 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5 
1
Personal View
Ketamine treatment for depression: opportunities for clinical 
innovation and ethical foresight
Ilina Singh, Celia Morgan, Valerie Curran, David Nutt, Anne Schlag, Rupert McShane
We present a review and analysis of the ethical considerations in off-label ketamine use for severe, treatment-resistant 
depression. The analysis of ethical considerations is contextualised in an overview of the evidence for ketamine use in 
depression, and a review of the drug’s safety profile. We find that, based on current evidence, ketamine use for severe, 
treatment-resistant depression does not violate ethical principles; however, clinicians and professional bodies must 
take steps to ensure that guidelines for good practice are enacted, that all experimental and trial data are made 
available through national registries, and that the risk potential of ketamine treatment continues to be monitored and 
modelled. We conclude with a set of key recommendations for oversight bodies that would support safe, effective, and 
ethical use of ketamine in depression.
Introduction
Ketamine has been hailed as the most important 
advance in the treatment of depression of the past 
50 years.1 Findings from several clinical trials have 
shown that a single, slow, intravenous dose given over 
about 40 min produces a rapid decrease in depressive 
symptoms lasting from a few hours to 14 days.2,3 All 
other existing antidepressant drug treatments have a 
therapeutic lag of 3–4 weeks, and about a third of 
patients do not respond.4
The impressive antidepressant effects of ketamine have 
spurred a great deal of research interest, with growing 
clinical use of ketamine for the treatment of depression. 
At present, clinical use is off label; no pharmaceutical 
company yet has a marketing authorisation. Additionally, 
there is considerable recreational use of ketamine in 
some countries,5 which has led to repeated calls for tighter 
regulatory controls on ketamine.6
Evidence for the use of ketamine in depression
The first study to draw attention to ketamine as an 
antidepressant was a crossover study of seven patients 
with major depressive disorder in 2000.7 6 years later, 
findings from a study2 of 17 patients with treatment-
resistant major depressive disorder showed that 71% of 
participants had a greater than 50% reduction in 
depressive symptoms within 24 h of ketamine admin-
istration (0·5 mg/kg intravenous infusion over 40 min), 
whereas the same participants showed almost no change 
in symptoms after placebo injection of saline. Moreover, 
the response was sustained for 1 week of follow-up in 
about a third of participants.
In a 2015 systematic review including nine ketamine 
trials, the drug was associated with higher levels of 
clinical response and remission than comparators 
(saline or midazolam) at 24 h, 3 days, and 7 days.8 
However, not all patients respond to ketamine and the 
duration of antidepressant effect is variable across 
individuals. Rapid reductions in suicidal ideation in 
patients with depression who received ketamine have 
been replicated.9,10 Other research has begun to assess 
the potential use of ketamine in palliative care settings, 
where the drug’s pain-reducing effects might provide an 
additional benefit alongside its antidepressant effects.11,12 
A study on the benefits of ketamine combined with 
electroconvulsive therapy treatment for major de-
pression found no benefits in alleviating adverse 
cognitive effects of electroconvulsive therapy or in rate of 
symptomatic improvement.13
Concerns about the use of ketamine for 
depression
Ketamine misuse has many negative long-term side-
effects, which study findings suggest are confined to daily 
users.14 The most serious of these side-effects is ketamine-
induced ulcerative cystitis (so-called ketamine bladder).15,16 
This recently identified condition is character 
ised by 
extremely painful and frequent urination, which seems to 
have severe and potentially long-lasting impacts on the 
patient’s health.17 However, people who use drugs 
who take ketamine less than daily have not reported (and 
show no evidence of) ketamine bladder.18 One case of 
ketamine-associated cystitis associated with chronic pain 
management has been reported.19
A key difference in clinical as opposed to recreational 
use of ketamine is the dose and frequency of 
use. Tolerance develops rapidly to ketamine (termed 
tachyphylaxis in anaesthetic practice). Frequent rec-
reational users will compensate for this tolerance by 
increasing the dose used over time, such that doses of 
several grams per day (rather than milligrams) are 
consumed, generally snorted similar to cocaine.5 By 
contrast, medical use in depression would generally be a 
single 35 mg dose (for an average-weight adult) given 
intravenously, which could be repeated at the same dose 
days or weeks later. Although an intranasal formulation 
is currently in development for the treatment of 
depression,20 it would again be at very small doses 
compared with those used recreationally. Dose level and 
frequency are related to risk of hepatotoxicity, with 
increased risk for prolonged infusion (eg, hepatotoxicity 
has been reported at anaesthetic doses [≥1 mg/kg] and in 
patients receiving low-dose continuous infusions for 
100 h) or frequent dosing in therapeutic contexts.21
Lancet Psychiatry 2017
Published Online 
April 5, 2017 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(17)30102-5
See Online/Comment 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(17)30155-4
Department of Psychiatry and 
Oxford Uehiro Centre, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK (Prof I Singh EdD); 
Department of Psychology, 
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK 
(Prof C Morgan PhD); Research 
Department of Clinical, 
Educational and Health 
Psychology, University College 
London, London, UK 
(Prof V Curran PhD); Centre for 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 
Division of Brain Sciences, 
Imperial College London, 
London, UK (Prof D Nutt MD); 
King’s College London, London, 
UK (A Schlag PhD); and Oxford 
Health NHS Foundation Trust, 
Warneford Hospital, Oxford, 
UK (R McShane PhD)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Ilina Singh, Department of 
Psychiatry and Oxford Uehiro 
Centre, University of Oxford, 
Oxford OX3 7JX, UK 
ilina.singh@psych.ox.ac.uk
 2 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5
Personal View
In a challenge study,22 patients with psychosis given 
an acute dose of ketamine in laboratory conditions 
experienced a resurgence of their individual psychotic 
symptoms that in some was protracted, lasting up to 
1 week. This study clearly provoked ethical concerns 
and no further challenge studies have been done 
in patients with schizophrenia. A review23 examining 
psychotomimetic phenomena across studies involving 
a total of 450 volunteers given similar doses of ketamine 
showed only six incidences of such mental states that 
were unpleasant enough to require the infusion to be 
stopped, all of which remitted completely in the hours 
after cessation of the infusion. Clearly, understanding 
of appropriate dose, infusion duration, and method of 
administration is still limited and requires active 
research attention.24
Ethical issues surrounding the use of ketamine 
in depression
Ketamine use for severe depression elicits a complex set 
of ethical concerns. The very limited existing literature 
about the ethics of ketamine use for depression has 
highlighted some of these, covering clinical ethics, 
research ethics, and health policy.25–34 Three primary 
ethical concerns have emerged: the genuine need for 
treatment of patients with severe, treatment-resistant 
depression; the insufficient safety and efficacy data for 
off-label use of ketamine; and the misuse potential of 
ketamine.
Clinical experience raises further practical and ethical 
challenges for clinicians, which have not been well 
documented in the scientific literature to date. First, they 
should be concerned about the potential of illegal diversion 
or self-treatment with illegally obtained drugs. Clinicians 
also face uncertainty, with no proven strategy to maintain a 
beneficial effect of ketamine. Patients who achieve a 
dramatic beneficial response to ketamine might face a 
serious fall in morale after rapid relapse; and patients with 
suicidal thoughts or ideation might be harmed by the false 
reassurance of an abrupt, but potentially brief, reduction 
in suicidality. Severe and unmonitored side-effects could 
lead to early dis 
continuation of an otherwise promising 
treatment. Finally, ketamine can seem attractive to 
individuals who would rather try a drug of misuse than a 
conventional antidepressant, due to stigma attached to 
treatment with psychiatric drugs.35
For some commentators, these concerns are sufficiently 
serious to constitute reasons to avoid clinical use of 
ketamine in depression.28,31,34 Others take a more 
moderate position, but highlight the need for judicious 
reporting of experimental findings and prudent 
professional decision making in the absence of evidence-
based guidance.26,27,32 Professional judgment and integrity 
are particularly relevant with regard to the need for 
careful and consistent monitoring of patients treated 
with ketamine.26 In the USA, strict regulations, legal 
concerns, and stigma are among the reasons why 
research into ketamine for depression might be scarce.30 
However, ketamine is available therapeutically through 
commercial clinics in the USA.27,29
Insufficient scientific knowledge about ketamine 
treatment in depression means that off-label clinical use 
entails substantial uncertainty. This uncertainty, and the 
potential for misuse of ketamine, risks harms to 
patients, clinicians, and society. At the same time, the 
need for further treatments in depression is clear, and 
the frustrating rate at which new drugs move from 
bench to bedside means that off-label use of ketamine is 
currently increasing.25
A relevant ethical analysis must identify as primary 
challenges the recognition of patient need, balanced 
against the risks of harm posed by lack of scientific 
knowledge and the misuse potential of ketamine. However, 
patient need and the potential for harm can pull in opposite 
directions in clinical decision making. An ethical analysis 
must do more than describe the harms and benefits of 
treatment; it should provide clinicians with some guidance 
about how to balance these opposing ethical forces.
We draw on a recently developed framework for ethical 
use of novel therapeutics36 to argue that ketamine use in 
depression presents an exceptional case for clinical 
application ahead of further trial evidence. We next 
consider the balance of patient need and the potential 
for harm in this case. We propose three key interests 
at stake in this balance: autonomy, innovation, and 
professional integrity. After outlining these interests, we 
make recommendations to support ethical clinical use 
of ketamine off label for severe, treatment-resistant 
depression.
As a foundation for its ethical guideline, in its report36 
on novel neurotechnologies the UK Nuffield Council 
on Bioethics recognised six principles of responsible 
research and innovation specific to these therapies 
(panel 1). We propose that these principles are relevant 
to the ethical use of ketamine for depression, in so far as 
the report covers novel therapeutics that are still in an 
experimental phase of development. Alongside these 
principles, the report recognises that innovation in 
psychiatric therapeutics is a societal good given the few 
effective treatments for severe, chronic mental disorders. 
Below we consider arguments for, and challenges to off-
label ketamine use in depression through the lens of the 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics core principles.
Panel 1: Six principles of responsible research in novel 
neurotechnologies36
• 
Clearly identified need
• 
Securing safety and efficacy
• 
Generating robust evidence
• 
Continuous reflexive evaluation
• 
Coordinated interdisciplinary action
• 
Effective and proportionate oversight
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5 
3
Personal View
Clearly identified need
Severe depression is an illness causing substantial 
impairment in patients’ ability to function and to lead 
flourishing lives. Moreover, patients’ suffering has 
negative consequences within families, communities, 
and the workplace, leading to a vicious circle of stigma, 
shame, and guilt. These effects are amplified if a patient 
loses the ability to work, further diminishing dignity and 
patients’ sense of personal and social value.37
The scientific literature about depression treatment 
suggests that 30% of patients are treatment resistant.38 
Many of these patients will respond to augmented 
treatments, but a quarter will respond inconsistently 
or not at all.39 The need for intervention is great—severe 
depression is associated with increased risk of 
suicide40—but treatment-resistant depression poses a 
substantial clinical challenge. The treatment of most 
value, electroconvulsive therapy, involves induction of 
seizures, and many patients are unwilling to undergo it 
because of fears of memory loss and general stigma 
about electroconvulsive therapy.41 Suicidal ideation is 
difficult to manage without effective treatment, and 
treatment resistance can contribute to a dangerous 
sense of hopelessness. Although ketamine can rapidly 
reduce suicidal ideation,42 the problem of rapid relapse 
after this beneficial response needs to be carefully 
managed clinically.
Safety and efficacy of ketamine treatment in 
depression
Ketamine can be used off label for treatment of 
depression because it is already a licensed drug. Off-label 
use of medicines is common across medical specialties,43 
but it is particularly high in psychiatry, due partly to lack 
of licensed treatments for many disorders.44 The 
precedent for off-label prescribing across affective 
disorders is now significant; 45% of antidepressant 
prescriptions are for disorders other than depression.45 
The important difference is that the treatment effects of 
antidepressants are much better understood than those 
of ketamine in patients with depressive disorders.
No matter how widespread, off-label use of medicines 
does not constitute a sound reason to endorse off-label 
ketamine use in depression. A primary challenge in 
off-label drug treatment is that a drug’s efficacy, dosing, 
and side-effects are interpreted largely through clinical 
experience and case studies, rather than through the gold 
standard of evidence provided by clinical trials, increasing 
concerns about the potential harms of treatment for 
drugs lacking trial safety data for specific disorders.
Although preliminary trial data for ketamine treatment 
in mood disorders are available (with further trials 
underway), they are compromised by methodological 
and other flaws; some commentators have suggested 
that clinical use of ketamine for depression should wait 
for the outcome of more robust trials providing higher 
standards of evidence.33
Further, randomised controlled trials do not provide 
the observational evidence necessary to understand how 
patients interact with treatments outside the rigours 
of the trial process.46 This knowledge is particularly 
important in the case of a drug with high misuse 
potential. Additionally, randomised controlled trials have 
high internal validity but low external validity; by design, 
trials enrol homogeneous patient populations that 
represent a narrow band of the diversity present in a 
complex, heterogeneous medical population such as 
patients with depressive disorders.47
One way to mitigate the problem of low external 
validity with randomised controlled trials is to do more 
of them, in more diverse patient populations. Several 
randomised controlled trials for ketamine use in 
depression are currently recruiting (eg, NCT01945047). 
However, ketamine is a generic drug, and continuous 
industry or public investment in a large number of 
expensive trials is unlikely. Such trials are required to 
assess the potential doses, routes, regimens, predictive 
factors, and drugs that could maintain the benefit of 
ketamine in depression. The challenge of developing a 
regimen for maintaining the acute benefit of ketamine 
is considerable. Each of the many variables that might 
effect safety and efficacy of such a regimen—eg, dose, 
routes, predictive factors—would require separate 
exploration. As a generic drug, a very large programme 
of trials would be required, which would place demands 
on scarce public funds and potentially delay beneficial 
therapies. Patients who are currently severely depressed 
might feel that they do not have the time to wait for the 
results of such studies.
Given this context, observational and single-case 
studies of ketamine use in depression should arguably 
be encouraged as part of a commitment to robust science 
and to patient need, as a necessary adjunct to the 
randomised controlled trials, and as an independently 
valid and valuable source of evidence for treatment safety 
and efficacy.48 To achieve maximum benefit, these cases 
should be registered and carefully monitored, and all 
data should be transparently shared with professional 
and patient groups (subject to criteria for data privacy).
One might agree with most of the arguments above 
and still advocate to delay ketamine use in the clinic until 
better trial data are available. To address the needs of 
treatment-resistant patients at high risk of suicide while 
trials are ongoing, compassionate use access to ketamine 
could be an option.49 However, the delay-advocacy 
position ignores the reality that ketamine is easily 
available commercially in independent clinics and on the 
black market. Such outlets will provide ketamine to 
patients with severe depression quickly, most likely 
without establishing a robust patient profile and without 
registering and monitoring outcomes.
Our analysis thus far suggests that there is a 
principled case for professional, clinical provision of 
ketamine treatment off label to patients with severe, 
 4 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5
Personal View
treatment-resistant depression. In the next section, we 
test the case against a set of key interests that apply in 
weighing up the balance between patient need and the 
potential for harm in off-label clinical use of ketamine 
for depression.
Balance of patient need and potential for harm
Autonomy
A general definition of autonomy in medical ethics 
addresses the capacity to reflect and decide on a set of 
choices independently, on the basis of factors that feel 
authentic to the individual. This account of autonomy 
assumes a process of self-reflection that eventually 
identifies a set of desires that are authentic (to the 
person).50 Severe depression can undermine the exercise 
of autonomy, because, for example, low self-worth or a 
lack of volitional agency compromise identification of 
authentic desires.51 These cognitive features might be 
causes or consequences of depression, but without 
effective treatment of the condition, autonomy capabilities 
could continue to diminish, sometimes to the point that a 
patient will no longer find his or her life worth living. 
Protection of autonomy in the treatment of severe 
depression is therefore both an ethical duty (to ensure 
that patient autonomy is not threatened by the process or 
outcomes of treatment) and a clinical goal (because 
treatment promotes or restores patient autonomy).
If there is a reasonable expectation that harmful 
side-effects of treatment can be managed, then a patient’s 
expressed desire for treatment—which is an expression 
of autonomy interests—must carry weight in the 
decision-making process. Indeed, a patient with severe 
depression who requests ketamine treatment can be 
viewed as exercising autonomy interests that require 
protection because the diminishment of patient auto-
nomy poses a risk to their life. Therefore, the moral duty 
to provide ketamine treatment when requested can be 
seen to have special force that might outweigh some 
other considerations.
However, a patient can be viewed as exercising 
autonomy only if they receive sufficient information to 
make an informed decision about off-label ketamine 
treatment.52 The value of consent is diminished if 
sufficient information is not available, and it is null if the 
patient lacks capacity or is coerced.53 The criteria for 
consent to experimental treatment with ketamine must 
be carefully considered, because insufficient evidence 
from randomised controlled trials is available to analyse 
the harm–benefit ratio, and (relatedly) patients’ inability 
to evaluate the harms of potential side-effects. However, 
the combination of clinical experience and available trial 
data arguably provides sufficient information for valid 
patient consent.
The capacity of patients with severe depression who are 
desperate for treatment has also been questioned,33 but 
distress should not be conflated with lack of capacity. The 
distressed drive of a desperate patient with depression to 
seek relief for their psychic pain is not, of itself, indicative 
of loss of capacity. The distress might or might not inter-
fere with the ability to take in and properly weigh up 
information about the risks and benefits of a new 
treatment. Depression creates a negative cognitive bias 
that can undermine balanced judgment.54 Patients with 
severe depression are more usually indecisive and cautious 
than recklessly risk taking.55 It is this indecisiveness—
rather than the patient’s desperation—that more frequently 
creates a dilemma for a clinician caring for a patient with 
severe depression. The levels of agency in the relationship 
are, by definition, highly asymmetric. A balanced 
presentation of the evidence, and of medical ignorance, 
can support patient decision making, but clinicians must 
guard against the harms of excessive paternalism that are 
an inevitable risk in the doctor–patient relationship.56
These challenges to information and consent in 
depression treatment and, by extension, to patient 
autonomy interests are not unique to ketamine; they 
also exist in relation to deep brain stimulation, another 
experimental psychiatric treatment for patients with 
severe depression.57 The particular challenges around 
consent can be addressed initially through acknow-
ledgement of these risks, institutional review of consent 
processes (in the case of research), and a commitment to 
ongoing monitoring and evaluation of patients.36 In 
practice, signed confirmation that detailed, up-to-date, 
written information has been received would meet this 
need. The information provided to patients should be 
explicit about the absence of information about strategies 
to maintain any acute benefit and the paucity of data 
about long-term risks.
When patients with capacity want to pay for a trial of 
ketamine, which they understand has an undefined and 
possibly small chance of benefit, the distinction between 
acute and chronic treatment is a crucial consideration 
in the avoidance of harm. The acute risks of medical 
ketamine are well known; many patients experience 
dose-dependent acute effects. Very few patients, if any, 
have long-term sequelae of treatment. What evidence 
there is about longer-term oral or intravenous58 use in 
medical contexts is relatively reassuring.59
Further strategies to ensure best practice in relation to 
consent should be considered: an interval between the 
consultation and first treatment allows a period for 
reflection and discussion with family and carers. The 
presence of a friend or relative in the consultation to act 
as an advocate can be helpful. As ever, the clinician must 
ensure that the decision-making process enables the 
patient to make an informed, autonomous decision.
Such processes cannot remove the risks inherent in 
this experimental treatment. However, in respect of 
patients’ autonomy interests, it is important to recognise 
that paternalism cuts both ways. We should not err on 
the side of paternalistic precaution when weighing up 
the balance of need and potential for harm in ketamine 
treatment.
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5 
5
Personal View
Innovation
Innovation that leads to better tolerated, more effective 
therapies for chronic mental illness benefits patients, 
families, and clinicians, has important public health 
benefits, and reduces the societal impacts of mental 
illness.36 For these reasons, innovation is a key interest in 
the balance of patient need and the potential for harm, and 
the precautionary principle should not operate a priori in a 
way that stifles innovation. The potential harms of 
ketamine must be managed in such a way that allows the 
innovative potential of its use in severe depression to be 
tested. Indeed, the innovative potential of ketamine-related 
compounds has been recognized by the US Food and Drug 
Administration for both treatment-resistant depression 
and for major depression with imminent risk of suicide.60
Innovation to address the problem of treatment-
resistance necessarily includes innovation in the pathways 
to clinical use of a particular intervention. We have already 
outlined some of the limitations of the conventional 
pathway through randomised controlled trials. It is also 
worth noting that, if access to ketamine were restricted to 
those involved in clinical trials, very few patients would 
receive it, creating unequal conditions (particularly for 
patients in low-resource settings and those with little 
access to clinical trials).61 Therefore, off-label use of 
ketamine for treatment-resistant depression in single 
cases can contribute to innovation and to justice, if the 
harms of ketamine use can be minimised and the benefits 
maximised in the form of systematic and transparent data 
recording and sharing.
Misuse potential
Innovation in treatment includes innovation in treatment 
delivery technologies. Most trials have used a low dose 
(typically 0·5 mg/kg) of intravenous ketamine, but a 
wide variety of other routes (oral, sublingual or 
transmucosal, subcutaneous, and intranasal) have been 
reported. These alternatives have the potential benefit 
that they are less invasive and can be self-administered 
by the patient outside of the clinic, thereby promoting 
patient autonomy and, possibly, compliance in treatment. 
However, this development is potentially at the price of 
increased misuse potential. As with analgesia and 
breakthrough pain, the use of progressively higher and 
more frequent doses to avert relapse is inevitable, if the 
patient has access to large supplies. Such addiction and 
misuse would not only undermine good treatment 
outcomes; it could potentially add fuel to the global black 
market in ketamine5 either through illegal diversion or, 
more likely, by patients pursuing illegal routes to access 
the drug if their physicians refuse to prescribe it.
At the same time, it is important not to confuse the 
desire to continue taking a drug that treats chronic 
symptoms which re-emerge when the drug is stopped, 
with the craving of addiction: paracetamol can be used 
repeatedly to treat a chronic pain; the dialysis patient feels 
better after each exchange.
There is already wide experience of successful use of 
long-term oral ketamine without such tolerance or 
tachyphylaxis.62,63 For example, daily dosing with oral 
ketamine (eg, 150 mg) has been used successfully in the 
context of pain. However, as the interval between ketamine 
doses declines, so the potential for addiction increases. So 
far, there are just two case reports of ketamine use.27,64 In 
one, intranasal ketamine was prescribed for depression at 
a dose of 75–150 mg intranasally every 4 h as needed,27 but 
was poorly monitored and was being used 10–12 times 
daily with clear evidence of intoxication. In the other 
study,64 intravenous ketamine (0·5 mg/kg) was admin-
istered on alternate days for 2 weeks with evidence of 
emergent craving.
The experience of using oral ketamine, benzodiazepines, 
oral opiate analgesia, and methadone for pain all offer 
potential models for successful management of addiction 
potential: short courses, prescriptions for small quantities, 
regular review, dosing intervals of at least 3 days, and 
directly observed therapy. Nevertheless, innovation in the 
development of ketamine and metabolite-related com-
pounds should prioritise lowering of the misuse potential 
of ketamine.65
Dependence is unlikely to occur in the context of 
clinical trials. Thus, careful prospective monitoring of 
real-world experience is essential to identify the incidence 
of misuse and dependence. Professional guidelines 
detailing harm minimisation strategies should not reject 
use of ketamine out of hand on the basis of risk; instead, 
they should achieve a balance between the benefits of 
innovation and patient autonomy on the one hand, and 
the potential for harm on the other. In the next section, 
we outline a set of harm minimisation strategies and 
recommendations pertinent to the case of off-label use of 
ketamine for depression.
Harm minimisation: strategies and 
recommendations
Professional virtue and integrity
Health professionals carry responsibility for assessment 
of patient need, and for the decision to experiment with 
ketamine treatment. In the absence of evidence and 
guidelines, and in light of the potential for individual 
and societal harm associated with ketamine treatment, 
a great deal of ethical weight rests on the virtue qualities 
of the clinician.36 The Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
Novel Neurotechnologies Report identified three virtues 
of particular importance in the context of novel 
neurotechnologies: inventiveness, humility, and re-
sponsibility (panel 2).
In the context of ketamine treatment for depression, 
inventiveness requires a degree of clinical experience 
and expertise that enables sound and reasoned decision 
making under conditions of risk and uncertainty. 
Humility means the ability to make clinical decisions on 
the basis of the best interests of the patient, without 
intrusion of personal interest or ambition. Responsibility 
 6 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5
Personal View
denotes a clinician who will contribute to improving the 
research knowledge base about ketamine use for 
depression, and who will not make undue claims for 
ketamine treatment. These three virtues reinforce the 
ethical principle of continuous reflective equilibrium.
It is in the interest of professional bodies to support 
the education and development of these essential 
virtuous qualities of clinicians who administer 
ketamine treatment for depression, and to promote the 
principle of reflexive evaluation of clinical practice in 
this context. For example, in their discussion of the 
availability of ketamine use for depression in the USA, 
Sisti and colleagues27 point out that some private clinics 
use potentially coercive financial incentives to attract 
and maintain patients as active ketamine users, such as 
offering a financial rebate after the first six ketamine 
infusions. Such behaviours diminish public trust in 
treatment innovation, and thereby hurt both patients in 
extreme need and the health professionals who manage 
their care.
Recommendations for monitoring and regulation
The increasing off-label use of ketamine for depression 
in the absence of long-term safety data raises complex 
ethical challenges that urgently require a reasoned 
response. In our recommendations for the monitoring 
and regulation of ketamine use in depression, we embed 
the principle of proportionate oversight, and aim to 
incorporate the principles of continuous reflexive 
evaluation and interdisciplinary action. We emphasise 
the need for an approach that views clinical guidance in 
this case as a dynamic process, in which guidance is 
systematically reviewed and updated as clinical evidence 
accumulates through transparent reporting of cases. We 
also underline the need for professional and oversight 
bodies to work together to ensure high ethical standards 
in off-label ketamine use in depression.
We consider it unlikely that the dangers of ketamine 
use would justify a different regulatory response to that 
of, for example, short-acting benzodiazepines such as 
lorazepam. Our analysis suggests that such off-label use 
can be ethical and it is important that any monitoring 
and regulation strategies are proportionate, and should 
not stifle innovation in treatment development or 
threaten the interests of patient autonomy, professional 
virtue, and professional integrity. However, if ketamine 
was a new drug, the manufacturer would usually collect 
safety data from open-label extensions of the licensing 
clinical trials. Therefore, we underline the importance 
of reporting on clinical practice and monitoring of 
outcomes. There is a risk that, if unmonitored, the risks 
of dependence and of cognitive, urological, and other 
damage will go unquantified.
Drawing on the scientific literature and this analysis, 
we propose a set of key action points for oversight bodies 
in panel 3. In spirit, these recommendations overlap 
considerably with the recommendations made in a 
consensus statement by the American Psychiatric 
Association.69 We are optimistic about the emergent 
broad agreement on the importance of robust clinical 
ethics procedures and systematic reporting of cases of 
off-label ketamine treatment.
Panel 2: Three virtues of importance in the context of 
novel neurotechnologies36
• 
Inventiveness: expressed through technological 
innovation and by identifying ways to provide widened 
access to therapies
• 
Humility: acknowledging the limits of current knowledge 
and ability to use technologies to alleviate the harms of 
brain disorders
• 
Responsibility: shown by robust research and clinical 
practices, and by avoiding hype in communication about 
their potential uses
Panel 3: Key actions for oversight bodies
• 
Professional bodies should provide guidance to ensure that ketamine treatment for 
depression and other affective disorders conforms to high ethical standards. Such 
guidance should include:
• 
Publication of dynamic good practice guidelines for ethical use of ketamine for 
depression, which are continually updated based on reviews of new data
• 
Guidance on the maximum quantity of intranasal, oral, or sublingual ketamine 
that can be supplied to patients to take at home, and the maximum interval 
between reviews by the prescriber
• 
A statement that, before initiating a trial of ketamine, patients should be informed 
about (and encouraged to consider) all viable, licensed options for treatment
• 
Recommendations on whether written consent should be required
• 
An example of content of a patient information sheet
• 
Requirement of contribution to national registries of structured data about the 
safety and efficacy of repeated doses of ketamine
• 
Professional bodies, together with national institutions (eg, the US Food and Drug 
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, and the UK Medicines and Healthcare 
Products Regulatory Agency) should evaluate the need for risk evaluation and 
mitigation strategies to minimise risk of off-label ketamine in depression and to 
maximize benefits66,67
• 
These national institutions should support development of the international evidence 
base for the safety and efficacy in ketamine treatment for depression, including:
• 
Development and maintenance of national registries to share trial information 
and safety and efficacy data, and to report data from single case studies
• 
Linking up of national registries through an international network (possibly hosted 
by existing structures such as the US Prescription Drug Monitoring Program)68
• 
Publication of recommendations about any governance procedures, including 
suggestions for oversight procedures in institutions supporting ketamine clinics
• 
Support for research to investigate the therapeutic and misuse potential of 
ketamine in depression, and to model the effects of diverse risk management 
pathways for patient need, medical use, and societal harms
The Prescription Drug Monitoring Program provides a mechanism by which health-care providers and pharmacists can check to 
see if a patient has obtained a prescription for the same drug from another source or multiple controlled drugs. This way, 
so-called doctor shopping can be reduced. Moreover, surveillance approaches are increasingly used to provide assurance that if 
unintended consequences do happen, they will be detected and dealt with in a timely manner.
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5 
7
Personal View
Conclusions
The balance of risk and benefit is such that new 
restrictions around the use of ketamine for depression 
are not needed. However, clinicians prescribing it should 
have a heightened degree of humility and responsibility. 
This will help to prevent the development of ketamine as 
a promising depression therapy from being stopped or 
delayed by clinical mistakes that increase policy makers’ 
concerns about the drug and decrease public trust.27,35 
Although our focus has been to provide ethical analysis 
and guidance for off-label clinical use of ketamine for 
depression, many of the ethical concerns we identify are 
broadly relevant to ketamine treatment in the context of 
research.
At present, clinicians should advise patients that 
knowledge about ketamine treatment is poor. The key 
information that is needed to enhance the ethical use of 
ketamine for affective disorders is structured, long-term, 
naturalistic data on the safety of repeated dosing, 
including incidence of misuse. Gathering of these data 
should be managed by national registries. Routine 
submission of data to such registries should be expected 
of all clinics. Efficacy trials of strategies for maintaining 
initial benefit are also required.
In the meantime, we hope that the recommendations 
proposed here go some way to enabling innovative use of 
ketamine for treatment-resistant depression to continue, 
with appropriate care, precaution, and foresight.
Contributors
IS developed the literature review and led the first draft and revision of the 
ethics section. CM developed the literature review and led the first draft 
and revision of the science and clinical section. VC contributed to the 
literature review and read and contributed to all drafts of the paper. DN 
contributed to the literature review and read and contributed to drafts of 
the paper. AS developed the recommendations section for the initial draft 
and revised version. RM read and contributed to all drafts of the paper.
Declaration of interests
Since January 2009, DN has served on advisory boards for Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Lilly, Shire, Lundbeck, Servier, Pfizer, Reckitt Benkiser, and D&A 
Pharma. He has received speaking honoraria from these companies and 
also from Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, and Schering-
Plough. Since 2015, IS has served on an independent ethics advisory group 
supported in part by Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Companies. She 
receives no compensation for her participation in this group. RM has had 
UK National Institute for Health Research grant funding to study 
ketamine, is participating in trials of esketamine, runs a clinic that provides 
ketamine treatment, and has consulted for Johnson & Johnson and Eleusis. 
AS reports personal fees from DrugScience. VC holds a research grant 
from Johnson & Johnson through UCL Business. CM reports grants from 
the Medical Research Council (MR L/023032/1) for ketamine research, and 
consultancy for Janssen Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Lived Experience Group at the University of Exeter Mood 
Disorders Centre for their helpful comments on an earlier version of the 
paper. We also benefited from comprehensive feedback provided by 
anonymous reviewers.
References
1 
Duman RS, Aghajanian GK. Neurobiology of rapid acting 
antidepressants: role of BDNF and GSK-3β. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 2014; 39: 233.
2 
Zarate CA Jr, Singh JB, Carlson PJ, et al. A randomized trial of an 
N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in treatment-resistant major 
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 856–64.
3 
aan het Rot M, Collins KA, Murrough JW, et al. Safety and efficacy 
of repeated-dose intravenous ketamine for treatment-resistant 
depression. Biol Psychiatry 2010; 67: 139–45.
4 
Machado-Vieira R, Baumann J, Wheeler-Castillo C, et al. The timing 
of antidepressant effects: a comparison of diverse pharmacological 
and somatic treatments. Pharmaceuticals 2010; 3: 19–41.
5 
Morgan CJ, Curran HV, Independent Scientific Committee on 
Drugs. Ketamine use: a review. Addiction 2012; 107: 27–38.
6 
Taylor P, Nutt D, Curran V, Fortson R, Henderson G, on behalf of 
DrugScience. Ketamine—the real perspective. Lancet 2016; 387: 1271–72.
7 
Berman RM, Cappiello A, Anand A, et al. Antidepressant effects of 
ketamine in depressed patients. Biol Psychiatry 2000; 47: 351–54.
8 
Caddy C, Amit BH, McCloud TL, et al. Ketamine and other 
glutamate receptor modulators for depression in adults. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 9: CD011612.
9 
Price RB, Nock MK, Charney DS, Mathew SJ. Effects of intravenous 
ketamine on explicit and implicit measures of suicidality in 
treatment-resistant depression. Biol Psychiatry 2009; 66: 522–26.
10 
Wilkinson ST, Sanacora G. Ketamine: a potential rapid-acting 
antisuicidal agent? Depress Anxiety 2016; 33: 711–17
.
11 
Kerr C, Holahan T, Milch R. The use of ketamine in severe cases of 
refractory pain syndromes in the palliative care setting: a case 
series. J Palliat Med 2011; 14: 1074–77
.
12 
Irwin SA, Iglewicz A, Nelesen RA, et al. Daily oral ketamine for the 
treatment of depression and anxiety in patients receiving hospice 
care: a 28-day open-label proof-of-concept trial. J Palliat Med 2013; 
16: 958–65.
13 
Anderson IM, Blamire A, Branton T, et al, on behalf of the 
Ketamine-ECT Study team. Ketamine augmentation of 
electroconvulsive therapy to improve neuropsychological and 
clinical outcomes in depression (Ketamine-ECT): a multicentre, 
double-blind, randomised, parallel-group, superiority trial. 
Lancet Psychiatry 2017; published online March 27
. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30077-9.
14 
Morgan CJ, Muetzelfeldt L, Curran HV. Consequences of chronic 
ketamine self-administration upon neurocognitive function and 
psychological wellbeing: a 1-year longitudinal study. Addiction 2010; 
105: 121–33.
15 
Shahani R, Streutker C, Dickson B, Stewart RJ. Ketamine-associated 
ulcerative cystitis: a new clinical entity. Urology 2007; 69: 810–12.
16 
Mason K, Cottrell AM, Corrigan AG, Gillatt DA, Mitchelmore AE. 
Ketamine-associated lower urinary tract destruction: a new 
radiological challenge. Clin Radiol 2010; 65: 795–800.
17 
Gu D, Huang J, Yin Y, Shan Z, Zheng S, Wu P. Long-term ketamine 
abuse induces cystitis in rats by impairing the bladder epithelial 
barrier. Mol Biol Rep 2014; 41: 7313–22.
18 
Cottrell MA, Athreeres, R, Weinstock P, Warren K, Gillatt D. 
Urinary tract disease associated with chronic ketamine use. BMJ 
2008; 336: 973.
19 
Gregoire MC, MacLellan DL, Finley, GA. A pediatric case of 
ketamine-associated cystitis (Letter-to-the-Editor Re. Shahani R, 
Streutker C, Dickson B, et al. Ketamine-associated ucerative 
cystitis: a new clinical entity). Urology 2007; 69: 810–12.
20 Lapidus KA, Levitch CF, Perez AM, et al. A randomized controlled 
trial of intranasal ketamine in major depressive disorder. 
Biol Psychiatry 2014; 76: 970–76.
Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched PubMed and Google Scholar for articles published 
from Jan 1, 2005, to March 9, 2017, with the terms “ethics”, 
“ketamine”, “depression”, “abuse”, “misuse”, and “safety”. We 
identified relevant medical and clinical articles through our 
professional networks, searches through our personal 
databases, through Google Scholar and PubMed, and by 
suggestions from anonymous reviewers. We reviewed articles 
resulting from these searches and relevant references cited in 
those articles. Only articles published in English were included.
 8 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online April 5, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30102-5
Personal View
21 
Radvansky BM, Shah K, Parikh A, Sifonios AN, Le V, Eloy JD. 
Role of ketamine in acute postoperative pain management: 
a narrative review. BioMed Res Int 2015; 2015: 749837
.
22 Lahti AC, Weiler MA, Tamara Michaelidis BA, Parwani A, 
Tamminga CA. Effects of ketamine in normal and schizophrenic 
volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology 2001; 25: 455–67
.
23 Perry EB Jr, Cramer JA, Cho HS, et al. Psychiatric safety of 
ketamine in psychopharmacology research. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2007; 192: 253–60.
24 
Zorumski CF, Conway CR. Use of ketamine in clinical practice: 
a time for optimism and caution. JAMA Psychiatry 2017; published 
online March 1. DOI:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017
.0078.
25 
Malhi GS, Lingford-Hughes AR, Young AH. Antidepressant treatment 
response: ‘I want it all, and I want it now!’. Br J Psychiatry 2016; 
208: 101–03.
26 Schak KM, Vande Voort JL, Johnson EK, et al. Potential risks of 
poorly monitored ketamine use in depression treatment. 
Am J Psychiatry 2016; 173: 215–18.
27 
Sisti D, Segal AG, Thase ME. Proceed with caution: off-label 
ketamine treatment for major depressive disorder. 
Curr Psychiatry Rep 2014; 16: 527
.
28 Zhang MW, Harris KM, Ho RC. Is off-label repeat prescription of 
ketamine as a rapid antidepressant safe? Controversies, ethical 
concerns, and legal implications. BMC Med Ethics 2016; 17: 4.
29 Segal A, Sisti D. Research moratoria and off-label use of ketamine. 
Am J Bioeth 2016; 16: 60–61.
30 Andreae MH, Rhodes E, Bourgoise T, et al. An ethical exploration of 
barriers to research on controlled drugs. Am J Bioeth 2016; 16: 36–47
.
31 
Schatzberg, AF. A word to the wise about ketamine. Am J Psychiatry 
2014; 171: 262–64.
32 Li JH, Vicknasingam B, Cheung YW, et al. To use or not to use: 
an update on licit and illicit ketamine use. Subst Abuse Rehabil 2011; 
2: 11–20.
33 Zhang MW, Ho RC. Ethical considerations for clinical research and 
off-label use of ketamine to treat mood disorders: the balance 
between risks and benefits. Ethics Behav 2016; 9: 211–17
.
34 
Loo C. Is ketamine ready to be used clinically for the treatment of 
depression? Med J Austr 2015; 203: 425.
35 
Pescosolido, B. The public stigma of mental illness: What do we think; 
what do we know; what can we prove? J Health Soc Behav 2013; 54: 1–21.
36 Nuffield Council on Bioethics. Novel neurotechnologies: intervening 
in the brain. London: Nuffield Council on Bioethics, 2013.
37 
Corrigan PW, Watson AC, Barr L. The self-stigma of mental illness: 
implications for self-esteem and self-efficacy. J Soc Clin Psychol 
2006; 25: 875–84.
38 Al-Harbi KS. Treatment-resistant depression: therapeutic trends, 
challenges, and future directions. Patient Prefer Adherence 2012; 
6: 369–88.
39 Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, et al. Acute and longer-term 
outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one or several 
treatment steps: a STAR*D report. Am J Psychiatry 2006; 163: 1905–17
.
40 
Hawton K, Casañas I Comabella C, et al. Risk factors for suicide in 
individuals with depression: a systematic review. J Affect Disord 
2013; 147: 17–28.
41 
Cleare A, Pariante CM, Young AH, et al, for Members of the 
Consensus Meeting. Evidence-based guidelines for treating 
depressive disorders with antidepressants: a revision of the 2008 
British Association for Psychopharmacology guidelines. 
J Psychopharmacol 2015; 29: 459–525.
42 
Ionescu DF, Swee MB, Pavone KJ, et al. Rapid and sustained 
reductions in current suicidal ideation following repeated doses of 
intravenous ketamine: secondary analysis of an open-label study. 
J Clin Psychiatry 2016; 77: 719–25.
43 
Conti RM, Bernstein AC, Villaflor VM, et al. Prevalence of off-label 
use and spending in 2010 among patent-protected chemotherapies 
in a population-based cohort of medical oncologists. J Clin Oncol 
2013; 31: 1134–39.
44 
Sridharan K, Arora K, Chaudhary S. Off-label drug use in psychiatry: 
a retrospective audit in a tertiary care hospital. Asian J Psychiatr 2016; 
24: 124.
45 
Wong J, Motulsky A, Eguale T, Buckeridge DL, Abrahamowicz M, 
Tamblyn R. Treatment indications for antidepressants prescribed 
in primary care in Quebec, Canada, 2006–2015. JAMA 2016; 
315: 2230–32.
46 
Cartwright N. Are RCTs the gold standard? BioSocieties 2007; 2: 11–20.
47 
Cartwright N. A philosopher’s view of the long road from RCTs to 
effectiveness. Lancet 2011; 377: 1400–01.
48 
Schorck N. Personalised medicine: time for one-person trials. 
Nature 2015; 520: 609–11.
49 
US Food and Drug Administration. Expanded access 
(compassionate use). http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/
PublicHealthFocus/ExpandedAccessCompassionateUse/default.
htm (accessed Nov 10, 2016).
50 Gillon, R. Ethics needs principles—four can encompass the rest—
and respect for autonomy should be “first among equals”. 
J Med Ethics 2003; 29: 307–12.
51 
Frankfurt H. The importance of what we care about. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1987
.
52 Corrigan O. Empty ethics: the problem with informed consent. 
Sociol Health Illn 2003; 25: 768–92.
53 O’Neill O. Symposium on consent and confidentiality: some limits 
of informed consent. J Med Ethics 2003; 29: 4–7
.
54 
Gotlib IH, Joorman J. Cognition and depression: current status and 
future directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2010; 6: 285–312.
55 
Di Schiena R, Luminet O, Chang B, et al. Why are depressive 
individuals indecisive? Different modes of rumination account for 
indecision in non-clinical depression. Cognit Ther Res 2013; 37: 713–24.
56 Pelto-Piri V, Engström K, Engström I. Paternalism, autonomy and 
reciprocity: ethical perspectives in encounters with patients in 
psychiatric in-patient care. BMC Med Ethics 2013; 14: 49.
57 
Schermer M. Ethical issues in deep brain stimulation. 
Front Integr Neurosci 2011; 5: 17
.
58 Niesters M, Martini C, Dahan A. Ketamine for chronic pain: 
risks and benefits. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2014; 77: 357–67
.
59 Schoevers RA, Chaves TV, Balukova SM, Rot MA, Kortekaas R. 
Oral ketamine for the treatment of pain and treatment-resistant 
depression. Br J Psychiatry 2016; 208: 108–13.
60 Johnson & Johnson. Esketamine receives breakthrough therapy 
designation from US Food and Drug Administration for major 
depressive disorder with imminent risk for suicide. https://www.jnj.
com/media-center/press-releases/esketamine-recieves-breakthrough-
therapy-designation-from-us-food-and-drug-administration-for-
major-depressive-disorder-with-imminent-risk-of-suicide (accessed 
Nov 10, 2016).
61 
van Leeuwen E. Research on controlled drug use: a paradigm for 
public health research in sustainable health. Am J Bioeth 2016; 
16: 50–52.
62 Schoevers RA, Chaves TV, Balukova SM, Rot MA, Korekaas R. 
Oral ketamine for the treatment of pain and treatment-resistant 
depression. Br J Psychiatry 2016; 208: 108–13.
63 Jafarinia M, Afarideh M, Tafakhori A, et al. Efficacy and safety of 
oral ketamine versus diclofenac to alleviate mild to moderate 
depression in chronic pain patients: a double-blind, randomized, 
controlled trial. J Affect Disord 2016; 204: 1–8.
64 
Mahesh R, Sunilkumar G, Preeth S, Chandrasekhar S. 
Therapy induced ketamine addiction. Case Study Case Rep 2011; 
1: 146–49.
65 
Zanos P, Moaddel R, Morris PJ, et al. NMDAR inhibition-independent 
antidepressant actions of ketamine metabolites. Nature 2016; 
533: 481–86.
66 Leiderman DB. Risk management of drug products and the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration: evolution and context. 
Drug Alcohol Depend 2009; 105 (suppl 1): S9–13.
67 
US Food and Drug Administration. Questions and answers on 
the federal register notice on drugs and biological products 
deemed to hve risk evaluation and mitigation strategies. 
http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Legislation/
SignificantAmendmentstotheFDCAct/
FoodandDrugAdministrationAmendmentsActof2007/ucm095439.
htm (accessed Nov 10, 2016).
68 McCormick CG, Henningfield JE, Haddox JD, et al. Case histories 
in pharmaceutical risk management. Drug Alcohol Depend 2009; 
105 (suppl 1): S42–55.
69 
Sanacora G, Frye MA, McDonald W, et al, for the American Psychiatric 
Association (APA) Council of Research Task Force on Novel 
Biomarkers and Treatments. A consensus statement on the use of 
ketamine in the treatment of mood disorders. JAMA Psychiatry 2017; 
published online March 1. DOI:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017
.0080.
