 REPORT
Rockefeller University Press
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
3368
J. Cell Biol. 2018 Vol. 217 No. 10 3368–3381
Rockefeller University Press
The mammary epithelium is composed of an inner luminal and surrounding myoepithelial cell layer. The presence of cancer 
cells beyond the myoepithelium defines invasive breast cancer, yet the role of the myoepithelium during invasion remains 
unclear. We developed a 3D organotypic culture assay to model this process through lineage-specific expression of the 
prometastatic transcription factor Twist1. We sought to distinguish the functional role of the myoepithelium in regulating 
invasion and local dissemination. Myoepithelial-specific Twist1 expression induced cell-autonomous myoepithelial 
cell escape. Remarkably, luminal-specific Twist1 expression was rarely sufficient for escape. Time-lapse microscopy 
revealed that myoepithelial cells collectively restrain and reinternalize invading Twist1+ luminal cells. Barrier function 
correlated with myoepithelial abundance and required the expression of α-smooth muscle actin and P-cadherin. We next 
demonstrated that myoepithelial cells can restrain and recapture invasive cancer cells. Our data establish the concept 
of the myoepithelium as a dynamic barrier to luminal dissemination and implicate both smooth muscle contractility and 
intercellular adhesion in barrier function.
Myoepithelial cells are a dynamic barrier to epithelial 
dissemination
Orit Katarina Sirka, Eliah R. Shamir, and Andrew J. Ewald
Introduction
The normal mammary gland is organized around a branched 
ductal network arranged in an epithelial bilayer, with an inner 
luminal and outer myoepithelial cell layer (Adriance et al., 2005). 
Myoepithelial cells and the basement membrane separate lumi-
nal epithelial cells from the stroma; hence, interactions between 
luminal cells and the surrounding mesenchyme are largely me-
diated by the myoepithelium (Deugnier et al., 2002; Faraldo et 
al., 2005; Gudjonsson et al., 2005). The myoepithelium has been 
proposed to regulate both normal mammary epithelial develop-
ment and cancer invasion. However, the cellular and molecular 
basis of this role remains incompletely understood (Gudjonsson 
et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2008).
The majority of breast tumors are thought to arise from lumi-
nal epithelial cells located inside the myoepithelium (Deugnier et 
al., 2002; Adriance et al., 2005; Polyak and Hu, 2005; Molyneux 
et al., 2010; Proia et al., 2011; Keller et al., 2012; Melchor et al., 
2014; Tao et al., 2015). The presence of tumor cells outside the 
myoepithelium distinguishes ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) 
from invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC; Sternlicht et al., 1997; 
Lerwill, 2004; Man and Sang, 2004). This fundamentally mor-
phological assessment of intercellular spatial relationships re-
mains the most efficient means to distinguish DCIS from IDC 
despite decades of analysis of mutations, gene expression, and 
protein localization (Ma et al., 2003; Hu et al., 2008). This clin-
icopathologic observation suggests that the integrity and extent 
of coverage of the myoepithelium is of central importance to 
patient outcomes.
Breast tumors are composed of heterogeneous cancer cell 
populations, and experiments suggest that a small and spe-
cialized subset of cancer cells is responsible for invasion, local 
dissemination from the primary tumor, systemic spread, and 
seeding of secondary sites (Sahai, 2007; Kedrin et al., 2008; 
Cheung et al., 2013). The molecular mechanisms by which epi-
thelial cells acquire the ability to migrate within the tissue and 
disseminate out of it remain largely unknown, as are the rela-
tive roles of different luminal and basal epithelial populations 
during dissemination. As tumors grow, the cancer cells progres-
sively outnumber the myoepithelial cells, yet it remains unclear 
how the cancer cells escape (Gusterson et al., 1982). Because of 
the limitations of tissue architecture modeling in 2D culture, 
most breast cancer invasion assays do not contain myoepithelial 
cells in their physiological organization relative to the cancer 
cells. However, multiple studies have proposed a role for myo-
epithelial cells as cellular tumor suppressors (Sternlicht et al., 
1997) and have identified mechanisms for this function through 
secretion of protease inhibitors and down-regulation of matrix 
metalloproteinases (Barsky and Karlin, 2005), which exert anti-
proliferative effects on cancer cells (Shao et al., 1998) and inhibit 
© 2018 Sirka et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the 
publication date (see http:/
/ 
www 
.rupress 
.org/ 
terms/ 
). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 
International license, as described at https:/
/ 
creativecommons 
.org/ 
licenses/ 
by 
-nc 
-sa/ 
4 
.0/ 
).
Departments of Cell Biology, Oncology, and Biomedical Engineering, Center for Cell Dynamics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD .
Correspondence to Andrew J. Ewald: andrew.ewald@ 
jhmi 
.edu. 
on June 2, 2019
jcb.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Published Online: 30 July, 2018 | Supp Info: 
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3369
angiogenesis (Nguyen et al., 2000). In addition, focal disruptions 
in the myoepithelial layer are associated with gene expression 
changes in the tumor cells, a higher rate of proliferation, and leu-
kocyte infiltration (Man and Sang, 2004).
Taken together, data from prior research suggests a critical 
role for the myoepithelium in maintaining the in situ status of 
DCIS lesions and imply that breach of myoepithelial integrity is 
critical for invasion (Adriance et al., 2005). There are, however, 
two distinct conceptual frameworks for thinking about this bar-
rier. The first derives from histological analysis, in which the 
myoepithelium is like a wall: once a gap is generated, the cancer 
cells can rush through without restriction. The second frame-
work derives from real-time analyses of epithelial tissues that 
reveal dynamic migrations within epithelial populations (Ewald 
et al., 2008; Neumann et al., 2018) and extensive regulatory in-
teractions between populations (Cerchiari et al., 2015). Accord-
ingly, it was possible that the myoepithelium could respond to 
and dynamically regulate the migration and invasion of lumi-
nal cancer cells.
Observing invasion past the myoepithelium in vivo is chal-
lenging because of the limited optical accessibility of the mam-
mary gland and the slow and unpredictable nature of localized 
invasion events. To overcome these challenges, we adapted a 3D 
organotypic culture based on normal mouse mammary epithe-
lium to model myoepithelial barrier function. We previously 
demonstrated that constitutive expression of the prometastatic 
transcription factor Twist1 (Yang et al., 2004) in primary mouse 
mammary organoids induces robust local dissemination of cells 
out of the epithelium into the surrounding ECM (Shamir et al., 
2014). In this study, we set out to determine the capacity of myo-
epithelial cells to limit luminal dissemination and the nature of 
this regulatory interaction.
Results and discussion
Mouse models used in this study
We first sought to test the dissemination potential of different 
epithelial cell types and visualize interactions between lumi-
nal and myoepithelial cells. To accomplish these goals, we de-
veloped three inducible and lineage-specific mouse models: 
Ubiquitous-Twist1, Myoepithelial-Twist1, and Luminal-Twist1. 
In the Ubiquitous-Twist1 model, we used a cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) promoter–driven reverse tetracycline transactivator 
(rtTA), a Tet-responsive Twist1, and a transgenic Keratin 14 
(K14) promoter-driven GFP as a myoepithelial-specific reporter 
allele (Fig. S1 A; CMV::rtTA;TRE-Twist1;K14::Actin-GFP, Ubiqui-
tous-Twist1 model). This combination enabled us to track the 
interactions of myoepithelial and luminal cell types in real-time 
while both populations expressed Twist1. We next established 
a Myoepithelial-Twist1 model in which Twist1 was regulated 
by a myoepithelial-specific K14 promoter–driven rtTA (K14::rt-
TA;TRE-Twist1, Myoepithelial-Twist1 model). Finally, we estab-
lished a Luminal-Twist1 model in which Twist1 was regulated 
by a luminal-specific Keratin 8 (K8) promoter–regulated rtTA 
(K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mTomato [mT]/mGFP 
[mG]). Because of its conditional design, the Luminal-Twist1 
mouse model can be used to drive Twist1 in a random subset of 
cells with adenoviral Cre recombinase (Adeno-Cre; designated 
the Mosaic-Twist1 model) or specifically in luminal cells using 
tamoxifen (Fig. 1 A; Luminal-Twist1 model). In both settings, the 
mT/mG Cre reporter serves as an indirect marker of Cre-lox re-
combination and rtTA expression. These three mouse models to-
gether enabled us to isolate the role of the myoepithelium during 
Twist1-induced dissemination.
The myoepithelium appears to regulate dissemination of 
Twist1+ luminal cells
We first examined the real-time interactions among labeled myo-
epithelial and luminal cell populations within organoids cultured 
from Ubiquitous-Twist1 mice using confocal microscopy (Fig. 
S1 A). Induction of Twist1 led to dissemination of both luminal 
epithelial and myoepithelial cells, consistent with our previous 
study (Shamir et al., 2014). Twist1 expression also disrupted the 
architecture of the organoids such that gaps in basal myoepithe-
lial coverage often emerged. In turn, Twist1+ luminal cells were 
observed to escape from the organoid through these gaps (Fig. 
S1 B). Furthermore, we occasionally observed myoepithelial cells 
wrapping around invasive luminal epithelial cells, giving the ap-
pearance that they were restraining the luminal cells from escap-
ing (Fig. S1 C). Based on these observations, we hypothesized that 
myoepithelial cells actively regulate luminal cell dissemination. 
However, the expression of Twist1 in both cell populations in 
the Ubiquitous-Twist1 model limited our analyses. We therefore 
turned to models in which Twist1 was expressed in specific epi-
thelial compartments and tested the dissemination potential of 
the various cell types.
Myoepithelial-specific Twist1 expression induces 
myoepithelial cell dissemination
To study the dissemination potential of myoepithelial cells, we 
used our Myoepithelial-Twist1 mouse model (Fig. S1 D). We ob-
served branching morphogenesis in both control and Twist1-in-
duced conditions, whereas dissemination was specific to the 
Twist1-induced organoids (Fig. S1, E–G′). In basal medium with-
out growth factors, Twist1 activation induced high levels of dis-
semination, which were significantly reduced by the addition 
of FGF2 (Fig. S1 E′′′). We conclude that the extent of myoepithe-
lial-specific dissemination is regulated by FGF2 signaling. We 
confirmed by immunofluorescence (IF) that disseminated cells 
were K14+ (Fig. S1 G′). Conversely, luminal cells in this model 
were Twist1− and remained within the organoid, demonstrating 
that myoepithelial-specific Twist1 expression leads to cell-auton-
omous myoepithelial dissemination. However, it is not sufficient 
for dissemination of Twist1− luminal epithelial cells.
Luminal-specific Twist1 expression is rarely sufficient 
for dissemination
We next used the Luminal-Twist1 model to assay the sufficiency 
of Twist1 to induce dissemination of luminal cells in the pres-
ence of a normal myoepithelium (Fig. 1, A and B). As an internal 
control and to provide a baseline for dissemination levels with 
this rtTA, we used Adeno-Cre to induce expression of rtTA in a 
random subset of both luminal and myoepithelial cells (Mosa-
ic-Twist1 model; Fig. 1, A and B). Mosaic-Twist1 organoids were 
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3370
typically branched, with robust levels of dissemination relative 
to Twist1− control organoids (Fig. 1 D vs. Fig. 1 C). We validated 
by IF that both luminal and myoepithelial cells disseminated in 
Mosaic-Twist1 organoids and were Twist1+ (Fig. 1, D′ and D′′). 
We next induced Twist1 expression specifically in luminal cells 
(Luminal-Twist1 model) and observed much lower levels of dis-
semination than in Mosaic-Twist1 organoids even though both 
were derived from the same mice (Fig. 1, B and E vs. Fig. 1 D). The 
limited dissemination capacity of Luminal-Twist1 organoids was 
despite expression and nuclear localization of Twist1 in nondis-
seminating cells (Fig. 1, E′ and E′′). Quantification across three 
biologically independent replicates revealed significantly lower 
dissemination behavior when the myoepithelium was Twist1− 
(Fig. 1 B). Finally, we confirmed that addition of tamoxifen to 
organoids did not itself suppress dissemination and that both 
Mosaic-Twist1 and Luminal-Twist1 organoids expressed com-
parable levels of Twist1 protein (Fig. S2, A–C). As an additional 
control, we tested the relative recombination efficiencies when 
Figure 1. Luminal-specific Twist1 expression rarely results in dissemination past normal myoepithelium. (A) Mosaic or luminal-specific expression of 
Twist1 was achieved in K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1 organoids by Adeno-Cre and a tamoxifen (Tam)-inducible Cre-ER, respectively, followed by culture 
in doxycycline (Dox) to induce Twist1 expression. (B) K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1 organoids from the same mouse were left untreated or treated 
with Adeno-Cre (Mosaic-Twist1) or tamoxifen (Luminal-Twist1). The number of disseminated cells per organoid was significantly higher in Adeno-Cre–treated 
organoids compared with tamoxifen-treated organoids (fivefold difference), whereas untreated organoids showed no dissemination across three biological 
replicates. (C–C′′) The no-Twist1 control showed branching and no dissemination. (D–D′′) Mosaic-Twist1 expression induced branching and dissemination. 
(E–E′′) Luminal-Twist1 expression rarely led to dissemination. In the Mosaic-Twist1 model, dissemination of both luminal and myoepithelial cells was observed 
(D′ and D′), whereas in the luminal-Twist1 model, we only observed dissemination of luminal cells (E′ and E′′). n, total number of organoids; r, number of bio-
logical replicates. In D and E, red arrowheads mark all disseminated cells. In D′, D″, E′, and E″, red arrowheads mark K14− cells, and green arrowheads mark 
K14+ cells. Data were analyzed by two-tailed nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis multiple comparisons test; ****, P < 0.0001. Data are presented as box plots, with 
error bars representing the 5th to 95th percentile.
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3371
using Adeno-Cre and tamoxifen to induce Twist1 expression 
and confirmed that induction of mG and doxycycline addition 
resulted in a large majority of Twist1+ cells in both models, with 
a high correlation between mG positivity and Twist1 expression 
(Fig. S2, D–G). Taken together, these data reveal that the pres-
ence of an intact myoepithelium correlates with reduced es-
cape of Twist1+ luminal cells. We next sought to determine the 
nature of the luminal–myoepithelial cell interactions driving 
this regulation.
Normal myoepithelial cells suppress dissemination of 
Twist1+ luminal cells
In the Luminal-Twist1 model, Cre-ER activity results in the con-
version of a reporter locus from driving mT (Cre−) to mG (Cre+) 
expression. Because Cre-ER is expressed under the control of 
the luminal-specific K8 promoter, addition of tamoxifen and 
doxycycline results in differentially labeled Twist1+ luminal cells 
and Twist1− myoepithelial cells (Fig. 2 A). For consistency, myo-
epithelial cells in time-lapse videos are pseudocolored in green 
throughout the figures. We conducted time-lapse confocal imag-
ing of Twist1-induced organoids from this model and observed 
that when Twist1+ luminal cells protruded into the ECM, the adja-
cent Twist1− myoepithelial cells typically covered and contained 
them, reestablishing a continuous myoepithelial layer (Fig. 2, B 
and D–D′; and Videos 2, 3, 4, and 5). We observed only rare in-
stances of luminal cells successfully disseminating through a 
normal myoepithelial layer (Fig. 2, B–C′; and Video 1). When we 
quantified those events, we found that luminal cell restraint oc-
curred 92% of the time, while luminal cell escape happened only 
8% of the time (Fig. 2 B).
To test directly whether myoepithelial cells are regulating lu-
minal cell dissemination, we combined clustered Twist1+ lumi-
Figure 2. The myoepithelium dynamically restrains protruding Twist1+ luminal cells. (A) Organoids isolated from K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-
Twist1;mT/mG mice were treated with tamoxifen (Tam) to induce rtTA expression and cultured in doxycycline to induce Twist1 expression specifically in the 
luminal cell population. (B) Luminal cell restraint by myoepithelial cells quantified across multiple replicates was observed 92% of the time, and luminal cell 
escape was observed 8% of the time. (C and C′) Luminal cells were very rarely observed to disseminate past the myoepithelium. (D and D′) Luminal cells 
that protruded past the myoepithelium were typically restrained by myoepithelial cells. Adjacent myoepithelial cells migrated over and appeared to contain 
protruding luminal cells. n, total number of videos analyzed; r, number of biological replicates. Myoepithelial cells in time-lapse videos are pseudocolored in 
green throughout the figure.
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3372
nal cells with varying ratios of normal (Twist1−) myoepithelial 
cells. To achieve this goal, we isolated differentially labeled cell 
populations via FACS: for Twist1-inducible luminal cells, we used 
the Ubiquitous-Twist1 mouse (CMV::rtTA;TRE-Twist1;K14::Ac-
tin-GFP;mT/mG), and for normal myoepithelial cells, we used a 
WT mouse that expresses a GFP under the K14 promoter (K14::Ac-
tin-GFP;mT/mG). The two cell populations, luminal (GFP−mT+) 
and myoepithelial (GFP+mT+), were aggregated overnight at dif-
ferent ratios and embedded in Matrigel the next day (Fig. 3 A). 
Myoepithelial cells localized to the outside of aggregated organ-
oids surrounding the luminal cells. Upon addition of doxycy-
cline, luminal cells expressed Twist1 while myoepithelial cells 
remained Twist1− (Fig. 3, C–C′′′). The number of disseminated 
cells per aggregated organoid decreased as the number of nor-
mal myoepithelial cells increased (Fig. 3, B and D). In addition, we 
observed that myoepithelial coverage was more complete with an 
increased number of myoepithelial cells (Fig. 3 D′), suggesting 
that the completeness of the myoepithelial layer had a direct im-
pact on the likelihood of cell escape. Collectively, our data demon-
strate that myoepithelial cells regulate dissemination of Twist1+ 
luminal cells and establish the concept of the myoepithelium as 
a dynamic barrier to cell escape. We next sought insight into the 
molecular mechanism underlying this barrier function.
Depletion of α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) or P-cadherin 
compromises the myoepithelial barrier
Myoepithelial cells express a smooth muscle contractile mo-
lecular program, and it is critical to their role in milk ejection 
(Haaksma et al., 2011; Weymouth et al., 2012). Markers for the 
smooth muscle program are also commonly used in pathology 
to assay the integrity of the myoepithelium and distinguish be-
tween in situ and invasive breast carcinoma (Werling et al., 2003; 
Hilson et al., 2009). Because SMA has a critical role in both de-
velopment and cancer diagnosis, we sought to test its require-
ment for myoepithelial regulation of dissemination. To achieve 
this goal, we knocked down SMA in luminal-Twist1 organoids 
(K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG) using lentivi-
rally delivered SMA shRNA (Knott et al., 2014) with nontargeting 
shRNA used as a control, and we monitored for differences in 
dissemination after Twist1 induction (Fig. 4 A). Control organ-
oids with Twist1+ luminal cells and Twist1− myoepithelial cells 
had rare disseminated cells (Fig. 4, E–E′′; similar to Fig. 1, E–E′′). 
In contrast, SMA knockdown organoids displayed a significant 
increase in dissemination (Fig. 4, G–G′′). Specifically, organoids 
with depleted SMA showed an approximately threefold increase 
in the number of disseminated cells as compared with control 
across three different shRNA clones, each of which significantly 
reduced SMA protein levels (Fig. 4, B and C). In contrast, there 
was no difference in the level of the basement membrane pro-
tein Laminin-332 in control versus SMA knockdown organoids 
(Fig. 4, D, F, F′, H, H′). This finding suggests that SMA is not re-
quired for establishing the basement membrane and that the 
presence of basement membrane is not sufficient for limiting 
cell dissemination. We next used confocal microscopy to monitor 
cell–cell interactions after SMA knockdown. Upon Twist1 induc-
tion, we observed luminal Twist1+ cells protruding and dissem-
inating into the ECM without evident restraint of migration by 
the surrounding myoepithelial cells (Fig. 4 I and Video 6). Knock-
down of the myoepithelial-specific classical cadherin P-cadherin 
also significantly increased dissemination of Twist1+ cells (Fig. 
S2, H–K′′). Taken together, these data implicate both SMA-de-
pendent contractility and intercellular adhesion in myoepithelial 
barrier function.
Myoepithelial cells appear to suppress invasion of luminal and 
basal phenotype tumor organoids
Our data thus far revealed that myoepithelial cells regulate dis-
semination in our Twist1+ model system. We next sought to test 
their capacity to restrain tumor invasion using tumor organoids 
isolated from a mouse model of basal breast cancer (C31-T-Ag;mT/
mG). We combined varying ratios of GFP+ myoepithelial cells 
isolated from WT mice (K14::Actin-GFP) with mT+ tumor cells 
and cultured the aggregated organoids in collagen I gels, which 
model the stromal microenvironment around invasive carcino-
mas (Fig. 5, A and B). Myoepithelial cells spontaneously localized 
to the outside of the tumor aggregates. Organoids consisting only 
of tumor cells showed robust dissemination (Fig. 5 C). In con-
trast, as we increased the number of normal myoepithelial cells, 
the number of disseminated cells per tumor organoid decreased 
markedly (Fig. 5, B and C′–C′′′). We next used real-time confocal 
microscopy to study cell–cell interactions between myoepithe-
lial and tumor cells during this process. Myoepithelial cells were 
observed to wrap around tumor cells as they protruded into col-
lagen I and to limit the extent of their invasion (Fig. 5, D–D′′; and 
Video 7). In addition, we observed myoepithelial cells capture al-
ready disseminated tumor cells and reestablish their connection 
to the main tumor mass (Fig. 5, E–E′′; and Video 8). Quantification 
revealed the relative frequency of cell restraint (78%), recapture 
(12%), and escape past the myoepithelium (10%; Fig. 5 F). Simi-
lar apparent restraint of invasion and recapture of disseminated 
cells was observed in tumor organoids derived from a mouse 
model of luminal breast cancer (MMTV::PyMT;βactin-CFP; Fig. 
S3, A–D). We conclude that the myoepithelium can actively regu-
late and suppress tumor cell invasion and dissemination through 
cell migrations and rearrangements that dynamically maintain 
overall tissue architecture.
Our focus in this study was on testing the role of the myoepi-
thelium in restraining epithelial invasion and local dissemination 
in organoid models. Prior studies had proposed that myoepithe-
lial cells could act as cellular tumor suppressors (Sternlicht et al., 
1997; Deugnier et al., 2002; Adriance et al., 2005; Gudjonsson et 
al., 2005; Polyak and Hu, 2005; Hu et al., 2008; Polyak, 2010). 
However, the nature of this interaction was unclear. We devel-
oped lineage-specific expression models to enable the induction 
of Twist1 in either luminal or myoepithelial cells. Myoepithelial 
cells directly contact the ECM and were observed to disseminate 
in a cell-autonomous fashion in response to Twist1 expression. 
In contrast, luminal epithelial cells are surrounded by contractile 
myoepithelial cells and so must negotiate this layer before they 
can access the ECM. Expression of Twist1 specifically in lumi-
nal cells rarely resulted in dissemination in these 3D cultures; 
we instead typically observed active migration of myoepithelial 
cells to enclose and restrain invasive luminal epithelial cells. Bar-
rier function depended on both the abundance of myoepithelial 
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3373
cells and on their molecular properties. Expression of Twist1 or 
knockdown of either of the myoepithelial-specific genes SMA or 
P-cadherin was sufficient to compromise the myoepithelial bar-
rier. We then demonstrated that normal myoepithelial cells could 
also restrain invasive cancer cells in 3D organoid culture. Our 
data establish the concept of the myoepithelium as a dynamic 
barrier to epithelial invasion and local dissemination through 
active cell migration and intercellular interactions.
We speculate that our conclusions have implications for un-
derstanding the role of the myoepithelium during breast cancer 
progression in patients. The integrity of the myoepithelium is 
used to distinguish DCIS from IDC, and even microscopic gaps 
in the myoepithelium correlate with worse patient outcomes 
(Sternlicht et al., 1997; Man et al., 2003; Man and Sang, 2004). 
As such, myoepithelial cells are quite literally positioned to reg-
ulate invasion. However, an invasion-suppressing role could be 
Figure 3. Myoepithelial cell abundance regulates the extent of Twist1+ luminal cell dissemination. (A) Twist1-inducible luminal cells were isolated from 
CMV::rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG;K14::Actin-GFP mice, and normal K14+ (mostly myoepithelial) cells were isolated from mT/mG;K14::Actin-GFP mice via FACS 
using cell type–specific fluorescent reporters. Twist1-inducible luminal cells (red) were aggregated with normal myoepithelial cells (green) at different ratios 
to form clusters, and aggregated clusters were cultured in 3D Matrigel. (B) The number of disseminated Twist1+ cells per organoid significantly decreased with 
an increasing number of normal myoepithelial cells. (C–C′′′) Addition of doxycycline (dox) to aggregated organoids induced luminal-specific Twist1 expression. 
(D and D′) Myoepithelial coverage increased and dissemination decreased with the addition of more myoepithelial cells. Arrowheads indicate disseminated 
cells. n, total number of organoids; r, number of biological replicates. Data were analyzed by two-tailed nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis multiple comparisons 
test: **, P < 0.01; ****, P < 0.0001. Data are presented as box plots, with error bars representing the 5th to 95th percentile.
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3374
Figure 4. Depletion of α-SMA leads to an increase in cell dissemination. (A) Organoids isolated from K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG mice were treated 
with lentiviral shRNA against a nontargeting (NT) control and against three different clones of α-SMA (myoepithelial smooth muscle gene). Organoids were treated 
with tamoxifen (Tam) to induce rtTA expression and cultured in doxycycline (Dox) to induce Twist1 expression in the luminal cell compartment. After Twist1 expression, 
organoids were monitored for dissemination. (B) Organoids were divided into nontargeting and SMA knockdown treatment groups. The number of disseminated cells 
per organoid was significantly higher in SMA knockdown organoids compared with the nontargeting control (two- to threefold difference) across five biological replicates. 
(C) SMA protein levels quantified from IF images confirmed a decrease in SMA expression in SMA knockdown organoids. (D) Laminin-332 protein levels quantified from 
IF images did not significantly differ between SMA knockdown organoids and controls. (E–F′) IF indicated retention of K14, SMA and Laminin-332 in control organoids. 
(G–H′) IF indicated retention of K14, loss of SMA, and retention of Laminin-332 in SMA knockdown organoids. Red and white arrowheads indicate disseminated cells. (I) 
Protruding Twist1+ luminal cells were observed to invade past the SMA-depleted myoepithelium and were able to disseminate (arrowheads). n, total number of organoids; 
r, number of biological replicates. Data were analyzed by two-tailed nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis multiple comparisons test: ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001. Data are 
presented as box plots, with error bars representing the 5th to 95th percentile. Myoepithelial cells in time-lapse videos are pseudocolored in green in I.
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3375
Figure 5. Normal myoepithelial cells suppress invasion and dissemination of C3-1-T tumor cells. (A) Tumor cells (mT+; red) were isolated from C3-1-
Tag;mT/mG mice and normal myoepithelial cells (GFP+; green) were isolated from K14::Actin-GFP mice via FACS. Tumor cells were aggregated with normal 
myoepithelial cells at different ratios to form clusters, and aggregated clusters were cultured in 3D collagen I. (B–C′′′) The clusters were divided into four groups 
and monitored for dissemination. The number of disseminated cells per cluster decreased with an increasing number of normal myoepithelial cells. Arrowheads 
indicate disseminated cells. (D and D′) Myoepithelial cells appeared to contain invasion past the myoepithelial layer and reestablish a continuous myoepithelial 
layer. (E and E′) Myoepithelial cells were also observed to extend into the collagen and capture disseminated tumor cells. (F) Tumor cell restraint, recapture, 
and dissemination quantified from real-time confocal videos across multiple replicates. n, total number of organoids; r, number of biological replicates. Data 
were analyzed by two-tailed nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis multiple comparisons test: ****, P < 0.0001. Data are presented as box plots, with error bars rep-
resenting the 5th to 95th percentile. Myoepithelial cells in time-lapse videos are pseudocolored in green.
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3376
accomplished by a passive mechanical barrier, similar to a stone 
wall. Once breached, it would not further resist invasion. Instead, 
in our organoid cultures, we observed a dynamic myoepithelial 
barrier capable of restraining invasion and even recapturing 
disseminated cells. We speculate that pathological evidence of 
microinvasion past an otherwise intact myoepithelium could 
be a snapshot in time of a myoepithelium that was still actively 
resisting invasion and dissemination in that patient (Man and 
Sang, 2004). Furthermore, a recent single-cell sequencing study 
revealed that most mutations and copy-number changes are 
shared between DCIS and IDC in the same patient (Casasent et 
al., 2018), lending plausibility to the idea that initiation of inva-
sive behavior may relate more to the overcoming of local barriers 
such as the myoepithelium than the acquisition of novel proinva-
sive mutations. We also note that the cancer cells that lead collec-
tive invasion express K14 but lack expression of smooth muscle 
markers such as SMA (Cheung et al., 2013). There are therefore 
distinct invasion suppressing (myoepithelial; K14+SMA+) and in-
vasion promoting (K14+SMA−) epithelial populations expressing 
K14 within breast tumors.
We demonstrated that the myoepithelium is a dynamic bar-
rier to luminal epithelial dissemination and relies upon both 
contractility and adhesion for this function. This concept is 
supported by recent papers that have elucidated self-organiz-
ing principles governing tissue architecture. Briefly, the orga-
nization of cell populations within tissues can be regulated by 
their relative cell–cell and cell–matrix adhesion (Cerchiari et al., 
2015), mutual adhesion and cortical tension (Maître et al., 2012), 
interfacial tensions (Neumann et al., 2018), and proteolytically 
driven differences in motility (Mori et al., 2009). Accordingly, it 
will be important to deepen our understanding of how molecular 
differences among cells drive cell behavior and ultimately tissue 
and organ structure and function. Based on past work, we spec-
ulate that the highly cohesive nature of the myoepithelium may 
underlie its ability to capture invasive luminal cells and restore 
normal tissue architecture (Cerchiari et al., 2015).
Further studies are now needed to identify the sensing mech-
anisms used by the myoepithelium to detect and respond to 
invasive luminal cells, particularly once they have already dis-
seminated. It will also be important to elucidate the mechanisms 
by which the myoepithelial barrier eventually fails and tumor 
cells succeed in metastasizing to distant sites. A better under-
standing of myoepithelial function may also help inform the di-
agnosis or management of breast cancer patients.
Materials and methods
Mouse strains
Mice used in this study were backcrossed to FVB/n background 
and maintained in accord with a protocol approved by the 
Johns Hopkins Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. 
The Twist1-tetO7-luc (TRE-Twist1) transgenic line contains the 
mouse Twist1 cDNA under the control of a bidirectional tet-
racycline responsive element (tetO7) and which regulates the 
luciferase gene as previously described (Tran et al., 2012). The 
CMV::rtTA transgenic line was a gift from F. Cong and H. Varmus 
(National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD). These mice carry the 
transgene encoding the reverse tetracycline-controlled transac-
tivator protein (rtTA) under the control of a human CMV early 
enhancer. Crossing of TRE-Twist1 and CMV::rtTA transgenic 
lines resulted in a transgenic line that contained both the rtTA 
activator and the tetracycline inducible Twist1-tetO7 transgene. 
Addition of doxycycline in these mice triggers a conformational 
change that enables tetO7 binding, activation, and Twist1 and luc 
transcription. The K14::Actin-GFP transgenic line was a gift from 
E. Fuchs (The Rockefeller University, New York, NY). In this line, 
the K14-GFP-actin transgene construct containing the human 
K14 promoter, rabbit β-globin intron, and EGFP-actin cDNA was 
randomly inserted, and as a result, the mice express EGFP-tagged 
murine β-actin under the control of the K14 promoter as de-
scribed previously (Vaezi et al., 2002). The K14::rtTA line was 
derived by using a construct containing rtTA2S-M2-VP16 (rtTA) 
preceded by a β-globin intron and under the control of the K14 
promoter as described previously (Nguyen et al., 2006). Cross-
ing the K14::rtTA line to theTRE-Twist1 line leads to expression 
of Twist1 protein in the basal cell lineage upon administration 
of doxycycline. The K8::Cre-ER line was generated by randomly 
inserting the K8-CreER fragment containing the CreERT2 frag-
ment preceded by the β-globin intron and followed by a simian 
virus 40 (SV40) polyA signal. This resulted in mice expressing 
CreER in the luminal lineage using the K8 promoter as previ-
ously described (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011). The mT/mG mouse 
line was derived by inserting the mT/mG construct containing 
the β-actin core promoter with a CMV enhancer driving a loxP-
flanked coding sequence of membrane-targeted tandem dimer 
Tomato (tdTomato) into the murine ROSA26 locus as described 
previously (Muzumdar et al., 2007). These mice ubiquitously 
expressed tdTomato with membrane localization. After breed-
ing mT/mG mice with the K8::Cre-ER line, and upon tamoxifen 
administration, there is Cre-mediated excision of the mT se-
quence, allowing expression of the membrane-localized EGFP 
(mG). The R26::Lox-Stop-Lox-rtTA-IRES-EGFP (R26::LSL-rtTA) 
mouse line was generated by a targeted insertion of a conditional 
rtTA-IRES-EGFP transgene between the first and second exons of 
the murine ROSA26 locus as previously described (Belteki et al., 
2005). In these mice, the upstream sequence is coding for rtTA, 
and the downstream sequence is coding for EGFP. These two cod-
ing sequences were preceded by a loxP site–flanked selectable 
marker. Prior to Cre-mediated excision of the loxP sequence, the 
downstream coding sequences are not expressed. Crossing the 
R26::LSL-rtTA line to the K8::Cre-ER and CMV::rtTA;TRE-Twist1 
lines leads to expression of Twist1 protein in the luminal cell 
lineage upon administration of tamoxifen and doxycycline. To 
derive the FVB-Tg(C3-1-TAg)cJeg/JegJ line, the rat prostatic ste-
roid-binding protein (C3-1) gene 5′ regulatory region and the 
simian virus 40 (SV40) large tumor antigen (TAg) were com-
bined to create a C3-1-TAg fusion sequence, which was inserted 
into mouse embryos as described previously (Maroulakou et al., 
1994). The C3-1 regulatory region was used to direct expression 
of SV40 TAg to the prostate and mammary glands, resulting in 
a transgenic model for studying tumorigenesis in these tissues. 
For generation of the MMTV::PyMT line, cDNA encoding the 
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) and the polyoma virus 
middle T antigen (PyVT) was inserted into the expression vec-
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3377
tor pMMTV-SV40 as previously described (Guy et al., 1992). 
MMTV::PyMT mice express the PyVT under the direction of the 
MMTV promoter and develop mammary tumors that metasta-
size to the lung. The βactin-CFP line was derived by inserting a 
transgenic construct containing an enhanced cyan fluorescent 
protein gene under the control of the chicken β-actin promoter 
coupled with the CMV enhancer into embryonic stem cells. These 
mice express CFP in all cell types. K14::rtTA, K8::Cre-ER, mT/mG, 
R26::LSL-rtTA, C3-1-Tag, MMTV::PyMT, and βactin-CFP mouse 
lines were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. For confo-
cal time-lapse experiments and FACS experiments, different 
transgenic lines were crossed with βactin-CFP, mT/mG and/or 
K14::Actin-GFP mice.
Isolation of primary murine mammary organoids
Epithelial fragments termed organoids were isolated from mu-
rine mammary glands and mammary tumors using previously 
described techniques (Ewald et al., 2008; Nguyen-Ngoc et al., 
2015). Normal mammary glands were harvested from 8- to 
12-wk-old mice, MMTV-PyMT tumors were harvested from 
mice at 12–16 wk of age, and C3-1-Tag tumors were harvested 
from mice at 20–24 wk of age. Briefly, we surgically removed no. 
3 and no. 4 mammary glands from normal mice and the largest 
tumors from tumor mice. Dissected tissue was then subjected to 
a combination of mechanical disruption, collagenase-trypsin di-
gestion, and DNase treatment to separate epithelial tissue from 
fat and stromal cells. The epithelial fragments were separated 
from single cells through differential centrifugation. The final 
pellet contained thousands of organoids, each composed of a cou-
ple hundred cells.
3D culture of primary murine mammary organoids
The isolated organoids were suspended in Matrigel (354230; BD) 
or rat-tail collagen I (354236; Corning) at a concentration of 1–2 
organoids/µl and plated as 100–120 µl suspensions in 24-well 
glass bottom plates (655892; Greiner Bio One) over a 37°C heat-
ing block. Acid-solubilized rat-tail collagen I gels (3 mg/ml colla-
gen I, pH 7–7.5) were prepared as described previously (Ewald et 
al., 2008; Nguyen-Ngoc et al., 2015). Matrigel and collagen I gels 
were polymerized at 37°C for 45 min before addition of organoid 
medium: DMEM (D6546; Sigma-Aldrich) with 1% insulin-trans-
ferrin-selenium (51500–056; Gibco) and 1% penicillin-strepto-
mycin (P4333; Sigma-Aldrich).
Cell type–specific Twist1 activation in 3D culture
In organoids isolated from CMV::rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/
mG;K14::Actin-GFP and K14::rtTA;TRE-Twist1 mice, Twist1 ex-
pression was induced by supplementing 3D Matrigel with 2.5 nM 
FGF2 and 5 µg/ml doxycycline organoid medium (Shanghai Ren-
Young Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd) on day 1 in culture. The organoid 
medium was not supplemented with 2.5 nM FGF2 in experiments 
where FGF2 effects were tested on cell dissemination in K14::rt-
TA;TRE-Twist1 organoids. Organoid medium was changed every 
48 h for all doxycycline induction experiments. In organoids iso-
lated from K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG mice, 
mosaic rtTA expression was induced by incubating organoids 
with Adeno-Cre (1045; Vector Laboratories) at a ratio of 107 PFU 
per 1,000 organoids for 1–2 h at 37°C before suspension in Matri-
gel, resulting in recombination of 50–75% cells. To induce rtTA 
expression in luminal cells, organoids embedded in 3D Matrigel 
were cultured continuously with 50 nM 4-hydroxy tamoxifen 
(H7904; Sigma-Aldrich), which activated Cre-ER in cytokeratin 
8 (K8)–positive cells. The next day, for both mosaic and luminal 
rtTA expression, the organoids were supplemented with 5 µg/ml 
doxycycline and 2.5 nM FGF2 organoid medium.
Differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy
Live imaging of organoids was conducted using an LD Plan-Neo-
fluar 20×/0.4 Korr Ph2 objective lens and a Zeiss Cell Observer 
system with a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 and an AxioCam MRM 
camera. For time-lapse imaging, images were acquired at 20-
min intervals for 5–7 d, with 100–200 videos collected in paral-
lel. For quantification of dissemination and branching, images 
were acquired on day 1 and days 5–9 in culture. Temperature was 
maintained at 37°C and CO2 was held at 5%. AxioVision64 soft-
ware (Zeiss) was used to analyze time-lapse videos and export 
individual TIFF files. ImageJ (National Institutes of Health) was 
used to count disseminated cells, crop and calibrate images, and 
place scale bars.
Confocal microscopy
Confocal imaging was conducted on a Solamere Technology 
Group spinning-disk confocal microscope with an iXon3 885 
electron-multiplying charge-coupled device camera (Andor). An 
LD C-Apochromat 40×/1.1 W Korr objective lens (Zeiss) was used 
for single and time-lapse image acquisition using water for still 
images and Immersol (Zeiss) for time lapse as the imaging me-
dium. For time-lapse imaging, images were acquired at 20-min 
time intervals with 15–20 videos collected in parallel using one 
to three channels (excitation at 405 nm, 488 nm, and 561 nm). 
For z stacks, 2-µm spacing was used. Acquisition of both time-
lapse and still images was performed using µManager (Stuurman 
et al., 2010) and Piper (Stanford Photonics, Inc.). Temperature 
was maintained at 37°C and CO2 at 5% for live imaging. Imaris 8 
(Bitplane) was used to analyze videos, export individual TIFFs, 
and adjust brightness and contrast of the images in each channel 
to maximize the clarity. Adjustments were always made across 
entire images. A minimal 0.137-µm Gaussian image filter was ap-
plied across images in Fig. 1 (C and D) to maximize image clarity. 
ImageJ was used to crop and calibrate images and place scale bars.
Analysis of cell dissemination, branching, and 
cellular protrusions
DIC images were used to analyze branching and dissemination 
of organoids. Branching was scored by counting the number of 
organoids with three or more distinct elongated buds. Dissem-
ination was scored by counting the number of adjacent single 
cells in the ECM separated from the organoid they originated 
from. An organoid was categorized as disseminated if it had at 
least two adjacent cells. Both dissemination and branching were 
quantified for organoids at 7–9 d in culture. Cell counting was 
performed using ImageJ software. For each experiment, dissemi-
nation of the treatment conditions was normalized to the median 
dissemination of the control, which was set to have a value of 
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3378
100. Normalized data from multiple independent biological rep-
licates were pooled, and the statistical analysis was performed 
using Prism (GraphPad Software). The P value was determined 
by a nonparametric Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test (compar-
ing two groups) or a Kruskal-Willis test (comparing multiple 
groups). Dissemination of cell types with different fluorescent 
markers (GFP and mT) was scored by analyzing confocal videos 
using Imaris. Myoepithelial restraint of luminal cell dissemina-
tion in K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG organoids 
was scored by counting the number of events of luminal cells 
protruding past the myoepithelial layer and being recaptured 
by myoepithelial cells. Myoepithelial restraint of tumor cell in-
vasion, tumor cell recapture, and tumor cell dissemination in 
clusters aggregated from cells from mT/mG;K14::Actin-GFP, C31-
T-Ag;mT/mG and MMTV::PyMT; βactin-CFP mice was quantified 
by scoring the number of these events observed in the real-time 
confocal videos. Restraint of tumor cells was defined as myoepi-
thelial cells wrapping around tumor cells that protruded past the 
myoepithelial layer and pulling them back, tumor cell recapture 
was defined as myoepithelial cells reaching out and pulling back 
fully disseminated tumor cells, and tumor cell dissemination was 
defined as cells protruding past the myoepithelial layer, fully de-
taching, and migrating away.
SMA and P-cadherin knockdown experiments
After isolation of K8::Cre-ER;R26::LSL-rtTA;TRE-Twist1(mT/
mG) organoids, 0.5–1 ml of a 10-ml organoid suspension was 
incubated with a cell dissociation reagent TrypLE Express En-
zyme (1×; 12604013; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 5–10 min 
to dissociate organoids into single cells. Trypan Blue Solution 
(152250061; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to the disso-
ciated cell solution, and a hematocytometer was used to count 
the number of cells. The resulting number was used to calculate 
an average organoid size and the number of cells in our origi-
nal organoid suspension. 1,000–1,200 organoids were plated 
in a nonadherent 96-well plate (655970; Greiner Bio-One), and 
organoids were allowed to settle for 1–1.5 h at 37°C. Three differ-
ent clones of lentiviral SMA shRNA and a nontargeting control 
shRNA were selected from the transOMIC technologies shERW 
OOD-UltramiR shRNA library (at >108 TU/ml): ULT 
RA-3452234 
Acta2, 5′-TGC 
TGT 
TGA 
CAG 
TGA 
GCG 
ATG 
ACG 
CTG 
AAG 
TAT 
CCG 
ATA 
ATA 
GTG 
AAG 
CCA 
CAG 
ATG 
TAT 
TAT 
CGG 
ATA 
CTT 
CAG 
CGT 
CAG 
TGC 
CTA 
CTG 
CCT 
CGGA-3′, ULT 
RA-3201946 Acta2, 5′-TGC 
TGT 
TGA 
CAG 
TGA 
GCG 
CCC 
TCA 
TGA 
AGA 
TCC 
TGA 
CTG 
ATA 
GTG 
AAG 
CCA 
CAG 
ATG 
TAT 
CAG 
TCA 
GGA 
TCT 
TCA 
TGA 
GGT 
TGC 
CTA 
CTG 
CCT 
CGGA-3′, ULT 
RA-3201947 Acta2, 5′-TGC 
TGT 
TGA 
CAG 
TGA 
GCG 
CGA 
CTC 
TCT 
TCC 
AGC 
CAT 
CTT 
ATA 
GTG 
AAG 
CCA 
CAG 
ATG 
TAT 
AAG 
ATG 
GCT 
GGA 
AGA 
GAG 
TCT 
TGC 
CTA 
CTG 
CCT 
CGGA-3′, and 
TLN 
VU4420 nontargeting control shRNA, 5′-TGC 
TGT 
TGA 
CAG 
TGA 
GCG 
AAG 
GCA 
GAA 
GTA 
TGC 
AAA 
GCA 
TTA 
GTG 
AAG 
CCA 
CAG 
ATG 
TAA 
TGC 
TTT 
GCA 
TAC 
TTC 
TGC 
CTT 
GCC 
TAC 
TGC 
CTC 
GGA-3′. 
Two different clones of lentiviral P-cadherin shRNA and Lu-
ciferase control shRNA were selected from the Sigma-Aldrich 
MIS 
SION pLKO.1-puro library (at >106 TU/ml): Cdh3 shRNA 1 
(TRCN0000430304), Cdh3 shRNA 2 (TRCN0000094414), and 
Luciferase shRNA (SHC007V). The oligonucleotide sequence 
used for Cdh3 shRNA#1 was 5′-CCG 
GCA 
CGT 
ATG 
ACT 
TGC 
ATC 
TTT 
CCT 
CGA 
GGA 
AAG 
ATG 
CAA 
GTC 
ATA 
CGT 
GTT 
TTT 
TG-3′ and 
for Cdh3 shRNA 2 was 5′-CCG 
GTG 
AAC 
TGG 
AGG 
TGA 
AGA 
TTC 
GCT 
CGA 
GCG 
AAT 
CTT 
CAC 
CTC 
CAG 
TTC 
ATT 
TTT 
TG-3′. The lentiviral 
particles were thawed on ice, mixed with 3 µl of ViroMag R/L 
nanoparticles (RL40200; OZ Biosciences), and incubated at room 
temperature for 30 min. Most of the media was removed from 
the 96-well plate with the organoids, and the ViroMag/lentivi-
rus mix was added. The organoids were transfected with lenti-
viral particles with an MOI of 7. Suspensions were well mixed to 
disperse the organoids and minimize aggregation. One well with 
organoids was reserved as a puromycin control to evaluate killing 
efficiency. The 96-well plate was incubated on top of a magnetic 
plate (MF10000OZ; OZ Biosciences) for 1.5 h at 37°C, and then the 
plate was taken off the magnetic plate and incubated overnight 
at 37°C. On day 2, 200 µl prewarmed organoid medium with 2.5 
nM FGF2 was added to all the wells, the plate was allowed to settle 
for 1 h, ∼200 µl media was removed, another 200 µl fresh FGF2 
organoid medium was added, and the suspensions were mixed 
to redisperse the organoids. On day 4, 200 µl media was removed 
from all wells, and 200 µl organoid medium with 2.5 nM FGF2 
and 2 µg/ml puromycin was added to each well. The efficiency of 
puromycin selection was evaluated by adding 2 µg/ml puromycin 
to noninfected organoids. On day 7, the organoids surviving pu-
romycin selection were harvested for 3D culture.
FACS to purify mammary gland cell populations
For each experiment, organoids were isolated from CMV::rt-
TA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG;K14::Actin-GFP, mT/mG;K14::Actin-GFP, 
C31-T-Ag;mT/mG, and MMTV::PyMT;βactin-CFP mice. For CM-
V::rtTA;TRE-Twist1;mT/mG;K14::Actin-GFP and mT/mG;K14::Ac-
tin-GFP mouse lines, three to five mice were used per experiment, 
and the epithelial tissue was pooled together. For the C31-T-
Ag;mT/mG and MMTV::PyMT;βactin-CFP mouse lines, a single 
mouse was used for each experiment. Isolated organoids were 
incubated with 5 ml PBS at room temperature for 5 min followed 
by a 5-min centrifugation at 1,500 rpm. Organoid pellets were re-
suspended in a cell dissociation reagent TrypLE Express Enzyme 
(1×; 12604013; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and gently pipetted for 
5–10 min at room temperature until dissociated into single cells. 
The dissociation reagent was neutralized by addition of 10 ml of 
5% FBS organoid medium. The cells were centrifuged for 10 min 
at 1,500 rpm, and the pellets were resuspended in 2.5 nM FGF2 
organoid medium. The resulting cell suspensions were filtered 
through 100-µm cell strainers (352235; Corning) and sorted on 
a Beckman Coulter MoFlo Cytometer. The cellular distributions 
were gated based on their endogenous fluorescence reporters 
(GFP+, GFP+/mT+, and mT+). Dead cells were excluded by propid-
ium iodide fluorescence. The sorted cells were resuspended in 2.5 
nM FGF2 organoid medium and plated in a nonadherent U-bot-
tom 96-well plate (655970; Greiner Bio One) or a nonadherent flat 
bottom 96-well plate (655970; Greiner Bio-One). The number of 
luminal cells was held constant between wells within an exper-
iment but varied between experiments based on FACS yield. A 
typical experiment would have 25,000 luminal cells and varying 
ratios of myoepithelial cells, resulting in a total cell number per 
well of between 50,000 and 100,000 cells. Cells were allowed to 
aggregate overnight at 37°C. The next day, the clusters formed in 
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3379
each well were collected and cultured in Matrigel or collagen I as 
described above. The clusters were imaged by confocal micros-
copy to confirm the presence of the corresponding fluorescence 
reporters as well as to examine the architecture of the overall 
cluster. The clusters were imaged by DIC microscopy on the first 
and last day of culture, and the number of disseminated cells per 
cluster was scored using ImageJ software.
Protein isolation
To dissolve Matrigel and isolate protein from organoids, gels 
were placed into BSA-coated tubes and incubated in 1× Prote-
ase-Phosphatase Inhibitor stock at 4°C for 30 min. 1× of Pro-
tease-Phosphatase Inhibitor stock had final concentrations of 
10% of a Roche Complete Mini tablet (11836153001) and 10% of 
a Roche PhosSTOP tablet (4906837001). The tubes containing 
dissolved gels were centrifuged at 400 rcf for 5 min at 4°C. The 
pellets were resuspended and washed twice with cold 1× PBS 
to remove remaining medium and Matrigel and centrifuged at 
400 rcf for 5 min at 4°C in between washes. The lysis buffer for 
protein isolation was prepared as following: 5% glycerol (G5516; 
Sigma-Aldrich), 1× RIPA buffer (20–188; EMD Millipore), 0.1% 
SDS, and 1× of Protease-Phosphatase Inhibitor stock. Lysis buf-
fer was added to pellets and left on ice for 20 min. The samples 
were centrifuged for 10 min at 18,000 rcf at 4°C. The lysates were 
transferred to prechilled tubes and stored at −80°C.
Western blotting
Protein lysates were thawed on ice along with the BSA standard 
solutions (0–2,000 µm/ml). Protein was quantified using a bicin-
choninic assay (23227; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Standards were 
loaded in triplicate and samples in duplicate on a 96-well plate 
(3595; Corning). The plate was incubated for 30 min at 37°C, and 
the absorbance was measured at 562 nm using a Biotek Synergy 
Mx microplate reader. A linear best-fit line was used to calculate 
the protein concentrations of samples. Samples resuspended 
in SDS protein loading buffer (LB0100; Morganville Scientific) 
and β-mercaptoethanol (M3148; Sigma-Aldrich) were heated at 
95°C for 5 min and loaded onto 4–15% Mini-PRO 
TEAN TGX gels 
(456-1084; Bio-Rad Laboratories) along with a Chameleon Duo 
prestained ladder (928–6000; Li-Cor). The gels were run in 1× 
TGS running buffer (161-0772; Bio-Rad Laboratories) at 120 V for 
∼1.5 h. Gels were transferred onto hydrophobic polyvinylidene 
difluoride membranes (IPFL07810; EMD Millipore) in cold 1× 
TG-MeOH (161–0771; Bio-Rad Laboratories) at 100 V for 1 h at 
4°C. Membranes were blocked in Odyssey Blocking Buffer (TBS) 
for 1–1.5 h. Primary antibodies were prepared in 50% Odyssey 
Blocking Buffer (TBS)/50% TBS-T and incubated at 4°C over-
night on an orbital shaker. Primary antibodies used were mouse 
anti-Twist1 (sc-81417; 1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) and 
rabbit anti-actin (A2103; 1:1,000; Sigma-Aldrich). The next day, 
the membranes were washed three times for 5 min each in TBS-T. 
Secondary antibodies were incubated in 50% Odyssey Blocking 
Buffer (TBS)/50% TBS-T for 1 h at room temperature on an or-
bital shaker. Secondary antibodies used were IRDye 800 CW and 
680RD (1:10,000; Li-Cor). The blots were washed 2 times for 5 
min each in TBS-T and one time for 10 min in TBS and scanned 
on a Li-Cor Odyssey CLx.
IF staining
Organoid-containing Matrigel and collagen I gels were fixed in 
4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at 37°C. The fixed gels were 
either stored for further staining in PBS at 4°C or embedded 
in optimal cutting temperature compound (OCT; Sakura) and 
frozen at −80°C. OCT blocks were cut into 50-µm sections on a 
cryostat at −20°C. For antibody staining, sections were thawed 
and rinsed twice in 1× PBS for 10 min to remove OCT. Both fixed 
gels and sections were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100/
PBS for 1 h, rinsed three times with PBS, blocked for 1–2 h with 
10% FBS/1% BSA/PBS, incubated with primary antibodies in 
1% FBS/1% BSA/PBS overnight at 4°C at the dilutions listed 
below, and rinsed three times with PBS for 15 min. Second-
ary antibodies diluted in 1% FBS/1% BSA/PBS were incubated 
for 4–6 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C. Gels were 
rinsed three times with PBS for 15 min and were ready for im-
aging. The slides were rinsed three times in PBS for 15 min, 
mounted with Fluoromount (F4680; Sigma-Aldrich), and sealed 
with coverslips.
Primaries antibodies used and their dilutions were as follows: 
rabbit anti–cytokeratin 14 (PRB-155P; 1:500; Covance), rat anti–
cytokeratin 8 (TRO 
MA-I; 1:100; Developmental Studies Hybrid-
oma Bank), mouse anti–αSMA (A5228; 1:250; Sigma-Aldrich; and 
ab7817, 1:250; Abcam), mouse anti-Twist1 (sc-81417, 1:50; Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), rat anti–P-cadherin (clone PCD-1, 
1:50; a gift from M. Takeichi, RIK 
EN Center for Developmental 
Biology, Kobe, Japan), and rabbit anti–Laminin-332 (1:500; gifts 
from P. Marinkovich, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, and M. 
Aumailley, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany). Second-
ary antibodies used were coupled to Alexa Fluor 405, 488, 568, 
or 647 (1:150; Invitrogen). F-actin–positive cell membranes were 
stained with Alexa Fluor phalloidin (1:100; Thermo Fisher Scien-
tific), and nuclei were stained with DAPI (D3571; 1:1,000; Thermo 
Fisher Scientific).
Quantification of SMA and P-cadherin protein levels in SMA 
and P-cadherin knockdown organoids
SMA and P-cadherin knockdown and control organoids cultured 
in Matrigel were fixed, stained with anti–αSMA, anti–P-cad-
herin, and anti–cytokeratin 14 antibodies, and imaged on the 
confocal microscope. Imaris was used to adjust brightness of the 
images in each channel, and to export individual TIFF files. The 
mean intensity of IF staining for SMA, P-cadherin, and K14 anti-
bodies was measured in ImageJ. K14 protein levels were used as 
a control for SMA and P-cadherin protein levels in control and 
knockdown organoids. Prism was used to plot all the final values 
and perform the statistical analysis.
Quantification of Laminin-332 protein levels in SMA 
knockdown organoids
SMA knockdown and control organoids cultured in Matrigel 
were fixed, stained with anti–αSMA and anti–Laminin-332, and 
imaged on the confocal microscope. Imaris was used to adjust 
brightness of the images in each channel, and to export individ-
ual TIFF files. The mean intensity of IF staining for Laminin-332 
antibody was measured in ImageJ. Prism was used to plot all the 
final values and perform the statistical analysis.
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3380
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows the myoepithelium restraining a luminal Twist1+ 
cell from escaping in the Ubiquitous-Twist1 model and cell-au-
tonomous Twist1 dissemination in the Myoepithelial-Twist1 
model. Fig. S2 demonstrates that luminal-specific Twist1 ex-
pression leads to low dissemination and is increased by P-cad-
herin knockdown. Fig. S3 demonstrates how myoepithelial 
cells suppress invasion and dissemination of PyMT tumor cells. 
Videos are 3D confocal time-lapse videos. Videos 1 and 2 show 
luminal cell escape and cell restraint, respectively, and corre-
spond with the still images in Fig. 2 (C and D). Videos 3, 4, and 
5 represent additional examples of the myoepithelial dynamic 
barrier function described in Fig. 2. Video 6 shows luminal cell 
dissemination past SMA-depleted myoepithelium and corre-
sponds with still images in Fig. 4 I. Video 7 shows myoepithelial 
cells limiting invasion of basal tumor cells and corresponds with 
still images in Fig. 5 D. Video 8 shows myoepithelial cells recap-
turing disseminated basal tumor cells and corresponds with still 
images in Fig. 5 E.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Ewald laboratory for helpful discus-
sions. We thank Hao Zhang of The Johns Hopkins School of Pub-
lic Health Flow Cytometry Core Facility for assistance with FACS 
and Dr. Masatoshi Takeichi for the gift of P-cadherin antisera. 
A.J. Ewald received support for this project through grants 
from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation/Pink Agenda 
(BCRF-16-048 and BCRF-17-048), the Metastatic Breast Cancer 
Network, the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer 
Institute (U01CA217846 and U54CA2101732), and the American 
Cancer Society (RSG-12-141-01-CSM). 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: Conceptualization: O.K. Sirka, E.R. 
Shamir, A.J. Ewald; Methodology: O.K. Sirka, E.R. Shamir, and A.J. 
Ewald; Validation: O.K. Sirka, E.R. Shamir, and A.J. Ewald; Formal 
analysis: O.K. Sirka, E.R. Shamir, and A.J. Ewald; Investigation: 
O.K. Sirka and E.R. Shamir; Writing: O.K. Sirka, E.R. Shamir, and 
A.J. Ewald; Visualization: O.K. Sirka and E.R. Shamir; Supervi-
sion: A.J. Ewald; Funding acquisition: A.J. Ewald.
Submitted: 28 February 2018
Revised: 12 June 2018
Accepted: 28 June 2018
References
Adriance, M.C., J.L. Inman, O.W. Petersen, and M.J. Bissell. 2005. Myoepithe-
lial cells: good fences make good neighbors. Breast Cancer Res. 7:190–197. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1186/ 
bcr1286
Barsky, S.H., and N.J. Karlin. 2005. Myoepithelial cells: autocrine and para-
crine suppressors of breast cancer progression. J. Mammary Gland Biol. 
Neoplasia. 10:249–260. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10911 
-005 
-9585 
-5
Belteki, G., J. Haigh, N. Kabacs, K. Haigh, K. Sison, F. Costantini, J. Whitsett, 
S.E. Quaggin, and A. Nagy. 2005. Conditional and inducible transgene 
expression in mice through the combinatorial use of Cre-mediated 
recombination and tetracycline induction. Nucleic Acids Res. 33:e51. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
nar/ 
gni051
Casasent, A.K., A. Schalck, R. Gao, E. Sei, A. Long, W. Pangburn, T. Casasent, 
F. Meric-Bernstam, M.E. Edgerton, and N.E. Navin. 2018. Multiclonal 
Invasion in Breast Tumors Identified by Topographic Single Cell Se-
quencing. Cell. 172:205–217.
Cerchiari, A.E., J.C. Garbe, N.Y. Jee, M.E. Todhunter, K.E. Broaders, D.M. Peehl, 
T.A. Desai, M.A. LaBarge, M. Thomson, and Z.J. Gartner. 2015. A strategy 
for tissue self-organization that is robust to cellular heterogeneity and 
plasticity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 112:2287–2292. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.1410776112
Cheung, K.J., E. Gabrielson, Z. Werb, and A.J. Ewald. 2013. Collective invasion 
in breast cancer requires a conserved basal epithelial program. Cell. 
155:1639–1651. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2013 
.11 
.029
Deugnier, M.A., J. Teulière, M.M. Faraldo, J.P. Thiery, and M.A. Glukhova. 
2002. The importance of being a myoepithelial cell. Breast Cancer Res. 
4:224–230. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1186/ 
bcr459
Ewald, A.J., A. Brenot, M. Duong, B.S. Chan, and Z. Werb. 2008. Collective ep-
ithelial migration and cell rearrangements drive mammary branching 
morphogenesis. Dev. Cell. 14:570–581. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.devcel 
.2008 
.03 
.003
Faraldo, M.M., J. Teulière, M.-A. Deugnier, I. Taddei-De La Hosseraye, J.P. 
Thiery, and M.A. Glukhova. 2005. Myoepithelial cells in the control of 
mammary development and tumorigenesis: data from genetically mod-
ified mice. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia. 10:211–219. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10911 
-005 
-9582 
-8
Gudjonsson, T., M.C. Adriance, M.D. Sternlicht, O.W. Petersen, and M.J. Bis-
sell. 2005. Myoepithelial cells: their origin and function in breast mor-
phogenesis and neoplasia. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia. 10:261–272. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10911 
-005 
-9586 
-4
Gusterson, B.A., M.J. Warburton, D. Mitchell, M. Ellison, A.M. Neville, and P.S. 
Rudland. 1982. Distribution of myoepithelial cells and basement mem-
brane proteins in the normal breast and in benign and malignant breast 
diseases. Cancer Res. 42:4763–4770.
Guy, C.T., R.D. Cardiff, and W.J. Muller. 1992. Induction of mammary tumors 
by expression of polyomavirus middle T oncogene: a transgenic mouse 
model for metastatic disease. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12:954–961. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1128/ 
MCB 
.12 
.3 
.954
Haaksma, C.J., R.J. Schwartz, and J.J. Tomasek. 2011. Myoepithelial cell con-
traction and milk ejection are impaired in mammary glands of mice 
lacking smooth muscle alpha-actin. Biol. Reprod. 85:13–21. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1095/ 
biolreprod 
.110 
.090639
Hilson, J.B., S.J. Schnitt, and L.C. Collins. 2009. Phenotypic alterations in duc-
tal carcinoma in situ-associated myoepithelial cells: biologic and diag-
nostic implications. Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 33:227–232. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1097/ 
PAS 
.0b013e318180431d
Hu, M., J. Yao, D.K. Carroll, S. Weremowicz, H. Chen, D. Carrasco, A. Richard-
son, S. Violette, T. Nikolskaya, Y. Nikolsky, et al. 2008. Regulation of 
in situ to invasive breast carcinoma transition. Cancer Cell. 13:394–406. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ccr 
.2008 
.03 
.007
Kedrin, D., B. Gligorijevic, J. Wyckoff, V.V. Verkhusha, J. Condeelis, J.E. Se-
gall, and J. van Rheenen. 2008. Intravital imaging of metastatic behav-
ior through a mammary imaging window. Nat. Methods. 5:1019–1021. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nmeth 
.1269
Keller, P.J., L.M. Arendt, A. Skibinski, T. Logvinenko, I. Klebba, S. Dong, A.E. 
Smith, A. Prat, C.M. Perou, H. Gilmore, et al. 2012. Defining the cellular 
precursors to human breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:2772–
2777. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.1017626108
Knott, S.R.V., A. Maceli, N. Erard, K. Chang, K. Marran, X. Zhou, A. Gordon, 
O.E. Demerdash, E. Wagenblast, S. Kim, et al. 2014. A computational al-
gorithm to predict shRNA potency. Mol. Cell. 56:796–807. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.molcel 
.2014 
.10 
.025
Lerwill, M.F. 2004. Current practical applications of diagnostic immunohisto-
chemistry in breast pathology. Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 28:1076–1091. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1097/ 
01 
.pas 
.0000126780 
.10029 
.f0
Ma, X.-J., R. Salunga, J.T. Tuggle, J. Gaudet, E. Enright, P. McQuary, T. Pay-
ette, M. Pistone, K. Stecker, B.M. Zhang, et al. 2003. Gene expression 
profiles of human breast cancer progression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
100:5974–5979. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.0931261100
Maître, J.L., H. Berthoumieux, S.F. Krens, G. Salbreux, F. Jülicher, E. Paluch, 
and C.P. Heisenberg. 2012. Adhesion functions in cell sorting by me-
chanically coupling the cortices of adhering cells. Science. 338:253–256. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.1225399
Man, Y.-G., and Q.-X.A. Sang. 2004. The significance of focal myoepithelial 
cell layer disruptions in human breast tumor invasion: a paradigm shift 
from the “protease-centered” hypothesis. Exp. Cell Res. 301:103–118. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.yexcr 
.2004 
.08 
.037
 Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201802144
Sirka et al. 
The myoepithelium actively restrains dissemination
3381
Man, Y.G., L. Tai, R. Barner, R. Vang, J.S. Saenger, K.M. Shekitka, G.L. Brat-
thauer, D.T. Wheeler, C.Y. Liang, T.N. Vinh, and B.L. Strauss. 2003. Cell 
clusters overlying focally disrupted mammary myoepithelial cell layers 
and adjacent cells within the same duct display different immunohisto-
chemical and genetic features: implications for tumor progression and 
invasion. Breast Cancer Res. 5:R231–R241. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1186/ 
bcr653
Maroulakou, I.G., M. Anver, L. Garrett, and J.E. Green. 1994. Prostate and 
mammary adenocarcinoma in transgenic mice carrying a rat C3(1) sim-
ian virus 40 large tumor antigen fusion gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
91:11236–11240. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.91 
.23 
.11236
Melchor, L., G. Molyneux, A. Mackay, F.A. Magnay, M. Atienza, H. Kendrick, 
D. Nava-Rodrigues, M.A. López-García, F. Milanezi, K. Greenow, et al. 
2014. Identification of cellular and genetic drivers of breast cancer het-
erogeneity in genetically engineered mouse tumour models. J. Pathol. 
233:124–137. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
path 
.4345
Molyneux, G., F.C. Geyer, F.A. Magnay, A. McCarthy, H. Kendrick, R. Natra-
jan, A. Mackay, A. Grigoriadis, A. Tutt, A. Ashworth, et al. 2010. BRCA1 
basal-like breast cancers originate from luminal epithelial progenitors 
and not from basal stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 7:403–417. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.stem 
.2010 
.07 
.010
Mori, H., N. Gjorevski, J.L. Inman, M.J. Bissell, and C.M. Nelson. 2009. Self-or-
ganization of engineered epithelial tubules by differential cellular mo-
tility. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:14890–14895. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.0901269106
Muzumdar, M.D., B. Tasic, K. Miyamichi, L. Li, and L. Luo. 2007. A global dou-
ble-fluorescent Cre reporter mouse. Genesis. 45:593–605.
Neumann, N.M., M.C. Perrone, J.H. Veldhuis, R.J. Huebner, H. Zhan, P.N. Dev-
reotes, G.W. Brodland, and A.J. Ewald. 2018. Coordination of Receptor 
Tyrosine Kinase Signaling and Interfacial Tension Dynamics Drives Ra-
dial Intercalation and Tube Elongation. Dev. Cell. 45:67–82.
Nguyen, H., M. Rendl, and E. Fuchs. 2006. Tcf3 governs stem cell features and 
represses cell fate determination in skin. Cell. 127:171–183. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2006 
.07 
.036
Nguyen, M., M.C. Lee, J.L. Wang, J.S. Tomlinson, Z.M. Shao, M.L. Alpaugh, and 
S.H. Barsky. 2000. The human myoepithelial cell displays a multifaceted 
anti-angiogenic phenotype. Oncogene. 19:3449–3459. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
sj 
.onc 
.1203677
Nguyen-Ngoc, K.-V., E.R. Shamir, R.J. Huebner, J.N. Beck, K.J. Cheung, and A.J. 
Ewald. 2015. 3D culture assays of murine mammary branching morpho-
genesis and epithelial invasion. Methods Mol. Biol. 1189:135–162. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
978 
-1 
-4939 
-1164 
-6 
_10
Polyak, K. 2010. Molecular markers for the diagnosis and management of duc-
tal carcinoma in situ. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 2010:210–213. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
jncimonographs/ 
lgq019
Polyak, K., and M. Hu. 2005. Do myoepithelial cells hold the key for breast 
tumor progression? J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia. 10:231–247. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10911 
-005 
-9584 
-6
Proia, T.A., P.J. Keller, P.B. Gupta, I. Klebba, A.D. Jones, M. Sedic, H. Gilmore, 
N. Tung, S.P. Naber, S. Schnitt, et al. 2011. Genetic predisposition directs 
breast cancer phenotype by dictating progenitor cell fate. Cell Stem Cell. 
8:149–163. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.stem 
.2010 
.12 
.007
Sahai, E. 2007. Illuminating the metastatic process. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 7:737–749. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nrc2229
Shamir, E.R., E. Pappalardo, D.M. Jorgens, K. Coutinho, W.-T. Tsai, K. Aziz, M. 
Auer, P.T. Tran, J.S. Bader, and A.J. Ewald. 2014. Twist1-induced dissem-
ination preserves epithelial identity and requires E-cadherin. J. Cell Biol. 
204:839–856. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1083/ 
jcb 
.201306088
Shao, Z.-M., M. Nguyen, M.L. Alpaugh, J.T. O’Connell, and S.H. Barsky. 1998. 
The human myoepithelial cell exerts antiproliferative effects on breast 
carcinoma cells characterized by p21WAF1/CIP1 induction, G2/M arrest, 
and apoptosis. Exp. Cell Res. 241:394–403. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1006/ 
excr 
.1998 
.4066
Sternlicht, M.D., P. Kedeshian, Z.M. Shao, S. Safarians, and S.H. Barsky. 1997. 
The human myoepithelial cell is a natural tumor suppressor. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 3:1949–1958.
Stuurman, N., A.D. Edelstein, N. Amodaj, K.H. Hoover, and R.D. Vale. 2010. 
Computer Control of Microscopes using μManager. Curr. Protoc. Mol. 
Biol. 14:20.
Tao, L., M.P. van Bragt, and Z. Li. 2015. A Long-Lived Luminal Subpopulation 
Enriched with Alveolar Progenitors Serves as Cellular Origin of Hetero-
geneous Mammary Tumors. Stem Cell Reports. 5:60–74. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.stemcr 
.2015 
.05 
.014
Tran, P.T., E.H. Shroff, T.F. Burns, S. Thiyagarajan, S.T. Das, T. Zabuawala, 
J. Chen, Y.-J. Cho, R. Luong, P. Tamayo, et al. 2012. Twist1 suppresses 
senescence programs and thereby accelerates and maintains mutant 
Kras-induced lung tumorigenesis. PLoS Genet. 8:e1002650. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.pgen 
.1002650
Vaezi, A., C. Bauer, V. Vasioukhin, and E. Fuchs. 2002. Actin cable dynamics 
and Rho/Rock orchestrate a polarized cytoskeletal architecture in the 
early steps of assembling a stratified epithelium. Dev. Cell. 3:367–381. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S1534 
-5807(02)00259 
-9
Van Keymeulen, A., A.S. Rocha, M. Ousset, B. Beck, G. Bouvencourt, J. Rock, 
N. Sharma, S. Dekoninck, and C. Blanpain. 2011. Distinct stem cells 
contribute to mammary gland development and maintenance. Nature. 
479:189–193. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature10573
Werling, R.W., H. Hwang, H. Yaziji, and A.M. Gown. 2003. Immunohistochem-
ical distinction of invasive from noninvasive breast lesions: a compar-
ative study of p63 versus calponin and smooth muscle myosin heavy 
chain. Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 27:82–90. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1097/ 
00000478 
-200301000 
-00009
Weymouth, N., Z. Shi, and D.C. Rockey. 2012. Actin isoform specificity is re-
quired for the maintenance of lactation. Dev. Biol. 363:1–14. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ydbio 
.2011 
.11 
.002
Yang, J., S.A. Mani, J.L. Donaher, S. Ramaswamy, R.A. Itzykson, C. Come, P. 
Savagner, I. Gitelman, A. Richardson, and R.A. Weinberg. 2004. Twist, 
a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor 
metastasis. Cell. 117:927–939. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2004 
.06 
.006
