 Screening for Breast Cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH, on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force*
Description: Update of the 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) recommendation on screening for breast
cancer.
Methods: The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the following:
effectiveness of breast cancer screening in reducing breast
cancer–specific and all-cause mortality, as well as the incidence
of advanced breast cancer and treatment-related morbidity;
harms of breast cancer screening; test performance characteris-
tics of digital breast tomosynthesis as a primary screening strat-
egy; and adjunctive screening in women with increased breast
density. In addition, the USPSTF reviewed comparative decision
models on optimal starting and stopping ages and intervals for
screening mammography; how breast density, breast cancer
risk, and comorbidity level affect the balance of benefit and
harms
of
screening
mammography;
and
the
number
of
radiation-induced breast cancer cases and deaths associated
with different screening mammography strategies over the
course of a woman's lifetime.
Population: This recommendation applies to asymptomatic
women aged 40 years or older who do not have preexisting
breast cancer or a previously diagnosed high-risk breast lesion
and who are not at high risk for breast cancer because of a
known underlying genetic mutation (such as a BRCA1 or BRCA2
gene mutation or other familial breast cancer syndrome) or a
history of chest radiation at a young age.
Recommendations: The USPSTF recommends biennial screen-
ing mammography for women aged 50 to 74 years. (B
recommendation)
The decision to start screening mammography in women prior
to age 50 years should be an individual one. Women who place
a higher value on the potential benefit than the potential harms
may choose to begin biennial screening between the ages of 40
and 49 years. (C recommendation)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient
to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening mam-
mography in women aged 75 years or older. (I statement)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient
to assess the benefits and harms of digital breast tomosynthesis
(DBT) as a primary screening method for breast cancer. (I
statement)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient
to assess the balance of benefits and harms of adjunctive screen-
ing for breast cancer using breast ultrasonography, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), DBT, or other methods in women
identified to have dense breasts on an otherwise negative
screening mammogram. (I statement)
Ann Intern Med. 2016;164:279-296. doi:10.7326/M15-2886
www.annals.org
For author affiliation, see end of text.
This article was published at www.annals.org on 12 January 2016.
*
For
members
of
the
USPSTF,
see
the
Appendix
(available
at
www.annals.org).
T
he U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
makes recommendations about the effectiveness of
specific preventive care services for patients without re-
lated signs or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of
both the benefits and harms of the service and an as-
sessment of the balance. The USPSTF does not consider
the costs of providing a service in this assessment.
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions in-
volve more considerations than evidence alone. Clini-
cians should understand the evidence but individualize
decision making to the specific patient or situation. Sim-
ilarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage deci-
sions involve considerations in addition to the evidence
of clinical benefits and harms.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND
EVIDENCE
The USPSTF recommends biennial screening mam-
mography for women aged 50 to 74 years. (B recom-
mendation)
The decision to start screening mammography in
women prior to age 50 years should be an individual
one. Women who place a higher value on the potential
benefit than the potential harms may choose to begin
biennial screening between the ages of 40 and 49
years. (C recommendation)
• For women who are at average risk for breast
cancer, most of the benefit of mammography results
from biennial screening during ages 50 to 74 years. Of
all of the age groups, women aged 60 to 69 years are
See also:
Related articles . . . 205, 215, 226, 236, 244, 256, 268
Editorial comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301, 303
Summary for Patients. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-28
Web-Only
Consumer Fact Sheet
Annals of Internal Medicine
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 279
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 most likely to avoid breast cancer death through mam-
mography screening. While screening mammography
in women aged 40 to 49 years may reduce the risk for
breast cancer death, the number of deaths averted is
smaller than that in older women and the number of
false-positive
results
and
unnecessary
biopsies
is
larger. The balance of benefits and harms is likely to
improve as women move from their early to late 40s.
Y In addition to false-positive results and unneces-
sary biopsies, all women undergoing regular screening
mammography are at risk for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of noninvasive and invasive breast cancer that
would otherwise not have become a threat to their
health, or even apparent, during their lifetime (known
as “overdiagnosis”). Beginning mammography screen-
ing at a younger age and screening more frequently
may increase the risk for overdiagnosis and subsequent
overtreatment.
Y Women with a parent, sibling, or child with
breast cancer are at higher risk for breast cancer and
thus may benefit more than average-risk women from
beginning screening in their 40s.
Go to the Clinical Considerations section for infor-
mation on implementation of the C recommendation.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms
of screening mammography in women aged 75 years
or older. (I statement)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the benefits and harms of digital
breast tomosynthesis (DBT) as a primary screening
method for breast cancer. (I statement)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms
of adjunctive screening for breast cancer using breast
ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
DBT, or other methods in women identified to have
dense breasts on an otherwise negative screening
mammogram. (I statement)
These recommendations apply to asymptomatic
women aged 40 years or older who do not have pre-
existing breast cancer or a previously diagnosed high-
risk breast lesion and who are not at high risk for breast
cancer because of a known underlying genetic muta-
tion (such as a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation or
other familial breast cancer syndrome) or a history of
chest radiation at a young age.
See Figure 1 for a summary of the recommenda-
tion and suggestions for clinical practice.
Appendix Table 1 describes the USPSTF grades,
and Appendix Table 2 describes the USPSTF classifica-
tion of levels of certainty about net benefit (both tables
are available at www.annals.org).
RATIONALE
Importance
Breast cancer is the second-leading cause of can-
cer death among women in the United States. In 2015,
an estimated 232 000 women were diagnosed with the
disease and 40 000 women died of it. It is most fre-
quently diagnosed among women aged 55 to 64 years,
and the median age of death from breast cancer is 68
years (1).
Benefit and Harms of Screening and Early
Treatment
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that mam-
mography screening reduces breast cancer mortality in
women aged 40 to 74 years. The number of breast can-
cer deaths averted increases with age; women aged 40
to 49 years benefit the least and women aged 60 to 69
years benefit the most. Age is the most important risk
factor for breast cancer, and the increased benefit ob-
served with age is at least partly due to the increase in
risk. Women aged 40 to 49 years who have a first-
degree relative with breast cancer have a risk for breast
cancer similar to that of women aged 50 to 59 years
without a family history. Direct evidence about the ben-
efits of screening mammography in women aged 75
years or older is lacking.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screen-
ing for breast cancer with mammography results in
harms for women aged 40 to 74 years. The most impor-
tant harm is the diagnosis and treatment of noninvasive
and invasive breast cancer that would otherwise not
have become a threat to a woman's health, or even
apparent, during her lifetime (that is, overdiagnosis and
overtreatment). False-positive results are common and
lead to unnecessary and sometimes invasive follow-up
testing, with the potential for psychological harms (such
as anxiety). False-negative results (that is, missed can-
cer) also occur and may provide false reassurance.
Radiation-induced breast cancer and resulting death
can also occur, although the number of both of these
events is predicted to be low.
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the
benefits and harms of DBT as a primary screening
method for breast cancer. Similarly, the USPSTF found
inadequate evidence on the benefits and harms of ad-
junctive screening for breast cancer using breast ultra-
sonography, MRI, DBT, or other methods in women
identified to have dense breasts on an otherwise neg-
ative screening mammogram. In both cases, while
there is some information about the accuracy of these
methods, there is no information on the effects of their
use on health outcomes, such as breast cancer inci-
dence, mortality, or overdiagnosis rates.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty
that the net benefit of screening mammography in
women aged 50 to 74 years is moderate.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty
that the net benefit of screening mammography in the
general population of women aged 40 to 49 years,
while positive, is small.
The USPSTF concludes that the evidence on mam-
mography screening in women age 75 years and older
is insufficient, and the balance of benefits and harms
cannot be determined.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
280 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 The USPSTF concludes that the evidence on DBT
as a primary screening method for breast cancer is in-
sufficient, and the balance of benefits and harms can-
not be determined.
The USPSTF concludes that the evidence on ad-
junctive screening for breast cancer using breast ultra-
sound, MRI, DBT, or other methods in women identi-
fied to have dense breasts on an otherwise negative
Figure 1. Screening for breast cancer: clinical summary.
Primary Screening for Breast Cancer With Conventional Mammography
Population
Women aged 40 to 49 y
Women aged 50 to 74 y
Women aged ≥75 y
Recommendation
The decision to start screening should be 
an individual one.
Grade: C
Screen every 2 years.
Grade: B
No recommendation.
Grade: I statement 
(insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment
These recommendations apply to asymptomatic women aged ≥40 y who do not have preexisting breast cancer or a previously
diagnosed high-risk breast lesion and who are not at high risk for breast cancer because of a known underlying genetic mutation
(such as a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation or other familial breast cancer syndrome) or a history of chest radiation at a young age.
Increasing age is the most important risk factor for most women.
Screening Tests
Conventional digital mammography has essentially replaced film mammography as the primary method for breast cancer screening
in the United States. Conventional digital screening mammography has about the same diagnostic accuracy as film overall, although 
digital screening seems to have comparatively higher sensitivity but the same or lower specificity in women age <50 y.
Starting and 
Stopping Ages
For women who are at average risk for breast cancer, most of the benefit of mammography results from biennial screening during
ages 50 to 74 y. While screening mammography in women aged 40 to 49 y may reduce the risk for breast cancer death, the
number of deaths averted is smaller than that in older women and the number of false-positive results and unnecessary biopsies is
larger. The balance of benefits and harms is likely to improve as women move from their early to late 40s.
Screening Interval
For most women, biennial mammography screening provides the best overall balance of benefit and harms.
Balance of Benefits 
and Harms 
The net benefit of screening mammography
in women aged 40 to 49 y, while positive, is
small.
The net benefit of screening
mammography in women aged 50
to 74 y is moderate.
Evidence on mammography screening in
women aged ≥75 y is insufficient, and the
balance of benefits and harms cannot be
determined.
Other Relevant 
USPSTF 
Recommendations
The USPSTF has made recommendations about the use of medications to reduce women’s risk for breast cancer, as well as risk
assessment, genetic counseling, and genetic testing for BRCA1- or BRCA2-related cancer (including breast cancer). These
recommendations are available on the USPSTF Web site (www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
Screening for Breast Cancer With Methods Other Than Conventional Mammography
Screening Method
Primary screening with DBT
Adjunctive screening with breast ultrasonography, MRI, DBT,
or other methods in women who have dense breasts
Recommendation
No recommendation.
Grade: I statement
(insufficient evidence)
No recommendation.
Grade: I statement
(insufficient evidence)
Benefits
From the limited data available, DBT seems to reduce recall
rates (i.e., follow-up for additional imaging or testing) and
increase cancer detection rates compared with conventional
digital mammography alone.
Limited data suggests that ultrasonography or MRI will detect
additional breast cancer in women who have dense breasts.
DBT also detects additional breast cancer in the short term.
Harms
As currently practiced in most settings, DBT exposes women to
about twice the amount of radiation as conventional digital
mammography. Current study designs cannot determine the
degree to which the additional cases of cancer detected would
have become clinically significant (i.e., the degree of
overdiagnosis).
Most positive adjunctive breast cancer screening test results
are false positive.
Balance of Benefits 
and Harms 
Evidence is insufficient, and the balance of benefits and harms
cannot be determined.
Evidence is insufficient, and the balance of benefits and harms
cannot be determined.
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 281
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 screening mammogram is insufficient, and the balance
of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Benefit of Screening
The results of the meta-analysis of clinical trials
from the systematic evidence review commissioned by
the USPSTF are summarized in Table 1. Over a 10-year
period, screening 10 000 women aged 60 to 69 years
will result in 21 (95% CI, 11 to 32) fewer breast cancer
deaths. The benefit is smaller in younger women:
Screening 10 000 women aged 50 to 59 years will re-
sult in 8 (CI, 2 to 17) fewer breast cancer deaths, and
screening 10 000 women aged 40 to 49 years will result
in 3 (CI, 0 to 9) fewer breast cancer deaths (2, 3). Most
of these trials began enrollment more than 30 years
ago, and these estimates may not reflect the current
likelihood of avoiding a breast cancer death with con-
temporary screening mammography technology. Mam-
mography imaging has since improved, which may re-
sult in more tumors being detected at a curable stage
today than at the time of these trials. However, breast
cancer treatments have also improved, and as treat-
ment improves, the advantage of earlier detection de-
creases, so that some of the women who died of breast
cancer in the nonscreened groups in these trials would
survive today.
Harms of Screening
The most important harm of screening is the detec-
tion and treatment of invasive and noninvasive cancer
that would never have been detected, or threaten
health, in the absence of screening (overdiagnosis and
overtreatment). Existing science does not allow for the
ability to determine precisely what proportion of cancer
diagnosed by mammography today reflects overdiag-
nosis, and estimates vary widely depending on the data
source and method of calculation used (2, 4). In the
United States, the rate of diagnosis of invasive plus
noninvasive breast cancer increased by 50% during the
era of mammography screening (Figure 2) (5). It is not
possible to know with certainty what proportion of that
increase is due to overdiagnosis and what proportion
reflects other reasons for a rising incidence. If overdi-
agnosis is the only explanation for the increase, 1 in 3
women diagnosed with breast cancer today is being
treated for cancer that would never have been discov-
ered or caused her health problems in the absence of
screening. The best estimates from randomized, con-
trolled trials (RCTs) evaluating the effect of mammogra-
phy screening on breast cancer mortality suggest that 1
in 5 women diagnosed with breast cancer over approx-
imately 10 years will be overdiagnosed (6). Modeling
studies conducted in support of this recommendation
by the Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling
Network (CISNET) provide a range of estimates that re-
flect different underlying assumptions; the median es-
timate is that 1 in 8 women diagnosed with breast can-
cer with biennial screening from ages 50 to 75 years
will be overdiagnosed. The rate increases with an ear-
lier start age or with annual mammography (7, 8). Even
with the conservative estimate of 1 in 8 breast cancer
cases being overdiagnosed, for every woman who
avoids a death from breast cancer through screening, 2
to 3 women will be treated unnecessarily.
The other principal harms of screening are false-
positive results, which require further imaging and of-
ten breast biopsy, and false-negative results. Table 2
summarizes the rates of these harms per screening
round using registry data for digital mammography
from
the
Breast
Cancer
Surveillance
Consortium
(BCSC), a collaborative network of 5 mammography
registries and 2 affiliated sites with linkages to tumor
registries across the United States (2, 9). (Note that Ta-
ble 2 describes a different time horizon than Table 1
[per screening round rather than per decade].)
When to Start Screening
Clinical trials, observational studies, and modeling
studies all demonstrate that the likelihood of avoiding a
breast cancer death with regular screening mammog-
raphy increases with age, and this increase in benefit
likely occurs gradually rather than abruptly at any par-
ticular age. In contrast, the harms of screening mam-
mography either remain constant or decrease with age.
For example, about the same number of breast biop-
sies are performed as a result of screening mammog-
raphy in women aged 40 to 49 years as in those aged
60 to 69 years, but many more of these biopsies will
result in a diagnosis of invasive cancer in the older age
group. Thus, the balance of benefit and harms im-
proves with age (Table 3).
The USPSTF concludes that while there are harms
of mammography, the benefit of screening mammog-
raphy outweighs the harms by at least a moderate
amount from age 50 to 74 years and is greatest for
women in their 60s. For women in their 40s, the num-
ber who benefit from starting regular screening mam-
mography is smaller and the number experiencing
harm is larger compared with older women. For
women in their 40s, the benefit still outweighs the
harms, but to a smaller degree; this balance may there-
fore be more subject to individual values and prefer-
ences than it is in older women. Women in their 40s
must weigh a very important but infrequent benefit (re-
duction in breast cancer deaths) against a group of
Table 1. Breast Cancer Deaths Avoided (95% CI) per 10 000 Women Screened by Repeat Screening Mammography Over 10
Years: Data From Randomized, Controlled Trials*
Variable
Ages 40–49 y
Ages 50–59 y
Ages 60–69 y
Ages 70–74 y
Breast cancer deaths avoided
3 (0–9)
8 (2–17)
21 (11–32)
13 (0–32)
* All women did not have 100% adherence to all rounds of screening offered in the randomized, controlled trials.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
282 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 meaningful and more common harms (overdiagnosis
and overtreatment, unnecessary and sometimes inva-
sive follow-up testing and psychological harms associ-
ated with false-positive test results, and false reassur-
ance from false-negative test results). Women who
value the possible benefit of screening mammography
more than they value avoiding its harms can make an
informed decision to begin screening.
Neither clinical trials nor models can precisely pre-
dict the potential benefits and harms that an individual
woman can expect from beginning screening at age 40
rather than 50 years, as these data represent popula-
tion effects. However, model results may be the easiest
way for women to visualize the relative tradeoffs of be-
ginning screening at age 40 versus 50 years. CISNET
conducted modeling studies to predict the lifetime
benefits and harms of screening with contemporary
digital mammography at different starting and stop-
ping ages and screening intervals. The models varied
their assumptions about the natural history of invasive
and noninvasive breast cancer and the effect of detec-
tion by digital mammography on survival. The models
assumed the ideal circumstances of perfect adherence
to screening and current best practices for therapy
across the life span. Table 3 compares the median and
range across the models for predicted lifetime benefits
and harms of screening biennially from ages 50 to 74
years with screening biennially from ages 40 to 74
years. (Note that Table 3 differs from Tables 1 and 2 in
terms of population metrics [per 1000 vs. 10 000
women] and time horizon considered [lifetime vs. 10-
year or single event].)
It is, however, a false dichotomy to assume that the
only options are to begin screening at age 40 or to wait
until age 50 years. As women advance through their
40s, the incidence of breast cancer rises. The balance
of benefit and harms may also shift accordingly over
this decade, such that women in the latter half of the
decade likely have a more favorable balance than
women in the first half. Indeed, the CISNET models
suggest that most of the benefit of screening women
aged 40 to 49 years would be realized by starting
screening at age 45 (7, 8).
Figure 2. Trends in invasive and noninvasive breast cancer incidence and mortality since the widespread introduction of
screening mammography in the United States.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Incidence and Mortality Rate per 100 000 Women
Year
Age-adjusted incidence of invasive
breast cancer
Age-adjusted incidence of invasive + noninvasive 
breast cancer
Mortality
Current incidence
Baseline mortality
Current mortality
Baseline incidence
The figure depicts changes in age-adjusted invasive and combined invasive and noninvasive breast cancer incidence and mortality rates in the
United States from 1975 through 2011. The baseline breast cancer incidence rate was 105 to 111 cases per 100 000 women (depending on whether
one considers invasive disease or invasive plus noninvasive disease together). With the widespread diffusion of mammography screening, this
rate increased to 165 cases of noninvasive plus invasive disease per 100 000 women in 2011 (an excess of 54 to 60 cases per 100 000 women, or
about a 50% increase). Breast cancer mortality rates have declined at a slower rate, from 31 to 22 cases (or a reduction of 9 deaths) per 100 000
women over the same time period. Based on data from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program (5).
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 283
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Risk Factors That May Influence When to Start
Screening
Advancing age is the most important risk factor for
breast cancer in most women, but epidemiologic data
from the BCSC suggest that having a first-degree rela-
tive with breast cancer is associated with an approxi-
mately 2-fold increased risk for breast cancer in women
aged 40 to 49 years (2, 9). Further, the CISNET models
suggest that for women with about a 2-fold increased
risk for breast cancer, starting annual digital screening
at age 40 years results in a similar harm-to-benefit ratio
(based on number of false-positive results or overdiag-
nosed cases per 1000 breast cancer deaths avoided) as
beginning biennial digital screening at age 50 years in
average-risk women (7, 8). This approach has not been
formally tested in a clinical trial; therefore, there is no
direct evidence that it would result in net benefit similar
to that of women aged 50 to 74 years. However, given
the increased burden of disease and potential likeli-
hood of benefit, women aged 40 to 49 years who have
a known first-degree relative (parent, child, or sibling)
with breast cancer may consider initiating screening
earlier than age 50 years. Many other risk factors have
been associated with breast cancer in epidemiologic
studies, but most of these relationships are weak or
inconsistent and would not likely influence how women
value the tradeoffs of the potential benefits and harms
of screening. Risk calculators, such as the National
Cancer Institute's Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool
(available
at
www.cancer.gov/BCRISKTOOL),
have
good calibration between predicted and actual out-
comes in groups of women but are not accurate at pre-
dicting an individual woman's risk for breast cancer
(10).
How Often to Screen
Once a woman has decided to begin screening,
the next decision is how often to undergo screening.
No clinical trials compared annual mammography with
a longer interval in women of any age. In the random-
ized trials that demonstrated the effectiveness of mam-
mography in reducing breast cancer deaths in women
aged 40 to 74 years, screening intervals ranged from
12 to 33 months (2, 3). There was no clear trend for
greater benefit in trials of annual mammography, but
other differences between the trials preclude certainty
that no difference in benefit exists. Available observa-
tional evidence evaluating the effects of varying mam-
mography intervals found no difference in the number
of breast cancer deaths between women aged 50 years
or older who were screened biennially versus annually
(2, 3).
Regardless of the starting age for screening, the
models consistently predict a small incremental in-
crease in the number of breast cancer deaths averted
when moving from biennial to annual mammography,
but also a large increase in the number of harms (Table
4) (7, 8). The USPSTF concludes that for most women,
biennial mammography screening provides the best
overall balance of benefit and harms.
When to Consider Stopping Screening
Clinical trial data for women aged 70 to 74 years
are inconclusive. In its 2009 recommendation (11), the
USPSTF extended the recommendation for screening
mammography to age 74 years based on the extrapo-
lation that much of the benefit seen in women aged 60
to 69 years should continue in this age range, and
modeling done at the time supported this assumption.
Current CISNET models suggest that women aged 70
to 74 years with moderate to severe comorbid condi-
tions that negatively affect their life expectancy are
unlikely to benefit from mammography (7, 8, 12). Mod-
erate comorbid conditions include cardiovascular dis-
ease, paralysis, and diabetes. Severe comorbid condi-
tions include (but are not limited to) AIDS, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, liver disease, chronic
renal failure, dementia, congestive heart failure, and
combinations of moderate comorbid conditions, as
well as myocardial infarction, ulcer, and rheumatologic
disease (12).
Screening in Women Aged 75 Years or Older
The USPSTF found insufficient evidence to assess
the balance of benefits and harms of screening mam-
mography in women aged 75 years or older. CISNET
models suggest that biennial mammography screening
may potentially continue to offer a net benefit after age
74 years among those with no or low comorbidity (7, 8),
but no randomized trials of screening included women
in this age group (2, 3).
Table 2. Harms of One-Time Mammography Screening per 10 000 Women Screened: Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium
Registry Data
Variable
Ages 40–49 y
Ages 50–59 y
Ages 60–69 y
Ages 70–74 y
False-positive test results (false alarms), n
1212
932
808
696
Breast biopsies, n
164
159
165
175
False-negative test results (missed cancers), n
10
11
12
13
Table 3. Lifetime Benefits and Harms of Biennial
Screening Mammography per 1000 Women Screened:
Model Results Compared With No Screening*
Variable
Ages
40–74 y
Ages
50–74 y
Fewer breast cancer deaths, n
8 (5–10)
7 (4–9)
Life-years gained
152 (99–195)
122 (75–154)
False-positive test results, n
1529 (1100–1976)
953 (830–1325)
Unnecessary breast biopsies, n
213 (153–276)
146 (121–205)
Overdiagnosed breast tumors, n
21 (12–38)
19 (11–34)
* Values reported are medians (ranges).
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
284 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 DBT as a Primary Screening Strategy
The USPSTF found insufficient evidence to assess
the balance of benefits and harms of DBT as a primary
screening method for breast cancer.
Background
Evidence on DBT is limited; a single study on the
test characteristics of DBT as a primary screening strat-
egy for breast cancer met the inclusion criteria of the
systematic evidence review (13).
Potential Benefits
From the limited data available, DBT seems to re-
duce recall rates (that is, follow-up for additional imag-
ing or testing) and increase cancer detection rates
compared with conventional digital mammography
alone (13). However, current study designs cannot de-
termine whether all of the additional cases of cancer
detected would have become clinically significant (that
is, the degree of overdiagnosis) or whether there is an
incremental clinical benefit to detecting these cancers
earlier than with conventional digital mammography. In
addition, no studies of DBT looked at clinical outcomes,
such as breast cancer morbidity or mortality or quality
of life (13).
Potential Harms
As currently practiced in most settings, DBT ex-
poses women to approximately twice the amount of
radiation as conventional digital mammography (13). In
2013, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved
a method to generate synthetic reconstruction of
2-dimensional images from 3-dimensional views, which
reduces the total radiation dose associated with DBT.
Although the extent to which this new software technol-
ogy has been implemented in mammography screen-
ing centers is not precisely known, it is currently
thought to be low. In women with abnormal findings,
DBT may also increase the rate of breast biopsy com-
pared with conventional digital mammography (13).
Primary and Adjunctive Screening in Women
With Dense Breasts
The USPSTF found insufficient evidence to assess
the balance of benefits and harms of adjunctive screen-
ing for breast cancer using breast ultrasonography,
MRI, DBT, or other methods in women identified to
have dense breasts on an otherwise negative screening
mammogram.
Epidemiology of Dense Breasts
In the United States, the most commonly used clas-
sification system for breast density is the American Col-
lege of Radiology's Breast Imaging Reporting and Data
System (BI-RADS) 4-category scale (a = the breasts are
almost entirely fatty; b = there are scattered areas of
fibroglandular density; c = the breasts are heteroge-
neously dense, which may obscure small masses; or
d = the breasts are extremely dense, which lowers the
sensitivity of mammography). Data from the BCSC indi-
cate that about 25 million women (about 43%) aged 40
to 74 years are classified as having heterogeneously or
extremely dense breasts. The proportion of women
with dense breasts is highest among those aged 40 to
49 years and decreases with age (14).
Increased breast density is a risk factor for breast
cancer. Data from the BCSC indicate that, compared
with women with average breast density, women aged
40 to 49 years with heterogeneously or extremely
dense breasts have a relative risk (RR) of 1.23 for devel-
oping invasive breast cancer. For women aged 50 to
64 years with heterogeneously or extremely dense
breasts, the RR is 1.29, and for women aged 65 to 74
years, it is 1.30 (7). However, women with dense breasts
who develop breast cancer do not have an increased
risk for dying from the disease, after adjustment for
stage, treatment, method of detection, and other risk
factors, according to data from the BCSC (15).
Primary Screening Test Performance Characteristics
Increased breast density reduces the sensitivity and
specificity of mammography for detecting cancer. A
BCSC study of more than 300 000 women found that
sensitivity decreased from 87% in the lowest density
category to 63% in the highest, and specificity de-
creased from 96% to 90% as breast density increased
(16).
A woman's BI-RADS breast density classification
can be inconstant over time. Good-quality studies of
U.S. radiologists demonstrate that major recategoriza-
tion of sequential screening examinations (that is, from
“dense” [c/d] to “nondense” [a/b] or vice versa) occurs
in approximately 13% to 19% of women (17, 18). These
studies excluded women taking hormone medications
or those with other medical conditions that may have
resulted in physiologic changes that would explain the
difference in breast density classification observed be-
tween examinations. Reclassification of breast density
status from year to year complicates women's assess-
ment of their underlying breast cancer risk, as well as
informed screening and care decisions.
Primary Screening Frequency
In 1 BCSC study, biennial screening mammogra-
phy was associated with greater risk for advanced-
Table 4. Lifetime Benefits and Harms of Annual Versus
Biennial Screening Mammography per 1000 Women
Screened: Model Results Compared With No Screening*
Variable
Ages
50–74 y,
Annual
Screening
Ages
50–74 y,
Biennial
Screening
Fewer breast cancer deaths, n
9 (5–10)
7 (4–9)
Life-years gained
145 (104–180)
122 (75–154)
False-positive test results, n
1798 (1706–2445)
953 (830–1325)
Unnecessary breast biopsies, n
228 (219–317)
146 (121–205)
Overdiagnosed breast tumors, n
25 (12–68)
19 (11–34)
* Values reported are medians (ranges).
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 285
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 stage cancer (stage IIB or greater) (odds ratio, 2.39 [CI,
1.06 to 3.39]) or a breast tumor larger than 20 mm
(odds ratio, 2.39 [CI, 1.37 to 3.18]) in women aged 40
to 49 years with extremely dense breasts (BI-RADS cat-
egory d) compared with annual screening; this risk was
not seen in women aged 50 to 74 years (19). No signif-
icant differences in lymph node involvement were ob-
served in either age group. Information about morbid-
ity or mortality end points is not available, so whether
these women ultimately fared any differently in their
clinical outcomes is not known (17, 19).
All women aged 40 to 74 years with increased
breast density are at increased risk for a false-positive
result, an unnecessary breast biopsy, or a false-
negative result compared with women with average
breast density. Screening more frequently (that is, an-
nually vs. biennially) further increases the probability
that a woman will experience one of these screening-
related harms. Data from the BCSC indicate that the
cumulative probability that a woman aged 40 to 49
years with extremely dense breasts screened annually
for a decade will receive a false-positive result is about
69%, compared with about 21% for biennial screening.
Similarly, unnecessary breast biopsy rates are 12% for
annual screening versus 3% for biennial screening (17,
18).
Adjunctive Screening
Potential Benefits. Current evidence on adjunctive
screening is very limited, but it suggests that for women
identified to have dense breasts on an otherwise neg-
ative mammogram, ultrasonography or MRI will detect
additional breast cancer but will also result in a higher
number of false-positive results. Data on DBT in women
with dense breasts are limited, but in the short term,
DBT also detects additional breast cancer. Most of the
additional cancer detected by these methods are inva-
sive tumors rather than ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
(17, 18). A short-term increase in the number of cancer
cases detected does not allow for the conclusion that
adjunctive screening reduces treatment-related mor-
bidity or breast cancer deaths or improves women's
quality of life. Although adjunctive screening may de-
tect more breast cancer, these cancers may fall into 1 of
3 categories: 1) those for which earlier detection leads
to improved outcomes, 2) those that would have had
the same outcome when detected later, or 3) those that
are overdiagnosed and would not have caused a health
problem during a woman's lifetime and may result in
harms from unnecessary treatment. Existing data do
not allow for estimation of the proportion of cancer that
falls into each category; therefore, the benefits on
health cannot be estimated.
Potential Harms.
Most positive adjunctive breast
cancer screening test results are false positive. Com-
pared with mammography alone, adjunctive screening
with ultrasonography or MRI seems to increase recall
and biopsy rates. Data on the effects of DBT on recall
and biopsy rates in women with dense breasts are too
limited to draw conclusions (17, 18). The effects of DBT
on overdiagnosis rates are unknown.
Current Practice. At the present time, 24 states re-
quire patient notification of breast density status when
mammography is performed; in some states, legisla-
tion also includes language to be sent to women in-
forming them that they should consider adjunctive
screening (17). No clinical practice guidelines explicitly
recommend adjunctive screening in women identified
to have dense breasts on an otherwise negative screen-
ing mammogram (17).
Assessment
Increased breast density is very common. It is an
independent risk factor for developing (but not dying
of) breast cancer, and it reduces mammography's abil-
ity to find and accurately identify breast cancer. Many
women will move between “dense” and “nondense”
breast classifications with sequential screening mam-
mograms, and these reclassifications are not primarily
due to physiologic causes. More evidence is needed to
better understand how the frequency of screening
might affect important health outcomes in women with
dense breasts. Overall, many important questions re-
main about the potential role of breast density in indi-
vidualizing screening approaches, and the current evi-
dence is insufficient to recommend a specific screening
strategy for women with increased breast density.
Other Approaches to Prevention
The USPSTF has made recommendations about
the use of medications to reduce women's risk for
breast cancer, as well as risk assessment, genetic coun-
seling, and genetic testing for BRCA1- or BRCA2-
related cancer (including breast cancer). These recom-
mendations are available on the USPSTF Web site
(www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Research Needs and Gaps
Trial data are too limited to directly inform the
question of what the best screening strategy is for
women or how clinicians can best tailor that strategy to
the individual.
Overdiagnosis
and
resulting
overtreatment
of
breast cancer that would otherwise not have become a
threat to a woman's health during her lifetime is the
most important harm associated with breast cancer
screening. Because it is impossible to determine for
any individual patient whether a diagnosed cancer will
or will not progress, measurements of overdiagnosis
are not straightforward but rather are indirectly quanti-
fied. Current estimates of the magnitude of overdiag-
nosis associated with mammography screening vary
widely. Researchers in the field must work together to
critically evaluate and ultimately agree on uniform def-
initions and standards to optimally measure and moni-
tor overdiagnosis and overtreatment in breast cancer
screening programs.
In addition, research is critically needed to identify
ways to reduce the occurrence of overdiagnosis and
subsequent overtreatment associated with breast can-
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
286 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 cer screening. Ductal carcinoma in situ is an example of
a breast lesion with the potential for high rates of over-
diagnosis and overtreatment. Before the widespread
use of screening mammography, 6 cases of DCIS per
100 000 U.S. women per year were identified com-
pared with 37 cases of DCIS per 100 000 women per
year after its introduction (5). When classified as cancer,
DCIS now accounts for about 1 in 4 of all breast cancer
diagnosed in a given year (20). However, its nomencla-
ture has recently been the subject of debate, because
by definition, DCIS is confined to the mammary ductal–
lobular system and is incapable of metastasis (that is, it
is noninvasive and thus lacks the classic characteristic of
cancer) (21). Ductal carcinoma in situ may therefore be
more appropriately classified as a risk factor for future
development of cancer; the primary goal in its manage-
ment is to reduce the incidence of new invasive carci-
noma. The natural history of DCIS—particularly screen-
detected
DCIS—is
poorly
understood.
Although
a
substantial proportion of these lesions will not progress
to invasive cancer (22), which women will and which will
not develop such cancer cannot be predicted with cer-
tainty. As such, nearly all women diagnosed with DCIS
receive treatment (generally either mastectomy or
lumpectomy with or without radiation; a chemopreven-
tive agent, such as tamoxifen, may also be offered) (23).
The 20-year breast cancer mortality rate after treatment
of DCIS is as low as 3% (24); whether this is due to the
effectiveness of the interventions or the fact that most
DCIS cases being treated are essentially benign is a
pressing research question. Research is needed to de-
velop better prognostic indicators to distinguish non-
progressive or slowly progressive lesions from tumors
that are likely to affect quality or length of life. Research
is also needed to compare the long-term benefits and
harms of immediate treatment versus observation or
surveillance with delayed intervention in women with
screen-detected DCIS.
Most of the available screening trials and high-
quality cohort studies were performed in Europe and
predominately enrolled white women younger than
age 70 years. Direct evidence about any differential ef-
fectiveness of breast cancer screening is lacking for im-
portant subgroups of women, such as African American
women, who are at increased risk for dying of breast
cancer, and older women, for whom balancing the po-
tential benefits and harms of screening may become
increasingly challenging with advancing age.
Newer technologies, such as DBT for primary
screening or ultrasonography and MRI for adjunctive
screening in women with dense breasts, are being in-
creasingly used in the United States without clear evi-
dence to demonstrate their effectiveness in improving
important health outcomes. Such studies are necessary
prerequisites for the appropriate incorporation of these
methods into established screening programs.
Finally, a large proportion of women in the United
States are classified as having dense breasts after
screening mammography. Increased breast density is
common in the general population; however, critical
questions remain about how best to manage this con-
dition and to support these women. Research to help
improve the validity and reproducibility of serial BI-
RADS assessments would be useful if breast density is
to be considered as a factor for personalized, risk-
based approaches to breast cancer screening. In addi-
tion, long-term randomized trials or longitudinal cohort
studies are needed that compare screening outcomes
in women with dense breasts who are not otherwise at
increased risk for breast cancer who receive adjunctive
screening versus those who do not and report impor-
tant outcomes, such as breast cancer stage at diagno-
sis, breast cancer recurrence rates, rates of overdiagno-
sis, and most importantly, breast cancer mortality.
DISCUSSION
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a series of systematic
evidence reviews in support of this recommendation.
The first addressed the effectiveness of breast cancer
screening in reducing breast cancer–specific and all-
cause mortality, as well as the incidence of advanced
breast cancer and treatment-related morbidity. It also
looked at the harms of breast cancer screening (2–4, 9).
A second systematic review summarized the evidence
about the test performance characteristics of DBT as a
primary screening strategy (13). A third systematic re-
view evaluated the evidence on adjunctive screening in
women with increased breast density, including the ac-
curacy and reproducibility of dense breast classification
systems and the diagnostic test performance character-
istics, benefits, and harms of adjunctive screening in
women identified to have dense breasts on an other-
wise negative screening mammogram (17, 18).
In addition to the systematic reviews of the evi-
dence, the USPSTF commissioned a report from the
CISNET Breast Cancer Working Group to provide infor-
mation from comparative decision models on optimal
starting and stopping ages and intervals for screening
mammography, as well as how breast density, breast
cancer risk, and comorbidity level affect the balance of
benefit and harms of screening mammography (7, 8). A
second decision analysis estimated the number of
radiation-induced breast cancer cases and deaths asso-
ciated with different screening mammography strate-
gies over the course of a woman's lifetime (25, 26).
Burden of Disease
There are approximately 125 new cases of breast
cancer and about 22 deaths per 100 000 U.S. women
each year. The mean age at diagnosis has remained
unchanged at 64 years since the late 1970s (27). The
median age at death is 68 years (1).
Risk Factors: Additional Considerations
About 5% to 10% of women who develop breast
cancer have a mother or sister who also has breast
cancer (2).
A few clinically significant factors are associated
with high risk (RR, ≥4) for breast cancer (women with a
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation or other hereditary
genetic syndromes or women with a history of high-
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 287
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 dose radiation therapy to the chest at a young age,
such as for treatment of Hodgkin lymphoma) (2).
Women with these risk factors are not within the scope
of this recommendation.
Race and ethnicity is a factor that has prompted
concern because of a growing disparity in breast can-
cer mortality rates. Although white women have histor-
ically had higher incidence rates than African American
women, incidence rates have come close to converging
as of 2012 (128 vs. 124 cases per 100 000 women per
year, respectively) (28). More African American women
die each year from breast cancer than white women
(about 31 vs. 22 breast cancer deaths per 100 000
women per year, respectively) (5). The reason for the
difference in breast cancer mortality between white
and African American women is not clear. It may be in
part due to differences in biology—African American
women are disproportionally affected by more aggres-
sive and treatment-resistant forms of breast cancer (that
is, cancer with adverse histologic features, such as
poorly differentiated tumors and triple-negative pheno-
types) (29, 30). Unfortunately, these types of cancer
may be the least likely to be positively affected by
screening programs, because they can grow so rapidly
that they develop and spread entirely within the times-
pan between screening examinations. The difference in
mortality rate may also be due to socioeconomic differ-
ences and health system failures. Multiple studies have
shown an association between African American race
and experiencing delays in receiving health care ser-
vices for cancer, not receiving appropriate treatment,
or not receiving treatment at all (31–33). African Amer-
ican women are also substantially underrepresented in
RCTs of mammography screening. As such, there is no
high-quality evidence to conclude that screening Afri-
can American women more often or earlier than al-
ready recommended for the overall population of
women would result in fewer breast cancer deaths or a
greater net benefit.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
All available RCTs evaluating the effectiveness of
breast cancer screening used film mammography. De-
spite a lack of direct evidence of effectiveness in reduc-
ing breast cancer deaths, conventional digital mam-
mography has essentially replaced film mammography
as the primary method for breast cancer screening in
the United States. Conventional digital screening mam-
mography has been shown to have about the same di-
agnostic accuracy as film, although digital screening
seems to have comparatively higher sensitivity in
women younger than age 50 years (34). Across all ages,
screening mammography has a sensitivity of approxi-
mately 77% to 95% and a specificity of about 94% to
97% (35).
Digital breast tomosynthesis is an emerging tech-
nology. One study on the test characteristics of DBT as
a primary breast cancer screening strategy met the
minimum inclusion criteria of the systematic evidence
review (that is, the study needed to be conducted in an
asymptomatic screening population, use a comprehen-
sive reference standard that applied to both negative
and positive test results, and have a minimum 1-year
follow-up for negative results to ascertain interval
breast cancer not identified by screening). As such, es-
timates of its test performance are subject to change
with additional research. However, the positive predic-
tive value of DBT (when used in conjunction with con-
ventional digital mammography and calculated as the
number of true positives [cancer] out of all positive ex-
aminations) ranges from 4.6% to 10.1% in U.S. studies
(13).
Some information is available about the diagnostic
test characteristics of adjunctive screening in women
identified to have dense breasts on an otherwise neg-
ative screening mammogram. Handheld breast ultra-
sonography has the most evidence available (5 stud-
ies); its sensitivity to detect breast cancer ranges from
80% to 83%, and its specificity ranges from 86% to
94%, with a positive predictive value between 3% and
8%. Three small studies of MRI in high-risk women
found that its sensitivity to detect breast cancer ranged
from 75% to 100%, specificity ranged from 78% to 89%,
and positive predictive value ranged from 3% to 33%,
although the applicability of these studies to women in
the general screening population is limited because of
the highly selected population in these studies (17, 18).
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
Primary Screening With Conventional
Mammography
An updated meta-analysis by Nelson and col-
leagues of RCTs of screening mammography found
similar RR reductions in breast cancer mortality by
age group as the previous USPSTF evidence review.
The combined RRs were 0.88 (CI, 0.73 to 1.003) for
women aged 39 to 49 years, 0.86 (CI, 0.68 to 0.97)
for women aged 50 to 59 years, 0.67 (CI, 0.55 to 0.91)
for women aged 60 to 69 years, and 0.80 (CI, 0.51 to
1.28) for women aged 70 to 74 years (2, 3).
None of the trials nor the combined meta-analysis
demonstrated a difference in all-cause mortality with
screening mammography (2).
Observational studies of screening mammography
reported a wide range of breast cancer mortality
reduction
rates.
Recent
meta-analyses
from
the
EUROSCREEN Working Group showed an approximate
25% to 31% relative reduction in breast cancer deaths
in women aged 50 to 69 years who were invited to
screening. In comparison, meta-analysis of RCTs that
used an intention-to-treat analysis found a 19% to 22%
breast cancer mortality reduction in women in the same
age range (2, 3).
Updated decision models performed by CISNET
yielded somewhat higher estimates in lifetime relative
breast cancer mortality reductions with biennial mam-
mography screening in women aged 50 to 74 years
compared with previous analyses (median reduction,
25.8% vs. 21.5%; range across models, 24.1% to 31.8%
vs. 20.0% to 28.0%, respectively). Since its previous
analysis, CISNET has revised the inputs of each of its 6
models (for example, portraying distinct molecular sub-
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
288 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 types and including digital mammography), which may
account for some of the difference (7, 8). The updated
estimate of the mortality benefit of mammography is
also higher than that obtained via meta-analysis of ran-
domized trials for a similar age group (24.1% to 31.8%
for women aged 50 to 74 years in decision models vs.
19% to 22% for women aged 50 to 69 years in RCTs) (2,
7). One reason for the discrepancy is the difference in
the time horizon evaluated; whereas the meta-analysis
looked at the impact of screening across a single de-
cade, the decision models evaluated the impact of
screening across an entire life span. It is also important
to recognize that the decision models assumed perfect
(100%) adherence to screening, follow-up for abnormal
findings, and treatment of screen-detected breast can-
cer for every patient. In addition, the models also as-
sumed that all women receive the most effective, stage-
specific treatments available for their breast cancer
once it is detected by mammography. As such, the de-
cision models represent an ideal, or the absolute max-
imum benefit, that a screening mammography pro-
gram could achieve given no barriers to the delivery of
health care services. In reality, the magnitude of benefit
would be lower, given the real-world constraints of im-
plementing a preventive service to such a large propor-
tion of women in the United States.
In addition to mortality, other outcomes—such as
quality of life or reduction in advanced-stage disease
and any associated treatment-related morbidity—are
also important to consider when evaluating the poten-
tial benefits of a screening program. From RCT evi-
dence, meta-analysis indicated a reduced risk for ad-
vanced cancer with the use of screening mammography
in women aged 50 years or older when “advanced dis-
ease” was defined by the most severe categories avail-
able (stages III and IV disease, tumor size ≥50 mm, or
≥4 positive lymph nodes) (RR, 0.62 [CI, 0.46 to 0.83]). A
significant reduction in advanced disease was not ob-
served with the use of screening mammography in
women aged 40 to 49 years (2, 3). Data from observa-
tional evidence have shown mixed results; some stud-
ies showed an association between screening and re-
duced lymph node–positive disease or smaller tumor
size (2), whereas others found no evidence of a change
in advanced cancer rates as a result of mammography
screening (2, 27).
The effect of screening mammography on associ-
ated adverse effects of treatment or their intensity is not
clear from the literature. A meta-analysis of 5 RCTs
showed that women randomly assigned to screening
mammography were significantly more likely to have a
mastectomy (RR, 1.20 [CI, 1.11 to 1.30]) and surgical
therapy (mastectomy and lumpectomy combined) (RR,
1.35 [CI, 1.26 to 1.44]) than women in the control
groups (36). However, critics have noted that these tri-
als do not reflect modern treatment standards and may
therefore not represent current practices. Four case-
series included in the systematic evidence review com-
pared breast cancer treatments in women who had pre-
vious mammography screening with those who did not
and reported significantly more breast-conserving sur-
geries, fewer mastectomies, and less chemotherapy in
women who had prior screening (2). However, all of
these studies included women with DCIS in the denom-
inator of screened women treated for cancer, leading
to potential bias between the screened and non-
screened groups based on differences in how DCIS
and invasive breast cancer are managed.
Primary Screening With DBT
No studies evaluated the effect of screening for
breast cancer with DBT on important health outcomes,
such as mortality, treatment-related morbidity, or qual-
ity of life (13).
Two case-series comparing conventional digital
mammography versus DBT plus conventional digital
mammography reported detection rates by cancer
stage. One study (n = 29 080) was conducted in the
United States and the other (n = 12 631) was con-
ducted in Norway. Neither found significant differences
in breast cancer size or node status at the time of diag-
nosis (37, 38).
Some evidence is available about the effect of DBT
on recall rates for positive findings requiring additional
evaluation. Nine studies compared findings from a sin-
gle cohort of women undergoing 2 types of screening
examinations or compared 2 screening cohorts of
women (conventional digital mammography alone vs.
combined with DBT). In the single study that met inclu-
sion criteria for the systematic review, DBT combined
with digital mammography was associated with a 0.6%
reduction in immediate recall rates compared with dig-
ital mammography alone (recall rate, 3.6% and 4.2%,
respectively). Overall, across all available studies, DBT
was associated with a median reduction in immediate
recall rates of 1.7% (range, 0.6% to 7.2%) (13).
Adjunctive Screening in Women With Dense Breasts
No studies evaluated the effects of adjunctive
screening with any method in women with dense
Table 5. Ten-Year Cumulative Probability (95% CI) of a False-Positive Test Result or Biopsy Recommendation From Annual or
Biennial Mammography Screening Starting at Age 40 or 50 Years: Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium Registry Data
Variable
Start at Age 40 y
Start at Age 50 y
Annual Screening
Biennial Screening
Annual Screening
Biennial Screening
False-positive test result, %
61.3 (59.4–63.1)
41.6 (40.6–42.5)
61.3 (58.0–64.7)
42.0 (40.4–43.7)
False-positive biopsy recommendation, %
7.0 (6.1–7.8)
4.8 (4.4–5.2)
9.4 (7.4–11.5)
6.4 (5.6–7.2)
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 289
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 breasts on breast cancer rates, quality of life, or mortal-
ity (17, 18).
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
Primary Screening With Conventional
Mammography
Screening mammography has several potential
harms. The most common is a false-positive result,
which can lead to psychological harms, as well as addi-
tional testing and invasive follow-up procedures. Stud-
ies show a fairly consistent association between a false-
positive screening mammogram and increased breast
cancer–specific distress, anxiety, and apprehension,
particularly in women who have an associated proce-
dure, such as fine-needle aspiration or breast biopsy.
These effects improve over time for most women (2, 4).
Table 5 summarizes BCSC data on the cumulative
probability of a woman (at varying starting ages and
intervals) receiving at least 1 false-positive mammo-
gram or a recommendation for what turns out to be a
false-positive biopsy over a 10-year period (39).
The most serious harm of screening mammogra-
phy is the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer that
would never have become a threat to a woman's
health, or even apparent, during her lifetime (overdiag-
nosis and overtreatment). Overdiagnosis occurs when
the breast tumor does not progress or when the
woman dies of a competing cause of death before the
breast cancer advances to the point of causing symp-
toms. Overdiagnosis is not the same as misdiagnosis.
Misdiagnosis is when a cancer is incorrectly classified
by an individual pathologist; overdiagnosis, on the
other hand, happens when there is general agreement
by pathologists on how to classify the cancer, but the
tumor does not go on to behave as expected based on
its appearance. It is not possible to directly observe for
any individual woman whether she has or does not
have an overdiagnosed tumor; it is only possible to in-
directly estimate the frequency of overdiagnosis that
may occur across a screened population. Researchers
have used multiple data sources to attempt to quantify
overdiagnosis rates associated with mammography
screening, including RCTs, pathology and imaging
studies, ecologic and cohort studies, and decision
modeling. To additionally complicate matters, there is a
lack of consensus concerning the optimal method for
calculating the magnitude of overdiagnosis, and inves-
tigators differ in their approaches (6, 40). This has re-
sulted in a wide range of estimates in the available lit-
erature (0% to 54%) (2, 4).
Of the available clinical trials, 3 RCTs in which there
was no mammography screening of the control groups
at the end of the study (Malmo
¨ Mammographic Screen-
ing Trial I and the Canadian National Breast Screening
Study 1 and 2) provided the least-biased estimates, as
they had the advantage of having comparable groups
at baseline, adequate follow-up beyond the screening
period to distinguish between earlier diagnosis and
overdiagnosis, and clear distinction between which
groups received screening and which did not (if screen-
ing was also provided to the control group, then over-
diagnosis could also occur in this population) (6). These
older trials likely underestimate the actual magnitude
of overdiagnosis associated with modern screening
mammography programs, given the increasing sensi-
tivity of newer technologies, but together, they suggest
that over a 10-year period, approximately 19% of
breast cancers are overdiagnosed (2, 4). CISNET deci-
sion models also investigated the degree of overdiag-
nosis likely to result from a screening mammography
program. The 6 decision models reported a wide range
of estimates of the magnitude of overdiagnosis associ-
ated with screening mammography (1.4% to 24.9% of
invasive cancer and 30.5% to 84.5% of DCIS, depend-
ing on the screening strategy) (7, 8). Assumptions in
several of the models may have increased the likeli-
hood of underestimating the true burden of overdiag-
nosis associated with screening mammography. Most
importantly, 4 of the 6 models assumed that all diag-
nosed invasive cancer can progress to lethality; only 1
(model W) allowed for the possibility of cancer with
“limited malignant potential,” whereby the tumor stops
progressing at an early invasive stage. In addition, 1 of
the models omitted DCIS.
Recurrent radiation exposure from a lifetime pro-
gram of mammography screening may slightly increase
the risk for breast cancer, although no empirical studies
have directly measured this effect. Simulation models
performed in support of this scientific report estimate
that
the
mean
lifetime
attributable
risk
(LAR)
of
radiation-induced breast cancer from biennial screen-
ing mammography in women aged 50 to 74 years is 3
cases per 10 000 women screened. The mean LAR of
breast cancer death is 0.5 deaths per 10 000 women
screened. If biennial screening begins at age 40 in-
stead of 50 years, the mean LAR of developing breast
cancer
increases
to
4
cases
per
10 000
women
screened, and the number of breast cancer deaths in-
creases to about 1 per 10 000 women screened (25,
26). Of note, women with large breasts, who may re-
quire extra views—and thus higher radiation doses—for
complete mammography examination, seem to be at
increased risk for radiation-induced breast cancer or
breast cancer death. Based on information from the
Digital Mammography Imaging Screening Trial (which
compared the test characteristics of film vs. digital
mammography) (41), as no representative population-
based data are available, an estimated 5% to 6% of U.S.
women will require additional views during screening
for complete breast examination. For biennial screen-
ing in women aged 50 to 74 years, the mean LAR of
developing breast cancer is an estimated 6 versus 2
cases per 10 000 screened women with and without
large breasts, respectively; the mean LAR of breast can-
cer death is 1 versus 0.4 deaths per 10 000 screened
women with and without large breasts, respectively (25,
26).
Primary Screening With DBT
Currently, DBT is most frequently performed in
combination with conventional digital mammography;
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
290 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 this practice essentially doubles the resulting radiation
exposure to the patient. The U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration has approved a method to generate syn-
thetic reconstructions of 2-dimensional images from
3-dimensional views, which reduces the total radiation
dose emitted. However, study data on the performance
of DBT in isolation (that is, with synthetic reconstruction
of 2-dimensional views) is limited to 1 mammography
reading study that compared sensitivity and specificity
and 1 prospective clinical trial (42), and the method is
not yet thought to be in widespread clinical use.
Limited evidence suggests that DBT may slightly
increase the risk for breast biopsy compared with con-
ventional digital mammography. In 4 U.S. studies of
DBT that reported breast biopsy rates, 3 noted higher
rates in the combined DBT and conventional digital
mammography group compared with conventional
digital mammography alone (median difference, 0.2%
[range, �0.1% to 0.4%]) (13).
Adjunctive Screening in Women With Dense Breasts
Although evidence is limited, the use of adjunctive
screening in women with increased breast density via
alternative technologies, such as handheld ultrasonog-
raphy or MRI, generally seems to increase recall and
breast biopsy rates compared with standard screening
mammography alone (17, 18). A single good-quality
U.S. study that evaluated the use of adjunctive hand-
held ultrasonography and MRI found that the recall rate
for handheld ultrasonography after a negative mam-
mogram was about 14% compared with 11% for pri-
mary screening mammography alone. In women who
received adjunctive screening with MRI after a negative
mammogram and negative ultrasound, the recall rate
was 23% (43).
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
For women who are not known to be at increased
risk for breast cancer, the value of screening mammog-
raphy increases with age, with the greatest benefit oc-
curring from ages 50 to 74 years. In particular, women
aged 60 to 69 years are the most likely to avoid a breast
cancer death. Screening women every 2 years provides
the best balance of benefit and harms. For women
aged 40 to 49 years, the potential benefit is smaller,
and the risk for harms is proportionally greater. How-
ever, the potential outcomes that need to be consid-
ered are not identical, and individual women may differ
in how they prioritize them. The small probability that a
woman may avoid a breast cancer death must be
weighed against the more likely scenario that she may
have a false-positive result and possible unnecessary
follow-up testing (including invasive testing); a false-
negative result, with false reassurance or delayed diag-
nosis; or most critically, diagnosis and treatment of can-
cer that would otherwise not have threatened her
health or even come to her attention. Women who
value the possible breast cancer mortality benefit more
than they value avoiding the harms can make an in-
formed decision to begin screening. For women aged
75 years or older, evidence is very limited concerning
the benefits and harms of screening mammography.
However, since the mortality benefits of screening
mammography (as with almost any cancer screening
test) generally take years to accrue but many of the
harms can be experienced immediately, women with
limited life expectancy or severe comorbid conditions
are unlikely to benefit.
Digital breast tomosynthesis is an emerging tech-
nology for breast cancer screening. Preliminary evi-
dence suggests that it can reduce recall rates for false-
positive results and detect more cancer compared with
conventional digital mammography. However, it may
increase breast biopsy rates, and as currently practiced
in most settings, DBT exposes women to more radia-
tion than conventional 2-dimensional mammography. It
is not clear whether all of the extra cancer cases de-
tected by DBT actually represent a benefit (that is, can-
cer that is clinically significant rather than overdiagno-
sis, and of any additional benefit compared with
detection by conventional digital mammography at the
next scheduled examination). Most importantly, no
studies assessed the effect of DBT on important health
outcomes for women, such as quality of life, morbidity,
or mortality. Finally, increased breast density is a com-
mon condition that imparts some increased risk for
breast cancer, and it reduces the test performance
characteristics of mammography as well. Current evi-
dence on the use of adjunctive screening in women
with increased breast density is not sufficient to recom-
mend a specific screening strategy. These are impor-
tant areas for future research.
UPDATE OF PREVIOUS USPSTF
RECOMMENDATION
This recommendation updates the 2009 USPSTF
recommendation on breast cancer screening with an
assessment of the most current available scientific evi-
dence for mammography screening. In addition, this
update also provides additional clarity on what is
meant by the “C” recommendation for women aged 40
to 49 years. A “C” recommendation is not a recommen-
dation against mammography screening in this age
group; it signifies moderate certainty of a net benefit
for screening that is small in magnitude. A “C” recom-
mendation emphasizes that the decision to screen
should be an individual one, made after a woman
weighs the potential benefit against the possible
harms. This recommendation also notes that women
aged 40 to 49 years with a first-degree relative (parent,
child, or sibling) with breast cancer may potentially
benefit more than average-risk women in this age
group from beginning screening mammography be-
fore age 50 years.
The USPSTF did not update its recommendation on
whether there are additional, incremental benefits or
harms associated with the use of MRI or digital mam-
mography instead of film mammography in women
who are not at increased risk for breast cancer, given
that digital mammography has now essentially re-
placed film mammography as the primary breast can-
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 291
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 cer screening method in the United States. The USPSTF
did not update its 2009 recommendation on teaching
breast self-examination; the USPSTF supports all pa-
tients being aware of changes in their bodies and dis-
cussing these changes with clinicians. The USPSTF also
did not update its recommendation on the additional
potential benefit of clinical breast examination.
This recommendation examines the evidence of
the effectiveness of an emerging technology—DBT—as a
primary screening strategy. It also evaluates the effec-
tiveness of adjunctive screening using ultrasonography,
MRI, DBT, or other methods in women identified
to have dense breasts on an otherwise negative mam-
mogram.
The scope of the evidence review supporting this
recommendation statement was determined after pub-
lic comment on the draft research plan.
Response to Public Comment
A draft recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF Web site from 21 April
through 18 May 2015. In response to the comments
received, the USPSTF clarified certain terminology (for
example, DBT and misdiagnosis vs. overdiagnosis), up-
dated or added references (for example, those related
to the long-term outcomes of DCIS), and provided ad-
ditional context around the potential risks of radiation
exposure due to mammography screening. Additional
discussion of the public comments is below.
Benefits of Contemporary Screening Mammography
Some commenters thought that the USPSTF did
not consider the available observational evidence on
the effectiveness of mammography screening, and that
the USPSTF's assessment is therefore based on out-
dated information, resulting in an underestimate of the
current benefits of screening. This is incorrect. The sys-
tematic evidence review, which served as the founda-
tion for this recommendation statement, encompassed
both RCTs and nonexperimental studies of mammog-
raphy screening. Nearly 200 observational studies, in-
cluding 83 that specifically evaluated the benefits of
screening mammography, were captured in the review
(2). The USPSTF agrees that more contemporary evi-
dence on breast cancer screening is important to con-
sider given the age of the available RCTs, and it re-
viewed both the recent Pan-Canadian (44) and the
Swedish Mammography Screening in Young Women
(45) cohort studies. As noted in the Discussion section,
RCTs
of
mammography
screening
have
generally
found smaller relative reductions in breast cancer mor-
tality than observational studies, although estimates
from the latter vary. For example, meta-analyses of
mammography screening in women aged 50 to 69
years showed RRs of breast cancer death ranging from
0.78 to 0.81 in RCTs compared with about 0.69 to 0.75
in observational studies (2). There may be several rea-
sons for this difference in the magnitude of benefit. Im-
provements in mammography technology may be
translating into an increased mortality benefit, so that
more recent observational evidence demonstrates a
real difference in the efficacy of modern-day screening
compared with that of the older randomized trials.
However, known and important methodological limita-
tions of observational studies, such as selection bias,
lead and length time bias, and residual or unknown
bias and confounding, are likely explanations for some
or even all of the difference observed. In the absence
of a modern-day clinical trial, it is impossible to know
with certainty the precise magnitude of benefit of cur-
rent screening mammography programs. As such, the
USPSTF believes it is most appropriate to consider all
of the evidence available (given that it meets prespeci-
fied and transparent quality standards, such as those
delineated in its commissioned systematic evidence re-
view) (2), while acknowledging that uncertainty remains
about the exact size of the anticipated benefit in either
direction.
Screening Mammography in Women Aged 40 to 49
Years
Some commenters incorrectly believed that the “C”
recommendation for women aged 40 to 49 years rep-
resented a change from what the USPSTF had recom-
mended in the past. Others thought that the “C”
recommendation meant that the USPSTF was recom-
mending against screening in this group of women. As
noted previously, the recommendation for women
aged 40 to 49 years was also a “C” in 2009 (meaning
that the USPSTF had concluded that it had moderate
certainty of a small net benefit to mammography
screening in this population). This update clarifies the
language
around
what
the
“C”
recommendation
means. It is not a recommendation against screening
but a statement that the decision to undergo screening
mammography for women in their 40s should be an
informed, individual one, after she weighs the potential
benefit against the potential harms.
Screening Mammography in Women Aged 70 to 74
Years or Older
Several commenters believed that the USPSTF was
inconsistent in extending a “B” recommendation to
women aged 70 to 74 years but assigning an “I” state-
ment to women aged 75 years or older. These com-
menters noted that although the USPSTF had explained
that trial data were inconclusive for women in their
early 70s, modeling data could support extending the
benefit seen in younger women to this age range. How-
ever, the USPSTF had stated that modeling data were
not sufficient to establish the benefits of mammogra-
phy screening in women aged 75 years or older. This is
an apparent, though not real, contradiction. Two RCTs
of
mammography
screening
included
participants
aged 70 to 74 years. A meta-analysis performed to sup-
port the 2002 USPSTF recommendations found that the
RR reduction of breast cancer death in screened
women aged 65 to 74 years was 0.78 (CI, 0.62 to 0.99)
(35). In 2009 and 2014, the meta-analyses were re-
stricted to women aged 70 to 74 years. In the most
recent update, the meta-analysis showed an RR reduc-
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
292 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 tion of 0.80 (CI, 0.51 to 1.28) (2), and the CI widened
and crossed 1.0 because of the small number of abso-
lute participants included in the analysis. The USPSTF
considered the trial data, which were suggestive but
not definitive, showing a benefit to mammography in
this age group within the context of the modeling data,
which also suggested an absolute breast cancer mor-
tality benefit (with reasonable additional harms) with
the extension of screening to this age group. In women
aged 75 years or older, however, direct evidence about
the benefits of screening mammography does not ex-
ist; no clinical trials of screening include this population
(2). Therefore, in this case, the USPSTF's assessment
could not rest on a foundation of empirical data aug-
mented with supplemental information, but would have
to be entirely based on decision modeling. The USPSTF
does not use evidence from models alone to establish
that a clinical preventive service is effective or harmful;
rather, it uses modeling as an important extension that
builds on observed evidence.
Definition of Overdiagnosis
The USPSTF received several comments about how
overdiagnosis was conceptualized in the recommenda-
tion statement. Commenters stressed that it is impossi-
ble to directly measure overdiagnosis, and that there
are multiple methods for estimating its frequency but
no scientific consensus on the optimal approach. The
USPSTF agrees, and it discusses these issues in several
places throughout the recommendation. Commenters
emphasized that because it is not possible to know
whether any individual screen-detected cancer would
have been clinically detected or gone on to cause
health problems in the absence of screening, clinicians
treat all detected breast cancer as potentially lethal;
again, the USPSTF concurs. Commenters disagreed
about the degree of overdiagnosis that is likely to occur
with the use of mammography screening, and the USP-
STF received requests to emphasize percentages that
are both higher and lower than the 19% estimate de-
rived from the trials that did not have screening in their
control groups at the end of the study. For the sake of
transparency, the USPSTF has provided the full range
of overdiagnosis estimates available in the literature as
identified in its commissioned systematic evidence re-
view, as well as specific estimates from observational
studies, randomized trials, and modeling studies, with
the clear caveat that ongoing uncertainty remains. This
uncertainty is not about the fundamental existence of
this critical harm of mammography screening (46), as a
few commenters suggested; rather, it is about the pre-
cise magnitude of the problem. The USPSTF notes that
continuing research is essential to advance understand-
ing of the magnitude of overdiagnosis and how to dis-
tinguish overdiagnosed cancer from cancer that is likely
to progress, as well as to reduce its occurrence.
DBT
Some
commenters
thought
the
USPSTF
over-
looked evidence in its review of the efficacy of DBT.
Commenters noted that studies have shown that DBT
increases the detection of breast cancer and reduces
recalls and false-positive results. The USPSTF commis-
sioned a systematic evidence review on DBT as a pri-
mary screening method for breast cancer (13). The
original search identified 945 studies, of which only 13
were identified as specifically relevant to the topic at
hand. A bridge search performed during the public
comment period to keep the review as temporally cur-
rent as possible identified another 79 studies, 5 of
which directly addressed the test characteristics of DBT.
Despite this expansive and meticulous search, a single
study met the prespecified inclusion criteria (studies
must be conducted in a screening population of
asymptomatic women aged 40 years or older and must
evaluate test performance characteristics against a
comprehensive reference standard that is applied to
both negative and positive test results). A “comprehen-
sive reference standard” means that further imaging
and/or biopsy is performed for positive results, and
there is a minimum of 1 year of clinical follow-up for
negative results in order to accurately assess the inter-
val breast cancer rate (that is, the number of cancers
that appear in between screening periods, which al-
lows for the calculation of false-negative results). Even
though no other studies met these inclusion criteria,
the USPSTF still carefully reviewed the data from all of
the studies identified as directly relevant to the use of
DBT for primary breast cancer screening, including
Friedewald and colleagues' 2014 study that evaluated
the performance of DBT in combination with conven-
tional digital mammography (47). As already noted
in the Clinical Considerations section, the USPSTF
agrees that preliminary evidence suggests that DBT
can reduce recall rates for false-positive results (median
reduction, 1.7% [range in the systematic review, 0.6%
to 7.2%]) (13). The USPSTF also agrees that DBT ap-
pears to increase the cancer detection rate compared
with conventional digital mammography alone. How-
ever, the rate of overdiagnosis associated with DBT is
unknown; it is also unknown if there is an incremental
benefit to finding these cancers earlier than with con-
ventional digital mammography. The USPSTF recom-
mends
continued
research
around
this
emerging
technology.
Comparison of the USPSTF's Recommendations With
Those of Other Organizations
Some commenters noted that the USPSTF recom-
mendations on breast cancer screening do not align
with those of other organizations, such as the American
College of Radiology (48) or the American Congress of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (49)—
both of whom
recommend annual mammography screening begin-
ning at age 40 years—and were concerned that the lack
of conformity may be confusing to clinicians and pa-
tients. While there are some differences, it is worth em-
phasizing the notable similarities in the approach of
many major guidelines, including those between the
USPSTF's recommendations and the recently released
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 293
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 recommendations from the American Cancer Society
(50). The USPSTF stands in agreement with most orga-
nizations that mammography screening can reduce
deaths due to breast cancer in women in their 40s.
Based on the evidence, the USPSTF found that there is
a net benefit for women to initiating screening in their
40s, and that the size of the net benefit is smaller than
that for older women; it therefore concludes that the
decision to begin screening should be an individual
one. The American Cancer Society, along with many
other groups, including the American College of Physi-
cians (51), the American Academy of Family Physicians
(52), the 2013 Well-Woman Task Force assembled by
the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecol-
ogists (53, 54), and the Canadian Task Force on Preven-
tive Health Care (55), also recommends individualized
decision making for women in their 40s on whether and
when to initiate mammography screening. The USPSTF
clarified that the risk for breast cancer increases with
age (so a 48-year-old woman's potential to benefit may
be more similar to a 50- rather than a 40-year-old
woman), and that women may wish to factor this infor-
mation into their decision making as they consider
whether and when to initiate screening in their 40s. No-
tably, the USPSTF is in agreement with all other major
professional organizations about the importance of
regular mammography screening for women aged 50
to 74 years. The USPSTF found that most of the benefit
of mammography screening is realized with biennial
screening. The newly released recommendations from
the American Cancer Society also support biennial
screening, at intervals of 1 to 2 years in women in their
50s, 60s, and 70s (50). National breast cancer screening
programs in the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, Poland, Norway, Luxembourg, Germany,
Finland, Denmark, and Belgium offer mammography
screening every 2 to 3 years for women aged 50 up to
74 years (56). Many European countries adhere to rec-
ommendations from the International Agency for Re-
search on Cancer, which recently updated its guide-
lines to promote screening starting at age 50 years (57).
Insurance Coverage and Access to Mammography
Some commenters expressed concern that a “C”
recommendation from the USPSTF might create a fi-
nancial barrier for some women in their 40s who wish
to undergo mammography screening after making an
informed
decision.
These
commenters
asked
the
USPSTF to change its recommendation to a “B” to guar-
antee insurance coverage for these women. The Af-
fordable Care Act mandates that persons with private
health plans receive coverage without copayment or
coinsurance for preventive services that have a USPSTF
“A” or “B” recommendation (58).
Recommendations from the USPSTF are based on
its interpretation of the science regarding the potential
benefits and harms of a preventive service; a “C” rec-
ommendation means that the USPSTF has concluded
that there is at least moderate certainty of a small net
benefit to the service, whereas a “B” recommendation
means that there is either high certainty that the net
benefit is moderate or moderate certainty that the net
benefit is moderate to substantial. The USPSTF found in
2009 and again in 2016 that there is moderate certainty
of a small net benefit to starting breast cancer screen-
ing before age 50 years because of the balance of
benefit and harms outlined in this recommendation
statement. The USPSTF could not give a “B” recommen-
dation for screening in women aged 40 to 49 years
because the science does not support moderate or
high certainty of moderate or substantial net benefit in
this age group. The role of the USPSTF is to assess the
scientific evidence for preventive services; it is not
within its mandate to reinterpret the science and inflate
the net benefit of mammography screening solely to
ensure insurance coverage of the service for women
with private insurance plans (59). The USPSTF recom-
mends that women in their 40s who understand the
potential harms of mammography screening but place
a higher value on the potential benefit have the option
to begin screening. The USPSTF appreciates that, in the
absence of full or partial insurance coverage, fewer
women may make that choice, but those determina-
tions are made by payers and legislators. Private and
public payers have the option of providing coverage
(as most do), and legislators have the option of requir-
ing coverage (as they have done in the past and again
in the 2016 Consolidated Appropriations Act) (60).
Some commenters highlighted the importance of
coverage without additional payment for women with
Medicare or Medicaid. Coverage in these plans does
not reflect USPSTF recommendations and is decided
separately by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Ser-
vices (for Medicare) and by individual states (for
Medicaid).
Commenters also expressed concern that mam-
mography is currently underutilized in the United States
in some settings (for example, rates of recent use
among women aged 50 to 74 years do not meet the
Healthy People 2020 target [61]) and that any recom-
mendation other than annual mammography screening
beginning at age 40 years might “drive complacency”
among women and cause them to delay needed atten-
tion to their health. The most recent trend data from the
National Committee for Quality Assurance suggest that
mammography screening rates have increased among
women in all insurance categories since the USPSTF’s
2009 recommendation (62). As with most effective
medical interventions, there is the potential for under-
use, appropriate use, and overuse of screening mam-
mography in the general population. The USPSTF
agrees that effective patient, provider, and systems-
level interventions should be employed to increase the
appropriate use of screening mammography among
women who are most likely to benefit from it, and it
feels strongly that women need accurate information
about potential benefits and harms so they can make
the best decision for themselves.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the USPSTF are inde-
pendent of the U.S. government. They should not be con-
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
294 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 strued as an official position of the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality or the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Financial Support: The USPSTF is an independent, voluntary
body. The U.S. Congress mandates that the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality support the operations of
the USPSTF.
Disclosures: Dr. Phillips disclosed that he has received past
grants and contracts from NCI and CDC for research on pat-
terns of use of screening tests for breast and other cancers in
primary care. Dr. owens discloses that he has received travel
reimbursement from the USPSTF. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at www.uspreventive
servicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/methods-and-processes.
Forms can be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors/icmje/
ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M15-2886.
References
1. SEER Stat Factsheets: Breast Cancer. Bethesda, MD: National Can-
cer Institute; 2015. Accessed at http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html
/breast.html on 13 April 2015.
2. Nelson HD, Cantor A, Humphrey L, Fu R, Pappas M, Daeges M,
et al. Screening for Breast Cancer: A Systematic Review to Update
the 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation. Ev-
idence Synthesis No. 124. AHRQ Publication No. 14-05201-EF-1.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015.
3. Nelson HD, Fu R, Cantor A, Pappas M, Daeges M, Humphrey L.
Effectiveness of breast cancer screening: systematic review and
meta-analysis to update the 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation. Ann Intern Med. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]. doi:
10.7326/M15-0969
4. Nelson HD, Pappas M, Cantor A, Griffin J, Daeges M, Humphrey
L. Harms of breast cancer screening: systematic review to update the
2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation. Ann In-
tern Med. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.7326/M15-0970
5. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, Garshell J, Miller D, Al-
tekruse SF, et al, eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2011.
Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2014. Accessed at http:
//seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011/ on 13 April 2015.
6. Marmot MG, Altman DG, Cameron DA, Dewar JA, Thompson SG,
Wilcox M. The benefits and harms of breast cancer screening: an
independent
review.
Br
J
Cancer.
2013;108:2205-40.
[PMID:
23744281] doi:10.1038/bjc.2013.177
7. Mandelblatt J, Cronin K, de Koning H, Miglioretti DL, Schechter C,
Stout N. Collaborative Modeling of U.S. Breast Cancer Screening
Strategies. AHRQ Publication No. 14-05201-EF-4. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015.
8. Mandelblatt JS, Stout NK, Schechter CB, van den Broek JJ,
Miglioretti DL, Krapcho M, et al. Collaborative modeling of the ben-
efits and harms associated with different U.S. breast cancer screen-
ing strategies. Ann Intern Med. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]. doi:
10.7326/M15-1536
9. Nelson HD, O’
Meara ES, Kerlikowske K, Balch S, Miglioretti D.
Factors associated with rates of false-positive and false-negative re-
sults from digital mammography screening: an analysis of registry
data. Ann Intern Med. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.7326
/M15-0971
10. Nelson HD, Smith ME, Griffin JC, Fu R. Use of medications to
reduce risk for primary breast cancer: a systematic review for the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:604-14.
[PMID: 23588749] doi:10.7326/0003-4819-158-8-201304160-00005
11. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for breast cancer:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann
Intern Med. 2009;151:716-26. [PMID: 19920272] doi:10.7326/0003
-4819-151-10-200911170-00008
12. Lansdorp-Vogelaar I, Gulati R, Mariotto AB, Schechter CB, de
Carvalho TM, Knudsen AB, et al. Personalizing age of cancer screen-
ing cessation based on comorbid conditions: model estimates of
harms and benefits. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:104-12. [PMID:
25023249] doi:10.7326/M13-2867
13. Melnikow J, Fenton JJ, Miglioretti D, Whitlock EP, Weyrich MS.
Screening for Breast Cancer With Digital Breast Tomosynthesis. Evi-
dence Synthesis No. 125. AHRQ Publication No. 14-05201-EF-2.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015.
14. Sprague BL, Gangnon RE, Burt V, Trentham-Dietz A, Hampton
JM, Wellman RD, et al. Prevalence of mammographically dense
breasts in the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106. [PMID:
25217577] doi:10.1093/jnci/dju255
15. Gierach GL, Ichikawa L, Kerlikowske K, Brinton LA, Farhat GN,
Vacek PM, et al. Relationship between mammographic density and
breast cancer death in the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:1218-27. [PMID: 22911616] doi:10
.1093/jnci/djs327
16. Carney PA, Miglioretti DL, Yankaskas BC, Kerlikowske K, Rosen-
berg R, Rutter CM, et al. Individual and combined effects of age,
breast density, and hormone replacement therapy use on the accu-
racy of screening mammography. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138:168-
75. [PMID: 12558355]
17. Melnikow J, Fenton JJ, Whitlock EP, Miglioretti DL, Weyrich MS,
Thompson JH, et al. Supplemental Screening for Breast Cancer in
Women With Dense Breasts: A Systematic Review for the U.S. Pre-
ventive Service Task Force. Evidence Synthesis No. 126. AHRQ Pub-
lication No. 14-05201-EF-3. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality; 2015.
18. Melnikow J, Fenton JJ, Whitlock EP, Miglioretti DL, Weyrich MS,
Thompson JH, et al. Supplemental screening for breast cancer in
women with dense breasts: a systematic review for the U.S. Preven-
tive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2016. [Epub ahead of
print]. doi: 10.7326/M15-1789
19. Kerlikowske K, Zhu W, Hubbard RA, Geller B, Dittus K, Braith-
waite D, et al; Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium. Outcomes of
screening mammography by frequency, breast density, and post-
menopausal hormone therapy. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:807-16.
[PMID: 23552817] doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.307
20. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA Can-
cer J Clin. 2014;64:9-29. [PMID: 24399786] doi:10.3322/caac.21208
21. Esserman LJ, Thompson IM Jr, Reid B. Overdiagnosis and over-
treatment in cancer: an opportunity for improvement. JAMA. 2013;
310:797-8. [PMID: 23896967]
22. Wickerham DL, Julian TB. Ductal carcinoma in situ: a rose by any
other name [Editorial]. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105:1521-2. [PMID:
24068770] doi:10.1093/jnci/djt268
23. Baxter NN, Virnig BA, Durham SB, Tuttle TM. Trends in the treat-
ment of ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2004;96:443-8. [PMID: 15026469]
24. Narod SA, Iqbal J, Giannakeas V, Sopik V, Sun P. Breast cancer
mortality after a diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in situ. JAMA Oncol.
2015;1:888-96.
[PMID:
26291673]
doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2015
.2510
25. Miglioretti DL, Lange J, van Ravesteyn N, van den Broek JJ, Lee
CI, Melnikow J, et al. Radiation-Induced Breast Cancer and Breast
Cancer Death From Mammography Screening [Abstract]. AHRQ
Publication No. 14-05201-EF-5. Rockville, MD: Agency for Health-
care Research and Quality; 2015.
26. Miglioretti DL, Lange J, van den Broek JJ, Lee CI, van Ravesteyn
NT, Ritley D, et al. Radiation-induced breast cancer incidence and
mortality from digital mammography screening. A modeling study.
Ann Intern Med. 2016. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.7326/M15
-1241
27. Welch HG, Gorski DH, Albertsen PC. Trends in metastatic breast
and prostate cancer—lessons in cancer dynamics. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:1685-7. [PMID: 26510017] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1510443
Screening for Breast Cancer
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016 295
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 28. DeSantis CE, Fedewa SA, Goding Sauer A, Kramer JL, Smith RA,
Jemal A. Breast cancer statistics, 2015: Convergence of incidence
rates between black and white women. CA Cancer J Clin. 2015.
[PMID: 26513636] doi:10.3322/caac.21320
29. Bauer KR, Brown M, Cress RD, Parise CA, Caggiano V. Descriptive
analysis of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative, progesterone receptor (PR)-
negative, and HER2-negative invasive breast cancer, the so-called triple-
negative phenotype: a population-based study from the California can-
cer Registry. Cancer. 2007;109:1721-8. [PMID: 17387718]
30. Carey LA, Perou CM, Livasy CA, Dressler LG, Cowan D, Conway
K, et al. Race, breast cancer subtypes, and survival in the Carolina
Breast Cancer Study. JAMA. 2006;295:2492-502. [PMID: 16757721]
31. Brawley OW. Is race really a negative prognostic factor for
cancer? [Editorial]. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101:970-1. [PMID:
19567421] doi:10.1093/jnci/djp185
32. Griggs JJ, Culakova E, Sorbero ME, Poniewierski MS, Wolff DA,
Crawford J, et al. Social and racial differences in selection of breast
cancer adjuvant chemotherapy regimens. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:
2522-7. [PMID: 17577029]
33. Roetzheim RG, Pal N, Tennant C, Voti L, Ayanian JZ, Schwabe A,
et al. Effects of health insurance and race on early detection of can-
cer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91:1409-15. [PMID: 10451447]
34. Souza FH, Wendland EM, Rosa MI, Polanczyk CA. Is full-field
digital mammography more accurate than screen-film mammogra-
phy in overall population screening? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Breast. 2013;22:217-24. [PMID: 23489759] doi:10.1016/j
.breast.2013.02.013
35. Humphrey LL, Helfand M, Chan BK, Woolf SH. Breast cancer screen-
ing: a summary of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:347-60. [PMID: 12204020]
36. Gøtzsche PC, Jørgensen KJ. Screening for breast cancer with
mammography. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;6:CD001877.
[PMID: 23737396] doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001877.pub5
37. Skaane P, Bandos AI, Gullien R, Eben EB, Ekseth U, Haakenaasen
U, et al. Comparison of digital mammography alone and digital
mammography plus tomosynthesis in a population-based screening
program. Radiology. 2013;267:47-56. [PMID: 23297332] doi:10
.1148/radiol.12121373
38. Rose SL, Tidwell AL, Bujnoch LJ, Kushwaha AC, Nordmann AS,
Sexton R Jr. Implementation of breast tomosynthesis in a routine
screening practice: an observational study. AJR Am J Roentgenol.
2013;200:1401-8. [PMID: 23701081] doi:10.2214/AJR.12.9672
39. Hubbard RA, Kerlikowske K, Flowers CI, Yankaskas BC, Zhu W,
Miglioretti DL. Cumulative probability of false-positive recall or bi-
opsy recommendation after 10 years of screening mammography: a
cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:481-92. [PMID: 22007042]
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-155-8-201110180-00004
40. Carter JL, Coletti RJ, Harris RP. Quantifying and monitoring over-
diagnosis in cancer screening: a systematic review of methods. BMJ.
2015;350:g7773. [PMID: 25569206] doi:10.1136/bmj.g7773
41. Pisano ED, Gatsonis C, Hendrick E, Yaffe M, Baum JK, Acharyya
S, et al; Digital Mammographic Imaging Screening Trial (DMIST) In-
vestigators Group. Diagnostic performance of digital versus film
mammography for breast-cancer screening. N Engl J Med. 2005;
353:1773-83. [PMID: 16169887]
42. Skaane P, Bandos AI, Eben EB, Jebsen IN, Krager M, Haakenaa-
sen U, et al. Two-view digital breast tomosynthesis screening with
synthetically reconstructed projection images: comparison with dig-
ital breast tomosynthesis with full-field digital mammographic im-
ages. Radiology. 2014;271:655-63. [PMID: 24484063] doi:10.1148
/radiol.13131391
43. Berg WA, Zhang Z, Lehrer D, Jong RA, Pisano ED, Barr RG, et al;
ACRIN 6666 Investigators. Detection of breast cancer with addition
of annual screening ultrasound or a single screening MRI to mam-
mography in women with elevated breast cancer risk. JAMA. 2012;
307:1394-404. [PMID: 22474203] doi:10.1001/jama.2012.388
44. Coldman A, Phillips N, Wilson C, Decker K, Chiarelli AM, Brisson
J, et al. Pan-Canadian study of mammography screening and mor-
tality from breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106. [PMID:
25274578] doi:10.1093/jnci/dju261
45. Hellquist BN, Duffy SW, Abdsaleh S, Bjo
¨rneld L, Borda
´s P, Taba
´r
L, et al. Effectiveness of population-based service screening with
mammography for women ages 40 to 49 years: evaluation of the
Swedish Mammography Screening in Young Women (SCRY) cohort.
Cancer. 2011;117:714-22. [PMID: 20882563] doi:10.1002/cncr.25650
46. Barratt A. Overdiagnosis in mammography screening: a 45 year
journey from shadowy idea to acknowledged reality. BMJ. 2015;350:
h867. [PMID: 25736426] doi:10.1136/bmj.h867
47. Friedewald SM, Rafferty EA, Rose SL, Durand MA, Plecha DM,
Greenberg JS, et al. Breast cancer screening using tomosynthesis in
combination with digital mammography. JAMA. 2014;311:2499-
507. [PMID: 25058084] doi:10.1001/jama.2014.6095
48. Lee CH, Dershaw DD, Kopans D, Evans P, Monsees B, Montic-
ciolo D, et al. Breast cancer screening with imaging: recommenda-
tions from the Society of Breast Imaging and the ACR on the use of
mammography, breast MRI, breast ultrasound, and other technolo-
gies for the detection of clinically occult breast cancer. J Am Coll
Radiol. 2010;7:18-27. [PMID: 20129267] doi:10.1016/j.jacr.2009.09.022
49. American College of Obstetricians-Gynecologists. Practice bul-
letin no. 122: Breast cancer screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118:
372-82. [PMID: 21775869] doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e31822c98e5
50. Oeffinger KC, Fontham ET, Etzioni R, Herzig A, Michaelson JS,
Shih YC, et al; American Cancer Society. Breast cancer screening for
women at average risk: 2015 guideline update from the American
Cancer Society. JAMA. 2015;314:1599-614. [PMID: 26501536] doi:
10.1001/jama.2015.12783
51. Qaseem A, Snow V, Sherif K, Aronson M, Weiss KB, Owens DK;
Clinical Efficacy Assessment Subcommittee of the American College
of Physicians. Screening mammography for women 40 to 49 years of
age: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Phy-
sicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:511-5. [PMID: 17404353]
52. American Academy of Family Physicians. Clinical Preventive Ser-
vice Recommendation: Breast Cancer. Leawood, KS: American
Academy of Family Physicians; 2016. Accessed at www.aafp.org
/patient-care/clinical-recommendations/all/breast-cancer.html on 25
November 2015.
53. American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Well-
Woman Recommendations. Washington, DC: American Congress of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2015. Accessed at www.acog.org
/About-ACOG/ACOG-Departments/Annual-Womens-Health-Care
/Well-Woman-Recommendations on 25 November 2015.
54. Conray JA, Brown H. Well-Woman Task Force: components of
the well-woman visit—executive summary. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;
126(4):697-701.
55. Tonelli M, Connor Gorber S, Joffres M, Dickinson J, Singh H,
Lewin G, et al; Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. Rec-
ommendations on screening for breast cancer in average-risk
women aged 40-74 years. CMAJ. 2011;183:1991-2001. [PMID:
22106103] doi:10.1503/cmaj.110334
56. Giordano L, von Karsa L, Tomatis M, Majek O, de Wolf C, Lan-
cucki L, et al; Eunice Working Group. Mammographic screening
programmes in Europe: organization, coverage and participation.
J Med Screen. 2012;19 Suppl 1:72-82. [PMID: 22972813]
57. Lauby-Secretan B, Scoccianti C, Loomis D, Benbrahim-Tallaa L,
Bouvard V, Bianchini F, et al. Breast-cancer screening—viewpoint of
the IARC Working Group. New Engl J Med. 2015;372:2353-8.
58. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 42 U.S.C. § 2713 (2010).
59. Siu AL, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC. Evidence-based clin-
ical prevention in the era of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act: the role of the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA.
2015;314:2021-2. [PMID: 26421503] doi:10.1001/jama.2015.13154
60. Consolidated Appropriations Act. 42 U.S.C. § 9(h)(v)(229) (2015).
61. Sabatino SA, White MC, Thompson TD, Klabunde CN. Cancer
screening test use—United States, 2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2015;64:464-8. [PMID: 25950253]
62. National Committee for Quality Assurance. State of Health
Care
Quality:
Breast
Cancer
Screening.
2015.
Accessed
at
http://www.ncqa.org/ReportCards/HealthPlans/StateofHealth
CareQuality/2015TableofContents/BreastCancer.aspx on 21 De-
cember 2015.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Breast Cancer
296 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 APPENDIX: MEMBERS OF THE USPSTF
Members of the USPSTF at the time this recom-
mendation was finalized† are Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH,
Chair (Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, and
James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bronx,
New York); Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS,
Co-Vice Chair (University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California); David C. Grossman, MD,
MPH, Co-Vice Chair (Group Health Research Institute,
Seattle, Washington); Linda Ciofu Baumann, PhD, RN,
APRN (University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin);
Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc (Columbia University,
New York, New York); Mark Ebell, MD, MS (University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia); Francisco A.R. Garcı
´a, MD,
MPH (Pima County Department of Health, Tucson, Ari-
zona); Matthew Gillman, MD, SM (Harvard Medical
School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Bos-
ton, Massachusetts); Jessica Herzstein, MD, MPH (Inde-
pendent Consultant, Washington, DC); Alex R. Kemper,
MD, MPH, MS (Duke University, Durham, North Caro-
lina); Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH (Fairfax Family Practice,
Fairfax, and Virginia Commonwealth University, Rich-
mond, Virginia); Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH
(New York University, New York, New York); Douglas K.
Owens, MD, MS (Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care
System, Palo Alto, and Stanford University, Stanford,
California); William R. Phillips, MD, MPH (University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington); Maureen G. Phipps,
MD, MPH (Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island);
and Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH (University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina). Michael LeFevre,
MD, MSPH, Immediate Past Chair (University of Mis-
souri, Columbia, Missouri), also contributed to the de-
velopment of this recommendation.
† For a list of current USPSTF members, go to
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/our-members.
Appendix Table 1. What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
Suggestions for Practice
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that
the net benefit is substantial.
Offer/provide this service.
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that
the net benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that
the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer/provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this
service to individual patients based on professional judgment
and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty that
the net benefit is small.
Offer/provide this service for selected patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or
high certainty that the service has no net benefit or that the
harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assess the balance of benefits and harms of the service. Evidence
is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered, patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits and harms.
Appendix Table 2. USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty*
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in
representative primary care populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health
outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but
confidence in the estimate is constrained by such factors as:
the number, size, or quality of individual studies;
inconsistency of findings across individual studies;
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice; and
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this
change may be large enough to alter the conclusion.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of:
the limited number or size of studies;
important flaws in study design or methods;
inconsistency of findings across individual studies;
gaps in the chain of evidence;
findings that are not generalizable to routine primary care practice; and
a lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow an estimation of effects on health outcomes.
* The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is
defined as benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level
on the basis of the nature of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Annals of Internal Medicine
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 4 • 16 February 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
