 Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force Recommendation Statement
Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH, on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force*
Description: Update of the 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) recommendation on screening for major de-
pressive disorder (MDD) in children and adolescents.
Methods: The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits
and harms of screening; the accuracy of primary care–feasible
screening tests; and the benefits and harms of treatment with
psychotherapy, medications, and collaborative care models in
patients aged 7 to 18 years.
Population: This recommendation applies to children and ado-
lescents aged 18 years or younger who do not have a diagnosis
of MDD.
Recommendation: The USPSTF recommends screening for
MDD in adolescents aged 12 to 18 years. Screening should be
implemented with adequate systems in place to ensure accurate
diagnosis, effective treatment, and appropriate follow-up. (B
recommendation)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient
to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for
MDD in children aged 11 years or younger. (I statement)
Ann Intern Med. 2016;164:360-366. doi:10.7326/M15-2957
www.annals.org
For author affiliation, see end of text.
This article was published at www.annals.org on 9 February 2016.
* For a list of USPSTF members, see the Appendix (available at
www.annals.org).
T
he U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
makes recommendations about the effectiveness of
specific preventive care services for patients without re-
lated signs or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of
both the benefits and harms of the service and an as-
sessment of the balance. The USPSTF does not consider
the costs of providing a service in this assessment.
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions in-
volve more considerations than evidence alone. Clini-
cians should understand the evidence but individualize
decision making to the specific patient or situation. Sim-
ilarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage deci-
sions involve considerations in addition to the evidence
of clinical benefits and harms.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND
EVIDENCE
The USPSTF recommends screening for major de-
pressive disorder (MDD) in adolescents aged 12 to 18
years. Screening should be implemented with ade-
quate systems in place to ensure accurate diagnosis,
effective treatment, and appropriate follow-up. (B rec-
ommendation)
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is
insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms
of screening for MDD in children aged 11 years or
younger. (I statement)
See the Figure for a summary of the recommenda-
tions and suggestions for clinical practice.
Appendix Table 1 describes the USPSTF grades,
and Appendix Table 2 describes the USPSTF classifica-
tion of levels of certainty about net benefit (both tables
are available at www.annals.org).
RATIONALE
Importance
Depression is a leading cause of disability in the
United States. Children and adolescents with MDD typ-
ically have functional impairments in their performance
at school or work, as well as in their interactions with
their families and peers. Depression can also negatively
affect the developmental trajectories of affected youth.
Major depressive disorder in children and adolescents
is strongly associated with recurrent depression in
adulthood; other mental disorders; and increased risk
for suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and suicide
completion.
In nationally representative U.S. surveys, about 8%
of adolescents reported having major depression in the
past year. Little is known about the prevalence of MDD
in children. Among children and adolescents aged 8 to
15 years, 2% of boys and 4% of girls reported having
MDD in the past year.
See also:
Related article . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
Editorial comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 372
Summary for Patients. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-28
Web-Only
CME quiz
Consumer Fact Sheet
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Annals of Internal Medicine
360 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Detection
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screen-
ing instruments for depression can accurately identify
MDD in adolescents aged 12 to 18 years in primary
care settings. The USPSTF found no studies of screen-
ing instruments for depression in children aged 11
years or younger in primary care (or comparable) set-
tings and concluded that the evidence is inadequate.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention and
Treatment
The USPSTF found no studies that directly evalu-
ated whether screening for MDD in adolescents in pri-
mary care (or comparable) settings leads to improved
health and other outcomes. However, the USPSTF
found adequate evidence that treatment of MDD de-
tected through screening in adolescents is associated
with moderate benefit (for example, improved depres-
sion severity, depression symptoms, or global function-
ing scores).
The USPSTF found no studies that directly evalu-
ated whether screening for MDD in children aged 11
years or younger in primary care (or comparable) set-
tings leads to improved health and other outcomes and
found inadequate evidence on the benefits of treat-
ment in children with screen-detected MDD.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention and
Treatment
The USPSTF found no direct evidence on the harms
of screening for MDD in adolescents. Medications for
the treatment of depression, such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), have known harms. How-
ever, the magnitude of the harms of pharmacotherapy
is small if patients are closely monitored, as recom-
mended by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). The USPSTF found adequate evidence on the
harms of psychotherapy and psychosocial support in
adolescents and estimates that the magnitude of these
harms is small to none.
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the
harms of screening for or treatment of MDD in children
aged 11 years or younger.
Figure. Screening for depression in children and adolescents: clinical summary.
Population
Adolescents aged 12 to 18 y 
Children aged ≤11 y
Recommendation
Screen for major depressive disorder (MDD). Adequate
systems should be in place to ensure accurate diagnosis,
effective treatment, and appropriate follow-up.
Grade: B
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment
Risk factors for MDD include female sex; older age; family (especially maternal) history of depression; prior episode
of depression; other mental health or behavioral problems; chronic medical illness; overweight and obesity; and, in
some studies, Hispanic race/ethnicity. Other psychosocial risk factors include childhood abuse or neglect, exposure to
traumatic events (including natural disasters), loss of a loved one or romantic relationship, family conflict, uncertainty
about sexual orientation, low socioeconomic status, and poor academic performance.
Screening Tests
Two instruments that have been most often studied are the Patient Health Questionnaire for Adolescents and the
primary care version of the Beck Depression Inventory.
Screening Interval
The optimal interval for screening for MDD is not known. Opportunistic screening may be appropriate for
adolescents, who may have infrequent health care visits.
Treatment and
Interventions
Treatment options for MDD include pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, collaborative care, psychosocial support
interventions, and complementary and alternative medicine approaches.
Balance of Benefits
and Harms 
Screening for MDD in adolescents aged 12 to 18 y has a
moderate net benefit.
The evidence on screening for MDD in children aged
≤11 y is insufficient, and the balance of benefits and
harms cannot be determined.
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
The USPSTF has made recommendations on screening for suicide risk in adolescents, adults, and older adults. Other
USPSTF recommendations on mental health topics pertaining to children and adolescents, including illicit drug and
alcohol use, can be found on the USPSTF Web site (www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting
documents, please go to www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.
Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016 361
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty
that screening for MDD in adolescents aged 12 to 18
years has a moderate net benefit.
The
USPSTF
concludes
that
the
evidence
on
screening for MDD in children aged 11 years or
younger is insufficient. Evidence is lacking, and the bal-
ance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to children and ado-
lescents aged 18 years or younger who do not have a
diagnosis of MDD. This recommendation focuses on
screening for MDD and does not address screening for
other depressive disorders, such as minor depression
or dysthymia.
Assessment of Risk
The USPSTF recommends screening for MDD in all
adolescents but notes that several risk factors might
help identify patients who are at higher risk. The causes
of MDD are not fully known and likely involve a combi-
nation of genetic, biological, and environmental fac-
tors. Risk factors for MDD in children and adolescents
include female sex; older age; family (especially mater-
nal) history of depression; prior episode of depression;
other mental health or behavioral problems; chronic
medical illness; overweight and obesity; and, in some
studies, Hispanic race/ethnicity. Other psychosocial risk
factors include childhood abuse or neglect, exposure
to traumatic events (including natural disasters), loss of
a loved one or romantic relationship, family conflict, un-
certainty about sexual orientation, low socioeconomic
status, and poor academic performance.
Screening Tests
Many MDD screening instruments have been de-
veloped for use in primary care and have been used in
adolescents. Two that have been most often studied
are the Patient Health Questionnaire for Adolescents
(PHQ-A) and the primary care version of the Beck De-
pression Inventory (BDI). Data on the accuracy of MDD
screening instruments in younger children are limited.
Screening Intervals
The USPSTF found no evidence on appropriate or
recommended screening intervals, and the optimal in-
terval is unknown. Repeated screening may be most
productive in adolescents with risk factors for MDD.
Opportunistic screening may be appropriate for ado-
lescents, who may have infrequent health care visits.
Treatment or Interventions
Treatment options for MDD in children and adoles-
cents include pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, collab-
orative care, psychosocial support interventions, and
complementary and alternative medicine approaches.
Fluoxetine is approved by the FDA for treatment of
MDD in children aged 8 years or older, and escitalo-
pram is approved for treatment of MDD in adolescents
aged 12 to 17 years. The FDA has issued a boxed warn-
ing for antidepressants, recommending that patients of
all ages who start antidepressant therapy be monitored
appropriately and observed closely for clinical worsen-
ing, suicidality, or unusual changes in behavior (1).
Collaborative care is a multicomponent, health care
system–level intervention that uses care managers to
link primary care providers, patients, and mental health
specialists.
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the
I Statement
In deciding whether to screen for MDD in children
aged 11 years or younger, primary care providers
should consider the following issues.
Potential Preventable Burden
Little is known about the prevalence of MDD in chil-
dren aged 11 years or younger. The mean age of onset
of MDD is about 14 to 15 years. Early onset is associ-
ated with worse outcomes. The average duration of a
depressive episode in childhood varies widely, from 2
to 17 months.
Potential Harms
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the
harms of screening for MDD in children. The USPSTF
concluded that screening itself is unlikely to be associ-
ated with significant harms, aside from opportunity
costs, labeling and potential stigma associated with a
positive result, and referral for further evaluation and
treatment.
The USPSTF concluded, on the basis of a previous
review, that the use of SSRIs in children is associated
with harms, specifically risk for suicidality. Evidence on
the harms of psychotherapy alone or in combination
with SSRIs in children is limited. Newer studies provide
little additional evidence on treatment harms in chil-
dren and adolescents but do not suggest more risks.
Only 4 studies examined the harms of treatment with
SSRIs in children and adolescents. These studies found
no increased risk for suicidality associated with antide-
pressant use, but risk for rare events could not be pre-
cisely determined because the studies had limited sta-
tistical power. No trials of psychotherapy or combined
interventions in children examined harms.
Current Practice
The USPSTF found no evidence on the current fre-
quency of or methods used in primary care for screen-
ing for MDD in children.
Additional Approaches to Prevention
The Community Preventive Services Task Force
recommends collaborative care for the management of
depressive disorders, based on strong evidence of ef-
fectiveness in improving depression symptoms, adher-
ence and response to treatment, and remission and
recovery from depression. For this and related recom-
mendations from the Community Preventive Services
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents
362 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Task Force, go to www.thecommunityguide.org
/mentalhealth/index.html.
Useful Resources
In a separate recommendation statement, the
USPSTF concluded that the current evidence is insuffi-
cient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of
screening for suicide risk in primary care settings, in-
cluding among adolescents (I statement). Other USP-
STF recommendations on mental health topics pertain-
ing to children and adolescents, including illicit drug
and alcohol use, can be found on the USPSTF Web site
(www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Implementation
Many screening tools are available to identify de-
pression in children and adolescents, and some have
been used in primary care. The number of items in
each tool, the administrative time required to complete
them, and the appropriate ages for screening vary. A
positive result on an initial screening test does not nec-
essarily indicate the need for treatment. Screening is
usually done in 2 phases: The initial screening is fol-
lowed by a second phase in which skilled clinicians take
into account contextual factors surrounding the pa-
tient's current situation, through either additional prob-
ing or a formal diagnostic interview. In instances where
treatment is recommended, it can be initiated by the
screening provider or through referral to another set of
treatment providers. A negative result on a screening
test, however, does not always preclude referral when
clinical judgment or parental concerns suggest it is
warranted.
The USPSTF recommends that screening be imple-
mented with adequate systems in place to ensure ac-
curate diagnosis, effective treatment, and appropriate
follow-up. Depression can be managed in the primary
care or specialist setting or collaboratively in both set-
tings. Treatment options for depression include phar-
macologic, behavioral, multimodal, and collaborative
care models, some of which require coordination. Fi-
nally, inadequate support and follow-up may result in
treatment failures or harms, as indicated by the FDA
boxed warning. “Adequate systems in place” refers to
having systems and clinical staff to ensure that patients
are screened and, if they screen positive, are appropri-
ately diagnosed and treated with evidence-based care
or referred to a setting that can provide the necessary
care.
These
essential
functions
can
be
provided
through a wide range of arrangements of clinician
types and settings.
Research Needs and Gaps
The systematic evidence review identified several
critical research gaps, including the need for studies of
screening for and treatment of MDD in children
younger than 11 years. Large, good-quality random-
ized, controlled trials (RCTs) are also needed to better
understand the overarching effects of screening for
MDD on intermediate and long-term health outcomes.
It would be helpful to quantify the proportion of per-
sons with screen-detected MDD who are treated or re-
ferred as well as their willingness and ability to be as-
sessed and treated.
The systematic review excluded studies with partic-
ipants who had comorbid disorders. Children and ad-
olescents with MDD more often have comorbid condi-
tions than those without MDD, particularly in primary
care settings. This underscores the importance of addi-
tional research in child and adolescent populations that
are similar to those found in primary care settings to
study the effects of comorbid conditions on screening
accuracy, type of MDD treatment selected, and benefits
and harms.
For treatment of MDD, research needs include
well-designed studies of psychotherapy and combined
treatments, as well as studies of the benefits and harms
of other treatments (such as non-SSRI medications and
complementary or alternative approaches). For rare
events, meta-analyses are needed that include only
children and adolescents with MDD and focus on cur-
rent FDA-approved medications. Studies with long-
term follow-up are also needed.
DISCUSSION
Burden of Disease
Although it is normal for children and adolescents
to experience occasional feelings of sadness and other
symptoms of depression, those with MDD have 1 or
more major depressive episodes that last at least 2
weeks and cause significant functional impairment
across social, occupational, or educational domains. In
some children and adolescents with MDD, these symp-
toms may present as periods of disruptive mood and
irritability rather than as a sad mood and may last for
weeks, months, or even years. Major depressive disor-
der is associated with significant morbidity and mortal-
ity. Morbidity in children and adolescents may be dem-
onstrated
through
decreased
school
performance,
poor social functioning, early pregnancy, increased
physical illness, and substance abuse. Depressed ado-
lescents have more psychiatric and medical hospitaliza-
tions than those who are not depressed. Children with
depressive disorders have increased health care costs
(including general medical and mental health care)
compared with those without mental health diagnoses
or those with other mental health diagnoses (except
conduct disorder). Major depressive disorder also in-
creases the risk for suicide. Ten percent of children
aged 5 to 12.9 years and 19% of adolescents aged 13
to 17.9 years with MDD attempt suicide (2).
The mean age of onset of MDD in childhood and
adolescence is about 14 to 15 years, and onset is ear-
lier in girls than boys. In 2 nationally representative U.S.
surveys, about 8% of adolescents reported having
MDD in the past year. Little is known about the preva-
lence of the disorder in children. The 2005 National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey found that
among children and adolescents aged 8 to 15 years,
2% of boys and 4% of girls reported having MDD in the
Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016 363
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 past year. However, the prevalence of depression in
primary care settings is often higher in studies with
community samples of children and adolescents. Only
36% to 44% of children and adolescents with depres-
sion receive treatment, suggesting that the majority of
depressed youth are undiagnosed and untreated (3).
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence
review to update its 2009 recommendation on screen-
ing for child and adolescent MDD among primary care
populations (3, 4). To focus on the population most
likely to benefit from screening and intervention, the
scope of the review was narrowed to focus on screen-
ing for and treatment of MDD. In addition, studies of
paroxetine were excluded because of the 2003 FDA
recommendation that it not be used to treat MDD in
children and adolescents because of reports of possi-
ble suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in children
and adolescents receiving paroxetine for depression.
As a result, many studies included in the 2009 review
were not included in the updated review. The USPSTF
examined the evidence on the benefits and harms of
screening;
the
accuracy
of
primary
care–feasible
screening tests; and the benefits and harms of treat-
ment with psychotherapy, medications, and collabora-
tive care models in patients aged 7 to 18 years. Treat-
ment
studies
were
limited
to
those
that
were
implemented in or received referrals from primary care
settings to ensure that the patient population was
similar to those who would be identified through
screening.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
The USPSTF found 5 good- or fair-quality studies of
the accuracy of MDD screening instruments in children
and adolescents. One study recruited adolescents from
a primary care setting and compared the PHQ-A with a
full diagnostic interview by a mental health profes-
sional. Four studies recruited adolescents from school
settings and compared the screening test with a diag-
nostic interview or a different screening test. One study
evaluated the BDI, 1 evaluated the Center for Epidemi-
ologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), 1 evaluated
the BDI and the CES-D, and 1 evaluated the Clinical
Interview Schedule–Revised. No studies included chil-
dren younger than 11 years.
The PHQ-A study had the highest positive predic-
tive value. The authors did not report a diagnostic cut-
off score but reported sensitivity of 73% and specificity
of 94% for a positive test result (5). Results were not
stratified by age, sex, or ethnicity. The 2 BDI studies
reported sensitivity ranging from 84% to 90% and spec-
ificity ranging from 81% to 86% when a cutoff score of
11 was applied (6, 7). One study (7) reported a higher
area under the curve for males than for females, but
neither of the BDI studies reported results by age or
ethnicity.
The CES-D studies used different diagnostic cutoff
scores (7, 8). One study enrolled a slightly younger
population than the other (age range of 11 to 15 years
vs. average age >16 years). Sensitivity ranged from
18% to 84% and specificity ranged from 38% to 83%,
depending on the cutoff score used. Results by sex
were inconsistent, and neither study stratified results by
age or ethnicity. One study evaluated the Clinical Inter-
view Schedule–Revised (9). The mean age was 15.7
years, and sensitivity and specificity were 18% and 97%,
respectively. The study did not report other outcomes
or stratify results by age, race, or ethnicity.
Effectiveness of Treatment
The USPSTF found 8 fair- or good-quality RCTs that
reported health outcomes in children or adolescents
with screen-detected MDD who were treated with
SSRIs (4 RCTs), psychotherapy (2 RCTs), SSRIs com-
bined with psychotherapy (1 RCT), or collaborative care
(1 RCT). Most trials were restricted to adolescents aged
12 to 14 years or older; only 2 of the SSRI trials included
children aged 7 or 8 years. Outcomes included treat-
ment response, which was defined differently across
studies; symptom severity; and global functioning. De-
pression outcomes were reported after 8 to 12 weeks
of SSRI treatment or psychotherapy, whereas the col-
laborative care study reported outcomes at 52 weeks.
SSRIs
One good-quality study (n = 221) compared fluox-
etine with placebo in adolescents aged 12 to 17 years
(10–12). Two fair-quality studies (n = 268 and 316) com-
pared escitalopram with placebo in children and ado-
lescents (13) and adolescents only (14). One fair-quality
study (n = 178) compared citalopram with placebo in
children and adolescents (15). The absolute difference
in response favored SSRIs in all 4 studies (range, 2.4%
to 25%) and was significant in 2 of the 4 trials. When
other outcomes, such as symptom severity or global
functioning, were reported, they also favored the SSRI
group. One trial examined the efficacy of escitalopram
by age group (children vs. adolescents) and found that
it was superior to placebo in improving depression
symptoms, depression symptom severity, and global
functioning in adolescents but not children (13). No tri-
als examined efficacy across sex or race/ethnicity
subgroups.
Psychotherapy
Two studies evaluated the benefits of cognitive be-
havioral therapy (CBT) compared with placebo (waitlist
control or clinical monitoring) in adolescents with MDD
and reported nonsignificant improvements in response
(43.2% vs. 34.8%) and recovery (odds ratio [OR], 2.15
[95% CI, 0.87 to 5.33]) (10, 11, 16). Results for remission
(16% vs. 17%) did not differ significantly between
groups.
SSRIs Combined With Psychotherapy
One CBT study also compared CBT plus fluoxetine
with placebo (10). The CBT plus fluoxetine group
showed a 71% response rate versus a 35% response
rate in the placebo group, which received a placebo
drug and weekly clinical monitoring (P = 0.001).
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents
364 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Collaborative Care
One recent RCT (n = 101) evaluated a 12-month
collaborative care intervention in adolescents aged 13
to 17 years who screened positive for depression (60%
with MDD) in 9 primary care clinics within 1 health sys-
tem (17). The intervention was based on the IMPACT
(Improving Mood–Promoting Access to Collaborative
Treatment) model and was adapted for adolescents.
Patients randomly assigned to the collaborative care
group had an initial in-person session that included
their parents, choice of treatment type, and regular
follow-up with depression care managers (28% re-
ceived psychotherapy alone, 4% received pharmaco-
therapy alone, and 54% received both). Patients ran-
domly assigned to the usual care control group
received screening results and could access mental
health services through the usual health care system.
Compared with the control group, patients in the col-
laborative care group had greater reductions in de-
pressive symptoms at 6 and 12 months (8.5- and 9.4-
point reductions on the Children's Depression Rating
Scale–Revised, respectively; P < 0.0001 for interaction),
better response rates (≥50% score reduction from
baseline) at 12 months (OR, 3.3 [CI, 1.4 to 8.2]) and 6
months (not significant), and higher likelihood of remis-
sion at 6 months (OR, 5.2 [CI, 1.6 to 17.3]) and 12
months (OR, 3.9 [CI, 1.5 to 10.6]).
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
The USPSTF found no direct evidence on the harms
of screening for MDD in adolescents or children.
SSRIs
Five SSRI trials reported on harms and found no
significant differences between intervention groups, al-
though none of these studies were powered to detect
these differences. Four trials (2 for escitalopram, 1 for
citalopram, and 1 for fluoxetine) reported on suicidality
(this included worsening suicidal ideation or a suicide
attempt; no completed suicides were reported). No
studies found significant differences but, again, none
were sufficiently powered for this outcome. No studies
examined subgroup differences in harms. The USPSTF
found no evidence on the long-term (>12 weeks) ef-
fects of SSRIs.
Psychotherapy
One CBT trial reported on harms and found no ap-
parent differences in harms-related, suicide-related, or
psychiatric adverse events between the CBT and pla-
cebo groups (10).
SSRIs Combined With Psychotherapy
The same trial also reported on the harms of CBT
plus fluoxetine versus placebo and found no apparent
differences (10).
Collaborative Care
The single trial of collaborative care found no dif-
ferences in the number of psychiatric hospitalizations
between the intervention and control groups (6% vs.
4%). More patients in the control group had an emer-
gency department visit with a primary psychiatric diag-
nosis (10% vs. 2%). However, this study was not pow-
ered to detect differences (17).
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screen-
ing tests can accurately identify MDD in adolescents. It
also found adequate evidence that treatment of adoles-
cents with screen-detected MDD is associated with
beneficial reductions in symptoms. Although the data
are limited, the USPSTF concludes that the evidence on
the frequency of medication-related adverse events in
adolescents is adequate to estimate that the magnitude
of harms of pharmacotherapy is small if patients are
closely monitored. The USPSTF concludes that the evi-
dence on the harms of psychotherapy and collabora-
tive care in adolescents is adequate to estimate that the
magnitude of harms is small to none. Therefore, the
USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that screen-
ing for MDD in adolescents aged 12 to 18 years is as-
sociated with moderate net benefit.
The
USPSTF
found
inadequate
evidence
that
screening tests can accurately identify MDD in children
and inadequate evidence on the effectiveness of treat-
ment of children with screen-detected MDD. As a re-
sult, the USPSTF concludes that the evidence is insuffi-
cient to make a recommendation on screening for
MDD in children aged 7 to 11 years.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement
was posted for public comment on the USPSTF Web
site from 8 September to 5 October 2015. Many com-
ments focused on the phrase “adequate systems.”
Some commenters requested a more detailed defini-
tion of what constitutes an adequate system for screen-
ing, others recommended removing the conditional
term “when,” and others recommended that the re-
quirement for adequate systems be stronger. To clarify
the recommendation, the USPSTF separated it into 2
statements: one to support screening, and a second to
explain how screening should be implemented. The
USPSTF also revised the section on implementation to
clarify that a range of staff types, organizational ar-
rangements, and settings can support the goals of de-
pression screening.
UPDATE OF PREVIOUS USPSTF
RECOMMENDATION
In 2009, the USPSTF recommended screening for
MDD in adolescents (aged 12 to 18 years) when sys-
tems are in place to ensure accurate diagnosis, psycho-
therapy (CBT or interpersonal), and follow-up and con-
cluded that the evidence was insufficient to make a
recommendation for children (aged 7 to 11 years). The
current recommendation reaffirms these positions but
Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016 365
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 removes the mention of specific therapies in recogni-
tion of decreased concern over the harms of pharma-
cotherapy in adolescents when they are adequately
monitored.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF OTHERS
The American Academy of Pediatrics' Bright Fu-
tures program recommends annual screening in child
and adolescent patients for emotional and behavioral
problems (18). Medicaid's child health component, the
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treat-
ment program, recommends screening to detect phys-
ical and mental conditions at periodic, age-appropriate
intervals and, if risk is identified, follow-up with diag-
nostic and treatment coverage (19). The Canadian Task
Force on Preventive Health Care states that there is in-
sufficient
evidence
to
recommend
for
or
against
screening for depression in children or adolescents in
primary care settings (20).
From the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Rockville,
Maryland.
Note: This recommendation statement is being published si-
multaneously in Pediatrics.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the USPSTF are inde-
pendent of the U.S. government. They should not be con-
strued as an official position of the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality or the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Financial Support: The USPSTF is an independent, voluntary
body. The U.S. Congress mandates that the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality support the operations of
the USPSTF.
Disclosures: Authors have disclosed no conflicts of interest.
Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest de-
scribed at www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/methods
.htm. Forms can be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors
/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M15-2957.
Requests for Single Reprints: Reprints are available from the
USPSTF Web site (www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
References
1. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Antidepressant Use in Chil-
dren, Adolescents, and Adults: Revisions to Product Labeling. Silver
Spring, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 2007. Accessed at
www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/InformationbyDrug
Class/UCM173233.pdf on 21 August 2015.
2. Kramer T, Iliffe S, Gledhill J, Garralda ME. Recognising and re-
sponding to adolescent depression in general practice: developing
and implementing the Therapeutic Identification of Depression
in
Young
people
(TIDY)
programme.
Clin
Child
Psychol
Psychiatry.
2012;17:482-94.
[PMID:
22523137]
doi:10.1177
/1359104512442639
3. Forman-Hoffman V, McClure E, McKeeman J, Wood CT, Cook
Middleton J, Skinner AC, et al. Screening for Major Depressive Dis-
order in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review for the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force. Evidence synthesis no. 116. AHRQ
publication no. 13-05192-EF-1. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2016.
4. Forman-Hoffman V, McClure E, McKeeman J, Wood CT, Cook
Middleton J, Skinner AC, et al. Screening for major depressive dis-
order in children and adolescents: a systematic review for the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164:342-49. 
[PMID: 26857836] doi:10.7326/M15-2259
5. Johnson JG, Harris ES, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health
Questionnaire for Adolescents: validation of an instrument for the
assessment of mental disorders among adolescent primary care pa-
tients. J Adolesc Health. 2002;30:196-204. [PMID: 11869927]
6. Canals J, Blade
´ J, Carbajo G, Dome
`nech-Llaberı
´a E. The Beck
Depression Inventory: psychometric characteristics and usefulness in
nonclinical adolescents. Eur J Psychol Assess. 2001;17:63-8.
7. Roberts RE, Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR. Screening for adolescent
depression: a comparison of depression scales. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 1991;30:58-66. [PMID: 2005065]
8. Garrison CZ, Addy CL, Jackson KL, McKeown RE, Waller JL. The
CES-D as a screen for depression and other psychiatric disorders in
adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1991;30:636-41.
[PMID: 1890099]
9. Patton GC, Coffey C, Posterino M, Carlin JB, Wolfe R, Bowes G. A
computerised screening instrument for adolescent depression:
population-based validation and application to a two-phase case-
control study. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 1999;34:166-72.
[PMID: 10327843]
10. March J, Silva S, Petrycki S, Curry J, Wells K, Fairbank J, et al;
Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS) Team.
Fluoxetine, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and their combination for
adolescents with depression: Treatment for Adolescents With De-
pression Study (TADS) randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:
807-20. [PMID: 15315995]
11. Kennard B, Silva S, Vitiello B, Curry J, Kratochvil C, Simons A,
et al; TADS Team. Remission and residual symptoms after short-term
treatment in the Treatment of Adolescents with Depression Study
(TADS). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006;45:1404-11.
[PMID: 17135985]
12. Vitiello B, Rohde P, Silva S, Wells K, Casat C, Waslick B, et al;
TADS Team. Functioning and quality of life in the Treatment for Ad-
olescents with Depression Study (TADS). J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2006;45:1419-26. [PMID: 17135987]
13. Wagner KD, Robb AS, Findling RL, Jin J, Gutierrez MM, Heydorn
WE. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of citalopram for the
treatment of major depression in children and adolescents. Am J
Psychiatry. 2004;161:1079-83. [PMID: 15169696]
14. Emslie GJ, Ventura D, Korotzer A, Tourkodimitris S. Escitalopram
in the treatment of adolescent depression: a randomized placebo-
controlled multisite trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;
48:721-9. [PMID: 19465881] doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181a2b304
15. Wagner KD, Jonas J, Findling RL, Ventura D, Saikali K. A double-
blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of escitalopram in the
treatment of pediatric depression. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychi-
atry. 2006;45:280-8. [PMID: 16540812]
16. Clarke GN, Rohde P, Lewinsohn PM, Hops H, Seeley JR.
Cognitive-behavioral treatment of adolescent depression: efficacy of
acute group treatment and booster sessions. J Am Acad Child Ado-
lesc Psychiatry. 1999;38:272-9. [PMID: 10087688]
17. Richardson LP, Ludman E, McCauley E, Lindenbaum J, Larison C,
Zhou C, et al. Collaborative care for adolescents with depression in
primary care: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312:809-16.
[PMID: 25157724] doi:10.1001/jama.2014.9259
18. Hagan JF Jr, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds. Bright Futures: Guide-
lines for Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents.
3rd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2008.
19. Health Resources and Services Administration. EPSDT Overview.
Rockville, MD: Health Resources and Services Administration; 2015.
Accessed at www.mchb.hrsa.gov/epsdt/overview.html on 21 August
2015.
20. MacMillan HL, Patterson CJ, Wathen CN. Screening for Depres-
sion in Primary Care: Updated Recommendations From the Cana-
dian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. London, Ontario, Can-
ada: Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care; 2004.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Screening for Depression in Children and Adolescents
366 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 APPENDIX: U.S. PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK
FORCE
Members of the USPSTF at the time this recom-
mendation was finalized† are Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH,
Chair (Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, and
James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bronx,
New York); Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS,
Co-Vice Chair (University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California); David C. Grossman, MD,
MPH, Co-Vice Chair (Group Health Research Institute,
Seattle, Washington); Linda Ciofu Baumann, PhD, RN,
APRN (University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin);
Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc (Columbia University,
New York, New York); Mark Ebell, MD, MS (University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia); Francisco A.R. Garcı
´a, MD,
MPH (Pima County Department of Health, Tucson, Ari-
zona); Matthew Gillman, MD, SM (Harvard Medical
School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Bos-
ton, Massachusetts); Jessica Herzstein, MD, MPH (inde-
pendent consultant, Washington, DC); Alex R. Kemper,
MD, MPH, MS (Duke University, Durham, North Caro-
lina); Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH (Fairfax Family Practice,
Fairfax, and Virginia Commonwealth University, Rich-
mond, Virginia); Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH
(New York University, New York, New York); Douglas K.
Owens, MD, MS (Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care
System, Palo Alto, and Stanford University, Stanford,
California); William R. Phillips, MD, MPH (University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington); Maureen G. Phipps,
MD, MPH (Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island);
and Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH (University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina).
† For a list of current USPSTF members, go to
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/our-members.
Appendix Table 1. What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
Suggestions for Practice
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is
substantial.
Offer/provide this service.
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is
moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to
substantial.
Offer/provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to
individual patients based on professional judgment and patient preferences.
There is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is small.
Offer/provide this service for selected patients
depending on individual circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty
that the service has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the
balance of benefits and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor
quality, or conflicting, and the balance of benefits and harms cannot be
determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section of the USPSTF
Recommendation Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the uncertainty about
the balance of benefits and harms.
Appendix Table 2. USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty*
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary
care populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore
unlikely to be strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the
estimate is constrained by such factors as:
the number, size, or quality of individual studies;
inconsistency of findings across individual studies;
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice; and
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be
large enough to alter the conclusion.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of:
the limited number or size of studies;
important flaws in study design or methods;
inconsistency of findings across individual studies;
gaps in the chain of evidence;
findings that are not generalizable to routine primary care practice; and
a lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow an estimation of effects on health outcomes.
* The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is
defined as benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level
on the basis of the nature of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Annals of Internal Medicine
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 5 • 1 March 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
