 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children
US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement
Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH; and the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththebenefits
andharmsoftheserviceandanassessmentofthebalance.TheUSPSTF
doesnotconsiderthecostsofprovidingaserviceinthisassessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) in young children for whom no concerns
of ASD have been raised by their parents or a clinician. (I state-
ment) (Figure 1)
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionlaterinthisarticleforsug-
gestions for practice regarding the I statement.
Rationale
Importance
Autism spectrum disorder is a developmental disorder character-
ized by persistent and significant impairments in social interaction
andcommunicationandrestrictiveandrepetitivebehaviorsandac-
tivities, when these symptoms cannot be accounted for by an-
othercondition.In2010,theprevalenceofASDintheUnitedStates
was estimated at 14.7 cases per 1000 children, or 1 in 68 children,
with substantial variability in estimates by region, sex, and
race/ethnicity.1
Detection
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatcurrentlyavailablescreen-
ing tests can detect ASD among children aged 18 to 30 months.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention or Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate direct evidence on the benefits of
screeningforASDintoddlersandpreschool-agechildrenforwhom
noconcernsofASDhavebeenraisedbyfamilymembers,othercare-
givers, or health care professionals. There are no studies that focus
on the clinical outcomes of children identified with ASD through
screening. Although there are studies suggesting treatment ben-
efit in older children identified through family, clinician, or teacher
concerns, the USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the efficacy
oftreatmentofcasesofASDdetectedthroughscreeningoramong
very young children. Treatment studies were generally very small,
fewwererandomizedtrials,mostincludedchildrenwhowereolder
than would be identified through screening, and all were in clini-
cally referred rather than screen-detected patients.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention or Treatment
The USPSTF found that the harms of screening for ASD and subse-
quent interventions are likely to be small based on evidence about
the prevalence, accuracy of screening, and likelihood of minimal
harms from behavioral interventions.
DESCRIPTION New US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation on
screening for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in young children.
METHODS The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the accuracy, benefits, and potential harms
of brief, formal screening instruments for ASD administered during routine primary care visits
and the benefits and potential harms of early behavioral treatment for young children
identified with ASD through screening.
POPULATION This recommendation applies to children aged 18 to 30 months who have not
been diagnosed with ASD or developmental delay and for whom no concerns of ASD have
been raised by parents, other caregivers, or health care professionals.
RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess
the balance of benefits and harms of screening for ASD in young children for whom no
concerns of ASD have been raised by their parents or a clinician. (I statement)
JAMA. 2016;315(7):691-696. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.0018
Editorial page 661
Author Audio Interview at
jama.com
JAMA Patient Page page 718
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 701
Related articles at
jamapediatrics.com,
jamaneurology.com, and
jamapsychiatry.com
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Authors/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Albert L. Siu,
MD, MSPH (chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
Special Communication | USPSTF RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
February 16, 2016
Volume 315, Number 7
691
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes that there is insufficient evidence to assess
the balance of benefits and harms of screening for ASD in children
aged 18 to 30 months for whom no concerns of ASD have been
raised.Evidenceislacking,ofpoorquality,orconflicting,andthebal-
ance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to children who have not been diag-
nosed with ASD or developmental delay and for whom no con-
cernsofASDhavebeenraisedbyparents,othercaregivers,orhealth
care professionals (Figure 2).
Screening Tests
A number of tests are available for screening for ASD in children
younger than 30 months. The most commonly studied tool is the
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) and its subse-
quent revisions (Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers with
Follow-Up [M-CHAT-F] and Modified Checklist for Autism in
Toddlers–Revised, with Follow-Up [M-CHAT-R/F]). The M-CHAT-
R/F is a parent-rated scale, and a positive finding leads to a
follow-up interview. If the follow-up interview is positive, a full
diagnostic workup for ASD is indicated. The screening process
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children
692
JAMA
February 16, 2016
Volume 315, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
assesses communication skills, joint attention, repetitive move-
ment, and pretend play.
Treatments and Interventions
TreatmentsforASDincludebehavioral,medical,educational,speech/
language, and occupational therapy and complementary and alter-
native medicine approaches. Treatments for young children in the
target age group for routine screening for ASD are primarily behav-
ioral interventions, particularly early intensive behavioral and de-
velopmental interventions, which may include approaches incor-
porating applied behavior analysis principles, parent training
components, and play- or interaction-based interventions. Among
thebehavioralinterventions,thosebasedonappliedbehavioranaly-
sis have the highest-quality data supporting their effects on cogni-
tive and language outcomes. These interventions can be delivered
in a home or school setting and are generally time-intensive, with
some programs requiring up to 40 hours a week.2
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
Potential Preventable Burden
Autismspectrumdisordercancausesignificantsocial,communica-
tion,andbehavioralchallengesforaffectedchildrenandplacesub-
stantial strain on family members and other caregivers. Treatment
andmaturationmayreducetheeffectsofthecoresymptomsofASD
for some children, but others may experience long-term effects on
education, employment, and ability to live independently.2 It is im-
portantthatclinicianslistencarefullytoparentswhenconcernsare
raised by the parents or during an examination and make prompt
use of validated tools to assess the need for further diagnostic
testing and services. Disparities have been observed in the fre-
quency and age at which ASD is diagnosed among children by
race/ethnicity,socioeconomicstatus,andlanguageoforigin,creat-
ing concern that certain groups of children with ASD may be sys-
tematically underdiagnosed.3 It is important to note that an I state-
ment is not a recommendation for or against screening. In the
absence of evidence about the balance of benefits and harms, cli-
nicians should use their clinical judgment to decide if screening in
children without overt signs and symptoms is appropriate for the
population in their care.
Potential Harms
Althoughthereislimitedevidenceabouttheharmsofscreeningfor
ASDinchildren,reportedpotentialharmsincludemisdiagnosisand
the anxiety associated with further testing after a positive screen-
ing result, particularly if confirmatory testing is delayed because of
resourcelimitations.Behavioraltreatmentsarenotgenerallythought
to be associated with significant harms but can place a large time
andfinancialburdenonthefamily.OthertreatmentsforASDareless
well studied and were not included in this review.
Current Practice
A2004surveyofpediatriciansinMarylandandDelawarefoundthat
8% screened specifically for ASD. Few data are available regarding
thecurrentprevalenceofscreeningforASDbycliniciansintheUnited
States.4Morerecentsurveyshavefoundhigherrates,althoughthey
remain less than 60%.5-8
Figure 2. Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children: Clinical Summary
Population
Children aged 18 to 30 months for whom no concerns of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have been raised by their parents
or a clinician
Recommendation 
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment 
Screening Tests 
Treatment and
Interventions
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Although a number of potential risk factors for ASD have been identified, there is insufficient evidence to determine if certain risk
factors modify the performance characteristics of ASD screening tests, such as the age at which screening is performed or other
characteristics of the child or family. 
The most commonly studied tool is the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) and its subsequent revisions. A positive
finding should lead to a follow-up interview, which, if positive, should lead to a full diagnostic workup for ASD.
Treatments for ASD include behavioral, medical, educational, speech/language, and occupational therapy and complementary and
alternative medicine approaches. Treatments for young children are primarily behavioral interventions, particularly early intensive
behavioral and developmental interventions. 
The USPSTF concludes that there is insufficient evidence to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for ASD in young
children for whom no concerns of ASD have been raised.
The USPSTF has made a recommendation on screening for speech and language delays and disorders in children 5 years or younger.
This recommendation is available on the USPSTF website (http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).  
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
February 16, 2016
Volume 315, Number 7
693
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Useful Resources
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides web-
based continuing education for clinicians called Autism Case Train-
ing (available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/autism
/case-modules/index.html), as well as other information about
ASD for families (available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism
/families.html).
TheHealthResourcesandServicesAdministration’
swebsitepro-
vides links to training resources for professionals (available at
http://mchb.hrsa.gov/programs/autism/trainingforprofessionals.html).
The M-CHAT screening tool is available online for free at https:
//m-chat.org/.Otherprofessionalandadvocacyorganizationshave
also developed toolkits and resources.
TheUSPSTFhasmadearecommendationonscreeningforspeech
andlanguagedelaysanddisordersamongchildren5yearsoryounger
(available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
Research has focused on screening and diagnostic tools and treat-
ment for symptomatic children, especially those who are severely
affected. Good-quality studies are needed to better understand the
intermediate and long-term health outcomes of screening for ASD
among children without obvious signs and symptoms and whether
earlier identification through universal screening is associated with
clinically important improvements in health outcomes. These stud-
ies are especially needed in populations with low socioeconomic
status and minority populations, where access to care may be more
limited. A number of different study designs could greatly improve
the understanding of the potential of screening. Large, good-
quality, randomized clinical trials (RCTs) of treatment that enroll
young children with ASD identified through screening and that
report patient-centered outcomes are critical to understanding the
effects of screening. Treatment could be compared with a wait-list
control, less intense treatment, or an alternative treatment, as in
the trials reviewed by the USPSTF. Similar studies in children identi-
fied through screening have recently begun to be published, indi-
cating that this is a feasible approach.9,10 Pragmatic quasi-
experimental designs, such as stepped-wedge trials, in regions with
low screening rates could compare the effects of screening at 18
and 24 months with later screening or case-finding on educational,
behavioral, functional, and IQ measures at 6 years. Randomized
clinical trials of screening may be feasible in locations where
screening is not standard practice or recommended. Studies fol-
lowing up large samples of screen-negative children, although
resource-intensive, would provide valuable information regarding
screening specificity.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Autism spectrum disorder is a developmental disorder character-
ized by persistent and significant impairments in social interaction
andcommunicationandrestrictiveandrepetitivebehaviorsandac-
tivities, when these symptoms cannot be accounted for by an-
othercondition.In2010,theprevalenceofASDintheUnitedStates
was estimated at 14.7 cases per 1000 children, or 1 in 68 children,
with substantial variability in estimates by region, sex, and
race/ethnicity.1Thisrepresentsa23%increasefrom2008;therea-
sons for this increase are not completely understood.1
Scope of Review
TheUSPSTFcommissionedasystematicreview2toevaluatetheevi-
dence on the accuracy, benefits, and potential harms of brief, for-
malscreeninginstrumentsforASDadministeredduringroutinepri-
mary care visits and the benefits and potential harms of early
behavioral treatment for children identified with ASD through
screening. The review focused on studies of screening in children
younger than 3 years who were unselected (ie, not identified be-
cause of risk factors or concerns regarding ASD).
Accuracy of Screening Tests
Several screening tools for ASD are available, but the strongest and
most applicable evidence is for the M-CHAT/F and M-CHAT-R/F, 2
versionsofthesametool.Bothuseaparent-ratedscalethatcanlead
to a follow-up interview, which, if positive, leads to referral for con-
firmatorydiagnosisbyabehavioralordevelopmentalspecialist.The
initial screening process takes 5 to 10 minutes. Two large, good-
quality trials conducted in the United States in children aged 16 to
30 months found similar positive predictive values for these tools
(approximately 50%) for the detection of ASD in unselected
populations.11,12 The validity of these studies was weakened some-
whatbythehighdropoutratebetweenscreeningstepsbutwasstill
reasonablyhighformassscreening.Therearenodataonthespeci-
ficityornegativepredictivevalueofthesescreeningtools.Onestudy
followed up a sample of children who were referred for diagnostic
evaluation as a result of screening but not diagnosed with ASD and
reported that almost all of these children had another form of de-
velopmentaldelay.12Itisnotknownwhetherearlydetectionofthese
other problems results in improved health outcomes. Although a
numberofpotentialriskfactorsforASDhavebeenidentified,there
isinsufficientevidencetodetermineifcertainriskfactorsmodifythe
performancecharacteristicsofASDscreeningtests,suchastheage
atwhichscreeningisperformedorothercharacteristicsofthechild
or family.
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
The USPSTF found no RCTs that directly addressed the overarch-
ing question of whether screening for ASD in children 3 years or
younger results in improvements to core ASD symptoms, cogni-
tive and intellectual functioning, language and communication
skill development, challenging behavior, adaptive behavior, edu-
cational placement or achievement, or quality of life for the child
and family.
TheUSPSTFfound26RCTsofearlyintensivebehavioralandde-
velopmentalinterventions(themostoftenstudiedtreatmentforthis
agegroup)forASDinyoungchildren.However,assessmentoftreat-
ment evidence was complicated by the variation among studies in
intervention design, method of delivery, comparators, and out-
comes measured, as well as by the heterogeneity in the age, types
of symptoms, and symptom severity of the children enrolled. Four
RCTs reported cognitive and language outcomes for early inten-
sive behavioral interventions delivered by trained clinicians. Three
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children
694
JAMA
February 16, 2016
Volume 315, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
of the 4 trials (including the largest trial, with 294 children) re-
ported that these interventions improved cognitive scores by 11 to
16 points (Mullen Scales of Early Learning or IQ) compared with a
range of comparators (calculated from published data).13-15 The
fourth RCT found no effect, but this trial compared different ways
ofdeliveringthesameintervention.16Thesamesetofstudiesshowed
a similar pattern for language outcomes. Twelve RCTs of play- or in-
teraction-basedinterventionsreportedsignificantimprovementsin
somemeasuresofinteractionbutnotothers.TheotherRCTsevalu-
ated various interventions delivered by parents and found incon-
sistent or negative results. Studies were very small (most enrolled
20-40 children), and study quality was generally fair.
In addition to the limitations of the evidence in size, study de-
sign,andothersourcesofheterogeneity,itisnotclearwhetherthese
studies are applicable to children who would be detected through
screening.Autismspectrumdisorderisahighlyheterogeneouscon-
dition in terms of onset and course of core clinical ASD symptoms
andcognitiveandlanguagedevelopment.17Allofthetreatmentstud-
ies were conducted in populations of children with a previous diag-
nosisofASD,manyofwhomwerereferredfromspecializedASDpro-
grams.Manyofthechildrenenrolledinthesestudieshadsignificant
impairmentsincognition,language,andbehavioridentifiedthrough
case-findingandwereolderthantheagegroupforwhichthescreen-
ing tools were developed. Children identified through screening
rather than through case-finding are likely to be younger and have
mildersymptomsthanthoseinstudypopulations.Itisthereforenot
clear whether young children with ASD detected by screening and
not because of parental or clinician concern will experience similar
benefits from earlier intervention.
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
The USPSTF found little evidence on the harms of screening and
treatment. Potential harms include misdiagnosis and the time, ef-
fort, and anxiety associated with further testing after a positive
screening result. This is of particular concern when there is a delay
in confirmatory testing because of resource limitations, which are
common.2 Even good-quality studies of screening had a high drop-
outratebetweenscreeningstepsandbetweenscreeninganddiag-
nosis, suggesting that the process may be difficult for some fami-
lies.Behavioraltreatmentsarenotgenerallythoughttobeassociated
with significant harms but can place a large time and financial bur-
denonthefamily.OthertreatmentsforASDarelesswellstudiedand
were not included in the scope of this review. The USPSTF con-
cludes that the potential harms of screening and behavioral treat-
ment are no greater than small.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
Overall,theUSPSTFfoundinsufficientevidenceonscreeningforASD
inchildrenaged18to30monthsforwhomnoconcernsofASDhave
been raised by parents, other caregivers, or health care profession-
als.TheUSPSTFidentifiednostudiesthatdirectlyevaluatedtheben-
efits or harms of screening for ASD in this age group. Studies on the
benefits and harms of treatment were of small size, few were ran-
domized, and all were conducted in populations that may not rep-
resent children who would be detected through screening pro-
grams alone. The USPSTF concludes that there is insufficient
evidence to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening
for ASD in young children.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from August 4, 2015, to
August 31, 2015. Many parents of children with ASD, adults with
ASD, and clinicians who care for children with ASD wrote to share
their personal experiences and concerns. One major area of con-
cern was a perception that the USPSTF was advocating against
screening or against the use of screening tools to follow up on par-
ents’concerns. This was not the USPSTF’
s intention, and the
USPSTF will be clear when communicating this recommendation
that it is not recommending for or against screening but advocat-
ing for more research. In the meantime, clinicians should use their
clinical judgment, especially when caring for populations in which
case-finding may be difficult because of language, access, or other
barriers. Furthermore, clinicians should listen carefully to parents’
concerns and use validated tools to assess whether further diag-
nosis or services are needed. Standardized tools, such as the
M-CHAT, may be used diagnostically to follow up on concerns
expressed by parents.
Another area of concern was why studies of test accuracy and
theeffectivenessoftreatmentwerenotsufficienttosupportscreen-
ing and what kind of research would be needed to support a posi-
tive recommendation. In response, the USPSTF revised the recom-
mendation statement to clarify the lack of treatment studies in the
population that would likely be identified through screening and to
providegreaterdetailaboutthedifferenttypesofstudiesthatcould
fillthisevidentiarygap.Finally,othercommentsfocusedonthelow
cost and lack of harms associated with screening. The USPSTF re-
vised the recommendation statement to clarify that, while the
screening tools are relatively easy to administer and behavioral in-
terventionsaregenerallysafe,thepotentialeffectsofextendedtreat-
ment, in the absence of clear benefit, on families in terms of time
and resources are not negligible.
Recommendations of Others
The American Academy of Pediatrics’Bright Futures guidelines rec-
ommend universal screening for ASD in all children at ages 18 and
24 months in addition to developmental surveillance and
monitoring.17,18 The American Academy of Family Physicians con-
cludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the bal-
ance of benefits and harms of screening for ASD in children for
whom no concerns of ASD have been raised by their parents or
clinical provider.19 The American Academy of Neurology and the
Child Neurology Society recommend routine developmental sur-
veillance be performed on all children to identify those at risk for
any type of atypical development, followed by screening specifi-
cally for autism using one of the validated instruments (the
M-CHAT or Autism Screening Questionnaire).20 The American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry recommends that the
developmental assessment of young children and the psychiatric
assessment of all children should routinely include questions about
ASD symptomatology.21 The UK National Screening Committee
does not recommend systematic population screening, citing con-
cerns about the stability of ASD diagnosis at a young age, lack of
data on positive predictive value, and weakness of the evidence for
the efficacy of treatment.22
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
February 16, 2016
Volume 315, Number 7
695
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members include the following
individuals: Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH; Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS; David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH; Linda Ciofu Baumann, PhD,
RN, APRN; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; Mark
Ebell, MD, MS; Francisco A. R. García, MD, MPH;
Matthew Gillman, MD, SM; Jessica Herzstein, MD,
MPH; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist,
MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH;
Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; William R. Phillips, MD,
MPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; and Michael P.
Pignone, MD, MPH.
Affiliations of Authors/ USPSTF members: Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York (Siu);
James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Bronx, New York (Siu); University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Wisconsin, Madison
(Baumann); Columbia University, New York,
New York (Davidson); University of Georgia, Athens
(Ebell); Pima County Department of Health,
Tucson, Arizona (García); Harvard Medical School
and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts (Gillman); Independent consultant,
Washington, DC (Herzstein); Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina (Kemper); Fairfax Family
Practice, Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (Krist);
New York University, New York (Kurth); Veterans
Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
California (Owens); Stanford University, Stanford,
California (Owens); University of Washington,
Seattle (Phillips); Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island (Phipps); University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill (Pignone).
Author Contributions: Dr Siu had full access to all
of the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Siu, Bibbins-Domingo,
Grossman, Ebell, García, Kemper, Krist,
Phillips.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Siu,
Bibbins-Domingo, Grossman, Baumann, Davidson,
Ebell, García, Gillman, Herzstein, Krist, Kurth,
Owens, Phillips, Phipps, Pignone.
Drafting of the manuscript: Siu, Phillips.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Siu, Bibbins-Domingo,
Grossman, Baumann, Davidson, Ebell, García,
Gillman, Herzstein, Kemper, Krist, Kurth, Owens,
Phillips, Phipps, Pignone.
Statistical analysis: Grossman, Owens.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Siu,
Ebell, Kurth.
Study supervision: Siu, Bibbins-Domingo,
Grossman, García, Krist, Phillips.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Dr Bibbins-Domingo reported having received
grants from the National Institutes of Health
and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and other support from the Institute for
Clinical and Economic Review. No other disclosures
were reported.
Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts
of interest described at http://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Elisabeth
Kato, MD, MRP, of AHRQ, who contributed to the
writing of the manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA, of
AHRQ, who assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network
Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators;
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among
children aged 8 years: Autism and Developmental
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites,
United States, 2010. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2014;
63(2):1-21.
2. McPheeters ML, Weitlauf A, Vehorn A, et al.
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder
Among Young Children: A Systematic Evidence
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 129 [AHRQ Publication No.
13-05185-EF-1]. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2016.
3. Mandell DS, Wiggins LD, Carpenter LA, et al.
Racial/ethnic disparities in the identification of
children with autism spectrum disorders. Am J
Public Health. 2009;99(3):493-498.
4. Dosreis S, Weiner CL, Johnson L, Newschaffer
CJ. Autism spectrum disorder screening and
management practices among general pediatric
providers. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2006;27(2)(suppl):
S88-S94.
5. Gillis JM. Screening practices of family physicians
and pediatricians in 2 southern states. Infants
Young Child. 2009;22(4):321-331.
6. Radecki L, Sand-Loud N, O’
Connor KG, Sharp S,
Olson LM. Trends in the use of standardized tools
for developmental screening in early childhood:
2002-2009. Pediatrics. 2011;128(1):14-19.
7. Arunyanart W, Fenick A, Ukritchon S, Imjaijitt W,
Northrup V, Weitzman C. Developmental and
autism screening: a survey across six states. Infants
Young Child. 2012;25(3):175-187.
8. Zuckerman KE, Mattox K, Donelan K, Batbayar
O, Baghaee A, Bethell C. Pediatrician identification
of Latino children at risk for autism spectrum
disorder. Pediatrics. 2013;132(3):445-453.
9. Baranek GT, Watson LR, Turner-Brown L, et al.
Preliminary efficacy of adapted responsive teaching
for infants at risk of autism spectrum disorder in a
community sample. Autism Res Treat. 2015;2015:
386951.
10. Wetherby AM, Guthrie W, Woods J, et al.
Parent-implemented social intervention for
toddlers with autism: an RCT. Pediatrics. 2014;134
(6):1084-1093.
11. Robins DL, Casagrande K, Barton M, Chen CM,
Dumont-Mathieu T, Fein D. Validation of the
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised
with Follow-up (M-CHAT-R/F). Pediatrics. 2014;133
(1):37-45.
12. Chlebowski C, Robins DL, Barton ML, Fein D.
Large-scale use of the Modified Checklist for Autism
in low-risk toddlers. Pediatrics. 2013;131(4):e1121-
e1127.
13. Strain PS, Bovey EH. Randomized, controlled
trial of the LEAP model of early intervention for
young children with autism spectrum disorders. Top
Early Child Spec Educ. 2011;31(3):133-154.
14. Dawson G, Rogers S, Munson J, et al.
Randomized, controlled trial of an intervention for
toddlers with autism: the Early Start Denver Model.
Pediatrics. 2010;125(1):e17-e23.
15. Smith T, Groen AD, Wynn JW. Randomized trial
of intensive early intervention for children with
pervasive developmental disorder. Am J Ment Retard.
2000;105(4):269-285.
16. Sallows GO, Graupner TD. Intensive behavioral
treatment for children with autism: four-year
outcome and predictors. Am J Ment Retard. 2005;
110(6):417-438.
17. Zwaigenbaum L, Bauman ML, Stone WL, et al.
Early identification of autism spectrum disorder:
recommendations for practice and research.
Pediatrics. 2015;136(suppl 1):S10-S40.
18. Committee on Practice and Ambulatory
Medicine; Bright Futures Periodicity Schedule
Workgroup. 2016 Recommendations for preventive
pediatric health care. Pediatrics. 2016;137(1):1-3.
19. Recommendations by type: clinical preventive
services. American Academy of Family Physicians.
http://www.aafp.org/patient-care/clinical
-recommendations/cps.html. Accessed December
29, 2015.
20. Filipek PA, Accardo PJ, Ashwal S, et al. Practice
parameter: screening and diagnosis of autism:
report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology and the Child
Neurology Society. Neurology. 2000;55(4):468-479.
21. Volkmar F, Siegel M, Woodbury-Smith M, King
B, McCracken J, State M; American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
Committee on Quality Issues (CQI). Practice
parameter for the assessment and treatment of
children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014;
53(2):237-257.
22. The UK NSC recommendation on autism
screening in children. UK National Screening
Committee. http://legacy.screening.nhs.uk/autism.
Accessed July 8, 2015.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Young Children
696
JAMA
February 16, 2016
Volume 315, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
