 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Depression in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement
Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH; and the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrecom-
mendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreventivecare
servicesforpatientswithoutrelatedsignsorsymptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththeben-
efitsandharmsoftheserviceandanassessmentofthebalance.The
USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a service in this
assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends screening for depression in the general
adult population, including pregnant and postpartum women.
Screening should be implemented with adequate systems in place
to ensure accurate diagnosis, effective treatment, and appropriate
follow-up. (B recommendation) (Figure 1)
Rationale
Importance
Depression is among the leading causes of disability in persons 15
years and older. It affects individuals, families, businesses, and so-
cietyandiscommoninpatientsseekingcareintheprimarycareset-
ting.Depressionisalsocommoninpostpartumandpregnantwomen
and affects not only the woman but her child as well.
Detection
TheUSPSTFfoundconvincingevidencethatscreeningimprovesthe
accurate identification of adult patients with depression in primary
care settings, including pregnant and postpartum women.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention and Treatment
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that programs combining
depression screening with adequate support systems in place
improve clinical outcomes (ie, reduction or remission of depres-
sion symptoms) in adults, including pregnant and postpartum
women.
TheUSPSTFfoundconvincingevidencethattreatmentofadults
andolderadultswithdepressionidentifiedthroughscreeninginpri-
marycaresettingswithantidepressants,psychotherapy,orbothde-
creases clinical morbidity.
TheUSPSTFalsofoundadequateevidencethattreatmentwith
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) improves clinical outcomes in
pregnant and postpartum women with depression.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention and Treatment
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatthemagnitudeofharms
of screening for depression in adults is small to none.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the magnitude of
harms of treatment with CBT in postpartum and pregnant women
is small to none.
DESCRIPTION Update of the 2009 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on screening for depression in adults.
METHODS The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits and harms of
screening for depression in adult populations, including older adults and pregnant and
postpartum women; the accuracy of depression screening instruments; and the benefits
and harms of depression treatment in these populations.
POPULATION This recommendation applies to adults 18 years and older.
RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends screening for depression in the general adult
population, including pregnant and postpartum women. Screening should be implemented
with adequate systems in place to ensure accurate diagnosis, effective treatment,
and appropriate follow-up. (B recommendation)
JAMA. 2016;315(4):380-387. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.18392
Editorial pages 349 and 351
Author Audio and Video
Interviews and JAMA Report
Video at jama.com
Related article page 388 and
JAMA Patient Page page 428
CMEQuizat
jamanetworkcme.comand
CMEQuestionspage411
Related articles at
jamapsychiatry.com,
jamainternalmedicine.com, and
jamaneurology.com
Author Affiliations: Author affiliations
are listed at the end of this article.
Authors/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Albert L. Siu,
MD, MSPH (albert.siu@mssm.edu).
Clinical Review & Education
Special Communication | USPSTF RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
380
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
The USPSTF found that second-generation antidepressants
(mostly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]) are associ-
ated with some harms, such as an increase in suicidal behaviors in
adults aged 18 to 29 years and an increased risk of upper gastroin-
testinal bleeding in adults older than 70 years, with risk increasing
withage;however,themagnitudeoftheserisksis,onaverage,small.
The USPSTF found evidence of potential serious fetal harms from
pharmacologictreatmentofdepressioninpregnantwomen,butthe
likelihoodoftheseseriousharmsislow.Therefore,theUSPSTFcon-
cludes that the overall magnitude of harms is small to moderate.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with at least moderate certainty that there is
a moderate net benefit to screening for depression in adults, includ-
ing older adults, who receive care in clinical practices that have ad-
equatesystemsinplacetoensureaccuratediagnosis,effectivetreat-
ment, and appropriate follow-up after screening (Figure 1). The
USPSTFalsoconcludeswithatleastmoderatecertaintythatthereis
a moderate net benefit to screening for depression in pregnant and
postpartum women who receive care in clinical practices that have
CBT or other evidence-based counseling available after screening.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationappliestoadults18yearsandolder(Figure2).
Itdoesnotapplytochildrenandadolescents,whoareaddressedin
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Screening for Depression in Adults
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
381
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
a separate USPSTF recommendation statement (available at
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
Assessment of Risk
The USPSTF recommends screening in all adults regardless of risk
factors. However, a number of factors are associated with an in-
creasedriskofdepression.Amonggeneraladultpopulations,preva-
lence rates vary by sex, age, race/ethnicity, education, marital sta-
tus, geographic location, and employment status. Women, young
andmiddle-agedadults,andnonwhitepersonshavehigherratesof
depression than their counterparts, as do persons who are under-
educated, previously married, or unemployed. Other groups who
areatincreasedriskofdevelopingdepressionincludepersonswith
chronic illnesses (eg, cancer or cardiovascular disease), other men-
tal health disorders (including substance misuse), or a family his-
tory of psychiatric disorders.
Among older adults, risk factors for depression include dis-
ability and poor health status related to medical illness, compli-
cated grief, chronic sleep disturbance, loneliness, and a history of
depression. However, the presence or absence of risk factors
alone cannot distinguish patients with depression from those
without depression.
Risk factors for depression during pregnancy and postpartum
include poor self-esteem, child-care stress, prenatal anxiety, life
stress,decreasedsocialsupport,single/unpartneredrelationshipsta-
tus, history of depression, difficult infant temperament, previous
postpartum depression, lower socioeconomic status, and unin-
tended pregnancy.
Screening Tests
Commonly used depression screening instruments include the
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) in various forms and the Hos-
pital Anxiety and Depression Scales in adults, the Geriatric
Depression Scale in older adults, and the Edinburgh Postnatal
Depression Scale (EPDS) in postpartum and pregnant women. All
positive screening results should lead to additional assessment
that considers severity of depression and comorbid psychological
problems (eg, anxiety, panic attacks, or substance abuse), alter-
nate diagnoses, and medical conditions.
Screening Timing and Interval
There is little evidence regarding the optimal timing for screen-
ing. The optimum interval for screening for depression is also
unknown; more evidence for all populations is needed to identify
Figure 2. Screening for Depression in Adults: Clinical Summary
Population
Adults aged ≥18 y 
Recommendation 
Screen for depression, with adequate systems in place to ensure accurate diagnosis, effective treatment, and appropriate follow-up.  
Grade: B 
Risk Assessment 
Screening Tests 
Screening Interval 
Treatment and
Interventions  
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Women, young and middle-aged adults, and nonwhite persons have higher rates of depression, as do persons who are
undereducated, previously married, or unemployed. Persons with chronic illnesses, other mental health disorders, or a family history
of psychiatric disorders are also at increased risk.     
Risk factors in older adults include disability and poor health status related to medical illness, complicated grief, chronic sleep
disturbance, loneliness, and history of depression. Risk factors during pregnancy and postpartum include poor self-esteem, child-care
stress, prenatal anxiety, life stress, decreased social support, single/unpartnered relationship status, history of depression, difficult
infant temperament, previous postpartum depression, lower socioeconomic status, and unintended pregnancy.   
Commonly used depression screening instruments include the Patient Health Questionnaire in various forms and the Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scales in adults, the Geriatric Depression Scale in older adults, and the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale in
postpartum and pregnant women. Positive screening results should lead to additional assessment that considers severity of depression
and comorbid psychological problems, alternate diagnoses, and medical conditions.      
The optimal timing and interval for screening for depression is not known. A pragmatic approach might include screening all adults
who have not been screened previously and using clinical judgment in consideration of risk factors, comorbid conditions, and life
events to determine if additional screening of high-risk patients is warranted.   
Effective treatment of depression in adults generally includes antidepressants or specific psychotherapy approaches, alone or in
combination. Given the potential harms to the fetus and newborn child from certain pharmacologic agents, clinicians are encouraged
to consider evidence-based counseling interventions when managing depression in pregnant or breastfeeding women.   
The net benefit of screening for depression in the general adult population is moderate. 
The USPSTF has made recommendations on screening for depression in children and adolescents and screening for suicide risk in
adolescents, adults, and older adults. These recommendations are available on the USPSTF website
(http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).   
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Screening for Depression in Adults
382
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
ideal screening intervals. A pragmatic approach in the absence of
data might include screening all adults who have not been
screened previously and using clinical judgment in consideration
of risk factors, comorbid conditions, and life events to determine
if additional screening of high-risk patients is warranted.
Treatment
Effective treatment of depression in adults generally includes
antidepressants or specific psychotherapy approaches (eg, CBT
or brief psychosocial counseling), alone or in combination. Given
the potential harms to the fetus and newborn child from certain
pharmacologic agents, clinicians are encouraged to consider CBT
or other evidence-based counseling interventions when manag-
ing depression in pregnant or breastfeeding women.
Other Approaches to Prevention
The Community Preventive Services Task Force, which makes
evidence-based recommendations on preventive services
for community populations, recommends collaborative care for
the management of depressive disorders as part of a multicom-
ponent, health care system–level intervention that uses case
managers to link primary care providers, patients, and mental
health specialists. More information about the Community Pre-
ventive Services Task Force and its recommendations on depres-
sion interventions is available on its website (http://www
.thecommunityguide.org).
Useful Resources
The USPSTF has made recommendations on screening for
depression in children and adolescents and screening for suicide
risk in adolescents, adults, and older adults (available at
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Ad-
ministration maintains a national registry of evidence-based
programs and practices for substance abuse and mental health
interventions (http://nrepp.samhsa.gov/) that may be helpful for
clinicians looking for models of how to implement depression
screening.
Other Considerations
Implementation
The USPSTF recommends that screening be implemented with
adequate systems in place. “
Adequate systems in place”refers to
having systems and clinical staff to ensure that patients are
screened and, if they screen positive, are appropriately diagnosed
and treated with evidence-based care or referred to a setting
that can provide the necessary care. These essential functions
can be provided through a wide range of different arrangements
of clinician types and settings. In the available evidence, the
lowest effective level of support consisted of a designated
nurse who advised resident physicians of positive screening
results and provided a protocol that facilitated referral to
evidence-based behavioral treatment.1 At the highest level,
support included screening; staff and clinician training (1- or 2-day
workshops); clinician manuals; monthly training lectures;
academic detailing; materials for clinicians, staff, and patients;
an initial visit with a nurse specialist for assessment, education,
and discussion of patient preferences and goals; a visit with a
trained nurse specialist for follow-up assessment and ongoing
support for medication adherence; a visit with a trained therapist
for CBT; and a reduced copayment for patients referred for
psychotherapy.2,3
Multidisciplinary team–based primary care that includes self-
management support and care coordination has been shown to
be effective in management of depression. These components of
primary care are detailed in recommendations from the Commu-
nity Preventive Services Task Force.4 It recommends collabora-
tive care for the treatment of major depression in adults 18 years
and older on the basis of strong evidence of effectiveness in
improving short-term treatment outcomes. As defined, collabora-
tive care and disease management of depressive disorders
include a systematic, multicomponent, and team-based approach
that “strengthens and supports self-care, while assuring that
effective medical, preventive, and health maintenance interven-
tions take place”to improve the quality and outcome of patient
care.4
Costs
The economic burden of depression is substantial for individuals
as well as society. Costs to an individual may include emotional
suffering, reduced quality of personal relationships, possible
adverse effects from treatment, cost of mental health and medi-
cal visits and medications, time away from work and lost wages,
and cost of transportation. Costs to society may include loss of
life, reduced productivity (because of both diminished capacity
while at work and absenteeism from work), and increased costs
of mental health and medical care.
Research Needs and Gaps
Gaps in the evidence on screening for depression in older adults
in primary care include a lack of information from large-scale ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs) in settings that are applicable to
the US population. More research is needed on the accuracy of
screening tools in languages other than English and Spanish and
to identify the timing and optimal screening interval in all popula-
tions. Data are lacking on both the accuracy of screening and the
benefits and harms of treatment in pregnant women, as well as
for the balance of benefits and harms of treatment with antide-
pressants in postpartum women. Finally, research is needed to
assess barriers to establishing adequate systems of care and how
these barriers can be addressed.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common and significant
health care problem. It is the leading cause of disability among
adults in high-income countries and is associated with increased
mortality due to suicide and impaired ability to manage other
health issues. Depression has a major effect on quality of life for
the patient and affects family members, especially children.
Depression also imposes a significant economic burden through
direct and indirect costs. In the United States, an estimated
Screening for Depression in Adults
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
383
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
$22.8 billion was spent on depression treatment in 2009, and
lost productivity cost an additional estimated $23 billion in 2011.5
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review to up-
date its 2009 recommendation, which focused on the direct evi-
denceonthebenefitsandharmsofscreeningfordepressioninadult
populations, including older adults and pregnant and postpartum
women. The USPSTF also reviewed the evidence on the accuracy
ofdepressionscreeninginstrumentsandthebenefitsandharmsof
depression treatment in these populations.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
General Adult Population and Older Adults
The accuracy of screening tests in the general adult population was
establishedinthe2002and2009USPSTFreviewsandfoundtobe
convincing.
Pregnant and Postpartum Women
Twenty-threestudies(n = 5398),including8studiesoftheEnglish-
language version, compared the accuracy of the EPDS with a diag-
nostic interview.6 Sensitivity of the English-language EPDS with a
cutoffscoreof13rangedfrom0.67(95%CI,0.18-0.96)to1.00(95%
CI, 0.67-1.00), and specificity for detecting MDD was consistently
at least 0.90. In the 2 trials conducted in the United States,7,8 in-
cludingarecentstudyinlow-incomeAfricanAmericanwomen,sen-
sitivity for detecting MDD ranged from 0.78 to 0.81. This suggests
that the average sensitivity of the EPDS with a cutoff score of 13 in
the United States is approximately 0.80, and the positive predic-
tive value for detecting MDD would be 47% to 64% in a population
with a 10% prevalence of MDD. The Spanish-language version also
showed acceptable performance characteristics. No studies of
screeninginpregnantandpostpartumwomenwiththe9-itemPHQ
or other versions met inclusion criteria.
Effectiveness of Screening and Treatment
General Adult Population and Older Adults
Nine good- or fair-quality trials addressed screening in general
adults (5 trials; n = 2924) and older adults (4 trials; n = 890).
Seven studies were conducted in the United States, and 2
(in older adults) were conducted in the Netherlands. Most studies
were published in the 1990s and early 2000s; only 1 (in older
adults) of the 9 trials was published since the previous systematic
review. One study in general adults directly compared screening
with usual care case-finding,9 while the other studies screened all
patients for depression, enrolled only those screening positive,
and returned results of screening to clinicians in the intervention
group only.6 Studies included a range of additional treatment
components along with providing screening result feedback to
clinicians.
Improvementsinremission,responserates,orbothinthegen-
eraladultpopulationrangedfrom17%to87%.Otheroutcomeswere
sparsely reported. The effect of screening on remission, response
rates,orbothinthetrialsofolderadultswasminimal.However,both
ofthetrialsinolderadultsthatshowedaparadoxicaleffectwerecon-
ducted in the Netherlands, and the trial with the worst outcomes
had a number of features that may have affected its reliability, in-
cluding external referrals for depression treatment, very low
uptake of treatment (19%), and high mortality and morbidity in the
intervention group, suggesting that the control and intervention
groups may have been different at baseline.
The 2009 USPSTF recommendation concluded that the evi-
dence was sufficient to establish the benefits of treatment of
depression in general adult populations, including older adults.10
A systematic review of intention-to-treat trials comparing 3
groups of adult patients who received antidepressants, psycho-
therapy, or a control condition reported a 46% remission rate
with antidepressants and a 48% remission rate with psycho-
therapy after 10 to 16 weeks.11 Two systematic reviews concluded
that antidepressants were effective in treating depression in
older adults. In 1 review, older adults who received antidepres-
sants were twice as likely to have remission from major or minor
depression as older adults who received placebo (odds ratio [OR],
2.03 [95% CI, 1.67-2.46]).12 The other review indicated that
among community-dwelling older adults, 36% of those who
received antidepressants were in remission at the end of the
study compared with 21% of those who received placebo
(OR, 2.13 [95% CI, 1.61-2.86]).13 In addition, 2 good-quality sys-
tematic reviews on the efficacy of psychotherapy in older adults
found that older adults who received psychotherapy were more
than twice as likely to have remission as those who received no
treatment (OR, 2.47 [95% CI, 1.76-3.47] vs 2.63 [95% CI,
1.96-3.53]).12,14
Pregnant and Postpartum Women
The USPSTF identified 6 fair- or good-quality trials (n = 11 869)
(5 in postpartum women and 1 in pregnant women) that assessed
the effect of screening for depression in pregnant and postpartum
women.6 Trial participants were identified through primary care
settings using the EPDS (cutoff scores varied) and included women
with and without depression. None of the trials simply compared
usual care with screening plus usual care. Two trials assessed mini-
mal additional intervention beyond screening or feedback of
screening results in postpartum15 and pregnant16 women, 2 trials
assessed the effects of screening plus provider supports in postpar-
tum women,16,17 and 2 trials assessed feedback of screening results
plus adjunctive counseling by home health visitors in postpartum
women.18,19 Studies varied by geographic location (United States,
northern Europe, United Kingdom, and Hong Kong), length of
follow-up (11 weeks to 16 months), and baseline depression rates
(10% to 28%).
Despite the variation in trial design and population, results
were reasonably consistent across the range of designs. Trials in
postpartum women showed 28% to 59% reductions in risk of
depression at follow-up compared with usual care. The reported
effect was smaller (18%) and did not reach significance in the trial
of pregnant women but was in the same direction.16 The 4 stud-
ies that reported remission or response rates reported significant
improvements in both postpartum and pregnant women. The
most applicable trial (US trial of screening plus provider supports)
found that 45% of intervention participants reported a 5-point or
greater reduction in 9-item PHQ score (an improvement consid-
ered to be clinically important) compared with 35% of usual care
participants (OR, 1.74 [95% CI, 1.05-5.86]; adjusted for depres-
sion history, marital status, income, education, age, and degree of
parenting stress).17
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Screening for Depression in Adults
384
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Eighteen trials examined the benefits of treatment interven-
tionsinwomenwhoscreenedpositivefordepressioninprimarycare
or community settings. Fifteen trials were in postpartum women
(usually 6-12 weeks postpartum) and 3 trials were in pregnant
women,20-22 but all reported outcomes during the postpartum pe-
riod. Only 1 small, short-term trial of screen-detected depression in
postpartumwomenincludedantidepressantsasanintervention.23
ThemostcommonlystudiedapproachwasCBTorrelatedinterven-
tions that included CBT components. All 10 trials of CBT or CBT-
related interventions, including the 2 trials in pregnant women,
showed an increased likelihood of remission with treatment in the
short term (�7.8 months). The magnitude of effect in pregnant
womenwassimilartothatinpostpartumwomen.Pooledresultsthat
used only the longest follow-up period within 1 year showed a 35%
increase in the likelihood of remission with CBT (DerSimonian and
Lairdpooledrelativerisk,1.34[95%CI,1.19-1.50];K = 10;I2 = 7.9%)
compared with usual care. The other 8 non-CBT studies examined
a diverse range of interventions but did not provide sufficient evi-
dencetodrawconclusionsforanyoneapproach.Therewasalsoin-
sufficient evidence to assess differences in effectiveness for pa-
tient subgroups.
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
General Adult Population and Older Adults
One trial in general adults reported no adverse events attribut-
able to screening in a subset of participants with newly identified
depression24; none of the other effectiveness trials in general
adults reported on harms. One trial in older adults reported para-
doxical effects from screening, as previously discussed. No addi-
tional studies addressing harms of screening were identified in
the review.
The 2009 USPSTF review found 7 studies that compared
suicide-related events in adults who received SSRIs and other
second-generation antidepressants vs placebo. No studies
reported a significant increase in completed suicide rates in adults
who received antidepressants compared with those who received
placebo, although completed suicides were rare and, as a result,
the power to detect a significant difference was limited.25 For
adults older than 65 years, antidepressant use seemed to be pro-
tective against suicidal behavior (OR, 0.06 [95% CI, 0.01-0.58]).26
In addition, the 2009 USPSTF review identified 1 fair-quality study
on bleeding risk in older adults who received SSRIs. Although
patients 16 years and older were at increased risk of upper
gastrointestinal bleeding during SSRI use, the risk increased signifi-
cantly with age, from 4.1 hospitalizations per 1000 adults aged 65
to 70 years to 12.3 hospitalizations per 1000 adults aged 80 to 89
years. The odds of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in adults aged
40 to 79 years who were taking SSRIs (adjusted OR, 3.0 [95% CI,
2.1-4.4]) were much higher when they were also taking a nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drug (adjusted OR, 15.6 [95% CI,
6.6-36.6]).27
Pregnant and Postpartum Women
Only 1 trial, which focused on the effects of screening alone in post-
partum women, specifically reported on adverse effects of screen-
ingandfoundnone.15Noneoftheotherscreeningtrialsshowedany
signals of concern. The literature search did not identify additional
trials addressing harms of screening.
None of the trials addressing the benefits of behavioral-based
interventions reported on harms of treatment. In addition, none of
the trials showed paradoxical effects of concern. The review found
noadditionaltrialsaddressingtheharmsofbehavioral-basedinter-
ventions beyond those that were included for the benefits of treat-
ment. The majority of the evidence on the harms of antidepres-
sants was drawn from a good-quality comprehensive systematic
review on the comparative effectiveness and safety of antidepres-
santtreatmentfordepressioninpregnantandpostpartumwomen
sponsoredbytheAgencyforHealthcareResearchandQuality.28This
reviewincludedstudiespublishedbetween1996and2013andwas
supplemented with 12 additional fair- to good-quality observa-
tional studies (n = 4 759 435) published after the review.6 The re-
view included 15 observational studies that provided evidence on
the harms of antidepressants at unknown dosages in pregnant
women with depression and an additional 109 observational stud-
iesthatprovidedevidenceontheharmsofantidepressantsinpreg-
nant women whose depression status in either or both treatment
groups was unknown. This observational evidence shows that sec-
ond-generationantidepressantuseduringpregnancymaybeasso-
ciatedwithasmallincreaseinriskofpreeclampsia,postpartumhem-
orrhage, miscarriage, perinatal death, preterm birth, serotonin
withdrawal syndrome, respiratory distress, pulmonary hyperten-
sion, major malformations, cardiac malformations, and being small
for gestational age.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
General Adult Population and Older Adults
The evidence from 5 RCTs, in addition to indirect evidence re-
viewed for the 2009 recommendation, supports moderate cer-
tainty that screening for depression in general adults is of moder-
ate net benefit. The evidence for older adults is less clear, because
the trials that assessed the direct effect of screening found no ben-
efit and possibly even harm. However, given the strength of the in-
direct evidence (the accuracy of screening in older adults and the
effectiveness of treatment in older adults), the inclusion of adults
older than 65 years in the studies of all adults, and the weakness of
the direct evidence on screening in older adults, the USPSTF con-
cludes that the weight of evidence still favors a net benefit. How-
ever,moreresearchonoptimalscreeningapproachesinolderadults
is imperative.
Pregnant and Postpartum Women
Directandindirectevidencesupportmoderatecertaintythatscreen-
ing for depression in pregnant and postpartum women is of mod-
erate net benefit. Six RCTs with varying degrees of additional sup-
port found direct benefit of screening, 23 studies confirmed the
accuracy of the EPDS for identifying MDD, and 10 RCTs found ben-
efit of treatment with CBT.6 Although most of the evidence (ex-
cept for evidence on harms of SSRIs) is in postpartum women, the
direction and magnitude of effect in pregnant women was consis-
tentwiththeoutcomesforpostpartumwomenandforadultsingen-
eral. It is important to note that the evidence on treatment benefit
is primarily for nonpharmacologic interventions (ie, CBT), there is
evidenceofasmallriskofharmtofetalhealthwithSSRIuseinpreg-
nant women, and there is a lack of evidence on harms of SSRI use in
postpartumwomen.Therefore,itisimportantthatarangeoftreat-
mentoptionsareavailableforpregnantandpostpartumwomenwith
Screening for Depression in Adults
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
385
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
depression who are identified through screening and that treat-
ment choices are made through shared decision making.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from July 28, 2015, to
August 24, 2015. A number of comments requested a more de-
taileddefinitionofwhatconstitutesan“
adequatesystem”forscreen-
ing. The USPSTF revised the implementation section to clarify that
arangeofstafftypes,organizationalarrangements,andsettingscan
be used to support the goals of depression screening and provided
a link to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration registry of evidence-based mental health interventions as a
resource. Comments suggested that access to depression screen-
ing and management resources would be useful. The USPSTF has
now provided links to evidence-based depression screening and
management toolkits for primary care settings. There were several
requests to clarify the potential harms of SSRIs; in response, the
USPSTF added information to the Discussion section. Finally, many
concerns were expressed about barriers to effectively implement-
ing screening within adequate systems of care; the USPSTF noted
this as a research need.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
In 2009, the USPSTF recommended screening all adults when
staff-assisted depression care supports are in place and selective
screening based on professional judgment and patient prefer-
ences when such support is not available. In recognition that such
support is now much more widely available and accepted as part
of mental health care, the current recommendation statement
has omitted the recommendation regarding selective screening,
as it no longer represents current clinical practice. The current
statement also specifically recommends screening for depression
in pregnant and postpartum women, subpopulations that were
not specifically reviewed for the 2009 recommendation.
Recommendations of Others
The American Academy of Family Physicians recommends screen-
ing for depression in the general adult population, including preg-
nant and postpartum women. Screening should be implemented
with adequate systems in place to ensure accurate diagnosis,
effective treatment, and appropriate follow-up.29 The American
Academy of Pediatrics recommends that pediatricians screen
mothers for postpartum depression at the infant’
s 1-, 2-, and
4-month visits.30 The American College of Preventive Medicine
recommends that primary care clinicians screen all adults for
depression and that all primary care clinicians should have systems
in place, either within the primary care setting itself or through col-
laborations with mental health professionals, to ensure the accu-
rate diagnosis and treatment of this condition.31 The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that clini-
cians screen patients at least once during the perinatal period for
depression and anxiety symptoms. Screening must be coupled
with appropriate follow-up and treatment when indicated (prac-
tices should be prepared to initiate medical therapy, refer patients
to appropriate care, or both), and systems should be in place to
ensure follow-up for diagnosis and treatment.32 The Canadian
Task Force on Preventive Health Care does not recommend rou-
tinely screening for depression in adults who are at average risk of
depression or in subgroups of the population who may be at
increased risk of depression.33 The Institute for Clinical Systems
Improvement recommends that clinicians use a standardized
instrument to screen for depression if it is suspected based on risk
factors or presentation.34 The Community Preventive Services
Task Force recommends collaborative care for the management of
depressive disorders based on strong evidence of effectiveness in
improving depression symptoms, adherence to treatment,
response to treatment, and remission and recovery from depres-
sion. This collaboration is designed to improve the routine screen-
ing and diagnosis of depressive disorders, as well as the manage-
ment of diagnosed depression.4
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members include the following
individuals: Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH; Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS; David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH; Linda Ciofu Baumann, PhD,
RN, APRN; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; Mark
Ebell, MD, MS; Francisco A. R. García, MD, MPH;
Matthew Gillman, MD, SM; Jessica Herzstein, MD,
MPH; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist,
MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH;
Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; William R. Phillips, MD,
MPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael P.
Pignone, MD, MPH.
Affiliations of Authors/US Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) members: Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York (Siu); James J. Peters
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bronx, New York
(Siu); University of California, San Francisco
(Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington (Grossman);
University of Wisconsin, Madison (Baumann);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); University of Georgia, Athens (Ebell);
Pima County Department of Health, Tucson,
Arizona (García); Harvard Medical School and
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts (Gillman); Independent consultant,
Washington, DC (Herzstein); Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina (Kemper); Fairfax Family
Practice, Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (Krist);
New York University, New York (Kurth); Veterans
Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
California (Owens); Stanford University, Stanford,
California (Owens); University of Washington,
Seattle (Phillips); Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island (Phipps); University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill (Pignone).
Author Contributions: Dr Siu had full access to all
of the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Siu, Grossman, Davidson,
Ebell, Garcia, Owens, Phillips, Pignone.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Siu,
Bibbins-Domingo, Baumann, Gillman, Herzstein,
Kemper, Krist, Kurth, Phillips, Phipps, Pignone.
Drafting of the manuscript: Siu, Davidson, Ebell,
Herzstein, Phillips.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Siu, Bibbins-Domingo,
Grossman, Baumann, Garcia, Gillman, Kemper,
Krist, Kurth, Owens, Phillips, Phipps, Pignone.
Statistical analysis: Phillips.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Siu,
Grossman, Davidson, Kurth, Phillips.
Study supervision: Siu, Garcia, Krist, Owens, Phillips.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the
ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential
Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.
Authors followed the policy regarding
conflicts of interest described at
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce
.org/Page/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Screening for Depression in Adults
386
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of the AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Elisabeth
Kato, MD, MRP, of AHRQ, who contributed to the
writing of the manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA, of
AHRQ, who assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Jarjoura D, Polen A, Baum E, Kropp D, Hetrick S,
Rutecki G. Effectiveness of screening and treatment
for depression in ambulatory indigent patients.
J Gen Intern Med. 2004;19(1):78-84.
2. Wells KB, Sherbourne C, Schoenbaum M, et al.
Impact of disseminating quality improvement
programs for depression in managed primary care:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2000;283(2):
212-220.
3. Wells K, Sherbourne C, Schoenbaum M, et al.
Five-year impact of quality improvement for
depression: results of a group-level randomized
controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61(4):
378-386.
4. Improving mental health and addressing
mental illness. Community Preventive Services
Task Force. http://www.thecommunityguide.org
/mentalhealth/index.html. Accessed December 2,
2015.
5. Witters D, Liu D, Agrawal S. Depression costs
US workplaces $23 billion in absenteeism. Gallup.
http://www.gallup.com/poll/163619/depression
-costs-workplaces-billion-absenteeism.aspx.
Accessed July 14, 2015.
6. O’
Connor E, Rossom RC, Henninger M, et al.
Screening for Depression in Adults: An Updated
Systematic Evidence Review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 128
[AHRQ Publication No. 14-05208-EF-1]. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016.
7. Beck CT, Gable RK. Comparative analysis of the
performance of the Postpartum Depression
Screening Scale with two other depression
instruments. Nurs Res. 2001;50(4):242-250.
8. Tandon SD, Cluxton-Keller F, Leis J, Le HN,
Perry DF. A comparison of three screening tools to
identify perinatal depression among low-income
African American women. J Affect Disord. 2012;136
(1-2):155-162.
9. Williams JW Jr, Mulrow CD, Kroenke K, et al.
Case-finding for depression in primary care:
a randomized trial. Am J Med. 1999;106(1):36-43.
10. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for depression in adults: US Preventive Services
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2009;151(11):784-792.
11. Casacalenda N, Perry JC, Looper K. Remission in
major depressive disorder: a comparison of
pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, and control
conditions. Am J Psychiatry. 2002;159(8):1354-1360.
12. Pinquart M, Duberstein PR, Lyness JM.
Treatments for later-life depressive conditions:
a meta-analytic comparison of pharmacotherapy
and psychotherapy. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(9):
1493-1501.
13. Wilson K, Mottram P, Sivanranthan A,
Nightingale A. Antidepressant versus placebo for
depressed elderly. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2001;(2):CD000561.
14. Pinquart M, Sörensen S. How effective are
psychotherapeutic and other psychosocial
interventions with older adults? a meta-analysis.
J Ment Health Aging. 2001;7(2):207-243.
15. Leung SS, Leung C, Lam TH, et al. Outcome of a
postnatal depression screening programme using
the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale:
a randomized controlled trial. J Public Health (Oxf).
2011;33(2):292-301.
16. Wickberg B, Tjus T, Hwang P. Using the EPDS in
routine antenatal care in Sweden: a naturalistic
study. J Reprod Infant Psychol. 2005;23(1):33-41.
17. Yawn BP, Dietrich AJ, Wollan P, et al; TRIPPD
practices. TRIPPD: a practice-based network
effectiveness study of postpartum depression
screening and management. Ann Fam Med. 2012;10
(4):320-329.
18. Morrell CJ, Slade P, Warner R, et al. Clinical
effectiveness of health visitor training in
psychologically informed approaches for
depression in postnatal women: pragmatic cluster
randomised trial in primary care. BMJ. 2009;338:
a3045.
19. Glavin K, Smith L, Sørum R, Ellefsen B.
Redesigned community postpartum care to
prevent and treat postpartum depression in
women: a one-year follow-up study. J Clin Nurs.
2010;19(21-22):3051-3062.
20. Kozinszky Z, Dudas RB, Devosa I, et al.
Can a brief antepartum preventive group
intervention help reduce postpartum depressive
symptomatology? Psychother Psychosom. 2012;81
(2):98-107.
21. McGregor M, Coghlan M, Dennis CL. The effect
of physician-based cognitive behavioural therapy
among pregnant women with depressive
symptomatology: a pilot quasi-experimental trial.
Early Interv Psychiatry. 2014;8(4):348-357.
22. O’
Mahen H, Himle JA, Fedock G, Henshaw E,
Flynn H. A pilot randomized controlled trial of
cognitive behavioral therapy for perinatal
depression adapted for women with low incomes.
Depress Anxiety. 2013;30(7):679-687.
23. Appleby L, Warner R, Whitton A, Faragher B.
A controlled study of fluoxetine and
cognitive-behavioural counselling in the treatment
of postnatal depression. BMJ. 1997;314(7085):932-
936.
24. Rost K, Nutting P, Smith J, Werner J, Duan N.
Improving depression outcomes in community
primary care practice: a randomized trial of the
quEST intervention: Quality Enhancement by
Strategic Teaming. J Gen Intern Med. 2001;16(3):
143-149.
25. O’
Connor EA, Whitlock EP, Gaynes BN, Beil TL.
Screening for Depression in Adults and Older Adults
in Primary Care: An Updated Systematic Review:
Evidence Synthesis No. 75 [AHRQ Publication
No. 10-05143-EF-1]. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2009.
26. Stone M, Jones ML. Clinical review: relationship
between antidepressant drugs and suicidality in
adults. In: Laughren TP. Memorandum: Overview
for December 13 Meeting of Psychopharmacologic
Drugs Advisory Committee (PDAC). Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug
Administration. http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets
/ac/06/briefing/2006-4272b1-01-FDA.pdf.
Accessed July 14, 2015.
27. Dalton SO, Sørensen HT, Johansen C. SSRIs and
upper gastrointestinal bleeding: what is known and
how should it influence prescribing? CNS Drugs.
2006;20(2):143-151.
28. McDonagh MS, Matthews A, Phillipi C, et al.
Depression drug treatment outcomes in pregnancy
and the postpartum period: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2014;124(3):
526-534.
29. Clinical preventive service recommendation:
depression. American Academy of Family
Physicians. http://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/depression.html.
Accessed July 14, 2015.
30. Earls MF; Committee on Psychosocial Aspects
of Child and Family Health American Academy of
Pediatrics. Incorporating recognition and
management of perinatal and postpartum
depression into pediatric practice. Pediatrics. 2010;
126(5):1032-1039.
31. Nimalasuriya K, Compton MT, Guillory VJ;
Prevention Practice Committee of the American
College of Preventive Medicine. Screening adults
for depression in primary care: a position statement
of the American College of Preventive Medicine.
J Fam Pract. 2009;58(10):535-538.
32. Committee on Obstetric Practice. The
American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists Committee Opinion No. 630:
screening for perinatal depression. Obstet Gynecol.
2015;125(5):1268-1271.
33. Joffres M, Jaramillo A, Dickinson J, et al;
Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.
Recommendations on screening for depression in
adults. CMAJ. 2013;185(9):775-782.
34. Mitchell J, Trangle M, Degnan B, et al. Adult
Depression in Primary Care. Bloomington, MN:
Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement; 2013.
Screening for Depression in Adults
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 26, 2016
Volume 315, Number 4
387
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
