 Jay S. Skyler,1 George L. Bakris,2 Ezio Bonifacio,3 Tamara Darsow,4 Robert H. Eckel,5
Leif Groop,6 Per-Henrik Groop,7,8,9 Yehuda Handelsman,10 Richard A. Insel,11
Chantal Mathieu,12 Allison T. McElvaine,4 Jerry P. Palmer,13 Alberto Pugliese,1
Desmond A. Schatz,14 Jay M. Sosenko,15 John P.H. Wilding,16 and
Robert E. Ratner4
Differentiation of Diabetes by
Pathophysiology, Natural History,
and Prognosis
Diabetes 2017;66:241–255 | DOI: 10.2337/db16-0806
The American Diabetes Association, JDRF, the Euro-
pean Association for the Study of Diabetes, and the
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists
convened a research symposium, “The Differentiation of
Diabetes by Pathophysiology, Natural History and
Prognosis” on 10–12 October 2015. International experts
in genetics, immunology, metabolism, endocrinology,
and systems biology discussed genetic and environ-
mental determinants of type 1 and type 2 diabetes risk
and progression, as well as complications. The partici-
pants debated how to determine appropriate therapeu-
tic approaches based on disease pathophysiology and
stage and defined remaining research gaps hindering a
personalized medical approach for diabetes to drive the
field to address these gaps. The authors recommend a
structure for data stratification to define the phenotypes
and genotypes of subtypes of diabetes that will facilitate
individualized treatment.
Though therapeutic algorithms for diabetes encour-
age individualization of approaches (1), they are often
broadly applied in treatment and reimbursement de-
cisions, reinforcing the “one-size-fits-all” approach (2).
However, if individualized approaches are successful
(if they improve morbidity/mortality and are cost-
effective), health care systems are persuaded to adopt
them. For example, better insights into the pathophys-
iology of different types of cancer have led to tailored di-
agnostic tools and therapies, which have dramatically
improved outcomes (3). A similar approach should be
realized for diabetes.
Many different paths, driven by various genetic and
environmental factors, result in the progressive loss of
b-cell mass (4,5) and/or function (6) that manifests clin-
ically as hyperglycemia. Once hyperglycemia occurs, peo-
ple with all forms of diabetes are at risk for developing
the same complications (Fig. 1), though rates of progres-
sion may differ. The present challenge is to characterize
the many paths to b-cell dysfunction or demise and
identify therapeutic approaches that best target each
path. By reviewing the current evidence and addressing
remaining research gaps, we aim to identify subtypes of
diabetes that may be associated with differential rates of
progression and differential risks of complications. A
personalized approach to intensive therapy to prevent
or treat specific complications may help resolve the bur-
den of diabetes complications, particularly in those at
highest risk.
1Diabetes Research Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL
2The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL
3Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
4American Diabetes Association, Arlington, VA
5University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO
6Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden
7Abdominal Center Nephrology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
8Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland
9Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia
10Metabolic Institute of America, Tarzana, CA
11JDRF, New York, NY
12Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
13University of Washington and VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA
14University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL
15University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL
16University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, U.K.
Corresponding author: Allison T. McElvaine, amcelvaine@diabetes.org.
Received 1 July 2016 and accepted 23 November 2016.
This article contains Supplementary Data online at http://diabetes
.diabetesjournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.2337/db16-0806/-/DC1.
© 2017 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as
long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered. More information is available at http://www.diabetesjournals
.org/content/license.
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
241
PERSPECTIVES IN DIABETES
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DIABETES
Demographics
Type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes differentially impact
populations based on age, race, ethnicity, geography, and
socioeconomic status.
Type 1 Diabetes
Between 2001 and 2009, there was a 21% increase in the
number of youth with type 1 diabetes in the U.S. (7). Its
prevalence is increasing at a rate of ;3% per year glob-
ally (8). Though diagnosis of type 1 diabetes frequently
occurs in childhood, 84% of people living with type 1 di-
abetes are adults (9). Type 1 diabetes affects males and
females equally (10) and decreases life expectancy by an
estimated 13 years (11). An estimated 5–15% of adults
diagnosed with type 2 diabetes actually have type 1 di-
abetes or latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA)
(12).
Europoid Caucasians have the highest prevalence of
type 1 diabetes among U.S. youth, representing 72% of
reported cases. Hispanic Caucasians represent 16%, and
non-Hispanic blacks represent 9% (7).
Figure 1—Genetic and environmental risk factors impact inflammation, autoimmunity, and metabolic stress. These states affect b-cell
mass and/or function such that insulin levels are eventually unable to respond sufficiently to insulin demands, leading to hyperglycemia
levels sufficient to diagnose diabetes. In some cases, genetic and environmental risk factors and gene–environment interactions can
directly impact b-cell mass and/or function. Regardless of the pathophysiology of diabetes, chronic high blood glucose levels are
associated with microvascular and macrovascular complications that increase morbidity and mortality for people with diabetes. This model
positions b-cell destruction and/or dysfunction as the necessary common factor to all forms of diabetes.
242
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 Incidence and prevalence rates for type 1 diabetes vary
dramatically across the globe. At the extremes, China has
an incidence of 0.1/100,000 per year and Finland has an
incidence of 60/100,000 per year (13). With some excep-
tions, type 1 diabetes incidence is positively related to
geographic distance north of the equator (13). Colder
seasons are correlated with diagnosis and progression of
type 1 diabetes. Both onset of disease and the appearance
of islet autoimmunity appear to be higher in autumn and
winter than in spring and summer (14).
Type 2 Diabetes
In the U.S., an estimated 95% of the nearly 30 million
people living with diabetes have type 2 diabetes. An addi-
tional 86 million have prediabetes, putting them at high
risk for developing type 2 diabetes (9). Among the demo-
graphic associations for type 2 diabetes are older age, race/
ethnicity, male sex, and socioeconomic status (9).
Type 2 diabetes incidence is increasing in youth,
especially among the racial and ethnic groups with dis-
proportionately high risk for developing type 2 diabetes
and its complications: American Indians, African Americans,
Hispanics/Latinos, Asians, and Pacific Islanders (9). Older
age is very closely correlated to risk for developing type 2
diabetes. More than one in four Americans over the age
of 65 years have diabetes, and more than half in this age-
group have prediabetes (9). The prevalence of type 2
diabetes in the U.S. is higher for males (6.9%) than for
females (5.9%) (15).
There is a high degree of variability for prevalence of
type 2 diabetes across the globe. East Asia, South Asia,
and Australia have more adults with diabetes than any
other region (153 million). North America and the
Caribbean have the highest prevalence rate, with one in
eight affected (8).
Independent of geography, the risk of developing type 2
diabetes is associated with low socioeconomic status. Low
educational level increases risk by 41%, low occupation
level by 31%, and low income level by 40% (16).
Research Gaps
The assembled experts agreed that research efforts are
needed to define causative factors that account for the
established correlations among different demographic
subsets and the corresponding variable risks for diabetes.
Factors associated with race/ethnicity and geography
that differentially increase risk for type 1 diabetes and for
type 2 diabetes need to be defined. For type 2 diabetes,
the drivers of increased risk in individuals of low
socioeconomic status also need to be established.
Genetics
Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes are polygenic diseases
where many common variants, largely with small effect
size, contribute to overall disease risk. Disease heritability
(h2), defined as sibling-relative risk, is 3 for type 2 diabetes
and 15 for type 1 diabetes (17). The lifetime risk of de-
veloping type 2 diabetes is ;40% if one parent has type 2
diabetes and higher if the mother has the disease (18).
The risk for type 1 diabetes is ;5% if a parent has type 1
diabetes and higher if the father has the disease (19).
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a mono-
genic disease and has a high h2 of ;50 (20). Mutations in
any 1 of 13 different individual genes have been identified
to cause MODY (21), and a genetic diagnosis can be crit-
ical for selecting the most appropriate therapy. For exam-
ple, children with mutations in KCJN11 causing MODY
should be treated with sulfonylureas rather than insulin.
Type 1 Diabetes
The higher type 1 diabetes prevalence observed in
relatives implies a genetic risk, and the degree of genetic
identity with the proband correlates with risk (22–26).
Gene variants in one major locus, human leukocyte anti-
gen (HLA) (27), confer 50–60% of the genetic risk by
affecting HLA protein binding to antigenic peptides and
antigen presentation to T cells (28). Approximately 50 ad-
ditional genes individually contribute smaller effects
(25,29). These contributors include gene variants that
modulate immune regulation and tolerance (30–33), var-
iants that modify viral responses (34,35), and variants
that influence responses to environmental signals and
endocrine function (36), as well as some that are expressed
in pancreatic b-cells (37). Genetic influences on the trig-
gering of islet autoimmunity and disease progression are
being defined in relatives (38,39). Together, these gene
variants explain ;80% of type 1 diabetes heritability. Epi-
genetic (40), gene expression, and regulatory RNA profiles
(36) may vary over time and reflect disease activity, pro-
viding a dynamic readout of risk.
Genetic variants can also identify patients at higher
risk, predict rates of C-peptide decline, and predict
response to various therapies (41). With a better under-
standing of inheritance profiles, it may become possible to
realize new targets for individualized intervention.
Type 2 Diabetes
While a subset of genetic variants are linked to both type 1
and type 2 diabetes (42,43), the two diseases have a
largely distinct genetic basis, which could be leveraged
toward classification of diabetes (44). Genome-wide asso-
ciation studies have identified more than 130 genetic var-
iants associated with type 2 diabetes, glucose levels, or
insulin levels; however, these variants explain less than
15% of disease heritability (45–47). There are many possi-
bilities for explaining the majority of type 2 diabetes
heritability, including disease heterogeneity, gene–gene
interactions, and epigenetics. Most type 2 variants are
in noncoding genomic regions. Some variants, such as
those in KCNQ1, show strong parent-of-origin effects
(48). It is possible that children of mothers carrying
KCNQ1 are born with a reduced functional b-cell mass
and thereby are less able to increase their insulin
secretion when exposed to insulin resistance (49). An-
other area of particular interest has been the search for
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
243
 rare variants protecting from type 2 diabetes, such as
loss-of-function mutations in SLC30A8 (50), which could
offer potential new drug targets for type 2 diabetes.
To date, however, the improvement in predictive value
of known genetic variants over that of classic clinical risk
factors (BMI, family history, glucose) has proven minimal
in type 2 diabetes.
The rapid development of molecular genetic tools and
decreasing costs for next-generation sequencing should
make dissection of the black box of genetics of diabetes
possible in the near future, but at this point, apart from
the profiles that distinguish between type 1 and type 2
diabetes and a limited number of specific variants that
identify small subgroups of patients (MODY), genetics has
not been successful in further differentiating subclasses of
diabetes.
Research Gaps
After consideration of the known genetic associations
with diabetes risk, consensus developed that the field is
not yet at a place where genetics has provided actionable
information to guide treatment decisions, with a few
notable exceptions, namely in MODY. The experts
agreed there is a need to use the increasingly accessible
and affordable technologies to further refine our un-
derstanding of how genetic variations affect the rate of
progression of diabetes and its complications. The expert
committee also highlighted the importance of determin-
ing categorical phenotypic subtypes of diabetes in order
to link specific genetic associations to these phenotypic
subtypes. These types of information are necessary to
develop the tools to predict response to—and side ef-
fects of—therapeutic approaches for diabetes in patient
populations.
Environmental Influences
Despite the genetic underpinnings of the diseases, the
prevalence of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes is increasing
globally at a rate that outpaces genetic variation, suggest-
ing that environmental factors also play a key role in both
types of diabetes. Common environmental factors are
associated with type 1 and type 2 diabetes, including di-
etary factors, endocrine disruptors and other environ-
mental polluters, and gut microbiome composition. In
addition to well-established roles in type 2 diabetes,
obesity and insulin resistance may be accelerators of
type 1 diabetes. Conversely, islet autoimmunity associated
with possible environmental triggers (e.g., diet, infection)
may have a role in a subset of people diagnosed with type 2
diabetes.
Type 1 Diabetes
Discordance rates in twins, the rise in global incidence,
variance in geographic prevalence, and assimilation of
local disease incidence rates when individuals migrate
from low- to high-incidence countries all support an en-
vironmental influence on risk for developing type 1 di-
abetes. Furthermore, many lines of evidence suggest that
environmental factors interact with genetic factors in
both the triggering of autoimmunity and the subse-
quent progression to type 1 diabetes. Supporting this
gene–environment interaction is the fact that most sub-
jects with the highest-risk HLA haplotypes do not develop
type 1 diabetes.
The timing of exposure to environmental triggers may
also be critical. The variability of age at disease onset com-
plicates the study of environmental exposures, though the
early age of onset of islet autoantibodies associated with
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes suggests that environmental
exposures in the first few years of life may be contributors.
Among the environmental associations linked to type 1
diabetes are enteroviral and other infections (51,52)
and altered intestinal microbiome composition (53). The
timing of exposure to foods including cereal (54) and
nutrients such as gluten (55) may influence b-cell auto-
immunity. Low serum concentrations of vitamin D have
been linked to type 1 diabetes. Perinatal risk factors and
toxic doses of nitrosamine compounds have been impli-
cated in the genesis of diabetes.
The effects of any environmental toxin on type 1 di-
abetes need further exploration. Studies on the environ-
mental contributions to type 1 diabetes have been small
and somewhat contradictory, highlighting the need for
larger collaborative investigations such as The Environ-
mental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY)
(56), which aims to identify infectious agents, dietary fac-
tors, and other environmental factors that trigger islet
autoimmunity and/or type 1 diabetes.
Type 2 Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes develops when b-cells fail to secrete suf-
ficient insulin to keep up with demand, usually in the
context of increased insulin resistance. A minority of peo-
ple diagnosed with type 2 diabetes also have evidence of
islet autoimmunity (57,58). Obesity is a major risk factor
for type 2 diabetes (59,60) with complex genetic and en-
vironmental etiology.
Insulin resistance develops with ectopic fat deposition
in the liver and muscle. Fat may also accumulate in the
pancreas and contribute to the decline in b-cell function,
islet inflammation, and eventual b-cell death (61). Type 2
diabetes occurs at different levels of BMI/body fat com-
position in different individuals and at lower BMI for
Asians and Asian Americans (62). For susceptible people,
there may be a personal “fat threshold” at which ectopic
fat accumulation occurs, worsening insulin resistance and
resulting in b-cell decompensation.
Weight loss improves insulin sensitivity in liver and
skeletal muscle (63) and may also reduce pancreatic fat
accumulation (64). Defects in insulin secretion are at least
partially reversible with energy restriction and weight loss
in prediabetes and recent-onset type 2 diabetes (65). Un-
fortunately, it is difficult to reverse long-standing di-
abetes, even with the large weight loss associated with
bariatric surgery (66).
244
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 Both reduced sleep time and increased sleep time are
associated with the development of obesity and diabetes.
Obstructive sleep apnea reduces sleep time and sleep
quality and is associated with type 2 diabetes and
metabolic syndrome. The modern “24-hour culture” may
reduce sleep time and thereby also contribute to increased
risk of type 2 diabetes. And while associations with addi-
tional environmental factors exist, there have been no
direct causal relationships defined to date.
Research Gaps
There is a clear correlation of environmental influences to
diabetes risk. Yet, the assembled experts agreed that
hypothesis-driven research is needed to define direct
causal relationships between specific environmental fac-
tors and pathophysiologies leading to diabetes. Research
efforts need to address environmental etiologies of type 1
diabetes and determine their relative contribution to
onset of autoimmunity and progression to symptomatic
disease. Whether there is a direct causal role of the
intestinal microbiota in pathogenesis of type 1 and type 2
diabetes and response to therapies needs to be
determined. Public health interventions that successfully
reduce the levels of consumption of energy-dense foods
and/or reduce sedentary time and increase time spent in
physical activity need to be evaluated to determine
whether they can reduce type 2 diabetes incidence at a
population level.
NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSIS
Regardless of the particular pathophysiology of an
individual’s diabetes, the unifying characteristic of the
vast majority of diabetes is hyperglycemia resulting from
b-cell destruction or dysfunction. There is a continuum of
progressive dysglycemia as insulin insufficiency in-
creases over time. Understanding the natural history
related to b-cell mass and function is key to staging
the diseases and identifying where and how interven-
tions can best be made to prevent or delay disease pro-
gression and complications.
b-Cell Mass and Function
While type 1 diabetes results from immune-mediated
destruction of b-cells and type 2 diabetes is primarily
associated with glucose-specific insulin secretory defects,
there is growing evidence of significant overlap across the
spectrum of diabetes. For example, b-cell mass is also
reduced in people with type 2 diabetes (67). In both
type 1 and type 2 diabetes, the stress response induced
by hyperglycemia may play a role in b-cell apoptosis (68).
Changes in b-cell phenotype associated with hyperglyce-
mia may reflect a dedifferentiation of b-cells important to
the natural history and staging of diabetes (69). Clearly,
an insufficient number or functional decline of b-cells is
central to hyperglycemia and the downstream complica-
tions of diabetes. Understanding the state of the b-cell is
key to defining subtypes of diabetes.
Type 1 Diabetes
Abnormal insulin secretion can occur well before the
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes (70–73), with a gradual de-
cline beginning at least 2 years before diagnosis and ac-
celerating proximal to diagnosis (74,75). A decline in
b-cell sensitivity to glucose (76) appears to occur on a
similar timeframe. As the early insulin response falters,
the later insulin response becomes greater, indicating a
possible compensatory mechanism. The accelerated loss
of insulin response continues into the early postdiagnos-
tic period (77).
Insulin secretion decline during the first few years after
diagnosis has been described as biphasic, steeper during
the first year than during the second year after diagnosis.
Data also suggest that the rate of decline is slower in
adults (78). The loss of insulin secretion can continue for
years after diagnosis until little or no insulin secretion
remains. However, low levels of C-peptide are detectable
in the majority of patients after 30 years of type 1 diabetes
(79).
Glucose levels are also frequently elevated years before
the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes (80–82). Even within the
normal range, higher glucose levels are predictive of type 1
diabetes (83). There are wide fluctuations of glucose during
the progression to type 1 diabetes (84). Metabolic markers
of progression, such as the occurrence of dysglycemia,
could be utilized to more precisely predict the onset of
diabetes in at-risk individuals (41,85). Risk scores that
combine dynamic changes in glucose and C-peptide can
further enhance prediction (86,87).
Type 2 Diabetes
Defective insulin secretion is central to the pathophys-
iology of type 2 diabetes. To maintain normal glucose
levels, insulin secretion varies over a wide range in re-
sponse to insulin sensitivity. The relationship between
insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity is curvilinear and
is expressed as the disposition index. People with type 2
diabetes cannot adequately increase insulin secretion to
overcome insulin resistance and have a low disposition
index (88). Consequently, while absolute insulin levels
may be higher in obese subjects with type 2 diabetes
who are insulin resistant than they are in lean control
subjects who are insulin sensitive, they are lower than
appropriate for their degree of insulin resistance. First-
phase insulin secretion, especially in response to stimula-
tion by glucose, is markedly impaired or lost (89). Maximal
insulin secretion and potentiation by hyperglycemia of in-
sulin responses to nonglucose stimuli are severely reduced
(90), and the ratio of proinsulin to insulin (C-peptide) is
high in type 2 diabetes (91). Over time, hyperglycemia
tends to become more severe and more difficult to treat.
This progressive nature of type 2 diabetes is usually due
to ongoing deterioration of b-cell function.
While prediabetes and diabetes are diagnosed by
absolute thresholds (92), dysglycemia is a continuum pro-
gressing from normal to overt diabetes. Early screening
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
245
 offers a window for treatment that may prevent or delay
progression of the disease and its complications (93,94).
In prediabetes, impaired glucose tolerance or impaired
fasting glucose indicates glucose levels higher than nor-
mal but not in the diabetes range (92). Currently, most
clinicians do not treat these patients to completely con-
trol blood glucose levels. Even after initiation of ther-
apy in frank diabetes, intensification of therapy is often
delayed (95–97), exposing people to hyperglycemia for
years (93).
Several studies have shown that treatment with
lifestyle change or medication can reduce the progression
from prediabetes to diabetes (98,99). Furthermore, a clinical
benefit of early therapy has been demonstrated (100,101),
with reductions in retinopathy and cardiovascular and all-
cause mortality (102). This evidence suggests that identify-
ing prediabetes at an early stage and keeping glucose levels
close to normal could change the natural history of the
disease (93).
Research Gaps.
The strong consensus of this group was that the primary
defect resulting in hyperglycemia is insufficient b-cell
number and/or b-cell function (of various etiologies).
From this b-cell–centric view, it is imperative to deter-
mine what etiological factors are the basis for abnormal
insulin secretion patterns in type 1 diabetes and type 2
diabetes. Biomarkers and imaging tools are needed to
assess b-cell mass and loss of functional mass and to
monitor progression and response to therapeutic inter-
ventions. The point at which b-cell dysfunction becomes
irreversible needs to be determined. The molecular basis
for the glucose-specific insulin secretory defect and the
role of b-cell dedifferentiation in type 1 diabetes and in
type 2 diabetes need to be determined. The extent to
which insulin resistance contributes to glycemia and
the complications of type 1 diabetes remains unknown.
Research is needed to determine whether increased b-cell
activity, stimulated by insulin resistance, enhances or ac-
celerates the b-cell lesion in type 1 diabetes and in type 2
diabetes and to identify mechanisms by which b-cells can
overcome an insulin-resistant environment.
Autoimmunity
Circulating autoantibodies against insulin, glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD), the protein tyrosine phosphatase
IA-2, and/or zinc transporter 8 can be detected prior to
clinical diagnosis of type 1 diabetes (103). While individ-
uals with single autoantibody positivity frequently revert
to negative, reversion is rare in people with multiple
autoantibodies (104). Currently, we lack sufficient biomarkers
and imaging techniques to monitor autoantibody flare-ups,
reversions, and progression to type 1 diabetes. The presence
of two or more islet autoantibodies in children with HLA risk
genotypes or with relatives who have type 1 diabetes is as-
sociated with a 75% risk of developing clinical diabetes
within 10 years (105). Risk is incremental with detection
of increasing numbers of autoantibodies (105–107). A pos-
itive test for at least two autoantibodies is now considered a
diagnostic stage of type 1 diabetes (Table 1) (41). The pres-
ence of islet autoantibodies reflects an underlying immune
B- and T-cell response to b-cell antigens. Autoimmune re-
sponses to b-cells lead to loss of b-cell mass and function
and onset of glucose intolerance, representing the next dis-
tinct stage prior to onset of clinical symptoms of diabetes.
Despite the strong prognostic value of autoimmunity
in type 1 diabetes, there is no successful strategy to
prevent or treat it. HLA confers strong susceptibility for
the development of two or more islet autoantibodies
(108). For primary prevention of b-cell autoimmunity in
children, data suggest there may be a critical period in the
first 2 years of life (109–111).
Interestingly, autoantibodies against GAD are present
in ;5% of individuals diagnosed with type 2 diabetes
(112). As compared with GAD antibody–negative patients
with type 2 diabetes, these patients have lower BMI and
residual b-cell function. Further, they carry a genetic pro-
file more similar to that of patients with type 1 diabetes
and an earlier requirement for insulin therapy (112), sug-
gesting that autoimmune diabetes in adults may actually
be a form of type 1 diabetes that exhibits slow progres-
sion associated with later age of onset.
Research Gaps
The assembled group agreed that while it is clear that
inflammation and autoimmunity lead to b-cell destruction
Table 1—Staging of type 1 diabetes
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Phenotypic
characteristics
c Autoimmunity
c Normoglycemia
c Presymptomatic
c Autoimmunity
c Dysglycemia
c Presymptomatic
c New onset
c Hyperglycemia
c Symptomatic
Diagnostic criteria
c Multiple autoantibodies
c No impaired glucose
tolerance or impaired
fasting glucose
c Multiple autoantibodies
c Dysglycemia: impaired fasting
glucose and/or impaired
glucose tolerance
c Fasting plasma glucose 100–125 mg/dL
c 2-h glasma glucose 140–199 mg/dL
c HbA1c 5.7–6.4% or $10% increase in HbA1c
c Clinical symptoms
c Diabetes by standard criteria
246
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 characteristic of type 1 diabetes, much more information is
needed to understand the pathophysiology and progression
of autoimmunity related to diabetes in order to develop
rational approaches to prevent or reverse it. We do not
have a clear understanding of whether different antigenic
targets, single-antibody positivity, or other contributing
factors have variable prognostic, genetic and environmen-
tal correlates that can be used to better develop and apply
stage-appropriate personalized therapies. The molecular
mechanisms by which b-cells die or fail in the presence
of b-cell autoimmunity need determination. Biomarkers
and imaging tools are needed to define reversion or stable
autoimmunity versus active or flaring autoimmunity. Fur-
thermore, inexpensive specific and sensitive assays to iden-
tify b-cell autoimmunity are needed, to be deployed on a
population-wide level and beyond the confines of special-
ized laboratories.
Therapeutics
Aside from insulin and insulin analogs, therapies for
diabetes include those that enhance insulin secretion, those
that stimulate insulin action, those that reduce hepatic and
endogenous glucose production, and those that impact
glycemia through other mechanisms. By better understand-
ing the pathophysiology and natural history of various
subtypes of diabetes and applying what we know about the
modes of action and pharmacogenomics of existing
therapies, we can better apply a personalized approach
to diabetes management. There is a growing body of
evidence regarding which phenotypic and genotypic subsets
of patients with diabetes respond best, or are resistant to,
specific therapies (113), including sulfonylureas (114,115),
metformin (116,117), thiazolidinediones (118,119), incretin
therapies (120), and inhibitors of sodium–glucose cotrans-
porter 2 (SGLT2) (121,122).
Type 1 Diabetes
Individuals with type 1 diabetes require intensive therapy,
characterized by exogenous insulin administration
through multiple daily injections with both fast-acting
insulin with meals and basal insulin, or with continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion through pumps. There are
no significant generalizable differences in efficacy or
safety between the two approaches (123).
The goal of intensive insulin therapy is to maintain as
close to normal glucose concentration as possible while
avoiding hypoglycemia. Achieving this goal requires individ-
ualization of treatment and targets, which may also change
over time within individuals. The American Diabetes Associ-
ation’s glycemic target for adults is HbA1c ,7%. However,
consideration of individual circumstances is critical. Pediatric
patients are recommended to target ,7.5%, whereas adults
who are able to do so safely should target ,6.5% (92).
Both long-acting and short-acting insulin analog prep-
arations with more predictable time-action profiles have
been developed, allowing patients to achieve more physio-
logical insulin delivery and, therefore, tighter glucose control
with fewer side effects. Technologies for self-monitoring
blood glucose and continuous glucose monitoring have
advanced in recent years and are becoming more
widespread. Continuous glucose monitoring allows pa-
tients to visualize changes in glucose levels and tailor
their treatment in real time (124). The amylin analog
pramlintide is approved for use as an adjunct to insulin
in patients with type 1 diabetes who have not achieved
glycemic goals despite optimized insulin therapy. Pramlin-
tide lowers postprandial glucose (125), thereby improving
overall glycemic control, and it has a modest but significant
weight loss effect. However, pramlintide added to insulin
may increase the risk of hypoglycemia (126,127).
A number of agents currently approved for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes have also been investigated
for use in type 1 diabetes, including a-glucosidase inhib-
itors (128,129), thiazolidinediones (130–132), metformin
(133), glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists
(134,135), dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors
(136), and SGLT2 inhibitors (137,138). The benefits of
these agents in type 1 diabetes are not well established,
and their eventual use in this population will depend on
further demonstration of efficacy and safety.
Type 2 Diabetes
There are many agents now available to treat hypergly-
cemia in type 2 diabetes, with varying mechanisms of
action and targeting different pathophysiological compo-
nents of the disease. Many agents are not always able to
achieve adequate control unless they are started earlier
in disease progression or are used in combinations
(metformin, SGLT2 inhibitors, DPP-4 inhibitors, GLP-1
receptor agonists, peroxisome proliferator–activated re-
ceptor g agonists). This limitation in efficacy may be
due in part to the fact that these agents are often initiated
after b-cell function or mass has deteriorated beyond a
critical level or to their limited effects on insulin secre-
tion. Many people with type 2 diabetes ultimately require
insulin therapy, which reflects long-standing type 2
diabetes and greatly diminished b-cell function but also
likely includes individuals who have slowly progressing
autoimmune diabetes with adult onset (LADA) or other
ambiguous forms of diabetes.
Age. Data from randomized controlled trials in people
with type 2 diabetes under the age of 18 years or over the
age of 65 years are scarce. Beneficial effects of tight
glucose control on complications take years to be
realized (139,140). Targets of glucose control should be
adapted to life expectancy, frailty, biological age, and
social situation rather than just calendar age. HbA1c tar-
gets in this population need to be adjusted when using
agents that cause side effects such as hypoglycemia.
However, overt hyperglycemia needs to be addressed to
avoid acute complications of diabetes and a catabolic
state (141).
Comorbidities: Kidney Impairment. Kidney impairment
is a prevalent complication of diabetes. It is also an
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
247
 independent comorbidity, very often caused by vascular
complications in people with type 2 diabetes. Therapeu-
tic choices become more limited because of contraindi-
cations (e.g., metformin) or the need for good kidney
function for efficacy (e.g., SGLT2 inhibitors), leaving
many patients with only insulin therapy (142). Targets
for glucose control in the population with kidney impair-
ment may need to be adapted, as kidney impairment also
predisposes to hypoglycemia (143). The use of HbA1c is
also problematic in people with kidney impairment because
of reduced red blood cell survival, use of erythropoietin,
modifications of hemoglobin (e.g., carbamylation), and me-
chanical destruction of red blood cells on dialysis (144).
Comorbidities: Cardiovascular Complications. Cardiovascular
complications require a multifactorial approach, including
blood pressure and lipid control. Hypoglycemia is linked
to arrhythmias and mortality in people with a history of
cardiovascular events (145). However, when agents that do
not cause hypoglycemia can be used, tight glucose control
should be sought. Agents such as DPP-4 inhibitors
(146–148) and GLP-1 receptor agonists (149) have been
shown to be safe in this population. Some agents, such as
pioglitazone (150) and metformin (151), may even be car-
dioprotective. Empagliflozin (152) and liraglutide (153) re-
duce cardiovascular and all-cause mortality over 2.5–5
years of therapy in patients at high risk of cardiovascular
disease. Nephropathy is a recognized risk factor for cardio-
vascular complications, especially in type 1 diabetes (143).
Weight. To avoid comorbidities and complications asso-
ciated with obesity, weight management should be a priority
in all patients, independent of BMI. Weight loss can be
achieved by lifestyle intervention, choosing glucose-
lowering drugs that promote weight loss, and incorpo-
rating obesity pharmacotherapy or bariatric surgery in
appropriate patients (154).
Research Gaps
While research and development efforts over the past few
decades have led to the availability of several new classes
of medications and new insulin formulations and
delivery methods, we still lack a clear understanding
of the ideal approaches to selecting appropriate treat-
ment regimens for particular individuals. With a more
in-depth characterization of the pathophysiology and
natural history of subtypes of diabetes coupled with the
pharmacogenomics of new and existing therapies, we can
begin to develop a more personalized approach to diabetes
management.
Several areas can be immediately addressed. This in-
cludes performing clinical trials in vulnerable and under-
studied populations, including the elderly and children,
that are critical to validate more precise evidence-based
treatments in these populations. Studies examining the
appropriate application of immune therapies in combi-
nation (sequentially or simultaneously) to target b-cell
specific immune response, islet inflammation, and more
global defective immunoregulation are critical. For type 2
diabetes, the early use of combinations of glucose-
lowering agents needs to be studied. For people with
diabetes who are overweight or obese, studies are needed
to determine whether weight loss medication and bariatric
surgery could be used to support diabetes treatment
goals.
Complications
Intensive glycemic control can reduce diabetes complica-
tions (140,155). In fact, in the decades since these studies
were first published, rates of microvascular and macro-
vascular complications of diabetes and deaths from hy-
perglycemic crisis have substantially decreased (156).
However, complications of diabetes remain the greatest
health threat to people living with diabetes. Research ef-
forts to identify clinical variables and biomarkers that
indicate the presence or progression of complications
may lead to a better understanding of risk and help iden-
tify individuals who may benefit from particular therapies
to reduce the impact of diabetes.
Type 1 Diabetes
The underlying pathophysiology driving an increased risk
of cardiovascular complications in type 1 diabetes remains
unclear. It is in part related to nephropathy and appears
to be distinct from the pathophysiology of cardiovascular
complications of type 2 diabetes (157). Intensive treat-
ment of type 1 diabetes with insulin often leads to weight
gain. Concurrent with the population-wide rise in inci-
dence of obesity, many people with type 1 diabetes have
begun to exhibit features of obesity and metabolic syn-
drome, likely increasing the development of cardiovas-
cular disease. Current treatment recommendations for
management of cardiovascular risk factors predominantly
derive from studies on type 2 diabetes or populations that
did not discriminate between diabetes type. Risk factors
should be monitored and treated in type 1 diabetes to
recommended targets, but research is needed to deter-
mine distinctions in cardiovascular risk pathophysiology
in type 1 diabetes and to identify appropriate therapies to
reduce risk.
Kidney disease predicts cardiovascular disease in
people with type 1 diabetes (143) and is associated with
development of additional microvascular and macrovascu-
lar complications over time. People with type 1 diabetes
show signs of premature arterial stiffening that is further
exaggerated in those with diabetic nephropathy.
There is a genetic propensity for diabetic nephropathy
that peaks at 10–14 years duration of type 1 diabetes
(158). The risk plateaus after 15 years duration, and the
incidence of microalbuminuria matches this pattern
(FinnDiane Study Group, unpublished observations). The
peak incidence of macroalbuminuria and end-stage kidney
disease lags 10 to 15 years behind the appearance of micro-
albuminuria. Progression to end-stage kidney disease is
linked to age of onset and duration of diabetes (159).
Female sex seems to be protective if age of onset occurs
during or after puberty. Similar factors influence risk for
248
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 and progression of diabetic retinopathy. Intensive glucose
control significantly reduces the risk of diabetic peripheral
neuropathy and cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in
type 1 diabetes (160).
Average HbA1c and HbA1c variability are higher in peo-
ple who progress to diabetic kidney disease (161). Those
with more components of metabolic syndrome have more
kidney disease and higher HbA1c. A person with type 1 di-
abetes is much more likely to develop diabetic kidney
disease if a sibling with type 1 diabetes has it. The risk
of diabetic nephropathy in type 1 diabetes is fourfold
higher in children whose mothers have type 1 diabetes
than in those without a parent with diabetes (162), in-
dicating a role for epigenetics in the development of kid-
ney disease. Urine metabolites have been identified that
highlight potential involvement of mitochondrial dys-
function in diabetic kidney disease (163).
Type 2 Diabetes
A large proportion of people with type 2 diabetes also
have nonhyperglycemic components of the metabolic
syndrome (164), including hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
and increased risk for cardiovascular disease. These metabolic
features are interrelated and must be considered collectively.
Multiple risk factor reduction is critical. Lipoprotein metab-
olism is often abnormal in diabetic nephropathy, but
treatment strategies to avoid cardiovascular disease in
this population are unclear. Statins appear to be ineffec-
tive at preventing cardiovascular disease in people with end-
stage kidney diease (165,166). Once on statins, fibrates may
not be beneficial for preventing cardiovascular disease in this
population but might have microvascular benefits through
anti-inflammatory actions (167). There are reasonably good
data indicating that cholesterol absorption is higher in di-
abetes, suggesting that ezetimibe might have unique effects
in diabetes (168,169).
Cardiovascular
disease
risk increases substantially
when estimated glomerular filtration rate falls below
45 mL/min/1.73 m2. Microalbuminuria is not always
due to diabetic nephropathy (170), but it is a marker of
inflammation that indicates vascular leakage and in-
creased cardiovascular risk. Albuminuria has been used
as a marker of diabetic nephropathy for three decades.
Yet, its power is limited. It varies by 25–30% daily in
individuals (171–174). It is transient and patients can
revert to normal albuminuria without treatment.
Interestingly, the urinary metabolomics signature of
diabetic kidney disease is similar in people with type 1
and type 2 diabetes (163). Newly identified biomarkers
such as urinary adiponectin and serum tumor necrosis
factor-a receptor 1 may be better predictors of nephrop-
athy than albumin excretion rate; however, they require
greater evaluation in prospective studies.
Tight glycemic control is the only strategy known to
prevent or delay the development of peripheral neurop-
athy, and cardiac autonomic neuropathy is perhaps even
more important in relation to cardiovascular mortality
(175). However, randomized clinical trials to determine
appropriate targets are lacking. Outcomes for cardiovas-
cular disease and mortality have been mixed in different
studies.
Research Gaps
The assembled experts agreed that the means to determine
which individuals with diabetes will develop particular
complications remain unclear. Research efforts are needed
to delineate the mechanisms underpinning the development
of complications in type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes and
identifying the differences between them. For example, the
contributions of genetics to development of complications in
specific populations need to be determined. The benefits of
screening and early treatment to control glucose levels in
people with presymptomatic diabetes on the development of
complications also needs to be assessed.
In some cases, the data supporting current treatment
recommendations are drawn from populations that are too
heterogeneous to be sufficiently representative of subtypes
of diabetes. For example, current treatment recommenda-
tions for management of cardiovascular complications
derive predominantly from data in type 2 diabetes or in
populations that did not discriminate between diabetes
type. Thus, data to support evidence-based targets to avoid
cardiovascular complications in type 1 diabetes are needed.
There are also some targeted issues that need to be
addressed around specific complications to better inform
treatment. For example, because of inconclusive associa-
tions, trials are needed to determine whether fibrates are
able to modify the natural history of retinopathy and, if
so, by what mechanisms. Given the limitations of current
predictors of kidney disease progression, better bio-
markers are needed. Finally, a better understanding of
how complications of diabetes affect one another and how
they impact treatment approaches is needed. This under-
lines a need for studies comparing the effectiveness of
different strategies for glucose control in subpopulations
with comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS
Diabetes is currently broadly classified as type 1, type 2,
gestational, and a group of “other specific syndromes.”
However, increasing evidence suggests that there are pop-
ulations of individuals within these broad categories that
have subtypes of disease with a well-defined etiology that
may be clinically characterized (e.g., LADA, MODY). These
developments suggest that perhaps, with more focused re-
search in critical areas, we are approaching a point where it
would be possible to categorize diabetes in a more precise
manner that can inform individual treatment decisions.
Characterization of disease progression is much more
developed for type 1 diabetes than for type 2 diabetes.
Studies of first-degree relatives of people with type 1 di-
abetes suggest that persistent presence of two or more
autoantibodies is an almost certain predictor of clini-
cal hyperglycemia and diabetes. The rate of progression
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
249
 depends on the age of antibody onset, the number of
antibodies, antibody specificity, and titer. Rising glucose
and HbA1c levels substantially precede the clinical onset of
diabetes, making diagnosis feasible well before the onset of
diabetic ketoacidosis. Three distinct stages of type 1 diabe-
tes can be identified (Table 1) and serve as a framework for
future research and regulatory decision-making (41).
The paths to b-cell demise and dysfunction are less
well defined, but deficient b-cell insulin secretion in the
face of hyperglycemia appears to be the common denom-
inator. Future classification schemes for diabetes will
likely focus on the pathophysiology of the underlying
b-cell dysfunction and the stage of disease as indicated
by glucose status (normal, impaired, or diabetes).
Recently, the All New Diabetics in Scania (ANDIS)
study reported five distinct subtypes of diabetes on the
basis of clustering of clinical, blood-based, and genetic
information in newly diagnosed patients in Sweden (176).
Importantly, these subtypes of diabetes appear to be dif-
ferentially linked to risk for particular complications. The
researchers confirmed similar groupings and relationships
among patients in Finland. This model represents a notable
example of an approach that, with additional information,
could be refined in more diverse populations to begin de-
veloping meaningful classifications based on clinical charac-
teristics, demographics, and novel biomarkers for disease
risk, progression, and complications in discreet populations.
Remaining critical research gaps are currently prevent-
ing the realization of true precision medicine for people
with diabetes. The authors have outlined some of these
key gaps (Supplementary Table 1) and call for the diabetes
research community to address these open questions to
better understand genetic and molecular mechanisms of
diabetes and its complications, define phenotypes and
genotypes of subtypes of diabetes, and use this under-
standing in the development and application of therapies
to prevent and treat diabetes and complications.
Understanding the pathways to loss of b-cell mass and
function is key to addressing all forms of diabetes and
avoiding complications of diabetes; therefore, the gaps in
these topic areas are highlighted as particular priorities
among the many critical areas that remain to be investi-
gated. By addressing the noted research gaps, we will be
able to further refine models and make meaningful dis-
tinctions to stage diabetes.
Acknowledgments. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Differenti-
ation of Diabetes by Pathophysiology, Natural History and Prognosis research
symposium steering committee members and speakers for the excellent
presentations, discussions, and contributions to the conference. J.S.S., G.L.B.,
E.B., R.H.E., L.G., P.-H.G., R.A.I., C.M., J.P.P., A.P., D.A.S., J.M.S., J.P.H.W., and
R.E.R. were presenters. Other faculty included Michael Bergman, New York
University School of Medicine; Barbara E. Corkey, Boston University School of
Medicine; James R. Gavin III, Emory University School of Medicine; Stanley
Schwartz, University of Pennsylvania; and Kumar Sharma, University of California
at San Diego. The conference was supported in part by an unrestricted
educational grant from Novo Nordisk Inc. The sponsor had no influence on the
selection of speakers, selection of writing group members, topics or content
covered at the conference, or the content of this report. The authors thank Shirley
Ash of the American Diabetes Association for assistance with the conference.
Duality of Interest. J.S.S. reports personal fees from Adocia, AstraZeneca,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Dance Biopharm, Debiopharm, DexCom Inc., Genentech,
Gilead, Intarcia Therapeutics, Merck, Regeneron, Sanofi, vTv Therapeutics,
and Valeritas outside the submitted work. G.L.B. reports personal fees from
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Merck,
NxStage, and Sanofi outside the submitted work. G.L.B. is a special government
employee of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services. T.D., A.T.M., and R.E.R. are employees of the American Di-
abetes Association, which received an unrestricted educational grant from Novo
Nordisk Inc. to support the research symposium. P.-H.G. reports personal fees from
AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Genzyme, Janssen, Medscape,
MSD, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi outside the submitted work. Y.H. reports
grants and personal fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boeh-
ringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi; grants from
Esparion, Grifolis, Hamni, Intarcia, and Lexicon; and personal fees from Amarin, Eli
Lilly, Eisai, Janssen, Regeneron, and Vivus (all outside the submitted work). R.A.I.
reports personal fees from Janssen outside the submitted work. J.P.H.W. reports
grants from the Novo Nordisk Research Foundation during the conduct of the
study. J.P.H.W. reports grants from AztraZeneca and Novo Nordisk; personal fees
from AstraZeneca, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Orexigen, and Novo Nordisk; and
other institutional support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen
Pharmaceuticals, Orexigen, and Novo Nordisk (all outside the submitted work).
No other potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.
References
1. Inzucchi SE, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, et al. Management of hyperglycemia
in type 2 diabetes, 2015: a patient-centered approach: update to a position
statement of the American Diabetes Association and the European Association for
the Study of Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:140–149
2. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. NICE guidance
[Internet]. Available from https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/conditions-and-
diseases/diabetes-and-other-endocrinal–nutritional-and-metabolic-conditions/
diabetes?unlid=957964380201659104345. Accessed 27 January 2016
3. Dietel M, Jöhrens K, Laffert MV, et al. A 2015 update on predictive mo-
lecular pathology and its role in targeted cancer therapy: a review focussing on
clinical relevance. Cancer Gene Ther 2015;22:417–430
4. Matveyenko AV, Butler PC. Relationship between beta-cell mass and di-
abetes onset. Diabetes Obes Metab 2008;10(Suppl. 4):23–31
5. Campbell-Thompson M, Fu A, Kaddis JS, et al. Insulitis and b-cell mass in
the natural history of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2016;65:719–731
6. Ferrannini E, Gastaldelli A, Miyazaki Y, Matsuda M, Mari A, DeFronzo RA.
b-Cell function in subjects spanning the range from normal glucose tolerance to
overt diabetes: a new analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:493–500
7. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Saydah S, et al.; SEARCH for Diabetes in
Youth Study. Prevalence of type 1 and type 2 diabetes among children and
adolescents from 2001 to 2009. JAMA 2014;311:1778–1786
8. International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas, 7th edition [Internet],
2015. Available from http://diabetesatlas.org. Accessed 7 January 2016
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics
Report: Estimates of Diabetes and Its Burden in the United States, 2014. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2014
10. Maahs DM, West NA, Lawrence JM, Mayer-Davis EJ. Epidemiology
of type 1 diabetes. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2010;39:481–497
11. Livingstone SJ, Levin D, Looker HC, et al.; Scottish Diabetes Research
Network epidemiology group; Scottish Renal Registry. Estimated life expectancy
in a Scottish cohort with type 1 diabetes, 2008-2010. JAMA 2015;313:37–44
12. Stenström G, Gottsäter A, Bakhtadze E, Berger B, Sundkvist G. Latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults: definition, prevalence, b-cell function, and
treatment. Diabetes 2005;54(Suppl. 2):S68–S72
250
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 13. Karvonen M, Viik-Kajander M, Moltchanova E, Libman I, LaPorte R,
Tuomilehto J. Incidence of childhood type 1 diabetes worldwide. Diabetes
Mondiale (DiaMond) Project Group. Diabetes Care 2000;23:1516–1526
14. Knip M, Veijola R, Virtanen SM, Hyöty H, Vaarala O, Akerblom HK. Envi-
ronmental triggers and determinants of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2005;54
(Suppl. 2):S125–S136
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Age-adjusted rates of diagnosed
diabetes per 100 civilian, non-institutionalized population, by sex, United States,
1980–2014 [Internet]. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics/prev/
national/figbysex.htm. Accessed 19 November 2015
16. Agardh E, Allebeck P, Hallqvist J, Moradi T, Sidorchuk A. Type 2 diabetes
incidence and socio-economic position: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Int J Epidemiol 2011;40:804–818
17. Prasad RB, Groop L. Genetics of type 2 diabetes-pitfalls and possibilities.
Genes (Basel) 2015;6:87–123
18. Groop L, Forsblom C, Lehtovirta M, et al. Metabolic consequences of a
family history of NIDDM (the Botnia study): evidence for sex-specific parental
effects. Diabetes 1996;45:1585–1593
19. Hämäläinen A-M, Knip M. Autoimmunity and familial risk of type 1 di-
abetes. Curr Diab Rep 2002;2:347–353
20. Hemminki K, Li X, Sundquist K, Sundquist J. Familial risks for type 2 di-
abetes in Sweden. Diabetes Care 2010;33:293–297
21. Murphy R, Ellard S, Hattersley AT. Clinical implications of a molecular
genetic classification of monogenic beta-cell diabetes. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol
Metab 2008;4:200–213
22. Barnett AH, Eff C, Leslie RD, Pyke DA. Diabetes in identical twins. A study
of 200 pairs. Diabetologia 1981;20:87–93
23. Srikanta S, Ganda OP, Eisenbarth GS, Soeldner JS. Islet-cell antibodies
and beta-cell function in monozygotic triplets and twins initially discordant for
type I diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1983;308:322–325
24. Redondo MJ, Jeffrey J, Fain PR, Eisenbarth GS, Orban T. Concordance for
islet autoimmunity among monozygotic twins. N Engl J Med 2008;359:2849–
2850
25. Rich SS. Mapping genes in diabetes. Genetic epidemiological perspective.
Diabetes 1990;39:1315–1319
26. Aly TA, Ide A, Jahromi MM, et al. Extreme genetic risk for type 1A di-
abetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:14074–14079
27. Noble JA, Valdes AM, Varney MD, et al.; Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Con-
sortium. HLA class I and genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes: results from the
Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium. Diabetes 2010;59:2972–2979
28. Hu X, Deutsch AJ, Lenz TL, et al. Additive and interaction effects at three
amino acid positions in HLA-DQ and HLA-DR molecules drive type 1 diabetes
risk. Nat Genet 2015;47:898–905
29. Cooper JD, Howson JMM, Smyth D, et al.; Type 1 Diabetes Genetics
Consortium. Confirmation of novel type 1 diabetes risk loci in families. Dia-
betologia 2012;55:996–1000
30. Long SA, Cerosaletti K, Bollyky PL, et al. Defects in IL-2R signaling con-
tribute to diminished maintenance of FOXP3 expression in CD4+CD25+ regulatory
T-cells of type 1 diabetic subjects. Diabetes 2010;59:407–415
31. Long SA, Cerosaletti K, Wan JY, et al. An autoimmune-associated variant
in PTPN2 reveals an impairment of IL-2R signaling in CD4(+) T cells. Genes
Immun 2011;12:116–125
32. Pugliese A, Zeller M, Fernandez A Jr, et al. The insulin gene is transcribed
in the human thymus and transcription levels correlated with allelic variation at
the INS VNTR-IDDM2 susceptibility locus for type 1 diabetes. Nat Genet 1997;15:
293–297
33. Sosinowski T, Eisenbarth GS. Type 1 diabetes: primary antigen/peptide/
register/trimolecular complex. Immunol Res 2013;55:270–276
34. Colli ML, Moore F, Gurzov EN, Ortis F, Eizirik DL. MDA5 and PTPN2,
two candidate genes for type 1 diabetes, modify pancreatic beta-cell re-
sponses to the viral by-product double-stranded RNA. Hum Mol Genet 2010;
19:135–146
35. Marroqui L, Dos Santos RS, Fløyel T, et al. TYK2, a candidate gene for type 1
diabetes, modulates apoptosis and the innate immune response in human pan-
creatic b-cells. Diabetes 2015;64:3808–3817
36. Fløyel T, Kaur S, Pociot F. Genes affecting b-cell function in type 1 di-
abetes. Curr Diab Rep 2015;15:97
37. Santin I, Eizirik DL. Candidate genes for type 1 diabetes modulate pan-
creatic islet inflammation and b-cell apoptosis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2013;15
(Suppl. 3):71–81
38. Törn C, Hadley D, Lee H-S, et al.; TEDDY Study Group. Role of type 1
diabetes-associated SNPs on risk of autoantibody positivity in the TEDDY study.
Diabetes 2015;64:1818–1829
39. Steck AK, Wong R, Wagner B, et al. Effects of non-HLA gene polymor-
phisms on development of islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes in a population
with high-risk HLA-DR,DQ genotypes. Diabetes 2012;61:753–758
40. Stankov K, Benc D, Draskovic D. Genetic and epigenetic factors in etiology
of diabetes mellitus type 1. Pediatrics 2013;132:1112–1122
41. Insel RA, Dunne JL, Atkinson MA, et al. Staging presymptomatic type 1
diabetes: a scientific statement of JDRF, the Endocrine Society, and the American
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1964–1974
42. Redondo MJ, Muniz J, Rodriguez LM, et al. Association of TCF7L2 vari-
ation with single islet autoantibody expression in children with type 1 diabetes.
BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2014;2:e000008
43. Basile KJ, Guy VC, Schwartz S, Grant SFA. Overlap of genetic susceptibility
to type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and latent autoimmune diabetes in adults.
Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:550
44. Oram RA, Patel K, Hill A, et al. A type 1 diabetes genetic risk score can aid
discrimination between type 1 and type 2 diabetes in young adults. Diabetes Care
2016;39:337–344
45. Morris AP, Voight BF, Teslovich TM, et al.; Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium; Meta-Analyses of Glucose and Insulin-related traits Con-
sortium (MAGIC) Investigators; Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric
Traits (GIANT) Consortium; Asian Genetic Epidemiology Network–Type 2
Diabetes (AGEN-T2D) Consortium; South Asian Type 2 Diabetes (SAT2D)
Consortium; DIAbetes Genetics Replication And Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM)
Consortium. Large-scale association analysis provides insights into the
genetic architecture and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. Nat Genet
2012;44:981–990
46. Scott RA, Lagou V, Welch RP, et al.; DIAbetes Genetics Replication and
Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium. Large-scale association analyses identify
new loci influencing glycemic traits and provide insight into the underlying bi-
ological pathways. Nat Genet 2012;44:991–1005
47. Gaulton KJ, Ferreira T, Lee Y, et al.; DIAbetes Genetics Replication And
Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium. Genetic fine mapping and genomic an-
notation defines causal mechanisms at type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci. Nat
Genet 2015;47:1415–1425
48. Travers ME, Mackay DJG, Dekker Nitert M, et al. Insights into the mo-
lecular mechanism for type 2 diabetes susceptibility at the KCNQ1 locus
from temporal changes in imprinting status in human islets. Diabetes 2013;62:
987–992
49. Portha B, Chavey A, Movassat J. Early-life origins of type 2 diabetes: fetal
programming of the beta-cell mass. Exp Diabetes Res 2011;2011:105076
50. Flannick J, Thorleifsson G, Beer NL, et al.; Go-T2D Consortium; T2D-GENES
Consortium. Loss-of-function mutations in SLC30A8 protect against type 2
diabetes. Nat Genet 2014;46:357–363
51. Schneider DA, von Herrath MG. Potential viral pathogenic mechanism in
human type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2014;57:2009–2018
52. Roivainen M, Klingel K. Virus infections and type 1 diabetes risk. Curr Diab
Rep 2010;10:350–356
53. Giongo A, Gano KA, Crabb DB, et al. Toward defining the autoimmune
microbiome for type 1 diabetes. ISME J 2011;5:82–91
54. Norris JM, Barriga K, Klingensmith G, et al. Timing of initial cereal ex-
posure in infancy and risk of islet autoimmunity. JAMA 2003;290:1713–1720
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
251
 55. Ziegler A-G, Schmid S, Huber D, Hummel M, Bonifacio E. Early infant
feeding and risk of developing type 1 diabetes-associated autoantibodies. JAMA
2003;290:1721–1728
56. Hagopian WA, Lernmark A, Rewers MJ, et al. TEDDY–The Environmental
Determinants of Diabetes in the Young: an observational clinical trial. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2006;1079:320–326
57. Tiberti C, Giordano C, Locatelli M, et al. Identification of tyrosine phos-
phatase 2(256-760) construct as a new, sensitive marker for the detection of islet
autoimmunity in type 2 diabetic patients: the non-insulin requiring autoimmune
diabetes (NIRAD) study 2. Diabetes 2008;57:1276–1283
58. Brooks-Worrell BM, Boyko EJ, Palmer JP. Impact of islet autoimmunity on
the progressive b-cell functional decline in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;
37:3286–3293
59. Chan JM, Rimm EB, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC. Obesity, fat
distribution, and weight gain as risk factors for clinical diabetes in men. Diabetes
Care 1994;17:961–969
60. Colditz GA, Willett WC, Rotnitzky A, Manson JE. Weight gain as a risk
factor for clinical diabetes mellitus in women. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:481–
486
61. van der Zijl NJ, Goossens GH, Moors CCM, et al. Ectopic fat storage in the
pancreas, liver, and abdominal fat depots: impact on b-cell function in indi-
viduals with impaired glucose metabolism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:
459–467
62. Araneta MRG, Kanaya AM, Hsu WC, et al. Optimum BMI cut points to
screen Asian Americans for type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:814–
820
63. Henry RR, Wallace P, Olefsky JM. Effects of weight loss on mechanisms of
hyperglycemia in obese non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 1986;
35:990–998
64. Lim EL, Hollingsworth KG, Aribisala BS, Chen MJ, Mathers JC, Taylor R.
Reversal of type 2 diabetes: normalisation of beta cell function in association with
decreased pancreas and liver triacylglycerol. Diabetologia 2011;54:2506–2514
65. McCaffery JM, Jablonski KA, Franks PW, et al.; Diabetes Prevention
Program Research Group. TCF7L2 polymorphism, weight loss and proinsulin:
insulin ratio in the diabetes prevention program. PLoS One 2011;6:e21518
66. Panunzi S, Carlsson L, De Gaetano A, et al. Determinants of diabetes
remission and glycemic control after bariatric surgery. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
166–174
67. Butler AE, Janson J, Bonner-Weir S, Ritzel R, Rizza RA, Butler PC. b-Cell
deficit and increased b-cell apoptosis in humans with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
2003;52:102–110
68. Laybutt DR, Kaneto H, Hasenkamp W, et al. Increased expression of an-
tioxidant and antiapoptotic genes in islets that may contribute to b-cell survival
during chronic hyperglycemia. Diabetes 2002;51:413–423
69. Weir GC, Bonner-Weir S. Five stages of evolving b-cell dysfunction during
progression to diabetes. Diabetes 2004;53(Suppl. 3):S16–S21
70. Vardi P, Crisa L, Jackson RA. Predictive value of intravenous glucose
tolerance test insulin secretion less than or greater than the first percentile in islet
cell antibody positive relatives of type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetic patients.
Diabetologia 1991;34:93–102
71. Chase HP, Voss MA, Butler-Simon N, Hoops S, O’Brien D, Dobersen MJ.
Diagnosis of pre-type I diabetes. J Pediatr 1987;111:807–812
72. Srikanta S, Ganda OP, Rabizadeh A, Soeldner JS, Eisenbarth GS. First-
degree relatives of patients with type I diabetes mellitus. Islet-cell antibodies and
abnormal insulin secretion. N Engl J Med 1985;313:461–464
73. Ginsberg-Fellner F, Witt ME, Franklin BH, et al. Triad of markers for
identifying children at high risk of developing insulin-dependent diabetes melli-
tus. JAMA 1985;254:1469–1472
74. Sosenko JM, Skyler JS, Beam CA, et al.; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet and
Diabetes Prevention Trial–Type 1 Study Groups. Acceleration of the loss of the
first-phase insulin response during the progression to type 1 diabetes in diabetes
prevention trial-type 1 participants. Diabetes 2013;62:4179–4183
75. Sosenko JM, Palmer JP, Rafkin LE, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1
Study Group. Trends of earlier and later responses of C-peptide to oral glucose
challenges with progression to type 1 diabetes in diabetes prevention trial-type 1
participants. Diabetes Care 2010;33:620–625
76. Ferrannini E, Mari A, Nofrate V, Sosenko JM, Skyler JS; DPT-1 Study
Group. Progression to diabetes in relatives of type 1 diabetic patients: mecha-
nisms and mode of onset. Diabetes 2010;59:679–685
77. Sosenko JM, Palmer JP, Rafkin-Mervis L, et al. Glucose and C-peptide
changes in the perionset period of type 1 diabetes in the Diabetes Prevention
Trial-Type 1. Diabetes Care 2008;31:2188–2192
78. Greenbaum CJ, Beam CA, Boulware D, et al.; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet
Study Group. Fall in C-peptide during first 2 years from diagnosis: evidence of at
least two distinct phases from composite Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet data. Diabetes
2012;61:2066–2073
79. Oram RA, Jones AG, Besser REJ, et al. The majority of patients with long-
duration type 1 diabetes are insulin microsecretors and have functioning beta
cells. Diabetologia 2014;57:187–191
80. Rosenbloom AL, Hunt SS, Rosenbloom EK, Maclaren NK. Ten-year prog-
nosis of impaired glucose tolerance in siblings of patients with insulin-dependent
diabetes. Diabetes 1982;31:385–387
81. Tarn AC, Smith CP, Spencer KM, Bottazzo GF, Gale EA. Type I (insulin
dependent) diabetes: a disease of slow clinical onset? Br Med J (Clin Res Ed)
1987;294:342–345
82. Beer SF, Heaton DA, Alberti KG, Pyke DA, Leslie RD. Impaired glucose
tolerance precedes but does not predict insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: a
study of identical twins. Diabetologia 1990;33:497–502
83. Sosenko JM, Palmer JP, Greenbaum CJ, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-
Type 1 Study Group. Increasing the accuracy of oral glucose tolerance testing and
extending its application to individuals with normal glucose tolerance for the
prediction of type 1 diabetes: the Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1. Diabetes Care
2007;30:38–42
84. Sosenko JM, Skyler JS, Krischer JP, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-
Type 1 Study Group. Glucose excursions between states of glycemia with
progression to type 1 diabetes in the diabetes prevention trial-type 1 (DPT-1).
Diabetes 2010;59:2386–2389
85. Sosenko JM, Palmer JP, Rafkin-Mervis L, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-
Type 1 Study Group. Incident dysglycemia and progression to type 1 diabetes
among participants in the Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1. Diabetes Care 2009;
32:1603–1607
86. Sosenko JM, Krischer JP, Palmer JP, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1
Study Group. A risk score for type 1 diabetes derived from autoantibody-
positive participants in the diabetes prevention trial-type 1. Diabetes Care 2008;31:
528–533
87. Sosenko JM, Skyler JS, Mahon J, et al.; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet and
Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study Groups. Validation of the Diabetes Pre-
vention Trial-Type 1 Risk Score in the TrialNet Natural History Study. Diabetes
Care 2011;34:1785–1787
88. Basu A, Dalla Man C, Basu R, Toffolo G, Cobelli C, Rizza RA. Effects of type 2
diabetes on insulin secretion, insulin action, glucose effectiveness, and postprandial
glucose metabolism. Diabetes Care 2009;32:866–872
89. van Haeften TW, Pimenta W, Mitrakou A, et al. Relative conributions of
beta-cell function and tissue insulin sensitivity to fasting and postglucose-load
glycemia. Metabolism 2000;49:1318–1325
90. Ward WK, Bolgiano DC, McKnight B, Halter JB, Porte D Jr. Diminished
B cell secretory capacity in patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
J Clin Invest 1984;74:1318–1328
91. Yoshioka N, Kuzuya T, Matsuda A, Taniguchi M, Iwamoto Y. Serum pro-
insulin levels at fasting and after oral glucose load in patients with type 2 (non-
insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia 1988;31:355–360
92. American Diabetes Association. Approaches to glycemic treatment. Sec. 7.
In Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes—2016. Diabetes Care 2016;39(Suppl.
1):S52–S59
252
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 93. Phillips LS, Ratner RE, Buse JB, Kahn SE. We can change the natural
history of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2668–2676
94. Bergman M, Dankner R, Roth J, Narayan KMV. Are current diagnostic
guidelines delaying early detection of dysglycemic states? Time for new ap-
proaches. Endocrine 2013;44:66–69
95. Phillips LS, Twombly JG. It’s time to overcome clinical inertia. Ann Intern
Med 2008;148:783–785
96. Nichols GA, Koo YH, Shah SN. Delay of insulin addition to oral combination
therapy despite inadequate glycemic control: delay of insulin therapy. J Gen
Intern Med 2007;22:453–458
97. Khunti K, Wolden ML, Thorsted BL, Andersen M, Davies MJ. Clinical inertia
in people with type 2 diabetes: a retrospective cohort study of more than 80,000
people. Diabetes Care 2013;36:3411–3417
98. Tuomilehto J, Lindström J, Eriksson JG, et al.; Finnish Diabetes Prevention
Study Group. Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by changes in lifestyle
among subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl J Med 2001;344:
1343–1350
99. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al.; Diabetes Prevention
Program Research Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with
lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med 2002;346:393–403
100. Gong Q, Gregg EW, Wang J, et al. Long-term effects of a randomised trial
of a 6-year lifestyle intervention in impaired glucose tolerance on diabetes-
related microvascular complications: the China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention
Outcome Study. Diabetologia 2011;54:300–307
101. Perreault L, Pan Q, Mather KJ, Watson KE, Hamman RF, Kahn SE; Diabetes
Prevention Program Research Group. Effect of regression from prediabetes to
normal glucose regulation on long-term reduction in diabetes risk: results from
the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet 2012;379:2243–2251
102. Li G, Zhang P, Wang J, et al. Cardiovascular mortality, all-cause mortality,
and diabetes incidence after lifestyle intervention for people with impaired glu-
cose tolerance in the Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study: a 23-year follow-up
study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:474–480
103. Bonifacio E. Predicting type 1 diabetes using biomarkers. Diabetes Care
2015;38:989–996
104. Vehik K, Lynch KF, Schatz DA, et al.; TEDDY Study Group. Reversion of
b-cell autoimmunity changes risk of type 1 diabetes: TEDDY study. Diabetes Care
2016;39:1535–1542
105. Ziegler AG, Rewers M, Simell O, et al. Seroconversion to multiple islet
autoantibodies and risk of progression to diabetes in children. JAMA 2013;309:
2473–2479
106. Steck AK, Vehik K, Bonifacio E, et al.; TEDDY Study Group. Predictors of
progression from the appearance of islet autoantibodies to early childhood
diabetes: The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY).
Diabetes Care 2015;38:808–813
107. Orban T, Sosenko JM, Cuthbertson D, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1
Study Group. Pancreatic islet autoantibodies as predictors of type 1 diabetes in the
Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1. Diabetes Care 2009;32:2269–2274
108. Colman PG, Steele C, Couper JJ, et al. Islet autoimmunity in infants with a
type I diabetic relative is common but is frequently restricted to one autoantibody.
Diabetologia 2000;43:203–209
109. Ziegler A-G, Bonifacio E; BABYDIAB-BABYDIET Study Group. Age-related
islet autoantibody incidence in offspring of patients with type 1 diabetes. Dia-
betologia 2012;55:1937–1943
110. Parikka V, Näntö-Salonen K, Saarinen M, et al. Early seroconversion and
rapidly increasing autoantibody concentrations predict prepubertal manifestation
of type 1 diabetes in children at genetic risk. Diabetologia 2012;55:1926–1936
111. Krischer JP, Lynch KF, Schatz DA, et al.; TEDDY Study Group. The 6 year
incidence of diabetes-associated autoantibodies in genetically at-risk children:
the TEDDY study. Diabetologia 2015;58:980–987
112. Leslie RD, Palmer J, Schloot NC, Lernmark A. Diabetes at the crossroads:
relevance of disease classification to pathophysiology and treatment. Dia-
betologia 2016;59:13–20
113. Pearson ER. Personalized medicine in diabetes: the role of ‘omics’ and
biomarkers. Diabet Med 2016;33:712–717
114. Shepherd M, Pearson ER, Houghton J, Salt G, Ellard S, Hattersley AT. No
deterioration in glycemic control in HNF-1a maturity-onset diabetes of the young
following transfer from long-term insulin to sulphonylureas. Diabetes Care 2003;26:
3191–3192
115. Holstein A, Hahn M, Patzer O, Seeringer A, Kovacs P, Stingl J. Impact of
clinical factors and CYP2C9 variants for the risk of severe sulfonylurea-induced
hypoglycemia. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2011;67:471–476
116. Dujic T, Zhou K, Donnelly LA, Tavendale R, Palmer CNA, Pearson ER.
Association of organic cation transporter 1 with intolerance to metformin in type 2
diabetes: a GoDARTS study. Diabetes 2015;64:1786–1793
117. Connelly PJ, Smith N, Chadwick R, Exley AR, Shneerson JM, Pearson ER.
Recessive mutations in the cancer gene Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM), at
a locus previously associated with metformin response, cause dysglycaemia and
insulin resistance. Diabet Med 2016;33:371–375
118. Jones TA, Sautter M, Van Gaal LF, Jones NP. Addition of rosiglitazone to
metformin is most effective in obese, insulin-resistant patients with type 2 di-
abetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2003;5:163–170
119. Brooks-Worrell BM, Palmer JP. Attenuation of islet-specific T cell re-
sponses is associated with C-peptide improvement in autoimmune type 2 di-
abetes patients. Clin Exp Immunol 2013;171:164–170
120. Jones AG, McDonald TJ, Shields BM, et al.; PRIBA Study Group. Markers of
b-cell failure predict poor glycemic response to GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy
in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2016;39:250–257
121. Ohki T, Isogawa A, Toda N, Tagawa K. Effectiveness of ipragliflozin, a
sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor, as a second-line treatment for non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who do not
respond to incretin-based therapies including glucagon-like peptide-1 analogs
and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors. Clin Drug Investig 2016;36:313–319
122. Wilding JPH, Woo V, Soler NG, et al.; Dapagliflozin 006 Study Group. Long-
term efficacy of dapagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus receiving
high doses of insulin: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2012;156:405–415
123. Yeh H-C, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al. Comparative effectiveness and
safety of methods of insulin delivery and glucose monitoring for diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:
336–347
124. Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, Bode BW, et al.; Juvenile Diabetes Research
Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group. Continuous glucose
monitoring and intensive treatment of type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;359:
1464–1476
125. Weyer C, Gottlieb A, Kim DD, et al. Pramlintide reduces postprandial
glucose excursions when added to regular insulin or insulin lispro in subjects with
type 1 diabetes: a dose-timing study. Diabetes Care 2003;26:3074–3079
126. Ratner RE, Dickey R, Fineman M, et al. Amylin replacement with pram-
lintide as an adjunct to insulin therapy improves long-term glycaemic and weight
control in type 1 diabetes mellitus: a 1-year, randomized controlled trial. Diabet
Med 2004;21:1204–1212
127. Edelman S, Garg S, Frias J, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
assessing pramlintide treatment in the setting of intensive insulin therapy in type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2189–2195
128. Raju B, Arbelaez AM, Breckenridge SM, Cryer PE. Nocturnal hypoglycemia
in type 1 diabetes: an assessment of preventive bedtime treatments. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:2087–2092
129. Riccardi G, Giacco R, Parillo M, et al. Efficacy and safety of acarbose in the
treatment of Type 1 diabetes mellitus: a placebo-controlled, double-blind, mul-
ticentre study. Diabet Med 1999;16:228–232
130. Strowig SM, Raskin P. The effect of rosiglitazone on overweight subjects
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2005;28:1562–1567
131. Shimada A, Shigihara T, Okubo Y, Katsuki T, Yamada Y, Oikawa Y. Pio-
glitazone may accelerate disease course of slowly progressive type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2011;27:951–953
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
253
 132. Yang Z, Zhou Z, Li X, Huang G, Lin J. Rosiglitazone preserves islet beta-
cell function of adult-onset latent autoimmune diabetes in 3 years follow-up
study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2009;83:54–60
133. Vella S, Buetow L, Royle P, Livingstone S, Colhoun HM, Petrie JR. The use
of metformin in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review of efficacy. Diabetologia
2010;53:809–820
134. Kielgast U, Krarup T, Holst JJ, Madsbad S. Four weeks of treatment with
liraglutide reduces insulin dose without loss of glycemic control in type 1 diabetic
patients with and without residual b-cell function. Diabetes Care 2011;34:
1463–1468
135. Crisci I, Aragona M, Politi KS, Daniele G, Del Prato S. GLP-1 receptor
agonists in type 1 diabetes: a proof-of-concept approach. Acta Diabetol 2015;
52:1129–1133
136. Garg SK, Moser EG, Bode BW, et al. Effect of sitagliptin on post-prandial
glucagon and GLP-1 levels in patients with type 1 diabetes: investigator-
initiated, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Endocr Pract
2013;19:19–28
137. Mudaliar S, Armstrong DA, Mavian AA, et al. Remogliflozin etabonate, a
selective inhibitor of the sodium-glucose transporter 2, improves serum glucose
profiles in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2198–2200
138. Peters AL, Henry RR, Thakkar P, Tong C, Alba M. Diabetic ketoacidosis
with canagliflozin, a sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, in patients with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2016;39:532–538
139. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews DR, Neil HAW. 10-year
follow-up of intensive glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;359:
1577–1589
140. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood-glucose
control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and
risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;
352:837–853
141. Twito O, Frankel M, Nabriski D. Impact of glucose level on morbidity and
mortality in elderly with diabetes and pre-diabetes. World J Diabetes 2015;6:
345–351
142. Flynn C, Bakris GL. Noninsulin glucose-lowering agents for the treatment
of patients on dialysis. Nat Rev Nephrol 2013;9:147–153
143. Tuttle KR, Bakris GL, Bilous RW, et al. Diabetic kidney disease: a report
from an ADA Consensus Conference. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2864–2883
144. Chachou A, Randoux C, Millart H, Chanard J, Gillery P. Influence of in vivo
hemoglobin carbamylation on HbA1c measurements by various methods. Clin
Chem Lab Med 2000;38:321–326
145. Chow E, Bernjak A, Williams S, et al. Risk of cardiac arrhythmias during
hypoglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular risk. Diabetes
2014;63:1738–1747
146. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, et al.; SAVOR-TIMI 53 Steering
Committee and Investigators. Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes in pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1317–1326
147. White WB, Cannon CP, Heller SR, et al.; EXAMINE Investigators. Alogliptin
after acute coronary syndrome in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2013;369:1327–1335
148. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, et al.; TECOS Study Group. Effect of
sitagliptin on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;
373:232–242
149. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Diaz R, et al.; ELIXA Investigators. Lixisenatide in
patients with type 2 diabetes and acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med 2015;
373:2247–2257
150. Dormandy JA, Charbonnel B, Eckland DJA, et al.; PROactive Investigators.
Secondary prevention of macrovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes in
the PROactive Study (PROspective pioglitAzone Clinical Trial In macroVascular
Events): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2005;366:1279–1289
151. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Effect of intensive blood-
glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients with type 2
diabetes (UKPDS 34). Lancet 1998;352:854–865
152. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.; EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investiga-
tors. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117–2128
153. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al.; LEADER Steering
Committee; LEADER Trial Investigators. Liraglutide and cardiovascular outcomes
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016;375:311–322
154. Wilding JPH. The importance of weight management in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Int J Clin Pract 2014;68:682–691
155. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. The effect
of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long-
term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;
329:977–986
156. Gregg EW, Li Y, Wang J, et al. Changes in diabetes-related compli-
cations in the United States, 1990-2010. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1514–
1523
157. de Ferranti SD, de Boer IH, Fonseca V, et al. Type 1 diabetes mellitus and
cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association and American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2014;37:
2843–2863
158. Krolewski AS, Warram JH, Christlieb AR, Busick EJ, Kahn CR. The
changing natural history of nephropathy in type I diabetes. Am J Med 1985;78:
785–794
159. Finne P, Reunanen A, Stenman S, Groop P-H, Grönhagen-Riska C. In-
cidence of end-stage renal disease in patients with type 1 diabetes. JAMA 2005;
294:1782–1787
160. Martin CL, Albers JW, Pop-Busui R; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Neu-
ropathy and related findings in the diabetes control and complications
trial/epidemiology of diabetes interventions and complications study. Diabetes
Care 2014;37:31–38
161. Wadén J, Forsblom C, Thorn LM, Gordin D, Saraheimo M, Groop PH;
Finnish Diabetic Nephropathy Study Group. A1C variability predicts incident
cardiovascular events, microalbuminuria, and overt diabetic nephropathy in pa-
tients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2009;58:2649–2655
162. Thorn LM, Forsblom C, Fagerudd J, Pettersson-Fernholm K, Kilpikari R,
Groop PH; FinnDiane Study Group. Clustering of risk factors in parents of
patients with type 1 diabetes and nephropathy. Diabetes Care 2007;30:
1162–1167
163. Sharma K, Karl B, Mathew AV, et al. Metabolomics reveals signature of
mitochondrial dysfunction in diabetic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 2013;24:
1901–1912
164. Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ. The metabolic syndrome. Lancet 2005;
365:1415–1428
165. Fellström B, Holdaas H, Jardine AG, et al.; AURORA Study Group. Car-
diovascular disease in patients with renal disease: the role of statins. Curr Med
Res Opin 2009;25:271–285
166. Wanner C, Krane V, März W, et al.; German Diabetes and Dialysis Study
Investigators. Atorvastatin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus undergoing
hemodialysis. N Engl J Med 2005;353:238–248
167. Simó R, Simó-Servat O, Hernández C. Is fenofibrate a reasonable treat-
ment for diabetic microvascular disease? Curr Diab Rep 2015;15:24
168. Baigent C, Landray MJ, Reith C, et al.; SHARP Investigators. The effects of
lowering LDL cholesterol with simvastatin plus ezetimibe in patients with chronic
kidney disease (Study of Heart and Renal Protection): a randomised placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet 2011;377:2181–2192
169. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al.; IMPROVE-IT Investigators.
Ezetimibe added to statin therapy after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med
2015;372:2387–2397
170. Steinke JM, Sinaiko AR, Kramer MS, Suissa S, Chavers BM, Mauer M;
International Diabetic Nephopathy Study Group. The early natural history of
nephropathy in Type 1 Diabetes: III. Predictors of 5-year urinary albumin ex-
cretion rate patterns in initially normoalbuminuric patients. Diabetes 2005;54:
2164–2171
254
Differentiation of Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 66, February 2017
 171. Kalaitzidis RG, Bakris GL. Should proteinuria reduction be the criterion for
antihypertensive drug selection for patients with kidney disease? Curr Opin
Nephrol Hypertens 2009;18:386–391
172. Weir MR, Bakris GL. Editorial perspective. Should microalbuminuria ever
be considered as a renal endpoint in any clinical trial? Am J Nephrol 2010;31:469–470
173. Glassock RJ. Debate: CON position. Should microalbuminuria ever be
considered as a renal endpoint in any clinical trial? Am J Nephrol. 2010;31:466–
467
174. Bakris GL, Molitch M. Microalbuminuria as a risk predictor in diabetes: the
continuing saga. Diabetes Care 2014;37:867–875
175. Serhiyenko VA, Serhiyenko AA. Diabetic cardiac autonomic neurop-
athy: Do we have any treatment perspectives? World J Diabetes 2015;6:
245–258
176. Storm, P, Rosengren A, Groop L. A novel fine-tuned classification of di-
abetes with prognostic value: steps towards precision medicine (Abstract). Di-
abetes 2016;65(Suppl. 1):A94
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Skyler and Associates
255
