 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 7 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Introduction
Frontline cancer treatments like radiation and chemotherapy sys-
temically interrupt critical cell processes and thus produce seri-
ous side effects, so there is considerable interest in developing 
immune-based treatments that can recognize and destroy tumor 
cells without harming healthy ones (1). For example, vaccines 
can be used to train the immune system to selectively destroy 
cancer cells. Unfortunately, the responses vaccines elicit may 
require months to mature and are usually insufficient to control 
advanced disease (2–5). In an effort to increase vaccine potency, 
various adjuvant compounds that stimulate tumor antigen uptake 
and cross-priming of naive T cells have been developed, and an 
understanding of innate signaling mechanisms has made it possi-
ble to rationally design more precise immunostimulants for treat-
ing cancer. One approach involves components of the stimulator 
of IFN genes (STING) pathway, which plays an important role in 
the detection of tumor cells by the immune system (6). In preclini-
cal studies, cyclic nucleotides that activate this pathway have been 
shown to promote an aggressive antitumor response (7, 8). Howev-
er, like previously described adjuvant compounds (e.g., R848 and 
related imidazoquinoline TLR7/8 agonists, muramyl dipeptides 
that trigger NOD-like receptors, and RNA oligonucleotide ligands 
of retinoic acid–inducible gene I [RIG-I]) (9–11), treatments using 
unformulated cyclic nucleotides are accompanied by systemic 
inflammatory toxicity, which creates a major hurdle for the imple-
mentation of these compounds to treat cancer patients (12, 13).
Another problem that impedes immunotherapeutic approach-
es is that endogenous T cell receptors (TCRs) typically have a low 
affinity for self/tumor antigens. To address this, an emerging can-
cer treatment strives to program patient-derived lymphocytes with 
genes encoding chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) that have been 
engineered to strongly bind proteins expressed by tumors (14, 15). 
It is also possible to cointroduce genes that can generate stimu-
latory signals to elicit robust T cell expansion, and, so far, CAR T 
lymphocyte therapy for hematological malignancies has produced 
impressive results in clinical trials (16, 17). The method involves 
retrieval of T cells from the patient and redirecting them ex vivo to 
express CARs composed of a tumor-specific single-chain antibody 
(scFv) fused to costimulatory and CD3ζ signaling domains. These 
proteins enable the programmed cells to lyse tumor targets in an 
HLA-independent fashion. Unfortunately, this treatment has not 
proved very useful for treating solid tumors, because these cancers 
produce immunosuppressive signals that impede T cells (18), and 
because there is substantial phenotypic diversity in the proteins 
expressed by solid malignancies (Figure 1). Consequently, many 
cancer cells in solid tumors escape detection by the targeting CARs.
To overcome the problem of tumor-induced immune sup-
pression, clinicians have used checkpoint antagonists to propel 
antitumor activities of programmed lymphocytes after they are 
returned to the patient (19). But because their application is sys-
Therapies using T cells that are programmed to express chimeric antigen receptors (CAR T cells) consistently produce positive 
results in patients with hematologic malignancies. However, CAR T cell treatments are less effective in solid tumors for 
several reasons. First, lymphocytes do not efficiently target CAR T cells; second, solid tumors create an immunosuppressive 
microenvironment that inactivates T cell responses; and third, solid cancers are typified by phenotypic diversity and thus 
include cells that do not express proteins targeted by the engineered receptors, enabling the formation of escape variants 
that elude CAR T cell targeting. Here, we have tested implantable biopolymer devices that deliver CAR T cells directly to the 
surfaces of solid tumors, thereby exposing them to high concentrations of immune cells for a substantial time period. In 
immunocompetent orthotopic mouse models of pancreatic cancer and melanoma, we found that CAR T cells can migrate 
from biopolymer scaffolds and eradicate tumors more effectively than does systemic delivery of the same cells. We have also 
demonstrated that codelivery of stimulator of IFN genes (STING) agonists stimulates immune responses to eliminate tumor 
cells that are not recognized by the adoptively transferred lymphocytes. Thus, these devices may improve the effectiveness of 
CAR T cell therapy in solid tumors and help protect against the emergence of escape variants.
Biopolymers codelivering engineered T cells and  
STING agonists can eliminate heterogeneous tumors 
Tyrel T. Smith,1 Howell F. Moffett,1 Sirkka B. Stephan,1 Cary F. Opel,2,3 Amy G. Dumigan,1 Xiuyun Jiang,4 Venu G. Pillarisetty,4 
Smitha P
. S. Pillai,5 K. Dane Wittrup,2,3,6 and Matthias T. Stephan1,7,8
1Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA. 2Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. 3Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 4Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 5Comparative 
Pathology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA. 6Department of Biological Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 7Department of Bioengineering and Molecular 
Engineering and Sciences Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 8Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Authorship note: T.T. Smith, H.F. Moffett, and S.B. Stephan contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: May 4, 2016; Accepted: February 23, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(6):2176–2191. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI87624.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 7 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
wave” response is broader and is produced by a spectrum of T 
cells that can eliminate tumor variants not recognized by the pro-
grammed CAR T cells.
Results
Systemic injections of tumor-reactive T cells do not eliminate pancre-
atic ductal adenocarcinoma. We used a cell line derived from the 
spontaneous pancreatic tumors produced by LSL-KrasG12D p53fl/+ 
mice (referred to hereafter as KPC mice) (26) as the basis for an 
immunocompetent, orthotopic murine model of pancreatic can-
cer that has rapid and predictable growth kinetics. We genetically 
tagged the KPC cells with luciferase, so we could use biolumines-
cence imaging to noninvasively quantify tumor burdens. When 
orthotopically transplanted into the pancreas of non-KPC litter-
mate mice, these tumor cells reproducibly developed into lesions 
that mimic human pancreatic cancer in terms of genetic muta-
tions, histologic appearance, and heterogeneity of antigen/target 
expression (Figure 2, A–C).
In our first experiments, we verified that i.v. injections of pan-
creatic cancer–specific lymphocytes fail to eradicate tumors in this 
model. To create these lymphocytes, we transduced mouse T cells 
with a retrovirus encoding a chimeric NK receptor (composed of 
NKG2D linked to the cytoplasmic signaling domain of CD3ζ) (ref. 
27 and Figure 2D) that is specific for the KPC antigen ribonucle-
ic acid export 1 (RAE1) (Figure 2, E and F). In order to track and 
quantify the in vivo migration of these cells in relationship to KPC 
tumors, we included vectors encoding click beetle red luciferase 
(CBR-luc) in the plasmid. Our results establish that, although 
these intravenously infused T cells accumulate in the spleen and 
liver, they inefficiently traffic to KPC tumor sites (Figure 2G) and 
confer only a 4-day survival advantage compared with what was 
observed in the untreated controls (Figure 2H). Furthermore, 
expression levels of the RAE1 antigen were only slightly impaired 
by infusions of CAR-expressing T cells compared with levels 
detected with infusions of control lymphocytes (Figure 2I).
Delivery via bioactive carriers substantially improves T cell expan-
sion and function at the tumor site, but antigen-negative tumor subtypes 
escape elimination by them. We next explored the possibility of using 
biomaterials to mediate the localized delivery of tumor-reactive T 
cells at pancreatic tumor sites and to create ways to sustain these 
T cells. As described previously (25), our group recently developed 
a method to embed cancer-fighting immune cells into a resorbable 
polymeric device that can be surgically implanted where a tumor 
has been excised, or on the surface of one that is nonresectable 
(Figure 3A). After being positioned at their target site, the antican-
cer lymphocytes can begin eliminating tumor cells immediately. 
We produce these porous scaffolds from polymerized alginate, a 
castable, naturally occurring polysaccharide that has been approved 
by the FDA for human use because of its exceptional biocompatibil-
ity and biodegradability (28). To enable these scaffolds to function 
as efficient delivery vehicles for active T cells, we manufactured 
them with migration-promoting macromolecules (e.g., a collagen- 
mimetic peptide) and stimulatory cues (e.g., microparticles display-
ing anti-CD3, anti-CD28, and anti-CD137 antibodies) (Figure 3A).
For these experiments, 10 days after infecting test mice with 
luciferase-expressing KPC tumor cells, we implanted scaffolds 
containing 7 × 106 NKG2D-CAR+ T cells directly onto the resulting 
temic, these treatments also disrupt immune homeostasis and 
induce dangerous autoimmune side effects (20–22). With regard 
to the problem of tumor heterogeneity, ideally, each patient 
should be treated with T cells that have been tailored to express 
CARs aligned to the tumor’s protein fingerprint, which would 
protect these T cells  from the emergence of antigen-loss vari-
ants. However, most clinics are not equipped or staffed to con-
duct the elaborate ex vivo procedures required to create a spec-
trum of targeted T cell variants for each cancer patient in their 
care. Furthermore, only a few CAR target antigens that are truly 
cancer specific have been identified, and systemically infus-
ing more broadly targeted T cells can result in life-threatening 
“on-target/off-tumor” toxicities (23, 24).
Using biotechnology, we can address these problems by com-
bining the benefits of CAR T cell therapy and cancer vaccines, 
while at the same time resolving some of their limitations. By 
doing so, we can provide clinicians with methods to pursue both 
local tumor destruction and systemic antitumor immunity. Spe-
cifically, we show here that appropriately engineered biomaterial 
delivery systems can efficiently deliver and functionally support 
tumor-targeting CAR T cells (see ref. 25 for an example) and at 
the same time chemically stimulate host immune responses to 
eliminate tumor cells that escape recognition by the adoptive-
ly transferred lymphocytes. Here, we use orthotopic models of 
inoperable pancreatic cancer and incompletely resected mela-
noma to demonstrate that biomaterial-mediated T cell delivery 
induces tumor regression more effectively than do systemic 
lymphocyte injections. We also establish that, beyond their pri-
mary function as T cell delivery vehicles, biomaterial implants 
can play a second important role: by releasing a vaccine adjuvant 
(such as the STING agonist cyclic di-GMP [cdGMP] tested here), 
these implants can convert the tumor into a “self” vaccine site, 
where eradicated cancer cells serve as sources of antigens that can 
launch an antitumor immune response by the host. This “second- 
Figure 1. Solid tumors are heterogeneous and express diverse levels of 
antigens commonly used as targets for therapy. This representative con-
focal image of a human PDA shows the substantial diversity of proteins 
expressed by these tumors. Cytokeratin expression commonly occurs in 
adenocarcinomas, so we used a pan-cytokeratin antibody (green) to define 
tumor cell populations. The tumor differentiation antigen mesothelin (red) 
is a likely candidate for immunotherapy, and treatments targeting the 
cancer stem cell marker EpCAM (blue) are currently in clinical development. 
Scale bar: 100 μm. The image shown is representative of 20 randomly 
chosen fields.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 7 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Figure 2. Systemic infusions of tumor-specific CAR T cells produce only modest therapeutic benefits. (A) Orthotopic mouse model of PDA. (B) Microsco-
py of KPC pancreas 7 days after implantation revealed invasive adenocarcinoma interspersed with parenchymal tissue; the adjacent healthy tissue accen-
tuates the disorganized nature of the neoplastic regions. The formation of glands and ducts, hallmarks of adenocarcinoma, is also clear. Magnified images 
(e.g., inset) revealed substantial recruitment of immune cells, including polymorphonuclear leukocytes, within the tumor microenvironment. Scale bar: 100 
μm. Original magnification: ×20. (C) Heatmap representation of flow cytometric data showing variability in RAE1 expression by KPC tumor cells. Tumors 
(7 days old) were disaggregated and labeled with anti-RAE1; the colors indicate expression levels in 1,800 randomly chosen cells pooled from 5 tumors 
compared with an isotype control. (D) The chimeric receptor we used to recognize RAE1 consisted of full-length mouse NGK2D fused to a murine CD3ζ 
intracellular signaling molecule. (E) Flow cytometry measuring surface expression of NKG2D CARs after retroviral transduction and 3 days of expansion in 
medium containing G418. The profile shown is representative of 8 independent experiments. (F) 51Cr release cytotoxicity assay of NKG2D CAR–transduced 
T cells reacting with KPC pancreatic tumor cells. Data are representative of 2 independent experiments. (G) Ten days after F-luc–expressing KPC tumor 
cells were transplanted into the pancreas, albino C57BL/6 mice were injected with 107 NKG2D CAR–transduced T cells that coexpressed CBR-luc. Shown is 
sequential bioluminescence imaging of the tumors and T cells in 5 representative mice from each cohort (n = 10). (H) Kaplan-Meier survival curves for 10 
mice per treatment group pooled from 3 independent experiments. ms, median survival. Statistical analysis of the treated experimental and the untreated 
control groups was performed using a log-rank test, and P value of less than 0.05 was considered significant. Asterisks indicate statistical significance. (I) 
Heatmap representation of flow cytometric quantification of RAE1 antigen expression on KPC tumor cells following control or NKG2D CAR T cell therapy. 
Shown are 1,800 randomly chosen cells pooled from 5 tumors
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 7 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
presenting cells (APCs) located in their draining lymph nodes and 
thereby prevent tumor-reactive T cells from differentiating into 
cytolytic effectors (18). In order to reverse this suppression, we 
used the biopolymer implants to provide high local concentrations 
of the immune-stimulatory STING agonist cyclic di–GMP (cdG-
MP), thereby rendering the tumor milieu more conducive for T 
cell priming via the recruitment and stimulation of APCs (Figure 
5B). DCs, defined by their high expression of MHC II and T cell 
costimulatory molecules (e.g., CD86), are the most potent APCs 
and are capable of orchestrating an adaptive antitumor immune 
response. Immune phenotyping of tumor-associated lymph nodes 
associated with established KPC tumors revealed that less than 
6% of their DCs (recognized in flow cytometry as CD11c+CD11b+) 
were appropriately activated, as evidenced by their expression of 
CD86; the majority of the DCs were tolerogenic (CD86–) (Figure 
6A). Releasing only cdGMP from implanted scaffolds upregulated 
CD86 and MHC II expression by a large proportion of these DCs 
and increased their overall frequency by 38-fold in the draining 
lymph nodes (Figure 6B). Following implantation of CAR T cell–
loaded scaffolds fabricated without the STING agonist, the num-
bers of CD11c+CD86+ mature DCs increased to a lesser degree 
(9.4-fold), but the MHC II expression levels on these cells were 
more than twice as high compared with the those in the cdGMP 
treatment group (Figure 6, A and B), which was presumably the 
result of tumor antigen release by the cytolytic CAR T cells. The 
release of both cdGMP and CAR T cells from implanted matrices 
produced a synergistic activation of DCs, which was reflected by 
robust increases in the frequencies of activated DCs (3.7-fold high-
er compared with cdGMP alone). Notably, these cells expressed 
high levels of costimulatory molecules as well as MHC II, indi-
pancreatic tumors (Figure 3B). A second group of mice received 
the same dose of cells injected directly into the tumors, and con-
trols received no treatment. We used bioluminescence imaging to 
quantify tumor growth and (in parallel experiments) to track tis-
sue distribution, expansion, and persistence of the lymphocytes. 
We found that the CAR T cells injected directly into pancreatic 
tumors persisted poorly in their immunosuppressive microen-
vironment and only produced a temporary delay in disease pro-
gression (median overall survival of 21 days versus 14.5 days in 
the untreated control group) (Figure 4, A–D). By contrast, T cells 
delivered from implanted polymer scaffolds underwent signifi-
cant proliferation at the tumor site (166-fold higher peak photon 
count relative to injected T cells on day 8, P < 0.0001) (Figure 4, 
A and B) and substantially reduced KPC tumor growth (Figure 4, 
A and C). However, even though they more than doubled the sur-
vival of treated mice, T cell–loaded scaffolds failed to completely 
clear the disease, and all mice eventually developed RAE1 low/
negative immune-escape variants (Figure 4E).
Combined delivery of CAR T cells and STING agonist by bio-
material implants results in a synergistic activation of host antigen- 
presenting cells. The results described above indicate that targeting 
single proteins with CAR T cells does not prevent the propagation 
of cancers via antigen-negative cells — even when the tumors are 
presented with high concentrations of anticancer lymphocytes 
delivered from a stimulating bioactive matrix. Accordingly, we 
next sought to simultaneously launch host T cell responses in an 
effort to eliminate residual CAR-resistant tumor cell types (Fig-
ure 5A). The immune system is able to generate effective cancer- 
specific responses, but it requires stimulation to do so. Unfortu-
nately, tumors inhibit the maturation and activation of antigen- 
Figure 3. Biomatrices placed 
directly on pancreatic tumors pro-
vide an effective delivery platform 
for CAR-programmed T cells. (A) 
Bright-field microscopy of stimu-
latory microspheres incorporated 
into the biopolymer scaffold and 
a depiction of the composition of 
the microspheres. Scale bar: 70 μm. 
(B) This series of images illustrates 
our methodology: (i) biopolymer 
scaffold; (ii) seeding of tumor- 
reactive T cells into the device; (iii) 
incision; (iv) orthotopic KPC pan-
creatic tumor; (v) implantation of 
a T cell–loaded device; (vi) wound 
closure; (vii–ix) sustained release of 
tumor-reactive T cells.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
late genes for cytokines and other proteins that are critical for the 
immune response (29). The NFAT-luc–transgenic mice used here 
contain an NFAT response element that drives the transcription of 
the luciferase reporter gene, so they emit light following TCR activa-
tion. This process can be serially quantified using bioluminescence 
imaging. We treated mice bearing KPC pancreatic tumors with bio-
material scaffolds engineered to release either cdGMP, CAR T cells, 
or a combination of the two. Control mice received no treatment. 
We used bioluminescence imaging to monitor the NFAT-luc signal 
every 2 days, over a period of 30 days. No bioluminescence above 
background levels could be detected in untreated mice (Figure 7, A 
and B). However, mice receiving scaffolds functionalized either with 
cating that they can efficiently cross-present tumor antigens and 
launch antitumor T cell responses (Figure 6B).
Combined CAR T cell and STING agonist therapy primes robust 
tumor-specific host lymphocyte responses. To directly visualize the loca-
tion and magnitude of endogenous T cell activation following differ-
ent treatment regimens, we implanted KPC tumors into transgenic 
mice that express nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) tagged 
with a luciferase reporter (NFAT-luc mice). NFAT is a prominent 
transcription factor downstream of the TCR/CD3 signaling cascade. 
Stimulation of TCRs activates calcineurin, which dephosphory-
lates NFAT; within minutes, the dephosphorylated NFAT proteins 
translocate from the cytoplasm into the nucleus, where they regu-
Figure 4. Polymer-launched CAR T cells robustly expand at the tumor site and bring about tumor regression, but spare cells that do not express 
the target antigen. (A) Bioluminescence imaging of KPC tumors and adoptively transferred CAR T cells. Mice were treated with 107 NKG2D-transduced 
lymphocytes injected locally into the tumor or contained in bioactive scaffolds implanted directly onto the tumor surface. Five representative mice from 
each cohort (n = 10) are shown. (B) T cell signal intensities from sequential bioluminescence images captured every 2 days after cell transfer. Each line 
represents 1 animal, and each dot denotes the whole-animal photon count. At the indicated time points, pairwise differences in photon counts between 
treatment groups were analyzed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Shown are data for 10 mice per treatment condition pooled from 3 independent 
experiments. (C) Quantification of KPC bioluminescent tumor signal. Pairwise differences in the bioluminescent T cell signals were analyzed at selected 
time points using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. A P value less than 0.05 was considered significant. (D) Kaplan-Meier survival curves for treated and control 
mice. Shown are 10 mice per treatment group pooled from 3 independent experiments. Statistical analysis between the experimental and control groups 
was performed using the log-rank test, and a P value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.  Asterisks indicate statistical significance. (E) Flow cyto-
metric quantification of RAE1 antigen expression on KPC tumor cells following NKG2D CAR T cell therapy. Shown are 1,800 randomly chosen cells pooled 
from 5 tumors.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
cdGMP or CAR T cells showed luciferase activity in the tumor area, 
which peaked between days 8 and 10 following implantation of the 
devices. The combined release of cdGMP and T cells from implant-
ed matrices triggered the maximal NFAT activation (5.6-fold high-
er peak photon count relative to that of T cells only on day 10, P < 
0.0001; Figure 7, A and B). Notably, in this treatment group, lucifer-
ase signals extended well beyond the pancreatic tumor region into 
the spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes, indicating host T cell acti-
vation in these organs (Figure 7A, lowest panel).
To verify that the recorded bioluminescent NFAT signals 
accurately reflect activation of tumor-specific T cells in the host, 
the experiments were repeated using a pancreatic tumor model 
in which the KPC cells express the lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus (LCMV) glycoprotein GP33. As a surrogate pancreatic tumor 
antigen, this protein enabled us to use flow cytometry to ana-
lyze how the biopolymer implants affect the frequency of GP33- 
specific lymphocytes among circulating CD8+ T cells. In order to 
distinguish between scaffold-delivered and endogenous T cells, 
we genetically tagged the donor cells with a CD45.2 marker and 
used CD45.1– transgenic mice as hosts. We treated mice with 
biomaterial scaffolds engineered to release into the tumor either 
cdGMP, CAR T cells, or a combination of the two. The control 
mice received no treatment. As expected, spontaneous antitumor 
T cell responses rarely occurred in the untreated mice (Figure 7C), 
establishing that, despite their expression of the GP33 xenoanti-
gen, KPC-GP33 tumors continued to be highly immunosuppres-
sive. Treatment with cdGMP-loaded scaffolds, or those deliver-
ing lymphocytes alone, produced only modest host antitumor T 
cell activities (1.3-fold and 2-fold increases in circulating GP33- 
specific T cells, respectively) (Figure 7, C and D). By contrast, the 
combination of cdGMP and CAR-expressing T cells elicited syn-
ergistic antitumor responses by host cells, which were, on average, 
6.4-fold higher than the responses of implants releasing only lym-
phocytes (Figure 7, C and D).
STING-delivering implants can trigger host antitumor immuni-
ty sufficient to clear tumors and eliminate metastases. To measure 
the antitumor benefits provided by biopolymer scaffolds that 
codeliver the STING agonist along with CAR-programmed T 
cells, we treated mice bearing orthotopic KPC tumors with scaf-
folds functionalized with either cdGMP alone or both cdGMP and 
anticancer CAR T cells. As a specificity control, a separate group 
of mice received scaffolds loaded with STING agonist and tumor- 
irrelevant (anti-GP75) CAR T cells. To enable a side-by-side com-
parison of biomaterial-mediated delivery versus local injection, 
Figure 5. Design of a biomaterial carrier 
that codelivers CAR-expressing T cells and 
vaccine adjuvant to simultaneously clear 
heterogeneous cancer cells and establish 
systemic antitumor immunity. (A) Sche-
matic diagrams of a scaffold loaded with 
CAR T cells interacting with the tumor bed: 
panels 1 and 2 show how factor-containing 
microspheres incorporated into the device 
stimulate the expansion of CAR-expressing  
T cells and promote their egress into 
surrounding tissue. Panels 2 and 3 illustrate 
the release of vaccine adjuvant from T 
cell–loaded implants, priming host immune 
cells to recognize and lyse tumor cells and 
thereby protect against antigen escape 
variants. (B) Macro- and microscopic views 
of a porous alginate matrix functionalized 
with microparticles that have the STING 
agonist cdGMP entrapped in the polymer 
core and stimulatory anti-CD3/CD28/CD137 
antibodies tethered to their phospholipid 
membrane. Schematic shows the chemical 
structure of cdGMP.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
we also included 2 groups that were treated with an intratumor 
injection of cdGMP (with or without tumor-specific CAR T cells). 
The control mice received no treatment. Serial bioluminescence 
imaging of tumor growth confirmed that the combined release 
of CAR T cells and cdGMP from biomaterial implants eradicated 
 
KPC tumors in 4 of 10 treated mice (Figure 8, A and B). The 
remaining 6 mice showed substantial tumor regression, with 
an average increase in survival of 37 days, which was a 4.6-fold 
improved outcome compared with cointroducing CAR T cells and 
the STING agonist by injection into the tumors. Importantly, the 
synergistic antitumor effect was dependent on tumor-specific 
 
CAR T cells, as codelivering tumor-irrelevant anti-GP75 CAR 
T cells using STING agonist–functionalized scaffolds improved 
survival by only 5 days. To exclude the possibility that luciferase 
affected the T cell response we achieved using STING/CAR T 
cell scaffolds, we performed independent experiments that com-
pared the survival rates of mice bearing unmodified versus lucif-
erase-tagged KPC pancreatic tumors. Animals were treated with 
scaffolds that either codelivered the STING agonist along with 
CAR-programmed T cells, or they received no therapy. We found 
that luciferase expression had no significant effect on the thera-
peutic outcome (Figure 8C), indicating that in our test system the 
luciferase protein is not a dominant neoantigen.
To determine whether the implants can elicit global antitumor 
immunity, we rechallenged the 4 mice that experienced complete 
tumor regression (Figure 9) with a systemic dose of 104 luciferase- 
expressing KPC tumor cells; tumor-naive mice were used as con-
trols. We then used bioluminescence imaging to quantify differ-
ences in growth rates of lung metastases between the treatment 
groups. The results showed that all mice cured with combined 
CAR T cell and STING agonist immunotherapy were fully protect-
ed from this rechallenge, with no measurable tumor mass 4 weeks 
after the KPC cells were administered. By contrast, the control 
animals quickly formed metastatic foci in their lungs and rapidly 
succumbed to their disease, as would be expected (Figure 9). Thus, 
our evidence shows that appropriately formulated combination 
therapy using CAR-programmed T cells and STING agonists can 
eliminate local tumors and trigger systemic host antitumor immu-
nity powerful enough to prevent untreated distant metastases.
We next measured the potential side effects the biomaterial 
implants may have on pancreatic function by monitoring the mice 
for weight loss and measuring their serum levels of pancreatic 
Figure 6. Scaffold-released CAR T cells and STING agonist synergize to activate host APCs. (A and B) Ten days after transplanting luciferase-expressing 
KPC tumor cells into the pancreases of mice, we implanted scaffolds containing either 7 × 106 tumor-reactive CAR T cells, 6 μg cdGMP, or a combination of 
both, onto the tumor surface. The control mice received no treatment. Five days later, peripancreatic lymph nodes were digested into cell suspensions for 
analysis by flow cytometry. We only tested lymph nodes that were not engulfed by tumors and pooled them from at least 5 animals. (A) Flow cytometric 
plots of myeloid maturation markers (CD11b and CD11c). Histograms depict the expression of the costimulatory factor CD86 and MHC II molecules after 
gating on CD11c+CD11b+ double-positive cell populations. The profiles shown here are representative of 4 independent experiments. MFI, mean fluores-
cence intensity. (B) Absolute numbers of mature and activated (CD11b+CD11c+CD86+MHCII+) DCs in peripancreatic lymph nodes. Points represent the num-
ber of cells per lymph node in samples pooled from 5 mice, and the data are representative of 4 separate experiments. Each bar represents the average 
number of cells ± SD.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
after scaffold implantation, the pancreases in survivors that had 
rejected disease showed a normal histological appearance (Figure 
8F, right panel), with no evidence of necrosis or inflammation.
Effects of CAR T cell and STING agonist therapy on melanoma 
 
cells. To confirm that these findings have relevance for other 
types of cancer, we created a second test system by subcutane-
ously injecting B16F10 melanoma cells into mice. Ten days later, 
we resected tumors but left behind 1% to 5% of the diseased tis-
sue (Figure 10A). In all untreated animals, post-resection tumor 
regrowth was observed, and approximately 40% of these mice 
developed palpable lymph node metastases.
We chose the tyrosinase-related protein 1 (or GP75) antigen 
(31) as the therapeutic target for melanoma, because it is the most 
abundant glycoprotein synthesized by pigmented melanocytes 
and melanomas. The fact that GP75 is specific for melanocytes 
along with both primary and metastatic melanomas makes it a very 
attractive immunotherapeutic target to treat this disease (32, 33). 
However, in our system, the surface expression of GP75 by tumor 
lipase and amylase 1 week after treatment. We found no significant 
difference in body weights among the different groups (Figure 8D), 
but we found that serum amylase levels in mice treated with STING 
agonist/CAR T cell implants were 1.3-fold lower than levels in the 
untreated tumor-bearing mice (average 640 U/l ± 17.9 versus 826 
U/l ± 54.7; P = 0.009; Figure 8E). In mice, normal serum amylase 
activity consists mainly of salivary amylase, because pancreatic 
amylase is not resorbed by renal tubular epithelial cells and is rap-
idly excreted in the urine (30). This means that in mice, caution 
must be taken when amylase values are used to evaluate pancre-
atic function. We found that serum lipase activity was also lower in 
the mice that were treated with cdGMP/CAR T cell scaffolds com-
pared with untreated tumor-bearing mice (82 U/l ± 4.5 versus 128 
U/l ± 10.85; P = 0.003). While a reference range for comparison of 
serum lipase activity in mice is not available, the reduced enzyme 
activity might indicate an exocrine pancreatic insufficiency due to 
the destruction or loss of acinar cells; however, a histological cor-
relate for this was not found (Figure 8F, left panel), and 3 weeks 
Figure 7. Corelease of cdGMP along with CAR-expressing T cells from biomaterial implants primes endogenous tumor-reactive lymphocytes. (A and 
B) KPC tumors were transplanted into NFAT-luc–expressing transgenic mice that had an albino background (which improves bioluminescence signal 
detection). We treated these mice with biomaterial-delivered cdGMP, CAR T cells, or a combination of the two, and monitored the NFAT-luc signal, which 
quantifies activated host T cells, every 2 days over a period of 30 days. (A) Bioluminescence imaging of 3 representative mice per treatment group 10 
days after scaffold implantation (dashed circles indicate implantation sites). Shown are 3 representative mice from each cohort (n = 10 in 2 independent 
experiments). (B) NFAT-luc signal intensities after treatments. Each line represents 1 animal, and each dot reflects the whole-animal photon count. (C 
and D) To confirm that the bioluminescence NFAT-luc signals reflected endogenous tumor-reactive T cell counts, we treated mice that had KPC pancreatic 
tumors expressing GP33 and then quantified host GP33-specific T cells in the peripheral blood by tetramer staining. For these studies, congenic CD45.1 
recipient mice were used to distinguish endogenous from adoptively transferred T cells. (C) Representative flow cytometric plots showing the percentages 
of GP33 tetramer–positive cells in peripheral blood 10 days after scaffold implantation, gated on CD45.1+ (host) CD8+ cells. (D) Absolute numbers of primed 
(CD45.1+CD8+GP33+) T cells. Each point represents the number of cells in peripheral blood per mouse. Each bar represents the average cell count ± SD. 
Shown are 10 mice pooled from 3 independent experiments. P values obtained by two-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
vaccines, clinicians have developed biomaterial-based platforms 
that can carry patient-specific tumor cells or tumor lysates along 
with immune-stimulating biomolecules (38, 39). Following s.c. 
implantation, these biomaterials attract circulating APCs, which 
take up the tumor antigens incorporated in the matrix, and then 
mature and emigrate into regional lymph nodes where they can 
prime T cells that are specific for the cancer. Although these devic-
es may provide significant therapeutic benefits compared with con-
ventional vaccines, they rely on the availability of enough tumor 
material (which is often limited because of diagnostic needs) to 
prepare autologous vaccines. Moreover, it may take months of 
repeated immunizations for an effective response to mature; unfor-
tunately, most malignancies produce substantial clinical deteriora-
tion, and often become fatal, within this time frame.
Our laboratory has developed a different approach to achiev-
ing rapid tumor destruction that is based on the direct delivery of 
 
laboratory-cultivated antitumor lymphocytes. We also designed the 
polymer implant to convert the tumor bed into a “self” vaccine site, 
using debris from eradicated tumor cells as the antigen source. Our 
data establish that, in addition to debulking tumors and increasing 
antigen release, scaffold-delivered CAR T cells work synergistically 
with the codelivered vaccine adjuvants to sway the tumor microen-
vironment from one that is suppressive to one that is permissive.
The mechanisms responsible for activating the host immune sys-
tem by the corelease of CAR T cells and STING agonists remain to be 
fully elucidated, but our results indicate that the effects involve more 
synergy than can be explained by a simple depot effect. Certainly, by 
simultaneously delivering engineered lymphocytes and vaccine adju-
vants from biopolymer implants, the methods described here bring 
together 3 key components that can propel host antitumor immu-
nity: (a) substantial densities of stimulated CAR T cells that destroy 
tumor cells; (b) significant amounts of tumor antigens arising from 
the eradicated cancer cells, which become available to APCs; and (c) 
high concentrations of stimulants that activate these APCs along with 
tumor-reactive immune cells to mount a robust anticancer response.
Something that may have improved the success of our treat-
ments is the relatively small tumor burdens in the test systems we 
used compared with the sizes of the implants. Like the human dis-
ease, surgically implanted KPC pancreatic tumors progress rapid-
ly, and this forced us to start therapy early enough to ensure that 
the animals survived the surgical placement of the scaffolds onto 
established tumors. Also, it is worth explaining that we resected 
primary B16 melanomas prior to scaffold implantation to induce 
the spread of distant metastases (40) (not to reduce tumor load). 
But it is likely that treating more expansive tumors that are difficult 
to penetrate will be challenging. We therefore envision that our 
technology will be most effective when used in combination with 
cells in established lesions varied considerably (Figure 10B); this 
mimics the heterogeneity of antigen expression seen in patients 
with melanoma (34). We created a CAR directed against GP75 
by linking a TA99 hybridoma–derived single-chain antibody to a 
synthetic receptor skeleton composed of the CD8 hinge, the CD28 
transmembrane and signaling domains, and the CD3ζ signaling 
domains (Figure 10C). We transduced murine T cells using recom-
binant retroviruses expressing these GP75-specific CARs, which 
enabled them to recognize and lyse B16F10 cells isolated from 
fresh tumors (Figure 10D). We then treated mice with these GP75 
CAR–expressing T cells and/or STING agonists just after surgical 
resection. As with the pancreatic tumor experiments described 
above, therapeutics were either directly injected into the resection 
cavity or launched from implanted biomaterial scaffolds (as illus-
trated in Figure 10E). We made caliper measurements to monitor 
the size of relapsing tumors. Results based on the B16F10 melano-
ma model were similar to those for KPC pancreatic tumors (Fig-
ure 9): only scaffold codelivery of cdGMP vaccine adjuvant along 
with tumor-specific CAR T cells launched synergistic antitumor 
responses strong enough to eliminate heterogeneous tumors (in 
6 of 10 animals; the others showed substantially delayed tumor 
relapse along with an average improvement in survival of 34 days 
compared with controls) (Figure 10, E and F). This local treatment 
led to systemic antitumor immune activity, as long-term survivors 
always rejected i.v. tumor rechallenge (Figure 10G). As expect-
ed, delivering the same dosage of cdGMP/CAR T cells locally via 
injection into the resection cavity provided only a modest (yet sig-
nificant) 6-day survival improvement over that of controls.
Thus, our results demonstrate in preclinical models of inoper-
able pancreatic cancer and incompletely resected melanoma that 
an appropriately designed biomaterial system can locally release 
synergistic combinations of anticancer T cells and adjuvant drugs 
to transform treated tumors from malignancies into in situ vac-
cines that trigger host antitumor immunity.
Discussion
Tumor heterogeneity poses a major obstacle to the success of 
immunotherapy. Because of this, many cancer treatments use 
“whole-cell” vaccines prepared from resected tissue that contains 
the entire antigen spectrum for each patient’s primary tumor (35–
37). By enabling the immune system to react with unique epitopes, 
these vaccines can evoke reactions against an array of antigens 
that do not need to be preidentified by the physician. Following 
tumor dissociation, the purified cancer cells are irradiated and 
compounded with potent vaccine adjuvants before the patients 
are immunized, usually via intradermal injections. In an effort to 
produce more robust immune responses from whole-cell cancer 
Figure 8. Implants that codeliver STING agonists along with CAR-expressing T cells can limit tumor immune escape in established inoperable tumors. (A) 
Serial in vivo bioluminescence imaging of KPC-luc tumors. Shown are 5 representative mice from each cohort (n = 10 mice in 3 independent experiments). 
Quantification of KPC bioluminescent tumor signals is also shown. (B) Kaplan-Meier survival curves for treated and control mice. Statistical analysis of the 
treated experimental and the untreated control groups was performed using the log-rank test, and a P value of less than 0.05 was considered significant. 
Asterisks indicate statistical significance. (C) Independent experiments showing survival and treatment responses of mice bearing unmodified versus 
luciferase-tagged KPC pancreatic tumors. Data obtained using the Log-rank test. (D–F) Assessment of side effects biomaterial implants have on pancreat-
ic functions. (D) Average weight changes (± SD) compared with control mice weights 1 week after treatment. Shown are 10 mice pooled from 2 indepen-
dent experiments. (E) Serum levels of amylase and lipase. Each bar represents the mean ± SEM. (F) Representative H&E-stained sections of pancreas 
isolated from mice treated with the cdGMP/CAR T cell scaffold for 1 week or 3 weeks. Scale bars: 100 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
cellular component incorporated into our platform could also 
be adapted. For example, TCR-engineered lymphocytes have 
emerged as a useful treatment option for various malignancies 
(44, 45). In this approach, patient-derived cells are programmed to 
produce engineered TCRs specific for selected tumor antigens. In 
contrast to the CAR T cells used in our studies (which can only rec-
ognize antigens located on the surfaces of tumor cells), TCR gene 
therapy can target lymphocytes to intracellular tumor antigens, 
including products of somatic mutations unique to each patient’s 
cancer (46). The question of whether codelivery of adjuvants along 
with TCR-engineered T cells can boost the antitumor activity of 
these T cells (as they do with CAR T cells) must still be evaluated, 
but the main hurdle for TCR gene therapy is the low (or nonexis-
tent) level of HLA expression by tumor cells, which is a mechanism 
these cancers exploit to escape immune attacks (47). It is likely that 
the local release of vaccine adjuvants from implants would upregu-
late surface expression of HLA molecules by cancer cells and there-
by precondition the tumor milieu for the codelivered engineered T 
cells that can now recognize and destroy the malignant cells.
In summary, our work demonstrates a new concept in cancer 
therapy that achieves both rapid tumor clearance and systemic anti-
tumor immunity. The biopolymer scaffold we developed could pro-
vide an effective treatment for solid cancers that do not respond well 
to conventional T cell therapies, because they are heterogeneous and 
protected in the microenvironment they create (48). More broadly, 
we believe that this platform provides a means to shift the focus of 
cancer treatment from broad-impact chemical and radiation-based 
interventions to tumor-specific immunotherapeutics by creating a 
way to safely apply treatments directly to the tumor.
Methods
Human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
For confocal imaging of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA) 
(Figure 1), fresh tumor tissue was obtained from patients undergoing 
pancreatic resection for PDA.
cytoreductive surgery, or as a strategy to reduce the size of inoper-
able tumors so that patients become eligible for further interven-
tions. In any case, clinical translation will first require optimizing 
the size, shape, and thickness of the implants, along with doses of 
T cells and immune stimulants, for each circumstance to propel 
penetration by tumor-destroying agents.
For our proof of concept, we chose STING agonists over other 
immune modulators currently in clinical development, because 
recent evidence indicates that cyclic dinucleotides targeting this 
pathway can launch vigorous T cell responses and thereby cause 
systemic tumor regression (7, 8). To be effective in the interven-
tions currently in use, however, these factors must be repeatedly 
injected directly into tumor lesions. This limits the therapy to sites 
that are accessible for daily inoculations (i.e., skin malignancies); 
as with other powerful immune stimulants, i.v. administration of 
STING agonists cannot be performed, because it leads to systemic 
inflammation and toxicity (12, 13). By using a biomaterial delivery 
device that slowly releases the adjuvant directly at the tumor site, 
we bypass the need for injections: this translates into significant 
reductions in dosages and minimizes off-target exposure. Besides 
cyclic dinucleotides, our platform could potentially codeliver 
(along with CAR T cells) other agonists that stimulate antitumor 
immune responses, such as anti-checkpoint blockade agents, TLR 
agonists, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibitors, TGF-β–
blocking antibodies, adenosine receptor antagonists, or even mix-
tures of these factors. Our group is particularly interested in testing 
whether codelivering demethylation drugs (such as azacitidine, 
which can unmask epigenetically silenced cell-surface proteins and 
thus make cancer cells more immunogenic [ref. 41]) can further 
improve the antitumor potential of CAR T cell/STING agonist–
functionalized implants. Given their potential to robustly sensitize 
tumors to immunotherapy, epigenetic therapies have become the 
focus of a rapidly emerging area of cancer research (42). However, 
the significant toxicity these agents produce when applied systemi-
cally is a major impediment to their clinical development (43).
Like our selection of the immune stimulant, the choice of the 
Figure 9. Implants can elicit global antitumor immunity. (A) Serial 
in vivo bioluminescence imaging of KPC-luc tumor cells injected 
i.v. into the 4 mice that experienced complete tumor regression, 
as shown in Figure 8. Age-matched naive mice were used as 
controls. (B) Kaplan-Meier survival curves.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Figure 10. cdGMP/CAR T cell–functionalized implants can efficiently treat heterogeneous melanoma. (A) Series of images illustrating the codelivery of anti-
cancer T cells and STING agonists via biomaterial carriers to prevent melanoma recurrence after surgery: (i) mouse B16F10 melanoma; (ii) surgical resection; 
(iii) resection cavity with residual tumor; (iv and v) implantation of biopolymer device; (vi) wound closure. (B) Heatmap depiction of flow cytometric data quan-
tifying the cell-to-cell variability in the expression of GP75 by 10-day-old B16F10 tumors. Colors indicate the relative levels compared with an isotype control, 
and the results are from 1,800 randomly chosen cells pooled from 5 tumors. (C) Schematic of the anti-GP75 CAR. (D) 51Cr release assay. Each point represents 
the mean ± SEM. Data are representative of 4 independent experiments. (E) Progression of B16F10 tumor growth following therapy. Every line represents 1 
animal, and each dot reflects the tumor size, as determined by caliper measurements. Data represent 10 animals pooled from 4 independent experiments. (F) 
Kaplan-Meier survival curves for treated versus control mice. Statistical analysis was performed using the log-rank test, and a P value of less than 0.05 was 
considered significant. (G) Kaplan-Meier survival curves of the 6 long-term survivors in panels E and F and age-matched naive control mice following tail vein 
injection of 25 × 104 B16F10 tumor cells. Asterisks indicate statistical significance.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
the full-length mouse NKG2D fused with the cytoplasmic portion of 
CD3ζ. The GP75-specific CAR consists of a TA99 hybridoma–derived 
single-chain antibody linked to a synthetic receptor skeleton composed 
of the CD8 hinge, the CD28 transmembrane and signaling domains, 
and the signaling domain from CD3ζ. To generate retroviral particles 
encoding the NKG2D CAR, Phoenix-ECO cells (1.5 × 106/10 cm cul-
ture plate) were transfected overnight with 10 μg vector DNA using 
standard calcium phosphate methods; the following day, they were 
incubated in 10 ml fresh DMEM for an additional day before the 
supernatant was filtered (0.45-μm filter; Nalgene) and concentrated 
10-fold using Ultracel 100K membranes (EMD Millipore). To trans-
duce mouse T cells with the GP75-specific CAR, we transfected the 
Platinum-E retroviral packaging cell line (Cell Biolabs) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions and harvested the retroviral supernatant 
48 hours later.
Preparation of tumor-targeting lymphocytes
To generate pancreatic cancer–specific (NKG2D CAR–transduced) T 
cells, spleens from C57BL/6J mice were macerated over a filter and 
resuspended in ammonium chloride potassium (ACK) lysing buf-
fer (Biosource). Effector CD8+ T cells were prepared by incubating 
splenocytes (3 × 106/ml) in complete RPMI 1640 with 1 ng/ml IL-7 
(PeproTech) and 2 μg/ml concanavalin A (Calbiochem) at 37°C. Two 
days later, dead cells were removed by Ficoll gradient separation (GE 
Healthcare), and then CD8+ cells were isolated using a mouse CD8– 
Isolation Kit (STEMCELL Technologies). Retroviral transduction was 
performed as follows to introduce the NKG2D CAR into T cells: 1 ml 
of concentrated NKG2D CAR–expressing retrovirus was preloaded 
into 6-well nontreated dishes coated with RetroNectin (TakiraBio) and 
incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. An equal volume of isolated T cells (3 × 
106 cells/ml supplemented with 10 ng/ml mouse IL-2 [mIL-2] [Pepro-
Tech]) was added, and the suspension was centrifuged at 2,000 g for 
30 minutes. After a 6-hour spinoculation, RPMI containing 10 ng 
mIL-2/ml was added. Two days after transfection, 0.5 × 106/ml to 1 × 
10
6
/ml of the transduced primary T cells were selected by culturing 
in RPMI-10 medium containing G418 (0.5 mg/ml) plus recombinant 
human IL-2 (25 U/ml) for an additional 3 days. Viable cells were iso-
lated using Histopaque 1083 (Sigma-Aldrich) and expanded for 2 days 
without G418 before adoptive transfer. For bioluminescence imaging 
experiments, the targeted T cells were genetically tagged with CBR-luc 
(50). Six hours after spinoculation, 1 ml RPMI containing 50 IU mIL-
2 was added, and the transduced T cells were used for experiments 
the next day. To generate melanoma-specific CAR T cells, we activat-
ed mouse T cells with anti-mouse CD3 (10 μg/ml), anti-mouse CD28 
(0.1 μg/ml), and mIL-2 (19 IU/ml) and transduced them 24 hours later 
with Platinum E-Retroviral supernatant (Cell Biolabs) on RetroNectin- 
coated plates. Following spinoculation (3,000 g, 2 h, 32°C), T cells were 
harvested and resuspended in complete RPMI with IL-2 (10 IU/ml) and 
mouse T Activator Beads (0.3 × 106 beads per 1 × 106 T cells; Thermo 
Fisher Scientific). Following a second spinoculation in retroviral super-
natant the next day, the cells were cultured for 24 hours in the presence 
of mouse IL-15 (50 ng/ml) before using them as a tumor therapeutic.
Preparation of stimulatory lipid-coated silica microspheres
Preparation of a maleimide-functionalized lipid film. Lipid stock solu-
tions were formulated in chloroform. Dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine 
(DOPC) (140 μl from a 10-mg/ml solution); 30 μl 1,2-distearoyl-sn- 
Cell lines
The murine pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) cell line KPC, 
a gift of Sunil Hingorani (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, Washington, USA), was derived from spontaneous pancreatic 
tumors developing in transgenic KPC mice (LSL-KrasG12D p53fl/+ mice) 
at 17 weeks of age. This cell line was cultured in Iscove’s modified 
Dulbecco’s medium (IMDM) with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 2 mM L- 
glutamine, 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 4.5 g/l glucose, 10 mM HEPES, 
1.0 mM sodium pyruvate, and 0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. B16F10 
melanoma cell lines (American Type Culture Collection [ATCC]; cat-
alog CRL-6475) were cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium with 
10% heat-inactivated FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1.5 g/l sodium bicar-
bonate, 4.5 g/l glucose, 10 mM HEPES, 1.0 mM sodium pyruvate, and 
0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Although GP75 occurs on the tumor cell 
membrane in vivo, surface expression is weak in vitro; therefore, we 
used B16F10 cells only from fresh tumors for in vitro functional assays. 
The Phoenix Eco retroviral packaging cell line (Orbigen) was cultured 
in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamate, 100 U/ml penicillin, 
and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. For in vivo bioluminescence imaging, the 
KPC cell line was retrovirally transduced with firefly luciferase (F-luc).
Mice and in vivo tumor models
Animals were housed in the animal facility of the Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center. In our orthotopic mouse model of PDA, 1 
× 105 KPC tumor cells were surgically implanted into the head of the 
pancreas of female Albino B6 (C57BL/6J-Tyr<c-2J>) mice (The Jackson 
Laboratory) and were allowed to establish for 1 week before treatment. 
Immediately before starting therapy, the KPC tumor burden for each 
animal was quantified using an in vivo imaging system (IVIS). Only 
animals with a bioluminescence tumor signal between 2 × 105 and 2 × 
106 photons/s/cm2 were randomly assigned to the various treatment or 
control groups for our experiments. To differentiate between adoptively 
transferred and endogenous T cells in flow cytometry measurements 
(Figure 5), we generated NKG2D CAR T cells using splenocytes isolat-
ed from WT (CD45.2+) C57BL/6 mice. Following gene transfer, T cells 
were used to treat B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ recipient mice (also from 
The Jackson Laboratory), which, instead of CD45.2, express the pan- 
leukocyte marker CD45.1. To directly visualize the location and magni-
tude of endogenous T cell activation following different treatment reg-
imens, we bred NFAT-luc–transgenic mice [B6.Cg-Tg(Il2/NFAT-luc) 
83Rinc/J; The Jackson Laboratory; stock no. 006098] into an albino B6 
(C57BL/6J-Tyr<c-2J>) background. In this test system, host T cells emit 
light following TCR activation, so we orthotopically implanted WT KPC 
(instead of KPC-luc) tumor cells for these experiments. To establish a 
preclinical model of incompletely resected melanoma, we injected 1.0 × 
106 B16F10 cells (in 100 μl sterile PBS) subcutaneously into the shaved 
right flank of anesthetized mice. Once the tumors achieved a size of 
approximately 150 mm2, we surgically resected them in a way that left 
behind approximately 1% to 5% of the tumor volume.
Retroviral vectors and viral production
SFG-CBR-luc (which expresses CBR-luc) and SFG–F-luc (which 
expresses F-luc) vectors were provided by Michel Sadelain (Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA). The retro-
viral vector pFb-chNKG2D-IRES-Neo, described previously (49), was 
provided by Charles Sentman (Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth 
College, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA). NKG2D CAR consists of 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 8 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
was again dialyzed (20-kDa molecular weight cutoff [MWCO] dialysis 
membrane; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and lyophilized.
To make scaffolds, the alginate stock was reconstituted to 7 ml of a 
2% w/v solution in PBS and warmed to 55 °C before mixing with 7 × 106 
stimulatory microspheres in aqueous suspension. Mild cross-linking 
was initiated by adding 1.4 ml of a 0.1% (w/v) calcium chloride solu-
tion while vortexing, and then 700 μl was immediately transferred 
into 15-mm round, Teflon-coated molds to form 2-mm-thick scaffolds. 
These were frozen at –78°C and lyophilized to yield porous matrices, 
which were stored at 4°C in a desiccator.
T cell seeding onto scaffolds
Mouse T cells genetically engineered to express NKG2D-CAR or anti–
GP75-CAR were washed twice in PBS and resuspended in nonsupple-
mented RPMI medium at a concentration of 14 × 106 cells/ml. After 
adding 5% AlgiMatrix Firming Buffer (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific), 500 μl of this cell suspension was immediately inoculated on 
top of each lyophilized scaffold in a 24-well tissue culture plate. Cells 
were allowed to infuse into these matrices for 30 minutes on ice before 
implantation into the peritoneal or tumor resection cavity.
Cytotoxicity assays
We measured the in vitro cytotoxic activity of T cells using standard 
51Cr release assays as described elsewhere (55). Briefly, KPC or B16F10 
cells were labeled with 51Cr for 1 hour at 37°C, washed with RPMI con-
taining 10% FCS, and resuspended in the same medium at a concen-
tration of 1 × 105 tumor cells/ml. T cells were added to the suspensions 
at varying effector-to-target cell ratios in 96-well plates (final volume, 
200 μl) and incubated for 4 hours at 37°C, then 30 μl of supernatant 
from each well was transferred into Lumaplate-96 microplates (Pack-
ard BioScience) for analysis with a Top Count NXT microplate scintil-
lation counter (Packard BioScience).
In vivo bioluminescence and imaging
We used D-luciferin (Xenogen) in PBS (15 mg/ml) as a substrate for 
F-luc (imaging of KPC pancreatic tumors) and CBR-luc (50) (T cell 
imaging). Bioluminescence images were collected with a Xenogen IVIS 
Spectrum Imaging System. Living Image software, version 4.3.1 (Xeno-
gen), was used to acquire (and later quantitate) the data 10 minutes 
after i.p. injection of D-luciferin into animals anesthetized with 150 
mg/kg of 2% isoflurane (Forane; Baxter Healthcare). Acquisition times 
ranged from 10 seconds to 5 minutes. Only acquisitions with unsaturat-
ed signals were included in the analysis. To correct for background bio-
luminescence, we subtracted signals acquired from healthy WT mice 
(injected with D-luciferin) from the region of interest (ROI) measured.
Toxicity studies
To measure potential in vivo toxicities of cdGMP/CAR T cell– 
functionalized implants, we established KPC pancreatic tumors in 4- 
to 6-week-old female C57BL/6 mice, then implanted scaffolds con-
taining either NKG2D-CAR+ T cells, cdGMP, or both (5 mice/group). 
The control animals received no treatment. Seven days after scaffold 
implantation, body weights were measured, mice were anesthetized, 
and blood was collected by cardiac puncture into microcontainers con-
taining EDTA. Analysis (conducted at the Phoenix Central Laborato-
ry, Mukitteo, Washington, USA) consisted of a complete blood count, 
which included a white cell count with differential, as well as red cell, 
glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine–PEG (DSPE-PEG 2000) maleimide 
(5 mg/ml); 150 μl cholesterol (5 mg/ml); and 50 μl 18:1 PEG 2000– 
phycoerythrin (PEG 2000–PE) (5 mg/ml), all acquired from Avan-
ti Polar Lipids, were combined to attain a DOPC/DSPE-PEG 2000 
maleimide/cholesterol/PEG 2000–PE mass ratio of 55:5:30:10 and 2.5 
mg total lipid. Chloroform was evaporated under a stream of nitrogen, 
and residual solvent was removed under vacuum overnight.
Amine modification of silica microparticles. Spherical silica gel (500 
mg, 15-μm particle diameter, 100-Å pore diameter; Sorbent Tech-
nologies) was suspended in 4 ml of 25% 3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)
ethylamino]propyltrimethoxysilane (AEPTMS) in ethanol and then 
mixed gently at room temperature for 5 hours. Unreacted AEPTMS 
was removed by centrifugation (1,000 g for 2 min) and decantation of 
the supernatant. The amine-modified silica was washed with ethanol 
(4 × 2 ml) and then air dried for 2 days.
Loading of STING agonist into mesoporous silica microparticles. 
A 100-mg/ml suspension of amine-modified silica was prepared in 
PBS at pH 7.2, then 360 μl of this was combined with 500 μl cdGMP 
 
(2 mg/ml in PBS; InvivoGen). The solution was gently vortexed for 1 
hour, followed by dilution with 400 μl PBS.
Lipid adsorption on silica. The SiO2/cdGMP suspension (400 μl) 
was added to a 2.5-mg batch of lipid film and vortexed for 15 sec-
onds at 10-minute intervals for a total of 1 hour. The particles were 
pelleted at 3,500 g for 2 minutes, washed with PBS (2 × 1 ml), and 
then resuspended in 250 μl PBS.
Antibody conjugation to lipid-coated microparticles
The following antibodies were purchased from BioXcell: InVivoMAb 
anti-mouse CD3, clone 17A2 (catalog BE0002); InVivoMAb anti-mouse 
CD28, clone 37.51 (catalog BE0015-1); and InVivoMAb anti-mouse 
4-1BB (CD137), clone LOB12.3 (catalog BE0169). The hinge region 
disulfide bonds of anti-mouse CD3, CD28, and CD137 antibodies were 
selectively reduced with DTT as previously described (51). After DTT 
was removed with a desalting column, these mildly reduced antibodies 
(anti-CD3: 200 μg; anti-CD28 and CD137: 400 μg) were added to 250 
μl maleimide-functionalized particles, vortexed briefly before rotation 
for 2 hours, and centrifuged at 3,500 g for 2 minutes. The pellet was 
washed with PBS (2 × 1 ml) and then suspended in 125 μl PBS.
Scaffold fabrication
We produced the alginate scaffolds from high-molecular-weight (~250 
kDa) ultrapure sodium alginate powder (Novamatrix Pronova UP 
MVG alginate) enriched in G blocks (≥60%) after it was oxidized with 
sodium periodate to create hydrolytically labile bonds, as previously 
described (52). Briefly, 200 μl of 0.25% sodium periodate was added 
dropwise to 10 ml aqueous 1% alginate and stirred in the dark at 25°C 
for 5 hours before the reaction was quenched by adding equimolar eth-
ylene glycol for 30 minutes. The sample was dialyzed against deion-
ized water for 3 days using membranes with a 3,500-molecular-weight 
cutoff and then lyophilized. The oxidized alginate was reconstituted in 
2-(N-morpholino)ethane-sulfonic acid (MES) buffer (0.1 M MES and 
0.3 M NaCl, pH 6.5) and covalently conjugated to the collagen-mimet-
ic peptide GFOGER (53) (obtained from the MIT Biopolymers facility) 
using carbodiimide chemistry (54): sulfo–N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide 
(Sulfo-NHS), 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydro-
chloride (EDC) (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the GFO-
GER peptide were added sequentially, and 24 hours later the solution 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 9 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. A P value of less than 0.05 was consid-
ered significant. Survival data were characterized using the log-rank 
test. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism, 
version 6.0 (GraphPad Software).
Study approval
Experiments and handling of mice was conducted following federal, 
state, and local guidelines under an IACUC protocol and with approv-
al of the IACUC of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. 
All patients provided informed consent under a research protocol 
approved by the Cancer Consortium IRB at the Fred Hutchinson Can-
cer Research Center.
Author contributions
TTS performed in vivo T cell–priming studies; HFM phenotyped 
KPC tumors following therapy; SBS prepared scaffolds and micro-
particles; CFO helped develop the retroviral vector pMP71 encod-
ing the GP75-specific CAR; AGD helped with adoptive T cell 
experiments; XJ performed the confocal microscopy; VGP provid-
ed human pancreatic tumor samples; SPSP performed serum anal-
yses and histopathology; KDW helped develop the retroviral vec-
tor pMP71 encoding the GP75-specific CAR; and MTS designed 
the study, performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data, 
and wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sunil Hingorani (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center) for the KPC cell line. This work was supported in part 
by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center’s Immunother-
apy Initiative with funds provided by the Bezos Family Founda-
tion; the National Cancer Institute (NCI), NIH (RO1 CA181413); 
and a Solid Tumor Translational Research (STTR) Translational 
Research Grant.
Address correspondence to: Matthias T. Stephan, Fred Hutchin-
son Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, 
Thomas Research Building, Mail Stop D3-100, Seattle, Washing-
ton 98109-1024, USA. Phone: 617.667.6677; E-mail: mstephan@
fredhutch.org.
CFO’s present address is: Gilead, Oceanside, California, USA.
AGD’s present address is: Centre for Infection and Immunity, 
Queen’s University, Belfast, Ireland.
hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet counts. Blood was also collected 
into serum separator tubes and sent to the same laboratory for analy-
sis of amylase and lipase serum levels. Animals were then euthanized 
with carbon dioxide to retrieve their pancreas. The excised organs were 
washed with deionized water and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde 
solution. The tissues were processed in a routine fashion, and sections 
were stained with H&E. All specimens were examined in a blinded 
fashion by Smitha Pillai, a board-certified staff pathologist.
Flow cytometry
Anti–recombinant annexin V (used to quantify apoptotic cells) and the 
following antibodies (used with the BD FACSCanto Flow Cytometer) 
were purchased from eBioscience: anti-NKG2D (catalog 130312; clone 
CX5); anti-CD8 (catalog 100738; clone 53-6.7); anti-CD11b 
(catalog 
101226; clone M1/70); anti-CD11c (catalog 117330; clone N418); anti-
CD86 (catalog 105039; clone GL-1); anti–MHC II (catalog 12-5321-81; 
clone M5/114.15.2); and anti-CD45.1 (catalog 45-0453-82; clone A20). 
H-2Db LCMV GP33 Tetramer-KAVYNFATC was synthesized in 
the Immune Monitoring Core Facility at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center.
Confocal microscopy
Sections (4-μm-thick) of formalin-fixed human PDA were deparaffin-
ized in xylene and rehydrated through a graded ethanol series before 
heat-mediated antigen retrieval in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer (pH 
6.0). Following PBS washing and treatment with 0.1% Triton X-100 
for 15 minutes, the cells were blocked with 10% normal goat serum in 
PBS for 30 minutes at room temperature, then incubated at 4°C over-
night with the following antibodies (as indicated in the figure legends): 
Alexa Fluor 594 anti-human CD326 (EpCAM) (324228, clone 9C4; 
BioLegend); FITC pan-cytokeratin (ab78478, clone C-11; Abcam); and 
rabbit anti-mesothelin (ab93620, clone SP74; Abcam). Samples were 
washed and then incubated with Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated anti- 
rabbit (4414S; Cell Signaling Technology) as appropriate for 1 hour at 
room temperature. The samples were then washed with PBS twice and 
counterstained with DAPI. Confocal microscopy was performed with 
a Leica SP8X confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems), and images 
were analyzed using Fiji ImageJ (NIH).
Statistics
The statistical significance of differences measured in T cell migra-
tion parameters was calculated using 1-way ANOVA, followed by 
Dunnett’s comparison test. Pairwise differences in bioluminescent 
tumor and T cell signals were analyzed at selected time points using 
 1. Mellman I, Coukos G, Dranoff G. Can-
cer immunotherapy comes of age. Nature. 
2011;480(7378):480–489.
 2. Sheikh NA, et al. Sipuleucel-T immune param-
eters correlate with survival: an analysis of the 
randomized phase 3 clinical trials in men with 
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Cancer 
Immunol Immunother. 2013;62(1):137–147.
 3. Kantoff PW, et al. Overall survival analysis of a 
phase II randomized controlled trial of a Poxviral- 
based PSA-targeted immunotherapy in metastatic 
castration-resistant prostate cancer.  
J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(7):1099–1105.
 4. Amato RJ, Stepankiw M. Clinical Efficacy of Tro-
Vax in the Treatment of Progressive Castration- 
resistant Prostate Cancer. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 
2012;6:67–73.
 5. Madan RA, et al. Ipilimumab and a poxviral 
vaccine targeting prostate-specific antigen in 
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: 
a phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet Oncol. 
2012;13(5):501–508.
 6. Barber GN. STING-dependent cytosolic 
DNA sensing pathways. Trends Immunol. 
2014;35(2):88–93.
 
7. Fu J, et al. STING agonist formulated can-
cer vaccines can cure established tumors 
resistant to PD-1 blockade. Sci Transl Med. 
2015;7(283):283ra52.
 8. Corrales L, et al. Direct Activation of STING in 
the Tumor Microenvironment Leads to Potent 
and Systemic Tumor Regression and Immunity. 
Cell Rep. 2015;11(7):1018–1030.
 9. Harrison LI, Astry C, Kumar S, Yunis C. Phar-
macokinetics of 852A, an imidazoquinoline 
Toll-like receptor 7-specific agonist, follow-
ing intravenous, subcutaneous, and oral 
administrations in humans. J Clin Pharmacol. 
2007;47(8):962–969.
 10. Walder P, et al. Pharmacokinetic profile of the 
immunomodulating compound adamantylamide 
dipeptide (AdDP), a muramyl dipeptide deriva-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 9 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
tive in mice. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 
1991;13(1-2):101–119.
 11. Kulkarni RR, et al. Activation of the RIG-I pathway 
during influenza vaccination enhances the germi-
nal center reaction, promotes T follicular helper 
cell induction, and provides a dose-sparing  
effect and protective immunity. J Virol. 
2014;88(24):13990–14001.
 12. Hanson MC, et al. Nanoparticulate STING ago-
nists are potent lymph node-targeted vaccine 
adjuvants. J Clin Invest. 2015;125(6):2532–2546.
 13. Gray PM, et al. Evidence for cyclic diguanylate as 
a vaccine adjuvant with novel immunostimulato-
ry activities. Cell Immunol. 2012;278(1-2):113–119.
 14. Sadelain M, Brentjens R, Rivière I. The basic 
principles of chimeric antigen receptor design. 
Cancer Discov. 2013;3(4):388–398.
 15. Barrett DM, Grupp SA, June CH. Chimeric 
Antigen Receptor- and TCR-Modified T Cells 
Enter Main Street and Wall Street. J Immunol. 
2015;195(3):755–761.
 16. Grupp SA, et al. Chimeric antigen receptor- 
modified T cells for acute lymphoid leukemia.  
N Engl J Med. 2013;368(16):1509–1518.
 17. Brentjens RJ, et al. CD19-targeted T cells rapidly 
induce molecular remissions in adults with 
chemotherapy-refractory acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2013;5(177):177ra38.
 18. Motz GT, Coukos G. Deciphering and revers-
ing tumor immune suppression. Immunity. 
2013;39(1):61–73.
 19. John LB, Kershaw MH, Darcy PK. Blockade of 
PD-1 immunosuppression boosts CAR T-cell 
therapy. Oncoimmunology. 2013;2(10):e26286.
 20. Johnson DB, et al. Severe cutaneous and neu-
rologic toxicity in melanoma patients during 
vemurafenib administration following anti-PD-1 
therapy. Cancer Immunol Res. 2013;1(6):373–377.
 21. Läubli H, Balmelli C, Bossard M, Pfister O, 
Glatz K, Zippelius A. Acute heart failure due to 
autoimmune myocarditis under pembrolizumab 
treatment for metastatic melanoma. J Immuno-
ther Cancer. 2015;3:11.
 22. Postow MA. Managing immune checkpoint- 
blocking antibody side effects. Am Soc Clin Oncol 
Educ Book. 2015;76–83.
 23. Parkhurst MR, et al. T Cells Targeting Carci-
noembryonic Antigen Can Mediate Regres-
sion of Metastatic Colorectal Cancer but 
Induce Severe Transient Colitis. Mol Ther. 
2011;19(3):620–626.
 24. Morgan RA, Yang JC, Kitano M, Dudley ME, 
Laurencot CM, Rosenberg SA. Case report of 
a serious adverse event following the admin-
istration of T cells transduced with a chimeric 
antigen receptor recognizing ERBB2. Mol Ther. 
2010;18(4):843–851.
 25. Stephan SB, Taber AM, Jileaeva I, Pegues EP, 
Sentman CL, Stephan MT. Biopolymer implants 
enhance the efficacy of adoptive T-cell therapy. 
Nat Biotechnol. 2015;33(1):97–101.
 26. Hingorani SR, et al. Trp53R172H and KrasG12D 
cooperate to promote chromosomal instability 
and widely metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocar-
cinoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 2005;7(5):469–483.
 27. Sentman CL, Meehan KR. NKG2D CARs as cell 
therapy for cancer. Cancer J. 2014;20(2):156–159.
 28. Baldwin AD, Kiick KL. Polysaccharide-modified 
synthetic polymeric biomaterials. Biopolymers. 
2010;94(1):128–140.
 29. Macian F. NFAT proteins: key regulators of T-cell 
development and function. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2005;5(6):472–484.
 30. Fox JG, Barthold S, Davisson M, Newcomer CE, 
Quimby FW, Smith A, eds. The Mouse in Biomedi-
cal Research, Volume 3, Second Edition: Normative 
Biology, Husbandry, and Models. Cambridge, MA: 
Academica Press: 2007.
 31. Ghanem G, Fabrice J. Tyrosinase related protein 
1 (TYRP1/gp75) in human cutaneous melanoma. 
Mol Oncol. 2011;5(2):150–155.
 32. Boross P, et al. Anti-tumor activity of human IgG1 
anti-gp75 TA99 mAb against B16F10 melanoma 
in human FcgammaRI transgenic mice. Immunol 
Lett. 2014;160(2):151–157.
 33. Albanesi M, et al. Cutting edge: FcγRIII (CD16) 
and FcγRI (CD64) are responsible for anti- 
glycoprotein 75 monoclonal antibody TA99 ther-
apy for experimental metastatic B16 melanoma.  
J Immunol. 2012;189(12):5513–5517.
 34. Bolander A, et al. The protein expression of TRP-1 
and galectin-1 in cutaneous malignant melanomas. 
Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2008;5(6):293–300.
 35. Clavreul A, et al. Autologous tumor cell vaccina-
tion plus infusion of GM-CSF by a programmable 
pump in the treatment of recurrent malignant 
gliomas. J Clin Neurosci. 2010;17(7):842–848.
 36. Muragaki Y, et al. Phase I/IIa trial of autologous 
formalin-fixed tumor vaccine concomitant with 
fractionated radiotherapy for newly diagnosed 
glioblastoma. Clinical article. J Neurosurg. 
2011;115(2):248–255.
 37. Zhou F, et al. InCVAX--a novel strategy for treat-
ment of late-stage, metastatic cancers through 
photoimmunotherapy induced tumor-specific 
immunity. Cancer Lett. 2015;359(2):169–177.
 38. Bencherif SA, et al. Injectable cryogel-based 
whole-cell cancer vaccines. Nat Commun. 
2015;6:7556.
 39. Kim J, et al. Injectable, spontaneously assem-
bling, inorganic scaffolds modulate immune cells 
in vivo and increase vaccine efficacy. Nat Biotech-
nol. 2015;33(1):64–72.
 40. Otsubo D, et al. Early-phase Treatment by Low-
dose 5-Fluorouracil or Primary Tumor Resection 
Inhibits MDSC-mediated Lung Metastasis For-
mation. Anticancer Res. 2015;35(8):4425–4431.
 41. Gang AO, et al. 5-Azacytidine treatment sensi-
tizes tumor cells to T-cell mediated cytotoxicity 
and modulates NK cells in patients with myeloid 
malignancies. Blood Cancer J. 2014;4:e197.
 42. Dear AE. Epigenetic Modulators and the 
New Immunotherapies. N Engl J Med. 
2016;374(7):684–686.
 43. Héninger E, Krueger TE, Lang JM. Augmenting 
antitumor immune responses with epigenetic 
modifying agents. Front Immunol. 2015;6:29.
 44. Draper LM, et al. Targeting of HPV-16+ Epi-
thelial Cancer Cells by TCR Gene Engineered 
T Cells Directed against E6. Clin Cancer Res. 
2015;21(19):4431–4439.
 45. Robbins PF, et al. A pilot trial using lymphocytes 
genetically engineered with an NY-ESO-1- 
reactive T-cell receptor: long-term follow-up 
and correlates with response. Clin Cancer Res. 
2015;21(5):1019–1027.
 46. Parkhurst MR, et al. Isolation of T cell receptors 
specifically reactive with mutated tumor asso-
ciated antigens from tumor infiltrating lympho-
cytes based on CD137 expression [published 
online ahead of print November 8, 2016]. Clin 
Cancer Res. https:/
/doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.
CCR-16-2680.
 47. Thor Straten P, Garrido F. Targetless T cells in 
cancer immunotherapy. J Immunother Cancer. 
2016;4:23.
 48. Meacham CE, Morrison SJ. Tumour hetero-
geneity and cancer cell plasticity. Nature. 
2013;501(7467):328–337.
 49. Zhang T, Lemoi BA, Sentman CL. Chimeric 
NK-receptor-bearing T cells mediate antitumor 
immunotherapy. Blood. 2005;106(5):1544–1551.
 50. Dobrenkov K, et al. Monitoring the efficacy of 
adoptively transferred prostate cancer-targeted 
human T lymphocytes with PET and biolumines-
cence imaging. J Nucl Med. 2008;49(7):1162–1170.
 51. Kwong B, Gai SA, Elkhader J, Wittrup KD, Irvine 
DJ. Localized immunotherapy via liposome- 
anchored Anti-CD137 + IL-2 prevents lethal 
toxicity and elicits local and systemic antitumor 
immunity. Cancer Res. 2013;73(5):1547–1558.
 52. Boontheekul T, Kong HJ, Mooney DJ. Controlling 
alginate gel degradation utilizing partial oxida-
tion and bimodal molecular weight distribution. 
Biomaterials. 2005;26(15):2455–2465.
 53. Wojtowicz AM, et al. Coating of biomaterial 
scaffolds with the collagen-mimetic peptide 
GFOGER for bone defect repair. Biomaterials. 
2010;31(9):2574–2582.
 54. Rowley JA, Mooney DJ. Alginate type and RGD 
density control myoblast phenotype. J Biomed 
Mater Res. 2002;60(2):217–223.
 55. Erskine CL, Henle AM, Knutson KL. Determin-
ing optimal cytotoxic activity of human Her2neu 
specific CD8 T cells by comparing the Cr51 
release assay to the xCELLigence system.  
J Vis Exp. 2012;(66):e3683.
