 https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881117699613
Journal of Psychopharmacology
 
1 
–6
© The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269881117699613
journals.sagepub.com/home/jop
Introduction
The healthy brain depends on a delicate balance of excitation and 
inhibition governed by neurotransmitters such as gamma-amin-
obutyric acid (GABA). Atypical levels of GABA have been associ-
ated with disorders such as epilepsy (Petroff et al., 1996), autism 
(Robertson et al., 2016), anxiety (Nemeroff, 2003) and depression 
(Honig et al., 1988), suggesting potential therapeutic benefits to 
modulating its concentration. Although dietary supplements con-
taining GABA are available commercially, their efficacy is limited 
due to low GABA permeability across the blood−brain barrier 
(Kakee et al., 2008). Inspired by work showing that serotonin lev-
els are increased by consumption of serotonin precursors (i.e. tryp-
tophan (Shabbir et al., 2013)), we asked whether consuming 
substances associated with the production of GABA could modu-
late the balance of inhibition and excitation in the brain.
GABA functions as the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in 
the mammalian nervous system. It is produced in the brain as a 
part of the GABA−glutamate cycle, with pyridoxine (vitamin 
B6) as a co-factor in this synthesis, and other substances such as 
vitamin B12 having a modulatory effect on its concentration 
(Ikeda et al., 1997). It is well established in neurophysiological 
work that evoked responses in early visual cortex are strongly 
modulated by GABA-ergic processes (Katzner et al., 2011; 
Morrone et al., 1987). Infusing a GABA antagonist (gabazine) 
into the cortex of anaesthetized cats has been shown to increase 
responsiveness by up to 300% (Katzner et al., 2011). This 
‘response gain’ effect should provide a clear index of GABA 
availability in cortex, in that increasing GABA concentration 
should reduce the neural response evoked by visual stimuli to 
below normal levels.
We measured steady-state visual evoked potentials (Norcia 
et al., 2015) using electroencephalography (EEG) as a baseline 
index of neural excitability. In this paradigm, flickering visual 
stimuli are displayed at different contrast levels, and a frequency-
locked response is recorded from posterior regions of the scalp 
over visual cortex (see Figure 1 for details). Participants then con-
sumed either a yeast extract substance rich in glutamate and B vita-
mins, or a control substance (peanut butter), each day for 1 month 
(while also continuing their normal diet), followed by a repeat of 
the EEG measurements. We determined that the active substance 
contained around 116 times more vitamin B12, 3 times more vita-
min B6, and 1.85 times more glutamate than the control substance 
(see Table 1 for further details). Any change in neural response as 
a consequence of the treatment is therefore likely to be due to these 
substances promoting increased GABA availability.
Methods
Participants
A group of 28 adult volunteers (10 males, mean age 22 years) 
completed the study after providing written informed consent. 
They were assigned randomly to either the control or treatment 
group, and were not informed of the experimental hypotheses. 
Because the experiment involved viewing flickering stimuli, we 
Dietary modulation of cortical excitation  
and inhibition
Anika K Smith1, Alex R Wade1, Kirsty EH Penkman2  
and Daniel H Baker1
Abstract
The balance of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in the brain affects both neural responses and behaviour in humans and animals. Here we 
investigated whether dietary intervention aimed at increasing levels of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) can influence 
neural responses to basic sensory stimuli. Using a steady-state electroencephalography (EEG) paradigm, we found that the neural response to visual 
patterns was reduced in individuals who consumed a yeast extract product rich in substances associated with the production of GABA (glutamate and 
B vitamins), but not in a control group who consumed a placebo substance (n = 14 per group). This demonstrates that the balance of excitation and 
inhibition in the brain can be influenced by dietary interventions, suggesting possible clinical benefits in conditions (e.g. epilepsy) where inhibition 
is abnormal.
Keywords
Steady-state electroencephalography (EEG), inhibition, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), diet, precursors
1Department of Psychology, University of York, UK
2Department of Chemistry, University of York, UK
Corresponding author:
Daniel H Baker, Department of Psychology, University of York, 
Heslington YO10 5DD, UK. 
Email: daniel.baker@york.ac.uk
699613 JOP0010.1177/0269881117699613Journal of PsychopharmacologySmith et al.
research-article2017
Short Report
 2 
Journal of Psychopharmacology 
 
ensured that participants did not have a history of epilepsy. We 
also confirmed that participants did not smoke, suffer from nut 
allergies, or use controlled substances recreationally. Procedures 
were approved by the research ethics committee of the 
Department of Psychology at the University of York, UK.
Apparatus and stimuli
Stimuli were displayed using a gamma corrected ViewPixx dis-
play (VPixx Technologies Ltd., Montreal, Canada) running at 
120 Hz. We recorded EEG signals at 1 kHz from 64 electrodes 
across the scalp (see Figure 1(b) for electrode locations) using 
 
a Waveguard cap and the ASAlab system (ANT Neuroscan, 
Netherlands). Stimulus onset and condition was recorded on the 
EEG trace using a low-latency digital trigger. EEG signals were 
stored on disk for offline analysis.
Stimuli were small patches of sine-wave grating, spatially cur-
tailed by a raised cosine envelope (see Figure 1(a) for examples). 
Each patch had a spatial frequency of 0.5 c/deg, and a diameter of 
3°. We tiled the patches across the display in a regular 17 × 9 grid 
separated by 3° of visual angle. The central element was removed 
to leave a space for an attentional control task, described below. 
To minimise adaptation, we randomised the orientation of the ele-
ments on each trial. Stimuli were presented using Matlab (The 
MathWorks Inc., Massachusetts, USA) and the Psychophysics 
Toolbox extensions, running on an Apple Macintosh computer.
The yeast extract substance was a commercially available 
spread (Marmite; Unilever Plc., London, UK) that is fortified with 
B vitamins. The control substance was smooth peanut butter con-
taining peanuts (97%), palm oil and salt. We tested three subsam-
ples of both substances for glutamate content (following 24 h acid 
treatment to hydrolyse any peptide-bound glutamic acid) using 
reverse-phase high pressure liquid chromatography (Penkman 
0
25
50
75
100
Time
Contrast (%)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
5
10
15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency (Hz)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Amplitude (μV)
7Hz response
7Hz target only
5Hz mask only
Figure 1. Illustration of the steady-state visual evoked potential paradigm. A visual stimulus flickering in contrast at a defined temporal frequency 
(smooth black curve in panel (a)) will produce a modulation of the EEG waveform (blue trace in panel (a)) over posterior scalp regions (panel (b)) 
at the target frequency and its harmonics. The dependent variable is the amplitude in the Fourier spectrum at the flicker frequency, which shows 
excellent isolation from adjacent frequencies, implying high signal-to-noise ratios (panels (c) and (d)). The data used to produce this figure were 
averaged over 28 observers in the baseline condition (pre-treatment) at the highest target contrast (panels (a)–(c)) and for a condition in which a 
mask was shown in isolation (panel (d)).
EEG: electroencephalography.
 Smith et al. 
3
et al., 2008). During hydrolysis, glutamine undergoes rapid irre-
versible deamination to glutamic acid (Hill, 1965), so as it is not 
possible to distinguish these, they are reported as Glx. Since simi-
lar processes would likely occur during metabolisation, this was 
not a major concern. We also had the B vitamin content assessed 
at an ISO17025 accredited laboratory in the UK. Detailed results 
of these analyses are presented in Table 1.
Procedures
Participants first completed four blocks of the EEG experiment. 
In each block, trials of 11 s duration were presented. Trials were 
presented in random order, with a 3 s inter-trial interval. There 
were seven target contrast levels from 0−64%, and two mask 
contrasts (0% and 32%). The target stimuli were cosine-phase 
sine-wave gratings that flickered sinusoidally in contrast between 
0% and their nominal maximum at 7 Hz. The mask stimuli were 
superimposed sine-phase gratings of the same spatial frequency 
but orthogonal orientation to the targets, that flickered at 5 Hz. 
The effect of the orthogonally-presented mask stimuli is to sup-
press neural responses to the target stimuli, with higher GABA 
levels being thought to result in greater suppression (Morrone 
et al., 1987). Each condition was repeated twice per block, result-
ing in eight repetitions per observer. Next, participants were 
given a jar of either the active or placebo substance and instructed 
to consume 5 mL (one teaspoon full) daily for 1 month. Their 
diets were otherwise unchanged. At the end of this time they 
returned to the lab and repeated the same EEG experiment. 
Participants also completed an adherence questionnaire, which 
indicated that no participants forgot to take more than four doses 
across the 4 weeks, and when they did so typically (in all but one 
case) took a double dose the following day. A subset of five par-
ticipants in the treatment group repeated the experiment a third 
time 3 months after the initial testing session.
During all blocks of the experiment, participants completed a 
contrast discrimination task in the centre of the screen that was 
intended to maintain fixation and attention. The stimuli were the 
same sine-wave gratings that were used as a stimulus in the EEG 
experiment, but always with a horizontal orientation. The dura-
tion of each trial was 1400 ms in total, in which pairs of stimuli 
with different contrasts were presented sequentially for 500 ms 
(inter-stimulus-interval of 400 ms), flickering at 6 Hz. The task 
was to report which of the stimuli appeared higher in contrast. In 
one interval the contrast was drawn from a normal distribution 
with a mean of 0% and a standard deviation of 2%. In the other 
interval the mean was 2% and the standard deviation was 2%. 
Negative contrasts constituted a phase reversal.
We discarded the first 1000 ms of each EEG trial, and took the 
Fourier transform of the remaining 10000 ms. The amplitudes at 
the first and second harmonic of the target and mask frequencies 
were taken as dependent variables. We averaged amplitudes 
coherently across trials and across the four posterior electrode 
locations that gave the strongest signal (electrodes Oz, O1, O2 
and POz, highlighted blue in Figure 1(b)). We then took the 
absolute value (discarding phase information) to calculate aver-
ages across observers and to perform statistical testing. Because 
the results of the treatment at the target frequency were similar in 
the 0% and 32% mask conditions (see Figure S1(a) and (b)), we 
ran a 4-way mixed ANOVA on these data (see Supplementary 
Table S1). At the mask frequency, there was no modulation in 
response when the mask contrast was 0%, but a substantial 
modulation when the mask contrast was 32% (see Figure S1(c) 
and (d)). We therefore ran two separate 3-way mixed ANOVAs 
for these conditions (see Supplementary Tables S2 and S3). 
Raw data are available online at: https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/
m9.figshare.3507410.v1.
Results
The steady-state paradigm produced monotonic contrast response 
functions that were locked to the target frequency of 7 Hz (see 
Figures 1(c) and 2(a) and (b)). When a second high-contrast com-
ponent (which we term the ‘mask’) was added flickering at a dif-
ferent frequency (5 Hz), it produced a strong response locked to 
its frequency (see Figures 1(d) and 2(c) and (d)). The mask 
response was suppressed by high target contrasts (downward 
trend in Figure 2(c) and(d)), consistent with results using similar 
stimulus arrangements in both humans and animals (Busse et al., 
2009; Heeger, 1992).
At the target temporal frequency (and at its second harmonic 
– see Figure S2 in supplementary information), evoked responses 
at high contrasts (>8%) were reduced following consumption of 
yeast extract, but not peanut butter (Figure 2(a) and (b)). This is 
supported by a significant interaction (F(2.53,65.73) = 4.10, p < 
0.05, partial η2 = 0.14) between substance (active versus control), 
time (baseline versus post-consumption) and target contrast 
 
(collapsing across mask contrast levels, which were similarly 
affected, see Table S1 in supplementary information). The 
involvement of target contrast in the interaction is critical, as it 
demonstrates that only stimulus-evoked responses were affected 
– the baseline ‘noise’ levels when viewing a blank screen 
remained constant, ruling out nuisance variables such as practise 
effects and equipment changes. There was also no modulation of 
responses at the mask frequency when the target was presented 
alone (blue circles and squares in Figure 2(c) and (d), see Table 
S2).
We replicated the critical effects at the mask temporal fre-
quency (5 Hz), where a consistent reduction in amplitudes (aver-
age of 30%) was observed at all target contrast levels following 
treatment (Figure 2(d)), but not placebo (Figure 2(c)). Interactions 
Table 1. Concentration of glutamate and B vitamins in the two substances used in the experiment. Inhomogeneity of the peanut butter led to 
greater variability between analyses for the glutamate analysis (two analytical replicates; three subsamples, error term represents coefficient of 
variance).
Nutrient
Yeast extract
Peanut butter
Ratio
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)
0.57 mg / 100 g
0.19 mg / 100 g
3
Vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin)
29 μg / 100 g
0.25 μg / 100 g
116
Glutamate (as glutamic acid)
2.8 g / 100 g (±12%)
1.5 g / 100 g (±43%)
1.85
 4 
Journal of Psychopharmacology 
 
between substance and time (F(1,26) = 8.46, p < 0.01, partial η2 
= 0.246) and between substance, time and contrast (F(4.52,117.54) 
= 3.06, p = 0.015, partial η2 = 0.105) were significant at the mask 
frequency (see Supplementary Table S3).
Since visual responses are modulated by attention (Verghese 
et al., 2012), we considered whether subjects in the active group 
might have paid less attention to the display during their second 
testing session. Throughout all experiments, participants per-
formed a challenging contrast discrimination task in the centre 
of the display to maintain fixation and attentional focus. We 
confirmed that performance remained constant across testing 
sessions for both the active (pre/post averages of 68% and 69% 
correct, p = 0.59) and control (pre/post averages of 67% and 
66% correct, p = 0.69) participants, ruling out changes in atten-
tion as a confounding factor in this study. We also assessed how 
long the effects might last by recalling a subset of participants 
from our treatment group and retesting them 2 months after 
they had ceased consuming the active substance. Response lev-
els were still reduced, but no longer significantly different from 
baseline in this group at either temporal frequency, suggesting 
that the effects begin to wear off after resuming a normal diet 
(see Figure 3).
Discussion
Using a steady-state EEG paradigm, we found that a dietary 
intervention had a significant effect on the brain’s response to 
visual stimuli, compared with consumption of a placebo. This 
was unlikely to be a consequence of attentional lapses, and the 
effects were reduced after 2 months of resuming a normal diet. 
These findings are consistent with an increase in the availability 
of GABA in visual areas of the brain that inhibits the excitability 
of neurons responsive to the stimulus (Katzner et al., 2011). 
Although we did not observe clear changes in suppression 
between stimuli (i.e. the reduction in response to the target caused 
by presentation of the mask did not substantially increase follow-
ing treatment, as shown in Figure S1(b)), we also anticipate that 
dietary modulation of neural inhibition will prove important for 
understanding basic suppressive processes in the healthy brain 
(Morrone et al., 1987).
Patients with epilepsy show increased visual responses using a 
similar steady-state paradigm to that used here (Porciatti et al., 
2000; Tsai et al., 2011). This raises the possibility that dietary inter-
ventions geared towards increasing GABA concentration might 
reduce excitability to normal levels, and potentially alleviate some 
Figure 2. Steady-state EEG responses at the target (panels (a) and (b)) and mask (panels (c) and (d)) frequencies in both the placebo control group 
(left) and the treatment group (right). Each data point is the average of 14 participants, with shaded regions indicating ± 1 SEM.
EEG: electroencephalography; SEM: standard error of the mean.
 Smith et al. 
5
symptoms of the disorder such as seizure frequency (particularly 
for photosensitive epileptics). This might be of particular utility in 
treating patients who either do not respond to traditional medica-
tion, or who cannot take it for other reasons (e.g. pregnancy, or 
interactions with other drugs). The apparent involvement of GABA 
in other neurological and mental health conditions (Honig et al., 
1988; Nemeroff, 2003; Robertson et al., 2016) suggests further 
potential for deployment of dietary interventions.
Could some alternative pathway be responsible for our 
results? One possibility is that vitamin B12 is involved as a co-
factor (Briani et al., 2013) in the production of myelin (the fatty 
sheath that insulates axons and improves nerve conductance). 
Increased myelin should speed up transmission of signals through 
the nervous system, yet an additional analysis of the phase com-
ponent of our steady-state data indicated no significant change in 
the response lag at the mask frequency following treatment (t-test 
for mask alone, t = −1.55, df = 13, p = 0.15; the mask frequency 
was chosen because it was slower than the target frequency (5Hz 
versus 7Hz) so will have fewer wraparound artefacts). Changes 
in myelin could conceivably influence signal amplitudes, though 
this would presumably be through increased signal fidelity 
(reduced noise). This account would predict increased ampli-
tudes following supplementation, yet the effect of the treatment 
was to reduce amplitudes (see Figure 2(b) and (d)). We intend to 
investigate this possibility further in future studies using struc-
tural magnetic resonance imaging. It is also conceivable that 
other micronutrients present in yeast extract (such as tyrosine, 
tryptophan, phenylanaline, niacin, folic acid and riboflavin) 
could have affected our results. However, we are not aware of 
any plausible pathway by which these nutrients could affect exci-
tation and inhibition, and their concentration in the active sub-
stance is not dramatically higher than in a typical diet.
The findings of this study suggest that dietary intervention 
may modulate cortical excitation and inhibition, which may be 
due to increased GABA concentration. If this is the case, although 
previous studies have shown that drugs such as lorazepam can 
transiently affect both GABA concentration and perception (Van 
Loon et al., 2013), this is the first demonstration (to our knowl-
edge) of dietary modulation of the same pathways. We anticipate 
that the processes involved will operate over a longer timescale, 
and perhaps be more stable than drug treatments. Since our active 
substance contained several ingredients, we hope to determine 
from future work which substances are key to modulating levels 
of this neurotransmitter in the cortex. Though it is possible that 
the effects may be due to substances present in the yeast extract 
other than those highlighted here, the dramatically high concen-
trations of vitamin B12 in our active substance (see Table 1), as 
well as potentially high levels of marginal deficiency in the popu-
lation (Allen, 2009), make this nutrient the most likely candidate 
for driving our effects.
Acknowledgements
AKS: designed the experiment, ran the experiment, analysed the data and 
wrote the paper.
ARW: designed the experiment and wrote the paper.
KEHP: ran the experiment, analysed the data and wrote the paper.
DHB: designed the experiment, ran the experiment, analysed the data and 
wrote the paper.
Declaration of conflicting interest
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was 
supported in part by the Wellcome Trust (ref: 105624) through the 
Centre for Chronic Diseases and Disorders (C2D2) at the University of 
York, UK. It was also supported by the Leverhulme Trust, UK.
References
Allen LH (2009) How common is vitamin B-12 deficiency? Am J Clin 
Nutr 89: 693S–696S.
Figure 3. Data from a subset of five participants in the treatment 
group who returned after a further 2 months during which they did 
not consume the active substance. The effect of the treatment after 1 
month is still apparent for this subgroup (compare circles and squares 
at high contrast in panel (a)). At 7 Hz there was a main effect of 
time (F(1,4) = 8.16, p < 0.05, partial η2 = 0.671) and time × contrast 
interaction (F(6,24) = 4.58, p < 0.01, partial η2 = 0.534). However, 
following the washout period of 2 months, responses had begun to 
return towards baseline (triangles in panel (a), green circles in panel 
(b), and were no longer significant (p > 0.05 for main effect of time 
and time × contrast interactions). These results suggest that the effects 
might be relatively long lasting, in the order of weeks or months.
EEG: electroencephalography.
 6 
Journal of Psychopharmacology 
 
Briani C, Dalla Torre C, Citton V, et al. (2013) Cobalamin deficiency: 
Clinical picture and radiological findings. Nutrients 15: 4521–4539.
Busse L, Wade AR and Carandini M (2009) Representation of concurrent 
stimuli by population activity in visual cortex. Neuron 64: 931–942.
Heeger DJ (1992) Normalization of cell responses in cat striate cortex. 
Vis Neurosci 9: 181–197.
Hill RL (1965) Hydrolysis of proteins. Adv Protein Chem 20: 37–107.
Honig A, Bartlett JR, Bouras N, et al. (1988) Amino acid levels in depres-
sion: A preliminary investigation. J Psychiatr Res 22: 159–164.
Ikeda M, Azuma S and Inoué S (1997) Vitamin B12 enhances GABA 
content but reduces glutamate content in the rat suprachiasmatic 
nucleus. Am J Physiol 273: R359–R363.
Kakee A, Takanaga H, Terasaki T, et al. (2008) Efflux of a suppres-
sive neurotransmitter, GABA, across the blood-brain barrier: Efflux 
transport of GABA across the BBB. J Neurochem 79: 110–118.
Katzner S, Busse L and Carandini M (2011) GABAA inhibition controls 
response gain in visual cortex. J Neurosci 31: 5931–5941.
Morrone MC, Burr DC and Speed HD (1987) Cross-orientation inhibi-
tion in cat is GABA mediated. Exp Brain Res 67: 635–644.
Nemeroff CB (2003) The role of GABA in the pathophysiology and 
treatment of anxiety disorders. Psychopharmacol Bull 37: 133–146.
Norcia AM, Appelbaum LG, Ales JM, et al. (2015) The steady-state 
visual evoked potential in vision research: A review. J Vis 15: 4.
Penkman KEH, Kaufman DS, Maddy D, et al. (2008) Closed-system 
behaviour of the intra-crystalline fraction of amino acids in mollusc 
shells. Quat Geochronol 3: 2–25.
Petroff OAC, Rothman DL, Behar KL, et al. (1996) Low brain GABA 
level is associated with poor seizure control. Ann Neurol 40: 908–
911.
Porciatti V, Bonanni P, Fiorentini A, et al. (2000) Lack of cortical con-
trast gain control in human photosensitive epilepsy. Nat Neurosci 3: 
259–263.
Robertson CE, Ratai E-M and Kanwisher N (2016) Reduced GABAergic 
Action in the Autistic Brain. Curr Biol 26: 80–85.
Shabbir F, Patel A, Mattison C, et al. (2013) Effect of diet on serotonergic 
neurotransmission in depression. Neurochem Int 62: 324–329.
Tsai JJ, Norcia AM, Ales JM, et al. (2011) Contrast gain control abnor-
malities in idiopathic generalized epilepsy. Ann Neurol 70: 574–582.
Van Loon AM, Knapen T, Scholte HS, et al. (2013) GABA shapes the 
dynamics of bistable perception. Curr Biol 23: 823–827.
Verghese P, Kim Y-J and Wade AR (2012) Attention selects informative 
neural populations in human V1. J Neurosci 32: 16379–16390.
