 FOOD, HEALTH, AND THE ENVIRONMENT (KE NACHMAN AND D LOVE, SECTION EDITORS)
Microplastics in Seafood and the Implications for Human Health
Madeleine Smith1 & David C. Love1,2 & Chelsea M. Rochman3 & Roni A. Neff1,2
Published online: 16 August 2018
# The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
Purpose of Review We describe evidence regarding human exposure to microplastics via seafood and discuss potential health
effects.
Recent Findings Shellfish and other animals consumed whole pose particular concern for human exposure. If there is toxicity, it
is likely dependent on dose, polymer type, size, surface chemistry, and hydrophobicity.
Summary Human activity has led to microplastic contamination throughout the marine environment. As a result of widespread
contamination, microplastics are ingested by many species of wildlife including fish and shellfish. Because microplastics are
associated with chemicals from manufacturing and that sorb from the surrounding environment, there is concern regarding
physical and chemical toxicity. Evidence regarding microplastic toxicity and epidemiology is emerging. We characterize current
knowledge and highlight gaps. We also recommend mitigation and adaptation strategies targeting the life cycle of microplastics
and recommend future research to assess impacts of microplastics on humans. Addressing these research gaps is a critical priority
due to the nutritional importance of seafood consumption.
Keywords Microplastics . Toxicology . Ocean . Seafood . Fish . Human health impacts
Introduction
Since the 1960s, plastic production has increased by approx-
imately 8.7% annually, evolving into a $600 billion global
industry [1, 2]. Approximately eight million metric tons of
plastics enter the oceans annually [2], and conservative esti-
mates suggest 5.25 trillion plastic particles currently circulate
in ocean surface waters [3•]. While some plastics enter oceans
from maritime operations, 80% is suspected to originate from
land-based sources [1]. Discarded plastic materials enter the
marine environment as trash, industrial discharge, or litter
through inland waterways, wastewater outflows, and transport
by winds or tides [4]. Waste generation and waste leakage are
inextricably linked and proportionally associated with eco-
nomic development, local infrastructure, and legislation.
Today, uncollected waste accounts for 75% of these land-
based discharges, while the remaining 25% comes from with-
in the waste management system [4].
When plastics enter the ocean, the rate of degradation and
persistence of plastics varies by polymer, shape, density, and
the purpose of the plastic itself [3•]. These characteristics also
govern where in the water column plastics may be found. For
example, more buoyant plastics are more likely to be carried
by ocean currents and wind across the environment [3•].
Additionally, when plastics are exposed to natural forces like
sunlight and wave action, plastics will degrade into
microplastics—defined as plastic particles under 5 mm in size.
This definition commonly includes plastic pieces in the nano-
scale, < 1 μm in size. The extent of plastic degradation de-
pends on factors including polymer type, age, and environ-
mental conditions like weathering, temperature, irradiation,
and pH [5]. Over time, plastic particles contaminate the ma-
rine ecosystem and the food chain, including foodstuffs
intended for human consumption [6]. In vivo studies have
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Food, Health, and the
Environment
* Roni A. Neff
rneff1@jhu.edu
1
Department of Environmental Health and Engineering, Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
USA
2
Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe St., W7010,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
3
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Current Environmental Health Reports (2018) 5:375–386
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-018-0206-z
 demonstrated that nanoplastics can translocate to all organs
[6]. Evidence is evolving regarding relationships between
micro- and nanoplastic exposure, toxicology, and human
health.
Nutritional authorities advise Americans to double their
seafood consumption; however, awareness or concerns about
microplastics in seafood could lead consumers to reduce their
consumption. Research to understand and reduce human
health risks is critical in order to simultaneously protect con-
sumers and support their nutritional health.
This review begins with a background on microplastics,
ocean dispersal, physical and chemical properties, and degra-
dation. Where relevant, we provide information about
nanoplastics. We then explore the life cycle of microplastics
including their toxicity and epidemiology in humans and an-
imals, strategies for mitigation and adaptation, and research
needs.
Approach
We conducted an unstructured literature review using
PubMed, Google Scholar, Nature’s database, and Science
Direct, focused on literature published after 2004 (the year
the term, “microplastic,” was introduced). We employed the
following keywords: microplastics, microdebris, primary
microplastics, secondary microplastics, nanoplastics, pellets,
marine debris and plastics, microbeads, marine biota, food
web, harmful effects, environmental policies, and industry.
These sites were searched until saturation occurred. Websites
of organizations with interest in this topic were also explored:
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and The Group of
Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental
Protection (GESAMP) of the United Nations, European
Food Safety Authority (EFSA), United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA). The resultant articles were organized and synthe-
sized into an overview describing the current state of the sci-
ence. Insights from this review were used to identify recom-
mendations for future research and mitigation.
Background on Microplastics
Sources and Distribution
In the marine environment, microplastics are a heterogeneous
group of particles (< 5 mm), varying in size, shape, and chem-
ical composition. They are found in sediment, on the sea sur-
face, in the water column, and in wildlife [7, 8]. Table 1 de-
scribes the most common plastic polymer types in the marine
environment. Of these, the most common plastic types
manufactured are polyethylene and polypropylene [7].
Microplastics are often categorized into primary and sec-
ondary types. Primary microplastics were originally produced
to be < 5 mm in size, while secondary microplastics result
from the breakdown of larger items. Microbeads in personal
care products are an example of primary microplastics [9•].
While they are now being phased out globally, in 2015, an
estimated eight billion microbeads were released into aquatic
habitats from the USA daily [10]. Other sources of primary
microplastics include industrial abrasives and pre-production
plastic pellets used to make larger plastic items. Sources of
secondary microplastics include microfibers from textiles, tire
dust, and larger plastic items that degrade and, consequently,
fragment into microplastic particles, mostly due to weathering
degradation [11]. Even if humans halted plastic production
and prevented plastic waste dumping, marine microplastics
would continue to increase as larger plastic litter degrades into
secondary microplastics [9•].
Physical and Chemical Properties
Microplastics in the marine environment are typically found
as pellets, fragments, or fibers and are composed of diverse
polymers [12], some denser than seawater and expected to
sink to the seafloor. These include polyamide, polyester, po-
lymerizing vinyl chloride (PVC), and acrylic, among others.
Others are lighter than seawater and are often found floating at
the surface, including polyethylene, polypropylene, and
polystyrene.
Plastic products are composed of monomers joined to make
the polymer structure and additive chemicals. During produc-
tion, plastic is processed with additives to provide specific
properties [13]. Several thousand distinct additives are used,
including plasticizers, flame retardants, pigments, antimicro-
bial agents, heat stabilizers, UV stabilizers, fillers, and flame
retardants such as polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs)
[13, 14••, 15]. Additives account for approximately 4% of the
weight of microplastics [14••]. Once created, plastic polymers
are described as non-toxic because they are not reactive and
generally cannot easily transport across biological membranes
due to their size [16]. However, non-polymeric substances,
like chemical additives or residual monomers, can be hazard-
ous to human health and the environment when they leach
from the plastic polymer matrix [6]. As plastics progressively
degrade, the surface area to volume ratio increases and addi-
tive chemicals are expected to leach [17]. Leached chemicals
may bioaccumulate in animals from seawater [17]. For organ-
isms that have directly ingested microplastics, the uptake rate
of additive chemicals by an organism’ gastrointestinal tract is
primarily influenced by the chemical fugacity gradient be-
tween the organisms’ tissues and the plastic, the gut retention
376
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
 time of the microplastics, and the material-specific kinetic
factors [18].
In addition to additive chemicals being associated with
plastic debris, microplastics in the ocean accumulate persistent
organic pollutants (POPs) such as polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and or-
ganochlorine pesticides like dichlorodiphynyltrichloroethane
(DDT) or hexachlorobenzene (HCB) from the water [18, 19].
These have a greater affinity for plastic than water, and con-
centrations on microplastics are orders of magnitude greater
than in surrounding water [19, 20]. PBDEs are human-made
flame-retardant chemicals. PBDEs enter the marine environ-
ment mainly via discarded or leaked consumer goods or mu-
nicipal waste. Plastic deposited on beaches from the marine
environment have been found to contain from 0.03 to 50 ng/g
PBDE [17].
The global distribution of chemicals in the marine environ-
ment may affect environmental and human health, but
microplastics do not represent the only exposure pathway. In
fact, microplastics may represent a relatively small contributor
to the total risk as there are many other sources for chemical
exposure [18]. For example, the total dietary intake of PCBs
from microplastics is likely minimal compared to that from
other sources, as identified in Table 2 [6]. For other chemicals,
such as bisphenol A (BPA) or PBDEs, sources of exposure
may be limited to or originate from microplastic degradation.
Degradation of Marine Plastics
Plastic is persistent in the marine environment because it is
manufactured to be durable. Still, plastic polymers can be
degraded slowly by microorganisms (e.g., Bacillus cereus,
Micrococcus sp., or Corynebacterium), heat, oxidation, light,
or hydrolysis, as identified in Table 3. The rate and extent of
plastic degradation are determined by the environmental var-
iables present.
Microplastics in the Food Chain
Exposure to Microplastics by Marine Animals
A 2016 UN report documented over 800 animal species con-
taminated with plastic via ingestion or entanglement—a figure
69% greater than that reported in a 1977 review, which esti-
mated only 247 contaminated species [21, 22]. Of these 800
species, 220 have been found to ingest microplastic debris in
natura [6].
Plastic ingestion occurs across taxa within different trophic
levels, including marine mammals, fish, invertebrates, and
fish-eating birds [8, 9•]. Plastic particles are often found con-
centrated in an organism’s digestive tract during carcass dis-
section and laboratory research. With preference to smaller
particles, micro- and nanoplastics can persist in the animal’s
body [6, 9•, 11, 22, 23] and translocate from the intestinal tract
to the circulatory system or surrounding tissue [6].
Human Exposure Pathways
Seafood consumption represents one pathway for human
microplastic exposure. As of 2015, global seafood intake rep-
resented 6.7% of all protein consumed and approximately
17% of animal protein consumption [24]. Global per capita
seafood consumption is over 20 kg/year; in the USA, it is 7 kg
annually [25]. Global seafood trade in 2016 was $132.6 bil-
lion, and over 90% of US seafood was imported from geo-
graphic regions with significant waste leakage and pelagic
plastic pollution [6]. Roughly half of seafood is farmed (e.g.,
aquaculture) and half is wild-caught. It is possible to control
environmental conditions in aquaculture—by raising animals
in ponds, tanks, or selected water bodies—and animals gen-
erally have shorter lifespans in aquaculture than in the wild,
which could provide less opportunities and time for
microplastic exposure and uptake. Due to few studies, there
Table 1 Common application of
plastic found in the marine
environment and the frequency of
polymer type identified in 42
studies of microplastic debris
sampled at sea or in marine
sediment
Plastic resin type (acronym)
Application
Percent of studies
(n) that identified
specific polymers
Polyethylene, high-density (PE-HD)
Milk and juice jugs
79 (33)
Polyethylene, low-density (PE-LD)
Plastic bag, six pack rings, bottles,
netting, and drinking straws
Polypropylene (PP)
Rope, bottle caps, and netting
64 (27)
Polystyrene (PS)
Plastic utensils, food containers
33 (17)
Polyamide (PA)
Nylon fabric
17 (7)
Polyester (PES)
Polyester fabric
10 (4)
Polyvinylchloride (PVC)
Film, containers and pipes
5 (2)
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
Plastic beverage bottles
2 (1)
Adapted from [9•, 10]
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
377
 is uncertainty about the differences in microplastics for farmed
and wild fish and shellfish.
Because of their small size, microplastics can be ingested
by a wide variety of marine organisms. Ingestion may be
direct or indirect via trophic transfer (e.g., up the food web).
Microplastic ingestion has been documented in planktonic
organisms and larvae at the bottom of the food chain
[25–28], in small and large invertebrates [6, 7, 11, 29, 22]
and in fish [6]. Trophic transfer of microplastics was observed
in the predatory Crucian carps [30].
Microplastics are found in many species intended for hu-
man consumption including invertebrates, crustaceans, and
fish [23, 31•]. Plastic particles are often found concentrated
in an organisms’ digestive tracts such that bivalves and small
fish consumed whole are more likely to expose microplastics
to the human diet [9•]. For example, Fig. 1 illustrates move-
ment of plastic from bivalve mollusks to the human diet. Van
Cauwenberghe and Janssen [23] found farmed mussels had
significantly higher microplastic concentrations (178
microfibers) than wild-caught mussels (126 microfibers)
[23]. Additionally, Rochman et al. identified the presence of
microplastics (> 500 μm) in commercially sold, wild-caught
fish from markets in Makassar, Indonesia (28% of fish proc-
essed contained microplastics), and California, USA (25% of
commercial fish processed contained microplastics) [31•].
Karami et al. investigated the potential presence of
microplastics in dried fish tissue: excised organs (viscera and
gills) and eviscerated flesh (whole fish, excluding the viscera
and gills) [32]. In four of 30 commonly consumed dried fish
species, 36 of 61 isolated foreign particles were identified as
Table 2
Comparing the estimated total dietary exposure to contaminants and additives directly from microplastics in seafood
Compound
Highest concentration
in microplastics
Calculated intake from
microplastics (pg/kg bw/day)
Total intake from the
diet (pg/kg bw/day)
Ratio intake microplastic/total
dietary intake (pg/kg bw/day) (%)
Contaminants
Non-dioxin like PCBs
2970
0.3
–
–
EFSA, 2012
–
–
4300a
0.007
JECFA, 2016
–
–
1000a
0.03
PAHs
44,800
4.5
–
–
EFSA, 2008
–
–
28,800b
0.02
JECFA, 2006
–
–
4000c
0.1
DDT
2100
0.2
–
–
EFSA, 2006
–
–
5000d
0.004
JECFA, 1960
–
–
100,000,000j
0.0000002
Additives/monomers
Bisphenol A
200
0.02
EFSA, 2015a
–
–
130,000e
0.00002
FAO/WHO, 2011
–
–
400,000f
0.000005
PBDEs
50
0.005
–
–
EFSA, 2011
–
–
700g
0.0007
JECFA, 2006
–
–
185h
0.003
NP
2500
0.3
NAi
–
OP
50
0.005
NAi
–
Reproduced with permission from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2017) and Lusher et al. [6]
PCBs polychlorinated biphenyls, PAHs polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, DDT dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, PBDEs polybrominated diphenyl
ethers, NP nonylphenol, OP octylphenol
a Lowest intake of six indicators of non-dioxin like PCBs, representing about 50% of all non-dioxin like PCBs
b Median intake (EFSA, 2008)
c Mean intake of benzo[a]pyrene (JECFA)
d Lowest intake, DDT, and related compounds (EFSA, 2006)
e Average intake adults (EFSA, 2015a)
f Lowest intake FAO/WHO
g Lowest intake, sum of BDE-47, BDE-209, BDE-153, and BDE-154 (EFSA, 2011)
h Lowest intake JECFA
i NA: dietary intake not available from EFSA or JECFA
j Provisional tolerable daily intake (JECFA)
378
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
 plastic polymers [32]. In young and adult fish, Yifeng et al.
demonstrated microplastic particle translocation from diges-
tive tracts to the gills and liver of zebra fish (Danio rerio), a
common prey fish [33]. Microplastic particle translocation is
also documented in European seabass and the common goby
(Pomatoschistus microps) [34]. Together, these studies dem-
onstrate the presence of microplastics, not the chemical con-
stituents, in some seafood and indicate that the challenge
could be widespread due to ubiquity in the environment and
translocation potentially moving particles to animal parts typ-
ically eaten by humans.
Because water and salt are often extracted from the natural
world, researchers investigated whether products made with
these ingredients were also contaminated with nano- and
microplastics. They investigated and found microplastics in
beer [35], honey [36], and sea salt [37]. While the origin of
these contaminants is uncertain, potential sources include at-
mospheric emission and uptake of microplastics by the basic
components of the food products, impurities introduced by
processing materials, and the contaminants present in packag-
ing [35]. Increasingly, scientific evidence outlines multiple
pathways of microplastic exposure via food including
Mussel
culture
Oyster
culture
Because they filter water, bivalves (such as mussels, oysters, clams and 
others) can absorb and excrete microplastic present in the sea water 
where they are cultivated
After harvesting, shellfish are usually kept in clean water to get rid of 
contaminants. The shellfish expel some microplastics, while others remain 
inside, reach the market and end up on the consumer’s plate
Nutrients
Microplastics
Sea 
water 
inhaled
Water 
exhaled
Sea 
water 
inhaled
Water 
exhaled
An 
example 
of 
how 
microplastics 
could 
end 
up 
on 
a 
consumer's 
plate
Sources: Tjärnö Marine Biological Laboratory, Strömstad, Sweden; personal communication with Dr. Sarah Dudas
Fig. 1 An example of how microplastics could end up on a consumer’s plate (Reproduced with permission from Maphoto/Riccardo Pravettoni;
originally published by Marine Litter GRID-ADRENAL, available at www.grida.no/resources/6915
Table 3 Explanation of
degradation processes [10]
Degradation process
Explanation
Biodegradation
Decomposition of organic materials by microorganisms
Photo degradation
Action of light or photons, usually sunlight (UVA or greater, > 320 nm)
Thermooxidative degradation
Slow oxidative, molecular deterioration at moderate temperatures
Thermal degradation
High temperature cause molecular deterioration
(not an environmental mechanism)
Hydrolysis
Reaction with water
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
379
 evidence that microplastics are present in species which con-
tribute to global marine fisheries [6]. Accordingly,
microplastics pose an emerging food safety concern [6].
International scientific committees such as the Joint FAO/
WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) has
not evaluated the food safety concern posed by microplastics
[6]; however, state-level environmental protection agencies
have begun assessing the public health implications of
microplastics and nanoplastics [38].
Human health effects depend on exposure concentrations.
Due to data gaps in microplastic research, there is insufficient
information to assess the true amount of microplastics humans
may be exposed to via food. Researchers have predicted that
the total microplastic intake from salts is at most 37 particles
per individual annually [37]. Researchers have also estimated
that a top European shellfish consumer eats approximately
11,000 plastic particles annually [23, 32, 37]. The implications
are unknown.
Microplastic exposure also can confer exposure to associ-
ated chemicals. Few studies have assessed the relative contri-
bution of microplastic exposure to additives or chemicals
found in organisms, versus alternative exposure pathways
[39]. The EFSA monitors six indicators for non-dioxin-like
PCBs in food to assess average total dietary exposure to
PCBs. While the portion of exposure from microplastics is
unknown, fish, meat, and dairy contribute the greatest dietary
exposure to PCBs, demonstrating a route of persistent expo-
sure to animal tissue and trophic level transfer [40]. It was
determined that total dietary PCB intake ranged from 1 to
83 ng PCB/kg bodyweight (bw) per day [41]. The average
dietary intake of PAHs, using benzo[a]pyrene as the reference
marker, ranged from 4 to 10 ng/kg b.w. per day [41].
The US FDA residue limit for PCBs in fish and shellfish is
0.2 ppm for infants and juniors and 2 ppm for adults, corre-
sponding to developmental effects, hormonal disruption, im-
mune system, thyroid effects, and cancer [40]. The FDA has
not established a limit governing the concentration of PAH
content in foodstuffs [42]. In animals, the US Environmental
Protection Agency has identified a reference dose for oral
benzo(a)pyrene exposure, the most studied PAH, at
0.0003 mg/kg/day [42]. The oral reference dose applies
to food and water and estimates the concentration at
which adverse effects on human health are known to
occur. Additional studies are needed to understand the
biological processes influencing the release of chemicals
associated with microplastic ingestion, and all routes of
chemical exposure [43].
Today, evidence is mounting suggesting that microplastic
ingestion or its associated chemicals pose a threat to marine
animals [9•, 14••, 31•]. Understanding whether microplastic
exposures impact human health requires standardized and re-
producible methods for sampling, exposure characterization,
ecological assessment, and human health assessment. There is
no standard operating procedure for sampling occurring on
beaches, in subtidal sediments, in biota, or within the water
column.
Toxicity to Humans
Microplastics may cause harm to humans via both physical
and chemical pathways. While it is not possible to completely
disentangle these, we separate them for the purpose of this
discussion.
Potential Physical Effects of Microplastics
Microplastics are ubiquitous in the marine environment and
are increasingly contaminating species in the marine environ-
ment. Given levels of seafood consumption worldwide, it is
inevitable that humans are exposed to microplastics at some
level. The human body’s excretory system eliminates
microplastics, likely disposing of > 90% of ingested micro-
and nanoplastic via feces [14••, 44•]. Factors affecting reten-
tion and clearance rates are the size, shape, polymer type, and
additive chemicals of microplastics ingested by humans [6].
The severity of adverse effects resulting from exposures de-
pends on the nature of the toxic chemical, exposure character-
istics, individual susceptibility, and hazard controls. The phys-
ical effects of accumulated microplastics are less understood
than the distribution and storage of toxicants in the human
body, but preliminary research has demonstrated several po-
tentially concerning impacts, including enhanced inflammato-
ry response, size-related toxicity of plastic particles, chemical
transfer of adsorbed chemical pollutants, and disruption of the
gut microbiome [44•].
Surface functional groups, size, shape, surface charge,
buoyancy, and hydrophobicity predict microplastic uptake
[45]. Mammalian systems modeling suggests that
microplastics with certain characteristics can translocate
across living cells, such as M cells or dendritic cells, to the
lymphatic and/or circulatory system, accumulate in secondary
organs, and impact the immune system and cell health [14••,
43, 45–51]. Microplastics may contact the airway or gastroin-
testinal epithelium demonstrating several routes of uptake and
translocation, such as endocytic pathways and persorption
[44•]. Medical literature related to the impact of micro- and
nanoplastics originating from surgical procedures and inhala-
tion provides insight into the kinetic movement of plastics in
humans [6]. For example, micro- and nanoplastics released
from surgical materials mimic the effects of absorbed particles
in the bloodstream and tissue [6], while inhaled particles in-
teract with the same type of epithelial tissue as that involved
during ingestion. For example, microbes colonized on the
surface of ingested microplastics may serve as a vector of
harmful bacteria when ingested, potentially resulting in direct
380
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
 physiological effects (nutritional, toxicological, immunologi-
cal, or developmental) on marine animals. Wright and Kelly
predict that ingested microplastics may cause inflammation in
tissue, cellular proliferation, and necrosis and may compro-
mise immune cells [44•]. While laboratory research has dem-
onstrated that plastic microspheres ingested by blue crabs
(Callinectes sapidus) stimulate hemocyte aggregation and re-
duce their respiratory function [52]. Moreover, after ingesting
microspheres, blue mussels experienced an immune response
and the formation of granulomas [53]. The Japanese medaka
(Oryzias latipes) experienced hepatic stress after ingesting
virgin polyethylene fragments [54]. Factors influencing the
biological and ecological impact of microplastics include
presence, sizes, and frequency of engagement between bio-
ta-microplastics. More research is needed to further inform
a risk assessment of the impact of microplastics on sea-
food and consequently human health. It would be valu-
able to conduct a risk analysis monitoring microplastics
and the related chemical concentrations in seafood, partic-
ularly shellfish to identify the potential biological conse-
quences of microplastic exposure. Additionally, in this
stage, it is important to monitor consumer consumption
rates of seafood, particularly bivalves. This information
will inform a risk evaluation and management or mitiga-
tion strategies connecting sources and drivers of
microplastic pollution. This approach integrates a systems
perspective that employs precautionary measures to re-
duce the threat of harm posed by microplastics to the
environment and to humans given present uncertainty.
Nanoplastic movement provides insight into the move-
ment and potential effects of non-degradable particles in
the human body. The potential health risks of micro- and
nanoplastics could be evaluated similar to those of
engineered nanoparticles [14••]. Following oral exposure,
nanoplastics are transported by M cells, specialized epi-
thelial cells of the mucosa, from the gut into the blood
where they are carried through the lymphatic system and
into the liver and gall bladder [55]. Their size and hydro-
phobicity enable their passage through the placenta and
blood-brain barrier and into the gastrointestinal tract and
lungs, potential sites for harm to occur [56]. Their large
surface area to volume ratio makes them potentially very
chemically reactive, more so than some microplastics.
Research studies have demonstrated toxicity in vitro to
lung cells, liver, and brain cells [9•]. The systemic distri-
bution from oral exposure to nanoparticles has been
shown to have numerous effects: cardiopulmonary re-
sponses, alterations of endogenous metabolites,
genotoxicity, inflammatory responses, oxidative stress, ef-
fects on nutrient absorption, gut microflora, and reproduc-
tion [14••, 36, 46]. Parallel research into nanoparticle
movement and toxicity provides insight into threats posed
by microplastics and nanoplastics.
Potential Effects of Chemical Additives
Chemical additives in plastic may cause toxic effects.
Moreover, the ability for microplastics to accumulate POPs
raises concern that microplastics could transfer hazardous
POPs to marine animals and subsequently humans [6].
Chemical partitioning between microplastics and animal
tissue is a dynamic process; there are few studies that
model variables and mechanisms like bioaccumulation,
kinetics, and the physicochemical properties of marine
microplastics [57].
Direct exposures to POPs and other chemicals associated
with microplastics may affect biological systems and pose
specific threats to juvenile humans and animals, including at
low doses [9•, 40]. Current guidelines for toxicity testing of
chemical components use high contaminant concentrations
from a single substance to estimate risk at lower exposure
levels or to make low-dose extrapolations. This method fails
to capture concerns related to low-dose contaminants or mixed
groups of contaminants. Additionally, this method makes it
challenging to account for non-linear dose relationships. As
a result, these methods fail to generate data that captures the
potential threat posed by chemicals associated with
microplastics.
Ingestion is a common interaction between biota and
microplastics. The fate and impact of microplastics and their
associated chemicals vary across species and environments
[6]. Laboratory studies demonstrate increased toxicity from
the combination of microplastics and associated chemicals
[51, 58]. It is difficult to evaluate whether toxicological im-
pacts translate to humans, however [59]. In animals, the quan-
tity of chemicals from microplastics is suspected to be mini-
mal compared to that from other components of the diet [6].
Microplastics and their constituents may exert localized parti-
cle toxicity, but chronic exposure producing a cumulative ef-
fect is of greater concern. In summary, further work is required
to estimate the dose of chemicals to humans from
microplastics in seafood and the related effects, including
studies of seafood intake, chemical characterization in sea-
food, and kinetic studies.
Epidemiology
In human medicine, microplastics are used as carriers of med-
ications into body tissues [60]. A report commissioned by the
House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee of the
UK Parliament speculates that the additives and contaminants
of concern, when adsorbed to marine microplastics, would act
similarly to microplastics used in medical procedures, which
transfer to human tissues [60], though there is insufficient data
demonstrating this [61].
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
381
 We do not fully understand how microplastics interact with
human biological tissue. For example, if there is an adverse
interaction, the effects may be apparent and significant to the
individual, but without sufficient and extensive epidemiolog-
ical studies, impacts may be difficult to detect at a population
level. There is a significant correlation between urine BPA
levels and both cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes
[62]. BPA exposures in humans occur both from low-
dose exposures to microplastics and both low- and high-
dose exposures from non-microplastic sources via inhala-
tion of air and dust or ingestion of foodstuffs. Research is
needed to thoroughly assess the risk of microplastics and
nanoplastic dietary exposure.
Microplastics and their constituents may exert localized
particle toxicity, but chronic exposure producing a cumulative
effect is of greater concern. To address research gaps, it is
recommended that scientists evaluate the relative impact of
microplastics as an exposure pathway. Further, it would be
valuable to identify sorbed contaminant bioavailability and
use biomonitoring methods to contextualize safe toxicological
exposure parameters for chronic exposure to microplastics
and their constituents [7].
Mitigation of and Adaptation to Risks
The above sections have described the state of evidence
linking microplastics to potential human and animal health
risk. Microplastics, chemical toxicity, and chronic exposure
to microplastics may pose risk to human health, especially
with increasing direct exposure to plastic and localized
chemicals. And, while significant gaps remain, complimenta-
ry bodies of evidence indicate likely exposures and potential
hazards from both particles and associated chemicals. The
impact of microplastics on human health is uncertain, but
cannot be ignored, and presents one justification to mitigate
the increasing influx of plastic into the environment.
Table 4
Global agreements and domestic legislation governing protection of the marine environment
Title
Description
A. Global agreements to protect the marine environment from dumping
Convention of the Prevention of Marine Pollution by
Dumping of Wastes and other Matter (London Convention 1972)
Limits the quantities of land-based waste permissible for dumping in the ocean
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from
Ships, 1973, as modified by the protocol of 1978
(MARPOL 73/78)
Provides measures to prevent pollution from ships and nation states, Annex
V: garbage [63]
1982 UN Convention of the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS 1982)
Provides a maritime framework addressing the rights and obligations of states.
XII: protection and preservation of the marine environment [64]
Honolulu Strategy
A global framework to reduce marine plastic and its ecological, human health,
and economic impacts [65]
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 14.1, 2015
By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce pollution marine debris, particularly
from land-based activities [66]
Clean Seas Campaign
Engaging individuals, industries, and member states of UNEP to voluntarily
commit to reducing plastic pollution [67]
B. Key US Federal legislation to protect the marine and coastal
environment
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act
(MPRSA), 1972 (also known as the Ocean Dumping Act)
Regulates and restricts dumping materials of any kind into the oceans which
would adversely affect human health, welfare, or amenities, or the marine
environment, ecological systems, or economic potentialities [63]
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972
Intended to protect and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity
of the nation’s waters [63]
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 1976 (RCRA)
Principal federal law governing the disposal of solid and hazardous waste [63]
Shore Protection Act 1988 (SPA)
Requires a vessel have a permit, number, or other marking visible if transporting
municipal or commercial waste within coastal waters [63]
Marine Debris Research, Prevention, and Reduction Act,
2006 (MDR PRA) (5. 362, 2006)
Identifies, determines sources of, assess, prevents, reduces, and removes marine
debris in addition to addressing the adverse impacts of marine debris on the
economy of the USA, marine environment, and navigation safety
Microbead-Free Waters Act (H.R. 1321, 2015)
Prohibits the manufacture of personal care products containing microbeads,
including those made of biodegradable polymers, as of July 1, 2017
Save Our Seas Act (S.756, 2017)
Providing funding for marine debris cleanup in coastal states and educational
outreach addressing the topic of marine debris as well as promoting
international action to reduce the incidence of marine debris
382
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
 Governments, industry, and civil society all have important
roles to play.
Multiple global agreements and domestic policies govern
protection of the marine environment; Table 4 identifies sev-
eral notable policies. Since the enactment of The United
Nations Law of the Sea in 1982, a coastal country has sover-
eign rights extending 200 nautical miles from its shoreline. It
is, therefore, the responsibility of governments in those loca-
tions to determine who may use this area and how. With di-
verse cultures, priorities, and opinions present in each coastal
country, levels of protection differ considerably.
Industry also plays a critical role in reducing microplastic
prevalence throughout the supply chain, in the form of prima-
ry microplastics used in industrial processes and secondary
microplastics. Extended producer responsibility (EPR), a
stewardship policy targeting corporations marketing consum-
er goods, holds manufacturers responsible for the post-
consumer phase of plastic packaging [68]. IKEA, for example,
has integrated EPR policies into its business model by pro-
moting material reuse and recycling throughout its supply
chain and consumer experience. The company indicates in
their Sustainability Summary Report F17 that 590,258 t of
waste was produced in 2017 across their supply chain of
which 83% was recycled or incinerated for energy recovery
[69].Other companies are utilizing focused upcycling strate-
gies in their supply chain by directly removing, recycling, and
reclaiming plastic from the marine environment to create tex-
tile fibers which are then processed and manufactured into
yarn for consumer goods. Adidas, for example, partnered with
Parley for the Oceans in 2015, to manufacture sneakers and
clothing from plastic pollution in the Maldives using a zero-
waste 3D printing technique. In 2017, Adidas sold one million
pairs of Parley collaborated shoes, equivalent to 16.5 million
plastic bottles and 14.3 t of nylon gill nets [70, 71]. Unifi,
Bureo, CityPlace, Method, and G-Star RAW clothing have
also taken steps to reduce ocean plastic pollution through
Ocean Plastic Programs [A.I.R., Avoid, Intercept, and
Redesign] [72]. While these are not EPR stewardship policies,
A.I.R. is a step in the right direction.
Another approach to mitigation is beach cleanup pro-
grams. These are generally organized by non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) globally and aim
both to raise awareness about marine debris and to re-
move materials that could cause harm and gradually de-
grade into microplastics. The International Coastal
Cleanup (ICC) coordinated by the Ocean Conservancy, a
US NGO, is one of the largest operational organizers of
these programs, providing significant financial and social
input [64]. The ICC engages 70 countries globally in an
annual September weekend litter survey and beach clean-
up activity [64]. From the 2016 event, 790,000 volunteers
participated in collecting 18 million pounds of trash
across over 25,000 miles of shoreline [64].
The extent to which these efforts influence marine plastic
pollution or protect the environment is unknown. It is also
unclear how measures aimed at preventing plastic pollution
leakage compare with reactive measures such as beach
cleanups, in terms of cost-effectiveness.
Conclusions
We know that humans ingest microplastics. Considering the
totality of research findings on microplastics to date, we know
that shellfish and other marine organisms consumed with intact
GI tracts pose particular concern because they accumulate and
retain microplastics. The toxicity associated with consuming
microplastics is likely dependent on size, associated chemicals,
and dose. Our collective understanding is limited regarding the
sources, fate, exposure, bioavailability, and toxicity of
microplastics and their associated chemicals in the marine en-
vironment. Current knowledge is mostly based on research
conducted within the last decade; however, interest in studying
microplastics is growing. The following are key research needs
for microplastics and their effects on human health:
&
Assess microplastics’ impact on ecological systems and
food safety and improve understanding of potential toxi-
cological mechanisms and public health effects.
&
Identify, if possible, lower risk species, production
methods, or regions, and interactions of microplastics with
nutrients and various seafood processing and cooking
methods, in order to promote adjustments rather than con-
sumer avoidance of seafood.
&
Standardize data collection methods for microplastic oc-
currence in the environment and food stuffs, followed by
exposure assessment for dietary intake.
&
Standardize data collection assessing major seafood pro-
duction types and seafood producing countries.
&
Collect data on presence, identity and quantity of degrad-
ed plastic in food, and data on the translocation of
microplastics through the aquatic food web and human
food system.
&
Develop methods to assess physical and chemical changes
of micro- and nanoplastics when interacting with biolog-
ical systems.
&
Collect toxicity exposure data evaluating mixtures of var-
ious additives/monomers.
&
Collect toxicological data on the most common polymers and
their relative contributions to microplastic contamination.
&
Develop specific biomonitoring processes and body bur-
den measurements for additives and monomers.
&
Research the toxicokinetics and toxicity of micro- and
nanoplastics and their associated chemical compounds,
to determine local gastrointestinal (GI) tract effects in an-
imals and humans.
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
383
 While much remains to be learned, filling these gaps is
essential for advancing the dual goals of promoting seafood
consumption and protecting consumers from negative health
effects from microplastics in the marine environment.
Acknowledgments
Support for D.C.L. and R.A.N. was provided by the Johns
Hopkins Center for a Livable Future (CLF) with a gift from
the GRACE Communications Foundation, which had no role
in study design, analysis, findings, or development of recom-
mendations. The authors thank Jillian Fry, Shawn McKenzie,
Jim Yager, Keeve Nachman, Mardi Shoer, and Marc
Weisskopf for their insightful feedback.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Madeleine Smith, David C. Love, Chelsea M.
Rochman, and Roni A. Neff declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does not
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of
the authors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major Importance
1.
Jambeck JR, Geyer R, Wilcox C, Siegler TR, Perryman M,
Andrady A, et al. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean.
Science. 2015;347(6223):768–71.
2.
Gourmelon G. Global plastic production rises, recycling lags. Vital
Signs. 2015.
3.• Eriksen M, Lebreton LCM, Carson HS, Thiel M, Moore CJ,
Borerro JC, et al. Plastic Pollution in the World’s Oceans: More
than 5 Trillion Plastic Pieces Weighing over 250,000 Tons Afloat at
Sea. PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e111913. This study provides a thor-
ough description of the presence, quantity, and distribution of
plastics in the ocean as well as the degradation processes that
result in micro- and nanoplastic production. It provides a com-
prehensive assessment of the movement and collection of
microplastics in the ocean, while accounting for variables such
as weather, depth, density, etc. that influence standardized col-
lection methods and, thereby, our understanding of the ubiqui-
tous nature of plastics in the ocean.
4.
McKinsey & Company. Saving the ocean from plastic waste |
McKinsey & Company. 2015; http://www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-
insights/saving-the-ocean-from-plastic-waste. Accessed Jan 23,
2017.
5.
Akbay İK, Özdemir T. Monomer migration and degradation of
polycarbonate via UV-C irradiation within aquatic and atmospheric
environments. J Macromol Sci A. 2016;53(6):340–5.
6.
Lusher A, Hollman P, Mendoza-Hill J. Microplastics in fisheries
and aquaculture: status of knowledge on their occurrence and im-
plications for aquatic organisms and food safety. FAO Fisheries and
Aquaculture Technical Paper 2017;(615).
7.
Thompson RC, Olsen Y, Mitchell RP, Davis A, Rowland SJ, John
AWG, et al. Lost at sea: where is all the plastic? Science.
2004;304(5672):838.
8.
Gall SC, Thompson RC. The impact of debris on marine life. Mar
Pollut Bull. 2015;92(1–2):170–9.
9.• GESAMP. Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine
environment: part two of a global assessment. IMO/FAO/
UNESCO-IOC/UNIDO/WMO/IAEA/UN/ UNEP/UNDP Joint
Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine
Environmental Protection 2016:220 p. This review is well
researched and provides comprehensive documentation defin-
ing the current state of knowledge of microplastics: the prove-
nance, fate, and externalities of their presence in our marine
ecosystem and interaction with marine organisms.
10.
Rochman CM, Kross SM, Armstrong JB, Bogan MT, Darling ES,
Green SJ, et al. Scientific evidence supports a ban on microbeads.
Environ Sci Technol 2015; 49(18):10759–10761.
11.
Duis K, Coors A. Microplastics in the aquatic and terrestrial envi-
ronment: sources (with a specific focus on personal care products),
fate and effects. Environ Sci Eur. 2016;28(1):2.
12.
Hidalgo-Ruz V, Gutow L, Thompson RC, Thiel M. Microplastics in
the marine environment: a review of the methods used for identifi-
cation and quantification. Environ Sci Technol. 2012;46(6):3060–
75.
13.
Lithner D. Environmental and health hazards of chemicals in plastic
polymers and products. Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg;
2011.
14.•• EFAS Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain (CONTAM).
Presence of microplastics and nanoplastics in food, with particular
focus on seafood. EFSA J. 2016;14(6):n/a. The report assesses the
overall food safety risk of microplastics and their associated
additives and contaminants in seafood. The report stresses the
need for substantially more research to properly conduct a full
risk assessment on the health risk posed by microplastics to
humans.
15.
Rosato DV. Extruding plastics: practical processing handbook. 1st
ed. London: Chapman & Hall; 1998.
16.
Anastas PT, Bickart PH, Kirchhoff MM. Designing safer polymers.
New York: Wiley-Interscience; 2000.
17.
Teuten EL, Saquing JM, Knappe DRU, Barlaz MA, Jonsson S,
Björn A, et al. Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to
the environment and to wildlife. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B
Biol Sci. 2009;364(1526):2027–45.
18.
Mato Y, Isobe T, Takada H, Kanehiro H, Ohtake C, Kaminuma T.
Plastic resin pellets as a transport medium for toxic chemicals in the
marine environment. Environ Sci Technol. 2001;35(2):318–24.
19.
Rochman CM, Hoh E, Hentschel BT, Kaye S. Long-term field
measurement of sorption of organic contaminants to five types of
plastic pellets: implications for plastic marine debris. Environ Sci
Technol. 2013;47(3):1646–54.
20.
Andrady AL. Microplastics in the marine environment. Mar Pollut
Bull. 2011;62(8):1596–605.
21.
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Marine de-
bris: understanding, preventing and mitigating the significant ad-
verse impacts on marine and coastal. UNEP 2016. Biodiversity.
Technical Series No. 83
384
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
 22.
Murray F, Cowie PR. Plastic contamination in the decapod crusta-
cean Nephrops norvegicus (Linnaeus, 1758). Mar Pollut Bull.
2011;62(6):1207–17.
23.
Van Cauwenberghe L, Janssen CR. Microplastics in bivalves cul-
tured for human consumption. Environ Pollut 2014;193 65–70.
24.
FAO. The state of the worlds fisheries and aquaculture; 2016;4–10.
25.
Fisheries of the United States. Fisheries of the United States 2015.
26.
Cole M, Lindeque P, Fileman E, Halsband C, Goodhead R, Moger
J, et al. Microplastic ingestion by zooplankton. Environ Sci
Technol. 2013;47(12):6646–55.
27.
Lee K-W, Shim WJ, Kwon OY, Kang J-H. Size-dependent effects
of micro polystyrene particles in the marine copepod Tigriopus
japonicus. Environ Sci Technol. 2013;47(19):11278–83.
28.
Steer M, Cole M, Thompson RC, Lindeque PK. Microplastic in-
gestion in fish larvae in the western English Channel. Environ
Pollut. 2017;226:250–9.
29.
Farrell P, Nelson K. Trophic level transfer of microplastic: Mytilus
edulis (L.) to Carcinus maenas (L.). Environ Pollut.
2013;177(Supplement C):1–3.
30.
Mattsson K, Hansson L, Cedervall T. Nano-plastics in the aquatic
environment. Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts.
2015;17(1):1712–21.
31.• Rochman CM, Tahir A, Williams SL, Baxa DV, Lam R, Miller JT,
et al. Anthropogenic debris in seafood: plastic debris and fibers
from textiles in fish and bivalves sold for human consumption.
Sci Rep. 2015;5:14340. Demonstrates the risk associated with
microplastics in the marine environment and the human diet.
This study assesses the potential for microplastics to enter the
human food chain, beyond the more common route of ingesting
mollusks and other crustaceans.
32.
Karami A, Golieskardi A, Ho YB, Larat V, Salamatinia B.
Microplastics in eviscerated flesh and excised organs of dried fish.
Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):5473.
33.
Lu Y, Zhang Y, Deng Y, Jiang W, Zhao Y, Geng J, et al. Uptake and
accumulation of polystyrene microplastics in zebrafish (Danio
rerio) and toxic effects in liver. Environ Sci Technol. 2016;50(7):
4054–60.
34.
de Sá LC, Luís LG, Guilhermino L. Effects of microplastics on
juveniles of the common goby (Pomatoschistus microps): confu-
sion with prey, reduction of the predatory performance and efficien-
cy, and possible influence of developmental conditions. Environ
Pollut. 2015;196:359–62.
35.
Liebezeit G, Liebezeit E. Synthetic particles as contaminants in
German beers. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control
Expo Risk Assess. 2014;31(9):1574–8.
36.
Liebezeit G, Liebezeit E. Non-pollen particulates in honey and sug-
ar. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk
Assess. 2013;30(12):2136–40.
37.
Yang D, Shi H, Li L, Li J, Jabeen K, Kolandhasamy P. Microplastic
pollution in table salts from China. Environ Sci Technol.
2015;49(22):13622–7.
38.
Weis J, Andrews CJ, Dyksen JE, et al. Human health impact of
microplastics and nanoplastics. NJDEP - Science Advisory Board,
2015.
39.
GESAMP. Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine
environment: a global assessment; 2015; https://doi.org/10.13140/
RG.2.1.3803.7925. Accessed January 2017.
40.
Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry. ATSDR―public
health statement: polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). 2015;
Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/phs/phs.asp?id=139&tid=
26. Accessed 28 Jan 2017.
41.
Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants: eightieth
report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food
Additives. WHO Technical Report Series. 2016;(995):I.
42.
EPA IRIS. Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) CASRN 50-32-8 | IRIS | US
EPA, ORD. 2017; Available at: https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris2/
chemicalLanding.cfm?substance_nmbr=136
43.
Tanaka K, Takada H, Yamashita R, Mizukawa K, Fukuwaka M,
Watanuki Y. Accumulation of plastic-derived chemicals in tissues
of seabirds ingesting marine plastics. Mar Pollut Bull. 2013;69(1–
2):219–22.
44.• Wright SL, Kelly FJ. Plastic and human health: a micro issue?
Environ Sci Technol. 2017;51(12):6634–47. Assesses potential
exposure levels of particle, chemical, and microbial hazards
associated with microplastics to inform understanding of
microplastics uptake, internalization, impacts, and potential
adverse human health outcomes.
45.
Anderson JC, Park BJ, Palace VP. Microplastics in aquatic environ-
ments: implications for Canadian ecosystems. Environ Pollut.
2016;218(Supplement C):269–80.
46.
Hodges GM, Carr EA, Hazzard RA, Carr KE. Uptake and translo-
cation of microparticles in small intestine. Morphology and quanti-
fication of particle distribution. Dig Dis Sci. 1995;40(5):967–75.
47.
Powell JJ, Faria N, Thomas-McKay E, Pele LC. Origin and fate of
dietary nanoparticles and microparticles in the gastrointestinal tract.
J Autoimmun. 2010;34(3):J233.
48.
Lomer MCE, Thompson RPH, Powell JJ. Fine and ultrafine
particles of the diet: influence on the mucosal immune re-
sponse and association with Crohn’s disease. Proc Nutr Soc.
2002;61(1):123–30.
49.
des Rieux A, Ragnarsson EGE, Gullberg E, Préat V, Schneider Y,
Artursson P. Transport of nanoparticles across an in vitro model of
the human intestinal follicle associated epithelium. Eur J Pharm Sci.
2005.
50.
Eldridge JH, Meulbroek JA, Staas JK, Tice TR, Gilley RM.
Vaccine-containing biodegradable microspheres specifically enter
the gut-associated lymphoid tissue following oral administration
and induce a disseminated mucosal immune response. Adv Exp
Med Biol. 1989;251:191–202.
51.
Brown DM, Wilson MR, MacNee W, Stone V, Donaldson K. Size-
dependent proinflammatory effects of ultrafine polystyrene parti-
cles: a role for surface area and oxidative stress in the enhanced
activity of ultrafines. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2001;175(3):191–9.
52.
Johnson NG, Burnett LE, Burnett KG. Properties of bacteria that
trigger hemocytopenia in the Atlantic blue crab, Callinectes
sapidus, Biol Bull 2011;221(2):164–175.
53.
Köhler A. Cellular fate of organic compounds in marine inverte-
brates. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part A:
Molecular & Integrative Physiology; 27th Congress of the
newEuropean Society of Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology, Alessandria, Italy, September 5–9, 2010. 2010;157:S8.
54.
Rochman CM, Hoh E, Kurobe T, Teh SJ. Ingested plastic transfers
hazardous chemicals to fish and induces hepatic stress. 2013 /11/
21;3:srep03263.
55.
Bergmann M, Gutow L, Klages M. Marine anthropogenic litter.
Cham: SpringerOpen; 2015.
56.
Seltenrich N. New link in the food chain? Marine plastic pollution
and seafood safety. Environ Health Perspect. 2015;123(2):A41.
57.
Hartmann NB, Rist S, Bodin J, Jensen LH, Schmidt SN, Mayer P, et
al. Microplastics as vectors for environmental contaminants: ex-
ploring sorption, desorption, and transfer to biota. Integr Environ
Assess Manag. 2017;13(3):488–93.
58.
Browne M, Niven S, Galloway T, Rowland S, Thompson R.
Microplastic moves pollutants and additives to worms, reducing
functions linked to health and biodiversity. Curr Biol.
2013;23(23):2388–92.
59.
Talsness CE, Andrade AJM, Kuriyama SN, Taylor JA, vom Saal
FS. Components of plastic: experimental studies in animals and
relevance for human health. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci.
2009;364(1526):2079–96.
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
385
 60.
UK Parliament. Microplastic pollution. Commons Select
Committees, 2016; 26.
61.
Thompson RC, Moore CJ, vom Saal FS, Swan SH. Plastics, the
environment and human health: current consensus and future
trends. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences. 2009;364(1526):2153–66.
62.
Melzer D, Rice NE, Lewis C, Henley WE, Galloway TS.
Association of urinary bisphenol A concentration with heart dis-
ease: evidence from NHANES 2003/06. PLoS One. 2010;5(1):
e8673. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008673.
63.
US EPA OW. Laws that protect our oceans. Available at: https://
www.epa.gov/beach-tech/laws-protect-our-oceans. Accessed 15
Dec 2016.
64.
United Nations. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982. 2017.
65.
UNEP and NOAA. The Honolulu Strategy, 2011. https://marinedebris.
noaa.gov/solutions/honolili-Strategy.
66.
United Nations. Sustainable development goal 14. 2015; Available
at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg14.
67.
UNEP. Cleanseas. 2017; Available at: http://cleanseas.org/about.
68.
OECD. Extended producer responsibility. 2016; Available at: http://
www.oecd.org/env/tools-evaluation/extendedproducerresponsibility.
htm.
69.
INGKA Holding G.V. 2017. Sustainability summary report FY17.
Ikea. 2017. http://www.ikea.com/gb/en/doc/ikea-2017-ikea-group-
sustainability-summary-report__1364488103883.pdf.
70.
Kharpal A. Adidas sold 1 million shoes made out of ocean plastic in
2017. CNBC. 2018. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/14/adidas-
sold-1-million-shoes-made-out-of-ocean-plastic-in-2017.html.
71.
Rhodes M. Adidas spins plastic from the ocean into awesome kicks.
2016.
72.
Greenstein J. Upcycled ocean plastic. 2016; Available at: http://
ocean.si.edu/ocean-news/upcycled-ocean-plastic. Accessed 30 Jan
2017
386
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:375–386
