 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 31 May 2018
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00142
A Larger Social Network Enhances
Novel Object Location Memory and
Reduces Hippocampal Microgliosis
in Aged Mice
Bryon M. Smith 1, Xinyue Yao 1, Kelly S. Chen 2 and Elizabeth D. Kirby 1,3,4*
1Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States, 2Department of Neurology and
Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, United States, 4Center for Chronic Brain Injury, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
United States
Edited by:
Ashok Kumar,
University of Florida, United States
Reviewed by:
James C. Vickers,
University of Tasmania, Australia
Anthony John Hannan,
Florey Institute of Neuroscience and
Mental Health, Australia
*Correspondence:
Elizabeth D. Kirby
kirby.224@osu.edu
Received: 22 December 2017
Accepted: 27 April 2018
Published: 31 May 2018
Citation:
Smith BM, Yao X, Chen KS
and Kirby ED (2018) A Larger Social
Network Enhances Novel Object
Location Memory and Reduces
Hippocampal Microgliosis in
Aged Mice.
Front. Aging Neurosci. 10:142.
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00142
The mammalian hippocampus shows marked decline in function with aging across
many species, including humans and laboratory rodent models. This decline frequently
manifests in memory impairments that occur even in the absence of dementia
pathology. In humans, a number of factors correlate with preserved hippocampal
memory in aging, such as exercise, cognitive stimulation and number of social ties. While
interventional studies and animal models clearly indicate that exercise and cognitive
stimulation lead to hippocampal preservation, there is relatively little research on whether
a decline in social ties leads to cognitive decline or vice versa. Even in animal studies
of environmental enrichment in aging, the focus typically falls on physical enrichment
such as a rotating cast of toys, rather than the role of social interactions. The present
studies investigated the hypothesis that a greater number of social ties in aging mice
would lead to improved hippocampal function. Aged, female C57/Bl6 mice were housed
for 3 months in pairs or large groups (7 mice per cage). Group-housed mice showed
greater novel object location memory and stronger preference for a spatial navigation
strategy in the Barnes maze, though no difference in escape latency, compared to
pair-housed mice. Group-housed mice did not differ from pair-housed mice in basal
corticosterone levels or adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Group-housed mice did,
however, show reduced numbers of Iba1/CD68+ microglia in the hippocampus. These
findings suggest that group housing led to better memory function and reduced markers
of neuroinflammation in aged mice. More broadly, they support a causative link between
social ties and hippocampal function, suggesting that merely having a larger social
network can positively influence the aging brain. Future research should address the
molecular mechanisms by which a greater number of social ties alters hippocampal
function.
Keywords: hippocampus, social, aging, neuroinflammation, environmental enrichment, neurogenesis, microglia
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
INTRODUCTION
Aging is associated with a prominent decline in cognitive
function (Bettio et al., 2017). In humans, this decline can limit
quality of life and restrict independance. The memory functions
mediated primarily by the hippocampus are particularly
vulnerable to decline with age (Bartsch and Wulff, 2015; Bettio
et al., 2017). Age-related decline in hippocampal memory occurs
even absent more obvious pathological conditions, such as
Alzheimer’s disease, and is similarly found in other mammals,
including non-human primates and rodents (Leal and Yassa,
2015).
As the average human lifespan increases, the economic
and social costs of age-related cognitive decline are growing
(Ballesteros et al., 2015; Sanderson et al., 2017). One approach
to developing treatments for cognitive decline has been to
pursue individual behavioral factors that are associated with
preserved function in old age. For example, a life history of
exercise and cognitive enrichment correlates with protection
from cognitive decline in human aging and there is some
evidence that introducing exercise and enrichment in old age
can provide protection from further decline (Ballesteros et al.,
2015; Bettio et al., 2017). Studies in rats and mice have similarly
shown benefits of exercise and environmental enrichment for
hippocampus-dependent memory function in aged animals (van
Praag et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2012).
A larger social network is also a well-established predictor
of protection from cognitive decline in humans, but it has
received much less attention as a potential treatment. Aged
individuals with more social ties show less cognitive decline
than those with fewer ties in both longitudinal and cross-
sectional studies (Bassuk et al., 1999; Seeman et al., 2001;
Béland et al., 2005; Ertel et al., 2008; Haslam et al., 2015). This
association between greater social ties and preserved cognition
even extends to pathological conditions such as Alzheimer’s
disease (Fratiglioni et al., 2004). However, aging is generally
associated with reduced social interactions (Shaw et al., 2007;
Bettio et al., 2017). This age-related contraction of social network
can be found in non-human primate species, as well (Almeling
et al., 2016; Crockford, 2016), suggesting that the decrease
in social interaction with increasing age may have conserved
biological underpinnings. This potentially self-driven reduction
in social interactions combined with the correlative nature of
currently available data make it unclear whether a large social
network protects the brain from impairment or whether a loss
of mental acuity drives withdrawal from social relationships. In
addition, social connectedness is difficult to control in humans
and effective study of social support as an intervention variable
has proved challenging (Hogan et al., 2002).
Remarkably, very few animal studies of age-related cognitive
decline to date have investigated the social network as a
neuroprotective factor. Those studies that do address social
interaction effects on cognition often combine it with other
forms of physical enrichment (larger cages, toys), making the
role of social interaction difficult to isolate (van Praag et al.,
2000; Lee et al., 2012). Studies that more specifically investigate
social interactions primarily compare socially isolated animals to
those that are group housed (Speisman et al., 2013). Complete
social isolation is a severe stressor in rodents (and humans)
and, though humans show reductions in social network size
with aging, complete isolation is not commonly found (Shaw
et al., 2007). It therefore remains unclear from both human
and rodent research whether larger social networks alone
can contribute to preserved hippocampal function in aged
individuals.
We hypothesized that having a larger social network would
improve hippocampal function in aging mice. Using wild-type,
aged female mice, we investigated the effect of living in pairs
(2 mice) or large groups (7 mice) on hippocampus-dependent
memory function and on histological markers of age-related
hippocampal dysfunction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Female C57/Bl6J mice aged 15 months were housed 4/cage
upon arrival in standard ventilated cages for 1 week before
experimental procedures began. Mice had ad libitum access to
food and water throughout all experiments and were maintained
on a 12 h light cycle with lights on at 6:30 h. Behavioral testing
was performed between 6:30 h and 14:30 h. This study was
carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the
National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals and the Veterans Administration Palo Alto
Committee on Animal Research. The protocol was approved by
the Veterans Administration Palo Alto Committee on Animal
Research.
Novel Object Location Pre-testing
Pre-testing in the hippocampus-dependent novel object location
task was used to assure similar baseline memory performance
across groups. After 1 week acclimation to housing, mice were
handled each day for 3 days. On day 4, mice were moved in their
home cage to a behavioral testing room and allowed to acclimate
for 30 min. Mice were placed in an open field (45 × 45 × 45 cm)
made of opaque plastic for 6 min. After a 1.5 h inter-trial interval
(ITI), two distinct objects were placed in the open field and mice
were given three 6-min trials to explore those objects with a 1.5 h
ITI. Mice were returned to their home cages in the testing room
between trials. At the end of training, mice were returned to the
colony room. 24 h after training, mice were again acclimated
to the testing room for 30 min. The same two objects from
training were placed in the open field with one object in the
same position as during training and the other placed in a new
location, equidistant from the open field walls as the unmoved
object. Mice were allowed to explore these objects in the open
field for 6 min. After testing, mice were returned to their home
cages then returned to the colony room.
The open field and objects were cleaned with 70% ethanol
between trials and between mice to reduce odor cues. Objects
were secured to the open field floor with tape to assure that
mice could not move the objects. Behavior was recorded by video
and TopScan software (CleverSys Inc.). Time spent in the center
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
70% of the open field and speed of travel were quantified by
TopScan. Object investigation was scored by a blinded observer.
Investigation was defined as a mouse with nose less than 1 cm
away from and pointed at an object.
Group Assignments
Mice were assigned to housing conditions to counterbalance:
(1) performance on the novel object location pre-testing; and
(2) familiarity of mice from the initial week of housing. Mice
were assigned to live either 2/cage (n = 10, 5 cages, ‘‘pairs’’) or
7/cage (n = 14, 2 cages, ‘‘groups’’). Two mice in the pair-housed
condition were euthanized for overgrooming 3 weeks before
behavioral testing and their cagemates were removed from
further analysis, resulting in a final n = 6 for pair-housed mice.
Mice living in pairs were all unfamiliar and had not been
previously housed together since arrival. Mice living in groups
had at most two mice who had been housed together since arrival.
Percent time investigating the novel object location in pre-testing
was similar between housing conditions: 56.931 ± 9.10% (SEM)
pair-housed vs. 58.65 ± 6.08% (SEM) group-housed mice;
t = 0.21, p = 0.83.
Experimental housing began 1 day after novel object location
pre-testing. Mice were housed with new cagemates in a clean,
large mouse cage (28 w × 28 l × 12.7 h cm) with corn-cob
bedding. Mice were provided with one nestlet for every two mice
in the cage throughout the experiment. Mice were weighed and
cages were changed weekly. These housing arrangements were
maintained for 3 months.
Fecal Matter Sampling
Fecal matter was collected from each cage every 2 weeks after
experimental housing began. Twenty-four hours after changing
to a clean cage, fecal pellets were collected in 1.5 ml tubes
using forceps. Samples were stored at −20◦C until assayed for
corticosterone.
Bromodeoxyuridine Injections
After 2 months in experimental housing groups, all mice were
injected with 150 mg/kg bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU, Sigma)
dissolved in sterile saline once per day for 4 days.
Novel Object Location and Recognition
Post-testing
After 3 months in pair or group housing conditions, mice were
handled each day for 3 days. On the 4th day, they were transferred
to individual holding cages with food and water, and allowed
to acclimate to the behavior testing room for 45 min. Mice
were given three 10-min trials with a 5 min ITI in the empty
open field used for pre-testing. Mice were then returned to
their home cages in the colony room. The next day, mice were
allowed to acclimate to the behavior testing room for 45 min
in the same individual holding cages used the previous day.
Two, distinct novel objects were placed in the open field and
mice were allowed to explore for 10 min. After a 5 min ITI
in the holding cage, mice were returned to the open field for
10 min with the same two objects but one was placed in a
new location equidistant from the walls as the other, un-moved
object (novel object location task, NOL). After a 5 min ITI,
the object that did not change location in the previous trial
was replaced by a new object the mice had never encountered
before and mice were allowed another 10 min of exploration
(novel object recognition task, NOR). Three objects total were
used and they were counterbalanced across mice. Half of the
mice saw objects 1 and 2 paired during training and NOL, and
objects 2 and 3 in the NOR task. The other half of the mice
saw objects 2 and 3 paired together during training and NOL,
and objects 1 and 2 in the NOR task. Object 2 was always
the object that moved and object 1 or 3 was the novel object,
depending on which one was used in the training and NOL trials.
This counterbalancing allowed comparison of investigation of
object 1 vs. 2 and 2 vs. 3 during training to assure that mice on
average showed no strong inherent preference for investigation
of one object over the other. In the training trial, percent time
investigating object 2 over object 1 was 48.39 ± 2.92% (SEM,
n = 11) and percent time investigating object 2 over object
3 was 47.14 ± 2.34% (SEM, n = 9). Neither of these percent
preferences was significantly different from 50% by one sample
t-test (object 2 vs. 1: t = 0.553, p = 0.592; object 2 vs. 3: t = 1.22,
p = 0.257). Mice were handled and placed in the open field by
an experimenter blind to housing condition. After the final trial,
mice were returned to their home cages in the colony room.
Cleaning and behavioral quantification was performed as in pre-
testing.
Barnes Maze Testing
One day after novel object testing, mice began training in the
Barnes maze. The Barnes maze is a hippocampus-dependent
task and the version used here has been previously shown
to be sensitive to rejuvenation of memory function in aged
C57/Bl6 mice (Castellano et al., 2017). The Barnes maze consisted
of a flat, circular platform with 40 holes. The platform was
elevated 40 cm from the floor and an escape tube made of
similar material as the platform was affixed beneath one hole.
Mice received 4 days of Barnes maze training with four trials
per day. Each day, mice were transferred to their individual
holding cages and transported to the behavioral testing room.
Mice were placed on the maze, near the outer edge, under an
opaque box for 10 s before being released to explore the maze.
If a mouse failed to enter the escape hole after 90 s, it was
guided to the hole and into the escape by an experimenter.
Throughout the duration of the trial, a 2 kHz tone was played.
An overhead light was also illuminated to provide additional
motivation to escape the maze. Within each day, the escape
was located under the same hole for all four trials and the
release sites were rotated for each trial relative to the escape.
Between days, the location of the escape hole moved 90◦
compared to the previous day. Once a mouse entered the
escape, the 2 kHz tone was terminated. The mouse was then
returned to its holding cage in the behavior testing room. The
maze was cleaned with 70% ethanol between trials. Mice were
run in groups of four, yielding an ITI of 5–10 min. After
four trials, mice were returned to their home cages in the
colony room. All trials were video recorded from a ceiling
mounted digital camera. Primary escape latency (the latency to
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
find the escape) and search strategy were scored by a blinded
observer for each trial (Harrison et al., 2006; O’Leary and
Brown, 2013). Search strategy was categorized as serial if a
mouse searched three or more consecutive peripheral holes
before finding the escape. Searching non-consecutive holes or
navigating directly to the escape was categorized as a spatial
search strategy.
Sociability and Social Memory Testing
One day after the last Barnes maze trial, mice were returned
to the behavior testing room in individual holding cages and
allowed to acclimate for 30 min. Mice were then placed in
a sociability testing apparatus consisting of three chambers
(20 l × 40.5 w × 22 h cm each) separated by clear plastic walls
with a doorway to connect the center chamber to each side
chamber (Moy et al., 2004). In the two outer chambers, wire
cages were placed such that a mouse had to enter the chamber
to investigate the cage. Mice first were allowed to explore the
sociability chambers with the wire cages empty for 5 min. Mice
were then confined to the center chamber and a novel object was
placed in one wire cage while an unfamiliar, age-matched female
mouse was placed in the other wire cage. Experimental mice
were then allowed to explore freely for 10 min (social preference
task) before being confined to the center again. The novel object
was then replaced with a second, unfamiliar age-matched female
mouse and experimental mice were allowed to explore freely for
10 min (social memory task). After testing, mice were returned
to their home cages in the colony room. The apparatus and
the cages were cleaned with 70% ethanol between experimental
mice. All behavior was recorded on ceiling mounted video and
amount of time in each chamber was scored by a blinded
observer. Stimulus mice were age-matched C57/Bl6J female
mice that the experimental mice had never encountered before.
Stimulus mice were habituated to the sociability apparatus and
the wire cages for 5 min/day for 3 days before sociability
testing. A total of 14 stimulus mice were used. Stimulus mice
were rotated such that they were not used in two consecutive
trials.
Euthanasia and Tissue Collection
Two days after sociability testing, mice received an overdose
of Avertin anesthetic. Atrial blood was collected with EDTA
followed by transcardial perfusion with ice cold, sterile 0.1 M
phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Blood was centrifuged 1000 g
at 4◦C, and plasma was collected and stored at −20◦C.
After perfusion, brains were harvested and fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PB for 24 h at 4◦C.
Corticosterone Assay
Fecal
and
plasma
corticosterone
were
assayed
using
a
Corticosterone EIA kit (Enzo LifeSciences) as per manufacturer
instructions. Plasma was assayed at a 1:50 dilution in assay buffer.
Fecal samples were homogenized using mortar and pestle then
dried at 37◦C for 30 min. Approximately 0.1 g of fecal material
from each sample was incubated in 80% methanol with vigorous
vortexing for 30 min at room temperature then centrifuged
for 10 min at 2500 g at room temperature. Supernatant was
assayed at 1:10 dilution in assay buffer. Extraction efficiency was
measured in four separate samples and was 124.1% ± 30.79 (SD),
which was not significantly different from 100% (one-sample
t-test vs. 100%, t = 1.566, p = 0.2153). Corticosterone metabolite
levels were normalized to the weight of fecal matter extracted.
Immunohistochemistry
After 24 h fixation, brains were equilibrated in 30% sucrose
(wt/vol) in PBS at 4◦C then sliced in a series of 1:12 coronal
sections at 40 µm on a freezing microtome. Sections were
stored at −20◦C in cryoprotectant media. Antibody staining was
performed using standard procedures on free-floating sections
(Kirby et al., 2015; see Table 1). To label cell nuclei, sections
were incubated in Hoescht 33342 (1:2000 in PBS, Invitrogen)
for 10 min. After 3 × 5 min PBS rinses, all sections were
also incubated in 1 mM cupric sulfate in 50 mM ammonium
acetate, pH 5.0 for 1 h then rinsed in water to quench lipofuscin
autofluorescence. Following 3 × 5 min PBS rinses, sections
were mounted on Superfrost Plus microscope glass slides (Fisher
Scientific) and protected with Prolong Gold anti-fading medium
(Invitrogen). Iba1 and CD68 antibodies have been previously
shown to be highly specific to microglial populations (Fulci et al.,
2007; Acharya et al., 2016; Qi et al., 2016; Andreou et al., 2017).
We further confirmed antibody specificity using brain tissue
slices from mice treated with 21 days of PLX5622 diet, which
strongly depletes microglial cell populations in the brain (McKim
et al., 2017; Supplementary Figure S1). PLX5622 led to an almost
complete loss of Iba1 and CD68+ immunoreactivity in the brain.
Microscopy and Imaging
Images were acquired on a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 microscope
with Apotome for optical sectioning using a 20× or 40× air
objective. Full z-stacks were acquired and merged for analysis.
TABLE 1 | Antibodies used with product information.
Antibody
Made in species
Vendor
Product number
Dilution
Antigen retrieval?
Primary
or secondary
Iba1
Goat
Abcam
ab5076
1:2000
No
Primary
CD68
Rat
Biorad
MCA1957
1:500
No
Primary
BrdU
Rat
Abcam
OBT0030
1:500
2N HCl at 37◦C for 30 min
Primary
DCX
Goat
Santa Cruz Biotechnologies
SC-8066
1:500
No
Primary
NeuN
Mouse
Millipore
MAB377
1:1000
No
Primary
Biotin anti-rat
Donkey
Jackson ImmunoResearch
102649–782
1:500
N/A
Secondary
AlexaFluor647 anti-goat
Donkey
Invitrogen
A21447
1:500
N/A
Secondary
AlexaFluor594 anti-rat
Donkey
Invitrogen
A21209
1:500
N/A
Secondary
Streptavidin AlexaFluor555
N/A
Invitrogen
S21381
1:1000
N/A
Tertiary
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
Thresholded area was performed by a blinded observer using
ImageJ. Iba1/CD68, DCX and BrdU counts were performed
using Zen software (Zeiss) by a blinded observer. Images
presented are merged z-stack adjusted only for contrast and
brightness.
Statistical Analysis
All analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software.
Welch’s comparisons were used when comparing pair vs.
group housing in a single outcome measure. When pair
and group housed mice were quantified repeatedly over
time, repeated measures two-way ANOVA (time by group)
was used. Repeated measures two-way ANOVA was also
used when comparing effects of housing across hippocampal
brain regions. Post hoc testing was performed using Welch’s
comparisons with Bonferroni correction. Welch’s comparisons
were chosen because this study had unequal sample sizes
and Welch’s test is more robust against Type I error in
the case of unequal sample sizes and unequal variances than
standard t-tests or Sidak’s post hoc comparisons (Ruxton,
2006; Derrick and White, 2016). One-sample t-tests were
used to compare individual group averages to a set standard
(such as 50%). P < 0.05 was considered significant in all
cases.
RESULTS
Group Housing Improves Novel Object
Location Memory
To determine the effect of social network size on hippocampal
memory in aged mice, 15 month-old female mice were housed
in either pairs (2 mice per cage) or groups (7 mice per cage)
for 3 months then tested on several behavioral tasks (Figure 1).
Mice were first habituated to an open field testing arena over
three trials. During these habituation trials, speed of locomotion
decreased over the trials but did not differ between pair- and
group-housed mice, suggesting similar activity levels between
housing conditions (Figure 2A). There was no effect of trial,
effect of housing condition or interaction of housing with trial
on time in the center of the open field (Figure 2B).
One day after open field habituation, mice were placed in
the same open field with two novel objects and allowed to
explore freely (training trial). After a 1-h ITI, one of the objects
was moved to a novel location and preference for investigating
the novel object location was measured (NOL trial). NOL is a
hippocampus-dependent test of spatial memory in which mice
with in-tact memory show a preference for investigating a moved
object over a stationary object (Bachevalier and Nemanic, 2007;
Komorowski et al., 2009; Barker and Warburton, 2011). This
form of memory deteriorates prominently with age (Fahlström
et al., 2011). In the NOL trial, group-housed mice spent
significantly more time investigating the moved object than
pair-housed mice (Figure 3A).
One hour after the NOL trial, the previously stationary
object was replaced with a novel object. This novel object
recognition (NOR) task is a test of short-term memory that is
largely independent of hippocampal function (Bachevalier
and
Nemanic,
2007;
Komorowski
et
al.,
2009;
Barker
and Warburton, 2011). Consistent with previous findings
that
aging
does
not
impair
object
recognition
memory
(Fahlström et al., 2011), mice showed a strong preference
for investigating the novel object over the familiar one
(Figure 3B). Percent time spent investigating the novel
object did not differ between the two housing conditions
(Figure 3B).
Over all three trials (training, NOL and NOR), total
object investigation time did not change while locomotor
speed decreased and neither was significantly affected by
housing condition (Figures 3C,D). These findings suggest that
hippocampus-dependent memory function is improved in aged
mice housed in large groups compared to mice housed in pairs.
Group Housing Changes Barnes Maze
Search Strategy
To further assess hippocampus-dependent memory function,
pair- and group-housed mice were trained in the Barnes maze.
The Barnes maze is a test of hippocampal spatial memory in
which mice learn to locate an escape hole on a circular platform.
In the present version of the Barnes maze, the escape was in a
novel location on each of four testing days (Castellano et al.,
2017). Latency to escape did not show any significant effect of
housing or trial alone (Figure 4A). To further assess Barnes
maze performance, search strategy was determined for each
mouse. Several different search strategies have been reported
in the Barnes maze, some of which are not dependent on
hippocampal memory function (Rosenfeld and Ferguson, 2014).
A spatial search strategy, which is the most accurate but most
demanding of memory processes, relies on a hippocampal-
dependent process of using spatial cues to learn to navigate
to the escape. A serial search strategy, in contrast, has also
been reported in this task where animals use a hippocampus-
independent process of serially searching each hole on the
perimeter of the maze until finding the escape. Aged animals
are particularly susceptible to relying on a serial search strategy
(Bach et al., 1999), which can be rapid but does not typically
show strong improvement over trials because the animal is
not learning the escape location. The spatial search strategy, in
contrast, results in longer latencies to escape when the escape
is in a novel location (i.e., trial 1) but will become shorter
as the escape location is learned over subsequent trials. We
assessed search strategy for each mouse in our study and found
that only half of the pair housed mice (3 of 6) were using
spatial search strategies to locate the escape while significantly
more (13 out of 14) group housed mice used spatial search
(Figure 4B). These findings suggest that group-housed mice
use neural processes that rely on hippocampal function in the
Barnes maze while pair-housed mice rely on non-hippocampal
processes.
Group Housing Does Not Alter Sociability
or Social Memory
Preference for interaction with a conspecific (sociability)
and preference for a novel conspecific over a familiar one
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
FIGURE 1 | Time of experimental procedures.
(social memory) can deteriorate with age (Shoji et al., 2016).
These processes rely on multiple brain regions, including the
basolateral amygdala and ventral hippocampus (Felix-Ortiz and
Tye, 2014). To determine whether group housing affected
social preference or social memory, mice were tested in a
3-chamber sociability task (Moy et al., 2004). Group-housed
and pair-housed mice did not differ in investigation time of
a novel mouse vs. a novel object or of a novel mouse over a
familiar one (Figures 5A,B). Total investigation time increased
significantly over trials but did not differ between housing
conditions on any trial (Figure 5C). These findings suggest
that sociability and social memory are not altered by group
housing.
Group Housing Does Not Affect Body
Weight or Basal Corticosterone
A prominent hypothesis of aging proposes that age-related
deterioration
in
hippocampal
function
results
from
the
cumulative effects of increasing basal stress levels (Sapolsky
et al., 1986). It is also hypothesized that social network-related
protection against age-related cognitive decline in humans
could rely on buffering of stress. We therefore asked whether
group-housed mice showed signs of reduced basal stress
levels by quantifying body weight and basal stress hormone
(corticosterone) levels in pair- and group-housed mice. Pair- and
group-housed mice showed significant weight gain throughout
the housing manipulation, but did not differ from each other
(Figure 6A). Because chronic stress in rodents is typically
associated with impaired weight gain (Harris, 2014), these
findings suggest that neither housing condition was substantially
more stressful than the other. To assess stress hormone
levels more directly, we used fecal sampling to non-invasively
measure basal corticosterone, the primary mouse glucocorticoid,
throughout the housing period. No notable difference was
found in fecal levels of corticosterone metabolites between
group cages and pair cages (Figure 6B). No difference was
found in individual plasma corticosterone from cardiac blood
taken at euthanasia between the two housing conditions either
(Figure 6C). These findings suggest that there is no gross
difference in basal stress levels between pair- and group-housed
mice.
Group Housing Reduces Microgliosis in
the Hippocampus
Aging is commonly associated with increased inflammation both
systemically and within the brain (Xia et al., 2016). In the
FIGURE 2 | (A) Speed of locomotion in the open field decreased over trials but did not differ by housing condition. Two-way RM-ANOVA, main effect of trial
(p < 0.0001), main effect of housing (p = 0.501), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.5923), effect of subjects (p < 0.0001). (B) Time in the center of the open field did
not differ by trial or housing. Two-way RM-ANOVA, main effect of trial (p = 0.823), main effect of housing (p = 0.203), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.119), effect of
subject (p < 0.0001). Each point represents one mouse. Average ± SEM is shown.
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
FIGURE 3 | (A) Group-housed mice spent significantly more time investigating the moved object in the novel object location task than pair-housed mice. Two-way
RM-ANOVA, main effect of trial (p = 0.517), main effect of housing (p = 0.134), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.093), effect of subjects (p = 0.172).
∗p = 0.032 Welch’s test Bonferroni corrected. (B) Group-housed and pair-housed mice spent similar percentages of time investigating a novel object. Unpaired
Welch’s test, p = 0.326. (C) Total object investigation time (s) did not differ by trial or housing condition. Two-way RM-ANOVA, main effect of trial (p = 0.080), main
effect of housing (p = 0.625), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.862), effect of subjects (p < 0.0001). (D) Speed decreased over trials but did not differ by housing
condition. Two-way RM-ANOVA, main effect of trial (p < 0.0001), main effect of housing (p = 0.619), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.836), effect of subjects
(p = 0.0004). Each point represents one mouse. Average ± SEM is shown.
brain, the hippocampus is particularly susceptible to signs of
gliosis, an increase in inflammation of local microglia which
impair hippocampal function (Barrientos et al., 2015; Pardo et al.,
2017). To determine whether the improvements in cognition
found in behavioral tasks were associated with underlying
changes in hippocampal neuroinflammation, we quantified
microgliosis in the three major subdivisions of the hippocampus:
the dentate gyrus (DG), CA3 and CA1. Microgliosis was
FIGURE 4 | (A) Latency to escape in the Barnes maze did not differ on any day of training between pair- and group-housed mice. Day 1: main effect of trial
(p = 0.131), main effect of housing (p = 0.604), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.927), effect of subjects (p = 0.680). Day 2: main effect of trial (p = 0.016), main effect
of housing (p = 0.224), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.308), effect of subjects (p = 0.076). Day 3: main effect of trial (p = 0.443), main effect of housing (p = 0.855),
trial by housing interaction (p = 0.445), effect of subjects (p = 0.080). Day 4: main effect of trial (p =0.012), main effect of housing (p = 0.864), trial by housing
interaction (p = 0.254), effect of subjects (p = 0.071). Average ± SEM is shown. (B) The number of mice displaying spatial search strategies was significantly higher
in grouped over paired housing. ∗p = 0.028, Chi2 test. Fraction of mice is shown with total number in text within bars.
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
FIGURE 5 | (A) Group- and pair-housed mice did not differ in percent time spent investigating a novel mouse over a novel object in the sociability task. Unpaired
Welch’s test, p = 0.625. (B) Group- and pair-housed mice did not differ in percent time spent investigating a novel mouse over a familiar mouse in the social memory
task. Unpaired Welch’s test, p = 0.327. (C) Total time spent investigating both chambers increased over habituation, sociability or social memory trials but did not
differ between group- and pair-housed mice. Two-way RM-ANOVA: main effect of trial (p < 0.0001), main effect of housing (p = 0.866), trial by housing interaction
(p = 0.221), effect of subjects (p = 0.008). Each point represents one mouse. Average ± SEM is shown.
measured by immunoreactivity of Iba1 (which is expressed by all
microglia) and CD68 (which is expressed by activated microglia).
Iba1 immunoreactive area was significantly decreased in group-
housed mice compared to pair-housed mice, most prominently
in the DG and CA3 (Figures 7A,D–G). CD68 immunoreactive
area was similarly reduced in group housed mice overall, with
the most prominent decrease in the DG (Figures 7B,D–G). All
Iba1+ cells were at least partially CD68+, consistent with an
overall high level of microglial activation in these aged mice.
The number of Iba1+/CD68+ microglia was similarly reduced in
the hippocampus of group-housed mice relative to pair-housed
mice, particularly in the DG (Figure 7C). These findings suggest
reduced microgliosis in the DG of group-housed mice due at
least partially to a reduction in total number of Iba1/CD68+
microglia.
Group Housing Does Not Alter Adult
Neurogenesis
In addition to age-related neuroinflammation, the aging brain
also shows a prominent decline in the birth of new neurons, or
adult neurogenesis, that is associated with memory dysfunction
(Lee et al., 2012). Within the hippocampus, adult neurogenesis
occurs selectively in the DG where resident stem and progenitor
cells proliferate and give rise to new neurons that integrate in
to local circuitry (Gonçalves et al., 2016). In aging, proliferative
activity of the neural stem and progenitor cells declines
precipitously, resulting in a decrease in new neuron number
(Lee et al., 2012; DeCarolis et al., 2015). To determine whether
housing conditions affected the number of newly proliferated
cells in the DG, we labeled dividing cells with the mitotic
marker BrdU 1 month before perfusion. As expected for
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
FIGURE 6 | (A) Body weight increased over the course of housing but did not differ between group- and pair-housed mice. Two-way RM-ANOVA: main effect of
week (p < 0.0001), main effect of housing (p = 0.798), trial by housing interaction (p = 0.840), effect of subjects (p < 0.0001). Each point represents average ± SEM.
(B) Fecal corticosterone metabolite levels were similar between pair-housed cages and group-housed cages. Each point represents one cage. Average ± SEM is
shown. (C) Plasma corticosterone did not differ between group- and pair-housed mice. Unpaired Welch’s test, p = 0.553. Each point represents one mouse.
Average ± SEM is shown.
aged mice, the total number of BrdU+ cells in the DG was
over all very low. BrdU+ cell number was not significantly
different between group- and pair-housed mice (Figures 8A,B).
There were too few BrdU+ cells to accurately assess neuronal
cell fate within this population. Therefore, to better assess
the number of new neurons, the number of cells expressing
doublecortin (DCX), a marker of immature neurons, was
quantified. Group- and pair-housed mice did not differ from
each other in number of DCX+ immature new neurons in the
DG (Figures 8C,D).
DISCUSSION
Effect of Social Network on Age-Related
Cognitive Decline
Aging is broadly associated with progressive impairment
in hippocampal function in mammals (Bettio et al., 2017).
Both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies suggest that
humans with more social ties have better preservation of
cognitive
function,
particularly
hippocampal-dependent
forms of memory, in old age than those with fewer ties
(Bassuk et al., 1999; Seeman et al., 2001; Béland et al., 2005;
Ertel et al., 2008; Haslam et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2016).
Causation,
however,
has
been
difficult
to
determine
in
humans and clinical trials of social network interventions
have yielded unclear results (Hogan et al., 2002; Green et al.,
2008).
Mice, like humans, are social and spontaneously associate
with conspecifics both in captivity and in the wild. We
found that housing mice in larger groups led to improved
novel
object
location
memory
compared
to
housing
in
pairs. Novel object location memory relies primarily on
hippocampal neural processes and deteriorates prominently
with age (Fahlström et al., 2011). Non-hippocampus-dependent
novel object recognition, in contrast, was well-preserved in
both pair- and group-housed mice (Bachevalier and Nemanic,
2007; Komorowski et al., 2009; Barker and Warburton, 2011;
Fahlström et al., 2011). In the Barnes maze, a spatial navigation
task that also shows age-related impairment, we did not
find a difference in overall performance between pair and
group-housed mice. While this version of the Barnes maze
has been shown to be sensitive to improved hippocampal
function in aged mice (Castellano et al., 2017), changes in
latency to escape in the present study were minimal in both
groups, providing little evidence of learning. These findings
suggesting the task was too difficult to master in the time
allotted. However, we did find that group-housed mice showed
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
FIGURE 7 | (A) Percent thresholded area of Iba1 immunoreactivity was significantly less in the hippocampus of group-housed over pair-housed mice, particularly in
the dentate gyrus (DG). Two-way RM-ANOVA: main effect of area (p = 0.021), main effect of housing (#p = 0.004), area by housing interaction (p = 0.021), effect of
subjects (p < 0.0001). ∗∗∗p = 0.0009, ∗p = 0.041, post hoc Welch’s test with Bonferoni correction. (B) Percent thresholded area of CD68 immunoreactivity was
significantly less in the hippocampus of group-housed over pair-housed mice, particularly in the DG. Two-way RM-ANOVA: main effect of area (p = 0.352), main
effect of housing (#p = 0.015), area by housing interaction (p = 0.352), effect of subjects (p = 0.004). ∗p = 0.023 post hoc Welch’s test with Bonferoni correction. In
both (A,B), each point represents one mouse, normalized to the pair-housed average by brain area. Average ± SEM is also shown. (C) Number of
Iba1/CD68 immunoreactive cells per µm2 was significantly less in the hippocampus of group-housed over pair-housed mice, particularly in the DG. Two-way
RM-ANOVA: main effect of area (p < 0.0001), main effect of housing (##p = 0.003), area by housing interaction (p = 0.108). ∗p = 0.027 post hoc Welch’s test with
Bonferoni correction. (D) Representative images of Iba1 (purple) and CD68 (green) immunoreactivity in hippocampus of pair- and group-housed mice, including
representative outlines of different hippocampal subregions for quantification. Hoescht (blue) provides cell nuclei labeling. Scale bar is 100 µm. (E–G) Higher
magnification representative images of Iba1 (purple) and CD68 (green) immunoreactivity in DG (E), CA3 (F) and CA1 (G) of pair- and group-housed mice. Hoescht
(blue) provides cell nuclei labeling. Scale bar is 20 µm.
a stronger preference for using spatial search strategies than
pair-housed mice, albeit with a small sample size for detecting
such an effect. Previous studies show that aging often leads
to a shift from more accurate, but difficult, spatial search
strategies to less accurate, but less cognitively demanding, serial
strategies in both rodents and humans (Bach et al., 1999;
Konishi et al., 2017). This shift is hypothesized to reflect
an age-related failure of hippocampal processes necessary to
support spatial search. Our findings of spatial search strategy
preference in group-housed mice therefore suggests greater
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
FIGURE 8 | (A) Pair- and group-housed mice were injected with BrdU
4 weeks before perfusion. No difference in BrdU+ cell number per µm2 in the
DG was found between housing conditions. Unpaired Welch’s test, p = 0.089.
(B) Representative images of BrdU-immunoreactive cells are shown with
NeuN immunoreactivity provided for anatomical orientation. Arrows point to
BrdU+ cells in the subgranular zone. (C) Doublecortin (DCX) immunoreactivity
in the DG revealed no difference in DCX+ cell number per µm2 between pair-
and group-housed mice. Unpaired Welch’s test p = 0.350. (D) Representative
images of DCX-immunoreactive cells are shown with NeuN immunoreactivity
provided for anatomical orientation. White box is shown magnified in inset. In
(B,D), scale bars are 20 µm.
reliance on hippocampal processes, possibly because they
are better preserved in these mice compared to pair-housed
mice (Bassuk et al., 1999; Hogan et al., 2002; Green et al.,
2008).
In contrast to spatial memory, social memory relies on several
brain regions that are resistant to age-related decline (Felix-Ortiz
and Tye, 2014). We found no differences in sociability or social
memory in pair- vs. group-housed mice. However, it is possible
that more subtle differences in social behavior could be found
in tests that allow direct contact between animals or with longer
delays for memory recall. The present work did not include
measures of home cage social behavior (agonistic interactions,
grooming), for example. Resident-intruder tests might also reveal
more insight in to social behaviors in group- vs. pair-housed
mice. Further research will be required to better understand how
social network size impacts sociability in aged mice.
Effect of Social Network on Age-Related
Neuroinflammation and Neurogenesis
Aging is associated with an increase in neuroinflammation
in humans and rodents (Barrientos et al., 2015; Pardo
et
al.,
2017).
This
inflammation
manifests
in
increased
pro-inflammatory cytokine expression by resident microglia,
as well as microglia proliferation, and is found markedly in
the hippocampus (Barrientos et al., 2015; Pardo et al., 2017).
Some theories of brain aging propose that neuroinflammation is
an underlying cause of age-related hippocampal cognitive
decline,
a
process
that
has
been
termed
inflammaging
(Franceschi
and
Campisi,
2014).
We
found
that
group
housing led to reduced microgliosis as reflected by decreased
Iba1 and CD68 immunoreactivity and decreased number of
Iba1+/CD68+ cells in the hippocampus compared to pair
housing, a finding which suggests that larger social network
size may protect against age-related microglial proliferation and
neuroinflammation.
The activity of hippocampal stem and progenitor cells
declines dramatically with age and the resultant reduced adult
neurogenesis has been postulated to contribute to age-related
hippocampal dysfunction (Lee et al., 2012). In the present study,
neurogenesis levels were very low, and no difference in adult
neurogenesis between pair- and group-housed mice was found.
Previous studies show that the decline in adult neurogenesis
occurs relatively early in aging, with 85%–90% reductions being
observed by 12 months (Bondolfi et al., 2004; Ben Abdallah
et al., 2010). The present study began at 15 months of age, long
after the most prominent decline in neurogenesis was complete.
Future research could address whether altering social network
size earlier in aging could prevent the decline in neurogenesis.
Effect of Environmental Enrichment on
Age-Related Memory Decline
Numerous studies show that environmental enrichment can
protect against age-related hippocampal dysfunction in rats
and mice (van Praag et al., 2000; Kempermann et al., 2002;
Kobayashi et al., 2002; Frick and Fernandez, 2003; Frick
et al., 2003; Bennett et al., 2006; Harburger et al., 2007;
Greenwood et al., 2009; McKinnon et al., 2009; Freret et al.,
2012; Speisman et al., 2013; Sampedro-Piquero et al., 2014;
Bergami et al., 2015; Mora-Gallegos et al., 2015; Pérez-Martín
et al., 2016). Aged animals may even be particularly susceptible
to the beneficial effects of enrichment compared to younger
animals (Harburger et al., 2007; Harati et al., 2011). Rodent
environmental enrichment is implemented in widely varying
ways across studies, often combining increased social network
size with exercise (running wheel) and/or addition of a rotating
cast of novel objects (i.e., toys). While the separable roles of
exercise and novel objects has been investigated (van Praag
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
et al., 1999; Fabel et al., 2009), the role of social interactions
as a single variable has received relatively little attention.
Some studies have even concluded that social interactions
have minimal impact on hippocampal function in young
animals (Rosenzweig et al., 1978; Pietropaolo et al., 2004;
Madroñal et al., 2010; Brenes et al., 2015). However, aging
animals may be particularly vulnerable to the effects of social
interactions. For example, a study of a transgenic mouse
model of Alzheimer’s-like pathology showed that co-housing
with a wildtype cage mate improved memory function over
housing with another transgenic mouse (Hsiao et al., 2014).
These findings suggest a potential greater vulnerability of aged
animals to the deleterious effects of an impoverished social
environment.
Hypotheses of Social Network Impact on
Cognitive Aging
Several mechanistic hypotheses have been proposed to explain
the connection between social network size and age-related
cognitive decline in humans. Some researchers have proposed
that larger social networks enable better cognitive aging through
instrumental support that improves physical health, such as
increased access to medical advice, physical support in daily
functions, or access to community resources. The present study
used a social rodent model where physical environment and care
were controlled. Our results therefore suggest that social network
size can drive improvements in memory function independent of
instrumental support.
Having more numerous social ties has also been proposed to
protect against cognitive decline in aging via improved emotional
support and stress buffering (Ozbay et al., 2008; Sherman
et al., 2016). Long-term exposure to elevated glucocorticoid
hormone levels is associated with hippocampal dysfunction and
neuroinflammation (Sapolsky et al., 1986; Lupien et al., 1998; Yau
and Seckl, 2012; Barrientos et al., 2015). We found no differences
in markers of chronic stress in group- vs. pair-housed mice.
Body weight, fecal corticosterone and plasma corticosterone were
all similar between the two housing groups. Nonetheless, it is
still possible that housing conditions could alter response to a
stressor. Over-grooming was found in two of the pair-housed
mice, resulting in their and their cage mates’ elimination
from the experiment. The meaning of over-grooming behavior
is debated but it could be related to stress or dominance
hierarchies (Militzer and Wecker, 1986; Garner et al., 2004a).
Over-grooming is estimated to occur in approximately 7.7%
percent of laboratory-housed mice, with risk factors for higher
rates of over-grooming including older age, being female and
being C57/Bl6 strain (Garner et al., 2004b). Given these risk
factors, the observed frequency of over-grooming in the present
study appears quite low. However, it is still possible that the
presence of over-grooming in pair housing conditions is an
indicator of greater stress in these mice, though the sample
size of the current study was not powered to detect such low
frequency events. Future research should more specifically test
stress response in group- vs. pair-housed mice.
A third hypothesis of social network modulation of cognitive
aging suggests that the daily interaction and cognitive load
dictated by larger social networks is stimulatory itself and
provides an intense enrichment that preserves brain function
in old age. In support of this hypothesis, two recent studies in
humans show that ties to a social group are more predictive
of preserved cognition in aging humans than ties to a series
of individual (i.e., pair-based) ties (Haslam et al., 2014, 2015).
These studies suggest that the complexity of group interactions
may provide a level of stimulation or cognitive demand that is
protective for the aging brain. Our findings provide potential
support for this cognitive enrichment hypothesis. The cognitive
load represented by gauging interactions, judging hierarchy and
making social decisions as one node in a seven node network
is likely much greater than that presented by a single pair
relationship. Further experiments are needed to confirm the
benefit of group interactions over pair-wise interactions with a
similar total number of mice. For example, one could compare
the memory benefits of daily exposure to six other mice in
isolated pair interactions vs. exposure to six other conspecifics
simultaneously in shared housing.
Limitations of the Present Work
The present study compared housing in pairs vs. housing in
groups using the same physical environment as a model for
having large vs. small numbers of social ties. However, there
are possible cofounding differences other than number of social
ties in a cage that could have driven the observed effects.
Interactions and activity in the home cages were not monitored
systematically. It is, therefore, possible that mice living with
more cage mates simply move more, resulting in more exercise.
Exercise is clearly linked to improved hippocampal function in
aged mice. However, exercise also reduces body weight in aged
mice and increases adult neurogenesis across the lifespan (Wu
et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2012). We saw no evidence of differences
in body weight or adult neurogenesis between pair and group-
housed mice, suggesting that large differences in activity level
in the home cages were not likely present. However, future
studies could address this more specifically with home cage
observations.
Another possible difference between pair- and group-housed
mice stems from the size of the home cage. We used the same
size home cage for pairs and for groups, resulting in smaller
cage volume per mouse in the group-housed mice than in the
pair-housed mice. We chose to use the same size cage for
both conditions because larger physical environments are likely
enriching (Bernstein, 1973), meaning that a larger cage for the
larger group size would create a confounding variable of greater
physical space to explore. However, it is possible some kind of
thermoregulatory benefit from a greater number of bodies per
cm3 could have played a role in the preservation of hippocampal
function that we observed.
The present study was limited to female animals to avoid
the high aggression levels males might display. Future studies in
males conducted with extra care taken to reduce aggression could
be useful. Male and females may show different effects of social
housing on hippocampal physiology (Tzeng et al., 2017) and how
these sex differences may interact with aging memory functions
warrants further exploration.
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
Future studies could greatly enhance these findings by
including multiple group sizes, ranging from isolated, single-
housed to larger groups. It remains undetermined whether
number
of
cage
mates
enhances
hippocampal
function
dose-dependently or whether there is a plateau level beyond
which no additional benefit can be derived. The present work
also does not reveal how different numbers of cage mates
compare to complete social deprivation. Future work could also
compare more directly how the change in social network size,
as opposed to total size, affects hippocampal function. The mice
in this experiment were housed four per cage in an NIA colony
and in-house before experimental manipulation began, resulting
in a decrease in social network size for pair-housed mice and an
increase for group-housed mice. To better mimic human aging
trajectories, future work could start with mice housed in large
groups at a much younger age then reduce cage mate number
as they age to determine how changes in network size over time
affect hippocampal health. Such a study would also address
another confound of the present study: by necessity, some of
the group-housed mice were familiar to each other before the
housing manipulation began, whereas pair-housed mice were
not. The number of familiar mice was kept minimal (2 mice per
cage of 7), but it is still possible that this familiarity between
two mice influenced the entire group’s response to housing. A
long-term aging study where cage mates are removed over time
would address this difficulty by using only mice familiar to each
other throughout.
All of the animals in the present study underwent behavioral
testing before perfusion. Behavioral testing itself can alter
brain function, including markers of hippocampal integrity
(Sampedro-Piquero et al., 2014). It is therefore possible that
the observed differences in hippocampal neuroinflammation
rely on the presence of behavioral testing to emerge. Future
studies can pursue replication of these effects in testing-
naïve mice. However, the presence of behavioral testing is not
entirely inappropriate, given that aging humans live in complex
environments that tax memory on a daily basis. Therefore, any
effect of social ties on human hippocampal function likely occur
on a background on daily cognitive tasks.
Summary
As medical care improvements lengthen the average lifespan,
preservation of quality of life is becoming a more urgent
public health goal. Cognitive decline can dramatically impair
function and wellness in aged individuals. However, there
is great heterogeneity in decline, with some individuals
appearing quite resilient (Negash et al., 2011, 2013). Common
correlates of resilience present potential avenues of treatment
or prevention if those correlates are indeed causative. Current
non-pharmacological
approaches
to
preserving
memory
function in old age include dietary restriction, physical exercise,
cognitive stimulation and stress management, among others
(Bettio et al., 2017). Our findings in a mouse model of social
network manipulation during aging suggest that encouraging
participation in larger social networks may also be a viable
non-pharmacological treatment for age-related memory decline.
Notably, other methods of preventing cognitive decline, such
as dietary restriction and exercise, often suffer from poor
adherence rates (Anton and Leeuwenburgh, 2013). In contrast,
a recent survey found that elderly individuals will combat
numerous obstacles (poor health, pain, hazardous conditions)
to achieve social engagement (Gardner, 2013). Encouraging
social participation and establishing communities conducive to
maintained social engagement, such as co-housing communities
(Williams, 2005), may therefore be a particularly practical
method for prevention or mitigation of cognitive decline.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
BS, XY and KC performed experiments, analyzed data and
edited/reviewed the manuscript. EK performed and designed
experiments, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge Kristina G. Witcher
and Jonathan P. Godbout for provision of brain slices from
PLX5622 and vehicle diet treated mice.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnagi.2018.001
42/full#supplementary-material
FIGURE S1 | Adult C57/Bl6 mice were fed PLX5622 or vehicle diet for
21 days. PLX5622 diet led to an almost complete loss of Iba1+ and CD68+
immunoreactivity, shown here in representative images at lower (A) and higher
magnifications (B). An example Iba1+/CD68+ cell from a vehicle diet treated
mouse is also shown (C). Scale bars are (A) 200 (B) 50 and (C) 10 µm.
REFERENCES
Acharya, M. M., Green, K. N., Allen, B. D., Najafi, A. R., Syage, A., Minasyan, H.,
et al. (2016). Elimination of microglia improves cognitive function following
cranial irradiation. Sci. Rep. 6:31545. doi: 10.1038/srep31545
Almeling, L., Hammerschmidt, K., Sennhenn-Reulen, H., Freund, A. M., and
Fischer, J. (2016). Motivational shifts in aging monkeys and the origins
of social selectivity. Curr. Biol. 26, 1744–1749. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.
04.066
Andreou, K. E., Soto, M. S., Allen, D., Economopoulos, V., de Bernardi, A.,
Larkin, J. R., et al. (2017). Anti-inflammatory microglia/macrophages as
a potential therapeutic target in brain metastasis. Front. Oncol. 7:251.
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2017.00251
Anton, S., and Leeuwenburgh, C. (2013). Fasting or caloric restriction for healthy
aging. Exp. Gerontol. 48, 1003–1005. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.04.011
Bach, M. E., Barad, M., Son, H., Zhuo, M., Lu, Y. F., Shih, R., et al. (1999). Age-
related defects in spatial memory are correlated with defects in the late phase
of hippocampal long-term potentiation in vitro and are attenuated by drugs
that enhance the cAMP signaling pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 96,
5280–5285. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.9.5280
Bachevalier, J., and Nemanic, S. (2007). Memory for spatial location and object-
place associations are differently processed by the hippocampal formation,
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
parahippocampal areas TH/TF and perirhinal cortex. Hippocampus 18, 64–80.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20369
Ballesteros, S., Kraft, E., Santana, S., and Tziraki, C. (2015). Maintaining older
brain functionality: a targeted review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 55, 453–477.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.06.008
Barker, G. R. I., and Warburton, E. C. (2011). When is the hippocampus involved
in recognition memory? J. Neurosci. 31, 10721–10731. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
6413-10.2011
Barrientos, R. M., Kitt, M. M., Watkins, L. R., and Maier, S. F. (2015).
Neuroinflammation in the normal aging hippocampus. Neuroscience 309,
84–99. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.03.007
Bartsch, T., and Wulff, P. (2015). The hippocampus in aging and disease: from
plasticity to vulnerability. Neuroscience 309, 1–16. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.
2015.07.084
Bassuk, S. S., Glass, T. A., and Berkman, L. F. (1999). Social disengagement
and incident cognitive decline in community-dwelling elderly persons.
Ann. Intern. Med. 131, 165–173. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-131-3-199908030
-00002
Béland, F., Zunzunegui, M.-V., Alvarado, B., Otero, A., and Del Ser, T. (2005).
Trajectories of cognitive decline and social relations. J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci.
Soc. Sci. 60, P320–P330. doi: 10.1093/geronb/60.6.p320
Ben Abdallah, N. M.-B., Slomianka, L., Vyssotski, A. L., and Lipp, H.-P.
(2010). Early age-related changes in adult hippocampal neurogenesis in
C57 mice. Neurobiol. Aging 31, 151–161. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.
03.002
Bennett, J. C., McRae, P. A., Levy, L. J., and Frick, K. M. (2006). Long-term
continuous, but not daily, environmental enrichment reduces spatial memory
decline in aged male mice. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 85, 139–152. doi: 10.1016/j.
nlm.2005.09.003
Bettio, L. E. B., Rajendran, L., and Gil-Mohapel, J. (2017). The effects of aging
in the hippocampus and cognitive decline. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 79, 66–86.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.04.030
Bergami, M., Masserdotti, G., Temprana, S. G., Motori, E., Eriksson, T. M.,
Göbel, J., et al. (2015). A critical period for experience-dependent remodeling
of adult-born neuron connectivity. Neuron 85, 710–717. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.
2015.01.001
Bernstein, L. (1973). A study of some enriching variables in a free-environment for
rats. J. Psychosom. Res. 17, 85–88. doi: 10.1016/0022-3999(73)90008-1
Bondolfi, L., Ermini, F., Long, J. M., Ingram, D. K., and Jucker, M. (2004).
Impact of age and caloric restriction on neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus
of C57BL/6 mice. Neurobiol. Aging 25, 333–340. doi: 10.1016/S0197-4580(03)
00083-6
Brenes, J. C., Lackinger, M., Höglinger, G. U., Schratt, G., Schwarting, R. K. W.,
and Wöhr, M. (2015). Differential effects of social and physical environmental
enrichment on brain plasticity, cognition, and ultrasonic communication in
rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 524, 1586–1607. doi: 10.1002/cne.23842
Brown, C. L., Robitaille, A., Zelinski, E. M., Dixon, R. A., Hofer, S. M., and
Piccinin, A. M. (2016). Cognitive activity mediates the association between
social activity and cognitive performance: a longitudinal study. Psychol. Aging
31, 831–846. doi: 10.1037/pag0000134
Castellano, J. M., Mosher, K. I., Abbey, R. J., McBride, A. A., James, M. L.,
Berdnik,
D.,
et
al.
(2017).
Human
umbilical
cord
plasma
proteins
revitalize hippocampal function in aged mice. Nature 544, 488–492.
doi: 10.1038/nature22067
Crockford, C. (2016). Aging: lessons for elderly people from monkeys. Curr. Biol.
26, R532–R534. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.05.002
DeCarolis, N. A., Kirby, E. D., Wyss-Coray, T., and Palmer, T. D. (2015).
The role of the microenvironmental niche in declining stem-cell functions
associated with biological aging. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 5:a025874.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a025874
Derrick, B., and White, P. (2016). Why Welch’s test is type I error robust. Quant.
Methods Psychol. 12, 30–38. doi: 10.1037/e518312009-003
Ertel, K. A., Glymour, M. M., and Berkman, L. F. (2008). Effects of social
integration on preserving memory function in a nationally representative US
elderly population. Am. J. Public Health 98, 1215–1220. doi: 10.2105/ajph.2007.
113654
Fabel,
K.,
Wolf,
S.
A.,
Ehninger,
D.,
Babu,
H.,
Leal-Galicia,
P.,
and
Kempermann,
G.
(2009).
Additive
effects
of
physical
exercise
and
environmental enrichment on adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice.
Front. Neurosci. 3:50. doi: 10.3389/neuro.22.002.2009
Fahlström, A., Yu, Q., and Ulfhake, B. (2011). Behavioral changes in aging female
C57BL/6 mice. Neurobiol. Aging 32, 1868–1880. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
2009.11.003
Felix-Ortiz, A. C., and Tye, K. M. (2014). Amygdala inputs to the ventral
hippocampus bidirectionally modulate social behavior. J. Neurosci. 34,
586–595. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4257-13.2014
Franceschi, C., and Campisi, J. (2014). Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and
its potential contribution to age-associated diseases. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci.
Med. Sci. 69, S4–S9. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glu057
Fratiglioni, L., Paillard-Borg, S., and Winblad, B. (2004). An active and socially
integrated lifestyle in late life might protect against dementia. Lancet Neurol. 3,
343–353. doi: 10.1016/s1474-4422(04)00767-7
Freret, T., Billard, J. M., Schumann-Bard, P., Dutar, P., Dauphin, F.,
Boulouard, M., et al. (2012). Rescue of cognitive aging by long-lasting
environmental
enrichment
exposure
initiated
before
median
lifespan.
Neurobiol. Aging 33, 1005.e1–1005.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.
09.028
Frick, K. M., and Fernandez, S. M. (2003). Enrichment enhances spatial memory
and increases synaptophysin levels in aged female mice. Neurobiol. Aging 24,
615–626. doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(02)00138-0
Frick, K. M., Stearns, N. A., Pan, J.-Y., and Berger-Sweeney, J. (2003). Effects
of environmental enrichment on spatial memory and neurochemistry
in
middle-aged
mice.
Learn.
Mem.
10,
187–198.
doi:
10.1101/lm.
50703
Fulci, G., Dmitrieva, N., Gianni, D., Fontana, E. J., Pan, X., Lu, Y., et al. (2007).
Depletion of peripheral macrophages and brain microglia increases brain
tumor titers of oncolytic viruses. Cancer Res. 67, 9398–9406. doi: 10.1158/0008-
5472.can-07-1063
Gardner, P. (2013). The role of social engagement and identity in community
mobility among older adults aging in place. Disabil. Rehabil. 36, 1249–1257.
doi: 10.3109/09638288.2013.837970
Garner, J. P., Dufour, B., Gregg, L. E., Weisker, S. M., and Mench, J. A. (2004a).
Social and husbandry factors affecting the prevalence and severity of barbering
(‘‘whisker trimming’’) by laboratory mice. Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci. 89, 263–282.
doi: 10.1016/j.applanim.2004.07.004
Garner, J. P., Weisker, S. M., Dufour, B., and Mench, J. A. (2004b). Barbering
(fur and whisker trimming) by laboratory mice as a model of human
trichotillomania and obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders. Comp. Med. 54,
216–224.
Gonçalves, J. T., Schafer, S. T., and Gage, F. H. (2016). Adult neurogenesis in the
hippocampus: from stem cells to behavior. Cell 167, 897–914. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2016.10.021
Green, A. F., Rebok, G., and Lyketsos, C. G. (2008). Influence of social network
characteristics on cognition and functional status with aging. Int. J. Geriatr.
Psychiatry 23, 972–978. doi: 10.1002/gps.2023
Greenwood, B. N., Strong, P. V., Foley, T. E., and Fleshner, M. (2009).
A behavioral analysis of the impact of voluntary physical activity on
hippocampus-dependent contextual conditioning. Hippocampus 19, 988–1001.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20534
Harati, H., Majchrzak, M., Cosquer, B., Galani, R., Kelche, C., Cassel, J.-C., et al.
(2011). Attention and memory in aged rats: impact of lifelong environmental
enrichment. Neurobiol. Aging 32, 718–736. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.
03.012
Harburger, L. L., Lambert, T. J., and Frick, K. M. (2007). Age-dependent effects of
environmental enrichment on spatial reference memory in male mice. Behav.
Brain Res. 185, 43–48. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.07.009
Harris, R. B. S. (2014). Chronic and acute effects of stress on energy balance: are
there appropriate animal models? Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.
308, R250–R265. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00361.2014
Harrison, F. E., Reiserer, R. S., Tomarken, A. J., and McDonald, M. P. (2006).
Spatial and nonspatial escape strategies in the Barnes maze. Learn. Mem. 13,
809–819. doi: 10.1101/lm.334306
Haslam, C., Cruwys, T., and Haslam, S. A. (2014). ‘‘The we’s have it’’: evidence
for the distinctive benefits of group engagement in enhancing cognitive
health in aging. Soc. Sci. Med. 120, 57–66. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.
08.037
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
Haslam, C., Cruwys, T., Milne, M., Kan, C.-H., and Haslam, S. A. (2015). Group
ties protect cognitive health by promoting social identification and social
support. J. Aging Health 28, 244–266. doi: 10.1177/0898264315589578
Hogan, B. E., Linden, W., and Najarian, B. (2002). Social support interventions:
do they work? Clin. Psychol. Rev. 22, 381–440. doi: 10.1016/S0272-7358(01)
00102-7
Hsiao, Y.-H., Hung, H.-C., Chen, S.-H., and Gean, P.-W. (2014). Social interaction
rescues memory deficit in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease by increasing
BDNF-dependent hippocampal neurogenesis. J. Neurosci. 34, 16207–16219.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0747-14.2014
Kempermann, G., Gast, D., and Gage, F. H. (2002). Neuroplasticity in old
age: sustained fivefold induction of hippocampal neurogenesis by long-term
environmental enrichment. Ann. Neurol. 52, 135–143. doi: 10.1002/ana.10262
Kirby, E. D., Kuwahara, A. A., Messer, R. L., and Wyss-Coray, T. (2015). Adult
hippocampal neural stem and progenitor cells regulate the neurogenic niche by
secreting VEGF. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 112, 4128–4133. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1422448112
Kobayashi, S., Ohashi, Y., and Ando, S. (2002). Effects of enriched environments
with different durations and starting times on learning capacity during aging
in rats assessed by a refined procedure of the Hebb-Williams maze task.
J. Neurosci. Res. 70, 340–346. doi: 10.1002/jnr.10442
Komorowski, R. W., Manns, J. R., and Eichenbaum, H. (2009). Robust conjunctive
item-place coding by hippocampal neurons parallels learning what happens
where. J. Neurosci. 29, 9918–9929. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1378-09.2009
Konishi, K., Mckenzie, S., Etchamendy, N., Roy, S., and Bohbot, V. D.
(2017). Hippocampus-dependent spatial learning is associated with higher
global cognition among healthy older adults. Neuropsychologia 106, 310–321.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.09.025
Leal, S. L., and Yassa, M. A. (2015). Neurocognitive aging and the hippocampus
across species. Trends Neurosci. 38, 800–812. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.10.003
Lee, S. W., Clemenson, G. D., and Gage, F. H. (2012). New neurons in an aged
brain. Behav. Brain Res. 227, 497–507. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.10.009
Lupien, S. J., de Leon, M., de Santi, S., Convit, A., Tarshish, C., Nair, N. P., et al.
(1998). Cortisol levels during human aging predict hippocampal atrophy and
memory deficits. Nat. Neurosci. 1, 69–73. doi: 10.1038/271
Madroñal, N., López-Aracil, C., Rangel, A., del Río, J. A., Delgado-García, J. M.,
and Gruart, A. (2010). Effects of enriched physical and social environments
on motor performance, associative learning, and hippocampal neurogenesis in
mice. PLoS One 5:e11130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011130
McKim, D. B., Weber, M. D., Niraula, A., Sawicki, C. M., Liu, X., Jarrett, B. L.,
et al. (2017). Microglial recruitment of IL-1β-producing monocytes to brain
endothelium causes stress-induced anxiety. Mol. Psychiatry doi: 10.1038/mp.
2017.64 [Epub ahead of print].
McKinnon, M. C., Yucel, K., Nazarov, A., and MacQueen, G. M. (2009). A
meta-analysis examining clinical predictors of hippocampal volume in patients
with major depressive disorder. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 34, 41–54.
Militzer, K., and Wecker, E. (1986). Behaviour-associated alopecia areata in mice.
Lab. Anim. 20, 9–13. doi: 10.1258/002367786781062061
Mora-Gallegos, A., Rojas-Carvajal, M., Salas, S., Saborío-Arce, A., Fornaguera-
Trías, J., and Brenes, J. C. (2015). Age-dependent effects of environmental
enrichment on spatial memory and neurochemistry. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.
118, 96–104. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2014.11.012
Moy, S. S., Nadler, J. J., Perez, A., Barbaro, R. P., Johns, J. M., Magnuson, T. R.,
et al. (2004). Sociability and preference for social novelty in five inbred strains:
an approach to assess autistic-like behavior in mice. Genes Brain Behav. 3,
287–302. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-1848.2004.00076.x
Negash, S., Bennett, D. A., Wilson, R. S., Schneider, J. A., and Arnold, S. E. (2011).
Cognition and neuropathology in aging: multidimensional perspectives from
the rush religious orders study and rush memory and aging project. Curr.
Alzheimer Res. 8, 336–340. doi: 10.2174/156720511795745302
Negash, S., Wilson, R. S., Leurgans, S. E., Wolk, D. A., Schneider, J. A.,
Buchman, A. S., et al. (2013). Resilient brain aging: characterization of
discordance between Alzheimer’s disease pathology and cognition. Curr.
Alzheimer Res. 10, 844–851. doi: 10.2174/15672050113109990157
O’Leary, T. P., and Brown, R. E. (2013). Optimization of apparatus design and
behavioral measures for the assessment of visuo-spatial learning and memory
of mice on the Barnes maze. Learn. Mem. 20, 85–96. doi: 10.1101/lm.028
076.112
Ozbay, F., Fitterling, H., Charney, D., and Southwick, S. (2008). Social support
and resilience to stress across the life span: a neurobiologic framework. Curr.
Psychiatry Rep. 10, 304–310. doi: 10.1007/s11920-008-0049-7
Pardo, J., Abba, M. C., Lacunza, E., Francelle, L., Morel, G. R., Outeiro, T. F.,
et al. (2017). Identification of a conserved gene signature associated with an
exacerbated inflammatory environment in the hippocampus of aging rats.
Hippocampus 27, 435–449. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22703
Pérez-Martín, M., Rivera, P., Blanco, E., Lorefice, C., Decara, J., Pavón, F. J.,
et al. (2016). Environmental enrichment, age and PPARα interact to regulate
proliferation in neurogenic niches. Front. Neurosci. 10:89. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2016.00089
Pietropaolo, S., Branchi, I., Cirulli, F., Chiarotti, F., Aloe, L., and Alleva, E. (2004).
Long-term effects of the periadolescent environment on exploratory activity
and aggressive behaviour in mice: social versus physical enrichment. Physiol.
Behav. 81, 443–453. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2004.02.022
Qi, J., Chen, C., Meng, Q.-X., Wu, Y., Wu, H., and Zhao, T.-B. (2016).
Crosstalk between activated microglia and neurons in the spinal dorsal horn
contributes to stress-induced hyperalgesia. Sci. Rep. 6:39442. doi: 10.1038/srep
39442
Rosenfeld, C. S., and Ferguson, S. A. (2014). Barnes maze testing strategies
with small and large rodent models. J. Vis. Exp. 84:e51194. doi: 10.3791/
51194
Rosenzweig, M. R., Bennett, E. L., Hebert, M., and Morimoto, H. (1978). Social
grouping cannot account for cerebral effects of enriched environments. Brain
Res. 153, 563–576. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(78)90340-2
Ruxton, G. D. (2006). The unequal variance t-test is an underused alternative
to Student’s t-test and the Mann-Whitney U test. Behav. Ecol. 17, 688–690.
doi: 10.1093/beheco/ark016
Sampedro-Piquero, P., De Bartolo, P., Petrosini, L., Zancada-Menendez, C.,
Arias, J. L., and Begega, A. (2014). Astrocytic plasticity as a possible
mediator of the cognitive improvements after environmental enrichment
in aged rats. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 114, 16–25. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2014.
04.002
Sanderson, W. C., Scherbov, S., and Gerland, P. (2017). Probabilistic population
aging. PLoS One 12:e0179171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179171
Sapolsky, R. M., Krey, L. C., and McEwen, B. S. (1986). The neuroendocrinology
of stress and aging: the glucocorticoid cascade hypothesis. Endocr. Rev. 7,
284–301. doi: 10.1210/edrv-7-3-284
Seeman, T. E., Lusignolo, T. M., Albert, M., and Berkman, L. (2001). Social
relationships, social support and patterns of cognitive aging in healthy,
high-functioning older adults: MacArthur studies of successful aging. Health
Psychol. 20, 243–255. doi: 10.1037//0278-6133.20.4.243
Shaw, B. A., Krause, N., Liang, J., and Bennett, J. (2007). Tracking changes in social
relations throughout late life. J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 62, S90–S99.
doi: 10.1093/geronb/62.2.s90
Sherman, S. M., Cheng, Y.-P., Fingerman, K. L., and Schnyer, D. M. (2016). Social
support, stress and the aging brain. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 11, 1050–1058.
doi: 10.1093/scan/nsv071
Shoji, H., Takao, K., Hattori, S., and Miyakawa, T. (2016). Age-related changes in
behavior in C57BL/6J mice from young adulthood to middle age. Mol. Brain
9:11. doi: 10.1186/s13041-016-0191-9
Speisman, R. B., Kumar, A., Rani, A., Pastoriza, J. M., Severance, J. E.,
Foster, T. C., et al. (2013). Environmental enrichment restores neurogenesis
and rapid acquisition in aged rats. Neurobiol. Aging 34, 263–274. doi: 10.1016/j.
neurobiolaging.2012.05.023
Tzeng, W.-Y., Wu, H.-H., Wang, C.-Y., Chen, J.-C., Yu, L., and Cherng, C. G.
(2017). Sex differences in stress and group housing effects on the number of
newly proliferated cells and neuroblasts in middle-aged dentate gyrus. Front.
Behav. Neurosci. 10:249. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2016.00249
van Praag, H., Kempermann, G., and Gage, F. H. (1999). Running increases cell
proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. Nat. Neurosci.
2, 266–270. doi: 10.1038/6368
van
Praag,
H.,
Kempermann,
G.,
and
Gage,
F.
H.
(2000).
Neural
consequences of environmental enrichment. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1, 191–198.
doi: 10.1038/35044558
Williams, J. (2005). Designing neighbourhoods for social interaction: the case
of cohousing. J. Urban Design 10, 195–227. doi: 10.1080/135748005000
86998
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
 Smith et al.
Social Network Protects Aging Hippocampus
Wu, C. W., Chang, Y. T., Yu, L., Chen, H. I., Jen, C. J., Wu, S. Y.,
et al. (2008). Exercise enhances the proliferation of neural stem cells and
neurite growth and survival of neuronal progenitor cells in dentate gyrus of
middle-aged mice. J. Appl. Physiol. 105, 1585–1594. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.
90775.2008
Xia, S., Zhang, X., Zheng, S., Khanabdali, R., Kalionis, B., Wu, J., et al. (2016). An
update on inflamm-aging: mechanisms, prevention and treatment. J. Immunol.
Res. 2016:8426874. doi: 10.1155/2016/8426874
Yau, J. L. W., and Seckl, J. R. (2012). Local amplification of glucocorticoids in
the aging brain and impaired spatial memory. Front. Aging Neurosci. 4:24.
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2012.00024
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Smith, Yao, Chen and Kirby. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
May 2018 | Volume 10 | Article 142
