 e44
Abstract—Two decades of epidemiological research shows that silent cerebrovascular disease is common and is 
associated with future risk for stroke and dementia. It is the most common incidental finding on brain scans. To 
summarize evidence on the diagnosis and management of silent cerebrovascular disease to prevent stroke, the 
Stroke Council of the American Heart Association convened a writing committee to evaluate existing evidence, to 
discuss clinical considerations, and to offer suggestions for future research on stroke prevention in patients with 
 
3 cardinal manifestations of silent cerebrovascular disease: silent brain infarcts, magnetic resonance imaging white 
matter hyperintensities of presumed vascular origin, and cerebral microbleeds. The writing committee found strong 
evidence that silent cerebrovascular disease is a common problem of aging and that silent brain infarcts and white 
matter hyperintensities are associated with future symptomatic stroke risk independently of other vascular risk 
factors. In patients with cerebral microbleeds, there was evidence of a modestly increased risk of symptomatic 
intracranial hemorrhage in patients treated with thrombolysis for acute ischemic stroke but little prospective evidence 
on the risk of symptomatic hemorrhage in patients on anticoagulation. There were no randomized controlled trials 
targeted specifically to participants with silent cerebrovascular disease to prevent stroke. Primary stroke prevention 
is indicated in patients with silent brain infarcts, white matter hyperintensities, or microbleeds. Adoption of standard 
terms and definitions for silent cerebrovascular disease, as provided by prior American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association statements and by a consensus group, may facilitate diagnosis and communication of findings from 
radiologists to clinicians.   
(Stroke. 2017;48:e44-e71. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000116.)
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements ◼ anticoagulants ◼ brain infarction ◼ cerebrovascular disorders  
◼ prevention and control ◼ white matter
Prevention of Stroke in Patients With Silent  
Cerebrovascular Disease
A Scientific Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the American 
Heart Association/American Stroke Association
The American Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this statement  
as an educational tool for neurologists.
Eric E. Smith, MD, MPH, FAHA, Chair; Gustavo Saposnik, MD, MSc, FAHA, Vice Chair;  
Geert Jan Biessels, MD, PhD; Fergus N. Doubal, PhD, FRCP;  
Myriam Fornage, MS, PhD, FAHA; Philip B. Gorelick, MD, MPH, FAHA;  
Steven M. Greenberg, MD, PhD, FAHA; Randall T. Higashida, MD, FAHA;  
Scott E. Kasner, MD, MS, FAHA; Sudha Seshadri, MD; on behalf of the American  
Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention;  
Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; and Council on Hypertension
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship 
or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on August 29, 2016, and the American 
Heart Association Executive Committee on September 23, 2016. A copy of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@
wolterskluwer.com.
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STR.0000000000000116/-/DC1.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Smith EE, Saposnik G, Biessels GJ, Doubal FN, Fornage M, Gorelick 
PB, Greenberg SM, Higashida RT, Kasner SE, Seshadri S; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular 
Radiology and Intervention; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; and Council on Hypertension. Prevention of stroke in patients 
with silent cerebrovascular disease: a scientific statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke. 2017;48:e44–e71. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000116.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express 
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000116
AHA/ASA Scientific Statement
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e45
N
euroimaging signs of silent cerebrovascular disease are 
highly prevalent in older people. Although many radio-
logical manifestations and secondary consequences are now 
known, the best-defined manifestations—in terms of radio-
logical definition, prevalence, and clinical associations—are 
silent brain infarcts, white matter lesions of presumed vascu-
lar origin, and microbleeds (Figure 1). Approximately 25% 
of people >80 years of age have ≥1 silent brain infarcts.1 The 
prevalence of silent cerebrovascular disease exceeds, by far, 
the prevalence of symptomatic stroke. It has been estimated 
that for every symptomatic stroke, there are ≈10 silent brain 
infarcts.2 As a result of this high prevalence, silent cerebro-
vascular disease is the most commonly encountered incidental 
finding on brain imaging.3
Two decades of research has generated important insights 
into the prevalence, manifestations, risk factors, and con-
sequences of silent cerebrovascular disease.4 Silent brain 
infarcts, also called silent strokes in the literature, are sub-
cortical cavities or cortical areas of atrophy and gliosis that 
are presumed to be caused by previous infarction.1 White 
matter lesions of presumed vascular origin represent areas of 
demyelination, gliosis, arteriosclerosis, and microinfarction 
presumed to be caused by ischemia.4 They may be visible 
as areas of white matter hyperintensity (WMH) on magnetic 
resonance (MR) imaging (MRI) or white matter hypodensity 
on computed tomography (CT). Microbleeds are thought to 
represent small areas of hemosiderin deposition from previ-
ous silent hemorrhages and are visible only on MRI sequences 
optimized for their detection.5 A previous statement from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association 
(AHA/ASA) on the definition of stroke includes, for the first 
time, definitions of silent brain infarcts and silent brain hem-
orrhages as manifestations of cerebrovascular disease.6
Although often called silent because they occur in the 
absence of clinically recognized stroke symptoms, population-
based epidemiological studies show that these manifestations 
of cerebrovascular disease are, in fact, associated with subtler 
cognitive and motor deficits on standardized testing, cognitive 
decline, gait impairment, psychiatric disorders, impairments 
in activities of living, and other adverse health outcomes.7–9 
Furthermore, both silent brain infarcts and WMHs are asso-
ciated with future incident cognitive decline and stroke.10–13 
Therefore, these lesions are neither silent nor innocuous. 
Consequently, some have advocated that the term covert cere-
brovascular disease is a more appropriate label than silent 
disease.14 A previous AHA/ASA statement on vascular con-
tributions to cognitive impairment and dementia reviewed the 
relationship between silent cerebrovascular disease and clini-
cally identified cognitive impairment.15 Salient findings and 
recommendations in the statement included that a pattern of 
diffuse, subcortical cerebrovascular pathology, identifiable on 
neuroimaging, can support a diagnosis of probable or possible 
vascular cognitive impairment. However, that statement did 
not offer guidance for stroke prevention.
In this statement, we systematically review the literature 
on the prevalence of silent cerebrovascular disease and its 
implications for stroke prevention. Our writing committee 
identified specific scenarios in which clinical decision making 
may be influenced by the presence of incidentally detected 
silent cerebrovascular disease. We conducted focused lit-
erature searches to address these clinical questions: (1) How 
should silent cerebrovascular disease be classified radiologi-
cally and reported? (2) What investigations, if any, should 
be ordered for patients with silent cerebrovascular disease? 
(3) How should patients with silent brain infarcts or WMHs 
be managed to prevent symptomatic stroke? (4) What is the 
safety of medical therapies, including anticoagulation, in 
patients with cerebral microbleeds (CMBs)? (5) What is the 
safety of thrombolysis or acute stroke reperfusion therapy in 
patients with microbleeds? (6) Is there a role for population 
screening for silent cerebrovascular disease? For each section, 
we offer suggestions and considerations for clinical practice 
(summarized in Table 1) and identify areas that require further 
investigation.
Methods
The writing committee was commissioned in September 2014 to 
review the literature on the management of silent cerebrovascu-
lar disease to reduce the risk of stroke and to improve outcomes 
from stroke, with the goal of identifying clinical considerations 
that should drive future research. With guidance from the Stroke 
Council Scientific Statements Oversight Committee, the writing 
committee chairs selected commonly encountered clinical sce-
narios in which there was uncertainty or controversy concern-
ing the implications of silent cerebrovascular disease for patient 
management. These scenarios were subsequently discussed and 
finalized with the entire writing committee. Because the fre-
quency of these clinical scenarios depends heavily on the preva-
lence of silent cerebrovascular disease, the committee chose 
to summarize existing data on prevalence also. The committee 
focused on the 3 manifestations of silent cerebrovascular dis-
ease that are best studied in the literature: silent brain infarcts, 
WMHs, and microbleeds. Thus, this statement is not intended 
to provide a comprehensive overview of all the manifestations 
of silent cerebrovascular disease, nor is it intended to review 
aspects related to pathology, pathophysiology, and pathogen-
esis. For background information, the reader is directed to 
excellent recent comprehensive reviews4,16 and to reviews of 
silent brain infarcts,1 WMHs,17 and microbleeds.18
In September 2014, the writing committee members were 
selected by the committee chair and vice chair, with input 
Figure 1. Left, Silent brain infarct (arrow) on magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) scan. 
Middle, White matter hyperintensity of presumed vascular origin 
on MRI FLAIR. Right, Microbleed (arrow) on MRI T2*-weighted 
gradient-recalled echo sequence. See the Diagnosis of Silent 
Cerebrovascular Disease by Neuroimaging section for radiologi-
cal terms and definitions.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e46  Stroke  February 2017
from the Stroke Council Scientific Statements Oversight 
Committee and AHA councils. Committee members were se-
lected on the basis of expert knowledge in this area and expe-
rience with guideline development. Care was taken to achieve 
a balance of early- and later-career investigators, as well as 
a balance in terms of sex, race, and ethnicity. All committee 
members were required to declare conflicts of interest.
The first conference call was held in January 2015. During 
this call, the purpose and topics of the statement were final-
ized, and literature search strategies were developed. Each of 
the 8 statement sections was assigned a lead and secondary 
author, and the chair and vice chair were responsible for draft-
ing the introduction, methods, and concluding sections and for 
editing all subsections.
For each section, relevant literature was identified through 
systematic review complemented by hand searching of refer-
ence lists and expert knowledge of relevant articles. Literature 
searches were conducted centrally, with the PubMed engine 
used to search the Medline database. Key words and medical 
subject heading terms relevant to silent brain infarcts, WMHs, 
and microbleeds were used, along with terms specific to sec-
tion topics of prevalence, diagnosis, stroke prevention, anti-
coagulation and thrombolysis treatment, and screening (Data 
Supplement Methods). The section writing lead reviewed ab-
stracts and titles for relevance and abstracted useful informa-
tion from the full articles; however, detailed evidence tables 
were not required. Full details of the search strategy are avail-
able in the Data Supplement Methods.
The statement was independently peer-reviewed. It was 
also reviewed internally by AHA Stroke Council leader-
ship and the Stroke Council Scientific Statements Oversight 
Committee. The writing committee responded in writing to 
Table 1. Summary of Suggestions for Clinical Care of 
Patients With Silent Cerebrovascular Disease
Diagnosis by neuroimaging
  
MRI has greater sensitivity than CT for diagnosis of silent 
cerebrovascular disease.
  
Minimum MRI acquisition standards are provided in Table 2.
  
Radiology reports should describe silent cerebrovascular disease 
according to STRIVE.16
  
WMHs of presumed vascular origin should be reported with the use of a 
validated visual rating scale such as the Fazekas scale for MRI.19
Investigations for patients with silent cerebrovascular disease
  
Assess common vascular risk factors and assess pulse for atrial 
fibrillation.
  
Consider carotid imaging when there is silent brain infarction in the 
carotid territory.
  
Consider echocardiography when there is an embolic-appearing pattern 
of silent infarction.
  
Consider noninvasive CT or MR angiography when there are large (>1.0 
cm) silent hemorrhages.
Prevention of stroke in patients with silent brain infarcts
  
Take a careful history to determine whether the infarction was symptomatic.
  
Implement preventive care recommended by AHA/ASA guidelines for 
primary prevention of ischemic stroke.
  
The effectiveness of aspirin to prevent stroke has not been studied in 
this setting.
  
The clinician should be aware that there is an increased risk for future 
stroke, and it is reasonable to consider this information when making 
decisions about anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation, revascularization 
for carotid stenosis, treatment of hypertension, and initiation of statin 
therapy. However, the clinician should also be aware that the role of 
silent brain infarcts in these decisions has not been studied in RCTs.
Prevention of stroke in patients with WMHs of presumed vascular origin
  
Implement preventive care recommended by AHA/ASA guidelines for 
primary prevention of ischemic stroke.
  
It is not clear whether WMH alone, in the absence of other risk factors, is 
a sufficient reason for aspirin therapy.
  
The clinician should be aware that there is an increased risk for future 
stroke, and it is reasonable to consider this information when making 
decisions about anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation, revascularization 
for carotid stenosis, treatment of hypertension, and initiation of statin 
therapy. However, the clinician should also be aware that the role of 
WMH burden in these decisions has not been studied in RCTs.
Anticoagulation and other therapies in patients with silent microbleeds
  
It is reasonable to provide anticoagulation therapy to patients with 
microbleeds when there is an indication (eg, AF).
  
When anticoagulation is needed, a novel oral anticoagulant is preferred 
over warfarin.
  
Percutaneous closure of the left atrial appendage could be considered as 
an alternative to anticoagulation.
  
It is reasonable to provide antiplatelet therapy to patients with 
microbleeds when there is an indication.
  
MRI screening for microbleeds is not needed before the initiation of 
antithrombotic therapies.
  
Individuals with silent microbleeds are at increased future risk of both 
ischemic stroke and ICH.
  
Implement preventive care recommended by AHA/ASA guidelines for 
primary prevention of ischemic stroke.
  
It is reasonable to provide preventive care recommended by AHA/ASA 
guidelines for prevention of ICH.
Safety of acute ischemic stroke therapy in patients with silent microbleeds
  
It is reasonable to administer intravenous alteplase to patients with 
acute ischemic stroke and evidence of microbleeds if it is otherwise 
indicated.
  
It is reasonable to perform endovascular thrombectomy in patients with 
acute ischemic stroke and evidence of microbleeds.
  
In acute ischemic stroke patients with microbleeds, bypassing 
intravenous alteplase therapy to proceed directly to endovascular 
thrombectomy is an unproven strategy.
Population screening
  
Screening the asymptomatic general population with MRI to detect silent 
cerebrovascular disease is not justified by current evidence.
AF indicates atrial fibrillation; AHA/ASA, American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association; CT, computed tomography; ICH, intracerebral 
hemorrhage; MR, magnetic resonance; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; RCT, 
randomized controlled trial; STRIVE, Standards for Reporting Vascular Changes 
on Neuroimaging; and WMH, white matter hyperintensity.
Table 1. Continued
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e47
each comment from the reviewers. Final approval was pro-
vided by the AHA Science Advisory and Coordinating 
Committee.
Diagnosis of Silent Cerebrovascular  
Disease by Neuroimaging
Silent cerebrovascular disease is typically recognized on brain 
MRI and CT scans. MRI has greater sensitivity and specificity 
than CT16 and can better demonstrate and differentiate small 
cortical and subcortical infarction, lacunar infarcts, WMHs, 
perivascular spaces, brain atrophy, and other structural lesions 
(Figure 1). CMBs are visible on hemorrhage-sensitive MRI 
sequences but unapparent on CT.
MRI Acquisition
A comprehensive MRI evaluation for silent cerebrovas-
cular diseases should include a minimum of the following 
sequences: axial diffusion-weighted imaging with both a 
trace image and an apparent diffusion coefficient map, fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), T2-weighted and T2* 
susceptibility-weighted imaging (or T2*-weighted gradient-
recalled echo if susceptibility-weighted imaging is not avail-
able), and T1-weighted imaging. The diffusion-weighted trace 
image and apparent diffusion coefficient map are important 
for identifying recent infarcts. Sequence parameters should be 
consistent with recommendations for neuroimaging from the 
American College of Radiologists,20 including that the slice 
thickness should be ≤5 mm and in-plane resolution should 
be ≤1×1 mm. For increased sensitivity to small infarcts and 
microbleeds, slice thickness should ideally be ≤3 mm and 
slice gaps should be minimized or slices should be acquired 
with no gaps. Whole-brain coverage in all sequences should 
be used. Three-dimensional T1-weighted thin-section iso-
tropic sequences can be reformatted to allow coregistration 
and to quantify brain volume. An MRI field strength of 3.0 
T is preferred for higher resolution; however, modern 1.5-T 
MRI scans are also acceptable.21 In either magnet, brain coils 
should always be used. Table 2 outlines the proposed MRI 
acquisition standards for neuroimaging for clinical care or 
epidemiological studies.16
A number of other techniques are currently under inves-
tigation, but their role in clinical practice is still uncertain. 
Diffusion tensor imaging has been used to assess surrogates 
of microarchitectural integrity and structural connectivity and 
to reconstruct white matter tracts in normal- and abnormal-
appearing white matter. Other techniques measure perfusion 
(by arterial spin label or perfusion-weighted MRI), magnetiza-
tion transfer, blood-brain barrier permeability, vascular reac-
tivity, metabolites, microatheroma in perforating arterioles, 
and microinfarcts, all of which may be clinically silent but 
may show lesional abnormalities on high-resolution MRI.16
Consensus Terms and Definitions for MRI and CT 
Manifestations of Silent Cerebrovascular Disease
Most silent cerebrovascular findings on MRI are related 
to cerebral small vessel disease. The first neuroimaging 
consensus document for classification of small vessel dis-
ease was proposed in 2006 by the US National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the Canadian 
Stroke Network as part of the development of standards for 
research on vascular cognitive impairment.22 More recently, 
a scientific statement from the AHA/ASA incorporated neu-
roimaging evidence of cerebrovascular disease for vascular 
cognitive impairment and dementia.15
The radiological definitions and terms used to describe silent 
cerebrovascular disease have varied substantially in research 
studies and in clinical practice.16,23,24 STRIVE (Standards for 
Reporting Vascular Changes on Neuroimaging) was an interna-
tional collaboration to recommend standards for research and to 
develop definitions and imaging standards for describing signs 
of small vessel disease on MRI and CT in the context of aging 
and neurodegeneration (Table 3).16 These terms and definitions 
Table 2. Image Acquisition Standards for Neuroimaging of Small Vessel Disease
Sequence
Purpose
Orientation
Target Slice  
Thickness, mm/In-Plane  
Resolution, mm
Comment
T1-weighted
Important for discriminating lacunes from dilated 
PVS, discriminating gray from white matter, and 
studying brain atrophy
2D axial, sagittal,  
or coronal
3–5/1×1
At least 1 sequence acquired in 
sagittal or coronal plane is helpful in 
visualizing full extent and orientation
DWI
Most sensitive sequences for acute ischemic 
lesions; positive up to several weeks after event
2D axial
3–5/2×2
Reduced signal on apparent diffusion 
coefficient map helps identify recent 
from old lesions
T2-weighted
Brain structure; differentiate lacunes from WMH and 
PVS; identify old infarcts
2D axial
3–5/1×1
 
FLAIR
Identify WMHs and established cortical or large 
subcortical infarcts; differentiate white matter lesion 
from PVS and lacunes
2D axial
3–5/1×1
 
T2*-weighted 
SWI or GRE
Detect hemorrhage, cerebral microbleeds, and 
siderosis
2D axial
3–5/1×1
Only reliable routine sequences for 
detection of hemorrhage; SWI is 
more sensitive than GRE
2D indicates 2-dimensional; DWI, diffusion weighted imaging; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; GRE, gradient-recalled echo; PVS, perivascular space; SWI, 
susceptibility-weighted imaging; and WMH, white matter hyperintensity.
Reprinted from Wardlaw et al16 in The Lancet Neurology with permission from Elsevier. Copyright © 2013, Elsevier Ltd.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e48  Stroke  February 2017
apply to currently recognized manifestations of cerebral small 
vessel disease, which accounts for the majority (85%–90%) of 
silent cerebrovascular disease. However, a minority (≈10%–
15%) of silent cerebrovascular disease is instead manifest as 
cortical infarcts or larger (>15 mm) subcortical infarcts related 
to large artery disease, cardioembolism, or other mechanisms 
rather than small vessel disease.25
Radiological Diagnosis and Reporting of Silent 
Brain Infarcts, WMHs, and Microbleeds
Silent Brain Infarcts
Most silent brain infarcts (80%–90%) are subcortical. 
Subcortical chronic infarcts appear as focal, irregularly shaped 
lesions with T1 hypointensity and T2 hyperintensity, reflect-
ing tissue destruction and cavitation (Figure 2). They usually, 
but not always, exhibit central hypointensity on the FLAIR 
sequence, often with an irregular rim of T2 hyperintensity 
reflecting adjacent gliosis; however, sometimes they appear 
hyperintense on FLAIR as a result of incomplete suppression 
of the intracavitary fluid (Figure 3).26 On CT, they appear as 
areas of hypodensity with attenuation similar to that of cere-
brospinal fluid (Figure 2). They are differentiated from peri-
vascular spaces by size (≥3 mm), shape (ovoid and irregular 
instead of linear or sausage-shaped), and location. Perivascular 
spaces are common in the basal ganglia and corona radiata but 
are rarely found in the pons, medulla, or cerebellum, so lesions 
in these regions are more likely to represent infarcts.27 They 
are differentiated from WMHs by the presence of cavitation, 
apparent as cerebrospinal fluid–like signal on T1-weighted 
and T2-weighted images. However, longitudinal studies show 
that some acute lacunar infarcts do not develop cavitation 
and therefore will be misclassified as WMHs in their chronic 
phase.26,28 Additionally, although the size criterion of ≥3 mm 
is useful to increase the specificity for infarction as opposed 
to perivascular space, neuropathological studies frequently 
identify much smaller infarcts, called microinfarcts, that are 
unapparent on routine clinical imaging.29,30 Therefore, MRI is 
likely to substantially underestimate the burden of infarction 
in some patients. Small subcortical infarcts that are 3 to 15 
mm in axial diameter have also been called lacunar infarcts or 
lacunar lesions and when attributed to vascular disease may 
also be called lacunes of presumed vascular origin (Table 2). 
They are presumed to result from the occlusion of a single 
small perforating artery caused by lipohyalinosis, microath-
eroma, or, less commonly, emboli. Large subcortical infarcts 
that exceed the maximum size typically attributed to lacunes 
(ie, >15 mm axial diameter) may have more diverse causes, 
including atherosclerotic large artery disease or embolism.
A minority of silent brain infarcts involve the cerebral cor-
tex (Figure 4). In this case, T2 hyperintensity and T1 hypoin-
tensity may be present as a result of gliotic changes, along 
with atrophic, involutional changes of the cerebral cortex. 
However, atrophy may be minimal when the cortical infarct 
is small. Higher-field-strength (3 T) imaging at high spatial 
resolution (eg, ≤1.5-mm slice thickness), as is sometimes used 
clinically in dementia protocols, may reveal very small (<3 
mm) infarcts in the cortical ribbon that are at the upper size 
limit of what have been called microinfarcts.31
White Matter Hyperintensities
WMH is a descriptive term for areas of increased sig-
nal intensity of the cerebral white matter detected on 
T2-weighted or FLAIR MRI or areas of hypodensity seen 
on CT (Figure 5). Depending on the MRI acquisition 
parameters, WMHs may appear isointense on T1-weighted 
sequences or hypointense, but they should not be as hypoin-
tense as cerebrospinal fluid (in which case the lesion should 
instead be classified as an infarct if presumed to be of vascu-
lar origin). Two varieties of WMHs have been described by 
some investigators on the basis of their location in the brain, 
periventricular WMHs (immediately contiguous to the ven-
tricular system) and deep WMHs (located in the subcortical 
Table 3. Glossary of Proposed Terms and Definitions for 
Neuroimaging Features of Small Vessel Disease
Lesion
Definition
Recent small 
subcortical infarct
Neuroimaging evidence of recent infarction in the 
territory of 1 perforating arteriole, with imaging 
features or clinical symptoms consistent with a 
lesion occurring in the previous few weeks.
Lacune of presumed 
vascular origin
A round or ovoid, subcortical, fluid-filled cavity 
(signal similar to CSF) between 3 and ≈15 mm in 
diameter, consistent with a previous acute small 
subcortical infarct or hemorrhage in the territory 
of 1 perforating arteriole.
WMH (MRI) or 
hypodensity (CT) of 
presumed vascular 
origin
Signal abnormality of variable size in the white 
matter that shows the following characteristics: 
hyperintensity on T2-weighted images such as 
FLAIR or hypodensity on CT, without cavitation 
(signal different from CSF). Lesions in the 
subcortical gray matter or brainstem are not 
included in this category unless explicitly 
stated. If deep gray matter and brainstem MRI 
hyperintensities (or CT hypodensities) are also 
included, the collective term should be MRI 
subcortical hyperintensities (or CT subcortical 
hypodensities).
Perivascular space
Fluid-filled spaces that follow the typical course of a 
vessel as it goes through gray or white matter. The 
spaces have signal intensity similar to CSF on all 
sequences. Because they follow the course of 
penetrating vessels, they appear linear when imaged 
parallel to the course of the vessel and round or 
ovoid, with a diameter generally <3 mm, when 
imaged perpendicular to the course of the vessel.
Microbleed
Small (generally 2–5 mm in diameter but 
sometimes up to 10 mm) areas of signal void 
with associated blooming seen on SWI, T2*-
weighted MRI, or other sequences that are 
sensitive to susceptibility effects.
Atrophy
A lower brain volume that is not related to a 
specific macroscopic focal injury such as trauma 
or infarction. Thus, infarction is not included in 
this measure unless explicitly stated.
CMB indicates cerebral microbleed; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed 
tomography; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; MRI, magnetic 
resonance imaging; SWI, susceptibility-weighted imaging; and WMH, white 
matter hyperintensity.
Reprinted from Wardlaw et al16 in The Lancet Neurology with permission from 
Elsevier. Copyright © 2013, Elsevier Ltd.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e49
regions and not contiguous with the ventricles), whereas oth-
ers aver that subcortical WMHs appear as the total volume of 
WMH increases above a threshold.32
WMH reporting may be the most variable of all the mani-
festations of silent cerebrovascular disease. Many synonyms 
for WMH such as leukoaraiosis, white matter changes, and 
small vessel ischemic disease have entered the literature. 
WMHs become ubiquitous with advanced age; therefore, 
clinical reports may neglect to mention their presence when 
the amount of WMH is expected for age, although there is no 
clear scientific evidence for a threshold below which WMH 
can be considered entirely benign. Furthermore, there is no 
uniform approach to describing the extent of WMH. However, 
there are opportunities to make reporting more uniform. The 
STRIVE group recommends adoption of the term T2 WMHs, 
or CT white matter hypodensity, of presumed vascular origin 
as a consensus term to confer the diagnostic impression that 
the white matter changes are probably related to arterioscle-
rotic microvascular diseases associated with aging and vascu-
lar risk factors and are not attributable to other specific white 
matter diseases, including demyelinating disease, leukodys-
trophy, and other nonvascular causes.33,34 Several rapid, easy-
to-use visual rating scales have been developed and validated 
against quantitative volumetric assessments, which would 
allow standardized reporting of WMH extent across a wide 
range of WMH.35,36 Probably the quickest to apply and among 
the best validated is the Fazekas scale (Figure 6) (see also the 
White Matter Hyperintensity section in Prevalence of Silent 
Brain Infarcts, WMHs, and Microbleeds).19
Microbleeds
Microbleeds appear as small, round, 5- to 10-mm areas of sig-
nal loss on MRI susceptibility-weighted sequences (Figure 1). 
They exhibit a blooming effect; that is, the diameter of the 
signal loss on the susceptibility-weighted sequence exceeds 
the actual size of the lesion. The sensitivity for their detec-
tion can vary up to 2- to 3-fold, depending on the MRI pro-
tocol. Longer echo time, higher field strength, higher spatial 
resolution, and postprocessing techniques can increase the 
sensitivity.5 An earlier review provides diagnostic criteria and 
information on acquisition protocols.5 There are potential 
mimics to avoid. Calcium deposits and vessels seen in cross 
section can have a similar appearance.
Suggestions and Considerations for Clinical Practice
MRI is preferred to CT because of its greater sensitivity for 
silent cerebrovascular disease and because only MRI can 
detect chronic microbleeds. We suggest using the minimum 
MRI acquisition standards in Table 2 for clinical scenarios in 
which silent cerebrovascular findings are commonly encoun-
tered, including when scanning patients with symptomatic 
stroke or cognitive impairment. Because silent brain infarcts, 
WMHs, and microbleeds have prognostic value for future 
clinical events such as symptomatic stroke and dementia, they 
should be reported when seen on neuroimaging. To reduce 
variation in reporting terminology, we suggest adoption of 
the STRIVE standard terms and definitions for clinical report-
ing of manifestations of cerebral small vessel disease. Using 
standard terms and definitions should improve communica-
tion between radiologists and ordering clinicians. Because 
WMH increases with advanced age, neuroradiology reports 
should include a description of the severity of the WMH and 
its presence. Ideally, WMH severity should be reported with a 
standardized validated visual rating scale such as the Fazekas 
scale (Figure 6).
Areas for Further Investigation
MRI exhibits superior contrast to CT for identifying tissue 
lesions, but more research is needed to quantify the impact 
Figure 2. A small (4-mm) subcortical silent brain infarct is visible as a hypodensity in the left thalamus on computed tomography (A). 
On magnetic resonance imaging (different patient), a 4-mm subcortical silent brain infarct (arrow) is visible on fluid-attenuated inversion 
recovery (FLAIR; B), T2-weighted (C), and T1-weighted (D) sequences, illustrating typical imaging features of small subcortical (lacunar) 
infarction. On FLAIR, the lesion exhibits central hypointensity with a surround rim of hyperintensity, reflecting gliosis. (This peri-infarct 
hyperintensity may sometimes be absent.) The infarct exhibits hyperintensity on T2-weighted and hypointensity on T1-weighted images, 
similar to the signal from cerebrospinal fluid, indicating central cavitation.
Figure 3. There is a 5-mm left thalamic hyperintensity (arrow) on 
the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence (left) 
with clear evidence of cavitation based on cerebrospinal fluid–
like hyperintensity on T2-weighted (middle) and hypointensity on 
T1-weighted (right) images. This lesion should be classified as a 
brain infarct. Small infarcts can sometimes appear hyperintense 
on FLAIR because of incomplete suppression of the intracavitary 
fluid. Modified from Moreau et al.26 Copyright © 2012, American 
Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e50  Stroke  February 2017
of this improved contrast on the sensitivity, specificity, and 
reliability for identifying silent brain infarcts and WMHs. 
This information will be needed to better justify MRI use in 
practice settings where access to MRI is more limited than 
access to CT.
Except for microbleeds, there has been very little work 
on how MRI scanner field strength, scan resolution, and scan 
parameters affect the sensitivity and specificity for the detec-
tion of silent cerebrovascular disease. Future studies should 
examine the sensitivity, specificity, and reliability for detecting 
silent brain infarcts and for accurately assessing WMH vol-
ume using patient volunteers. The development of appropriate 
phantoms could help in assessing scanner-related variance.
Generally, moderate to good reliability is reported 
for assessments of silent brain infarcts, microbleeds, and 
WMHs.36 However, these studies report reliability from expe-
rienced research groups with a limited number of raters and 
may overestimate the reliability of reporting that could be 
expected in routine clinical practice. More research is needed 
to better understand the sensitivity, specificity, and reliability 
of reporting findings of silent cerebrovascular disease in clini-
cal practice to identify areas where improvement in reporting 
is needed.
Investigational MRI techniques may improve the diagno-
sis of silent cerebrovascular disease in the future. Of particular 
interest would be techniques that help inform the clinician as 
to whether the incidentally detected cerebrovascular disease 
is likely to be associated with subclinical, but real, impair-
ments in cognition, mood, or gait, as well as techniques that 
improve the detection of small lesions such as microinfarcts 
and microbleeds. Such techniques could include assessments 
of perfusion, vascular reactivity, brain white matter connectiv-
ity, atrophy, and others.16
Prevalence of Silent Brain Infarcts,  
WMHs, and Microbleeds
We screened >800 studies but included only population-based 
and case-control studies with >150 subjects, basing our preva-
lence estimates largely on the community-based data and 
alluding briefly to data from case-control studies in settings 
that might be frequently encountered such as an acute stroke 
setting. Furthermore, we chose to include only MRI studies 
because the sensitivity of CT scans for the various markers 
of vascular brain injury is lower. We have focused on 1- to 
3-T MRI scans because these are the field strengths that have 
been widely used to date in population-based studies. We have 
used the author-defined criteria for silent brain infarction, 
WMH, and CMB because most of these articles were pub-
lished before recent harmonization attempts.16 For estimates 
of silent brain infarct prevalence, we have included all stud-
ies with T1- and T2-weighted imaging; for WMH prevalence 
studies, either T2-weighted or T2-FLAIR sequences; and for 
Figure 4. Cortical silent brain infarct. On 
computed tomography (A), a silent corti-
cal infarct is visible in the right parietal 
lobe (arrow). On magnetic resonance 
imaging (different patient), a silent corti-
cal infarct (arrow) is visible as a small 
region of T2 hyperintensity on the fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery image (B) 
in the right parietal cortex and adjacent 
subcortical white matter. On T1-weighted 
inversion-recovery spoiled gradient-
recalled echo imaging (C), the infarct 
appears hypointense, interrupting the 
cortical ribbon.
Figure 5. White matter lesions of presumed vascular origin. Extensive periventricular (arrowhead) and subcortical (arrow) white matter 
signal abnormalities are seen on computed tomography (CT; A) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; B and C). On CT (A), the abnor-
malities appear as white matter hypodensities. On MRI, the abnormalities appear as white matter hyperintensity (WMH) on T2-weighted 
sequences, including fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (B). On T1-weighted inversion-recovery spoiled gradient-recalled echo (C), 
some of the WMH appears mildly to moderately hypointense but without the very hypointense cerebrospinal fluid–like signal indicative of 
cavitation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e51
studies of microbleeds, T2*-weighted gradient-recalled echo 
or susceptibility-weighted imaging.16
Silent Brain Infarcts
In population studies, >90% of silent brain infarcts correspond to 
lacunar infarcts, defined as small subcortical infarcts of 3 to 15 
mm, whereas the remaining 10% correspond to larger subcortical 
infarcts or cortical infarcts.25 Population-based studies in whites, 
blacks, and Japanese have reported an overall silent brain infarc-
tion prevalence of 8% to 31%,37–41 with an incidence of 0.3%/y to 
3%/y that progressively increases with age.42–44 In a Framingham 
study sample 62±9 years of age, the prevalence of silent brain 
infarction was 10.7%, with 84% having a single infarct.45
Silent brain infarcts are more prevalent among patients 
with cardiovascular disease, stroke, and dementia. Risk 
factors for silent brain infarcts have been systematically 
reviewed1,46 and include advanced age, hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, and smoking. One population-based study in a mul-
tiethnic cohort also found that men and younger blacks were 
at increased risk for silent brain infarction.47
White Matter Hyperintensity
WMH prevalence and volume are partly genetically deter-
mined48–50 but increase exponentially with age, and the preva-
lence is greater in individuals with higher levels of and longer 
exposure to various vascular risk factors, notably hypertension 
and diabetes mellitus.51,52 WMHs are likely more common in 
individuals with stroke, dementia, migraine,53,54 or late-life 
depression55 but not in younger adults with bipolar disease or 
schizophrenia.56 In community-based samples, WMH preva-
lence was low before 55 years of age57 but increased sharply 
with age thereafter, from 11% to 21% in the subjects 64 years 
of age on average to 94% in individuals 82 years of age on 
average.8,25,58–60 Whereas most studies have been in whites liv-
ing in industrialized nations, the prevalence of WMHs in rural 
Ecuador and in blacks and Hispanics in Northern Manhattan 
was comparable.61,62 However, another study suggests that 
blacks may be at higher risk for more severe WMHs than 
Americans of European descent.63 Early studies used a variety 
of semiquantitative visual rating scales with limited agree-
ment,8,19,60,64,65 and they reported a prevalence of moderate to 
severe WMH of ≈22%.66 In some studies of older adults that 
additionally categorized WMH by location, a prevalence of 
20% to 67% for deep and subcortical WMHs and from 15% to 
94% for periventricular WMHs has been noted.67,68 Currently, 
automated methods for assessment of WMH volumes are con-
sidered the gold standard for research purposes.69 An entity 
of large or extensive WMHs has been described as a WMH 
volume >1 or 1.5 SD above the age- and sex-specific mean; by 
definition, the prevalence of this condition is 12% to 17%.70,71 
Figure 6. Fazekas visual rating scale for 
magnetic resonance imaging white matter 
hyperintensities (WMHs). Periventricular 
WMH is graded as follows: 0=absence, 
1=caps or pencil-thin lining, 2=smooth 
halo, and 3=irregular periventricular WMH 
extending into the deep white matter. 
Separately, deep (subcortical) WMH is 
graded as follows: 0=absence, 1=punctu-
ate foci, 2=beginning confluence of foci, 
and 3=large confluent areas. Reprinted 
from Fazekas et al19 with permission from 
the American Journal of Roentgenology. 
Copyright © 1987, American Roentgen 
Ray Society. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e52  Stroke  February 2017
In specific settings such as in patients who have suffered an 
acute stroke, semiautomated methods that mask the acutely 
infarcted areas to assess WMH only in noninfarcted brain are 
used that correlate well with methods used in stroke-free pop-
ulation samples72; individuals with stroke have more prevalent 
WMHs (19.5% had confluent WMHs versus 7.5% of normal) 
and larger WMH volumes.73
Estimates of WMH volume are dependent on the MRI 
sequences and the WMH measurement methods used; thus, 
it is uncertain whether they can be directly compared across 
studies. Figure 7 provides estimates of the frequency of dif-
ferent WMH grades, measured on FLAIR with the Fazekas 
visual rating scale (Figure 6), for age categories from <55 to 
>75 years of age based on the findings of 2 population-based 
studies.74,75 Unfortunately, similar normative data are not 
available for CT.
The most consistently identified risk factors for WMH are 
advanced age and hypertension.8,63,70,76
Cerebral Microbleeds
CMBs were found in up to 5% to 21% of the general pop-
ulation,20,77–84 30% to 40% of patients with ischemic stroke, 
and 60% to 68% of patients with primary intracerebral 
hemorrhage (ICH) with the use of gradient-recalled echo 
sequences.85 Microbleeds are strongly associated with age. 
On a high-sensitivity MR sequence, CMBs were found in 
18% of individuals 60 to 69 years of age and in 38% of sub-
jects >80 years of age, whereas using less sensitive gradient-
recalled echo sequences, the Framingham and AGES (Age, 
Gene/Environment Susceptibility) studies noted a prevalence 
of 9% and 13% at mean ages of 67 and 76 years, respec-
tively.81,84 Prevalence was similar in a multiethnic cohort, the 
Washington Heights-Inwood Columbia Aging Project.86
Technical and measurement-related factors may influ-
ence CMB prevalence rates. Most important, MRI parameters 
such as longer echo time, smaller interslice gap, and the use 
of 3-dimensional acquisition, a higher magnetic field, and 
newer sequences such as susceptibility-weighted imaging can 
increase the ability to detect microbleeds by 2- to 3-fold.5,20 
Additionally, the reliability of microbleed identification is 
only moderate, probably because of the presence of mimics 
such as flow voids, cavernous malformations, hemorrhagic 
transformation of small infarcts, iron deposition, and scattered 
calcifications that can be misidentified as microbleeds.5
Risk factors for microbleeds have been systematically 
reviewed20 and include advanced age and hypertension. 
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a risk factor for lobar 
microbleeds, and a pattern of microbleeds restricted to lobar 
locations is diagnostic for CAA in specific clinical settings 
(Table 4, Boston criteria). A mixed pattern of both deep and 
lobar microbleeds is not uncommon, caused by either arterio-
sclerosis (resulting from hypertension, aging, and other risk 
factors) or a combination of arteriosclerosis and CAA.
Suggestions and Considerations  
for Clinical Practice
Because of the high prevalence of silent cerebrovascular dis-
ease, it will be encountered frequently as an incidental find-
ing on brain MRI and CT scans, particularly in older people. 
Cerebrovascular disease was the most commonly encoun-
tered incidental brain finding in the Rotterdam Scan Study 
and Cardiovascular Health Study, with a prevalence exceed-
ing that of all other incidental findings (eg, meningiomas and 
arachnoid cysts) combined.3,89 Implications for clinical care 
are discussed in subsequent sections of this statement.
Areas for Further Investigation
More prevalence data are needed in younger populations 
and from non–North American, non-European countries. 
Normative data on the population prevalence and severity 
of WMH by age are needed, but to pool data from exist-
ing cohorts, a standardized WMH assessment method would 
need to be selected. These normative data would help cli-
nicians accurately identify patients with excessive WMHs 
for a given age. Additional population-based, longitudinal 
studies on CMBs would be valuable, addressing the impact 
of disease location (eg, deep versus lobar microbleeds) and 
disease burden on outcomes, including future risk of stroke 
and cognitive decline.
Investigations for Patients With Silent 
Cerebrovascular Disease
This section reviews considerations for diagnostic inves-
tigations in the commonly encountered clinical scenarios 
in which ≥1 silent brain infarcts, extensive WMHs for a 
given age, or ≥1 silent CMBs are incidentally discovered 
on brain imaging done for unrelated reasons. We focus on 
Figure 7. Distribution of magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) white matter hyper-
intensity by age category in the general 
population, measured with the Fazekas 
scale (Figure 6). Data were derived from 2 
population-based studies of aging.74,75
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e53
investigations to identify mechanisms of cerebrovascular 
disease and risk factors that would inform primary preven-
tion of symptomatic stroke. A full discussion of the dif-
ferential diagnosis of nonvascular causes of cystic brain 
lesions or white matter signal abnormalities is outside the 
scope of this statement. However, the reader should be aware 
that nonvascular causes of such lesions exist. For example, 
adult-onset leukoencephalopathies or demyelinating dis-
ease can also cause WMHs on MRI.33,34 Here, we focus on 
circumstances in which the radiology and medical history 
are considered sufficient to exclude nonvascular causes and 
are instead consistent with incidental silent cerebrovascular 
disease. Additionally, we do not provide suggestions for the 
assessment of patients with symptomatic cerebrovascular 
disease; instead, the reader should refer to AHA guidelines 
for secondary prevention of stroke.90 Finally, we do not pro-
vide detailed discussions of workup for rare genetic causes 
of cerebral small vessel disease such as cerebral autosomal 
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical ischemic leukoen-
cephalopathy (CADASIL), which are usually symptomatic on 
presentation but may be detected in asymptomatic mutation 
carriers before disease onset. However, we provide sugges-
tions for when rare genetic causes could be suspected.
Investigations for Patients With Silent  
Brain Infarcts
The diagnostic approach to clinically apparent, symptomatic 
ischemic stroke is typically 2-pronged: identifying common 
vascular risk factors and determining the underlying mecha-
nistic cause of the stroke. Because both silent brain infarction 
and ischemic stroke are presumed to share the same pathol-
ogy, namely cerebral infarction, the diagnostic approach to 
silent infarction arguably ought to be the same. However, evi-
dence supporting this approach is sparse.
The evaluation of typical vascular risk factors, including 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, cigarette smok-
ing, and physical inactivity, is relatively straightforward and is 
discussed in detail in existing guidelines for both primary and 
secondary prevention of stroke.91
The diagnosis of ischemic stroke origin is a major compo-
nent of early evaluation because it has potential implications 
for treatment. The origin is often classified as 1 of the follow-
ing 5 mechanisms: cardioembolism, large vessel atherothrom-
boembolism, small vessel occlusive disease, other determined 
cause, or cryptogenic (idiopathic) causes.92,93 Mechanistically, 
these same categories seem reasonably applied to silent infarc-
tion, but the reliability of this approach has not been studied. 
Most silent infarcts (80%–90%) are subcortical and <1.5 cm in 
maximal diameter and would therefore most likely be classified 
as small vessel occlusive disease or lacunar infarction. Only a 
minority (10%–20%) are cortical or large infarcts that are more 
likely to arise from a proximal source of embolism from the 
heart or a proximal larger artery such as the carotid artery.25 
However, the categories of cardioembolism and large-vessel 
disease are likely the major areas for which specific guidelines 
are needed in relation to silent infarction because of the strong 
relationships between diagnostic risk stratification and treat-
ment decisions. Existing AHA/ASA guidelines for early man-
agement of symptomatic ischemic stroke recommend cardiac 
rhythm monitoring in all patients, as well as noninvasive vas-
cular imaging of the cervical vessels and intracranial vessels 
(when knowledge of intracranial steno-occlusive disease would 
alter management) in all patients with ischemic stroke or tran-
sient ischemic attack (TIA),94 and by logical extension may also 
pertain to patients with clinically unrecognized infarction.
The most common cause of cardioembolism is atrial fibril-
lation (AF). The risk of stroke in patients with AF can be esti-
mated with the CHADS2-VASC scheme, which incorporates 
congestive heart failure, hypertension, age, diabetes mellitus, 
prior stroke or TIA, female sex, and vascular disease (includ-
ing peripheral artery disease, myocardial infarction, or aortic 
plaque) into a composite score.95 A score of 0 is considered 
low risk; a score of 1 is considered moderate risk; and scores 
of ≥2 are considered high risk. A prior stroke or TIA alone 
earns 2 points and in itself identifies a patient at high risk. 
The process that was used to develop and validate this scoring 
system did not account for silent infarction. However, those 
studies also did not attempt to characterize prior stroke as 
specifically attributable to AF or another cause. Furthermore, 
Table 4. Modified Boston Criteria for the Diagnosis of CAA
Definite CAA
Full postmortem examination demonstrating:
1. Lobar, cortical, or corticosubcortical 
hemorrhage
2. Severe CAA with vasculopathy
3. Absence of other diagnostic lesion
Probable CAA with 
supporting pathology
Clinical data and pathological tissue (evacuated 
hematoma or cortical biopsy) demonstrating:
1. Lobar, cortical, or corticosubcortical 
haemorrhage
2. Some degree of CAA in the specimen
3. Absence of other diagnostic lesion
Probable CAA
Clinical data and MRI or CT demonstrating:
1. Age ≥55 y
2. Either (a) multiple hemorrhages restricted to 
lobar, cortical, or corticosubcortical regions 
(cerebellar hemorrhage allowed) or (b) 
single lobar, cortical, or corticosubcortical 
hemorrhage and focal or disseminated 
superficial siderosis
3. Absence of other cause of hemorrhage or 
superficial siderosis
Possible CAA
Clinical data and MRI or CT demonstrating:
1. Age ≥55 y 
2. Either (a) single lobar, cortical, or 
corticosubcortical hemorrhage or (b) focal or 
disseminated superficial siderosis
3. Absence of other cause of hemorrhage or 
superficial siderosis
Hemorrhages may be either hematomas or magnetic resonance imaging–
defined microbleeds. The criteria have been pathologically validated to have 
high specificity and positive predictive value in the setting of lobar intracerebral 
hemorrhage87 but have been less validated in the general population without 
hemorrhagic stroke.88
CAA indicates cerebral amyloid angiopathy; CT, computed tomography; and 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Modified from Linn et al87 with permission of the publisher. Copyright © 
2010, by AAN Enterprises, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e54  Stroke  February 2017
history of prior stroke or TIA was not adjudicated and might 
have included radiographic evidence of prior stroke. Notably, 
silent infarction is found in about a quarter of patients with 
AF who have no history of stroke.96
From a pathophysiological perspective, any evidence of 
prior infarction in a patient with AF would seem to correlate 
with the propensity to form emboli. Observational studies have 
not been able to confirm or refute this idea, with some suggest-
ing a greater risk of subsequent stroke among those with silent 
infarction compared with those without97 and others showing 
no difference.98 These studies have not attempted to define 
silent infarctions as embolic in origin on the basis of their 
radiographic appearance. However, an analysis of patients with 
recent cryptogenic ischemic stroke found that radiographic 
evidence of prior cortical or cerebellar (presumably embolic-
appearing) infarction was associated with a 3-fold increase in 
the likelihood of finding AF with 28 days of continuous cardiac 
monitoring.99 This suggests that patients with such patterns of 
silent infarction may benefit from monitoring. The AHA/ASA 
guideline on the primary prevention of stroke states that “active 
screening for AF in the primary care setting in patients >65 
years of age by pulse assessment followed by ECG as indi-
cated can be useful.”91 For patients found to have silent brain 
infarction, a similar strategy seems appropriate at a minimum, 
regardless of age. The AHA/ASA guidelines for secondary 
prevention recommend that “for patients who have experi-
enced an acute ischemic stroke or TIA with no other apparent 
cause, prolonged rhythm monitoring (≈30 days) for AF is rea-
sonable within 6 months of the index event.” For patients with 
silent infarction, the timing of the “event” is unknown, and the 
value of extensive rhythm monitoring is not determined. The 
role of echocardiography is undefined in guidelines for recent 
symptomatic stroke (although it is often performed in this set-
ting), and its utility in silent stroke has not been investigated.
Stenosis of the internal carotid artery is also a well-estab-
lished cause of cerebral infarction, with a high risk of subsequent 
stroke (≈10%/y–15%/y) among patients who have recently 
been symptomatic with a TIA or ischemic stroke and a much 
lower risk (≈2%/y) among those who are asymptomatic. The 
AHA/ASA guidelines for secondary prevention recommend 
carotid revascularization for eligible patients with symptomatic 
internal carotid artery stenosis of 50% to 99% and recent TIA 
or ischemic stroke within 6 months90; however, for patients with 
silent brain infarction, the timing of the infarction is unknown. 
Silent infarctions are found in about a quarter of patients with 
asymptomatic carotid stenosis but do not consistently appear 
to be more common on the side of the carotid stenosis.100–103 As 
with AF, data relating silent infarction to subsequent risk are 
limited but suggest greater risk of subsequent stroke and mor-
tality among those with preoperative silent infarction. A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis found 2 studies that showed 
that a nonlacunar pattern of cortical and subcortical silent CT 
infarctions ipsilateral to the carotid stenosis was associated with 
future stroke risk (pooled odds ratio [OR], 4.6; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 3.0–7.2), but there were no prospective MRI stud-
ies linking silent infarction and stroke risk in this setting.103 This 
study103 suggests that the presence of nonlacunar silent infarc-
tion is associated with a risk of subsequent stroke about halfway 
between that of symptomatic and of asymptomatic stenosis (as 
reported in prior studies without evaluation for silent infarction) 
and warrants diagnosis and consideration of intervention.
Rarely, the clinician may identify a patient with multiple 
lacunes and extensive WMHs who is relatively young and 
without a severe burden of conventional vascular risk factors. 
In such cases, a monogenic disorder such as CADASIL may 
be the cause. A family history of early-onset stroke, dementia, 
or migraine is usually present, although some disorders are 
autosomal recessive (eg, cerebral autosomal recessive arte-
riopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) 
and family history will be lacking in cases of spontaneous 
de novo mutations, which have been described. Monogenic 
causes of cerebral small vessel disease have been reviewed 
elsewhere.104
Suggestions and Considerations for Investigations  
in Patients With Silent Brain Infarction
We suggest that it is reasonable for all patients with silent brain 
infarct infarction to have an assessment of common vascular 
risk factors, including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyper-
lipidemia, smoking, and physical inactivity, as well as active 
screening for AF by pulse assessment followed by ECG as indi-
cated. This suggestion is consistent with AHA guidelines for 
the primary prevention of stroke. For patients with an embolic-
appearing pattern of infarction, that is, single or multiple corti-
cal infarcts or large, nonlacunar subcortical infarcts, prolonged 
rhythm monitoring for AF might be considered. However, evi-
dence is lacking on whether silent brain infarction can be con-
sidered equivalent to symptomatic stroke for risk stratification 
for anticoagulant treatment for AF (see also the Prevention of 
Symptomatic Stroke in Patients With Silent Brain Infarcts sec-
tion). The role of echocardiography to identify cardiac sources 
for embolism has not been defined but could be considered when 
there is an embolic-appearing pattern of silent brain infarction. 
Noninvasive carotid imaging may be considered to determine 
the presence or absence of carotid stenosis in patients with 
silent brain infarction in the carotid perfusion territory because 
these patients appear to have an intermediate risk for subsequent 
brain infarction (between the risk for recently symptomatic [<6 
month] and asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis) and therefore 
could be candidates for carotid intervention, depending on the 
perioperative risk and patient preferences.
Routine genetic testing for monogenic causes of cerebral 
small vessel disease is not warranted because they are rare. 
Genetic testing should be considered only when lacunes are 
present in a young patient with extensive WMHs in the absence 
of sufficient conventional vascular risk factors.105 The presence 
of migraine, cognitive impairment, and a positive family history 
are additional features of CADASIL, the commonest monogenic 
disorder that causes cerebral small vessel disease.106 CADASIL 
can be diagnosed on the basis of testing for mutations in the 
NOTCH3 gene.106 For patients with a suspected genetic disor-
der, referral to a specialist would also be reasonable.
Investigations for Patients With WMHs of 
Presumed Vascular Origin
WMHs of presumed vascular origin become extremely 
common with aging, being found to some extent in >90% 
of individuals ≥70 years of age. Therefore, finding small 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e55
scattered WMHs in middle-aged and older people is a fre-
quent, expected finding that does not require additional 
investigation. However, WMHs that are excessive for age are 
associated with increased future risk for stroke. Therefore, 
assessment of vascular risk factors for the primary prevention 
of stroke and cardiovascular disease is warranted in patients 
with extensive WMHs. Currently, identifying such patients 
with extensive WMHs relies on clinical judgment because 
there has been no consensus on WMH rating methods and, 
as a result, there are no published, widely accepted normative 
data for comparison. The presence of confluent or beginning 
confluent WMHs, corresponding to a Fazekas score of 2 or 3 
in the periventricular or subcortical white matter (Figure 6), 
has sometimes been used as an operational definition of exten-
sive WMH in research studies.
In contrast to silent brain infarcts, less is known about the 
pathophysiology of WMH. Ischemia, infarction, inflamma-
tion, increased vascular permeability, and venous insufficiency 
have all been proposed as causes of WMHs. It is possible 
that WMHs may not result from a single pathophysiological 
pathway but rather may be the common result of a number of 
pathophysiological disturbances. Furthermore, WMHs have 
a high heritable component, although the genetic basis for 
this heritability is not well understood. WMHs are associated 
with cerebral small vessel diseases, although AF has also been 
identified as a risk factor in epidemiological studies.107 WMHs 
are only weakly associated with subclinical measures of ath-
erosclerotic carotid disease26,108 and are not more common on 
the side of the carotid stenosis in patients with symptomatic 
carotid disease.109 Extensive, confluent WMHs are also a fea-
ture of the rare genetic disorder CADASIL.106 The presence 
of WMHs in the anterior temporal white matter or external 
capsule is typical for CADASIL as indicated by case-control 
studies,106 but the positive predictive value of this pattern of 
WMH has not been tested in population-based studies and 
may be low in that setting.
Suggestions and Considerations for Investigations in 
Patients With WMHs of Presumed Vascular Origin
In patients with excessive WMHs for age, including patients 
with beginning confluent or confluent WMHs (periven-
tricular or subcortical Fazekas score of 2 or 3), we sug-
gest assessment of common vascular risk factors, including 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, smoking, 
and physical inactivity. We also suggest active screening for 
AF by pulse assessment followed by an ECG as indicated. 
Investigations for proximal sources of embolism, includ-
ing carotid imaging and echocardiography, are probably not 
needed. Routine genetic testing is not indicated and should 
be reserved for exceptional cases in which the patient is rel-
atively young, other features of CADASIL or other mono-
genic disorders are present, the WMH is large and confluent, 
and the burden of WMH is not well accounted for by conven-
tional vascular risk factors.
Investigations for Patients With Silent CMBs
Microbleeds are most commonly associated with hyper-
tensive arteriopathy or CAA. Less common causes include 
infective endocarditis, multiple cavernous malformations, 
coagulopathies, and head trauma, which can generally be iden-
tified on the basis of the clinical history. Larger silent hem-
orrhages (>1.0 cm) are less common than microbleeds and 
probably have a range of causes similar to symptomatic ICH.
Microbleeds have different risk factors, depending on their 
location. Microbleeds may be subdivided into those occurring 
in deep brain locations (the basal ganglia and brainstem) and 
those occurring in lobar brain locations (within the cerebral 
cortex or subcortical white matter). In 2 population-based 
studies that looked separately at risk factors for microbleeds 
in the 2 locations, lobar microbleeds were associated with the 
presence of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, whereas 
deep microbleeds were associated with hypertension, smok-
ing, and brain infarcts.84,110 These findings suggest that CAA, 
a hypertension-independent small vessel disease that is more 
common in APOE ε4 allele carriers, is a common cause of 
lobar microbleeds in the general population. The Boston cri-
teria for diagnosis of CAA have been validated pathologically 
in the context of a history of lobar ICH (Table 4).111 In patients 
with hemorrhages restricted to lobar brain locations only, the 
Boston criteria can be used to diagnose probable or possible 
CAA, depending on whether multiple lobar hemorrhages or 
a single lobar hemorrhage is present. A modified version of 
the criteria incorporates superficial siderosis as a hemorrhage 
equivalent.87 However, there is limited validation of the origi-
nal or modified Boston criteria in the general population.88 
Patients who have a combination of lobar and nonlobar (deep) 
hemorrhages may have both CAA and arteriosclerosis (caused 
by aging, hypertension, and other vascular risk factors) as the 
underlying vascular pathology, although long-standing hyper-
tension can be sufficient to cause microbleeds in all territories.
Suggestions and Considerations for Investigations in 
Patients With Silent CMBs
In patients with silent microbleeds, we suggest that common 
risk factors for ICH, particularly hypertension, should be 
assessed. CT angiography, CT venography, contrast-enhanced 
CT, contrast-enhanced MRI, MR angiography, and MR venog-
raphy can be useful to evaluate large (ie, >1.0 cm in diameter) 
silent hemorrhages for underlying structural lesions, including 
vascular malformations and tumors, when there is clinical or 
radiological suspicion. For silent hemorrhages or microbleeds 
not attributable to secondary causes such as vascular malfor-
mations, the modified Boston criteria (Table 4) are probably 
useful to classify the likelihood of underlying CAA pathol-
ogy. APOE testing is not recommended for patients with ICH 
because it does not accurately identify patients with CAA112; 
therefore, we do not suggest testing patients with microbleeds 
either.
Areas for Further Investigation
Research into the causes and pathophysiology of cerebral 
small vessel disease may yield insights that lead to new diag-
nostic testing strategies. Of the cardinal manifestations of 
silent brain cerebrovascular disease reviewed in this state-
ment, the pathophysiology of WMH is probably the least well 
understood. More research is needed on the diagnostic yield 
(eg, sensitivity and specificity) of investigations for causes 
of silent cerebrovascular disease because epidemiological 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e56  Stroke  February 2017
studies have focused on relative risks. For example, there is 
limited information on how frequently one would identify 
clinically important risk factors such as AF or hypertension 
among patients with silent brain infarcts, WMHs, or micro-
bleeds. At the present time, there is essentially no information 
on the yield or cost-effectiveness of diagnostic strategies for 
silent cerebrovascular disease, probably because the benefit 
of risk factor modification in this clinical setting is uncertain 
because it has not yet been subject to clinical trials (see also 
the subsequent 2 sections on stroke prevention in patients with 
silent brain infarct and in patients with WMH).
Prevention of Symptomatic Stroke  
in Patients With Silent Brain Infarcts
In this section, we discuss symptomatic stroke risk in patients 
with silent brain infarcts (from observational or randomized 
trials), controlled trials of vascular risk reduction in patients 
with silent brain infarcts, and suggestions for strategies to pre-
vent ischemic stroke in patients with silent brain infarcts. Our 
discussion emphasizes silent brain infarcts in the general pop-
ulation and does not focus primarily on specialized conditions 
or circumstances that provoke silent infarcts such as sickle 
cell disease and aortic and mitral valve replacement surgery 
or other interventions.
Information From Population-Based and Other 
Observational Studies About the Risk of Future 
Symptomatic Stroke When There Are Silent  
Brain Infarcts
Four population-based studies in the United States and Europe 
have reported the incidence of new symptomatic stroke in 
individuals with versus without MRI-defined silent brain 
infarcts at baseline, with mean follow-up ranging from 3 to 15 
years (Table 5). With age, sex, and vascular risk factors con-
trolled for, the presence of silent brain infarcts was an inde-
pendent predictor of future stroke in all of the studies, with 
hazard ratios (HRs) ranging from 1.5 to 3.3. In the 2 studies 
with mean age of 62 years, the unadjusted absolute increased 
risk was 0.34%/y and 1.2%/y. In the 2 studies with a mean 
age in the early 70s, the unadjusted absolute increased risk 
was 1.6%/y and 2.3%/y. The higher absolute annual risks in 
older individuals reflect the fact that older age is also a risk 
factor for symptomatic stroke independently of the presence 
or absence of silent brain infarcts.
A larger number of silent brain infarcts at baseline was 
associated with higher risk of subsequent symptomatic 
stroke.13 Most incident strokes were ischemic (81%–89%), not 
hemorrhagic (11%–19%),10,12,13,108 similar to the distribution 
seen in all symptomatic stroke in the population. The studies 
did not accrue enough incident events to analyze risk for isch-
emic stroke separately from that for hemorrhagic stroke, nor 
did they have enough power to analyze whether the location 
and type of baseline silent brain infarct (eg, whether lacunar 
or cortical) were associated with the type of recurrent stroke.
The association between silent brain infarcts and future 
stroke risk has also been investigated in observational studies 
in specific settings of increased cardiovascular risk. A system-
atic review of studies of silent brain infarction in patients with 
asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis showed that nonlacu-
nar ipsilateral silent CT brain infarctions, potentially caused 
by arterio-arterial embolism, were associated with future 
symptomatic stroke risk (pooled OR, 4.6; 95% CI, 3.0–7.2; 
P<0.0001).103
Information From Randomized Controlled Trials 
About the Risk of Future Symptomatic Stroke 
When There Are Silent Brain Infarcts
Several recurrent stroke prevention clinical trials provide 
important information about silent brain infarcts and sub-
sequent symptomatic stroke. The EAFT (European Atrial 
Fibrillation Trial) showed that the presence of silent brain 
infarcts was associated with an increased risk of vascular events 
in general (HR, 1.5; 95% CI, 1.2–1.9; P=0.001) and recurrent 
stroke in particular (HR, 1.7; 95% CI, 1.2–2.3; P=0.002).97 
In a substudy of PROGRESS (Perindopril Protection Against 
Recurrent Stroke Study), perindopril-based blood pressure–
lowering therapy did not decrease the risk of new silent brain 
infarcts (12.5% in the treatment group had new infarcts com-
pared with 15.0% in the placebo group; P=0.34) or brain 
atrophy. Rates of symptomatic stroke recurrence in patients 
with versus without silent brain infarcts were not provided.113 
However, this substudy in a portion of the PROGRESS par-
ticipant groups probably lacked statistical power to detect an 
effect. In the PRoFESS (Prevention Regimen for Effectively 
Avoiding Second Strokes) imaging substudy, after a mean 
Table 5. Risk for Future Stroke in Individuals With Silent Brain Infarcts
Study
Setting
Size, n/Mean 
Age, y
With Silent Brain 
Infarcts, %
Incident Stroke 
Events, n
Event Rate in 
Individuals With 
Silent Brain 
Infarcts, %/y
Event Rate 
in Individuals 
Without Silent 
Brain Infarcts, %/y
Adjusted HR  
(95% CI)
Cardiovascular Health 
Study13
Population-based
3324/74
27.8
159
1.87
0.95
1.5 (1.1–2.1)
Rotterdam Scan Study10
Population-based
1077/72
21
57
2.9
0.58
3.3 (1.8–5.9)
Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities Study108
Population-based
1884/62
11.7
157
1.6
0.4
2.5 (1.7–3.8)
Framingham study12
Population-based
2229/62
11
32
0.5
0.16
2.8 (1.3–6.0)
All HRs were adjusted for age, sex, and vascular risk factors (including hypertension).
CI indicates confidence interval; and HR, hazard ratio. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e57
follow-up of only 2.5 years, silent brain infarction was not 
shown to be an independent risk for recurrent stroke, other 
vascular events, or a higher mortality.114 Ongoing aspirin and 
other stroke prevention trials have the potential to expand our 
knowledge of the prevention of silent brain infarction.115,116
Vascular Risk Reduction in Patients With Silent 
Brain Infarction to Prevent Symptomatic Stroke
There is a paucity of information from controlled, clinical 
trials on the prevention of symptomatic stroke in patients 
with silent brain infarction. A number of observational stud-
ies and scientific statements call for additional information in 
this area but do not provide high-level evidence to guide the 
clinician.6,91
A guideline from the AHA recommends that it is reason-
able to implement programs to systematically identify and 
treat risk in individuals at risk of stroke.91 The obvious targets 
for prevention of silent brain infarction such as conventional 
cardiovascular risk factors have been identified.6,91 Of note, 
significant effort has been leveraged to identify which patients 
will benefit from intervention for asymptomatic carotid artery 
stenosis, which could reduce risk of silent brain infarction and 
symptomatic stroke.117 Diagnostic assessments for such explo-
ration are reviewed elsewhere.117
Suggestions and Considerations for Clinical 
Practice
We suggest that it may be reasonable to follow AHA/ASA 
guidelines for primary stroke prevention90 to prevent symp-
tomatic stroke in individuals with silent brain infarction who 
have not had a TIA or symptomatic stroke. The effectiveness of 
aspirin or other antithrombotic therapies in preventing symp-
tomatic stroke or recurrent silent brain infarction in patients 
with silent brain infarction has not been established. Careful 
elicitation of a history of prior symptoms of TIA or stroke 
in patients with silent brain infarction is important because 
such symptoms may be missed in more casual examination. 
If such symptoms are detected, the patient may be classified 
in a recurrent stroke prevention category, and recurrent stroke 
prevention therapies should be administered.
The clinician should be aware that silent brain infarction 
predicts an increased risk of subsequent symptomatic stroke 
even after known vascular risk factors are controlled for and 
that this risk has been documented in the general population 
and in patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis. It is rea-
sonable for the clinician to consider this information when 
making decisions about the benefits of statin therapy, choice of 
antithrombotic in patients with AF, revascularization therapy 
in patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis, or treatment 
of hypertension. However, the clinician should be aware that 
it is currently unproven whether information on the presence 
or absence of silent brain infarcts improves the prediction of 
future symptomatic stroke compared with existing risk predic-
tion tools such as the Pooled Cohort Equations118 for determin-
ing eligibility for statin therapy119 or CHA2DS2-VASC score 
for patients with AF, which do not include imaging informa-
tion. Similarly, there are no clinical trial data to show whether 
the benefit of asymptomatic carotid revascularization differs 
in patients with or without silent brain infarction. It is not clear 
whether silent brain infarcts should be considered equivalent 
to symptomatic stroke for determining blood pressure targets.
Areas for Further Investigation
Prevention of a symptomatic stroke in the presence of existent 
silent brain infarct has not been a major focus of clinical trials. 
The most useful new information would come from clinical 
trials of antithrombotic and other stroke prevention strate-
gies in patients with silent brain infarction without a history 
of symptomatic stroke. Some stroke and cardiovascular trials 
have incorporated substudies with neuroimaging secondary 
end points. Such substudies can also provide information on 
the effectiveness of the study interventions in patients with 
and without silent brain infarction, although they will prob-
ably lack statistical power because of the limited number of 
patients with silent brain infarcts.
Research is needed on the added value of silent brain 
infarcts for predicting risk of cardiovascular events, not only 
stroke, in the general population. Current research shows that 
silent brain infarcts are associated with the risk for future 
symptomatic stroke when known vascular risk factors are 
controlled for. Future research should address whether add-
ing information on silent brain infarcts to risk prediction 
tools (such as the Pooled Cohort Equations118 and CHA2DS2-
VASC scores) provides clinically meaningful improvements 
in the discrimination of patients with versus without future 
cardiovascular events. If so, then modified versions of these 
scores could be derived for use in patients when neuroimaging 
information is available. Because incident events are relatively 
uncommon in the general population, studies to derive risk 
prediction scores will require large sample sizes and could 
potentially be facilitated by pooling data from existing studies.
Prevention of Symptomatic Stroke in Patients 
With WMHs of Presumed Vascular Origin
WMHs are very commonly identified on brain CT and MRI 
scans of elderly people and have been associated with stroke, 
cognitive decline, depression, and gait impairment.36 This 
section reviews the scientific evidence for stroke prevention 
strategies in patients without a history of stroke who have 
excessive WMHs for age on brain imaging done for unrelated 
reasons. We discuss stroke risk in patients with WMHs and 
vascular risk reduction in WMH.
Information From Population-Based and Other 
Studies About the Risk of Future Symptomatic 
Stroke Associated With WMHs
A meta-analysis of 6 population-based studies reported a sig-
nificant association of WMHs with risk of future stroke (HR, 
3.1 for high burden of WMH versus low burden; 95% CI, 
2.3–4.1; P<0.001; Figure 8).17 Of note, the studies included 
in that meta-analysis used different scales and cut points to 
categorize WMHs, most often comparing individuals across 
tertiles—or other distribution measures derived from the study 
population concerned—of WMH severity. This complicates 
the translation of the reported HR to a risk estimate for an indi-
vidual patient with WMH because the risk at specific WMH 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e58  Stroke  February 2017
thresholds was not defined. As a result, the pooled data are 
currently insufficient to determine annualized absolute stroke 
risks at different levels of WMH. There are insufficient data to 
determine the shape of the curve of the association between 
WMH and stroke risk, and it is not currently known whether 
there is a minimum WMH threshold below which there is no 
longer an association between WMH and stroke risk, that is, 
in which a variation in WMH volume can no longer be consid-
ered clinically relevant for stroke prediction.
Although the pathophysiology of WMH remains unclear 
and may be multifactorial, associations with vascular risk fac-
tors and symptomatic stroke120,121 suggest that WMH may serve 
as a proxy measure of cerebral small vessel disease. However, 
there is insufficient evidence to conclude that WMH should be 
considered an equivalent of symptomatic stroke in stroke pre-
vention strategies. Hence, in patients with an increased WMH 
burden but no history of a vascular event, guidelines for the 
secondary prevention of stroke are of unclear relevance, but 
guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke would certainly 
apply. Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke from 
the AHA/ASA recommend that it is reasonable to use a risk 
assessment tool such as the AHA/ACC CV Risk Calculator122 
because these tools can help identify individuals who could 
benefit from therapeutic interventions and who may not be 
treated on the basis of any single risk factor.91 However, these 
calculators do not include WMH as a marker of possible risk. 
Hence, individual clinical judgment must be exercised when 
considering whether the amount of WMH is an important mod-
ifier of the future risk of stroke in an individual patient.
Vascular Risk Reduction in Patients With WMH  
to Prevent Symptomatic Stroke
As indicated in the previous section, vascular risk reduction 
strategies in patients with an increased burden of WMH are 
probably best based on available evidence-based guidelines 
for the primary prevention of stroke, taking into account the 
increased risk of stroke conveyed by the WMH, in light of the 
overall risk profile of the patient.
Because the absolute risk of a future stroke is higher in 
patients with than in those without WMH, the numbers needed 
to treat for preventive treatment would be lower for patients 
with than for those without WMH if the relative risk reduction 
of a certain treatment would be the same in patients with and 
without WMHs. However, this is not likely to be the case for 
all treatments that can be considered for the primary preven-
tion of stroke. Currently, there are no solid data on absolute 
or relative reductions of stroke risk specifically for patients 
with WMH.
There are indications from observational studies, how-
ever, that active blood pressure–lowering therapy59 can slow 
the progression of WMH in patients at increased vascular 
risk. WMH progression has also been evaluated in MRI sub-
studies of several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of 
vascular risk reduction. In the PROGRESS MRI substudy of 
192 patients with symptomatic stroke, the active treatment 
(perindopril plus indapamide) resulted in a 11.2–mm Hg 
reduction in systolic blood pressure compared with placebo, 
and treated patients were less likely to have new WMHs 
seen on follow-up MRI at a mean of 3 years.123 However, 
the addition of telmisartan to usual blood pressure treatment, 
which reduced mean systolic blood pressure by 3 mm Hg, 
did not reduce WMH progression in the PRoFESS trial.124 
For statin treatment, trials have provided conflicting evi-
dence as to whether statin treatment reduces WMH progres-
sion.125–127 Intensive glucose-lowering therapy in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus did not reduce WMH progres-
sion and in fact was associated with higher WMH progres-
sion for unclear reasons.128 Vitamin B and folate therapy did 
not reduce the progression of WMH in the VITATOPS study 
(Vitamins to Prevent Stroke), although a significant reduc-
tion in WMH progression (0.3 versus 1.7 cm3; P=0.04) was 
detected in patients with severe WMH at baseline.129 Finally, 
a small RCT (65 patients) in patients with Alzheimer dis-
ease showed that patients randomized to multimodal vascu-
lar care—consisting of algorithms for the management of 
diet, physical exercise, hypertension, and hypercholesterol-
emia, as well as aspirin, pyridoxine, and folic acid—had less 
change in WMH at 2 years.130
The clinical relevance of these RCT results on WMH pro-
gression remains uncertain, however, because the reduction in 
WMH needed to produce clinically relevant benefits in cog-
nition or stroke risk reduction is unclear. Furthermore, all of 
these trials to prevent WMH progression were done in subsets 
of patients participating in larger RCTs, had a relatively short 
Figure 8. Hazard ratio for future symptomatic stroke in individu-
als with a high burden of white matter hyperintensities (WMHs). 
Data were pooled from studies that categorized WMH, compar-
ing the highest category with the lowest category. From Debette 
and Markus.17 Copyright © 2010, The Authors. This is an Open 
Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-
mons Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original work is properly cited, the use is non commercial and is 
otherwise in compliance with the license.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e59
follow-up, and probably lacked statistical power to link WMH 
progression with clinical events.
Another issue to consider is potential harm of treatment in 
relation to the presence of WMHs. Although no studies on the 
primary prevention of stroke provide data on potential harm in 
relation to WMH burden, data from post hoc analyses in sec-
ondary prevention studies show that patients with WMHs may 
be at increased risk of ICH when treated with antithrombotic 
agents. Severe WMH was an independent predictor of antico-
agulation-related hemorrhages in SPIRIT (Stroke Prevention 
in Reversible Ischemia Trial), which assessed secondary pre-
vention in patients with arterial stroke (HR, 2.7; 95% CI, 1.4–
5.3).131 Other secondary prevention trials with antithrombotic 
agents have not provided stratified analyses on bleeding risk 
according to WMH presence. Of note, in patients with early 
Alzheimer disease, aspirin use may be linked to an increased 
risk of ICHs. In the EVA study (Evaluation of Vascular Care 
in Alzheimer’s Disease), patients with Alzheimer disease and 
≥1 manifestations of cerebral small vessel disease (WMHs 
or infarcts) were randomized to multimodal vascular care, 
including aspirin, or placebo.132 Among the 65 patients ran-
domized to aspirin, 3 had fatal ICH. A pooled analysis of 
EVA with the Aspirin in Alzheimer’s Disease trial showed a 
nonsignificantly elevated risk for ICH in aspirin users with 
Alzheimer disease (HR, 7.63; 95% CI, 0.7–81.7; P=0.09).133 
These findings, although not providing direct evidence for 
an unfavorable benefit/risk ratio for the use of antithrom-
botic agents for the primary prevention of stroke in patients 
with WMH, suggest that some caution is warranted. Another 
potential issue is the risk for falls in patients with too rigorous 
a reduction of blood pressure because WMHs are associated 
with gait and balance disturbances.134
Suggestions and Considerations for  
Clinical Practice
We suggest that it may be reasonable to follow AHA/
ASA guidelines for primary stroke prevention to prevent 
symptomatic stroke in individuals with WMHs.91 The cli-
nician should be aware that higher WMH burden predicts 
an increased risk of subsequent symptomatic stroke in the 
general population, even after controlling for known vas-
cular risk factors. However, WMHs are not incorporated 
into existing clinical risk prediction tools such as the AHA/
ACC CV Risk Calculator or the CHA2DS2-VASC score for 
predicting ischemic stroke risk in patients with AF. The 
effectiveness of aspirin or other antithrombotic therapies in 
preventing symptomatic stroke in patients with WMHs has 
not been established. Some RCTs suggest higher rates of 
symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage in stroke patients or 
patients with dementia with high WMHs treated with anti-
thrombotics (see the preceding section for details), and the 
pathophysiology of WMH remains uncertain and may be 
mediated by mechanisms other than thrombosis. Therefore, 
we suggest that WMH alone, in the absence of other vascu-
lar risk factors, is probably not a sufficient reason to start 
antithrombotic therapy to prevent stroke. On the other hand, 
the presence of WMH should not dissuade the clinician from 
prescribing antithrombotic therapy when there is a clear 
guideline-based indication. It is possible that the absence or 
presence of concomitant CMBs could identify subpopula-
tions among individuals with WMH who are at lower versus 
higher risk of hemorrhage with antithrombotic therapies; 
however, this has not been specifically studied. Blood pres-
sure lowering appears to be the most promising therapy for 
preventing WMH; however, it is not clear whether the pres-
ence of WMH should influence the choice of blood pressure 
targets in the elderly.
Areas for Further Investigation
Patients with WMHs have not been subjected to RCTs of vas-
cular risk reduction except as substudies of larger trials. More 
data are needed to determine the relationship between the 
amount of reduced WMH progression and the clinical impact, 
including on stroke risk and cognitive impairment.
Future studies should address whether WMH confers 
clinically meaningful added predictive utility compared 
with commonly used stroke and cardiovascular disease pre-
diction tools such as the AHA/ACC CV Risk Calculator 
and CHA2DS2-VASC scores. More data are needed on the 
relationship between baseline WMH and incident stroke 
risk, including whether the risk increases linearly across 
the entire range of WMHs or whether there are nonlinear 
effects. Because incident events are less common than preva-
lent events, large studies or pooling of data from existing 
large population-based studies will be needed to precisely 
define risk throughout the typical range of WMHs, including 
whether there is a minimum threshold below which WMH 
is no longer relevant to stroke risk and can be considered a 
benign consequence of aging.
Anticoagulation and Other Medical  
Therapies in Patients With Silent CMBs
Anticoagulation with the vitamin K antagonist warfarin or 
non–vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOACs) such as dabi-
gatran, apixaban, rivaroxaban, and edoxaban135 is a recom-
mended treatment of nonvalvular AF (NVAF) for primary 
stroke prevention when stroke risk is sufficiently high91 and 
for secondary prevention after TIA or stroke.90 These recom-
mendations, mostly with Class I treatment effect, are driven 
by the extraordinary effectiveness of anticoagulants for pre-
venting NVAF-associated thromboembolic stroke. Adjusted-
dose warfarin with a target international normalized ratio of 
2 to 3 eliminates much of the excess risk of ischemic stroke 
associated with NVAF, with a risk ratio (RR) reduction of 
64% (95% CI, 49–74) for stroke occurrence relative to pla-
cebo and 39% (95% CI, 22–52) relative to antiplatelets.136 
Warfarin treatment for NVAF is also associated with reduced 
all-cause mortality136 and reduced ischemic stroke sever-
ity.137–139 Anticoagulation with NOACs appears at least equally 
effective as anticoagulation with warfarin for ischemic stroke 
prevention. A meta-analysis of 42 411 NVAF trial subjects 
assigned to the NOACs dabigatran, apixaban, rivaroxaban, 
and edoxaban versus 29 272 assigned to warfarin found non-
significantly fewer ischemic strokes with NOAC treatment 
(RR versus warfarin, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.83–1.02).140
The major risk of anticoagulation is intracranial hemor-
rhage. Among warfarin-treated patients with NVAF in the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e60  Stroke  February 2017
Kaiser Permanente of Northern California healthcare system 
followed up for 15 370 person-years,141 intracranial hem-
orrhage (71% intracerebral, 21% subdural) occurred at an 
annualized rate of 0.47% with discharge outcomes of death 
in 42% and major disability in 34%, accounting for ≈90% of 
bleeding-related deaths and 95% of major disability in this 
cohort. In contrast, intracranial hemorrhage is relatively less 
frequent in patients taking NOACs compared with patients 
taking warfarin. A meta-analysis of the NOAC trials showed 
reduced hemorrhagic stroke (RR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.38–0.64) or 
intracranial hemorrhage (RR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.39–0.59) rela-
tive to warfarin but increased gastrointestinal bleeding (RR, 
1.25; 95% CI, 1.01–1.55).140 Although concerns have been 
raised because of the absence of established reversal treatment 
for NOACs,142 mortality after intracranial hemorrhage was no 
higher on dabigatran or rivaroxaban than on warfarin in the 
randomized trials.143,144
The key clinical question is, Do CMBs in patients with 
NVAF confer sufficient risk for ICH to offset the substan-
tial benefits of anticoagulation? Unfortunately, no studies to 
date have determined the effect of microbleeds on ICH risk 
specifically in the setting of anticoagulation. However, some 
longitudinal studies have investigated the association between 
baseline microbleeds and subsequent stroke in stroke patients 
or in the general population, not limited to patients taking 
anticoagulation. A meta-analysis of 3067 patients with base-
line ischemic stroke or TIA from all causes, 29% of whom 
had microbleeds, found that the patients with microbleeds had 
a pooled OR for any type of future stroke of 2.25 (95% CI, 
1.70–2.98) relative to patients without microbleeds.145 Among 
studies that distinguished between future stroke types, the 
OR for ICH was 8.52 (95% CI, 4.23–17.18) and for ischemic 
stroke was 1.55 (95% CI, 1.12–2.13). Two Japanese studies 
have been performed in subjects not selected for prior stroke 
or TIA. A study of 698 subjects scanned in Osaka, 17% with 
microbleeds, found multivariable-adjusted HRs of 1.48 (95% 
CI, 0.63–3.45) for future ICH and 11.77 (95% CI, 2.95–46.82) 
for future ischemic stroke.146 A more recent study of 2102 vol-
unteers scanned in Izumo, 4.4% with microbleeds, reported a 
multivariable-adjusted HR of 50.2 (95% CI, 16.7–150.9) for 
future ICH and 4.48 (95% CI, 2.20–12.22) for future ischemic 
stroke.147 However, even the elevated HR for future ICH in this 
study represented a relatively low absolute event rate (≈2 to 
3 incident ICHs per 1000 person-years among CMB-positive 
subjects).
As suggested by the wide range of values obtained across 
these analyses, there is likely to be substantial heterogeneity 
among the various subjects classified as microbleed posi-
tive. Factors contributing to this heterogeneity include differ-
ences between Asian and Western populations145; different 
T2*-weighted methods, which can substantially affect CMB 
detection5; and differences in the number of microbleeds per 
subject, with evidence suggesting higher subsequent ICH risk 
at higher total microbleed counts.148,149 Other likely sources of 
heterogeneity are the different types of cerebral small vessel 
diseases responsible for microbleeds. The age- and hyperten-
sion-related process of arteriolosclerosis commonly causes 
microbleeds in deep hemispheric gray matter and brainstem, 
whereas CAA is typically associated with microbleeds in 
a strictly lobar brain distribution5 and higher rates of ICH 
recurrence.150,151 A recent hospital-based analysis of 60 sub-
jects diagnosed with probable CAA on the basis of multiple 
(median, 10) strictly lobar microbleeds found an incidence 
of 5 symptomatic ICHs per 100 person-years (95% CI, 2.6–
8.7),152 suggesting that the risk of future ICH in selected sub-
groups of microbleed-positive individuals can be quite high.
In the absence of controlled studies of anticoagulation in 
the setting of microbleeds, decision-analysis models provide 
a framework for understanding the decision “tipping point,” 
that is, the threshold at which the risks of anticoagulation out-
weigh its benefits. A Markov state transition analysis based on 
a subject with NVAF with a typical thromboembolic stroke 
risk (4.5%/y untreated) found that anticoagulation with warfa-
rin would result in better predicted outcome than aspirin or no 
antithrombotic treatment unless the individual’s microbleed 
status carried a >16-fold increased hazard for ICH.153 The tip-
ping point moves to lower threshold values in individuals at 
particularly low thromboembolic stroke risk153; conversely, a 
higher threshold would apply if the presence of microbleeds 
confers increased ischemic stroke risk, as suggested by current 
data.145,154,155 Anticoagulation also is increasingly preferred 
when lower intracranial hemorrhage risks156 are assumed, as 
observed in the NOAC trials.140
Risks for ICH in patients taking antiplatelet drug therapy 
or statins are likely considerably lower than for anticoagu-
lation. According to data from the Antithrombotic Trialists 
Collaboration,157 the stratified OR for hemorrhagic stroke in 
antiplatelet drug users is 1.22 (SE, 0.10). The use of high-
dose atorvastatin was associated with increased ICHs in the 
SPARCL trial (Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in 
Cholesterol Levels; HR, 1.68; 95% CI, 1.09–2.59)158 but not 
in a subsequent meta-analysis of all statin trials (OR, 1.08; 
95% CI, 0.88–1.32).159 The degree to which these risks may be 
increased in the presence of microbleeds has not been defined 
by clinical trials.
A recent population-based study shows that microbleeds 
are associated with increased risk for future ischemic stroke 
and hemorrhagic stroke.160 In that study, there were overall 
more ischemic strokes than hemorrhagic strokes in the indi-
viduals with microbleeds. The increased risks were indepen-
dent of silent brain infarcts and WMHs. Patients with a pattern 
of lobar-only microbleeds, potentially indicating underlying 
CAA, were at risk for ICH but not ischemic stroke, whereas 
individuals with other microbleed patterns were at risk for 
both ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke. There are cur-
rently no published clinical trials for ischemic stroke preven-
tion in patients with microbleeds.
Suggestions and Considerations for Clinical 
Practice
Current data do not convincingly indicate that the presence 
of microbleeds (without prior ICH) confers enough risk for 
future ICH to tip the clinical decision away from anticoagu-
lation in patients with NVAF for whom it is otherwise indi-
cated. The suggestion that CMB-positive patients may be at 
increased risk for ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke further 
reinforces this impression. We suggest that it is reasonable 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e61
to proceed with oral anticoagulation despite the detection of 
microbleeds when anticoagulation is otherwise indicated for 
NVAF according to existing primary or secondary stroke pre-
vention guidelines. It is therefore reasonable not to perform 
routine MRI screening of patients with NVAF.
The lower risk of intracranial hemorrhage associated 
with NOAC anticoagulation suggests that these agents may 
be useful in patients considered at increased ICH risk on 
the basis of their microbleed status. Therefore, we suggest 
that, for patients with NVAF in whom anticoagulation is 
indicated but who are considered at particularly high risk of 
future ICH on the basis of microbleed number and location, 
it may be reasonable to administer dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
apixaban, or edoxaban in preference to warfarin. Another 
alternative to warfarin anticoagulation that might be consid-
ered is percutaneous closure of the left atrial appendage,161 
as suggested in AHA/ASA guidelines for the management 
of spontaneous ICH.112
Other guidelines suggested for the prevention of ICH 
recurrence in patients with spontaneous ICH112 are also rea-
sonable considerations for patients with CMBs. These guide-
lines for patients with ICH include blood pressure control and 
no restriction on the use of statins. It is reasonable to avoid 
antiplatelet agents when there is no specific cardiovascular or 
cerebrovascular indication but otherwise to use them accord-
ing to currently recommended indications.
Finally, one should not overlook the fact that patients with 
microbleeds are also at increased risk for ischemic stroke. We 
suggest that it may be reasonable to follow AHA/ASA guide-
lines for primary stroke prevention to prevent symptomatic 
stroke in individuals with microbleeds.91 We suggest that the 
presence of microbleeds alone, in isolation of other findings 
and patient characteristics, does not warrant the initiation of 
antiplatelet medications or statin therapy for preventing stroke.
Areas for Further Investigation
Currently, there are no direct measurements of ICH risk 
among microbleed-positive individuals treated with warfarin 
or NOACs. Such data could come from registries or cohort 
studies of anticoagulated patients with baseline MRI infor-
mation. There are similarly no prospective measurements of 
ICH risk associated with antiplatelet or statin treatment of 
microbleed-positive individuals. There are no clinical trials 
of vascular risk reduction to prevent ischemic or hemorrhagic 
stroke in individuals with microbleeds. It would be useful to 
add MRI substudies to current and future trials of oral antico-
agulants to investigate whether particular microbleed-positive 
subgroups such as individuals with many strictly lobar micro-
bleeds are at higher ICH risk and thus may cross the ICH risk 
threshold for avoiding anticoagulation.
Safety of Intravenous Thrombolysis and Acute 
Ischemic Stroke Reperfusion Therapy in 
Patients With Silent CMBs
Intravenous thrombolysis and endovascular therapy for 
patients with acute ischemic stroke have proven benefits but 
can cause ICH. Predicting which patients may have an ICH 
can guide treatment decisions. Microbleeds are identified on 
T2* or susceptibility-weighted imaging MRI brain scans,5 are 
associated with ICH,145 and may act as a predictor of post–
tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) symptomatic intracra-
nial hemorrhage (sICH). Here, we assess whether CMBs are 
associated with symptomatic sICH after acute stroke therapy 
and whether the presence of microbleeds should influence the 
decision to administer intravenous tPA or endovascular ther-
apy to patients with acute ischemic stroke.
Several observational studies have investigated whether 
microbleeds predict sICH after acute stroke reperfusion 
therapy. A recent scientific statement from the AHA/ASA 
found no evidence that the risk for sICH was increased in 
patients with microbleeds and recommended that “systemic 
intravenous rtPA [recombinant tPA] administration in these 
patients is therefore reasonable.”162 However, subsequent to 
this recommendation, a more recent updated meta-analysis 
of observational trials was published,163 analyzing data from 
10 eligible studies (2028 patients) that studied the association 
between baseline microbleeds and postthrombolysis sICH. 
Eight studies provided data for intravenous tPA,164–171 and 2 
other studies included patients with endovascular acute isch-
emic stroke therapy or a mixture of methods.172,173 The crude 
prevalence of microbleeds in all 10 studies before thromboly-
sis was 23%.163 The rate of sICH in patients with microbleeds 
was 8.5% (95% CI, 6.1–11.4) and in patients without micro-
bleeds was 3.9% (95% CI, 3–5). There was no significant het-
erogeneity between studies. A meta-analysis showed that the 
presence of CMBs (versus the absence of microbleeds) was 
associated with an increased risk of postthrombolysis sICH 
(OR, 2.26; 95% CI, 1.46–3.49; P<0.001).163 Similarly, CMBs 
were associated with an increased risk of sICH when studies 
reporting only intravenous thrombolysis were combined (OR, 
2.87; 95% CI, 1.76–4.69; P<0.0001).163 The authors could not 
exclude residual confounding from study design heterogene-
ity. Most recently, Turc et al174 found that, after adjustment for 
other predictors, microbleed burden in 717 patients did not 
predict sICH or poor outcome at 3 months (OR, 1.03; 95% 
CI, 0.96–1.11 per 1-CMB increase; P=0.37) after intravenous 
thrombolysis for ischemic stroke.
Endovascular thrombectomy with clot retrieval devices 
is an alternative acute ischemic stroke treatment approach 
that does not necessarily require administration of a sys-
temic thrombolytic. However, rates of sICH are similarly 
high in patients treated with endovascular therapy alone and 
in patients who receive either intravenous thrombolysis or 
combination therapy, suggesting that avoiding intravenous 
thrombolysis does not eliminate the risk of sICH after reper-
fusion.175 One study found that, in 206 patients treated with 
thrombectomy for acute ischemic stroke, baseline micro-
bleeds did not predict parenchymal hematoma formation (rate 
with microbleeds, 16%; rate without microbleeds, 19%) or 
modified Rankin Scale score at discharge.176 Other studies did 
not report thrombectomy subgroups separately.167 There are 
insufficient data to assess associations between the presence 
of baseline CMBs and sICH or outcome in patients treated 
with intra-arterial thrombolysis.166,173
No randomized trials have been published that address 
whether CMB identified before intravenous thrombolysis 
should influence the decision to administer thrombolysis.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e62  Stroke  February 2017
In summary, CMBs may modestly increase the risk of 
postthrombolysis sICH, but this relationship requires clarifi-
cation, especially with respect to the burden rather than the 
simple presence or absence of microbleeds. In the absence of 
RCT data, it is not possible to determine whether this possibly 
increased risk of sICH in patients with microbleeds outweighs 
the known therapeutic benefits of thrombolysis.
Suggestions and Considerations for Clinical 
Practice
In contrast to prior evidence summarized in a recent AHA/
ASA scientific statement, newer evidence suggests that 
patients with ≥1 microbleeds are at increased risk for symp-
tomatic ICH after systemic thrombolysis, with an approxi-
mate doubling of the risk.163 However, there are insufficient 
data to show whether this increased risk for ICH outweighs 
the known, strong benefit of thrombolysis. Accordingly, we 
suggest that the prior AHA/ASA recommendation162 remains 
appropriate and that it is still reasonable to administer sys-
temic intravenous tPA in patients with ≥1 microbleeds. We 
suggest that clinicians should not withhold endovascular acute 
ischemic stroke therapy such as thrombectomy on the basis of 
the presence of microbleeds in an otherwise eligible patient. 
Because there are few data on the relationship between micro-
bleeds and complications of endovascular thrombectomy for 
acute ischemic stroke, clinicians should consider a strategy of 
proceeding directly to thrombectomy without thrombolysis to 
be an unproven approach in these patients.
Areas for Further Investigation
The most important question is whether clinical disability and 
mortality outcomes are different in patients with and those 
without microbleeds treated with thrombolysis or endovas-
cular thrombectomy. This information would clarify whether 
the benefits of reperfusion therapy outweigh the moderately 
increased risk of ICH. Ideally, these data would come from 
randomized trials. However, it is unlikely that such trials will 
be done because of the paucity of acute stroke centers that 
currently use MRI for acute stroke imaging. Instead, data 
could come from analysis of observational studies and throm-
bolysis registries with baseline MRI information and 90-day 
outcomes, as has been done in other circumstances in which 
thrombolysis is associated with increased risk. For example, 
analysis of the Safe Implementation of Treatments in Stroke-
Monitoring International Stroke Thrombolysis Registry sug-
gests that thrombolysis is still effective in patients taking 
antithrombotic drugs at the time of their stroke because there 
was no increase in disability and mortality despite the obser-
vation that prestroke antiplatelet drug use was associated with 
a 1.74-fold increased odds of ICH.177
Further stratification of risk associated with the number 
of microbleeds should also be possible and could lead to the 
identification of number thresholds at which risk actually out-
weighs benefits. In addition to obtaining precise data on the 
relationship between CMB number and ICH risk, it would be 
useful to assess whether relationships are modified by CMB 
location (including lobar versus deep and anterior versus pos-
terior). A pattern of lobar-only microbleeds may be indicative 
of CAA,111 which is associated with higher ICH recurrence 
in patients with primary, non–thrombolysis-associated ICH. 
However, it is not known whether this potential CAA pattern 
of microbleeds is associated with risk for ICH after thrombol-
ysis. Finally, more research is needed to understand whether 
microbleeds are associated with different patterns or sever-
ity of postthrombolysis ICH. It has been hypothesized that 
microbleeds may be associated with a higher risk of remote 
ICH rather than ICH resulting from hemorrhagic transforma-
tion within the infarcted tissue because microbleeds reflect 
a more diffusely distributed hemorrhage-prone small vessel 
vasculopathy.
Population Screening for Silent 
Cerebrovascular Disease
Although the progression of silent cerebrovascular disease 
is associated with greater cognitive decline in observational 
studies, it remains unproven whether preventing its pro-
gression also prevents cognitive decline. In this context, it 
is unclear whether MRI screening in the population or sub-
groups to identify those at risk is warranted. To date, no study 
has addressed the utility of screening for silent cerebrovas-
cular disease with regard to reduced adverse health events or 
cost-effectiveness.
There are several challenges to screening for silent cere-
brovascular disease. First, the lack of evidence for an estab-
lished medical treatment for its progression makes screening 
difficult to justify. Second, although silent cerebrovascular 
disease clearly confers an increased risk of stroke and demen-
tia, the absolute risk increase is small and may not justify the 
high cost of screening in the general population.
Even in children with sickle cell anemia, in whom silent 
brain infarction is highly prevalent and is associated with sig-
nificant cognitive and academic morbidity and increased risk 
of future stroke, no evidence-based approach has been devel-
oped to systematically identify children with silent cerebral 
infarcts, despite evidence that transfusion reduces the risk of 
recurrent silent brain infarction.178,179 In light of the limited 
evidence, recent recommendations did not support neuroim-
aging screening in asymptomatic children, adolescents, and 
adults with sickle cell disease.180
Suggestions and Considerations for Clinical 
Practice
We suggest that screening for silent brain infarcts or other 
forms of cerebrovascular disease is not warranted in asymp-
tomatic individuals. Neuroimaging investigation should be 
reserved for patients with potential manifestations of clini-
cally unrecognized cerebrovascular disease such as focal neu-
rological symptoms or cognitive decline.
Areas for Further Investigation
To determine the benefits and costs of screening the asymp-
tomatic population, it will be necessary to have RCT data dem-
onstrating that silent cerebrovascular disease progression can 
be reduced and that this reduction decreases the incidence of 
clinically meaningful end points such as symptomatic stroke 
or cognitive decline. Research to identify people at higher risk 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e63
for silent cerebrovascular disease may allow targeted neuro-
imaging screening of higher-risk individuals, thereby improv-
ing cost-effectiveness by avoiding costly screening scans in 
individuals unlikely to have lesions.
Conclusions
We found consistent evidence that silent cerebrovascular dis-
ease is a very common problem of aging and that infarcts and 
WMHs are strongly associated with future symptomatic stroke 
risk (2- to 3-fold increase in relative risk) even after controlling 
for vascular risk factors such as hypertension. In patients with 
CMBs, there was evidence of a moderately increased risk of 
symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage in patients treated with 
thrombolysis for acute ischemic stroke but little prospective 
evidence on the risk of symptomatic hemorrhage in patients on 
anticoagulation. We found little evidence for how to investigate 
or manage patients with silent cerebrovascular disease, includ-
ing that there were no prospective RCTs targeted specifically to 
this patient population. Therefore, formal recommendations for 
care cannot be provided; instead, we describe clinical consider-
ations and offer suggestions for future research. In light of the 
limited evidence for the management of silent cerebrovascular 
disease, population screening is not justified.
Silent brain infarcts are the most frequently identified 
incidental finding on brain scans.3,89 With >1.5 million brain 
scans performed each year for headache alone in the United 
States,181 many patients will have incidentally detected silent 
cerebrovascular disease. This unintended screening has poten-
tial benefit if it can be used to target health-promoting interven-
tions to patients with silent cerebrovascular disease, but it also 
has potential risks if it leads to excessive testing or overtreat-
ment, contributing to rising healthcare costs or even causing 
harm. Additionally, detection of silent cerebrovascular disease 
may have implications in other clinical settings such as symp-
tomatic stroke. For example, there is clinical concern about 
the safety of antithrombotic medications in ischemic stroke 
patients whose brain MRI additionally shows silent CMBs.182
To date, there has been little consensus on the clinical rel-
evance of incidentally detected silent cerebrovascular disease 
in routine practice or how it should be managed. The 2013 
AHA/ASA statement on the definition of stroke noted that 
patients with silent cerebrovascular disease would have been 
included in primary prevention trials and that there was a pau-
city of data from clinical trials targeted specifically at patients 
with silent cerebrovascular disease.6 Therefore, the statement 
suggests that vascular risk factors in patients with silent cere-
brovascular disease should be managed according to existing 
primary prevention guidelines; however, these suggestions 
were not accompanied by systematic literature reviews or for-
mal AHA/ASA recommendations.
Accurate and reliable radiological reporting using consen-
sus terms understood by radiologists and nonradiologists alike 
will be essential to identify patients with silent cerebrovascu-
lar disease for appropriate management. We suggest defini-
tions, terms, and reporting standards for silent cerebrovascular 
disease that are based on and consistent with past AHA/ASA 
scientific statements6,15 and previously published consensus 
standards.16,22 More research is needed on the accuracy and 
reliability of reporting in routine clinical practice and on how 
technical factors such as MR field strength and sequence 
parameter choices affect sensitivity and specificity.
Patients with silent brain infarcts and extensive WMHs 
are at increased risk of future symptomatic stroke indepen-
dently of known vascular risk factors. Limited evidence sug-
gests that silent brain infarcts are associated with increased 
risk of ischemic stroke in patients with asymptomatic carotid 
artery disease or AF. The clinician should keep this in mind 
when determining individual stroke risk reduction strategies. 
However, the effectiveness of specific risk reduction strate-
gies, including the use of aspirin, has not been established by 
RCTs. Increasingly, cardiovascular care guidelines incorpo-
rate risk-based strategies. Examples include recommendations 
for anticoagulation based on high CHA2DS2-VASC score or 
statin therapy for patients at high risk119 based on the Pooled 
Cohort Equations.118 Silent brain infarcts or WMHs might 
plausibly improve ischemic stroke risk prediction because in 
epidemiological studies they are associated with increased 
risk even after controlling for vascular risk factors. However, 
longitudinal studies are needed to determine the degree to 
which silent brain infarcts and WMHs improve the discrimi-
nation of future stroke when added to these risk scores.
The safety of anticoagulation in patients with silent CMBs 
has been much debated.182 However, there are no large, pro-
spective studies to quantify the risk. Current evidence suggests 
that the risk for future ICH is not sufficiently high to outweigh 
the benefits of anticoagulation in patients with NVAF for 
whom it is otherwise indicated. The AHA/ASA guidelines for 
ICH provide recommendations for the clinical management of 
patients with AF and a history of symptomatic ICH.112
There is evidence that patients with silent CMBs are prob-
ably at increased risk of ICH when given thrombolysis for 
acute ischemic stroke on the basis of a meta-analysis of 10 
studies. However, patient outcome data showing whether this 
potential increased risk outweighs the known, strong benefits 
of thrombolysis are lacking. Studies of other risk factors for 
thrombolysis-associated ICH have shown that the clinical ben-
efits of tPA are maintained across a wide range of predicted or 
actual risks.177,183 Accordingly we suggest that thrombolysis 
with tPA should not be withheld in patients with CMBs in 
whom it is otherwise indicated.
Our reviews identified many areas where new knowledge 
is needed to guide management. No RCTs have specifically 
targeted patients with silent cerebrovascular disease. However, 
conducting such RCTs may be challenging. In the general 
population, absolute risks for incident stroke are relatively low 
even in participants at higher relative risk, including those with 
silent brain infarcts; therefore, prevention RCTs will need to be 
large to capture enough symptomatic stroke events. Screening 
and recruitment of participants with silent brain infarcts also 
present challenges. Study-sponsored MRI screening may not 
be cost-effective because many screened patients will not have 
silent infarcts and therefore would not be eligible for the trial. 
On the other hand, identifying participants on the basis of clini-
cal scans may yield a heterogeneous population (because of 
varying clinical indications for the scans). In routine clinical 
practice, the sensitivity of clinical radiology reporting and the 
frequency of disclosure of the incidental findings to the patient 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e64  Stroke  February 2017
are not clear. One approach would be to include silent brain 
infarcts as evidence of elevated cardiovascular and stroke risk 
in prevention trials, which are often targeted at high-risk popu-
lations. We note that recent trials of cardiovascular prevention 
have sometimes included evidence of subclinical cardiovascu-
lar disease as an entry criterion (eg, based on asymptomatic 
electrocardiographic findings),184 and neuroimaging evidence 
of silent brain infarction or WMH would be the closest cere-
brovascular analog to that approach.
Comparative-effectiveness research could be used to asso-
ciate treatment strategies with outcomes in patients with silent 
cerebrovascular disease diagnosed on clinical neuroimaging. 
However, adoption of standardized radiological terms (such 
as those recommended by this statement) will first be needed 
so that radiological diagnoses can be reliably extracted from 
clinical reports.
Even in the absence of RCTs targeted specifically at patients 
with silent cerebrovascular disease, important new clinically 
relevant information can be generated from other RCTs and 
cohort studies that include neuroimaging assessment of silent 
cerebrovascular disease at baseline. Data from larger longitu-
dinal cohort studies with more incident events will be useful to 
better quantify symptomatic stroke risk in patients with silent 
cerebrovascular disease, including the relationship between 
WMH load and risk. More data are needed on risk in specific 
clinical scenarios, including in patients with AF and asymp-
tomatic carotid disease. Longitudinal cohort studies are needed 
to prospectively define the rate of future ICH in patients with 
CMBs treated with anticoagulation or who undergo endovas-
cular thrombectomy for acute ischemic stroke. Cohort studies 
should be used to define stroke risk in individuals with more 
recently recognized manifestations of cerebral small vessel 
disease, including the clinical relevance of greater numbers of 
visible perivascular spaces. Finally, important information may 
be gained by embedding MRI substudies, with either baseline 
or baseline and follow-up MRI, in ongoing RCTs for the pri-
mary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Such 
substudies will be useful for identifying effect modification (ie, 
whether prevention strategies are more or less effective in par-
ticipants with silent cerebrovascular disease) and to better define 
natural history (using data from control arms as appropriate).
Additional useful information could be derived from RCT 
substudies that include MRI at follow-up in addition to base-
line. Such studies could provide valuable information on risk 
factors for incident silent brain infarcts, microbleeds, and 
WMH progression, including the effect of treatments. Because 
silent brain infarct prevalence and incidence are higher than 
for symptomatic stroke, it is possible that treatment effects on 
silent brain infarcts could be demonstrated with smaller sam-
ple sizes than would be required for symptomatic stroke end 
points. However, per-subject costs would be higher because of 
the need for scanning. More research is needed on the clinical 
benefits of preventing silent brain infarction before it can be 
considered a fully validated surrogate outcome measure.
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Eric E. Smith
University of Calgary
McMaster University 
(blinded MRI readings 
for clinical trials 
and epidemiological 
studies)†; Canadian 
Institutes of Health 
Research†; Heart and 
Stroke Foundation of 
Canada†; Alzheimer 
Society of Canada†; 
Canadian Partnership 
Against Cancer†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Gustavo Saposnik
St. Michael’s Hospital, 
University of Toronto
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Geert Jan Biessels
University Medical 
Centre Utrecht 
(Netherlands)
Boehringer Ingelheim*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Fergus N. Doubal
University of Edinburgh
Alzheimer’s Society  
(PI on trial testing 
nitrates and cilostazol 
following stroke)†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Myriam Fornage
University of Texas 
Health Science Center 
at Houston
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Disclosures
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e65
References
 1. Vermeer SE, Longstreth WT Jr, Koudstaal PJ. Silent brain infarcts: a 
systematic review. Lancet Neurol. 2007;6:611–619. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(07)70170-9.
 2. Leary MC, Saver JL. Annual incidence of first silent stroke in the United 
States: a preliminary estimate. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2003;16:280–285. doi: 
71128.
 3. Vernooij MW, Ikram MA, Tanghe HL, Vincent AJ, Hofman A, Krestin 
GP, Niessen WJ, Breteler MM, van der Lugt A. Incidental findings on 
brain MRI in the general population. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:1821–
1828. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070972.
 4. Pantoni L. Cerebral small vessel disease: from pathogenesis and clinical 
characteristics to therapeutic challenges. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9:689–
701. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70104-6.
 5. Greenberg SM, Vernooij MW, Cordonnier C, Viswanathan A, Al-Shahi 
Salman R, Warach S, Launer LJ, Van Buchem MA, Breteler MM; Microbleed 
Study Group. Cerebral microbleeds: a guide to detection and interpretation. 
Lancet Neurol. 2009;8:165–174. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70013-4.
 6. Sacco RL, Kasner SE, Broderick JP, Caplan LR, Connors JJ, Culebras 
A, Elkind MS, George MG, Hamdan AD, Higashida RT, Hoh BL, 
Janis LS, Kase CS, Kleindorfer DO, Lee JM, Moseley ME, Peterson 
ED, Turan TN, Valderrama AL, Vinters HV; on behalf of the American 
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory Board
Other
Mitchell S. 
Elkind
Columbia 
University
NINDS (NOMAS grant 
on stroke incidence 
and risk factors)†
None
None
Merck/
Organon*; 
BMS-Sanofi*; 
Hi-Tech*
None
Boehringer-
Ingelheim, Inc*; 
BMS-Pfizer 
Partnership*; 
Sanofi-Regeneron*; 
BioTelemetry/
Cardionet*
American Academy of 
Neurology (associate editor 
for the Resident and Fellow 
Section of Neurology, in 
which capacity I review 
articles related to dissection 
and stroke)*; AHA/ASA 
(board member)*
Rebecca F. 
Gottesman
Johns Hopkins 
University
NIH (coinvestigator 
and collaborator on 
multiple NIH grants 
to study small vessel/
cerebrovascular 
disease)†
None
None
None
None
None
Neurology (associate 
editor)†
Chelsea S. 
Kidwell
University of 
Arizona
NIH/NINDS 
U-01-NS069763 
(coinvestigator)†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Joshua Z. 
Willey
Columbia 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during 
any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or 
more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Philip B. Gorelick
Michigan State 
University
Bayer*
None
Boehringer 
Ingelheim*
None
None
New Haven 
Pharmaceuticals*
None
Steven M. Greenberg
Harvard University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Randall T. Higashida
University of California, 
San Francisco
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Scott E. Kasner
University of 
Pennsylvania
W.L. Gore†
None
None
None
None
BMS*
None
Sudha Seshadri
Boston University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person 
receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the 
entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e66  Stroke  February 2017
Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Epidemiology 
and Prevention; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on 
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism. An updated definition of 
stroke for the 21st century: a statement for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2013;44:2064–2089. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318296aeca.
 7. Prins ND, van Dijk EJ, den Heijer T, Vermeer SE, Jolles J, Koudstaal PJ, 
Hofman A, Breteler MM. Cerebral small-vessel disease and decline in 
information processing speed, executive function and memory. Brain. 
2005;128(pt 9):2034–2041. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh553.
 8. Longstreth WT Jr, Manolio TA, Arnold A, Burke GL, Bryan N, Jungreis 
CA, Enright PL, O’Leary D, Fried L. Clinical correlates of white matter 
findings on cranial magnetic resonance imaging of 3301 elderly people: 
the Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 1996;27:1274–1282.
 9. Au R, Massaro JM, Wolf PA, Young ME, Beiser A, Seshadri S, 
D’Agostino RB, DeCarli C. Association of white matter hyperinten-
sity volume with decreased cognitive functioning: the Framingham 
Heart Study. Arch Neurol. 2006;63:246–250. doi: 10.1001/archneur. 
63.2.246.
 10. Vermeer SE, Hollander M, van Dijk EJ, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, 
Breteler MM; Rotterdam Scan Study. Silent brain infarcts and white 
matter lesions increase stroke risk in the general population: the 
Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke. 2003;34:1126–1129. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000068408.82115.D2.
 11. Vermeer SE, Prins ND, den Heijer T, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler 
MM. Silent brain infarcts and the risk of dementia and cognitive decline. 
N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1215–1222. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa022066.
 12. Debette S, Beiser A, DeCarli C, Au R, Himali JJ, Kelly-Hayes M, 
Romero JR, Kase CS, Wolf PA, Seshadri S. Association of MRI mark-
ers of vascular brain injury with incident stroke, mild cognitive impair-
ment, dementia, and mortality: the Framingham Offspring Study. Stroke. 
2010;41:600–606. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.570044.
 13. Bernick C, Kuller L, Dulberg C, Longstreth WT Jr, Manolio T, 
Beauchamp N, Price T; Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative 
Reseach Group. Silent MRI infarcts and the risk of future stroke: the 
Cardiovascular Health Study. Neurology. 2001;57:1222–1229.
 14. Longstreth WT Jr. Brain vascular disease overt and covert. Stroke. 
2005;36:2062–2063.
 15. Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, Decarli C, Greenberg SM, Iadecola 
C, Launer LJ, Laurent S, Lopez OL, Nyenhuis D, Petersen RC, 
Schneider JA, Tzourio C, Arnett DK, Bennett DA, Chui HC, Higashida 
RT, Lindquist R, Nilsson PM, Roman GC, Sellke FW, Seshadri S; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, 
Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, and Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia. Vascular contributions to cog-
nitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare profession-
als from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke. 2011;42:2672–2713. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182299496.
 16. Wardlaw JM, Smith EE, Biessels GJ, Cordonnier C, Fazekas F, Frayne R, 
Lindley RI, O’Brien JT, Barkhof F, Benavente OR, Black SE, Brayne C, 
Breteler M, Chabriat H, Decarli C, de Leeuw FE, Doubal F, Duering M, 
Fox NC, Greenberg S, Hachinski V, Kilimann I, Mok V, Oostenbrugge 
Rv, Pantoni L, Speck O, Stephan BC, Teipel S, Viswanathan A, Werring 
D, Chen C, Smith C, van Buchem M, Norrving B, Gorelick PB, 
Dichgans M; STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimag-
ing (STRIVE v1). Neuroimaging standards for research into small ves-
sel disease and its contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet 
Neurol. 2013;12:822–838. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70124-8.
 17. Debette S, Markus HS. The clinical importance of white matter hyper-
intensities on brain magnetic resonance imaging: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMJ. 2010;341:c3666.
 18. Cordonnier C, Al-Shahi Salman R, Wardlaw J. Spontaneous brain micro-
bleeds: systematic review, subgroup analyses and standards for study 
design and reporting. Brain. 2007;130(pt 8):1988–2003. doi: 10.1093/
brain/awl387.
 19. Fazekas F, Chawluk JB, Alavi A, Hurtig HI, Zimmerman RA. MR signal 
abnormalities at 1.5 T in Alzheimer’s dementia and normal aging. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol. 1987;149:351–356. doi: 10.2214/ajr.149.2.351.
 20. American College of Radiology. ACR-ASNR-SPR practice parameter 
for the performance and interpretation of magnetic resonance imaging 
of the brain. http://www.acr.org/~/media/ACR/Documents/PGTS/guide-
lines/MRI_Brain.pdf. Accessed November 3, 2015.
 21. Wardlaw JM, Brindle W, Casado AM, Shuler K, Henderson M, Thomas 
B, Macfarlane J, Muñoz Maniega S, Lymer K, Morris Z, Pernet C, 
Nailon W, Ahearn T, Mumuni AN, Mugruza C, McLean J, Chakirova 
G, Tao YT, Simpson J, Stanfield AC, Johnston H, Parikh J, Royle 
NA, De Wilde J, Bastin ME, Weir N, Farrall A, Valdes Hernandez 
MC; SINAPSE Collaborative Group. A systematic review of the util-
ity of 1.5 versus 3 Tesla magnetic resonance brain imaging in clinical 
practice and research. Eur Radiol. 2012;22:2295–2303. doi: 10.1007/
s00330-012-2500-8.
 22. Hachinski V, Iadecola C, Petersen RC, Breteler MM, Nyenhuis DL, 
Black SE, Powers WJ, DeCarli C, Merino JG, Kalaria RN, Vinters 
HV, Holtzman DM, Rosenberg GA, Wallin A, Dichgans M, Marler JR, 
Leblanc GG. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-
Canadian Stroke Network vascular cognitive impairment harmonization 
standards [published correction appears in Stroke. 2007;38:1118]. Stroke. 
2006;37:2220–2241. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000237236.88823.47.
 23. Potter GM, Marlborough FJ, Wardlaw JM. Wide variation in defini-
tion, detection, and description of lacunar lesions on imaging. Stroke. 
2011;42:359–366. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.594754.
 24. Zhu YC, Dufouil C, Tzourio C, Chabriat H. Silent brain infarcts: a review 
of MRI diagnostic criteria. Stroke. 2011;42:1140–1145. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.600114.
 25. Vermeer SE, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Breteler MM. 
Prevalence and risk factors of silent brain infarcts in the population-
based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke. 2002;33:21–25.
 26. Moreau F, Patel S, Lauzon ML, McCreary CR, Goyal M, Frayne R, 
Demchuk AM, Coutts SB, Smith EE. Cavitation after acute symptom-
atic lacunar stroke depends on time, location, and MRI sequence. Stroke. 
2012;43:1837–1842. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.647859.
 27. Bokura H, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi S. Distinguishing silent lacunar 
infarction from enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces: a magnetic resonance 
imaging and pathological study. J Neurol. 1998;245:116–122.
 28. Potter GM, Doubal FN, Jackson CA, Chappell FM, Sudlow CL, Dennis 
MS, Wardlaw JM. Counting cavitating lacunes underestimates the 
burden of lacunar infarction. Stroke. 2010;41:267–272. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.109.566307.
 29. Smith EE, Schneider JA, Wardlaw JM, Greenberg SM. Cerebral micro-
infarcts: the invisible lesions. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:272–282. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70307-6.
 30. Brundel M, de Bresser J, van Dillen JJ, Kappelle LJ, Biessels GJ. 
Cerebral microinfarcts: a systematic review of neuropathological 
studies. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32:425–436. doi: 10.1038/
jcbfm.2011.200.
 31. van Dalen JW, Scuric EE, van Veluw SJ, Caan MW, Nederveen AJ, 
Biessels GJ, van Gool WA, Richard E. Cortical microinfarcts detected 
in vivo on 3 Tesla MRI: clinical and radiological correlates. Stroke. 
2015;46:255–257. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007568.
 32. DeCarli C, Fletcher E, Ramey V, Harvey D, Jagust WJ. Anatomical map-
ping of white matter hyperintensities (WMH): exploring the relationships 
between periventricular WMH, deep WMH, and total WMH burden. 
Stroke. 2005;36:50–55. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000150668.58689.f2.
 33. Schiffmann R, van der Knaap MS. Invited article: an MRI-based approach 
to the diagnosis of white matter disorders. Neurology. 2009;72:750–759. 
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000343049.00540.c8.
 34. Hesselink JR. Differential diagnostic approach to MR imaging of white 
matter diseases. Top Magn Reson Imaging. 2006;17:243–263. doi: 
10.1097/01.rmr.0000248666.91834.af.
 35. Wahlund LO, Barkhof F, Fazekas F, Bronge L, Augustin M, Sjögren M, 
Wallin A, Ader H, Leys D, Pantoni L, Pasquier F, Erkinjuntti T, Scheltens 
P; European Task Force on Age-Related White Matter Changes. A new 
rating scale for age-related white matter changes applicable to MRI and 
CT. Stroke. 2001;32:1318–1322.
 36. Kapeller P, Barber R, Vermeulen RJ, Adèr H, Scheltens P, Freidl W, 
Almkvist O, Moretti M, del Ser T, Vaghfeldt P, Enzinger C, Barkhof F, 
Inzitari D, Erkinjunti T, Schmidt R, Fazekas F; European Task Force of 
Age Related White Matter Changes. Visual rating of age-related white 
matter changes on magnetic resonance imaging: scale comparison, 
interrater agreement, and correlations with quantitative measurements. 
Stroke. 2003;34:441–445.
 37. Kobayashi S, Okada K, Koide H, Bokura H, Yamaguchi S. Subcortical 
silent brain infarction as a risk factor for clinical stroke. Stroke. 
1997;28:1932–1939.
 38. Schmidt R, Fazekas F, Hayn M, Schmidt H, Kapeller P, Roob G, 
Offenbacher H, Schumacher M, Eber B, Weinrauch V, Kostner 
GM, Esterbauer H. Risk factors for microangiopathy-related 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e67
cerebral damage in the Austrian stroke prevention study. J Neurol Sci. 
1997;152:15–21.
 39. Price TR, Manolio TA, Kronmal RA, Kittner SJ, Yue NC, Robbins J, 
Anton-Culver H, O’Leary DH. Silent brain infarction on magnetic reso-
nance imaging and neurological abnormalities in community-dwelling 
older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study: CHS Collaborative 
Research Group. Stroke. 1997;28:1158–1164.
 40. Longstreth WT Jr. Brain abnormalities in the elderly: frequency and 
predictors in the United States (the Cardiovascular Health Study): 
Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative Research Group. J Neural 
Transm Suppl. 1998;53:9–16.
 41. Chen X, Wen W, Anstey KJ, Sachdev PS. Prevalence, incidence, and 
risk factors of lacunar infarcts in a community sample. Neurology. 
2009;73:266–272. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181aa52ea.
 42. Longstreth WT Jr, Dulberg C, Manolio TA, Lewis MR, Beauchamp 
NJ Jr, O’Leary D, Carr J, Furberg CD. Incidence, manifestations, and 
predictors of brain infarcts defined by serial cranial magnetic reso-
nance imaging in the elderly: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 
2002;33:2376–2382.
 43. Vermeer SE, Den Heijer T, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, 
Breteler MM; Rotterdam Scan Study. Incidence and risk factors of silent 
brain infarcts in the population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke. 
2003;34:392–396.
 44. Gouw AA, van der Flier WM, Fazekas F, van Straaten EC, Pantoni L, 
Poggesi A, Inzitari D, Erkinjuntti T, Wahlund LO, Waldemar G, Schmidt 
R, Scheltens P, Barkhof F; LADIS Study Group. Progression of white 
matter hyperintensities and incidence of new lacunes over a 3-year 
period: the Leukoaraiosis and Disability study. Stroke. 2008;39:1414–
1420. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.498535.
 45. Das RR, Seshadri S, Beiser AS, Kelly-Hayes M, Au R, Himali JJ, Kase 
CS, Benjamin EJ, Polak JF, O’Donnell CJ, 
Yoshita M, D’Agostino RB Sr, 
DeCarli C, Wolf PA. Prevalence and correlates of silent cerebral infarcts 
in the Framingham Offspring Study. Stroke. 2008;39:2929–2935. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.516575.
 46. Fanning JP, Wong AA, Fraser JF. The epidemiology of silent brain 
infarction: a systematic review of population-based cohorts. BMC Med. 
2014;12:119. doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0119-0.
 47. Prabhakaran S, Wright CB, Yoshita M, Delapaz R, Brown T, DeCarli 
C, Sacco RL. Prevalence and determinants of subclinical brain infarc-
tion: the Northern Manhattan Study. Neurology. 2008;70:425–430. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000277521.66947.e5.
 48. Fornage M, Debette S, Bis JC, Schmidt H, Ikram MA, Dufouil C, 
Sigurdsson S, Lumley T, DeStefano AL, Fazekas F, Vrooman HA, 
Shibata DK, Maillard P, Zijdenbos A, Smith AV, Gudnason H, de Boer R, 
Cushman M, Mazoyer B, Heiss G, Vernooij MW, Enzinger C, Glazer NL, 
Beiser A, Knopman DS, Cavalieri M, Niessen WJ, Harris TB, Petrovic 
K, Lopez OL, Au R, Lambert JC, Hofman A, Gottesman RF, Garcia M, 
Heckbert SR, Atwood LD, Catellier DJ, Uitterlinden AG, Yang Q, Smith 
NL, Aspelund T, Romero JR, Rice K, Taylor KD, Nalls MA, Rotter 
JI, Sharrett R, van Duijn CM, Amouyel P, Wolf PA, Gudnason V, van 
der Lugt A, Boerwinkle E, Psaty BM, Seshadri S, Tzourio C, Breteler 
MM, Mosley TH, Schmidt R, Longstreth WT, DeCarli C, Launer LJ. 
Genome-wide association studies of cerebral white matter lesion burden: 
the CHARGE consortium. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:928–939. doi: 10.1002/
ana.22403.
 49. Atwood LD, Wolf PA, Heard-Costa NL, Massaro JM, Beiser A, 
D’Agostino RB, DeCarli C. Genetic variation in white matter hyperin-
tensity volume in the Framingham study. Stroke. 2004;35:1609–1613. 
doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000129643.77045.10.
 50. Verhaaren BF, Debette S, Bis JC, Smith JA, Ikram MK, Adams HH, 
Beecham AH, Rajan KB, Lopez LM, Barral S, van Buchem MA, van 
der Grond J, Smith AV, Hegenscheid K, Aggarwal NT, de Andrade 
M, Atkinson EJ, Beekman M, Beiser AS, Blanton SH, Boerwinkle E, 
Brickman AM, Bryan RN, Chauhan G, Chen CP, Chouraki V, de Craen 
AJ, Crivello F, Deary IJ, Deelen J, De Jager PL, Dufouil C, Elkind MS, 
Evans DA, Freudenberger P, Gottesman RF, Guðnason V, Habes M, 
Heckbert SR, Heiss G, Hilal S, Hofer E, Hofman A, Ibrahim-Verbaas 
CA, Knopman DS, Lewis CE, Liao J, Liewald DC, Luciano M, van 
der Lugt A, Martinez OO, Mayeux R, Mazoyer B, Nalls M, Nauck M, 
Niessen WJ, Oostra BA, Psaty BM, Rice KM, Rotter JI, von Sarnowski 
B, Schmidt H, Schreiner PJ, Schuur M, Sidney SS, Sigurdsson S, 
Slagboom PE, Stott DJ, van Swieten JC, Teumer A, Töglhofer AM, 
Traylor M, Trompet S, Turner ST, Tzourio C, Uh HW, Uitterlinden AG, 
Vernooij MW, Wang JJ, Wong TY, Wardlaw JM, Windham BG, Wittfeld 
K, Wolf C, Wright CB, Yang Q, Zhao W, Zijdenbos A, Jukema JW, Sacco 
RL, Kardia SL, Amouyel P, Mosley TH, Longstreth WT Jr, DeCarli CC, 
van Duijn CM, Schmidt R, Launer LJ, Grabe HJ, Seshadri SS, Ikram 
MA, Fornage M. Multiethnic genome-wide association study of cere-
bral white matter hyperintensities on MRI. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 
2015;8:398–409. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000858.
 51. Allan CL, Zsoldos E, Filippini N, Sexton CE, Topiwala A, Valkanova 
V, Singh-Manoux A, Tabák AG, Shipley MJ, Mackay C, Ebmeier KP, 
Kivimäki M. Lifetime hypertension as a predictor of brain structure in 
older adults: cohort study with a 28-year follow-up. Br J Psychiatry. 
2015;206:308–315. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.153536.
 52. Swan GE, DeCarli C, Miller BL, Reed T, Wolf PA, Jack LM, Carmelli D. 
Association of midlife blood pressure to late-life cognitive decline and 
brain morphology. Neurology. 1998;51:986–993.
 53. Pavese N, Canapicchi R, Nuti A, Bibbiani F, Lucetti C, Collavoli P, 
Bonuccelli U. White matter MRI hyperintensities in a hundred and twenty-
nine consecutive migraine patients. Cephalalgia. 1994;14:342–345.
 54. Hamedani AG, Rose KM, Peterlin BL, Mosley TH, Coker LH, Jack CR, 
Knopman DS, Alonso A, Gottesman RF. Migraine and white matter 
hyperintensities: the ARIC MRI study. Neurology. 2013;81:1308–1313. 
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a8235b.
 55. Jorm AF, Anstey KJ, Christensen H, de Plater G, Kumar R, Wen W, 
Sachdev P. MRI hyperintensities and depressive symptoms in a com-
munity sample of individuals 60-64 years old. Am J Psychiatry. 
2005;162:699–705. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.162.4.699.
 56. Breeze JL, Hesdorffer DC, Hong X, Frazier JA, Renshaw PF. Clinical 
significance of brain white matter hyperintensities in young adults with 
psychiatric illness. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2003;11:269–283.
 57. Hopkins RO, Beck CJ, Burnett DL, Weaver LK, Victoroff J, Bigler ED. 
Prevalence of white matter hyperintensities in a young healthy popula-
tion. J Neuroimaging. 2006;16:243–251.
 58. DeCarli C, Miller BL, Swan GE, Reed T, Wolf PA, Garner J, Jack L, 
Carmelli D. Predictors of brain morphology for the men of the NHLBI 
twin study. Stroke. 1999;30:529–536.
 59. Dufouil C, de Kersaint-Gilly A, Besançon V, Levy C, Auffray E, 
Brunnereau L, Alpérovitch A, Tzourio C. Longitudinal study of blood 
pressure and white matter hyperintensities: the EVA MRI cohort. 
Neurology. 2001;56:921–926.
 60. Mosley TH Jr, Knopman DS, Catellier DJ, Bryan N, Hutchinson RG, 
Grothues CA, Folsom AR, Cooper LS, Burke GL, Liao D, Szklo M. 
Cerebral MRI findings and cognitive functioning: the Atherosclerosis 
Risk in Communities study. Neurology. 2005;64:2056–2062. doi: 
10.1212/01.WNL.0000165985.97397.88.
 61. Brickman AM, Schupf N, Manly JJ, Luchsinger JA, Andrews H, Tang 
MX, Reitz C, Small SA, Mayeux R, DeCarli C, Brown TR. Brain mor-
phology in older African Americans, Caribbean Hispanics, and whites 
from northern Manhattan. Arch Neurol. 2008;65:1053–1061. doi: 
10.1001/archneur.65.8.1053.
 62. Del Brutto OH, Mera RM, Del Brutto VJ, Zambrano M, Lama J. White 
matter hyperintensities of presumed vascular origin: a population-
based study in rural Ecuador (the Atahualpa Project). Int J Stroke. 
2015;10:372–375. doi: 10.1111/ijs.12417.
 63. Liao D, Cooper L, Cai J, Toole J, Bryan N, Burke G, Shahar E, Nieto J, 
Mosley T, Heiss G. The prevalence and severity of white matter lesions, 
their relationship with age, ethnicity, gender, and cardiovascular disease 
risk factors: the ARIC Study. Neuroepidemiology. 1997;16:149–162.
 64. Scheltens P, Barkhof F, Valk J, Algra PR, van der Hoop RG, Nauta J, 
Wolters EC. White matter lesions on magnetic resonance imaging in 
clinically diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for heterogeneity. 
Brain. 1992;115(pt 3):735–748.
 65. Wardlaw JM, Ferguson KJ, Graham C. White matter hyperintensities 
and rating scales-observer reliability varies with lesion load. J Neurol. 
2004;251:584–590. doi: 10.1007/s00415-004-0371-x.
 66. Sandeman EM, Hernandez Mdel C, Morris Z, Bastin ME, Murray C, 
Gow AJ, Corley J, Henderson R, Deary IJ, Starr JM, Wardlaw JM. 
Incidental findings on brain MR imaging in older community-dwelling 
subjects are common but serious medical consequences are rare: a cohort 
study. PLoS One. 2013;8:e71467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071467.
 67. Fazekas F, Schmidt R, Kleinert R, Kapeller P, Roob G, Flooh E. The 
spectrum of age-associated brain abnormalities: their measurement and 
histopathological correlates. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1998;53:31–39.
 68. Söderlund H, Nyberg L, Adolfsson R, Nilsson LG, Launer LJ. High 
prevalence of white matter hyperintensities in normal aging: relation to 
blood pressure and cognition. Cortex. 2003;39:1093–1105.
 69. DeCarli C, Murphy DG, Tranh M, Grady CL, Haxby JV, Gillette JA, 
Salerno JA, Gonzales-Aviles A, Horwitz B, Rapoport SI, Schapiro MB. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e68  Stroke  February 2017
The effect of white matter hyperintensity volume on brain structure, cog-
nitive performance, and cerebral metabolism of glucose in 51 healthy 
adults. Neurology. 1995;45:2077–2084.
 70. Jeerakathil T, Wolf PA, Beiser A, Massaro J, Seshadri S, D’Agostino 
RB, DeCarli C. Stroke risk profile predicts white matter hyperinten-
sity volume: the Framingham study. Stroke. 2004;35:1857–1861. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000135226.53499.85.
 71. Smith EE, Egorova S, Blacker D, Killiany RJ, Muzikansky A, Dickerson 
BC, Tanzi RE, Albert MS, Greenberg SM, Guttmann CR. Magnetic 
resonance imaging white matter hyperintensities and brain volume in 
the prediction of mild cognitive impairment and dementia. Arch Neurol. 
2008;65:94–100. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2007.23.
 72. Rost NS, Rahman RM, Biffi A, Smith EE, Kanakis A, Fitzpatrick K, 
Lima F, Worrall BB, Meschia JF, Brown RD Jr, Brott TG, Sorensen AG, 
Greenberg SM, Furie KL, Rosand J. White matter hyperintensity volume 
is increased in small vessel stroke subtypes. Neurology. 2010;75:1670–
1677. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fc279a.
 73. Schmidt R, Fazekas F, Kleinert G, Offenbacher H, Gindl K, Payer F, 
Freidl W, Niederkorn K, Lechner H. Magnetic resonance imaging signal 
hyperintensities in the deep and subcortical white matter: a compara-
tive study between stroke patients and normal volunteers. Arch Neurol. 
1992;49:825–827.
 74. Schmidt R, Schmidt H, Haybaeck J, Loitfelder M, Weis S, Cavalieri 
M, Seiler S, Enzinger C, Ropele S, Erkinjuntti T, Pantoni L, Scheltens 
P, Fazekas F, Jellinger K. Heterogeneity in age-related white mat-
ter changes. Acta Neuropathol. 2011;122:171–185. doi: 10.1007/
s00401-011-0851-x.
 75. Smith EE, O’Donnell M, Dagenais G, Lear SA, Wielgosz A, Sharma M, 
Poirier P, Stotts G, Black SE, Strother S, Noseworthy MD, Benavente O, 
Modi J, Goyal M, Batool S, Sanchez K, Hill V, McCreary CR, Frayne R, 
Islam S, DeJesus J, Rangarajan S, Teo K, Yusuf S; PURE Investigators. 
Early cerebral small vessel disease and brain volume, cognition, and gait. 
Ann Neurol. 2015;77:251–261. doi: 10.1002/ana.24320.
 76. de Leeuw FE, de Groot JC, Oudkerk M, Witteman JC, Hofman A, van 
Gijn J, Breteler MM. A follow-up study of blood pressure and cerebral 
white matter lesions. Ann Neurol. 1999;46:827–833.
 77. Roob G, Schmidt R, Kapeller P, Lechner A, Hartung HP, Fazekas F. MRI 
evidence of past cerebral microbleeds in a healthy elderly population. 
Neurology. 1999;52:991–994.
 78. Jeerakathil T, Wolf PA, Beiser A, Hald JK, Au R, Kase CS, Massaro JM, 
DeCarli C. Cerebral microbleeds: prevalence and associations with car-
diovascular risk factors in the Framingham Study. Stroke. 2004;35:1831–
1835. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000131809.35202.1b.
 79. Kuller LH, Longstreth WT Jr, Arnold AM, Bernick C, Bryan RN, 
Beauchamp NJ Jr; Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative Research 
Group. White matter hyperintensity on cranial magnetic resonance imag-
ing: a predictor of stroke. Stroke. 2004;35:1821–1825. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000132193.35955.69.
 80. Yakushiji Y, Nishiyama M, Yakushiji S, Hirotsu T, Uchino A, 
Nakajima J, Eriguchi M, Nanri Y, Hara M, Horikawa E, Kuroda Y. 
Brain microbleeds and global cognitive function in adults without 
neurological disorder. Stroke. 2008;39:3323–3328. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.108.516112.
 81. Sveinbjornsdottir S, Sigurdsson S, Aspelund T, Kjartansson O, 
Eiriksdottir G, Valtysdottir B, Lopez OL, van Buchem MA, Jonsson PV, 
Gudnason V, Launer LJ. Cerebral microbleeds in the population based 
AGES-Reykjavik study: prevalence and location. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2008;79:1002–1006. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2007.121913.
 82. Liu PF, Cui YZ, Na J, Gao PY. Cerebral microbleeds: prevalence, distri-
bution and risk factors in northeast population without preceding large-
area stroke. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010;123:286–290.
 83. van Es AC, van der Grond J, de Craen AJ, Westendorp RG, Bollen EL, 
Blauw GJ, Greenberg SM, van Buchem MA; PROSPER Study Group. 
Cerebral microbleeds and cognitive functioning in the PROSPER study. 
Neurology. 2011;77:1446–1452. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318232ab1d.
 84. Romero JR, Preis SR, Beiser A, DeCarli C, Viswanathan A, Martinez-
Ramirez S, Kase CS, Wolf PA, Seshadri S. Risk factors, stroke pre-
vention treatments, and prevalence of cerebral microbleeds in the 
Framingham Heart Study. Stroke. 2014;45:1492–1494. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.114.004130.
 85. Koennecke HC. Cerebral microbleeds on MRI: prevalence, associations, 
and potential clinical implications. Neurology. 2006;66:165–171. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000194266.55694.1e.
 86. Wiegman AF, Meier IB, Schupf N, Manly JJ, Guzman VA, Narkhede A, 
Stern Y, Martinez-Ramirez S, Viswanathan A, Luchsinger JA, Greenberg 
SM, Mayeux R, Brickman AM. Cerebral microbleeds in a multiethnic 
elderly community: demographic and clinical correlates. J Neurol Sci. 
2014;345:125–130. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.024.
 87. Linn J, Halpin A, Demaerel P, Ruhland J, Giese AD, Dichgans M, van 
Buchem MA, Bruckmann H, Greenberg SM. Prevalence of superfi-
cial siderosis in patients with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Neurology. 
2010;74:1346–1350. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dad605.
 88. Martinez-Ramirez S, Romero JR, Shoamanesh A, McKee AC, Van Etten 
E, Pontes-Neto O, Macklin EA, Ayres A, Auriel E, Himali JJ, Beiser 
AS, DeCarli C, Stein TD, Alvarez VE, Frosch MP, Rosand J, Greenberg 
SM, Gurol ME, Seshadri S, Viswanathan A. Diagnostic value of lobar 
microbleeds in individuals without intracerebral hemorrhage. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2015;11:1480–1488. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.009.
 89. Yue NC, Longstreth WT Jr, Elster AD, Jungreis CA, O’Leary DH, Poirier 
VC. Clinically serious abnormalities found incidentally at MR imaging 
of the brain: data from the Cardiovascular Health Study. Radiology. 
1997;202:41–46. doi: 10.1148/radiology.202.1.8988190.
 90. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, Bravata DM, Chimowitz MI, 
Ezekowitz MD, Fang MC, Fisher M, Furie KL, Heck DV, Johnston 
SC, Kasner SE, Kittner SJ, Mitchell PH, Rich MW, Richardson D, 
Schwamm LH, Wilson JA; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council 
on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. 
Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and tran-
sient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association [published 
correction appears in Stroke. 2015;46:e54]. Stroke. 2014;45:2160–2236. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000024.
 91. Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, Braun LT, Bravata DM, 
Chaturvedi S, Creager MA, Eckel RH, Elkind MS, Fornage M, Goldstein 
LB, Greenberg SM, Horvath SE, Iadecola C, Jauch EC, Moore WS, 
Wilson JA; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; 
Council on Hypertension. Guidelines for the primary prevention of 
stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754–3832. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000046.
 92. Adams HP Jr, Bendixen BH, Kappelle LJ, Biller J, Love BB, Gordon 
DL, Marsh EE 3rd. Classification of subtype of acute ischemic stroke: 
definitions for use in a multicenter clinical trial: TOAST: Trial of Org 
10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment. Stroke. 1993;24:35–41.
 93. Ay H, Benner T, Arsava EM, Furie KL, Singhal AB, Jensen MB, Ayata C, 
Towfighi A, Smith EE, Chong JY, Koroshetz WJ, Sorensen AG. A com-
puterized algorithm for etiologic classification of ischemic stroke: the 
Causative Classification of Stroke System. Stroke. 2007;38:2979–2984. 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.490896.
 94. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaerschalk 
BM, Khatri P, McMullan PW Jr, Qureshi AI, Rosenfield K, Scott PA, 
Summers DR, Wang DZ, Wintermark M, Yonas H; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular 
Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. Guidelines for the early management of patients with 
acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2013;44:870–947. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a.
 95. Lip GY, Nieuwlaat R, Pisters R, Lane DA, Crijns HJ. Refining clinical 
risk stratification for predicting stroke and thromboembolism in atrial 
fibrillation using a novel risk factor-based approach: the Euro Heart 
Survey on Atrial Fibrillation. Chest. 2010;137:263–272.
 96. Feinberg WM, Seeger JF, Carmody RF, Anderson DC, Hart RG, 
Pearce LA. Epidemiologic features of asymptomatic cerebral infarc-
tion in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Arch Intern Med. 
1990;150:2340–2344.
 97. Silent brain infarction in nonrheumatic atrial fibrillation: EAFT Study 
Group: European Atrial Fibrillation Trial. Neurology. 1996;46:159–165.
 98. Ezekowitz MD, James KE, Nazarian SM, Davenport J, Broderick JP, 
Gupta SR, Thadani V, Meyer ML, Bridgers SL. Silent cerebral infarc-
tion in patients with nonrheumatic atrial fibrillation: the Veterans Affairs 
Stroke Prevention in Nonrheumatic Atrial Fibrillation Investigators. 
Circulation. 1995;92:2178–2182.
 99. Favilla CG, Ingala E, Jara J, Fessler E, Cucchiara B, Messé SR, Mullen 
MT, Prasad A, Siegler J, Hutchinson MD, Kasner SE. Predictors 
of finding occult atrial fibrillation after cryptogenic stroke. Stroke. 
2015;46:1210–1215. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007763.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e69
 
100. Brott T, Tomsick T, Feinberg W, Johnson C, Biller J, Broderick J, 
Kelly M, Frey J, Schwartz S, Blum C, Nelson JJ, Chambless L, Toole 
J; Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study Investigators. Baseline 
silent cerebral infarction in the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis 
Study. Stroke. 1994;25:1122–1129.
 
101. Cao P, Zannetti S, Giordano G, De Rango P, Parlani G, Caputo N. 
Cerebral tomographic findings in patients undergoing carotid endarterec-
tomy for asymptomatic carotid stenosis: short-term and long-term impli-
cations. J Vasc Surg. 1999;29:995–1005.
 
102. Hougaku H, Matsumoto M, Handa N, Maeda H, Itoh T, Tsukamoto Y, 
Kamada T. Asymptomatic carotid lesions and silent cerebral infarction. 
Stroke. 1994;25:566–570.
 
103. Jayasooriya G, Thapar A, Shalhoub J, Davies AH. Silent cerebral events 
in asymptomatic carotid stenosis. J Vasc Surg. 2011;54:227–236. doi: 
10.1016/j.jvs.2011.01.037.
 
104. Federico A, Di Donato I, Bianchi S, Di Palma C, Taglia I, Dotti MT. 
Hereditary cerebral small vessel diseases: a review. J Neurol Sci. 
2012;322:25–30. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.07.041.
 
105. Kilarski LL, Rutten-Jacobs LC, Bevan S, Baker R, Hassan A, Hughes 
DA, Markus HS; UK Young Lacunar Stroke DNA Study. Prevalence of 
CADASIL and Fabry disease in a cohort of MRI defined younger onset 
lacunar stroke. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0136352. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0136352.
 
106. Chabriat H, Joutel A, Dichgans M, Tournier-Lasserve E, Bousser 
MG. Cadasil. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8:643–653. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(09)70127-9.
 
107. de Leeuw FE, de Groot JC, Oudkerk M, Kors JA, Hofman A, van Gijn 
J, Breteler MM. Atrial fibrillation and the risk of cerebral white matter 
lesions. Neurology. 2000;54:1795–1801.
 
108. Windham BG, Deere B, Griswold ME, Wang W, Bezerra DC, Shibata 
D, Butler K, Knopman D, Gottesman RF, Heiss G, Mosley TH Jr. Small 
brain lesions and incident stroke and mortality: a cohort study. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;163:22–31. doi: 10.7326/M14-2057.
 
109. Liao SQ, Li JC, Zhang M, Wang YJ, Li BH, Yin YW, Liu Y, Gao CY, 
Zhang LL. The association between leukoaraiosis and carotid ath-
erosclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Neurosci. 
2015;125:493–500. doi: 10.3109/00207454.2014.949703.
 
110. Poels MM, Vernooij MW, Ikram MA, Hofman A, Krestin GP, van der Lugt 
A, Breteler MM. Prevalence and risk factors of cerebral microbleeds: an 
update of the Rotterdam scan study. Stroke. 2010;41(suppl):S103–S106. 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.595181.
 
111. Knudsen KA, Rosand J, Karluk D, Greenberg SM. Clinical diagno-
sis of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: validation of the Boston criteria. 
Neurology. 2001;56:537–539.
 
112. Hemphill JC 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, Becker K, Bendok BR, 
Cushman M, Fung GL, Goldstein JN, Macdonald RL, Mitchell PH, Scott 
PA, Selim MH, Woo D; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council 
on Clinical Cardiology. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous 
intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2015;46:2032–2060. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000069.
 
113. Hasegawa Y, Yamaguchi T, Omae T, Woodward M, Chalmers J; 
PROGRESS CT Substudy Investigators. Effects of perindopril-
based blood pressure lowering and of patient characteristics on the 
progression of silent brain infarct: the Perindopril Protection against 
Recurrent Stroke Study (PROGRESS) CT Substudy in Japan [pub-
lished correction appears in Hypertens Res. 2004;27:447]. Hypertens 
Res. 2004;27:147–156.
 
114. Weber R, Weimar C, Wanke I, Möller-Hartmann C, Gizewski ER, 
Blatchford J, Hermansson K, Demchuk AM, Forsting M, Sacco RL, 
Saver JL, Warach S, Diener HC, Diehl A; PRoFESS Imaging Substudy 
Group. Risk of recurrent stroke in patients with silent brain infarction 
in the Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes 
(PRoFESS) imaging substudy. Stroke. 2012;43:350–355. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.631739.
 
115. Nelson M, Reid C, Beilin L, Donnan G, Johnston C, Krum H, Storey 
E, Tonkin A, McNeil J; Aspirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly 
(ASPREE) Study Group. Rationale for a trial of low-dose aspirin for 
the primary prevention of major adverse cardiovascular events and vas-
cular dementia in the elderly: Aspirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly 
(ASPREE). Drugs Aging. 2003;20:897–903.
 
116. Reid CM, Storey E, Wong TY, Woods R, Tonkin A, Wang JJ, Kam A, 
Janke A, Essex R, Abhayaratna WP, Budge MM; ASPREE Study Group. 
Aspirin for the prevention of cognitive decline in the elderly: rationale 
and design of a neuro-vascular imaging study (ENVIS-ion). BMC 
Neurol. 2012;12:3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-3.
 
117. Paraskevas KI, Spence JD, Veith FJ, Nicolaides AN. Identifying 
which patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis could ben-
efit from intervention. Stroke. 2014;45:3720–3724. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.114.006912.
 
118. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, Coady S, D’Agostino 
RB, Gibbons R, Greenland P, Lackland DT, Levy D, O’Donnell CJ, 
Robinson JG, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, Sorlie P, Stone NJ, 
Wilson PW, Jordan HS, Nevo L, Wnek J, Anderson JL, Halperin JL, 
Albert NM, Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, DeMets D, Hochman 
JS, Kovacs RJ, Ohman EM, Pressler SJ, Sellke FW, Shen WK, Smith 
SC Jr, Tomaselli GF. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of 
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [pub-
lished correction appears in Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S74–
S75]. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S49–S73. doi: 10.1161/01.
cir.0000437741.48606.98.
 
119. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, Bairey Merz CN, Blum CB, 
Eckel RH, Goldberg AC, Gordon D, Levy D, Lloyd-Jones DM, McBride 
P, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, Watson K, Wilson PW, Eddleman 
KM, Jarrett NM, LaBresh K, Nevo L, Wnek J, Anderson JL, Halperin JL, 
Albert NM, Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, DeMets D, Hochman JS, 
Kovacs RJ, Ohman EM, Pressler SJ, Sellke FW, Shen WK, Smith SC Jr, 
Tomaselli GF. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood cho-
lesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines [published corrections appear in Circulation. 
2014;129(suppl 2):S46–S48 and Circulation. 2015;132:e396]. Circulation. 
2014;129:S1–S45. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437738.63853.7a.
 
120. Iadecola C. The pathobiology of vascular dementia. Neuron. 
2013;80:844–866. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.008.
 
121. Wardlaw JM, Smith C, Dichgans M. Mechanisms of sporadic cerebral 
small vessel disease: insights from neuroimaging [published correction 
appears in Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:532]. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:483–
497. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70060-7.
 
122. American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology. CV 
Risk Calculator. http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator. Accessed 
November 9, 2016.
 
123. Dufouil C, Chalmers J, Coskun O, Besançon V, Bousser MG, Guillon 
P, MacMahon S, Mazoyer B, Neal B, Woodward M, Tzourio-
Mazoyer N, Tzourio C; PROGRESS MRI Substudy Investigators. 
Effects of blood pressure lowering on cerebral white matter hyper-
intensities in patients with stroke: the PROGRESS (Perindopril 
Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study) Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging Substudy. Circulation. 2005;112:1644–1650. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.104.501163.
 
124. Weber R, Weimar C, Blatchford J, Hermansson K, Wanke I, Möller-
Hartmann C, Gizewski ER, Forsting M, Demchuk AM, Sacco RL, Saver 
JL, Warach S, Diener HC, Diehl A; PRoFESS Imaging Substudy Group. 
Telmisartan on top of antihypertensive treatment does not prevent pro-
gression of cerebral white matter lesions in the Prevention Regimen for 
Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes (PRoFESS) MRI substudy. Stroke. 
2012;43:2336–2342. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.648576.
 
125. Xiong Y, Wong A, Cavalieri M, Schmidt R, Chu WW, Liu X, Wong KS, 
Mok V. Prestroke statins, progression of white matter hyperintensities, 
and cognitive decline in stroke patients with confluent white matter 
hyperintensities. Neurotherapeutics. 2014;11:606–611. doi: 10.1007/
s13311-014-0270-5.
 
126. ten Dam VH, van den Heuvel DM, van Buchem MA, Westendorp RG, 
Bollen EL, Ford I, de Craen 
AJ, Blauw GJ; PROSPER Study Group. Effect 
of pravastatin on cerebral infarcts and white matter lesions. Neurology. 
2005;64:1807–1809. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000161844.00797.73.
 
127. Mok VC, Lam WW, Fan YH, Wong A, Ng PW, Tsoi TH, Yeung V, Wong 
KS. Effects of statins on the progression of cerebral white matter lesion: 
post hoc analysis of the ROCAS (Regression of Cerebral Artery Stenosis) 
study. J Neurol. 2009;256:750–757. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5008-7.
 
128. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, Lazar RM, Gerstein HC, Murray 
AM, Sullivan M, Horowitz KR, Ding J, Marcovina S, Lovato LC, Lovato 
J, Margolis KL, O’Connor P, Lipkin EW, Hirsch J, Coker L, Maldjian 
J, Sunshine JL, Truwit C, Davatzikos C, Bryan RN; ACCORD MIND 
Investigators. Effects of intensive glucose lowering on brain structure 
and function in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): a ran-
domised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:969–977. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70188-0.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 e70  Stroke  February 2017
 
129. Cavalieri M, Schmidt R, Chen C, Mok V, de Freitas GR, Song S, Yi Q, 
Ropele S, Grazer A, Homayoon N, Enzinger C, Loh K, Wong KS, Wong 
A, Xiong Y, Chang HM, Wong MC, Fazekas F, Eikelboom JW, Hankey 
GJ; VITATOPS Trial Study Group. B vitamins and magnetic reso-
nance imaging-detected ischemic brain lesions in patients with recent 
transient ischemic attack or stroke: the VITAmins TO Prevent Stroke 
(VITATOPS) MRI-substudy. Stroke. 2012;43:3266–3270. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.112.665703.
 
130. Richard E, Gouw AA, Scheltens P, van Gool WA. Vascular care in 
patients with Alzheimer disease with cerebrovascular lesions slows 
progression of white matter lesions on MRI: the Evaluation of Vascular 
Care in Alzheimer’s Disease (EVA) study. Stroke. 2010;41:554–556. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.571281.
 
131. Gorter JW. Major bleeding during anticoagulation after cerebral isch-
emia: patterns and risk factors: Stroke Prevention In Reversible Ischemia 
Trial (SPIRIT): European Atrial Fibrillation Trial (EAFT) study groups. 
Neurology. 1999;53:1319–1327.
 
132. Richard E, Kuiper R, Dijkgraaf MG, Van Gool WA; Evaluation of 
Vascular care in Alzheimer’s disease. Vascular care in patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease with cerebrovascular lesions: a randomized clinical 
trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57:797–805.
 
133. Thoonsen H, Richard E, Bentham P, Gray R, van Geloven N, De Haan 
RJ, Van Gool WA, Nederkoorn PJ. Aspirin in Alzheimer’s disease: 
increased risk of intracerebral hemorrhage: cause for concern? Stroke. 
2010;41:2690–2692. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.576975.
 
134. Zheng JJ, Delbaere K, Close JC, Sachdev PS, Lord SR. Impact of 
white matter lesions on physical functioning and fall risk in older 
people: a systematic review. Stroke. 2011;42:2086–2090. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.610360.
 
135. Furie KL, Goldstein LB, Albers GW, Khatri P, Neyens R, Turakhia MP, 
Turan TN, Wood KA; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; 
Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; 
Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Oral antithrombotic agents for 
the prevention of stroke in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: a science advi-
sory for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association [published corrections appear in Stroke. 
2012;43:e181 and Stroke. 2013;44:e20]. Stroke. 2012;43:3442–3453. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318266722a.
 
136. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Aguilar MI. Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy 
to prevent stroke in patients who have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Ann 
Intern Med. 2007;146:857–867.
 
137. Hylek EM, Go AS, Chang Y, Jensvold NG, Henault LE, Selby JV, Singer 
DE. Effect of intensity of oral anticoagulation on stroke severity and 
mortality in atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1019–1026. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa022913.
 
138. Andersen KK, Olsen TS. Reduced poststroke mortality in patients with 
stroke and atrial fibrillation treated with anticoagulants: results from a 
Danish quality-control registry of 22,179 patients with ischemic stroke. 
Stroke. 2007;38:259–263. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000254622.52483.03.
 
139. McGrath ER, Kapral MK, Fang J, Eikelboom JW, Conghaile Aó, 
O’Conghaile A, Canavan M, O’Donnell MJ; Investigators of the 
Ontario Stroke Registry. Association of atrial fibrillation with mortal-
ity and disability after ischemic stroke [published corrections appear in 
Neurology. 2013;81:825–832 and Neurology. 2016;86:492]. Neurology. 
2013;81:825–832. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a2cc15.
 
140. Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, Hoffman EB, Deenadayalu 
N, Ezekowitz MD, Camm AJ, Weitz JI, Lewis BS, Parkhomenko A, 
Yamashita T, Antman EM. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of 
new oral anticoagulants with warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation: 
a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet. 2014;383:955–962. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62343-0.
 
141. Fang MC, Go AS, Chang Y, Hylek EM, Henault LE, Jensvold NG, Singer 
DE. Death and disability from warfarin-associated intracranial and extra-
cranial hemorrhages. Am J Med. 2007;120:700–705. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjmed.2006.07.034.
 
142. Kaatz S, Kouides PA, Garcia DA, Spyropolous AC, Crowther M, 
Douketis JD, Chan AK, James A, Moll S, Ortel TL, Van Cott EM, Ansell 
J. Guidance on the emergent reversal of oral thrombin and factor Xa 
inhibitors [published correction appears in Am J Hematol. 2012;87:748]. 
Am J Hematol. 2012;87(suppl 1):S141–S145. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23202.
 
143. Hankey GJ, Patel MR, Stevens SR, Becker RC, Breithardt G, Carolei A, 
Diener HC, Donnan GA, Halperin JL, Mahaffey KW, Mas JL, Massaro 
A, Norrving B, Nessel CC, Paolini JF, Roine RO, Singer DE, Wong 
L, Califf RM, Fox KA, Hacke W; ROCKET AF Steering Committee 
Investigators. Rivaroxaban compared with warfarin in patients with 
atrial fibrillation and previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack: a sub-
group analysis of ROCKET AF. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:315–322. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70042-X.
 
144. Hart RG, Diener HC, Yang S, Connolly SJ, Wallentin L, Reilly 
PA, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S. Intracranial hemorrhage in atrial 
fibrillation patients during anticoagulation with warfarin or dabi-
gatran: the RE-LY trial. Stroke. 2012;43:1511–1517. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.112.650614.
 
145. Charidimou A, Kakar P, Fox Z, Werring DJ. Cerebral microbleeds 
and recurrent stroke risk: systematic review and meta-analysis of pro-
spective ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack cohorts. Stroke. 
2013;44:995–1001. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.000038.
 
146. Nishikawa T, Ueba T, Kajiwara M, Fujisawa I, Miyamatsu N, Yamashita 
K. Cerebral microbleeds predict first-ever symptomatic cerebrovascu-
lar events. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2009;111:825–828. doi: 10.1016/j.
clineuro.2009.08.011.
 
147. Bokura H, Saika R, Yamaguchi T, Nagai A, Oguro H, Kobayashi S, 
Yamaguchi S. Microbleeds are associated with subsequent hemorrhagic 
and ischemic stroke in healthy elderly individuals. Stroke. 2011;42:1867–
1871. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.601922.
 
148. Greenberg SM, Eng JA, Ning M, Smith EE, Rosand J. Hemorrhage 
burden predicts recurrent intracerebral hemorrhage after lobar 
hemorrhage. 
Stroke. 
2004;35:1415–1420. 
doi: 
10.1161/01.
STR.0000126807.69758.0e.
 
149. Soo YO, Yang SR, Lam WW, Wong A, Fan YH, Leung HH, Chan AY, 
Leung C, Leung TW, Wong LK. Risk vs benefit of anti-thrombotic 
therapy in ischaemic stroke patients with cerebral microbleeds. J Neurol. 
2008;255:1679–1686. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0967-7.
 
150. Biffi A, Halpin A, Towfighi A, Gilson A, Busl K, Rost N, Smith EE, 
Greenberg MS, Rosand J, Viswanathan A. Aspirin and recurrent intra-
cerebral hemorrhage in cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Neurology. 
2010;75:693–698. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181eee40f.
 
151. Bailey RD, Hart RG, Benavente O, Pearce LA. Recurrent brain hem-
orrhage is more frequent than ischemic stroke after intracranial hemor-
rhage. Neurology. 2001;56:773–777.
 
152. van Etten ES, Auriel E, Haley KE, Ayres AM, Vashkevich A, Schwab 
KM, Rosand J, Viswanathan A, Greenberg SM, Gurol ME. Incidence 
of symptomatic hemorrhage in patients with lobar microbleeds. Stroke. 
2014;45:2280–2285. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005151.
 
153. Eckman MH, Wong LK, Soo YO, Lam W, Yang SR, Greenberg SM, 
Rosand J. Patient-specific decision-making for warfarin therapy 
in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: how will screening with genet-
ics and imaging help? Stroke. 2008;39:3308–3315. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.108.523159.
 
154. Nishikawa T, Ueba T, Kajiwara M, Miyamatsu N, Yamashita K. Cerebral 
microbleeds in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage are associated 
with previous cerebrovascular diseases and white matter hyperintensity, 
but not with regular use of antiplatelet agents. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 
2009;49:333–338.
 
155. Song TJ, Kim J, Lee HS, Nam CM, Nam HS, Heo JH, Kim YD. The 
frequency of cerebral microbleeds increases with CHADS(2) scores 
in stroke patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation. Eur J Neurol. 
2013;20:502–508. doi: 10.1111/ene.12003.
 
156. Eckman MH, Singer DE, Rosand J, Greenberg SM. Moving the tip-
ping point: the decision to anticoagulate patients with atrial fibrilla-
tion. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011;4:14–21. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.110.958108.
 
157. Antithrombotic Trialists Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of 
randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myo-
cardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients [published correction 
appears in BMJ. 2002;324:141]. BMJ. 2002;324:71–86.
 
158. Amarenco P, Bogousslavsky J, Callahan A 3rd, Goldstein LB, Hennerici 
M, Rudolph AE, Sillesen H, Simunovic L, Szarek M, Welch KM, Zivin 
JA; Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels 
(SPARCL) Investigators. High-dose atorvastatin after stroke or tran-
sient ischemic attack. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:549–559. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa061894.
 
159. Hackam DG, Woodward M, Newby LK, Bhatt DL, Shao M, Smith 
EE, Donner A, Mamdani M, Douketis JD, Arima H, Chalmers J, 
MacMahon S, Tirschwell DL, Psaty BM, Bushnell CD, Aguilar 
MI, Capampangan DJ, Werring DJ, De Rango P, Viswanathan A, 
Danchin N, Cheng CL, Yang YH, Verdel BM, Lai MS, Kennedy 
J, Uchiyama S, Yamaguchi T, Ikeda Y, Mrkobrada M. Statins and 
intracerebral hemorrhage: collaborative systematic review and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Smith et al  Prevention of Stroke and Silent Cerebrovascular Disease  e71
meta-analysis. Circulation. 2011;124:2233–2242. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.111.055269.
 
160. Akoudad S, Portegies ML, Koudstaal PJ, Hofman A, van der Lugt 
A, Ikram MA, Vernooij MW. Cerebral microbleeds are associated 
with an increased risk of stroke: the Rotterdam Study. Circulation. 
2015;132:509–516. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016261.
 
161. Reddy VY, Sievert H, Halperin J, Doshi SK, Buchbinder M, Neuzil 
P, Huber K, Whisenant B, Kar S, Swarup V, Gordon N, Holmes D; 
PROTECT AF Steering Committee and Investigators. Percutaneous left 
atrial appendage closure vs warfarin for atrial fibrillation: a randomized 
clinical trial [published correction appears in JAMA. 2015;313:1061]. 
JAMA. 2014;312:1988–1998. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.15192.
 
162. Demaerschalk BM, Kleindorfer DO, Adeoye OM, Demchuk AM, Fugate 
JE, Grotta JC, Khalessi 
AA, Levy EI, Palesch 
YY, Prabhakaran S, Saposnik 
G, Saver JL, Smith EE; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Scientific 
rationale for the inclusion and exclusion criteria for intravenous alteplase 
in acute ischemic stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2016;47:581–641. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000086.
 
163. Charidimou A, Shoamanesh A, Wilson D, Gang Q, Fox Z, Jäger HR, 
Benavente OR, Werring DJ. Cerebral microbleeds and postthromboly-
sis intracerebral hemorrhage risk: updated meta-analysis. Neurology. 
2015;85:927–934. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001923.
 
164. Kakuda W, Thijs VN, Lansberg MG, Bammer R, Wechsler L, Kemp 
S, Moseley ME, Marks MP, Albers GW; DEFUSE Investigators. 
Clinical importance of microbleeds in patients receiving IV 
thrombolysis. 
Neurology. 
2005;65:1175–1178. 
doi: 
10.1212/01.
wnl.0000180519.27680.0f.
 
165. Derex L, Nighoghossian N, Hermier M, Adeleine P, Philippeau F, 
Honnorat J, Yilmaz H, Dardel P, Froment JC, Trouillas P. Thrombolysis 
for ischemic stroke in patients with old microbleeds on pretreatment 
MRI. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2004;17:238–241. doi: 10.1159/000076123.
 
166. Kim HS, Lee DH, Ryu CW, Lee JH, Choi CG, Kim SJ, Suh DC. Multiple 
cerebral microbleeds in hyperacute ischemic stroke: impact on preva-
lence and severity of early hemorrhagic transformation after thrombo-
lytic treatment. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2006;186:1443–1449. doi: 
10.2214/AJR.04.1933.
 
167. Gratz PP, El-Koussy M, Hsieh K, von Arx S, Mono ML, Heldner MR, 
Fischer U, Mattle HP, Zubler C, Schroth G, Gralla J, Arnold M, Jung 
S. Preexisting cerebral microbleeds on susceptibility-weighted magnetic 
resonance imaging and post-thrombolysis bleeding risk in 392 patients. 
Stroke. 2014;45:1684–1688. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.004796.
 
168. Yan S, Jin X, Zhang X, Zhang S, Liebeskind DS, Lou M. Extensive 
cerebral microbleeds predict parenchymal haemorrhage and poor out-
come after intravenous thrombolysis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2015;86:1267–1272. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-309857.
 
169. Dannenberg S, Scheitz JF, Rozanski M, Erdur H, Brunecker P, Werring 
DJ, Fiebach JB, Nolte CH. Number of cerebral microbleeds and risk 
of intracerebral hemorrhage after intravenous thrombolysis. Stroke. 
2014;45:2900–2905. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.006448.
 
170. Moriya Y, Takahashi W, Kijima C, Yutani S, Iijima E, Mizuma A, Honma 
K, Uesugi T, Ohnuki Y, Nagata E, Yanagimachi N, Takizawa S. Predictors 
for hemorrhagic transformation with intravenous tissue plasminogen 
activator in acute ischemic stroke. Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 2013;38:24–27.
 
171. Kimura K, Aoki J, Shibazaki K, Saji N, Uemura J, Sakamoto Y. New 
appearance of extraischemic microbleeds on T2*-weighted mag-
netic resonance imaging 24 hours after tissue-type plasminogen 
activator administration. Stroke. 2013;44:2776–2781. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.113.001778.
 
172. Fiehler J, Albers GW, Boulanger JM, Derex L, Gass A, Hjort N, 
Kim JS, Liebeskind DS, Neumann-Haefelin T, Pedraza S, Rother 
J, Rothwell P, Rovira A, Schellinger PD, Trenkler J; MR STROKE 
Group. Bleeding Risk Analysis in Stroke Imaging Before ThromboLysis 
(BRASIL): pooled analysis of T2*-weighted magnetic resonance imag-
ing data from 570 patients. Stroke. 2007;38:2738–2744. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.106.480848.
 
173. Kidwell CS, Saver JL, Villablanca JP, Duckwiler G, Fredieu A, Gough 
K, Leary MC, Starkman S, Gobin YP, Jahan R, Vespa P, Liebeskind 
DS, Alger JR, Vinuela F. Magnetic resonance imaging detection of 
microbleeds before thrombolysis: an emerging application. Stroke. 
2002;33:95–98.
 
174. Turc G, Sallem A, Moulin S, Tisserand M, Machet A, Edjlali M, 
Baron JC, Leclerc X, Leys D, Mas JL, Cordonnier C, Oppenheim C. 
Microbleed status and 3-month outcome after intravenous thrombolysis 
in 717 patients with acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2015;46:2458–2463. 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.009290.
 
175. Akins PT, Amar AP, Pakbaz RS, Fields JD; SWIFT Investigators. 
Complications of endovascular treatment for acute stroke in the 
SWIFT trial with Solitaire and Merci devices. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2014;35:524–528. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3707.
 
176. Shi ZS, Duckwiler GR, Jahan R, Tateshima S, Gonzalez NR, Szeder V, 
Saver JL, Kim D, Ali LK, Starkman S, Vespa PM, Salamon N, Villablanca 
JP, Viñuela F, Feng L, Loh Y, Liebeskind DS. Mechanical thrombectomy 
for acute ischemic stroke with cerebral microbleeds. J Neurointerv Surg. 
2016;8:563–567. doi: 10.1136/neurintsurg-2015-011765.
 
177. Diedler J, Ahmed N, Sykora M, Uyttenboogaart M, Overgaard K, 
Luijckx GJ, Soinne L, Ford GA, Lees KR, Wahlgren N, Ringleb P. Safety 
of intravenous thrombolysis for acute ischemic stroke in patients receiv-
ing antiplatelet therapy at stroke onset. Stroke. 2010;41:288–294. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.559724.
 
178. DeBaun MR, Gordon M, McKinstry RC, Noetzel MJ, White DA, Sarnaik 
SA, Meier ER, Howard TH, Majumdar S, Inusa BP, Telfer PT, Kirby-
Allen M, McCavit TL, Kamdem A, Airewele G, Woods GM, Berman B, 
Panepinto JA, Fuh BR, Kwiatkowski JL, King AA, Fixler JM, Rhodes 
MM, Thompson AA, Heiny ME, Redding-Lallinger RC, Kirkham FJ, 
Dixon N, Gonzalez CE, Kalinyak KA, Quinn CT, Strouse JJ, Miller JP, 
Lehmann H, Kraut MA, Ball WS Jr, Hirtz D, Casella JF. Controlled trial 
of transfusions for silent cerebral infarcts in sickle cell anemia. N Engl J 
Med. 2014;371:699–710. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1401731.
 
179. DeBaun MR. The challenge of creating an evidence-based guideline 
for sickle cell disease. JAMA. 2014;312:1004–1005. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2014.11103.
 
180. Yawn BP, Buchanan GR, Afenyi-Annan AN, Ballas SK, Hassell KL, 
James AH, Jordan L, Lanzkron SM, Lottenberg R, Savage WJ, Tanabe 
PJ, Ware RE, Murad MH, Goldsmith JC, Ortiz E, Fulwood R, Horton 
A, John-Sowah J. Management of sickle cell disease: summary of the 
2014 evidence-based report by expert panel members [published correc-
tions appear in JAMA. 2014;312:1932 and JAMA. 2015;313:729]. JAMA. 
2014;312:1033–1048. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.10517.
 
181. Callaghan BC, Kerber KA, Pace RJ, Skolarus LE, Burke JF. Headaches 
and neuroimaging: high utilization and costs despite guidelines. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2014;174:819–821. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.173.
 
182. Wang Z, Soo YO, Mok VC. Cerebral microbleeds: is antithrombotic 
therapy safe to administer? Stroke. 2014;45:2811–2817. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.114.004286.
 
183. Whiteley WN, Thompson D, Murray G, Cohen G, Lindley RI, Wardlaw 
J, Sandercock P; IST-3 Collaborative Group. Targeting recombinant 
tissue-type plasminogen activator in acute ischemic stroke based on risk 
of intracranial hemorrhage or poor functional outcome: an analysis of 
the Third International Stroke Trial. Stroke. 2014;45:1000–1006. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.004362.
 
184. Sprint Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, 
Snyder JK, Sink KM, Rocco MV, Reboussin DM, Rahman M, Oparil 
S, Lewis CE, Kimmel PL, Johnson KC, Goff DC Jr, Fine LJ, Cutler 
JA, Cushman WC, Cheung AK, Ambrosius WT. A randomized trial 
of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:2103–2116.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
