 technologies
Protocol
Technology-Supported Group Activity to Promote
Communication in Dementia: A Protocol for a
Within-Participants Study †
Sarah K. Smith 1,* ID and Arlene J. Astell 2,3,4
1
Interdisciplinary Centre of the Social Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S1 4DP, UK
2
Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences, Whitby, ON L1N 5S9, Canada; a.astell@reading.ac.uk
3
Occupational Therapy & occupational Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada
4
Berkshire Memory & Cognition Research Centre, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6AH, UK
*
Correspondence: s.k.smith@sheffield.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-(0)114-215-9120
†
This paper is an extended version of our paper published in AAATE2017 Congress Proceedings, Sheffield,
UK, 13–14 September 2017.
Received: 24 January 2018; Accepted: 6 March 2018; Published: 12 March 2018
Abstract: Computer Interactive Reminiscence and Conversation Aid (CIRCA)is an interactive
conversation support for people living with dementia. CIRCA facilitates one-to-one conversations
and caregiving relationships in formal care environments. Originally developed as a standalone
device, a new web-based version of CIRCA has been created to increase availability. The potential
of CIRCA to support group activities and conversation between people living with dementia and
a facilitator has not previously been explored. The two objectives of this study are (i) to validate
the new web-based version of CIRCA against the original standalone device, and (ii) to explore the
efficacy of CIRCA in supporting group activity for people with dementia in a formal care setting.
This mixed-methods study comprises two parts: (i) an eight-session group activity using the CIRCA
stand-alone device, and (ii) an eight-session group activity using the web-based CIRCA. One hundred
and eighty people with dementia will be recruited: 90 for part (i) and 90 for part (ii). Measures of
cognition and quality of life will be taken at the baseline, post-CIRCA intervention, and three months
later, plus video recordings of the group sessions. Both parts of the study will be completed by
June 2018. The study will provide evidence on two issues: (i) a validation of the new web-based
version of CIRCA, and (ii) the suitability of CIRCA to support group activities in formal care settings
for people living with dementia. This protocol is an extended version of the short paper presented at
the AAATE 2017 conference and published in Studies in Health Technology & Informatics.
Keywords: dementia; psychosocial; Computer Interactive Reminiscence and Conversation Aid
(CIRCA); technology
1. Introduction
Dementia is an overarching term, applied to a collection of progressive neurological disorders that
at present cannot be prevented or reversed. Age is the biggest risk factor for developing dementia [1],
and as life expectancy continues to grow, the number of people in the world with dementia is predicted
to rise from 46.8 million in 2015, to 74.7 million by 2030, and to 131.5 million by 2050 [1]. There is no
single cause of dementia, and no single pattern to the way it affects people. Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for an estimated 60–80% of cases, with another
10% attributed to vascular causes (e.g., stroke—many of those with Alzheimer’s pathology also have
evidence of vascular disease [2]. Although there is a class of drugs—cholinesterase inhibitors—that can
Technologies 2018, 6, 33; doi:10.3390/technologies6010033
www.mdpi.com/journal/technologies
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
2 of 12
slow the progression of AD, there are no disease-modifying therapies, i.e., nothing to reverse or cure
any type of dementia [3], meaning that people will live with the condition for the rest of their lives.
Dementia is primarily a cognitive disorder [4] with each type of dementia characterised by a
different profile of spared and impaired cognitive function. These can include memory, language,
attention, planning, and initiating activities. For example, in AD, it has long been noted that an early
symptom is a problem with working memory, which makes it difficult for people to keep current
or recent events in mind [5]. However, their memory for people, places, and events from earlier in
their lives, particularly childhood and early adulthood, is typically preserved [6]. Even so, dementia
is a progressive disorder, and over time, all aspects of cognitive function are generally implicated.
These changes affect people’s social and emotional behaviour and everyday activities, making people
with dementia increasingly reliant on family or professional caregivers for meeting all their needs [7].
The cognitive changes make communication between people with dementia and those who care
for them particularly problematic. This is partly due to the working memory, which makes it difficult
for people to hold conversations, as they cannot keep track of the turns [8]. In addition, repetitions
and lack of responses can give the appearance of not listening to what their conversation partner
is saying. This can be frustrating and disempowering for people with dementia, and distressing
for the family and care staff they are trying to communicate with [9]. Developing interventions to
support communication and maintain relationships between people with dementia and those who
care for them is unsurprisingly a growing social and healthcare priority. In 2013, the U.K. government
prioritised the identification of “non-drug interventions that make a real difference to people’s lives
and improve quality of life” and “enable people to maintain their dignity and independence for longer,
reducing disability” [10] (p. 35). Whilst many non-pharmacological interventions for dementia have
been developed and tested, to date only one—Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) [11,12] has been
recommended by the U.K. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE). To stimulate the
development, testing and implementation of new interventions, the Prime Minister’s Challenge on
Dementia 2020 highlighted the gaps in provision and the importance of offering an expanded range of
services from the point of diagnosis. This pointed to approaches beyond pharmacology, specifically
“incorporating new ideas including technology solutions into everyday practice” [13] (p. 32).
1.1. Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
Technology is becoming common practice in dementia care, with interventions such as GPS
tracking systems and home health monitoring proving popular with caregivers [14]. Many of these
technologies address issues of safety and security or provide reassurance to caregivers, but may
not address the needs and priorities of people with dementia [15]. These sorts of technologies
have been developed in line with the traditional medical model of dementia, which focuses on
neurodegeneration and loss of abilities [16–18].
This view has been criticised for being both
deterministic and pessimistic [19], and is responsible for widely-held misconceptions that little or
nothing can be done directly for people living with dementia [20,21].
One consequence has been an attitude towards dementia that is excessively disabling of
individuals with the condition [22]. Excess disability refers to the situation where an individual
with an acquired or congenital condition is disabled to a greater extent than is due to simply having
the condition [23]. This excessive disabling is down to environmental factors, including the attitudes
and behaviour of those around the person, which results in overtaking tasks or not allowing the
individual to do a range of things for themselves. These decisions, while usually well-meaning,
are paternalistic and not helpful for enabling individuals with dementia to retain their skills, autonomy,
and independence [24]. In addition, this disabling attitude has meant that progress in developing
technologies for people with dementia has been both slow and sparse, compared with the rapid
developments in consumer electronics over the past 25 years.
In contrast to the medical model, the psychosocial approach focuses on the skills and
abilities—both cognitive and behavioural—that people with dementia retain. In addition, this approach
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
3 of 12
takes account of the desires of people with dementia to continue participating in activities that
are important to them [25]. These may very well be everyday activities, such as shopping and
cooking, but also include socialising, hobbies, and leisure pursuits [24]. The potential of contemporary
information and communication technologies (ICTs) to meet these needs and aspirations is increasingly
being recognised in the dementia literature [26–28] with an exciting influx of evidence demonstrating
how new forms of ICT can engage a person with dementia in activities they value [29–31]. This focus
on the person with dementia as a separate entity from caregivers, who have their own different needs
and priorities, is essential for examining the potential of contemporary ICTs to benefit them in line
with the rest of the population [10,32].
Everyday non-specialised technology, such as television sets and telephones, have been shown
to have utility and significance in the lives of people with dementia [27]. Further exploration of the
growing mainstream functionality, including smart devices such as tablets, could go a long way to
addressing the pressing needs of growing numbers of people with dementia. For example, individuals
with dementia can be trained and supported to use tablets and smart devices to engage with activities
of their choice and interest, just like the population at large [32].
The potential of technology to support people living with dementia is increasingly acknowledged,
but currently far from realised [33]. One explanation is that opportunities, places, and support that
may enable participation in such activities are currently not keeping pace with the desire from people
living with dementia [32]. A further explanation is the slow pace of development of devices aimed at
people with dementia rather than caregivers [24]. Coupled with these challenges, many people with
dementia, along with their families and the services that support them, are largely unaware of the way
ICT can be used, or unsure how to adopt it. There is also a need to expand research across the range of
environments and contexts where people with dementia live and operate, to identify their needs and
priorities for technological solutions both inside and outside the home.
1.2. Computer Interactive Reminiscence and Conversation Aid (CIRCA)
In addition to off-the-shelf devices and applications, there is room for bespoke interventions
developed specifically to address the needs of people living with dementia. Computer Interactive
Reminiscence and Conversation Aid (CIRCA) is a multimedia computer system developed to support
and promote communication between people with dementia and caregivers [34,35]. CIRCA is based
on reminiscing: the process of recollecting memories from one’s life, about work or hobbies for
instance, and speaking about these with one or more other people. Reminiscing is a basic human
activity that emerges early in life and plays an important role in shaping self-identity and social
relationships [36].
Telling our stories also provides a way to process and deal with emotional
experiences, by allowing us to reflect on what has happened to us: “Our past experiences are
emotionally saturated: we recount and reminisce about particular events because they are personally
significant and emotionally meaningful” [37] (p. 39). For people living with dementia, engaging in
reminiscing has shown to contribute to well-being and provide a positive activity [38].
Reminiscing is a popular group activity in dementia care settings, where one or more care staff
or activity coordinators act as facilitators. Such sessions require facilitators to generate topics and
find and organise materials to prompt reminiscing and discussion within the group [39]. It should be
acknowledged that reminiscing is rarely carried out as a one-to-one activity in care settings, due to
time constraints and the need to find stimuli for individuals.
CIRCA is a cooperatively-designed interactive software application comprising a multimedia
database, containing a broad range of stimuli to prompt reminiscing by people with dementia [40].
It is delivered on a touch screen to avoid the need for a mouse, keyboard, prior experience, or intensive
training. CIRCA utilises hypermedia to allow users to move instantaneously between different media
including music, video clips, and photographs. CIRCA was designed to mitigate the working memory
problem common in dementia by focusing on whatever is currently on screen, and removing the
need to keep track of conversational turns [41]. Two key features of hypermedia are pertinent: first,
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
4 of 12
the inherent flexibility enables users to explore interconnected but individual items as they choose,
and there is no right or wrong way to navigate the materials. Second, hypermedia provides a dynamic
opportunity involving photographs, music, and video to be seamlessly intertwined, resulting in an
engaging shared experience [1,2]. Figure 1 illustrates a photograph being viewed on CIRCA.
Technologies 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
4 of 11 
 
resulting in an engaging shared experience [1,2]. Figure 1 illustrates a photograph being viewed on 
CIRCA. 
 
Figure 1. An example of a typical photograph included in Computer Interactive Reminiscence and 
Conversation Aid (CIRCA). 
CIRCA was developed through a user-centred design approach, in order to address the 
expressed need for supported conversations between people with dementia and caregivers. Working 
closely with individuals living with dementia, family members in a caregiving role, and formal 
caregivers in a range of dementia care services, CIRCA was iteratively developed over a number of 
years [42]. All aspects of decision making relating to the interface, layout colours, fonts, backgrounds, 
buttons, and contents were informed through an interactive process consistently involving the 
intended user’s perspectives and opinions [42]. 
The CIRCA team demonstrated that when compared to traditional reminiscing activities, CIRCA 
provided a more enjoyable experience for people with dementia and caregivers [15]. For the person 
with dementia, CIRCA provides the opportunity to make independent choices and engage as an 
equal partner during conversations with others [41]. Furthermore, the randomised presentation 
keeps caregivers engaged, and seeing people with dementia interacting with the computer leads 
them to re-evaluate their expectations of the person with dementia and view them “in a new light” 
[41]. Formal caregivers reported feelings of increased competence within the caring role, and were 
visibly more relaxed, resulting in time spent together using CIRCA improving their caregiving 
relationships [7]. 
1.3. Current Study 
CIRCA was primarily developed to support one-to-one conversations between people living 
with dementia and caregivers. However, in most care settings there is little opportunity for one-to-
one time, and so group activities are favoured. In a pilot study across two care homes, caregivers 
utilised CIRCA in a wide range of activities besides one-to-one interactions, including groups, 
quizzes, and getting to know new residents [42]. In spite of this creativity, there has been no 
systematic application or exploration of CIRCA as a group activity that could be scalable across care 
settings. The current study was developed firstly to examine the utility of CIRCA as a systematic 
group activity that can be delivered in a range of care settings. The second purpose was to validate a 
new web-based version of CIRCA (CIRCA-WB) against an existing version, prepopulated on a 
standalone device. The existing CIRCA version is populated with generic material that may be 
suitable for the majority. Figure 2 illustrates CIRCA being explored and discussed.  
Figure 1. An example of a typical photograph included in Computer Interactive Reminiscence and
Conversation Aid (CIRCA).
CIRCA was developed through a user-centred design approach, in order to address the expressed
need for supported conversations between people with dementia and caregivers. Working closely
with individuals living with dementia, family members in a caregiving role, and formal caregivers
in a range of dementia care services, CIRCA was iteratively developed over a number of years [42].
All aspects of decision making relating to the interface, layout colours, fonts, backgrounds, buttons,
and contents were informed through an interactive process consistently involving the intended user’s
perspectives and opinions [42].
The CIRCA team demonstrated that when compared to traditional reminiscing activities, CIRCA
provided a more enjoyable experience for people with dementia and caregivers [15]. For the person
with dementia, CIRCA provides the opportunity to make independent choices and engage as an
equal partner during conversations with others [41]. Furthermore, the randomised presentation
keeps caregivers engaged, and seeing people with dementia interacting with the computer leads
them to re-evaluate their expectations of the person with dementia and view them “in a new
light” [41]. Formal caregivers reported feelings of increased competence within the caring role, and
were visibly more relaxed, resulting in time spent together using CIRCA improving their caregiving
relationships [7].
1.3. Current Study
CIRCA was primarily developed to support one-to-one conversations between people living with
dementia and caregivers. However, in most care settings there is little opportunity for one-to-one time,
and so group activities are favoured. In a pilot study across two care homes, caregivers utilised CIRCA
in a wide range of activities besides one-to-one interactions, including groups, quizzes, and getting
to know new residents [42]. In spite of this creativity, there has been no systematic application or
exploration of CIRCA as a group activity that could be scalable across care settings. The current
study was developed firstly to examine the utility of CIRCA as a systematic group activity that can be
delivered in a range of care settings. The second purpose was to validate a new web-based version of
CIRCA (CIRCA-WB) against an existing version, prepopulated on a standalone device. The existing
CIRCA version is populated with generic material that may be suitable for the majority. Figure 2
illustrates CIRCA being explored and discussed.
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
5 of 12
Technologies 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
5 of 11 
 
 
Figure 2. The original CIRCA being enjoyed. 
CIRCA-WB is being developed as part of the Independent Living Functions for the Elderly (IN-
LIFE) project, a large European Horizon 2020 program of work developing a cloud-based platform 
for people with dementia and their caregivers across Europe to access. CIRCA-WB retains the look 
and feel of CIRCA, with similar backgrounds and layouts to the original. The randomised 
presentation has been retained to provide as close an experience to the original CIRCA as possible. 
The web-based contents are stored in the cloud and accessed via a login. CIRCA-WB has the added 
functionality that contents can be added or labeled in a wide range of languages, ensuring that it can 
be used across countries and topics. For the U.K. pilot site, CIRCA-WB will be localised to Sheffield, 
the city in which the majority of participants live. This will involve accessing the Sheffield Archives 
for local material about the city and the surrounding areas.  
CIRCA-WB will be offered as part of the IN-LIFE platform, along with 18 other web-based 
services to support people living well with dementia. These alternate services are being investigated 
in parallel across five other European countries, to explore the potential of digital services for 
supporting people to live well with dementia using contemporary ICTs.  
The protocol development was informed by examining the work of Spector et al [11,12] in 
developing and testing Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) as a group-based activity. CST is a 
manualised activity program developed from the principles of reality orientation and “cognitive 
stimulation” [43] to enhance cognitive function and quality of life for people living with dementia. 
CST was developed as an intervention for use in day programs and care homes and tested in a single-
blind, multi-centre, randomised controlled trial [11]. The findings demonstrated an improvement in 
both the cognitive performance and quality of life of participants who received CST, relative to those 
who did not, and the improvements “compare favourably with trials of drugs for dementia” [13] (p. 
248). A cost-effectiveness review of a 16-session CST program twice a week for eight weeks suggested 
it could be more cost-effective than usual treatment [44]. This current protocol will enable the 
systematic study of CIRCA as a group intervention, whilst comparing the existing application with 
that of a web-based version developed for the IN-LIFE project. We also intend to compare the 
findings with those achieved by CST, as CIRCA requires minimal training or set up and could 
provide a technology-based alternative to CST in dementia care settings. 
2. Methods  
2.1. Design 
This protocol describes a within-participant’s design, where all participants will receive the 
intervention. All participants will be assessed at baseline, at the end of the intervention, and three 
months later, to explore the possible maintenance of effects of the intervention. The project comprises 
Figure 2. The original CIRCA being enjoyed.
CIRCA-WB is being developed as part of the Independent Living Functions for the Elderly
(IN-LIFE) project, a large European Horizon 2020 program of work developing a cloud-based platform
for people with dementia and their caregivers across Europe to access. CIRCA-WB retains the look and
feel of CIRCA, with similar backgrounds and layouts to the original. The randomised presentation
has been retained to provide as close an experience to the original CIRCA as possible. The web-based
contents are stored in the cloud and accessed via a login. CIRCA-WB has the added functionality that
contents can be added or labeled in a wide range of languages, ensuring that it can be used across
countries and topics. For the U.K. pilot site, CIRCA-WB will be localised to Sheffield, the city in which
the majority of participants live. This will involve accessing the Sheffield Archives for local material
about the city and the surrounding areas.
CIRCA-WB will be offered as part of the IN-LIFE platform, along with 18 other web-based services
to support people living well with dementia. These alternate services are being investigated in parallel
across five other European countries, to explore the potential of digital services for supporting people
to live well with dementia using contemporary ICTs.
The protocol development was informed by examining the work of Spector et al [11,12] in
developing and testing Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) as a group-based activity. CST is a
manualised activity program developed from the principles of reality orientation and “cognitive
stimulation” [43] to enhance cognitive function and quality of life for people living with dementia.
CST was developed as an intervention for use in day programs and care homes and tested
in a single-blind, multi-centre, randomised controlled trial [11]. The findings demonstrated an
improvement in both the cognitive performance and quality of life of participants who received
CST, relative to those who did not, and the improvements “compare favourably with trials of drugs
for dementia” [13] (p. 248). A cost-effectiveness review of a 16-session CST program twice a week for
eight weeks suggested it could be more cost-effective than usual treatment [44]. This current protocol
will enable the systematic study of CIRCA as a group intervention, whilst comparing the existing
application with that of a web-based version developed for the IN-LIFE project. We also intend to
compare the findings with those achieved by CST, as CIRCA requires minimal training or set up and
could provide a technology-based alternative to CST in dementia care settings.
2. Methods
2.1. Design
This protocol describes a within-participant’s design, where all participants will receive the
intervention. All participants will be assessed at baseline, at the end of the intervention, and three
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
6 of 12
months later, to explore the possible maintenance of effects of the intervention. The project comprises
two parts: (i) an eight-session standalone CIRCA-based group activity, and (ii) an eight-session
web-based CIRCA-based group activity.
2.2. Sample Size
The primary outcome will be the impact of CIRCA on cognitive function. The Addenbrookes
Cognitive Examination—third edition (ACE-III) will be used to assess cognition at three time points:
baseline, at the end of the intervention, and three months post-intervention. To detect a standardised
mean change or effect size of 0.25 on the ACE-III outcome, with 90% power and 5% (two-sided)
significance level, and assuming 15% attrition, a minimum sample size of 180 people with dementia
will need to be recruited.
2.3. Ethics
Health Research Authority (HRA) approval was received and a favourable opinion from the
Sheffield Research Ethics Committee(REC), reference 16/YH/0354.
2.4. Participants
A total of 180 older adults living with cognitive impairment will be recruited from Sheffcare Ltd.
(a provider of residential care and day care), and Alzheimer’s Society Sheffield. Half of the participants
will take part in an eight-session (twiceweekly for four weeks) group activity using standalone CIRCA,
and half will take part in an eight-session (twiceweekly for four weeks) group activity using web-based
CIRCA (CIRCA-WB; see Figure 3).
Technologies 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
6 of 11 
 
two parts: (i) an eight-session standalone CIRCA-based group activity, and (ii) an eight-session web-
based CIRCA-based group activity. 
2.2. Sample Size 
The primary outcome will be the impact of CIRCA on cognitive function. The Addenbrookes 
Cognitive Examination—third edition (ACE-III) will be used to assess cognition at three time points: 
baseline, at the end of the intervention, and three months post-intervention. To detect a standardised 
mean change or effect size of 0.25 on the ACE-III outcome, with 90% power and 5% (two-sided) 
significance level, and assuming 15% attrition, a minimum sample size of 180 people with dementia 
will need to be recruited.  
2.3. Ethics 
Health Research Authority (HRA) approval was received and a favourable opinion from the 
Sheffield Research Ethics Committee(REC), reference 16/YH/0354 
2.4. Participants 
A total of 180 older adults living with cognitive impairment will be recruited from Sheffcare Ltd. 
(a provider of residential care and day care), and Alzheimer’s Society Sheffield. Half of the 
participants will take part in an eight-session (twiceweekly for four weeks) group activity using 
standalone CIRCA, and half will take part in an eight-session (twiceweekly for four weeks) group 
activity using web-based CIRCA (CIRCA-WB; see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Recruitment of participants and intervention applied. Addenbrookes Cognitive 
Examination-III (ACE-III); The quality of life in Alzheimer’s disease (QOL-AD); EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D). 
2.5. Recruitment Strategy 
Recruitment will be supported by the Sheffield Alzheimer’s Society dementia support workers 
and day care managers at Sheffcare, who will assist in the identification of potential participants with 
N=180 participants recruited 
Pre-intervention assessment 
measures 
ACE III, QOL-AD, EQ-5D
N=90-8 group sessions 
standalone CIRCA 
twice a week for 4 
weeks
N=90-8 group 
sessions web-based 
CIRCA twice a week 
for 4 weeks
Post intervention assessment 
measures 
ACE III, QOL-AD, EQ-5D 
3-month follow-up assessment 
measures 
ACE III, QOL-AD, EQ-5D
Figure 3. Recruitment of participants and intervention applied. Addenbrookes Cognitive Examination-III
(ACE-III); The quality of life in Alzheimer’s disease (QOL-AD); EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D).
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
7 of 12
2.5. Recruitment Strategy
Recruitment will be supported by the Sheffield Alzheimer’s Society dementia support workers
and day care managers at Sheffcare, who will assist in the identification of potential participants with
their knowledge and expertise of their client’s respective organisations. Each organisation will be
provided with information sheets and study flyers to distribute to potential participants who meet the
inclusion criteria (see Table 1). A follow up telephone call to each organisation will follow 2–3 days later,
to identify people interested in participating. At this time, the details of those interested individuals
will be passed to the researcher for further contact.
Table 1. Inclusion/exclusion criteria people living with dementia.
Inclusion Criteria
Exclusion Criteria
Diagnosis of dementia according to the Diagnostic &
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders(DSM-5)
Requires consultee involvement
Ability to verbally communicate
Sensory impairment that will negatively impact
technology participation
Secondary long term conditions that could affect
group participation
Behavioural challenges that could negatively affect
group activities
3. Materials
3.1. Assessment Measures
To minimise burden on participants with dementia, only three measures will be used.
3.2. Cognition
The primary outcome measure is the Addenbrookes Cognitive Examination-III (ACE-III) [45].
The ACE-III covers five cognitive domains; attention, memory, fluency, language, and visuospatial—and
is scored out of 100. The ACE-III cognitive domains have been found to correlate significantly with
standardised neuropsychological tests illustrating high levels of sensitivity and validity. For comparison with
the CST study [12], the ACE-III scores will be converted to equivalent Mini Mental State Examination(MMSE)
scores, using the algorithm developed by Giebeland Challis (2017) [46].
3.3. Quality of Life
The quality of life in Alzheimer’s disease (QOL-AD) [47] scale is the secondary outcome
measure. The QOL-AD comprises thirteen items, covering physical health, energy, mood, living
situation, memory, family, marriage, friends, chores, fun, money, self, and life as a whole. QOL-AD
can be completed by people with a range of dementia severity.
QOL-AD was also used by
Spector et al. (2003) [11] in their CST study, where they found it has good internal consistency, validity,
and reliability [11]. QOL-AD is recommended by the European consensus on outcome measures for
psychosocial interventions in dementia [48].
3.4. Health Status
The EQ-5D [49], is an additional, brief, self-reported health and quality of life measure, which is
included as a further secondary measure. The EQ-5D has been widely used with a range of study
populations, and has been considered appropriate to utilise with people with dementia [50,51]
producing a simple value of health status.
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
8 of 12
4. Procedure
4.1. CIRCA Group Activity
One hundred and eighty participants with dementia will be recruited from Sheffcare Ltd.,
Sheffield, UK and the local Alzheimer’s Society in Sheffield, UK. Within Sheffcare, half of the
participants will be recruited from the day care program and half from residential care homes.
The Alzheimer’s Society participants will all be people living at home in the community. It is considered
that this will give a varied representation of the stage and experience of dementia. The goal is for all
participants to provide independent informed and maintained consent, with a full understanding of
the nature and purpose of the research project. Obtaining informed consent from people with dementia
is an essential part of the principle of autonomy [52] (p. 305), and will be taken in accordance with the
Mental Capacity Act of 2005. In order to ensure that the researcher effectively gains and maintains
consent from participants, the “process consent model” [53] will be closely adhered to. This will
include accessible consent forms and ongoing consent monitoring, as well as feedback and support.
Following the consent procedure, each participant will complete the three formal measures
(ACE-III, QoL-AD, and EQ-5D) in the week prior to the first group session. A caregiver can be present
if they choose during the baseline assessment. Participants will be recruited to participate in small
groups of between 4–6 individuals. Over the course of the project, between 30 and 45 groups will be
required. The group intervention will run twice a week for 60 min, over 4 weeks, and consist of the
group and one facilitator interacting with CIRCA. Figure 4 illustrates an example image of what a
group of 5 participants plus the facilitator may look like.
Technologies 2018, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
8 of 11 
 
4. Procedure 
4.1.CIRCA Group Activity 
One hundred and eighty participants with dementia will be recruited from Sheffcare Ltd, 
Sheffield UK and the local Alzheimer’s Society in Sheffield, UK. Within Sheffcare, half of the 
participants will be recruited from the day care program and half from residential care homes. The 
Alzheimer’s Society participants will all be people living at home in the community. It is considered 
that this will give a varied representation of the stage and experience of dementia. The goal is for all 
participants to provide independent informed and maintained consent, with a full understanding of 
the nature and purpose of the research project. Obtaining informed consent from people with 
dementia is an essential part of the principle of autonomy [52] (p. 305), and will be taken in 
accordance with the Mental Capacity Act of 2005. In order to ensure that the researcher effectively 
gains and maintains consent from participants, the “process consent model” [53] will be closely 
adhered to. This will include accessible consent forms and ongoing consent monitoring, as well as 
feedback and support. 
Following the consent procedure, each participant will complete the three formal measures 
(ACE-III, QoL-AD, and EQ-5D) in the week prior to the first group session. A caregiver can be present 
if they choose during the baseline assessment. Participants will be recruited to participate in small 
groups of between 4–6 individuals. Over the course of the project, between 30 and 45 groups will be 
required. The group intervention will run twice a week for 60 min, over 4 weeks, and consist of the 
group and one facilitator interacting with CIRCA. Figure 4 illustrates an example image of what a 
group of 5 participants plus the facilitator may look like. 
 
Figure 4. An example of group interactions involving CIRCA. 
Half of the groups will use the original standalone CIRCA and half will use CIRCA-WB. All of 
the group sessions will be video-recorded to examine the group dynamics and social interactions. All 
group members will be seated facing the 21.5″desktop touch-screen computer displaying CIRCA, 
and the facilitator will be seated to one side of the screen. All sessions will take place in quieter areas 
away from ongoing activities, to reduce noise and distraction for the group. At the beginning of each 
session, the facilitator will seek ongoing verbal consent and ensure each member of the group 
understands why they are there and what they are going to do. The session will begin with the 
facilitator offering the group the choice of “music, video, or photographs”, followed by the topic, 
which could be any of six choices: entertainment, childhood, sport, everyday life, recreation, people, 
and events. Following the eighth and final session, the formal measures (ACE-III, QoL-AD, and EQ-
5D) will be repeated. Three months after the end of the group sessions, the three measures (ACE-III, 
QoL-AD, EQ-5D) will be repeated. Two researchers will be involved in completing the formal 
assessments and conducting the sessions. Where Researcher (1) undertakes the assessments at 
baseline, post-CIRCA, and three months later, Researcher (2) will facilitate the eight group sessions, 
and vice versa. 
Figure 4. An example of group interactions involving CIRCA.
Half of the groups will use the original standalone CIRCA and half will use CIRCA-WB. All of the
group sessions will be video-recorded to examine the group dynamics and social interactions. All group
members will be seated facing the 21.5”desktop touch-screen computer displaying CIRCA, and the
facilitator will be seated to one side of the screen. All sessions will take place in quieter areas away
from ongoing activities, to reduce noise and distraction for the group. At the beginning of each session,
the facilitator will seek ongoing verbal consent and ensure each member of the group understands
why they are there and what they are going to do. The session will begin with the facilitator offering
the group the choice of “music, video, or photographs”, followed by the topic, which could be any of
six choices: entertainment, childhood, sport, everyday life, recreation, people, and events. Following
the eighth and final session, the formal measures (ACE-III, QoL-AD, and EQ-5D) will be repeated.
Three months after the end of the group sessions, the three measures (ACE-III, QoL-AD, EQ-5D) will
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
9 of 12
be repeated. Two researchers will be involved in completing the formal assessments and conducting
the sessions. Where Researcher (1) undertakes the assessments at baseline, post-CIRCA, and three
months later, Researcher (2) will facilitate the eight group sessions, and vice versa.
4.2. Analysis
Repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) will be used to examine the impact of CIRCA on
the primary outcome measure (ACE III) by comparing scores at baseline, post-intervention, and three
months later. Post-hoc analysis will be carried out to explore any significant relationships.
Repeated measures ANOVA will also be used to examine the impact of CIRCA on the two
secondary outcome measures (QoL-AD and EQ-5D). Post-hoc analysis will also be conducted
as appropriate.
To validate CIRCA-WB against the original CIRCA, a Bland–Altman analysis [54] will be used to
compare the cognitive (ACE-III) outcomes between the two versions.
5. Discussion
This protocol has been designed to address the identified need for new provisions for people
living with dementia utilising contemporary ICTs. CIRCA has been extensively evaluated within
smaller projects since its development, but not as a group activity at scale. The intention is to further
develop CIRCA and ultimately present it as a web-based application accessible through the IN-LIFE
cloud-based platform, as part of a large European multi-site trial. As part of IN-LIFE, our partners
in the Netherlands, Spain, and Sweden are also piloting culturally and linguistically-appropriate
versions of CIRCA. If successful, the trial results will contribute to existing research and practice
regarding the “best” ways to engage people with dementia using contemporary ICTs. Furthermore,
positive outcomes could also provide additional options for services to offer, once a diagnosis has
been received.
6. Trial Status
The trial is ongoing and will be completed in June 2018.
Acknowledgments: Independent Living Functions for the Elderly (IN-LIFE) is a Horizon 2020 funded project;
Grant Agreement No. 643442.
Author Contributions:
Sarah K. Smith and Arlene J. Astell conceived and designed the experiments;
Sarah K. Smith performed the experiments; Sarah K. Smith and Arlene J. Astell analyzed the data and wrote
the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Prince, M.; Albanese, M.; Guerchet, E.; Prina, M. World Alzheimer Report; Alzheimer’s Disease International:
London, UK, 2014.
2.
Alzheimer’s Association. 2017 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures; Alzheimer’s Association: Chicago, IL,
USA, 2017.
3.
Egan, K.; Macleod, M. Two decades testing interventions in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease:
Designing and interpreting studies for clinical trial success. Clin. Investig. 2014, 4, 693–704. [CrossRef]
4.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), 5th ed.;
American Psychiatric Association Publishing: Washington, DC, USA, 2013.
5.
Baddeley, A.; Logie, R.; Bressi, S.; della Sala, S.; Spinnler, H. Dementia and Working Memory. Q. J. Exp.
Psychol. Sect. A 1986, 38, 603–618. [CrossRef]
6.
Gold, C.A. Memory loss in Alzheimer’s disease:
Implications for development of therapeutics.
Expert Rev. Neurother. 2009, 8, 1879–1891. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
10 of 12
7.
Astell, A.J.; Ellis, M.P.; Bernardi, L.; Alm, N.; Dye, R.; Gowans, G.; Campbell, J. Using a touch screen computer
to support relationships between people with dementia and caregivers. Interact. Comput. 2010, 22, 267–275.
[CrossRef]
8.
Alm, N.; Dye, R.; Gowans, G.; Campbell, J.; Astell, A.; Ellis, M. A communication support system for older
people with dementia. Computer 2007, 40, 35–41. [CrossRef]
9.
Searson, R.; Hendry, A.M.; Ramachandran, R.; Burns, A.; Purandare, N. Activities enjoyed by patients with
dementia together with their spouses and psychological morbidity in carers. Aging Ment. Health 2008, 12,
276–282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Department of Health. Dementia: A State of the Nation Report on Dementia Care and Support in England;
Department of Health: London, UK, 2013.
11.
Spector, A.; Thorgrimsen, L.; Woods, B.; Royan, L.; Davies, S.; Butterworth, M.; Orrell, M. Efficacy of an
evidence-based cognitive stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia: Randomised controlled
trial. Br. J. Psychiatry 2003, 183, 248–254. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Spector, A.; Orrell, M.; Davies, S.; Woods, B. Can reality orientation be rehabilitated? Development
and piloting of an evidence-based programme of cognition-based therapies for people with dementia.
Neuropsychol. Rehabil. 2001, 11, 377–397. [CrossRef]
13.
Department of Health. The Dementia Challenge: Driving Improvements in Health; Department of Health:
London, UK, 2015.
14.
Burstein, A.A.; DaDalt, O.; Kramer, B.; D’Ambrosio, L.A.; Coughlin, J.F. Dementia caregivers and technology
acceptance: Interest outstrips awareness. Gerontechnology 2015, 14, 45–56. [CrossRef]
15.
Astell, A.J. Technology and personhood in dementia care. Qual. Ageing 2006, 7, 15–25. [CrossRef]
16.
Gilliard, J. Dementia care in England and the social model of disability: Lessons and issues. Dementia 2005, 4,
571–586. [CrossRef]
17.
Innes, A. Dementia Studies: A Social Science Perspective; SAGE Publications Ltd.: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA;
London, UK, 2009.
18.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Dementia: Supporting People with Dementia and Their
Carers in Health and Social Care; The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: London, UK, 2006.
19.
Kitwood, T. Dementia Reconsidered: The Person Comes First; Open University Press: Buckingham, UK, 1997.
20.
Banerjee, S. Living well with dementia—Development of the national dementia strategy for England. Int. J.
Geriatr. Psychiatry 2010, 25, 917–922. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Vernooij-dassen, M.J.; Moniz-Cook, E.D.; Woods, R.T.; De Lepeleire, J.; Leuschner, A.; Zanetti, O.; de Rotrou, J.;
Kenny, G.; Franco, M.; Peters, V.; et al. Factors affecting timely recognition and diagnosis of dementia—From
awareness to stigma 2005. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2005, 20, 377–386. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Wells, D.L.; Dawson, P. Description of retained abilities in older persons with dementia. Res. Nurs. Health
2000, 23, 158–166. [CrossRef]
23.
Brody, H.; Kleban, E.; Lawton, M.; Silverman, P. Excess Disabilities of Mentally Impaired Aged: Impact of
Individualized Treatment. Gerontologist 1971, 11, 124–133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Astell, A.J. Supporting a good life with dementia. In Ageing and the Digital Life Course; Prendergast, D.,
Garattini, C., Eds.; Berghan Books: Oxford, UK, 2015.
25.
Smith, S.K.; Mountain, G.A. New forms of information and communication technology (ICT) and the
potential to facilitate social and leisure activity for people living with dementia. Int. J. Comput. Healthc. 2012,
1, 332–345. [CrossRef]
26.
Meiland, F.; Innes, A.; Mountain, G.; Robinson, L.; van der Roest, H.; García-Casal, J.A.; Gove, D.;
Thyrian, J.R.; Evans, S.; Dröes, R.M.; et al.
Technologies to Support Community-Dwelling Persons
with Dementia:
A Position Paper on Issues Regarding Development, Usability, Effectiveness and
Cost-Effectiveness, Deployment, and Ethics. JMIR Rehabil. Assist. Technol. 2017, 4, e1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Nygard, L. The meaning of everyday technology as experienced by people with dementia who live alone.
Dementia 2008, 7, 481–502. [CrossRef]
28.
Topo, P. Technology Studies to Meet the Needs of People with Dementia and Their Caregivers: A Literature
Review. J. Appl. Gerontol. 2008, 28, 5–37. [CrossRef]
29.
Cutler, C.; Hicks, B.; Innes, A. Technology, fun and games. J. Dement. Care 2014, 22, 12–13.
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
11 of 12
30.
Leng, F.Y.; Yeo, D.; George, S.; Barr, C. Comparison of iPad applications with traditional activities using
person-centred care approach: Impact on well-being for persons with dementia. Dementia 2014, 13, 265–273.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Lazar, A.; Demiris, G.; Thompson, H.J. Involving family members in the implementation and evaluation of
technologies for dementia: A dyad case study. J. Gerontol. Nurs. 2015, 41, 21–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Smith, S.K. Exploring the Potential of Touch-Screen Computer Technology in Promoting Enjoyable Activities for
People Living with Dementia: A Visual Ethnography Sarah Kate Smith a Thesis Submitted to the University of
Sheffield in Partial Fulfilment of the Requiremen; University of Sheffield: Sheffield, UK, 2015.
33.
Robinson, L.; Brittain, K.; Lindsay, S.; Jackson, D.; Olivier, P. Keeping in Touch Everyday (KITE) project:
Developing assistive technologies with people with dementia and their carers to promote independence.
Int. Psychogeriatr. 2009, 21, 494–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Alm, N.; Astell, A.; Ellis, M.; Dye, R.; Gowans, G.; Campbell, J. A cognitive prosthesis and communication
support for people with dementia. Neuropsychol. Rehabil. 2004, 14, 117–134. [CrossRef]
35.
Astell, A. Facilitating communication in dementia with multimedia technology. Brain Lang. 2004, 91, 80–81.
[CrossRef]
36.
Astell, A.J.; Purves, B.; Phinney, A. “Story of My Life?” The Contents and Functions of Reminiscing.
Available online: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~danco/remchiwork/papers/astell-Stimulating-reminiscing-
BP-AJA.pdf (accessed on 7 December 2017).
37.
Fivush, E.; Haden, R.; Reese, C. Remembering, recounting and reminiscing:
The development of
autobiographical memory in social context. In Rembereing Our Past: Studies in Autobiographical Memory;
Rubin, D.C., Ed.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1995.
38.
Fels, D.I.; Astell, A.J. Storytelling as a model of conversation for people with dementia and caregivers. Am. J.
Alzheimers Dis. Other Dement. 2011, 26, 535–541. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Schweitzer, E.; Bruce, P. Remembering Yesterday, Caring Today: Reminiscence in Dementia Care—A Guide to Good
Practice UK; Jessica Kingsley: London, UK, 2008.
40.
Gowans, G.; Dye, R.; Alm, N.; Vaughan, P.; Astell, A.; Ellis, M. Designing the interface between dementia
patients, caregivers and computer-based intervention. Des. J. 2007, 10, 12–23. [CrossRef]
41.
Astell, P.; Alm, A.J.; Gowans, N.; Ellis, G.; Dye, M.; Campbell, R.; Vaughan, J. The CIRCA: A communication
prosthesis for dementia. Technol. Aging 2008, 105, 64–69.
42.
Astell, M.S.; Parsons, A. CIRCA: Technology to prompt reminiscing and conversation between residents in
care homes and care staff. Gerontechnology 2010, 9, 68–69. [CrossRef]
43.
Breuil, V.; de Rotrou, J.; Forette, F.; Tortrat, D.; Ganansia-Ganem, A.; Frambourt, A.; Moulin, F.; Boller, F.
Cognitive stimulation of patients with dementia: Preliminary results. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 1994, 9,
211–217. [CrossRef]
44.
Knapp, M.; Thorgrimsen, L.; Patel, A.; Spector, A.; Hallam, A.; Woods, B.; Orrell, M. Cognitive stimulation
therapy for people with dementia: Cost-effectiveness analysis. Br. J. Psychiatry 2006, 188, 574–580. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
45.
Hsieh, S.; Schubert, S.; Hoon, C.; Mioshi, E.; Hodges, J.R. Validation of the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive
Examination III in Frontotemporal Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 2013,
36, 3–4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Giebel, C.M.; Challis, D. Sensitivity of the Mini-Mental State Examination, Montreal Cognitive Assessment
and the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III to everyday activity impairments in dementia:
An exploratory study. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2017, 32, 1085–1093. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Logsdon, R.G.; Gibbons, L.E.; McCurry, S.M.; Teri, L. Assessing Quality of Life in Older Adults with
Cognitive Impairment. Psychosom. Med. 2002, 64, 510–519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Moniz-Cook, E.; Vernooij-Dassen, M.; Woods, R.; Verhey, F.; Chattat, R.; De Vugt, M.; Mountain, G.;
O’Connell, M.; Harrison, J.; Vasse, E.; et al. A European consensus on outcome measures for psychosocial
intervention research in dementia care. Aging Ment. Health 2008, 12, 14–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Euroqol Group. EuroQol—A new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of life. Health Policy
1990, 16, 199–208.
50.
Hounsome, N.; Orrell, M.; Edwards, R.T. EQ-5D as a quality of life measure in people with dementia and
their carers: Evidence and key issues. Value Health 2011, 14, 390–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Technologies 2018, 6, 33
12 of 12
51.
Wolfs, C.A.G.; Kessels, A.; Dirksen, C.D.; Severens, J.L.; Verhey, F.R.J. Integrated multidisciplinary diagnostic
approach for dementia care: Randomised controlled trial. Br. J. Psychiatry 2008, 192, 300–305. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
52.
Bjorneby, S. Ethical Considerations in the ENABLE Project. Dementia 2004, 3, 297–312. [CrossRef]
53.
Dewing, J. Participatory research A method for process consent with persons who have dementia. Dementia
2007, 6, 11–25. [CrossRef]
54.
Bland, J.M.; Altman, D.G. Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical
measurement. Lancet 1986, 1, 307–310. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
