 Open Forum Infectious Diseases
Vaccine Rejection and Hesitancy: A Review and Call to Action • OFID • 1
Open Forum Infectious Diseases®
Vaccine Rejection and Hesitancy: A Review and Call 
to Action
Tara C. Smith1
1College of Public Health, Kent State University, Ohio
Vaccine refusal has been a recurring story in the media for well over a decade. Although there is scant evidence that refusal is genu-
inely increasing in the population, multiple studies have demonstrated concerning patterns of decline of confidence in vaccines, the 
medical professionals who administer vaccines, and the scientists who study and develop vaccines. As specialists in microbiology, 
immunology, and infectious diseases, scientists are content experts but often lack the direct contact with individuals considering 
vaccination for themselves or their children that healthcare professionals have daily. This review examines the arguments and play-
ers in the US antivaccination scene, and it discusses ways that experts in infectious diseases can become more active in promoting 
vaccination to friends, family, and the public at large.
Keywords: antivaccination; internet; misinformation; vaccine denial; vaccine hesitancy. 
Since the late 1990s, concern has grown regarding a resurgence 
of the “anti-vaccine movement,” a loosely defined group of indi-
viduals who sow doubt about the effectiveness and safety of 
vaccines. Although the most current iteration of this scare can 
be traced to the publication of Andrew Wakefield’s (since-re-
tracted) paper linking the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vac-
cine to autism in 1998, anti-immunization sentiment in reality 
predates the process of vaccination, dating back to objections 
to the process of variolation in the early 18th century to reduce 
smallpox morbidity and mortality [1, 2].
Although vaccine rates have remained high in the United 
States as a whole [2, 3], national surveys can overlook pock-
ets of vaccine refusal that exist in many communities [4]. Areas 
with low vaccination rates have resulted in localized outbreaks 
of vaccine-preventable diseases, including measles and per-
tussis [5]. Measles cases in the United States reached a 20-year 
high in 2014 [6]; 90% of those were among individuals who had 
not been vaccinated or whose vaccination status was unknown 
[6, 7], suggesting the unvaccinated are drivers of outbreaks. 
Furthermore, vaccines are victims of their own success. Today, 
even many physicians have not seen a case of measles, diph-
theria, or other vaccine-preventable diseases; parents are a gen-
eration more removed from the scourges that polio and rubella 
represented. As such, antivaccine activists have been able to 
describe these diseases as harmless consequences of childhood, 
and vaccines are presented as the danger rather than the dis-
ease. Although public health and medical practitioners have 
been concerned about increasing antivaccine sentiment, pro-
grams that have been implemented to change minds and atti-
tudes have been largely ineffective [8, 9].
This review aims to (1) provide infectious disease experts 
with grounding in the current rhetoric of vaccine denial, (2) 
introduce the cast of characters who play a role in perpetuating 
vaccine misinformation and driving vaccine fear, and (3) dis-
cuss ways scientists can respond in various venues to demon-
strate support of vaccines and the very principles of vaccination.
THE ARGUMENTS
The arguments against vaccination have changed little over 
time [1, 2]. These are summarized in Table 1 and will be dis-
cussed here briefly. Most objections to vaccination are currently 
cached in language that makes them highly palatable to par-
ents and difficult for scientists to object to, using terms such 
as “informed consent,” “health freedom,” and “vaccine safety” 
[10]. A recent article in Natural Mother Magazine makes it 
explicit that antivaccine advocates should use language that 
frames vaccines as dangerous or unnatural, substituting “vac-
cine-free” or “intact immune system” for “unvaccinated”
, and 
“vaccine-associated diseases” instead of “vaccine-preventable 
diseases” [11], for instance.
Many of the arguments focus on areas of distrust in medical 
science. They advance the notion that vaccines are “unavoid-
ably” dangerous because of nebulous “toxins” introduced into 
the body via vaccination. Some of these chemicals are present 
in small amounts (aluminum as an adjuvant, for example); oth-
ers, such as “antifreeze,” are not and never have been present 
R E V I E W  A R T I C L E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial reproduction and distribution of the work, in any 
medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed in any way, and that the 
work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofx146
Received 6 June 2017; editorial decision 27 June 2017; accepted 11 July 2017.
Correspondence: T. C. Smith, PhD, College of Public Health, Kent State University, Kent, OH 
44242 (tsmit176@kent.edu).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2 • OFID • Smith
in vaccines [12]. Another commonly feared “toxin,” the ethyl 
mercury that is part of the preservative thimerosal, has been 
removed from most routine vaccinations since 2001 (and was 
never present in live vaccine formulations), despite no evidence 
of harm [13]. Still, many argue that children are purposely 
“poisoned” via vaccines because it benefits the bottom line of 
“Big Pharma” and the physicians pharmaceutical companies 
work with.
Other arguments stem from misinformation regarding the 
immune system and vaccine response, claiming vaccines “over-
whelm” the immune system, and that natural immunity is better 
than immunity induced by vaccines. The latter argument misses 
the point of vaccination entirely, and the former ignores the fact 
that the body is seeded by thousands of species of microbes and 
is exposed to countless antigens from birth onward; the rela-
tively few additional antigens introduced via vaccination are, 
relatively speaking, a drop in the bucket [14].
As a result of the spread and increased acceptance of these 
arguments, researchers have documented reduced trust in med-
ical practitioners by parents and an increase in concerns about 
vaccines. Although only 19% of parents noted “concerns about 
vaccines” in a 2000 survey [15], by 2009, 50% of parents had 
concerns [16] (reviewed in [17]).
THE CAST OF CHARACTERS
Although many parents may repeat uncritically the information 
they receive from vaccine denial groups, these claims rarely 
originate with the parent de novo. As noted above, iterations 
of the same arguments against and fears about vaccines have 
been used for well over a century, and they are merely recycled 
and updated to better reflect the modern science landscape and 
language. These updated vaccine myths are then circulated by 
a variety of influential individuals and organizations (Table 2) 
and are read and repeated by parents and other media consum-
ers. Collectively, this “influencer” group has undue sway over 
the media when it comes to vaccine information, becaue some 
media stories on vaccination strive for “balance” in reporting. 
Although this idea of “balance” is false [18]—far more physi-
cians and scientists support vaccines than not—the same anti-
vaccine individuals are interviewed for news pieces repeatedly, 
increasing their exposure and profile in the news media.
Many of these “influencers” rely on the internet to spread 
their message (together, the individuals and organizations 
included in Table 2 have more than 7 million Facebook fol-
lowers, although some overlap in followers may be expected). 
Recent work has demonstrated that approximately 80% of indi-
viduals use the internet yearly to search for health information 
[19], and relatively few discuss these findings with a healthcare 
professional. Kata [10] notes that “common assertions found 
online included: that vaccines cause illness; that they are inef-
fective; that they are part of a medical/pharmaceutical/govern-
ment conspiracy; and that mainstream medicine is incorrect 
or corrupt. Misinformation was widespread, in the form of 
inaccuracies or outright deception.” Although the effect of 
online misinformation on vaccination attitudes and decision 
making has not been carefully quantified, parents have often 
listed concerns similar to those on antivaccine websites when 
asked by researchers why they did not vaccinate [20, 21], sug-
gesting permeation into community groups from antivaccine 
books and internet sites or similar sources of misinformation. 
Furthermore, even short exposure to vaccine-critical internet 
sites has been shown to increase perceived risks of vaccinating 
and minimize the risks of vaccine-preventable diseases [22].
Although many of the individuals who spread vaccine misin-
formation are ordinary citizens, the sources of most antivaccine 
tropes are individuals or groups who benefit from the spread of 
such inaccuracies. Many of the primary antivaccine “thought 
leaders” have written books or produced movies that charac-
terize vaccines as dangerous and unsafe (see Supplemental 
Information for examples of antivaccine books and sites). 
Others run groups dependent on donations from individuals 
who support their ideas. Still others rely on clicks, advertis-
ing revenue, and product sales from online sites where they 
share articles on the “dangers” of vaccines. A recent analysis 
Table 1. The Arguments
Vaccines are “toxic” and contain antifreeze, mercury, ether, aluminum, human aborted fetal tissue, antibiotics, and other dangerous chemicals that can lead to 
autism and an assortment of chronic health conditions. Slogan: “Green our Vaccines”
.
Vaccines are a tool of “Big Pharma;” individuals who promote them are merely profiting off of harm to children and/or paid off by pharmaceutical companies 
(“Pharma shills”).
A child’s immune system is too immature to handle vaccines; they are given “too many, too soon” and the immune system becomes “overwhelmed,
” leading 
to autism and an assortment of chronic health conditions.
“Natural immunity is better;” most vaccine-preventable diseases are harmless to most children, and natural exposure provides more long-lasting immunity. eg, 
“I had the chickenpox as a kid and I was just fine.
” Some individuals may also have the mistaken belief that all “natural” infections confer life-long immunity, 
whereas all vaccine-derived immunity is short-lived.
Vaccines have never been tested in a true “vaccinated versus unvaccinated” study; the vaccines in the current schedule have never been tested collectively.
Diseases declined on their own due to improved hygiene and sanitation; “vaccines didn’t save us.
”
Vaccines “shed” (can be transmitted by vaccinated individuals to others); therefore, cases of vaccine-preventable diseases in the population are driven by the 
vaccinated, not the unvaccinated.
Adapted from [2, 10, 23]; see Supplemental Information for a list of comprehensive rebuttals.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Vaccine Rejection and Hesitancy: A Review and Call to Action • OFID • 3
of antivaccination websites demonstrated that every website 
examined except 1 “contained arguments against vaccination 
that could be considered disingenuous” [23], supporting their 
role in the dissemination of misinformation about vaccines. 
Furthermore, “mommy blogs” in particular have been analyzed 
and found to tell persuasive stories, suggesting that vaccines 
pose a threat to children, which may be circulated to large num-
bers of readers [24].
Table 2. Thought Influencers in the Antivaccine Movement
Category
Name
Description
The Doctors
Andrew Wakefield
Former British physician; lead author of 1998 study in The Lancet suggesting MMR vaccination led to autism [1], since 
retracted. Discredited after an investigation into the study demonstrated undisclosed conflicts of interest and unethical 
conduct; subsequently, Wakefield lost his medical license. He currently lives in United States and remains active pro-
moting antivaccine ideas, including the 2016 documentary VAXXED (see Supplemental Information for books, movies, 
and web sites from antivaccine thought influencers). Active on social media via the VAXXED page (~67 
000 followers on 
Facebook).
Robert Sears
California physician, author of “The Vaccine Book”
. Formulated an “alternative” vaccine schedule that delays many vaccines 
from the CDC-recommended schedule; this schedule has been widely promoted by other antivaccine activists and is 
often cited by parents, and reinforces the idea that children receive “too many, too soon” (see Table 1). Active on social 
media (~65 
000 followers on Facebook).
Sherri Tenpenny
Private practice physician in Ohio, author of “Vaccines: The Risks, the Benefits, the Choices, a Resource Guide for 
Parents” and “Saying No to Vaccines: A Resource Guide for All Ages”
. Co-founder of the International Medical Council on 
Vaccination (http://www.vaccinationcouncil.org/), whose purpose is to “counter the messages asserted by pharmaceu-
tical companies, the government and medical agencies that vaccines are safe, effective and harmless.
” Active on social 
media (~215 
000 followers on Facebook).
Toni Bark
Private practice physician at “The Center for Disease Prevention and Reversal” in Illinois; prior vice-president of the 
American Institute of Homeopathy. Featured in Oprah.com and the recent web series “The Truth about Vaccines.
” Active 
on social media (~6000 followers on Facebook).
Susanne Humphries Private practice physician in Maine and Virginia, author of “Dissolving Illusions: Disease, Vaccines and the Forgotten 
History”
. Active on social media (~31 
000 followers on Facebook).
Larry Palevsky
Private practice and holistic/integrative physician in New York. Featured in the web series “The Truth about Vaccines” and 
the anti-HPV vaccine documentary “The Greater Good”
. Active on social media (~13 
000 followers on Facebook).
Joseph Mercola
Former private practice physician in Illinois, runs the website and business Mercola.com. Author of “The Great Bird 
Flu Hoax: The Truth They Don’t Want You to Know About the ‘Next Big Pandemic’”
. Founder of “Health Liberty” (“
A 
nonprofit coalition formed by Mercola.com, National Vaccine Information Center, Fluoride Action Network, Institute 
for Responsible Technology, Organic Consumers Association, and Consumers for Dental Choice, to help protect every 
American’s freedom to make voluntary health choices”). Active on social media (~1 
600 
000 followers on Facebook).
The Celebrity
Jenny McCarthy
Actress and comedian, “Mommy warrior,
” Generation Rescue spokesperson, parent of autistic child. Author of “Louder 
Than Words: A Mother’s Journey in Healing Autism”; “Mother Warriors: A Nation of Parents Healing Autism Against 
All Odds”; and “Healing and Preventing Autism: A Complete Guide”
. Active on social media (~1 
100 
000 followers on 
Facebook).
The Organizers J. B. Handley
Activist and parent of autistic child, cofounder of Generation Rescue and cofounder and contributor to the Age of Autism 
blog. Both organizations suggest that vaccines are a major factor driving the development of autism. Active on social 
media (~25 
000 followers on Facebook).
Robert F
. Kennedy, 
Jr.
Environmental lawyer, author of “Thimerosal: Let the Science Speak” and controversial 2005 article, “Deadly Immunity,
” 
published in Rolling Stone and Salon but later retracted. Reported in 2017 to have been appointed to lead a vaccine 
safety commission for President Trump. Active on social media (~20 
000 followers on Facebook).
Barbara Loe Fisher
Activist and founder of the National Vaccine Information Center (NVIC), originally Dissatisfied Parents Together (DPT). 
Fisher began speaking out against vaccines after her son suffered what she believes is a vaccine injury. Coauthor of 
“
A Shot in the Dark” and “Vaccines, Autism & Chronic Inflammation: The New Epidemic”
. Via the NVIC, Fisher is active 
in tracking and responding to local and state vaccine-related legislation. Active on social media via the NVIC (~193 
000 
followers on Facebook).
The “Mommy 
Bloggers”
Sarah Pope
Nutrition and parenting blogger who has dubbed herself the “Healthy Home Economist.
” Appeared on the “Late Show 
with Jon Stewart” to defend her antivaccine stance. Active on social media (~155 
000 followers on Facebook).
Megan Heimer
Mother of 5, naturopath, and “wellness” blogger at “Living Whole.
” Heimer posts self-declared “common sense” informa-
tion about healthy living, which includes avoiding vaccines. Active on social media (~26 
000 followers on Facebook).
Kate Tietje
Mother of 5, cooking and parenting blogger at “Modern Alternative Mama;” sells “health and wellness” products at 
Earthley.com. Active on social media (~70 
000 followers on Facebook).
The 
Opportunists
Vani Hari
The “Food Babe;” influential “food safety” advocate who and social media star who has argued against vaccines. Hari 
recently had her first child and joined the ranks of the “mommy bloggers,
” recommending against vaccines. Instead of 
accepting the influenza vaccine during pregnancy, she recommended “wash hands often, reduce stress, exercise, drink 
lots of filtered water, eat fermented foods, and avoid industrial toxins”
. Active on social media (~1 
200 
000 followers on 
Facebook).
Mike Adams
Owner/operator of “Natural News” website; has dubbed himself “The Health Ranger.
” Adams is a key purveyor of conspir-
acy theories, suggesting the government is lying to the public about vaccines, Ebola, influenza, and much more, simulta-
neously denying Zika exists and profiting from Zika mosquito repellent (https://www.healthrangerstore.com/ 
collections/Health-Rangers-Bugs-Away-Spray-defense-against-the-Zika-Mosquitos). Active on social media (~2 
200 
000 
followers on Facebook).
Abbreviations: CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; DPT
, dissatisfied parents together; HPV, human papillomavirus; MMR vaccine, measles, mumps, and rubella. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
 4 • OFID • Smith
Although many of the antivaccine arguments that parents 
refer to may ultimately stem from or be promoted by such 
celebrities and/or websites, parents may not always believe or 
know their information has been filtered through these individ-
uals, nor that they have been influenced by such. In addition, an 
individual’s personal history of vaccination or medical care for 
themselves or their children may also color their view of vac-
cinations, independent of or reinforced by exposure to media 
on vaccines. There is wide heterogeneity in individuals who 
doubt vaccines [17, 25], so although understanding individu-
als and groups involved in antivaccine messaging is important, 
scientists should not assume that all individuals who express 
skepticism about vaccines share the same background, media 
consumption, or views.
It should also not be assumed that individuals who question 
vaccines have merely absorbed antivaccine messages (including 
those from the above sites and individuals) in a vacuum. Both 
vaccine hesitancy and vaccine promotion are influenced by the 
social and cultural contexts in which messages are received 
[26], as discussed below.
THE SPECTRUM OF VACCINE SKEPTICISM
There are many different subpopulations of individuals with 
divergent reasons for not vaccinating or delaying vaccines [27]. 
This may be due to a variety of factors, including (1) compla-
cency (low-risk perceptions of vaccine-preventable diseases), 
(2) lack of convenient access to vaccine services, (3) or lack of 
confidence in vaccines due to concerns about safety and other 
vaccine issues [25, 28].
Although many may characterize all individuals who eschew 
vaccines as “anti-vaccine” or “vaccine deniers,” in reality there is 
a broad spectrum of individuals who choose not to have them-
selves or their children vaccinated. These range from individ-
uals who are solidly antivaccine, frequently termed “vaccine 
rejectors” (VRj), to those who may accept or even advocate 
for most vaccines but have concerns over 1 or more vac-
cines. Hagood and Mintzer Herlihy [29] suggest a 3-category 
model, characterizing individuals as VRj, vaccine-resistant 
 
(VR), or vaccine-hesitant (VH). Vaccine rejectors are those 
who are “unyieldingly entrenched in their refusal to consider 
vaccine information,” prone to conspiracy theory thinking, and 
may eschew traditional medical providers altogether in favor 
of “complementary” or “alternative” medical practices and, as 
such, very unlikely to change their opinions on vaccines. The 
VR are those who may currently reject vaccination but are still 
willing to consider information, and they have a lower inci-
dence of belief in conspiracy theories than VRj individuals. The 
VH individuals tend to have anxiety about vaccinations but are 
not committed to vaccine refusal [29]. These groups correspond 
roughly to the “refusers,” “late/selective vaccinators,” and “the 
hesitant” identified in [30]. Interventions targeted at changing 
minds or attitudes to increase vaccine acceptance need to take 
into consideration this spectrum of beliefs regarding vaccines 
to be properly tailored to the targeted audience [26, 31], rather 
than assuming that all individuals with vaccine concerns have a 
single cohesive belief system.
As the above demonstrates, there is no “one size fits all” model 
for responding to vaccine hesitancy or denial. In the experi-
ence of the author, most of the ideas scientists commonly have 
about vaccine rejection seem to fit in more with the VRj group. 
Although this group may be the most vocal about their vaccine 
concerns, it is likely that they are in the minority in the spec-
trum of individuals adverse to vaccines; Leask et al [30] suggest 
that less than 2% of all parents are outright refusers. However, 
these active rejectors may cause damage in the general public by 
amplifying myths and misinformation about vaccination and 
shift the opinions of others away from vaccine acceptance [32].
WHAT 
TO DO AND HOW 
TO RESPOND AS AN EXPERT 
LACKING PATIENT CONTACT
Most interventions in recent years have focused on the VH. 
Vaccine hesitancy has been defined as “delay in acceptance or 
refusal of vaccines despite availability of vaccination services” 
[25], to separate them from individuals or children who may 
be delayed on vaccines through lack of services or access rather 
than a philosophical belief. This group is generally thought to be 
the most amenable to interventions, because they typically are 
not solidly antivaccine and may be considered “fence-sitters” on 
many vaccine issues, who have not strongly committed to either 
a “pro” or “anti” vaccine stance. Some concerns these parents 
express over vaccines are seemingly minor, including pain dur-
ing injections and fevers after vaccination [33], but they may also 
have concerns about autism and the MMR vaccine, Guillain-
Barré syndrome and the influenza vaccine, or others [33].
Most articles examining interventions for the VH were writ-
ten with healthcare providers as primary targets [30, 34, 35]. 
Although microbiologists and infectious disease experts may 
not always have direct patient care responsibilities, they likely 
have extensive knowledge of the concepts underlying vaccina-
tion and of the diseases that vaccines prevent. However, scien-
tists do not always know the rhetorical tricks and tactics [10] 
that vaccine rejectors and their leaders (see Table 2) frequently 
use; engaging them can be a mistake without understanding 
not only the science, but also the objections and references that 
vaccine rejectors may use. Understanding the arguments and 
concerns that individuals have about vaccines, and from where 
they originate, can allow for better communication regarding 
vaccines on the part of scientists.
Furthermore, scientists should realize that engaging directly 
with active rejectors will be very unlikely to change minds, 
although less is known about the effectiveness of this tactic on 
“lurkers” or other readers or listeners who may be following 
along with a conversation but not participating. Prior research 
has documented that exposure to social information online can 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Vaccine Rejection and Hesitancy: A Review and Call to Action • OFID • 5
impact attitudes and behavior [36], although this has not been 
tested explicitly with readers of vaccine information, either 
provaccine or antivaccine.
As noted previously, one impulse many scientists may have 
is to simply educate the public. Known as the “information 
deficit model” of science communication, this model assumes 
that the public is merely uneducated or undereducated about 
vaccines, and that providing additional factual information 
will fill this knowledge gap and lead people toward vaccinating 
[28]. Unfortunately, information alone has not been shown to 
increase vaccine confidence among hesitant parents [9, 37].
This is not to suggest that providing knowledge is unimpor-
tant. Filling in data gaps and acting as a reliable, factual source 
of information is an essential service to those genuinely seek-
ing science-based evidence about vaccination. This information 
can be communicated in person with friends or family mem-
bers (particularly those with shared values) [38, 39], submitted 
to local newspapers as opinion pieces or letters to editors [40], 
or provided online through blog posts, social media updates, or 
other sites on the internet, where it may be inadvertently “stum-
bled upon” by searches or references from other links. Individuals 
should be aware that such educational efforts are likely to back-
fire for individuals deeply entrenched in vaccine rejection [8] but 
have been cited in “conversion” stories of individuals who moved 
across the spectrum from vaccine doubter to advocate [41].
Furthermore, the frequent use of conspiracy theory think-
ing among antivaccine thought leaders engenders a lack of 
trust towards the medical and scientific communities. As such, 
providing more education to some on the spectrum of vaccine 
refusal/hesitancy will be ineffective [23], because it is unlikely 
to be sufficient to simply reassure many VH parents that expert 
groups have confirmed that vaccines are safe and effective when 
these parents already distrust the “experts” [23].
Still, biomedical scientists who are vocal in their support 
for vaccines can serve to cement the idea that vaccination is 
“normal” and expected. Kestenbaum and Feemster [34] note 
that a “…parent’s motivation to vaccinate their children is also 
influenced by social norms, which are the rules that a group uses 
for appropriate and inappropriate values, beliefs, attitudes, and 
behaviors”
. A recent Pew survey found that 82% of US adults 
agree that “healthy children should be required to be vaccinated 
to attend school because of potential risk to others,” and 88% 
agree that vaccine benefits outweigh the risks [42]. Although 
vaccine hesitancy does exist, vaccination on schedule is still the 
norm for the great majority of families. As a professional who 
accepts vaccines as a part of life for yourself and your children, 
conveying that information to your networks can help to subtly 
shift opinion on what Shelby and Ernst [43] call “the greatest 
story never told: the uneventful vaccination” (see Figure 1). 
Although stories of uncomplicated vaccine administration are 
less likely to “go viral” than stories of injured children [43, 44], 
these stories can further ingrain the idea that vaccines are being 
given every day without incident.
For those who want to get more deeply involved, Shelby and 
Ernst [43] put forward the idea of a “vaccine ambassador” pro-
gram at physician offices. The authors noted that “There is a 
growing passion among parents who vaccinate to begin speaking 
up about the importance of immunization, and yet we continue 
to hear from these parents that they don’t know how to help.” 
They suggest that physicians put a call out to their patients, and 
willing parents could provide contact information that can be 
given to VH parents. The “ambassadors” would receive training 
and share the reasons why they decided to vaccinate their own 
children [43]. Particularly if this is done amongst individuals 
with shared values [26], such a program may be beneficial.
Ambassadors may benefit from using the C.A.S.E. method 
outlined by Singer [45], which includes steps to corroborate 
parents’ fears, offer information about the educator and their 
personal experience with vaccines, provide information about 
the science regarding vaccines, and explain recommendations, 
Figure 1. Examples of photos posted to the author’s social media accounts. (A) The author (middle) and her older children after receipt of seasonal influenza vaccines. (B) 
The author’s youngest child at Walt Disney World, wearing a shirt saying “Fully Vaccinated. You’re Welcome.” Both techniques can serve as conversation-starters around 
vaccination.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
 6 • OFID • Smith
all within a context of empathy and an established relationship 
[29, 45]. A recent publication by Schoeppe et al [46] involved 
parents as immunization advocates to address vaccine hesitancy 
in Washington state, whose school entry exemption rate was 3 
times the national average. Although lacking a control group, 
they found that vaccine hesitancy was reduced in their popula-
tion, from 23% to 14%, and the number of parents who agreed 
vaccination is a good idea rose. Scientists may adapt recom-
mendations from papers targeting healthcare professionals to 
work with such groups [30, 35].
Although many scientists may hesitate to “get political,” vac-
cine policy is set at the state level; as such, privately contacting 
state legislators and advocating for the strengthening of vac-
cine exemption policies is another way to protect herd immu-
nity, because states with stricter exemption criteria have higher 
rates of vaccination compliance [47]. California recently passed 
SB277, which eliminated religious and philosophical exemption 
for school admittance. In their first year of data analysis, they 
found that vaccination rates rose in students attending kinder-
garten 2.8 percentage points [48]. Similarly in Michigan, state 
officials issued a regulation requiring consultation with local 
health departments before obtaining a vaccine waiver, result-
ing in 35% fewer vaccine exemptions in the first year [49]. In 
each case, an outbreak may have helped both to sway legisla-
tors and mobilize parents (the Disneyland measles outbreak in 
California, and a large outbreak of pertussis associated with a 
Traverse City charter school in Michigan), but one need not 
wait for an emergency situation to push state legislators to 
strengthen vaccine regulations. This is one way scientists can 
work “behind the scenes,” to advocate for and promote such 
legislation.
Academics can also examine vaccine policies at their own 
institutions. My current institution requires only the MMR 
for admission, whereas many universities have more rigorous 
vaccine requirements. The University of California system will 
expand their vaccine requirements as of fall 2017, requiring 
students be vaccinated for hepatitis B, measles, mumps and 
rubella, chicken pox, meningococcus, and tetanus, diphtheria 
and whooping cough before registration. Advocating for vac-
cine protection for college students is another way scientists can 
use their expertise to increase vaccination rates and demon-
strate the importance of immunization.
CONCLUSIONS
Finally, although there may be no single leader of an antivac-
cine “movement,” many of those listed in Table 2 are highly 
media-savvy and unafraid to push their opinions that vaccines 
are dangerous, full stop. Scientists, by our training and often by 
our nature, are often loathe to think of issues without bringing 
in shades of gray, whereas vaccine thought leaders frequently 
express strict black-and-white thinking. Advocating for vac-
cines is not always easy; it may necessitate leaving one’s comfort 
zone, and open one up as a target of harassment [50]. However, 
with so much at stake, shouldn’t subject experts be on the fore-
front of this fight?
Supplementary Data 
Supplementary materials are available at Open Forum Infectious Diseases 
online. Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, 
the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of 
the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corre-
sponding author.
Acknowledgments
Potential conflicts of interest. The author: No reported conflicts of interest.
The author has submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the con-
tent of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Poland GA, Jacobson RM. The age-old struggle against the antivaccinationists. N 
Engl J Med 2011; 364:97–9.
2. Hausman BL, Ghebremichael M, Hayek P, Mack E. ‘Poisonous, filthy, loathsome, 
damnable stuff’: the rhetorical ecology of vaccination concern. Yale J Biol Med 
2014; 87:403–16.
3. Omer SB, Richards JL, Ward M, Bednarczyk RA. Vaccination policies and rates of 
exemption from immunization, 2005–2011. N Engl J Med 2012; 367:1170–1.
4. Omer SB, Salmon DA, Orenstein WA, et al. Vaccine refusal, mandatory immu-
nization, and the risks of vaccine-preventable diseases. N Engl J Med 2009; 
360:1981–8.
5. Phadke VK, Bednarczyk RA, Salmon DA, Omer SB. Association between vaccine 
refusal and vaccine-preventable diseases in the united states: a review of measles 
and pertussis. JAMA 2016; 315:1149–58.
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Measles cases in the United States 
reach 20-year high. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/
p0529-measles.html. Accessed August 2, 2017.
7. Mitra T, Counts S, Pennebaker JW
. Understanding anti-vaccination attitudes 
in social media. Proceedings of the Tenth International Association for the 
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Conference on Web and Social 
Media (ICWSM 2016) (pp. 269–278). 2016. Available at: https://www.aaai.org/ocs/
index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM16/paper/view/13073/12747. Accessed August 2, 2017.
8. Nyhan B, Reifler J, Richey S, Freed GL. Effective messages in vaccine promotion: 
a randomized trial. Pediatrics 2014; 133:e835–42.
9. Jarrett C, Wilson R, O’Leary M, et al. Strategies for addressing vaccine hesitancy - a 
 
systematic review. Vaccine 2015; 33:4180–90.
10. Kata A. Anti-vaccine activists, Web 2.0, and the postmodern paradigm–an over-
view of tactics and tropes used online by the anti-vaccination movement. Vaccine 
2012; 30:3778–89.
11. Daly G. Vacctivism terminology: how to empower instead of cower. Available at: 
https://issuu.com/naturalmothermagazine/docs/febraury_2017_final. Accessed 
August 2, 2017.
12. Offit PA, Jew RK. Addressing parents’ concerns: do vaccines contain harmful pre-
servatives, adjuvants, additives, or residuals? Pediatrics 2003; 112:1394–7.
13. Offit PA. Thimerosal and vaccines–a cautionary tale. N Engl J Med 2007; 
357:1278–9.
14. Offit PA, Quarles J, Gerber MA, et al. Addressing parents’ concerns: do multiple vac-
cines overwhelm or weaken the infant’s immune system? Pediatrics 2002; 109:124–9.
15. Gellin BG, Maibach EW, Marcuse EK. Do parents understand immunizations? 
A national telephone survey. Pediatrics 2000; 106:1097–102.
16. Freed GL, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, et al. Parental vaccine safety concerns in 2009. 
Pediatrics 2010; 125:654–9.
17. Gowda C, Dempsey AF. The rise (and fall?) of parental vaccine hesitancy. Hum 
Vaccin Immunother 2013; 9:1755–62.
18. Voices for Vaccines. Avoiding False Balance: Vaccines in the Media Available 
at: 
https://www.voicesforvaccines.org/content/uploads/2015/02/False-Balance-
Toolkit-VFV.pdf. Accessed August 2, 2017.
19. Pew Research Center. Health Online 2013. Available at: http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2013/Health-online.aspx. Accessed August 2, 2017.
20. Salmon DA, Moulton LH, Omer SB, et al. Factors associated with refusal of child-
hood vaccines among parents of school-aged children: a case-control study. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2005; 159:470–6.
21. Salmon DA, Sotir MJ, Pan WK, et al. Parental vaccine refusal in Wisconsin: a 
case-control study. WMJ 2009; 108:17–23.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Vaccine Rejection and Hesitancy: A Review and Call to Action • OFID • 7
22. Betsch C, Renkewitz F, Betsch T, Ulshöfer C. The influence of vaccine-critical 
websites on perceiving vaccination risks. J Health Psychol 2010; 15:446–55.
23. Kata A. A postmodern Pandora’s box: anti-vaccination misinformation on the 
Internet. Vaccine 2010; 28:1709–16.
24. Tangherlini TR, Roychowdhury V, Glenn B, et al. “Mommy blogs” and the vacci-
nation exemption narrative: results from a machine-learning approach for story 
aggregation on parenting social media sites. JMIR Public Health Surveill 2016; 
2:e166.
25. MacDonald NE. Vaccine hesitancy: definition, scope and determinants. Vaccine 
2015; 33:4161–4.
26. Attwell K, Freeman M. I immunise: an evaluation of a values-based campaign to 
change attitudes and beliefs. Vaccine 2015; 33:6235–40.
27. Dubé È, MacDonald NE. Managing the risks of vaccine hesitancy and refusals. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:518–9.
28. Rossen I, Hurlstone MJ, Lawrence C. Going with the grain of cognition: apply-
ing insights from psychology to build support for childhood vaccination. Front 
Psychol 2016; 7:1483.
29. Hagood EA, Mintzer Herlihy S. Addressing heterogeneous parental concerns 
about vaccination with a multiple-source model: a parent and educator perspec-
tive. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2013; 9:1790–4.
30. Leask J, Kinnersley P, Jackson C, et al. Communicating with parents about vacci-
nation: a framework for health professionals. BMC Pediatr 2012; 12:154.
31. Butler R, MacDonald NE. Diagnosing the determinants of vaccine hesitancy in 
specific subgroups: The Guide to Tailoring Immunization Programmes (TIP). 
Vaccine 2015; 33:4176–9.
32. Schmid P, MacDonald NE, Habersaat K, Butler R. Commentary to: How 
to respond to vocal vaccine deniers in public. Vaccine 2016: doi: 10.1016/j.
vaccine.2016.09.065.
33. Kennedy A, Basket M, Sheedy K. Vaccine attitudes, concerns, and information 
sources reported by parents of young children: results from the 2009 HealthStyles 
survey. Pediatrics 2011;127 (Suppl 1):S92–9.
34. Kestenbaum LA, Feemster KA. Identifying and addressing vaccine hesitancy. 
Pediatr Ann 2015; 44:e71–5.
35. Loehr J, Savoy M. Strategies for addressing and overcoming vaccine hesitancy. 
Am Fam Physician 2016; 94:94–6.
36. Hsueh M, Yogeeswaran K, Malinen S. “Leave Your Comment Below”: can biased 
online comments influence our own prejudicial attitudes and behaviors? Hum 
Commun Res 2015; 41:557–76.
37. Sadaf A, Richards JL, Glanz J, et al. A systematic review of interventions for reduc-
ing parental vaccine refusal and vaccine hesitancy. Vaccine 2013; 31:4293–304.
38. Witteman HO. Addressing vaccine hesitancy with values. Pediatrics 2015; 136:215–7.
39. McRoberts C. The Most Important Playground Conversation: How to Persuade a 
Friend to Vaccinate. Available at: https://violentmetaphors.com/2013/12/20/the-
most-important-playground-conversation-how-to-persuade-a-friend-to-vacci-
nate/. Accessed August 2, 2017.
40. Shelby A. Voices for Vaccines: Writing an Op-Ed for Publication. Available at: 
https://www.voicesforvaccines.org/content/uploads/2013/01/OpEdtoolkit.pdf. 
Accessed August 2, 2017.
41. Krolak B. I Used to Be Anti-Vaccine. Available at: https://www.voicesforvaccines.
org/1769-2/. Accessed August 2, 2017.
42. Funk C, Kennedy B, Hefferon M. Vast majority of Americans say benefits of 
childhood vaccines outweigh risks: Pew Research Center 2017. Available at: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/02/vast-majority-of-americans-say-bene-
fits-of-childhood-vaccines-outweigh-risks/. Accessed August 2, 2017.
43. Shelby A, Ernst K. Story and science: how providers and parents can utilize story-
telling to combat anti-vaccine misinformation. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2013; 
9:1795–801.
44. McGrath K. Vaccine Injury Stories: the Sacred Cows of the Internet? Available 
at: https://www.voicesforvaccines.org/vaccine-injury-stories-the-sacred-cows-of-
the-internet/. Accessed August 2, 2017.
45. Singer A. Communicating Vaccine Safety Information to Parents: A New 
Framework. Available at: https://cdc.confex.com/cdc/nic2010/webprogram/
Paper22643.html. Accessed August 2, 2017.
46. Schoeppe J, Cheadle A, Melton M, et al. The immunity community. Health 
Promot Pract 2017: doi: 10.1177/1524839917697303.
47. Blank NR, Caplan AL, Constable C. Exempting schoolchildren from immuniza-
tions: states with few barriers had highest rates of nonmedical exemptions. Health 
Aff 2013; 32:1282–90.
48. 2016–2017 Kindergarten Immunization Assessment – Executive Summary 
California Department of Public Health, Immunization Branch, 2017. Available 
at: 
https://archive.cdph.ca.gov/programs/immunize/Documents/2016-17_CA_
KindergartenSummaryReport.pdf.
49. Gugliotta G. Refined Vaccine Waivers Improve Vaccination Rate in Michigan, 
2017. Available at: http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/878615. Accessed 
August 2, 2017.
50. Hughes V. Mercury rising. Nat Med 2007; 13:896–7.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/4/3/ofx146/3978712 by guest on 02 June 2019
