  
 
 
 
 
 
Smolen, J. S., Aletaha, D., and McInnes, I. B. (2016) Rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet, 
388(10055), pp. 2023-2038. 
 
 
 
 
There may be differences between this version and the published version. You are 
advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it. 
 
 
 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/131249/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposited on: 22 March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk 
                              Elsevier Editorial System(tm) for The Lancet 
                                  Manuscript Draft 
 
 
Manuscript Number:  
 
Title: Rheumatoid Arthritis  
 
Article Type: Invited Seminar 
 
Corresponding Author: Prof. Josef S. Smolen,  
 
Corresponding Author's Institution: Vienna General Hospital 
 
First Author: Josef S. Smolen 
 
Order of Authors: Josef S. Smolen; Daniel Aletaha 
 
Abstract: Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory joint disease, 
leading to cartilage and bone damage as well as disability. Early 
diagnosis is key to optimal therapeutic success with well characterized 
risk factors for bad outcome, such as high disease activity, presence of 
autoantibodies and early damage. Treatment algorithms involve measuring 
disease activity with composite indices, applying a treatment-to-target 
strategy, and conventional as well as novel biologic and non-biologic 
disease modifying antirheumatic drugs. Once the treatment target of 
stringent remission or at least low disease activity is maintained, dose 
reduction or interval increases should be attempted. While today 
prospects are good for the majority of patients, many do not respond to 
current therapies and, therefore, new therapies are needed and partly on 
the horizon.  In this Seminar we elude to current insights into genetics 
and etiology, pathophysiology, epidemiology, assessment, therapeutic 
agents and strategies as well as unmet needs of rheumatoid arthritis. 
 
 
 
 
 Seminar: Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Josef S. Smolen,1,2 Daniel Aletaha,1 Iain McInnes3 
1Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine 3, Medical University of Vienna, 22nd Department of 
Medicine, Hietzing Hospital Vienna, Austria, and 3Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK 
 
 
Address for Correspondence: 
Josef Smolen, MD, Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine 3, Medical University of Vienna, 
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria 
 
 
 
 
 
            
Tel: +43-1-40400-43000; Fax: +43-1-40400-43310; e-mail: smolen@wienkav.at 
 
Key words: rheumatoid arthritis, pathogenesis, therapy, treat to target, disease activity 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors’ contributions: 
JS wrote the first versions of the introduction, the sections on treatment strategies, therapies, tapering, 
adverse events, failed therapies and open questions and contributed to all other parts of the manuscript. 
DA performed the search and wrote the first versions of the sections on epidemiology, differential 
diagnosis and assessment and contributed to all other parts of the manuscript. 
IMcI wrote the first versions of the sections on genetics and pathophysiology, contributed to all other 
parts of the manuscript and amended language aspects. 
All authors performed several rounds of amendments and also had a face-to-face meeting to finalise the 
manuscript.  
 
 
   
Manuscript
 2 
 
 
Summary 
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory joint disease, leading to cartilage and bone 
damage as well as disability. Early diagnosis is key to optimal therapeutic success with well 
characterized risk factors for bad outcome, such as high disease activity, presence of 
autoantibodies and early damage. Treatment algorithms involve measuring disease activity with 
composite indices, applying a treatment-to-target strategy, and conventional as well as novel 
biologic and non-biologic disease modifying antirheumatic drugs. Once the treatment target of 
stringent remission or at least low disease activity is maintained, dose reduction or interval 
increases should be attempted. While today prospects are good for the majority of patients, many 
do not respond to current therapies and, therefore, new therapies are needed and partly on the 
horizon.  In this Seminar we elude to current insights into genetics and etiology, pathophysiology, 
epidemiology, assessment, therapeutic agents and strategies as well as unmet needs of 
rheumatoid arthritis. 
 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is one of the most prevalent chronic inflammatory diseases. It primarily 
involves the joints, but should be considered a syndrome that includes extra-articular manifestations, 
such as rheumatoid nodules, pulmonary involvement or vasculitis, as well as systemic comorbidities, 
particularly affecting the vasculature and metabolism. A therapeutic revolution in the treatment of RA in 
the last decade that includes advent of novel therapeutics, introducing therapy earlier and application of 
effective treatment strategies, has transformed outcomes such that long term damage and functional 
decline have been significantly reduced and systemic features diminished.   
 3 
 
In this seminar, we will highlight recent insights into the epidemiology of RA; diagnostic and differential 
diagnostic approaches; etiology and pathophysiology; the current state of clinical treatment targets, 
disease assessment and follow up; established, new and evolving treatment approaches; therapeutic 
strategies and their outcomes and controversies; and future prospects and open questions.  Importantly, 
despite remarkable progress, our pathogenetic insights are still limited, exemplified by the frequent 
failure of novel molecular therapeutic entities. There is still a considerable unmet need in RA – deep 
remission is not the norm, nor is it typically sustained.  
 
Search strategy and selection criteria 
We searched Medline using the terms “rheumatoid arthritis” in conjunction with “diagnosis”, 
“classification”, “epidemiology” and “pathogenesis”. For treatment, we used the systematic literature 
searches that were done for the development of the 2013 update of the EULAR Management 
Recommendations and the treat-to-target recommendations,1-4 and updated the respective searches to 
extend through Oct 2015 and to include terms on novel therapeutic mode of actions and the term 
“treatment strategy”. We considered all reports that were identified by this search or during the review 
of reference lists of individual papers. Selection of included articles was based on our personal 
judgement of relevance within the scope of the present Seminar. 
 
Epidemiology and genetics 
RA carries a significant burden, for both the individual and society.5-10 The individual burden is a direct 
consequence of  musculoskeletal deficits, with attendant decline in physical function and quality of life 
and cumulative co-morbid risk.11 The socio-economic burden, aside from major direct medical costs, is a 
consequence of functional disability and ensuing reduced work capacity and societal participation.12 As a 
 4 
 
chronic disease, RA confers exponential burden over time; in turn efforts to establish the diagnosis early 
(to initiate treatment promptly) and design novel treatment strategies (to meticulously control 
inflammation and reduce or prevent consequent damage) are paramount. 
RA has an incidence of 0.5% to 1%, with an apparent decline from North to South and from urban to 
rural areas.13-15 Consistently reported risk factors for developing RA and increased disease severity 
include smoking and lower socioeconomic status,16-19 which – in addition to different genetic 
backgrounds – may partly explain the above observations.  A positive family history increases the risk of 
RA ~3-5 fold; concordance rates in twins are elevated implicating genetic factors in pathogenesis.14;20  
The heritability of RA is debated, currently estimated to be between 40-65% for seropositive disease, but 
lower (20%) for seronegative RA.21;22  This has provoked intense genetic study in search of pathogenetic 
clues, clinical endotypes and prognostic biomarkers.   Modern genetic technologies combined with large 
well-characterized clinical cohorts have considerably advanced our understanding. Genome wide (SNP) 
association, Immunochip and next-generation sequencing studies, have now characterized >100 loci 
associated with RA risk, the large majority of which implicate immunity (Figure 1), most of which 
furthermore are common across distinct geographical populations, and some of which are shared with 
other chronic inflammatory diseases.23  The HLA (particularly HLA-DRB1) remains the dominant influence, 
strongly implicating (self) peptide binding in pathogenesis.24-26 Disease associated alleles share common 
amino acid sequences in the peptide-binding groove referred to as the ‘shared epitope’.27 Moreover, 
some HLA genotypes particularly associate with more aggressive erosive disease and with higher all 
cause mortality pointing to a critical, quantitatively relevant functional impact of peptide binding.28;29  
The HLA also accounts exclusively for the remarkable gene environmental interaction between smoking 
and RA risk, although this is not consistently observed and further studies may be needed.30-35 Other 
genetic loci likely contribute smaller functional effects that are presumably singly or cumulatively 
mediated35 e.g. via altered co-stimulatory pathways (e.g. CD28, CD40), cytokine signaling, lymphocyte 
 5 
 
receptor activation threshold (e.g. PTPN22) and innate immune activation (Figure 1).  Intriguing familial 
aggregation studies suggest that known genetic and environmental factors as yet explain only a small 
part of aggregation and much more remains to be elucidated in this area. The increased risk for RA in 
patients with the HLA-DRB1 shared epitope is also linked with seropositivity for autoantibodies against 
citrullinated peptides (ACPA) and immunoglobulin G (rheumatoid factor, RF), autoantibodies that are 
characteristic for many patients with RA (~80% with established disease, ~50% with early disease). It is 
by virtue of this immunologic association that the shared epitope is also linked with progression of joint 
damage. The shared epitope has only poor association with ACPA and or RF negative RA patients.36 
Epigenetics are considered to contribute to pathogenesis, likely by integrating environmental and 
genetic effects.37  At the population level, a recent epigenome wide association study identified ten 
differentially methylated positions that could promote genetic risk in RA38 – more studies are underway.   
Studies at the cellular level have been highly informative; altered histone acetylation and DNA 
methylation can significantly influence the inflammatory, matrix regulatory and invasive properties of 
synovial fibroblasts, and some leukocyte populations37.  As such, pathways that regulate the epigenome 
e.g. histone deacetylases, bromodomains, represent exciting novel therapeutic targets. MicroRNAs 
represent a further level of epigenetic regulation by targeting and removing mRNA thereby fine-tuning 
cellular responses.39;40  Many microRNAs have now been identified as key regulators of lymphocytes, 
macrophages and synovial fibroblasts, in the context of animal arthritis models or human RA studies, e.g. 
miR146a or miR15540 – whether microRNAs will offer therapeutic utility beyond biomarker or pathway 
identification is unclear.37  
 
Pathophysiology of RA 
RA is pathologically heterogeneous – seropositive RA, characterized by the presence of autoantibodies, 
has been most thoroughly investigated.  The detection of autoimmune responses to citrullinated self-
 6 
 
proteins represents a major advance.41;42 ACPAs recognize citrullinated residues on many self-proteins 
including vimentin, α-enolase, fibronectin, fibrinogen, type II collagen. The tissue origin of such reactivity 
is uncertain but may arise at mucosal sites.  The lung is an attractive candidate originator tissue, 
commensurate with a role for smoking in RA, the detection of pulmonary CT abnormalities in early 
disease and the presence of shared citrullinated peptides in lung and synovial tissue biopsies (Figure 
2).43;44  Circulating ACPAs may be detected in low titre and with limited specificity up to 10 years prior to 
diagnosis – so called ‘pre-RA’.45  Over time their concentration and epitope diversity increases, as do 
serum cytokine and chemokine levels, especially prior to onset of articular involvement.  ACPAs can be of 
IgG, IgA or IgM isotype, indicative of T cell help, are of low avidity but with high tissue penetration, and 
have altered glycosylation status that confers enhanced effector functional properties.  ACPA producing 
B cells are identified in the synovium and, using high sensitivity methods, in the circulation.46;47  ACPAs 
may be directly pathogenic via macrophage activation (e.g. by TLR binding or FcR engagement), or by 
osteoclast activation via immune complex formation and Fc-rceptor engagement or possibly membrane 
cit-vimentin binding,48 possibly promoting bone loss, even prior to onset of synovitis.  Their 
concentrations decrease with effective therapeutics but patients usually do not become ACPA 
seronegative, contrasting with RF.49 More recently anti-carbamylated peptide autoantibodies have also 
been identified50 - more autospecificities may emerge with improved detection methodologies. RF has 
been shown to be more directly involved in macrophage activation and induction of cytokine activation 
than ACPA. Possibly ACPA form immune complexes that interact with RF, thus potentiating the effect on 
the inflammatory and destructive response.51;52 Less is known of the T cell response that supports the 
foregoing.   Clonal T cell expansions are detected in early RA synovitis.53 Using HLA-DRB1*0401 tetramers, 
elevated numbers of Th1 cells have been found circulating in RA particularly in early disease.54 Whether T 
cells must exhibit obligate citrullinated peptide specificity or indeed precisely where and when they 
contribute to emerging autoimmunity remains uncertain.  Lymph node biopsies in early RA suggest T cell 
 7 
 
activation distant from the synovium.55 Recent elegant studies e.g. suggest that the RA-protective HLA-
DRB1*13 allele contains a peptide that deletes cit-vinculin specific, autoreactive T cells that could 
otherwise react to microbial peptides via molecular mimicry and promote ACPA production.56   
 
RA has long been associated with infectious triggers e.g Proteus, E.coli, EBV, generally via molecular 
mimicry models that have not been fulfilled upon closer scrutiny. RA is associated with periodontal 
disease although the causality and functional nature of the relationship remains ill defined.57  One 
hypothesis proposes that P. gingivalis, by virtue of endogenous peptidyl-arginine-deiminase (PADI) 4 
expression, can promote aberrant citrullination and provoke local breach of tolerance to citrullinated 
peptides.58  In common with many autoimmune diseases, there is now considerable interest in the 
impact of the microbiome on RA risk and progression (Figure 2).59;60 Animal models of arthritis, e.g. KRN, 
collagen-induced arthritis, IL-1Ra-deficient arthritis, all point to a critical role for the gut microbiome in 
the development of disease.59  Various explanatory mechanisms are proposed including facilitation of 
type 17 immune responses, or exposure to microbial-derived innate activators, arising from microbial 
population changes and/or altered mucosal permeability.59  Initial human studies have identified 
gastrointestinal dysbiosis, particularly in early RA.61  Remarkably, in a recent study, common microbial 
population alterations were detected in oral, salivary and gastrointestinal sites, that were associated 
with CRP, ACPA status and were further altered by DMARD therapy.62  The mechanisms underpinning 
such observations remain to be elucidated and their importance requires exploration.  
 
The major clinical characteristic of RA is joint swelling reflecting inflammation in the synovial membrane 
as a consequence of the events discussed above. It comprises leukocyte infiltration of a normally 
relatively sparsely populated synovial compartment (Figure 3).  The cellular composition of RA synovitis 
includes features of innate (e.g. monocytes, dendritic cells, mast cells, innate lymphoid cells) and 
 8 
 
adaptive (e.g. T helper cell [Th] 1, Th17, B cells, plasmablasts and plasma cells) immunity, together with a 
robust tissue response whereby synovial fibroblasts accumulate and assume an aggressive inflammatory, 
matrix regulatory and invasive phenotype, that together with enhanced chondrocyte catabolism and 
osteoclastogenesis, promote articular destruction.63;64  Original studies did not reveal particularly 
remarkable cellular differences between early and established disease synovium.  However with the 
advent of US-guided micro techniques, detailed molecular, particularly transcriptomic analyses, suggest 
that myeloid, lymphocytic and fibroid dominant synovial subtypes may exist that could be of therapeutic 
significance; confirmatory studies are.65  This inflammatory milieu is regulated in turn by a complex 
cytokine and chemokine network – clinical interventions clearly demonstrate that of these, tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin (IL)-6 and likely granulocyte-monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-
CSF) are hierarchically critical, while others, such as IL-1 and various lymphokines may be less 
important.66 Cytokines and chemokines lead to the induction or aggravation of the inflammatory 
response by activating endothelial cells and attracting immune cells to accumulate within the synovial 
compartment. Activated fibroblasts in conjunction with the accumulated activated T- and B-cells as well 
as monocyte/macrophages ultimately trigger osteoclast generation via engagement of receptor activator 
of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), expressed on T-cells, B-cells and fibroblasts, with its receptor 
RANK on macrophages, dendritic cells and pre-osteoclasts. Bony erosions ensue, arising from the “bare 
area” at the junction between cartilage, periosteal synovial membrane insertion and bone. Cartilage 
undergoes damage by the evolution of catabolic effects in chrondrocytes after their stimulation by 
cytokines. Cytokines bind cognate receptors to trigger various intracellular signal transduction events, 
which are the actual intermediaries between the different extracellular events and the activation of an 
array of genes that lead to or aggravate inflammation (Figure 3). Many of these cells and molecules have 
been tested as therapeutic targets, with some success, allowing for dramatic advances in treatment of 
RA and subsequently other chronic inflammatory diseases.  Thus, whereas the pathogenetic events 
 9 
 
initiating and thereafter mediating chronicity of the synovial lesion are not yet fully understood, there 
have been remarkable recent insights arising from genetic, epidemiologic, translational biological and 
therapeutic studies. 
  
Taken together, RA likely arises from multiple ‘hits’ whereby an initial combination of environmental, 
lifestyle and stochastic insults occurring in a genetically predisposed, epigenetically modified individual, 
leads to breach of immunological tolerance.  This manifests as the emergence of low titre autoantibodies 
(primarily ACPAs and subsequently RF), circulating cytokines and metabolic disturbance, often occurring 
considerably prior to the development of clinically evident articular disease.  A further trigger, perhaps 
infectious, facilitated particularly by HLA class II associated pathways, drives the expansion of T cell 
mediated autoimmunity, and thereafter, articular localization via currently obscure mechanisms (e.g. 
neurologic, vascular, biomechanical). This critical transition to chronic (non-resolving) synovitis is 
characterised by leukocyte and stromal cell dysregulation and wider co-morbidity affecting vascular, 
cardiac, bone and neurologic tissues. Importantly, this transition must occur quite early, since treatment 
of very early, clinically incipient but overt RA usually does not reverse arthritis and since synovial 
infiltration by inflammatory cells may occur before clinical signs and symptoms.67 Therefore, diagnosis of 
pre-clinical RA becomes a target and focus of research activities68;69 to be able to employ preventive 
therapy and the term “window of opportunity” increasingly refers to preventive aspects rather than 
interferences with early but clinically already manifest disease. 
 
Diagnostic approach and differential diagnosis 
No diagnostic criteria exist for RA. The typical patient presents tender and swollen joints of recent onset, 
morning stiffness, and abnormal laboratory tests, such as elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels or 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate.  Unfortunately, this  presentation is not at all specific for RA and there is 
 10 
 
no pathognomonic finding for RA. Other causes of arthritis need to be considered, such as reactive 
arthritis, osteoarthritis, infectious arthritis (viral; bacterial, particularly Lyme disease depending on 
geographic region); some rarer autoimmune conditions, such as connective tissue diseases, may be 
considered if additional suggestive signs or symptoms are present (e.g. rash, mouth ulcers, alopecia, 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, ANA, elevated muscle enzymes). In fact, in many patients no specific diagnosis 
can be made at first presentation, and the diagnosis of exclusion is “undifferentiated arthritis”. This may 
be important, since (disease modifying) treatment is indicated and necessary for any type of chronic 
inflammatory arthritis, supported by periodic reassessment. 
New classification criteria of RA have been developed and published in 2010.70 Their purpose was to 
eliminate shortcomings of the former criteria, established by the American Rheumatism Association in 
1987. Those were not any more helpful, since they included features of chronicity and poor prognosis 
(e.g. erosions) as well as low prevalence characteristics (e.g. nodules)  - this was unfit to recognise early 
disease.71 Briefly, the new criteria require a single clinically swollen joint as entry criterion in the absence 
of other diseases explaining the clinical symptoms. Thereafter, the classification criteria allow for 
sensitive assessment of extent of joint involvement (tender joints can be considered as “active joints”; 
imaging by ultrasound [US] or magnetic resonance [MRI] may also be used). Additional features are 
serological markers of the disease (RF and APCA), and (with smaller contribution) longer symptom 
duration and laboratory markers of systemic inflammation. Since publication, the criteria have been 
validated in numerous settings and offer 21% higher sensitivity than the 1987 criteria, at the cost of 16% 
lower specificity.72 Note that classification is not synonymous with diagnosis. While diagnosis has the 
ultimate goal of being correct at the individual patient level, classification aims to maximise homogenous 
populations for study purposes, but can be used to support diagnosis.  
 
 
 11 
 
 
Disease assessment and definition of treatment targets 
Assessment of disease activity is critical to follow-up of RA patients because it drives adverse clinical 
outcomes, including joint damage, and poor physical function and quality of life.73;74 Composite 
measures that include joint counts have been recommended for daily practice. The American College of 
Rheumatology (ACR) improvement criteria75 differentiate placebo from active therapy and are widely 
used in clinical trials, but cannot be employed easily in practice. In contrast, the disease activity score 
(DAS) employing 28 joint counts,76 the simplified and the clinical disease activity index (SDAI, CDAI)77;78 
provide continuous numerical scales reflecting disease activity (higher is worse).79;80 While the DAS28 
requires a computer, SDAI and CDAI are easy to calculate in routine practice (Table 1).  Importantly, 
these measures can also classify disease activity states (high, moderate, low and remission). Other 
disease activity measures that do not include joint counts,81 have also been developed but are not 
recommended because there is insufficient evidence that they can be used reliably across all patient 
populations and reflect all disease outcomes.  There is an almost linear relationship between disease 
activity, particularly discrete disease activity states, and physical function or quality of life.82;83 The 
relationship between disease activity and progression of joint damage is also essentially linear, even 
upon treatment with csDMARDs.78;84-86 
 
 
 
Remission or low-disease activity have been established as treatment targets.87;88 The American College 
of Rheumatology (ACR) and the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) have recently developed 
new remission criteria89, which are based on a Boolean approach and an index-based approach using the 
criteria of the SDAI and CDAI (Table 1).90 Other definitions of remission (e.g. “DAS28 remission”) should 
not now be used, since they are associated with progression of joint damage,91 presence of 
 12 
 
comorbidities,92 and significant residual activity in many patients.93;94 Moreover, they frequently result in 
high false positive response rates, particularly when drugs affecting the acute phase response are 
employed.95 For example, a normal ESR of 15mm/h contributes almost 2 points to the DAS28 score, 
which has a cut-off for “remission” at 2.6, whilst 20 swollen joints contribute only 1.2 points, a score 
likewise provided by just 5 tender joints.96;97 With the development of the new remission criteria, the 
definition of remission is now truly related to the virtual absence of residual inflammatory disease 
activity, as is required for such state,89 leaving other definitions that allow for significant residual disease 
activity as better consistent with a state of low disease activity.98  
 
Finally, it is important to evaluate the structural progression of disease. Treatment of RA should, in 
addition to symptom relief, prevent or halt structural changes and thereby minimize or reverse physical 
disability. In routine practice, structure progression is usually done semi-quantitatively, usually at 
intervals of approximately 1 year. Formal scoring of radiographs for progression of erosions and joint 
space narrowing, as performed in trials, is more accurate and sensitive.99 Other imaging modalities are 
being increasingly used not only for diagnostic purposes, but also for follow up: MRI scans detect bone 
marrow edema as a potential area of (future) erosions,100 and may differentiate overt synovitis (and 
tenosynovitis) from other – potentially non-inflammatory – causes of pain and swelling. Ultrasound can 
quantify the degree and extent of inflammatory synovitis by using gray scale and power Doppler 
measurements, respectively.101 However, the relevance of detecting subclinical inflammation in patients 
in clinical remission, in order to decide on treatment reduction or escalation, is unclear102-104 Notably, a 
large proportion of healthy persons may have detectable ultrasound and MRI signals of synovitis and 
vascularity.105 
Physical function is typically assessed using the Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index 
(HAQ).106 Newer computer assisted methods have not yet entered daily routine management.107 
 13 
 
Functional assessments are typically performed at every clinical visit, although they may be done 
remotely from the clinic, since they are solely questionnaire based. 
 
Treatment strategies 
Since inflammation is at the apex of clinical events (driving damage, functional impairment, comorbidity), 
its reversal is the major therapeutic target – if inflammation subsides rapidly, damage or its progression 
are prevented and physical function maximally improved without further sequelae. By corollary, it is 
critical to determine disease activity regularly in pursuit of a desired clinical state (low disease activity or 
remission).   Treatment of RA thus requires a strategic approach whereby regular disease activity 
assessment drives therapeutic adaptations or changes of drugs in accordance with such activity (“Treat 
to Target”; T2T).89  Composite disease activity measures that include joint counts are preferred 
instruments in T2T approaches; measures of structure or function are sub-optimal in T2T approaches 
because they reflect the consequence of inflammation. In practice, if a state of low disease activity has 
been reached, or approximately 80% improvement in SDAI or CDAI is achieved by three months, then the 
likelihood of reaching the treatment target at 6 months from therapy initiation is very high108. If 
improvement is small at 3 months (Figure 4A), treatment should be adapted. Likewise, if the state of low 
disease activity (or remission) is not attained at 6 months, treatment should be re-evaluated.  
 
 
The therapies 
Disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) target inflammation and by definition must reduce 
structural damage progression. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), while reducing pain and 
stiffness and improving physical function, do not interfere with joint damage and, therefore, will not 
 14 
 
affect the long-term sequelae of RA. Glucocorticoids, on the other hand, have rapid symptomatic and 
disease modifying effects, but carry significant long-term side effects.109  
 
There are two major classes of DMARDs, namely synthetic (sDMARDs) and biological (bDMARDs); 
sDMARDs are defined as conventional synthetic (cs) or targeted synthetic (ts) DMARDs.110 The former 
comprise methotrexate (MTX), sulphasalazine, leflunomide, gold salts and (hydroxy)chloroquine – their 
use has evolved empirically and their modes of action are still largely unknown. In contrast, tsDMARDs 
have been developed to modulate a particular target implicated in the generation of inflammation. Key 
exemplars include Janus kinase (Jak) inhibitors, such as tofacitinib or baricitinib.  
cs DMARDs and glucocorticoids. According to EULAR recommendations for the management of RA,87 
treatment should be initiated with a csDMARD, ideally MTX, plus low dose glucocorticoids (Figure 4B). 
There is compelling evidence that this is the optimal approach. Firstly, clinical trials comparing 
MTX+glucocorticoids with combinations of MTX plus a biological agent have shown no significant 
difference in outcomes (Table 2);111-113 secondly, comparing MTX+glucocorticoids with combinations of 
csDMARDs plus glucocorticoids revealed similar efficacy with less toxicity (Table 2).114-117 Glucocorticoids 
are given at low to intermediate oral doses or parenterally as single intravenous or intramuscular 
applications. Low doses of glucocorticoids combined with MTX confer additive structural protection 
when compared with MTX alone.118-120 Oral glucocorticoids should be tapered within 3 months, when 
csDMARD should have induced significant improvement.121 With respect to the choice of a csDMARD, 
MTX is considered the anchor drug that also optimizes efficacy of bDMARDs.122 However, it has not yet 
been conclusively shown that MTX is superior to other csDMARDs clinically or structurally; rather, 
comparisons with sulfasalazine or leflunomide revealed similar outcomes, but the doses of MTX in these 
studies were low compared with those used today.114;114;115;115  
 15 
 
Table 2 summarizes the most recent data on csDMARD mono- and combination therapy. They suggest 
that combination of csDMARD has little place in the treatment armamentarium, since in comparison 
with MTX monotherapy there is no added efficacy at cost of more toxicity. Moreover, in comparison with 
biological agents used after MTX, csDMARD combination confers profound responses (e.g. ACR70) at 
only low frequencies.123  
 
When the first treatment cycle fails, EULAR recommends stratifying for predictors of severe disease 
which comprise the presence of high disease activity despite the prior therapy; autoantibodies (ACPA or 
RF, especially at high titres); and early joint damage on radiography (Figure 4C). Patients exhibiting these 
risk factors should receive a bDMARD, whereas those without should receive another csDMARD again in 
combination with glucocorticoids.  
    
bDMARDs. Biologic therapeutics comprise four different modes of action:1 TNF-inhibition, IL-6 receptor 
inhibition, T-cell costimulation blockade and B-cell depletion (Table 3, yellow ovals in Figure 3 and Figure 
5). A small proportion of patients may respond to inhibition of IL-1 pathways.124   Among the TNF-
inhibitors (TNFis), 5 compounds are currently approved, one for i.v. use (infliximab) and 4 for s.c. 
application (adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, etanercept, golimumab). Biosimilar infliximab is already 
available in Europe and a biosimilar etanercept has just been approved by the European Medicines 
Agency (Table 3). IL-6 inhibition is currently delivered by tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody 
directed at the IL-6 receptor; sarilumab, also an IL-6R inhibitor, has completed phase 3 trials. IL-6 itself is 
targeted by several monoclonal antibodies, including sirukumab and clazakizumab, both currently  
undergoing phase 3 trial. Abatacept is presently the only T-cell costimulation inhibitor; intriguingly its 
efficacy may reflect not only T cell targeting but also reverse licencing, and therefore inhibition of 
 16 
 
myeloid cell activation,125 and migration inhibition. 126. Rituximab is the only monoclonal anti-CD20 
antibody approved for the treatment of RA, but biosimilars are expected in the near future. 
These mechanistically discrete therapies appear to convey similar efficacy.1 Focusing on ACR70 response 
rates as a surrogate for achieving low disease activity, patients who are MTX naïve have the highest  
overall response rates (~40%) to bDMARDs in combination with MTX (Figure 5). However, embedded 
within these responders are those who would experience efficacy with MTX alone (20-25%). This formed 
one of the rationales for EULAR and more recently also ACR to recommend starting csDMARD treatment 
with MTX.87;88 Importantly, despite the differences in the targets, when used in patients with active 
disease despite prior MTX treatment, all four major principles of targeted biological agents (added to 
MTX) arrive at ACR70 rates of ~20% , while those who have previously failed TNFis usually exhibit only 
about 10-15% ACR70 rates when exposed to another biological (Figure 5). These responses are seen 
irrespective of the bDMARD and thus even on another TNFi if patients failed a TNFi (Figure 4C).1;127;128 
This indicates that all these agents may ultimately mediate their efficacy by interfering with a common 
final pathway, namely proinflammatory cytokine production,129 by either acting further upstream or 
directly at the cytokine level.    
All bDMARDs exhibit enhanced efficacy when combined with MTX and presumably other csDMARDs.130 
Indeed, none of the bDMARDs, when employed as a monotherapy, has shown consistent clinical or 
functional superiority compared with MTX.131-135 Progression of structural damage is inhibited more 
strongly than MTX monotherapy, albeit to a lesser extent than with the combination therapy. Moreover, 
MTX (plus glucocorticoids) conveys similar clinical, functional and structural efficacy as MTX plus 
biological agent (Table 2).112;113;136 If a monotherapy of a bDMARD must be given because of intolerance 
of all csDMARDs, then tocilizumab would be the biologic of choice, since it has better efficacy than TNF-
inhibitor monotherapy.137 
 17 
 
tsDMARDs. The first ever approved tsDMARD is tofactinib, a pan-Jak inhibitor;138 Jak inhibition interferes 
with signal transduction and thus cell activation elicited by IL-6, GM-CSF, interferons (type I and type II) 
and common gamma chain cytokines (like IL-2 or IL-15), but also erythropoietin.139 Tofacitinib has 
hitherto been approved in the USA, Canada, Japan, and several other countries, but not yet in the 
European Union.  The efficacy of tofacitinib plus MTX at the approved dose of 5mg bid appears to be 
similar to that of biological agents (Figure 5). In phase 3 clinical trials the Jak 1,2-inhibitor baricitinib 
appears to convey a similar range of efficacy as the bDMARDs and tofacitinib (Figure 5). Interestingly, 
however, in a very recent trial baricitinib elicited a superior clinical and functional, though not structural 
outcome compared with adalimumab;140 moreover, the ~15% ACR70 response rate in patients who 
previously failed a TNFi was seen similarly in patients who failed multiple biologics.141   
 
Tapering therapy.  
Once the desired treatment target (LDA or remission) has been reached and sustained for some time 
(usually about 6 months), one should consider rationalisation of therapeutics. The first agent that should 
already have been withdrawn within about 3 months is glucocorticoid. Concerning biologic therapy, the 
risk of a flare upon halving dose or doubling the interval between doses is low, while upon complete 
withdrawal most patients will eventually flare, irrespective of the type of biologic.142-146 Importantly, 
even if patients flare they usually respond very well again to the same agent. However it may not be 
considered ethical to let patients undergo the ordeal of a flare and also risk that some of them may not 
recapture the original response hence dose reduction should be the norm.146  
 
Adverse event profiles.  
The biologic agents and the tsDMARDs induce higher rates of adverse events than csDMARDs. In 
particular, the rates of serious infections are increased, although they decrease over time.3;147 A special 
 18 
 
risk relates to reactivation of tuberculosis,148 although this has not been reported on rituximab. 
Rituximab would also be the drug of choice in patients with concomitant multiple sclerosis, since it has 
shown efficacy in this disease,149 while TNF-inhibitors can elicit flares.150 Patients with hepatitis B or C 
whose disease is well controlled with antiviral therapy, may be cautiously treated with biologics, 
whereby the risk is lower for hepatitis C. It is recommended to avoid biological agents (except rituximab) 
within 5 years after a malignancy has been cured, although registry data do not suggest increased 
risks.151 On the other hand, with a history of lymphoma again rituximab or possibly also tocilizumab, 
which is used to treat Castleman’s disease, would be drugs of choice. During pregnancy, the drug of 
choice is sulphasalazine, while MTX and leflunomide are contraindicated; also biologics are not 
recommended, although their detailed teratogenic risk is unknown.152-154 
 
Targeted therapies that failed.  
While results obtained from experimental models and/or ex-vivo data are helpful to drive hypotheses, 
the ultimate information on efficacy and safety of a treatment targeting specific molecules or cells has to 
come from clinical trials as a proof of concept. Over the years, many targeted therapies have failed to 
elicit any or at least clinically important responses (red ovals in Figure 3). Among these disappointing 
results are the effects of depletion of CD4-T-cells155, the use of IL-10 as an anti-inflammatory principle,156 
or the inhibition of IL-17,  IL-12 and IL-23 pathways.157-159 Especially the results obtained by IL-17 and IL-
23 inhibition are perplexing, since RA was believed to be a Th17 mediated disease.160 Direct inhibition of 
IL-23, the pivotal cytokine leading to Th17 activation, and of IL-17A itself, were expected to constitute 
new therapeutic advances. Negative results were also obtained for p38 MAPK inhibition, which 
constitutes an important intracellular messenger protein for TNF- and IL-1 effects,161;162 presumably by 
virtue of the redundancy of signal transduction events involved in signaling of this pivotal pathway. 
Inhibition of spleen tyrosine kinase (syk), a molecule involved in B-cell and Fc-gamma receptor signaling, 
 19 
 
failed to reveal reproducible efficacy.163 Thus, the negative as well as the positive results of clinical trials 
allow recognition of the level of importance of specific molecules and cells in the context of the 
inflammatory response in RA.   
  
Open questions and unmet needs 
Despite all the advances made over the last decade or two, many open issues remain to be resolved. 
Firstly,164;165 we still do not understand the riddle of the similar efficacies of therapies targeting different 
molecules and we even do not know if profound responses are elicited by these agents in the same, 
totally different or somewhat overlapping patient populations. We do not yet have clinically useful 
endotypes nor biomarkers that can offer utility beyond acute phase reactants and the presence of 
autoantibodies. Secondly, it can still not be predicted who will respond best to which treatment; 
molecular analyses have failed to provide clues to answer this question,166-169 although we firmly believe 
the predictors exist which would allow introducing precision medicine approaches also in rheumatology. 
Thirdly, given that remission or at least low disease activity are today’s therapeutic goals for RA patients, 
a significant proportion of them does still not reach this target, implying that new therapies are still 
needed.  Further, many patients lose responsiveness over time, and the reasons for this loss are not yet 
fully elucidated and might be due to immunogenicity, non-adherence or other factors. Fourthly, 
therapeutics are not delivered via a pathogenetically coherent protocol, that takes account of early 
dominant autoimmunity and later damage-related effector pathways; in this context, preventive 
treatment may be highly effective to interfere with the manifestation of RA, but we have no clues yet 
how to detect pre-RA or patients at risk. Finally, future therapeutics must deliver more predictable and 
better outcomes; Table 4 describes some potential approaches that are partly already addressed in early 
trials. The ultimate desire would be to develop causative therapies, but this will not be possible without 
deciphering the cause(s) of RA. 
 20 
 
 
Conclusion 
Over the last decade, several pieces of evidence have accumulated. These insights constitute the basis of 
recommendations for the management of RA, which are captured in a general way in   Figure 4.87 (i) Early 
diagnosis and initiation of DMARD therapy are pivotal to prevent damage from occurring or becoming 
significant.170 (ii) The better the disease activity state reached at 6 months or one year, the lower is the 
progression of joint damage and the better the functional outcome; reaching stringent remission within 
3- 6 months halts damage progression independent of the type of therapy, MTX or biological.84;91 (iii) 
Setting a treatment target of low disease activity or remission, following patients regularly using 
composite disease activity measures which comprise joint counts to determine the disease activity status 
and adapting DMARD therapy rapidly if the targeted state has not been achieved within a period of few 
months leads to better outcomes than routine care.136;171;172 (iv) Treating patients at high risk of 
developing joint damage and thus irreversible disability with biologics reduces the risk of bad outcome, 
while such treatment is not necessarily important in patients with low risk.173 (v) Adding low dose 
glucocorticoids to csDMARDs maximises clinical, functional and structural benefit.118;120 (vi) Using MTX as 
a first DMARD and adding a biological agent in those who do not attain low disease activity within 6 
months and have high progression risk optimises the benefit.174 (vii) If a state of low disease activity or an 
80% reduction of disease activity is achieved within 3 months from start of treatment, attainment of the 
target of low-disease activity or remission at 6 months is highly likely. Application of this approach will 
maximise treatment success in RA. Hopefully, by the end of the present decade most of our patients will 
experience cessation of disease progression and disability with retention of high levels of quality of life. 
 
 
 21 
 
Figure legends 
Figure 1. A selection of critical loci associated with risk and progression of RA are depicted on a notional 
map of the key immune cells implicated in the pathogenesis of RA. 
Figure 2. Etiology of and pathways to RA. In a genetically predisposed host with susceptibility genes, 
some of which are depicted here and in more detail in Fig 1, environmental insults, epigenetic 
modifications and posttranslational modifications can lead to loss of tolerance with subsequent 
asymptomatic synovitis, ultimately leading to clinically overt arthritis. Modified after63;64 
Figure 3. Pathogenetic pathways in RA ca. 2016 showing pathobiologic, cell biologic and molecular 
biologic aspects. Adapted from63 and Mavers M, et al. Curr Rheum Rep. 2009;11:378-385 and Rommel C, 
et al. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007;7:191-201. Yellow ovals: molecules or cells which are successfully targeted 
by respective therapies; red ovals: molecules or cells targeting which was not effective. 
Figure 4.  Therapeutic approach to rheumatoid arthritis. A. General strategy; B. Early treatment 
phase; C. Treatment approach when MTX (plus glucocorticoid) failed to allow reaching the treatment 
target; D. Treatment approach when a first biological failed. After87;89 
 
Figure 5. Response rates to different DMARD therapies. As a surrogate of profound treatment responses 
the ACR70 improvement rates are shown. A. Abatacept (inhibition of T-cell costimulation); B. Golimumab 
(TNF-inhibitor); C. Tocilizumab (anti-IL-6 receptor antibody); D. Rituximab (anti-CD20 mediated B-cell 
depletion); E. Tofacitinib (pan-Jak inhibitor); F. Baricitinib (Jak1/2 inhibitor). These agents were selected 
because they are the only ones with published clinical trials covering the whole range of RA patient 
population, from early MTX-naïve to TNF-inhibitor insufficient responders. Baricitinib is not yet approved 
by regulatory authorities but has completed the pertinent phase 3 trials.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 
Table 1. Composite measures of disease activity comprising joint counts and ACR-EULAR 
remission criteria. 
Index/ 
Criterion 
Formula 
Cutpoints 
REM/LDA/MDA 
 
DAS28 
0.56 x √(TJC28) + 0.28 x √(SJC28) + 
0.70 x lognat(ESR) + 0.014 x GH76 
2.6/3.2/5.1 
 
SDAI 
SJC28+TJC28+PGA+EGA+CRP77;175 
3.3/11/26  
 
CDAI 
SJC28+TJC28+PGA+EGA77;78;175 
2.8/10/22  
 
ACR-
EULAR 
remission90 
Boolean: SJC, TJC, PGA, CRP 
Index-based: SDAI 
Index-based: CDAI 
All ≤1 
≤3.3 
≤2.8 
 
REM, remission; LDA, low disease activity; MDA, moderate disease activity; high disease activity above 
the highest of these cutpoints; DAS28, disease activity score using 28 joint counts; SDAI, simplified 
disease activity index; CDAI, clinical disease activity index;TJC, tender joint count; SJC, swollen joint 
count; lognat, natural logarithm; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; PGA, patient global assessment; 
EGA, evaluator (physician) global assessment; CRP, C-reactive protein. 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Achievement of low disease activity using MTX monotherapy in combination with 
glucocorticoids compared with combinations of either csDMARDs plus glucocorticoids, or 
biological agents plus MTX 
 
MTX + glucocorticoid 
MTX+other csDMARD(s)+GC, 
or MTX+bDMARD 
CareRA117 – 4 months 
87%1 
85%2 
 
 
 
tREACH176 – 6 months 
68%3 
71%4 
 
 
 
IDEA112 – 6 months 
67%5 
65%6 
 
 
 
BeSt111 – 6 months 
67%7 
64%8 
 
 
 
115mg MTX + 30mg prednisone (tapered); 215mg MTX + 2g SSZ + 60mg prednisone (tapered);  325mg MTX + 
15mg prednisone; 425mg MTX + 2g SSZ + 400mg hydoxychloroquine + 15mg prednisone; 520mg MTX + single iv 
of 250mg methylprednisolone; 620mg MTX + infliximab; 77.5mg MTX (increased to 30mg if needed) + 2g SSZ + 
60mg prednisone; 825mg MTX + infliximab 
 23 
 
 
Table 3. Currently applied DMARDs and their doses 
DMARD 
 
Name 
Usual Dose 
Loading 
dose 
Comments* 
csDMARDs 
 
Methotrexate 
25mg once 
weekly 
No 
Starting dose 10mg 
– escalation to 25mg 
within 4-8 weeks, 
folate use important 
(suggest 
10mg/week) 
 
 
Sulphasalazine 
3g/day 
No 
Starting dose 1g, 
escalation to 3g/day 
within 4-8 weeks 
 
 
Leflunomide 
20mg/day 
Optional  Loading dose 
associated with 
more GI side effects 
 
 
Hydroxychloroquine 400mg/day 
No 
For mild arthritis or 
as combination 
therapy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bDMARDs 
TNF-
inhibitors 
Adalimumab 
40mg every 2 
weeks sc 
No 
Biosimilar 
application 
 
 
Certolizumab pegol 
200mg every 2 
weeks sc 
Yes 
 
 
 
Etanercept 
50mg/week sc 
No 
Biosimilar approved 
 
 
Golimumab 
50mg/month sc 
No 
 
 
 
Infliximab 
3-10mg/kg iv 
every 4-8 weeks 
Yes 
Biosimilar approved 
 
Anti-B-cell 
Rituximab 
1000mg iv 
every 6 mo. 
No 
Biosimilar 
application 
 
Anti-T-cell 
costimulation 
Abatacept 
125mg/week sc 
No 
iv available 
 
Anti-IL-6R 
Tocilizumab 
162.6mg/week 
sc 
 
iv available; 
Sarilumab (anti-IL-
6R) and anti-IL-6 
cytokine antibodies 
(sirukumab, 
clazakizumab) in 
development 
tsDMARDs 
Janus-kinase 
inhibitors 
Tofacitinib 
5mg twice daily 
No 
Jak 1,2,3 inhibitor; 
once daily 
medication in 
development; 
baricitinib, a Jak 1,2 
inhibitor, completed 
phase 3 trials 
*Dose reductions needed with renal or hepatic impairment; for adverse events see package inserts 
 24 
 
Table 4. Potential future therapeutics for RA 
 
Biologic agents 
Cytokine inhibitors (human, or humanized) targeting e.g. IL-6, IL-17, IL-21,  
 
 
 
 
Interferons, GM-CSF, GM-CSFR 
Cytokine /Ig fusion proteins e.g. IL-4:IgG 
Cell targeting agents e.g. B cell depletion, co-stimulatory blockade 
 
Intracellular signal inhibitors 
Janus Kinase inhibitors e.g. baricitinib, filgotinib 
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors  
PI3 Kinase inhibitors 
 
Cellular therapies 
Tolerogenic dendritic cell transfer 
Stem cell transfer 
T regulatory cell activation 
 
Miscellaneous approaches 
Toll-like receptor inhibitors 
PADI4 inhibitors 
Epigenetic modifiers e.g. histone deacetylase inhibitors 
GnRH antagonists 
Vagus nerve stimulation 
 
 
 25 
 
Conflicts of interest statement: 
 
JSS: Research support (for the institution) from from Abbvie, Lilly, MSD, Pfizer, Roche. Honoraria for 
consultancies or speaking engagements from Abbvie, Amgen, Astra-Zeneca, BMS, Celgene, Glaxo, 
Janssen, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Samsung, UCB.  
 
DA: Research support (for institution) from BMS, MSD and Roche. Abbvie, MSD, Pfizer, Roche.  Honoraria 
for consultancies or speaking engagements from Abbvie, BMS, Janssen, Medac, MSD, Pfizer, Roche, UCB. 
 
IMcI: Research Funding or Honoraria from Abbvie, Astra Zeneca, BMS, Celgene, Crescendo Bioscience, 
Janssen, MSD, Novartis, Lilly, UCB, Amgen, Pfizer, Galapagos 
 
 
Reference List 
 
 
(1)  Nam JL, Ramiro S, Gaujoux-Viala C, Takase K, Leon-Garcia M, Emery P et al. Efficacy 
of biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: a systematic literature review 
informing the 2013 update of the EULAR recommendations for the management of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(3):516-528. 
 
(2)  Gaujoux-Viala C, Nam J, Ramiro S, Landewe R, Buch MH, Smolen JS et al. Efficacy of 
conventional synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, glucocorticoids and 
tofacitinib: a systematic literature review informing the 2013 update of the EULAR 
recommendations for management of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 
73(3):510-515. 
 
(3)  Ramiro S, Gaujoux-Viala C, Nam JL, Smolen JS, Buch M, Gossec L et al. Safety of 
synthetic and biological DMARDs: a systematic literature review informing the 2013 
update of the EULAR recommendations for management of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2014; 73(3):529-535. 
 
(4)  Stoffer MA, Schoels M, Smolen JS, Aletaha D, Breedveld FC, Burmester GR et al. 
Evidence for treating rheumatoid arthritis to target - a systematic literature research 
informing the treat-to-target task force. Ann Rheum Dis 2015; submitted. 
 
(5)  Lundkvist J, Kastäng F, Kobelt G. The burden of rheumatoid arthritis and access to 
treatment: health burden and costs. Eur J Health Econ 2008; 8 (Suppl 2):S49-S60. 
 
(6)  Murray CJ, Vos T, Lozano R, Naghavi M, Flaxman AD, Michaud C et al. Disability-
adjusted life years (DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012; 
380(9859):2197-2223. 
 
(7)  Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, Danaei G, Shibuya K, Adair-Rohani H et al. A comparative 
risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk 
factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of 
Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012; 380(9859):2224-2260. 
 26 
 
 
(8)  Stoffer MA, Smolen JS, Woolf A, Ambrozic A, Bosworth A, Carmona L et al. 
Development of patient-centred standards of care for rheumatoid arthritis in Europe: the 
eumusc.net project. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73:902-905. 
 
(9)  Puolakka K, Kautiainen H, Pekurinen M, Mottonen T, Hannonen P, Korpela M et al. 
Monetary value of lost productivity over a 5-year follow up in early rheumatoid arthritis 
estimated on the basis of official register data on patients' sickness absence and gross 
income: experience from the FIN-RACo Trial. Ânn Rheum Dis 2005; Nov 16; [Epub 
ahead of print]. 
 (10)  Cross M, Smith E, Hoy D, Carmona L, Wolfe F, Vos T et al. The global burden of 
rheumatoid arthritis: estimates from the global burden of disease 2010 study. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2014; 73(7):1316-1322. 
 (11)  Kitas GD, Gabriel SE. Cardiovascular disease in rheumatoid arthritis: state of the art and 
future perspectives. Ann Rheum Dis 2011; 70(1):8-14. 
 (12)  Sokka T, Kautiainen H, Pincus T, Verstappen SM, Aggarwal A, Alten R et al. Work 
disability remains a major problem in rheumatoid arthritis in the 2000s: data from 32 
countries in the QUEST-RA study. Arthritis Res Ther 2010; 12(2):R42. 
 (13)  Gabriel SE. The epidemiology of rheumatoid arthritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2001; 
27:269-281. 
 (14)  Silman AJ, Pearson JE. Epidemiology and genetics of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res 
2002; 4 (Suppl 3):S265-S272. 
 (15)  Alamanos Y, Voulgari PV, Drosos AA. Incidence and prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis, 
based on the 1987 American College of Rheumatology criteria: a systematic review. 
Semin Arthritis Rheum 2006; 36(3):182-188. 
 (16)  Uhlig T, Hagen KB, Kvien TK. Current tobacco smoking, formal education, and the risk 
of rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 1999; 26(1):47-54. 
 (17)  Michaud K, Messer J, Choi HK, Wolfe F. Direct medical costs and their predictors in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a three-year study of 7,527 patients. Arthritis Rheum 
2003; 48(10):2750-2762. 
 (18)  Millar K, Lloyd SM, McLean JS, Batty GD, Burns H, Cavanagh J et al. Personality, 
socio-economic status and inflammation: cross-sectional, population-based study. PLoS 
One 2013; 8(3):e58256. 
 (19)  Callahan LF, Pincus T. Education, self-care, and outcomes of rheumatic diseases: further 
challenges to the "biomedical model" paradigm. Arthritis Care Res 1997; 10(5):283-288. 
 (20)  Silman AJ, MacGregor AJ, Thomson W, Holligan S, Carthy D, Farhan A et al. Twin 
concordance rates for rheumatoid arthritis: results from a nationwide study. Br J 
Rheumatol 1993; 32(10):903-907. 
 27 
 
 (21)  Jiang X, Frisell T, Askling J, Karlson EW, Klareskog L, Alfredsson L et al. To what 
extent is the familial risk of rheumatoid arthritis explained by established rheumatoid 
arthritis risk factors? Arthritis Rheumatol 2015; 67(2):352-362. 
 (22)  Frisell T, Hellgren K, Alfredsson L, Raychaudhuri S, Klareskog L, Askling J. Familial 
aggregation of arthritis-related diseases in seropositive and seronegative rheumatoid 
arthritis: a register-based case-control study in Sweden. Ann Rheum Dis 2016; 75(1):183-
189. 
 (23)  Roberson ED, Bowcock AM. Psoriasis genetics: breaking the barrier. Trends Genet 2010; 
26(9):415-423. 
 (24)  Raychaudhuri S, Sandor C, Stahl EA, Freudenberg J, Lee HS, Jia X et al. Five amino 
acids in three HLA proteins explain most of the association between MHC and 
seropositive rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Genet 2012; 44(3):291-296. 
 (25)  Okada Y, Wu D, Trynka G, Raj T, Terao C, Ikari K et al. Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis 
contributes to biology and drug discovery. Nature 2014; 506(7488):376-381. 
 (26)  Eyre S, Bowes J, Diogo D, Lee A, Barton A, Martin P et al. High-density genetic 
mapping identifies new susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Genet 2012; 
44(12):1336-1340. 
 (27)  Gregersen PK, Silver J, Winchester RJ. The shared epitope hypothesis: an approach to 
understanding the molecular genetics of susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis 
Rheum 1987; 30:1205-1213. 
 (28)  van Steenbergen HW, Raychaudhuri S, Rodriguez-Rodriguez L, Rantapaa-Dahlqvist S, 
Berglin E, Toes RE et al. Association of valine and leucine at HLA-DRB1 position 11 
with radiographic progression in rheumatoid arthritis, independent of the shared epitope 
alleles but not independent of anti-citrullinated protein antibodies. Arthritis Rheumatol 
2015; 67(4):877-886. 
 (29)  Viatte S, Plant D, Han B, Fu B, Yarwood A, Thomson W et al. Association of HLA-
DRB1 haplotypes with rheumatoid arthritis severity, mortality, and treatment response. 
JAMA 2015; 313(16):1645-1656. 
 (30)  Silman AJ, Newman J, MacGregor AJ. Cigarette smoking increases the risk of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Results from a nationwide study of disease-discordant twins. 
Arthritis Rheum 1996; 39(5):732-735. 
 (31)  Klareskog L, Malmstrom V, Lundberg K, Padyukov L, Alfredsson L. Smoking, 
citrullination and genetic variability in the immunopathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. 
Semin Immunol 2011; 23(2):92-98. 
 (32)  Lee HS, Irigoyen P, Kern M, Lee A, Batliwalla F, Khalili H et al. Interaction between 
smoking, the shared epitope, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide: a mixed picture in three 
large North American rheumatoid arthritis cohorts. Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56(6):1745-
1753. 
 28 
 
 (33)  Vesperini V, Lukas C, Fautrel B, Le L, X, Rincheval N, Combe B. Association of tobacco 
exposure and reduction of radiographic progression in early rheumatoid arthritis: results 
from a French multicenter cohort. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken ) 2013; 65(12):1899-1906. 
 (34)  Kallberg H, Ding B, Padyukov L, Bengtsson C, Ronnelid J, Klareskog L et al. Smoking is 
a major preventable risk factor for rheumatoid arthritis: estimations of risks after various 
exposures to cigarette smoke. Ann Rheum Dis 2011; 70(3):508-511. 
 (35)  Lenz TL, Deutsch AJ, Han B, Hu X, Okada Y, Eyre S et al. Widespread non-additive and 
interaction effects within HLA loci modulate the risk of autoimmune diseases. Nat Genet 
2015; 47(9):1085-1090. 
 (36)  Plenge RM, Bridges SL, Jr. Personalized medicine in rheumatoid arthritis: miles to go 
before we sleep. Arthritis Rheum 2011; 63(3):590-593. 
 (37)  Klein K, Gay S. Epigenetics in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2015; 
27(1):76-82. 
 (38)  Liu Y, Aryee MJ, Padyukov L, Fallin MD, Hesselberg E, Runarsson A et al. Epigenome-
wide association data implicate DNA methylation as an intermediary of genetic risk in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Biotechnol 2013; 31(2):142-147. 
 (39)  Baxter D, McInnes IB, Kurowska-Stolarska M. Novel regulatory mechanisms in 
inflammatory arthritis: a role for microRNA. Immunol Cell Biol 2012; 90(3):288-292. 
 (40)  Bluml S, Bonelli M, Niederreiter B, Puchner A, Mayr G, Hayer S et al. Essential role of 
microRNA-155 in the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis in mice. Arthritis Rheum 
2011; 63(5):1281-1288. 
 (41)  Schellekens GA, de Jong BA, van den Hoogen FH, van de Putte LB, van Venrooij WJ. 
Citrulline is an essential constituent of antigenic determinants recognized by rheumatoid 
arthritis-specific autoantibodies. J Clin Invest. 101, 273-281. 1998.  
Ref Type: Journal (Full) 
 (42)  Girbal-Neuhauser E, Durieux JJ, Arnaud M, Dalbon P, Sebbag M, Vincent C et al. The 
epitopes targeted by the rheumatoid arthritis-associated antifilaggrin autoantibodies are 
posttranslationally generated on various sites of (pro)filaggrin by deimination of arginine 
residues. J Immunol 1999; 162(1):585-594. 
 (43)  Klareskog L, Catrina AI. Autoimmunity: lungs and citrullination. Nat Rev Rheumatol 
2015; 11(5):261-262. 
 (44)  Reynisdottir G, Olsen H, Joshua V, Engstrom M, Forsslund H, Karimi R et al. Signs of 
immune activation and local inflammation are present in the bronchial tissue of patients 
with untreated early rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2015. 
 (45)  Nielen MM, van Schaardenburg, Reesink WH, van de Stadt RJ, van der Horst-Bruinsma 
IE, de Koning MG et al. Specific autoantibodies precede the symptoms of rheumatoid 
 29 
 
arthritis: a study of serial measurements in blood donors. Arthritis Rheum. [50], 380-386. 
2004.  
Ref Type: Journal (Full) 
 (46)  Kerkman PF, Fabre E, van der Voort EI, Zaldumbide A, Rombouts Y, Rispens T et al. 
Identification and characterisation of citrullinated antigen-specific B cells in peripheral 
blood of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2015. 
 (47)  Rombouts Y, Willemze A, van Beers JJ, Shi J, Kerkman PF, van TL et al. Extensive 
glycosylation of ACPA-IgG variable domains modulates binding to citrullinated antigens 
in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2015. 
 (48)  Harre U, Georgess D, Bang H, Bozec A, Axmann R, Ossipova E et al. Induction of 
osteoclastogenesis and bone loss by human autoantibodies against citrullinated vimentin. 
J Clin Invest 2012; 122(5):1791-1802. 
 (49)  Bohler C, Radner H, Smolen JS, Aletaha D. Serological changes in the course of 
traditional and biological disease modifying therapy of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2013; 72(2):241-244. 
 (50)  Shi J, van Veelen PA, Mahler M, Janssen GM, Drijfhout JW, Huizinga TW et al. 
Carbamylation and antibodies against carbamylated proteins in autoimmunity and other 
pathologies. Autoimmun Rev 2014; 13(3):225-230. 
 (51)  Aletaha D, Alasti F, Smolen JS. Rheumatoid factor, not antibodies against citrullinated 
proteins, is associated with baseline disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis clinical trials. 
Arthritis Res Ther 2015; 17:229. 
 (52)  Sokolove J, Johnson DS, Lahey LJ, Wagner CA, Cheng D, Thiele GM et al. Rheumatoid 
factor as a potentiator of anti-citrullinated protein antibody-mediated inflammation in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol 2014; 66(4):813-821. 
 (53)  Klarenbeek PL, de Hair MJ, Doorenspleet ME, van Schaik BD, Esveldt RE, van de Sande 
MG et al. Inflamed target tissue provides a specific niche for highly expanded T-cell 
clones in early human autoimmune disease. Ann Rheum Dis 2012; 71(6):1088-1093. 
 (54)  James EA, Rieck M, Pieper J, Gebe JA, Yue BB, Tatum M et al. Citrulline-specific Th1 
cells are increased in rheumatoid arthritis and their frequency is influenced by disease 
duration and therapy. Arthritis Rheumatol 2014; 66(7):1712-1722. 
 (55)  de Hair MJ, Zijlstra IA, Boumans MJ, van de Sande MG, Maas M, Gerlag DM et al. 
Hunting for the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis: core-needle biopsy of inguinal 
lymph nodes as a new research tool. Ann Rheum Dis 2012; 71(11):1911-1912. 
 (56)  van HJ, Jansen DT, Polydorides S, Moustakas AK, Bax M, Feitsma AL et al. 
Crossreactivity to vinculin and microbes provides a molecular basis for HLA-based 
protection against rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Commun 2015; 6:6681. 
 30 
 
 (57)  Scher JU, Ubeda C, Equinda M, Khanin R, Buischi Y, Viale A et al. Periodontal disease 
and the oral microbiota in new-onset rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2012; 
64(10):3083-3094. 
 (58)  Wegner N, Wait R, Sroka A, Eick S, Nguyen KA, Lundberg K et al. Peptidylarginine 
deiminase from Porphyromonas gingivalis citrullinates human fibrinogen and alpha-
enolase: implications for autoimmunity in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2010; 
62(9):2662-2672. 
 (59)  Honda K, Littman DR. The microbiome in infectious disease and inflammation. Annu Rev 
Immunol 2012; 30:759-795. 
 (60)  Scher JU, Littman DR, Abramson SB. Review: Microbiome in Inflammatory Arthritis 
and Human Rheumatic Diseases. Arthritis Rheumatol 2016; 68(1):35-45. 
 (61)  Scher JU, Sczesnak A, Longman RS, Segata N, Ubeda C, Bielski C et al. Expansion of 
intestinal Prevotella copri correlates with enhanced susceptibility to arthritis. Elife 2013; 
2:e01202. 
 (62)  Scher JU, Ubeda C, Artacho A, Attur M, Isaac S, Reddy SM et al. Decreased bacterial 
diversity characterizes the altered gut microbiota in patients with psoriatic arthritis, 
resembling dysbiosis in inflammatory bowel disease. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015; 
67(1):128-139. 
 (63)  Smolen JS, Aletaha D, Koeller M, Weisman M, Emery P. New therapies for the treatment 
of rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 2007; 370:1861-1874. 
 (64)  McInnes IB, Schett G. The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 2011; 
365(23):2205-2219. 
 (65)  Humby F, Kelly S, Hands R, Rocher V, DiCicco M, Ng N et al. Use of ultrasound-guided 
small joint biopsy to evaluate the histopathologic response to rheumatoid arthritis therapy: 
recommendations for application to clinical trials. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015; 
67(10):2601-2610. 
 (66)  Feldmann M, Maini SR. Role of cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis: an education in 
pathophysiology and therapeutics. Immunol Rev 2008; 223:7-19. 
 (67)  Kraan MC, Versendaal H, Jonker M, Bresnihan B, Post WJ t Hart BA, Breedveld FC et al. 
Asymptomatic synovitis precedes clinically manifest arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 41, 1481-
1488. 1998.  
Ref Type: Journal (Full) 
 (68)  Raza K, Saber TP, Kvien TK, Tak PP, Gerlag DM. Timing the therapeutic window of 
opportunity in early rheumatoid arthritis: proposal for definitions of disease duration in 
clinical trials. Ann Rheum Dis 2012; 71(12):1921-1923. 
 (69)  Gerlag DM, Raza K, van Baarsen LG, Brouwer E, Buckley CD, Burmester GR et al. 
EULAR recommendations for terminology and research in individuals at risk of 
 31 
 
rheumatoid arthritis: report from the Study Group for Risk Factors for Rheumatoid 
Arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2012; 71(5):638-641. 
 (70)  Aletaha D, Neogi T, Silman A, Funovits J, Felson D, Bingham CO III et al. The 2010 
American College of Rheumatology / European League Against Rheumatism 
Classification Criteria for Rheumatoid Arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2010; 69:1580-1588. 
 (71)  Aletaha D, Breedveld FC, Smolen JS. The need for new classification criteria for 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2005; 52:3333-3336. 
 (72)  Radner H, Neogi T, Smolen JS, Aletaha D. Performance of the 2010 ACR/EULAR 
classification criteria for rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic literature review. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2013. 
 (73)  van der Heijde DM, Van't Hof MA, van Riel PL, van Leeuwen MA, van Rijswijk MH, 
van de Putte LB. Validity of single variables and composite indices for measuring disease 
activity in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 1992; 51:177-181. 
 (74)  Welsing P.M., van Gestel A.M., Swinkels H.L., Kiemeney L.A., van Riel P.L. The 
relationship between disease activity, joint destruction, and functional capacity over the 
course of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2001; 44(9):2009-2017. 
 (75)  Felson DT, Anderson JJ, Boers M, Bombardier C, Furst D,  GC et al. American College 
of Rheumatology preliminary definition of improvement in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis 
Rheum 1995; 38:727-735. 
 (76)  Prevoo MLL, van't Hof MA, Kuper HH, van de Putte LBA, van Riel PLCM. Modified 
disease activity scores that include twenty-eight-joint counts. Development and validation 
in a prospective longitudinal study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 
1995; 38:44-48. 
 (77)  Smolen JS, Breedveld FC, Schiff MH, Kalden JR, Emery P, Eberl G et al. A Simplified 
Disease Activity Index for Rheumatoid Arthritis For Use In Clinical Practice. 
Rheumatology 2003; 42:244-257. 
 (78)  Aletaha D, Nell VPK, Stamm T, Uffmann M, Pflugbeil S, Machold K et al. Acute phase 
reactants add little to composite disease activity indices for rheumatoid arthritis: 
Validation of a clinical activity score. Arthritis Res 2005; 7:R796-R806. 
 (79)  van Gestel AM, Prevoo MLL, van't Hof MA, van Rijswijk MH, van de Putte LBA, van 
Riel PLCM. Development and validation of the European League Against Rheumatism 
response criteria for rheumatoid arthritis: Comparison with the preliminary American 
College of Rheumatology and the World Health Organization/International League 
Against Rheumatism Criteria. Arthritis Rheum 1996; 39:34-40. 
 (80)  Aletaha D, Martinez-Avila J, Kvien TK, Smolen JS. Definition of treatment response in 
rheumatoid arthritis based on the simplified and the clinical disease activity index. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2012; 71:1190-1196. 
 32 
 
 (81)  Pincus T, Swearingen CJ, Bergman M, Yazici Y. RAPID3 (Routine Assessment of 
Patient Index Data 3), a rheumatoid arthritis index without formal joint counts for routine 
care: proposed severity categories compared to disease activity score and clinical disease 
activity index categories. J Rheumatol 2008; 35(11):2136-2147. 
 (82)  Klarenbeek NB, Koevoets R, Van der Heijde DM, Gerards AH, Ten WS, Kerstens PJ et 
al. Association with joint damage and physical functioning of nine composite indices and 
the 2011 ACR/EULAR remission criteria in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2011; 
70(10):1815-1821. 
 (83)  Radner H, Smolen JS, Aletaha D. Remission in rheumatoid arthritis: benefit over low 
disease activity in patient reported outcomes and costs. Arthritis Res Ther 2014; 
16(1):R56. 
 (84)  Smolen JS, Han C, Van der Heijde DM, Emery P, Bathon JM, Keystone E et al. 
Radiographic changes in rheumatoid arthritis patients attaining different disease activity 
states with methotrexate monotherapy and infliximab plus methotrexate: the impacts of 
remission and TNF-blockade. Ann Rheum Dis 2009; 68:823-827 [Epub 2008 Jul 1]. 
 (85)  Welsing PM, Landewe RB, van Riel PL, Boers M, van Gestel AM, van der LS et al. The 
relationship between disease activity and radiologic progression in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis: a longitudinal analysis. Arthritis Rheum 2004; 50(7):2082-2093. 
 (86)  Smolen JS, Han C, van der Heijde D, Emery P, Bathon JM, Keystone E et al. Infliximab 
Inhibits Radiographic Progression Regardless of Disease Activity at Baseline and 
Following Treatment in Patients with Early Active Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 
54 (Suppl), Abst 466. 2006.  
Ref Type: Abstract 
 (87)  Smolen JS, Landewe R, Breedveld FC, Buch M, Burmester G, Dougados M et al. 
EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis with synthetic and 
biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2013 update. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 
73(3):492-509. 
 (88)  Singh JA, Saag KG, Bridges SL, Jr., Akl EA, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC et al. 2015 
American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis. 
Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken ) 2015. 
 (89)  Smolen JS, Breedveld FC, Burmester GR, Bykerk V, Dougados M, Emery P et al. 
Treating rheumatoid arthritis to target: 2014 update of the recommendations of an 
international task force. Ann Rheum Dis 2015. 
 (90)  Felson DT, Smolen JS, Wells G, Zhang B, van Tuyl LH, Funovits J et al. American 
college of rheumatology/european league against rheumatism provisional definition of 
remission in rheumatoid arthritis for clinical trials. Ann Rheum Dis 2011; 70(3):404-413. 
 (91)  Kavanaugh A, Fleischmann RM, Emery P, Kupper H, Redden L, Guerette B et al. 
Clinical, functional and radiographic consequences of achieving stable low disease 
 33 
 
activity and remission with adalimumab plus methotrexate or methotrexate alone in early 
rheumatoid arthritis: 26-week results from the randomised, controlled OPTIMA study. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 72(1):64-71. 
 (92)  Thiele K, Huscher D, Bischoff S, Spathling-Mestekemper S, Backhaus M, Aringer M et 
al. Performance of the 2011 ACR/EULAR preliminary remission criteria compared with 
DAS28 remission in unselected patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 
72(7):1194-1199. 
 (93)  Makinen H, Kautiainen H, Hannonen P, Sokka T. Is DAS28 an appropriate tool to assess 
remission in rheumatoid arthritis? Ann Rheum Dis 2005; 64:1410-1413 originally 
published online 7 Jun 2005; doi:10.1136/ard.2005.037333. 
 (94)  Fleischmann R, van der Heijde D, Koenig AS, Pedersen R, Szumski A, Marshall L et al. 
How much does Disease Activity Score in 28 joints ESR and CRP calculations 
underestimate disease activity compared with the Simplified Disease Activity Index? Ann 
Rheum Dis 2014. 
 (95)  Smolen JS, Aletaha D. Interleukin-6 receptor inhibition with tocilizumab and attainment 
of disease remission in rheumatoid arthritis: The role of acute-phase reactants. Arthritis 
Rheum 2011; 63(1):43-52. 
 (96)  Bakker MF, Jacobs JW, Verstappen SM, Bijlsma JW. Tight control in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis: efficacy and feasibility. Ann Rheum Dis 2007; 66 Suppl 3:iii56-iii60. 
 (97)  Smolen JS, Aletaha D. The assessment of disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis. Clin 
Exp Rheumatol 2010; 28 (Suppl 59):S18-S27. 
 (98)  Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry - Rheumatoid arthritis: Developing 
drug products for treatment. Draft Gudance May 2013. http://www fda 
gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM3544
68 pdf (last accessed October 5, 2013) 2013. 
 (99)  van der Heijde D, Simon L, Smolen J, Strand V, Sharp J, Boers M et al. How to report 
radiographic data in randomized clinical trials in rheumatoid arthritis: guidelines from a 
roundtable discussion. Arthritis Rheum 2002; 47(2):215-218. 
 
(100)  Jimenez-Boj E, Nobauer-Huhmann I, Hanslik-Schnabel B, Dorotka R, Wanivenhaus AH, 
Kainberger F et al. Bone erosions and bone marrow edema as defined by magnetic 
resonance imaging reflect true bone marrow inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis. 
Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56(4):1118-1124. 
 
(101)  Mandl P, Balint PV, Brault Y, Backhaus M, D'Agostino MA, Grassi W et al. Metrologic 
properties of ultrasound versus clinical evaluation of synovitis in rheumatoid arthritis: 
results of a multicenter, randomized study. Arthritis Rheum 2012; 64(4):1272-1282. 
 
(102)  Sakellariou G, Scire CA, Verstappen SM, Montecucco C, Caporali R. In patients with 
early rheumatoid arthritis, the new ACR/EULAR definition of remission identifies 
 34 
 
patients with persistent absence of functional disability and suppression of 
ultrasonographic synovitis. Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 72(2):245-249. 
 
(103)  Balsa A, de Miguel E, Castillo C, Peiteado D, Martin-Mola E. Superiority of SDAI over 
DAS-28 in assessment of remission in rheumatoid arthritis patients using power Doppler 
ultrasonography as a gold standard. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010; 49(4):683-690. 
 
(104)  Dale J, Striling A, McInnes IB:Porter D. Targeting Ultrasound Remission In Early 
Rheumatoid Arthritis - Results Of The Taser Study. Arthritis Rheum 2013; 65 
(Suppl):S338-S339. 
 
(105)  Terslev L, Torp-Pedersen S, Qvistgaard E, von der RP, Bliddal H. Doppler ultrasound 
findings in healthy wrists and finger joints. Ann Rheum Dis 2004; 63(6):644-648. 
 
(106)  Fries J.F., Spitz P, Kraines RG, Holman HR. Measurement of patient outcome in arthritis. 
Arthritis Rheum 1980; 23:137-145. 
 
(107)  Fries JF, Witter J, Rose M, Cella D, Khanna D, Morgan-DeWitt E. Item response theory, 
computerized adaptive testing, and PROMIS: assessment of physical function. J 
Rheumatol 2014; 41(1):153-158. 
 
(108)  Aletaha D, Alasti F, Smolen JS. Optimisation of a treat-to-target approach in rheumatoid 
arthritis: strategies for the 3-month time point. Ann Rheum Dis 2015. 
 
(109)  Kirwan JR. The effect of glucocorticoids on joint destruction in rheumatoid arthritis. The 
Arthritis and Rheumatism Council Low-Dose Glucocorticoid Study Group. N Engl J Med 
1995; 333(3):142-146. 
 
(110)  Smolen JS, van der Heijde D, Machold KP, Aletaha D, Landewe R. Proposal for a new 
nomenclature of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(1):3-5. 
 
(111)  Goekoop-Ruiterman YP, De Vries-Bouwstra JK, Allaart CF, Van Zeben D, Kerstens PJ, 
Hazes JM et al. Clinical and radiographic outcomes of four different treatment strategies 
in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (the BeSt study): A randomized, controlled trial. 
Arthritis Rheum 2005; 52:3381-3390. 
 
(112)  Nam JL, Villeneuve E, Hensor EM, Conaghan PG, Keen HI, Buch MH et al. Remission 
induction comparing infliximab and high-dose intravenous steroid, followed by treat-to-
target: a double-blind, randomised, controlled trial in new-onset, treatment-naive, 
rheumatoid arthritis (the IDEA study). Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(1):75-85. 
 
(113)  Heimans L, Wevers-de Boer KV, Visser K, Goekoop RJ, van OM, Harbers JB et al. A 
two-step treatment strategy trial in patients with early arthritis aimed at achieving 
remission: the IMPROVED study. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(7):1356-1361. 
 
(114)  Dougados M, Combe B, Cantagrel A, Goupille P, Olive P, Schattenkirchner M et al. 
Combination therapy in early rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised, controlled, double blind 
52 week clinical trial of sulphasalazine and methotrexate compared with the single 
components. Ann Rheum Dis 1999; 58(4):220-225. 
 35 
 
 
(115)  Haagsma CJ, van Riel PL, de Jong AJ, van de Putte LB. Combination of sulphasalazine 
and methotrexate versus the single components in early rheumatoid arthritis: a 
randomized, controlled, double-blind, 52 week clinical trial. Br J Rheumatol 1997; 
36(10):1082-1088. 
 
(116)  de Jong PH, Hazes JM, Barendregt PJ, Huisman M, van ZD, van der Lubbe PA et al. 
Induction therapy with a combination of DMARDs is better than methotrexate 
monotherapy: first results of the tREACH trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 72(1):72-78. 
 
(117)  Verschueren P, De CD, Corluy L, Joos R, Langenaken C, Taelman V et al. Methotrexate 
in combination with other DMARDs is not superior to methotrexate alone for remission 
induction with moderate-to-high-dose glucocorticoid bridging in early rheumatoid 
arthritis after 16 weeks of treatment: the CareRA trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2015; 74(1):27-34. 
 
(118)  Wassenberg S, Rau R, Steinfeld P, Zeidler H. Very low-dose prednisolone in early 
rheumatoid arthritis retards radiographic progression over two years: a multicenter, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum 2005; 52:3371-3380. 
 
(119)  Svensson B, Boonen A, Albertsson K, van der Heijde D, Keller C, Hafstrom I. Low-dose 
prednisolone in addition to the initial disease-modifying antirheumatic drug in patients 
with early active rheumatoid arthritis reduces joint destruction and increases the remission 
rate: a two-year randomized trial. Arthritis Rheum 2005; 52:3360-3370. 
 
(120)  Bakker MF, Jacobs JW, Welsing PM, Verstappen SM, Tekstra J, Ton E et al. Low-Dose 
Prednisone Inclusion in a Methotrexate-Based, Tight Control Strategy for Early 
Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Randomized Trial. Ann Intern Med 2012; 156(5):329-339. 
 
(121)  Aletaha D, Funovits J, Keystone EC, Smolen JS. Disease activity early in the course of 
treatment predicts response to therapy after one year in rheumatoid arthritis patients. 
Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56(10):3226-3235. 
 
(122)  Pincus T, Yazici Y, Sokka T, Aletaha D, Smolen JS. Methotrexate as the "anchor drug" 
for the treatment of early rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2003; 21 (Suppl 
31):S178-S185. 
 
(123)  O'Dell JR, Mikuls TR, Taylor TH, Ahluwalia V, Brophy M, Warren SR et al. Therapies 
for Active Rheumatoid Arthritis after Methotrexate Failure. N Engl J Med 2013; 369:307-
318. 
 
(124)  Cohen S, Hurd E, Cush J, Schiff M, Weinblatt ME, Moreland LW et al. Treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis with anakinra, a recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, 
in combination with methotrexate: results of a twenty-four-week, multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum 2002; 46(3):614-624. 
 
(125)  Patakas A, Ji RR, Weir W, Connolly SE, Benson RA, Nadler SG et al. Abatacept inhibits 
T cell priming by inducing of a unique transcriptional profile that reduces their ability to 
activate antigen presenting cells. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015. 
 36 
 
 
(126)  Bonelli M, Ferner E, Goschl L, Bluml S, Hladik A, Karonitsch T et al. Abatacept (CTLA-
4IG) treatment reduces the migratory capacity of monocytes in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2013; 65(3):599-607. 
 
(127)  Schoels M, Aletaha D, Smolen JS, Wong JB. Comparative effectiveness and safety of 
biological treatment options after tumour necrosis factor alpha inhibitor failure in 
rheumatoid arthritis: systematic review and indirect pairwise meta-analysis. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2012; 71(8):1303-1308. 
 
(128)  Smolen JS, Kay J, Matteson EL, Landewe R, Hsia EC, Xu S et al. Insights into the 
efficacy of golimumab plus methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis who 
discontinued prior anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy: post-hoc analyses from the GO-
AFTER study. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(10):1811-1818. 
 
(129)  Smolen JS, Aletaha D. Forget personalised medicine and focus on abating disease activity. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 72(1):3-6. 
 
(130)  Burmester GR, Mariette X, Montecucco C, Monteagudo-Saez I, Malaise M, Tzioufas AG 
et al. Adalimumab alone and in combination with disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs 
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in clinical practice: the Research in Active 
Rheumatoid Arthritis (ReAct) trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2007; 66(6):732-739. 
 
(131)  Burmester GR, Rigby WF, van Vollenhoven RF, Kay J, Rubbert-Roth A, Kelman A et al. 
Tocilizumab in early progressive rheumatoid arthritis: FUNCTION, a randomised 
controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2015. 
 
(132)  Breedveld FC, Weisman MH, Kavanaugh AF, Cohen SB, Pavelka K, van Vollenhoven R 
et al. The PREMIER study - A multicenter, randomized, double-blind clinical trial of 
combination therapy with adalimumab plus methotrexate versus methotrexate alone or 
adalimumab alone in patients with early, aggressive rheumatoid arthritis who had not had 
previous methotrexate treatment. Arthritis Rheum 2006; 54:26-37. 
 
(133)  Klareskog L, van der Heijde D, de Jager JP, Gough A KJ, Malaise M, Martin-Mola E et al. 
Therapeutic effect of the combination of etanercept and methotrexate compared with each 
treatment alone in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: double-blind randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet 2004; 363:675-681. 
 
(134)  Edwards JC, Szczepanski L, Szechinski J, Filipowicz-Sosnowska A, Emery P, Close DR 
et al. Efficacy of B-cell-targeted therapy with rituximab in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:2572-2581. 
 
(135)  Dougados M, Kissel K, Sheeran T, Tak PP, Conaghan PG, Mola EM et al. Adding 
tocilizumab or switching to tocilizumab monotherapy in methotrexate inadequate 
responders: 24-week symptomatic and structural results of a 2-year randomised controlled 
strategy trial in rheumatoid arthritis (ACT-RAY). Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 72:43-50. 
 
(136)  Klarenbeek NB, Guler-Yuksel M, van der Kooij SM, Han KH, Ronday HK, Kerstens PJ 
et al. The impact of four dynamic, goal-steered treatment strategies on the 5-year 
 37 
 
outcomes of rheumatoid arthritis patients in the BeSt study. Ann Rheum Dis 2011; 
70(6):1039-1046. 
 
(137)  Gabay C, Emery P, van VR, Dikranian A, Alten R, Pavelka K et al. Tocilizumab 
monotherapy versus adalimumab monotherapy for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis 
(ADACTA): a randomised, double-blind, controlled phase 4 trial. Lancet 2013; 
381(9877):1541-1550. 
 
(138)  Burmester GR, Blanco R, Charles-Schoeman C, Wollenhaupt J, Zerbini C, Benda B et al. 
Tofacitinib (CP-690,550) in combination with methotrexate in patients with active 
rheumatoid arthritis with an inadequate response to tumour necrosis factor inhibitors: a 
randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet 2013; 381:451-560. 
 
(139)  O'Shea JJ, Schwartz DM, Villarino AV, Gadina M, McInnes IB, Laurence A. The JAK-
STAT pathway: impact on human disease and therapeutic intervention. Annu Rev Med 
2015; 66:311-328. 
 
(140)  Taylor PC, Keystone EC, van der Heijde D, Tanaka Y, Ishii T, Emoto K et al. Baricitinib 
Versus Placebo or Adalimumab in Patients with Active Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) and an 
Inadequate Response to Background Methotrexate Therapy: Results of a Phase 3 Study. 
[Abstract]. Arthritis Rheum 2015; 67 (Suppl 10):L2. 
http://acrabstracts.org/abstract/baricitinib-versus-placebo-or-adalimumab-in-patients-
with-active-rheumatoid-arthritis-ra-and-an-inadequate-response-to-background-
methotrexate-therapy-results-of-a-phase-3-study/. Accessed January 4, 2016. 
 
(141)  Genovese MC, Keystone E, Taylor P, Drescher E, Berclaz PY, Lee CH et al. 24-Week 
Results of a Blinded Phase 2b Dose-Ranging Study of Baricitinib, an Oral Janus Kinase 
1/Januse Kinase 2 Inhibitor, in Combination with Traditional Disease Modifying 
Antirheumatic Drugs in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis.  Arthritis Rheum 2012; 
64:S1049-S1050. 
 
(142)  Smolen JS, Nash P, Durez P, Hall S, Ilivanova E, Irazoque-Palazuelos F et al. 
Maintenance, reduction, or withdrawal of etanercept after treatment with etanercept and 
methotrexate in patients with moderate rheumatoid arthritis (PRESERVE): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2013; 381(9870):918-929. 
 
(143)  Emery P, Hammoudeh M, Fitzgerald O, Combe B, Martin-Mola E, Buch MH et al. 
Sustained remission with etanercept tapering in early rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 
2014; 371(19):1781-1792. 
 
(144)  Emery P, Burmester GR, Bykerk VP, Combe BG, Furst DE, Barre E et al. Evaluating 
drug-free remission with abatacept in early rheumatoid arthritis: results from the phase 3b, 
multicentre, randomised, active-controlled AVERT study of 24 months, with a 12-month, 
double-blind treatment period. Ann Rheum Dis 2015; 74(1):19-26. 
 
(145)  Buch MH, Smolen JS, Betteridge N, Breedveld FC, Burmester G, Dorner T et al. Updated 
consensus statement on the use of rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2011; 70(6):909-920. 
 38 
 
 
(146)  Smolen JS, Emery P, Ferraccioli GF, Samborski W, Berenbaum F, Davies OR et al. 
Certolizumab pegol in rheumatoid arthritis patients with low to moderate activity: the 
CERTAIN double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2014. 
 
(147)  Listing J, Strangfeld A, Kary S, Rau R, von HU, Stoyanova-Scholz M et al. Infections in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with biologic agents. Arthritis Rheum 2005; 
52(11):3403-3412. 
 
(148)  Dixon WG, Hyrich KL, Watson KD, Lunt M, Galloway J, Ustianowski A et al. Drug-
specific risk of tuberculosis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with anti-TNF 
therapy: results from the British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register (BSRBR). 
Ann Rheum Dis 2010; 69(3):522-528. 
 
(149)  Hauser SL, Waubant E, Arnold DL, Vollmer T, Antel J, Fox RJ et al. B-cell depletion 
with rituximab in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2008; 358(7):676-
688. 
 
(150)  Mohan N, Edwards ET, Cupps TR, Oliverio PJ, Sandberg G, Crayton H et al. 
Demyelination occurring during anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha therapy for 
inflammatory arthritides. Arthritis Rheum 2001; 44(12):2862-2869. 
 
(151)  Strangfeld A, Pattloch D, Herzer P, Edelmann E, Zinke S, Aringer M et al. Risk of cancer 
recurrence or new tumors in RA patients with prior malignancies treated with various 
biologic agents. Arhritis Rheum 2013; in press (ACR 2013 Abstract). 
 
(152)  Verstappen SM, King Y, Watson KD, Symmons DP, Hyrich KL. Anti-TNF therapies and 
pregnancy: outcome of 130 pregnancies in the British Society for Rheumatology 
Biologics Register. Ann Rheum Dis 2011. 
 
(153)  Ishikawa T, Kojima T, Kanamono T, et al. Pregnancy in women with rheumatoid 
arthritis receiving biologic agents – results from 7 years of surveillance of clinical practice 
in Japanese TBC registry for the patients with rheumatoid arthritis using biologics.  Ann 
Rheum Dis 70 (Suppl 3), 256. 2011.  
Ref Type: Abstract 
 
(154)  Ostensen M, Forger F. Management of RA medications in pregnant patients. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol 2009; 5(7):382-390. 
 
(155)  van der Lubbe PA, Dijkmans BS, Markusse H, Nassander U, Breedveld FC. A 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of CD4 monoclonal antibody therapy 
in early rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 38, 1097-1106. 1995.  
Ref Type: Abstract 
 
(156)  Maini RN, Paulus H, Breedveld FC, Moreland LW, St.Clair WE, Russell AS et al. rHu 
IL-10 in jubjects with active rheumatoid arthritis: A phase I cytokine response study. 
Arthritis Rheum 41 (Suppl), S 224. 1998.  
Ref Type: Generic 
 39 
 
 
(157)  Genovese MC, Durez P, Richards HB, Supronik J, Dokoupilova E, Mazurov V et al. 
Efficacy and safety of secukinumab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a phase II, dose-
finding, double-blind, randomised, placebo controlled study. Ann Rheum Dis 2013; 
72(6):863-869. 
 
(158)  Genovese MC, Greenwald M, Cho CS, Berman A, Jin L, Cameron GS et al. Phase 2 
randomized study of subcutaneous ixekizumab, an Anti-IL-17 monoclonal antibody, in 
biologic-naive or TNF-IR patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol 2014; 
66:1693-1704. 
 
(159)  Smolen J, Agarwal SK, Ilivanova E, Xu XL, Miao Y, Mudivarthy S et al. A phase 2 study 
evaluating the efficacy and safety of subcutaneously administered ustekinumab and 
guselkumab in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis despite treatment with 
methotrexate. Ann Rheum Dis 2015; 74 (Suppl. 2):76-77. 
 
(160)  Miossec P. IL-17 in rheumatoid arthritis: a new target for treatment or just another 
cytokine? Joint Bone Spine 2004; 71(2):87-90. 
 
(161)  Genovese MC, Cohen SB, Wofsy D, Weinblatt ME, Firestein GS, Brahn E et al. A 24-
week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study of the efficacy 
of oral SCIO-469, a p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor, in patients with active 
rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2011; 38(5):846-854. 
 
(162)  Damjanov N, Kauffman RS, Spencer-Green GT. Efficacy, pharmacodynamics, and safety 
of VX-702, a novel p38 MAPK inhibitor, in rheumatoid arthritis: results of two 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical studies. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 
60(5):1232-1241. 
 
(163)  Genovese MC, Kavanaugh A, Weinblatt ME, Peterfy C, Dicarlo J, White ML et al. An 
oral syk kinase inhibitor in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: A 3 month randomized 
placebo controlled phase 2 study in patients with active RA who had failed biologic 
agents. Arthritis Rheum 2010. 
 
(164)  Lindstrom TM, Robinson WH. Biomarkers for rheumatoid arthritis: making it personal. 
Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl 2010; 242:79-84. 
 
(165)  Semerano L, Romeo PH, Boissier MC. Metabolomics for rheumatic diseases: has the time 
come? Ann Rheum Dis 2015; 74(7):1325-1326. 
 
(166)  Ducreux J, Durez P, Galant C, Nzeusseu TA, Van den Eynde B, Houssiau FA et al. 
Global molecular effects of tocilizumab therapy in rheumatoid arthritis synovium. 
Arthritis Rheumatol 2014; 66(1):15-23. 
 
(167)  Burska AN, Roget K, Blits M, Soto GL, van de Loo F, Hazelwood LD et al. Gene 
expression analysis in RA: towards personalized medicine. Pharmacogenomics J 2014; 
14(2):93-106. 
 
(168)  Ponchel F, Burska AN, Vital EM. Pharmacogenomics in rheumatoid arthritis: how close 
are we to the clinic? Pharmacogenomics 2014; 15(10):1275-1279. 
 40 
 
 
(169)  Ortea I, Roschitzki B, Ovalles JG, Longo JL, de lT, I, Gonzalez I et al. Discovery of 
serum proteomic biomarkers for prediction of response to infliximab (a monoclonal anti-
TNF antibody) treatment in rheumatoid arthritis: an exploratory analysis. J Proteomics 
2012; 77:372-382. 
 
(170)  Combe B, Landewe R, Lukas C, Bolosiu HD, Breedveld FC, Dougados M et al. Eular 
recommendations for the management of early arthritis: Report of a task force of the 
European Standing Committee for International Clinical Studies Including Therapeutics 
(ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis 2006; 66:34-45. 
 
(171)  Grigor C, Capell H, Stirling A, McMahon AD, Lock P, Vallance R et al. Effect of a 
treatment strategy of tight control for rheumatoid arthritis (the TICORA study): a single-
blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004; 364:263-269. 
 
(172)  Gullick NJ, Oakley SP, Zain A, Gibson T, Jones T, Mistlin A et al. Goal-directed therapy 
for RA in routine practice is associated with improved function in patients with disease 
duration up to 15 years. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2012; 51(4):759-761. 
 
(173)  Vastesaeger N, Xu S, Aletaha D, St Clair EW, Smolen JS. A pilot risk model for the 
prediction of rapid radiographic progression in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 
(Oxford) 2009; 48(9):1114-1121. 
 
(174)  Smolen JS, Emery P, Fleischmann R, van Vollenhoven RF, Pavelka K, Durez P et al. 
Adjustment of therapy in rheumatoid arthritis on the basis of achievement of stable low 
disease activity with adalimumab plus methotrexate or methotrexate alone: the 
randomised controlled OPTIMA trial. Lancet 2014; 383(9914):321-332. 
 
(175)  Aletaha D, Ward MM, Machold KP, Nell VPK, Stamm T, Smolen JS. Remission and 
active disease in rheumatoid arthritis: Defining criteria for disease activity states. Arthritis 
Rheum 2005; 52:2625-2636. 
 
(176)  de Jong PH, Hazes JM, Han HK, Huisman M, van ZD, van der Lubbe PA et al. 
Randomised comparison of initial triple DMARD therapy with methotrexate monotherapy 
in combination with low-dose glucocorticoid bridging therapy; 1-year data of the 
tREACH trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(7):1331-1339. 
 
 
 Fast Facts
Click here to download Supplementary Material: FAST FACTS.docx
 Figure 1:  
A selection of critical loci associated with risk and progression of RA are depicted on a notional map of the key 
immune cells implicated in the pathogenesis of RA.
m
DC
p
DC
B cell
Germinal
Center
formation
Th17 (Th1) 
cell
Treg 
cell
Macrophage
Fibroblast like synoviocyte
Plasma cell
CD40
PTPN22
TYK2
HLA DR4
CTLA4
CD28
CCL21
STAT4
TNFAIP3
TRAF1
C5
IL-2 IL-21
IL-2RB
IL-6R
IRAK1
PADI4
Osteoclast
Chondrocyte
Neutrophil
Mast cell
Figure 1
 Bronchial 
microbiome
Oral microbiome
(Recurrent exposure to
exogeneous, endogenous or
commensal viral, bacterial or
other agents)
Shared
epitope (Chr. 6)
PTPN22
PAD
TNF
….
+
+
+
Posttranslational modifitations
•
Acetylation
•
Carbamylation
•
Citrullination
•
Methylation
•
Phosphorylation
•
Sumoylation
•
Ubiquitination
=
=
Asymptomatic arthritis
(Cellular infiltrate)  
Transition to
manifest arthritis
Symptomatic arthritis
(Swelling, pain, stiffness, damage)
Figure 2. Etiology and pathway to arthritis
Pre-Arthritis
Loss of Tolerance
Figure 2
 CYTOPLASM
NUCLEUS
Kinas
es
Kinase
s
p38
JNK
ERK
MAPK
signalling 
cascade
SYK (& 
BTK)
signalling 
cascade
Syk
BTK
PI3K
signalling 
cascade
PI3
K
PI3
K
PI3
K
Lipid 
messeng
ers
PI3K
Second 
messeng
ers
NFKB
signalling 
cascade
IKK
NFκB
JAK JAK
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
Gene transcription
IL-6
IL-12
IFN
JAK
signalling 
cascade 
Within a cell
Within the joint
Figure 3
Pathogenesis
IL-12, 
IL-23
IL-15,
/Th17
Within the
synovial tissue
Pathobiology
Cell biology
Molecular biology
IL-23
Normal
joint
RA joint
Figure 3
 Early diagnosis
Follow 
patients using
a composite
measure of
disease
activity that
comprises
joint counts.
Aim at clinical
remission
(ACR-EULAR 
criteria) or at 
least low
disease
activity within
6 months (this
requires about
80% 
improvement
of disease
activity within
3 months of
starting
treatment)
MTX+low dose 
glucocorticoid
With risk factors present
add any biological agent
With risk factors absent
switch to (or add)
another cs DMARD
Upon failure:
Switch to any other
biologic agent
(even within same
class) plus MTX or to
a tsDMARD (+/- MTX)
Immediate 
treatment
initiation
Upon 
failure:
Stratify
B.
C.
D.
Once any of the treatment regimens has led to the treatment target and its
maintenance, consider reducing dose or increasing interval
(suggested sequence: glucocorticoids, bDMARDs, csDMARDs)
Figure 4. Therapeutic approach to rheumatoid arthritis.  A. General strategy; B. Early treatment phase;
C. Treatment approach when MTX (plus glucocorticoid) failed to allow reaching the treatment target; 
D. Treatment approach when a first biological failed.
A.
Figure 4
 Figure 5. ACR70 response rates with different bDMARDs and tsDMARDs
19,8
32,0
19,8
10,2
16,0
24,0
20,0
12,0
0,0
5,0
10,0
15,0
20,0
25,0
30,0
35,0
40,0
45,0
50,0
MTX-naive
MTX-naive
MTX-IR
Anti-TNF-IR MTX-Naive
MTX-Naive
MTX-IR
Anti-TNF-IR
% ACR70 responders
(AIM)
(ATTAIN)
(GO-FORWARD) (GO-AFTER)
(AGREE)
(GO-BEFORE)
Golimumab (50 mg) + MTX
MTX monotherapy
Abatacept (~10 mg/kg)+ MTX
A.
B.
Figure 5
 25,4
38,6
22,0
12,4
25,0
47,0
20,0
12,0
0,0
5,0
10,0
15,0
20,0
25,0
30,0
35,0
40,0
45,0
50,0
MTX-naive
MTX-naive
MTX-IR
Anti-TNF-IR
MTX-Naive
MTX-Naive
MTX-IR
Anti-TNF-IR
% ACR70 responders
(OPTION)
(RADIATE)
(DANCER)
(REFLEX)
(FUNCTION)
(IMAGE)
Rituximab (1000 mg) + MTX
MTX monotherapy
Tocilizumab (8 mg/kg)+ MTX
C.
D.
 15,0
29,0
20,0
14,0
21,0
42,0
24,0
17,0
0,0
5,0
10,0
15,0
20,0
25,0
30,0
35,0
40,0
45,0
MTX-naive
MTX-naive
MTX-IR
Anti-TNF-IR
MTX-Naive
MTX-Naive
MTX-IR
Anti-TNF-IR
% ACR70 responders
(Oral-
STANDARD)
(Oral-STEP)
(RA-BUILD) (RA-BEACON)
(Oral-START)
(RA-BEGIN)
Baricitinib (4 mg/day) 
MTX monotherapy
Tofacitinib (5mg bid) 
E.
F.
