 Ethics and the Legalization of Physician-Assisted Suicide: An American
College of Physicians Position Paper
Lois Snyder Sulmasy, JD, and Paul S. Mueller, MD, MPH, for the Ethics, Professionalism and Human Rights Committee of the
American College of Physicians*
Calls to legalize physician-assisted suicide have increased and
public interest in the subject has grown in recent years despite
ethical prohibitions. Many people have concerns about how they
will die and the emphasis by medicine and society on interven-
tion and cure has sometimes come at the expense of good end-
of-life care. Some have advocated strongly, on the basis of au-
tonomy, that physician-assisted suicide should be a legal option
at the end of life. As a proponent of patient-centered care, the
American College of Physicians (ACP) is attentive to all voices,
including those who speak of the desire to control when and
how life will end. However, the ACP believes that the ethical
arguments against legalizing physician-assisted suicide remain
the most compelling. On the basis of substantive ethics, clinical
practice, policy, and other concerns articulated in this position
paper, the ACP does not support legalization of physician-
assisted suicide. It is problematic given the nature of the patient–
physician relationship, affects trust in the relationship and in the
profession, and fundamentally alters the medical profession'
s
role in society. Furthermore, the principles at stake in this debate
also underlie medicine'
s responsibilities regarding other issues
and the physician'
s duties to provide care based on clinical judg-
ment, evidence, and ethics. Society'
s focus at the end of life
should be on efforts to address suffering and the needs of pa-
tients and families, including improving access to effective hos-
pice and palliative care. The ACP remains committed to improving
care for patients throughout and at the end of life.
Ann Intern Med. 2017;167:576-578. doi:10.7326/M17-0938
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at Annals.org on 19 September 2017.
H
ow we die, live, and are cared for at the end of life
is important, with implications for individuals, their
families, and society. The 1997 report Approaching
Death: Improving Care at the End of Life, by the Insti-
tute of Medicine (IOM), documented inadequate end-
of-life care in the United States (1). The investigators of
SUPPORT (Study to Understand Prognoses and Prefer-
ences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment; 2000)
agreed (2, 3). The emphasis by medicine and society
on intervention and cure has sometimes come at the
expense of good end-of-life care. Inappropriate treat-
ment at the end of life may be harmful and draining—
physically, emotionally, and financially—for patients and
their families. Many people have concerns about death.
At the end of life, some patients receive unwanted care;
others do not receive needed care (4–6). Some end-of-
life concerns are outside of medicine'
s scope and
should be addressed in other ways. Although medicine
now has an unprecedented capacity to treat illness and
ease the dying process, the right care in the right place
at the right time has not been achieved.
Medicine and society still struggle with getting it
right for all patients. Although progress has been
made, the principles and practices of hospice and pal-
liative medicine have not been fully realized (4). Revis-
iting these issues in 2014, the IOM'
s Dying in America:
Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences
Near the End of Life reported that challenges remain in
delivering quality end-of-life care to a growing and di-
verse elderly population, especially with regard to ac-
cess to care, communication barriers, time pressures,
and care coordination (7). Inadequate reimbursement
and other disincentives also are barriers to palliative and
hospice care.
Hospice and palliative care may ease apprehension
about the dying process. Such care requires improving
access to, financing of, and training in palliative care;
improving hospital, nursing home, and at-home capa-
bilities in delivering care; and encouraging advance
care planning and openness to discussions about dy-
ing. Of note, 90% of U.S. adults do not know what pal-
liative care is; however, when told the definition, more
than 90% say they would want it for themselves or fam-
ily members if severely ill (4).
Within this context of challenges in providing palli-
ative and hospice care, a few U.S. jurisdictions have
legalized physician-assisted suicide. This paper pres-
ents the position of the American College of Physicians
(ACP) on the topic. The ACP recognizes the range of
views on, the depth of feeling about, and the complex-
ity of this issue. This executive summary is a synopsis of
See also:
Related article . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 579
Editorial comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 595, 597
* This paper, authored by Lois Snyder Sulmasy, JD, and Paul S. Mueller, MD, MPH, was developed for the Ethics, Professionalism and Human Rights Committee
of the American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the Ethics, Professionalism and Human Rights Committee at the time of the paper'
s approval
were Carrie A. Horwitch, MD, MPH† (Chair); Omar T. Atiq, MD† (Vice Chair); John R. Ball, MD, JD†; Nitin S. Damle, MD, MS†; Pooja Jaleel, BA†; Daniel B.
Kimball Jr., MD†; Lisa S. Lehmann, MD, PhD†; Ana Marı
´a Lo
´ pez, MD, MPH†; Paul S. Mueller, MD, MPH‡; Alexandra Norcott, MD†; Sima Suhas Pendharkar, MD,
MPH†; Julie R. Rosenbaum, MD†; Molly B. Southworth, MD, MPH†; and Thomas G. Tape, MD†. Approved by the ACP Board of Regents on 27 March 2017.
† Nonauthor contributor.
‡ Author.
POSITION PAPER
Annals of Internal Medicine
576 © 2017 American College of Physicians
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 the ACP'
s position. See the Glossary for definitions and
the Appendix for the full position paper.
METHODS
This position paper was developed from Septem-
ber 2015 to March 2017 on behalf of the ACP Ethics,
Professionalism and Human Rights Committee (EPHRC).
Committee members abide by the ACP'
s conflict-of-
interest policy and procedures (www.acponline.org
/about-acp/who-we-are/acp-conflict-of-interest-policy
-and-procedures), and appointment to and procedures
of the EPHRC are governed by the ACP'
s bylaws (www
.acponline.org/about-acp/who-we-are/acp-bylaws). Af-
ter an environmental assessment to determine the
scope of issues and literature reviews, the EPHRC eval-
uated and discussed several drafts of the paper; the
paper was then reviewed by members of the ACP
Board of Governors, Board of Regents, Council of Early
Career Physicians, Council of Resident/Fellow Mem-
bers, Council of Student Members, Council of Subspe-
cialty Societies, Patient Partnership in Healthcare Cen-
ter and Advisory Board, and other committees and
experts. The paper was revised on the basis of com-
ments from the aforementioned groups and individu-
als, reviewed again by the full leadership, and then
revised further. Finally, the ACP Board of Regents re-
viewed the paper and approved it on 27 March 2017.
Financial support for this project is exclusively from the
ACP operating budget.
BACKGROUND AND BRIEF RATIONALE
In 2001, the ACP published a position paper op-
posing legalization of physician-assisted suicide (8).
This issue also has been considered every few years in
the American College of Physicians Ethics Manual, in-
cluding the current edition (9). Given recent changes in
the legal landscape, public interest in the topic, and
continuing barriers to palliative and hospice care, an
updated position paper is presented here. Within a
framework that considers clinical practice, ethics, law,
and policy, this paper provides background, discusses
the role of palliative and hospice care, explores the na-
ture of the patient–physician relationship and the dis-
tinction between refusal of life-sustaining treatment
and physician-assisted suicide, and provides recom-
mendations for responding to patient requests for
physician-assisted suicide.
Medical ethics establishes the duties of physicians
to patients and society, sometimes to a greater extent
than the law (9). Physicians have duties to patients on
the basis of the ethical principles of beneficence (that
is, acting in the patient'
s best interest), nonmaleficence
(avoiding or minimizing harm), respect for patient au-
tonomy, and promotion of fairness and social justice
(9). Medical ethics and the law strongly support a
patient'
s right to refuse treatment, including life-
sustaining treatment. The intent is to avoid or withdraw
treatment that the patient judges to be inconsistent
with his or her goals and preferences. Death follows
naturally, after the refusal, as a result of the underlying
disease (9).
Ethical arguments in support of physician-assisted
suicide highlight the principle of respect for patient au-
tonomy and a broad interpretation of a physician'
s duty
to relieve suffering (10). Proponents view physician-
assisted suicide as an act of compassion that respects
patient choice and fulfills an obligation of nonabandon-
ment (11). Opponents maintain that the profession'
s
most consistent ethical traditions emphasize care and
comfort, that physicians should not participate in inten-
tionally ending a person'
s life, and that physician-
assisted suicide requires physicians to breach specific
prohibitions as well as the general duties of benefi-
cence and nonmaleficence. Such breaches are viewed
as inconsistent with the physician'
s role as healer and
comforter (12, 13).
Both sides agree that patient autonomy is critical
and must be respected, but they also recognize that it
is not absolute and must be balanced with other ethical
principles (9, 14). To do otherwise jeopardizes the phy-
sician'
s ability to practice high-value care in the best
interests of the patient, in a true patient–physician part-
nership. Only by this balancing of ethical principles can
physicians fulfill their duties, including those in more
everyday encounters, such as when a physician advises
against tests requested by a patient that are not medi-
cally indicated, declines to write an illegal prescription,
or breaches confidentiality to protect public health. It
also undergirds the physician'
s duty not to engage in
futile care (such as care based on requests for nonindi-
cated
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
or
end-of-life
treatment of brain-dead patients under an expansive
view of patient autonomy). Physicians are members of a
profession with ethical responsibilities; they are moral
agents, not merely providers of services (15).
The suffering of dying patients may be great and is
caused by somatic symptoms, such as pain and nausea;
psychological conditions, such as depression and anx-
iety; interpersonal suffering due to dependency or un-
resolved conflict; or existential suffering based in hope-
lessness, indignity, or the belief that one'
s life has
ended in a biographical sense but has not yet ended
biologically. For some patients, a sense of control over
the manner and timing of death brings comfort. How-
ever, is it reasonable to ask medicine to relieve all hu-
man suffering? Just as medicine cannot eliminate
death, medicine cannot relieve all human suffering.
Both proponents and opponents of physician-assisted
suicide wish to alleviate suffering of dying patients, and
physicians have an ethical duty to provide competent
palliative and hospice care (9). However, is physician-
Glossary
Suicide: The act of killing oneself intentionally.
Physician-assisted suicide: Physician participation in advising or
providing, but not directly administering, the means or information
enabling a person to intentionally end his or her life (e.g., ingesting a
lethal dose of medication prescribed for that purpose).
Euthanasia: The act of intentionally ending a life to relieve pain or other
suffering (e.g., lethal injection performed by a physician).
Ethics and the Legalization of Physician-Assisted Suicide
POSITION PAPER
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017 577
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 assisted suicide a type of control over suffering and the
dying process that is within the goals and scope of
medicine?
Balancing respect for patient autonomy against 
other principles reflects ethical arguments about the 
nature of the patient–physician relationship—a relation-
ship that is inherently unequal because of power differ-
entials and the vulnerability of illness—physicians'
 du-
ties, and the role of the medical profession in society. A 
fuller consideration of this ethical balance, intent and 
causation in acts near the end of life, medicalization 
versus personalization of death, and the ethics and im-
plications of physician-assisted suicide are presented in 
the Appendix (16–81).
POSITION STATEMENT
The ACP affirms a professional responsibility to im-
prove the care of dying patients and their families.
The ACP does not support the legalization of
physician-assisted suicide, the practice of which raises
ethical, clinical, and other concerns. The ACP and its
members, including those who might lawfully partici-
pate in the practice, should ensure that all patients can
rely on high-quality care through to the end of life, with
prevention or relief of suffering insofar as possible, a
commitment to human dignity and management of
pain and other symptoms, and support for families.
Physicians and patients must continue to search to-
gether for answers to the challenges posed by living
with serious illness before death (9).
CONCLUSION
Society'
s goal should be to make dying less, not
more, medical. Physician-assisted suicide is neither a
therapy nor a solution to difficult questions raised at the
end of life. On the basis of substantive ethics, clinical
practice, policy, and other concerns, the ACP does not
support legalization of physician-assisted suicide. This
practice is problematic given the nature of the patient–
physician relationship, affects trust in that relationship
as well as in the profession, and fundamentally alters
the medical profession'
s role in society. Furthermore,
the principles at stake in this debate also underlie med-
icine'
s responsibilities on other issues and the physi-
cian'
s duty to provide care based on clinical judgment,
evidence, and ethics. Control over the manner and tim-
ing of a person'
s death has not been and should not be
a goal of medicine. However, through high-quality care,
effective communication, compassionate support, and
the right resources, physicians can help patients control
many aspects of how they live out life'
s last chapter.
From the American College of Physicians, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
Acknowledgment: The authors and the ACP Ethics, Profes-
sionalism and Human Rights Committee thank the many re-
viewers of the paper for helpful comments on drafts and
Kathy Wynkoop for administrative assistance.
Financial
Support:
Exclusively
from
the
ACP
operating
budget.
Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline
.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M17
-0938.
Requests for Single Reprints: Lois Snyder Sulmasy, JD, Amer-
ican College of Physicians, Center for Ethics and Professional-
ism, 190 N. Independence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA 19106;
e-mail, lsnyder@acponline.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
References
1. Field MJ, Cassel CK, eds; Committee on Care at the End of Life.
Approaching Death: Improving Care at the End of Life. Washington,
DC: National Academies Pr; 1997.
2. Phillips RS, Hamel MB, Covinsky KE, Lynn J. Findings from
SUPPORT and HELP: an introduction. Study to Understand Progno-
ses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatment. Hospital-
ized Elderly Longitudinal Project. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000;48:S1-5.
[PMID: 10809450]
3. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized pa-
tients. The study to understand prognoses and preferences for out-
comes and risks of treatments (SUPPORT). The SUPPORT Principal
Investigators. JAMA. 1995;274:1591-8. [PMID: 7474243]
4. Kelley AS, Morrison RS. Palliative care for the seriously ill. N Engl J
Med. 2015;373:747-55. [PMID: 26287850] doi:10.1056/NEJMra
1404684
5. Johnson KS. Racial and ethnic disparities in palliative care. J Palliat
Med. 2013;16:1329-34. [PMID: 24073685] doi:10.1089/jpm.2013
.9468
6. Payne R. Racially associated disparities in hospice and palliative
care access: acknowledging the facts while addressing the opportu-
nities to improve. J Palliat Med. 2016;19:131-3. [PMID: 26840847]
doi:10.1089/jpm.2015.0475
7. Institute of Medicine; Committee on Approaching Death. Dying in
America: Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences
Near the End of Life. Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2014.
doi:10.17226/18748
8. Snyder L, Sulmasy DP; Ethics and Human Rights Committee,
American College of Physicians-American Society of Internal Medi-
cine. Physician-assisted suicide. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:209-16.
[PMID: 11487490]
9. Snyder L; American College of Physicians Ethics, Professionalism,
and Human Rights Committee. American College of Physicians Eth-
ics Manual: sixth edition. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:73-104. [PMID:
22213573] doi:10.7326/0003-4819-156-1-201201031-00001
10. Angell M. The Supreme Court and physician-assisted suicide—
the ultimate right [Editorial]. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:50-3. [PMID:
8970940]
11. Quill TE, Back AL, Block SD. Responding to patients requesting
physician-assisted death: physician involvement at the very end of
life. JAMA. 2016;315:245-6. [PMID: 26784762] doi:10.1001/jama
.2015.16210
12. Gaylin W, Kass LR, Pellegrino ED, Siegler M. ‘
Doctors must not
kill’. JAMA. 1988;259:2139-40. [PMID: 3346989]
13. Decisions near the end of life. Council on Ethical and Judicial
Affairs, American Medical Association. JAMA. 1992;267:2229-33.
[PMID: 1372944]
14. Callahan D. When self-determination runs amok. Hastings Cent
Rep. 1992;22:52-5. [PMID: 1587727]
15. Yang YT, Curlin FA. Why physicians should oppose assisted sui-
cide. JAMA. 2016;315:247-8. [PMID: 26784763] doi:10.1001/jama
.2015.16194
POSITION PAPER
Ethics and the Legalization of Physician-Assisted Suicide
578 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Current Author Addresses: Ms. Snyder Sulmasy: American
College of Physicians, Center for Ethics and Professionalism,
190 N. Independence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA 19106.
Dr. Mueller: Mayo Clinic, Gonda Building 17, 200 First Street
Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: P.S. Mueller.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: L. Snyder Sulmasy, P.S.
Mueller.
Drafting of the article: L. Snyder Sulmasy, P.S. Mueller.
Critical
revision
for
important
intellectual
content:
P.S.
Mueller.
Final approval of the article: L. Snyder Sulmasy, P.S. Mueller.
Administrative,
technical,
or
logistic
support:
L.
Snyder
Sulmasy.
Collection and assembly of data: L. Snyder Sulmasy, P.S.
Mueller.
APPENDIX AND EXPANDED RATIONALE: ETHICS
AND THE LEGALIZATION OF PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE—AN AMERICAN COLLEGE
OF PHYSICIANS POSITION PAPER
Framing the Issues: Care Near the End of Life
We all will die. How we die—and live at the end of
life—is important, with implications for individuals, their
families, and society. How we are cared for at the end
of life matters.
The groundbreaking 1997 report Approaching
Death: Improving Care at the End of Life, by the IOM,
documented inadequate end-of-life care in the United
States (1). In 2000, the SUPPORT investigators agreed
(2, 3). Although the cultural norm of fighting disease
aggressively is the right approach in many cases, the
emphasis by medicine, as well as society, on interven-
tion and cure sometimes comes at the expense of good
end-of-life care. Inappropriate treatment at the end of
life may be harmful and draining—physically, emotion-
ally, and financially—for patients and their families.
Many of us have concerns or apprehensions about how
we will die. Indeed, some patients receive unwanted
care at the end of life, whereas others do not receive
the care they need (4–6). Although medicine now has
an unprecedented capacity to treat illness and ease the
dying process, the right care in the right place at the
right time has not been achieved.
Medicine and society still struggle to get it right for
all patients. Although progress has been made, the
principles and practices of hospice and palliative med-
icine have not been fully realized (4). Revisiting these
issues in 2014, the IOM report Dying in America: Im-
proving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences
Near the End of Life found that challenges remain in
delivering quality end-of-life care to a growing and di-
verse elderly population, especially regarding access to
care, communication barriers, time pressures, and care
coordination (7). Inadequate reimbursement and other
disincentives also create barriers to palliative and hos-
pice care.
Wide agreement exists that hospice and palliative
care may ease apprehension about the dying process.
Such care requires improving access to, financing of,
and training in palliative care; improving hospital, nurs-
ing home, and at-home capabilities in delivering care;
and encouraging advance care planning and openness
to discussions about dying. Of note, 90% of U.S. adults
do not know what palliative care is, but when told the
definition, more than 90% say they would want it for
themselves or family members if severely ill (4).
Access to state-of-the-art symptom control remains
limited for all dying patients. Of particular concern, ev-
idence of ethnic and racial disparities in access, out-
comes, and communication is increasing (5, 6). Many
patients fear they will not receive appropriate end-of-
life care when they need it. Others are concerned
about being a financial, physical, or other burden on
their family, losing autonomy or control, or being
placed in a long-term care facility. Some are alone or
lonely; loneliness has a mortality risk similar to that of
cigarette smoking, yet its health implications are un-
derappreciated (16). Many persons approaching death
are clinically depressed or have other psychiatric co-
morbid conditions, and some contemplate suicide (17,
18). According to Wilson and colleagues, “the expres-
sion of a desire for death by a terminally ill patient
should raise a suspicion about mental health problems;
by itself, however, it is not definitively diagnostic of
one” (17). This desire fluctuates over time (19, 20) and
may be related to inadequate symptom management.
Medicine can and should ameliorate many of these
problems; some, however, are outside the scope or
goals of medicine and should be addressed in other
ways.
As challenges in providing palliative and hospice
care
continue,
a
few
jurisdictions
have
legalized
physician-assisted suicide (see the Glossary for defini-
tions and the Appendix Table for U.S. jurisdictions with
physician-assisted suicide laws). The ACP recognizes
the range of views, depth of feeling, and complexity of
the issue of physician-assisted suicide.
Appendix Table. U.S. Jurisdictions Where Physician-
Assisted Suicide Is Legal
Where
When
How
Oregon
1997
Voter-approved ballot initiative
Washington
2008
Voter-approved ballot initiative
Montana
2009
Court decision*
Vermont
2013
Legislation
California
2015
Legislation
Colorado
2016
Voter-approved ballot initiative
District of Columbia
2016
Legislation
* A patient'
s request for physician-assisted suicide can be an affirma-
tive defense for a physician who participates.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Revisiting Physician-Assisted Suicide
In 2001, the ACP published a position paper op-
posing legalization of physician-assisted suicide (8).
The issue also has been considered every few years in
the American College of Physicians Ethics Manual, in-
cluding the current edition (9). Given recent changes in
the legal landscape, public interest in the topic, and
continuing barriers to palliative and hospice care, an
updated position paper is presented here. Within a
framework that considers clinical practice, ethics, law,
and policy, this paper provides background, discusses
the role of palliative and hospice care, explores the na-
ture of the patient–physician relationship and the dis-
tinction between refusal of life-sustaining treatment
and physician-assisted suicide, and provides recom-
mendations for responding to patient requests for
physician-assisted suicide.
The Context
Physician-assisted suicide is medical help with a pa-
tient'
s intentional act to end his or her own life (for ex-
ample, an individual taking a lethal dose of medication
prescribed by a physician for that purpose). It is ethi-
cally, legally, and clinically different from patient refusal
of life-sustaining treatment through the withdrawal or
withholding of treatment. Physician-assisted suicide
also differs from euthanasia, an act in which a physician
intentionally terminates the life of a patient (such as by
lethal injection), the purpose of which is to relieve pain
or other suffering (8). Dictionaries define suicide as in-
tentionally ending one'
s own life. Despite cultural and
historical connotations, the term is neither disparaging
nor a judgment. Terms for physician-assisted suicide,
such as aid in dying, medical aid in dying, physician-
assisted death, and hastened death, lump categories of
action together, obscuring the ethics of what is at stake
and making meaningful debate difficult; therefore, clar-
ity of language is important.
Although suicide and attempted suicide have been
decriminalized in the United States, assisting a suicide
remains a statutory offense in most states. Euthanasia is
illegal everywhere in the United States. In New Mexico,
a lower-court decision authorized physician-assisted
suicide, but it was struck down; like all appellate courts,
the New Mexico Supreme Court ruled that there is no
right to physician-assisted suicide. Elsewhere in the
world, in 2015, the Parliament of the United Kingdom
voted down a physician-assisted suicide bill, 330 to
118, and Canada legalized both physician-assisted sui-
cide and euthanasia. In 2016, the Parliament of South
Australia rejected a bill on euthanasia. Physician-
assisted suicide and euthanasia are legal in the Nether-
lands, Belgium, and Luxembourg; euthanasia is legal in
Colombia; and Switzerland has decriminalized assisted
suicide.
Principles of Medical Ethics and Arguments,
Pro and Con
Medical ethics establishes the duties of physicians
to patients and society, sometimes to a greater extent
than the law (9). Physicians have duties to patients
based on the ethical principles of beneficence (acting
in the patient'
s best interest), nonmaleficence (avoiding
or minimizing harm), respect for patient autonomy, and
promotion of fairness and social justice (9). Medical
ethics and the law strongly support a patient'
s right to
refuse treatment, including life-sustaining treatment.
The intent is to avoid or withdraw treatment that the
patient considers unduly burdensome and inconsistent
with his or her health goals and preferences. Death fol-
lows naturally after the refusal, due to the underlying
disease (9).
Ethical arguments in support of physician-assisted
suicide highlight the principle of respect for patient au-
tonomy and a broad interpretation of a physician'
s duty
to relieve suffering. The decision to intentionally end
one'
s life is regarded as intensely private and therefore
should not be prohibited (10). Seeking physician-
assisted suicide is most frequently associated with con-
cerns about loss of autonomy and control, decreasing
ability to participate in enjoyable activities, and loss of
dignity, rather than pain or other symptoms (21, 22).
For persons who seek this type of control, palliative and
hospice care are not the issue—they often are already
receiving those services. In Oregon, the state with the
most experience, 1327 persons have obtained pre-
scriptions for lethal doses of medications under the law
since 1997; 859 died after taking the medication. Of
105 deaths during 2014, 68% occurred in persons
older than 65 years, 95% were white, 56% were men,
48% were persons with a baccalaureate degree or
higher, and 69% had cancer (21). More recent justifica-
tions present physician-assisted suicide as a personal
choice, avoiding discussion of important medical ethics
considerations (11).
Proponents of physician-assisted suicide view it as
an act of compassion that respects patient choice and
fulfills an obligation of nonabandonment (11). In sup-
port of legalization, they also argue that some patients
receiving a lethal prescription ultimately do not use it.
In addition, some maintain that physician-assisted sui-
cide already occurs where it is illegal (23), so legaliza-
tion would result in standardization, transparency, and
monitoring.
Opponents maintain that the profession'
s most
consistent ethical traditions emphasize care and com-
fort and that physicians should not participate in inten-
tionally ending a person'
s life (12). Physician-assisted
suicide requires physicians to breach specific prohibi-
tions as well as the general duties of beneficence and
nonmaleficence. Such breaches are viewed as inconsis-
tent with the physician'
s role as healer and comforter
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 (13). Pronouncements against physician-assisted sui-
cide date back to Hippocrates.
Opponents agree that patient autonomy is critical
and must be respected but recognize that it is not ab-
solute and must be balanced with other ethical princi-
ples (9, 14). To do otherwise jeopardizes the physi-
cian'
s ability to practice high-value care in the best
interests of the patient, in a true patient–physician part-
nership. Only by such a balance of ethical principles
can physicians fulfill their duties, including those in
more everyday encounters, such as when a physician
advises against tests requested by a patient that are not
medically indicated, declines to write illegal prescrip-
tions, or breaches confidentiality to protect public
health. It also undergirds the duty that physicians not
engage in futile care (for example, care based on re-
quests for nonindicated cardiopulmonary resuscitation
or end-of-life treatment of brain-dead patients under
an expansive view of patient autonomy). Physicians are
members of a profession with ethical responsibilities;
they are moral agents, not merely providers of services
(15).
Death certificate requirements under physician-
assisted suicide laws ask physicians to list the cause of
death as the underlying illness, not the new pathology
caused by ingestion of a lethal dose of medicine (24),
which seems inconsistent with the physician'
s duty of
honesty. Moreover, although individual physicians may
decline
to
participate,
conscientious
objection
to
physician-assisted suicide does not address the funda-
mental ethical objections to it.
The suffering of dying patients may be great; it is
caused by somatic symptoms, such as pain and nausea;
psychological conditions, such as depression and anx-
iety; interpersonal suffering due to dependency or un-
resolved conflict; or existential suffering based in hope-
lessness, indignity, or the belief that one'
s life has
ended in a biographical sense but has not yet ended
biologically. For some patients, a sense of control over
the manner and timing of death brings comfort. How-
ever, is it reasonable to ask medicine to relieve all hu-
man suffering? Just as medicine cannot eliminate
death, medicine cannot relieve all human suffering; at-
tempting to do so ultimately leads to bad medical care
(25). Good medicine demands compassion for the dy-
ing, but compassion also needs reason (26). Both pro-
ponents and opponents wish to alleviate suffering of
dying patients, and physicians have an ethical duty to
provide competent palliative and hospice care (9).
However, is physician-assisted suicide a type of control
over suffering and the dying process that is within the
goals and scope of medicine?
Balancing respect for patient autonomy against
other ethical principles reflects arguments about the
nature of the patient–physician relationship, physicians'
duties, and the role of the medical profession in soci-
ety. In fact, one may argue that making physicians arbi-
ters of assisted suicide is a return to paternalism and
not a power physicians should want (27), that “the le-
galization of physician-assisted suicide does not em-
power patients; it empowers physicians” (28).
Legalization
of
physician-assisted
suicide
also
raises social justice issues. Society and the medical pro-
fession have duties to safeguard the patient–physician
relationship and human dignity. These duties apply es-
pecially to the most vulnerable members of society: the
sick, the elderly, children, the disabled, the poor, mi-
norities, and others. Some individuals might view them-
selves as unproductive or burdensome and, on that ba-
sis, as candidates for assisted suicide, especially if a
physician raises it or validates a request. Physician-
assisted suicide laws have been associated with a 6%
increase in total suicides (15% in those older than 65
years) in the states where physician-assisted suicide is
legal, controlling for state-specific time trends (29, 30).
Although a recent study did not find vulnerable groups
being pressured to accept physician-assisted suicide, it
did raise questions about a lack of data on complica-
tions and on how many physicians may have assisted
without reporting (31). Vulnerable communities and in-
dividuals raise strong concerns that legalization leads
to attitudinal changes, subtle biases about quality of
life, and judgments that some lives are not worth living
(32, 33). National disability groups are opposed to
physician-assisted suicide (32, 34). One article reported
various opinions among focus group participants (35).
Finally, advocating for physician-assisted suicide where
there is no general right to health care and access to
hospice and palliative care services is limited, espe-
cially in an era of health care cost containment, is ironic
(8).
Ethics and the Nature of the Patient–Physician
Relationship
The ACP'
s main concerns in this debate are ethical
ones. The patient–physician relationship is inherently
unequal. Physicians have specialized medical knowl-
edge, training, experience, and prescribing powers
that patients do not. Illness makes patients vulnerable
(including physicians who are patients [36, 37]). Pa-
tients disrobe, are examined, and disclose intimate in-
formation to their physicians. The physician must earn
the patient'
s trust, preserve his or her confidentiality,
and act as a fiduciary. Physicians publicly profess that
they will act for the benefit of their patients, putting
patients' welfare and best interests first and helping
them cope with illness, disability, suffering, and death.
The physician has a duty to respect the dignity and the
cultural and spiritual uniqueness and traditions of every
patient (9).
Physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia were
common during the time of Hippocrates, leading to
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 their specific prohibition in the Hippocratic Oath (38).
Together with the prohibition of sexual relationships
between physicians and patients and the duty to main-
tain patient confidentiality, the Oath provides a context
for a therapeutic alliance to prevent the exploitation of
patient relationships.
The Hippocratic Oath, of course, is not followed
word for word today; however, it has been analyzed
and applied over time in light of its fundamental prin-
ciples. Acting in the best interests of the patient and
recognizing the special nature of the patient–physician
relationship, principles and prohibitions set ethical
boundaries to prevent misunderstandings and misuse
of medical authority. These boundaries encourage pa-
tients to be open and honest regarding intimate health
matters in a safe space, in the context of a trusted
relationship.
Physicians can influence patients, even in ways phy-
sicians may not appreciate. Patients seeking physician-
assisted suicide may seek validation to end their lives.
Indeed, studies have shown that socially isolated, vul-
nerable persons seek social support and contact
through visits with their physicians (16). Physicians may
influence patients based on their own fears of death
and disability (39). Evidence also suggests that many
physicians who participate in physician-assisted suicide
are adversely affected by the experience (40). Some
commentators question whether assisted suicide needs
to be physician assisted and whether others might pro-
vide assistance instead (41).
The Ethics of Refusal of Treatment and
Providing Symptom Control: A Closer Look
at Intent and Causation
For decades, the consensus has been that after a
careful weighing of patient autonomy, beneficence,
nonmaleficence, and societal interests, a patient may
forgo life-sustaining treatment. Although Hippocratic
writings explicitly proscribe euthanasia and physician-
assisted suicide, they deem treatment abatement ethi-
cally appropriate in patients who are “overmastered by
disease” (42). Although some lower courts have ques-
tioned the importance of this distinction (43), the U.S.
Supreme Court has distinguished the refusal of treat-
ment from suicide (44, 45). Withdrawal of treatment
based on patient wishes respects the patient'
s bodily
integrity and right to be free of unwanted treatment.
Physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia are interven-
tions done with the intent to end the patient'
s life (46,
47). This distinction is ethically and legally important
(9).
Some argue that withdrawing treatment on the ba-
sis of patient wishes—an omission, such as forgoing a
mechanical ventilator in a patient with respiratory fail-
ure—and prescribing a lethal dose of medicine for the
patient'
s use—a commission—are equivalent, because
they both are acts that lead to the patient'
s death. How-
ever, commission (doing something) versus omission
(not doing something) is not alone determinative. With-
drawing ventilator support is an act, but the act merely
removes an intervention that prevented a preexisting
illness from running its course. The aim of the act is not
to terminate the patient'
s life (47). Intent and causation
are critical factors in distinguishing physician-assisted
suicide from withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment.
Death may be accelerated if a patient requests
withdrawal of a life-sustaining treatment and that re-
quest is carried out. However, the patient could have
refused the treatment when it was originally offered;
therefore, he or she may request its withdrawal after it
is started. If not for the intervention to which the patient
consented, death would have occurred as a result of
the underlying disease. As the International Association
for Hospice and Palliative Care, citing the European As-
sociation for Palliative Care, stated, “Withholding or
withdrawing ineffective, futile, burdensome, and un-
necessary life-prolonging procedures or treatments
does not constitute euthanasia or PAS [physician-
assisted suicide] because it is not intended to hasten
death, but rather indicate the acceptance of death as a
natural consequence of the underlying disease pro-
gression” (48).
The intent of treatment refusal is freedom from an
unwanted intervention. A natural death follows due to
the underlying disease (in fact, imposing unwanted
treatment is a bodily invasion and is considered uneth-
ical and an illegal battery). In contrast, if a person dis-
connects a ventilator without patient consent and the
patient subsequently dies, that person has acted
wrongly. In both instances, the patient dies after with-
drawal of life-sustaining treatment, but in very different
ways under ethics and the law. Death by medication
overdose is not a natural death due to an underlying
medical condition.
Research
advances
have
introduced
new
life-
sustaining technologies into clinical practice. For exam-
ple, many patients have life-sustaining devices, such as
pacemakers,
implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators,
and ventricular assist devices. Physicians inevitably en-
counter patients whose underlying disease no longer is
being treated effectively by the device or who have a
terminal illness the device cannot treat (such as cancer).
Desiring a natural death, patients or their surrogates
may request withdrawal of therapies delivered by these
devices. In these situations, the death that follows is
due to the underlying heart disease or other comorbid
conditions (49, 50). Physicians should honor these re-
quests. However, without a firm line drawn between
withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment and physician-
assisted suicide, or because of confusion between the
two, some physicians might consider discontinuation of
these therapies as intentional killing and refuse to im-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 plement such requests. Patients and families often, but
not always, see the line.
Intent and causation also are critical factors in pro-
viding pain or symptom relief. Competent provision of
symptom control is an ethical duty (9). Patients often
fear the prospect of unrelieved pain. Some physicians
withhold pain medication because of ungrounded con-
cerns that higher doses may accelerate death through
respiratory suppression or that the patient may become
addicted to the medication. Appropriate pain relief,
however, rarely results in either (51, 52), and patients
and families need to understand this (52). Under the
rule of double effect, strong ethical support exists for
increasing pain medication for terminally ill patients if
the intent is to relieve pain, even if it might shorten life
(9, 53, 54).
The rule of double effect holds that an action un-
dertaken with the intent of achieving a benefit is mor-
ally acceptable even if it has a harmful side effect, pro-
vided that the harmful side effect is not intended, the
side effect is not the cause of the benefit, and the ben-
efit outweighs the harm. Vigorous management of pain
and symptoms, such as dyspnea and nausea, at the end
of life is ethical, even if the risk for shortening life is
foreseeable, if the intent is to relieve those symptoms.
The beneficial effects are pain and symptom control;
the rare but potential harmful effect is respiratory sup-
pression, but it is not intended. If the intent was to
cause death, or to cause death to relieve pain, it would
not be permissible. Likewise, it would not be in keeping
with the rule of double effect to use pain control to
“treat” loneliness, depression, being tired of living, or
existential suffering.
Law and Ethics: U.S. Supreme Court Decisions
on Assisted Suicide
Although the language of rights is sometimes in-
voked, there is no right to physician-assisted suicide in
the United States. In fact, in landmark decisions, the
U.S. Supreme Court overruled 2 lower courts that had
found a constitutional right (45, 55). The lower-court
rulings differed in important ways. In Compassion in
Dying v. Washington (56), the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit had held that persons have a right to
choose how and when they die. As applied to the lim-
ited circumstance of the competent, terminally ill adult
who wants a physician'
s prescription for a lethal dose of
medication, the Washington State criminal statute ban-
ning physician-assisted suicide was found unconstitu-
tional as a violation of the Due Process Clause of the
14th Amendment, which says a state may not “deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property without due pro-
cess of law.”
In contrast, in Quill v. Vacco (43), the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit specifically declined to
“identify a new fundamental right.” It said a New York
law was unconstitutional on much narrower grounds, as
a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th
Amendment, because competent patients at the end of
life were being treated differently: Some patients could
refuse life-sustaining treatment and thereby accelerate
death, but others were prohibited from seeking pre-
scriptions from physicians to hasten death. The Equal
Protection Clause says that no state shall “deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the
laws.”
The U.S. Supreme Court found both lower-court
decisions unpersuasive. Instead, it found refusal of
treatment and physician-assisted suicide to be very dif-
ferent. Refusal of treatment, the Court concluded,
means being free of the bodily invasion of unwanted
medical treatment—a right to be left alone, not a right to
something. This is a “negative right”—a form of right of
which Americans have many—and differs from a posi-
tive right to secure assistance to kill oneself and control
the manner and timing of death. Lending support to
the rule of double effect, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor
pointed out in her concurring opinion that vigorous
pain control for the dying is ethical and available: “. . . a
patient who is suffering from a terminal illness and who
is experiencing great pain has no legal barriers to ob-
taining medication, from qualified physicians, to allevi-
ate that suffering, even to the point of causing uncon-
sciousness and hastening death.” This would include
what some refer to as palliative sedation or terminal
sedation, although a more accurate term would be
double-effect sedation.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that there is no con-
stitutional right to assisted suicide and that states may
prohibit it. However, the Court also left open the pos-
sibility that individual states could legalize it.
Slippery Slopes
Although the ACP'
s fundamental concerns are
based on ethical principles, research suggests that a
“slippery slope” exists in jurisdictions where physician-
assisted suicide and euthanasia are legal. In the Neth-
erlands, requests are granted for patients whose “med-
ical condition” is categorized as “tired of living.” Many
patients report “loneliness” and “psychological suffer-
ing” as symptoms (57). One study found that persons
receiving euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide in
the Netherlands for psychiatric disorders were mostly
women with complex and chronic psychiatric, medical,
and psychosocial histories, and disagreement about
patient eligibility among physicians was not unusual
(58, 59). In Oregon, referrals for psychiatric evaluations
have been infrequent (60); in 2014, only 3 of 105 per-
sons who died under the law were referred for formal
psychiatric or psychological evaluation. In a study from
Belgium, death by euthanasia increased from 2% in
2007 to 5% in 2013. Similarly, approvals of euthanasia
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 requests increased from 55% in 2007 to 77% in 2013
(61). An editorial said these trends were “worrisome”
and “require that [the slippery-slope concern] be taken
very seriously” (62).
A recent review found that safeguards and controls
in jurisdictions where physician-assisted suicide and eu-
thanasia are legal are not always followed (63), and
concerns have been raised about underreporting (31).
Subtle long-term changes in attitudes are difficult to
detect. For example, although only a small number of
persons have requested physician-assisted suicide in
Oregon, as noted earlier, questions arise regarding
whether that fact lessens these and other concerns.
Limiting physician-assisted suicide to the terminally
ill is said to be a safeguard, but prognostication raises
practical concerns. Laws such as Oregon'
s require a
consultation from a second physician to confirm the di-
agnosis and prognosis. However, predicting how long
a terminally ill patient will live or to what extent cogni-
tive capacity will be impaired by disease or injury often
is difficult. In addition, many patients do not have long-
standing relationships with physicians who know them
well. Furthermore, current safeguards are likely to be
challenged. Restricting physician-assisted suicide to
terminally ill adults with decision-making capacity raises
legal concerns about arbitrary discrimination (64). Fair-
ness, it may be argued, would require granting access
to decisionally incapable and non–terminally ill per-
sons. Also, because some patients cannot take pills, ar-
bitrary discrimination could be asserted, unless the
practice is broadened from physician-assisted suicide
to euthanasia.
Dying Well: Moving From Medicalization to
Personalization of Death
Is a medicalized death a good death? Have we al-
ready gone too far down a path in which dying patients
receive unwanted technology in the intensive care unit
while their family members are regarded as “visitors”?
Is the solution medicalization of death through medica-
tion overdose? Physician-assisted suicide is not a ther-
apy. It runs counter to the goal of the patient rights
movement to empower patients to experience a more
natural death.
Medicalizing death does not address the needs of
dying patients and their families. What is needed is
care that emphasizes caring in the last phase of life,
facilitating a natural dying process, and humanizing in-
stitutions that are used only when those settings are
unavoidable. The 3 Wishes Project shows how even
simple, nontechnologic approaches in the hospital in-
tensive care unit can improve care, ease dying, en-
hance dignity, and give voice to patients and families
while deepening the sense of vocation among clini-
cians (65). The 3 Wishes researchers said the project:
. . . aimed to integrate palliative care and spir-
itual care into critical care practice. Eliciting
and honoring wishes fostered a community
of
caring,
promoting
patient-
and
family-
centeredness as a core component of palliative
care. It encouraged the verbalization and real-
ization of unmet spiritual needs, whether secu-
lar or faith-based. Our findings underscore the
drive that we all have to search for meaning,
memories, and closure in anticipation of death
while helping to create preparedness, comfort,
and connections during the dying process.
(65)
In “A Modern Ars Moriendi,” a physician recounts
the death of her rancher father, noting the challenges
they faced trying to refuse hospital treatment. Ulti-
mately, his wishes were met by going home and chang-
ing the “focus from life-prolonging technology to life-
enriching
community”
(66).
Earlier
hospice
care,
avoiding the intensive care unit in the last month of life,
and experiencing death at home are associated with
family perceptions of better care for cancer patients
(67). Studies have found regional variations in end-of-
life care, with “little relationship to patient preference,”
but some evidence of lower-intensity care when the pri-
mary care physician is more involved in care (68). Lon-
gitudinal relationships should be valued and supported
by health care systems and payers.
Home is where most patients want to die (69), and
even the discontinuation of ventilators (70) or implant-
able cardiac devices (71) can be done compassionately
and effectively at home with hospice care. This ap-
proach is more patient centered and a better use of
resources when hospital care is not truly necessary. This
is the control the medical profession can and should
give patients and their families. Dying well requires sci-
ence and an art of caring for the dying.
Medicine's Role in a Societal Decision
The ACP recognizes that some patient cases will
be medically and ethically challenging, that autonomy-
based
arguments
in
support
of
legalization
of
physician-assisted suicide are compelling, and that
some might find physician-assisted suicide justifiable in
rare circumstances. Patients have the ultimate authority
over their lives, but whether physicians should assist
them in carrying out suicide is another matter.
Despite changes in the legal and political land-
scape, the ethical arguments against legalization of
physician-assisted suicide remain the most compelling.
We are mindful that ethics is not merely a matter for a
vote. Majority support of a practice does not make it
ethical. Medical history provides several cautionary ex-
amples of laws and practices in the United States (such
as racial segregation of hospital wards) that were
widely endorsed but very problematic.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Furthermore, the ACP does not believe neutrality
on this controversial issue is appropriate. The medical
profession should not be neutral regarding matters of
medical ethics (9). The ACP is not neutral on practices
that affect the patient–physician relationship and trust
in the profession, such as laws that restrict or mandate
discussions with, or certain recommendations for, pa-
tients. According to the American College of Physicians
Ethics Manual, physicians have a duty to come forward,
to “clearly articulate the ethical principles that guide
their behavior in clinical care, research, and teaching,
or as citizens or collectively as members of the profes-
sion. It is crucial that a responsible physician perspec-
tive be heard as societal decisions are made” (9).
A few patients want to control the timing and man-
ner of death; many more are fearful of what living the
last phase of life with serious illness will be like. To the
extent that the debate about legalizing physician-
assisted suicide is a dilemma because of the failings of
medicine to adequately provide comfort and good
care to dying patients, medicine should do better. Le-
galized physician-assisted suicide medicalizes suicide
(72). Physician-assisted suicide is not a private act but a
social one, with effects on family, community, and
society.
Responding to Patient Requests for Assisted
Suicide
Etymologically, to be compassionate means to
“suffer with” another person; remaining with a dying
patient is the essence of nonabandonment (73). When
the patient'
s suffering is interpersonal, existential, or
spiritual, care coordination is necessary, and the roles
of the physician are to remain present; provide com-
passionate care; and enlist the support of social work-
ers, psychologists, hospice volunteers, chaplains, and
family in addressing sources of suffering that are be-
yond the scope of medical care.
Regardless of jurisdiction, physicians may encoun-
ter patients who request physician-assisted suicide (or
express fear of suffering with death). Patient concerns
and reasons for the request should be discussed thor-
oughly. As for all patients nearing the end of life, the
physician should:
1. Be present (74), listening to the patient and
keeping dialogue open, exploring the reasons for the
request, trying to understand its meaning and seeking
alternative solutions where possible.
2. Affirm that he or she will care for and not aban-
don the patient, accompanying and advising the pa-
tient through the journey of end-of-life care (studies
suggest “the desire to hasten death is future focused
and appears to be related to fear of distress and not
coping, rather than with current levels of distress or
coping ability” [75]).
3. Discuss patient goals of care and the nature of
curative and comfort care, explaining a both/and ap-
proach to disease-oriented and palliative care as well
as an either/or approach and asking, for example, how
do you hope I can help you?
4. Facilitate advance care planning and an under-
standing of surrogate decision making, as desired by
the patient.
5. Ensure that the patient is fully informed of the
right to refuse treatments and what that entails.
6. Discontinue or do not start medications and in-
terventions that interfere with the patient'
s values,
goals, and preferences.
7. Assess and treat the patient'
s pain and other dis-
tressing physical and psychological symptoms.
8. Assess and optimize patient function through a
whole-patient focus.
9. Coordinate, as desired by the patient, the efforts
of other members of the health care team, and use
community-based resources to address financial, emo-
tional, and spiritual burdens on the patient and family.
10. Prepare the patient and family for what they can
expect as illness progresses, addressing uncertainty to-
gether and ensuring that the patient and family have
informed expectations, including, for example, an un-
derstanding that advanced illness often entails a natu-
ral loss of appetite and thirst.
11.
Regularly
assess
the
patient'
s
status
and
decision-making capacity.
12. Arrange hospice care at home if that is the pa-
tient'
s preference, being cognizant that palliative and
hospice care expertise should be used as early as is
indicated. Many patients in the United States receive
such care too late or not at all.
Requests for physician-assisted suicide are unlikely
to persist when compassionate supportive care is pro-
vided (76, 77). However, providing this care may be
challenging, especially in today'
s time-pressured health
care environment. It requires us to reflect and act on
“. . . the original purpose of physicians' work: to wit-
ness
others' suffering
and
provide
comfort
and
care . . . the privilege at the heart of the medical profes-
sion” (78).
Physicians should consult with colleagues in caring
for the patient and family but also seek support for
themselves. According to Kearney and colleagues,
“Self-care is an essential part of the therapeutic man-
date” (79). Collegial support also reinforces better care
of the patient and family. Describing a phone conver-
sation with a colleague about the shared care of a pa-
tient, a physician reflects that it was, “A call whose sole
but worthy purpose was to say, ‘
I feel powerless, and I
know you do, too, so let'
s talk this over.’” Yet, it “. . . al-
lowed two physicians to share . . . and reconcile to the
inevitable. All too often, we announce our triumphs but
camouflage our losses, as if the death of a patient rep-
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 resents a personal failure. In hindsight, acknowledging
the impending loss enabled appropriate palliation for
the patient and timely pastoral care for her hus-
band . . . ” (80).
The need to ensure the central role of families in
care; provision of consistent, high-quality care; and ed-
ucation, training, and support of physicians were iden-
tified as overarching themes in a series of reports on
end-of-life care recently issued by the British Medical
Association (81). The British Medical Association and
Australian Medical Association both reaffirmed opposi-
tion to legalization of physician-assisted suicide and eu-
thanasia in 2016.
Conclusion
The art of medicine is arguably most needed as
patients live out the last phase of life. Society'
s goal
should be to make dying less, not more, medical. The
ACP affirms a professional responsibility to improve the
care of dying patients and their families.
The ACP does not support the legalization of
physician-assisted suicide, the practice of which raises
ethical, clinical, and other concerns. The ACP and its
members, including those who might lawfully partici-
pate in the practice, should ensure that all persons can
rely on high-quality care through to the end of life, with
prevention or relief of suffering insofar as possible, a
commitment to human dignity and the management of
pain and other symptoms, and support for family. Phy-
sicians and patients must continue to search together
for answers to the challenges posed by living with seri-
ous illness before death (9).
Control over the manner and timing of a person'
s
death has not been and should not be a goal of medi-
cine. However, through high-quality care, effective
communication, compassionate support, and the right
resources, physicians can help patients control many
aspects of how they live out life'
s last chapter. Through-
out patients'lives, including as they face death, medi-
cine must strive to give patients the care, respect, and
comfort they deserve.
Web-Only References
16. Gerst-Emerson K, Jayawardhana J. Loneliness as a public health
issue: the impact of loneliness on health care utilization among older
adults. Am J Public Health. 2015;105:1013-9. [PMID: 25790413] doi:
10.2105/AJPH.2014.302427
17. Wilson KG, Dalgleish TL, Chochinov HM, Chary S, Gagnon PR,
Macmillan K, et al. Mental disorders and the desire for death in pa-
tients receiving palliative care for cancer. BMJ Support Palliat Care.
2016;6:170-7.
[PMID:
24644212]
doi:10.1136/bmjspcare-2013
-000604
18. Monforte-Royo C, Villavicencio-Cha
´vez C, Toma
´s-Sa
´bado J,
Mahtani-Chugani V, Balaguer A. What lies behind the wish to hasten
death? A systematic review and meta-ethnography from the per-
spective of patients. PLoS One. 2012;7:e37117. [PMID: 22606338]
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0037117
19. Chochinov HM, Tataryn D, Clinch JJ, Dudgeon D. Will to live in
the terminally ill. Lancet. 1999;354:816-9. [PMID: 10485723]
20. Rosenfeld B, Pessin H, Marziliano A, Jacobson C, Sorger B, Ab-
bey J, et al. Does desire for hastened death change in terminally ill
cancer patients? Soc Sci Med. 2014;111:35-40. [PMID: 24747154]
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.03.027
21. Oregon Health Authority. Death with Dignity Act. 2017. Ac-
cessed at http://public.health.oregon.gov/ProviderPartnerResources
/EvaluationResearch/DeathwithDignityAct/Pages/index.aspx on 24
February 2017.
22. Loggers ET, Starks H, Shannon-Dudley M, Back AL, Appelbaum
FR, Stewart FM. Implementing a Death with Dignity program at a
comprehensive cancer center. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1417-24.
[PMID: 23574120] doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1213398
23. Meier DE, Emmons CA, Wallenstein S, Quill T, Morrison RS, Cas-
sel CK. A national survey of physician-assisted suicide and euthana-
sia in the United States. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1193-201. [PMID:
9554861]
24. Wash. Rev. Code § 70.245.040 (1)(b)(2).
25. Callahan D. Self-extinction: the morality of the helping hand. In:
Weir RF, ed. Physician-Assisted Suicide. Bloomington, IN: Univ Indi-
ana Pr; 1997.
26. Pellegrino ED. Compassion needs reason too. JAMA. 1993;270:
874-5. [PMID: 8340989]
27. Yuill K. Assisted Suicide: The Liberal, Humanist Case Against Le-
galization. Basingstoke, United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan; 2015.
28. Scofield GR. Exposing some myths about physician-assisted sui-
cide. Seattle Univ Law Rev. 1995;18:473-93. [PMID: 11656832]
29. Jones DA, Paton D. How does legalization of physician-assisted
suicide affect rates of suicide? South Med J. 2015;108:599-604.
[PMID: 26437189] doi:10.14423/SMJ.0000000000000349
30. Kheriaty A. Social contagion effects of physician-assisted suicide:
commentary on “How Does Legalization of Physician-Assisted Sui-
cide Affect Rates of Suicide?” South Med J. 2015;108:605-6. [PMID:
26437190] doi:10.14423/SMJ.0000000000000346
31. Emanuel EJ, Onwuteaka-Philipsen BD, Urwin JW, Cohen J. Atti-
tudes and practices of euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide in
the United States, Canada, and Europe. JAMA. 2016;316:79-90.
[PMID: 27380345] doi:10.1001/jama.2016.8499
32. Golden M, Zoanni T. Killing us softly: the dangers of legalizing
assisted suicide. Disabil Health J. 2010;3:16-30. [PMID: 21122765]
doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2009.08.006
33. Mattlin B. Suicide by choice? Not so fast. The New York Times. 1
November 2012:A31. Accessed at www.nytimes.com/2012/11/01
/opinion/suicide-by-choice-not-so-fast.html on 24 February 2017.
34. Disability Rights & Defense Fund. National disability organiza-
tions that oppose the legalization of assisted suicide. 2017. Accessed
at https://dredf.org/public-policy/assisted-suicide/national-disability
-organizations-that-oppose-the-legalization-of-assisted-suicide on 24
February 2017.
35. Drum CE, White G, Taitano G, Horner-Johnson W. The Oregon
Death with Dignity Act: results of a literature review and naturalistic
inquiry.DisabilHealthJ.2010;3:3-15.[PMID:21122764]doi:10.1016/j
.dhjo.2009.10.001
36. Ingelfinger FJ. Arrogance. N Engl J Med. 1980;303:1507-11.
[PMID: 7432420]
37. Norden C. I had to get cancer to become a more empathetic
doctor. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:525-6. [PMID: 27699400] doi:10
.7326/M16-1243
38. Hippocrates. The oath. In: Jones WH, ed. Hippocrates I. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard Univ Pr; 1923:289-301.
39. Miles SH. Physicians and their patients'suicides. JAMA. 1994;
271:1786-8. [PMID: 8196123]
40. Stevens KR Jr. Emotional and psychological effects of physician-
assisted suicide and euthanasia on participating physicians. Issues
Law Med. 2006;21:187-200. [PMID: 16676767]
41. Prokopetz JJ, Lehmann LS. Redefining physicians' role in as-
sisted dying. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:97-9. [PMID: 22784111] doi:
10.1056/NEJMp1205283
42. Hippocrates. The art. In: Jones WH, ed. Hippocrates II. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard Univ Pr;1923:193.
43. Quill v. Vacco, 80 F.3d 716 (2d Cir. 1996).
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 44. Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, 110 S. Ct.
2841 (1990).
45. Vacco v. Quill, 117 S. Ct. 2293 (1997).
46. Gert B, Bernat JL, Mogielnicki RP. Distinguishing between pa-
tient'
s refusals and requests. Hastings Cent Rep. 1994;24:13-5.
[PMID: 7960698]
47. Sulmasy DP. Killing and allowing to die: another look. J Law Med
Ethics. 1998;26:55-64. [PMID: 11067586]
48. De Lima L, Woodruff R, Pettus K, Downing J, Buitrago R, Muny-
oro E, et al. International Association for Hospice and Palliative Care
Position Statement: euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. J Pal-
liat Med. 2017;20:8-14. [PMID: 27898287]
49. Lampert R, Hayes DL, Annas GJ, Farley MA, Goldstein NE, Ham-
ilton RM, et al; American College of Cardiology. HRS Expert Consen-
sus Statement on the Management of Cardiovascular Implantable
Electronic Devices (CIEDs) in patients nearing end of life or request-
ing withdrawal of therapy. Heart Rhythm. 2010;7:1008-26. [PMID:
20471915] doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2010.04.033
50. Mueller PS, Swetz KM, Freeman MR, Carter KA, Crowley ME,
Severson CJ, et al. Ethical analysis of withdrawing ventricular assist
device support. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85:791-7. [PMID: 20584919]
doi:10.4065/mcp.2010.0113
51. Fohr SA. The double effect of pain medication: separating myth
from reality. J Palliat Med. 1998;1:315-28. [PMID: 15859849]
52. Curry TA. A piece of my mind. What would mom want? JAMA.
2016;315:261-2. [PMID: 26784770] doi:10.1001/jama.2015.13326
53. Quill TE, Dresser R, Brock DW. The rule of double effect—a cri-
tique of its role in end-of-life decision making. N Engl J Med. 1997;
337:1768-71. [PMID: 9392707]
54. Sulmasy DP, Pellegrino ED. The rule of double effect: clearing
up the double talk. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159:545-50. [PMID:
10090110]
55. Washington v. Glucksberg, 117 S. Ct. 2258 (1997).
56. Compassion in Dying v. Washington, 79 F.3d 790 (9th Cir. 1996).
57. Snijdewind MC, Willems DL, Deliens L, Onwuteaka-Philipsen BD,
Chambaere K. A study of the first year of the end-of-life clinic for
physician-assisted dying in the Netherlands. JAMA Intern Med.
2015;175:1633-40. [PMID: 26258534] doi:10.1001/jamainternmed
.2015.3978
58. Kim SY, De Vries RG, Peteet JR. Euthanasia and assisted suicide
of patients with psychiatric disorders in the Netherlands 2011 to
2014. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;73:362-8. [PMID: 26864709] doi:10
.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2887
59. Appelbaum PS. Physician-assisted death for patients with mental
disorders—reasons for concern [Editorial]. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;73:
325-6. [PMID: 26864504] doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2890
60. Ganzini L, Goy ER, Dobscha SK. Prevalence of depression and
anxiety in patients requesting physicians'aid in dying: cross sectional
survey. BMJ. 2008;337:a1682. [PMID: 18842645] doi:10.1136/bmj
.a1682.
61. Dierickx S, Deliens L, Cohen J, Chambaere K. Comparison of the
expression and granting of requests for euthanasia in Belgium in
2007 vs 2013 [Letter]. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:1703-6. [PMID:
26259113] doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.3982
62. Lerner BH, Caplan AL. Euthanasia in Belgium and the Nether-
lands: on a slippery slope? JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:1640-1.
[PMID: 26259038] doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.4086
63. Pereira J. Legalizing euthanasia or assisted suicide: the illusion of
safeguards and controls. Curr Oncol. 2011;18:e38-45. [PMID:
21505588]
64. Kamisar Y. Are laws against assisted suicide unconstitutional?
Hastings Cent Rep. 1993;23:32-41. [PMID: 8496049]
65. Cook D, Swinton M, Toledo F, Clarke F, Rose T, Hand-
Breckenridge T, et al. Personalizing death in the intensive care unit:
the 3 Wishes Project: a mixed-methods study. Ann Intern Med. 2015;
163:271-9. [PMID: 26167721] doi:10.7326/M15-0502
66. McKenzie KC. A modern ars moriendi. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:
2107-9. [PMID: 27248618] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1601820
67. Wright AA, Keating NL, Ayanian JZ, Chrischilles EA, Kahn KL,
Ritchie CS, et al. Family perspectives on aggressive cancer care near
the end of life. JAMA. 2016;315:284-92. [PMID: 26784776] doi:10
.1001/jama.2015.18604
68. Ankuda CK, Petterson SM, Wingrove P, Bazemore AW. Regional
variation in primary care involvement at the end of life. Ann Fam
Med. 2017;15:63-7. [PMID: 28376462] doi:10.1370/afm.2002
69. Groff AC, Colla CH, Lee TH. Days spent at home—a patient-
centered goal and outcome. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1610-2.
[PMID: 27783911]
70. Unger KM. Withdrawal of ventilatory support at home on hos-
pice. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2016;52:305-12. [PMID: 27112313]
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2016.03.004
71. Panke JT, Ruiz G, Elliott T, Pattenden DJ, DeRenzo EG, Rollins
EE, et al. Discontinuation of a left ventricular assist device in the
home hospice setting. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2016;52:313-7.
[PMID: 27208865] doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2016.02.010
72. Salem T. Physician-assisted suicide. Promoting autonomy—or
medicalizing suicide? Hastings Cent Rep. 1999;29:30-6. [PMID:
10420304]
73. Pellegrino ED. Nonabandonment: an old obligation revisited
[Editorial]. Ann Intern Med. 1995;122:377-8. [PMID: 7847651]
74. Verghese A. The importance of being. Health Aff (Millwood).
2016;35:1924-7. [PMID: 27702966]
75. Robinson S, Kissane DW, Brooker J, Hempton C, Burney S. The
relationship between poor quality of life and desire to hasten death:
a multiple mediation model examining the contributions of depres-
sion, demoralization, loss of control, and low self-worth. J Pain
Symptom Manage. 2017;53:243-9. [PMID: 27744017] doi:10.1016/j
.jpainsymman.2016.08.013
76. Physician-assisted suicide. In: National Cancer Institute. Educa-
tion in Palliative and End-of-Life Care for Oncology [CD-ROM].
Bethesda: National Cancer Institute; 2006.
77. Ganzini L, Nelson HD, Schmidt TA, Kraemer DF, Delorit MA, Lee
MA. Physicians'experiences with the Oregon Death with Dignity Act.
N Engl J Med. 2000;342:557-63. [PMID: 10684915]
78. Rosenthal DI, Verghese A. Meaning and the nature of physicians'
work. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1813-5. [PMID: 27959650]
79. Kearney MK, Weininger RB, Vachon ML, Harrison RL, Mount BM.
Self-care of physicians caring for patients at the end of life: “Being
connected . . . a key to my survival”. JAMA. 2009;301:1155-64.
[PMID: 19293416] doi:10.1001/jama.2009.352
80. Srivastava R. The sharing of loss. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:2309-
11. [PMID: 27305191] doi:10.1056/NEJMp1603934
81. British Medical Association. End-of-life care and physician-
assisted dying. 9 December 2014. Accessed at www.bma.org.uk
/collective-voice/policy-and-research/ethics/end-of-life-care
on
24
February 2017.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 167 No. 8 • 17 October 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
