 PAPER
Appealing to the crowd: ethical justifications in
Canadian medical crowdfunding campaigns
Jeremy Snyder,1 Valorie A Crooks,2 Annalise Mathers,1 Peter Chow-White3
ABSTRACT
Medical crowdfunding is growing in terms of the number
of active campaigns, amount of funding raised and
public visibility. Little is known about how campaigners
appeal to potential donors outside of anecdotal evidence
collected in news reports on specific medical
crowdfunding campaigns. This paper offers a first step
towards addressing this knowledge gap by examining
medical crowdfunding campaigns for Canadian
recipients. Using 80 medical crowdfunding campaigns
for Canadian recipients, we analyse how Canadians
justify to others that they ought to contribute to funding
their health needs. We find the justifications
campaigners tend to fall into three themes: personal
connections, depth of need and giving back. We further
discuss how these appeals can understood in terms of
ethical justifications for giving and how these
justifications should be assessed in light of the academic
literature on ethical concerns raised by medical
crowdfunding.
Medical crowdfunding is the practice of using web-
sites to raise money from donors to pay for medical
care or expenses related to medical care. Many dif-
ferent
social
networking
companies
facilitate
medical
crowdfunding
through
their
websites,
including popular sites such as GoFundMe and
YouCaring. Those setting up and administering
crowdfunding
campaigns
can
be
the
intended
recipient of the donations or a friend or family
member administering the campaign on the recipi-
ent’s behalf. These campaigns appeal both to
friends and family members of the campaign’s
recipient and to strangers who may not know the
recipient. This practice is growing in terms of the
number of active campaigns, amount of funding
raised and public visibility.1 2 One of the leading
medical crowdfunding sites, GoFundMe, illustrates
this growth: in 2011, GoFundMe hosted 8000
medical crowdfunding campaigns raising US$1.6
million in donations and by 2014 raised US$150
million in 600 000 campaigns.3
Medical crowdfunding has the potential to gen-
erate substantial benefits for recipients, allowing
them to access needed medical treatment, avoid
debt from receiving medical care and have family
members spend additional time with ill loved ones.
However, this practice has also been associated
with a range of ethical concerns. Medical crowd-
funding can be used to take advantage of donors
through fraudulent campaigns.2 The recipients of
these donations risk negative impacts as well,
including
loss
of
privacy
given
pressure
to
communicate extensive details about their health
status in the campaign.4 Other ethical concerns are
more systemic in nature, including worries about
encouraging the distribution of health resources
through private donations rather than public enti-
tlements as well as unfairness and inefficiency in
which individuals and health needs are rewarded
through
crowdfunding.
Furthermore,
medical
crowdfunding
tends
to
ignore
the
underlying
causes of insufficient resources to meet medical
needs in favour of portraying these needs as bad
luck.5
Very
little
research
has
been
conducted
to
explore why individuals use medical crowdfunding,
what barriers they face when conducting these cam-
paigns and how campaigns are distributed in terms
of the location of recipients and their underlying
health needs.5 Research has shown that crowd-
funded lending to entrepreneurs is more likely
when campaigners present narratives of themselves
as trustworthy and successful.6 Those donating to
charitable crowdfunding campaigns are motivated
both by altruism and benefits to self-esteem.7
However, little is known about how campaigners
for
medical
crowdfunding
appeal
to
potential
donors outside of anecdotal evidence collected in
news reports on specific medical crowdfunding
campaigns. This paper offers a first step towards
addressing this knowledge gap by examining 80
medical crowdfunding campaigns for Canadian
recipients in order to explore how Canadians
justify to others that they ought to contribute to
funding their health needs. W
e explore how these
appeals can be framed around ethical justifications
for giving and how these justifications should be
assessed in light of the academic literature on
ethical concerns raised by medical crowdfunding.
METHODS
W
e identified and gathered 80 medical crowdfund-
ing campaigns for Canadian recipients for review
during March and April 2016. W
e collected the 20
most recent such campaigns from each of four
commonly used crowdfunding websites: FundRazr.
com
(F),
Generosity.com
(G),
GoFundMe.com
(GFM) and YouCaring.com (Y). They were the four
most popular crowdfunding websites measured by
their web traffic in Canada (as measured by Alexa.
com), allowed campaigns for Canadian recipients,
and clearly displayed the location of the recipient
in order to allow distinctions between Canadian
and non-Canadian campaigns.
The researchers extracted all text from the cam-
paigns and stored the data in a shared spreadsheet.
364   
Snyder J, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:364–367. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103933
Public health ethics
To cite: Snyder J, Crooks VA, 
Mathers A, et al. J Med Ethics 
2017;43:364–367.
1Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada
2Department of Geography, 
Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada
3School of Communication, 
Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada
Correspondence to
Dr Jeremy Snyder, Simon Fraser 
University, Blusson Hall 10516, 
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, 
British Columbia, Canada V5A 
1S6; Jcs12@sfu.ca
Received 8 September 2016
Revised 25 November 2016
Accepted 9 January 2017
Published Online First 
30 January 2017
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103933 on 30 January 2017. Downloaded from 
 W
e reviewed independently the textual content of 40 cam-
paigns, each having been read in detail by two authors, noting
identifying patterns and outliers among the campaigns. W
e then
met to come to consensus on dominant themes across the cam-
paigns, which is consistent with a thematic approach to qualita-
tive data analysis.8 W
e all agree that campaigns generally made
an attempt to justify giving by the potential donor, and identi-
fied three dominant themes that contribute to understanding the
scope of such justification. The lead author manually extracted
content related to each theme and together we contrasted what
we learned about these themes against the existing crowdfund-
ing literature—an important step in thematic analysis—to iden-
tify the potential for a novel contribution and points for
discussion.
FINDINGS
W
e found that requests for help focused on monetary gifts and
included campaigners asking that readers send their ‘thoughts
and prayers’, spread word of the campaign and in a few cases
practice prevention of the disease or donate blood. The cam-
paigns were for medical needs related to a range of illnesses or
treatments as well as acute situations such as injuries following
vehicle collisions, but in nearly half of all cases referenced a
cancer diagnosis. Other common illnesses included kidney
disease, neurological disease and Lyme disease. In the remainder
of this section, we examine the findings pertaining to campaign
donation justification, organising them around three analytic
themes: (1) personal connections between the recipient and
potential donor; (2) the recipient’s need for help and the good
that can be done by the donation and (3) giving back to recipi-
ents who had previously given to their communities. T
o
enhance the reliability of our interpretation, we have included
direct quotes throughout as well as unique identifiers for each
that begin with an indication of the host website.
Personal connections
In many cases, the reviewed campaigns either assumed that only
friends and family members of the campaign’s recipient would
be engaging with the content or made special appeals to friends
and families. Often campaigns appealed to friends and families in
the tone of an open letter to these groups. In others, the assump-
tion that friends and families were a special audience for these
appeals was stated directly, as in a campaign that began: “I’m
guessing that if you’re reading this, you know and love Steve”
(Y23). Readers in other cases were asked to share the campaign
with those who knew the recipient. Many of these campaigns
assumed that the reader was already familiar with the recipient’s
medical needs and so used the campaign largely as a means of
organising friends and families in their giving activities.
Personal relationships with those in need were often framed
explicitly as creating an obligation to donate. As one campaigner
put it: “I truly believe that when we have someone we care
about in need, we should gather around them as one big family
and help as much as possible” (GFM20). Another put the
requirement to give in the form of an imperative: “[the home
team of her friends, colleagues and family] must be there for as
long as she needs us” (F6). In one case, the campaigner recog-
nised that a request for financial help could place a strain on
friendships, and stressed the importance of these relationships
over his need: “Dear friends and family who are reading this,
please know that I sincerely hope you feel under no obligation
whatsoever, and that thoughts, prayers, kindness, insights, and
friendship are as deeply important to me as financial help”
(GFM16). For this campaigner, the love and support of friends
and families could be expressed in non-financial means, the
importance of which was stressed. This idea was echoed in
other campaigns, where non-financial support such as prayers
were asked of loved ones and it was even expressed that ‘family
and community support is essential to healing process’ (Y22).
Depth of need
Many campaigns sought to motivate donors’ giving through a
detailed description of the recipient’s medical need. Often, they
sought to give a history of the recipient’s medical treatment to
date, in part to introduce the reader to the process by which the
need has arisen. These descriptions can be graphic: ‘So far
Celine has been in the OR [operating room] for surgery 3 times,
each time having more and more of her leg tissue removed,
making the wound larger and more severe’ (GFM9). Similarly, a
young woman is described as having experienced ‘a broken
shoulder, broken ribs, a punctured lung and several broken ver-
tebrae, partially severing her spine’ from a car accident (Y8).
The long-term, chronic nature of illness was also described in
some cases, as with one who stated that: “Ever since I can
remember I’ve been living in pain” (Y16). Another campaigner
attributed her medical need to barriers faced in the Canadian
healthcare system: “not one MD [medical doctor] has been able
to help me. One even told me to seek a psychologist. With
respect to the diagnosis and care of Lyme Disease, the Canadian
healthcare system has been, for me, a nightmare” (GFM6).
Campaigners also stressed the impact of medical need on
others. Young persons, and especially children, were framed as
being particularly in need of help. In one case, a young child’s
life-threatening illness was movingly described through the child
crying ‘Mommy Daddy save me’ (G10). Children were often
described as deserving more years of life: ‘She is only 15 years
old and has a long happy life to live’ (G9). The tone of these mes-
sages was that suffering was especially unacceptable in children,
as when: ‘no three year old should have to know the inside of a
hospital as well as Ryan does, because no parent should have to
know how to answer the kind of questions that Ryan’s parents
are having to answer’ (G1). Even adults were flagged as suffering
too early in their lives, as in the case of one recipient who is ‘only
32 and was in worse shape than most people several times his
age’ (Y13). Parents of young children were similarly identified as
having greater need of help, with the impacts of parents’ loss of
income due to illness or absence from their family stressed. In
one case, fundraising for an ill parent was justified in part by the
recipient having children with their own medical crises. In this
case, ‘The loss of an income, no matter how temporary, will be
devastating to this hardworking, caring family’ (F1).
Campaigns often pivoted between detailed characterisations of
recipients’ ill health and how financial assistance could alleviate
that need. Many campaigners described crowdfunding as a last
resort. Their campaigns had the practical benefit of helping
reduce the recipient’s illness and/or improving health and well-
being: “I need your support now as I fight for my life. No dona-
tion is too small; and is very much appreciated” (G1 2). Several
campaigns detailed existing support from friends and families
but stressed the need of additional help: ‘Many people have
asked how they can help. At this point, financial assistance is
what’s needed’ (Y9). Similarly, “My family and I are here to
support her but there is no doubt she requires financial assistance
in order to deal with the foreseeable financial commitments”
(F4). In other cases, this potential benefit was stated as a simple
fact, where readers are invited ‘to join us in helping Al and his
family’ (Y12). In these ways, the good that could be done via
these donations was taken self-evidently to justify donating.
365
Snyder J, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:364–367. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103933
Public health ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103933 on 30 January 2017. Downloaded from 
 Giving back
Many campaigns emphasised the selfless characteristics of recipi-
ents and the good works that they have engaged in the past.
Recipients were described as being ‘compassionate, loving,
giving and one of the most caring women on this planet’
(GFM2), as having ‘a huge heart’ (GFM20) and ‘giving heart’
(Y5), ‘unselfish, kind, caring and giving’ (F7), a ‘man who puts
others first’ (F1) and ‘literally one of those people who would
give you the shirt off his back’ (F10). A typical campaign
described the activities that the recipients engaged in great
detail: ‘loading (almost too) many children into their adventure
van, selflessly shuttling them home and on play dates. They are
front and centre at all of our events, volunteering by sharing
their time, knowledge and creations. “Come on over!” is their
most common phrase, as they have been a social hub of our
class and community’ (G8). The good works described in these
campaigns included both those targeting friends, family and
community members, and also those directed at strangers and
persons in need regardless of personal connections.
In some cases, the past efforts of the recipients on behalf of
others were used as a rationale for the reader to contribute to
the crowdfunding campaign. Because of the ‘inspiring’ work
that she/he had done for others, a campaign noted the recipient
‘deserves us to all rally together to help her fight’ (GFM2).
Similarly, another recipient ‘would stop at nothing to help a
friend or person in need’ and therefore, ‘Now it is our turn to
help’ (Y12). Other campaigns described the recipient as running
up a line of credit of good works that justified help now that
the campaigner, later in life, was in a position of need. For
example, one recipient was described as a ‘person who was
always there for others when needed, and now its come to a
time in his life where he needs us’ (GFM12). Similarly, dona-
tions were justified as a reward for past help: ‘Let us show them
that generosity of spirit is rewarded in this crazy world’ (G8).
Parents’ good works could justify help for their children as well,
as in the case of one campaign where the parents of a child with
cancer had been ‘supporting cancer research selflessly’ (G1).
The reluctance of one generous recipient to accept help, always
preferring to give help to others, was presented in another cam-
paign as creating a ‘chance to show our appreciation and grati-
tude towards such a caring individual’ (F14).
DISCUSSION
While the 80 Canadian medical crowdfunding campaigns we
reviewed did not frame their appeals to potential donors in
explicitly ethical language, the three themes we identified are
associated with ethical traditions and justifications. Appeals
based on personal connections with the recipient echo justifica-
tions from the ethics of care and relational ethics, where
emphasis is put on the ethical demands created by concrete,
intimate relationships, and especially those based on depend-
ence.9 In the ethics of care, parenting is often used as a meta-
phor for the shape our ethical obligations take, based on need
and relationships rather than voluntary, contractual agreements.
This language was echoed in some of the reviewed campaigns,
as with the campaign that appealed to potential donors in terms
of a family. Relationships of dependency are emphasised in the
ethics of care and were represented in these campaigns as
demonstrated in the statement that donors must be there for the
recipients as long as they are needed.
Campaigns that emphasised the suffering of the recipient and
the good that the potential donor could achieve by giving to the
campaign evoked duties of beneficence and, to some extent,
utilitarian thinking. The focus on the needs of many campaign
recipients was often used to make the case that the potential
donor was in a position to relieve this suffering and in doing so
achieve a great good, irrespective of any personal connection to
the campaign’s recipient. The ethical imperative created by the
recipient’s need and opportunity to improve their health and
well-being was typically stated as a given. The particular atten-
tion given to the suffering of children is relevant in this regard
as the potential to generate utility is greater among those who
have the potential for longer lives. This was put explicitly in
some cases, as when a campaign stated that, with the help of
donors, a child recipient would live a long and happy life and in
the case of even young adults for whom it was emphasised that
donations were particularly worthy given their opportunity for
many additional years of life.
Finally, the campaigns that appealed to potential donors
based on the idea of giving back to recipients who had shown
past generosity to their communities drew implicitly on the
values of fairness and reciprocity. In many cases, the reader’s
obligation to give to the campaign was put in terms of a repay-
ment for the past contributions of the recipient, echoing a
narrow understanding of reciprocity as requiring in-kind repay-
ments for past actions. This understanding of reciprocity can be
seen in many campaigns, including those that traded on varia-
tions of the claim that it was time to ‘give back’. Some cam-
paigns
deviated
from
a
quid-pro-quo
understanding
of
reciprocity, taking the view more generally that fairness requires
that those who have given to others should receive help in their
time of need. Campaigns that pledged a portion of donations to
charities or research linked to the recipient’s medical condition
can also be read as trying to generate aid to others that should
be rewarded by help for the recipient.
What is particularly notable about the justifications for con-
tributing to medical crowdfunding campaigns identified in this
analysis is that they typically did not appeal to the injustice of
needing to resort to crowdfunding for care in the first place.
Canada offers what it considers to be ‘universal access’ to essen-
tial medical care to all residents. This entitlement is widely
viewed as representing a core Canadian value, that all residents
should have their essential medical needs met as a matter of
social justice. Failure to provide this care, either due to unavail-
able resources or lengthy wait times for care, have been pre-
sented as failures of the Canadian government elsewhere.10
While some of the care being sought by Canadians through
crowdfunding might be considered to be non-essential, and thus
not a public entitlement, many of campaigns reviewed in this
study were for care that could arguably be considered to be
essential. The forms of support that were requested were often
not for direct medical care, which is typically provided within
the public system, but for forms of social support such as hos-
pital parking, time off work, travel expenses and other living
expenses. In other cases, expenses more directly related to
medical care were cited, including experimental interventions
not offered within Canada or non-covered medical expenses
such as for pharmaceuticals. These expenses can be described as
revealing gaps in the Canada Health Act and the Canadian
health system more generally. These campaigns reveal the dis-
tress faced by Canadians when they found themselves unable to
meet these expenses and follow trends of increasing private
expenditures related to medical care by Canadians.11
Thus, the fact that Canadians feel that they must appeal to
families, friends and strangers for resources related to their
medical care might reasonably be seen as an injustice—and yet,
these campaigners almost exclusively chose not to frame their
366
Snyder J, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:364–367. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103933
Public health ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103933 on 30 January 2017. Downloaded from 
 appeals for funding around the perceived injustice of their situ-
ation. A notable exception to this absence was a campaigner
who described the Canadian healthcare system as a nightmare
due to its failure, in her view, to appropriately diagnose her
chronic Lyme disease. While this case may be an outlier, it is
worth noting that those managing chronic Lyme disease are a
particularly organised and politically active group, perhaps
leading to their greater awareness of the perceived injustice of
their situation and willingness to appeal to potential donors
based on the failings of the Canadian healthcare system.12
This general absence of appeals to injustice helps to confirm
what has previously been a purely speculative ethical concern
with medical crowdfunding.5 13 Medical crowdfunding has the
potential to mask systemic injustices in the provision of health-
care if people are able to meet their medical needs via medical
crowdfunding without drawing attention to or addressing these
injustices. This can be the case even if campaigners do not per-
ceive any injustice in their situation as the language of their cam-
paigns perpetuates a view that their need is the result more of
misfortune than systemic injustice (although certainly the needs
identified by crowdfunding campaigns will not always be the
result of an underlying injustice). This phenomenon is particu-
larly worrisome if there are inequities built into who succeeds
with medical crowdfunding. There is good reason to think that
these inequities do in face exist, as persons who have large
social networks, skills with online marketing, media contacts,
medical needs that are not stigmatised and the ability to express
themselves in the dominant local language are likely to have
more success with crowdfunding than those who lack these
attributes. As a result, medical crowdfunding can increase health
inequities while making it more difficult to observe and counter-
act systemic injustice. The almost universal indifference to issues
of justice observed in this study highlight that this concern is
well founded and should be addressed.
CONCLUSION
This study demonstrated that Canadians using crowdfunding
websites to raise money for medical care appeal to personal con-
nections, the capacity of donors to relieve their suffering and
giving back to those who have given to others in order to
encourage donations. These types of appeals can be linked to
ethical justifications found in the ethics of care, a duty of benefi-
cence or utilitarian ethics and the values of reciprocity and fair-
ness, respectively. These campaigns almost universally did not
appeal to the perceived injustice of having to resort to crowd-
funding by Canadians with an existing entitlement to essential
medical care, supporting the concern that medical crowdfunding
can obscure systemic injustices and widen health inequities.
These findings support the need for additional research
linked
to
ethical
issues
raised
by
medical
crowdfunding.
Additional research should investigate whether any of the
appeals observed here are more successful than others in motiv-
ating giving and whether these appeals are observed in popula-
tions
outside
of
Canada.
Qualitative
interviews
with
crowdfunding campaigners could also explore whether they per-
ceived but did not appeal to injustice when initiating their cam-
paigns and, if so, why.
Contributors All authors made substantial contributions to the conception or
design of the work and analysis of data for the work. All authors contributed to
drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content, gave final
approval of the version to be published and agreed to be accountable for all aspects
of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any
part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.
Funding Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research, Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Gustke C. Managing health costs with crowdfunding. New York Times, 30 January
2015.
2
Romm C. Is it fair to ask the internet to pay your hospital bill? The Atlantic,
12 March 2015.
3
Chandler R. GoFundMe sees boom in medically-related fundraising campaigns.
WHO TV March 14, 2015.
4
Sisler J. Crowdfunding for medical expenses. CMAJ 2012;184.2:E123–4.
5
Snyder J. Crowdfunding for medical care: ethical issues in an emerging health care
funding practice. Hastings Cent Rep 2016;46:36–42.
6
Herzenstein M, Sonenshein S, Dholakia UM. Tell me a good story and I may lend
you money: the role of narratives in peer-to-peer lending decisions. J Mark Res
2011;48(SPL):S138–49.
7
Gleasure R, Feller J. Does heart or head rule donor behaviors in charitable
crowdfunding markets? Int J Electron Commerce 2016;20:499–524.
8
Creswell JW. Research design: qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods
approaches. 3rd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009.
9
Kittay EF. Love’s labor: essays on women, equality, and dependency. New York, NY:
Routledge, 1999.
10
Romanow RJ. Shape the future of health care: interim report. Saskatoon, SK: The
Commission, 2002.
11
Law MR, Daw JR, Cheng L, et al. Growth in private payments for health care by
Canadian households. Health Policy 2013;110:141–6.
12
McPhail M, Shelley J. The role of patient advocates in Lyme disease policy should
be limited. Healthy Debate 15 June 2016.
13
Snyder J, Mathers A, Crooks VA. Fund my treatment! A call for ethics-focused social
science research into the use of crowdfunding for medical care. Soc Sci Med
2016;169:27–30.
367
Snyder J, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:364–367. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103933
Public health ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103933 on 30 January 2017. Downloaded from 
