 Original research n Special RepoRt
Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
203
1 From the Dept of Diagnostic Imaging, Federal Univ of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil (P.S.d.O.S., R.X., J.S.); Foundation 
Inst for Education and Research in Diagnostic Imaging, 
Dept of Diagnostic Imaging, Federal Univ of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil (P.S.d.O.S., J.S.); Dept of Radiology, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Ctr, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Mass (D.L.); Instituto de Pesquisa Professor Amorim 
Neto, Campina Grande, PB, Brazil (A.S.d.O.M., M.M.R.A.); 
Instituto de Saúde Elpidio de Almeida, Campina Grande, 
PB, Brazil (A.S.d.O.M., M.M.R.A.); Faculdade de Ciências 
Médicas de Campina Grande, Campina Grande, PB, Brazil 
(A.S.d.O.M.); Hosp Municipal Pedro I, Serviço Municipal 
de Atendimento Transdisciplinar a Gestantes e Bebês 
com Infecção Congênita por Zika Virus, Campina Grande, 
PB, Brazil (A.S.d.O.M., A.G.M.B.); Universidade Federal 
de Campina Grande, PB, Brazil (M.M.R.A.); Laboratory of 
Neuropathology, State Inst of Brain, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
(L.C.); Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biologia, Uni-
versidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
(A.T., R.S.A.); Div of Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, 
Lis Maternity Hosp, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Ctr, Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv Univ, Tel Aviv, Israel (G.M.); 
Fetal Medicine Foundation Latinamerica–FMFLA, Centrus–
Fetal Medicine, Campinas, Brazil (R.X.); Boston Children’s 
Hosp, Boston, Mass (R.R.); Inst of Biomedical Sciences and 
National Ctr for Structural Biology and Bioimaging, Federal 
Univ of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (F.T.M.); and 
D’Or Inst for Research and Education, Rua Diniz Cordeiro 
30, Botafogo, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 22881-100 (F.T.M.). 
Received July 7, 2016; revision requested July 14; revision 
received July 22; accepted July 27; final version accepted 
August 3. Address correspondence to F.T.M. (e-mail: 
Fernanda.tovarmoll@idor.org).
q RSNA, 2016
Purpose:
To document the imaging findings associated with con-
genital Zika virus infection as found in the Instituto de 
Pesquisa in Campina Grande State Paraiba (IPESQ) in 
northeastern Brazil, where the congenital infection has 
been particularly severe.
Materials and 
Methods:
From June 2015 to May 2016, 438 patients were referred 
to the IPESQ for rash occurring during pregnancy or for 
suspected fetal central nervous system abnormality. Pa-
tients who underwent imaging at IPESQ were included, as 
well as those with documented Zika virus infection in fluid 
or tissue (n = 17, confirmed infection cohort) or those 
with brain findings suspicious for Zika virus infection, 
with intracranial calcifications (n = 28, presumed infection 
cohort). Imaging examinations included 12 fetal magnetic 
resonance (MR) examinations, 42 postnatal brain com-
puted tomographic examinations, and 11 postnatal brain 
MR examinations. Images were reviewed by four radiolo-
gists, with final opinion achieved by means of consensus.
Results:
Brain abnormalities seen in confirmed (n = 17) and pre-
sumed (n = 28) congenital Zika virus infections were simi-
lar, with ventriculomegaly in 16 of 17 (94%) and 27 of 28 
(96%) infections, respectively; abnormalities of the corpus 
callosum in 16 of 17 (94%) and 22 of 28 (78%) infections, 
respectively; and cortical migrational abnormalities in 16 
of 17 (94%) and 28 of 28 (100%) infections, respectively. 
Although most fetuses underwent at least one examination 
that showed head circumference below the 5th percentile, 
head circumference could be normal in the presence of se-
vere ventriculomegaly (seen in three fetuses). Intracranial 
calcifications were most commonly seen at the gray mat-
ter–white matter junction, in 15 of 17 (88%) and 28 of 28 
(100%) confirmed and presumed infections, respectively. 
The basal ganglia and/or thalamus were also commonly in-
volved with calcifications in 11 of 17 (65%) and 18 of 28 
(64%) infections, respectively. The skull frequently had a 
collapsed appearance with overlapping sutures and redun-
dant skin folds and, occasionally, intracranial herniation 
of orbital fat and clot in the confluence of sinuses.
Conclusion:
The spectrum of findings associated with congenital Zika 
virus infection in the IPESQ in northeastern Brazil is il-
lustrated to aid the radiologist in identifying Zika virus 
infection at imaging.
q 
RSNA, 2016
Online supplemental material is available for this article.
Patricia Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld, MD
Deborah Levine, MD
Adriana Suely de Oliveira Melo, MD, PhD
Melania Maria Ramos Amorim, MD, PhD
Alba Gean M. Batista, MD
Leila Chimelli, MD, PhD
Amilcar Tanuri, MD, PhD
Renato Santana Aguiar, PhD
Gustavo Malinger, MD, PhD
Renato Ximenes, MD
Richard Robertson, MD
Jacob Szejnfeld, MD, PhD
Fernanda Tovar-Moll, MD, PhD
congenital Brain abnormalities 
and Zika Virus: What the  
Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Prenatally and Postnatally1
This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org
 204 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
infection, viral infection was confirmed 
by means of serologic findings or reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR). An assay (Rapid Test DPP 
Zika IgM/IgG Assay; Chembio, Medford, 
NY) was used to detect immunoglobulin 
G and immunoglobulin M against Zika 
virus in the fluids. Virus genome was 
identified in fluids and/or tissues with 
RT-PCR by using specific primers and 
probes to identify the region of Zika 
virus (13). Dengue virus and chikun-
gunya virus infection were excluded by 
using enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay and RT-PCR. The patients tested 
negative for toxoplasmosis, syphilis, 
varicella-zoster virus, Parvovirus B19, 
rubella, Cytomegalovirus, and herpes 
virus (TORCH) infection, as well as hu-
man immunodeficiency virus.
As described previously (4,5), pre-
natal US was performed by fetal med-
icine specialists using either a Voluson 
E8 unit (General Electric, Milwaukee, 
Wis) with transvaginal probes or a 
Samsung XG or WS80 unit (Sam-
sung, Seoul, South Korea) with 2–9-
MHz probes. MR imaging of the fetus 
was performed with a 3-T Skyra unit 
at prenatal ultrasonography (US), and/
or (c) postnatal microcephaly or other 
CNS malformation that was believed 
to be characteristic of congenital infec-
tion. During this period, 384 pregnant 
women with a rash or a history of CNS 
abnormality at US (group 1) and 47 ne-
onates with postnatal physical examina-
tion findings suggestive of microcephaly 
(head circumference , 33 cm) (group 2) 
were enrolled in this protocol. Group 1 
exclusion criteria included not returning 
for imaging at IPESQ, no CNS abnor-
mality identified at US examination at 
IPESQ, classic findings of isolated CNS 
abnormality not characteristic of infec-
tion, diagnosis of a genetic syndrome or 
aneuploidy, and lack of postnatal images 
for review. Group 2 exclusion criteria 
included not returning for computed to-
mography (CT) or magnetic resonance 
(MR) imaging examination at IPESQ 
and no calcification on postnatal images. 
Initially, we used a head circumference 
criterion of 32.5 cm for microcephaly as 
an exclusion criterion for the postnatal 
diagnosis, but after review of the imaging 
findings, there was a newborn with nor-
mal head circumference but severe ven-
triculomegaly and calcifications similar 
to those seen in the other confirmed and 
presumed Zika virus infections; there-
fore, this neonate was included in our 
population with presumed Zika virus in-
fection. After exclusions, there were im-
aging studies of 31 fetuses in 30 pregnant 
women (which included one set of twins) 
and 45 neonates (which included the 31 
fetuses that underwent prenatal imaging, 
as well as an additional 14 neonates that 
were enrolled postnatally; Fig 1).
Results in 10 of these patients have 
been reported previously (4,5); however, 
these prior publications were not of suf-
ficiently large sample size to provide esti-
mates of the types of abnormalities seen 
in infected neonates, and the images 
were not formally reviewed by multiple 
fetal and neonatal imaging experts.
Prenatal and/or postnatal Zika virus 
infection investigations were performed 
on the patients’ fluids (blood, urine, am-
niotic fluid, and/or cord blood) or tis-
sues (placenta or brain and other organ 
tissue at autopsy), as described previ-
ously (4). In the group with confirmed 
Published online before print
10.1148/radiol.2016161584 Content codes: 
 
 
Radiology 2016; 281:203–218
Abbreviations:
CNS = central nervous system
IPESQ = Instituto de Pesquisa in Campina Grande State 
Paraiba
RT-PCR = reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
TORCH = toxoplasmosis, syphilis, varicella-zoster virus, par-
vovirus B19, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes virus
Author contributions:
Guarantors of integrity of entire study, P.S.d.O.S., D.L., 
A.S.d.O.M., A.G.M.B., A.T., R.X., F.T.M.; study concepts/
study design or data acquisition or data analysis/interpreta-
tion, all authors; manuscript drafting or manuscript revision 
for important intellectual content, all authors; approval of 
final version of submitted manuscript, all authors; agrees to 
ensure any questions related to the work are appropri-
ately resolved, all authors; literature research, P.S.d.O.S., 
D.L., A.S.d.O.M., M.M.R.A., L.C., R.S.A., R.X., R.R., F.T.M.; 
clinical studies, P.S.d.O.S., A.S.d.O.M., A.G.M.B., L.C., 
G.M., R.X., R.R., F.T.M.; experimental studies, A.T., R.S.A., 
F.T.M.; statistical analysis, P.S.d.O.S., D.L., J.S., F.T.M.; and 
manuscript editing, P.S.d.O.S., D.L., A.S.d.O.M., L.C., R.S.A., 
G.M., R.X., R.R., J.S., F.T.M.
Conflicts of interest are listed at the end of this article.
M
uch has been written recently 
regarding Zika virus in preg-
nancy and the increased risk 
of microcephaly in fetuses exposed to 
the virus. The outbreak of infection 
in Brazil, especially in the northeast 
part of the country (1), has been of 
particular concern. The virus has 
been found in the fluids of pregnant 
mothers and during autopsy in the 
brains of neonates with microceph-
aly (2–5). Much of the concern in the 
media regarding the teratogenicity of 
Zika virus infection has focused on 
brain findings of microcephaly. How-
ever, as documented in many case 
series, there are a variety of brain 
abnormalities that can be found in 
fetuses exposed to intrauterine Zika 
virus infection (2–11). These include 
abnormalities in ventricular size, gray 
and white matter volume loss, brain-
stem abnormalities, and calcifications.
Although the current outbreak has 
centered in Brazil, according to the U.S. 
Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion, there are currently 51 countries 
or territories in which active transmis-
sion of Zika virus has been reported 
(12). It is important for radiologists to 
understand the type of abnormalities 
associated with congenital Zika virus in-
fection to aid in recognition of disease 
and appropriate counseling of patients. 
The purpose of this special report is to 
document the imaging findings associ-
ated with congenital Zika virus infection 
as found in patients seen at the Instituto 
de Pesquisa in Campina Grande State 
Paraiba (IPESQ) in northeastern Brazil.
Materials and Methods
This retrospective review includes im-
aging and autopsy data from an insti-
tutional review board–approved study 
that allowed for imaging and follow-up 
of presumed Zika virus infection in preg-
nant women and their neonates. Writ-
ten informed consent was obtained from 
the pregnant women and/or the parents 
of newborns. From June 2015 to May 
2016, 438 patients were referred to the 
IPESQ for one or more of the following: 
(a) pregnancy with rash, (b) fetal cen-
tral nervous system (CNS) abnormalities 
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
205
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
yielding 17 fetuses and/or neonates), 
testing for Zika virus by means of RT-
PCR and/or serologic analysis gener-
ated positive results in amniotic fluid 
in nine women (with 10 gestational 
sacs), cord blood in seven women, 
neonatal brain during autopsy in 
three neonates, and placenta in one 
neonate, with multiple positive sites 
in two women (one of whom had 
twins; Table E2 [online]). A rash 
characteristic of Zika virus infection 
was present in the first trimester in 
13 of 16 women (81%) with confirmed 
infection (one with twins) and in 22 
of 28 women (78%) with presumed 
infection.
The imaging findings are described 
in Table 1. Figures depicting fetal 
Neurological findings on prenatal 
MR images and postnatal CT and MR 
images were subjectively described by 
four radiologists with experience in fetal 
and/or neonatal neuroradiology (D.L., 
an obstetric and fetal MR imager with 
20 years of experience; R.R. and F.T.M., 
pediatric neuroradiologists with 20 and 
16 years of experience, respectively; 
and P.S.d.O.S., a neuroradiologist with 
12 years of experience). Findings were 
agreed on in consensus. In a minority of 
cases, select images from obstetric US 
were also available for review.
Results
In the 16 women with confirmed in-
fection (including one set of twins, 
(Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Ger-
many) or a 1.5-T Espree unit (Siemens 
Healthcare) with an eight-channel body 
coil and standard acquisition protocols 
(Table E1 [online]). Postnatal head CT 
was performed with a 16-section CT 
scanner (Siemens Healthcare). Post-
natal MR imaging was performed with 
a 1.5-T Espree brain MR imaging unit 
(Siemens 
Healthcare). 
Postmortem 
brain examination was performed in 
stillborns or neonates who died within 
48 hours of birth after obtaining paren-
tal consent to perform autopsy. Brain 
tissue images were acquired with a 
64-channel multisection CT scanner 
(GE Healthcare) and a 3-T MR imag-
ing unit (Achieva; Philips, Best, the 
Netherlands).
Figure 1
Figure 1: Flowchart for subject inclusion and exclusion in the confirmed and presumed Zika virus (ZikV 
) infection cohorts. ∗ = Gestational ages for fetal MR exam-
inations were 26 weeks (with a second MR examination at 30 weeks), 29 weeks, 29 weeks (with a second MR examination at 37 weeks), 32 weeks, 34 weeks, and 
four examinations at 36 weeks (one in a set of twins).
 206 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
Table 1
Imaging Findings in 17 Confirmed and 28 Presumed Zika Virus Infections
Abnormality
No. of Confirmed  
Infections at  
Prenatal and/or  
Postnatal Imaging
No. of Presumed Infections  
with Microcephaly and 
Calcifications on CT Images  
or Postnatal MR Images
Comments
Parenchymal volume loss
17 (100)
28 (100)
…
 Mild to moderate
6 (35)
17 (61)
…
 Severe
12 (70)
11 (39)
…
Cortical abnormalities
16 (94)
28 (100)
Fifteen subjects were categorized as having both polymicrogyria and 
irregular areas of sulci and/or gyri not otherwise specified.
 Lissencephaly
2 (12)
6 (21)
…
 Polymicrogyria or pachygyria
11 (65)
14 (50)
…
 Irregular areas of sulci and/or gyri  
 not otherwise specified
5 (29)
21 (75)
…
Corpus callosum abnormalities
16 (94)
22 (78)
CT findings of agenesis and/or dysgenesis of the corpus callosum  
were frequently difficult owing to relatively large fornices and some 
anterior corpus callosum being present, but pronounced colpocephaly 
without visualization of the body of the corpus callosum was used  
for this diagnosis at CT. At MR imaging and US, direct visualization  
of the corpus callosum was used for diagnosis.
Ventriculomegaly
16 (94)
27 (96)
It can be difficult to characterize ventriculomegaly as mild or moderate,  
since the occipital horns were often dilated out of proportion to the  
frontal horns owing to parieto-occipital gray and white matter loss. 
Asymmetrical venticulomegaly was observed in six of 17 and five  
of 28 of the confirmed and presumed infections, respectively.
 Mild
4 (24)
5 (18)
…
 Moderate
7 (41)
9 (32)
…
 Severe
5 (29)
13 (46)
…
 Septations in occipital horns
5 (29)
3 (11)
…
Cerebellum abnormalities
14 (82)
21 (75)
Twelve subjects had abnormalities of cerebellar hemispheres and vermis.
 Hemisphere hypoplasia or  
 maldevelopment
14 (82)
11 (39)
…
 Vermis hypoplasia
10 (59)
19 (68)
…
Brainstem hypoplasia and/or atrophy
12 (70)
6 (21)
The high percentage in the confirmed infections reflects that these are 
predominantly prenatally diagnosed infections compared with the 
presumed infections, which has many neonates with only postnatal 
images. Prenatal imaging includes sagittal fetal MR imaging, which 
allows for better visualization of the brainstem compared with axial 
postnatal CT.
Calcifications
17 (100)
28 (100)
This was an inclusion criterion for the presumed infection cohort.
 Periventricular
11 (65)
4 (14)
All instances with periventricular calcifications had the periventricular 
calcifications in areas of parenchymal thinning.
 Cortical
4 (24)
4 (14)
At times, a layered appearance can be seen with cortical, gray, and  
white matter.
 Gray matter–white matter junction
15 (88)
28 (100)
…
 Basal ganglia and/or thalamus
11 (65)
18 (64)
…
 Brainstem
3 (18)
4 (14)
…
 Cerebellum
1 (6)
1 (4)
…
 Soft tissues of the neck
0
1 (4)
…
Heterogeneous material, some  
  of which could be thrombus  
   
in the region of the  
confluence of sinuses
9 (53)
8 (28)
At unenhanced CT, it is helpful to compare material in the confluence  
of the sinuses region to the basilar artery to determine if the  
attenuating and/or heterogeneous material is due to thrombus  
rather than dehydration and hemoconcentration effect.
Note.—Numbers in parentheses are percentages.
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
207
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
anatomy (Figs 2–8), neonatal micro-
cephaly (Figs 9–15; Figs E1–E3 [on-
line]), and one neonate with normal 
head circumference but with charac-
teristic calcifications in association with 
severe ventriculomegaly (Fig 16 ) are 
illustrated. Movie clips of sequences of 
images are also available in Movies 1–
E5 (online).
In all but one fetus with confirmed 
Zika virus infection at prenatal imag-
ing, the head circumference percen-
tile was at or below the 5th percentile 
in at least one US examination per-
formed during the second trimester 
of pregnancy (Table 2). However, one 
fetus with severe parenchymal and 
brainstem malformation had severe 
ventriculomegaly and normal head 
circumference at a scan conducted at 
17 weeks of gestational age, and the 
circumference remained within the 
normal range later in pregnancy. In 
23 of 26 fetuses that underwent serial 
prenatal US, head circumference re-
mained under the 5th percentile until 
birth, which led to a diagnosis of mi-
crocephaly at birth. However, it is no-
table that the three fetuses with head 
circumference in the normal range at 
birth showed severe ventriculomegaly, 
which we presume was due to the en-
larged, obstructed ventricles. For this 
reason, we included Figure 16, which 
depicts a neonate referred to IPESQ 
for potential Zika virus infection, but 
the head circumference was 38 cm at 
birth. The CT images showed calcifica-
tions in the subcortical region, thala-
mus, basal ganglia, and brainstem. No 
sulci were seen; however, the paren-
chyma was extremely thin. There was 
pontocerebellar hypoplasia and Dan-
dy-Walker spectrum anomaly, and the 
corpus callosum was not visualized.
The most remarkable change in the 
brain parenchyma, present on all neona-
tal images, was the reduction in paren-
chymal volume. Abnormalities of corti-
cal development associated with volume 
changes were observed in 16 of 17 con-
firmed infections (94%) and 28 of 28 pre-
sumed infections (100%). Abnormalities 
of the corpus callosum were present in 
Figure 2
Figure 2: (a) Axial, (b) sagittal, and (c) coronal fetal T2-weighted MR images in a 29-year-old woman with confirmed Zika virus infection, initially seen for charac-
teristic rash at 12 weeks of gestational age. (d) Axial postnatal CT image and (e–g) axial and (h) coronal T2-weighted MR images obtained in her male neonate. The 
fetal MR images obtained at 34 weeks (a–c) show asymmetrical ventriculomegaly with a septation in the right occipital horn (arrowhead on a), small frontal lobes, 
thinning of the occipital parenchyma (left worse than right), underdeveloped sylvian fissures, and regions of thickened cortex, as in the right frontal lobe, which is 
suggestive of polymicrogyria (arrow on a). There is abnormal, increased signal intensity in the white matter. The postnatal CT image (d) obtained in the 22-day-old 
neonate shows punctate calcifications at the gray matter–white matter junction and asymmetrical ventriculomegaly. The T2-weighted MR images obtained at 26 days 
(e–h) show septation in the ventricle (arrowhead on e). Note how the right ventricle has relatively decreased in size compared with the prenatal image, whereas the 
left ventricle has increased in size. Under-rotation of the hippocampus (arrowheads on f ) is demonstrated. There is clear asymmetry of the gyral pattern on g, which 
is relatively smooth in the left occipital region, with abnormal folds in the right occipital and frontoparietal regions (arrows on g). Subependymal cysts are visualized on 
h, which are not seen on fetal MR images.
 208 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
Figure 3
Figure 3: Images in the case of a 34-year-old woman with confirmed Zika virus infection, initially seen for a rash at 8 weeks of gestation. Fetal head cir-
cumference was in the normal range at 12 and 16 weeks (5.8 cm and 11.9 cm, respectively) but then decreased to the 10th percentile at 22 weeks and was 
below the 3rd percentile in subsequent imaging examinations. (a–h) US images obtained at 30 weeks. Head circumference on the axial image (a) measured 24 
cm (,2.3 percentile, corresponding to a gestational age of 26 weeks 3 days). Note the open sylvian fissures and relatively smooth cortex, which are abnormal 
findings at this gestational age. Oblique axial image (b) shows cerebellar calcifications (seen as the echogenic outer contour of the cerebellar hemispheres) and 
inferior vermian hypoplasia with associated enlarged cisterna magna. A sagittal transvaginal image (c) shows calcifications in the basal ganglia (arrowheads) 
and more bulky calcification at the gray matter–white matter junction. Another sagittal transvaginal image (d) shows a relatively small corpus callosum (arrows). 
A coronal image (e) shows cortical and subcortical white matter calcifications in a linear pattern. The gyral pattern is abnormal, which is suggestive of polymi-
crogyria. A sagittal color Doppler image (f) shows a stretched appearance of vessels coursing into the posterior fossa. An oblique axial gray-scale transvaginal 
image in the posterior fossa (g) shows heterogeneous material in the confluence of sinuses due to blood clot (arrow). A three-dimensional US image of the face 
(h) shows a sloping forehead, compatible with frontal lobe hypoplasia. (i) Axial and (j) sagittal fetal MR images obtained at 29 weeks show atrophic frontal lobes, 
wide sylvian fissures, enlarged posterior fossa, abnormal gyral pattern, prominent cerebrospinal fluid spaces, and inferior vermian hypoplasia. On i, note the 
diffuse hypointense and undersulcated cortex, which is suggestive of mineralization and polymicrogyria. The hypoplastic corpus callosum can be seen on the 
sagittal view (j), as well as the inferior vermian hypoplasia, enlarged cisterna magna, and heterogeneous signal intensity in the confluence of sinuses. There is a 
subjectively thin spinal cord. (k) Postnatal axial MR image obtained at 81 days shows small frontal lobes and cortical thickening. The choroid plexi are enlarged. 
(l) Photograph of the neonate after birth.
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
209
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
16 of 17 confirmed infections (94%) and 
22 of 28 presumed infections (78%).
Lateral ventricles were enlarged in 
16 of 17 confirmed infections (94%) 
and 27 of 28 presumed infections 
(96%). This was asymmetrical in six of 
17 confirmed infections and five of 28 
presumed infections. Despite ventricu-
lomegaly, the extra-axial spaces are 
frequently still prominent because of 
cortical underdevelopment or atrophy. 
Other findings associated with the ven-
tricles were septations in the ventricle 
(typically in the occipital horns), which 
were frequently difficult to distinguish 
Figure 4
Figure 4: Images in the case of an 18-year-old woman, first seen for rash at 10 weeks of pregnancy, with confirmed Zika virus infection. US findings obtained 
at 20 weeks of gestational age were reportedly normal, with normal head circumference of 17.5 cm. At 37 weeks of gestational age, (a) sagittal transvaginal and 
(b) coronal transabdominal US images obtained with the head upside down show a small head circumference (26.4 cm, corresponding to 28 weeks 5 days, below 
the 3rd percentile), moderate ventriculomegaly with dense intracranial calcifications (arrowheads on a), and abnormal head shape with flattened appearance and 
thickened skin (arrow on a). On the sonogram, it is difficult to precisely localize the calcifications, given the thin parenchyma. (c, d) Axial bone window CT images, 
(e) sagittal localizer CT image, and (f–h) axial CT images show microcephaly with cerebral atrophy, and, despite ventriculomegaly, the extra-axial cerebrospinal 
fluid spaces are still prominent. The dense calcifications are predominantly located in the subcortical white matter at the gray matter–white matter interface. There 
is markedly abnormal skull shape with some eversion of the bones at the suture sites (particularly frontoparietal sites), with redundant skin folds (particularly in 
the parieto-occipital region). (i) Sagittal T1-weighted, ( j, k) coronal T2-weighted, and (l) axial susceptibility-weighted MR images obtained at 1 month of age show 
an undersegmented midbrain, severe microcephaly, open sylvian fissures, and polymicrogyria. The dense calcifications are evident on the susceptibility-weighted 
image. On the sagittal images (a, e, i), note the small supratentorial compartment and associated skull deformity.
 210 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
Figure 5
Figure 5: Images in the case of a 33-year-old woman who had a rash at 10 weeks of pregnancy, with confirmed Zika virus infec-
tion. US performed at 19 weeks of gestational age showed a head circumference in the normal range (16.6 cm). (a, b) Sagittal and 
(c) coronal transvaginal US images obtained at the next US examination at 27 weeks 2 days of gestational age, however, showed 
the fetal head circumference to be 21.6 cm, which corresponded to 23 weeks 3 days (,2.3 percentile, not shown). There was 
mild ventriculomegaly with septations in the occipital horns. Calcifications could be seen at the gray matter–white matter junction. 
The cerebrum was atrophic. There was blood clot in the region of the confluence of sinuses (arrow). (d) Coronal, (e) axial, and (f) 
sagittal T2-weighted fetal MR images obtained at 32 weeks show septations in the ventricles and an abnormal-appearing cortex, 
with a thickened and undersulcated cortex most marked on the left, compatible with polymicrogyria. The sagittal midline view shows 
microcephaly, blood clot in the region of the confluence of sinuses, and prominent skin folds. (g, h) Axial T2-weighted and (i) sagittal 
T1-weighted postnatal MR images obtained in the 4-week-old neonate show diffuse gyral abnormality and abnormal myelination. 
The septations in the ventricles are again seen. The sagittal image shows thinning of the spinal cord at the craniocervical junction.
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
211
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
Figure 6
Figure 6: Images in the case of a 24-year-old woman pregnant with twins, with characteristic rash at 9 weeks of pregnancy and confirmed Zika virus infection. 
(For each pair of images, the first image is of twin A, and the second image is of twin B.) At 14 weeks of gestational age, the fetal head size of both twins was 
normal. The head size never went below the 3rd percentile for either fetus in examinations at 19–28 weeks. (a, b) Sagittal and (c, d) axial fetal MR images were 
obtained at 36 weeks. (e, f ) Axial and (g, h) surface reconstruction postnatal CT images and (i, j) axial T2-weighted and (k, l) coronal MR images were obtained 
1 week after delivery at 38 weeks of gestational age. There is severe microcephaly with profound frontal lobe hypoplasia. Calcifications in the subcortical white 
matter at the gray matter–white matter junction are visualized. Both twins have a flattened appearance of the pons. The spinal cord is atrophic (best seen on a). 
Redundant skin is seen in the occipital region. There is polymicrogyria involving the frontal and parietal regions and atrophic cortex and white matter in the occip-
ital regions. Each twin has hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, with prominent fornices. There is abnormal myelination in the occipital region that, in twin A (i), has 
the appearance of a cyst or septation within the ventricle. The cerebellum is somewhat small and nodular. There is lack of rotation of the hippocampi.
from subventricular cysts. Subependy-
mal cysts were occasionally visualized.
Abnormalities of cortical develop-
ment were present in all patients but 
with a substantial variation regarding 
the type of abnormality, hemispheric 
symmetry, and severity (Table 1). 
The most common finding was irreg-
ular areas of sulci and/or gyri not 
otherwise specified, but focal cortical 
malformation was also observed. In 
addition, six patients had the appear-
ance of lissencephaly. In three fetuses, 
this was diagnosed prenatally. Of the 
other three, two did not have a fetal 
sonogram for review, and one only un-
derwent a scan at 10 weeks of gesta-
tion, which is too early to assign this 
diagnosis. The cortical development 
abnormalities were usually asymmet-
rical. In general, the sulci were less 
 212 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
the vermis, associated with an enlarged 
cisterna magna.
Abnormalities of the corpus cal-
losum—usually thin, dysgenetic, and 
hypoplastic or even absent—were fre-
quently observed. Other changes in-
cluded under-rotation of the hippocam-
pus and thickened fornices.
In some imaging studies, an en-
larged confluence of the dural venous 
sinuses had heterogeneous material. In 
a few fetal sonograms that were avail-
able for review, this was demonstrated 
to be blood clot (Fig 3g). In many 
postnatal CT studies, there was hy-
perattenuating material in this region, 
which could be either thrombus or 
hematocrit effect (due to dehydration 
with hemoconcentration). In many 
identified. However, these were usually 
present in more severe manifestations 
of infection, being associated with dys-
morphic brainstem, stenosis of the aq-
ueduct, and secondary supratentorial 
hydrocephaly. Calcification in the brain-
stem was a common finding at autopsy 
(in three of three of the neonates with 
confirmed infection that underwent 
autopsy).
Abnormalities of the brainstem 
were identified. The pons was often 
thin and atrophic. There was frequently 
a kink seen at the pontomedullary 
junction. The spinal cord was thinned 
and at times irregular in its appearance. 
Other posterior fossa abnormalities in-
cluded cerebellar hemisphere hypopla-
sia, vermis hypoplasia, and elevation of 
prominent, and wide sylvian and in-
terhemispheric fissures were identi-
fied in most neonates, as well as ab-
normal myelination.
Calcification regions were predomi-
nantly located in the gray matter–white 
matter junction in our series (88% in 
the confirmed infection cohort and 
100% in the presumed infection co-
hort). Calcifications were also iden-
tified in the thalamus, basal ganglia, 
cortex, and periventricular regions. It 
is important to mention that the latter 
were only present in neonates where 
there was substantial thinning of the 
brain parenchyma; thus, the precise 
location of calcifications was difficult 
to determine. Although less common, 
infratentorial calcifications were also 
Figure 7
Figure 7: Images in the case of a pregnant 20-year-old woman, without history of rash, who was referred for fetal brain abnormality at US with confirmed 
Zika virus infection. (a) Graph of head circumference during pregnancy shows small head size in the second trimester, which increased in the third trimester. US 
(not shown) showed moderate ventriculomegaly starting at 23 weeks, which progressed to severe ventriculomegaly by the third trimester, associated with the 
increase in head circumference. (b) Axial, (c) sagittal, and (d) coronal fetal MR images obtained at 36 weeks show severe asymmetric ventriculomegaly, marked 
parenchymal thinning and/or atrophy, sloping forehead, and elevation of the hypoplastic cerebellar vermis with hypoplastic cerebellar hemispheres. The brainstem 
is thin, and the midbrain is foreshortened. The spinal cord is irregular, thin, and nonvisualized in parts, and then thicker and possibly mineralized. (e, f) Axial CT 
images obtained 1 day postnatally show severe asymmetrical ventriculomegaly with dense calcifications in the brainstem, cerebellum, and gray matter–white 
matter interface (temporal lobes on f) and marked parenchymal atrophy. (g) Axial CT image obtained in the 6-week-old infant, after shunting, showed persistent 
ventriculomegaly and periventricular, midbrain, thalamic, and cerebellar calcifications. (h) Photograph of the neonatal face shows redundant skin folds and skull 
asymmetry.
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
213
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
conjunctivitis, and, in rare instances, 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (15).
It is well recognized that Zika virus 
crosses the fetal-placental barrier. Zika 
virus has been isolated from the brain 
and cerebrospinal fluid of neonates born 
with congenital microcephaly and iden-
tified in the amniotic fluid and placental 
tissue of mothers who had experienced 
clinical symptoms consistent with Zika 
virus infection during their pregnancies 
(2–5,8,15,16). Zika virus has also been 
shown to lead to neurotoxiticity and to 
impair human neurosphere growth in 
experimental models (17).
orbital fat into the cranial vault. Body 
abnormalities included arthrogryposis.
Discussion
Zika virus is a single-strand RNA Flavi-
virus (1). It is transmitted by infected 
female mosquito vectors, such as the 
Aedes aegypti mosquito. Diagnosis of 
Zika virus infection is complicated by 
the fact that it is asymptomatic in up 
to 80% of infections (14). The com-
mon symptoms tend to be mild and 
nonspecific, including headache, fever, 
and rash. Other symptoms include 
fetal and neonatal MR studies, there 
was fluid posterior to the confluence 
of the sinuses that was either similar 
to cerebrospinal fluid in attenuation or 
signal intensity or contained fluid with 
a higher protein content than that of 
cerebrospinal fluid. The location of the 
fluid collection is likely related to the 
unusual head shape and overlapping 
sutures. This abnormal head shape 
was frequently associated with redun-
dant skin folds.
Other findings include orbital abnor-
malities, such as asymmetrical microp-
thalmia, cataracts, and herniation of the 
Figure 8
Figure 8: Fetal and postnatal images in the case of an 18-year-old pregnant woman initially seen for a rash at 12 weeks of 
gestation, with confirmed Zika virus infection. Signs of joint contractures were identified at US at 17 weeks, but head circum-
ference was in the normal range, then decreased to the 15th percentile at 21 weeks and was below the 3rd percentile at 
subsequent scans at 24 and 36 weeks (19.0 cm and 25.0 cm, respectively). (a) Axial transabdominal US performed at 36 weeks 
shows ventriculomegaly, calcifications in the thalamus and basal ganglia, and enlarged cisterna magna. (b) Soft-tissue, (c) body 
bone reconstruction, and (d, e) axial postmortem CT images show an abnormal profile, moderate ventriculomegaly, parenchymal 
atrophy, splaying of the cerebellar hemispheres, inferior vermian hypoplasia, and calcifications in the subcortical white matter, 
thalamus, and basal ganglia. The corpus callosum is not visualized. The gyral pattern is abnormally smooth for a term neonate. 
The postnatal bone reconstruction image showed the severe joint contractures, similar to those observed on (f) a photograph of 
the neonate.
 214 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
virus, it is clear that there are devel-
opmental insults that lead to micren-
cephaly (small brain) and associated 
microcephaly (small head) (6,18–21). 
It is important to recognize that almost 
all of the infections at our institution 
There are many causes of microceph-
aly, the most common being infections 
(such as TORCH infections and human 
immunodeficiency virus), teratogens 
(including maternal exposure to heavy 
metals, alcohol, and radiation), genetic 
abnormalities and syndromes, and 
growth restriction. In the case of Zika 
Microcephaly is a nonspecific term 
that refers to a head circumference 
smaller than normal for gestational age. 
Figure 9
Figure 9: Axial CT image in a 1-week-old female 
neonate with a head circumference of 31 cm at 
birth and presumed Zika virus infection. The frontal 
lobes are slightly hypoplastic, with mild underoper-
cularization of the hypoplastic sylvian fissures. There 
are scattered subcortical calcifications (arrowheads), 
and there is high-attenuating material (arrow) in the 
region of the confluence of sinuses, likely represent-
ing blood products.
Figure 10
Figure 10: Oblique axial CT image in a 3-month-
old male infant with a head circumference of 27.5 
cm at birth, with presumed Zika virus infection. 
Note the misshapen skull, ventriculomegaly, absent 
corpus callosum, diffuse parenchymal volume 
loss, diffuse cortical migrational abnormality, and 
calcifications, most likely subcortical but difficult to 
classify secondary to parenchymal thinning.
Figure 11
Figure 11: Axial CT image in a 1-month-old 
male neonate with a head circumference of 27 cm 
at birth, with presumed Zika virus infection. Note 
ventriculomegaly with septation (arrow) in the right 
occipital horn and striking subcortical calcifications. 
There are also cortical and periventricular calcifica-
tions. The gyral pattern is diffusely abnormal, and 
the skull is deformed.
Figure 12
Figure 12: Oblique coronal CT image in a 
1-month-old male neonate with a head circumfer-
ence of 29.5 cm at birth, with presumed Zika virus 
infection. Note the misshapen skull; ventriculomeg-
aly; absent corpus callosum; cerebellar hypoplasia 
(arrows); thin parenchyma with diffuse gyral 
abnormality; calcifications in the thalamus, basal 
ganglia, and subcortical white matter; and cerebellar 
hemispheres.
Figure 13
Figure 13: Axial CT image in a 1-month-old 
female neonate with a head circumference of 31 
cm at birth, with presumed Zika virus infection. Note 
severe ventriculomegaly, subcortical calcifications, 
and diffuse gyral abnormality.
Figure 14
Figure 14: Axial CT image in a 2-month-old 
female infant with a head circumference of 32.5 cm 
at birth, with presumed Zika virus infection. Note the 
asymmetrical volume loss, more marked on the right 
than the left. Also note the diffusely irregular sulci 
and gyri bilaterally.
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
215
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
applying our exclusion criteria. In the 
report by França et al, one in five def-
inite or probable Zika virus infections 
yielded head circumferences in the 
normal range (more than 22 standard 
deviations below the median of the In-
ternational Fetal and Newborn Growth 
Consortium for the 21st Century, or 
INTERGROWTH-21st, standard), and 
for one-third of definite and probable 
infections, there was no history of a 
rash during pregnancy (24). This sug-
gests that our series is biased to the 
more severe infections. However, in the 
series by França et al (24), the more 
severe infections were localized in the 
northeast region of Brazil, since 97% 
of definite or probable infections were 
from the northeast region, where 28% 
of all births in Brazil occur. This sug-
gests that there could be additional un-
known factors that exacerbate the fetal 
infection in this region. Coinfections, in 
addition to those already excluded, as 
well other environmental factors, will 
need to be explored further.
There are many nomograms for head 
circumference size. Current guidance in 
Brazil is to use the standards from the 
INTERGROWTH-21st study for fetuses 
(25), the INTERGROWTH-21st study 
for infants (25), and World Health Or-
ganization criteria for full-term neonates 
(26). These charts show that a head 
circumference of 32 cm is at about 22 
is 1%–13% (22). However, as the flow 
of women referred to the IPESQ for 
assessment demonstrates, it is clear 
that many pregnant women with a 
rash in Brazil are never shown to have 
congenitally infected fetuses, although 
some certainly could have less severe 
infection that has thus far been undiag-
nosed. For women who have neonates 
with findings suggestive of severe mi-
crocephaly but who have a history of 
rash or for those who had a rash in the 
third trimester, we can hypothesize that 
there was an unrecognized or asymp-
tomatic first-trimester exposure and/or 
infection.
As of July 2, 2016, the Brazilian 
Ministry of Health had been notified 
of 8301 cases of microcephaly and 
confirmed 1656 infections (23). In a 
recent study, França et al reported on 
the follow-up of 1501 cases in which 
Zika virus infection was suspected, of 
which 602 were deemed to be defi-
nitely or probably due to Zika virus (76 
definite infections, 54 highly probable 
infections, 181 moderately probable 
infections, and 291 somewhat proba-
ble infections) (24). The incidence of 
confirmed infection in our study with 
respect to referral population is similar 
to what has been seen in the larger Bra-
zilian population. In our study, of 432 
women initially screened, only findings 
in 44 patients are reported here after 
occurred in women who had a charac-
teristic rash in the late first trimester. 
This correlates well with the finding of 
severe cerebral dysmorphisms asso-
ciated with infection during a time of 
rapid brain development. According to 
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, the risk of microceph-
aly after maternal infection with Zika 
virus in the first trimester of pregnancy 
Figure 15
Figure 15: Axial CT image in a 3-month-old 
female infant with cord blood positive for Zika virus 
(confirmed Zika virus infection) and a head circum-
ference of 28.5 cm at birth. The mother had a rash 
at 12 weeks. Bilateral cataracts are seen, as well 
as abnormal cerebellar vermis and fat herniating 
posteriorly from the orbits through the superior 
orbital fissure into the cranial vault.
Figure 16
Figure 16: Axial CT images in a 5-month-old male infant with a head circumference of 38 cm at birth. The mother had a rash at 11 
weeks. The size of the head is likely secondary to hydrocephalus. Unlike most of our cohort, the head was still round in shape. However, 
calcifications are present in the subcortical region, thalamus, basal ganglia, and brainstem. No sulci were seen; however, the paren-
chyma is extremely thin. There is pontocerebellar hypoplasia, nonvisualization of the corpus callosum, and Dandy-Walker spectrum 
anomaly. This is an example of how Zika virus infection can be missed if only newborns with microcephaly are assessed.
 216 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
instances, a normal (or even increased) 
head circumference may be present.
Another unusual finding that sug-
gests skull collapse is that neonates 
have orbital fat herniation into the cra-
nial vault. Thus, some of the ocular find-
ings could be secondary to the process 
of skull deformation itself rather than 
direct infection of the eye. For example, 
nerve and blood flow interruption could 
be due to herniated tissue.
We used brain calcifications as in-
clusion criteria for the postnatal as-
sessment to exclude microcephaly from 
causes other than infection, such as 
a combination of the small brain as it 
develops and a result of what, at some 
point, was likely a larger head size (due 
to ventriculomegaly) that then decom-
presses. Cerebral atrophy may also con-
tribute, giving the skull the collapsed 
shape with everted and/or cupped su-
tures and overriding bones in the occipi-
tal region, causing redundant and folded 
skin. In part, this is also likely due to 
the head and skin continuing to grow, 
while the size of the brain regresses. 
However, in some fetuses and/or neo-
nates, the ventricle and/or brain atro-
phy has not yet occurred, and in these 
standard deviations below the mean for 
both boys and girls at term. However, 
this threshold will naturally include some 
normally developing neonates and also 
be inaccurate for neonates born prema-
turely. However, it should be recognized 
that to cast a broad net to find neonates 
with congenital Zika virus infection, we 
must bear in mind that not all neonates 
will have microcephaly at birth.
The striking imaging features of the 
severe micrencephaly associated with 
Zika virus include a markedly abnormal 
head shape. The unusual appearance 
of the skull, we hypothesize, is due to 
Table 2
Head Circumference Percentiles with Respect to Gestational Age in Fetuses with Prenatal US Images
Infection Group and  
Case No.
Gestational Age
Head Circumference  
at Birth (cm)
Gestational Age  
at Birth (wk)
14–16 Weeks
17–20 Weeks
21–24 Weeks
25–30 Weeks
31–35 Weeks
36 Weeks
Confirmed infection
 C1
…
5
…
,3
5
40
36.5
41
 C2
5
5
5
3–5
,3
3
30.5
40
 C3
…
50
90
25
…
…
35
36
 C4
…
…
25
…
3
,3
31.5
41
 C5
50
25
…
5
5
,5
33
39
 C6
…
10
5
5
…
25
35
39
 C7
…
50
…
,3
,3
,3
28
39
 C8
…
50
…
5
,3
…
28.5
39
 C9
25
25
…
3–5
…
…
28
38
 C10
5
5
…
3
…
…
26
38
 C11
…
…
50
5
3
,3
29
40
 C12
25
5
10
…
…
,3
29.5
40
 C13
…
50
…
…
…
,3
28
40
 C14
…
…
…
…
25
3
30
41
 C15
50
…
50
…
5
…
32.5
41
 C16
…
…
10
…
…
,3
27.5
39
Presumed infection
 P1
…
…
10
5
…
…
31
38
 P2
10
50
…
5
,3
…
27
38
 P3
…
…
…
…
,3
…
28.5
40
 P4
…
10
…
…
…
…
29
40
 P5
…
40
50
,3
3
3
31
39
 P6
…
…
…
…
…
,3
27.5
39
 P7
…
25
5
…
,3
…
31
39
 P8
…
…
…
5
…
,1
30
39
 P9
…
…
5
…
,3
…
28
39
 P10
…
75
25
25
3
3
31.5
40
 P11
…
…
…
…
,3
…
27
36
 P12
50
25
…
…
…
…
27
38
 P13
…
…
25
…
…
,1
30
37
 P14
…
…
…
…
…
,3
29
39
 P15
…
…
…
,3
…
…
29.5
40
Note.—Data are percentages, unless indicated otherwise. If more than one examination was conducted in a given time period, measurements from the first examination were used.
 Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
217
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
with normal head size or brain abnor-
malities without calcifications could 
have been missed. In addition, it could 
be that some of the cohort had disease 
origin for microcephaly other than Zika 
virus. For example, we excluded a neo-
nate with microcephaly and confirmed 
Zika virus infection due to aneuploidy 
with trisomy 13 syndrome. However, 
other infections or syndromes could be 
present but not yet identified in either 
our confirmed infection cohort or our 
presumed infection cohort. Findings on 
MR images can lead to underestimation 
of the incidence of calcifications, and 
evaluation of CT images makes charac-
terization of subtle parenchymal abnor-
malities and corpus callosum abnormal-
ities difficult. Further imaging studies 
on these neonates as they grow will be 
helpful in further assessment of areas 
involved with the infection. Finally, we 
focused on brain findings in this review. 
Additional sites of infection and associ-
ated pathologic abnormalities will likely 
be identified in the future.
It is well recognized that transpla-
cental transmission of viruses, even in 
subclinical maternal infection, can lead 
to severe congenital abnormalities. As 
in other infections, serial imaging can 
demonstrate evolution of findings. Pre-
natal sonograms may show normal or 
decreased head circumference and, 
rarely, increased head circumference. 
Almost all neonates will show intrapa-
renchymal calcifications more severe 
than what are typically seen in TORCH 
infections and frequently occur at the 
gray matter–white matter junction, 
which is an unusual location for the cal-
cifications of other congenital infections. 
We hope the illustrations of these many 
fetuses and neonates will aid others in 
the event that the unfortunate epidemic 
of congenital Zika virus continues.
Acknowledgments: We gratefully acknowledge 
the members of the Brazilian Network BRAZIKA 
(Rede Internacional de Estudos Sobre Zika no 
Brasil).
Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest: P.S.d.O.S. 
disclosed no relevant relationships. D.L. Activ-
ities related to the present article: disclosed 
no relevant relationships. Activities not related 
to the present article: author received roy-
alties from Elsevier and UpToDate. Other re-
lationships: disclosed no relevant relationships. 
There have been many reports of 
small series of imaging findings in fe-
tuses and neonates with congenital Zika 
virus infection. In 2016, Mlakar et al de-
scribed one pregnancy at 29 weeks with 
microcephaly and intracranial calcifica-
tions, with an earlier, second-trimester 
sonogram that showed no abnormality 
(6). Also in 2016, Calvet et al described 
two pregnant women who underwent 
US at 22 weeks, which showed micro-
cephaly (2). Sarno et al described a 
stillbirth at 32 weeks, with microceph-
aly, intracranial calcifications, and fetal 
hydrops (7). Driggers et al in 2016 de-
scribed decreased fetal head circumfer-
ence between 16 and 21 weeks, with 
brain abnormalities (8). In a study by 
Brasil et al (3), of 88 pregnant women 
with rash, 72 tested positive for Zika 
virus. Fetal US was performed in 42 
fetuses, and abnormalities were seen 
in 12, including intrauterine growth re-
striction with or without microcephaly 
and ventricular calcifications (3).
Schuler-Faccini et al described 35 
neonates with microcephaly, including 
brain calcifications, ventriculomgaly, 
and cortical and/or subcortical atrophy 
(9). In 2016, Hazin et al (10) and de 
Fatima Vasco Aragao et al (11) each de-
scribed 23 neonates with microcephaly 
who had CT findings that included intra-
cranial calcifications, ventriculomegaly, 
abnormal gryal pattern, and abnormal 
white matter attenuation. Guillemette-
Artur et al described three neonates 
with congenital Zika virus infection, 
with micrencephaly in all three, small 
cerebellum in two, occipital subependy-
mal pseudocysts in two, polymicrogyria 
in three, corpus callosum abnormalities 
in two, and hypoplastic brainstem in 
one (32). These findings are all similar 
to what we report.
Our study had limitations. What we 
present here is a convenience sample 
of imaging findings for illustrative pur-
poses. Our cohort was obtained from a 
referral center for high-risk pregnancy. 
Thus, we have no information on inci-
dence of the Zika virus in the general 
population or risk estimates for trans-
mission to the fetus. Because of the 
manner in which we accrued subjects, 
neonates with congenital infection but 
unrecognized prematurity or congenital 
syndromes. While this could have led 
to exclusion of some infections with-
out intracranial calcifications, it led 
to a homogeneous group of neonates 
with strikingly similar parenchymal 
abnormalities. In our series, the most 
common location for calcifications was 
the gray matter–white matter junction 
(88% in the confirmed infection cohort 
and 100% in the presumed infection co-
hort), which is an area not classically 
or commonly targeted in other con-
genital infections. The location of the 
calcifications at the gray matter–white 
matter interface could suggest a vascu-
lar component to the infection, as other 
processes that preferentially affect the 
gray matter–white matter junction have 
been posited to be due to changes in 
arterial configuration from straight ves-
sels in the cortex to coiled vessels in the 
subcortical white matter (27).
In the classic TORCH infections, 
the brain calcifications are periventric-
ular and cortical, although rare cases 
of basal ganglia and thalamus calcifi-
cations have been reported (28,29). 
Other findings include intraventricular 
adhesions, callosal abnormalities, peri-
ventricular pseudocysts, sulcation, and 
gyral abnormalities (29–31), similar to 
what we describe in this report.
However, unlike most patients with 
congenital Cytomegalovirus, the pa-
tients with documented or presumed 
Zika virus infection described in this re-
port had severe microcephaly. This may 
be due to the first-trimester nature of 
most of the infections reported herein. 
It could also be due to the viral load in 
the Zika virus infections, which we as-
sume are severe infections. It could be 
that congenital Cytomegalovirus is di-
agnosed in a range of infections from 
mild to severe, whereas we may be fo-
cusing our results on the severe Zika 
virus infections. In our cohort, almost 
all fetuses and neonates had dramati-
cally abnormal cerebral volume, abnor-
mal cortical folding pattern, and/or re-
gions of lissencephaly, pachygyria, and/
or polymicrogyria. We hypothesize that 
the cortical abnormalities visualized are 
due at least in part to arrested cortical 
development at various stages.
 218 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 281: Number 1—October 2016
SPECIAL REPORT: Congenital Brain Abnormalities and Zika Virus: What the Radiologist Can Expect to See 
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld et al
A.S.d.O.M. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
M.M.R.A. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
A.G.M.B. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
L.C. disclosed no relevant relationships. A.T. 
disclosed no relevant relationships. R.S.A. dis-
closed no relevant relationships. G.M. disclosed 
no relevant relationships. R.X. disclosed no rel-
evant relationships. R.R. disclosed no relevant 
relationships. J.S. disclosed no relevant relation-
ships. F.T.M. disclosed no relevant relationships.
References
 1. Campos GS, Bandeira AC, Sardi SI. Zika 
virus outbreak, Bahia, Brazil. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2015;21(10):1885–1886.
 2. Calvet 
G, 
Aguiar 
RS, 
Melo 
AS, 
et 
al. 
Detection 
and sequencing of Zika virus from amniotic 
fluid of fetuses with microcephaly in Brazil: 
a case study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;16(6): 
653–660.
 3. Brasil P, Pereira JP Jr, Raja Gabaglia C, et 
al. Zika virus infection in pregnant women 
in Rio de Janeiro—preliminary report. N 
Engl J Med 2016 Mar 4. [Epub ahead of 
 
print]
 4. Melo A, Aguiar R, Amorim M, et al. Con-
genital Zika virus infection: beyond neonatal 
microcephaly. JAMA Neurol (in press).
 5. Oliveira Melo AS, Malinger G, Ximenes R, 
Szejnfeld PO, Alves Sampaio S, Bispo de 
Filippis AM. Zika virus intrauterine infec-
tion causes fetal brain abnormality and mi-
crocephaly: tip of the iceberg? Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2016;47(1):6–7.
 6. Mlakar J, Korva M, Tul N, et al. Zika virus 
associated with microcephaly. N Engl J Med 
2016;374(10):951–958.
 7. Sarno M, Sacramento GA, Khouri R, 
 
et al. Zika virus infection and stillbirths: a 
case of hydrops fetalis, hydranencephaly and 
fetal demise. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2016;10(2): 
e0004517.
 8. Driggers RW, Ho CY, Korhonen EM, et al. 
Zika virus infection with prolonged mater-
nal viremia and fetal brain abnormalities. N 
Engl J Med 2016;374(22):2142–2151.
 9. Schuler-Faccini L, Ribeiro EM, Feitosa IM, 
et al. Possible association between Zika virus 
infection and microcephaly—Brazil, 2015. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65(3): 
59–62.
 
10. Hazin AN, Poretti A, Turchi Martelli CM, 
et al. Computed tomographic findings in 
microcephaly associated with Zika virus. N 
Engl J Med 2016;374(22):2193–2195.
 
11. de Fatima Vasco Aragao M, van der Linden 
V, Brainer-Lima AM, et al. Clinical features 
and neuroimaging (CT and MRI) findings 
in presumed Zika virus related congenital 
infection and microcephaly: retrospective 
case series study. BMJ 2016;353:i1901.
 
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
All Countries & Territories with Active Zika 
Virus Transmission. http://www.cdc.gov/
zika/geo/active-countries.html. Updated July 
 
26, 2016. Accessed July 29, 2016.
 
13. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Ge-
netic and serologic properties of Zika virus 
associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Mi-
cronesia, 2007. Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14(8): 
1232–1239.
 
14. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. 
Zika virus outbreak on Yap Island, Federated 
States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med 2009; 
360(24):2536–2543.
 
15. Faria NR, Azevedo RdoS, Kraemer MU, et 
al. Zika virus in the Americas: early epidemi-
ological and genetic findings. Science 2016; 
352(6283):345–349.
 
16. Martines RB, Bhatnagar J, Keating MK, 
et al. Notes from the field: evidence of Zika 
virus infection in brain and placental tissues 
from two congenitally infected newborns and 
two fetal losses—Brazil, 2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65(6):159–160.
 
17. Garcez PP, Loiola EC, Madeiro da Costa R, 
et al. Zika virus impairs growth in human 
neurospheres and brain organoids. Science 
2016;352(6287):816–818.
 
18. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, 
Petersen LR. Zika virus and birth defects—
reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl 
J Med 2016;374(20):1981–1987.
 
19. Besnard M, Eyrolle-Guignot D, Guillemette-
Artur P, et al. Congenital cerebral malfor-
mations and dysfunction in fetuses and new-
borns following the 2013 to 2014 Zika virus 
epidemic in French Polynesia. Euro Surveill 
2016;21(13).
 
20. de Paula Freitas B, de Oliveira Dias JR, 
Prazeres J, et al. Ocular findings in infants 
with microcephaly associated with pre-
sumed Zika virus congenital infection in Sal-
vador, Brazil. JAMA Ophthalmol 2016 Feb 
9. [Epub ahead of print]
 
21. Miranda-Filho DdeB, Martelli CM, Ximenes 
RA, et al. Initial description of the pre-
sumed congenital Zika syndrome. Am J 
Public Health 2016;106(4):598–600.
 
22. Johansson MA, Mier-y-Teran-Romero L, 
Reefhuis J, Gilboa SM, Hills SL. Zika and 
the risk of microcephaly. N Engl J Med 2016; 
375(1):1–4.
 
23. Brazilian Ministry of Health. Ministério da 
Saúde Confirma 1.656 Casos de Microce-
falia. http://portalsaude.saude.gov.br/index.
php/cidadao/principal/agencia-saude/24437-
ministerio-da-saude-confirma-1-656-ca-
sos-de-microcefalia. Updated July 7, 2016. 
Accessed July 7, 2016.
 
24. França GV, Schuler-Faccini L, Oliveira WK, 
et al. Congenital Zika virus syndrome in 
Brazil: a case series of the first 1501 live-
births with complete investigation. Lancet 
2016 Jun 29. [Epub ahead of print]
 
25. Papageorghiou AT, Ohuma EO, Altman 
DG, et al; International Fetal and Newborn 
Growth Consortium for the 21st Century 
(INTERGROWTH-21st). International stan-
dards for fetal growth based on serial ul-
trasound measurements: the Fetal Growth 
Longitudinal Study of the INTERGROWTH-
21st Project. Lancet 2014;384(9946):869–
879.
 
26. World Health Organization. Head Cir-
cumference-for-Age. 
http://www.who.int/
childgrowth/standards/hc_for_age/en/. Ac-
cessed June 12, 2016.
 
27. Nonaka H, Akima M, Hatori T, Nagayama 
T, Zhang Z, Ihara F. The microvasculature 
of the cerebral white matter: arteries of the 
subcortical white matter. J Neuropathol Exp 
Neurol 2003;62(2):154–161.
 
28. Estroff JA, Parad RB, Teele RL, Benacerraf 
BR. Echogenic vessels in the fetal thalami and 
basal ganglia associated with cytomegalovi-
rus infection. J Ultrasound Med 1992;11(12): 
686–688.
 
29. Picone O, Simon I, Benachi A, Brunelle F, 
Sonigo P. Comparison between ultrasound 
and magnetic resonance imaging in assess-
ment of fetal cytomegalovirus infection. Pre-
nat Diagn 2008;28(8):753–758.
 
30. Moinuddin A, McKinstry RC, Martin KA, 
Neil JJ. Intracranial hemorrhage progress-
ing to porencephaly as a result of congeni-
tally acquired cytomegalovirus infection—an 
illustrative report. Prenat Diagn 2003;23 
(10):797–800.
 
31. Teissier N, Fallet-Bianco C, Delezoide AL, 
et al. Cytomegalovirus-induced brain mal-
formations in fetuses. J Neuropathol Exp 
Neurol 2014;73(2):143–158.
 
32. Guillemette-Artur P, Besnard M, Eyrolle-
Guignot D, Jouannic JM, Garel C. Prenatal 
brain MRI of fetuses with Zika virus infec-
tion. Pediatr Radiol 2016;46(7):1032–1039.
