 83
Sohal AH, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2018;94:83–87. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866
Health services research
Short report
Improving the healthcare response to domestic 
violence and abuse in sexual health clinics: feasibility 
study of a training, support and referral intervention
Alex hardip Sohal,1 Neha pathak,2 Sarah Blake,3 Vanessa Apea,4 Judith Berry,5 
Jayne Bailey,5,6 Chris Griffiths,7 Gene Feder8
To cite: Sohal Ah, 
pathak N, Blake S, 
et al. Sex Transm Infect 
2018;94:83–87.
1Queen Mary University of 
London, Centre for primary Care 
and public health, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, London, UK
2Women’s health research 
Unit, Queen Mary University 
of London, University of Bristol 
School of Social and Community 
Medicine, Bristol, UK
3University of Bristol, School of 
Social and Community Medicine, 
Bristol, UK
4Barts health NhS trust, Sexual 
health, London, UK
5University hospitals Bristol NhS 
Foundation trust, Bristol Sexual 
health Centre, Bristol, UK
6University of Bristol, School of 
Social and Community Medicine, 
Bristol, UK
7Queen Mary University of 
London, Centre for primary Care 
and public health, London, UK
8University of Bristol, Centre 
for Academic primary Care, 
Bristol, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Alex hardip Sohal, Queen 
Mary University of London, 
Centre for primary Care and 
public health, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Yvonne Carter 
Building, 58 turner Street, 
London e1 2AB, UK;  
ahsohal@ 
yahoo. 
co. 
uk
received 21 September 2016
revised 27 February 2017
Accepted 16 March 2017
published online First 
19 July 2017
 
► http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
sextrans- 
2017- 
053322
 
► http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
sextrans- 
2017- 
053411
AbsTrACT
Objectives Sexual health and gynaecological 
problems are the most consistent and largest physical 
health differences between abused and non-abused 
female populations. Sexual health services are well 
placed to identify and support patients experiencing 
domestic violence and abuse (DVA). Most sexual health 
professionals have had minimal DVA training despite 
english National Institute for health and Care excellence 
recommendations. We sought to determine the 
feasibility of an evidence-based complex DVA training 
intervention in female sexual health walk-in services (IrIS 
ADViSe: Identification and referral to Improve Safety 
whilst Assessing Domestic Violence in Sexual health 
environments).
Methods An adaptive mixed method pilot study in 
the female walk-in service of two sexual health clinics. 
Following implementation and evaluation at site 1, 
the intervention was refined before implementation at 
site 2. the intervention comprised electronic prompts, 
multidisciplinary training sessions, clinic materials and 
simple referral pathways to IrIS ADViSe advocate-
educators (Aes). the pilot lasted 7 weeks at site 1 
and 12 weeks at site 2. Feasibility outcomes were to 
assign a supportive DVA clinical lead, an IrIS ADViSe 
Ae employed by a local DVA service provider, adapt 
electronic records, develop local referral pathways, assess 
whether enquiry, identification and referral rates were 
measurable.
results Both sites achieved all feasibility outcomes: 
appointing a supportive DVA clinical lead and IrIS 
ADViSe Ae, establishing links with a local DVA provider, 
adapting electronic records, developing local referral 
pathways and rates of enquiry, identification and referral 
were found to be measurable. Site 1: 10% enquiry 
rate (n=267), 4% identification rate (n=16) and eight 
Ae referrals. Site 2: 61% enquiry rate (n=1090), a 7% 
identification rate (n=79) and eight Ae referrals.
Conclusions IrIS ADViSe can be successfully developed 
and implemented in sexual health clinics. It fulfils the 
unmet need for DVA training. Longer-term evaluation is 
recommended.
InTrOduCTIOn
Domestic violence and abuse (DVA) is a major public 
health and clinical problem affecting individuals, 
families, communities and society. The UK intergov-
ernmental definition of DVA is any incident or pattern 
of controlling, coercive or threatening behaviour, 
violence or abuse between people aged ≥16 years 
who are or have been intimate partners or family 
members, regardless of gender or sexuality.1 DVA 
can encompass, but is not limited to, psychological, 
physical, sexual, financial or emotional abuse. The 
estimated annual cost of DVA to the British National 
Health Service is £1.7 
billion per year, additional 
mental health costs £176 
million2 and the aggre-
gate UK cost including lost economic output, social 
services, medical and emotional costs an estimated 
£11 
billion.3 Although DVA affects men and women, 
the prevalence of all DVA is higher among women 
and increasing since 2008/2009.4 Women experience 
more severe and repeated physical abuse, much more 
sexual abuse and more coercive control than men.1
Gynaecological and sexual health problems are the 
most prevalent and persistent physical health conse-
quence of DVA. Presentations include STIs, painful 
sex, chronic pelvic pain, vaginal bleeding and recur-
rent urinary tract infections. Risk of these problems 
is threefold higher in abused women, and increases 
in a dose–response fashion with coexisting sexual 
and physical abuse.5 DVA is also associated with an 
increased risk of unintended pregnancy, induced 
abortion, increased sexual risk taking and incon-
sistent condom use.6 7 Lifetime prevalence of DVA 
in women attending sexual health services (47%) is 
higher than in the general population.8
Sexual health services can be the first point of 
contact for women who have experienced DVA, 
so is an appropriate setting in which to identify 
and support women affected by DVA.9 They were 
listed as a setting in which all patients should be 
asked about DVA as a ‘routine part of good clinical 
practice’ by the National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence,10 which develops evidence-based 
guidance for healthcare in England. However, 
most sexual health professionals have had minimal 
training in identifying and responding to DVA.
IRIS (Identification and Referral to Improve 
Safety) is an evidence-based complex intervention 
including DVA training, support and referrals to 
specialist DVA advocate-educators (AE) in primary 
care, designed to improve the healthcare response 
to women affected by DVA. A cluster randomised 
controlled trial in Hackney and Bristol general 
practices showed that IRIS increased the identi-
fication of women affected by DVA (currently or 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866 on 19 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 84
Sohal AH, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2018;94:83–87. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866
Health services research
historically) 3-fold, discussion about referral 22-fold and actual 
referral 6-fold.11 The IRIS intervention is likely to be cost-effec-
tive12 as well as acceptable to service users13 and professionals.14 
The IRIS model has been endorsed by the Royal College of 
General Practitioners and is frequently cited in guidance as good 
practice.10 15–17 IRIS has been commissioned in 34 localities, 
involving >1000 UK general practices.
Aim
Determining the feasibility of developing and implementing an 
IRIS-type model in sexual health services: IRIS ADViSE (Assessing 
Domestic Violence in Sexual Health Environments).
MeTHOds
design
We used an adaptive pilot study design18 where the experience and 
data at site 1, in East London, led to modifications at site 2, in 
Bristol. We used a mixed methods approach to evaluation. This 
comprised monitoring of predefined feasibility outcomes which 
included analysis of numerical data extracted from the electronic 
medical record. Qualitative analysis of staff interviews is reported 
in a separate paper.19
setting and participants
Both sites were female walk-in sexual health services. Site 1 was 
an east London clinic, serving an inner-city multiethnic popu-
lation. Site 2 was a Bristol clinic, serving an urban population. 
Both clinics saw commuters and those referred from primary 
care, community and regional clinics.
Process, intervention and procedures
Figure 1 summarises the core methodology including the IRIS 
ADViSE intervention details. Sexual health-based case studies inte-
grating best practice in the healthcare response to DVA with routine 
sexual healthcare were included. Local steering groups facilitated 
discussion on how best to develop and implement IRIS ADViSE 
locally. At site 1, adaptation of electronic records and paper triage 
forms occurred simultaneously; while at site 2, a question on abuse 
was added to the paper triage form, 3 
months prior to the abuse 
questions’ integration into the electronic records. Patients on 
arrival at reception complete the paper triage form that contains 
questions about reason for attendance.
Table 1 summarises how site 1 informed implementation 
at site 2. At site 1, it was not mandatory for staff to indicate 
whether they had asked about DVA whereas it was at site 2. This 
difference was instituted directly due to the results from site 1.
ethical aspects
We sought the views of chairs of local ethics committees at both 
sites. We received written confirmation that the collection of data 
from the medical record constituted routine service evaluation.
Outcome measures and data collection
The predefined feasibility outcome measures were whether
 
►
a DVA clinical lead was appointed in each sexual health 
service
 
►
a local DVA services’ provider collaborated with the sexual 
health service on this project
 
►
an advocate educator was appointed
 
►
an electronic pro forma included assessment of DVA
 
►
local referral pathways were developed
 
►
enquiry, identification and referral rates were measurable.
Handwritten notes were kept on the progress of the project 
by AS at site 1 and NP at site 2. Anonymised aggregated data, 
following the first session of training, once the pilot project was 
live was collected for 7 
weeks at site 1 and 12 weeks at site 2, on 
the number of women who
 
►
attended the walk-in sexual health service at east London 
and Bristol
 
►
were asked about DVA by staff
 
►
were identified as being affected by DVA, either currently 
or historically
 
►
were referred to the AE.
We aimed to collect 3 
months of baseline data at each site.
Figure 1 IRIS ADViSE adaptive pilot study: core methodology.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866 on 19 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 85
Sohal AH, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2018;94:83–87. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866
Health services research
Table 1 IRIS ADViSE adaptive pilot study: how site 1 informed site 2?
site 1
How site 1 informed site 2?
site 2
Clinical training sessions: Two open to staff attending on the day.
Informal feedback to AE and qualitative interview revealed staff that had had no 
IRIS training.
Tried to improve access to training for all clinicians working in the service.
Additional abridged training sessions held for those unable to attend the main 
training sessions.
Electronic records’ adaptation: Six HARKCS questions on DVA, within a template, 
inserted into pro forma. Each question required a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer, alongside 
free text boxes:
H—Humiliate?
A—Afraid?
R—Rape?
K—Kick?
C—Children?
S—Safety?
Electronic quantitative results showed that
 
► HARKCS template regularly completed incorrectly, for example, queries 
about children and safety made, even when no DVA identified.
 
► Potential for clinicians to just read out questions in a tick box manner.
 
► Reflective discussion at site 2 led to decision to use
 
► HARKCS image, reminding clinicians to ask about the multiple dimensions 
of DVA, including emotional, sexual, physical abuse and coercive control, 
related to being afraid.
 
► Fewer initial questions
 
► Prompts to enquire about children and safety only appearing if there was a 
DVA disclosure.
HARKCS image added to pro forma.
Two DVA questions inserted into pro forma:
1. Have you asked about DVA? Y/N
2. Has DVA been disclosed? Y/N
If DVA disclosed, two more questions appear:
1. Immediate safety at risk?
2. Patient has children?
With free text box for recording of referral details.
HARKCS questions did not have to be filled in but could be skipped.
Site 1: Enquiry rate 10%, identification rate 4%, referral rate 50%.
Tried to improve these rates by making it mandatory to indicate whether DVA 
had been asked about.
Mandatory for staff to indicate whether they had asked about DVA (‘yes’ or ‘no’) 
before they could complete the electronic notes.
Site 2: Enquiry rate 61%, identification rate 7%, referral rate 10%.
Evaluation: Pretraining and post-training sessions’ questionnaires used—low 
rates of return; given out to staff not delivering care at female wal in service—
inappropriate to evaluate.
Tried to improve return of questionnaires—their completion aligned closely 
to receiving a certificate of continuing professional development (CPD) and 
attendance.
Pretraining and post-training sessions’ questionnaires when completed 
exchanged for a certificate confirming attendance at CPD session.
Evaluation showed average self-rated knowledge on DVA health consequences, 
enquiry, response and how to make advocacy referrals increased by 40%.
Four qualitative interviews, with staff; initial pilot interview carried out by 
academic GP. Other interviews by independent qualitative researcher.
Topic guide for qualitative interview first constructed by academic GP. Revised 
and improved by independent qualitative researchers at site 1 and later at site 2, 
where it was used for a more comprehensive qualitative study. Results published 
separately.
17 qualitative interviews by independent qualitative researcher.
AE, advocate-educator; DVA, domestic violence and abuse; GP, general practitioner; IRIR ADViSE, Identification and Referral to Improve Safety while Assessing Domestic Violence in Sexual Health Environments; HARKCS, template questions for 
asking about domestic violence and abuse—please see details in second row of table.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866 on 19 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 86
Sohal AH, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2018;94:83–87. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866
Health services research
resulTs
At both sites, all feasibility outcomes were achieved, in that 
process measures (appointing key staff; see below) were attained 
and potential future outcome measures (enquiry, identification 
and referral rates) were measurable.
Process measures attained
Local sexual health consultants were appointed as DVA CLs, 
local DVA service providers collaborated on the project and 
AEs, experienced in advocacy and training, were successfully 
recruited. DVA enquiry was integrated into the standard elec-
tronic template, reminding sexual health staff to ask about DVA. 
Adapted IRIS training was delivered to the sexual health team 
in their weekly continuing professional development education 
session. Clear local referral pathways on how best to contact the 
IRIS AE were established.
Outcome measures measurable
At site 1, over 7 
weeks, the DVA enquiry rate was 10% with 267 
women out of 2568 women attending asked about DVA. The 
DVA identification rate was 4% with 12 out of the 267 women 
asked about abuse, affected by abuse. Four additional cases of 
DVA were identified via the self-triage form. Overall 50% (8 out 
of 16) of the women affected by abuse were referred to the AE.
At site 2, over 12 weeks, the DVA enquiry rate was 61% with 
1090 women out of 1775 women attending asked about DVA. 
The DVA identification rate was 7% with 79 out of the 1090 
women asked about abuse affected by abuse. At site 2, 13 of the 
79 cases of DVA were identified via the self-triage form. Overall 
10% (8 out of 79) of the women affected by abuse were referred 
to the AE.
During the 3 
months preceding the start of each pilot project, 
there were no electronically recorded cases of DVA identified 
and no referrals to DVA specialist services. At site 2, during this 
3-month period, it is unknown how many women disclosed 
abuse on the paper self-triage form but none were referred to 
specialist services.
dIsCussIOn
This adaptive pilot study shows that it is feasible to develop and 
implement an IRIS-based DVA training and referral package for 
sexual health clinics. The intervention resulted in the identifica-
tion and referral of women affected by DVA, suggesting that it 
is a potentially effective intervention. It is also feasible to collect 
data for quantitative evaluation of the intervention’s impact on 
DVA enquiry, identification and referral for advocacy.
The actual rates of DVA enquiry, identification and referral, 
all show a change from baseline which means that IRIS ADViSE 
affects clinician behaviour. The limitations of this study is that 
it is not powered to estimate the size of this effect, nor can it 
conclusively exclude a secular trend due to the non-randomised 
study design.
This study’s strength was its adaptive design, allowing trans-
parent, sequential, rapid refinement of IRIS ADViSE. Piloting 
IRIS ADViSE in more than one site acknowledges variation in 
sexual health service delivery and confirms the feasibility of 
tailoring the intervention to individual services.
Comparison of sites 1 and 2 shows that the DVA enquiry rate 
increased over fivefold, from 10% to 61% with just under a 
doubling in the DVA identification from 4% to 7% 
and a drop 
in referral rates from 50% at site 1% to 10% at site 2, meaning 
that the absolute numbers of women referred to an AE at the two 
sites was the same (eight women at each site). These differences 
are most likely to be due to the adaptive change made at site 2, 
making it mandatory for clinicians to indicate whether DVA had 
been asked about before proceeding.
As IRIS ADViSE is introduced into diverse sexual health 
services and settings, the local steering groups should consider 
the cons and pros to each approach. For example, making it 
mandatory to record whether DVA enquiry has occurred appears 
to be associated with a drop in the referral rates through higher 
enquiry and identification rates. IRIS ADViSE may benefit 
women affected by DVA who are asked about DVA but decide 
to not disclose (large numbers as estimated by DVA survey 
prevalence figures) and may benefit women identified as being 
affected by DVA who are offered referral but decide that they do 
not want to be referred.
A recent DVA screening study, in multiple hospital settings, 
found that in genitourinary medicine 5.7% patients screened 
reported ever experiencing DVA, using a training intervention 
delivered by a local specialist DVA provider,20 without clini-
cian-delivered clinically relevant training, nor using validated 
DVA questions like HARK,21 nor reporting how abuse questions 
were integrated into the medical record. This intervention’s 
DVA enquiry rate (ie, the number of patients asked about DVA) 
and referral rate for advocacy are unknown (ie, source of refer-
rals received by the hospital-based domestic violence advisor 
undetermined). To allow a quantitative comparison with IRIS 
ADViSE requires the latter’s identification rates to be adjusted 
so that the denominator is changed from the total number asked 
about DVA to the total number who attended the service. At 
site 1, this adjusted identification rate is 0.6% (= 16/2568); at 
site 2 this is 4.5% (= 79/1775), which is a similar level to the 
Warren-Gash et al study. These figures support and we recom-
mend retaining site 2’s mandatory recording of whether DVA 
enquiry has occurred.
In summary, the IRIS intervention has been successfully 
adapted for female walk-in sexual health services. Further 
evaluation of IRIS ADViSE with appropriate refinement for 
each setting is now required to confirm its effectiveness prior 
to national scaling up. A quasi-experimental approach would 
enable a pragmatic phased implementation of IRIS ADViSE to 
other sexual health clinics, including HIV clinics, pregnancy 
advisory services, outreach services, psychosexual clinics, male 
and LGBT services. Future studies, using this adaptive, novel 
approach, should extend DVA enquiry ensuring a competent and 
compassionate clinical response whenever abuse is identified.
Contributors AhS designed the pilot evaluation in site 1 and was responsible for 
the study at that site. She drafted and revised the manuscript. Np designed the pilot 
evaluation in site 2 and was responsible for the study at that site. She contributed 
to manuscript revision and constructed the figures and tables. GF contributed to the 
design of the studies and contributed to manuscript revision. SB, VA, JB, JB and CG 
contributed to manuscript revision. SB was also an advocate educator at site 2. VA 
and JB were responsible for service delivery at sites 1 and 2, respectively, assisting in 
anonymous data collection.
Funding Should read: "AhS and Np were funded by the National Institute for 
health research (NIhr) for their academic clinical lectureship and academic clinical 
fellowship respectively, during the preparation of this manuscript. Np was funded 
by the Wellcome trust during the implementation of the pilot. the research and 
AhS was supported by the NIhr Collaboration for Leadership in Applied health 
research and Care (CLAhrC) North thames at the Barts health NhS trust; and the 
West CLAhrC. the views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily 
those of the NhS, the NIhr or the Department of health. tower hamlets public 
health provided funding for work carried out at site 1. GF is a consultant for the IrIS 
programme for which the University of Bristol receives a fee. None of these funding 
organisations had any role in the design, implementation, and interpretation nor 
reporting of this work."
Competing interests None declared.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866 on 19 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 87
Sohal AH, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2018;94:83–87. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866
Health services research
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
data sharing statement Additional unpublished data are available from the 
corresponding author by contacting via email.
Open Access this is an open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits others 
to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, provided 
the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Satistics ofN. C. Chapter 4: Violent Crime and Sexual Offences - Intimate 
Personal Violence and Serious Sexual Assault. Crime Statistics, Focus on Violent Crime 
and Sexual Offences 2013/14 Release, 2015.
 2 Walby S. The cost of domestic violence: up-date 2009. Lancaster University, 2009.
 3 Walby S, olive p. Estimating the costs of gender-based violence in the European 
Union: european Institute for Gender equality, 2014.
 4 Walby S, towers J, Francis B. Is violent crime increasing or decreasing? A new 
methodology to measure repeat attacks making visible the significance of gender and 
domestic relations. Br J Criminol 2016;56:1203–34.
 5 Campbell JC. health consequences of intimate partner violence. Lancet 
2002;359:1331–6.
 6 Miller e, McCauley hL, tancredi DJ, et al. recent reproductive coercion and 
unintended pregnancy among female family planning clients. Contraception 
2014;89:122–8.
 7 hall M, Chappell LC, parnell BL, et al. Associations between intimate partner violence 
and termination of pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 
2014;11:e1001581.
 8 Loke WC, torres C, Bacchus L, et al. Domestic violence in a genitourinary medicine 
setting–an anonymous prevalence study in women. Int J STD AIDS 2008;19:747–51.
 9 Bacchus LJ, Bewley S, Vitolas Ct, et al. evaluation of a domestic violence intervention 
in the maternity and sexual health services of a UK hospital. Reprod Health Matters 
2010;18:147–57.
 
10 National Institute for health and Care excellence. Domestic violence and abuse: multi-
agency working NICe guideline. 2014.
 
11 Feder G, Davies rA, Baird K, et al. Identification and referral to improve safety (IrIS) 
of women experiencing domestic violence with a primary care training and support 
programme: a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011;378:1788–95.
 
12 Devine A, Spencer A, eldridge S, et al. Cost-effectiveness of identification and referral 
to improve safety (IrIS), a domestic violence training and support programme for 
primary care: a modelling study based on a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open 
2012;2:e001008.
 
13 Malpass A, Sales K, Johnson M, et al. Women’s experiences of referral to a domestic 
violence advocate in UK primary care settings: a service-user collaborative study. Br J 
Gen Pract 2014;64:e151–8.
 
14 Yeung h, Chowdhury N, Malpass A, et al. responding to domestic violence in 
general practice: a qualitative study on perceptions and experiences. Int J FamilyMed 
2012;2012:1–7.
 
15 Who. responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women: 
who clinical and policy guidelines. 2013.
 
16 Domestic homicide review: lessons learnt. Home Office 2013.
 
17 HM Government: Ending violence against women and girls Strategy 2016 - 2020: 
London, 2016.
 
18 Kairalla JA, Coffey CS, thomann MA, et al. Adaptive trial designs: a review of barriers 
and opportunities. Trials 2012;13:145.
 
19 Morden A, Bailey J, pathak N, et al. Assessing for domestic violence in Sexual health 
environments: a qualitative study.
 
20 Warren-Gash C, Bartley A, Bayly J, et al. outcomes of domestic violence screening at 
an acute London trust: are there missed opportunities for intervention? BMJ Open 
2016;6:e009069.
 
21 Sohal h, eldridge S, Feder G. the sensitivity and specificity of four questions (hArK) 
to identify intimate partner violence: a diagnostic accuracy study in general practice. 
BMC Fam Pract 2007;8:49.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2016-052866 on 19 July 2017. Downloaded from 
