 RevIewed by:
ChRIstIna 
seIx 
aCademy
09–10 yeaRs old
7-8
4+6=
%
+
3
4
October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 1
NeuroscieNce
Published: 17 October 2017
doi:10.3389/frym.2017.00057
kids.frontiersin.org
Who Is afRaId of math? What Is math 
anxIety? and What Can you do about It?
H. Moriah Sokolowski and Daniel Ansari*
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
Mathematics is a necessary skill that people use throughout their lives, 
such as when they travel, use money, or keep track of time. Therefore, 
mathematics is an important skill to learn at school. Unfortunately, many 
children and adults feel stressed and anxious when they have to do math. 
People who experience feelings of stress when faced with math-related 
situations may be experiencing what is called “math anxiety.” Math anxiety 
affects many people and is related to poor math ability in school and later 
during adulthood. Researchers have studied how math anxiety first appears, 
what is happening in the brain when people experience math anxiety, and 
how to best help people who are suffering with math anxiety.
Have you ever felt stressed and anxious when your math teacher asks you a 
question? Or when you are doing your math homework? If so, you might have 
experienced what is called math anxiety. If you have experienced math anxi-
ety, you are not alone. Many people feel extremely nervous when faced with 
a situation that requires them to do basic mathematics. Math anxiety is more 
than just feeling nervous about doing math. Nervousness is a sensible reac-
tion to a situation that is actually scary. In contrast, anxiety might not make 
sense. This means that a person may feel anxious even though he or she knows 
math anxIety
The feeling of being 
extremely nervous when 
faced with doing basic 
mathematics.
 October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 2
kids.frontiersin.org
Sokolowski and Ansari
What Is Math Anxiety?
that there is really no reason to feel anxious. Also, anxiety can cause physical 
symptoms, such as a racing heart or sweating. Usually, people who have math 
anxiety believe that they are bad at math and because of this, they do not like 
math. These feelings lead them to avoid situations in which they have to do 
math. Children with math anxiety often have poor math skills [1]. Adults with 
math anxiety often have trouble with math in their careers and everyday life 
[2]. Adults with math anxiety are less likely to show interest, enter, and suc-
ceed in careers relating to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Because math anxiety affects many people and is related to poor math skills, 
it is important to understand when and how math anxiety first appears, what 
is happening in the brain when people are feeling anxious about math, and 
how to best help people with math anxiety.
When and hoW does math anxIety fIRst 
aPPeaR?
Until recently, scientists and educators thought that math anxiety first appears 
when children begin to learn complicated mathematics (such as algebra). This 
would mean that young children (who do not yet do complicated math) do not 
experience math anxiety. However, recent research has shown that some children 
as young as 6 years old say that they feel anxious about math. A team of researchers 
asked 154 children in grades 1 and 2 questions like, “how do you feel when tak-
ing a big test in your math class?” [3] The children had to indicate how nervous 
they felt by pointing to a position on a scale, ranging from a very nervous face 
on the left to a calm face on the right. (See Figure 1 for a picture of the scale.) 
After answering these questions, the children took a math test that measured 
their math abilities. These researchers found that almost half of the children who 
participated in the study said that they were at least somewhat nervous about 
doing math [3]. Also, children with higher math anxiety got worse scores on the 
math test. This research tells us that math anxiety and the relationship between 
math anxiety and math ability develops when children are very young.
Researchers are also interested in how math anxiety develops. Although 
research has shown that math anxiety and math abilities are related [1], no 
study so far has been able to tell us which comes first. In other words, we do 
not know if being bad at math causes math anxiety, or if having math anxiety 
makes people bad at math.
fIgure 1
fIguRe 1
Children used a scale that 
looks like this to show 
how nervous they would 
feel about math-related 
situations (for example, if 
they were asked “how do 
you feel when taking a big 
test in your math class?”) 
by pointing to a position 
on the scale.
(This image is based on 
the Children’s Math 
Anxiety Questionnaire 
found at http://
spatiallearning.org/media/
silc_pdfs/resources/
testsandinstruments/
tandi-new/Childrens_
Math_Anxiety_
Questionnaire.pdf.)
 October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 3
kids.frontiersin.org
Sokolowski and Ansari
What Is Math Anxiety?
Researchers have two ideas about how math anxiety might develop. One 
idea is that children who struggle with learning numbers when they are 
very young are more likely to develop math anxiety when they start going 
to school. This idea has not yet been tested in children. Another idea is 
that math anxiety develops in children who experience certain kinds of 
social situations that influence the child’s thoughts or feelings. This means 
that the child’s emotions, opinions, or behaviors are affected by things that 
other people say or do. One study that gives an example of this showed 
that teachers with high math anxiety were more likely to have students 
with poorer math achievement at the end of the school year [4]. This study 
suggests that the way the teacher acted somehow affected the math ability 
of the students. Although researchers have not yet answered the question 
of what comes first, math ability or math anxiety, there have been many 
important discoveries that have given us hints about when and how math 
anxiety appears.
What Is haPPenIng In the bRaIn When a 
PeRson Is exPeRIenCIng math anxIety?
To better understand how math anxiety develops and how to help people 
who suffer with it, we need to understand what is happening in brain while 
a person with math anxiety is doing math. One idea is that the human brain 
can only process a certain amount of information at a time. A system in 
the brain that allows us to process information is called working memory. 
Working memory is a part of the human memory system that allows us 
to remember and think about several things at the same time. This skill is 
very important for doing math. For example, if a teacher reads out a math 
problem, the student must hold all numbers in his or her mind, consider 
the steps needed to solve the problem, and write out the answer at the 
same time. Researchers think that maybe, when people feel anxious, the 
math anxiety that they feel is using up some of their working memory, so 
they do not have enough working memory left to solve the math problem. 
Maybe the working memory that is being used for the anxiety would have 
been used for solving the math problem if those people did not feel so anx-
ious [3]. In other words, math anxiety causes students to think and worry 
about how afraid they feel of math, which occupies the working memory 
resources that they would otherwise use to do the math problems. This idea 
that math anxiety uses working memory has been supported by research 
studies. Importantly, researchers have reported that children who have a 
high level of working memory do better on math tests than children with 
a low level of working memory.
Researchers have also examined how hard different parts of the brain are 
working while children with either high or low math anxiety solve challenging 
math problems [5]. These researchers asked a group of 7- to 9-year-old children 
WoRkIng 
memoRy
A part of the memory 
system that is used to 
remember and hold 
information in your mind 
so you can use it when 
doing activities.
 October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 4
kids.frontiersin.org
Sokolowski and Ansari
What Is Math Anxiety?
with and without math anxiety to do some math problems while they were in 
a device called a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner [5]. An MRI 
scanner is a machine that can be used to measure how hard each region of the 
brain is working during a specific task using a tool called functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). (See Figure 2 for a picture of an MRI scanner.) This 
measurement is called “brain activation.” If a brain region is working hard, 
there will be more brain activation. These researchers found that a part of the 
brain called the amygdala is more activated (working harder) in children with 
high math anxiety than in children with low math anxiety. Also, in children 
with high math anxiety, the areas of the brain that deal with working memory 
and mathematical processing (called the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and 
the intraparietal sulcus) are less activated (working less hard) compared with 
those brain areas in children who have low math anxiety [5]. The amygdala 
is a small almond-shaped structure in the lower middle part of the brain and 
it is important for experiencing and processing emotions, including fear and 
anxiety. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is a larger part of the brain located 
at the very front of the brain, and it is involved in many complicated behav-
iors, such as planning and decision making. The intraparietal sulcus is a brain 
region near the top of the brain that is important for mathematics and paying 
attention. (See Figure 3 for a picture of where these brain regions are located.) 
So, overall, this study suggests that when children solve math problems, those 
children with high math anxiety activate brain regions involved in anxiety, 
while those children with low math anxiety activate brain regions that are 
involved with solving math problems.
hoW Can We helP PeoPle WIth math anxIety?
One of the main goals of understanding what causes math anxiety and how 
math anxiety affects the brain is to find ways to help people with math anxiety 
and ultimately to prevent it from happening. Some researchers have created 
magnetIC 
ResonanCe 
ImagIng (mRI)
An MRI is a machine that 
uses a strong magnet to 
create pictures of your 
brain.
funCtIonal 
magnetIC 
ResonanCe 
ImagIng (fmRI)
A tool that measures 
which brain regions are 
activated while you 
complete different 
activities in an MRI 
scanner, such as adding 
and subtracting.
bRaIn 
aCtIvatIon
A measure of how hard a 
region of the brain is 
working during a specific 
task. If a brain region is 
working hard, there will be 
more brain activation.
fIgure 2
fIguRe 2
This is a picture of an MRI 
scanner.
An MRI scanner is a large 
donut-shaped magnet 
that often has a tunnel in 
the center. The person 
being studied is placed on 
a comfortable table that 
slides into the tunnel. The 
person then stays very still 
while the MRI scanner 
works with a computer to 
produce clear black-and-
white images of the brain. 
These images can be 
taken while people do 
activities to show which 
areas of the brain are 
activated.
 October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 5
kids.frontiersin.org
Sokolowski and Ansari
What Is Math Anxiety?
tools to help people with math anxiety. These tools are called interventions. 
For example, researchers have made interventions based on research showing 
that writing down thoughts and feelings beforehand can make people feel 
less nervous when taking tests. Researchers thought that if children wrote 
down their thoughts and feelings, those feelings would not occupy working 
memory while the children were completing a math test. So, the researchers 
did an intervention where they asked children with math anxiety to write 
about their math-related worries. These researchers found that, when students 
wrote about their math-related worries, their math test scores improved [6]. 
A different group of researchers showed that if college students with math 
anxiety did some breathing exercises to calm them down before a math test, 
they felt more calm and their scores on the test improved [7]. Together, these 
intervention studies provide scientific evidence for ways that we can help 
people with math anxiety. This research is very promising because it tells us 
that people with math anxiety can be helped—they are not stuck with math 
anxiety for life.
ConClusIon
Since we know that people with math anxiety face challenges in their math 
classes, careers, and everyday lives, many different researchers have worked 
to learn more about math anxiety. Researchers continue to make progress in 
this area. Research on math anxiety has shown that it develops early, and that 
it is related to both social situations and brain processes like working mem-
ory. Also, individuals with math anxiety show more brain activation in brain 
regions involved with negative emotions, and less brain activation in brain 
regions involved with mathematical thinking. Researchers have also started to 
test possible interventions that seem to help individuals suffering with math 
anxiety. However, there is still a lot of work to be done to discover how math 
anxiety first appears, what causes only some people to have it, and how we can 
help people who have math anxiety. For now, whether you are experiencing 
math anxiety or not, talk to your fellow students and your teachers about math 
InteRventIon
A tool or program that is 
given to people with the 
goal of helping them 
improve or get better at a 
skill.
fIgure 3
fIguRe 3
This picture shows the 
brain regions that are 
more activated (working 
harder) and the brain 
regions that are less 
activated (working less 
hard) in individuals with 
high math anxiety when 
they do math problems.
 October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 6
kids.frontiersin.org
Sokolowski and Ansari
What Is Math Anxiety?
anxiety. It is important to have conversations about your emotional reactions 
to math because this is the first step toward helping to reduce the potentially 
harmful effects of math anxiety.
RefeRenCes
1. 
Wu, S. S., Barth, M., Amin, H., Malcarne, V., and Menon, V. 2012. Math anxiety in 
second and third graders and its relation to mathematics achievement. Front. 
Psychol. 3:1–11. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00162
2. Ma, X. 1999. A meta-analysis of the relationship between anxiety toward 
mathematics and achievement in mathematics. J. Res. Math. Educ. 30:520–40. 
doi:10.2307/749772
3. Ramirez, G., Gunderson, E. A., Levine, S. C., and Beilock, S. L. 2013. Math anxiety, 
working memory, and math achievement in early elementary school. J. Cogn. Dev. 
14:187–202. doi:10.1080/15248372.2012.664593
4. Beilock, S. L., Gunderson, E. A., Ramirez, G., and Levine, S. C. 2010. Female 
teachers’ math anxiety affects girls’ math achievement. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 107:1860–3. doi:10.1073/pnas.0910967107
5. Young, C. B, Wu, S. S., and Menon, V. 2012. The neurodevelopmental basis of 
math anxiety. Psychol. Sci. 23:492–501. doi:10.1177/0956797611429134
6. Park, D., Ramirez, G., and Beilock, S. L. 2014. The role of expressive writing in 
math anxiety. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 20:103–11. doi:10.1037/xap0000013
7. Brunyé, T. T., Mahoney, C. R., Giles, G. E., Rapp, D. N., Taylor, H. A., and Kanarek, 
R. B. 2013. Learning to relax: evaluating four brief interventions for overcoming the 
negative emotions accompanying math anxiety. Learn. Individ. Differ. 27:1–7. 
doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2013.06.008
submItted: 29 March 2017; accepted: 25 September 2017;  
PublIshed onlIne:  17 October 2017.
edIted by: Robert T. Knight, University of California, Berkeley, United States
CIt
atIon: Sokolowski H.M and Ansari D (2017) Who Is Afraid of Math? What Is Math 
Anxiety? And What Can You Do about It? Front. Young Minds 5:57. doi:10.3389/
frym.2017.00057
conflIct of Interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
CopyrIght © 2017 Sokolowski and Ansari. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution 
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are 
credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted 
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
 October 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 57 | 7
kids.frontiersin.org
Sokolowski and Ansari
What Is Math Anxiety?
RevIeWed by
 ChRIstIna seIx aCademy
, 09–10 yeaRs old
CSA is an innovative urban Pre-K-8 independent school focused on providing students from 
underserved communities with a holistic education, critical habits of mind, and an engaging 
learning environment. A scholarship is awarded to every child entering the academy to cover 
tuition, books, school uniforms, meals, door to door transportation, as well as room and 
board for students that choose to board in 4th to 8th grade. Our goal is to ensure that all 
students move from "Potential to Achievement" and graduate inspired to "Pay it Forward" 
like our Founder, Christina Seix.
authoRs
h. moRIah sokoloWskI
I am a Ph.D. student at the University of Western Ontario. I am interested in how young 
children learn basic number skills such as how to count, or what “3” means. I want to 
understand what happens in the brain while children develop and learn math. I also want to 
learn about why some children like math and do well in math, while others feel nervous 
about math and find it hard. When I am not doing research, I like to sing in a choir, do yoga, 
and hang out with my cat.
danIel ansaRI
I am interested in how our brains process numbers and how we use them. We use numbers 
all the time. I want to know how the human brain is able to know about numbers and why 
some children find numbers so hard to understand. What is different about their brains and 
why do some people find numbers really scary while others love to use them?  
*daniel.ansari@uwo.ca
