 CONTEMPORARY
ISSUES
Andrew J. Solomon, MD
Dennis N. Bourdette,
MD
Anne H. Cross, MD
Angela Applebee, MD
Philip M. Skidd, MD
Diantha B. Howard, MA
Rebecca I. Spain, MD
Michelle H. Cameron,
MD
Edward Kim, MD
Michele K. Mass, MD
Vijayshree Yadav, MD
Ruth H. Whitham, MD
Erin E. Longbrake, MD,
PhD
Robert T. Naismith, MD
Gregory F. Wu, MD,
PhD
Becky J. Parks, MD
Dean M. Wingerchuk,
MD
Brian L. Rabin, MD
Michel Toledano, MD
W. Oliver Tobin,
MBBCh, PhD
Orhun H. Kantarci, MD
Jonathan L. Carter, MD
B. Mark Keegan, MD
Brian G. Weinshenker,
MD
Correspondence to
Dr. Solomon:
andrew.solomon@uvm.edu
The contemporary spectrum of multiple
sclerosis misdiagnosis
A multicenter study
ABSTRACT
Objective: To characterize patients misdiagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS).
Methods: Neurologists at 4 academic MS centers submitted data on patients determined to have
been misdiagnosed with MS.
Results: Of 110 misdiagnosed patients, 51 (46%) were classified as “definite” and 59 (54%)
“probable” misdiagnoses according to study definitions. Alternate diagnoses included migraine
alone or in combination with other diagnoses 24 (22%), fibromyalgia 16 (15%), nonspecific or
nonlocalizing neurologic symptoms with abnormal MRI 13 (12%), conversion or psychogenic
disorders 12 (11%), and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder 7 (6%). Duration of misdiagnosis
was 10 years or longer in 36 (33%) and an earlier opportunity to make a correct diagnosis was
identified for 79 patients (72%). Seventy-seven (70%) received disease-modifying therapy and
34 (31%) experienced unnecessary morbidity because of misdiagnosis. Four (4%) participated in
a research study of an MS therapy. Leading factors contributing to misdiagnosis were consider-
ation of symptoms atypical for demyelinating disease, lack of corroborative objective evidence of
a CNS lesion as satisfying criteria for MS attacks, and overreliance on MRI abnormalities in
patients with nonspecific neurologic symptoms.
Conclusions: Misdiagnosis of MS leads to unnecessary and potentially harmful risks to patients.
Misinterpretation and misapplication of MS clinical and radiographic diagnostic criteria are impor-
tant contemporary contributors to misdiagnosis. Neurology® 2016;87:1393–1399
GLOSSARY
IgG 5 immunoglobulin G; MS 5 multiple sclerosis; NMOSD 5 neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder; OCB 5 oligoclonal
band.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) remains a clinical diagnosis, as no specific biomarker for MS has been
identified. Diagnosis relies on the appropriate interpretation of radiologic data in patients with
the appropriate history and neurologic examination suggestive of demyelination. Despite well-
validated diagnostic criteria,1 misdiagnosis remains a problem that has significant implications
for patients, their providers, and health care systems.2–4
In 2015, the Institute of Medicine described the need to study misdiagnosis as a “moral,
professional, and public health imperative.”5,6 A recent study has suggested that medical error is
the third leading cause of death in the United States.7 Although misdiagnosis of MS is frequently
acknowledged,8,9 data concerning misdiagnosis typically originate from case reports, limiting
generalizability and recommendable solutions. Few studies have reported characteristics of cohorts
of patients mistakenly diagnosed with MS, the most recent published almost 20 years ago.10–12
With the evolution of diagnostic criteria and the incorporation of imaging, the frequency and
factors contributing to misdiagnosis of MS have likely changed. Prior studies may not reflect the
current spectrum of, and contributors to, MS misdiagnosis. A survey of 122 MS specialists
published in 2012 suggested that misdiagnosis of MS remains common, and most frequently
From the Departments of Neurological Sciences (A.J.S., A.A.) and Ophthalmology (P.M.S.), and Center for Clinical and Translational Science (D.B.H.),
University of Vermont, Burlington; Department of Neurology (D.N.B., R.I.S., M.H.C., E.K., M.K.M., V.Y., R.H.W.), Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland; Department of Neurology (A.H.C., E.E.L., R.T.N., G.F.W., B.J.P.), Washington University, St. Louis, MO; Department of
Neurology (D.M.W., B.L.R., J.L.C.), Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ; and Department of Neurology (M.T., W.O.T., O.H.K., B.M.K., B.G.W.), Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
© 2016 American Academy of Neurology
1393
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 migraine, psychiatric disease, and neuromyelitis
optica spectrum disorders (NMOSDs) are mis-
taken for MS. Overreliance on MRI findings
was hypothesized as contributing to misdiagno-
sis,2 but conclusions from surveys are limited.
In this study, we assessed the clinical and
radiographic characteristics of a large contem-
porary population of patients across 4 US-
based academic medical centers who were
determined by MS specialists to have been
misdiagnosed with MS. The aim of this pilot
study was to determine the contemporary
spectrum of alternative diagnoses mistaken
for MS and to understand the risks associated
with these misdiagnoses. We subsequently as-
sessed whether these diagnostic errors were
avoidable by identifying problems arising from
application of patient clinical and MRI data to
current MS diagnostic criteria.
METHODS Twenty-three neurologists with subspecialty train-
ing and/or practice focus in MS on the staff of MS centers at the
University of Vermont, Oregon Health & Science University,
Washington University, and Mayo Clinic participated.
Patients were identified by participating neurologists during
clinical evaluations either prospectively during the 13 months of
the study or shortly before study initiation. Patients were classified
as having “definite misdiagnosis” when an alternative diagnosis was
definitively made based on clinical, laboratory, and neuroimaging
evaluation and “probable misdiagnosis” when an alternative diag-
nosis was suspected and diagnostic criteria for MS were not met.
Only patients who were previously informed by another phy-
sician that they had a diagnosis of MS were included. Patients for
whom MS was one of several diagnoses being considered, but
who were not provided with a firm diagnosis, were excluded. Sus-
pected or confirmed alternative diagnoses were recorded for each
patient. Demographic, clinical, and radiographic data were also
evaluated. Neurologists were asked to assess whether inappropri-
ate application of clinical or radiographic MS diagnostic criteria
contributed to misdiagnosis in each case.
A password-protected, web-based data entry form for the col-
lection of individual patient characteristics was developed using
REDCap, through collaboration among the lead investigators at
each center (A.J.S., D.N.B., A.H.C., B.G.W.). The treating neu-
rologist who established the MS misdiagnosis completed the
patient data form. Data entry fields included no identifiable
patient information. Although each institution was identifiable,
no identifier linked specific neurologists at these institutions to
their reports. Whether the participating provider or another pro-
vider made the initial misdiagnosis of MS was not surveyed.
Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient
consents. The data entry form and the study were reviewed and
approved by the institutional review boards at the University of
Vermont, Oregon Health & Science University, Washington
University, and Mayo Clinic. Data were collected from August
1, 2014, to September 1, 2015.
RESULTS Demographic characteristics of misdiagnosed
patients.
One-hundred
ten
patients
incorrectly
diagnosed with MS were identified, 61 (55%) from
Mayo Clinic, 27 (25%) from University of Vermont,
12 (11%) from Washington University, and 10 (9%)
from Oregon Health & Science University. Ninety-
three (85%) were women and 17 (15%) were men.
Mean age was 49 6 11 years with a range from 21 to
77 years. Fifty-one patients (46%) were classified as
“definite” and 59 (54%) as “probable” misdiagnoses.
Figure 1 presents approximate duration of misdiagnosis
in all 110 patients.
Neurologists informed 107 (97%) of the patients
that their MS diagnosis was incorrect. In the remain-
ing 3 patients (3%), neurologists intended to discuss
misdiagnosis after further evaluation (1), the misdiag-
nosis discussion had occurred with another physician
before their evaluation (1), and misdiagnosis was con-
firmed following postmortem evaluation (1). Misdi-
agnosis of MS was made by a neurologist with
fellowship training or a practice focus in MS in 26 pa-
tients (24%), a neurologist without such training in
35 (32%), a nonneurologist in 3 (3%), and a physi-
cian with unknown training in the remaining 46 pa-
tients (42%).
Alternative diagnoses. The five most frequent alternative
diagnoses reported by participating neurologists com-
prised 66% of the misdiagnosed patients (table 1),
and included migraine alone or in combination with
additional diagnoses, fibromyalgia, nonspecific or non-
localizing neurologic symptoms with abnormal MRI,
conversion or psychogenic disorder, and NMOSD. Fi-
bromyalgia was reported significantly more often by
Mayo Clinic neurologists than the other institutions
(p 5 0.04), but there were no other differences in
the frequency of the other 4 most reported diagnoses
among participating institutions.
Migraine alone or in combination with additional
diagnoses was the most common alternative diagnosis
in patients misdiagnosed with MS and was reported
Figure 1
Duration of misdiagnosis
The number of years patients had been misdiagnosed with
multiple sclerosis.
1394
Neurology 87
September 27, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 in 24 patients (22%). Additional diagnoses in combi-
nation with migraine included psychiatric disease (3),
fibromyalgia (2), small vessel disease (2), acute laby-
rinthitis (1), spells of uncertain etiology (1), rheuma-
toid arthritis (1), vitamin B12 deficiency (1), and
small fiber neuropathy (1). Neurologists also reported
imaging abnormalities related to tobacco use, vitamin
B12 deficiency, and small vessel ischemic disease in
patients with migraine. In the patients with migraine,
neurologists specified that migrainous symptoms
mistaken for demyelinating attacks were incorrectly
used
to
satisfy
dissemination
in
time criteria.
Presumed migraine-associated white matter lesions
were often used to document dissemination in space
imaging criteria.
In patients with a primary diagnosis of conversion
or psychogenic disorder, additional diagnoses of
migraine, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, tobacco
use, and small vessel ischemic disease were noted to
have contributed to abnormal imaging. In one case
of nonspecific or nonlocalizing neurologic symptoms
with abnormal MRI, a MRI contrast-enhancing vas-
cular lesion resulted in an erroneous determination
of dissemination in time. One case of conversion dis-
order and one case of fibromyalgia misdiagnosed as
MS had normal imaging.
Of 7 patients with NMOSD, 5 were seropositive
for anti–aquaporin-4 antibodies, one was seronega-
tive, and serostatus for one was not reported. Six
patients diagnosed with NMOSD had a history of
optic neuritis, 6 had a history of a longitudinally
extensive spinal cord lesion, and one had a history
of “intractable vomiting or hiccoughs.”
Exposure to immunomodulatory therapy. Seventy-seven
patients (70%) had received one or more immuno-
modulatory therapies for MS (table 2). Twenty-six
patients (24%) were exposed to 2 therapies, 6 (5%)
to 3 therapies, 7 (6%) to 4 therapies, and 1 (1%) to
5 therapies. Figure 2 presents the approximate
cumulative time of exposure to any combination of
immunomodulatory therapy in 75 of the 77 patients.
Exposure to methylprednisolone or prednisone was
not recorded as part of the study.
CSF evaluation. CSF was evaluated in 74 patients
(67%) at the time of their initial misdiagnosis, and
specific results were available for review in 52.
Twenty-eight of 52 (54%) had negative results for
Table 1
Diagnoses and syndromes mistaken for multiple sclerosis
No. (%)
Migraine alone or in combination with other diagnoses
24 (22)
Fibromyalgia
16 (15)
Nonspecific or nonlocalizing neurologic symptoms with abnormal MRI
13 (12)
Conversion or psychogenic disorder
12 (11)
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder
7 (6)
Clinically isolated syndrome
3 (3)
Neurodegenerative cerebellar syndrome
2 (2)
MRI changes caused by vascular disease
2 (2)
Parkinsonism with nonspecific white matter abnormalities
2 (2)
“Radiologically isolated syndrome”
2 (2)
Cervical spondylosis with myelopathy
2 (2)
Genetic leukodystrophy
2 (2)
Idiopathic transverse myelitis
2 (2)
Noninflammatory myelopathy
2 (2)
Nonspecific symptoms with positive CSF OCBs
2 (2)
Stroke, nonembolic
2 (2)
Anti-Ma2 paraneoplastic syndrome
1 (1)
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
1 (1)
Astrocytoma
1 (1)
Mitochondrial disorder
1 (1)
Neurosarcoidosis
1 (1)
Moyamoya disease
1 (1)
Hypertension and alcohol abuse
1 (1)
Neuropathy
1 (1)
Unclear diagnosis; complaints of paresthesias
1 (1)
Nonspecific or nonlocalizing neurologic symptoms with normal MRI
1 (1)
Viral meningoencephalitis with subsequent abnormal MRI and acute labyrinthitis
1 (1)
White matter lesions due to TNF-a inhibitor use for psoriasis
1 (1)
Behçet syndrome
1 (1)
CADASIL
1 (1)
Degenerative joint disease of lumbar spine
1 (1)
Abbreviations: CADASIL 5 cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts
and leukoencephalopathy; OCB 5 oligoclonal band; TNF-a 5 tumor necrosis factor a.
Table 2
Immunomodulatory therapies received
by patients with misdiagnosis
No. (%)
Interferon beta-1a or interferon beta-1b
58 (53)
Glatiramer acetate
44 (40)
Natalizumab
14 (13)
Dimethyl fumarate
7 (6)
Fingolimod
5 (5)
Teriflunomide
3 (3)
Mitoxantrone
2 (2)
Cyclophosphamide
1 (1)
IV immunoglobulin
1 (1)
Repository corticotropin injection
1 (1)
Unknown
1 (1)
Forty patients (36%) had received more than one therapy.
Immunomodulatory therapy data were unavailable in 2
patients.
Neurology 87
September 27, 2016
1395
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 CSF
oligoclonal
bands
(OCBs)
and
normal
immunoglobulin G (IgG) index. Eight (15%) had
negative OCBs with unknown IgG index results, 2
(4%) had normal IgG index with unknown OCB
results, 6 (12%) had positive OCBs with unknown
IgG index results, 1 (2%) had elevated IgG index
with unknown OCB results, 2 (4%) had positive
OCBs and normal IgG index, 1 (2%) had elevated
IgG index and normal OCBs, and 4 (8%) had
positive OCBs and elevated IgG index. Neurologists
noted that in 8 of the patients where CSF was initially
performed, an initial erroneous interpretation of the
results contributed to misdiagnosis (i.e., OCBs were
elevated both in serum and CSF). Potential differences
between laboratories in CSF assay methods and
positive result thresholds were not evaluated.
Contributors to misdiagnosis. Participating MS special-
ists were asked their opinion about the potential con-
tribution to misdiagnosis from an inappropriate
application of MS clinical and MRI diagnostic criteria
for each patient. Inappropriate interpretation of
symptoms as relapses, lack of objective demonstration
that historical symptoms were demyelinating events,
and misinterpretation of MRI were all identified as
contributors to misdiagnosis (table 3).
Clinical trial exposure. Four patients (4%) participated
in clinical trials for MS therapeutics. The diagnoses in
these patients included nonspecific or nonlocalizing
neurologic symptoms with abnormal MRI, moya-
moya disease, migraine, and fibromyalgia, with spells
and visual and urinary symptoms of uncertain
etiology.
Missed opportunity and morbidity. Neurologists identi-
fied “clear evidence of an earlier missed opportunity to
make a correct diagnosis” in 79 (72%) of misdiagnosed
patients and that 34 (31%) experienced “unnecessary
morbidity as a direct result of a misdiagnosis of MS.”
Morbidities included the following: risks associated with
unnecessary immunomodulatory therapy exposure and
treatment-related side effects (19), risks associated with
unnecessary exposure to corticosteroids and related side
effects (5) including psychosis in one patient, delay in
treatment for cervical spondylosis (1), psychological
harm including anxiety and depression (7), avoidable
motor weakness (1), worsening of neuromyelitis
spectrum disorder associated with interferon therapy
(1), mesenchymal stem cell transplant (1), and death
from
fulminant
neuromyelitis
optica
(1).
Two
morbidities were reported for 5 patients.
DISCUSSION In this study, we identified 110 patients
incorrectly diagnosed with MS. A number of common
diagnoses and syndromes were frequently mistaken for
MS, and many patients had been misdiagnosed for a pro-
longed period of time. As a result, at least a third of all
patients experienced morbidity and many more were
Figure 2
Cumulative exposure to
immunomodulatory therapy
The cumulative number of years misdiagnosed patients had
been exposed to any immunomodulatory therapy.
Table 3
Contributors to MS misdiagnosis
Yes
No
Unknown
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
Inappropriate application to MS diagnostic criteria of neurologic
symptoms atypical for a demyelinating attack
72 (65)
24 (22)
14 (13)
Inappropriate application to diagnostic criteria of a historical
episode of neurologic dysfunction without corroborating objective
evidence of a lesion (on neurologic examination, evoked potentials,
or imaging)
53 (48)
38 (35)
19 (17)
Overreliance on the presence of MRI abnormalities meeting DIS to
confirm a diagnosis of MS in a patient with “nonspecific neurologic
symptoms”
66 (60)
28 (25)
16 (15)
Erroneous determination of juxtacortical or periventricular lesion
location to fulfill DIS
36 (33)
43 (39)
31 (28)
Erroneous determination of DIT because of variability of MRI slice
orientation (i.e., MRIs performed on different scanners leading to
the appearance of new lesions)
13 (12)
64 (58)
33 (30)
Abbreviations: DIS 5 dissemination in space; DIT 5 dissemination in time; MS 5 multiple sclerosis.
1396
Neurology 87
September 27, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 likely exposed to unnecessary risk. Our study suggests
that the misinterpretation and misapplication of MS
clinical and radiographic diagnostic criteria are important
contemporary contributors to misdiagnosis.
Approximately half of the patients in the study
were classified as a “definite” misdiagnosis (in which
an alternative confirmed diagnosis was made) while
half were classified as a “probable” misdiagnosis (in
which an alternative diagnosis was suspected and who
did not satisfy diagnostic criteria for diagnosis of MS).
However, participating neurologists were sufficiently
confident to inform 97% of patients that they had
been misdiagnosed. Migraine, fibromyalgia, nonspe-
cific or nonlocalizing neurologic symptoms with
abnormal MRI, conversion or psychogenic disorder,
and NMOSD were the most frequently reported
alternate diagnoses made among patients who had
been misdiagnosed with MS and constituted two-
thirds of the patients reported. These findings closely
parallel the diagnoses reported to have been most
frequently mistaken for MS in clinical practice by
a large group of MS specialists in a 2012 survey.2
Furthermore, previous data from 2 large cohort stud-
ies performed at MS tertiary care centers in 1984 and
2005 indicated that psychiatric disease and migraine
were frequent final diagnoses in patients initially
referred for evaluation for MS, suggesting the endur-
ing potential for misdiagnosis in these disorders.13,14
With the exception of NMOSD, diagnoses fre-
quently mistaken for MS in our study lack a specific
biomarker and their correct identification relies
instead on clinical and radiographic results and the
clinician’s acumen alone. Of note, 26 patients
(24%) were misdiagnosed by neurologists with MS-
focused practices, suggesting that this problem is not
confined to nonspecialists. Prior authors have noted
barriers to reexamining established diagnoses of
MS,4,8 and suggested a tendency for MS specialists,
after seeing many atypical presentations of MS, to
dismiss “red flags” as being within the spectrum of
MS, rather than a clue to an alternative condition.
Although the often-cited expansive differential diag-
nosis of MS includes red flags for a variety of rare
disorders,15 several of which were identified in this
study, our data confirm that common disorders or
syndromes account for misdiagnosis in most cases.
This observation also suggests that an extensive serum
laboratory evaluation may not always be helpful in the
evaluation of suspect MS, as laboratory tests cannot
confirm a diagnosis of fibromyalgia, migraine, or
a psychogenic disorder and that overreliance on imag-
ing abnormalities may contribute to misdiagnosis in
such cases. However, our findings do not preclude the
possibility that additional disorders known to mimic
MS were identified through such testing and may have
prevented misdiagnosis in those cases. A significant
number of patients were misdiagnosed with MS despite
the finding of normal CSF during their initial evalua-
tion, perhaps a reflection of a relative higher weight
given to interpretation of radiographic abnormalities
in evaluation of patients for MS and the elimination
of CSF consideration from the 2010 McDonald diag-
nostic criteria for relapsing-remitting MS.
Our data differ from prior studies. In the 1980s, 2
small studies10,11 (including 33 and 10 patients)
reported a higher number of neoplastic, infectious,
or vascular disorders that were mistaken for MS,
likely reflecting the lack of MRI availability at that
time. In 1997, Charles Poser reported on 130 mis-
diagnosed patients he had evaluated.12 His cohort
contained 37% with “disseminated encephalomyeli-
tis,” 22% with chronic fatigue syndrome, 21% with
“myelopathy,” 4% with “posttraumatic syndrome,”
4% with complicated migraine, and 4% with psychi-
atric disorders that were misdiagnosed as MS.12 These
diagnoses reflect referral patterns for a single well-
known MS neurologist before the incorporation of
MRI into MS diagnostic criteria in 2001.16 MRI
demonstration of dissemination in time by current
criteria may have confirmed an MS diagnosis in
a number of these patients. It is also possible that
some of Poser’s patients might have been subse-
quently diagnosed as NMOSD after this disorder
was recognized as a pathologically distinct entity with
a highly specific biomarker.
Many of the patients in our study carried a misdiag-
nosis for a lengthy period of time, including a third for
10 years or longer, and they were often exposed to
unnecessary and potentially harmful treatments. More
than two-thirds of the patients were exposed to immuno-
modulatory therapy, almost a third for 10 years or lon-
ger. Fourteen patients received natalizumab, a drug
associated with progressive multifocal leukoencephalop-
athy. Four patients were exposed to investigational agents
in a clinical trial for MS therapies. In addition to unnec-
essary exposure to these therapies, participating MS spe-
cialists indicated a number of morbidities experienced by
patients in this study as a result of misdiagnosis, includ-
ing one patient who died having a misdiagnosis of MS
where appropriate therapies for NMOSD were not pro-
vided. Failure to treat the correct diagnosis was acknowl-
edged as a contributor to morbidity in a number of
patients. Although difficult to measure, the psychological
harm associated with a misdiagnosis of MS and its sub-
sequent reversal3 was also noted in the study. Lastly, the
financial risk to patients and our health care system as
a consequence of expensive MS disease-modifying ther-
apies,17 imaging, and clinical care in these 110 patients
alone was likely substantial.
Participating
MS
specialists
identified
“clear
evidence of an earlier missed opportunity to make
a correct diagnosis” in a majority (72%) of patients.
Neurology 87
September 27, 2016
1397
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Most important, our study suggests that strict adher-
ence to clinical and radiographic MS diagnostic criteria
may have prevented misdiagnosis in many patients.
Atypical symptoms for a demyelinating attack contrib-
uted to misdiagnosis in almost two-thirds of the patients.
This observation likely reflects misunderstanding of what
constitutes a “typical” demyelinating attack (i.e., optic
neuritis, transverse myelitis, brainstem syndrome). MS
diagnostic criteria were not rigorously validated in pa-
tients with atypical clinical presentations.18 MRI criteria
were also not developed to facilitate differentiation of
MS from other conditions, such as migraine, associated
with MRI white matter abnormalities, but to identify
patients at high risk of MS after clinical presentations
“typical for demyelination.”1 MRI abnormalities incor-
rectly attributed to MS in patients with nonspecific
neurologic symptoms contributed to misdiagnosis in
more than half of the patients in the study. MS diagnos-
tic criteria also stipulate that corroborating objective
findings must be sought in patients reporting historical
episodes of neurologic dysfunction suggestive of demy-
elination before diagnosis is confirmed.1 This frequently
overlooked requirement4,19,20 contributed to misdiagno-
sis in half of the patients in the study and corroboration
of such reported symptoms through clinical, radio-
graphic, or neurophysiologic evaluation providing evi-
dence for a CNS lesion may have aided in diagnosis in
these patients. Overreliance on the interpretation of
MRI abnormalities in patients with atypical syndromes
and unverified prior symptoms may be a significant
cause of misdiagnosis.2,18,21,22
There are limitations to this study. Neurologists
participating in the study may have been incorrect in
their assessment of misdiagnosis in some cases. Given
the lack of specific biomarkers for the disorders mis-
taken for MS identified in this study, it is possible that
neurologists might disagree on their assessment of the
correct clinical diagnosis in some cases. Selection and
referral bias likely influenced patient characteristics.
An estimate of the frequency of MS misdiagnosis
would be desirable, but obtaining such an estimate
would require a different study design. While contrib-
utors to misdiagnosis may be inferred from available
patient records and the specific alternative diagnosis
identified, in most instances, our neurologists did not
participate in making the initial incorrect diagnosis of
MS and thus their assessment of potential contributors
to misdiagnosis may be considered speculative. Lastly,
the assessment of some patients later in their disease
course may have facilitated recognition of a misdiagno-
sis, and hindsight bias may have influenced opinions
regarding earlier opportunity for a correct diagnosis.
MS is complex and can be challenging to diagnose.
Some degree of diagnostic uncertainty is inevitable.
Nevertheless, misdiagnosis of MS has significant con-
sequences for patients. Although it may not be possible
to eliminate diagnostic error completely, strict adher-
ence and conservative application of MS clinical and
corresponding radiographic diagnostic criteria and edu-
cation concerning proper use of MS diagnostic criteria
may prevent misdiagnosis. CSF analyses can be infor-
mative, although clinicians should understand that pos-
itive parameters for CNS inflammation are not specific
for the diagnosis of MS. Serial clinical and radiographic
monitoring may be prudent in patients with atypical
clinical presentations and/or with nonspecific MRI
abnormalities. Such observation over time may ulti-
mately confirm a diagnosis of MS, or establish an alter-
native diagnosis. This approach may be difficult in light
of emerging data supporting early initiation of disease-
modifying therapy in patients with MS or at high risk of
MS.23–25 Continual vigilance for “red flags”15,26,27 in
patients with an existing diagnosis of MS remains
important, especially in those with atypical clinical or
radiographic features or lacking CSF markers of intra-
thecal IgG synthesis. Future MS diagnostic criteria
should balance the need for prompt diagnosis and insti-
tution of therapy and the potential for misinterpretation
or misapplication and the risks of misdiagnosis.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Andrew J. Solomon, MD: conceptualization and study design, analysis
and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellec-
tual content. Dennis N. Bourdette, MD: conceptualization and study
design, analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the man-
uscript for intellectual content. Anne H. Cross, MD: conceptualization
and study design, analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting
of the manuscript for intellectual content. Angela Applebee, MD: analysis
and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellec-
tual content. Philip M. Skidd, MD: analysis and interpretation of the
data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. Diantha
B. Howard, MA: conceptualization and study design, analysis and inter-
pretation of the data. Rebecca I. Spain, MD: analysis and interpretation
of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content.
Michelle H. Cameron, MD: analysis and interpretation of the data,
and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. Edward Kim,
MD: analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manu-
script for intellectual content. Michele K. Mass, MD: analysis and inter-
pretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual
content. Vijayshree Yadav, MD: analysis and interpretation of the data,
and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. Ruth H. Whitham,
MD: analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manu-
script for intellectual content. Erin E. Longbrake, MD, PhD: analysis
and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellec-
tual content. Robert T. Naismith, MD: analysis and interpretation of the
data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. Gregory F.
Wu, MD, PhD: analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the
manuscript for intellectual content. Becky J. Parks, MD: analysis and inter-
pretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content.
Dean M. Wingerchuk, MD: analysis and interpretation of the data, and
drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. Brian L. Rabin, MD:
analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for
intellectual content. Michel Toledano, MD: analysis and interpretation of
the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. W. Oliver
Tobin, MBBCh, PhD: analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting
of the manuscript for intellectual content. Orhun H. Kantarci, MD: anal-
ysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for intel-
lectual content. Jonathan L. Carter, MD: analysis and interpretation of the
data, and drafting of the manuscript for intellectual content. B. Mark Keegan,
MD: analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript for
1398
Neurology 87
September 27, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 intellectual content. Brian G. Weinshenker, MD: conceptualization and study
design, analysis and interpretation of the data, and drafting of the manuscript
for intellectual content.
STUDY FUNDING
National Multiple Sclerosis Society PP2074. Anne H. Cross was sup-
ported in part by the Manny and Rosalyn Rosenthal–Dr. John L. Trotter
MS Center Chair from the Barnes-Jewish Hospital Foundation.
DISCLOSURE
A. Solomon reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. D. Bourdette
reports section editor Current Neurology and Neuroscience. A. Cross reports
consulting for AbbVie, Biogen EMD Serono, Novartis, Mallinckrodt, Teva,
Roche/Genentech, Genzyme/Sanofi; Scientific Advisory Board: Roche, Asso-
ciate editor for Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology; Research
support: Biogen and Teva. A. Applebee, P. Skidd, and D. Howard report
no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. R. Spain reports funding from the
Conrad Hilton Foundation. M. Cameron reports consulting for Acorda
therapeutics, MD consult, and ReWalk. E. Kim reports serving on advisory
boards of Teva and Genzyme. M. Mass reports no disclosures relevant to the
manuscript. V. Yadav reports consult for Biogen Idec and serving on an
advisory board for Genentech. R. Whitham reports serving on a data safety
monitoring board for a clinical trial sponsored by Chugai Pharmaceutical.
E. Longbrake reports speaking and consulting for Genzyme. R. Naismith
reports speaking for Acorda, Biogen, and Genzyme and consulting for Acor-
da, Alkermes, Biogen, EMD Serono, Genentech, Genzyme, Novartis, Pfizer,
Questcor. G. Wu reports serving on an advisory board for Biogen Idec and
speaking for Pfizer. B. Parks reports consulting for Biogen Idec and Novartis,
serving on an advisory board, and holding stock or stock options greater than
5% of the company or greater than $10,000 in value (Regeneron).
D. Wingerchuk reports serving on a clinical trial adjudication panel for
MedImmune, research support from Alexion and TerumoBCT, and com-
pensation for serving as editor in chief of The Neurologist. B. Rabin,
M. Toledano, W. Oliver Tobin, and O. Kantarci report no disclosures
relevant to the manuscript. J. Carter reports serving on the data safety and
monitoring committee for Alder Pharmaceuticals, compensation for devel-
oping a drug treatment monograph for Omnicare/USciences, and research
support from Roche, Sanofi, and Genzyme. B. Mark Keegan reports con-
sulting for Novartis, Bionest, and Bristol-Myers Squibb and receives research
support from Caridian BCT. B. Weinshenker reports data safety monitoring
board membership for Novartis and Mitsubishi and MedImmune for adju-
dication committee membership. He reports for travel to attend an EMA
conference supported by Alexion and royalties from RSR Ltd. and from
Oxford University for patent for neuromyelitis optica IgG for diagnosis of
neuromyelitis optica. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received January 28, 2016. Accepted in final form June 9, 2016.
REFERENCES
1.
Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic
criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDo-
nald criteria. Ann Neurol 2011;69:292–302.
2.
Solomon AJ, Klein EP, Bourdette D. “Undiagnosing”
multiple sclerosis: the challenge of misdiagnosis in MS.
Neurology 2012;78:1986–1991.
3.
Solomon AJ, Klein E. Disclosing a misdiagnosis of multiple
sclerosis: do no harm? Continuum 2013;19:1087–1091.
4.
Solomon AJ, Weinshenker BG. Misdiagnosis of multiple
sclerosis: frequency, causes, effects, and prevention. Curr
Neurol Neurosci Rep 2013;13:403.
5.
Singh H, Graber ML. Improving diagnosis in health care:
the next imperative for patient safety. N Engl J Med 2015;
373:2493–2495.
6.
Committee on Diagnostic Error in Health Care; Board on
Health Care Services; Institute of Medicine; The National
Academies
of
Sciences,
Engineering,
and
Medicine.
Improving Diagnosis in Health Care. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2015.
7.
Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error: the third leading
cause of death in the US. BMJ 2016;353:i2139.
8.
Herndon RM, Brooks B. Misdiagnosis of multiple sclero-
sis. Semin Neurol 1985;5:94–98.
9.
Rudick RA, Miller AE. Multiple sclerosis or multiple
possibilities: the continuing problem of misdiagnosis.
Neurology 2012;78:1904–1906.
10.
Engell TA. Clinico-pathoanatomical study of multiple
sclerosis diagnosis. Acta Neurologica Scand 1988;78:39–
44.
11.
Rudick RA, Schiffer RB, Schwetz KM, Herndon RM.
Multiple sclerosis: the problem of incorrect diagnosis. Arch
Neurol 1986;43:578–583.
12.
Poser CM. Misdiagnosis of multiple sclerosis and beta-
interferon. Lancet 1997;349:1916.
13.
Murray TJ, Murray SJ. Characteristics of patients found
not to have multiple sclerosis. Can Med Assoc J 1984;131:
336–337.
14.
Carmosino
MJ,
Brousseau
KM,
Arciniegas
DB,
Corboy JR. Initial evaluations for multiple sclerosis in
a university multiple sclerosis center: outcomes and role
of magnetic resonance imaging in referral. Arch Neurol
2005;62:585–590.
15.
Miller DH, Weinshenker BG, Filippi M, et al. Differential
diagnosis of suspected multiple sclerosis: a consensus
approach. Mult Scler 2008;14:1157–1174.
16.
McDonald WI, Compston A, Edan G, et al. Recommen-
ded diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: guidelines
from the international panel on the diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2001;50:121–127.
17.
Hartung DM, Bourdette DN, Ahmed SM, Whitham RH.
The cost of multiple sclerosis drugs in the US and the
pharmaceutical industry: too big to fail? Neurology
2015;84:2185–2192.
18.
Poser CM, Brinar VV. Problems with diagnostic criteria
for multiple sclerosis. Lancet 2001;358:1746–1747.
19.
Rudick RA. Diagnostic criteria in multiple sclerosis:
headed in the right direction but still a ways to go. Ann
Neurol 2011;69:234–236.
20.
Selchen D, Bhan V, Blevins G, et al. MS, MRI, and the
2010 McDonald criteria: a Canadian expert commentary.
Neurology 2012;79:S1–S15.
21.
Schiffer RB, Giang DW, Mushlin A, et al. Perils and pit-
falls of magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of
multiple sclerosis. The Rochester-Toronto MRI Study
Group. J Neuroimaging 1993;3:81–88.
22.
Whiting P, Harbord R, Main C, et al. Accuracy of mag-
netic resonance imaging for the diagnosis of multiple scle-
rosis: systematic review. BMJ 2006;332:875–884.
23.
Bates D. Treatment effects of immunomodulatory thera-
pies at different stages of multiple sclerosis in short-term
trials. Neurology 2011;76:S14–S25.
24.
Coyle PK. Early treatment of multiple sclerosis to prevent
neurologic damage. Neurology 2008;71:S3–S7.
25.
Goodin DS, Reder AT, Ebers GC, et al. Survival in
MS: a randomized cohort study 21 years after the start
of the pivotal IFNbeta-1b trial. Neurology 2012;78:
1315–1322.
26.
Toledano M, Weinshenker BG, Solomon AJ. A clinical
approach to the differential diagnosis of multiple sclerosis.
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2015;15:57.
27.
Charil A, Yousry TA, Rovaris M, et al. MRI and the
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: expanding the concept of
“no better explanation.” Lancet Neurol 2006;5:841–852.
Neurology 87
September 27, 2016
1399
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
