 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
382 
MMWR / April 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 14
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Opioid overdose deaths in Massachusetts increased 150% 
from 2012 to 2015 (1). The proportion of opioid overdose 
deaths in the state involving fentanyl, a synthetic, short-acting 
opioid with 50–100 times the potency of morphine, increased 
from 32% during 2013–2014 to 74% in the first half of 2016 
(1–3). In April 2015, the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) 
and CDC reported an increase in law enforcement fentanyl 
seizures in Massachusetts, much of which was believed to be 
illicitly manufactured fentanyl (IMF) (4). To guide overdose 
prevention and response activities, in April 2016, the 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health and the Office 
of the Chief Medical Examiner collaborated with CDC to 
investigate the characteristics of fentanyl overdose in three 
Massachusetts counties with high opioid overdose death rates. 
In these counties, medical examiner charts of opioid overdose 
decedents who died during October 1, 2014–March 31, 
2015 were reviewed, and during April 2016, interviews were 
conducted with persons who used illicit opioids and witnessed 
or experienced an opioid overdose. Approximately two thirds 
of opioid overdose decedents tested positive for fentanyl 
on postmortem toxicology. Evidence for rapid progression 
of fentanyl overdose was common among both fatal and 
nonfatal overdoses. A majority of interview respondents 
reported successfully using multiple doses of naloxone, the 
antidote to opioid overdose, to reverse suspected fentanyl 
overdoses. Expanding and enhancing existing opioid overdose 
education and prevention programs to include fentanyl-specific 
messaging and practices could help public health authorities 
mitigate adverse effects associated with overdoses, especially 
in communities affected by IMF.
Barnstable, Bristol, and Plymouth counties in Massachusetts 
were investigated because of high opioid overdose death rates 
(estimated 29.8–34.5 per 100,000 population in 2015), and 
feasibility of interviewee recruitment through existing harm 
reduction programs in these counties (5).* To rapidly obtain 
a cross section of persons misusing opioids for semistructured, 
in-person interviews, a nonrandom sample of approximately 
20 knowledgeable respondents per county was recruited 
with the help of harm reduction programs. Eligible persons 
were aged ≥18 years, lived in Massachusetts, had used illicit 
opioids during the previous 12 months, and had witnessed or 
experienced an opioid overdose during the previous 6 months. 
Equal numbers of men and women were recruited. Trained 
interviewers asked respondents about their experiences, 
knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs regarding opioid overdose. 
Interviews were audio recorded, transcribed, and thematically 
coded by multiple investigators.
Opioid overdose death data were abstracted from medical 
examiner charts, which included autopsy and toxicology 
reports, death scene reports, and emergency medical service 
logs. Abstracted charts met the following criteria: the death 
occurred during October 1, 2014–March 31, 2015; the 
decedent overdosed or resided in Barnstable, Bristol, or 
Plymouth counties; and opioids were listed as a contributing 
cause of death. Postmortem toxicology tests were used to 
categorize deaths as involving fentanyl (regardless of presence 
of other drugs), heroin or morphine (i.e., no fentanyl),† or 
other opioids (e.g., prescription opioids). Fentanyl deaths were 
further categorized using death scene evidence as suspected 
IMF, suspected prescription fentanyl, or unknown source of 
fentanyl. Rapidity of overdose death was determined from 
available evidence, including needles inserted in decedents’ 
bodies, syringes found in hand, tourniquets still in place, and 
bystander reports of rapid unconsciousness after drug use. 
Demographic and overdose characteristic frequencies were 
examined by drug type.
Among 64 interview respondents, 52% were women, 
61% were aged 25–44 years, and 81% were non-Hispanic 
white. Ninety-one percent reported that they were trained 
by a Massachusetts Department of Public Health-supported 
overdose education and naloxone distribution program in the 
use of naloxone for reversing an opioid overdose; trainees are 
taught that opioid overdose is defined by unresponsiveness 
and decreased respirations (6). During the 6 months before 
the interview, 95% of respondents witnessed an overdose 
and 42% overdosed themselves. Eighty-eight percent of 
respondents attributed the increase in opioid overdose deaths to 
suspected fentanyl, and 69% reported that suspected fentanyl 
Characteristics of Fentanyl Overdose — Massachusetts, 2014–2016
Nicholas J. Somerville, MD1,2; Julie O’Donnell, PhD1,3; R. Matthew Gladden, PhD4; Jon E. Zibbell, PhD4; Traci C. Green, PhD5;  
Morgan Younkin, MD6; Sarah Ruiz, MSW2; Hermik Babakhanlou-Chase, MPH2; Miranda Chan, MPH2; Barry P
. Callis, MSW2;  
Janet Kuramoto-Crawford, PhD1; Henry M. Nields, MD, PhD7; Alexander Y. Walley, MD2,5
* County-specific rates were calculated using the number of deaths listed in this 
reference and population counts from CDC WONDER (https://wonder.cdc.gov/).
† There is no toxicology test specifically for heroin. Heroin metabolizes into 
6‐monoacetylmorphine (6-MAM), which in turn is rapidly metabolized to 
morphine. Deaths in which the decedent tested positive for 6-MAM or 
morphine were classified as heroin- or morphine-involved. Recent evidence 
from Massachusetts indicates that a majority of morphine-positive toxicology 
test results are due to heroin metabolism. http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/gov/
departments/dph/stop-addiction/chapter-55-overdose-assessment.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 14 
383
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
was now available for purchase in powdered form (consistent 
with IMF preparation), and not as diverted prescription 
medications, (e.g., Duragesic transdermal fentanyl patch) 
(Box). Respondents reported that suspected fentanyl could 
be obtained alone or mixed with heroin, and persons using 
heroin often did not know whether fentanyl was mixed into the 
heroin they purchased. Respondents’ reactions to the addition 
of fentanyl to the illicit drug market varied. Although some 
persons sought out fentanyl and others attempted to avoid 
it, a majority of respondents reported that opioid-seeking 
behaviors were not altered in response to the emergence of 
fentanyl. A majority of respondents who witnessed a suspected 
fentanyl overdose (75%) described symptoms as occurring 
rapidly, within seconds to minutes. Twenty-five percent 
reported witnessing or experiencing an overdose when fentanyl 
was insufflated (snorted), and the remainder reported the 
overdose always involved injecting fentanyl. Atypical overdose 
characteristics described by respondents during suspected 
fentanyl overdose included immediate blue discoloration of the 
lips (20%), gurgling sounds with breathing (16%), stiffening of 
the body or seizure-like activity (13%), foaming at the mouth 
(6%), and confusion or strange affect before unresponsiveness 
(6%). Seventy-five percent of respondents reported witnessing 
naloxone administration, administering naloxone themselves, 
or receiving naloxone to successfully reverse an opioid or 
fentanyl overdose. Among these events, 83% of respondents 
reported that ≥2 naloxone doses (typical nasally administered 
dose in Massachusetts is 2 mg/2 mL§) per suspected fentanyl 
overdose were used before the person responded. Thirty percent 
of respondents reported using heroin or fentanyl with others 
present to help protect themselves from a fatal overdose.
Among 196 opioid overdose decedents whose records were 
reviewed, 73% were men, 50% were aged 15–34 years, and 91% 
were non-Hispanic white. Demographics of fentanyl overdose 
decedents were similar to those of the overall opioid overdose 
decedents (Table). Among all opioid overdose decedents 64% 
tested positive for fentanyl on postmortem toxicology; this 
proportion increased from 44% in October 2014 to 76% in 
March 2015 (Figure). Eighty-two percent of fentanyl deaths 
were suspected to involve IMF
, 4% were suspected to involve 
prescription fentanyl, and 14% involved an unknown source of 
fentanyl. Thirty-six percent of fentanyl deaths had evidence of 
an overdose occurring within seconds to minutes after drug use, 
and 90% of fentanyl overdose decedents were pulseless upon 
emergency medical services arrival (Table). Ninety-one percent 
of fatal fentanyl overdoses occurred in a hotel, motel, or private 
residence. Only 6% of fentanyl overdose deaths had evidence 
BOX. Sample quotations from persons who reported using opioids 
and who had witnessed or experienced an opioid overdose — 
Barnstable, Bristol, and Plymouth counties, Massachusetts, April 2016* 
Illicitly manufactured fentanyl (IMF) responsible for 
opioid overdose deaths
“So, now what they [people selling illicit drugs] are doing 
is they’re cutting the heroin with the fentanyl to make 
it stronger. And the dope [heroin] is so strong with the 
fentanyl in it, that you get the whole dose of the fentanyl 
at once rather than being time-released [like the patch]. 
And that’s why people are dying—plain and simple. You 
know, they [people using illicit drugs] are doing the whole 
bag [of heroin mixed with fentanyl] and they don’t realize 
that they can’t handle it; their body can’t handle it.”
Overdoses involving IMF are acute and rapid
“A person overdosing on regular dope [heroin] leans back 
and drops and then suddenly stops talking in a middle of 
a conversation and you look over and realize that they’re 
overdosing. Not like with fentanyl. I would say you notice 
it [a fentanyl overdose] as soon as they are done [injecting 
the fentanyl]. They don’t even have time to pull the needle 
out [of their body] and they’re on the ground.”
Naloxone reverses overdoses involving IMF; multiple 
doses often required
“So he put half [one dose] up one nose [nostril] and half 
[one dose] up the other nose, like they trained us to do, and 
she didn’t come to. So he put water on her face and kind of 
slapped her, which doesn’t really make you come to [regain 
consciousness]. It doesn’t. So he pulled out another thing of 
Narcan [brand of naloxone] and he put half of it [another 
dose] up one nose and then she came to…She just didn’t 
remember anything. She said, ‘What happened? I remember 
washing my hands and, like, what happened?’ We said, ‘You 
just overdosed in this room!’ So yeah, it was wicked scary.”
Self-protective measures often employed
“Like I will do a very, very, very little bit of fentanyl…
and if I don’t feel it, I will do that little bit plus half. I’m 
just not going to throw the whole thing in the cooker and 
then do it, no way. I just know better.”
Co-use of opioids and benzodiazepines
“My daughter’s mother had benzos. And when she did one 
bag of heroin she already had done four or five Klonopin 
[brand of clonazepam] and she just died. That was it. She went 
into a coma for the night and she was dead in the morning.”
* Categories are not mutually exclusive; all respondents reported using 
opioids in the past 12 months and had witnessed or experienced an 
overdose, or both.
§ http://prescribetoprevent.org/pharmacists/formulations.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
384 
MMWR / April 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 14
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of lay bystander-administered naloxone, which is available from 
pharmacies and harm reduction programs in Massachusetts. 
In addition to the limited use of naloxone by laypersons, rapid 
bystander response to fentanyl overdose was inhibited by lack of 
bystanders (18%), spatial separation of decedents from bystanders 
(e.g., person was in another room of the house [58%]), lack of 
awareness of decedent’s drug use by bystanders (24%), intoxication 
of bystanders who were present (12%), failure of bystanders to 
recognize overdose symptoms (11%), or bystander assumption 
that the decedent had gone to sleep (15%). Clear evidence that a 
bystander was unimpaired, witnessed the drug consumption, and 
was present during an overdose (i.e., able to respond immediately) 
was reported in 1% of the fentanyl overdose decedent charts.
Discussion
Introduction of fentanyl into the illicit drug market has 
been a major contributing factor to the rapid increase in 
opioid overdoses in southeastern Massachusetts and reflects 
a growing national public health issue (7). Previous DEA 
reports (4) and the findings of this investigation indicate 
that IMF is widely available through illicit drug markets in 
southeastern Massachusetts, and that the majority of fentanyl 
linked to fatal overdoses is suspected IMF rather than diverted 
prescription fentanyl. Taken together, these data highlight the 
need to integrate fentanyl testing into standard substance use 
toxicology tests employed by the medical, criminal justice, and 
treatment communities in Massachusetts areas with high levels 
of fentanyl use and overdose.
Evidence from over one third of medical examiner charts 
and reports from 75% of interview respondents demonstrated 
that fentanyl overdose can begin suddenly, progress to death 
rapidly, and manifest atypical physical symptoms. Timely 
administration of a sufficient naloxone dose by a trained 
layperson or emergency medical services responder can reverse 
fentanyl overdose. Although bystanders were frequently 
present in the general location of overdose death, timely 
bystander naloxone administration did not occur because 
bystanders did not have naloxone, were spatially separated 
or impaired by substance use, or failed to recognize overdose 
symptoms. Findings indicate that persons using fentanyl 
have an increased chance of surviving an overdose if directly 
observed by someone trained and equipped with sufficient 
FIGURE. Percentage of opioid overdose deaths involving fentanyl, 
heroin/morphine (without fentanyl), and other opioids (without 
fentanyl, heroin/morphine) — Barnstable, Bristol, and Plymouth 
counties, Massachusetts, October 2014–March 2015
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oct
(n = 32)
Nov
(n = 22)
Dec
(n = 37)
Jan
(n = 35)
Feb
(n = 33)
Mar
(n = 34)
Month (no. deaths)
Percent age
Any fentanyl
Heroin/morphine
Other opioids
TABLE. Demographic characteristics and overdose precipitating 
circumstances of fentanyl overdose decedents (N = 125) — 
Barnstable, Bristol, and Plymouth counties, Massachusetts, 
October 1, 2014–March 31, 2015
Characteristic
No. (%)
Sex
Male
100 (80)
Female
25 (20)
Age group (yrs)
15–24
15 (12)
25–34
52 (42)
35–44
24 (19)
≥45
34 (27)
Race/Ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic
111 (89)
Other
14 (11)
Location of overdose
Decedent's home
85 (68)
Other private residence
22 (18)
Hotel or motel
7 (6)
Other
11 (9)
Overdose onset, pulselessness, and bystander naloxone administration
Evidence of rapid onset of overdose symptoms
45 (36)
Pulseless upon emergency medical services arrival
112 (90)
Evidence of bystander naloxone administration
7 (6)
Barriers to bystander response
No bystander present
23 (18)
Decedent spatially separated from any bystander*
73 (58)
Bystander unaware of decedent’s drug use
30 (24)
Bystander also using drugs or alcohol
15 (12)
Bystander reported symptoms of intoxication or overdose 
(snoring, falling asleep, or nodding), but did not realize 
decedent was overdosing
14 (11)
Decedent was thought to have gone to sleep
19 (15)
Route of drug administration†
Evidence of injection
83 (66)
Evidence of insufflation (snorting)
11 (9)
No evidence of route of administration
26 (21)
* Spatial separation defined as having a bystander nearby, either during or 
shortly preceding the overdose, who potentially had an opportunity to 
intervene and respond to the overdose, but who was not in the same room 
or physical space as the decedent.
† Categories were not defined as mutually exclusive, but all records with 
evidence of injection had no evidence of insufflation, and all records with 
evidence of insufflation had no evidence of injection. Any evidence of route 
of administration was coded but not linked to specific drugs.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 14 
385
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
doses of naloxone. In some countries, including Canada 
and Australia, overdose morbidity and mortality rates have 
decreased in areas near supervised injection facilities where 
personnel are available to observe overdose onset, if it occurs, 
and administer naloxone as needed (8). Because multiple 
doses might be required to reverse a fentanyl overdose, 
emergency medical services and community naloxone 
distribution programs might need to ensure that appropriate 
numbers of doses are distributed.
The findings in this report are subject to at least three 
limitations. First, toxicology reports in medical examiner 
charts cannot distinguish between prescription fentanyl and 
IMF; therefore, categorization was completed using death 
scene evidence, which varied and sometimes was inconclusive. 
In addition, samples were not tested for emerging fentanyl 
analogs, such as carfentanil. Overdose deaths were also 
categorized broadly as involving fentanyl, heroin or morphine, 
or other opioids, although in many cases other drugs also 
contributed to the death. Atypical symptoms reported during 
fentanyl overdose may be attributable to other drugs or drug 
combinations and not fentanyl. Second, circumstances or 
events preceding death (e.g., rapid onset of overdose symptoms) 
can be inferred from death scene evidence, but absence of 
evidence cannot be interpreted as evidence of absence; numbers 
presented therefore likely underestimate the actual prevalence 
of circumstances. Finally, interview respondents were recruited 
with the help of community-based harm reduction programs 
in which overdose prevention education and naloxone rescue 
kits were offered. Thus, this sample population was potentially 
more informed about and experienced with fentanyl, naloxone, 
overdose prevention and treatment, and rescue efforts than 
are all persons who use illicit opioids. In addition, interview 
comparability is limited because not all respondents were asked 
uniform questions.
Adaptation of harm reduction practices designed to reduce 
health-related consequences of unsafe drug use, including 
the addition of warnings about fentanyl’s characteristics and 
toxicity, could mitigate the fentanyl-related impact of the 
U.S. opioid epidemic in communities affected by fentanyl. 
Population-based strategies to prevent and reduce opioid 
use and opioid use disorders, such as expansion of access 
to evidence-based treatment, are likely to be effective in 
preventing fentanyl overdose and death. The high percentage 
of fatal overdoses occurring at home with no naloxone 
present, coupled with the rapid onset of overdose symptoms 
after using fentanyl through injection or insufflation, 
underscores the urgent need to expand initiatives to link 
persons at high risk for overdose (such as persons using 
heroin, persons with past overdoses, or persons recently 
released from incarceration) to harm reduction services and 
evidence-based treatment (2,8).
Acknowledgments
Donna Mello, Kim Powers, Max Sandusky, AIDS Support Group 
of Cape Cod Massachusetts; Heather Kennedy, Jesse Pack, Brockton 
Area Multi-Services Inc., Massachusetts; Haley Fiske, Todd Kerensky; 
Boston Medical Center; Susan Manning, Mei Shang, CDC; Kevin 
Botelho, Ellen Boundy, Alfred DeMaria, Greg Grays-Thomas, 
Thomas Land, Deryk Meehan, Eduardo Nettle, Jen Parks, Brittni 
Reilly, Paige Shaffer, Amy Sorensen-Alawad, Kevin Stanton, Sarah 
Stone, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; Deborah 
Isenberg, consultant to Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Connie Rocha‐Mimosa, Jessica Rodriguez, Seven Hills Foundation; 
Alejandro Azofeifa, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration, Rockville, Maryland.
 1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 2Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health; 3Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 
Rockville, Maryland; 4Division of Unintentional Injury Prevention, National 
Center for Injury Prevention and Control, CDC; 5Boston Medical Center/
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; 6Lawrence 
Family Medicine Residency, Lawrence, Massachusetts; 7Massachusetts Office 
of the Chief Medical Examiner.
Corresponding authors: Nick Somerville, yxp3@cdc.gov, 617-624-6023; 
Julie O’Donnell, irh8@cdc.gov, 404-498-5005.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Fentanyl has a growing presence in the illicit drug market and is 
involved in an increasing proportion of opioid overdose deaths.
What is added by this report?
Approximately two thirds of investigated opioid overdose 
deaths in southeastern Massachusetts during October 1, 
2014–March 31, 2015 involved fentanyl, a majority of which was 
suspected illicitly manufactured fentanyl (IMF), reported to be 
widely available in the illicit drug market. Fentanyl overdose can 
progress rapidly, and a majority of decedents were physically 
separated from bystanders. Naloxone can reverse fentanyl 
overdose if administered in sufficient dosage immediately upon 
recognition of overdose symptoms.
What are the implications for public health practice?
A comprehensive public health response is needed to address 
overdoses related to IMF. First, fentanyl should be included on 
standard toxicology screens to facilitate early identification. 
Second, existing harm reduction strategies to identify likely 
fentanyl exposure should be adapted, such as training for 
bystanders that includes direct observation of anyone injecting 
or insufflating illicit opioids, ensuring that trained bystanders 
are equipped with sufficient doses of naloxone, expanding 
layperson training, and providing access to naloxone. Third, 
access and linkages to medication for opioid use disorders need 
to be enhanced in fentanyl-affected areas.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
386 
MMWR / April 14, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 14
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
1. Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Data brief: opioid-related 
overdose deaths among Massachusetts residents. Boston, MA: 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Executive Office of Health and Human 
Services, Department of Public Health; 2016. http://www.mass.gov/
eohhs/docs/dph/stop-addiction/current-statistics/data-brief-overdose-
deaths-nov-2016-ma-residents.pdf
2. Massachusetts Department of Public Health. An assessment of opioid-
related deaths in Massachusetts (2013–2014). Boston, MA: Commonwealth 
of Massachusetts, Executive Office of Health and Human Services, 
Department of Public Health; 2016. http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/gov/
departments/dph/stop-addiction/chapter-55-overdose-assessment.html
3. Algren DA, Monteilh CP
, Punja M, et al. Fentanyl-associated fatalities among 
illicit drug users in Wayne County, Michigan (July 2005–May 2006). J Med 
Toxicol 2013;9:106–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13181-012-0285
4. CDC. Increases in fentanyl drug confiscations and fentanyl-related 
overdose fatalities. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, CDC; 2015. https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00384.asp
5. Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Number of unintentional 
opioid-related overdose deaths by county, MA residents: 2000–2015. 
Boston, MA: Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Executive Office of 
Health and Human Services, Department of Public Health; 2016. http://
www.mass.gov/eohhs/docs/dph/stop-addiction/current-statistics/
overdose-deaths-by-county-nov-2016.pdf
6. Walley AY, Xuan Z, Hackman HH, et al. Opioid overdose rates 
and implementation of overdose education and nasal naloxone 
distribution in Massachusetts: interrupted time series analysis. BMJ 
2013;346(jan30 5):f174. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f174
7. Rudd RA, Seth P
, David F, Scholl L. Increases in drug and opioid-involved 
overdose deaths—United States, 2010–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:1445–52. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm655051e1
8. Potier C, Laprévote V, Dubois-Arber F, Cottencin O, Rolland B. 
Supervised injection services: what has been demonstrated? A systematic 
literature review. Drug Alcohol Depend 2014;145:48–68. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.10.012  
