  
Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Invasive cardiovascular infection by 
Mycobacterium chimaera – 30 April 2015. 
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2015  
 
 
Main conclusions and options for response 
Since 2011, cases of infection caused by Mycobacterium chimaera have been detected in patients having 
previously undergone cardiac surgery in Europe (1-3).  
Healthcare providers involved in caring for patients who have undergone open-heart surgery should be vigilant 
for cases of endocarditis or other cardiovascular infection of unidentified origin and consider testing specifically 
for slow-growing non-tuberculous mycobacteria such as M. chimaera. Regulatory bodies in charge of licensing 
and agencies monitoring the safety of such devices should be aware of the potential association of invasive 
cardiovascular infections caused by M. chimaera with heater-cooler units and relevant information should be 
disseminated to all centres performing cardiac surgery. 
ECDC is maintaining vigilance for additional information that can be used to further evaluate the public health 
risk of invasive cardiovascular infection by M. chimaera associated with heater-cooler units and will update its 
risk assessment as new evidence is obtained. 
Source and date of request 
ECDC internal decision, 13 April 2015. 
Public health issue 
Assess the risk of invasive cardiovascular infection by Mycobacterium chimaera potentially associated with heater-
cooler units used during cardiac surgery in Europe. 
Disease background information 
Mycobacterium chimaera is a slow-growing non-tuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) distinguished as a species 
within the Mycobacterium avium complex in 2004 (4). Identification requires molecular diagnostic testing. M. 
chimaera has been linked to lung infections in patients with underlying lung disease, such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. Colonisation of water sources, aided by the formation of biofilm, is possible. 
 
 
RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT 
  
Invasive cardiovascular infection  
by Mycobacterium chimaera potentially associated  
with heater-cooler units used during cardiac surgery  
 
30 April 2015 
  
 
 
 
RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT 
Invasive cardiovascular infection by Mycobacterium chimaera – 30 April 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Event background information 
Since 2011, cases of invasive cardiovascular infection caused by M. chimaera in patients having previously 
undergone cardiac surgery in Switzerland, the Netherlands and Germany have been reported by the relevant 
authorities (1-3, 5). 
Switzerland has reported six M. chimaera infections: three cases of endocarditis, one bloodstream infection and 
two vascular graft infections. Two of the six had fatal outcomes related to the infection (2). The clinical 
manifestations included osteomyelitis and involvement of multiple organs such as the eye and spleen. The 
Netherlands reported one fatal M. chimaera infection in a patient following cardiac surgery (1, 6). A case has also 
been reported in Germany. Investigation in Switzerland included microbiological examination of environmental 
samples that identified M. chimaera contamination in heater-cooler units used during cardiac operations, including 
water samples from the units. Air sampling cultures became positive for M. chimaera when units were running but 
not if they were turned off. Some strains from air and water samples showed matching Random Amplified 
Polymorphic DNA (RAPD)-PCR patterns (2, 3). This suggests M. chimaera-contaminated heater-cooler units as a 
potential source of infection (2). Heater-cooler units are used to regulate the temperature of the blood during 
extracorporeal circulation and use filtered tap water as a heat exchanger. 
A number of control measures have been implemented. In the Netherlands, several elective heart surgery 
procedures were postponed until measures had been taken, such as placing devices that may spread the bacteria 
outside of operating rooms, although acute cardiac surgery was not postponed. By 12 February 2015, the regular 
programme of operations had resumed at these centres (1). 
In Switzerland, cleaning and decontamination of the heater-cooler units was followed by recontamination. A new 
heater-cooler unit that initially tested negative for M. chimaera at the hospital tested positive three months after 
purchase and installation. In a Zurich hospital, a maintenance protocol was applied that included daily water 
change (using 0.2μm bacterial filters). The hospital also started building customised housing units for these devices 
inside operating rooms, with high-efficiency particulate air filters connected (2). 
National regulatory authorities for medical devices have been notified in countries that have reported infections. In 
the Netherlands, authorities reported the incident to the Health Inspectorate which sent information to professional 
associations, including the Dutch Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (NVT) and the Dutch Society for Medical 
Microbiology (NVMM), and to the public via a press release (1). In Switzerland, the Federal Office of Public Health 
issued a public alert in July 2014, following an alert to all 16 Swiss hospitals that perform this type of cardiac 
surgery and to cardiac surgeons via the Swiss Society for Cardiac and Thoracic Vascular Surgery (3). In Germany 
the regional authorities were informed and comprehensive investigations were initiated (5). In the UK, Public 
Health England (PHE) are working with the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) to 
assess whether there is any historic or ongoing risk to patients who have had or are undergoing cardiac surgery. 
PHE has also alerted cardiothoracic centres, microbiologists and public health services across the UK to their 
investigation (7). 
ECDC threat assessment for the EU 
ECDC is gathering information in collaboration with affected countries to evaluate the public health risk of 
cardiovascular-surgery-associated invasive infections with M. chimaera potentially linked to heater-cooler units, and 
will update its risk assessment as new evidence is obtained. Healthcare providers involved in caring for patients 
who have undergone open-heart surgery or other surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass such as lung 
transplant should be vigilant for cases of endocarditis or other cardiovascular, deep-surgical-site or disseminated 
infection of unidentified origin. They should also consider testing specifically for slow-growing non-tuberculous 
mycobacteria such as M. chimaera. Regulatory bodies in charge of licensing and agencies monitoring the safety of 
such devices should be aware of the potential association of invasive cardiovascular infections caused by M. 
chimaera with heater-cooler units and relevant information should be disseminated to all centres performing 
cardiac surgery. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT 
Invasive cardiovascular infection by Mycobacterium chimaera – 30 April 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
References 
1. 
Inspectie voor de Gezondheidszorg (IGZ). Hartcentra nemen maatregelen om hartoperaties veiliger te 
maken [20 April 2015]. Available from: 
http://www.igz.nl/actueel/nieuws/hartcentra_nemen_maatregelen_om_hartoperaties_veiliger_te_maken.aspx. 
2. 
Sax H, Bloemberg G, Hasse B, Sommerstein R, Kohler P, Achermann Y, et al. Prolonged Outbreak of 
Mycobacterium chimaera Infection After Open-Chest Heart Surgery. Clinical infectious diseases : an official 
publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2015. 
3. 
Swiss Agency for Therapeutic Products. Mycobacterium risks in cardiac surgery – Heater Cooler Devices  [20 
April 2015]. Available from: 
https://www.swissmedic.ch/rueckrufe_medizinprodukte/00833/01630/02299/index.html?lang=en. 
4. 
Tortoli E, Rindi L, Garcia MJ, Chiaradonna P, Dei R, Garzelli C, et al. Proposal to elevate the genetic variant 
MAC-A, included in the Mycobacterium avium complex, to species rank as Mycobacterium chimaera sp. nov. 
International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology. 2004;54(Pt 4):1277-85. 
5. 
Bundesinstitut für Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte (BfArM). Möglicher Zusammenhang zwischen 
Hypothermiegeräten und Infektionsrisiko mit Mykobakterien bei der Herzchirurgie 2015 [cited 2015 30 
April]. Available from: 
http://www.bfarm.de/SharedDocs/Risikoinformationen/Medizinprodukte/DE/Hypothermiegeraete.html?nn=3
495216. 
6. 
Isala. Isala heeft melding gedaan van besmetting hartpatiënt met M. chimaera bij Inspectie  [23 April 
2015]. Available from: http://www.isala.nl/over-isala/nieuws/isala-melding-besmetting-hartpatient-m-
chimaera-inspectie. 
7. 
Public Health England. Investigation of Mycobacterium chimaera infection associated with cardiopulmonary 
bypass 2015 [cited 2015 30 April]. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health-
protection-report-volume-9-2015/hpr-volume-9-issue-15-news-30-april. 
 
