  
 
 
This is an Accepted Article that has been peer-reviewed and approved for publication in the The 
Journal of Physiology, but has yet to undergo copy-editing and proof correction. Please cite this 
article as an 'Accepted Article'; doi: 10.1113/JP275166. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Title: 
Predictive neuromechanical simulations indicate why walking performance declines with 
aging 
 
Authors: 
Seungmoon Song and Hartmut Geyer 
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
 
Corresponding author: 
S. Song: Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
Email: smsong@cmu.edu 
 
Key points summary: 
- Although the natural decline in walking performance with aging affects the quality of life of 
a growing elderly population, its physiological origins remain unknown. 
- By using predictive neuromechanical simulations of human walking with age-related neuro-
musculo-skeletal changes, we find evidence that the loss of muscle strength and muscle 
contraction speed dominantly contribute to the reduced walking economy and speed. 
- The findings imply that focusing on recovering these muscular changes may be the only 
effective way to improve performance in elderly walking. 
- More generally, the work is of interest for investigating the physiological causes of altered 
gait due to age, injury and disorders. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Abstract 
Healthy elderly people walk slower and energetically less efficiently than young adults. This 
decline in walking performance lowers the quality of life for a growing aging population, and 
understanding its physiological origin is critical for devising interventions that can delay or 
revert it. However, the origin of the decline in walking performance remains unknown, as 
aging produces a range of physiological changes whose individual effects on gait are difficult 
to separate in experiments with human subjects. Here we use a predictive neuromechanical 
model to separately address the effects of common age-related changes to the skeletal, 
muscular, and nervous systems. We find in computer simulations of this model that the 
combined changes produce gait consistent with elderly walking and that mainly the loss of 
muscle strength and mass reduces energy efficiency. In addition, we find that the slower 
preferred walking speed of elderly people emerges in the simulations when adapting to 
muscle fatigue, again mainly caused by muscle-related changes. The results suggest that a 
focus on recovering these muscular changes may be the only effective way to improve 
performance in elderly walking. 
 
Introduction 
Walking performance declines with aging. Compared to young adults in their 20s, elderly 
people in their 70s walk with a 15-30% higher metabolic cost (Fig. 1) (Martin et al., 1992; 
Mian et al., 2006) and a 0.2-0.6 m s−1 slower speed (Himann et al., 1988; Lauretani et al., 
2003). At the same time, the physiological properties of the locomotor apparatus change with 
aging. The body’s mass distribution shifts Pavol et al., 2002), muscles become weaker 
(Goodpaster et al., 2006; Delmonico et al., 2009) and slower (Thelen, 2003, Nilwik et al., 
2013), and neural signals become slower (Rivner et al., 2001) and noisier (Goble et al., 
2009). Understanding how these physiological changes relate to the decline in walking 
performance is essential to improving mobility, and thus, the quality of life for elderly 
people. 
Despite many experiments with human subjects, the physiological origins of the decline 
in walking performance remain obscure. Previous experimental studies have found that 
neither the mechanical work (Mian et al., 2006; Monaco and Micera, 2012) nor stability 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
measures (Malatesta et al., 2003; Ortega et al., 2008) nor the basal metabolism (Mian et al., 
2006) explain the increase in the metabolic cost of elderly walking. Other suggestions such as 
a change in control strategy (Peterson and Martin, 2010; Hortobagyi et al., 2011) or a decline 
in muscle force capacity (Lauretani et al., 2003; Monaco and Micera, 2012) remain debated 
or require further investigation for clarification (Martin et al., 1992). The decrease in walking 
speed seems to be even more difficult to explain, as it involves the notion of preference. For 
instance, the minimization of the cost of transport (COT), the metabolic energy consumed per 
distance travelled, is often argued to explain the preferred walking speed in animals and 
humans. Yet the speed at which the COT is minimal does not change much with aging (Fig. 
1) and, therefore, the COT cannot account for the lower walking speed elderly people prefer 
(Martin et al., 1992; Malatesta et al., 2003; Mian et al., 2006). The problem with 
understanding elderly gait is that age-related changes in physiology cannot be independently 
controlled in experiments with humans, making it difficult to reveal a causal relationship 
between walking performance and a particular change. 
This problem vanishes in simulation studies. In neuromechanical models of human gait, 
physiological changes can be independently controlled, and their effect on walking 
performance can be evaluated with computer simulations. So far, only a few such simulation 
studies have focused on age-related changes. For instance, it has been found in simulations 
that the ability to walk with the joint angles of young adults is fairly robust to weakening 
muscles, although it would increase muscle stress (muscle force relative to its force capacity) 
(van der Krogt et al., 2012), and that weak muscles with softer tendons do not alter the net 
mechanical efficiency of the lower limb muscles in elderly gait, although individual muscle 
efficiencies shift (Monaco and Micera, 2012). However, in these previous studies, the 
neuromechanical models were simulated to follow walking trajectories observed in young 
and elderly adults, leaving it open whether the predicted effects result from the applied 
physiological changes or the enforced walking trajectories. This ambiguity can be resolved 
with neuromechanical models that generate walking behaviour. 
 
Methods 
Here, we use a predictive neuromechanical model to investigate the physiological origins of 
both the higher metabolic cost and the slower speed in elderly walking. Specifically, we 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
modify a baseline model of young adult walking (Song and Geyer, 2015) (Fig. 2) to represent 
healthy elderly gait. The modifications mimic common age-related physiological changes 
including skeletal changes (  : lighter legs and heavier trunk (Pavol et al., 2002),   : reduced 
range of hip extension (Roach and Miles, 1991)), muscular changes (  : weaker and smaller 
muscles (Goodpaster et al., 2006; Delmonico et al., 2009),   : other muscle properties 
leading primarily to slower contraction (Thelen, 2003; Nilwik et al., 2013)), and neural 
changes (  : slower neural conductance speed (Rivner et al., 2001),   : higher sensory and 
motor noise (Goble et al., 2009) (Table 1). We then simulate walking at different speeds (0.8 
to 1.8 m s−1) with this model, and analyse which modifications trigger elderly-like walking 
with higher metabolic cost and why elderly prefer to walk slower. 
 
Baseline neuromechanical model 
We adapt a previously proposed neuromechanical walking model that can generate diverse 
3D human locomotion behaviours (Song and Geyer, 2015) and predict human responses 
during walking against a range of unexpected disturbances (Song and Geyer, 2017). The 
model represents the human body with a rigid body chain whose joints are actuated by Hill-
type muscles (Fig. 2). These muscle models combine an active, force-producing element with 
passive series and parallel elasticities similar to human muscle-tendon units. The active 
elements are stimulated by feedback control circuits that simulate neural control circuits, 
relating sensory input from the muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs (length and velocity 
of contractile elements, force of muscle-tendon units), from the vestibular system (trunk 
lean), and from mechanoreceptors underneath the feet (contact information as well as 
perceived leg loading) to the output of the alpha-motoneurons. The resulting muscle 
contraction forces act through moment arms to produce joint torques, which together with the 
gravitational force and the ground reaction forces that the legs experience, generate walking 
in a physics-based simulation of the human model. No human gait data is used in the 
simulation process, and the actual walking motion that emerges in the model depends solely 
on the values of its control parameters (such as the gain of a muscle’s stretch reflex) and of its 
mechanical parameters (such as segment mass, maximum muscle force, and contraction 
velocity).  
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
We use the 2D sagittal plane portion of this model and add more physiological details 
relevant to the study of elderly gait. Specifically, the length and mass of skeletal segments 
(Winter, 2009), the strength and mass of muscles (Miller, 2014), and the range of joint 
motions (Roach and Miles, 1991) are further tuned. We also use a more detailed muscle 
activation dynamics model (the relationship between muscle excitation and contraction) 
(Thelen, 2003), and add sensory and motor noise (van der Kooij and Peterka, 2011), where 
the parameter values are all determined based on human experimental data. 
Model modification on age-related physiological changes 
We modify the baseline model to represent healthy adults with an age of about 80 years. 
Pathological symptoms not observed in healthy elderlies, such as stooped posture (Hirose et 
al., 2004), are not considered. All modifications to the baseline model are presented in Table 
1, where the specific values of changes are either adopted from previous modelling studies or 
estimated from available human data. The modifications are categorized into six groups 
based on the component of the model they apply to (Fig. 2). In the skeletal layer, the body 
mass distribution changes due to loss of leg muscles and gain of body fat (  ) (Jensen and 
Fletcher, 1994; Pavol et al., 2002), and the range of hip extension reduces due to muscle 
contracture (  ) (Roach and Miles, 1991; Kerrigan et al., 1998). In the muscular layer, the 
muscles lose strength (Thelen, 2003; Monaco and Micera, 2012) and mass, with much larger 
loss in the strength (  ) (Goodpaster et al., 2006; Delmonico et al., 2013), and a number of 
muscle properties change, where the most prominent change is becoming slower (  ) 
(Thelen, 2003; Monaco and Micera, 2012; Lexell, 1995; Nilwik et al., 2013). Since not much 
is known about how the control changes in elderly walking, we do not change the neural 
control structure, but we apply neural changes of reduced neural conductance speed (  ) 
(Bouche et al., 1993; Rivner et al., 2001) and increased sensory and motor noise (  ) (Goble 
et al., 2009). All changes are applied together to represent elderly people, and each change 
are applied individually to the baseline young model for further analysis. 
 
Control parameter optimization 
For each model with different physiological changes, we optimize the control parameters to 
minimize the cost 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
   
 ∑ ∫   
   
 
 
 (         )
   
(1) 
where   is the time duration,    is muscle activation,      is the average walking speed, and 
     is the target walking speed. All of these values are calculated during the last six steady 
steps of the simulation. The first term, 
 
 ∑
∫
  
   
 
 
, represents muscle fatigue and has 
been commonly used in neuromechanical modelling studies of human locomotion (Thelen 
and Anderson, 2006; Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010; Miller et al., 2012) as an 
optimization cost (Appendix A - Optimization cost). For all models, we search for solutions 
at 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6 and 1.8 m s−1, which covers the range of slow and fast walking speeds 
of healthy people (Murray et al., 1984). 
We use covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) (Hansen, 2006) with 
the actual optimization cost constructed as multiple stages (Song and Geyer, 2015) that first 
search for steady and stable walking solutions with all joint angles within the range of 
motion, and then minimize Eq. (1). A single trial of CMA-ES is set to run for 400 generations 
with a population size of 16 and takes about one day on a modern desktop machine. To 
ensure convergence and to avoid bad local minima, we chain multiple CMA-ES trials by 
initializing a new run (with a new unbiased covariance matrix) with a previous solution until 
the solutions do not improve and by starting new trials with different initial parameters. We 
continue this optimization process until most of the monitored walking features of a model, 
such as   (Eq. 1), COT, step length, and trunk lean, show qualitatively smooth trends across 
all walking speeds. On average, the optimization process for one set of control parameters 
involved five CMA-ES trials. 
 
Results and Discussion 
The simulations show that the combined modifications produce gait consistent with elderly 
walking. Like young and elderly people (Kerrigan et al., 1998; Monaco et al., 2009; Schmitz 
et al., 2009), the young and elderly models walk with more or less similar time-trajectories of 
the joint angles and torques, the ground reaction forces, and the muscle activations. However, 
the elderly model has also adapted in ways common to elderly gait. It has more pelvic tilt 
with less hip extension throughout the gait cycle (Kerrigan et al., 1998; Monaco et al., 2009) 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
and a smaller ankle plantarflexion torque during stance (Kerrigan et al., 1998; Monaco et al., 
2009; Monaco and Micera, 2012) (Fig. 3). Most importantly, the metabolic cost has shifted as 
known from human experiments. It is, on average, 16% higher than in the young model 
across all walking speeds, and the walking speed that minimizes COT remains about the 
same in both models as observed in humans (compare Fig. 4a and Fig. 1). 
When the modifications are applied one by one, the simulations reveal the increase in 
COT is triggered mainly by the loss of muscle strength and mass (  ). Applying    to the 
young model results in a substantial increase in the average COT (16%), while applying any 
of the other modifications does not (< 5%) (Fig. 4b). Further analysis of the muscle 
metabolics model (     (       )    , where    is the muscle mass,      is the 
activation and maintenance heat,    is the shortening heat, and    is the mechanical work) 
points to two factors that mainly and about equally contribute to the COT increase (Appendix 
A - Metabolic energy calculations). The first factor is the decline in muscle quality. Aging 
muscles weaken more than they lose mass (Goodpaster et al., 2006; Delmonico et al., 2009) 
(Table 1-  ), which results in more energy consumed per amount of force produced due to 
the increase in activation and maintenance heat rate. Second, the size-principle of motor unit 
recruitment amplifies the energy consumption of weaker muscles. Motor unit recruitment 
progresses from slow-twitch muscle fibres at low activations to metabolically more expensive 
fast-twitch fibres at higher activations (Martin et al., 1992; Bhargava et al., 2004), which is 
captured in the activation and maintenance heat rate of the metabolics model and further 
amplifies the energetic cost of producing the same force. 
Our simulation results suggest training muscle strength and mass may be the only 
effective way to enhance metabolic economy in elderly walking. While it is known that 
physical training can reverse muscular changes and enhance walking performance in elderly 
people, the effects of different training regimes vary and it remains unclear which one is 
optimal (Lopopolo et al., 2006). Our results suggest that a training regime which focuses on 
restoring muscle strength and mass (  ) may be most effective, and that reversing other 
physiological changes matters less (  ,   ,   ) or not at all (  ,   ). 
Neither in human experiments nor in our computer simulations can the metabolic cost of 
transport explain the slower speed at which elderly prefer to walk, but we find evidence 
another criterion based on muscle fatigue can. Muscle fatigue is often studied in elderly with 
regard to balance control and fall risk (dos Santos et al., 2017). Its effect on the preferred 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
speed of walking is not well understood; however, fatigue of the tibialis anterior muscle has 
been shown to lower the speed at which humans prefer to transition from walking to running 
(Segers et al, 2007). We find that, when combined in a performance criterion similar to the 
COT, minimizing muscle fatigue suggests preferred walking speeds observed in young adults 
and elderly. Specifically, we define the fatigue of transport (FOT) as the fatigue accumulated 
by all muscles over the distance travelled, 
 
 ∑
∫
  
   
 
 
, where the squared muscle 
activations is a gauge of fatigue commonly used in neuromechanical models (Appendix A - 
Muscle fatigue calculations) (Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010). We then compute the 
FOT from our simulation data and find it is minimal at 1.49 m s−1 in the young model and at 
1.21 m s−1 in the elderly model (Fig. 4c). The two minima are consistent with the preferred 
walking speeds of young and elderly people (Himann et al., 1988; Lauretani et al., 2003), 
supporting the hypothesis that muscle fatigue could govern a person’s preference on speed. 
The result may also explain the observation that fatigued young and elderly people do not 
change walking speed by much (Helbostad et al., 2007; Granacher et al., 2010), as their gait 
seems already optimal in this regard. 
If muscle fatigue indeed governs the preferred speed, then the FOT calculations for the 
model variants with individual age-related modifications show that restoring walking speed is 
more difficult than restoring metabolic economy. Similarly to the increase in metabolic costs, 
a shift of the minimum FOT towards slower walking speed in the elderly model results from 
the loss of muscle strength and mass (  , −0.32 m s−1). Yet, in contrast to the results for 
metabolic costs, the shift also results from the redistribution of the segment masses (  , −0.31 
m s−1) and from the lower speed of muscle contraction (  , −0.18 m s−1) (Fig. 4d). These 
results suggest that increasing the preferred walking speed would require a training that 
addresses all three changes simultaneously. However, the changes are connected at least in 
part by the age-related atrophy of fast twitch fibres (Nilwik et al., 2013), which is associated 
with loss and slowdown of leg muscles and a related shift in mass distribution. A training that 
focuses on reversing this atrophy would thus seem most effective. 
As with any simulation study, ours is based on assumptions that may limit its predictive 
capabilities. First, our model simplifies the neuromuscular structure of human locomotor 
system. Although we have tried to include in this structure the parts that previous studies 
have suggested to influence elderly gait, any missing part may have an effect as well. For 
instance, we estimated metabolics of young and elderly muscles following the same 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
formulation (Bhargava et al., 2004), but the validity of this assumption has not been tested. 
Second, we rely on a hypothesized neural control circuitry and an optimization criterion to 
identify walking gaits in our model. Although neither has been validated in human 
experiments, the optimization criterion we use is commonly applied in many studies on 
human locomotion performance (Thelen and Anderson, 2006; Ackermann and van den 
Bogert, 2010; Miller et al., 2012), and we find no qualitative differences in model outcome 
with alternative criteria of muscle fatigue and metabolic energy (Appendix A – Optimization 
cost). The control circuitry of the model has at least been demonstrated to predict human leg 
kinematics, kinetics, and muscle activations in steady walking (Song and Geyer, 2015) and 
human responses to unexpected disturbances (Song and Geyer, 2017). An alternative to 
assuming a specific neural control circuitry would be to directly optimize the muscle 
stimulation patterns for obtaining walking gaits (Ackermann and van den Bogert 2010; Miller 
et al., 2012). However, this alternative approach implies the human controller has no 
underlying structural constraints. Moreover, when muscle stimulation patterns are directly 
optimized, it is difficult to include the effects of control-related changes, such as neural 
transmission delays (  ) and sensory and motor noise (  ). 
 
Conclusion 
We have investigated the physiological origins of the age-related decline in walking 
performance with a predictive neuromechanical model. In simulations of this model with 
physiological changes known to affect elderly people, we have found that their increased 
metabolic cost of walking is caused mainly by the loss of muscle strength and mass. In 
addition, we have found that the slower preferred walking speed of elderly people would 
emerge if humans adapt to muscle fatigue rather than energy economy, and that this 
adaptation occurs in response to several muscle-related changes in physiology. The results 
suggest that reversing these changes is the only effective way to enhance the performance of 
elderly walking. Physical training has been shown to achieve such a reversion, although it 
remains unclear precisely which training regimes work well (Lopopolo et al., 2006). A 
regime with a focus on restoring the fast-twitch muscle fibres (Nilwik et al., 2013; Pyka et al., 
1994) may be most effective. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Appendix A: Physiological criteria of gait 
Optimization cost 
Our human model is based on the model proposed in Song and Geyer (2015). In that work, 
we used the metabolic energy as the cost criterion for optimization. Here, instead, we 
switched to muscle fatigue (Eq. 1). We made this switch because the cost associated with 
muscle fatigue is computationally simpler, and still results in human-like kinematics, kinetics 
and muscle activations (Fig. 5). In fact, as in other studies on modelling human walking and 
running (Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010; Miller et al., 2012), we observed that the 
fatigue-optimal walking showed kinematics more similar to human gait; specifically, the knee 
flexion during early stance and ankle dorsiflexion in late stance became more similar. 
Given that the details of the gait data also depend on the simplified musculoskeletal 
system and the underlying control structure of the model, small differences in the resulting 
gait may not be enough to judge the plausibility of the corresponding costs. Nevertheless, 
other simulation studies consistently find fatigue-like costs result in more knee flexion during 
stance (Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010), although in some control models, this can 
lead to crouched gaits with too much knee flexion (Wang et al., 2012). 
 
Metabolic energy calculations 
The activation-to-metabolics relationship remains debated with competing evidence (Saugen 
and Vollestad, 1995; Hunter et al., 2001; Christie et al., 2014). Here we present the effect the 
activation-to-metabolics relationship on the COT-to-walking-speed relationship (Fig. 6). In 
our main study, we have used the Bhargava’s muscle metabolics model, which has a convex 
activation-to-metabolics relationship based on the size-principle of motor unit recruitment 
(Fig. 6a). On the other hand, the Umberger’s model has a concave relationship (Fig. 6f), 
while in more recent studies (Uchida et al., 2016; Jackson et al., 2017) this model has been 
adapted to have the convex relationship (similar to Fig. 6b). We have adapted the original 
Bhargava’s and Umberger’s models to have convex, linear or concave relationships and 
found that the COT calculation is much affected by the activation-to-metabolics relationship 
and that the convex relationship results in COT-to-speed relationships closest to those 
observed in young and elderly people. Moreover, the increase in COT of the elderly model 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
without the size-principle decreases to about half (compare Fig. 6a and c), indicating that 
both the decline in muscle quality and the size-principle contribute about equally to the 16% 
COT increase of the elderly model. 
 
Muscle fatigue calculations 
We have used the integration of squared muscle activation (∑
∫
  
   
 
 
) as an estimate for 
muscle fatigue. While this estimate is often used in neuromechanical studies of human 
locomotion (Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010; Miller et al., 2012), exponents of 1.5 to 
5.0 of either muscle activations or normalized muscle force ( 
̅
  
 
 
 
   ) have also been 
considered (Crowninshield and Brand, 1981; Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010; Miller et 
al., 2012), while metabolic energy is depends on muscle activation more linearly (Ackermann 
and van den Bogert, 2010; Umberger, 2010) (Fig. 7a). We have found that the fatigue-like 
measures of exponents higher than one of muscle activation and force suggest slower walking 
speeds for elderly people (Fig. 7c-f), while the energy-like measure does not (Fig. 7a). This 
overall trend supports our conclusion that minimizing for FOT, but not COT, can explain 
slower walking speeds in elderly people. 
 
Appendix B: Contributions of individual muscles in COT and 
FOT. 
Three muscles show meaningful differences (   ) in the contributions to the total 
metabolic COT between the elderly model and the young model (Fig. 8a). The elderly model 
uses more actuation of the hip flexors (HFL) and less actuation of the ankle extensors (GAS: 
gastrocnemius; SOL; soleus), which is in line with what is observed in elderly people (Judge 
et al., 1996; Monaco et al., 2009; Schmitz et al., 2009; Buddhadev and Martin, 2016). 
Although the change in muscle properties (  ) does not have much effect on the total COT, 
it is the main contributor to the change in muscle coordination (Fig. 8b), suggesting that the 
slower muscles of elderly people are no more suitable for performing fast ankle push off, and 
thus, they use more hip flexors to propel the limbs forward. For the contributions to the total 
muscle FOT, three hip muscles (HFL; GLU: glutei; HAM: hamstring) show meaningful 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
changes (   ) in the elderly model (Fig. 8c). Mainly the loss of muscle strength and mass 
(  ) contributes to these changes (Fig. 8d). 
 
References 
Ackermann, M. and van den Bogert, A. J. (2010). Optimality principles for model-based 
prediction of human gait. J Biomech, 43(6):1055–1060. 
Asai, Y., Tasaka, Y., Nomura, K., Nomura, T., Casadio, M., and Morasso, P. (2009). A 
model of postural control in quiet standing: Robust compensation of delay-induced instability 
using intermittent activation of feedback control. PLoS ONE, 4(7). 
Bhargava, L. J., Pandy, M. G., and Anderson, F. C. (2004). A phenomenological model for 
estimating metabolic energy consumption in muscle contraction. J Biomech, 37(1):81–88. 
Bouche, P., Cattelin, F., Saint-Jean, O., L´eger, J. M., Queslati, S., Guez, D., Moulonguet, A., 
Brault, Y., Aquino, J. P., and Simunek, P. (1993). Clinical and electrophysiological study of 
the peripheral nervous system in the elderly. J Neurol, 240(5):263–268. 
Buddhadev, H. H. and Martin, P. E. (2016). Effects of age and physical activity status on 
redistribution of joint work during walking. Gait Posture, 50:131–136. 
Christie, A. D., Tonson, A., Larsen, R. G., DeBlois, J. P., and Kent, J. A. (2014). Human 
skeletal muscle metabolic economy in vivo: effects of contraction intensity, age, and mobility 
impairment. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 307(9):R1124–35. 
Crowninshield, R. D. and Brand, R. A. (1981). A physiologically based criterion of muscle 
force prediction in locomotion. J Biomech, 14(11):793–801. 
Delmonico, M. J., Harris, T. B., Visser, M., Park, S.W., Conroy, M. B., Velasquez-Mieyer P., 
Boudreau, R., Manini, T. M., Nevitt, M., Newman, A. B., and Goodpaster, B. H. (2009). 
Longitudinal study of muscle strength, quality, and adipose tissue infiltration. Am J Clin 
Nutr, 90(6):1579–1585. 
DeVita, P. and Hortobagyi, T. (2000). Age causes a redistribution of joint torques and powers 
during gait. J Appl Physiol, 88(5):1804–1811. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
dos Santos, P. C. R., Orcioli-Silva, D., Simieli, L., Pereira, V. I. A., and Barbieri, F. A. 
(2017). The influence of muscle fatigue on walking: The role of aging and Parkinson’s 
disease. In Locomotion and Posture in Older Adults, pages 143–159. Springer International 
Publishing, Cham. 
Goble, D. J., Coxon, J. P., Wenderoth, N., Van Impe, A., and Swinnen, S. P. (2009). 
Proprioceptive sensibility in the elderly: Degeneration, functional consequences and plastic-
adaptive processes. Neurosci Biobehav Rev, 33(3):271–278. 
Goodpaster, B. H., Park, S. W., Harris, T. B., Kritchevsky, S. B., Nevitt, M., Schwartz, A. V., 
Simonsick, E. M., Tylavsky, F. a., Visser, M., Newman, A. B., and Abc, H. (2006). The loss 
of skeletal muscle strength, mass, and quality in older adults: the health, aging and body 
composition study. J Gerontol, 61(10):1059–64. 
Hansen, N. (2006). The CMA evolution strategy: a comparing review. In Towards a new 
evolutionary computation, volume 192, pages 75-102. Springer Science & Business Media. 
Helbostad, J. L., Leirfall, S., Moe-Nilssen, R., and Sletvold, O. (2007). Physical fatigue 
affects gait characteristics in older persons. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, 62(9):1010–5. 
Himann, J. E., Cunningham, D. A., Rechnitzer, P. A., and Peterson, D. H. (1988). Age-
related changes in speed of walking. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 
20(2):161–166. 
Hirose, D., Ishida, K., Nagano, Y., Takahashi, T., and Yamamoto, H. (2004). Posture of the 
trunk in the sagittal plane is associated with gait in community-dwelling elderly population. 
Clinical Biomechanics, 19(1):57–63. 
Hortobagyi, T., Finch, A., Solnik, S., Rider, P., and De Vita, P. (2011). Association between 
muscle activation and metabolic cost of walking in young and old adults. J Gerontol A Biol 
Sci Med Sci, 66 A(5):541–547. 
Hunter, G. R., Newcomer, B. R., Larson-Meyer, D. E., Bamman, M. M., and Weinsier, R. L. 
(2001). Muscle metabolic economy is inversely related to exercise intensity and type-II 
myofiber distribution. Muscle Nerve, 24(May):654–661. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Jackson, R.W., Dembia, C. L., Delp, S. L., and Collins, S. H. (2017). Muscle-tendon 
mechanics explain unexpected effects of exoskeleton assistance on metabolic rate during 
walking. J Exp Biol, (March):jeb.150011. 
Jensen, R. K. and Fletcher, P. (1994). Distribution of mass to the segments of elderly males 
and females. J Biomech, 27(1):89–96. 
Judge, J. O., Davis, R. B., and Ounpuu, S. (1996). Step length reductions in advanced age: 
the role of ankle and hip kinetics. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, 51(6):M303–M312. 
Kerrigan, D., Todd, M., Croce, U., and al, E. (1998). Biomechanical gait alterations 
independent on speed in the healthy elderly: Evidence for specific limiting Impairments. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 79(March):317–322. 
Kim, W. S. and Kim, E. Y. (2014). Comparing self-selected speed walking of the elderly with 
self-selected slow, moderate, and fast speed walking of young adults. Ann Rehabil Med, 
38(1):101–108. 
Lauretani, F., Russo, C. R., Bandinelli, S., Bartali, B., Cavazzini, C., Di Iorio, A., Corsi, A. 
M., Rantanen, T., Guralnik, J. M., and Ferrucci, L. (2003). Age-associated changes in skeletal 
muscles and their effect on mobility: an operational diagnosis of sarcopenia. J Appl Physiol, 
95(5):1851–60. 
Lexell, J. (1995). Human aging, muscle mass, and fiber type composition. J Gerontol A Biol 
Sci Med Sci, 50A(Special Issue):11–16. 
Lopopolo, R., Greco, M., Sullivan, D., and Craik, R. (2006). Effect of therapeutic exercise on 
gait speed in community-dwelling elderly people: a meta-analysis. Physical Therapy, 86(4). 
Malatesta, D., Simar, D., Dauvillier, Y., Candau, R., Borrani, F., Prefaut, C., Caillaud, C., 
Dauvilliers, Y., Candau, R., Borrani, F., Pr´efaut, C., and Caillaud, C. (2003). Energy cost of 
walking and gait instability in healthy 65- and 80-year-olds. J Appl Physiol, 95(6):2248–
2256. 
Martin, P. E., Rothstein, D. E., and Larish, D. D. (1992). Effects of age and physical activity 
status on the speed-aerobic demand relationship of walking. J Appl Physiol, 73(1):200–206. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Mian, O. S., Thom, J. M., Ardigo, L. P., Narici, M. V., and Minetti, A. E. (2006). Metabolic 
cost, mechanical work, and efficiency during walking in young and older men. Acta 
Physiologica, 186(2):127–139. 
Miller, R. H. (2014). A comparison of muscle energy models for simulating human walking 
in three dimensions. J Biomech, 47(6):1373–1381. 
Miller, R. H., Umberger, B. R., Hamill, J., and Caldwell, G. E. (2012). Evaluation of the 
minimum energy hypothesis and other potential optimality criteria for human running. Proc R 
Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 279(1733):1498–505. 
Monaco, V. and Micera, S. (2012). Age-related neuromuscular adaptation does not affect the 
mechanical efficiency of lower limbs during walking. Gait Posture, 36(3):350–355. 
Monaco, V., Rinaldi, L. A., Macr`ı, G., and Micera, S. (2009). During walking elders 
increase efforts at proximal joints and keep low kinetics at the ankle. Clin Biomech, 
24(6):493–498. 
Murray, MP and Mollinger, LA and Gardner, GM and Sepic, S. (1984). Kinematic and EMG 
patterns during slow, free, and fast walking. J Orthop Res, 2(3):272–280. 
Nilwik, R., Snijders, T., Leenders, M., Groen, B. B. L., van Kranenburg, J., Verdijk, L. B., 
and Van Loon, L. J. C. (2013). The decline in skeletal muscle mass with aging is mainly 
attributed to a reduction in type II muscle fiber size. Exp Gerontol, 48(5):492–498. 
Ortega, J. D., Fehlman, L. A., and Farley, C. T. (2008). Effects of aging and arm swing on the 
metabolic cost of stability in human walking. Journal of Biomechanics, 41(16):3303–3308. 
Pavol, M. J., Owings, T. M., and Grabiner, M. D. (2002). Body segment inertial parameter 
estimation for the general population of older adults. J Biomech, 35(5):707–712. 
Peterson, D. S. and Martin, P. E. (2010). Effects of age and walking speed on coactivation 
and cost of walking in healthy adults. Gait Posture, 31(3):355–359. 
Pyka, G., Lindenberger, E., Charette, S., and Marcus, R. (1994). Muscle strength and fiber 
adaptations to a year-long resistance training program in elderly men and women. J Gerontol, 
49(1):M22–M27. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Rivner, M. H., Swift, T. R., and Malik, K. (2001). Influence of age and height on nerve 
conduction. Muscle Nerve, 24(9):1134–1141. 
Roach, K. E. and Miles, T. P. (1991). Normal hip and knee active range of motion: the 
relationship to age. Physical therapy, 71(9):656–65. 
Saugen, E. and Vøllestad, N. K. (1995). Nonlinear relationship between heat production and 
force during voluntary contractions in humans. J Appl Physiol, 79(6):2043–9. 
Schmitz, A., Silder, A., Heiderscheit, B., Mahoney, J., and Thelen, D. G. (2009). Differences 
in lower-extremity muscular activation during walking between healthy older and young 
adults. J Electromyogr Kinesiol, 19(6):1085–1091. 
Segers, V., Lenoir, M., Aerts, P., and De Clercq, D. (2007). Influence of M. tibialis anterior 
fatigue on the walk-to-run and run-to-walk transition in non-steady state locomotion. Gait 
Posture, 25(4):639–647. 
Song, S. and Geyer, H. (2015). A neural circuitry that emphasizes spinal feedback generates 
diverse behaviours of human locomotion. J Physiol, 593:3493–3511. 
Song, S. and Geyer, H. (2017). Evaluation of a neuromechanical walking control model using 
disturbance experiments. Front Comput Neurosci, 11(March):15. 
Suzuki, Y., Nomura, T., Casadio, M., and Morasso, P. (2012). Intermittent control with ankle, 
hip, and mixed strategies during quiet standing: A theoretical proposal based on a double 
inverted pendulum model. J Theor Biol, 310:55–79. 
Thelen, D. G. (2003). Adjustment of muscle mechanics model parameters to simulate 
dynamic contractions in older adults. J Biomech Eng, 125(1):70–77. 
Thelen, D. G. and Anderson, F. C. (2006). Using computed muscle control to generate 
forward dynamic simulations of human walking from experimental data. J Biomech, 
39(6):1107–1115. 
Uchida, T. K., Hicks, J. L., Dembia, C. L., and Delp, S. L. (2016). Stretching your energetic 
budget: How tendon compliance affects the metabolic cost of running. PLoS ONE, 11(3):1–
19. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Umberger, B. R. (2010). Stance and swing phase costs in human walking. J Royal Soc 
Interface, 7(50):1329–40. 
Van Der Kooij, H. and Peterka, R. J. (2011). Non-linear stimulus-response behavior of the 
human stance control system is predicted by optimization of a system with sensory and motor 
noise. J Comput Neurosci, 30(3):759–778. 
van der Krogt, M. M., Delp, S. L., and Schwartz, M. H. (2012). How robust is human gait to 
muscle weakness? Gait Posture, 36(1):113–119. 
Winter, D. A. (2009). Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement, volume 2nd. 
 
Additional Information 
Competing interset 
None declared. 
Author contributions 
Both authors designed the research and drafted the article. S.S. conducted the simulation 
studies. Both authors approved the final version of the manuscript, agreed to be accountable 
for all aspects of the work, and qualify for authorship. All those who qualify for authorship 
are listed. 
 
Funding 
This work is supported in part by the Richard King Mellon Foundation Presidential 
Fellowship in the Life Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank H. van der Kooij and Y. Suzuki for discussions and clarifications on modelling 
noise in the human nervous system and S. Collins, B. Umberger, and G. Sawicki for 
discussions on muscle physiology. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure captions 
Figure 1. Metabolic cost of transport in young and elderly people (measured by oxygen 
consumption)  
The plot is reproduced from data reported in Martin et al. (1992). 
 
Figure 2. Predictive neuromechanical model of human locomotion. 
The model consists of skeletal, muscular and neural layers. The muscle lengths,   , are 
defined by the joint angles of the skeletal system,   , and the muscle forces,   , are 
converted to joint torques,   , which actuate the skeletal system interacting with the ground. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
The muscles are activated based on the stimulation signals from the neural controller, which 
consists primarily of proprioceptive spinal reflexes. The sensory and motor noises,    and   , 
are added in our simulation based on studies in human standing posture. We use a noise 
model called S1M1 proposed in van der Kooij and Peterka (2011). We adapt the model by 
using white Gaussian noise instead of pink noise in the original model, as white noise is 
simpler to implement in our variable time-step simulations and as other studies show human-
like standing posture, which has a pink power spectral density, can be reproduced with white 
noise (Asai et al., 2009; Suzuki et al., 2012). (    ,       ,        and      : masses of 
the HAT, thigh, shank and foot segments;     : hip extension angle; CE: contractile element; 
 
  ,     and    : force, length and velocity of CE; PE: parallel elasticity; SE: series elasticity; 
 
  : force of PE;   : muscle activation;  
   : maximum isometric force of CE;  
 (   ): 
force-length relationship of CE;  
 (   ): force-velocity relationship of CE;  : eccentric force 
enhancement,     : maximum contraction speed;        : reference strain of parallel 
elasticity; ECC: excitation-contraction coupling time constants;      and      : ECC time 
constants; and   : neural transmission time delay) 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Figure 3. Kinematics, dynamics and muscle activations of young and elderly models. 
The plots show gait data of the young and elderly models walking at 1.2 m s-1. The 
differences between the young and elderly models that are consistently observed across 
walking speeds (at least for 1.0-1.6 m s−1) are marked with shaded ovals. The ovals with 
dashed border mark the differences that agree with reported human data, the ones with dotted 
border mark the ones that oppose the reported human data, and the ones with no border do 
not have enough human data to compare with. We refer to human data that allow 
comparisons between young and elderly walking at similar speeds (Kerrigan et al., 1998; 
Monaco et al., 2009; Kim and Kim 2014; DeVita and Hortobagyi 2000; Monaco and Micera 
2012; Schmitz et al., 2009). (BW: body weight; LL: leg length) 
 
Figure 4. Metabolic COT and muscle FOT of walking in simulation with age-related 
physiological changes. 
a, COT for slow to fast walking of the young (grey) and elderly (black) models (circle: 
simulation data; solid line: least-squares fitted quadratic polynomial; vertical dotted line: 
walking speed at the minimum of the fitted curve; horizontal dotted line: mean value of 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
simulation data with value shown to the right). b, COT resolved by individual age-related 
physiological changes. (   and    are omitted, as they had little effect. Applying the control 
parameters optimized for the young model for either    or    generates practically the same 
behaviour and, thus, the same COT and FOT.) c and d, FOT equivalent to panels a and b. 
(FTG: fatigue accumulated by all muscles over the distance travelled.) The contribution of 
individual muscles to the change in COT and FOT are discussed in Appendix B. 
 
Figure 5. Kinematics, dynamics and muscle activations when optimized for different 
costs. 
The plots show gait data of young adults and the baseline young model walking at 1.2 m s-1 
while minimizing either muscle fatigue (Eq. 1) or metabolic energy (Song and Geyer, 2015). 
The metabolic energy is calculated using the model proposed in Umberger (2010). 
Optimizing with the energy model proposed in Bhargava et al. (2004) results in a gait that is 
somewhat between those optimized with Umberger’s model and with muscle fatigue (not 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
shown), which is reasonable due to the convex activation-to-cost relationship in the fatigue 
calculations (Appendix A - Metabolic energy calculations). 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Metabolic COT calculations with different models. 
COT-speed relationships are shown, where the COTs are calculated differently based on 
Bhargava’s (Bhargava et al., 2004) and Umberger’s (Umberger, 2010) muscle metabolics 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
models. The original models are adapted to have convex, linear or concave activation-to-
metabolics relationships. 
 
Figure 7. Muscle FOT calculations with different models. 
FOT-speed relationships are shown, where the FOTs are calculated as exponents of either 
muscle activation or normalized muscle force. Exponents of one (a and b), which are actually 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
closer to a measure of metabolic energy than muscle fatigue (Ackermann and van den Bogert, 
2010) are shown for comparison. 
 
Figure 8. Metabolic COT and muscle FOT of individual muscles during walking with 
age-related physiological properties. 
a and b, COT of individual muscles. c and d, FOT of individual muscles. Only the muscles 
that show differences of more than 5% of the total COT or FOT are shown. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Skeletal, muscular and neural changes in the elderly model. 
Physiological property 
Modification from young model 
  : body mass distribution (Pavol et al., 2002) 
    : -10%;                    
  : range of motion (Roach and Miles, 2001) 
   (    ): -20% 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
  :muscle strength and mass (Goodpaster et al., 
2006; Delmonico et al., 2009) 
 
   : -30%;   : -10% 
  : muscle properties (Thelen, 2003; Nilwik et 
al., 2013) 
    : -20%;  : +30%;        : -15%; 
     : +20%;    : -10% 
  : neural conductance speed (Rivner et al., 
2001) 
  : +15% 
  : sensing and motor noise (Goble et al., 2009)      : +100% 
      : total body mass;                         ;   : muscle mass;    : 
proportion of fast-twitch muscle fibres; other parameters defined in Fig. 2 
 
