 NEUROSCIENCE
Patterns of coordinated cortical remodeling during
adolescence and their associations with functional
specialization and evolutionary expansion
Aristeidis Sotirasa,b,1, Jon B. Toledoa,c,d, Raquel E. Gure, Ruben C. Gure, Theodore D. Satterthwaitea,e,2,
and Christos Davatzikosa,b,2
aCenter for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; bDepartment of
Radiology, Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; cDepartment of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; dDepartment of Neurology, Houston
Methodist Neurological Institute, Houston, TX 77030; and eDepartment of Psychiatry, Neuropsychiatry Section and the Brain Behavior Laboratory, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
Edited by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, and approved February 3, 2017 (received for review December 30, 2016)
During adolescence, the human cortex undergoes substantial
remodeling to support a rapid expansion of behavioral reper-
toire. Accurately quantifying these changes is a prerequisite for
understanding normal brain development, as well as the neu-
ropsychiatric disorders that emerge in this vulnerable period. Past
accounts have demonstrated substantial regional heterogeneity
in patterns of brain development, but frequently have been lim-
ited by small samples and analytics that do not evaluate complex
multivariate imaging patterns. Capitalizing on recent advances
in multivariate analysis methods, we used nonnegative matrix
factorization (NMF) to uncover coordinated patterns of cortical
development in a sample of 934 youths ages 8–20, who com-
pleted structural neuroimaging as part of the Philadelphia Neu-
rodevelopmental Cohort. Patterns of structural covariance (PSCs)
derived by NMF were highly reproducible over a range of reso-
lutions, and differed markedly from common gyral-based struc-
tural atlases. Moreover, PSCs were largely symmetric and showed
correspondence to specific large-scale functional networks. The
level of correspondence was ordered according to their functional
role and position in the evolutionary hierarchy, being high in
lower-order visual and somatomotor networks and diminishing in
higher-order association cortex. Furthermore, PSCs showed diver-
gent developmental associations, with PSCs in higher-order asso-
ciation cortex networks showing greater changes with age than
primary somatomotor and visual networks. Critically, such devel-
opmental changes within PSCs were significantly associated with
the degree of evolutionary cortical expansion. Together, our find-
ings delineate a set of structural brain networks that undergo
coordinated cortical thinning during adolescence, which is in part
governed by evolutionary novelty and functional specialization.
MRI | cortical thickness | development | nonnegative matrix factorization |
cortical organization
T
he human brain undergoes a protracted course of devel-
opment throughout adolescence and young adulthood (1),
allowing the emergence of cognitive ability and diversification
of the behavioral repertoire. However, such plastic change may
also confer vulnerability to neuropsychiatric illnesses, which fre-
quently emerge during this critical period. Thus, understanding
normal patterns of brain development is necessary for accounts of
both healthy maturation and psychopathology. Substantial prior
work using structural MRI has documented an early increase in
gray matter (2), followed by spatially heterogeneous cortical thin-
ning (3–8). Previous data also suggest that the developmental
sequencing of cortical thinning may carry functional significance
rooted in evolutionary hierarchy, with lower-order somatomotor
cortex maturing before higher-order association areas (4, 9).
The brain is increasingly modeled as a highly networked sys-
tem, but most prior studies of structural brain maturation have
considered the cortex as a set of independent regions using
mass-univariate analyses. Prior work has examined developmen-
tal change within selected regions (1, 3, 4, 8), across gyri using
coarse anatomic atlases (6–8, 10), or with higher-resolution vox-
elwise analysis (4, 5). However, few efforts have modeled the
complete multivariate patterns of structural maturation, which
could reveal coordinated development of structural brain net-
works. Studies have typically used seed-based correlation anal-
yses (11), which are limited to specific locations defined a
priori, or have used straightforward clustering techniques (12)
that prioritize the mutual exclusion of features, thus not allowing
for participation of cortex in multiple networks driven by concur-
rent processes. Moreover, the degree to which developing struc-
tural networks align with large-scale functional networks remains
sparsely investigated, with most prior accounts finding little sim-
ilarity between the two (12). Finally, despite frequent discus-
sion of its relevance, previous studies have not attempted to
Significance
During adolescence, the human cortex is morphed under the
influence of regionally heterogeneous and heterochronous
processes. Accurately mapping these processes and quantify-
ing their effect is essential for understanding brain develop-
ment, both in order and disorder. Currently, our understand-
ing remains fundamentally “localizational” in nature, while
often being limited by small samples. Here, we capitalize
on a large cohort of youths and apply advanced multivari-
ate analysis techniques to capture the coordinated growth
of structural brain networks during adolescence. Our results
delineate a representation of cortical organization that differs
markedly from typical anatomical atlases. This representation
comprises structural networks that relate closely to functional
brain networks, while exhibiting differential developmen-
tal effects that are consistent with an evolutionary view of
development.
Author contributions: A.S., T.D.S., and C.D. designed research; A.S. performed research;
J.B.T., R.E.G., and R.C.G. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; A.S., T.D.S., and C.D.
analyzed data; and A.S., J.B.T., R.E.G., R.C.G., T.D.S., and C.D. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the
Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP), www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap (acces-
sion no. phs000607.v1.p1), and in the GitHub repository at https://github.com/asotiras/
stable projects/tree/master/brain parcellation/Sotiras2017 PNC CT NMF.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: aristeidis.sotiras@uphs.upenn.
edu.
2T.D.S. and C.D. contributed equally to this work.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1620928114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620928114
PNAS
|
March 28, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 13
|
3527–3532
 quantitatively relate developmental changes within structural
brain networks to evolutionary cortical expansion (9).
We tested the hypothesis that the cortex matures through the
development of spatially heterogeneous, yet regionally coordi-
nated, structural networks. We predicted that structural net-
works would align with known functional networks and that
structural networks would show differential patterns of develop-
mental change based on their evolutionary novelty. To address
this hypothesis, we capitalized on a large sample of youth of the
Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental Cohort (PNC) (13) and lever-
aged advances in unsupervised multivariate analysis. Specifically,
we delineated structural networks using nonnegative matrix fac-
torization (NMF), which has been highly successful in analyz-
ing diverse types of complex data (14, 15), but has only recently
been adapted for use in high-dimensional neuroimaging data
(16). NMF allows structural brain networks to be described in
a hypothesis-free, data-driven way by identifying complex multi-
variate patterns of covariation in the data. In contrast to alter-
native techniques, such as principal components analysis and
independent components analysis, which yield widely distributed
components with both positive and negative weights that are
often difficult to interpret, NMF produces a sparse, parts-based
representation of the data.
Using this approach, we derived a set of neurobiologi-
cally meaningful patterns of structural covariance (PSCs). As
described below, these structural networks are highly repro-
ducible and diverge substantially from traditional gyral-based
atlases. They show a correspondence with functional brain net-
works that is inversely related to functional complexity and
demonstrate differential, sex-specific developmental changes
during adolescence. Finally, we demonstrate that developmental
effects within structural networks are governed in part by each
network’s position in the evolutionary hierarchy.
Results
We studied a sample of 934 healthy participants aged 8–20 y old,
who were imaged as part of the PNC (13). The structural data
were processed by using the FreeSurfer software suite (17) to
generate cortical-thickness maps. Cortical-thickness maps were
analyzed by using NMF (16) to delineate coherent PSCs during
development.
NMF Identifies Structural Networks That Are Highly Reproducible.
Split-half reproducibility analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S1) and
reconstruction error analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S2) were used
to examine network resolutions ranging from 2 to 60 PSCs. The
reproducibility analysis demonstrated that stability was not uni-
form; as expected, reproducibly declined as network resolution
increased. However, clear peaks of reproducibility occurred for
the 2-, 7-, and 18-PSC solutions (Fig. 1), which were explored fur-
ther. Across split-half folds, identified networks were often qual-
itatively impossible to distinguish (Fig. 1 and SI Appendix, Fig.
S3), emphasizing the robustness of the networks identified by
the decomposition. Despite this method being completely unsu-
pervised and data-driven, nearly all PSCs were highly symmet-
ric bilaterally, regardless of the resolution of the decomposition.
The 2-PSC solution identified an anterior–posterior division of
the cortex (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). This division followed the cen-
tral sulcus closely, separating frontal, temporal, and inferior pari-
etal cortices (anterior PSC) from occipital and superior parietal
cortices (posterior PSC). In the 7-PSC solution (SI Appendix, Fig.
S5), anterior cortex was subdivided into anterior and middle tem-
poral lobe. Notably, one PSC was composed of cortex that reca-
pitulates the large-scale functional network known as the fron-
toparietal control network (FPN; PSC 5 in SI Appendix, Fig. S5)
(18, 19). When these networks were further divided as part of
the 18-PSC solution (Fig. 2 and SI Appendix, Figs. S6 and S7),
reproducibility remained high, while better reconstruction was
Fig. 1.
Reproducibility of the decomposition algorithm is plotted as a func-
tion of the estimated patterns for the split-half analysis. The decomposition
is less stable with increasing number of estimated PSCs, which is expected
because the complexity of the problem increases, while the size of the pat-
terns and the modeled effect decreases. The local maxima (marked by color-
filled circles) indicate the number of patterns that can be stably estimated
(i.e., 2, 7, and 18 patterns). Indicative views of the estimated patterns across
splits are also shown (for the 18-PSC solution, see also SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
achieved. As noted above, even at the relatively higher resolution
provided by 18 PSCs, most networks were remarkably symmetric.
Two notable exceptions were language-related PSCs that closely
approximated Wernicke’s (PSC 7) and Broca’s (PSC 18) area,
respectively. Moving forward, we focus on the 18-PSC solution.
PSCs Correspond to Known Functional Networks and Are Function-
ally Coherent. Many of the PSCs appeared to demonstrate a
notable correspondence to known large-scale functional net-
works. To explicitly test the relationship between PSCs and
functional networks, we compared the PSCs to the widely used
7-network functional parcellation of Yeo et al. (18) (SI Appendix,
Fig. S8; for convergent results using the 17-network parcella-
tion of Yeo et al., see SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Correspondence
between functional and structural networks was assessed by using
the inner product of their spatial distribution (SI Appendix, Fig.
S10, Upper), with the significance determined by using permuta-
tion testing (SI Appendix, Fig. S10, Lower). The correspondence
between PSCs and known functional systems was prominent in
lower-order functional networks (Fig. 3; also see SI Appendix,
Fig. S10) and diminished according to an evolutionary hierarchy
of cortical expansion and cognitive complexity. Most dramati-
cally, much of the visual functional network was captured by a
single structural network (PSC 4; also see SI Appendix, Fig. S11).
In the 7-network parcellation provided by Yeo et al., primary
motor, somatosensory, and auditory cortices are represented as
a single functional network. These three separate functional sys-
tems are represented by distinct PSCs, with separate bilater-
ally symmetric patterns being found for each element (motor,
PSC 8; somatosensory, PSC 11; and auditory, PSC 7; also see SI
Appendix, Fig. S12). Similarly, the third PSC comprised almost
entirely cortex belonging to the limbic functional network (also
see SI Appendix, Fig. S13).
Although not as dramatic as in lower-order brain regions, sev-
eral PSCs displayed a strong correspondence to the dorsal and
ventral attention systems. Superior parietal cortex of the dorsal
attention system overlapped mainly with PSC 6 (SI Appendix, Fig.
S14). Bilateral insular cortex was encompassed entirely by PSC
3528
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620928114
Sotiras et al.
 NEUROSCIENCE
A
B
Fig. 2.
A grid placement of the 18-PSC solution on the lateral (A) and medial (B) aspect of the left cortical hemisphere (for the right cortical hemisphere,
see SI Appendix, Fig. S7). The location of each PSC on the gray brain map represents the location each component best encodes. Warmer colors correspond
to higher values. In describing the estimated PSCs, we use conventional anatomical labels, but these only approximate the observed patterns: 1, prefrontal
cortex (PFC); 2, inferior lateral parietal cortex; 3, entorhinal cortex and medial temporal pole; 4, occipital cortex; 5, superior frontal cortex; 6, superior parietal
cortex; 7, perisylvian region; 8, primary motor cortex; 9, cingulate; 10, inferior and anterior middle temporal lobe; 11, primary somatosensory cortex; 12,
lingual gyrus; 13, dorsolateral frontal cortex; 14, left posterior middle and superior temporal lobe; 15, insula; 16, precuneus; 17, inferior frontal cortex; and
18, pars opercularis and triangularis predominantly present in the right hemisphere (not shown here; SI Appendix, Fig. S7).
15 and showed significant overlap with that element of the ven-
tral attention (cingulo-opercular) system (SI Appendix, Fig. S15).
The FPN and the default mode network (DMN) are generally
considered to subserve the most complex cognitive functions, and
they have the highest degree of areal expansion in humans com-
pared with macaques. In sharp contrast to lower-order systems,
where there was strong correspondence between PSCs and func-
tional networks, we did not observe significant overlap between
these two large-scale functional networks (SI Appendix, Fig. S10).
Instead, these networks seemed decomposed into multiple PSCs
that sometimes had substantial overlap across networks (e.g.,
frontopolar cortex in PSC 1 and lateral PFC in PSC 13). However,
several PSCs had relatively specific loading onto the DMN, but
not the FPN (PSCs 10 and 14). Lastly, although components in
the 18-PSC solution did not comprise long-range relations (apart
from interhemispheric ones), components of the 2- and 7-PSC
solutions did. The anterior–posterior division (2-PSC solution)
bore certain similarities to the two-system (intrinsic–extrinsic)
solution reported by Golland et al. (20). Similar to the intrin-
sic functional network, our anterior network grouped together
frontal, inferior parietal, and inferior temporal cortices, whereas,
similar to the extrinsic functional network, our posterior network
comprised mainly auditory, visual, and somatosensory cortices.
Furthermore, one component in the 7-PSC solution did show a
striking correspondence to the FPN (SI Appendix, Fig. S5).
The above analyses demonstrate correspondence between spe-
cific lower-order PSCs and known large-scale functional net-
works. To further study the functional relevance of structural
covariance, we investigated the functional coherence of struc-
tural PSCs in a subsample of 524 participants, who also com-
pleted resting-state functional connectivity (rsfc-MRI) imaging
(SI Appendix, Fig. S16). The appropriateness of the structurally
derived functional parcellation was evaluated by using a qual-
ity index compared with a null distribution from spatial per-
mutations that preserved local autocorrelation. This procedure
established that structurally derived PSCs demonstrated signifi-
cant functional coherence (FPQI = 9.84, p = 0.006; see also SI
Appendix, Fig. S17). When each PSC was evaluated individually,
visual (PSC 4, p = 0.005) and motor (PSC 11, p = 0.017) had
elevated intraparcel functional coherence, providing convergent
evidence for the strong correspondence between structure and
lower-order functional networks.
PSCs Display Differential Developmental Effects. The data-driven
NMF approach identified patterns of covariance in this large
developmental sample, but did not include information regard-
ing participant age or sex. Accordingly, we next investigated
whether males and females exhibited developmental differences
(SI Appendix, Table S1), and whether developmental patterns
varied across the PSCs using stepwise polynomial regression (SI
Appendix, Table S2); correlations were also performed to esti-
mate effect sizes (SI Appendix, Table S3 and Fig. S18). This
procedure identified significant sex and sex-by-age interaction
effects in frontal cortex (PSCs 5, 13, and 17), cingulate cortex
(PSC 9), and parietal cortex (PSCs 2, 7, and 16; SI Appendix, SI
Results), as well as linear and quadratic developmental effects (SI
Appendix, Fig. S19). Despite the unbiased decomposition used,
PSCs showed heterogeneous associations with age, with effect
sizes ranging from small (PSC 3: r = −0.19) to large (PSC 12:
r = −0.66).
To compactly summarize both mean thickness and develop-
mental effects, we plotted mean PSC thickness (regression inter-
cept) vs. the linear developmental slope (Fig. 4). Several of the
Somatomotor
PSC 7
PSC 8
PSC 11
All
PSC 4
Visual
Limbic
PSC 3
Dorsal Attention
PSC 6
Ventral Attention
PSC 15
Fig. 3.
Close-up of the overlap between functional networks (18) and best
corresponding PSCs (statistically significant results at false discovery rate
level 0.05). Borders of functional networks are shown as purple lines. The
somatomotor functional network overlaps strongly with three PSCs: the 7th,
8th, and 11th PSCs (approaching statistical significance). The visual network
shows strong alignment with the 4th PSC, whereas the limbic network cor-
responds largely to the 3rd PSC. Dorsal and ventral attention functional net-
works align well with the 6th and 15th PSCs, respectively. High-order dis-
tributed FPN and DMN were not coupled with a specific PSC.
Sotiras et al.
PNAS
|
March 28, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 13
|
3529
 Fig. 4.
Scatter plot of the estimated linear model regression coefficients
for each PSC (the x and y axes indicate the intercept and slope values,
respectively). Star denotes best-fitting quadratic model; respective models
are shown for males (blue) and females (red) in Lower. A square denotes
significant sex and sex-by-age interaction effects, and a hexagon denotes
only significant sex-by-age interaction effect. The points for different PSCs
are color-coded by distinct colors. Characteristic views of the corresponding
PSCs are shown next to the respective points, enclosed by a bounding box
of the same color as the point. The figure is color-partitioned to low–high
cortical thickness (blue corresponds to low values) and to low, moderate,
and steep slope (darker colors correspond to steeper slope values).
thinnest regions had only limited developmental effects. For
example, PSCs in the visual cortex (PSC 4) and precentral cortex
(PSC 8) were both thin and had limited developmental changes
during the age range sampled. Conversely, prefrontal regions,
including the anterior PFC (PSC 1), medial frontal cortex (PSC
5), cingulate cortex (PSC 9), dorsolateral PFC (PSC 13), and
inferior frontal gyrus (PSC 17), all showed dramatic developmen-
tal effects within cortex that is, on average, thicker during the age
range examined. Together, these results delineate cortical orga-
nization in adolescence by concisely summarizing both cortical
topography and associated age-related variation. Furthermore,
the ordering of developmental effects from lower order (i.e., pri-
mary visual and somatomotor) to higher order (frontal associa-
tion cortex) suggests that developmental effects may be in part
linked to evolutionary novelty.
Developmental Patterns of Cortical Thinning Are Governed in Part
by Evolutionary Expansion. To test whether developmental effects
are linked to evolutionary novelty, we examined how evolu-
tionary expansion of the cortex was associated with both mean
PSC thickness and observed developmental effects. By using
a published atlas of cortical expansion (9), cortical expansion
was averaged within each PSC (Fig. 5C). Critically, evolution-
ary expansion was associated with both mean cortical thick-
ness (r = 0.6, p < 0.01; Fig. 5D) and the linear slope of age
effects (r = −0.62, p = 0.032; Fig. 5E). Thus, regions with
greater evolutionary expansion both were thicker and exhib-
ited greater developmental changes during adolescence. Finally,
although the small number of PSCs precluded statistical testing,
regions that displayed significant quadratic age effects (Fig. 4,
Lower) showed differences in evolutionary expansion according
to whether the quadratic effect was concave or convex. Specifi-
cally, late-developing PSCs with concave developmental patterns
showed a high level of cortical expansion compared with early
developing regions with a convex pattern (Fig. 5F). Correspon-
dence with evolutionary expansion was also observed for the
2-PSC solution (Fig. 5B), as well as for vertexwise developmental
data (SI Appendix, SI Results).
Discussion
We used advanced multivariate methods in a large cohort of
youth to capture the coordinated growth of structural brain net-
works during adolescence. These networks differ substantially
from typical anatomical atlases, and instead align with func-
tional brain networks in a way that diminishes with increasing
functional complexity and developmental remodeling. Critically,
these developmental changes are driven in part by each net-
work’s position in the evolutionary hierarchy of cortical expan-
sion. Together, these results delineate a representation of corti-
cal organization and development.
Topography of Coordinated Cortical Development. We used NMF
to decompose the cortex into covariance-based structural net-
works exhibiting coordinated development. Notably, identified
networks were highly reproducible at multiple scales. In deriv-
ing this reproducible structural representation of the cortex,
four features of the hypothesis-free, data-driven methodolog-
ical approach were crucial. First, even without a hierarchical
constraint, higher resolutions demonstrated increasing differ-
entiation, while largely respecting the boundaries of coarser
subdivisions. This effect is consistent with an economical cor-
tical organization (21) that is implemented in a hierarchical
way, where small morphogenetic differences accrue across scales,
leading to the emergence of functionally specialized units. Sec-
ond, without incorporating any constraint for spatial contigu-
ity and sparsity, the decomposition revealed sparse patterns
that exhibit high spatial contiguity within hemispheres. Impor-
tantly, these patterns neither form blobs, which could arise from
smoothing imaging data, nor are driven by spatial proximity
alone. Thus, our results further support evidence for small-world,
functionally driven network properties in human brain cortical
gray matter structure (22, 23). Third, our approach is blind to
location in space and was conducted on both hemispheres simul-
taneously, with no constraint for hemispheric symmetry. Still,
the majority of derived PSCs were predominantly symmetric
bilaterally. However, hemispheric asymmetries were observed in
regions such as Broca’s and Wenicke’s areas, where lateralization
is expected. Fourth and finally, our analysis is agnostic to genetic
or anatomical priors. Nonetheless, the identified components
corresponded closely to meaningful genetic (24) and structural
units (Fig. 2 and SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Specifically, they showed
close relatedness to genetic patterning of cortical thickness (12-
cluster solution of ref. 24), which is consistent with recent results
showing that genetic factors affect cortical changes throughout
life (25). Additionally, despite similarity to structural units, they
differed markedly from common atlas definitions. The estimated
PSCs did not necessarily follow gyral boundaries (e.g., anterior–
posterior division of temporal cortex in PSCs 10 and 14). More-
over, cortical elements participated in multiple networks, poten-
tially driven by concurrent processes.
Functional Relevance of Structural Covariance. Prior studies have
sought to map structural covariance networks to functional net-
works, but have produced mixed results. Although seed-based
analyses of selected regions have demonstrated overlap with
functional patterns (11, 26), previous whole-brain covariance-
based parcellations have not aligned well with known large-scale
3530
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620928114
Sotiras et al.
 NEUROSCIENCE
A
G
B
H
C
D
E
F
K
J
I
Fig. 5.
(Left) Relationship between evolutionary novelty and 2-PSC solution. (A) Cortical expansion (9). (B) Average cortical expansion within first (shown in
G) and second PSC (shown in H). (Right) Relationship between evolutionary novelty and developmental effects for the 18-PSC solution. (C) Average cortical
expansion within each PSC. Associations of cortical expansion with: (D) average cortical thickness, or intercept (shown in I); (E) cortical thickness change, or
slope (shown in J); and (F) quadratic effects (shown in K). Warmer colors in colormaps correspond to regions of higher evolutionary expansion. Points in
regression plots are color-coded according to the color partition of Fig. 4.
functional networks (12, 27). In contrast to these prior efforts,
the PSCs produced by NMF showed significant overlap with cer-
tain functional networks. This correspondence was present in
both a parcellation derived from an independent dataset and
when using functional imaging data from a subset of our partic-
ipants. Notably, the convergence between PSCs and functional
networks was inversely related to functional complexity. Motor,
sensory, visual, and limbic functional networks aligned to distinct
PSCs. This correspondence may be due to the high special-
ization and old evolutionary age of these networks. Functional
specialization may impose constraints on the determinants of
regional cortical thickness, while the evolutionary preservation
may have allowed genes influencing these regions to reach allelic
fixation, as suggested by low genetic variability in these areas
(28, 29). Together, these factors may explain the high coordi-
nation and low intersubject variance in these regions (30). This
finding emphasizes the distinct, specialized nature of low-order
networks that develop in a segregated fashion. Conversely, func-
tional and structural correspondence in higher-order networks
was less apparent. The link between structure and function may
be weakened by relatively high levels of interindividual variabil-
ity within these functional complex networks (31, 32), which has
been emphasized by recent studies of individual difference in
cortical neuroanatomy (33, 34). One exception to the weak corre-
spondence between PSCs and higher-order networks is the reca-
pitulation of the FPN seen in the 7-PSC solution, emphasizing
that structure–function relationships require evaluation at multi-
ple scales.
Cortical Patterning, Maturation Timing, and Evolutionary Hierarchy.
Although the spatial decomposition of the cortex was agnostic
to age and sex, the derived components demonstrated markedly
different developmental patterns. As in prior reports, we found
that mean cortical thickness in males was initially greater than
that in females throughout most of the association cortex [an
effect that was inverted at 20 y (35)] and that primary motor
and somatosensory networks mature before higher-order asso-
ciation cortices (4, 5). Thus, PSCs mapping to sensorimotor
cortices were associated with small age effects, whereas PSCs
within higher-order association cortex exhibited greater devel-
opmental changes. Critically, such variation in the develop-
mental effects of these structural networks aligned well with
data regarding evolutionary cortical expansion. Structural net-
works with greater evolutionary expansion were both thicker and
exhibited greater developmental change during adolescence,
consistent with greater functional complexity in adulthood (9)
and protracted maturation (1, 4, 5). Notably, our 2-PSC solution
exemplifies this distinction, aligning remarkably with regional
evolutionary cortical expansion (9); the anterior PSC encoded
regions of high expansion, whereas the posterior PSC encoded
regions of low expansion (SI Appendix, Fig. S20).
Limitations. Although this study capitalized on a large sample
and advanced methods, certain limitations should be noted. First,
our inferences on cortical development are drawn from cross-
sectional data; longitudinal data may provide superior estimates
of cortical development. However, the multivariate nature of our
analysis largely overcomes this limitation by leveraging contrasts
among different brain regions, rather than against a baseline
measure. Second, primary somatosensory regions may have
undergone substantial maturation at the lower end of the age
range in our cohort (4, 5). Third, although associations between
structural components and both functional networks as well as
evolutionary expansion are suggestive and intuitive, such corre-
lational analyses do not establish causality. Lastly, our analysis
draws only from cortical-thickness data, thus not exploiting com-
plementary information from other modalities that could lead to
better elucidating concurrent developmental processes (36).
Study Implications. Despite these limitations, the identified net-
works have the potential to become an important alternative
to existing atlas definitions (36), providing a concise summary
of the data that will facilitate integration with other high-
dimensional data types (e.g., genomics). Additionally, being
informed by specific neurodevelopmental data, they enable fur-
ther studies to understand how they support cognitive abilities
that develop during this epoch and provide an important context
for understanding how abnormal development is associated with
psychopathology (37). Lastly, our methodological framework is
general and fully automatic and can be readily applied to other
datasets.
Conclusions
Our study provides insights into cortical organization and matura-
tion during adolescence. We demonstrated that cortical develop-
ment progresses in a spatially heterogeneous fashion by integrat-
ing highly coordinated units. These structural networks mirrored
both certain functional networks and the evolutionary expansion
of the cerebral cortex and could provide a concise and effective
representation of cortical structure and maturation.
Sotiras et al.
PNAS
|
March 28, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 13
|
3531
 Materials and Methods
Participants and Neuroimaging. All participants were imaged as part of the
PNC (13). All subjects, or their parent or guardian, provided informed con-
sent, and minors provided assent; study procedures were approved by the
institutional review boards of both the University of Pennsylvania and the
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. All included participants were medically
healthy, were not taking psychotropic medication, and had imaging data
that passed strict quality-assurance procedures. The final sample included
934 youths (512 males) ages 8–20 (mean, 14.44 y; SD, 3.24). A subsample of
524 youth also completed rsfc-MRI imaging (215 males; mean age 15.45; SD
2.86). For further details, see SI Appendix, SI Methods.
Multivariate Analysis of Structural Covariance. PSCs were estimated by using
NMF (14, 16), which factors the data by positively weighting cortical ele-
ments that covary. This method leads to a highly specific and reproducible
(SI Appendix, SI Results) parts-based representation, where parts are com-
bined in an additive way to form a whole. Model selection was performed
by using split-sample reproducibility analysis and evaluation of the recon-
struction quality. For further details, see SI Appendix, SI Methods.
Estimation of Structure–Function Associations. We studied the functional rel-
evance of structural covariance by using the inner product (range 0–1) to
examine the overlap between the estimated PSCs and functional clusters
estimated in an independent cohort of 1,000 subjects (18) (SI Appendix, Fig.
S8). The functional coupling of the estimated PSCs was further evaluated by
assessing the appropriateness of a PSC-derived parcellation to fit the avail-
able rsfc-MRI scans. The goodness of fit was summarized by a functional par-
cellation quality index (FPQI) that collectively evaluated the functional com-
pactness and separation of the parcels; intraparcel and interparcel coherence
were evaluated as well. Statistical significance was evaluated by using permu-
tation testing (38). For further details, see SI Appendix, SI Methods.
Analysis of Developmental Effects and Evolutionary Expansion. Age-related
effects were modeled for each PSC by using stepwise polynomial regres-
sion including sex and sex-by-age interaction terms; inclusion of quadratic
terms was evaluated by using Akaike information criterion (8). The effect
size of the linear term for each PSC was determined by using Pearson’s cor-
relation. To describe the relationship between the mean cortical thickness
of each PSC and observed developmental effects, we plotted the coefficient
of the model intercept (mean thickness) vs. the coefficient of the linear age
term (developmental slope). Finally, we evaluated whether developmental
changes of each PSC showed an association with the evolutionary expan-
sion of the cortex, using a published atlas of cortical surface area expansion
(9). Expansion was calculated for each PSC, and associations between expan-
sion and both mean thickness and developmental effects were described by
using Pearson’s correlations. The expansion of PSCs with convex and concave
quadratic effects was compared for the PSCs with a significant quadratic
term. For further details, see SI Appendix, SI Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by National Institute
of Mental Health Grants MH107235, MH089983, MH089924, MH096891,
MH101111, and MH107703; National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering Grant EB022573; National Institute of Neurological Disor-
ders and Stroke Grant NS042645; and the Dowshen Program for Neuro-
science.
1. Toga AW, Thompson PM, Sowell ER (2006) Mapping brain maturation. FOCUS 4(3):
378–390.
2. Knickmeyer RC, et al. (2008) A structural MRI study of human brain development from
birth to 2 years. J Neurosci 28(47):12176–12182.
3. Sowell ER, et al. (2004) Longitudinal mapping of cortical thickness and brain growth
in normal children. J Neurosci 24(38):8223–8231.
4. Gogtay N, et al. (2004) Dynamic mapping of human cortical development dur-
ing childhood through early adulthood. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(21):8174–
8179.
5. Shaw P, et al. (2008) Neurodevelopmental trajectories of the human cerebral cortex.
J Neurosci 28(14):3586–3594.
6. Tamnes CK, et al. (2010) Brain maturation in adolescence and young adulthood:
Regional age-related changes in cortical thickness and white matter volume and
microstructure. Cereb Cortex 20(3):534–548.
7. Group BDC (2012) Total and regional brain volumes in a population-based normative
sample from 4 to 18 years: The NIH MRI study of normal brain development. Cereb
Cortex 22(1):1–12.
8. Taki Y, et al. (2013) Linear and curvilinear correlations of brain gray matter volume
and density with age using voxel-based morphometry with the Akaike information
criterion in 291 healthy children. Hum Brain Mapp 34(8):1857–1871.
9. Hill J, et al. (2010) Similar patterns of cortical expansion during human development
and evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(29):13135–13140.
10. Lenroot RK, et al. (2007) Sexual dimorphism of brain developmental trajectories dur-
ing childhood and adolescence. Neuroimage 36(4):1065–1073.
11. Zielinski BA, Gennatas ED, Zhou J, Seeley WW (2010) Network-level structural
covariance in the developing brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(42):18191–
18196.
12. Krongold M, Cooper C, Bray S (December 9, 2015) Modular development of cortical
gray matter across childhood and adolescence. Cereb Cortex, 10.1093/cercor/bhv307.
13. Satterthwaite TD, et al. (2014) Neuroimaging of the Philadelphia neurodevelopmen-
tal cohort. Neuroimage 86:544–553.
14. Seung HS, Lee DD (1999) Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix factor-
ization. Nature 401(6755):788–791.
15. Brunet JP, Tamayo P, Golub TR, Mesirov JP (2004) Metagenes and molecular pat-
tern discovery using matrix factorization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(12):4164–
4169.
16. Sotiras A, Resnick SM, Davatzikos C (2015) Finding imaging patterns of structural
covariance via non-negative matrix factorization. Neuroimage 108:1–16.
17. Fischl B (2012) FreeSurfer. Neuroimage 62:774–781.
18. Yeo BTT, et al. (2011) The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by
intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 106(3):1125–1165.
19. Dosenbach NUF, et al. (2007) Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task
control in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(26):11073–11078.
20. Golland Y, Golland P, Bentin S, Malach R (2008) Data-driven clustering reveals a fun-
damental subdivision of the human cortex into two global systems. Neuropsychologia
46(2):540–553.
21. Bullmore E, Sporns O (2012) The economy of brain network organization. Nat Rev
Neurosci 13(5):336–349.
22. He Y, Chen ZJ, Evans AC (2007) Small-world anatomical networks in the human brain
revealed by cortical thickness from MRI. Cereb Cortex 17(10):2407–2419.
23. Bassett DS, et al. (2008) Hierarchical organization of human cortical networks in
health and schizophrenia. J Neurosci 28(37):9239–9248.
24. Chen CH, et al. (2013) Genetic topography of brain morphology. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 110(42):17089–17094.
25. Fjell AM, et al. (2015) Development and aging of cortical thickness correspond to
genetic organization patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112(50):15462–15467.
26. Raznahan A, et al. (2011) Patterns of coordinated anatomical change in human corti-
cal development: A longitudinal neuroimaging study of maturational coupling. Neu-
ron 72(5):873–884.
27. Alexander-Bloch A, Raznahan A, Bullmore E, Giedd J (2013) The convergence of mat-
urational change and structural covariance in human cortical networks. J Neurosci
33(7):2889–2899.
28. Lenroot RK, et al. (2009) Differences in genetic and environmental influences on the
human cerebral cortex associated with development during childhood and adoles-
cence. Hum Brain Mapp 30(1):163–174.
29. Schmitt JE, et al. (2014) The dynamic role of genetics on cortical patterning during
childhood and adolescence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(18):6774–6779.
30. Fischl B, Dale AM (2000) Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from
magnetic resonance images. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97(20):11050–11055.
31. Mueller S, et al. (2013) Individual variability in functional connectivity architecture of
the human brain. Neuron 77(3):586–595.
32. Langs G, et al. (2015) Identifying shared brain networks in individuals by decoupling
functional and anatomical variability. Cereb Cortex 26(10):4004–4014.
33. Laumann TO, et al. (2015) Functional system and areal organization of a highly sam-
pled individual human brain. Neuron 87(3):658–671.
34. Satterthwaite TD, Davatzikos C (2015) Towards an individualized delineation of func-
tional neuroanatomy. Neuron 87(3):471–473.
35. Raznahan A, et al. (2010) Longitudinally mapping the influence of sex and androgen
signaling on the dynamics of human cortical maturation in adolescence. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 107(39):16988–16993.
36. Glasser MF, et al. (2016) A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature
536(7615):171–178.
37. Paus T, Keshavan M, Giedd JN (2008) Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge dur-
ing adolescence? Nat Rev Neurosci 9:947–957.
38. Gordon EM, et al. (2016) Generation and evaluation of a cortical area parcellation
from resting-state correlations. Cereb Cortex 26(1):288–303.
3532
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620928114
Sotiras et al.
