 Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23:2287–2301
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-018-0086-5
IMMEDIATE COMMUNICATION
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain
insulin sensitivity and metabolism
Marion Soto1
● Clémence Herzog1
● Julian A. Pacheco2
● Shiho Fujisaka3
● Kevin Bullock2
● Clary B. Clish2
●
C. Ronald Kahn1
Received: 7 November 2017 / Revised: 13 February 2018 / Accepted: 26 March 2018 / Published online: 18 June 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is published with open access
Abstract
Obesity and diabetes in humans are associated with increased rates of anxiety and depression. To understand the role of the
gut microbiome and brain insulin resistance in these disorders, we evaluated behaviors and insulin action in brain of mice
with diet-induced obesity (DIO) with and without antibiotic treatment. We find that DIO mice have behaviors reflective of
increased anxiety and depression. This is associated with decreased insulin signaling and increased inflammation in in the
nucleus accumbens and amygdala. Treatment with oral metronidazole or vancomycin decreases inflammation, improves
insulin signaling in the brain and reduces signs of anxiety and depression. These effects are associated with changes in the
levels of tryptophan, GABA, BDNF, amino acids, and multiple acylcarnitines, and are transferable to germ-free mice by
fecal transplant. Thus, changes in gut microbiota can control brain insulin signaling and metabolite levels, and this leads to
altered neurobehaviors.
Introduction
Over the past decade there has been a mounting body of
evidence that gut microbiota can modulate host physiology
in mice, humans and other species [1–6]. Many factors can
affect the composition of the gut microbiome, including
colonization at time of birth, changes in the diet, and
exposure to antibiotics [7–10]. In both humans and mice,
feeding a high fat diet (HFD) or over-eating due to a genetic
mutation in the leptin axis induces robust alterations in gut
microbial flora, reducing bacterial diversity and altering the
overall bacterial composition [11, 12]. These shifts in
microbial composition can affect the host’s physiology,
inducing systemic insulin resistance and modifying glucose
homeostasis and the immune response [1, 8]. The mod-
ifications in gut microbiota composition contribute to these
metabolic changes as demonstrated by the fact that some of
the
metabolic
abnormalities
associated
with
obesity,
including over-eating and weight gain, can be reproduced in
germ-free (GF) mice by colonization with gut microbiota
from obese mice or obese humans [4, 5]. In addition, we [8]
and others [13–15] have shown that treatment with pre-
biotics, probiotics or antibiotics, which modulate the gut
microbiome, can reduce insulin resistance and inflammation
in peripheral organs, such as liver, fat and muscle, in mice
models.
In addition to metabolic abnormalities, both obesity and
diabetes
are
associated
with
increased
risk
of
neu-
ropsychiatric and mood disorders, including poorer cogni-
tive performance, and increased rates of depression, anxiety
and dementia [16–18]. These can be reproduced in mouse
models by induction of diet-induced obesity (DIO) [19–21].
One
potential
contributor
to
these
neurobehavioral
abnormalities is the gut microbiome [22]. Other studies
have shown that modifying the gut microbiota of conven-
tional mice by the use of prebiotics [23] and probiotics [24]
can improve neurobehavior and that in addition to the
abnormalities in gut development and metabolism which
* C. Ronald Kahn
C.Ronald.Kahn@joslin.harvard.edu
1
Section of Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes
Center and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA
2
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
3
First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Toyama,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-018-0086-5) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:
 can be reversed by microbial re-colonization, GF-mice have
decreased anxiety-like behavior that are also reversed by
microbiome colonization [25, 26].
Here, we investigate the link between gut microbiota and
brain function in a context of obesity and metabolic syndrome
using mice challenged with a HFD, without or with treatment
by vancomycin or metronidazole, to further modify the
microbiome. We find that DIO mice exhibit insulin resistance
in brain and multiple depressive-like and anxiety-like beha-
viors, and these are improved by antibiotic treatment. These
changes are transferrable to germ-free mice, and are asso-
ciated with modifications in the levels of neurotransmitters
and other metabolites, which can affect brain function.
Methods
Animals
Six-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were purchased from
Jackson Laboratory and maintained on either a normal
chow containing 22% of calories from fat, 23% from pro-
tein, and 55% from carbohydrates (Mouse diet 9F 5020;
PharmaServ) or a high-fat diet (Open Source Diet, D12492;
Research Diets) containing 60% of calories from fat, 20%
from protein, and 20% from carbohydrates for 6 weeks.
During the last 2 weeks, some of the HFD mice were treated
with vancomycin or metronidazole (1 g/L in the drinking
water).
For germ-free (GF) experiments, cecal contents from
mice that received the treatment described above were col-
lected immediately after euthanasia, suspended in PBS, and
filtered through a 40 μm cell strainer. Bacterial transfer was
performed by gastric gavage with 200 μl of diluted cecal
contents. Six-week-old male GF-C57BL/6J mice (obtained
from the gnotobiotic core facility of Brigham and Women’s
Hospital) were given chow or HFD (double irradiated
D1249ii, Research Diets) for 4 weeks, and then gavaged
with cecum contents from donor mice. The colonized mice
were continuously fed chow or HFD for 2 more weeks.
To determine the effect of removing the antibiotic
treatment, mice were fed chow or HFD for 11 weeks
without or with antibiotics (as described above) from week
5 to week 7, and then switched to normal water. All mice
were housed at 22 °C on a 12 h light/dark cycle. All animal
studies were approved by the IACUC of Joslin Diabetes
Center (# 97-05) and Harvard Medical School (# 05131)
and were in accordance with NIH guidelines.
16S rRNA sequence analysis
Six-week-old male C57BL/6 J mice were treated with either
placebo, vancomycin (1 g/L) or metronidazole (1 g/L) in
drinking water then started on HFD (or continued on chow)
from age 7 to 11 weeks. The mice were fasted for 2 h,
anesthetized with isoflurane and cecum was collected. DNA
was extracted from cecum samples using a MoBio Fecal
DNA extraction kit (MoBio Laboratories Inc., Carlsbad,
CA). A multiplexed amplicon library covering the 16 S
rDNA gene V4 region was generated from DNA extracted
samples, and reads were generated from the amplicon library
and clustered into Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs)
(MiSeq instrument–average of 27,331.5 reads per sample.
Differences in microbial community structure were visua-
lized using phylogenetic methods. The number of OTUs per
sample were then scaled so each sample had the same mean,
filtered to only include OTUs that were present at 0.1% of
the total counts in at least 3 samples, log-transformed, and
plotted in PCA space using the R software. PCA plots, as
well as representation of bacterial communities at the phy-
lum levels are described in another paper [27]. 16S rRNA
datasets have been deposited in Sequence Read Archive
(SRA) database (accession number: SRP132006).
Metabolic studies
Food intake was estimated by weekly measures of weight
differential of cups containing the diet. Body weight was
measured every week. Locomotor activity was measured at
ambient temperature using a Comprehensive Lab Animal
Monitoring System (Columbus Instruments). Oral glucose
tolerance tests (2 g dextrose/kg body weight) were per-
formed by gavage in mice fasted for 4 h. Tail vein blood
glucose levels were measured using Infinity glucose moni-
tors (US Diagnostics). To assess insulin signaling in vivo, 5
U insulin (Humulin R, Eli Lilly) was injected via the
inferior vena cava. Samples were collected 10 min later and
immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Insulin and leptin
were measured by ELISA (Crystal Chem and Invitrogen).
Open field exploration
The open field test is widely used to measure anxiety-like in
rodents [20, 28]. The activity of the mouse was recorded by
an overhead video camera placed on top of an open field
box (57 × 37 × 31 cm) for 5 min. ANY Maze video tracking
software (Stoelting) was used to analyze the number of
entries, latency to enter and duration of time spent in the
center arena, as described before [28]. For all behavioral
tests, data recording and potential subsequent analysis were
blinded.
Novelty-suppressed feeding
NSF measures a rodent’s aversion to eating in a novel
environment. This test assesses stress-induced anxiety by
2288
M. Soto et al.
 measuring the latency of an animal to approach and eat a
familiar food in an aversive environment. Mice were fasted
overnight (~15 h) and placed in the open field box with a
white disc (15 cm diameter) in the center in which rested a
food pellet of their usual diet (either chow or HFD
according to the groups) for 10 min. The latency to start
feeding
was
measured
to
assess
the
anxiety-related
behavior.
Dark-light test
This test is a measure of anxiety-related behavior, based on
the innate aversion of rodents to brightly illuminated areas.
The apparatus (44 × 21 × 21 cm) contains two chambers of
equal size, one bright and the other dark. The animals were
initially placed in the light side. Transitions between sides
and the time spent in each compartment were recorded for 5
min by a camera and analyzed with AnyMaze software.
Marble burying
Marble burying is an elicited repetitive behavior in rodents
notably observed in models of autism [29]. Mice were
transferred to a new housing cage with 5 cm wood chip
bedding. 15 glass marbles (16 mm diameter) were aligned
equidistantly in a 5 × 3 design in the testing cage. The
number of marbles buried (min. 1:2 their depth) in 30 min
was recorded.
Cytokine ELISAs
Frozen brain tissue were homogenized in RIPA buffer
containing
protease
inhibitor
cocktail
(ThermoFisher,
Pittsburgh, PA), centrifuged for 15 min at 13000 r.p.m. and
diluted
into
PBS
(1:2).
TNFα
and
IL-1β
ELISAs
(eBioscience) were performed according to manufacturer’s
instructions. The amount of protein in each well was
quantified using protein microassay (Bio-Rad).
Protein analysis
Frozen tissues were lysed in ice-cold buffer (RIPA buffer
complemented with 0.1% SDS and 1× protease and phos-
phatase inhibitor cocktail (Biotool)). Protein concentrations
were determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay
reagent (Thermo Scientific). Lysates (15-20 μg) were sepa-
rated on NuPage 4–12% polyacrylamide gels (Thermo-
Fisher)
and
transferred
to
nitrocellulose
membranes
(ThermoFisher). Antibodies against phospho-Akt (S473)
(#4060, 1:1000), Akt (#4685, 1:1000), phospho-Creb
(S133) (#9198, 1:600), Creb (#9197, 1:1000), phopsho-
DARP32 (T75) (#2301, 1:1000), DARP32 (#2306, 1:1000),
ΔFosB (#9890, 1:1000), phospho-ERK1/2 (T202-Y204)
(#4370,
1:1000),
ERK1/2
(#9102,
1:1000),
GAPDH
(#5174, 1:2000), phospho-IR/IGF1R (#3024, 1:500), IRβ
(#3020, 1:1000) and TH (#2792, 1:1000) were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technologies. Anti-β-actin (#1616-
HRP, 1:10 000) and BDNF (#546, 1:500) antibodies were
from Santa-Cruz. Cd11b (MCA711G, 1:1000) antibody
was
from
Bio-Rad.
Anti-DAT
(MAB369,
1:5000),
phospho-IRS-1 (Y608) (09432, 1:1000) and IRS-1 (06248,
Millipore,
1:1000)
were
from
Millipore.
Anti-GFAP
(#7260,
1:1000)
was
from
Abcam
and
anti-Iba1
(01620001, 1:1000) was purchased from Wako. The
appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(1:7000). Membranes were visualized with Immobilon
Western HRP Substrate (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Quan-
tification was performed using ImageJ software.
Immunostaining
Mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal (i.p.) injec-
tion of Avertin (300 mg/kg) and transcardially perfused
with PBS followed by 4 % paraformaldehyde. Brains were
dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight,
cryoprotected in 15% (w/v) then 30% sucrose, and frozen in
OCT compound (Tissue-Tek). Serial 30 μm coronal sec-
tions were generated using a cryostat. Free-floating sections
were washed, blocked (0.2% Triton-X-100 + 5% normal
goat serum (NGS) in PBS) and stained with anti-Cd11b
(1:50, rat, MCA711G, Bio-Rad) and anti-rabbit GFAP
(1:500; rabbit, #7260, Abcam) antibodies diluted in PBS
containing 0.1 Triton X-100 + 1% NGS overnight at 4 °C.
Sections were then washed and subsequently stained with
secondary antibodies (goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 and
goat anti-rat Alexa Fluor 546, 1:500, ThermoFisher Scien-
tific). Sections were mounted with SlowFade Diamond
mountant containing DAPI (Life Technologies) and imaged
with a 10× objective on a Zeiss LSM710-Duo confocal
microscope.
qRT-PCR
RNA was extracted from tissues with an RNeasy minikit
(Qiagen), and complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthe-
sized with a high-capacity cDNA reverse-transcription kit
(Applied Biosystems). Real-time qPCR was performed
using SYBR Green (Bio-Rad) with specific primers
(Supplementary Table 1) on an ABI Prism 7900HT
sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems). Ampli-
fication of specific transcripts was confirmed by analyzing
melting curve profiles at the end of each PCR. All
expression data were normalized to TATA-binding protein
(TBP)
expression
using
the
relative
standard
curve
method.
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2289
 Metabolomic and bioinformatic analysis
Frozen brain tissue samples were homogenized in 4
volumes of HPLC water using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen).
Polar metabolites were profiled using liquid chromato-
graphy tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Positive ioni-
zation mode data were acquired using multiple reaction
monitoring and retention times, mass transitions, and col-
lision energies, determined with authentic reference stan-
dards (Supplementary Table 2). Additional information is
described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Ana-
lysis was done in R/Bioconductor. To preprocess the data,
metabolites that had missing values in more than 80% of the
samples were filtered out, missing values were imputed with
half of the minimums of the metabolite’s intensity, and all
metabolite intensities were log2 transformed. Between
group comparisons per metabolite were analyzed account-
ing for the mean-variance trend and sample-specific weights
with the limma package [30]. PCA plots were calculated
with the prcomp function.
Statistical analyzes
All data are presented as mean ± SEM. Data were analyzed
by one-way ANOVA (two-way ANOVA was not feasible
due to unbalanced design) to look for an effect of the diet
(Chow vs. HFD groups) or antibiotic treatment (HFD vs.
HFD + Antibiotics) with repeated measures when neces-
sary. This was followed by t-tests to examine pre-planned
comparisons of interest. N indicates the number of animals
per group. A p-value lower than 0.05 was considered sta-
tistically significant.
Data availability
All data and original codes used in this study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request. The
complete data set of metabolites in brain and plasma and
their response to diet and antibiotics is available at Meta-
bolomics
Workbench
(http://www.metabolomicsw
orkbench.org).
Results
Effect of HFD and antibiotic treatment on gut
microbial communities
To assess the effects of diet and antibiotics on the gut
microbiome composition, 6-week-old mice were divided
into four groups. Two were given regular drinking water
(placebo), one drinking water containing vancomycin (1 g/
L), which kills gram positive organisms, and the fourth
drinking water containing metronidazole (1 g/L), which
kills anaerobes. One week later both antibiotic-treated
groups and one of the two control groups were challenged
with a high fat diet (60% fat by calories) for 4 weeks, while
the second control group remained on normal chow (22%
fat by calories). 16S rRNA sequence analysis of cecal
contents showed large differences of the composition of
bacterial communities between the different groups [27] as
represented in a principal component analysis, which dis-
tinctly separated in all four groups (Supplementary Fig. 1a).
While the Shannon Index was not different between chow-
fed and HFD-fed mice, entropy was significantly decreased
by vancomycin and tended to be decreased by metronida-
zole (Supplementary Fig. 1b), consistent with a decrease in
diversity of microbial species in the antibiotic-treated
groups. Analysis of the microbiota at the class level
demonstrated the expected reduction in Bacteriodetes Bac-
teroidia and increase in Firmicutes (Clostridia) and Verru-
comicrobiae in response to HFD. Treatment with either
antibiotic resulted in elimination of many classes of bac-
teria, with the remaining bacteria being primarily Firmicutes
of the Bacillus class, i.e., Bacillales and Lactobacillales
(Supplementary Fig. 1c). In a more detailed analysis of
these data, we show that these changes in gut microbial
composition are associated with different predicted func-
tions of the microbiome and affect levels of a large number
of metabolites in both cecum and blood of host, with some
correlating with insulin resistance [27].
One read-out of changing gut microbiota composition is
cecum size, which has been shown to be increased in GF-
mice and decreased in these mice after microbiota transfer
[31]. Interestingly, in HFD-fed DIO mice, cecum weight
was reduced by ~ 50%, and this was restored, or even
increased above control levels, by antibiotic treatment
(Supplementary Fig. 2a). These changes were reversible and
were not observed 4 weeks after discontinuation of anti-
biotics (Supplementary Fig. 2b). The changes in cecum size
were a measure of the changing microbiome and could be
reproduced, and even magnified, in GF-mice receiving gut
microbiota transfer from HFD and HFD-antibiotic-treated
mice (Supplementary Fig. 2c).
Effect of antibiotic treatment on metabolism in
HFD-fed mice
It is known that even shorter-term changes in diet can
induce changes in the microbiome and metabolism. Thus,
for the metabolic and behavioral studies, a second protocol
was developed in which 6-week-old male C57BL/6J mice
were fed either normal chow or a HFD for six weeks, and
two subgroups were given drinking water with either van-
comycin or metronidazole during the last two weeks of the
HFD challenge. As with the longer-term diet study [27],
2290
M. Soto et al.
 HFD-fed mice had higher caloric intake, showed greater
body weight gain and higher blood glucose levels than
chow-fed mice (Fig. 1a,b and Supplementary Fig. 2d).
Treatment of the HFD-fed mice with vancomycin or
metronidazole during the last two weeks of the HFD chal-
lenge reduced the level of hyperglycemia to that of chow-
fed controls without impacting body weight gain (Fig. 1a,
b). Oral glucose tolerance testing (oGTT) of HFD-fed mice
revealed marked glucose intolerance, which was sig-
nificantly improved in the groups that received either anti-
biotic compared to those on HFD alone (Fig. 1c,d). As
anticipated, HFD-feeding increased circulating leptin and
insulin levels (Supplementary Fig. 2e,f). While antibiotic
treatment had no significant effect on leptin levels, insulin
levels tended to be lower in HFD-antibiotic-treated mice,
indicating
reduced
insulin
resistance
(Supplementary
Fig. 2f). When antibiotics were discontinued and the mice
followed for an additional 4 weeks on HFD, blood glucose
levels during an oral GTT in mice that had received anti-
biotics reversed and rebounded to even higher levels than
those of HFD-fed mice that had never been treated with
antibiotics (Supplementary Fig. 2g).
To determine to what extent the improved metabolic
phenotype observed in antibiotic-treated HFD-fed mice was
secondary to changes in gut microbiota, we performed
microbiota transfer from the cecum of chow- and HFD-fed
donor mice (including those with or without vancomycin-
or metronidazole-treatment) into germ-free (GF) C57BL/6 J
recipient mice that had been previously started on either
irradiated chow or HFD and then continued on the same
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
4
5
6
Time (weeks)
Body weight gain (g)
200
250
300
350
400
0
15 30
60
90
120
Time after glucose load (min)
Blood glucose (mg/dl)
200
300
400
500
0
15 30
60
90
120
Time after glucose load (min)
Blood glucose (mg/dl)
20
25
30
35
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (weeks)
Body weight (g)
0
10
20
30
40
C
H M V
Glucose AUC (103)
150
180
210
240
270
C
H M V
Blood glucose (mg/dl)
oGTT
*****
*
Chow
HFD
HFD+M
HFD+V
Chow < HFD
Abx < HFD
###
###
a
b
e
c
Germ-free recipients
*****
oGTT
Chow
HFD
HFD+M
HFD+V
Chow < HFD
Chow < HFD ###
Chow < HFD
Abx < HFD
###
###
###
Abx
**
Chow
HFD
HFD+M
HFD+V
d
Donors
Transfer
f
Fig. 1 Effect of antibiotic
treatment on metabolism in
HFD-fed mice. a Body weight
gain of mice on Chow or HFD
with or without Abx treatment
(metronidazole or vancomycin
(n = 10/group). Time 0 is the
beginning of the HFD and the
dashed line represents the
beginning of Abx treatment. b
Blood glucose levels in the
random fed state of mice on a
Chow or HFD with or without
Abx treatment (n = 10/group). c
OGTT performed in mice on a
Chow or HFD with or without
Abx treatment (n = 9/group).
d AUC of blood glucose levels
during an OGTT (n = 9/group).
e Weight gain of chow or HFD
recipient GF-mice after bacterial
transfer from mice treated with
chow/HFD with or without Abx
(n = 8-9/group). f OGTT of
chow or HFD recipient GF-mice
2 weeks after bacterial transfer
from mice treated with chow/
HFD with or without Abx (n =
8/group). C chow, H HFD, M
HFD + metronidazole, V HFD
+ vancomycin. Data are shown
as mean ± SEM. ##P < 0.01, and
###P < 0.001 by repeated
measure ANOVA. *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 by
ANOVA, followed by pre-
planned t-tests
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2291
 diets for two additional weeks after transplant, but with no
antibiotic treatment. HFD-fed GF-mice that received bac-
teria from HFD-fed donor mice gained more weight than
chow-fed GF-mice that received bacteria from chow-fed
donor mice (Fig. 1e) and displayed higher fasting blood
glucose levels and markedly impaired glucose intolerance
during an oGTT (Fig. 1f). These mice also had a 2.5-fold
increase in fasting insulin levels indicative of insulin
resistance, although this did not quite reach statistical sig-
nificance due to inter-animal variability (Supplementary
Fig. 2h). HFD-fed GF-mice receiving microbiota from the
HFD-fed antibiotic-treated donor mice showed weight gain
similar to that of mice receiving microbiota from HFD-fed,
non-antibiotic-treated
donors,
but
has
significantly
improved fasting insulin levels, blood glucose levels and
significantly improved glucose tolerance compared with
mice colonized with HFD-only donors (Fig. 1e,f and
Supplementary Fig. 2h). Thus, the improvements in the
metabolic status by antibiotics were, in large part, trans-
ferable via transplant of gut microbiota, despite the fact that
recipient mice never received antibiotics. Together, these
data demonstrate that antibiotics ameliorate the HFD-
associated alterations in the gut and in metabolism, and
that these changes are transferrable to germ-free mice and
do not persist after antibiotic removal, consistent with a role
of modifications in gut microbiota composition in deter-
mining these effects.
Antibiotic treatment reverses HFD-induced
depressive and anxiety-like behaviors
Obesity in humans is associated with an increased risk of
anxiety and depression [18, 32], and DIO mice have also
been shown to have altered behaviors reflective of increased
6
8
10
12
14
16
C
H
M
V
Buried marbles
60
80
100
120
C
H M
V
Light zone duration (s)
5
7
9
11
13
C
H
M
V
Buried marbles
20
40
60
80
100
120
C
H M
V
Center duration (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
C
H
M
V
Center entries
5
10
15
20
25
30
C
H
M
V
Center duration (s)
c
d
a
b
***
**
***
***
**
**
100
200
300
400
500
C
H M
V
Latency to feed (s)
*
***
***
*
*
** **
*
* **
**
*** *
**
e
Marble-
burying
Novelty-suppressed feeding
Dark-light test
Transfer
Donors
Fig. 2 Antibiotic treatment reverses HFD-induced depressive and
anxiety-like behaviors. a Time spent in light compartment during light/
dark box test of mice on a Chow or HFD with or without Abx treat-
ment (n = 18/group). b Assessment of conflict-based anxiety as
latency to feed and time spent in the center zone during novelty
suppressed feeding test (n = 18/group). c Number of entries and time
spent in the center during open-field exploration (n = 18/group). d
Assessment of anxiety as number of buried marbles during a marble-
burying task (n = 14/group). e Assessment of anxiety as number of
buried marbles during a marble-burying task of chow or HFD recipient
GF-mice 2 weeks after bacterial transfer from mice treated with chow/
HFD with or without Abx (n = 6/group). C chow, H HFD, M HFD +
metronidazole, V HFD + vancomycin. Data are shown as mean ±
SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 by ANOVA, followed
by pre-planned t-tests
2292
M. Soto et al.
 depression and anxiety [20, 21]. To determine the role of
the gut microbiome on these behaviors, mice on chow or
HFD for six weeks without or with antibiotics for the final
two weeks were subjected to a panel of behavioral tests at
the end of the study period. Using a dark/light box, we found
that HFD-fed mice ventured into the light compartment 26%
less of the time than control mice (Fig. 2a), consistent with
increased anxiety, and this was reversed by treatment of
HFD-fed mice with either vancomycin or metronidazole. To
further assess anxiety, mice were subjected to a novelty-
suppressed feeding test, in which fasted mice are placed in
an open-field box containing food pellets in its center, but on
a white paper disc, which creates anxiety to enter the center
and feed. In HFD-fed mice, the latency to feed was increased
by 1.6-fold (Fig. 2b). As a result, there was a significant
decrease in the time spent in the center of the box (Fig. 2b).
Antibiotic treatment significantly reversed these behavioral
changes to the level of chow-fed controls (Fig. 2b). In an
open field exploration test, HFD-fed mice also had signs of
increased anxiety with a decreased number of entries and a
decreased time spent in the center of the arena (Fig. 2c).
Treatment of HFD-fed mice with either antibiotic also
reversed these changes, with an increased number of entries
and time spent in the center of the box (Fig. 2c). In this test,
HFD-fed mice also traveled 23% less distance than chow-
fed mice (Supplementary Fig. 3a), and this decrease was
reversed by antibiotic treatment, despite no effect on body
weight and no change in overall spontaneous locomotor
activity levels between HFD and HFD plus antibiotics
treated mice as measured in metabolic cages (Supplementary
Fig. 3b). Thus, the difference in behavior between HFD and
chow-fed controls was not simply due to higher body mass.
Like the metabolic changes, the improved behavioral phe-
notypes observed in the open field test in HFD-fed mice that
had been treated with antibiotics returned to DIO levels
within four weeks after discontinuation of the antibiotics
(Supplementary Fig. 3c).
Finally, we performed a marble burying test which
measures the propensity of mice to engage in a digging
behavior and is increased in models of anxiety [33]. HFD-
fed mice displayed a 1.3-fold increase in marble burying
compared to controls, and this was reversed toward chow-
fed levels in the antibiotic-treated HFD mice (Fig. 2d). To
confirm that these changes in neurobehavior were in fact
due to changes in gut microbiota, we assessed marble
burying activity in GF-mice, fed chow or HFD, that had
been colonized with cecal microbiota from chow, HFD and
HFD plus antibiotics donors. Like the donor mice, HFD-fed
GF-mice colonized with microbiota from HFD-fed mice
showed an increase in marble burying activity compared to
chow-fed controls, and this was not observed in recipient
mice receiving microbiota from antibiotic-treated HFD-fed
donors (Fig. 2e). Thus, HFD-fed mice demonstrate multiple
depressive- and anxiety-like behaviors that are ameliorated
by either vancomycin or metronidazole treatment and return
when the antibiotic treatment is discontinued. They are also
transmitted to GF recipient mice by cecal microbiota
transfer, indicating a role of the gut microbiome in these
behavioral changes.
Antibiotic treatment ameliorates HFD-induced
insulin resistance in the brain
We have previously shown that loss of insulin signaling in
brain of mice by tissue specific knockout of the insulin
receptor is associated with neurobehavior abnormalities,
especially as mice age [28]. We [10] and others [34] have
also demonstrated that HFD feeding can induce both sys-
temic and brain insulin resistance in mice. To understand
the role of altered insulin signaling in the context of HFD
and antibiotic treatment, we assessed insulin receptor (IR)
and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) phosphorylation in
brain regions in vivo, following injection of insulin into the
vena cava. We focused on the hypothalamus, a major center
in control of peripheral metabolism, and the nucleus
accumbens (Nacc), which plays a central role in reward
behavior. Following insulin injection, phosphorylation of
IR and IRS-1, expressed as the ratio to IR and IRS-1 pro-
teins, was increased by ~2.5-fold in the hypothalamus of
chow-fed mice within 10 min (Fig. 3a-c). By contrast, there
was little or no increase in the ratio of pIR/IR or pIRS-1/
IRS-1 in HFD-fed mice following insulin injection, indi-
cating central insulin resistance. In HFD-fed mice treated
with either metronidazole or vancomycin, the ability of
insulin to stimulate IR and IRS-1 phosphorylation was
returned to near normal (Fig. 3a-c). A similar decrease and
rescue of IR and IRS-1 phosphorylation was observed in the
Nacc (Fig. 3d,e).
To determine if these changes in brain insulin action
were related to changes in the gut microbiome, we per-
formed insulin signaling in GF-mice receiving either chow
or HFD and colonized with cecal contents from donor mice
treated with chow or HFD, with or without antibiotics
(Fig. 4a). As in the donor mice, insulin receptor phos-
phorylation in the hypothalamus was stimulated 44-fold by
peripheral insulin injection in mice colonized with micro-
biota from chow-fed animals, and this was almost com-
pletely lost in HFD-fed GF-mice receiving microbiota from
HFD donors (Fig. 4b,c). As in the donor mice, HFD-fed
GF-mice colonized with cecal contents from either metro-
nidazole or vancomycin treated HFD mice showed robust
insulin stimulation (Fig. 4b,c). IRS-1 phosphorylation
showed parallel changes (Fig. 4b,d). Similar changes in IR
and IRS-1 phosphorylation were observed in the Nacc
(Fig. 4e,f) and in the amygdala, which controls emotional
reactions
and
cognition
(Supplementary
Fig.
4a-c).
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2293
 Together, these data show that HFD-fed mice display
insulin resistance in the brain, which is improved by
antibiotic-induced changes in gut microbiota, and these
responses are transferred to GF-mice by fecal transplant.
Antibiotic treatment ameliorates HFD-induced
inflammation and BDNF signaling in the nucleus
accumbens
Low-grade inflammation in adipose tissue and liver is an
important component of the pathophysiology of insulin
resistance in obesity [1, 8]. We have previously shown that
treatment with vancomycin or metronidazole can decrease
adipose and liver inflammation and the elevated serum
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) levels which occur in HFD-
fed C57Bl/6J mice, and that this can be transferred to GF-
mice [8]. RT-qPCR analysis of the Nacc of HFD-fed mice
showed markedly increased levels of TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6,
and IL-10 mRNAs, and these returned to normal in HFD-
fed mice treated with antibiotics (Fig. 5a). This was
accompanied by similar, albeit smaller, changes in TNFα
and IL-1β protein levels in the Nacc (Fig. 5b). The mac-
rophage marker Cd11b was also increased by HFD feeding
in the Nacc, and this was decreased by treatment with
antibiotics (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 5a,b). Glial-
fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), a marker of astrocyte acti-
vation [35], was also increased by the HFD at the protein
and mRNA levels in the Nacc, but this was not reversed by
antibiotic treatment (Supplementary Fig. 5c,d), while Iba1,
a microglial marker, was not changed by either HFD or
antibiotics (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Finally, we measured
the levels of inflammatory markers in the ventral tegmental
area (VTA), a region from which dopaminergic neurons
project to the Nacc along the mesolimbic pathway. As in the
Nacc, mRNA levels of IL-10 and IL-6 were increased in the
VTA with the HFD and decreased to control levels by
vancomycin treatment (Supplementary Fig. 5e). Overall,
these findings support the hypothesis that gut microbes
affect central inflammation in brain regions involved in
behavioral and mood control.
Fig. 3 Antibiotic treatment
ameliorates HFD-induced
insulin resistance in the brain.
a, d Representative western
blots of insulin signaling in
hypothalamic (a) and nucleus
accumbens (Nacc) (d) extracts
from chow, HFD-fed mice and
HFD-fed mice treated with
metronidazole or vancomycin,
after injection of saline or
insulin. Actin serves as a loading
control. b, c, e Quantification of
IR and IRS-1 phosphorylation
(pIR and pIRS-1) normalized by
total protein levels in the
hypothalamus (b, c, n = 5-8/
group) and Nacc (e, n = 5-8/
group). M metronidazole, V
vancomycin. Data are shown as
mean ± SEM, normalized to
chow-fed mice stimulated with
insulin. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
and ***P < 0.001 by pre-
planned t-tests
2294
M. Soto et al.
 HFD and antibiotics affect the levels of metabolites
and of the neurotrophic factor BDNF in the brain
Microbes in the intestine produce a variety of metabolites
which can be absorbed to varying degrees and further
metabolized or taken up into tissues, including the brain,
where they can influence metabolic, immunologic, and
behavioral phenotypes [36–38]. To determine the effect
of changing the gut microbiota by HFD and antibiotics on
the metabolome, we performed gas chromatography
coupled with mass spectrometry (GC/LC-MS) to measure
the levels of 116 metabolites, including most major
neurotransmitters, in plasma and in extracts from hypo-
thalamus
and
Nacc.
Tryptophan
was
significantly
increased in the Nacc of HFD-fed mice, and returned
toward normal in the HFD + vancomycin group (Fig. 6a).
GABA followed the same trend, and tended to be
decreased by metronidazole (Fig. 6a). Other neuro-
transmitters, such as serotonin, glutamate and dopamine,
tended to be lower in HFD-fed mice and increase in HFD
+ vancomycin, but these changes did not reach sig-
nificance (Fig. 6a). Levels of all these neurotransmitters
followed
similar
patterns
in
the
hypothalamus
(Supplementary Fig. 6a), consistent with the strong cor-
relation in metabolites levels between both brain regions
(Supplementary Fig. 6b). These were largely independent
of changes in plasma, where GABA and glutamate were
decreased, and serotonin increased by HFD (Fig. 6c).
Indeed, there was a poorer correlation of metabolites in
plasma and brain versus the correlation between brain
regions (Supplementary Fig. 6c,d).
In addition to neurotransmitters, acylcarnitines and
amino acids and their derivatives were significantly changed
by the HFD and by antibiotics in the brain (Fig. 6c,d). For
example, C14 carnitine was significantly decreased by HFD
in the hypothalamus, and this was reversed by vancomycin
(Fig. 6c). By contrast, C5-DC and C10:2 carnitines both
showed significant increases in Nacc and hypothalamus of
HFD mice, but these did not reverse with antibiotics.
Among amino acids and their derivatives, guanidinoacetic
acid was significantly decreased by HFD in the Nacc, and
this was reversed by metronidazole (Fig. 6d). Symmetric
dimethylarginine (SDMA) and hydroxyproline were also
significantly decreased by the HFD in the hypothalamus and
increased toward normal by either one or both antibiotics.
As for the neurotransmitters, the levels of most carnitines
0
1
2
3
pIRS1/IRS1
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
pIR/IR
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
pIR/IR
a
c
e
f
pIRS1
IRS1
pIR
IR
Actin
Chow
HFD
HFD+M
HFD+V
- - + +
-
-
+ +
-
-
+ +
- +
+
b
Chow
HFD
Chow
HFD
HFD+V
-
+
HFD+M
-
+
-
+
-
+
pIRS1
IRS1
pIR
IR
Actin
Insulin
Insulin
-
+
Insulin
-
+
-
+
-
+
Chow
HFD
HFD+V
HFD+M
-
+
Insulin
-
+
-
+
-
+
Chow
HFD
HFD+V
HFD+M
-
+
Insulin
-
+
-
+
-
+
Chow
HFD
HFD+V
HFD+M
d
*
p=0.07
**
*
*
***
***
**
HFD
HFD+M
HFD+V
Chow
Donors
Donors
Nucleus Accumbens
Hypothalamus
Cecum 
transfer
GF-mice
Fig. 4 Gut microbiota directly
modulates brain insulin
signaling. a Schematic of the
experimental design. Chow or
HFD recipient GF-mice were
colonized with caecum content
of mice treated with chow/HFD
with or without Abx
(metronidazole (HFD + M) or
vancomycin (HFD + V)).
b, e Representative western blots
of insulin signaling in
hypothalamus (b) and Nacc (e)
from GF-mice colonized with
gut microbiota from chow,
HFD-fed mice and HFD-fed
mice treated with antibiotics, 10
min after vena cava injection of
saline or 5 U insulin. Actin
served as a loading control.
c, d, f Quantification of IR and
IRS-1 phosphorylation (pIR and
pIRS-1) normalized by total
protein levels in the
hypothalamus
(c, d, n = 4/group) and Nacc
(f, n = 4/group). M
metronidazole, V vancomycin.
Data are shown as mean ± SEM,
normalized to GF-mice
colonized with gut microbiota
from chow-fed mice, stimulated
with insulin. *P < 0.05, **P <
0.01, and ***P < 0.001 by pre-
planned t-tests
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2295
 and amino acids were more similar between brain regions
than between brain and plasma (Supplementary Fig. 6e,f).
Finally,
increased
brain-derived
neurotrophic
factor
(BDNF) signaling in the Nacc has been linked to depression
in humans [39], as well as greater susceptibility to the
depressive effects of social defeat [39] and diet-induced
obesity [20] in mice. We also observed a two-fold increase
in the levels of pro and mature BDNF proteins in the Nacc
after 6 weeks of HFD compared with chow-fed mice, and
this was reversed with antibiotic treatment (Fig. 6e). Inter-
estingly, this occurred with no significant change in mRNA
levels of BDNF or its receptor TrkB in the Nacc (Supple-
mentary Fig. 7a), indicating a post-transcriptional effect. In
the VTA, BDNF was also significantly decreased by van-
comycin
treatment
in
HFD-fed
mice
(Supplementary
Fig. 7b). Overall, these data show that microbial metabolites
and other molecules, such as BDNF, are affected by chan-
ges in gut microbiota composition driven by HFD and
antibiotics, coupled with the changes in insulin signaling
and inflammation in the brain. These can contribute to the
changes in metabolism and behavior.
Discussion
Modifications in gut microbial composition induced by diet
and other factors can play an important role in the metabolic
changes associated with obesity, including glucose intoler-
ance, insulin resistance and inflammation in fat and liver [1,
2, 8, 11]. These interactions are complex and depend on
multiple factors, such as host genetics; diet composition and
quantity; presence of probiotics, prebiotics, or antibiotics;
and other environmental factors [8, 10]. In the present
study, we show that modification of gut microbiota due to
HFD feeding of mice results in multiple behavioral
abnormalities indicative of anxiety and depression. These
include increased time spent in the dark compartment of a
dark-light box, increased latency to feed in a novelty-
suppressed feeding test, decreased exploration in an open-
field test and increased marble burying activity. We show
that antibiotic treatment improves not only the metabolic
abnormalities induced by the HFD, but many of the beha-
vioral changes associated with diet-induced obesity. Indeed,
two weeks of treatment with either vancomycin or metro-
nidazole reverses HFD-induced hyperglycemia and glucose
intolerance (without affecting body weight) and corrects the
depressive and anxiety-like behaviors. As 6 weeks on high-
fat diet led to increased body weight gain compared to
chow, it is not possible to separate the effect of mild diet-
induced obesity (DIO) from the effects of the high-fat diet
itself on behavior. However, antibiotic treatment did not
lead to changes in food intake or body composition or block
the HFD-induced weight gain, although it did reverse most
of the behavioral changes. Thus, whether the behavioral
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
C
H
M
V
IL1  (pg/mg)
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
C
H
M
V
TNF  (pg/mg)
Il1b
IL6
TNFa
IL10
0
1
2
3
4
C
H
M
V
C
H
M
V
C
H
M
V
C
H
M
V
mRNA expression 
(fold change)
Chow
HFD + M
HFD + V
HFD
aca
aca
aca
aca
Cd11b
Cd11b
Cd11b
Cd11b
a
c
*
** * *
*****
*
** ***
* ***
b
IL1b
IL6
TNFa
IL10
Fig. 5 Antibiotic treatment ameliorates HFD-induced inflammation in
the nucleus accumbens (Nacc). a mRNA abundance measured by RT
qPCR in the Nacc of chow and HFD-fed mice, treated or not with
antibiotics (n = 12/group). b ELISA assays for IL-1β and TNFα pre-
sent in homogenates from the Nacc (n = 14/group). c Representative
images of the Nacc from chow and HFD-fed mice treated or not with
antibiotics, stained with Cd11b antibody (red). Scale bars, 200 μm.
C chow, H HFD, M HFD + metronidazole, V HFD + vancomycin.
Data
are
shown
as
mean ± SEM.
*P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01,
and
***P < 0.001 by ANOVA, followed by pre-planned t-tests
2296
M. Soto et al.
 changes in the HFD mice are due to the diet itself or mild
obesity, the response to antibiotics indicates that they are, at
least in part, due to the changing microbiome. This is
further supported by the fact that the effect of HFD and
antibiotics improvement could be reproduced in germ-free
mice by fecal transfer of gut microbiota. Mechanistically,
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2297
 the improved behavioral tests are associated with a reversal
of brain insulin resistance and signs of brain inflammation
observed in DIO mice, as well as changes in brain meta-
bolites, some neurotransmitters and the neurotrophic factor
BDNF. Although vancomycin targets gram-positive bac-
teria, and metronidazole targets anaerobic bacteria, in the
context of HFD-induced obesity, both antibiotics have
similar effects on insulin signaling, inflammation, metabo-
lism and behavior, suggesting the gut bacteria involved are
sensitive to both antibiotics.
Many clinical reports have shown that obesity and Type
2 diabetes are associated with brain disorders, including
depression, anxiety, dementia, and increased rates of cog-
nitive decline [16–18]. In mice, eating a HFD for as little as
six weeks leads to neurobehavioral abnormalities, with
increases in behaviors reflective of both anxiety and
depression, and changing gut microbiota composition of the
HFD-fed mice using antibiotics lead to recovery from the
increased anxiety and depressive-like behaviors in less than
two weeks, without affecting weight gain. Other studies
have shown that the effects of the changing microbiome are
complex and depend on many factors, including the timing
and direction of change. For example, despite some lim-
itations with the germ-free mouse model, which can also
have developmental defects, these mice display decreased
anxiety on behavioral testing that can be reversed by
colonization with microbiota from healthy donor mice [25].
On the other hand, antibiotic treatment early in life, when
the gut microbiome is developing, can induce long-term
anxiety-like behaviors, as well as abnormal social behaviors
in mice [40].
We have previously shown that modification of gut
microbiota through antibiotic treatment in DIO mice
improves insulin signaling in peripheral tissues, like muscle,
fat and liver [8]. The current study shows that similar
changes occur in the brain. Indeed, HFD leads to reduced
phosphorylation of the IR and IRS-1 in response to exo-
genous insulin in multiple brain regions including the
hypothalamus, which controls metabolic homeostasis, and
regions of the limbic system such as the Nacc, which are
known to control mood and behavior [41], consistent with
other studies [34, 42]. Antibiotic treatment returns insulin
stimulation to control levels. These changes in insulin sig-
naling at the molecular level can be reproduced in germ-free
mice by fecal transplantation, directly demonstrating a role
of gut microbes in control of brain insulin signaling. While
metronidazole is absorbed and can cross the blood-brain
barrier (BBB) [43], orally administered vancomycin is not
absorbed and does not cross the BBB, excluding a direct
effect of antibiotics on the insulin signaling pathway [44].
Deficits in insulin signaling in the brain have been pre-
viously associated with neurobehavioral abnormalities.
Indeed, anxiety and depressive-like behaviors have been
observed in mice with a complete knockout of insulin sig-
naling in the brain [28], and in mice with knockdown of
insulin receptors in specific brains areas, including the
hypothalamus, central amygdala, and hippocampus ([45]
and manuscript in preparation). Furthermore, in humans,
intranasal insulin treatment of obese men has been shown to
improve mood and reduce levels of the stress hormones
ACTH and cortisol [46]. Since DIO mice have both per-
ipheral and central insulin resistance, it is possible that
improved systemic insulin sensitivity and glucose home-
ostasis play some role in the amelioration of the behaviors
of HFD-fed mice treated with antibiotics. Indeed, db/db
obese mice treated with the insulin sensitizer rosiglitazone,
which does not cross the BBB, have improved peripheral
insulin sensitivity accompanied by a decrease in depressive-
like behavior [47]. On the other hand, we and others have
shown that brain insulin resistance can lead to peripheral
metabolic abnormalities [48, 49]. Thus, it seems more likely
that the decrease in insulin signaling in brain of HFD-fed
mice and the improvement with antibiotics contributes to
the improvements in peripheral tissue response rather than
vice versa [8].
Tissue inflammation is a general feature of obesity
[1, 11] and appears to play a role in the brain insulin
resistance created by the changing gut microbiota. We and
others have previously shown that HFD increases systemic
inflammation, increasing levels of serum TNFα and mac-
rophage infiltration in peripheral tissues that can be
decreased after treatment with antibiotics [1, 8, 11]. This is
mediated, at least in part, through changes in the balance
between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory bile acids,
and changes in the bile acid receptor TGR5 [8]. Our current
data show that HFD also induces inflammation in the brain,
with increased levels of cytokines and Cd11b positive
macrophages in the Nacc and VTA, consistent with other
studies [42, 50]. As with the peripheral inflammation of
HFD-fed mice, treatment with metronidazole or vancomy-
cin decreases the levels of cytokines and the levels of
Cd11b positive macrophages in the Nacc. Sampson et al.
Fig. 6 HFD affect the levels of metabolites and BDNF in the brain and
in the plasma. Boxplots of neurotransmitter levels in the Nacc (a) and
plasma (b) (n = 6/group). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 by moderated t-
tests. c Heat map of the top 10 acylcarnitines differentially regulated
by HFD and/or antibiotics in the hypothalamus and Nacc. d Heat map
of the top 10 amino acids and derivatives differentially regulated by
HFD and/or antibiotics in the hypothalamus and Nacc. Asterisk (*)
and (#) represent metabolites significantly changed by HFD compared
to chow levels, and significantly reversed to control levels by metro-
nidazole (*) or vancomycin (#). e Western blots and quantification of
mature BDNF and pro-BDNF reported to GAPDH in the Nacc of
chow and HFD-fed mice, treated or not with antibiotics (n = 8/group).
Data are shown as mean ± SEM, normalized to chow-fed mice. **P <
0.01 and ***P < 0.001 by ANOVA, followed by pre-planned t-tests.
C chow, H HFD, M HFD + metronidazole, V HFD + vancomycin
2298
M. Soto et al.
 have shown that depletion of gut bacteria with antibiotics
also ameliorates neuroinflammation in a mouse model of
Parkinson’s disease [51]. As deleting the insulin receptor in
the brain does not induce an inflammatory response, but is
sufficient to induce anxiety-like behaviors [28], it seems
likely that it is the brain insulin resistance, rather than HFD-
induced inflammation, which acts as the causal factor in the
behavioral changes, although it is likely that inflammation
can make the insulin resistance worse [52].
Another possible mechanism contributing to gut-brain
communication in these animals may be changes in circu-
lating and brain metabolites. Using LCMS metabolomics,
we found that tryptophan and GABA levels in the Nacc are
increased by HFD feeding and that metronidazole decreases
levels of GABA back to control levels. The levels of other
metabolites and neurotransmitters follow distinct patterns in
brain and in plasma. For example, in plasma, GABA is
decreased and serotonin is increased by HFD, consistent
with previous studies showing that different gut bacteria can
synthesize and modify circulating levels of GABA [53] and
serotonin [54]. Our data also show that in brain, levels of
tryptophan, the precursor of serotonin, increase with HFD
and further increase with metronidazole. These changes are
opposite in direction from the changes in the blood, sug-
gesting that increased influx of tryptophan into the brain by
HFD could be related to increased blood insulin levels [55].
In addition to neurotransmitters and their precursors, a
number of amino acids or their derivatives are changed in
the brain by HFD and/or antibiotics. For example, guani-
dinoacetic acid, a precursor of creatine, is significantly
reduced by HFD and increased by metronidazole in the
Nacc. Guanidinoacetic acid supplementation has been
shown to increase of the creatine pool in the human brain
potentially restoring cellular bioenergetics in disorders
characterized by low brain creatine, including neurodegen-
erative diseases [56]. In the periphery, guanidinoacetic acid
has been shown to decrease plasma glucose, increase insulin
secretion, and improve insulin sensitivity [57, 58]. On the
other hand, in the hypothalamus, hydroxyproline, a mod-
ified amino acid generally related to collagen synthesis, is
reduced by HFD and increased by vancomycin, with no
change in blood levels. Hydroxyproline has been shown to
be decreased in plasma of genetically obese mice [59] and
increased in the plasma of humans and mice after treatment
with metformin [60]. Rats given fish protein dietary sup-
plements have been shown to have increased hydroxypro-
line In the brain, and this was associated with decreased
anxiety-like behaviors [61], There are also changes in
multiple acylcarnitines in brain with HFD and antibiotics.
Previous studies have shown that acylcarnitines in brain are
involved in stabilizing membrane composition, improving
mitochondrial function, and enhancing cholinergic neuro-
transmission [62].
Finally, another potential mediator of the effects of the
HFD on behavior is the increase in BDNF levels in the Nacc
and VTA [20]. Increased BDNF in limbic regions of the
brain is associated with chronic defeat stress [39], and
BDNF injection into the VTA induces depressive-like
behaviors in mice [63]. In our study, BDNF levels are
increased in Nacc of DIO mice and normalized by antibiotic
treatment. This is consistent with previous data showing
that BDNF levels are lower in the cortex and hippocampus
of germ-free mice compared to conventional mice [64].
BDNF is involved in synaptic vesicle maturation, and its
elevation in DIO mice might cause a potentiation of
synaptic transmission leading to the observed abnormalities
in these mice behaviors [65].
Taken together, our data indicate that modifications in
gut microbiome of DIO mice drive changes in both host
metabolism and host behavior. Indeed, HFD-fed mice
develop central insulin resistance and altered behaviors
indicative of anxiety and depression. Antibiotic treatment of
HFD-fed mice, which causes major remodeling of the gut
microbiome [8], improves peripheral and central insulin
sensitivity, and reverses these behavioral/mood abnormal-
ities. These effects are reversible when antibiotics are
stopped and transferable to germ-free mice by cecal bac-
terial transfer. These effects of gut microbiota on the brain
and behavior are mediated by changes in brain insulin
signaling and inflammation, and by the modulation of
neurotransmitters, metabolites and other neuroactive mole-
cules, such as BDNF. Understanding these gut-brain inter-
actions may open novel approaches to treatment of mood
and behavioral disorders.
Acknowledgements We thank Christie Penniman, Lucie Orliaguet,
Vladimir Yeliseyev, Chris Cahill, Carly Cederquist, Jonathan Drey-
fuss, and Hui Pan from the Joslin DRC Bioinformatics Core for their
technical assistance. The authors also thank the Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Harvard Digestive Diseases Center for Clinical and Trans-
lational Metagenomics for their support. This work was supported by
NIH grants (R01 DK031036 and DK033201 to CRK) and the Mary K.
Iacocca Professorship (to CRK). CH was supported by the Ecole
Polytechnique.
Author contributions: MS designed the study, researched data, and
wrote the manuscript. CH, JP, SF, LB, and CC researched data and/or
helped design experiments. CRK designed the study, supervised all
work and helped write the manuscript.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2299
 changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Cani PD, Bibiloni R, Knauf C, Waget A, Neyrinck AM, Delzenne
NM,
et al.
Changes in
gut microbiota
control
metabolic
endotoxemia-induced inflammation in high-fat diet-induced obe-
sity and diabetes in mice. Diabetes. 2008;57:1470–81.
2. Duca F, Gerard P, Covasa M, Lepage P. Metabolic interplay
between
gut
bacteria
and
their
host.
Front
Horm
Res.
2014;42:73–82.
3. Patterson E, Ryan PM, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Ross RP, Fitzgerald
GF, et al. Gut microbiota, obesity and diabetes. Postgrad Med J.
2016;92:286–300.
4. Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Cheng J, Duncan AE, Kau AL,
et al. Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity modulate
metabolism in mice. Science. 2013;341:1241214.
5. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER,
Gordon JI. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased
capacity for energy harvest. Nature. 2006;444:1027–31.
6. van de Wouw M, Schellekens H, Dinan TG, Cryan JF.
Microbiota-gut-brain xis: modulator of host metabolism and
appetite. J Nutr. 2017;147:727–45.
7. Bokulich NA, Chung J, Battaglia T, Henderson N, Jay M, Li H,
et al. Antibiotics, birth mode, and diet shape microbiome
maturation during early life. Sci Transl Med. 2016;8:343ra382.
8. Fujisaka S, Ussar S, Clish C, Devkota S, Dreyfuss JM, Sakaguchi
M, et al. Antibiotic effects on gut microbiota and metabolism are
host dependent. J Clin Invest. 2016;126:4430–43.
9. Sonnenburg JL, Backhed F. Diet-microbiota interactions as
moderators of human metabolism. Nature. 2016;535:56–64.
10. Ussar S, Griffin NW, Bezy O, Fujisaka S, Vienberg S, Softic S,
et al. Interactions between gut microbiota, host genetics and diet
modulate the predisposition to obesity and metabolic syndrome.
Cell Metab. 2015;22:516–30.
11. Kim KA, Gu W, Lee IA, Joh EH, Kim DH. High fat diet-induced
gut microbiota exacerbates inflammation and obesity in mice via
the TLR4 signaling pathway. PLoS One. 2012;7:e47713.
12. Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony G,
et al. Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with meta-
bolic markers. Nature. 2013;500:541–6.
13. Carvalho BM, Guadagnini D, Tsukumo DML, Schenka AA,
Latuf-Filho P, Vassallo J, et al. Modulation of gut microbiota by
antibiotics improves insulin signalling in high-fat fed mice. Dia-
betologia. 2012;55:2823–34.
14. Everard A, Belzer C, Geurts L, Ouwerkerk JP, Druart C, Bindels
LB, et al. Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and
intestinal epithelium controls diet-induced obesity. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2013;110:9066–71.
15. Hwang I, Park YJ, Kim YR, Kim YN, Ka S, Lee HY, et al.
Alteration of gut microbiota by vancomycin and bacitracin
improves insulin resistance via glucagon-like peptide 1 in diet-
induced obesity. FASEB J. 2015;29:2397–411.
16. Riederer P, Korczyn AD, Ali SS, Bajenaru O, Choi MS, Chopp
M, et al. The diabetic brain and cognition. J Neural Trans.
2017;124:1431–54.
17. Sanderlin AH, Todem D, Bozoki AC. Obesity and co-morbid
conditions
are
associated
with
specific
neuropsychiatric
symptoms in mild cognitive impairment. Front Aging Neurosci.
2017;9:164.
18. Simon GE, Von Korff M, Saunders K, Miglioretti DL, Crane PK,
van Belle G, et al. Association between obesity and psychiatric
disorders in the US adult population. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63:824–30.
19. Andre C, Dinel AL, Ferreira G, Laye S, Castanon N. Diet-induced
obesity progressively alters cognition, anxiety-like behavior and
lipopolysaccharide-induced depressive-like behavior: focus on
brain
indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase
activation.
Brain
Behav
Immun. 2014;41:10–21.
20. Sharma S, Fulton S. Diet-induced obesity promotes depressive-
like behaviour that is associated with neural adaptations in brain
reward circuitry. Int J Obes. 2013;37:382–9.
21. Yamada N, Katsuura G, Ochi Y, Ebihara K, Kusakabe T, Hosoda
K, et al. Impaired CNS leptin action is implicated in depression
associated with obesity. Endocrinology. 2011;152:2634–43.
22. Bruce-Keller AJ, Salbaum JM, Luo M, Blanchard Et, Taylor CM,
Welsh DA, et al. Obese-type gut microbiota induce neurobeha-
vioral changes in the absence of obesity. Biol Psychiatry.
2015;77:607–15.
23. Burokas A, Arboleya S, Moloney RD, Peterson VL, Murphy K,
Clarke G, et al. Targeting the microbiota-gut-brain axis: prebiotics
have anxiolytic and antidepressant-like effects and reverse the
impact
of
chronic
stress
in
mice.
Biol
Psychiatry.
2017;82:472–87.
24. Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, Escaravage E, Savignac HM,
Dinan TG, et al. Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emo-
tional behavior and central GABA receptor expression in a mouse
via the vagus nerve. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;108:16050–5.
25. Diaz Heijtz R, Wang S, Anuar F, Qian Y, Bjorkholm B,
Samuelsson A, et al. Normal gut microbiota modulates brain
development
and
behavior.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA.
2011;108:3047–52.
26. Neufeld KM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Reduced anxiety-
like behavior and central neurochemical change in germ-free
mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2011;23:255–64. e119.
27. Fujisaka S, Avila-Pacheco J, Soto M, Kostic A, Dreyfuss JM, Pan
H, et al. Diet, genetics and gut microbiome drive dynamic changes
in plasma metabolites. Cell Rep. 2018;22:3072–86. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.02.060.
28. Kleinridders A, Cai W, Cappellucci L, Ghazarian A, Collins WR,
Vienberg SG, et al. Insulin resistance in brain alters dopamine
turnover and causes behavioral disorders. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2015;112:3463–8.
29. Hsiao EY, McBride SW, Hsien S, Sharon G, Hyde ER, McCue T,
et
al.
Microbiota
modulate
behavioral
and
physiological
abnormalities associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. Cell.
2013;155:1451–63.
30. Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, et al.
limma
powers
differential
expression
analyses
for
RNA-
sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43:
e47.
31. Yoshiya K, Lapchak PH, Thai TH, Kannan L, Rani P, Dalle Lucca
JJ, et al. Depletion of gut commensal bacteria attenuates intestinal
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver
Physiol. 2011;301:G1020–30.
32. Svenningsson I, Bjorkelund C, Marklund B, Gedda B. Anxiety
and depression in obese and normal-weight individuals with dia-
betes type 2: a gender perspective. Scand J Caring Sci.
2012;26:349–54.
33. Njung’e K, Handley SL. Evaluation of marble-burying behavior
as a model of anxiety. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1991;38:63–7.
34. Arnold SE, Lucki I, Brookshire BR, Carlson GC, Browne CA,
Kazi H, et al. High fat diet produces brain insulin resistance,
2300
M. Soto et al.
 synaptodendritic abnormalities and altered behavior in mice.
Neurobiol Dis. 2014;67:79–87.
35. Buckman LB, Thompson MM, Moreno HN, Ellacott KL.
Regional astrogliosis in the mouse hypothalamus in response to
obesity. J Comp Neurol. 2013;521:1322–33.
36. Brown JM, Hazen SL. Targeting of microbe-derived metabolites
to improve human health: The next frontier for drug discovery. J
Biol Chem. 2017;292:8560–8.
37. De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Goncalves D, Vinera J,
Zitoun C, Duchampt A, et al. Microbiota-generated metabolites
promote metabolic benefits via gut-brain neural circuits. Cell.
2014;156:84–96.
38. Gasperotti M, Passamonti S, Tramer F, Masuero D, Guella G,
Mattivi F, et al. Fate of microbial metabolites of dietary poly-
phenols in rats: is the brain their target destination? ACS Chem
Neurosci. 2015;6:1341–52.
39. Krishnan V, Han MH, Graham DL, Berton O, Renthal W, Russo
SJ, et al. Molecular adaptations underlying susceptibility and
resistance
to
social
defeat
in
brain
reward regions.
Cell.
2007;131:391–404.
40. Leclercq S, Mian FM, Stanisz AM, Bindels LB, Cambier E, Ben-
Amram H, et al. Low-dose penicillin in early life induces long-
term changes in murine gut microbiota, brain cytokines and
behavior. Nat Commun. 2017;8:15062.
41. Shirayama Y, Chaki S. Neurochemistry of the nucleus accumbens
and its relevance to depression and antidepressant action in
rodents. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2006;4:277–91.
42. De Souza CT, Araujo EP, Bordin S, Ashimine R, Zollner RL,
Boschero AC, et al. Consumption of a fat-rich diet activates a
proinflammatory response and induces insulin resistance in the
hypothalamus. Endocrinology. 2005;146:4192–9.
43. Hoffmann HG, Forster D, Muirhead B. [Metronidazole con-
centration of the cerebrospinal fluid from slightly inflamed
meninges]. Arzneim-Forsch. 1984;34:830–1.
44. Frohlich EE, Farzi A, Mayerhofer R, Reichmann F, Jacan A,
Wagner B, et al. Cognitive impairment by antibiotic-induced gut
dysbiosis: Analysis of gut microbiota-brain communication. Brain
Behav Immun. 2016;56:140–55.
45. Grillo CA, Piroli GG, Kaigler KF, Wilson SP, Wilson MA,
Reagan LP. Downregulation of hypothalamic insulin receptor
expression elicits depressive-like behaviors in rats. Behav brain
Res. 2011;222:230–5.
46. Hallschmid M, Benedict C, Schultes B, Born J, Kern W. Obese
men respond to cognitive but not to catabolic brain insulin sig-
naling. Int J Obes. 2008;32:275–82.
47. Sharma AN, Elased KM, Lucot JB. Rosiglitazone treatment
reversed depression- but not psychosis-like behavior of db/db
diabetic mice. J Psychopharmacol. 2012;26:724–32.
48. Bruning JC, Gautam D, Burks DJ, Gillette J, Schubert M, Orban
PC, et al. Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight
and reproduction. Science. 2000;289:2122–5.
49. Grillo CA, Tamashiro KL, Piroli GG, Melhorn S, Gass JT,
Newsom RJ, et al. Lentivirus-mediated downregulation of hypo-
thalamic
insulin
receptor
expression.
Physiol
Behav.
2007;92:691–701.
50. Naznin F, Toshinai K, Waise TM, NamKoong C, Md Moin AS,
Sakoda H, et al. Diet-induced obesity causes peripheral and
central ghrelin resistance by promoting inflammation. J Endocri-
nol. 2015;226:81–92.
51. Sampson TR, Debelius JW, Thron T, Janssen S, Shastri GG, Ilhan
ZE, et al. Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroin-
flammation
in
a
model
of
Parkinson’s
disease.
Cell.
2016;167:1469–80. e1412.
52. Adabimohazab R, Garfinkel A, Milam EC, Frosch O, Mangone
A, Convit A. Does inflammation mediate the association
between obesity and insulin resistance? Inflammation. 2016;39:
994–1003.
53. Barrett E, Ross RP, O’Toole PW, Fitzgerald GF, Stanton C.
gamma-Aminobutyric acid production by culturable bacteria from
the human intestine. J Appl Microbiol. 2012;113:411–7.
54. Yano JM, Yu K, Donaldson GP, Shastri GG, Ann P, Ma L, et al.
Indigenous bacteria from the gut microbiota regulate host ser-
otonin biosynthesis. Cell. 2015;161:264–76.
55. Daniel PM, Love ER, Moorhouse SR, Pratt OE. The effect of
insulin upon the influx of tryptophan into the brain of the rabbit. J
Physiol. 1981;312:551–62.
56. Ostojic SM, Ostojic J, Drid P, Vranes M, Jovanov P. Dietary
guanidinoacetic acid increases brain creatine levels in healthy
men. Nutrition. 2017;33:149–56.
57. Aynsley-Green A, Alberti KG. In vivo stimulation of insulin
secretion by guanidine derivatives in the rat. Horm Metab Res.
1974;6:115–20.
58. Meglasson MD, Wilson JM, Yu JH, Robinson DD, Wyse BM, de
Souza CJ. Antihyperglycemic action of guanidinoalkanoic acids:
3-guanidinopropionic acid ameliorates hyperglycemia in diabetic
KKAy and C57BL6Job/ob mice and increases glucose dis-
appearance
in
rhesus
monkeys.
J
Pharmacol
Exp
Ther.
1993;266:1454–62.
59. Giesbertz P, Padberg I, Rein D, Ecker J, Hofle AS, Spanier B,
et al. Metabolite profiling in plasma and tissues of ob/ob and db/
db mice identifies novel markers of obesity and type 2 diabetes.
Diabetologia. 2015;58:2133–43.
60. Rotroff DM, Oki NO, Liang X, Yee SW, Stocker SL, Corum
DG, et al. Pharmacometabolomic assessment of metformin in
non-diabetic, African Americans. Front Pharmacol. 2016;7:
135.
61. Funatsu S, Kondoh T, Kawase T, Ikeda H, Nagasawa M, Denbow
DM, et al. Long-term consumption of dried bonito dashi (a tra-
ditional Japanese fish stock) reduces anxiety and modifies central
amino acid levels in rats. Nutr Neurosci. 2015;18:256–64.
62. Jones LL, McDonald DA, Borum PR. Acylcarnitines: role in
brain. Prog Lipid Res. 2010;49:61–75.
63. Eisch
A.
Brain-derived
neurotrophic
factor
in
the
ventral
midbrain–nucleus accumbens pathway: a role in depression. Biol
Psychiatry. 2003;54:994–1005.
64. Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu XN, et al.
Postnatal microbial colonization programs the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal system for stress response in mice. J Physiol.
2004;558:263–75.
65. Yoshii A, Constantine-Paton M. Postsynaptic BDNF-TrkB sig-
naling in synapse maturation, plasticity, and disease. Dev Neu-
robiol. 2010;70:304–22.
Gut microbiota modulate neurobehavior through changes in brain insulin sensitivity and metabolism
2301
