 1
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Perceived Dangerousness as 
Related to Psychiatric Symptoms 
and Psychiatric Service Use – a 
Vignette Based Representative 
Population Survey
Julia F. Sowislo*, Franca Gonet-Wirz*, Stefan Borgwardt, Undine E. Lang & Christian G. Huber
Perceptions of dangerousness are an influential component of mental health stigma and can be driven 
by the display of psychiatric symptoms and the use of psychiatric service institutions. Yet, no previous 
study compared symptoms and service use associated perceptions of dangerousness. Therefore, we 
conducted a representative survey (N = 2,207) in the canton of Basel-Stadt, Switzerland. Participants 
were asked to answer the perceived dangerousness scale with respect to a vignette that either 
depicted psychiatric symptoms of a fictitious character or a psychiatric service institution the fictitious 
character had been admitted to. Between the vignettes, type of symptoms, type of psychiatric service, 
dangerousness, and gender were systematically varied. Perceived dangerousness was significantly 
lower as related to psychiatric service use than related to psychiatric symptoms. Overall, symptoms of 
alcohol dependency, behavior endangering others, and male gender of the fictitious character tend to 
increase perceived dangerousness. Furthermore, being hospitalized in a psychiatric unit at a general 
hospital or the rater being familiar with psychiatric services tends to decrease perceived dangerousness. 
Effective anti-stigma initiatives should integrate education about dangerousness as well as methods 
to increase familiarity with psychiatry. Additionally, an integration of modern psychiatry in somato-
medical care institutions might decrease stigmatization.
Individuals with mental illness are exposed to extreme stigmatization and devaluation1. The negative conse-
quences of stigmatization, such as increased anxiety and stress, decreased functional outcome, and lower quality 
of life can be considered as a ‘second disease’2,3. Accordingly, a wealth of scientific literature has been published 
on mental health stigma, some of which is inconsistent in its findings. These inconsistencies might be partly due 
to the fact that stigma consist of different facets. The most commonly measured facets of stigma are (increased) 
desire for social distance and perception of (higher) dangerousness of the target group4. Individuals with mental 
illness are commonly perceived as being relatively dangerous, as multiple representative studies have shown4. 
This finding is mirrored in everyday life, for instance by stereotyped media portrays that highlight a high risk 
for violence in mental illness3. Yet, these perceptions are biased: Although there is a significantly elevated risk 
for violence, the risk is small and the majority of individuals with mental illness are not violent5. Perceptions of 
dangerousness gain special importance as they are hypothesized to influence other facets of stigmatization such 
as desire for social distance6 or for coercion7.
Perceptions of dangerousness might be influenced by different sources of information. One source might 
be information about symptoms or deviant behavior (dangerousness associated with psychiatric symptoms). 
However, psychiatric symptoms are, in contrast to other stigmatized conditions such as ethnicity, often invisible. 
Consequently, information about psychiatric service use (e.g., the information that a person has been treated in 
a psychiatric hospital) is another important source of perceptions of dangerousness (dangerousness associated 
Universitäre Psychiatrische Kliniken (UPK), Universität Basel, Wilhelm Klein-Str. 27, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. 
*These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
C.H. (email: christian.huber@upkbs.ch)
received: 06 September 2016
accepted: 06 March 2017
Published: 03 April 2017
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
with psychiatric service use). This in turn negatively influences psychiatric service use and adherence: To avoid 
stigmatization, individuals with mental illness tend to avoid the treatment they are in need for8,9.
Research on perceived dangerousness associated with psychiatric symptoms has revealed differences across 
different bundles of symptoms/psychiatric diagnoses. More precisely, individuals with alcoholism are perceived as 
more dangerous than individuals with psychosis10. Yet, research on the stigmatization of individuals with symp-
toms of personality disorders is still scarce. The only existent studies suggest that mental health professionals11,12 
perceive individuals with borderline personality disorder (BPD) as more dangerous than individuals with alco-
holism. However this effect might be specific to professionals, as individuals with BPD tend to evoke a intense 
disorder-specific countertransference in treatment13. Thus, supplemental studies in the general population are 
needed.
To the best of our knowledge, there is as yet no research on dangerousness associated with psychiatric service 
use that studies differences across different types of service institutions. However, there is one previous study 
showing that hospitalizations in a psychiatric unit at a general hospital evoke less desire for social distance (the 
latter being another facet of stigmatization as mentioned above)14. It is plausible that the concrete type of institu-
tion also influences perceptions of dangerousness. For instance, by often being geographically dislocated, psychi-
atric hospitals might evoke associations of confinement and thus foster perceptions of dangerousness15.
In addition, familiarity with psychiatric illness16 is known to influence the stigma associated with displaying 
psychiatric symptoms. For instance, Angermeyer et al.17 showed that individuals who are familiar with psychiatric 
illness are less likely to believe that people with psychiatric illnesses are dangerous.
The present study is the first to compare the amount of perceived dangerousness associated with psychiatric 
symptoms versus with psychiatric service use. Furthermore, we pitted perceived dangerousness associated with 
symptoms of BPD in the general population against perceived dangerousness associated with symptoms of alco-
hol dependency and schizophrenia. Finally, our study is the first to compare the amount of perceived dangerous-
ness across different psychiatric inpatient institutions, including forensic-psychiatric settings.
Methods
Sample and Procedure. 
Data come from a survey on psychiatric service use and stigmatization that was 
conducted from autumn 2013 to spring 2014 among citizens of Basel, Switzerland14. This study was approved by 
the local ethics committee (“Ethikkommission Nordwest- und Zentralschweiz”
, EKNZ 2014-394) and conducted 
according to the Declaration of Helsinki. The current study used questionnaires that were sent out to the gen-
eral population aged 18 or above. It included a letter detailing study procedures, stating that participation was 
completely optional, and that non-participation would not be followed by any consequence. Persons agreed to 
participate by sending in their questionnaire. This procedure was accepted as informed consent by the EKNZ. 
The manuscript does not contain information or images that could lead to identification of a study participant.
A sample of 10,000 individuals was randomly drawn from the cantonal resident register and was mailed study 
material. To be eligible, participants had to be registered in a private household in Basel-City, Bettingen, or Riehen 
for a minimum of two years, had to be aged from 18 to 65 years, and had to have sufficient knowledge of the 
German language. This approach was chosen in a consensus procedure together with the Statistical Office of 
Basel-City and an external advisory committee to generate a representative study sample.
Participants had to read a vignette and answer several questionnaires. Vignettes described a fictitious charac-
ter and depicted either the psychiatric symptoms of the character (case vignette) or a clinic the character had been 
admitted to (clinic vignette). Between both types of vignettes, gender and dangerousness of the fictitious patient 
were systematically varied: Half of the case vignettes contained a male (Sebastian M.) versus a female character 
(Katrin M.). Moreover, it was explicitly stated that within the last month the main character (case vignette) or 
the patients of the clinic (clinic vignette), either displayed no dangerous behavior, self-endangering behavior, or 
behavior endangering others. Additionally, between the case vignettes, type of psychiatric symptoms was system-
atically varied. They either described a case of acute psychotic disorder, a case of alcohol dependency, or a case of 
borderline personality disorder, not being labeled directly, but with symptoms fulfilling the relevant DSM-V cri-
teria18. Case vignettes were constructed based on the vignettes that had been used in previous stigma research19,20. 
However, some modifications were introduced to eliminate potential confounders. Apart from the characteristics 
that were systematically varied (i.e., symptoms, gender, and dangerousness), all other information (e.g., age of the 
fictitious character) was kept constant between the case vignettes. Before being used in the main survey, vignettes 
were submitted to N = 
 18 psychiatrists and clinical psychologists for blind diagnostic allocation. Supporting the 
validity of the case vignettes, each diagnosis was labeled correctly by all of the clinical experts.
Moreover, between the clinic vignettes, type of the psychiatric service institution to which the fictitious char-
acter was admitted was systematically varied. Vignettes either described a general hospital including a psychiatric 
unit, or a psychiatric hospital, or a psychiatric hospital also including a forensic unit. Thus, we systematically 
manipulated the characteristics that are per definition specific to the respective types of clinics, as well as gender 
and dangerousness, whereas all other information (e.g., carrying capacity of the fictitious clinic) was kept con-
stant across the clinic vignettes.
Considering the variations described above there were 36 individual vignette conditions, so that each condi-
tion was sent to about 277 participants (for the concrete wording of exemplary vignette conditions see Sowislo 
et al.14).
The final sample consisted of 2,207 individuals (61.5% female, 66.5% Swiss citizens, 44.7% single), reflect-
ing a response rate of 22.1%. Mean age of participants was 43.4 years (SD = 
 13.4). 6.2% percent had com-
pleted the obligatory 9 school years, 51.3% had completed secondary education (approximately 12 years), and 
42.0% had a university degree. There were no significant differences in number of respondents per individual 
vignette condition, nor for the case (χ 
2 (17, N = 1107) = 19.00, p = 
 0.329) neither for the clinic vignettes (χ 
2 (17, 
N = 1100) = 6.84, p = 0.986).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
To assess representativeness of our sample, respondent characteristics were compared to official census data as 
published in the statistical almanac of Basel-City21. However, this comparison has to be interpreted with caution, 
as the data available from the statistical almanac represent the whole population of Basel-City without the restric-
tions posed by our in- and exclusion criteria. At the end of 2013, 191,606 persons were registered in Basel-City. 
52.0% were of female gender, 67.0% were Swiss citizens, and 45.7% were single. Mean age was 42.9 years. 17.5% 
had completed obligatory school, 48.6 secondary education, and 32.5% higher/university education. The compar-
ison shows that questionnaires were sent out to over 5.2% of the population. The study sample represents more 
than 1.2% of the total population and can be assumed to be representative with regard to age, nationality, martial 
status, and living situation. However, there seems to be an overrepresentation of women and of persons with 
higher education in our sample.
Measures. 
Perceived Dangerousness. Perceived dangerousness was measured with the dangerousness 
scale22,23. The scale consists of eight items that assess individual beliefs about the dangerousness of the fictitious 
person in the vignette. Responses were made on a 4-point scale and a composite (with higher values indicating 
higher perceived dangerousness) was derived by totaling the sum of all items.
Familiarity with Mental Illness. Familiarity with mental illness was measured with four items asking participants 
whether they themselves had ever undergone psychiatric inpatient or outpatient treatment, and whether anyone 
within their family or anyone within their circle of friends had ever undergone psychiatric treatment. Similar to 
Angermeyer et al.17, we used this information to construct four hierarchical categories representing the degree 
of familiarity with mental illness: (1) the participant herself/himself, (2) a family member of the participant, (3) 
or a friend of the participant has undergone psychiatric treatment, or (4) none of these possibilities applies to the 
participant. If more than one category applied for one respondent, we chose the one with the highest familiarity.
Statistical Analysis. 
All statistical analyses were conducted using the SPSS 19 statistical package for 
Windows (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). We examined differences in social distance between case and 
clinic vignettes using an independent t-test. Then, we conducted two separate multiple regression analyses for the 
case and clinic vignettes respectively, with perceived dangerousness as dependent variable. Categorical predictors 
with more than two categories (i.e., type of psychiatric symptoms, type of psychiatric service, degree of familiarity 
with psychiatric illness, and dangerousness) were entered as dummy variables. In the first regression analysis, type 
of psychiatric symptoms, gender and dangerousness of the fictitious person in the vignette, and familiarity with 
psychiatric illness of the respondent were entered as independent variables. In the second regression analysis, 
type of psychiatric service, gender of the fictitious person in the vignette, dangerousness, and familiarity with 
psychiatric illness of the respondent were entered as independent variables. Multiple regression analysis offers 
a significance test for the difference between the chosen reference category (e.g., alcohol dependency) and each 
of the chosen comparison groups (e.g., psychosis and BPD), respectively. However, it does not allow statistically 
comparing the comparison groups (e.g., psychosis versus BPD) in a direct fashion. To do so, we statistically pitted 
the available standardized regression weights (e.g., alcohol dependency versus acute psychotic disorder and alco-
hol dependency versus BPD) against each other, using a t-test for the difference between regression weights from 
the same sample (overlapping coefficients). As suggested by Cohen et al.24 the standard error of the difference 
between such two regression weights (i.e., β 
i and β 
j) was of the form:
=
−
−
−
+
+
β
β
−
SE
R
n
k
r
r
r
1
1
(
2
)
(1)
i
j
y
ii
jj
ij
2
In this equation, i and j denote the two (dummy) variables, n is the number of participants, k is the number of 
independent variables, R2 is the coefficient of determination, and rii, rjj, and rij represent corresponding elements 
of the inverted correlation matrix.
Results
First, an independent t-test showed that perceived dangerousness was significantly higher (t = 
 11.33, p < 
 0.001) 
with respect to the case vignettes (M = 
 10.38, SD = 
 4.29) than with respect to the clinic vignettes (M = 
 8.16, 
SD = 4.87).
Second, the regression predicting dangerousness of the fictitious person in the case vignettes revealed that 
familiarity, type of psychiatric symptoms, dangerousness, and gender of the fictitious person were significant 
predictors (see Table 1). Concerning familiarity, perceived dangerousness was significantly lower when the par-
ticipant, a family member, or a friend versus none of them had undergone psychiatric treatment. Furthermore, 
t-tests comparing the standardized regression weights showed that there was no significant difference in per-
ceived dangerousness between a family member versus a friend having undergone psychiatric treatment (t = 
 − 
1.15, p = 
 0.252) and the patient herself/himself versus a family member having undergone psychiatric treatment 
(t = 
 − 
0.34, p = 
 0.737). Concerning type of psychiatric symptoms, symptoms of alcohol dependency tended to 
elicit significantly more perceived dangerousness than symptoms of BPD, whereas there was no corresponding 
difference between symptoms of alcohol dependency and symptoms of psychotic disorder. Again, a t-test com-
paring the standardized regression weights indicated that perceived dangerousness does not significantly differ 
between BPD and acute psychotic disorder (t = − 
0.37, p = 
 0.712). Concerning dangerous behavior, information 
that the fictitious person endangered others elicited significantly more perceived dangerousness than information 
that the fictitious person endangered herself/himself or endangered no one at all. Furthermore, at a trend level, 
information that an individual endangered herself/himself provoked more perceived dangerousness than infor-
mation that an individual endangered no one at all (t = 
 − 
1.65, p = 
 0.099). Finally and replicating prior research, 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
the description of a female fictitious person provoked significantly less perception of danger than the description 
of a male fictitious person.
Third, the regression predicting dangerousness of the fictitious person in the clinic vignettes revealed that 
familiarity, type of psychiatric symptoms, dangerous behavior, and gender of the fictitious person were significant 
predictors (see Table 2). Concerning familiarity, the pattern of the first regression analysis was replicated. More 
precisely, the fact that the participant herself/himself, or a family member, or a friend had been in psychiatric 
treatment significantly decreased perceived dangerousness. However, there were no significant differences in 
perceived dangerousness between different degrees of familiarity (patient herself/himself versus family member: 
t = − 
0.74, p = 0.459; family member versus friend: t = − 
0.92, p = 0.358). Concerning type of psychiatric service, 
patients of a general hospital with a psychiatric unit tended to elicit less perception of dangerousness than patients 
of a psychiatric hospital with a forensic unit. Patients of a psychiatric hospital without a forensic unit provoked 
similar perceived dangerousness as patients of a psychiatric hospital with a forensic unit. A t-test comparing the 
standardized regression weights further revealed no difference in perceived dangerousness between patients of 
a general hospital with a psychiatric unit and patients of a psychiatric hospital without a forensic unit (t = 
 0.29, 
p = 
 0.771). Concerning dangerous behavior manipulated across the vignettes, information that an individual was 
inpatient at a hospital some of whose patients endanger others elicited significantly more perceived dangerous-
ness than information that none of the other patients had shown dangerous behavior. However, and in contrast to 
the previous analyses, the degree of dangerousness did not differ for some of the other patients showing behavior 
endangering others versus self-endangering behavior. Furthermore, information that some of the patients endan-
ger themselves does not provoke significantly more perceived dangerousness than information that the patients 
endanger no one at all (t = − 
1.07, p = 
 0.285). Last and as in the previous analysis, male fictitious persons yielded 
higher ratings of perceived dangerousness than female fictitious persons.
Discussion
Main Findings. 
This vignette and questionnaire based study is the first to show that individuals with mental 
illness are believed to be more dangerous than individuals using psychiatric services. Dangerousness associated 
with psychiatric symptoms was diagnosis-specific: While symptoms of alcohol dependency elicited stronger per-
ception of dangerousness, symptoms of BPD and acute psychotic disorder did so to a lesser extent. Dangerousness 
associated with psychiatric services was partly institution-specific: Individuals were perceived more dangerous 
when they used a psychiatric hospital with a forensic unit in contrast to a general hospital which included a 
psychiatric unit. However, this difference disappeared when the psychiatric hospital did not include a forensic 
unit. Furthermore, concerning the relative amount of dangerousness, it made no significant difference whether 
the psychiatric hospital included a forensic unit or not. The respondent being familiar with psychiatric illness 
decreased both symptom and service-use related stigma. Behavior endangering others and self-endangering 
behavior both increased perceived dangerousness associated with psychiatric symptoms (e.g., in case the person 
carrying symptoms was displaying this behavior) as well as dangerousness associated with psychiatric service 
use (e.g., in case the persons used a service institution some of whose inpatients were displaying this behavior). 
Finally, male persons tended to elicit more perceived dangerousness than female persons.
Variables Connected with Perceived Dangerousness. 
Our findings demonstrate that individuals dis-
playing psychiatric symptoms (case vignette) are believed to be more dangerous than individuals using psychi-
atric institutions (clinic vignette). This is in line with previous findings that demonstrated a similar pattern of 
results for a familiar component of stigma, namely desire for social distance14. Together these findings highlight 
that a distinction along the source of stigma (symptoms vs. service use) might be useful for different components 
of stigma. As stigma emerging from symptoms versus service use seems to be relatively independent (our study 
B
β
SE B
p
Constant
15.52 (14.46, 16.69)
0.56
p < 0.001
Familiarity
 Friends vs. none
− 
1.48 (− 
2.30, − 
0.71)
− 
0.15
0.44
p = 0.001
 Family vs. none
− 
2.22 (− 
3.01, − 
1.47)
− 
0.24
0.42
p < 0.001
 Self vs. none
− 
2.48 (− 
3.23, − 
1.72)
− 
0.27
0.42
p < 0.001
Diagnosis
 Borderline vs. alcohol dependency
− 
0.62 (− 
1.23, − 
0.03)
− 
0.07
0.30
p = 0.038
 Psychosis vs. alcohol dependency
− 
0.43 (− 
1.02, − 
0.17)
− 
0.05
0.30
p = 0.154
Dangerousness
 None vs. endangering others
− 
2.53 (− 
3.12, − 
1.86)
− 
0.28
0.30
p < 0.001
 Self-endangering vs. endangering others
− 
1.60 (− 
2.19, − 
1.03)
− 
0.18
0.30
p < 0.001
Gender
 Female vs. male
− 
0.98 (− 
1.47, − 
0.47)
− 
0.11
0.25
p < 0.001
Table 1.  Linear Model of Predictors of Change in Perceived Dangerousness in the Case Vignettes. Note. 
R2 = 0.114 (p < 0.001); 95% bias corrected and accelerated confidence intervals (CI) are reported in parentheses. 
Confidence intervals and standard errors (SE) are based on 1000 bootstrap samples. B: unstandardized 
regression weight; β: standardized regression weight.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
systematically varies one source of stigma while simultaneously holding the other constant) anti-stigma cam-
paigns should target both.
With regard to type of symptoms, alcohol dependency was believed to be the most dangerous condition. This 
might be at least partly due to differences in the frequency of personal experience25. More people in the general 
population might have been confronted with alcohol-related violence than with violence related to the two other 
conditions, because alcohol consumption is relatively prevalent in non-clinical as well as clinical settings26. Yet, 
this perceived rang-order might accurately mirror the corresponding rank-order in risk estimates for violence. 
More precisely, in their meta-analysis Fazel et al.27 showed that the risk of violence in individuals with sub-
stance abuse is higher than in individuals with psychotic disorder. Thus, although the amount of dangerousness 
of individuals with psychiatric symptoms might be overestimated, differences in dangerousness between different 
symptom conditions might be judged accurately. This hypothesis should be investigated in future studies in the 
general population.
Our study is the first to show that perceived dangerousness is directly connected to the type of psychiatric 
service used by an individual, independent of the psychiatric diagnosis or symptoms displayed. Indeed, in our 
study we observed that, although diagnoses treated did not vary, the use of a psychiatric hospital is eliciting more 
dangerousness than the use of a general hospital that includes a psychiatric unit. This is interesting as – in con-
trast to psychiatric symptoms – the structure of psychiatric services provided in an area could be changed. As the 
stigma associated with psychiatric treatment tends to be institution-specific, an integration of modern psychiatry 
in somato-medical care institutions might be a possibility to decrease stigmatization and increase the utilization 
and thereby improve the outcome of psychiatric treatment. Moreover, concerning the degree of stigmatization, in 
our study it makes no difference whether the psychiatric hospital includes a forensic unit or not. This observation 
supports the view that – despite being informed adequately about the patient population– the general population 
is not able to distinguish a common psychiatric hospital where medical care is provided from a forensic hospital, 
where legally detained criminals are treated.
Finally, our study shows that familiarity with mental illness decreases perceptions of dangerousness. In the 
context of other studies, a difference between having had contact to a person in psychiatric treatment or not 
seems to replicate across studies17. Clearly, to build non-biased, realistic, and available representations of dan-
gerousness, the general public should have multiple opportunities to contact and interact with individuals with 
psychiatric illness.
Strengths and Limitations. 
Our study was the first of its kind to systematically investigate differences 
in stigma between inpatient settings which might be especially informative to concrete service institutions and 
general practitioners. However, the findings should be viewed in the context of the study’s limitations. A first lim-
itation consists in possible threats to external validity. The response rate of 22.1% might account for selection and 
non-response biases (e.g., leading to increased participation of women and of persons with higher education). 
Participation of persons with a relatively high level of education may additionally have been facilitated due to the 
questionnaire-based method. Moreover, participation was limited to inhabitants of the canton of Basel-Stadt, 
an urban environment, which might also be reflected in differences in stigmatization of psychiatry across cul-
turally and politically distinct areas. A second limitation pertains to the internal validity of our interpretation 
regarding familiarity with psychiatric illness. As we used cross-sectional data, a causal interpretation of the asso-
ciation between familiarity and perceptions of dangerousness cannot be ensured. It is also possible that individ-
uals with higher perceptions of dangerousness avoid psychiatric treatment and/or contact to individuals who 
sought psychiatric treatment. Although there is one study28 that suggests that familiarity has a causal role for per-
ceived dangerousness, future longitudinal studies should complete the picture. However, due to the experimental 
B
β
SE B
p
Constant
13.58 (12.05, 15.07)
0.72
p < 0.001
Familiarity
 Friends vs. none
− 
2.67 (− 
3.80, − 
1.56)
− 
0.23
0.58
p < 0.001
 Family vs. none
− 
3.32 (− 
4.43, − 
2.22)
− 
0.32
0.55
p < 0.001
 Self vs. none
− 
4.03 (− 
5.16, − 
1.97)
− 
0.40
0.55
p < 0.001
Clinic
 Psychiatry vs. forensic
− 
0.46 (− 
1.16, 0.25)
− 
0.04
0.36
p = 0.200
 General hospital vs. forensic
− 
0.82 (− 
1.51, − 
0.14)
− 
0.08
0.36
p = 0.022
Dangerousness
 None vs. endangering others
− 
1.29 (− 
1.96, − 
0.60)
− 
0.13
0.36
p < 0.001
 Self-endangering vs. endangering others
− 
0.61 (− 
1.36, − 
0.07)
− 
0.06
0.36
p = 0.086
Gender
 Female vs. male
− 
0.81 (− 
1.38, − 
0.26)
− 
0.08
0.29
p = 0.005
Table 2.  Linear Model of Predictors of Change in Perceived Dangerousness in the Clinic Vignettes. Note. 
R2 = 0.071 (p < 
 0.001); 95% bias corrected and accelerated confidence intervals (CI) are reported in parentheses. 
Confidence intervals and standard errors (SE) are based on 1000 bootstrap samples. ‘Psychiatry’ abbreviates 
a psychiatric hospital without forensic unit; ‘forensic’ abbreviates a psychiatric hospital with forensic unit. B: 
unstandardized regression weight; β: standardized regression weight.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
manipulation of symptoms, service institutions, gender, and dangerous behavior, our conclusions referring to 
these constructs are highly internally valid.
Conclusion
Although the majority of individuals with a mental illness is not violent, our results suggest that this finding is not 
reflected in attitudes of the general population. Individuals displaying psychiatric symptoms or using psychiatric 
service institutions are perceived to be dangerous. Therefore, effective anti-stigma initiatives should integrate 
education about dangerousness as well as methods to increase familiarity with psychiatry. Finally, an integration 
of modern psychiatry in somato-medical care institutions and health centers might decrease perceived danger-
ousness. A corresponding increase in utilization of psychiatric treatment and in well-being of our patients should 
be further explored in clinical practice and research.
References
1. Angermeyer, M. C., Matschinger, H. & Schomerus, G. Attitudes towards psychiatric treatment and people with mental illness: 
changes over two decades. Br. J. Psychiatry 203 (2013).
2. Rüsch, N., Berger, M., Finzen, A. & Angermeyer, M. C. In Psychische Erkrankungen - Klinik und Therapie (ed. M. Berger) 1–14 
(2004).
3. Hinshaw, S. P. & Stier, A. Stigma as related to mental disorders. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psych. 4, 367–393 (2008).
4. Jorm, A. F., Reavley, N. J. & Ross, A. M. Belief in the dangerousness of people with mental disorders: a review. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 
46, 1029–1045 (2012).
5. Pulay, A. J. et al. Violent behavior and DSM-IV psychiatric disorders: results from the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and 
related conditions. J. Clin. Psychiatry 69, 12 (2008).
6. Marie, D. & Miles, B. Social distance and perceived dangerousness across four diagnostic categories of mental disorder. Aust. N. Z. 
J. Psychiatry 42, 126–133 (2008).
7. Slovic, P. & Monahan, J. Probability, danger, and coercion: A study of risk perception and decision making in mental health law. Law 
Human Behav. 19, 49–65 (1995).
8. Sirey, J. A. et al. Perceived stigma as a predictor of treatment discontinuation in young and older outpatients with depression. Am. J. 
Psychiatry 158, 479–481 (2001).
9. Wrigley, S., Jackson, H., Judd, F. & Komiti, A. Role of stigma and attitudes toward help‐seeking from a general practitioner for 
mental health problems in a rural town. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 39, 514–521 (2005).
10. Jorm, A. F., Christensen, H. & Griffiths, K. M. The public’s ability to recognize mental disorders and their beliefs about treatment: 
changes in Australia over 8 years. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 40, 36–41 (2006).
11. Markham, D. Attitudes towards patients with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder: Social rejection and dangerousness. J. 
Ment. Health 12, 595–612 (2003).
12. Servais, L. M. & Saunders, S. M. Clinical psychologists’ perceptions of persons with mental illness. Profes. Psychol. 38, 214 (2007).
13. Bourke, M. E. & Grenyer, B. F. S. Psychotherapists’ response to borderline personality disorder: A core conflictual relationship theme 
analysis. Psychother. Res. 20, 680–691 (2010).
14. Sowislo, J. F. et al. Stigmatization of psychiatric symptoms and psychiatric service use: a vignette-based representative population 
survey. Eur. Arch. of Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci., 1–7 (2016).
15. Schomerus, G., Matschinger, H. & Angermeyer, M. C. Do psychiatric units at general hospitals attract less stigmatizing attitudes 
compared with psychiatric hospitals? Epidemiol. Psychiatric Sci. 1, 1–6 (2013).
16. Corrigan, P. W., Green, A., Lundin, R., Kubiak, M. A. & Penn, D. L. Familiarity with and social distance from people who have 
serious mental illness. Psychiatr. Serv. 52, 953–958 (2001).
17. Angermeyer, M. C., Matschinger, H. & Corrigan, P. W. Familiarity with mental illness and social distance from people with 
schizophrenia and major depression: Testing a model using data from a representative population survey. Schizophr. Res. 69, 
175–182 (2004).
18. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (APA, 2013).
19. Schomerus, G., Matschinger, H. & Angermeyer, M. C. Continuum beliefs and stigmatizing attitudes towards persons with 
schizophrenia, depression and alcohol dependence. Psychiatry Res. 209, 665–669 (2013).
20. Nordt, C., Rössler, W. & Lauber, C. Attitudes of mental health professionals toward people with schizophrenia and major depression. 
Schizophr. Bull. 32, 709–714 (2006).
21. Statisches Amt des Kantons Basel-Stadt. Statistisches Jahrbuch des Kantons Basel-Stadt (Statisches Amt des Kantons Basel-Stadt, 
2013).
22. Penn, D. L. et al. Dispelling the stigma of schizophrenia: what sort of information is best? Schizophr. Bull. 20, 567–578 (1994).
23. Link, B. G., Phelan, J. C., Bresnahan, M., Stueve, A. & Pescosolido, B. A. Public conceptions of mental illness: labels, causes, 
dangerousness, and social distance. Am. J. Public Health 89, 1328–1333 (1999).
24. Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G. & Aiken, L. S. Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (Routledge, 
2013).
25. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychol. 5, 207–232 (1973).
26. Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Ogburn, E. & Grant, B. F. Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and 
dependence in the United States: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Arch. Gen. 
Psych. 64, 830–842 (2007).
27. Fazel, S., Gulati, G., Linsell, L., Geddes, J. R. & Grann, M. Schizophrenia and violence: systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS 
Med 6, e1000120 (2009).
28. Link, B. G. & Cullen, F. T. Contact with the mentally ill and perceptions of how dangerous they are. J. of Health Soc. Behav. 27, 
289–302 (1986).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Viola Engemann, Sarah Königer, Claudia Lange, and Reka Schweighoffer for their assistance 
in conducting the study. This work was supported by an intramural grant of the University of Basel (DMS2304) 
to J.F.S. In addition, C.G.H. received funding from a research grant by the UPK Basel, Switzerland and from an 
educational and research grant by Takeda Pharma AG, Pfäffikon, Switzerland.
Author Contributions
J.F.S., C.G.H., S.B., and U.E.L. designed the current study protocol. J.F.S., F.G.W. and C.G.H. collected the data. 
J.F.S. and C.G.H. analyzed and interpreted the data, and J.F.S. wrote the initial draft of the paper. All authors have 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45716 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45716
contributed to, read and approved the final version of the manuscript. J.F.S. had full access to all the data in the 
study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Additional Information
Presented at the Annual Meetings of the SGPP, Basel, Switzerland, September 2014 and August 2016, and at the 
Annual Meeting of the DGPPN, Berlin, Germany, November 2014 and November 2015.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Sowislo, J. F. et al. Perceived Dangerousness as Related to Psychiatric Symptoms and 
Psychiatric Service Use – a Vignette Based Representative Population Survey. Sci. Rep. 7, 45716; doi: 10.1038/
srep45716 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2017
