 73
ISSN 1479-6694
Future Oncol. (2016) 12(23s), 73–77
part of
10.2217/fon-2016-0331 © Corrado Spatola
SUPPLEMENT
Role, timing and technique 
of radiotherapy in pediatric 
pleuropulmonary synovial sarcoma
Corrado Spatola*,1, Alessandra Tocco1, Roberto Milazzotto1, Antonio Pagana1, 
Ilenia Chillura1, Roberta Bevilacqua1, Carmelo Militello1, Vincenzo Salamone1, Luigi 
Raffaele1, Marcello Migliore2 & Giuseppe Privitera1
1UOC Radiodiagnostica e Radioterapia, AOU Policlinico-VE di Catania, 95125, Italy 
2UOC Chirurgia Toracica, AOU Policlinico-VE di Catania, Italy 
*Author for correspondence: cor_spatola@hotmail.com
The management of pediatric thoracic synovial sarcoma remains a matter of debate in 
clinical oncology, especially as regard to the local control of the disease. Surgery remains 
the gold standard, while the role and timing of radiotherapy is still controversial. We report a 
14-year-old male, who has not received proper treatment at the time of diagnosis and initial 
management. Intensity-modulated irradiation was performed only at relapse, as a salvage 
treatment and, at 10-month follow-up, the young patient was free from relapse, without 
significant acute and subacute toxicity. We discuss the role and timing of radiotherapy in 
thoracic synovial sarcoma, a disease in which the need to increase local control should be 
placed in the foreground. 
First draft submitted: 14 July 2016; Accepted for publication: 9 September 2016; Published 
online: 23 September 2016
KEYWORDS  
• radiotherapy • sarcoma 
• synovial sarcoma
Synovial sarcoma (SS) is a rare soft-tissue sarcoma, typical of childhood, which poses serious 
c 
hallenges in clinical management, in particular concerning the role and timing of radiotherapy.
In this paper, we discuss a case of pediatric pleuropulmonary SS, which is a very rare localization in 
a site with several surrounding healthy tissues, such that the concern for secondary radiation-induced 
damages can lead in some circumstances to an erroneous choice to avoid a local radiotherapy.
Clinical case
A 14-year-old male, after onset of dyspnea, cough and hemoptysis, was admitted in October 2014 
to the Pediatric department. Thoracic CT scan showed evidence of a voluminous neoplasia (9.5 cm 
in maximum diameter) of the left lower lobe infiltrating the ipsilateral hilum and the costal pleura 
(see Figure 1, left side). A 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET-computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET-CT) 
did not show distant metastases of the disease.
At another center, the option of neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not recommended to the patient, 
so he underwent radical surgery with a left lower lobectomy, lingulectomy and hilar-mediastinal 
lymphadenectomy. The histologic study diagnosed a monophasic synovial sarcoma (SYT-SSX1 
fusion protein positive), grade III sec French Federation of Cancer Centers (FNCLCC), tumor 
necrosis, fibrosis and lymphatic invasion. Tumor infiltrated the visceral pleura and some bronchial 
structures with intraluminal tumor growth. There were metastases to the 1/10 left hilar lymph 
nodes, but surgical margins were free.
The patient was included in the EpSSG NRSTS 2005 protocol, in IRS group III, and he was 
subsequently subjected to adjuvant chemotherapy with ifosfamide and doxorubicin for six cycles. 
For reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.com
 Future Oncol. (2016) 12(23s)
74
Figure 1. Axial computed tomography images showing the initial neoplasia in the left lower lobe 
infiltrating the hilum and the costal pleura (on the left) and the disease relapse in the left pleural 
cavity (on the right, the blue arrows indicate the subpleural multiple nodules, histologically 
proven).
SupplEmEnt Spatola, Tocco, Milazzotto et al.
future science group
Contrary to the indications of the study protocol, 
adjuvant radiotherapy was not recommended to 
the patient, because of the concerns about induc-
ing heart or lung toxicities. We point out that 
the decision was taken without c 
onsulting the 
radiation oncologist of our center.
After a disease-free interval of only 6 months, 
local pluricentric nodules in the left pleural 
cavity were detected on CT scan (see Figure 1, 
right side), and histologically confirmed as SS 
m 
ultiple relapses.
Only at that point, the patient was referred to 
our Radiotherapy department and thoracic irra-
diation was proposed as salvage therapy. A com-
plex intensity-modulated irradiation (IMRT) 
technique, concomitant to chemotherapy with 
ifosfamide continuous infusion, was used in 
order to reduce dose to the surrounding normal 
tissues.
The whole inferobasal pleural cavity and 
the ipsilateral hilum were enclosed in the clini-
cal target volume and irradiation was carried 
out through eight static ‘step and shoot’ fields 
(IMRT), with a dose of 54 Gy in 30 frac-
tions. The dose–volume histograms showed 
a V20 = 38% for left lung, a V20 = 12% for 
the right lung and a V25 = 15% for the heart. 
Thus, according to QUANTEC (quantitative 
analyses of normal tissue effects in the clinic), 
doses to the left lung and to the heart were 
slightly above the constraints. During the treat-
ment period, the patient developed a grade II 
esophagitis, while no hematological toxicity was 
reported. After a short follow-up of 10 months, 
no local relapse or subacute toxicity occurred, 
as 18F-FDG-PET-CT showed at 3 and 9 months 
post-treatment. Obviously, a longer follow-up is 
needed to assess late lung/heart toxicity and the 
duration of local control.
Discussion
SS is a rare tumor, with less than three cases per 
million being diagnosed each year, it is more 
common among teenagers and young adults. 
The disease starts most commonly in the legs or 
arms, but it can appear in any part of the body, 
the thoracic location is very rare [1,2].
The data in the literature show that the 
tumor site should be considered when defin-
ing a risk-adapted treatment strategy for SS. 
In a study from the Associazione Italiana di 
Emato-Oncologia Pediatrica – Soft Tissue 
Sarcoma Committee (AIEOP-STSC) on 115 
pediatric SS cases, the role of the tumor site was 
clearly highlighted. Patients with nonextremity 
SS (e.g., lung or pleura) had a 5-year overall 
survival of 55 versus 84% of patients with limb 
tumors, mainly due to local failure [3].
Surgery is considered the treatment of choice 
but the rate of local control is very low in local 
advanced disease. A multimodal approach, 
including surgical resection, chemotherapy 
and radiotherapy, has generally been suggested. 
The quality of surgery that patients receive 
and the characteristics of the disease (includ-
ing tumor size, local invasiveness, histological 
subtype, presence of metastases and lymph 
node involvement) influence prognosis in SS 
patients. The risk of local relapse and of devel-
oping distant metastases is higher for patients 
with tumors that are larger than 5 cm. Patients 
with the high-grade subtypes are considered to 
have a worse prognosis than those with other 
subtypes [4].
 75
Role, timing & technique of radiotherapy in pediatric pleuropulmonary synovial sarcoma SupplEmEnt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
The case shown, as mentioned, contains 
some inconsistencies, especially in the ini-
tial management which occurred at other 
cancer center, like the surgical manage-
ment as initial approach, without a neoadju-
vant treatment. The patient was included in 
Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS) 
III group [5], according to the European pedi-
atric Soft Tissue Sarcoma Study Group proto-
col (EpSSG NRSTS 2005) and he underwent 
to adjuvant chemotherapy treatment with 
ifosfamide-doxorubicin. There were at least 
three risk factors for poor prognosis and local 
recurrence: tumor site, tumor size and high-
grade histology. All three factors are an indica-
tion for adjuvant radiotherapy but the evidence 
of free surgical margins and the concern for 
radiation-induced damages, in particular for 
childhood, have been a deterrent to its applica-
tion in adjuvant setting [6]. We reiterate that, 
until that time, the patient was not referred to 
our Radiation Oncology department, so the 
decision to avoid radiotherapy was not taken 
in a multidisciplinary discussion.
On the other hand, clinicians have to pay 
attention to the prognostic importance of a local 
relapse. An Italian analysis on 44 relapsing cases 
in a series of 118 consecutive patients less than 
21 years of age with nonmetastatic synovial 
sarcoma, showed a particularly poor outcome 
for relapsing tumors, with an overall survival of 
29.7% at 5 years for SS patients whose tumors 
relapse [7].
According to the EpSSG protocol, surgery 
could be considered the unique local treatment 
for group I patients, while postoperative radio-
therapy is required for IRS group II patients [8]. 
IRS group III patients are at high risk of local 
relapse, with an incidence of local failure of 
about 44% [9], and radiotherapy is almost always 
carried out. There is not a clear consensus on 
the timing of it (pre-operative vs postoperative), 
and the mainstay of treatment is to obtain a 
se 
condary complete resection (when applicable).
In our case, it was not clear to which prog-
nostic group the patient belonged, because the 
tumor diameter was greater than 5 cm and 
poorly differentiated, but the first surgery was 
R0. Hence, despite him being included in IRS 
Group III for N1 disease, there was no need for 
a secondary surgery. Therefore, radiotherapy 
would have a role as an adjuvant treatment, as 
for IRS group I or II patients. Literature reports 
a 5-year local relapse-free survival of 78% in 
IRS group I patients (R0 at surgery) treated 
with radiotherapy and 67% in those treated 
without postoperative radiotherapy. The ben-
efit of adjuvant radiotherapy is more evident 
in IRS group II patients (R1 at surgery), with 
a local relapse-free survival rate at 5 years of 
75.7% in patients administered radiotherapy 
and 55.6% in patients who did not receive 
radiotherapy [10].
However, the patient was referred to us only 
at the time of pleural recurrence, when only a 
salvage treatment could be done. We decided 
to perform a concomitant radiochemotherapy 
treatment, with thoracic IMRT and ifosfamide 
continuous infusion. It was well tolerated by 
the patient, with the occurrence of a grade II 
esophagitis.
To our knowledge, the literature does not 
report any experience about the use of intensity- 
modulated radiotherapy for the treatment of 
pleuropulmonary SS, neither in adjuvant setting 
nor in relapsing tumors. Nevertheless, there is 
increasing interest in its use for the treatment 
of various types of thoracic tumors, thanks to 
the ability of IMRT to reduce radiation dose 
delivered to healthy tissues.
Conclusion
The optimal management of SS remains to be 
determined, in particular for rare localizations. 
Surgery is the mainstay of treatment, both as 
initial approach and as a second option. The 
role and timing of radiotherapy and chemo-
therapy are a matter of debate. Radiotherapy 
has a role in improving local control but it is 
often avoided when a R0 resection is obtained. 
In our opinion, all prognostic factors (includ-
ing tumor size, site of localization, tumor grad-
ing) should be considered when a treatment 
strategy must is programmed. The wide dis-
tribution and the increasing indications point-
ing to IMRT should encourage clinicians to 
avoid the underutilization of radiotherapy, in 
particular when local recurrence significantly 
influences overall survival. Moreover, the per-
spective of tailored treatment strategy should 
always be discussed in a multidisciplinary 
setting.
The case presented unfortunately describes 
a not very rare reality in clinical practice. 
Radiation therapy is often avoided or post-
poned in rare thoracic tumors, with no real 
clinical grounds, but only for the supposed risk 
of serious side effects and, above all, without the 
 Future Oncol. (2016) 12(23s)
76
SupplEmEnt Spatola, Tocco, Milazzotto et al.
future science group
radiation oncologist is involved in decision mak-
ing. However, the case needs a longer follow-up 
to assess the duration of local control and the 
occurrence of late toxicities.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial 
involvement with any organization or entity with a finan-
cial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter 
or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes 
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or 
options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or 
pe 
nding, or royalties.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of 
this manuscript.
Informed consent disclosure
The authors state that they have obtained verbal and written 
informed consent from the patient/patients for the inclusion 
of their medical and treatment history within this case report.
Open access
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Unported License. To 
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
EXECutIVE SummARY
 
●
 
Synovial sarcoma (SS) is a rare soft-tissue sarcoma, typical of childhood.
 
●
 
Its management remains a matter of debate in clinical oncology, especially as regard the local control of the disease. 
Surgery remains the gold standard, while the role and timing of radiotherapy is still controversial.
 
●
 
In this paper, the authors discuss a case of a 14-year-old male with pleuropulmonary SS, which is a very rare localization 
in a site with several surrounding healthy tissues, such that the concern for secondary radiation-induced damages can 
lead in some circumstances to an erroneous choice to avoid a local radiotherapy.
 
●
 
The patient did not receive proper treatment at the time of diagnosis and initial management: at another center 
where the option of a neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not recommended to the patient, so he underwent to a radical 
surgery, with a diagnosis of monophasic SS (SYT-SSX1 positive).
 
●
 
Adjuvant chemotherapy was performed, according to the European Pediatric Soft Tissue Sarcoma Study Group 
prospective trial (EpSSG NRSTS 2005) protocol, but adjuvant radiotherapy was not recommended, due to the concern 
for radiation-induced side effects, thus resulting in an early relapse, after 6 months.
 
●
 
The authors point out that they do not share clinical decisions until the time of the relapse, when patient was finally 
referred to the radiotherapy department.
 
●
 
A salvage treatment was performed at that time. A complex intensity-modulated irradiation (IMRT) technique, 
concomitant to chemotherapy with ifosfamide continuous infusion, was used in order to reduce dose to the 
surrounding normal tissues.
 
●
 
The whole inferobasal pleural cavity and the ipsilateral hilum were enclosed in the clinical target volume and 
irradiation was carried out through eight static ‘step and shoot’ fields (IMRT), with a dose of 54 Gy in 30 fractions.
 
●
 
During the treatment period, the patient developed a grade II esophagitis, while no hematological toxicity was 
reported. After a short follow-up of 10 months, no local relapse or subacute toxicity occurred, as 18F-FDG-PET-CT 
showed at 3- and 9-month post-treatment.
 
●
 
A longer follow-up is needed to assess late lung/heart toxicity and the duration of local control.
 
●
 
The authors discuss the role and timing of radiotherapy in thoracic SS, a disease in which the need to increase local 
control should be placed in the foreground.
 
●
 
The literature report a 5-year local relapse-free survival of 78% in Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study group I 
patients (R0 at surgery) treated with radiotherapy and 67% in those treated without postoperative radiotherapy. The 
benefit of adjuvant radiotherapy is more evident in Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study group II patients (R1 at 
surgery), with a local relapse-free survival rate at 5 years of 75.7% in patients administered radiotherapy and 55.6% in 
patients who did not receive radiotherapy.
 
●
 
The literature does not report any experience about the use of IMRT for the treatment of pleuropulmonary SS, neither 
in adjuvant setting nor in relapsing tumors. Nevertheless, there is increasing interest in its use for the treatment of 
various types of thoracic tumors, thanks to the ability of IMRT to reduce radiation dose delivered to healthy tissues.
 77
Role, timing & technique of radiotherapy in pediatric pleuropulmonary synovial sarcoma SupplEmEnt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
Role, timing & technique of radiotherapy in pediatric pleuropulmonary synovial sarcoma SupplEmEnt
Bibliography
Papers of special note have been highlighted as:  
• of interest; •• of considerable interest
1 
Sultan I, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Saab R et al. 
Comparing children and adults with synovial 
sarcoma in the Surveillance, Epidemiology 
and End Results Program, 1983 to 2005: an 
analysis of 1268 patients. Cancer 115, 
3537–3547 (2009).
2 
WHO Classification of Tumours. Pathology and 
Genetics. Tumours of Soft Tissue and Bone. 
Fletcher CDM, Unni KK, Mertens F (Eds). 
IARC Press, Lyon, France (2002).
3 
Ferrari A, Bisogno G, Alaggio R et al. 
Synovial sarcoma of children and adolescents: 
the prognosticrole of axial sites. Eur. J. Cancer 
44(9), 1202–1209 (2008).
• 
Regarding the general management of 
synovial sarcoma (SS), particularly its 
treatment strategy and the timing of 
interventions.
4 
Spillane AJ, A’Hern R, Judson IR et al. 
Synovial sarcoma: a clinic-pathologic, staging, 
and prognostic assessment. J. Clin. Oncol. 18, 
3794–3803 (2000).
5 
Maurer HM, Beltangady M, Gehan EA et al. 
The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study I: 
a final report. Cancer 61, 209–220 (1988).
6 
Pappo AS, Fontanesi J, Luo X et al. Synovial 
sarcoma in children and adolescents: the St. 
Jude Children’s Research Hospital experience. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 12, 2360–2366 (1994).
7 
Ferrari A, Salvo GL, Dall’igna P et al. Salvage 
rates and prognostic factors after relapse in 
children and adolescents with initially 
localized synovial sarcoma. Eur. J. Cancer 
48(18), 3448–3455 (2012).
• 
Regarding the general management of SS, 
particularly its treatment strategy and the 
timing of interventions.
8 
Ferrari A, De Salvo GL, Brennan B et al. 
Synovial sarcoma in children and adolescents: 
the European Pediatric Soft Tissue Sarcoma 
Study Group prospective trial (EpSSG 
NRSTS 2005). Ann. Oncol. 26(3), 567–572 
(2015).
•• 
Regarding the study protocol EpSSG 
NRSTS 2005.
9 
Spunt SL, Ashley Hill D, Motosue AM et al. 
Clinical features and outcome of initially 
unresected nonmetastatic pediatric non 
rhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 20, 3225–3235 (2002).
• 
Regarding the general management of SS, 
particularly its treatment strategy and the 
timing of interventions.
10 
Ferrari A, Casanova M, Collini P et al. 
Adult-type soft tissue sarcomas in  
pediatric-age patients: experience at the 
Istituto Nazionale Tumori in Milan. J. Clin. 
Oncol. 23(18), 4021–4030 (2005).
• 
Regarding the general management of SS, 
particularly its treatment strategy and the 
timing of interventions.
