 67
ISSN 1479-6694
Future Oncol. (2016) 12(23s), 67–71
part of
10.2217/fon-2016-0330 © Corrado Spatola
SUPPLEMENT
Intensity-modulated radiotherapy for 
relapsed malignant pleural mesothelioma
Corrado Spatola*,1, Carmelo Militello1, Alessandra Tocco1, Vincenzo Salamone1, 
Luigi Raffaele1, Marcello Migliore2, Antonio Pagana1, Roberto Milazzotto1, 
Ilenia Chillura1, Stefano Pergolizzi3 & Giuseppe Privitera1
1UOC Radiodiagnostica e Radioterapia, AOU Policlinico-VE di Catania, 95125, Italy  
2UOC Chirurgia Toracica, AOU Policlinico-VE Catania 
3UOC Radioterapia, AOU Policlinico di Messina, 98124, Italy 
*Author for correspondence: cor_spatola@hotmail.com
The use of novel radiotherapy techniques is widely increasing, allowing clinicians to treat 
diseases that were previously difficult to treat with radiation therapy. Malignant pleural 
mesothelioma is a clear example of this clinical challenge. We describe our first experience 
with intensity-modulated radiotherapy technique which was used to treat a 73-year-old 
patient with multiple relapsing malignant pleural mesothelioma. Intensity-modulated 
radiation therapy has allowed to respect the QUANTEC (quantitative analyses of normal tissue 
effects in the clinic) dose constraints, patient has experienced a 14 months progression-free 
time, without relevant subacute or late lung toxicity.
First draft submitted: 14 July 2016; Accepted for publication: 7 September 2016; Published 
online: 21 September 2016
KEYWORDS   
• IMRT • malignant pleural 
mesothelioma • radiation 
therapy
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a serious challenge for the radiation oncologists, 
because of its natural history of high tendency to local relapse, most often confined to the 
ipsilateral pleura. Surgery is considered the treatment of choice, by means of an extrapleural 
pneumonectomy (EPP) or pleurectomy/decortication, but the rate of local control is very low 
in local advanced disease and, consequently, a local radical therapy is often needed in order to 
prolong the time to progression [1,2]. In this setting, 3D conventional external beam radiotherapy 
encounters great difficulties, due to the large radiation fields required, resulting in increased risk 
of lung toxicity [3,4].
We report on our first experience with a complex intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) 
technique, used in a patient with a history of multiple relapsed locally advanced MPM.
Patient history
A 73-year-old man was referred to our department in September 2015 with a diagnosis of relapsed 
MPM of the right pleura. He had previously received an EPP on October 2013 (histologic subtype: 
epithelioid) with hyperthermic intrapleural chemotherapy with cisplatin, followed by an adjuvant 
chemotherapy with carboplatin–pemetrexed for six cycles. No adjuvant radiotherapy was proposed. 
After a disease-free survival of 10 months, a local relapse infiltrating circumferentially the right 
lung was detected on a computed tomography-fludeoxyglucose-PET (CT-18FDG-PET). After a 
chemotherapy rechallenge with the same protocol for two cycles (with no disease response), a local 
irradiation was proposed on June 2015. The patient was assessed according to modified RECIST 
criteria before and after radiotherapy. We defined a target volume (clinical target volume [CTV] 
For reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.com
 Future Oncol. (2016) 12(23s)
68
Figure 1. Treatment planning dose distribution with static step and shoot intensity-modulated radiation therapy technique. 
Red contour indicate the clinical target volume 1, green contour (outer to red one) indicate a ghost volume for treatment planning 
procedures, lung volumes are indicated with inner green contours.
6155.7
5706.8
5257.9
4809.1
4360.2
3911.3
3462.4
3013.5
2564.7
2115.8
SupplEmEnt Spatola, Militello, Tocco et al.
future science group
1) as a ring encompassing the whole right lung 
composed of the pleura and the chest wall of 
the entire hemithorax, with a dose of 5040 cGy 
in 28 fractions. A second volume (CTV2) was 
identified, composed by a gross visible disease 
located at the lung apex, with a dose of 1080 cGy 
in six fractions. PTV1 and PTV2 were created 
by adding 1 cm circumferential margins to 
CTV1 and CTV2, to account for respiratory 
movements. A treatment plan comparison was 
made between a conventional tridimensional 
conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT) technique, 
through two AP-PA (antero-posterior portals) 
opposed fields and an IMRT, through eight 
static ‘step and shoot’ fields (at 20°, 150°, 180°, 
220°, 270°, 300°, 340°, 350° angles, with a total 
of 131 segments, see Figure 1). The IMRT plan 
was preferred based on the resulting doses to 
the organs at risk (OARs), according to the 
QUANTEC (quantitative analyses of normal 
tissue effects in the clinic) constraints. The 
treatment plan was developed by treatment plan-
ning system Elekta XiO (Elekta AB, Stockholm, 
Sweden). The Dosimetry Check software (Math 
Resolutions, LLC5975 Gales Lane, Columbia) 
provides patient-specific pretreatment dose qual-
ity assurance of intensity modulated treatment 
plan. The γ index passing rate (3%, 3 mm) was 
96% of measured points. The doses at OARs 
were calculated by treatment planning system 
and are the following:
 
● Spinal cord: mean dose 1841 cGy, Dmax 
4200 cGy;
 
● Heart: V25 4.24%, V30 2.2%;
 
● Liver: mean dose 951 cGy;
 
● Left lung: V20 0.14%;
 
● Right lung: V20 38%;
 
● Combined lung: V20 29%, mean dose 
2210 cGy.
 
● Esophagus: V35 24.63%
The patient was able to complete treatment 
with medical support and without the need 
 69
Intensity-modulated radiotherapy for relapsed malignant pleural mesothelioma SupplEmEnt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
for treatment breaks. No grade III toxicity was 
detected, but only a grade II esophagitis. At a 
follow-up time of 14 months, he was free from 
progression and without any relevant grade II or 
more subacute or late lung toxicity.
Discussion
The role and the timing of radiotherapy in the 
management of MPM is still controversial, 
because, despite it being widely used both in 
postoperative and in radical setting, the risk of 
lung and heart toxicity pose a serious restriction 
or delay in its clinical application [2,3]. There are 
also a lack of randomized trials assessing the use 
of radiotherapy after EPP. Literature reports on 
several small series where radiotherapy is a part 
of trimodality approach in adjuvant setting and 
as a palliative treatment in recurrent or advanced 
diverse [5–7].
In the few last years, the technological 
advancements in delivery of radiation therapy 
has permitted to use high radiation doses to 
target volumes in the thorax, while maintain-
ing the dose to the surrounding normal tissues 
(liver, heart, cord and lung above all) under the 
tolerance limits. IMRT technique can reduce 
dose to OARs, with a small and clinically neg-
ligible increase in dose absorption to the con-
tralateral lung, compared with conventional 
3D-CRT technique. To date, the role of IMRT 
in the treatment of MPM is not supported by 
clear evidence, and its use is limited inside an 
experimental series [4–8].
The patient on whom, we report is an elderly 
man with a history of relapsed MPM. Despite 
the age and the previous thoracic surgery, his 
pulmonary function tests (FEV1 and DLCO) 
were within normal limits at the time of enroll-
ment. The patient was admitted at the radio-
therapy department 12 months after surgery, 
with a local relapse not responding to chemo-
therapy. IMRT technique was preferred to con-
ventional 3D-CRT because of a more favorable 
dose–volume histograms developed during the 
planning process. In particular doses to the spi-
nal cord, to the contralateral lung and to the 
esophagus were within the QUANTEC dose 
constraints, and this explains the good acute 
and subacute tolerance to radiotherapy [9]. The 
major challenge was the dose to the affected 
lung, which showed a V20 of 38%, above the 
QUANTEC constraint, but, despite the high 
risk, no relevant grade II–IV toxicity have been 
detected at a follow-up time of 10 months. The 
patient is still alive after 32 months from diag-
nosis, and, at the time of this report, is free from 
local and distant progression.
The reported experiences on the use of tho-
racic IMRT for MPM show unclear data on the 
outcome. The majority of trials regarding the use 
of radiotherapy as a component of radical treat-
ment, both in a trimodality approach and as an 
adjuvant therapy after EPP, showed with IMRT 
a reduced dose to OARs such liver, hearth, kid-
ney and affected lung, but an increased dose to 
contralateral lung and kidney [4–8]. Moreover, 
some authors reported serious adverse events, 
like the Boston experience, where six of 13 
patients treated with IMRT after EPP (dose 
5400 cGy, with a V20 >20%) died from radia-
tion pneumonitis [10]. Also, a large prospective 
randomized Phase II trial (SAKK 17/04) on 
multimodality therapy showed that the addi-
tion of hemithoracic radiation to chemotherapy 
and surgery failed to improve local control and 
overall survival in MPM [11]. For these reasons, 
currently, the use of IMRT must be limited 
to clinical trials, especially in adjuvant setting 
after EPP, where more prospective studies are 
needed to determine the safe dose levels to be 
respected, while its role in palliative setting, 
included relapsed disease and pain control, is 
well established.
Conclusion
IMRT of locally advanced or relapsing MPM 
is a feasible treatment option, with an accept-
able toxicity profile. In our experience, we have 
used a complex static step and shoot technique, 
which allowed us to maintain the dose to the 
OARs under the constraints of QUANTEC. 
The conventional 3D-CRT technique is usually 
unable to safely deliver a tumoricidal dose of 
about 5000 cGy. This is only a case report and 
more studies are needed to validate an extended 
use of IMRT in a challenging disease such as 
MPM.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial 
involvement with any organization or entity with a finan-
cial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter 
or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes 
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or 
options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pend-
ing, or royalties.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of 
this manuscript.
 Future Oncol. (2016) 12(23s)
70
SupplEmEnt Spatola, Militello, Tocco et al.
future science group
EXECutIVE SummARY
 
●
 
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a serious challenge for the radiation oncologist, because of its natural 
history of high tendency to local relapse. Surgery is considered the treatment of choice, but a local radical therapy is 
often needed in order to prolong the time to progression.
 
●
 
This manuscript report authors first experience with a complex intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) 
technique, used in a patient with a history of multiple relapsed locally advanced MPM, whereas 3D conventional 
external beam radiotherapy does not allow to achieve the same therapeutic goals.
 
●
 
A 73-year-old man was referred to the Radiotherapy Department, after he underwent to extrapleural pneumonectomy 
(EPP), with hyperthermic intrapleural chemotherapy with cisplatin, for a right epithelioid MPM. Surgery was followed 
by adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin–pemetrexed for six cycles.
 
●
 
At the time of recruitment, the patient had a local relapse infiltrating circumferentially the right lung. A local 
radiotherapy was proposed.
 
●
 
A treatment plan comparison was made between a conventional 3D-conformal radiotherapy technique and an IMRT.
 
●
 
The IMRT plan was preferred based on the resulting doses to the organs at risk (OARs), according to the QUANTEC 
constraints. IMRT was done through eight static ‘step and shoot’ fields.
 
●
 
Clinical target volume 1 was defined as a ring encompassing the whole right lung composed of the pleura and the 
chest wall of the entire hemithorax, with a dose of 5040 cGy in 28 fractions. A second volume (clinical target volume 2) 
was identified, composed by a gross visible disease located at the lung apex, with a dose of 1080 cGy in six fractions.
 
●
 
The doses at OARs were calculated by treatment planning system and are the following: spinal cord: mean dose 
1841 cGy, Dmax 4200 cGy; heart: V25 4.24%, V30 2.2%; liver: mean dose 951 cGy; left lung: V20 0.14%; right lung: 
V20 38%; combined lung: V20 29%, mean dose 2210 cGy; esophagus: V35 24.63%.
 
●
 
The patient was able to complete treatment. No grade III toxicity was detected, but only a grade II esophagitis. At a 
follow-up time of 14 months, he was free from progression and without any relevant grade II or more subacute or late 
lung toxicity.
 
●
 
The reported experiences on the use of thoracic IMRT for MPM show unclear data on the outcome. The majority of 
trials regarding the use of radiotherapy as a component of radical treatment, both in a trimodality approach and as an 
adjuvant therapy after EPP, showed with IMRT a reduced dose to OARs such liver, hearth, kidney and affected lung, but 
an increased dose to contralateral lung and kidney.
 
●
 
Currently, the use of IMRT must be limited to clinical trials, especially in adjuvant setting after EPP, where more 
prospective studies are needed to determine the safe dose levels to be respected, while its role in palliative setting, 
included relapsed disease and pain control, is well established.
 
●
 
Manuscript concluded that IMRT of locally advanced or relapsing MPM is a feasible treatment option, with an 
acceptable toxicity profile.
References
Papers of special note have been highlighted as:  
• of interest; •• of considerable interest
1 
Migliore M, Calvo D, Criscione A et al. 
Cytoreductivesurgery and hyperthermic 
intrapleural chemotherapy for malignant 
pleuraldiseases: preliminary experience. 
Future Oncol. 11, 47–52 (2015). 
• 
Regarding the general management of 
malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM), 
especially about the treatment strategy and 
the timing of interventions.
2 
Price A. What is the role of radiotherapy in 
malignant pleural mesothelioma? Oncologist 
16, 359–365 (2011).
3 
Yajnik S, Rosenzweig KE, Mychalczak B et al. 
Hemithoracic radiation after extrapleural 
pneumonectomy for malignant pleural 
Informed consent disclosure
The authors state that they have obtained verbal and writ-
ten informed consent from the patient/patients for the inclu-
sion of their medical and treatment history within this case 
report.
Open access
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Unported License. To 
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
 71
Intensity-modulated radiotherapy for relapsed malignant pleural mesothelioma SupplEmEnt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
mesothelioma. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. 
Phys. 56, 1319–1326 (2003).
4 
Tonoli S, Vitali P, Scotti V et al. Adjuvant 
radiotherapy after extrapleural 
pneumonectomy for mesothelioma. 
Prospective analysis of a multi-institutional 
series. Radiother. Oncol. 101, 311–315 (2011).
• 
Regarding the general management of 
MPM, especially about the treatment 
strategy and the timing of interventions.
5 
Rosenzweig KE, Zauderer MG, Laser B et al. 
Pleural intensity-modulated radiotherapy for 
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Int. J. 
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 83, 1278–1283 
(2012).
•• 
Regarding the feasibility and technical 
specifications of intensity-modulated 
radiation therapy (IMRT) for MPM.
6 
Ahamad A, Stevens CW, Smythe WR et al. 
Intensity-modulated radiation therapy: a novel 
approach to the management of malignant 
pleural mesothelioma. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 
Biol. Phys. 55, 768–775 (2003).
•• 
Regarding the feasibility and technical 
specifications of IMRT for MPM.
7 
Sterzing F, Sroka-Perez G, Schubert K et al. 
Evaluating target coverage and normal tissue 
sparing in the adjuvant radiotherapy of 
malignant pleural mesothelioma: helical 
tomotherapy compared with step-and-shoot 
IMRT. Radiother. Oncol. 86, 251–257 (2008).
•• 
Regarding the feasibility and technical 
specifications of IMRT for MPM.
8 
Rimner A, Rosenzweig KE. Novel radiation 
therapy approaches in malignant pleural 
mesothelioma. Ann. Cardiothorac. Surg. 1(4), 
457–461 (2012).
•• 
Regarding the feasibility and technical 
specifications of IMRT for MPM.
9 
Marks B, Bentzen SM et al. Radiation 
dose–volume effects in the lung. Int. J. 
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 76(Suppl. 3), 
S70–S76 (2010).
10 
Allen AM, Czerminska M, Janne PA et al. 
Fatal pneumonitis associated with intensity-
modulated radiation therapy for 
mesothelioma. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. 
Phys. 65, 640–645 (2006).
•• 
Regarding the feasibility and technical 
specifications of IMRT for MPM.
11 
Stahel R, Riesterer O, Alexandros X et al. 
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and extrapleural 
pneumonectomy of malignant pleural 
mesothelioma with or without hemithoracic 
radiotherapy: final results of the randomized 
multicenter Phase II trial SAKK 17/04. 
Presented at: ESMO 2014 Congress. Madrid, 
Spain, 26–30 September 2014 
(Abstract LBA37_PR). 
• 
Regarding the general management of 
MPM, especially about the treatment 
strategy and the timing of interventions.
