 PERSPECTIVE
OPEN
The Breathing, Thinking, Functioning clinical model: a
proposal to facilitate evidence-based breathlessness
management in chronic respiratory disease
Anna Spathis1,2, Sara Booth2, Catherine Moffat1, Rhys Hurst1, Richella Ryan2, Chloe Chin1 and Julie Burkin1
Refractory breathlessness is a highly prevalent and distressing symptom in advanced chronic respiratory disease. Its intensity is not
reliably predicted by the severity of lung pathology, with unhelpful emotions and behaviours inadvertently exacerbating and
perpetuating the problem. Improved symptom management is possible if clinicians choose appropriate non-pharmacological
approaches, but these require engagement and commitment from both patients and clinicians. The Breathing Thinking
Functioning clinical model is a proposal, developed from current evidence, that has the potential to facilitate effective symptom
control, by providing a rationale and focus for treatment.
npj Primary Care Respiratory Medicine  (2017) 27:27 ; doi:10.1038/s41533-017-0024-z
INTRODUCTION
Breathlessness is prevalent in chronic respiratory disease, and
primary care bears much of the burden of its management. Over
80% of patients in the community with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), for example, experience some degree
of breathlessness.1, 2 It is a debilitating symptom, with a negative
impact on quality of life, psychological wellbeing and functional
status.3 Multiple observational studies link breathlessness with
anxiety
and
depression.4,
5
Carers
also
suffer
significantly,
burdened by distress, social isolation and a devastating sense of
helplessness.6
The management of breathlessness is hampered by its inherent
complexity. Optimising treatment of the underlying disease has an
inconsistent impact on the symptom. There are a plethora of non-
pharmacological approaches to ameliorate breathlessness, with-
out evidence to guide individualisation of therapy. Furthermore,
understandable, but unhelpful, reactions to the perception of
breathlessness unwittingly compound the symptom.
In this paper, we explore this complexity and outline a proposal,
developed from current evidence, on how to overcome it using
the
Breathing,
Thinking,
Functioning
(BTF)
clinical
model.
Although we focus on breathlessness management in COPD, this
pragmatic clinical approach can be used in any advanced cardio-
respiratory disease.
UNDERSTANDING THE COMPLEXITY
Relationship between disease and breathlessness severity
Breathlessness severity is not reliably predicted by the severity of
airflow limitation in COPD. Multiple studies have shown marked
variation in the perception of breathlessness, for a given level of
lung function.7, 8 An observational study of almost 50,000 patients
with COPD in the UK revealed that a third of those with stage 1
disease described moderate to severe breathlessness, whereas
over 20% of those with stage 4 disease did not have clinically
significant breathlessness.2 In a recent controlled trial, broncho-
scopic lung volume reduction significantly improved FEV1 by 25%,
without relief of breathlessness.9
The inconsistent relationship between pathology and breath-
lessness perception explains why optimising disease management
alone does not guarantee good symptom control. This discre-
pancy has led to a number of terms suggesting exaggerated
symptom perception, such as ‘disproportionate breathlessness’,
‘breathlessness out of keeping with pathology’ and ‘medically
unexplained breathlessness’. It is apparent that there must be
factors influencing breathlessness beyond that expected due to
the underlying disease.
Neurophysiology of breathlessness
Neuroimaging studies over the last decade have significantly
increased understanding of the neural processing of the sensation
of breathlessness, and the range of factors influencing the
symptom perception.10,
11 Demand for ventilation, sensed by
chemo-receptors and metabo-receptors, is compared with affer-
ent information on actual ventilation from widespread sources,
including pulmonary stretch receptions, pulmonary C fibres, chest
wall joint and skin receptors, and skeletal muscle ergoreceptors.12
Breathlessness perception is believed to be driven by a mismatch
between the two.13, 14 Neural integration occurs in cortico-limbic
regions of the brain, which are influenced by thoughts and
emotions, further modulating breathlessness perception.11, 15
A consequence of this neural complexity is that it limits the
potential for a single effective intervention, a point supported by
an increasing body of literature (Table 1). Oxygen therapy,
although it reverses hypoxaemia, does not improve breathlessness
in patients with cancer, and the marginal benefit seen in a meta-
analysis of COPD patients is of dubious clinical significance.16, 17
Benzodiazepines are widely used, but do not improve breath-
lessness.18 Even opioids, with most evidence to support their use,
provide benefit of only borderline clinical significance.19, 20
Received: 10 May 2016 Revised: 24 February 2017 Accepted: 27 February 2017
1Department of Palliative Care, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK and 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Correspondence: Anna Spathis (aspathis@doctors.org.uk)
www.nature.com/npjpcrm
Published in partnership with Primary Care Respiratory Society UK
 Instead the most successful interventions appear to be multi-
modal, non-pharmacological approaches that work concurrently
at multiple points within the brain, respiratory and skeletal
system.21–23 There is strong evidence, for example, that pulmonary
rehabilitation, involving exercise, education and support over
many weeks, leads to clinically significant reduction in breath-
lessness, as well as substantial improvements in fatigue, emotional
functioning and quality of life.24 Approaches incorporating
cognitive behavioural therapy ameliorate breathlessness, as well
as anxiety and depression.21 Evidence is emerging for the
effectiveness of breathlessness services, providing a range of
predominantly non-pharmacological approaches, such as breath-
ing and relaxation techniques, use of a handheld fan, cognitive
behavioural therapy, activity management and carer support.
Table 1.
Summary of key evidence for approaches to the management of breathlessness in advanced disease
Reference
Description
Impact on breathlessness and other key outcomes
Non pharmacological approaches
Bausewein et al.
200822
Cochrane systematic review of 47 controlled studies (2532
participants) evaluating non-pharmacological approaches in any
advanced disease. Studies evaluating pulmonary rehabilitation,
exercise and self-management education excluded
High strength of evidence for neuromuscular electrical
stimulation and chest wall vibration
Moderate strength of evidence for walking aids and breathing
retraining
Low strength of evidence for acupuncture/pressure
Zwerink et al. 2014 Cochrane systematic review of 28 controlled studies evaluating
self-management interventions in COPD
Significant reduction in breathlessness and respiratory-related
hospital admissions
Improved health-related quality of life
Howard et al.
201421
Randomised controlled trial involving 222 COPD patients
allocated to receive a cognitive-behavioural manual (applying
CBT techniques within a self-management framework, with brief
telephone support) or an information booklet
Significant improvement in breathlessness at 6 months
(secondary outcome)
Reduction in A&E visits by 42% with associated cost-savings,
improved anxiety, depression
McCarthy et al.
201524
Cochrane systematic review of 65 randomised controlled trials
evaluating pulmonary rehabilitation in COPD
Moderately large and clinically significant improvement in
breathlessness.
Also improvements in fatigue, quality of life and emotional
function
Pharmacological approaches
Abernethy et al.
200319
Randomised controlled crossover trial of oral morphine
sustained release 20 mg twice daily for 4 days vs. placebo,
involving 48 opioid-naive participants
6.6–9.5% improvement in breathlessness
More distressing constipation in the opioid group despite
laxatives
Abernethy et al.
201043
Randomised controlled trial of 239 participants (152 with COPD)
with life-limiting illness, 2 l/min oxygen or room air via a
concentrator for at least 15 h/day
Improvement in both oxygen and room air group, but no
significant differences between groups
Barnes et al.
201620
Cochrane systematic review of 26 controlled trials evaluating
opioids for refractory breathlessness in any advanced disease
Low quality evidence of improvement in post-treatment
breathlessness, but no statistically significant change of
breathlessness from baseline
Simon et al. 201018 Cochrane systematic review of seven controlled trials evaluating
benzodiazepines in advanced malignant or non-malignant
disease
No beneficial effect of benzodiazepines, including from a
meta-analysis of six of the seven studies
Uronis et al.
200816, 44
Systematic review and meta-analysis of five studies evaluating
oxygen for dyspnoea in mildly- or non-hypoxaemic cancer
patients
Oxygen did not improve breathlessness
Ekstrom et al.
201617
Cochrane systematic review of 33 randomised controlled trials
evaluating oxygen for dyspnoea in patients with COPD who do
not qualify for home oxygen therapy
Oxygen improved breathlessness by the equivalent of 0.7 cm
in a 10 cm visual analogues scale, on exercise only.
There was no benefit from oxygen before exercise, and no
improvement in quality of life.
Complex interventions from specialist breathlessness services
Bredin et al. 199945 Randomised controlled trial of 119 patients with lung cancer
receiving a nurse-led, non-pharmacological, outpatient
intervention or best supportive care
Significant improvement in breathlessness, as well as
performance status, anxiety and depression, at 8 weeks
Farquhar et al.
201425
Randomised controlled trial involving 67 cancer patients,
receiving the Breathlessness Intervention Service
(multidisciplinary team providing predominantly home-based,
non-pharmacological approaches) or usual care
Distress from breathlessness improved significantly (primary
outcome) at 2 weeks
Evidence of cost-effectiveness
Higginson et al.
201426
Randomised controlled trial involving 105 patients with mixed
advanced disease, receiving Breathlessness Support Service
(multidisciplinary team providing predominantly outpatient and
home-based, predominantly non-pharmacological approaches)
or usual care.
Mastery of breathlessness improved significantly by an
average of 16% (primary outcome), at 6 weeks
Significant improvement in survival in the intervention group
Johnson et al.
201527
Randomised controlled trial involving 156 cancer patients
receiving either three or a single breathing technique training
session
Improvement in worst breathlessness in last 24 h in both
groups, but not difference between groups
The single session was cost-effective
The breathing, thinking, functioning clinical model
A Spathis et al
2
npj Primary Care Respiratory Medicine (2017)  27 
Published in partnership with Primary Care Respiratory Society UK
 Such services provide a brief, cost-effective intervention that
impacts positively on distress from breathlessness, mastery,
quality of life, and even survival.25–27
Reactions to breathlessness
There is growing evidence for a further level of complexity: the
human reaction to the perception of breathlessness may worsen
the symptom. Comroe, an eminent cardiologist, showed great
prescience when he wrote in 1966 that breathlessness ‘involves
both the perception of the sensation by the patient and his
reaction to it…’
Neuroimaging studies reveal that breathlessness activates
cortico-limbic areas, particularly the right anterior insula.10,
11
These regions subserve awareness of threats such as thirst,
hunger, acute pain and breathlessness. Interoceptive awareness of
an acute homoeostatic threat leads to an avoidance behaviour
motivated by emotion, which, in evolutionary terms, clearly
confers a survival advantage. However, in the context of chronic
perceived threats such as persistent breathlessness, such emo-
tions
and
behaviours
can
be
unhelpful
and
inadvertently
perpetuate the problem. For example, attempting to avoid the
perception of breathlessness by reducing activity, leads to
deconditioning that, in turn, worsens breathlessness. Decondition-
ing could, in part, explain the evidence in longitudinal studies for
progression
in
breathlessness
severity,
despite
stable
lung
function.28
In a context where optimising management of the underlying
disease is insufficient, where no single effective intervention for
breathlessness exists, and where patients and clinicians risk being
overwhelmed by a myriad of non-pharmacological approaches,
crucially,
these
inadvertently
unhelpful
reactions
provide
a
valuable opportunity to intervene.
THE BTF CLINICAL MODEL
The model is based on three predominant cognitive and
behavioural reactions to breathlessness that, by causing vicious
cycles, worsen and maintain the symptom (Fig. 1).
Breathing domain
Dysfunctional breathing patterns are well recognised in breathless
individuals without underlying respiratory pathology.29 Features
include apical breathing, higher ratio of inspiratory to expiratory
length, absence of end-expiratory pause and frequent sighs or
yawns.30 Breathing pattern disorders occur in about a third of
asthma patients,31 and although there has been no research in
other respiratory conditions, such as COPD, there is extensive
anecdotal evidence that dysfunctional breathing patterns do
occur. Breathless patients experience a sense of ‘needing more air’
and, therefore, may consciously or subconsciously increase their
tidal volume or respiratory rate, breathing predominantly using
the upper chest and accessory muscles. Apical breathing causes
reliance on fatiguable accessory muscles of respiration, under-
utilising the efficient and relatively fatigue-resistant diaphragmatic
muscle, further increasing the work of breathing and intensifying
breathlessness.32
Thinking domain
It is well-recognised that the anxiety or fear caused by breath-
lessness can, in turn, augment the perception of breathlessness.33
This vicious cycle can lead to a rapidly escalating sense of panic,
which most breathless patients experience at some point. The
neural processing for this feedback loop is likely to occur in the
cortico-limbic areas of the brain, involved in both breathlessness
perception and processing of emotion.34 In addition, anxiety
increases the respiratory rate and can cause muscle tension in
both the ventilatory pump and other skeletal muscles, so further
increasing the work of breathing and respiratory demand.
Functioning domain
As breathlessness is so unpleasant, it is natural to avoid it by
reducing activity. However, inactivity leads to muscle decondition-
ing, with reduced oxidative capacity, muscle fibre atrophy and
fibre type shift from type 1 (oxidative) to type IIb (glycolytic)
fibres.35 This increases the demand on the respiratory system, and
worsens breathlessness further. Patients intuitively understand
Fig. 1
The Breathing, Thinking, Functioning clinical model
The breathing, thinking, functioning clinical model
A Spathis et al
3
Published in partnership with Primary Care Respiratory Society UK
npj Primary Care Respiratory Medicine (2017)  27 
 this ‘deconditioning vicious cycle’, being aware that less ‘fit’
people are more breathless on exertion. Family members and
other carers can unwittingly compound the situation, by trying to
help through doing activities that the patient might otherwise
have done.
Model development
This empirical model was developed by the Cambridge Breath-
lessness Intervention Service (CBIS), a multidisciplinary home-
based intervention of proven cost-effectiveness.25 Each of the
three domains is supported by research evidence, as described
above, and the model is theoretically underpinned by a ‘vicious
flower’
maintenance
model
formulation,
widely
used
in
cognitive–behavioural therapy within psychological medicine.36
It was initially conceived in 2012 for use as an educational tool
for healthcare staff, to explain mechanisms worsening breath-
lessness beyond the underlying respiratory condition, and to
facilitate choice of non-pharmacological techniques to interrupt
each vicious cycle. As well as being enthusiastically endorsed by
healthcarers for providing a conceptually clear approach to the
management of a complex symptom, service evaluations and
anecdotal evidence from clinical utilisation within CBIS are
revealing unanticipated benefits for patients and their families.
POTENTIAL ROLES IN SUPPORTING SELF-MANAGEMENT IN
PRIMARY CARE
Explaining and engaging
The evidence is clear that when individuals with a chronic
condition, like COPD, actively participate in their own care through
self-management, their medical outcomes improve.37,
38 Non-
pharmacological
interventions
are
under-utilised,
not
least
because
patients
need
commitment
to
make
and
sustain
behaviour change. Providing a clear and logical rationale for
symptom deterioration, or perpetuation beyond an initial trigger,
can be profoundly motivating.
Patients, furthermore intuitively comprehend that a vicious
cycle can be broken, turning instead into a ‘cycle of improvement’.
The ‘small changes approach’, accepted as a particularly effective
and feasible way of achieving behavioural change, develops the
potential to generate rapid and large gains.39 Enhancing self-
efficacy
is
a
particularly
effective
way
to
support
self-
management.40
Engaging healthcare professionals is equally vital. Clinical
training prioritises disease-modification over symptom control
and, unlike allied health professionals, doctors are rarely taught
how to support behaviour change. The focus is on prescribing, a
relatively simple, culturally acceptable and passive practice
compared to the time, energy and cohesive teamwork required
to deliver non-pharmacological therapies. Providing a rationale,
not just for the presence of the symptom, but also for why
it should be amenable to intervention, can be helpful for
clinicians too.
Facilitating and focusing management
Patients with intractable breathlessness are commonly fatigued,
which limits the capacity to retain and process new information.41
The more information presented in a consultation, the lower the
proportion that is correctly recalled.42 The wide array of potentially
effective non-pharmacological interventions for breathlessness fit
neatly within the three domains of the clinical model (Table 2).
Clinical experience shows that, although all three vicious cycles
occur to a degree in each breathless patient, in practice, one or
two tend to predominate. Focusing on those interventions which
impact on the predominant cycle can increase adherence and,
importantly, provide early ‘quick wins’ that further contribute to
patient engagement and self-efficacy. Simply, for example,
compassionately challenging one of the misconceptions driving
a predominant vicious cycle (Fig. 2) can, in itself, be highly
effective and time-efficient in a busy healthcare setting.
NEXT STEPS
Although, as described, the model underpins the delivery of an
evidence-based intervention and each of the three domains are
supported by research evidence, formal research evaluation of the
model is required. A mixed-methods approach is planned.
Phenomenological qualitative research methods, with in-depth
interviews and focus groups, will gather and triangulate insights
from patients, carers and healthcare staff, in terms of experiences
of using the model and attributed meaning. As anecdotal
evidence suggests that the model could have a particular role in
facilitating
brief
community-based
intervention,
a
cluster-
randomised trial will be undertaken to evaluate the cost-
effectiveness of a single intervention for patients with COPD in
primary care. It will initially be tested in patients with severe
disease
who
remain
symptomatic
after,
or
could
not
complete, pulmonary rehabilitation, and those considered, but
ineligible, for invasive procedures like lung volume reduction or
transplant. Key outcomes will include changes in perceived self-
efficacy in symptom management, in the rate of primary care
consultations and in the number of contacts with emergency
services out of hours.
CONCLUSION
Insight into the many factors influencing breathlessness in chronic
respiratory disease, including the inadvertently unhelpful reac-
tions that exacerbate it, provide a valuable opportunity to
intervene.
We propose that the BTF model not only explains how
breathlessness perpetuates and worsens, but also provides a
structure and rationale for its management—through generating
the antithesis of vicious cycles, ‘cycles of improvement’—thereby
engaging patients and professionals alike. Given the availability of
diverse non-pharmacological approaches, the model potentially
provides direction and focus to initial management, facilitating the
provision of personalised therapy.
Table 2.
Categorisation of symptom management approaches according to Breathing, Thinking, Functioning domain
Breathing
Thinking
Functioning
Breathing techniques
Cognitive behavioural therapy
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Handheld fan
Relaxation techniques
Activity promotion
Airway clearance techniques
Mindfulness
Walking aids
Inspiratory muscle training
Acupuncture
Pacing
Chest wall vibration
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation
Non-invasive ventilation
The breathing, thinking, functioning clinical model
A Spathis et al
4
npj Primary Care Respiratory Medicine (2017)  27 
Published in partnership with Primary Care Respiratory Society UK
 Approaches that promote self-management are known to
benefit people with chronic conditions. Time-pressured clinical
settings require a brief intervention that targets the specific
mechanisms driving an individual’s symptoms. The BTF model has
the potential to fulfil all these needs, and may be particularly
relevant in community settings. Further research is required to
clarify its effectiveness.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.S. wrote each draft of this article in close collaboration with S.B., and all authors
were involved in preparation of this manuscript.
COMPETING INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Theander, K., Hasselgren, M., Luhr, K., Eckerblad, J., Unosson, M. & Karlsson, I.
Symptoms and impact of symptoms on function and health in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and chronic heart failure in primary health
care. Int. J. Chron. Obstruct. Pulmon. Dis. 9, 785–794 (2014).
2. Mullerova, H., Chao, L., Hao, L. & Tabberer, M. Prevalence and burden of
breathlessness in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease managed
in primary care. PLoS One 9, e85540 (2014).
3. Tanaka, K., Akechi, T. & Okuyama, T. Impact of dyspnea, pain, and fatigue on daily
life activities in ambulatory patients with advanced lung cancer. J. Pain Symptom
Manage. 23, 417–423 (2002).
4. Ho, S., O’Mahony, M., Steward, J., Breay, P., Buchalter, M. & Burr, M. Dyspnoea and
quality of life in older people at home. Age and Aging 30, 155–159 (2001).
5. Chavannes, N., Huiber, M., Schermer, T., Hendricks, A., van Weel, C. & Wouters, E.
et al. Associations of depressive symptoms with gender, body mass index and
dyspnea in primary care COPD patients. Fam. Pract. 22, 604–607 (2005).
6. Booth, S., Silvester, T. & Todd, C. Breathlessness in cancer and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: using a qualitative approach to describe the experience of
patients and carers. Palliat. Support. Care 1, 337–344 (2003).
7. Agusti, A., Calverley, P., Celli, B., Coxson, H., Edwards, L. & Lomas, D. et al. Char-
acteriation of COPD heterogeneity in the ECLIPSE cohort. Respir. Res. 11, 122 (2010).
8. Grønseth, R., Vollmer, W., Hardie, J., Ólafsdóttir, I., Lamprecht, B. & Buist, A. et al.
Predictors of dyspnoea prevalence: results from the BOLD study. Eur. Respir. J. 43,
1610–1120 (2013).
9. Zoumot, Z., Davey, C., Jordan, S., McNulty, W., Carr, D. & Hind, M. et al. A ran-
domised controlled study of bronchoscopic lung volume reduction with endo-
bronchial valves for patients with heterogeneous emphysema and intact
interlobar fissures: the BeLieVeR-HIFi study. Effic. Mech. Eval. 2, 5 (2015).
10. Banzett, R., Mulnier, H., Murphy, K., Rosen, S., Wise, R. & Adams, L. Breathlessness
in humans activates insular cortex. Neuroreport 11, 2117–2120 (2000).
11. Evans, K., Banzett, R., Adams, L., McKay, L., Frackowiak, R. & Corfield, D. Bold fMRI
indentifies limbic, paralimbic, and cerebellar activation during air hunger. J.
Neurophysiol. 88, 1500–1511 (2002).
12. Sharma, P., Morris, N. & Adams, L. Effect of induced leg muscle fatigue on
exertional dyspnea in healthy subjects. J. Appl. Physiol. 118, 48–54 (2015).
13. Manning, H. & Schwartzstein, R. Pathophysiology of dysnpnea. N. Engl. J. Med.
333, 1547–1553 (1995).
14. Schwartzstein, R., Manning, H., Weiss, J. & Weinberger, S. Dyspnoea: a sensory
experience. Lung 168, 185–199 (1990).
15. Schon, D., Rosenkranz, M., Regelsberger, J., Dahme, B., Buchel, C. & von Leupoldt,
A. Reduced perception of dyspnoea and pain after right insular cortex lesion. Am.
J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 178, 1173–1179 (2008).
16. Uronis, H., Currow, D., McCrory, D., Samsa, G. & Abernethy, A. Oxygen for relief of
dyspnoea in mildly- or non-hypoxaemic patients with cancer: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Br. J. Cancer 98, 294–299 (2008).
17. Ekström, M., Ahmadi, Z., Bornefalk-Hermansson, A., Abernethy, A. & Currow, D.
Oxygen for breathlessness in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease who do not qualify for home oxygen therapy. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
11, CD006429 (2016).
18. Simon, S., Higginson, I., Booth, S., Harding, R. & Bausewein, C. Benzodiazepines for
the relief of breathlessness in advanced malignant and non-malignant diseases in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 1, CD007354. doi:007310.001002/14651858
(2010).
19. Abernethy, A., Currow, D., Frith, P., Fazekas, B., McHugh, A. & Bui, C. Randomised,
double blind, placebo controlled crossover trial of sustained release morphine for
the management of refractory dyspnoea. Br. Med. J. 327, 523–526 (2003).
20. Barnes P., McDonald J., Smallwood N., Manser R. Opioids for the palliation of
refractory breathlessness in adults with advanced disease and terminal illness.
Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 3, CD011008 (2016).
21. Howard, C. & Dupont, S. The COPD breathlessness manual’: a randomised con-
trolled trial to test a cognitive-behavioural manual versus information booklets
on health service use, mood and health status, in patients with chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease.
Prim.
Care
Respir.
Med.
24,
14076.
doi:14010.11038/npjpcrm.12014.14076 (2014).
22. Bausewein, C., Booth, S., Gysels, M. & Higginson, I. Non-pharmacological inter-
ventions for breathlessness in advanced stages of malignant and non-malignant
diseases.
Cochrane
Database
Syst.
Rev.
2,
CD005623.
doi:005610.001002/
14651858 (2008).
Breathing
“It is natural to think when you are feeling breathless that you need more air in. In fact this isn’t the 
case -we know that there is plenty of air in your lungs. Try instead to lengthen your out breath, 
which can make your breathing more efficient and create space for your next breath.” 
Thinking
“Some people say that they’re terrified that they are going to die gasping for breath. Although this is 
an understandable feeling, this almost never happens” (Then give a relevant explanation for a 
particular patient, for example “At that time, waste gases tend to build up in the blood, making 
people feel calm and sleepy.)”
Functioning
“Choosing to make yourself moderately breathless by being active is not harming you. In fact it 
builds up fitness in your muscles again and can improve your breathing and general health over 
weeks and months.”
Fig. 2
Challenging the misconceptions driving each vicious cycle
The breathing, thinking, functioning clinical model
A Spathis et al
5
Published in partnership with Primary Care Respiratory Society UK
npj Primary Care Respiratory Medicine (2017)  27 
 23. Zwerink, M., Brusse-Keizer, M., van der Valk, P., Zielhuis, G., Monninkhof, E. & van
der Palen, J. et al. Self management for patients with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 19, CD002990 (2014).
24. McCarthy, B., Casey, D., Devane, D., Murphy, K., Murphy, E. & Lacasse, Y. Pul-
monary rehabilitation for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst. Rev. 23, CD003793 (2015).
25. Farquhar, M., Prevost, A., McCrone, P., Brafman-Price, B., Bentley, A. & Higginson, I.
et al. Is a specialist breathlessness service more effective and cost-effective
for patients with advanced cancer and their carers than standard care?
Findings of a mixed-method randomised controlled trial. BMC Med. 12, 194
(2014).
26. Higginson, I., Bausewein, C., Reilly, C., Gao, W., Gysels, M. & Dzingina, M. et al. An
integrated palliative and respiratory care service for patients with advanced
disease and refractory breathlessness: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Respir. Med. 2, 979–987 (2014).
27. Johnson, M., Kanaan, M., Richardson, G., Nabb, S., Torgerson, D. & English, A. et al.
A randomised controlled trial of three or one breathing technique training ses-
sions for breathlessness in people with malignant lung disease. BMC Med. 13, 213
(2015).
28. Mahler, D., Ward, D., Waterman, L. & Baird, J. Longitudinal changes in patient-
reported dyspnoea in patients with COPD. COPD 9, 522–527 (2012).
29. Gardner, W. The pathophysiology of hyperventilation disorders. Chest 109,
516–534 (1996).
30. Chaitow L., Bardley D., Gilbert C. Multidisciplinary approaches to breathing pattern
disorders. (Churchill Livingstone, London, 2002).
31. Thomas, M., McKinley, R., Freeman, E. & Foy, C. Prevalence of dysfunctional
breathing in patients treated for asthma in primary care: cross sectional survey.
Br. Med. J. 2001, 1098–1100 (2001).
32. Dempsey, J., Romer, L., Rodman, J., Miller, J. & Smith, C. Consequences of exercise-
induced respiratory muscle work. Resp. Phys. Neurobiol. 151, 242–250 (2006).
33. Livermore, N., Butler, J., Sharpe, L., BcBain, R., Gandevia, S. & McKenzie, D. Panic
attacks and perception of inspiratory resistive loads in chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 178, 7–12 (2008).
34. von Leupoldt, A., Sommer, T., Kegat, S., Baumann, H., Klose, H. D., Dahme, B.
& Büchel, C. The unpleasantness of perceived dyspnea is processed in the
anterior insula and amygdala. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 177, 1026–1032 (2008).
35. Kim, H., Mofarrahi, M. & Hussain, S. Skeletal muscle dysfunction in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int. J. Chron. Obstruct. Pulmon. Dis. 3,
637–658 (2008).
36. Moorey, S. The six cycles maintenance model: growing a ‘vicious flower’ for
depression. Behav Cogn Psychol. 38, 173–184 (2010).
37. Bucknall, C., Miller, G., Lloyd, S., Cleland, J., McCluskey, S. & Cotton, M. et al.
Glasgow supported self-management trial (GSuST) for patients with moderate to
severe COPD: a randomised controlled trial. Br. Med. J. 344, e1060 (2012).
38. Shively, M., Gardetto, G., Kodiath, M., Kelly, A., Smith, T. & Stepnowsky, C. et al.
Effect of patient activation on self-management in patients with heart failure. J.
Cardiovasc. Nurs. 28, 20–34 (2013).
39. Hill, J., Wyatt, H., Reed, G. & Peters, J. Obesity and the environment: where do we
go from here? Science 299, 835–855 (2003).
40. The Health Foundation. Evidence: helping people help themselves (The Health
Foundation, 2011).
41. Baltzan, M., Scott, A., Wolkeove, N., Bailes, S., Bernard, S. & Bourbeau, J. et al.
Fatigue in COPD: prevalence and effect on outcomes in pulmonary rehabilitation.
Chron. Respir. Dis. 8, 119–128 (2011).
42. Anderson, J., Dodman, S., Kopelman, M. & Fleming, A. Patient information recall in
a rheumatology clinic. Rheumatol. Rehabil. 18, 245–255 (1979).
43. Abernethy, A., McDonald, C., Frith, P., Clark, K., Herndon, J. & Marcello, J. et al.
Effect of palliative oxygen versus room air in relief of breathlessness in patients
with refractory dyspnoea: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 376,
784–793 (2010).
44. Uronis, H., McCrory, D., Samsa, G., Currow, D. & Abernethy, A. Symptomatic
oxygen for non-hypoxaemic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst. Rev. 6, CD006429 (2011).
45. Bredin, M., Corner, J., Krishnasamy, M., Plant, H., Bailey, C. & A’Hern, R. Multicentre
randomised controlled trial of nursing intervention for breathlessness in patients
with lung cancer. Br. Med. J. 318, 901–914 (1999).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
The breathing, thinking, functioning clinical model
A Spathis et al
6
npj Primary Care Respiratory Medicine (2017)  27 
Published in partnership with Primary Care Respiratory Society UK
