 Practice Forum
A model for choosing an automated ultraviolet-C disinfection system
and building a case for the C-suite: Two case reports
Maureen Spencer RN, MEd, CIC a, Michelle Vignari RN, CIC b, Elizabeth Bryce MD c,
Helen Boehm Johnson MD d,*, Loretta Fauerbach MS, CIC e, Denise Graham BS f
a Universal Health Services, King of Prussia, PA
b Thompson Health and the University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY
c Vancouver General Hospital and the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
d Freelance medical writer, Vero Beach, FL
e Retired infection preventionist, Gainesville, FL
f Public health and government relations consultant, Marietta, GA
Key Words:
Infection prevention
Environmental interventions
UV-C technology
Environmental disinfection
Evaluating infection prevention technology
Building a business case for infection
prevention
Environmental disinfection has become the new frontier in the ongoing battle to reduce the risk of health
care–associated infections. Evidence demonstrating the persistent contamination of environmental sur-
faces despite traditional cleaning and disinfection methods has led to the widespread acceptance that
there is both a need for reassessing traditional cleaning protocols and for using secondary disinfection
technologies. Ultraviolet-C (UV-C) disinfection is one type of no-touch technology shown to be a suc-
cessful adjunct to manual cleaning in reducing environmental bioburden. The dilemma for the infection
preventionist, however, is how to choose the system best suited for their facility among the many UV-C
surface disinfection delivery systems available and how to build a case for acquisition to present to the
hospital administration/C-suite. This article proposes an approach to these dilemmas based in part on
the experience of 2 health care networks.
© 2017 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier
Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Environmental disinfection has become the new frontier in the
ongoing battle to reduce the risk of health care–associated infec-
tions (HAIs). Evidence demonstrating the persistent contamination
of environmental surfaces despite traditional cleaning and disin-
fection methods has led to the widespread acceptance that there
is both a need for reassessing traditional cleaning protocols and for
using secondary disinfection technologies.1-10 Research has shown
that as many as 50% of surfaces remain contaminated with patho-
gens, including multidrug-resistant organisms such as methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), despite regular manual
cleaning efforts.2 Additionally, it has become clear that there are mul-
tiple reservoirs for these pathogens within the health care setting,
from portable blood pressure monitors to intravenous stopcocks,
that are not adequately disinfected even with enhanced manual
cleaning protocols.3,4,11 Ultraviolet-C (UV-C) disinfection is one type
of no-touch technology shown to be a successful adjunct to manual
cleaning in reducing environmental bioburden.12-18 The dilemma for
the infection preventionist, however, is how to choose the system
best suited for their facility among the many UV-C surface disin-
fection delivery systems available and how to build a case for
acquisition to present to the hospital administration/C-suite.19,20 This
article proposes an approach to these dilemmas based in part on
the experience of 2 health care networks.
BACKGROUND
The literature is replete with evidence documenting the persis-
tence of pathogens on environmental surfaces, manual cleaning
efforts notwithstanding.1-10,21-23 The ability of many pathogens to
survive for extended periods of time on inanimate surfaces con-
tributes to this problem,23 but the inadequacy of cleaning protocols
and lack of consistency with protocol implementation are clearly
important factors.1,2 The challenge is that the environmental service
(EVS) worker must cover all surfaces and allow sufficient contact
time of the cleaner or disinfectant per the manufacturer’
s recom-
mendations. Concerns about poor staff compliance with cleaning
protocols and the recognition that pathogens can be spread by means
other than direct contact, including through aerial dissemination,
have further highlighted the need to supplement manual cleaning
* Address correspondence to Helen Boehm Johnson, MD, 1321 Sea Hawk Lane,
Vero Beach, FL 32963.
E-mail address: hboehm705@gmail.com (H.B. Johnson).
Conflicts of interest: None to report.
0196-6553/© 2017 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-
ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2016.11.016
American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 288-92
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
American Journal of Infection Control
journal homepage: www.ajicjournal.org
American Journal of 
Infection Control
 methods.1,24-26 In Carling’
s multisite study, an average rate of just
32% for cleaning thoroughness was reported.27 One study evaluating
a secondary disinfection technology to be used after manual clean-
ing found that manual cleaning actually introduced MRSA and
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) onto previously negative
surfaces because of contaminated cleaning cloths and cleaning so-
lutions. However, the continuing desire to prevent HAIs, particularly
those caused by hard to kill pathogens such as Clostridium difficile,
has led to a growing demand for adjunctive automated disinfec-
tion technologies, including UV-C disinfection.1,14
UV-C light’
s germicidal function is largely a result of the forma-
tion of thymine dimers, which inactivate the organism’
s DNA and
RNA.28 Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation for surface disinfection has
been demonstrated to be highly effective at eliminating both vege-
tative pathogens, including MRSA, VRE, carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae, and multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii,
and spores, such as C difficile.1,12-17,29,30 Multiple studies have dem-
onstrated a >3 log10 colony forming units per square centimeter
reduction in clinically significant pathogens when UV-C systems
were tested in a variety of configurations within a hospital room14,31,32
and in vitro studies.12 Napolitano et al actually demonstrated a
34% reduction in HAIs in a California hospital when UV-C systems
were integrated into their environmental interventions protocol.33 The
Environmental Protection Agency, however, has yet to establish device
testing or efficacy standards, which are critically needed to facili-
tate the interpretation of published UV-C disinfection results.19,20
Automated area UV-C–emitting systems: What are the options?
A detailed description of all commercially available UV-C systems
is beyond the scope of this article; however, the options are multi-
ple, each with a variety of both nuanced and more distinct differences.
One means of categorizing commercially available UV-C–emitting
systems is by lamp or bulb class: steady-state low-pressure mercury
bulbs that emit light at 254 nm and xenon bulbs that emit a pulsed
spectrum of light encompassing the UV (100-280 nm) and visible
(380-700 nm) spectra.15 There is currently only one commercially
available xenon bulb system which provides short, high-intensity
pulses (2 Hz) of the broad-spectrum light and runs, as suggested by
the manufacturer, in two 5- to 7-minute cycles, each in a different
location in a room, taking approximately 15-20 minutes for the dis-
infection process.15 The low-pressure mercury bulb systems deliver
radiation in a continuous stream with one system having 2 set-
tings, vegetative (12,000 uWs/cm2) and sporicidal (22,000 uWs/cm2),
and one system having a single vegetative or sporicidal setting (46,000
uWs/cm2).16 The pulsed xenon system manufacturer suggests using
shorter disinfection times than most of the commercially available
steady-state mercury systems; however, the one published study com-
paring the efficacy of the 2 different lamp classes determined that
“PX-UV was less effective than continuous UV-C devices [e.g. steady
state mercury systems] in reducing pathogen recovery on glass slides
with a 10-minute exposure time in similar hospital rooms.”15 The in
vitro study concluded that steady-state mercury vapor 254 nm re-
sulted in reductions of C difficile and MRSA colony forming units
roughly twice that of pulsed xenon and 6 times greater for VRE. All
systems can be operated remotely with tablets or personal digital as-
sistants, but they must be manually wheeled into the room for
operation. Additionally, almost all the systems have software that
allows them to capture utilization data, including treatment time, lo-
cation usage, and operator statistics. For the system with the remote
wireless UV-C measurement sensors, the software also tracks deliv-
ered dose and utilization data in real time. How the final dose is
determined for each device varies. Some systems calculate the dose
to be delivered (dose = UV-C intensity × time of exposure to the UV-
C) based on the dimensions of the room and are set on a timed
interval, but without active dose measurement. Other systems have
sensors on the emitter that measure the light reflected back to the
device from surfaces within the room; however, movement of the
device interferes with reflective light measurement, and rooms that
inhibit the reflection of light require longer treatment times.14 One
system uses remote wireless sensors placed in different targeted areas
of the room to measure incident light (both reflective and direct) and
therefore actual dose delivered.16 The estimated treatment time for
these systems can range from 5 to ≥50 minutes, and the physical foot-
print of each can vary significantly.16
Despite the lack of UV-C efficacy standards and the difficulties
interpreting studies because of methodologic variation and a lack
of consensus on acceptable pathogen reductions, there is agree-
ment that protein load and shadowing diminish UV-C effectiveness.
Studies have repeatedly demonstrated that the effectiveness of UV-C
systems is diminished with increasing concentrations of organic or
protein matter (eg, bodily fluids, dirt), thereby underscoring the im-
portance of using UV-C technology as an adjunct to manual
cleaning.14-16,18,29,34 Many of these systems are challenged with in-
creasing distance between the device and targeted areas, particularly
for shadowed areas or areas not in the direct line of light.15-18,29 This
is a particular issue for rooms that have irregular shapes or nooks,
or have permanent structures or furnishings that create shadows.
One system has a patented pause and reposition system that allows
for the unit to be repositioned to address the more difficult to reach
parts of the room in a time-effective manner.16 Other systems that
cannot be paused until their timed interval is complete or who rely
on reflected light for dose calculation must build in additional time
in their algorithms to disinfect the challenging areas.14,15 Given the
relationship between distance from device and effective killing, many
researchers have advised that high-touch objects be moved closer
to the device prior to utilization to optimize exposure.14,15
Choosing a UV-C–emitting system for your facility:
The Vancouver example
The infection prevention and infectious disease team at Van-
couver General Hospital, a 728-bed tertiary care hospital, went
through this evaluation and selection process beginning in 2013.
Their experience provides a great example for those looking to nav-
igate their way through it. Their process began with a pilot study
evaluating the incremental benefit of UV-C decontamination in
MRSA, VRE, and C difficile isolation rooms using 2 different com-
mercially available automated UV-C systems.16 They chose 2 systems
they thought to be good candidates for their facility, disregarding
any preexisting relationships between their external, outsourced EVSs
provider and specific UV-C manufacturers. Their study, published
in the April 2016 issue of the American Journal of Infection Control,
produced several key results. Even though housekeeping staff was
aware of being audited for the ongoing study, researchers noted no
significant changes in pre- and postmanual cleaning cultures for any
of the 3 organisms. Although notable, this finding cannot neces-
sarily be extrapolated to other institutions. By contrast, UV-C
disinfection reduced the percentage of MRSA from 34.4% to 3.3%,
VRE from 29.5% to 4.9%, and C difficile from 31.8% to 0%.16 Patho-
gen killing was diminished in the presence of a protein load. The
investigators concluded that, “both [systems] were equally excel-
lent in enhancing overall patient room cleanliness as an adjunct to
manual cleaning in a real-world setting.”16
Their selection of technology was therefore made based on “op-
erational and usability differences between the machines” in their
health care setting. A deciding factor in machine selection was the
room turnaround time in their overcapacity hospital, thus, the
machine that could be repositioned and had the shortest average
use time was therefore chosen.16
289
M. Spencer et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 288-92
 The determination of how those specific operational and us-
ability differences would impact their facility was decided after a
heuristic evaluation that was performed by their on-site human
factors engineer who engaged housekeeping staff, infection
preventionists, and operations personnel. This comprehensive mul-
tifaceted approach helped them determine that the faster emitter
better suited their facility’
s specific needs based on a number of dif-
ferent factors, including the following:
• Their near 100% occupancy rate and need for rapid room turn-
over (faster use times lead to more rapid room turnover, the
opportunity to treat more rooms in a shorter period of time,
and therefore, more rapid room turnover and increased patient
throughput).
• The history of their peak turnover times (further underscor-
ing the need for rapid room turnover).
• Usability (one setting left less room for user error in cycle se-
lection, and one machine could treat more rooms in a shorter
time frame).
• The device’
s robust software with a metrics-driven tracking
system. These software systems generally require that the pur-
chaser input room data either manually or electronically. However,
once the room data are entered, key pieces of data could be cor-
related, such as actual dose delivered to individual rooms, average
room treatment times, operator variability regarding room turn-
around time, and device utilization over time.
• The pause and reposition capability (which allows the opera-
tor to pause the system when the first 2 remote sensors have
reached their predetermined dose and reposition the device,
unlike other systems that must complete their full cycle before
the device can be repositioned, further adding to use time).
• Ergonomic issues (related to the device’
s ability to be moved
through small entrances and to be maneuvered by personnel).
Having made their decision regarding device selection, the team
then proceeded to build their case for the C-suite. The business case
included the pilot study data and potential for reducing antibiotic
resistance rates and HAIs, human factors engineer’
s comprehen-
sive evaluation, projected capital costs, projected operating costs
(which they determined could be offset by funds saved from the dra-
matic reduction in enhanced cleaning requests based on results from
their pilot study), and implementation plan.
The implementation plan was a critical part of the business case
because they knew they needed to demonstrate optimal utiliza-
tion. There were a number of key components of their plan which
were done in collaboration with their EVS team to ensure that their
needs were considered. For example, it was decided that not all EVS
workers would operate the systems but rather EVS would manu-
ally clean a room and enter the completed job into a computer, which
would then generate a computer call out to the dedicated EVS UV-C
device user or operator. This allowed the EVS to proceed with the
next job. In addition, it would facilitate the prioritization of UV-C
jobs by the operator who understood which areas and rooms were
to be targeted based on regular analysis that identified the units
with the most opportunity to improve their MRSA and C difficile rates.
These clear guidelines on room prioritization minimized operator
variation in room selection if multiple call outs were received in a
short period of time. They further optimized utilization by using
the systems to provide nighttime disinfection for operating rooms,
endoscopy suites, equipment supply rooms, and other high-use
rooms that were typically vacant during the night shift. They de-
termined docking locations for the devices that would allow for the
quickest access for high utilization areas, emphasizing the need for
proper device staging when considering labor and other operation-
al costs. Because of the unique data capturing and tracking capability
of the system, they developed a schedule for regular software report
reviews so that they could monitor for quality control and
compliance issues and regularly reassess their utilization pat-
terns, particularly as they related to infection clusters or outbreaks,
and the need for operator retraining. For example, after the device
was implemented, they noted an operator trend of significantly
shorter UV-C cycles compared with the average. Subsequently, they
were able to work with the operator and determine that the remote
sensors were being positioned closer to the device than recom-
mended by the manufacturer. Additionally, random audits using
adenosine triphosphate monitoring were initiated to ensure that
use of the technology did not precipitate a regression in compli-
ance with housekeeping manual cleaning. Finally, and perhaps
equally as importantly, the infection prevention team and the human
factors engineer looked at potential errors that could arise with the
use of the system and preemptively proposed solutions for each.
With this approach, the team was able to secure authorization
for purchasing the UV-C systems and began successfully imple-
menting the systems in 2014.
Building a case for a UV-C system purchase: The Rochester example
Between 2010 and 2011, Rochester General Hospital (RGH), a 528-
bed tertiary care hospital, saw a 23% increase in their crude C difficile
infection (CDI) rates, prompting their infection prevention team to
explore the use of additional environmental disinfection methods,
specifically UV-C technology. The team ultimately determined that
based on their facility’
s needs and their infection prevention goals,
there were several critical components they were looking for in a UV-C
system, the most significant of which was the ability to monitor dose-
based performance. Their high occupancy rates and need for rapid
turnover additionally demanded a rapid treatment time. Knowing that
many of their rooms had shadowed areas and were not standard
squares, they wanted to have a system they could pause and repo-
sition to more quickly and efficiently disinfect. Finally, as they were
embarking on a robust campaign to combat their rising C difficile rates,
they wanted a system that allowed for comprehensive data captur-
ing and analysis to help optimize utilization. Having chosen a system
that met these needs, they began to build a case for the C-suite. This
was a process that involved a number of the following key steps:
• Engaging an executive champion whom they could educate on
the technology and have as an inside sponsor when bringing
their case to the entire executive team.
• Creating a multidisciplinary team by bringing on board key
leaders from infection prevention, EVSs, pharmacy (particular-
ly those leading antimicrobial stewardship efforts), nursing,
microbiology, and respiratory and obtaining their buy-in and
support for both UV-C technology and the implementation plan.
• Proposing how UV-C disinfection would deliver a measurable
return to the organization (Table 1):
Table 1
Business case for one UV-C system using a 20% reduction model
Variable
Value
CDI costs
CDI cases per year
194 (2011)
Cost per case
$35,00035
Annual cost for CDI
$6,790,000
UV-C cost
$60,000
CDI savings
CDI case reduction
20%
CDI cases less
39
Annual CDI savings
$1,365,000
CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; UV-C, ultraviolet-C.
290
M. Spencer et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 288-92
 • Show their current care rates for high-risk pathogens (eg, C
difficile, MRSA).
• Provide data on the average cost of care for each.
• Demonstrate how incremental reductions in those infection
rates would translate into direct savings, including de-
creased length of stay leading to increased throughput.
• Explain how the chosen UV-C system’
s attributes (rapid dis-
infection time, delivered dose measurement, comprehensive
data tracking capability) would serve to achieve this goal.
With this comprehensive approach, the RGH infection preven-
tion team obtained the C-suite’
s support for acquiring 2 UV-C systems
and implemented them beginning in 2012 as part of a bundle ap-
proach to tackle their rising C difficile rates. Working with their
multidisciplinary team, they developed a 4-pronged bundle with
infection prevention, microbiology-laboratory, and pharmacology
components. They revamped their infection prevention protocols
by establishing equipment grids outlining who was responsible for
cleaning each piece of equipment. They created isolation timelines
to establish when CDI isolation could be discontinued. The crux of
their environmental component was their newly acquired UV-C tech-
nology, but additionally, they used bleach-based disinfectants,
performed ATP testing, and developed detailed daily and terminal
cleaning protocols for staff. Literature has shown that inappropri-
ate testing for CDI may lead to false identified true clinical cases
and lead to treatment of asymptomatic carriers.36,37 They reedu-
cated staff on the definition of diarrhea and developed guidelines
for stool testing. They also engaged pharmacy to create a tiered al-
gorithm for CDI treatment. Perhaps most significantly, recognizing
the impact of community onset and community onset health care
facility–associated CDI, they produced clean sweep protocols to im-
plement after unit CDI burdens were evaluated during biweekly
meetings of their multidisciplinary team. Using an empty swing bed
to facilitate patient movement, units identified as having in-
creased CDI rates were all terminally cleaned and disinfected with
UV-C. All available portable equipment was put in rooms for UV-C
disinfection, and unit common areas were terminally cleaned. The
results of these efforts led to significant reductions in CDIs at RGH.
RGH saw a 56% reduction between 2011 and 2015 and a 46% re-
duction between 2012 and 2015 in their New York State risk-
adjusted rates, which are adjusted for testing type.38 Nationally, RGH’
s
efforts yielded statistically significantly better than the average
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services standard infection ratios
for 3 consecutive years, most recently showing in 2015 30% less CDI
cases than predicted.
CONCLUSIONS
Acquisition of a UV-C disinfection system can be a substantial
purchase for a health care facility, and as a result, it is imperative
that a comprehensive evaluation of a facility’
s need for UV-C dis-
infection, the potential for improved patient outcomes, and a return
on investment can be demonstrated to the C-suite.
Clearly, it falls on the infection preventionist to perform thor-
ough due diligence in their evaluation and to develop a strong case
for the hospital administration. This includes using data on the es-
timated costs of infection, such as Dubberke and Olsen’
s estimate
of $4.8 billion for CDI in U.S. acute care facilities alone in 2008 or
Levy et al’
s estimated Can$12,000-Can$15,000 per CDI case in 2012,
to demonstrate theoretically how many avoided cases would allow
a facility to recoup the costs of the equipment.39,40
Limitations to these models include the difficulty in demonstrat-
ing data for true HAI reduction because the vast majority of research
on UV-C’
s efficacy in environmental disinfection has focused on
bioburden reduction and not actual infection reduction. To date, all
but one study have been before-after studies in which HAI rates after
implementation of UV-C were compared with those prior to UV-C
use.41 There has only been 1 randomized controlled trial
evaluating the impact UV-C has on reducing HAI among patients ad-
mitted to a room previously occupied by a patient with either MRSA,
VRE, or CDI.41 In their 2016 article, Weber et al acknowledge the chal-
lenges facing researchers interested in documenting actual infection
reduction with no-touch disinfection technologies, “. . .logistic and
cost reasons are likely to preclude randomized clinical trials. Rather,
decisions on use of these devices will need to be based on consis-
tent demonstration of effectiveness in killing pathogens as previously
detailed and quasi-experimental studies.”41 Additionally, Vancou-
ver General Hospital and RGH are both tertiary academic centers, and
their experiences may not necessarily be extrapolated to smaller com-
munity hospitals. This makes it all the more critical that infection
preventionists take a comprehensive approach to their evaluation to
determine cost-effectiveness for their facility (cost of equipment and
operation vs savings in avoided infections based on past rates). Key
steps in this process include the following:
• Educating oneself on the options and their attributes: Consid-
er creating a checklist of attributes and specifications to facilitate
comparison of systems (Table 2).
• Analyzing your particular facility’
s needs: If you have access to
a human factors’engineer, use them to determine the system
most compatible with your facility’
s workflow, design, and staff-
ing practices. If you do not have a human factors’engineer, use
publicly available templates for evaluating new technologies,
such as the Canadian Standards Association EXP06-2015, and
engage other departments for feedback on the usability of the
systems you are considering.
• Building a comprehensive business case: This should be built
on cost avoidances or return on investment, including reduced
hospitalization costs (eg, antibiotics, excess length of stay, in-
tensive care stay, test costs, isolation room time, staffing time,
disposable equipment costs), reduced emergency room divert
time, reduced operating room case cancellations, reduced CMS
penalties, among others.42 Revenue enhancement potential
through increased patient throughput, increased surgical cases,
and increased emergency room visits and admissions should be
another component of the business case.
• The plan ideally would be able to draw on the experience of
other facilities to demonstrate the technology’
s efficacy.
Table 2
Example of system specification comparison checklist
Attribute/
specification
System A
System B
System C
Capital cost
$x
$y
$z
Service and
support
agreement
$y annually
$x annually
Included in price
UV-C lamp cost
Included
$xyz for 4-pack
Included
UV-C dose
measurement
Yes: reflective light
measurement
No
Yes: delivered dose
measurement
Data capturing
capability
Yes
Yes: compatible
with EPIC
Yes: compatible
with Cerner
and EPIC
UV-C dose-based
repositioning
capability
No
No
Yes
Estimated
treatment time
X minutes
Y minutes
Z minutes
Physical footprint
of system
X × Y units
Y × Z units
X × Z units
UV-C, ultraviolet-C.
291
M. Spencer et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 288-92
 • Outline how the chosen system meets your facility’
s needs
and demonstrate the support of a multidisciplinary team in
the adoption of the technology.
• Include proposals for mitigating operating costs, such as
sharing the burden across departments if possible (eg, if en-
hanced cleaning requests are reduced, funds from EVS could
be diverted to UV-C operation; if a percentage of nursing staff
is on furlough, they could be trained to operate systems).
• Developing a strong implementation plan: If you have se-
lected your technology, engage the manufacturer to help you
create an implementation plan designed to optimize utiliza-
tion for your specific facility. Ask them to hold training sessions
not just for operators but also for directors and of multiple de-
partments (EVS, nursing, infectious disease, and corporate) so
that everyone involved is aware of the why, the when, and the
how of the UV-C disinfection systems.
UV-C disinfection can be an excellent adjunct to the cleaning
process, but it is imperative that the technology is not just pur-
chased out of the box. Infection preventionists must think
strategically about how they are going to maximize usage to achieve
the most efficiency. They must choose a system that meshes with
their facility’
s patient flow and operational needs and develop an
implementation plan that enables them to optimize a return on the
investment.
References
1. Chemaly RF, Simmons S, Dale C Jr., Ghantoji SS, Rodriguez M, Gubb J, et al. The
role of the healthcare environment in the spread of multidrug-resistant
organisms: update on current best practices for containment. Ther Adv Infect
Dis 2014;2:79-90.
2. Sexton T, Clarke P, O’
Neill E, Dillane T, Humphreys H. Environmental reservoirs
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in isolation rooms: correlation
with patient isolates and implications for hospital hygiene. J Hosp Infect
2006;62:187-94.
3. Dumford DM 3rd, Nerandzic MM, Eckstein BC, Donskey CJ. What is on that
keyboard? Detecting hidden environmental reservoirs of Clostridium difficile
during an outbreak associated with North American pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis type 1 strains. Am J Infect Control 2009;37:15-9.
4. Loftus RW, Koff MD, Burchman CC, Schwartzman JD, Thorum V, Read ME, et al.
Transmission of pathogenic bacterial organisms in the anesthesia work area.
Anesthesiology 2008;109:399-407.
5. Eckstein BC, Adams DA, Eckstein EC, Rao A, Sethi AK, Yadavalli GK, et al. Reduction
of Clostridium difficile and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus contamination
of environmental surfaces after an intervention to improve cleaning methods.
BMC Infect Dis 2007;7:61.
6. Hayden MK, Bonten MJ, Blom DW, Lyle EA, van de Vijver DA, Weinstein RA.
Reduction in acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus after enforcement
of routine environmental cleaning measures. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:1552-60.
7. Hacek DM, Ogle AM, Fisher A, Robicsek A, Peterson LR. Significant impact of
terminal room cleaning with bleach on reducing nosocomial Clostridium difficile.
Am J Infect Control 2010;38:350-3.
8. Carling PC, Parry MF, Bruno-Murtha LA, Dick B. Improving environmental hygiene
in 27 intensive care units to decrease multidrug-resistant bacterial transmission.
Crit Care Med 2010;38:1054-9.
9. Jefferson J, Whelan R, Dick B, Carling P. A novel technique for identifying
opportunities to improve environmental hygiene in the operating room. AORN
J 2011;93:358-64.
10. Munoz-Price LS, Birnbach DJ, Lubarsky DA, Arheart KL, Fajardo-Aquino Y, Rosalsky
M, et al. Decreasing operating room environmental pathogen contamination
through improved cleaning practice. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:897-
904.
11. Hayden MK, Blom DW, Lyle EA, Moore CG, Weinstein RA. Risk of hand or glove
contamination after contact with patients colonized with vancomycin-resistant
enterococcus or the colonized patients’environment. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2008;29:149-54.
12. Rutala WA, Gergen MF, Weber DJ. Room decontamination with UV radiation.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010;31:1025-9.
13. Anderson DJ, Gergen MF, Smathers E, Sexton DJ, Chen LF, Weber DJ, et al.
Decontamination of targeted pathogens from patient rooms using an automated
ultraviolet-C-emitting device. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013;34:466-71.
14. Nerandzic MM, Fisher CW, Donskey CJ. Sorting through the wealth of options:
comparative evaluation of two ultraviolet disinfection systems. PLoS ONE
2014;9:e107444.
15. Nerandzic MM, Thota PT, Sankar T, Jencson A, Cadnum JL, Ray AJ, et al.
Evaluation of a pulsed xenon ultraviolet disinfection system for reduction of
healthcare-associated pathogens in hospital rooms. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2015;36:192-7.
16. Wong T, Woznow T, Petrie M, Murzello E, Muniak A, Kadora A, et al. Postdischarge
decontamination of MRSA, VRE, and Clostridium difficile isolation rooms using
2 commercially available automated ultraviolet-C–emitting devices. Am J Infect
Control 2016;44:416-20.
17. Boyce JM, Havill NL, Moore BA. Terminal decontamination of patient rooms using
an automated mobile UV light unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011;32:737-
42.
18. Sitzlar B, Deshpande A, Fertelli D, Kundrapu S, Sethi AK, Donskey CJ. An
environmental disinfection odyssey: evaluation of sequential interventions to
improve disinfection of Clostridium difficile isolation rooms. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2013;34:459-65.
19. Cowan TE. Need for uniform standards covering UV-C based antimicrobial
disinfection devices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2016;37:1000-1.
20. Nerandzic MM, Donskey CJ. Response to cowan on need for UV-C antimicrobial
device standards. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2016;37:1001-2.
21. Carling PC, Huang SS. Improving healthcare environmental cleaning and
disinfection current and evolving issues. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2013;34:507-13.
22. Weber DJ, Anderson D, Rutala WA. The role of the surface environment in
healthcare-associated infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2013;26:338-44.
23. Kramer A, Schwebke I, Kampf G. How long do nosocomial pathogens persist on
inanimate surfaces? A systematic review. BMC Infect Dis 2006;6:1.
24. Roberts K, Smith CF, Snelling AM, Kerr KG, Banfield KR, Sleigh PA, et al. Aerial
dissemination of Clostridium difficile spores. BMC Infect Dis 2008;8:7.
25. Fernstrom A, Goldblatt M. Aerobiology and its role in the transmission of disease.
J Pathog 2013;2013:493960.
26. Best EL, Fawley WN, Parnell P, Wilcox MH. The potential for airborne dispersal
of Clostridium difficile from symptomatic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2010;50:1450-
7.
27. Carling P. Methods for assessing the adequacy of practice and improving room
disinfection. Am J Infect Control 2013;41:S20-5.
28. Kowalski W. Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation handbook: UVGI for air and surface
disinfection. New York (NY): Springer Science and Business Media; 2010.
29. Cadnum JL, Tomas ME, Sankar T. Effect of variation in test methods on
performance of ultraviolet-C radiation room decontamination. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2016;37:555-60.
30. Kanamori H, Rutala WA, Gergen MF, Weber DJ. Patient room decontamination
against carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus using a fixed cycle-time ultraviolet-C device and two
different radiation designs. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2016;1-3.
31. Manian FA, Griesnauer S, Bryant A. Implementation of hospital-wide enhanced
terminal cleaning of targeted patient rooms and its impact on endemic
Clostridium difficile infection rates. Am J Infect Control 2013;41:537-41.
32. Otter JA, Yezli S, Salkeld JA, French GL. Evidence that contaminated surfaces
contribute to the transmission of hospital pathogens and an overview of
strategies to address contaminated surfaces in hospital settings. Am J Infect
Control 2013;41:S6-11.
33. Napolitano NA, Mahapatra T, Tang W. The effectiveness of UV-C radiation for
facility-wide environmental disinfection to reduce health care–acquired
infections. Am J Infect Control 2015;43:1342-6.
34. Zhang J, Johnson TR, Patel VL, Paige DL, Kubose T. Using usability heuristics to
evaluate patient safety of medical devices. J Biomed Inform 2003;36:23-
30.
35. Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology. Guide to
preventing Clostridium difficile infections. 2013. Available from: www.apic.org/
Resource_/EliminationGuideForm/59397fc6-3f90-43d1-9325-e8be75d86888/
File/2013CDiffFinal.pdf. Accessed October 20, 2016.
36. Dubberke ER, Han Z, Bobo L, Hink T, Lawrence B, Copper S, et al. Impact of clinical
symptoms on the interpretation of diagnostic assays for Clostridium difficile.
J Clin Microbiol 2011;49:2887-93.
37. Kundrapu S, Sunkesula VC, Donskey CJ. Do asymptomatic carriers of toxigenic
Clostridium difficile identified through inappropriate testing represent a
significant risk for transmission? In: Open Forum Infectious Diseases. Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 2014. p. S440.
38. New York State Department of Health. Healthcare-acquired infection (HAI) rates
in New York State Hospitals. Available from: https://www.health.ny.gov/
statistics/facilities/hospital/hospital_acquired_infections/. Accessed August 3,
2016.
39. Dubberke ER, Olsen MA. Burden of Clostridium Difficile on the healthcare system.
Clin Infect Dis 2012;55(Suppl):S88-92.
40. Levy AR, Szabo SM, Lozano-Ortega G, Lloyd-Smith E, Leung V, Lawrence R, et al.
Incidence and costs of Clostridium difficile infections in Canada. Open Forum
Infect Dis 2015;2:ofv076.
41. Weber DJ, Rutala WA, Anderson DJ, Chen LF, Sickbert-Bennett EE, Boyce JM.
Effectiveness of ultraviolet devices and hydrogen peroxide systems for terminal
room decontamination: focus on clinical trials. Am J Infect Control 2016;44:e77-
84.
42. Perencevich EN, Stone PW, Wright SB, Carmeli Y, Fisman DN, Cosgrove SE, et al.
Raising standards while watching the bottom line: making a business case for
infection control. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007;28:1121-33.
292
M. Spencer et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 288-92
