 Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation
Charles Spence a,⇑, Katsunori Okajima b, Adrian David Cheok c, Olivia Petit c, Charles Michel a
a Crossmodal Research Laboratory, Oxford University, UK
b Yokohama National University, Japan
c Imagineering Institute, Malaysia
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 26 May 2015
Revised 23 August 2015
Accepted 24 August 2015
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Vision
Food intake
Visual hunger
Virtual
Gastrophysics
Food aesthetics
Technology
Digital
Behaviour
Food porn
Gastroporn
Cognition
a b s t r a c t
One of the brain’s key roles is to facilitate foraging and feeding. It is presumably no coincidence, then, that
the mouth is situated close to the brain in most animal species. However, the environments in which our
brains evolved were far less plentiful in terms of the availability of food resources (i.e., nutriments) than
is the case for those of us living in the Western world today. The growing obesity crisis is but one of the
signs that humankind is not doing such a great job in terms of optimizing the contemporary food land-
scape. While the blame here is often put at the doors of the global food companies – offering addictive
foods, designed to hit ‘the bliss point’ in terms of the pleasurable ingredients (sugar, salt, fat, etc.), and
the ease of access to calorie-rich foods – we wonder whether there aren’t other implicit cues in our envi-
ronments that might be triggering hunger more often than is perhaps good for us. Here, we take a closer
look at the potential role of vision; Specifically, we question the impact that our increasing exposure to
images of desirable foods (what is often labelled ‘food porn’, or ‘gastroporn’) via digital interfaces might
be having, and ask whether it might not inadvertently be exacerbating our desire for food (what we call
‘visual hunger’). We review the growing body of cognitive neuroscience research demonstrating the pro-
found effect that viewing such images can have on neural activity, physiological and psychological
responses, and visual attention, especially in the ‘hungry’ brain.
� 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction: The brain and food
It was Apicius, the 1st Century Roman gourmand (see Apicius,
1936), who purportedly coined the phrase ‘‘We eat first with our
eyes” (Delwiche, 2012). Nowadays, a growing body of evidence
from the cognitive neurosciences is revealing just how true this
aphorism really is (e.g., see Van der Laan, De Ridder, Viergever, &
Smeets, 2011, for a review). By allowing early life forms to probe
and sense their environments at ever greater distances (that is,
by allowing them to perceive those stimuli situated in extraper-
sonal space), eyes, and the visual systems that those eyes feed into,
evolved in order to increase a species’ chances of survival, by
enhancing the efficient detection of energy (food) sources, or
nutriments,
from
within
a
given environmental
niche
(e.g.,
Allman, 2000; Gehring, 2014).
Foraging – the search for nutritious foods – is one of the brain’s
most important functions. In humans, this activity relies primarily
on vision, especially when it comes to finding those foods that we
are already familiar with (see also Laska, Freist, & Krause, 2007). In
fact, it has been suggested that trichromatic colour vision may
originally have developed in primates as an adaptation that facili-
tated the selection of more energy-rich (and likely red) fruits from
in-amongst the dark green forest canopy (e.g., Bompas, Kendall, &
Sumner, 2013; Regan et al., 2001; Sumner & Mollon, 2000). Cer-
tainly, a complex interplay of animal signalling designed to capture
the attention (often visual) of pollinators and/or repel predators
has been a central part of the co-evolution of both the visual sys-
tems of animals and the colouration schemes utilized in both the
animal and plant kingdoms (e.g., see Barth, 1985; Cott, 1940;
Poulton, 1890; Rowe & Skelhorn, 2005; Schaefer & Schmidt, 2013).
Finding nutritious sources of food is undoubtedly essential for
human well-being, an activity where vision plays a central role,
one that is mediated by the attentional, pleasure, and reward
systems, as well as by complex physiological cycles of hunger
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
0278-2626/� 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Abbreviations: SOA, stimulus onset asynchrony; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; BMI,
body-mass index; EFS, external food sensitivity; AR, augmented reality; VR, virtual
reality.
⇑ Corresponding author at: Department of Experimental Psychology, University
of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK.
E-mail addresses: charles.spence@psy.ox.ac.uk (C. Spence), okajima@ynu.ac.jp
(K.
Okajima),
adrian@imagineeringinstitute.org
(A.D.
Cheok),
oliviapetit@
imagineeringinstitute.org (O. Petit).
Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Brain and Cognition
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/b&c
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 (e.g., Berthoud & Morrison, 2008; Kringelbach, Stein, & van
Hartevelt, 2012; LaBar et al., 2001; Masterson, Kirwan, Davidson,
& LeCheminant, 2015; Shin, Zheng, & Berthoud, 2009; Van den
Bos & de Ridder, 2006). It should come as no surprise, then, that
the visual appeal exerts an important influence on the overall plea-
sure that food elicits (e.g., Hurling & Shepherd, 2003; Spence &
Piqueras-Fiszman, 2014).1
2. The hungry brain
That the vast majority of animal species have evolved a mouth
that is situated close to their brain is presumably no coincidence;
As the famous British scientist J.Z. Young (http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/John_Zachary_Young) once put it: ‘‘The fact that the brain and
the mouth are both at the same end of the body may not be as trivial
as it seems.” (Young, 1968, p. 22). In fact, some have taken this obser-
vation to suggest that the brain may have evolved in animals as the
gut’s means of controlling its nutrient intake, and by so doing,
increasing the chances of survival and reproduction (e.g., Allman,
2000). Put another way, by determining which nutritious foods to
accept (that is, to ingest) and which potentially harmful (e.g., poi-
sonous) foodstuffs to avoid or reject (Piqueras-Fiszman, Kraus, &
Spence, 2014), the mouth may ultimately have played an important
role in guiding cortical development (e.g., Allman, 2000). Once
again, it was J.Z. Young who captured the idea in the opening sen-
tences of one of his papers: ‘‘No animal can live without food. Let us
then pursue the corollary of this: Namely, food is about the most impor-
tant influence in determining the organization of the brain and the
behavior that the brain organization dictates.” (Young, 1968, p. 21).
The brain is the body’s most energy-consuming organ, account-
ing for somewhere in the region of 25% of blood flow, or rather, 25%
of the available consumed energy (e.g., see Wenk, 2015, p. 9;
Wrangham, 2010). Note that this figure is even higher in the new-
born human, where the brain absorbs up to two thirds of the
energy that is consumed by the developing organism. As Brown
notes: ‘‘In embryos, the first part of the neocortex to develop is the
part which will represent the mouth and tongue. . .” As the brain grew
in size over the course of human evolution, the demands on the
visual system to efficiently locate nutrients in the environment
would likely also have increased.2
It is undoubtedly the case that the food landscapes inhabited by
those of us living in the western world today are very different
from those that our ancestors had to deal with; In particular, the
human brain evolved during a period when food was much scarcer
than it is now (Caballero, 2007), and it would appear that our
genetic make-up still seemingly drives us toward consumption
whenever food is readily accessible (e.g., Marteau, Hollands, &
Fletcher, 2012; Pinel, Assanand, & Lehman, 2000; Wenk, 2015). It
could well be argued that ‘visual hunger’ – a concept that we define
here as a natural desire, or urge, to look at food – could well be an
evolutionary adaption: Our brains learnt to enjoy seeing food, since
it would likely precede consumption. The automatic reward
associated with the sight of food likely meant another day of
sufficient nutrients for survival, and at the same time, the physio-
logical responses would prepare our bodies to receive that food.
Our suggestion here is that the regular exposure to virtual foods
nowadays, and the array of neural, physiological, and behavioural
responses linked to it, might be exacerbating our physiological
hunger way too often. Such visual hunger is presumably also part
of the reason why various food media have become increasingly
successful in this, the digital age.
Before discussing the potential role of visual hunger in public
health, we take a brief look at the evidence suggesting that the
exposure to appetizing images of food (the majority of which are
presented digitally, and hence in a unisensory manner) is becom-
ing an increasingly important source of enjoyment for many peo-
ple in society today (e.g., see Prince, 2014; Spence, 2015, for a
recent commentary). We then take a look at the evidence from
the cognitive neurosciences highlighting the effect that viewing
food images has on both the physiological and neural levels.
3. Virtual food for hungry eyes
The last 50 years or so have seen a widespread growth in the
popularity of various culinary practices, as well as the rise of the
celebrity ‘chef’ (Hansen, 2008). This has led to an inevitable expo-
sure to visually succulent cooking procedures and beautifully-
portrayed dishes, often making use of foods that are less than
healthy.3 Every day, it feels as though we are being exposed to ever
more appetizing (and typically high calorie) images of food, what
some
(perhaps
pejoratively)
call
‘gastroporn’4
or
‘food
porn’
(McBride, 2010; http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_porn).5 More-
over, the shelves of the bookstores are increasingly sagging under
the weight of all those cookbooks filled with high-definition and
digitally-enhanced food images (Spence & Piqueras-Fiszman, 2014;
see Myhrvold & Young, 2011, for one particularly spectacular exam-
ple). It has been suggested that those of us currently living in the
Western world are watching more cookery shows on TV than ever
before (Bellman, 2004; de Solier, 2005; Prince, 2014; Ray, 2007). Such
food shows often glamorize food without necessarily telling a bal-
anced story when it comes to the societal, health, and environmental
consequences of excess consumption (Caraher, Lange, & Dixon, 2000;
Ketchum, 2005; Meister, 2001). Moreover, the number of hours of TV
a person watches is positive correlated with their body-mass index
(BMI; see Boulos, Vikre, Oppenheimer, Chang, & Kanarek, 2012).6
Indeed, laboratory studies have shown that watching food-related
TV programs can affect people’s patterns of energy intake from a
given set of available foods (Bodenlos & Wormuth, 2013). It also leads
to an increased consumption of calories in the food that people end
1 While the appearance of food is not itself a primary reinforcer, food images may
acquire such positive properties through Pavlovian-Instrumental Transfer (e.g., see
Talmi, Seymour, Dayan, & Dolan, 2008). Note also that the exposure to familiar food
images is likely to result in cognitive processes such as the retrieval of relevant
memories and hedonic evaluations that have been stored during the previous
exposure(s) to, and experiences with, the food in question (e.g., Berthoud & Morrison,
2008; Shin et al., 2009).
2 Though, of course, mention should also be made here of Wrangham’s (2010)
intriguing suggestion that the introduction of fire (cooking) would have dramatically
increased our ancestors food-related energy efficiency, by allowing them to spend
less time foraging, chewing, and digesting. Homo erectus would thus have developed a
smaller, more efficient digestive tract which would have freed up more energy, thus
enabling further brain growth (see also Aiello & Wheeler, 1995).
3 Howard, Adams, and White (2012) found that TV chefs’ recipes were higher in fat,
saturated fat, and sodium than recommended by the World Health Organization’s
nutritional guidelines.
4 This term, which has now made its way into the Collins English Dictionary, is
defined as ‘the representation of food in a highly sensual manner’. The term was first
introduced by Alexander Cockburn, in a 1977 article that appeared in the New York
Review of Books, and was used to emphasize on the visual appearance of food (see
Poole, 2012, p. 59).
5 According to one commentator, the contemporary concern with the presentation
of food can be traced back to the early 1970’s, with the simultaneous emergence of
food photography and food media: ‘‘Really, the concern with how the food looked can be
traced back to the emergence of nouvelle cuisine. The pictures of these dishes have set
themselves in the mind of the public. Nouvelle cuisine was essentially photogenic. . . Think
of the glorious coloured photographs of these dishes, which have become eponymous with
the purveying of recipes.” (Halligan, 1990, p. 121; see also Smart, 1994). In terms of the
food porn on TV, Ray (2007) describes it as occurring ‘‘when we imagine cooking and
eating while watching other people actually doing it”. Others describe it as ‘foodatain-
ment’ (Finkelstein, 1999).
6 Pinel et al. (2000, p. 1112) put it thus: ‘‘From the perspective of our evolutionary
analysis, the reason humans living in modern industrialized societies tend to overeat is
that the presence, the expectation, or even the thought of food with a high positive-
incentive value promotes hunger.”
2
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 up cooking for themselves (Pope, Latimer, & Wansink, 2015), even
though many of us are spending less and less time actually interact-
ing with food itself (as the consumption of processed, convenience
foods, and ready-meals continues its relentless rise; e.g., Capps,
Tedford, & Havlicek, 1985; Hamrick, Andrews, Guthrie, Hopkins, &
McClelland, 2011; Howard et al., 2012; Moss, 2013; Smith, Ng, &
Popkin, 2013). This is obviously worrying news given that ready-
meals are almost as unhealthy as the meals prepared by many of
the most popular chefs on the TV cookery shows (Howard et al.,
2012; Meister, 2001; see also Food Standards Agency, 2003).
From restaurants to supermarkets, from stories in the press
through to the sides of product packaging, serving suggestions are
often showcased with the foods themselves presented in the most
favourable and desirable (albeit unrealistic) manner possible: Many
such food images tend to be much more appetizing than the actual
products that they portray. In some cases, dishes are created solely
with the visual aesthetic in mind (see www.theartofplating.com).7
That said, the way in which a food is plated (i.e., presented visually)
exerts an impact on people’s flavour perception, and can modify peo-
ple’s subsequent food choices, not to mention their consumption
behaviour (e.g., Deroy, Michel, Piqueras-Fiszman, & Spence, 2014;
Michel, Velasco, Gatti, & Spence, 2014; Spence, Piqueras-Fiszman,
Michel, & Deroy, 2014; Zellner, Loss, Zearfoss, & Remolina, 2014;
see also Linné, Barkeling, Rössner, & Rooth, 2002).
Due to the exponential growth in the availability of digital
interfaces and audiovisual media over the last century (think
smartphones, tablets, and computer monitors), most people now
have daily access to digital screens. As the years go by, the digital
display (but also the in-built cameras) of these devices has been
improving continuously in terms of resolution and the quality of
the colour rendition, resulting in the pictures taken (and seen) hav-
ing a greater aesthetic appeal too. Furthermore, more and more
‘embellishing’ technologies are also coming onto the market, from
programs such as ‘Photoshop’ for photography amateurs and pro-
fessionals, through to ‘Instagram’, where anyone can easily make
their images more visually attractive. These new technologies are
resulting in consumers’ increasing exposure to digital food images,
that is, divorced from the natural situations of consumption.8 At
the same time, the last few years have seen a dramatic rise in the
dining public’s obsession with taking images of the foods that they
are about to eat, often sharing those images via their social media
networks (e.g., see Abbar, Mejova, & Weber, 2015). The situation
has reached the point now that some chefs are considering whether
to limit, or even, on occasion, to ban their customers from taking
photographs of the dishes when they emerge from the kitchen
(e.g., see Alexander, 2014; Clay, 2014; Ensor, 2013; O’Neill, 2015).
However, one restaurant consultant and publisher has recently sug-
gested that the way food looks is perhaps more important than ever:
‘‘I’m sure some restaurants are preparing food now that is going to look
good on Instagram” (Saner, 2015). Some chefs have even embraced
this trend by providing diners with camera stands at their restaurant
tables, even serving food on plates that spin 360�, thus allowing their
customers to get the perfect shot every time (Elliott, 2015; Michel,
Woods, Neuhäuser, Landgraf, & Spence, 2015). Books on the art of
plating also urge the reader to make it look beautiful (e.g., Siple &
Sax, 1982).
While it might seem that the influence of this ‘digital grazing’ is
gaining traction across a wide cross-section of the public, there is a
very real concern that this onslaught of appetizing food images
may be having a deleterious impact on certain of our eating beha-
viours (e.g., see Ouwehand & Papies, 2010; Robinson & Matheson,
2014).9 After all, it is already well-known that food advertising
increases the consumers’ wanting for food, hence increasing their
consumption of whatever food happens to be within reach. This is
true in both children and adults (Borzekowski & Robinson, 2001;
Halford et al., 2008; Harris, Bargh, & Brownell, 2009). It would seem
that ‘visual hunger’ may well activate those behaviours that are
associated with food consumption in a manner that is relatively
automatic.
Indeed, the pervasive visual exposure to food has already been
shown to exert an essential role in terms of consumption beha-
viours: According to Wansink (2006), the food information derived
from digital media is thought to influence over 70% of the food
eaten by American households. At the same time, the dieting cul-
ture, together with lean ideals, contrast with what the media
seems to want to indulge their viewers with (see Howard et al.,
2012). Pope and her colleagues have recently suggested that this
indulgence leading to visual satiation might just be an outlet for
actual behaviours that are either obesogenic, or less acceptable in
today’s society, while the promotion of healthy eating has become
commonplace. This paradoxical observation concerning media
content attests to the ‘vicarious gluttony’ (see Adema, 2000), or
‘vicarious consumption’ (Pope et al., 2015)10 that many people find
themselves indulging in. Indeed, cooking shows, food advertisement,
and social media feeds containing images of high-energy foods may
well offer a substitute source of pleasure, while at the same time
indirectly
promoting
overconsumption
and
gratification.
As
Passamonti and his colleagues (2009, p. 43) note, ‘‘external food cues,
such as the sight of appetizing food can evoke a desire to eat, even in the
absence of hunger.” The real problem here is that such indulgence, by
modelling how much and what type of food we end up eating, might
actually be detrimental to both our psychological and physiological
well-being.
On the flip side, though, the hope amongst some researchers is
that by gaining a better understanding of the neural underpinnings
of our visually-elicited food behaviours, we may one day poten-
tially be able to nudge consumers toward healthier eating (e.g.,
Toepel, Knebel, Hudry, le Coutre, & Murray, 2009).
3.1. On the (neuro-)physiological consequences of viewing food images
But are there really any indirect health-related consequences
associated with the dramatic increase in our exposure to appealing
images of foods (increasingly, via our smartphones and other
mobile technologies)? What seems clear from a casual reading of
the literature is that the exposure to images of desirable foods
can trigger inhibitory cognitive processes such as self-restraint,
that is, effortful processes associated with resisting the temptation
that desirable foods constitute in order, one presumes, to maintain
7 Indeed, there is a very real danger that by making food as visually appealing as
possible, that is, by idealizing its visual appearance, we sometimes end up forgetting
about, or downplaying, the importance of flavour, of foods that actually taste good, or
that are ethically sourced.
8 See Marks & Spencer’s recent food campaign, for one particularly evocative
example (http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/09/02/marks-and-spencer-food-
pudding-advert-this-is-not-just-any_n_5751628.html).
9 Here, an analogy can be drawn with the on-going debate about the negative
consequences on society of the non-edible variety of pornography (e.g., Lambert,
Negash, Stillman, Olmstead, & Fincham, 2012; Maddox, Rhoades, & Markman, 2011;
Malamuth & Check, 1985; Olmstead, Negash, Pasley, & Fincham, 2013). In fact, the
link between sex and food, two primary reinforcers is a topic awaiting thorough
academic study (e.g., see Crumpacker, 2006, for an engaging introduction). And
according to Jamie Oliver, a highly influential chef and food entrepreneur, ‘‘food” is
the second most searched for term on the Internet after, you guessed it, pornography
(e.g., Cadwalladr, 2014; see also Carter, 2014).
10 According to Pope et al. (2015), people, especially women, may use food
television as an outlet for actual behaviours that are not so acceptable in today’s
society, cooking programs may offer pleasure vicariously. Pope et al. go on to say that:
‘‘Because many cooking shows normalize overconsumption and gratification, it comes as
no surprise that viewers’ culinary habits are negatively influenced” (Pope et al., 2015,
p. 132).
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
3
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 a
reasonably
healthy
weight
(e.g.,
Fishbach,
Friedman,
&
Kruglanski, 2003; Kroese, Evers, & De Ridder, 2009; Van den Bos
& de Ridder, 2006; see also Uher, Treasure, Heining, Brammer, &
Campbell, 2006).
Such inhibitory processes may be especially challenging for
those who, for whatever reason, exhibit a tendency to overeat
(e.g., Ouwehand & Papies, 2010; Passamonti et al., 2009).11 Note
here also that those individuals who suffer from binge-eating
disorder and bulimia experience greater reward sensitivity, brain
activation, and arousal, in response to viewing images of pleasant
foods (e.g., Schienle, Schäfer, Hermann, & Vaitl, 2009). Obese individ-
uals, by contrast, exhibit significantly less activation of the reward-
related brain areas in response to food consumption than do healthy
weight individuals. However, they show greater activation in the
gustatory cortex and in somatosensory regions in response to
anticipated food intake compared to healthy weight individuals. This
pattern of results therefore suggests that those individuals who are
overweight may anticipate more reward from food intake while at
the same time experiencing less sensory pleasure as a result of
eating (Stice, Spoor, Bohon, Veldhuizen, & Small, 2008).
Given the impact that visual images of food so obviously have
on our eating behaviours, as outlined in the previous section, it
should come as little surprise that the human brain preferentially
directs its limited attentional resources toward the processing of
high-fat foods (e.g., Toepel et al., 2009; see also Harrar, Toepel,
Murray, & Spence, 2011). In one study, Toepel and his colleagues
utilized a calibrated series of food images that had been developed
to control for any low-level differences in terms of their visual
characteristics (such as their luminance and spatial frequency dis-
tributions), but which varied in terms of their fat content. Using
electrical neuroimaging of visual evoked potentials (VEPs), these
researchers were able to demonstrate that the high-fat food images
were processed differently, with this topographical difference in
cortical processing showing-up pretty rapidly (that is, within about
165 ms of participants seeing the visual stimulus; see also Killgore
et al., 2003).
Meanwhile, Harrar et al. (2011) used a subset of stimuli from
the same database in order to demonstrate that high-fat food
images also motivate human behaviour more effectively than do
low-fat food images. In their study, participants had to make
speeded target elevation discrimination responses to a series of
visual targets presented to the left or right of central fixation.
Shortly before the presentation of each target (at stimulus onset
asynchronies of 100, 300, or 450 ms), a spatially-nonpredictive
image (that participants were supposed to ignore) was flashed up
on either the same or opposite side of the screen (see Fig. 1). The
results of this study revealed that the participants responded more
rapidly, and no less accurately to the targets following the presen-
tation of high-fat food images than following the presentation of
low-fat or no fat images.12 A similar pattern of results was also
obtained when the images were grouped in terms of whether high
versus low carbohydrate foods were depicted. Harrar et al. (2011,
p. 351) summarized their findings as follows: ‘‘These results support
the view that people rapidly process (i.e. within a few hundred
milliseconds) the fat/carbohydrate/energy value or, perhaps more gener-
ally, the pleasantness of food. Potentially as a result of high fat/high
carbohydrate food items being more pleasant and thus having a higher
incentive value, it seems as though seeing these foods results in a
response readiness, or an overall alerting effect, in the human brain.”
The research that has been conducted over the last 5–10 years
shows that attentional capture by food images tends to be more
pronounced in those participants who are hungry than in those
who are sated (Piech, Pastorino, & Zald, 2010; see also Siep et al.,
2009). Attentional capture is also higher in response to food images
that are judged to be more pleasant (di Pellegrino, Magarelli, &
Mengarelli, 2011; see also Brignell, Griffiths, Bradley, & Mogg,
2009). The capture of attention by food stimuli is also modulated
by
an
individual’s
body-mass
index
(BMI)
(Nummenmaa,
Hietanen, Calvo, & Hyönä, 2011; see also Yokum, Ng, & Stice,
2011). Now, given that covert shifts of a person’s attention nor-
mally precede any overt shift of gaze, one might therefore consider
whether such preferential attentional capture by certain types of
food image might not also lead to a subtle biasing of consumer
choice. However, while some published results support such a
claim (namely, that we tend to choose the stimuli that first cap-
tures our attention), it is important to note that the jury would still
appear to be out on this one (see Van der Laan, Hooge, de Ridder,
Viergever, & Smeets, 2015, for recent debate).
In our everyday lives, of course, we rarely see images of food in
isolation. That is, they are typically presented against a certain
backdrop, be it the packaging of the food on which that image is
presented, or the place setting when we are presented with a plate
of food in a restaurant setting. Zhang and Seo (2015) recently
found that the amount of attention that people devote to images
of food depends on background saliency (i.e., it changes as a func-
tion of both table setting and decoration) and culture.13 In sum-
mary,
the
research
that
has
been
reported
to
date
clearly
demonstrates that the consumer’s brain tends to direct its limited
attentional resources (first covertly, then overtly) toward the ener-
getic food sources that currently happen to be in the field of view.
3.2. Neural substrates underlying the processing of visual food cues
Food is one of the most effective stimuli in terms of modulating
brain activity in hungry participants (see Fig. 2), with the sight and
smell of appetizing food leading to a striking 24% increase in whole
brain metabolism in one representative PET study (see Wang et al.,
2004; see also LaBar et al., 2001).14 This is no mean feat when it is
remembered that the brain is the body’s most energy-hungry organ,
accounting for something like 25% of blood flow/available consumed
energy (Aiello & Wheeler, 1995; Wenk, 2015). Remarkably, pretty
significant changes in neural activity are also elicited if a participant
happens to see nothing more than the static visual image of a desir-
able foodstuff on a monitor while lying passively in a brain scanner.
Van der Laan et al. (2011) conducted a meta-analysis of 17 dif-
ferent neuroimaging studies (involving almost 300 participants) in
which the neural activation elicited by the visual presentation of
food images had been assessed. While nearly 200 separate foci of
activation were highlighted across this diverse set of studies, the
results of the meta-analysis revealed a small number of key brain
regions that were activated in response to food pictures (across a
number of the studies). So, for example, the bilateral posterior fusi-
form gyrus, the left lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and the left
middle insula all exhibited increased neural activity following
the presentation of food images in several of the studies. Sepa-
rately, the hunger state of the participants modulated the brain’s
11 As Passamonti et al. (2009, p. 43) put it: ‘‘Eating is not only triggered by hunger but
also by the sight of foods. Viewing appetizing foods alone can induce food craving and
eating, although there is considerable variation in this ‘‘external food sensitivity” (EFS).
Because increased EFS is associated with overeating, identifying its neural correlates is
important for understanding the current epidemic of obesity.”
12 Interestingly, though, the magnitude of the stimulus-driven, or exogenous, spatial
cuing effect was unaffected by the type of image that was shown visually, thus
suggesting that the presentation of the food images had a more general effect on
participants’ motivation/arousal levels rather than specifically enhancing spatial
attentional capture.
13 The visual attention of the Chinese participants in Zhang and Seo’s (2015) study
was directed to the food in the images a little later in time than was the case for the
North American participants whose behaviour was assessed.
14 As Gordon Shepherd (2014) put it recently in a conference presentation: ‘‘Flavor
engages more of the brain than any other activity.”
4
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 response to food pictures in the right amygdala and left lateral OFC.
Finally, the response in the hypothalamus/ventral striatum was
modulated by the expected energy content of the food.15
More recently, Pursey et al. (2014) conducted a meta-analysis of
60 different neuroimaging studies (involving a total of 1565 partic-
ipants) that had assessed the neural response to visual food cues as
a function of the weight of their participants. In this case, the
results revealed that obese individuals exhibited a greater increase
in neural activation in response to food as compared to non-food
images, especially for high-calorie foods, in those brain regions
that are associated with reward processing (e.g., the insula and
OFC), reinforcement and adaptive learning (the amygdala, puta-
men, and OFC), emotional processing (the insula, amygdala, and
cingulate gyrus), recollective and working memory (the amygdala,
hippocampus, thalamus, posterior cingulate cortex, and caudate),
executive functioning (the prefrontal cortex (PFC), caudate, and
cingulate gyrus), decision making (the OFC, PFC, and thalamus),
visual processing (the thalamus and fusiform gyrus), and motor
learning and coordination, such as hand-to-mouth movements
and swallowing (the insula, putamen, thalamus, and caudate).
Fig. 1. (A) A subset of the three types of image used in Harrar et al.’s (2011) study of attention capture by high-fat (or high-carbohydrate) food images: high-fat food (left
column), low-fat food (middle column), and non-food items (right column). (B) Methods. The first frame shows the fixation cross, which was shown for 700 ms. The second
frame shows the visual cue (a slice of pizza) appearing to the left of the fixation cross—a dashed rectangle shows the other possible location where the visual cue could occur.
The third frame shows a visual target (not drawn to scale) presented in the top right (the other three possible locations for the visual target are depicted by faint circles). The
condition shown in the figure is a non-cued trial with a high-fat food image. [Figure adapted from Harrar et al. (2011).]
Fig. 2. PET images from one of the hungry participants who took part in Wang et al.’s (2004) study of brain activity in response to the presentation of, and talking about,
appetizing foods. In the food presentation condition, the participants (whose last meal had been between 17 and 19 h earlier), had to describe their favourite foods and how
they liked to eat them. At the same time, they were presented with foods that they had reported as being amongst their favourite, the food was warmed to ensure the delivery of
appetizing food aromas too. Furthermore, cotton swabs that had been impregnated with one of the participant’s favourite foods were placed on their tongues so that they could
taste it as well. A 24% increase in whole brain metabolism was documented on being shown appetizing images of food while lying in a brain scanner. (Red represents the
highest metabolic activity and dark violet the lowest.) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
15 Though interestingly, it turns out that there can actually be quite a mismatch
between the expected satiety of foods (as assessed from their visual appearance) and
their actual energy content (e.g., Brunstrom, Shakeshaft, & Scott-Samuel, 2008; see
also Davies, 2015; Jimenez et al., 2015).
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
5
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 Those individuals who were obese were also shown to be more
responsive to food cues when in a satiated state than were the
healthy weight individuals. In the fasting state, obese individuals
demonstrated increased neural activation in those areas that are
known to be associated with the anticipation of reward. By con-
trast, healthy weight controls exhibited greater activation in those
neural areas that are associated more closely with cognitive con-
trol. Results such as these therefore suggest that the weight and
hunger state of the consumer/participant in a neuroimaging study
exerts a significant influence on the reward responsiveness of their
brains to pictures of food. The healthiness and the perceived tasti-
ness of food images also influence the brain’s response, especially
in those individuals with a higher BMI.
Petit et al. (2014) reported that when participants viewed pic-
tures of healthy foods while thinking about the pleasure that they
would get, were they to eat them, greater activation was seen in
individuals with higher BMI than in lean individuals in those brain
areas that are associated with cognitive control (inferior frontal
gyrus) and the anticipation of reward (insula, orbitofrontal cortex).
On the other hand, when those individuals with a higher BMI
viewed the same images while thinking about the possible health
benefits, less activity was observed in these same brain areas.
These results suggest that individuals with a higher BMI tend to
dismiss the health benefits, and that promoting the tastiness of
healthy food improves their self-regulation capabilities.
Before closing this section, though, it is perhaps worth pausing
for a moment to consider just how far removed from the
real-world of multisensory food consumption is the experience of
those participants who agree to take part in one of these neu-
roimaging studies (see Spence & Piqueras-Fiszman, 2014).16 Notice
how the participants typically have to stare passively at carefully-
controlled, but not necessarily all that appealing, images of food
(i.e., unisensory stimulation) with no real expectation that they will
have the opportunity to eat any of the foods that they see (in this
way, perhaps mirroring the situation for all of those consumers
watching all those food shows on TV). Given such constraints, it
might well be anticipated that the changes in brain activation that
are likely to be associated with the presence of real food prior to
an actual consumption experience (with all the multisensory stimu-
lation that normally entails), will be much higher than has typically
been reported in the neuroimaging studies that have been summa-
rized in this section (cf. Spence, 2011).
3.3. Influence of food images of psychology/physiology
Not only do food images result in profound changes in attention
as well as in neural activity across a network of brain areas (see
above), they can also lead to increased salivation (at least if the
food images are combined with other food-related sensory cues;
see Spence, 2011, for a review), not to mention a number of other
physiological changes. Changes in the cephalic phase release of
insulin have been reported following the presentation of food
images, as well as changes in heart rate in anticipation of the food
that is expected to come (e.g., Drobes et al., 2001; Wallner-
Liebmann et al., 2010). Interestingly, here, the large body of older
research on the exogenous factors that elicit a salivatory response
are illustrative in showing how much more of a (salivatory)
response one is likely to see the more sensory cues one incorpo-
rates in the stimulation that is presented to the participant, and
the closer to a real food consumption episode that one can get.
Food pictures can also modify the process of hedonic taste eval-
uation. By means of electro-encephalography (EEG), Ohla, Toepel,
Le Coutre, and Hudry (2012) showed that high (vs. low) calorie
food images enhance the hedonic evaluation of a subsequently-
presented hedonically neutral electric taste produced by a small
current that was applied to the tongue. At the behavioural level,
the participants rated the electrical taste as significantly more
pleasant after viewing high-calorie food images than after viewing
the low-calorie food images. At the cerebral level, high-calorie food
images induced an early modulation of taste-evoked neural activ-
ity in the insula/frontal operculum (FOP) within 100 ms after taste
onset. Such a pattern of results clearly suggests that visual infor-
mation concerning the energy-content of a food modulates taste
representations during the early level of stimulus encoding in the
primary taste areas. The later differences of activation that were
seen in the OFC (at a latency of 180 ms), and which were positively
correlated with the hedonic evaluation of the taste, were followed
by subsequent modulations of activation in the insula/FOP at a
latency of around 360 ms. This late activation suggests an intero-
ceptive hedonic re-evaluation of the taste based on the perceived
energy-content of the food images.
In a sense, one can question here whether the appearance of
digitally enhanced food-related sensory experiences, such as
olfactory apps (e.g., see http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-
26526916), virtual taste (Ranasinghe et al., 2011), cooking simula-
tion computer games (e.g. Cooking Mama: http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Cooking_Mama), and virtual reality food experiences (http://
www.projectnourished.com/), no matter how realistic they might
be, might actually be having the opposite effect to the one that
they market themselves on. There is even talk of enhanced 3D
VR food blogs (see Perception Fixe, by Matheus De Paula Santos
of Myo Studios). According to Swerdloff (2015): ‘‘Myo Studios is
banking on the notion that providing an enhanced visual experience
through virtual reality will markedly up its food blog’s ante. Users will
be able to ‘‘sit down in front of a steak from some restaurant, even
though there’s no reservation for three months.” . . . DePaulaSantos
told me, ‘‘One of my hopes is to not just take photographs of food,
but also be able to animate it. If you see a sizzling steak in front of
you, that’s just one way of stimulating more senses.”
3.4. Interim summary
What we have seen so far, then, is that the human brain is the
body’s most demanding organ in terms of energy-consumption,
that one of the primary functions of brain function is to find nutri-
tious sources of food, that high-energy food images preferentially
receive processing resources, and that the unisensory visual pre-
sentation of food images can lead to profound changes in cerebral
activity, especially in hungry individuals. It is at this point that we
need to consider the changing face of the food landscape for
humans during the twentieth century: From hunter-gatherers
evolving by means of natural selection, we have increasingly
grown to be super-consumers, the primary predator of the planet’s
limited natural resources. Our search for food no longer takes place
out in the wild, but involves industrial food production at one end,
and the shoppers’ navigation of the supermarket aisle (and increas-
ingly online) at the other (Sobal & Wansink, 2007).
It has been argued by many that the oversupply of food has led
to the growing obesity crisis faced by many of the countries in the
developed world (e.g., Caballero, 2007; Critsen, 2003; Moss, 2013;
World Health Organization, 1998). Blame here is often laid at the
doors of the global food companies (Moss, 2013), pumping out
addictive foods, designed to hit ‘the bliss point’ in terms of sugar,
salt, fat, etc. (Moskowitz & Gofman, 2007; Wrangham, 2010,
p. 195). However, our aim in the section that follows is rather to
take a closer look at the potential role of vision, and specifically
the growing exposure to appetizing high-fat images of food in
exacerbating our overconsumption of food.
16 It can, of course, be difficult to capture the realistic situation of food consumption
while one’s participant is clamped still in the brain scanner; see Spence & Piqueras-
Fiszman, 2014).
6
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 4. Eating with our eyes: Visual hunger in the digital age
As we saw earlier, ‘visual hunger’ can be defined as the natural
desire, or urge, to see food images and the subsequent array of neu-
ral, physiological, and behavioural responses that result from an
individual’s exposure to food images – typically implying unisen-
sory (visual) stimulation in the absence of any actual food. The
existence of this phenomenon could be put down as an early Pleis-
tocene adaptation to the comfort of seeing food, meaning to early
humans having enough energy to survive for a few more days. The
rise of painting and the visual arts made it possible to depict food
without any actually being present. In recent times, the appearance
of print, and thereafter digital screens – whose presence in the
daily lives of modern humans is seeing an exponential growth –
has rendered the presence of virtual food ubiquitous. As advanced
in this article, the regular exposure to virtual foods might well be
exacerbating our physiological hunger more often than needed,
due to the array of neural, physiological, and behavioural responses
linked to seeing food. Given the fact that a growing proportion of
the world’s population lives in obesogenic environments, this
doesn’t seem to be helping in solving certain costly food-related
diseases that are of concern to certain influential organizations
and public policy makers, not to mention the environmental conse-
quences related to the growing production of such foods. We
believe that discussing and understanding the importance of the
unimodal visual presentation of food in today’s environment is
important in terms of orienting populations towards more appro-
priate food behaviours and choices, a subject of great importance
given the fact that some of the biggest challenges facing human-
kind are related to food consumption and food systems – health,
excessive meat-consumption, the use of natural resources, water
management, land use – to name just a few.
In society at large, there is a growing awareness of just how
much people like to take pictures of the food that they have
ordered in restaurants, and chefs wanting to design food in most
pleasing manner. Increasingly, it would appear that people are
spending more time looking at virtual images of appetizing foods,
and paying less attention to the actual foods being consumed (see
Fig. 3). Worse still, many of us eat while mindlessly watching
screens (TV, or smartphone), failing to focus our attention on the
flavour experience which might the very source of lower satiety,
and higher-calorie food intake: The pleasure of seeing virtual food
(the hunger for images, or ‘digital grazing’) while eating has in
some sense superseded the pleasure of seeing the real thing. And
while some might be tempted to see this as the fault of industry/
marketers, it is important to remember, given the growing popu-
larity of consumers taking pictures of food,17 that the problem here
would appear to be, at least partly, self-inflicted.18
4.1. From real cooking to virtual feeding
Here, one might also want to consider the consequences of our
increasing reliance on processed foods, driven both by its low price
and its convenience (e.g., Moss, 2013). According to Eric Schlosser
(2001, p. 121), in his best-selling book Fast Food Nation: ‘‘about 90%
of the money spent by North Americans on food is used to buy pro-
cessed food”. Note that beside the negative health consequences
that are typically associated with a diet that involves the consump-
tion of large quantities of such foods (see Moss, 2013), one
little-considered consequence is that when the food comes
pre-prepared, all of the sensory (including visual) cues that are
normally associated with food preparation are essentially elimi-
nated. Might it be, then, that the current obsession with viewing
others cooking on the television, and reading endless beautifully-
illustrated (gastroporn) cookbooks (Allen, 2012, p. 74; Baumann,
1996, p. 121) can be framed as an implicit coping strategy designed
to make up for the loss of all the cooking-related sensations (a kind
of virtual comfort if you will; Prince, 2014)? As Allen (2012, p. 74)
notes, there certainly needs to be some account of why there are
now so many more cookbooks out there than anyone could ever
manage to cook from over a lifetime. And what impact, one has
to ask, is submitting to our hunger for visual images of food having
on our patterns of consumption (Boyland et al., 2011)?
4.2. Using visual images to encourage healthy eating
In closing, it is worth noting that while the increased visual
exposure to food images has generally been framed as having a
negative impact on people’s food consumption, this need not
always be the case if visual stimulation is curated properly, and
used in a timely manner (see also Boulos et al., 2012). There are,
in fact, certain situations in which the increased visual exposure
to food images can actually exert a beneficial effect over people’s
food behaviours. So, for example, young children’s liking for veg-
etables can be increased simply by exposing them to pictures of
those vegetables (e.g., in books; Houston-Price, Burton, et al.,
2009; Houston-Price, Butler, & Shiba, 2009). Intriguingly, visual
exposure to food images can also induce satiety: Similar to the
gradual reduction of hunger that is seen during actual consump-
tion (Redden & Haws, 2013), even just the simulation of consump-
tion can reduce hunger (Morewedge, Huh, & Vosgerau, 2010).
Morewedge et al. demonstrated that the mere act of imagining eat-
ing a large number of M&M’s (vs. a small number) significantly
reduced people’s subsequent consumption of these candies. Per-
haps even more surprising, though, are recent findings showing
that simply viewing 60 (vs. 20) food pictures associated with a
specific taste experience (e.g. salty) decreased people’s enjoyment
of similar taste experiences during consumption (Larson, Redden,
& Elder, 2014).
Another, more indirect, benefit of exposure to food images is
linked to the work of the growing number of researchers who
are presenting visual food images (e.g., over the internet) in an
experimental setting – that is, to assess people’s preferences for
one configuration of the elements versus another (e.g., Michel
et al., 2015; Reisfelt, Gabrielsen, Aaslyng, Bjerre, & Møller, 2009;
Youssef, Juravle, Youssef, Woods, & Spence, 2015). The results of
such research will hopefully increasingly be used to help food pro-
viders optimize the visual presentation of the foods that they serve,
and could one day even feed into public health policies and clev-
erly designed virtual food content. One could certainly see how fig-
uring out how to make healthy food more attractive visually might
one day potentially play a role in terms of encouraging people to
eat more healthily (see Michel et al., 2014).19
17 This may all come down to the fact that, it is simply much easier to enhance (or
hack) the aesthetic pleasantness of food on-screen, thanks to the increasing high-
definition of portable cameras and the pre-made filters (Instagram), and, at a
professional level, the technology available to beautify the visual renderings of the
food. Indeed, one increasingly also sees explicit recommendations to the public with
titles such as: ‘‘How to turn your dull food images into Instagram food porn” (e.g., see
Victor, 2015b)
18 Interestingly, the fact that visual stimulation is so complex in nature might be one
of the reasons why our attention is so easily captured by screens, even while eating.
The problem might be, then, that if our attention is directed to visual stimuli while
eating, this may well result in reduced satiety and thus lead to a higher-energy intake
(e.g., Boulos et al., 2012; Braude & Stevenson, 2014; Gore, Foster, DiLillo, Kirk, & West,
2003; Robinson & Matheson, 2014).
19 Note how such research is firmly based on the belief that the expectation about
food that have been set visually will anchor the subsequent experience should we
actually get to taste whatever we are looking at (see Piqueras-Fizman & Spence, 2015,
for a review).
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
7
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 Fig. 3. What is the impact, and what is the cause, of our growing food porn addiction (Victor, 2015b)?
Fig. 4. Still images from AR sushi demo. (A) and (C) The original sushi (tuna) on the left and the augmented versions (fatty tuna and salmon, respectively) on the right. (B)
Hand action used as a trigger to change the visual texture. See http://www.okajima-lab.ynu.ac.jp/demos.html for a video. [Video courtesy of Prof. Katsunori Okajima, Dept.
Environment & Information Sciences, Yokohama National University, Japan.]
8
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 And, looking a little further into the future, it will be interesting
to see how the various new augmented and virtual reality (AR and
VR, respectively) technologies that are currently starting to appear
at the technology conferences, and occasionally, in the marketplace,
will allow the diners of the future to eat one food while simultane-
ously viewing another (e.g., Choi, Foth, & Hearn, 2014; Narumi, Ban,
Kajinami, Tanikawa, & Hirose, 2012; Okajima & Spence, 2011;
Okajima, Ueda, & Spence, 2013; Schöning, Rogers, & Krüger, 2012;
Swerdloff, 2015; Victor, 2015a). The AR system utilized by Okajima
et al. can change the visual appearance of any food, including drinks
in real time. Importantly, this can be done without the need for any
marker to be placed on the food itself. Under these conditions,
changing the visual appearance of the food was shown to dramati-
cally modify the taste, as well as the perceived texture, of foods,
such as cake and sushi (see Fig. 4). Here, one could imagine a con-
sumer viewing what looks like a highly-desirable, but unhealthy,
food which actually eating a healthy alternative.
5. Conclusions
One of the primary functions, or challenges, faced by the brain is
to find nutritious foods and to avoid ingesting those substances that
may be poisonous or otherwise harmful. While the senses of taste
(gustation),
smell
(olfaction),
and
texture
(touch
or
oral-
somatosensation) provide the ultimate arbiters of a food’s palatabil-
ity, it is the sense of vision that provides a far more effective means
of foraging, predicting which foods are likely going to be safe and
nutritious to consume, and generating those expectations that will
constrain the consumption experience. Contemporary neuroscience
demonstrates just what a powerful cue the sight of appealing food
can be for the brain, especially the brain of a hungry person.
Given the current obesity crisis (Flegal, Carroll, Ogden, & Curtin,
2010), it would seem advisable to pay particular attention to any
environmental factor that may influence our relation to food, and
potentially sensitize the brain to food stimuli (see Castellanos
et al., 2009; Marteau et al., 2012; Stoeckel et al., 2008). According
to the body of research that has been outlined here, one candidate
factor that most certainly deserves a closer look is the increasing
prevalence of high fat food images that surround us in both the real
and virtual food landscape. Crucially, the question that has yet to
receive a satisfactory answer is just what the impact of all those
appealing food images is having on the consumption behaviour
of those in the Western world who are both flooded with opportu-
nities to eat, and at the same time bombarded with gastroporn (cf.
Berthoud, 2011). In the years to come, answering such questions
will likely become increasingly important for those of us who are
‘lucky’ enough to be surrounded by an abundance of food, both real
and virtual.
Given the essential role that food plays in helping us to live long
and healthy lives, one of the key challenges outlined here concerns
the extent to which our food-seeking sensory systems/biology,
which evolved in pre-technological and food-scarce environments,
are capable of adapting to a rapidly-changing (sometimes abun-
dant) food landscape, in which technology plays a crucial role in
informing our (conscious and automatic) decisions.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Author’s contributions
CS, CM, OP, and AC contributed to the writing of this paper. All
of the authors read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
Acknowledgments
CS would like to acknowledge the AHRC Rethinking the Senses
grant (AH/L007053/1). KO would like to acknowledge the JSPS
KAKENHI Grants (23135511 and 25135715).
References
Abbar, S., Mejova, Y., & Weber, I. (2015). You Tweet what you eat: Studying food
consumption through Twitter. Paper presented at CHI 2015, April 18–23, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. Available from arXiv:1412.4361 on 10.05.15.
Adema, P. (2000). Vicarious consumption: Food, television, and the ambiguity of
modernity. Journal of American Culture, 23, 113–123.
Aiello, L., & Wheeler, P. (1995). The expensive-tissue hypothesis: The brain and the
digestive system in human and primate evolution. Current Anthropology, 36,
199–221.
Alexander, H. (2014). French chefs hit back at ’food porn’ photos in their
restaurants. The Telegraph, 16th February. Downloaded from <http://www.
telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/10641913/French-chefs-hit-
back-at-food-porn-photos-in-their-restaurants.html> on 18.04.15.
Allen, J. S. (2012). The omnivorous mind: Our evolving relationship with food. London,
UK: Harvard University Press.
Allman, J. M. (2000). Evolving brains. New York, NY: Scientific American Publishing.
Apicius (1936). Cooking and dining in Imperial Rome (c. 1st Century; J. D. Vehling,
Trans.). Chicago, IL: Springer.
Barth, F. G. (1985). Insects and flowers: The biology of a partnership (M. Ann
Biederman-Thorson, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Springer.
Baumann, Z. (1996). Life in fragments: Essays in postmodern morality. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell.
Bellman, A. (2004). Ready, steady, look. The Age, Epicure, 2 March.
Berthoud, H.-R. (2011). Metabolic and hedonic drives in the neural control of
appetite: Who is the boss? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 21, 888–896.
Berthoud, H.-R., & Morrison, C. (2008). The brain, appetite, and obesity. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 55–92.
Bodenlos, J. S., & Wormuth, B. M. (2013). Watching a food-related television show
and caloric intake. A laboratory study. Appetite, 61, 8–12.
Bompas, A., Kendall, G., & Sumner, P. (2013). Spotting fruit versus picking fruit as
the selective advantage of human colour vision. i-Perception, 4, 84–94.
Borzekowski, D. L. G., & Robinson, T. N. (2001). The 30-second effect. An experiment
revealing the impact of television commercials on food preferences of
preschoolers. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 101, 42–46.
Boulos, R., Vikre, E. K., Oppenheimer, S., Chang, H., & Kanarek, R. B. (2012). ObesiTV.
How television is influencing the obesity epidemic. Physiology & Behavior, 107,
146–153.
Boyland, E. J., Harrold, J. A., Kirkham, T. C., Corker, C., Cuddy, J., Evans, D., et al.
(2011).
Food
commercials
increase
preference
for
energy-dense
foods,
particularly in children who watch more television. Pediatrics, 128, e93–e100.
Braude, L., & Stevenson, R. J. (2014). Watching television while eating increases
energy intake. Examining the mechanisms in female participants. Appetite, 76,
9–16.
Brignell, C., Griffiths, T., Bradley, B. P., & Mogg, K. (2009). Attentional and approach
biases for pictorial food cues. Influence of external eating. Appetite, 52, 299–306.
Brunstrom, J. M., Shakeshaft, N. G., & Scott-Samuel, N. E. (2008). Measuring
‘expected satiety’ in a range of common foods using a method of constant
stimuli. Appetite, 51, 604–614.
Caballero, B. (2007). The global epidemic of obesity: An overview. Epidemiologic
Reviews, 29, 1–5.
Cadwalladr, C. (2014). Jamie Oliver’s FoodTube: Why he’s taking the food revolution
online. The Guardian, June 22. <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/
jun/22/jamie-oliver-food-revolution-online-video> Downloaded on 06.04.15.
Capps, O., Jr., Tedford, J. R., & Havlicek, J. Jr., (1985). Household demand for
convenience and nonconvenience foods. American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 67, 862–869.
Caraher, M., Lange, T., & Dixon, P. (2000). The influence of TV and celebrity chefs on
public attitudes and behavior among the English public. Journal for the Study of
Food and Society, 4, 27–46.
Carter, B. (2014). Restaurants the nation’s most searched everyday service.
Hospitality Magazine, June 24. <http://www.hospitalitymagazine.com.au/food/
news/restaurants-the-nation-s-most-searched-everyday-se>
Downloaded
on
06.04.15.
Castellanos, E. H., Charboneau, E., Dietrich, M. S., Park, S., Bradley, B. P., Mogg, K.,
et al. (2009). Obese adults have visual attention bias for food cue images:
Evidence for altered reward system function. International Journal of Obesity, 33,
1963–1973.
Choi, J. H.-J., Foth, M., & Hearn, G. (Eds.). (2014). Eat, cook, grow: Mixing human–
computer interactions with human–food interactions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clay, X. (2014). Is it wrong to photograph your food in restaurants? The Telegraph,
19th February. Downloaded from <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/
restaurants/10648419/Is-it-wrong-to-photograph-your-food-in-restaurants.html>
on 17.04.15.
Cott, H. B. (1940). Adaptive coloration in animals. London, UK: Methuen.
Critsen, G. (2003). Fat land: How Americans became the fattest people in the world.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
9
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 Crumpacker, B. (2006). The sex life of food: When body and soul meet to eat. New York,
NY: Thomas Dunne Books.
Davies, M. (2015). What DOES 100 calories look like? From a third of a muffin to a
sliver of cheese – We reveal how much of your favourite foods you can eat.
DailyMail Online, 29th April. Downloaded from <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/
health/article-3059330/What-DOES-100-calories-look-like-muffin-sliver-cheese-
reveal-favourite-foods-eat.html#ixzz3YibMh25k> on 29.04.15.
de Solier, I. (2005). TV dinners: Culinary television, education and distinction.
Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 19, 465–481.
Delwiche, J. F. (2012). You eat with your eyes first. Physiology & Behavior, 107,
502–504.
Deroy, O., Michel, C., Piqueras-Fiszman, B., & Spence, C. (2014). The plating
manifesto (I): From decoration to creation. Flavour, 3, 6.
di Pellegrino, G., Magarelli, S., & Mengarelli, F. (2011). Food pleasantness affects
visual selective attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64,
560–571.
Drobes, D. J., Miller, E. J., Hillman, C. H., Bradley, M. M., Cuthbert, B. N., & Lang, P. J.
(2001). Food deprivation and emotional reactions to food cues: Implications for
eating disorders. Biological Psychology, 57, 153–177.
Elliott, A. F. (2015). Lights, camera, broccoli! New restaurant concept built entirely
around Instagram-worthy food serves meals on spinning plates with built-in
phone stands. DailyMail Online, 6th May. Downloaded from <http://www.
dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3070928/Lights-camera-broccoli-New-restaurant-
concept-built-entirely-Instagram-worthy-food-serves-meals-spinning-plates-built-
phone-stands.html> on 10.05.15.
Ensor, J. (2013). Eat and then tweet, the modern way to dine out that’s driving chefs
to distraction: Leading chefs have observed a rising number of customers taking
photographs of their meals for social media profiles or blogs, to the irritation of
other guests. The Daily Telegraph, 27th January. Downloaded from <http://www.
telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/9828766/Eat-and-then-tweet-the-modern-way-
to-dine-out-thats-driving-chefs-to-distraction.html> on 05.11.14.
Finkelstein, J. (1999). Foodatainment. Performance Research, 4, 130–136.
Fishbach, A., Friedman, R. S., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2003). Leading us not into
temptation: Momentary allurements elicit overriding goal activation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 296–309.
Flegal, K. M., Carroll, M. D., Ogden, C. L., & Curtin, L. R. (2010). Prevalence and trends
in obesity among US adults, 1999–2008. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical
Association, 303(3), 235–241.
Food
Standards
Agency
(2003).
Salt
in
ready
meals
survey
findings.
2003.
<www.food.gov.uk/multimedia/faq/readymealqanda/>.
Gehring, W. J. (2014). The evolution of vision. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Developmental Biology, 3, 1–40.
Gore, S. A., Foster, J. A., DiLillo, V. G., Kirk, K., & West, D. S. (2003). Television viewing
and snacking. Eating Behaviors, 4, 399–405.
Halford, J. C., Boyland, E. J., Hughes, G. M., Stacey, L., McKean, S., & Dovey, T. M.
(2008). Beyond-brand effect of television food advertisements on food choice in
children. The effects of weight status. Public Health Nutrition, 11, 897–904.
Halligan, M. (1990). Eat my words. London, UK: Angus & Robertson.
Hamrick, K. S., Andrews, M., Guthrie, J., Hopkins, D., & McClelland, K. (2011). How
much time do Americans spend on food. United States Department of Agriculture,
Economic Research Service, 86, 1–58.
Hansen, S. (2008). Celebrity chefs deliver consumers. Food, Culture and Society, 11,
49–67.
Harrar, V., Toepel, U., Murray, M., & Spence, C. (2011). Food’s visually-perceived fat
content affects discrimination speed in an orthogonal spatial task. Experimental
Brain Research, 214, 351–356.
Harris, J. L., Bargh, J. A., & Brownell, K. D. (2009). Priming effects of television food
advertising on eating behavior. Health Psychology, 28, 404–413.
Houston-Price, C., Burton, E., Hickinson, R., Inett, J., Moore, E., Salmon, K., et al.
(2009). Picture book exposure elicits positive visual preferences in toddlers.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 104, 89–104.
Houston-Price, C., Butler, L., & Shiba, P. (2009). Visual exposure impacts on toddlers’
willingness to taste fruit and vegetables. Appetite, 53, 450–453.
Howard, S., Adams, J., & White, M. (2012). Nutritional content of supermarket ready
meals and recipes by television chefs in the United Kingdom. Cross sectional
study. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 345, e7607.
Hurling, R., & Shepherd, R. (2003). Eating with your eyes: Effect of appearance on
expectations of liking. Appetite, 41, 167–174.
Jimenez, M., Rodriguez, D., Greene, N., Zellner, D. A., Cardello, A. V., & Nestrud, M.
(2015). Seeing a meal is not eating it: Hedonic context effects differ for visually
presented and actually eaten foods. Food Quality and Preference, 41, 96–102.
Ketchum, C. (2005). The essence of cooking shows: How the food network
constructs consumer fantasies. Journal of Communication Inquiry, 29, 217–
234.
Killgore, W. D. S., Yount, A. D., Femia, L. A., Bogorodzki, P., Rogowska, J., & Yurgelun-
Todd, D. A. (2003). Cortical and limbic activation during viewing of high- versus
low-calorie foods. NeuroImage, 19, 1381–1394.
Kringelbach, M. L., Stein, A., & van Hartevelt, T. J. (2012). The functional human
neuroanatomy of food pleasure cycles. Physiology & Behavior, 106, 307–
316.
Kroese, F. M., Evers, C., & De Ridder, D. T. (2009). How chocolate keeps you slim. The
effect of food temptations on weight watching goal importance, intentions, and
eating behaviour. Appetite, 53, 430–433.
LaBar, K. S., Gitelman, D. R., Parrish, T. B., Kim, Y. H., Nobre, A. C., & Mesulam, M. M.
(2001). Hunger selectively modulates corticolimbic activation to food stimuli in
humans. Behavioral Neuroscience, 115, 493–500.
Lambert, N. M., Negash, S., Stillman, T. F., Olmstead, S. B., & Fincham, F. M. (2012). A
love that doesn’t last: Pornography consumption and weakened commitment to
one’s romantic partner. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 31, 410–438.
Larson, J., Redden, J. P., & Elder, R. (2014). Satiation from sensory simulation:
Evaluating foods decreases enjoyment of similar foods. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 24, 188–194.
Laska, M., Freist, P., & Krause, S. (2007). Which senses play a role in nonhuman
primate food selection? A comparison between squirrel monkeys and spider
monkeys. American Journal of Primatology, 69, 282–294.
Linné, Y., Barkeling, B., Rössner, S., & Rooth, P. (2002). Vision and eating behaviour.
Obesity Research, 10, 92–95.
Maddox, A., Rhoades, G. K., & Markman, H. J. (2011). Viewing sexually-explicit
materials alone and together: Associations with relationship quality. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 40, 441–448.
Malamuth, N. M., & Check, J. V. P. (1985). The effects of aggressive pornography on
beliefs in rape myths: Individual differences. Journal of Research in Personality,
19, 299–320.
Marteau, T. M., Hollands, G. J., & Fletcher, P. C. (2012). Changing human behavior to
prevent disease – The importance of targeting automatic processes. Science, 337,
1492–1495.
Masterson, T., Kirwan, C. B., Davidson, L. E., & LeCheminant, J. D. (2015). Neural
reactivity to visual food stimuli is reduced in some areas of the brain during
evening hours compared to morning: An fMRI study in women. Brain Imaging
and Behavior.
McBride, A. (2010). Food porn. Gastronomica, 10, 38–46.
Meister, M. (2001). Cultural feeding, good life science, and the TV food network.
Mass Communication and Society, 4, 165–182.
Michel, C., Velasco, C., Gatti, E., & Spence, C. (2014). A taste of Kandinsky: Assessing
the influence of the visual presentation of food on the diner’s expectations and
experiences. Flavour, 3, 7.
Michel, C., Woods, A. T., Neuhäuser, M., Landgraf, A., & Spence, C. (2015). Orienting
the plate: Online study assesses the importance of the orientation in the plating
of food. Food Quality and Preference, 44, 194–202.
Morewedge, C. K., Huh, Y. E., & Vosgerau, J. (2010). Thought for food: Imagined
consumption reduces actual consumption. Science, 330, 1530–1533.
Moskowitz, H., & Gofman, A. (2007). Selling blue elephants: How to make great
products that people will want even before they even know they want them. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing.
Moss, M. (2013). Salt, sugar, fat: How the food giants hooked us. St Ives, UK: W.H.
Allen.
Myhrvold, N., & Young, C. (2011). Modernist cuisine. The art and science of cooking. La
Vergne, TN: Ingram Publisher Services.
Narumi, T., Ban, Y., Kajinami, T., Tanikawa, T., & Hirose, M. (2012). Augmented
perception of satiety: Controlling food consumption by changing apparent size
of food with augmented reality. In Proceedings 2012 ACM annual conference
human factors in computing systems; CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas.
Nummenmaa, L., Hietanen, J. K., Calvo, M. G., & Hyönä, J. (2011). Food catches the
eye but not for everyone: A BMI-contingent attentional bias in rapid detection
of nutriments. PLoS One, 6(5), e19215.
O’Neill (2015). Heston Blumenthal lays down the law on dinner table photos. The
Telegraph,
13th
February.
Downloaded
from
<http://www.telegraph.co.
uk/foodanddrink/foodanddrinknews/11410674/Heston-Blumenthal-puts-a-stop-
to-photos-at-the-dinner-table.html> on 18.04.15.
Ohla, K., Toepel, U., Le Coutre, J., & Hudry, J. (2012). Visual-gustatory interaction:
Orbitofrontal and insular cortices mediate the effect of high-calorie visual food
cues on taste pleasantness. PLoS One, 7(3), e32434.
Okajima, K., & Spence, C. (2011). Effects of visual food texture on taste perception.
i-Perception,
2(8).
<http://i-perception.perceptionweb.com/journal/I/article/
ic966>.
Okajima, K., Ueda, J., & Spence, C. (2013). Effects of visual texture on food
perception. Journal of Vision, 13, 1078. <http://jov.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?
articleid=2143185>.
Olmstead, S. B., Negash, S. N., Pasley, K., & Fincham, F. D. (2013). Emerging adults’
expectations
for
pornography
use
in
the
context
of
future
committed
relationships: A qualitative study. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 625–635.
Ouwehand, C., & Papies, E. K. (2010). Eat it or beat it. The differential effects of food
temptations on overweight and normal-weight restrained eaters. Appetite, 55,
56–60.
Passamonti, L., Rowe, J. B., Schwarzbauer, C., Ewbank, M. P., von Dem, H. E., & Calder,
A. J. (2009). Personality predicts the brain’s response to viewing appetizing
foods: The neural basis of a risk factor for overeating. Journal of Neuroscience, 29,
43–51.
Petit, O., Merunka, D., Raccah, D., Anton, J. L., Nazarian, B., Cheok, A. D., et al. (2014).
Health and pleasure in dietary food choices: Individual differences in the value
system of the brain. Poster presented at the annual conference consumer
neuroscience satellite symposium, September 25th, Miami, Florida.
Piech, R. M., Pastorino, M. T., & Zald, D. H. (2010). All I saw was the cake. Hunger
effects on attentional capture by visual food cues. Appetite, 54, 579–582.
Pinel, J. P., Assanand, S., & Lehman, D. R. (2000). Hunger, eating, and ill health.
American Psychologist, 55, 1105–1116.
Piqueras-Fiszman, B., Kraus, A., & Spence, C. (2014). ‘‘Yummy” versus ‘‘yucky”!
Explicit and implicit approach—Avoidance motivations toward appealing and
disgusting foods in normal eaters. Appetite, 78, 193–202.
Piqueras-Fizman, B., & Spence, C. (2015). Sensory expectations based on product-
extrinsic food cues: An interdisciplinary review of the empirical evidence and
theoretical accounts. Food Quality and Preference, 40, 165–179.
10
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
 Poole, S. (2012). You aren’t what you eat: Fed up with gastroculture. London, UK:
Union Books.
Pope, L., Latimer, L., & Wansink, B. (2015). Viewers vs. doers. The relationship
between watching food television and BMI. Appetite, 90, 131–135.
Poulton, E. B. (1890). The colours of animals. Their meaning and use. Especially
considered in the case of insects. London, UK: Springer.
Prince, R. (2014). How we’re fed 434 hours of TV cookery a week – But the more
they show, the less we cook. Daily Mail Online, 26th September. Downloaded
from
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2771553/How-fed-434-
hours-TV-cookery-week-cook.html> on 13.05.15.
Pursey, K. M., Stanwell, P., Callister, R. J., Brain, K., Collins, C. E., & Burrows, T. L.
(2014). Neural responses to visual food cues according to weight status: A
systematic review of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. Frontiers
in Nutrition, 1, 7.
Ranasinghe, N., Karunanayaka, K., Cheok, A. D., Fernando, O. N. N., Nii, H., &
Gopalakrishnakone,
P.
(2011,
November).
Digital
taste
and
smell
communication. In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on body area
networks (pp. 78–84). ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics
and Telecommunications Engineering).
Ray, K. (2007). Domesticating cuisine: Food and aesthetics on American television.
Gastronomica, 7, 50–63.
Redden, J., & Haws, K. (2013). Healthy satiation: The role of decreasing desire in
effective self-control. Journal of Consumer Research, 39, 1100–1114.
Regan, B. C., Julliot, C., Simmen, B., Vienot, F., Charles-Dominique, P., & Mollon, J. D.
(2001). Fruits, foliage and the evolution of primate colour vision. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B, 356, 229–283.
Reisfelt, H. H., Gabrielsen, G., Aaslyng, M. D., Bjerre, M. S., & Møller, P. (2009).
Consumer preferences for visually presented meals. Journal of Sensory Studies,
24, 182–203.
Robinson, T. N., & Matheson, D. M. (2014). Environmental strategies for portion
control in children. Appetite, 88, 33–38.
Rowe, C., & Skelhorn, J. (2005). Colour biases are a question of taste. Animal
Behaviour, 69, 587–594.
Saner, E. (2015). Plate spinning: The smart chef’s secret ingredient. The Guardian,
12th
May.
Downloaded
from
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/
shortcuts/2015/may/12/plate-spinning-smart-chefs-secret-ingredient-food-on-
plate> on 15.05.15.
Schaefer, H. M., & Schmidt, V. (2013). Detectability and content as opposing signal
characteristics in fruits. Proceedings of the Royal Society London B, 271(Suppl.),
S370–S373.
Schienle, A., Schäfer, A., Hermann, A., & Vaitl, D. (2009). Binge-eating disorder:
Reward sensitivity and brain activation to images of food. Biological Psychiatry,
65, 654–661.
Schlosser, E. (2001). Fast food nation: What the all-American meal is doing to the
world. New York, NY: Allen Lane, Penguin Press.
Schöning, J., Rogers, Y., & Krüger, A. (2012). Digitally enhanced food. Pervasive
Computing, 4–6.
Shepherd, G. M. (2014). Neurogastronomy. Invited talk given at the science of taste
interdisciplinary symposium, August 11–12, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Shin, A. C., Zheng, H., & Berthoud, H.-R. (2009). An expanded view of energy
homeostasis: Neural integration of metabolic, cognitive, and emotional drives
to eat. Physiology & Behavior, 97, 572–580.
Siep, N., Roefs, A., Roebroeck, A., Havermansa, R., Bonteb, M. L., & Jansena, A. (2009).
Hunger is the best spice: An fMRI study of the effects of attention, hunger and
calorie content on food reward processing in the amygdala and orbitofrontal
cortex. Behavioural Brain Research, 198, 149–158.
Siple, M., & Sax, I. (1982). Foodstyle: The art of presenting food beautifully. New York,
NY: Crown Publishers.
Smart, B. (1994). Digesting the modern diet: Gastro-porn, fast food and panic
eating. In K. Tester (Ed.), The Flâneur (pp. 158–180). London, UK: Routledge.
Smith, L. P., Ng, S. W., & Popkin, B. M. (2013). Trends in US home food preparation
and consumption: Analysis of national nutrition surveys and time use studies
from 1965–1966 to 2007–2008. Nutrition Journal, 12, 45.
Sobal, J., & Wansink, B. (2007). Kitchenscapes, tablescapes, platescapes, and
foodscapes: Influences of microscale built environments on food intake.
Environment and Behavior, 39, 124–142.
Spence, C. (2011). Mouth-watering: The influence of environmental and cognitive
factors on salivation and gustatory/flavour perception. Journal of Texture Studies,
42, 157–171.
Spence, C. (2015). Oculus Rift will make dinner taste better. Wired, January.
Downloaded from <http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2015/01/ideas-
bank/oculus-rift-will-make-dinner-taste-better> on 17.05.15.
Spence, C., & Piqueras-Fiszman, B. (2014). The perfect meal: The multisensory science
of food and dining. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Spence, C., Piqueras-Fiszman Michel, C., & Deroy, O. (2014). Plating manifesto (II):
The art and science of plating. Flavour, 3, 4.
Stice, E., Spoor, S., Bohon, C., Veldhuizen, M. G., & Small, D. M. (2008). Relation of
reward from food intake and anticipated food intake to obesity: A functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117,
924–935.
Stoeckel, L. E., Weller, R. E., Cook, E. W., III, Twieg, D. B., Knowlton, R. C., & Cox, J. E.
(2008). Widespread reward-system activation in obese women in response to
pictures of high-calorie foods. NeuroImage, 41, 636–647.
Sumner, P., & Mollon, J. D. (2000). Catarrhine photopigments are optimized for
detecting targets against a foliage background. Journal of Experimental Biology,
203, 1963–1986.
Swerdloff, A. (2015). Eating the uncanny valley: Inside the virtual reality world of
food. Munchies, April 13. Munchies. Downloaded from <http://munchies.
vice.com/author/alexswerdloff> on 18.04.15.
Talmi, D., Seymour, B., Dayan, P., & Dolan, R. J. (2008). Human Pavlovian–
instrumental transfer. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 360–368.
Toepel, U., Knebel, J.-F., Hudry, J., le Coutre, J., & Murray, M. M. (2009). The brain
tracks the energetic value in food images. NeuroImage, 44, 967–974.
Uher, R., Treasure, J., Heining, M., Brammer, M. J., & Campbell, I. C. (2006). Cerebral
processing of food-related stimuli: Effects of fasting and gender. Behavioural
Brain Research, 169, 111–119.
Van den Bos, R., & de Ridder, D. (2006). Evolved to satisfy our immediate needs:
Self-control and the rewarding properties of foods. Appetite, 47, 24–29.
Van der Laan, L. N., De Ridder, D. T. D., Viergever, M. A., & Smeets, P. A. (2011). The
first taste is always with the eyes: A meta-analysis on the neural correlates of
processing visual food cues. NeuroImage, 55, 296–303.
Van der Laan, L. N., Hooge, I. T. C., de Ridder, D. T. D., Viergever, M. A., & Smeets, P. A.
M. (2015). Do you like what you see? The role of first fixation and total fixation
duration in consumer choice. Food Quality and Preference, 39, 46–55.
Victor, A. (2015a). Is this the future of food? Virtual reality experiment lets you eat
anything you want without worrying about calories or allergies. DailyMail
Online, 8th January. Downloaded from <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/
food/article-2901755/Virtual-reality-gastronomic-Project-Nourished-Kokiri-Lab-
uses-Oculus-Rift-headsets-create-unique-dining-experiences.html> on 07.05.15.
Victor, A. (2015b). Keep your background blurry, never use a flash and DON’T
overuse filters: How to turn your dull food images into Instagram food porn in
12 simple steps. DailyMail Online, 28th April, 2015. Downloaded from <http://
www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/food/article-3050116/12-tricks-help-beautiful-food-
photos-Instagram.html> on 29.04.15.
Wallner-Liebmann, S., Koschutnig, K., Reishofer, G., Sorantin, E., Blaschitz, B.,
Kruschitz, R., et al. (2010). Insulin and hippocampus activation in response to
images of high-calorie food in normal weight and obese adolescents. Obesity, 18,
1552–1557.
Wang, G.-J., Volkow, N. D., Telang, F., Jayne, M., Ma, J., Rao, M., et al. (2004). Exposure
to appetitive food stimuli markedly activates the human brain. NeuroImage, 21,
1790–1797.
Wansink, B. (2006). Nutritional gatekeepers and the 72% solution. Journal of the
American Dietetic Association, 106, 1324–1327.
Wenk, G. L. (2015). Your brain on food: How chemicals control your thoughts and
feelings. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization (1998). Obesity: Preventing and managing the global
epidemic. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Wrangham, R. (2010). Catching fire: How cooking made us human. London, UK:
Profile Books.
Yokum, S., Ng, J., & Stice, E. (2011). Attentional bias to food images associated with
elevated weight and future weight gain: An fMRI study. Obesity (Silver Spring),
19, 1775–1783.
Young, J. Z. (1968). Influence of the mouth on the evolution of the brain. In P. Person
(Ed.), Biology of the mouth: A symposium presented at the Washington meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 29–30 December 1966
(pp. 21–35). Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Youssef, J., Juravle, G., Youssef, L., Woods, A., & Spence, C. (2015). On the art and
science of naming and plating food. Flavour, 4, 27.
Zellner, D. A., Loss, C. R., Zearfoss, J., & Remolina, S. (2014). It tastes as good as it
looks! The effect of food presentation on liking for the flavor of food. Appetite,
77C, 31–35.
Zhang, B., & Seo, H.-S. (2015). Visual attention toward food-item images can vary as
a function of background saliency and culture. Food Quality and Preference, 41,
172–179.
C. Spence et al. / Brain and Cognition xxx (2015) xxx–xxx
11
Please cite this article in press as: Spence, C., et al. Eating with our eyes: From visual hunger to digital satiation. Brain and Cognition (2015), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.006
