 Systemic Immunity is Required for Effective Cancer 
Immunotherapy
Matthew H. Spitzer1,2,3,4,6,7,8, Yaron Carmi1,6, Nathan E. Reticker-Flynn1,6, Serena S. Kwek5, 
Deepthi Madhireddy2, Maria M. Martins1, Pier Federico Gherardini2, Tyler R. Prestwood1, 
Jonathan Chabon1, Sean C. Bendall1, Lawrence Fong5, Garry P. Nolan2,3,7, and Edgar G. 
Engleman1,3,7
1Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2Baxter Lab in Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA
3Program in Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
4Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
5Department of Medicine, Hem/Onc Division, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
Summary
Immune responses involve coordination across cell types and tissues. However, studies in cancer 
immunotherapy have focused heavily on local immune responses in the tumor microenvironment. 
To investigate immune activity more broadly, we performed an organism-wide study in 
genetically-engineered cancer models using mass cytometry. We analyzed immune responses in 
several tissues after immunotherapy by developing intuitive models for visualizing single-cell data 
with statistical inference. Immune activation was evident in the tumor and systemically shortly 
after effective therapy was administered. However, during tumor rejection, only peripheral 
immune cells sustained their proliferation. This systemic response was coordinated across tissues 
and required for tumor eradication in several immunotherapy models. An emergent population of 
peripheral CD4 T cells conferred protection against new tumors and was significantly expanded in 
patients responding to immunotherapy. These studies demonstrate the critical impact of systemic 
immune responses that drive tumor rejection.
Correspondence: matthew.spitzer@ucsf.edu (M.H.S.), edengleman@stanford.edu (E.G.E.).
6Co-first authors
7Corresponding authors
8Lead contact
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, M.H.S., Y.C., N.R.F.; Experimental Methodology, M.H.S., Y.C., N.R.F., S.S.K; Computational Methodology, 
M.H.S., P.F.G.; Investigation, M.H.S., Y.C., N.R.F., S.S.K., D.M., M.M.M., T.R.P., J.C., L.F.; Writing – Original Draft, M.H.S.; 
Writing – Review & Editing, all authors; Funding Acquisition, M.H.S., S.C.B., L.F., G.P.N., E.G.E.; Resources, S.C.B.; Supervision, 
L.F., G.P.N., E.G.E.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 January 26; 168(3): 487–502.e15. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.022.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 eTOC
A systems approach reveals that engagement of systemic immunity is critical to the process of 
tumor rejection following immunotherapy
Introduction
Since the use of bacterial vaccines for the treatment of cancer over a century ago (Coley, 
1893), evidence has mounted demonstrating the ability of the immune system to reject 
tumors. Several immunotherapeutic strategies have now yielded sustained clinical responses, 
including blocking antibodies against suppressive receptors (Topalian et al., 2015) and 
transfer of adoptive T cells (Restifo et al., 2012), dendritic cells (Kantoff et al., 2010), or 
engineered T cells (Porter et al., 2011). For specific immunotherapies, individual cell subsets 
have been queried for mechanistic roles, and features have been correlated with 
responsiveness (Herbst et al., 2014). However, a comprehensive understanding of the global 
immune dynamics that mediate effective anti-tumor immunity remains unclear. Because 
most cancer patients do not respond to immunotherapy, there is an urgent need to improve 
upon the current toolkit, especially for adenocarcinomas, the most common forms of cancer.
Another gap in our knowledge is which anatomic sites drive anti-tumor immunity. 
Expansion of tumor-infiltrating T cells has shown striking results in melanoma, 
demonstrating that effective cells can be found within the microenvironment (Restifo et al., 
2012). In contrast, dendritic cell vaccines can stimulate de novo T cell responses and have 
shown efficacy (Kantoff et al., 2010). For strategies that initiate anti-tumor immunity in the 
patient, it remains unclear where immune cell activation takes place. For example, in the 
case of CTLA-4 blockade, administering antibody into the tumor can induce rejection 
(Simpson et al., 2013) and is dependent on Fcγ receptors (Bulliard et al., 2013), consistent 
with depleting intratumoral regulatory T cells and releasing local effector cells. However, 
Spitzer et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 new tumor-reactive T cell clones emerge in patients experiencing clinical benefit, suggestive 
of new priming (Kvistborg et al., 2014). For other strategies to induce immune responses in 
situ, this question has not been addressed conclusively.
New methods of assessing the immune state under any given condition allow us to 
systematically address this question by characterizing diverse cell subsets and their 
activation states simultaneously. Mass cytometry builds upon the success of flow cytometry 
and enables over 40 simultaneous parameters to be quantified by replacing fluorophores 
with mass tags (Bandura et al., 2009; Bendall et al., 2011). It is thus possible to discern the 
identity and behavior of numerous cell types from a single experiment (Bendall et al., 2011; 
Spitzer et al., 2015). Using a spontaneous model of triple-negative breast cancer, we 
assessed immune cell dynamics across the organism during tumor rejection.
Results
Tumor-binding antibodies combined with dendritic cell adjuvants induce potent T cell 
immunity against spontaneous breast tumors
To characterize effective anti-tumor immunity, we chose a therapy with efficacy in multiple 
cancer types. We recently described the combination of tumor-binding antibodies and 
adjuvants to stimulate dendritic cells as a means of inducing potent T cell-mediated 
immunity (Carmi et al., 2015). Beyond melanomas, this strategy was effective against Lewis 
lung and 4T1 breast carcinomas. While carcinomas are the most common class of cancer, 
more limited progress has been made in immunotherapy compared to melanoma or 
hematological malignancies (Topalian et al., 2015). We thus determined if this approach 
would be effective in a widely used spontaneous model of carcinoma, MMTV-PyMT triple-
negative breast cancer, which is refractory to other immunotherapies such as checkpoint 
blockade (i.e., anti-PD-1) (Bos et al., 2013).
Once animals developed a tumor of 25mm2, they were injected intratumorally with 
allogeneic tumor-binding IgG antibodies (alloIgG) combined with anti-CD40 antibody and 
interferon (IFN)-γ (Carmi et al., 2015). Treated animals experienced regression of the 
injected lesion (Fig. 1A). We previously established that the efficacy of this therapy in 
melanoma depends on T cell responses. Treated MMTV-PyMT tumors were infiltrated by 
CD8 T cells, concurrent with tumor shrinkage and tumor cell death indicated by TUNEL 
staining (Fig. 1B–C).
We devised an experimental strategy for elucidating the system-wide immunological 
underpinnings of this response (Fig. 1D). AlloIgG from CD-1 and C57BL/6 mice bound 
MMTV-PyMT breast tumor cells (Fig. 1E). Mice were randomized to one of those sources 
of alloIgG, ensuring that responses were not specific to one antibody source. Anti-PD-1 
served as a model of ineffective therapy due to its wide clinical use but lack of efficacy in 
this model. PyMT-expressing females were randomized to treatment groups as follows: B6-
alloIgG + anti-CD40 + IFNγ, CD-1-allo-IgG + anti-CD40 + IFNγ, anti-PD-1, or no 
treatment. The mouse began treatment once it developed a tumor of 25 mm2, which was 
considered day zero.
Spitzer et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We previously determined that immune activation is discernable by 3 days after treatment 
(i.e., “priming phase”), with tumor shrinkage by day 8 (i.e., “rejection phase”). At these time 
points, we sacrificed mice from each treatment (n=3–4 per treatment, per time point) and 
prepared tissues for mass cytometry. Animals receiving alloIgG therapy experienced 
significant tumor regression by day 8, with no significant difference between untreated 
animals and those receiving anti-PD-1 (Fig. 1F). This design enabled us to contrast effective 
and ineffective immune responses.
Immune cell proliferation is not maintained in the tumor microenvironment during tumor 
rejection
We next sought to systematically define changes in immune cell organization and behavior 
in the tumor microenvironment between the effective and ineffective treatments. We recently 
reported a computational method called Scaffold maps for creating a reference map from 
high-dimensional single-cell data, facilitating comparisons across samples (Spitzer et al., 
2015). These maps provide a data-driven representation of the cells present in a sample 
while also denoting the location of landmark immune cell populations, defined using prior 
knowledge of the immune system (Fig. S1). These Landmarks (visualized as black nodes in 
the graph) function as flags to orient the investigator. In these graphs, the similarity of two 
groups of cells is visualized by the length of the edge connecting them. In other words, two 
groups of cells connected by a short line are similar to one another with respect to the 
proteins they express (see Methods).
This method was developed in an extensible manner for future datasets to be incorporated, 
but it did not enable precise statistical comparisons across groups of samples. Another 
algorithm for mass cytometry analysis, Citrus (Bruggner et al., 2014), provides statistical 
comparisons between groups. The results from Citrus, however, can be cumbersome to 
interpret. We therefore determined whether the statistical inference integrated into Citrus 
could instead be applied to Scaffold maps. We call this hybrid method “Statistical Scaffold” 
(Fig. S1). We altered the first step of Scaffold maps, clustering data from all tumor 
specimens together to define cell groups in an unbiased manner. This enables direct 
comparisons across samples. We then used the Significance Analysis of Microarrays 
framework to identify statistically significant features between the sample types (effective 
vs. ineffective treatment groups) as in Citrus (Bair and Tibshirani, 2004; Bruggner et al., 
2014). The resulting Scaffold maps can then be colored by statistical significance, where 
features with q-values less than 0.05 (adjusted for multiple testing) are colored in either red 
or blue depending on the directionality of the change (for example, up or down in the group 
that received effective therapy). These features can either be changes in the frequency or 
molecular expression of a particular cell subset.
Because the text identifying Landmark populations can be obscured, an empty reference 
graph can be found as Fig. S2. The frequency, coefficient of variation and protein expression 
of each cluster are shown in Fig. S3 and Table S2. Because the plasmacytoid dendritic cells 
(pDC) are far from other cell populations in the graph, they are displayed in an inset image 
(black dashed outline).
Spitzer et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We began applying Statistical Scaffold to data from the tumor specimens collected during 
the priming phase. In animals treated with effective therapies, a large number of immune 
cells increased in frequency as a percent of total cells in the tumor, consistent with an anti-
tumor immune response (Fig. 2A). Very few differences existed between untreated mice and 
those receiving the ineffective anti-PD-1 therapy (Fig. S2B–D), demonstrating that effective 
therapy initiated a fundamentally different immune response. We therefore asked how these 
cell populations were changing with effective therapy at the molecular level, leveraging the 
interactivity of Scaffold maps to visualize protein expression between the treatment groups.
Subsets of macrophages increasing in frequency with effective treatment expressed high 
levels of the immunosuppressive co-receptor programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and 
plasmacytoid dendritic cell antigen 1 (PDCA-1), both of which are inducible by IFNγ. 
Additionally, these cells had high expression of the co-stimulatory receptor CD86 and MHC 
class II, indicating activation and enhanced antigen presentation. A small decrease in 
expression of Fcγ receptors (FcγR) CD16/32 could reflect internalization upon ligation by 
alloIgG (Fig. 2B).
Classical dendritic cells (cDC) increasing during the priming phase also expressed high 
levels of CD86, MHC II and PD-L1 (Fig. 2C). The integrin CD103 mediates trafficking to 
the tissues and is expressed by cross-presenting DC that can promote anti-tumor immunity 
(Broz et al., 2014). Interestingly, this population significantly decreased in tumors after 
effective therapy, perhaps indicating migration. DC increasing in frequency after effective 
therapy displayed higher variance in FcγR CD16/32 expression, consistent with modulation 
of this pathway during effective therapy with alloIgG. Concurrently, there was also an 
unexpected increase in myeloid populations traditionally thought to be immunosuppressive 
in cancer, such as Ly6C+ monocytes and Ly6G+ neutrophils (Gabrilovich et al., 2012).
NK cell subsets markedly increased with higher expression of CD11b, killer-cell lectin like 
receptor G1 (KLRG1), and the transcription factor T-bet, consistent with an effector 
phenotype (Fig. 2D). These cells had little expression of the immunosuppressive co-receptor 
programmed death-1 (PD-1).
Several types of T cells expanded significantly with effective therapy. Several increasing 
subsets were attributable to conventional CD4 and CD8 T cells. Contrary to expectations, 
however, regulatory T cells (Tregs) expressing the transcription factor Foxp3 were also more 
prevalent after effective therapy (Fig. 2E). These cells co-expressed KLRG1 and CD44, 
denoting an increase in effector Tregs (Cheng et al., 2012) present in the tumor. The 
frequency of Tregs has been suggested as a negative prognostic feature for various tumors 
(Bates et al., 2006; Curiel et al., 2004). Based on our data, utilizing this metric would be 
quite misleading. Taken together, these results demonstrate the complex dynamics that 
underlie productive anti-tumor immunity, including the effector and regulatory arms of 
myeloid and lymphoid lineages.
We next queried whether changes in immune cell proliferation within the tumor were 
observed. During the priming phase, a large portion of immune cell types exhibited 
increased rates of proliferation with effective therapies, evident by the proportion of cells 
Spitzer et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expressing Ki67 (Fig. 2F), including Tregs (Fig. 2G). Despite decreasing in frequency, 
CD103+ DC also exhibited higher proliferation (Fig. 2H), suggesting that these cells do 
become activated. Thus, the priming phase of the effective anti-tumor immune response is 
characterized by broad expansion of leukocytes as well as enhanced proliferation in the 
tumor microenvironment across many immune cell types.
We next mapped the dynamics of intratumoral immune cells during the rejection phase (8 
days after therapy)(Fig. 2I). Similar changes to those seen in the priming phase were 
observed in the macrophage compartment during tumor rejection, consistent with activation 
(Fig. 2J). The frequency of B cell subsets and innate lymphoid cells (ILC) also increased 
during the rejection phase. One prominent ILC cluster (outlined in orange) contained cells 
expressing FcγR, some of which expressed T-bet (Fig. 2K). Manual identification of T-bet+ 
type-1 ILC confirmed their increased prevalence (Fig. 2L). Numerous clusters of T cells 
were also significantly expanded with effective therapy, including effector memory CD4 and 
CD8 T cells (Fig. 2M–N) as well as Tregs.
In stark contrast to the priming phase, there was no difference in the rate of proliferation 
across immune cells in the tumor microenvironment during the rejection phase (Fig. 2O). 
Similar results were found in a genetically-engineered inducible mouse model of melanoma 
driven by BrafV600E and loss of Pten (referred to as BP melanoma mice) on day eight after 
treatment with effective therapy (Fig S3A)(Dankort et al., 2009). We therefore hypothesized 
that other anatomical locations were responsible for sustaining the immune response during 
the rejection phase.
Lymphocyte activation and proliferation are maintained in the secondary lymphoid organs 
throughout the immune response
We next analyzed the immune cell composition in the tumor-draining lymph nodes of treated 
animals. During the priming phase, several specific clusters of lymphocytes expanded in 
frequency (Fig. 3A). Marked expansion of activated, naive B cells expressing IgM, high 
levels of CD44, CD86 and MHC II, but low levels of IgD, was observed (Fig. 3B).
In the T cell compartment, a cluster of Th1 cells (CD44+T-bet+) emerged with effective 
therapy with a unique phenotype (CD90hiCD69+CD62L-CD27-KLRG1-) and active 
proliferation (Ki-67+)(Fig. 3C). Additionally, a Treg subset with a similar molecular profile 
to intratumoral Tregs (KLRG1hiCD103+) significantly expanded (Fig. 3D). The CD8 T cells 
that became more prevalent with effective therapy had some features of central memory cells 
(Ly6C+ and CD62L+), though they did not upregulate CD44 expression (Fig. 3E)(Hänninen 
et al., 2011; Wherry et al., 2007).
Analysis of proliferation in the draining lymph node revealed active cell division across 
many cell types during the priming phase of an effective anti-tumor immune response (Fig. 
3F). Nearly all clusters of B cells, NK cells, cDC, plasmacytoid DC (pDC) and ILC 
displayed enhanced Ki67 expression. Effector/memory T cell clusters (CD44+ or Ly6C+) 
exhibited significant increases in proliferation (Fig. 3G), consistent with the development of 
a T cell-mediated immune response.
Spitzer et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The rejection phase in the tumor-draining lymph node displayed similarly complex 
dynamics (Fig. 3H). Similar changes in the B cell compartment were observed as during the 
initiation phase (Fig. 3I), which may in part be in response to anti-CD40. Both increasing 
CD4 and CD8 T cell subsets exhibited higher expression of CD62L without a change in 
PD-1 levels (Fig. 3J–K). A subset of expanding CD8 T cells also expressed Ly6C and CD44 
(Fig. 3K), denoting the formation of central memory CD8 T cells. Consistent with the tumor 
microenvironment, Tregs also increased in frequency (Fig. 3L), once again highlighting 
immune regulation.
In contrast to the tumor microenvironment, however, significant increases in leukocyte 
proliferation across the system were observed during the rejection phase in the draining 
lymph node (Fig. 3M). This observation was also consistent in BP melanoma mice after 
therapy (Fig. S4B). Furthermore, this trend extended to some naïve T cell subsets that had 
not increased their rates of division during the priming phase (Fig. 3M). These dynamics, 
with elevated proliferation of antigen-experienced cells followed by naïve cells, suggest that 
previously activated T cell clones form a memory immune response, followed by a wave of 
de novo T cell activation. These results conclusively demonstrate that immune cell 
proliferation persists in the periphery, even after cells in the tumor microenvironment return 
to baseline levels of cell division.
We next asked if the immune response extended into other secondary lymphoid organs such 
as the spleen, where contact with the treated tumor was less direct. Similar changes were 
observed in the priming and rejection phases (Fig. S5A,H), including expansion of activated 
B cells (Fig. S5B,I). Plasma cells also increased in frequency, proliferating and upregulating 
MHC II, which has been associated with regulation of T cell responses (Fig. S5C,J)(Pelletier 
et al., 2010). The T cell and NK cell compartments in the spleen also changed similarly (Fig. 
S5D–F,K–M), including the emergence of a CD90hiKi-67+ Th1 cell population (Fig. S5E). 
Proliferation in the spleen was also widespread during priming and rejection (Fig. S5G,N), 
demonstrating that sustained proliferation is generalizable across secondary lymphoid 
organs during effective anti-tumor immunity.
Systemic activation during effective immunotherapy is captured in peripheral blood
To assess whether the responses we observed during tumor rejection were indeed systemic, 
we analyzed peripheral blood. Profound changes were apparent during the priming phase 
(Fig. 4A). NK cells, cDC activated B cells and a subset of activated pDC (Ly6C+CD4+MHC 
IIhi) all increased in frequency (Fig. 4B–C). Changes in the T cells paralleled those of the 
secondary lymphoid organs. CD4 T cell subsets increasing in frequency were largely naïve 
cells (CD62L+CD44−) with no change in PD-1 levels (Fig. 4D). The emergence of CD90hi 
proliferative Th1 cells was also evident (Fig. 4E). CD8 T cells increasing in frequency were 
antigen-experienced cells expressing Ly6C and variable levels of CD44 (Fig. 4F). 
Alterations in circulating monocytes were observed, with subsets of classical (Ly6C+) and 
non-classical (Ly6C−) monocytes expressing elevated levels of F4/80, the CSF-1 receptor 
(CD115), MHC II and PD-L1, indicative of activation and perhaps differentiation to a 
macrophage-like state (Fig. 4G–H). Many cell types exhibited increased proliferation as well 
(Fig. 4I), including macrophages, cDC, pDC, B cells, NK cells, and many T cell clusters, 
Spitzer et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 particularly effector/memory cells. These results support the notion that the priming phase of 
the anti-tumor immune response is systemic in nature.
The rejection phase in the blood was marked by more substantial decreases in immune cell 
frequencies (Fig. 4J) and an increase in platelet frequencies (Fig. 4K). These dynamics may 
reflect immune cells trafficking into the tissues., Many immune cell populations retained 
elevated levels of proliferation during the rejection phase (Fig. 4L), demonstrative of 
ongoing immune responses in circulating cells. This was also observed in BP melanoma 
mice (Fig. S4C). This sustained immune cell proliferation in the blood may present 
opportunities for non-invasive immune monitoring of anti-tumor immunity.
Immune remodeling by effective immunotherapy extends to the bone marrow
Because the immune response was evidently systemic, we asked whether changes might also 
take place in the bone marrow, thereby affecting hematopoiesis. Similarly widespread 
changes were evident (Fig. S6A,I), involving the emergence of activated B cells, CD4 and 
CD8 T cells, macrophages and pDC (Fig. S6B–F,J–N). No changes were observed in the 
frequency of hematopoietic progenitors (Lineage-cKit+ cells), however (Fig. S6G,O). Many 
T cell, B cell, and DC subsets exhibited more proliferation during both the initiation and 
rejection phases (Fig. S6H,P), reflecting a truly systemic response.
Systemic immune responses are required for tumor eradication
Effective immunotherapy induces marked changes in both the microenvironment and the 
periphery, but the prevailing dogma holds that productive immunotherapy functions by 
reinvigorating immune cells that are actively suppressed in the tumor microenvironment 
(Jiang et al., 2015). We thus sought to clarify the predominant site in which the anti-tumor 
immune response was generated. To segregate the immune response in the tumor from the 
systemic immune response, we treated animals with FTY720, a ligand of the sphinosine-1-
phosphate receptor 1, which is required for immune cells to migrate from the secondary 
lymphoid organs (Matloubian et al., 2004). Treatment was initiated one day prior to 
immunotherapy to inhibit migration caused by immunotherapy. Animals treated with vehicle 
control and immunotherapy experienced tumor regression, but those co-administered 
FTY720 had progressive tumor growth (Fig. 5A). Therefore, we conclude that the local 
activation of tumor-infiltrating leukocytes is insufficient to mediate tumor rejection in this 
system, instead pointing to an essential role for the systemic immune response.
We previously reported that tumor-binding antibody therapy induces tumor-eradicating 
immune responses in the transplantable 4T1 breast cancer model (Carmi et al., 2015). 
Consistent with the autochthonous model, blocking leukocyte egress from lymphoid organs 
prevented regression of 4T1 tumors as well (Fig. 5B). Treating these mice again on day 7 
after the initial dose resulted in modest tumor shrinkage followed by continued growth, 
demonstrating that the kinetics of the response were not simply altered by inhibiting 
leukocyte egress (Fig. 5B). Consistently, histological analysis of tumors revealed robust T 
cell infiltration in animals treated with tumor-binding antibody therapy alone, while 
simultaneous inhibition of leukocyte egress prevented accumulation of CD4 and CD8 T cells 
Spitzer et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 but not CD11b+ myeloid cells (Fig. 5C). Inhibition of leukocyte egress also prevented 
immunological control of metastasis to the lungs (Fig. 5D–E).
Finally, we assessed whether the T cells in the secondary lymphoid organs were sufficient to 
induce anti-tumor immunity. After tumor-binding antibody therapy with egress blockade, T 
cells were transferred from the secondary lymphoid organs into naïve animals, which were 
challenged with 4T1 tumor cells the following day. Consistent with our previous findings, 
these T cells from the periphery were sufficient to confer protection from 4T1 tumors (Fig. 
5F). These results rule out the possibility that FTY720 directly prevented the anti-tumor 
activity of T cells and demonstrate that anti-tumor T cells are induced in the secondary 
lymphoid organs during the immune response.
Tumor-binding antibody therapy functions by enabling dendritic cell-mediated activation of 
T cells (Carmi et al., 2015). In contrast, the rejuvenation of exhausted T cells has been 
suggested as a primary mechanism underlying other immunotherapies, such as checkpoint 
blockade with anti-PD-1 antibodies (Topalian et al., 2015). We thus determined whether T 
cell responses in the lymphoid organs were required for productive anti-PD-1 therapy as 
well. Treatment of mice bearing MC38 colon carcinomas with anti-PD-1 antibodies did 
induce anti-tumor immune responses capable of controlling tumor growth for up to two 
weeks (Fig. 5G). In contrast, tumors in animals treated with anti-PD-1 and FTY720 grew 
progressively, similar to untreated animals (Fig. 5G). These results demonstrate that a 
systemic immune response is required for effective immunotherapy across multiple cancer 
models and therapeutic strategies.
A peripheral CD4 T cell subset confers protection to new tumors
Having established a requirement for peripheral immune responses and previously 
determined that tumor eradication initiated by tumor-binding antibody therapy is T cell-
dependent (Carmi et al., 2015), we asked whether we could identify the peripheral T cell 
subsets that drove tumor eradication. Network analyses have proven effective for identifying 
dominant elements of a systems-level response (Hotson et al., 2012; Ideker and Krogan, 
2012). We therefore calculated immune cell population frequencies from each tissue and 
calculated pairwise correlations across all animals receiving effective therapy. Indeed, 
several coordinated modules were readily apparent (Fig. 6A). While many immune features 
in the tumor were concentrated in a single module, features from peripheral tissues were 
interspersed, demonstrating coordination across organs during the productive immune 
response. This was especially evident among effector/memory T cell subsets in the 
peripheral sites (Fig. S7A). These modules did not simply represent basal organization at 
steady-state (Fig. S7B–C), confirming that effective immunotherapy involves new systemic 
coordination of an immune response.
To identify the key T cell populations that may coordinate the response, we assessed the 
degree of connectivity of each subset. We generated an adjacency matrix, filtering out weak 
correlations, and ranked populations by their connectivity in the network. Of the T cell 
subpopulations, seven of the top eight ranking subsets were types of CD4 T cells (Fig. 6B). 
We thus hypothesized that CD4 T cells were more central to the effective immune response 
than were CD8 T cells, in contrast to the dominant focus on CD8 T cell responses in cancer 
Spitzer et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 immunotherapy (Chen and Mellman, 2013; Topalian et al., 2015). Based on the assumption 
that CD8 T cells are the critical targets for therapy, numerous efforts focus on CD8 CAR T 
cells or identifying HLA class I epitopes that can be targeted with vaccines.
To address this question experimentally, we treated animals bearing MMTV-PyMT tumors 
with effective tumor-binding antibody therapy. During tumor rejection, we sacrificed 
animals, isolated the peripheral lymphoid organs (lymph nodes, spleen and blood), and 
sorted antigen-experienced (CD44+) CD4 and CD8 T cells. After expansion in culture, we 
transferred either the peripheral CD4 or CD8 T cell subsets into untreated animals bearing 
several large MMTV-PyMT tumors. While both CD4 and CD8 T cells were capable of 
mediating tumor rejection, animals receiving peripheral CD4 T cells experienced 
significantly more prolonged protection (Fig. 6C).
We then sought to identify the CD4 T cell subset responsible for orchestrating this anti-
tumor activity. To investigate whether unique T cell phenotypes emerged after therapy, we 
performed an unsupervised clustering of all T cells across all tissues and visualized their 
similarities using a force-directed graph (Fig. 6D). Each tissue was colored uniquely, with 
light colors representing cells from the priming phase and dark colors representing cells 
from the rejection phase. Cells from animals left untreated or treated with ineffective therapy 
are colored black in Fig. 6D (with the inverted coloration in Fig. S7D).
T cells from the tumor microenvironment occupied markedly distinct regions of the graph, 
denoting that these cells exhibited unique characteristics from cells in other organs. In 
contrast, cells from the draining lymph node, spleen and blood were interspersed. Only 
animals treated with effective therapy contained T cells in the tumor similar to those from 
secondary lymphoid organs (Fig. 6D). CD4 T cells in the periphery were mixed together by 
tissue but distinctly organized by treatment (Fig. 6D). One region of the graph was highly 
enriched in cells from the periphery of mice receiving effective therapy (Fig 6E). The 
phenotype of these cells is most consistent with an activated, effector memory Th1 subset 
(CD44+CD69+CD62L-CD27lowT-bet+), and they uniquely expressed high levels of the 
immunoglobulin family member CD90 involved in T cell receptor signaling (Haeryfar and 
Hoskin, 2004). A similar subset also emerged after treatment in BP melanoma (Fig. 6F).
We then tested whether this subset of CD4 T cells found in the periphery conferred tumor 
protection. These cells were sorted from the periphery of treated MMTV-PyMT mice and 
transferred into untreated animals at the time of tumorigenesis following sublethal 
irradiation. Indeed, this subset of peripheral CD4 T cells was capable of conferring 
significant protection against tumor development (Fig. 6G). These results conclusively 
demonstrate that peripheral activated CD4 T cells are capable of orchestrating potent anti-
tumor immunity.
A similar CD4 T cell subset is associated with a favorable response to immunotherapy in 
melanoma patients
We next determined whether similar CD4 T cells could be found in the blood of cancer 
patients who responded to immunotherapy. We recently described a clinical study of 
melanoma patients who received anti-CTLA-4 antibodies (Ipilimumab) in combination with 
Spitzer et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GM-CSF (Kwek et al., 2015). We analyzed blood from these patients both three and six 
weeks post-therapy using Statistical Scaffold. Consistent with our pre-clinical results, 
specific clusters of CD4 T cells were significantly elevated in responders compared to non-
responders at both time points (Fig. 6H, Fig S6E). A subset of Tregs was also elevated in 
responders six weeks after therapy (Fig. S7E). The expanded clusters expressed lower levels 
of CD127 compared to the remaining CD4 T cells, indicative of activation, and lower levels 
of PD-1, suggesting that they were not exhausted (Fig. S7F). We confirmed these results by 
manually gating PD-1-CD127low CD4 T cells (Fig. 6I). These results provide further 
experimental evidence of a critical role for CD4 T cells in coordinating effective anti-tumor 
immunity.
Simultaneous PD-L1 blockade breaks tolerance to un-injected tumors in multifocal disease
We next asked whether we could leverage this modeling-based approach to improve the 
efficacy of the tumor-binding antibody therapy. An observation from the initial analysis is 
that many immune cells in the tumor significantly upregulate PD-L1 after the effective 
therapy (Fig. 2B–C). PD-L1 is a repressor of T cell responses, and PD-L1 expression by 
tumor cells and immune cells mediates immunosuppression. We confirmed our observation 
by globally mapping cell subsets exhibiting significant differences in PD-L1 expression 
between therapies (Fig. 7A). In the effectively treated animals, all myeloid cell subsets and 
some T cell subsets upregulated PD-L1 after effective therapy, as did tumor cells (Fig. 7B). 
We hypothesized that PD-L1/PD-1 signaling may limit the efficacy of these immune 
responses. However, because these tumors do regress, a modified experimental setting was 
required to investigate this possibility.
MMTV-PyMT animals eventually develop tumors in all of their mammary fat pads. We had 
previously observed that, when animals were treated with tumor-binding antibody therapy 
after they had developed many tumors, only the injected tumor is rejected. In addition the 
injected tumor, we also observed PD-L1 upregulation in the draining lymph node and blood 
(Fig. 7C–D), as well as un-injected tumors during the priming phase (Fig. 7E–F). We 
hypothesized that the PD-L1/PD-1 axis may act more broadly to protect un-injected tumors.
We thus asked whether systemic administration of anti-PD-L1 blocking antibodies might 
break tolerance to un-injected tumors. We treated MMTV-PyMT animals once they had 
developed many tumors with tumor-binding antibody therapy alone or in combination with 
anti-PD-L1. Combination with anti-PD-L1 resulted in additional reduction in overall tumor 
burden (Fig. 7G) and rejection of multiple, un-injected tumors (Fig. 7H). These results 
suggest that the PD-L1/PD-1 axis dampens the anti-tumor immune response to distal tumors, 
despite the systemic nature of the immune response.
Discussion
The variance in clinical responses to immunotherapy suggests that productive immune 
responses against cancer are necessarily complex. There is an urgent need for methods to 
understand the nature of anti-tumor immunity to more reproducibly harness the immune 
system against cancer.
Spitzer et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here, we provide a systems-wide, organism-wide assessment of effective anti-tumor 
immune responses. Even for a therapy delivered intratumorally, a systemic immune response 
was required for tumor rejection. The effective tumor-binding antibody therapy activates a 
broad immune cell network including dendritic cells, which can prime T cells in the 
periphery. This could explain its efficacy against less immunogenic tumors compared to 
anti-PD-1, which is thought to act downstream on T cells themselves. With the increased use 
of immunotherapies, systemic responses should be taken into account when determining 
radiation or surgical regimens including lymphadenectomy.
Our results indicate that secondary lymphoid organs are critical sites of T cell generation. 
This contrasts with results from a B16 melanoma model engineered to express strong model 
antigens, where intratumoral T cells could mediate rejection when combination 
immunotherapy was initiated early after tumor implantation (Spranger et al., 2014). While 
most adoptive T cell protocols utilize tumor-infiltrating cells (Rosenberg, 2014), a recent 
study has shown that T cells from blood can be used successfully (Cohen et al., 2015). 
While immune cells in the microenvironment may be sufficient in some settings, 
development of new immunotherapies must consider the benefit of systemic immunity.
Many studies have focused on CD8 T cells (Chen and Mellman, 2013; Im et al., 2016), with 
less emphasis on harnessing CD4 T cells (Tran et al., 2014; Xie et al., 2010). In other 
contexts, CD4 T cells orchestrate functional immune responses by coordinating immune 
activity (Swain et al., 2012). Our results extend this notion to anti-tumor immunity, 
providing a rationale for leveraging CD4 T cell responses in cancer.
These results highlight the benefit of system-wide assessments. Simple prognostic metrics 
have been proposed for monitoring anti-tumor immunity, including Treg frequency in 
tumors (Bates et al., 2006; Curiel et al., 2004). Productive immunity in this setting was 
accompanied by an increase in Treg frequency and proliferation in the context of a powerful 
T cell response. With high throughput and high dimensional single-cell technologies such as 
mass cytometry, assessing all immune cells simultaneously is now achievable, enabling 
individual metrics to be contextualized into the broader immune state. For instance, the 
systemic proliferative response identified may provide a means for noninvasive monitoring 
during immunotherapy. The graphical user interface that accompanies Scaffold maps 
(https://github.com/nolanlab/scaffold/) enables further interrogation of this dataset. Using 
similar approaches, we expect that future studies will identify a multitude of drivers of 
effective responses.
A thorough understanding of the immune dynamics essential to any anti-tumor response 
requires comparison across numerous therapies. A systematic approach to understanding the 
mechanisms of new therapies will shed light on the core elements of immune activation 
required to reproducibly reject tumors. Additional behavioral programs, such as signaling, 
metabolism and cytokine production, would enrich our view of the immune response.
These approaches also enabled rational design of drug combinations. PD-L1 induction 
mediated active resistance before T cells primed in the periphery could reach distal tumors, 
Spitzer et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 revealing another opportunity for modulating this pathway. System-wide studies should 
provide numerous opportunities for augmenting therapeutic efficacy.
The number of clinical trials in immunotherapy today provides opportunities to perform 
parallel studies in humans, building on our initial analysis here. A systematic understanding 
of anti-tumor immunity at the organismal and systems levels should enable significant 
progress in developing rational immunotherapeutic strategies.
STAR Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by lead contact Matthew Spitzer (matthew.spitzer@ucsf.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animals
Female MMTV-PyMT mice and male Tyr::CreER; BrafV600E/+; Ptenlox/lox mice were bred 
in our colony at Stanford University. All mice were housed in an American Association for 
the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care–accredited animal facility and maintained in 
specific pathogen-free conditions. Animal experiments were approved and conducted in 
accordance with Stanford University Asia Pacific Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation 
#13605. Animals began treatment when they developed a primary tumor reaching 25mm2 in 
area (referred to as day 0) and were randomized to different treatment groups. Wild-type 
female FVB, BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory and 
housed at our facility or were bred at Stanford University. Mice were transplanted with 2.5 × 
105 tumor cells when the mice were nine to twelve weeks of age. 4T1 breast cancer cells 
were transplanted into the fourth mammary fat pad, and MC38 cells were transplanted into 
the subcutaneous region of the flank when animals were between 8–10 weeks old. Animals 
were housed under standard SPF conditions with typical light/dark cycles and standard 
chow.
Human Subjects
Eligible patients were adults with histologically confirmed unresectable metastatic 
melanoma as previously reported (Kwek et al., 2015). The protocol was approved by the 
Institutional Review Board of each participating institution and was conducted in accordance 
with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and within the Good Clinical 
Practice guidelines as defined by the International Conference on Harmonization. All 
patients gave written informed consent for participation in the study. The trial was registered 
on ClinicalTrials.gov with Identifier NCT01363206.
At the initiation of treatment (months 1–3), patients were treated with four cycles of GM-
CSF and ipilimumab administered every 3 weeks. Ipilimumab was administered 
intravenously at a dose of 10 mg/kg on day 1 of each 21 d cycle. GM-CSF was administered 
subcutaneously daily for 14 d at a dose of 125 mg/m2 beginning on day 1 of each cycle. 
After the first four cycles of treatment, GM-CSF administration without ipilimumab 
Spitzer et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 continued for four more cycles on the same schedule and dose for the first 14 d of every 21 d 
cycle until month 6. Maintenance therapy began at month 6 and consisted of ipilimumab in 
the same dose (10 mg/kg) combined with 14 d of GM-CSF. This combination was 
administered every 3 mo thereafter for up to 2 y or until disease progression or unacceptable 
toxicity. Blood samples were obtained at week 3 (end of cycle 1) and at week 6 (end of cycle 
2) and were cryopreserved for subsequent analysis by flow cytometry.
Cell Lines
4T1 cells were purchased from the ATCC (catalog number CRL-2539). 4T1 and MC38 cells 
were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine,100 U/mL 
penicillin and 100 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin.
Primary Cell Cultures
MMTV-PyMT T Cell Transfer Studies—MMTV-PyMT animals bearing 25mm2 tumors 
were treated with anti-CD40, IFNγ, and allogeneic (CD-1) IgG antibodies as described 
under “Treatments”. On day 7 following treatment, mice were euthanized and their spleens 
and lymph nodes harvested. Following tissue dissociation, T cells were enriched using the 
EasySep Mouse T Cell Enrichment Kit (StemCell, 588CAD), and sorted by FACS for the 
following markers: CD4+CD69+CD44+Lin- or CD8a+Ly6C+CD44+Lin−. Cells were 
expanded in vitro by culturing in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FCS, 2 mM L-
glutamine,100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin, 30IU of hIL-2 and anti-
CD3/CD28 Dynabeads (Life Technologies, 11452D) at a bead:cell ratio of 1:2. Cells were 
expended with beads for 7 days, after which the beads were removed and the cells were 
cultured for an additional two days. Tumor-bearing naïve MMTV-PyMT recipient mice were 
sub-lethally irradiated with 4 Gray. Subsequently, 3×106 CD4 or CD8 T cell populations 
were transferred to the mice through tail vein injections in 200μL of PBS. Tumor burden was 
assessed on days 0, 4, 8, 12, and 16 following T cell transfer.
METHOD DETAILS
Tumor-Binding Antibody Purification
Mouse antibodies were obtained from the pooled sera of retired breeders from Charles River 
using protein-G columns (GE Healthcare). The levels of purified IgG and were measured 
using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The capacity of purified 
antibodies to bind tumor cells was tested by flow cytometry before their use in vivo.
Treatments
Animals treated for tumor kinetics analysis were injected intratumorally with 100μg anti-
CD40 (clone FGK4.5; BioXCell) and 1μg IFNγ (Biolegend) with or without 300μg B6 IgG 
antibodies and 300μg CD-1 IgG antibodies. Animals treated for mass cytometry analysis 
with tumor-binding antibody therapy were injected intratumorally with 400μg allo-IgG 
(either B6 or CD-1) and 100μg anti-CD40 and IFNγ or with 250μg anti-PD-1 (clone 
RMP1-14, BioXCell) injected i.p. Injections were performed on day 0 and day 2. In some 
cases, mice were injected i.p. with 200 μg of anti-PD-L1 (clone 10F.9G2; BioXCell) every 3 
days until the experiment was terminated. Day 0 was considered the first day of treatment.
Spitzer et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mass Cytometry Antibodies
A summary of all mass cytometry antibodies, reporter isotopes and concentrations used for 
analysis can be found in Supplementary Table 1. Primary conjugates of mass cytometry 
antibodies were prepared using the MaxPAR antibody conjugation kit (Fluidigm) according 
to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. Following labeling, antibodies were diluted in 
Candor PBS Antibody Stabilization solution (Candor Bioscience GmbH, Wangen, 
Germany) supplemented with 0.02% NaN3 to between 0.1 and 0.3 mg/mL and stored long-
term at 4°C. Each antibody clone and lot was titrated to optimal staining concentrations 
using primary murine samples. One antibody cocktail was prepared for the staining of all 
samples for mass cytometry analysis.
Cell Preparation
All tissue preparations were performed simultaneously from each individual mouse. After 
euthanasia by C02 inhalation, peripheral blood was collected via the posterior vena cava 
prior to perfusion of the animal and transferred into sodium heparin-coated vacuum tubes 
prior to 1:1 dilution in RMPI 1640. Spleens and lymph nodes were homogenized in PBS 
+ 5mM EDTA at 4°C. Bone marrow was flushed from femuri and resuspended in PBS 
+ 5mM EDTA at 4°. Tumors were finely minced and digested in RPMI 1640 with 1 mg/ml 
collagenase IV, and 0.1 mg/ml DNase I. After digestion, cells re-suspended cells were 
quenched with RPMI with 10% FCS at 4°C. Cells were then homogenized in RPMI with 
10% FCS. All tissues except peripheral blood were washed with PBS with 5mM EDTA and 
resuspended 1:1 with PBS with 5mM EDTA and 100μM Ciaplatin (Enzo Life Sciences, 
Farmingdale, NY) for 60s before quenching 1:1 with PBS with 0.5% BSA and 5mM EDTA 
to determine viability as previously described (Spitzer et al., 2015). Cells were centrifuged at 
500g for 5 min at 4°C and resuspended in PBS with 0.5% BSA and 5mM EDTA at a density 
between 1–10*106 cells/ml. Suspensions and blood were fixed for 10 min at RT using 1:1.4 
Proteomic Stabilizer according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Smart Tube Inc., Palo 
Alto, CA) and frozen at −80°C.
Mass-Tag Cellular Barcoding
Mass-tag cellular barcoding was preformed as previously described (Zunder et al., 2015). 
Briefly, 1*106 cells from each animal were barcoded with distinct combinations of stable Pd 
isotopes chelated by isothiocyanobenzyl-EDTA in 0.02% saponin in PBS. Samples from any 
given tissue from one mouse per treatment group were barcoded together, with at least 3 
biological replicates per treatment group across different plates. Cells were washed two 
times in PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3 and pooled into a single FACS tube (BD 
Biosciences). After data collection, each condition was deconvoluted using a single-cell 
debarcoding algorithm (Zunder et al., 2015).
Mass Cytometry Staining and Measurement
Cells were resuspended in PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3 and metal-labeled 
antibodies against CD16/32 were added at 20μg/ml for 5 min at RT on a shaker to block Fc 
receptors. Surface marker antibodies were then added, yielding 500 uL final reaction 
volumes and stained at room temperature for 30min at RT on a shaker. Following staining, 
Spitzer et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells were washed 2 more times with PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3 then 
permeabilized with 4°C methanol for at 10 min at 4°C. Cells were then wash ed twice in 
PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3 to remove remaining methanol, and then stained with 
intracellular antibodies in 500 μL for 30 min at RT on a shaker. Cells were washed twice in 
PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3 and then stained with 1 mL of 1:4000 191/193Ir 
DNA intercalator (Fluidigm) diluted in PBS with 1.6% PFA overnight. Cells were then 
washed once with PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3 and then two times with double-
deionized (dd)H20. Care was taken to assure buffers preceding analysis were not 
contaminated with metals in the mass range above 100 Da. Mass cytometry samples were 
diluted in ddH2O containing bead standards (see below) to approximately 106 cells per mL 
and then analyzed on a CyTOFTM 2 mass cytometer (Fluidigm) equilibrated with ddH2O. 
We analyzed 1–5*105 cells per animal, per tissue, per time point, per treatment, consistent 
with generally accepted practices in the field.
Bead Standard Data Normalization
Just before analysis, the stained and intercalated cell pellet was resuspended in ddH2O 
containing the bead standard at a concentration ranging between 1 and 2*104 beads per ml 
as previously described (Finck et al., 2013). The bead standards were prepared immediately 
before analysis, and the mixture of beads and cells were filtered through a filter cap FACS 
tubes (BD Biosciences) before analysis. All mass cytometry files were normalized together 
using the mass cytometry data normalization algorithm (Finck et al., 2013), which uses the 
intensity values of a sliding window of these bead standards to correct for instrument 
fluctuations over time and between samples.
Scaffold Map Generation
Total live leukocytes (excluding erythrocytes) were used for all analyses. Cells from each 
tissue for all animals were clustered together (rather than performing CLARA clustering on 
each file individually as originally implemented in Spitzer et al., Science, 2015.) Cells were 
then deconvolved into their respective samples. Cluster frequencies or the Boolean 
expression of Ki67 or PD-L1 for each cluster were passed into the Significance Across 
Microarrays algorithm (Bair and Tibshirani, 2004; Bruggner et al., 2014), and results were 
tabulated into the Scaffold map files for visualization through the graphical user interface. 
Cluster frequencies were calculated as a percent of total live nucleated cells (excluding 
erythrocytes). For each cluster in each tissue, the most similar cluster in every other tissue is 
included as Table S3 for comparisons.
Scaffold maps were then generated as previously reported (Spitzer et al., 2015). Briefly, we 
chose the spleen data to spatialize the initial Scaffold map because all major, mature immune 
cell populations are present in that tissue. A graph was constructed by first connecting 
together the nodes representing the manually gated landmark populations and then 
connecting to them the nodes representing the cell clusters as well as connecting the clusters 
to one another. Each node is associated with a vector containing the median marker values of 
the cells in the cluster (unsupervised nodes) or gated populations (landmark nodes). Edge 
weights were defined as the cosine similarity between these vectors after comparing the 
results from the implementation of several distance metrics. Edges of low weight were 
Spitzer et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 filtered out. We experimented with different threshold values for the weights and we found 
values of 0.8 for the initial subgraph of landmark nodes, and 0.7 for the complete graph to 
produce satisfying results. The graph was then laid out using an in-house R implementation 
of the ForceAtlas2 algorithm from the graph visualization software Gephi. To overlay the 
additional samples on the spleen map, the position and identity of the landmark nodes was 
fixed and the clusters of each sample were connected to the landmark nodes as described 
above. Once again the graphs were laid out using ForceAtlas2 but this time only the 
unsupervised nodes were allowed to move. All analyses were performed using the open 
source Scaffold maps R package available at github.com/nolanlab/scaffold.
Cell Population Expression Profiles
Cell clusters of interest were further investigated by visualizing the distribution of protein 
expression within the cells comprising each cluster as a histogram. This was performed 
using the density visualization feature of the Scaffold maps R package. Histograms shown in 
the figures were created by exporting clusters as .FCS files using the Scaffold maps R 
package and using the flowCore and ggplot2 packages in R to write vector histogram plots. 
Scripts are available at github.com/mhspitzer.
Unsupervised Force-Directed Graph Generation
Cells were manually gated as Live CD45+ lineage- (Ter119, Ly6G, Siglec-F, CD19, B220, 
F4/80, CD11c, PDCA-1, FcεR1α) and then CD3+ to identify T cells. The gated cell 
populations for each tissue/timepoint/treatment group were clustered independently in 50 
clusters using clara in R. The clusters for all the tissues were combined in a single graph 
with edge weights defined as the cosine similarity between the vectors of median marker 
values of each cluster. All the pairwise distances were calculated and for each node only the 
10 edges of highest weight were retained. The graph was then laid out using the ForceAtlas2 
algorithm in Gephi (https://gephi.org).
Correlation Network Analysis and Connectivity Analysis
Immune cell subsets were gated from mass cytometry data, and the frequency of each subset 
in each tissue of each mouse was calculated. For animals receiving effective therapy or those 
receiving no or ineffective therapy, pairwise Spearman correlations were calculated for each 
immune cell subset, and hierarchical clustering was performed to organize the correlation 
matrix. The hierarchical clustering result from the mice receiving effective therapy was 
additionally imposed on the correlation matrix for the animals receiving no or ineffective 
therapy as a means of comparing the networks.
For the connectivity analysis, an adjacency matrix was created from the correlation matrix of 
animals receiving effective therapy, using a Spearman correlation coefficient of 0.5 as the 
threshold. The number of remaining correlations was tabulated for each immune cell 
population from each tissue, and these were rank ordered. The graph of the adjacency matrix 
visualizes all positive and negative correlations present in the adjacency matrix for each 
subset.
Spitzer et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Histology and Immunohistochemistry
Following excision from mice, tissues were fixed in 4% buffered formalin for one hour at 
room temperature. Tissues were then transferred to 30% sucrose solution in PBS and left 
overnight at 4°C. They were then embedded in O.C.T. Compound (Tissue-Tek) and frozen 
on dry ice. Tissue blocks were sectioned at 6μm on a microtome onto positively charged 
glass slides (Fisher Scientific) and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) according to 
standard protocols.
Additional slides were blocked with PBS containing 10% normal goat serum and 5% BSA 
for 30 min at room temperature and stained for the following antigens at a 1:100 dilution 
overnight at 4°C: CD45 (30-F11, BioLegend), CD8 α (53–6.7, BioLegend), CD4 (RM4-5, 
BioLegend), and CD11b (M1/70, BioLegend), mounted with LabVision PermaFluor 
Aqueous Mounting Medium (Thermo Scientific), and imaged on a Zeiss LSM700 confocal 
microscope. When co-stained with TUNEL, sections were stained overnight at 4°C with 
1:50 dilution of rat-anti mouse polyoma virus- middle T antigen (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology). Sections were then washed three times in PBS, incubated for 1 hour at 
room temperature with, and stained with 1:100 Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated anti-CD8β 
(YTS156.7.7) and with 1:200 Alexa Fluor 488-Conjugated anti-rat IgG antibodies 
(BioLegend). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick end labeling 
(TUNEL) assays were performed according to manufacturer's instructions (Roche manual). 
Briefly, cells were washed thrice in PBS, and fixed in freshly prepared 4% 
paraformaldehyde in PBS for 1 h at room temperature, and then washed with PBS and 
permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 in 0.1% sodium citrate. Cells were then incubated with 
TUNEL reaction mixture (Roche) for 60 min at 37°C i n a humidified atmosphere in the 
dark.
Leukocyte Egress Blockade
Animals bearing 25mm2 tumors were treated with alloIgG (from B6 mice), anti-CD40 and 
IFNγ and were randomized to receive daily i.p. injections of FTY720 (3 mg/kg) or ethanol 
control beginning one day prior to therapy.
Adoptive T Cell Transfer
Balb/c mice were injected orthotopically into the fourth mammary fat pad with 105 4T1 
tumor cells. On days 12 and 14, mice were injected intratumorally with 100μg anti-CD40 
(clone FGK4.5; BioXCell) and 1μg IFNγ (Biolegend) and 400μg allo-IgG along with daily 
i.p. injections of FTY720 (3mg/kg). On day seven, mice were euthanized and the draining 
lymph nodes and spleens were removed and mechanically dissociated to obtain single cell 
suspension. T cells were then enriched by negative selection using magnetic beads 
(EasySep, StemCell technologies) and a total of 8×106 cells were injected intravenously into 
Balb/c female mice. After one day, both T cell-recipient mice and naïve control mice were 
challenged with 5×104 4T1 tumor cells subcutaneously. Starting the day of T cell transfer, 
mice were treated twice a day for five days with 220,000 IU of human IL-2 (Peprotech).
Spitzer et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Flow Cytometry
For human samples, cell surface staining was performed in fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting (FACS) buffer for 30 min at 4°C. Intracellular foxhead box P3 (FoxP3) was 
performed using the FoxP3 fix/perm buffer set (Biolegend, Inc.) according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. The following anti-human antibodies were used: (Alexa Fluor 
700)-CD3 (clone HIT3a), (Brilliant violet 570)-CD4 (clone RPA-T4), (Brilliant violet 650)-
CD25 (clone BC96), (Alexa Fluor 647)-CD127 (clone A019D5), (Alexa Fluor 488)-FoxP3 
(clone 206D), and (Brilliant violet 421)-PD-1 (clone EH12.2H7). All antibodies were 
purchased from Biolegend, Inc. Stained cells were fixed with Fluorofix buffer (Biolegend, 
Inc.) according to manufacturer’s instructions and analyzed with an LSR II flow cytometer 
(BD Biosciences).
QUANTIFICATION AND STATICAL ANALYSIS
Comparison of cell frequencies and protein expression in Statistical Scaffold was performed 
using Significance Analysis of Microarrays as described above and in Bair and Tibshirani, 
2004 and Bruggner et al., 2014. Individual comparisons presented as stand alone panels 
were made using heteroskedastic, two-tailed t-tests performed in R.
Analysis of tumor sizes was performed by calculating a fold change in the size of the tumor 
at time point t compared to the baseline size at the time of treatment or adoptive transfer. 
Comparisons were made using heteroskedastic, two-tailed t-tests performed in R.
Frequency of human CD4+PD-1-CD127low T cells (identified manually) was calculated as a 
percent of total leukocytes, and results were compared between responding and non-
responding patients by two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test performed in R.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Statistical Scaffold and all mass cytometry data are publicly available at http://
www.github.com/spitzerlab/Modeling_Effective_Cancer_Immunotherapy
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank G.K. Fragiadakis and L.E. Sanman for helpful conversations and feedback and A. Trejo and A. Jager for 
CyTOF maintenance. M.H.S., P.F.G., L.F. and G.P.N. are investigators of the Parker Institute for Cancer 
Immunotherapy. G.P.N. has a personal financial interest in, and S.C.B. has been a paid consultant for Fluidigm, 
manufacturer of the mass cytometer utilized. E.G.E. is a founder and board member of Bolt Biotherapeutics, 
licensee of the alloIgG therapy. This work was supported by NIH F31CA189331 and DP5OD023056 to M.H.S.; 
F32CA189408 to N.R.F.; NIH U19AI057229, U19AI100627, R33CA183654, R01HL120724, DOD OC110674 
and 11491122, Gates Foundation OPP1113682, NIAID HHSN272201200028C, FDA HHSF223201210194C 
BAA-12-00118 to G.P.N.; NIH R01CA196657 to G.P.N., E.G.E.; R01AI118884 to E.G.E.
Spitzer et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Bair E, Tibshirani R. Semi-supervised methods to predict patient survival from gene expression data. 
PLoS Biol. 2004; 2:e108. [PubMed: 15094809] 
Bandura DR, Baranov VI, Ornatsky OI, Antonov A, Kinach R, Lou X, Pavlov S, Vorobiev S, Dick JE, 
Tanner SD. Mass cytometry: technique for real time single cell multitarget immunoassay based on 
inductively coupled plasma time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2009; 81:6813–6822. 
[PubMed: 19601617] 
Bates GJ, Fox SB, Han C, Leek RD, Garcia JF, Harris AL, Banham AH. Quantification of regulatory T 
cells enables the identification of high-risk breast cancer patients and those at risk of late relapse. J 
Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:5373–5380. [PubMed: 17135638] 
Bendall SC, Bendall SC, Simonds EF, Simonds EF, Qiu P, Qiu P, Amir EAD, Amir EAD, Krutzik PO, 
Krutzik PO, et al. Single-Cell Mass Cytometry of Differential Immune and Drug Responses Across 
a Human Hematopoietic Continuum. Science. 2011; 332:687–696. [PubMed: 21551058] 
Bos PD, Plitas G, Rudra D, Lee SY, Rudensky AY. Transient regulatory T cell ablation deters 
oncogene-driven breast cancer and enhances radiotherapy. J Exp Med. 2013; 210:2435–2466. 
[PubMed: 24127486] 
Broz ML, Binnewies M, Boldajipour B, Nelson AE, Pollack JL, Erle DJ, Barczak A, Rosenblum MD, 
Daud A, Barber DL, et al. Dissecting the Tumor Myeloid Compartment Reveals Rare Activating 
Antigen-Presenting Cells Critical for T Cell Immunity. Cancer Cell. 2014:1–15.
Bruggner RV, Bodenmiller B, Dill DL, Tibshirani RJ, Nolan GP. Automated identification of 
stratifying signatures in cellular subpopulations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USa. 2014; 111:E2770–E2777. 
[PubMed: 24979804] 
Bulliard Y, Jolicoeur R, Windman M, Rue SM, Ettenberg S, Knee DA, Wilson NS, Dranoff G, 
Brogdon JL. Activating Fc receptors contribute to the antitumor activities of immunoregulatory 
receptor-targeting antibodies. J Exp Med. 2013; 210:1685–1693. [PubMed: 23897982] 
Carmi Y, Spitzer MH, Linde IL, Burt BM, Prestwood TR, Perlman N, Davidson MG, Kenkel JA, Segal 
E, Pusapati GV, et al. Allogeneic IgG combined with dendritic cell stimuli induce antitumour T-cell 
immunity. Nature. 2015:1–6.
Chen DS, Mellman I. Oncology meets immunology: the cancer-immunity cycle. Immunity. 2013; 
39:1–10. [PubMed: 23890059] 
Cheng G, Yuan X, Tsai MS, Podack ER, Yu A, Malek TR. IL-2 receptor signaling is essential for the 
development of Klrg1+ terminally differentiated T regulatory cells. J Immunol. 2012; 189:1780–
1791. [PubMed: 22786769] 
Cohen CJ, Gartner JJ, Horovitz-Fried M, Shamalov K, Trebska-McGowan K, Bliskovsky VV, 
Parkhurst MR, Ankri C, Prickett TD, Crystal JS, et al. Isolation of neoantigen-specific T cells from 
tumor and peripheral lymphocytes. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:3981–3991. [PubMed: 26389673] 
Coley WB. The treatment of malignant tumors by repeated inoculations of erysipelas: with a report of 
ten original cases. Am J Med Sci. 1893:487–511.
Curiel TJ, Coukos G, Zou L, Alvarez X, Cheng P, Mottram P, Evdemon-Hogan M, Conejo-Garcia JR, 
Zhang L, Burow M, et al. Specific recruitment of regulatory T cells in ovarian carcinoma fosters 
immune privilege and predicts reduced survival. Nat Med. 2004; 10:942–949. [PubMed: 
15322536] 
Dankort D, Curley DP, Cartlidge RA, Nelson B, Karnezis AN, Damsky WE Jr, You MJ, DePinho RA, 
McMahon M, Bosenberg M. BrafV600E cooperates with Pten loss to induce metastatic melanoma. 
Nat Genet. 2009; 41:544–552. [PubMed: 19282848] 
Finck R, Simonds EF, Jager A, Krishnaswamy S, Sachs K, Fantl W, Pe'er D, Nolan GP, Bendall SC. 
Normalization of mass cytometry data with bead standards. Cytometry A. 2013; 83:483–494. 
[PubMed: 23512433] 
Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V. Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by tumours. 
Nature Reviews Immunology. 2012; 12:253–268.
Haeryfar SMM, Hoskin DW. Thy-1: More than a Mouse Pan-T Cell Marker. The Journal of 
Immunology. 2004; 173:3581–3588. [PubMed: 15356100] 
Spitzer et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hänninen A, Maksimow M, Alam C, Morgan DJ, Jalkanen S. Ly6C supports preferential homing of 
central memory CD8+ T cells into lymph nodes. Eur J Immunol. 2011; 41:634–644. [PubMed: 
21308682] 
Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, Fine GD, Hamid O, Gordon MS, Sosman JA, McDermott DF, 
Powderly JD, Gettinger SN, et al. Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody 
MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature. 2014; 515:563–567. [PubMed: 25428504] 
Hotson D, Gopinath S, Nolan GP, Monack DM. A systems biology approach to persistent Salmonella 
infection reveals a neutrophil dependent IL-2 mediated dampening of TH1 response. 2012:1–29.
Ideker T, Krogan NJ. Differential network biology. Mol Syst Biol. 2012; 8:1–9.
Im SJ, Hashimoto M, Gerner MY, Lee J, Kissick HT, Burger MC, Shan Q, Hale JS, Lee J, Nasti TH, et 
al. Defining CD8+ T cells that provide the proliferative burst after PD-1 therapy. Nature. 2016:1–
20.
Jiang Y, Li Y, Zhu B. T-cell exhaustion in the tumor microenvironment. Cell Death Dis. 2015; 6:e1792. 
[PubMed: 26086965] 
Kantoff PW, Higano CS, Shore ND, Berger ER, Small EJ, Penson DF, Redfern CH, Ferrari AC, 
Dreicer R, Sims RB, et al. Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2010; 363:411–422. [PubMed: 20818862] 
Kvistborg P, Philips D, Kelderman S, Hageman L, Ottensmeier C, Joseph-Pietras D, Welters MJP, van 
der Burg S, Kapiteijn E, Michielin O, et al. Anti-CTLA-4 therapy broadens the melanoma-reactive 
CD8+ T cell response. Science Translational Medicine. 2014; 6:254ra128–254ra128.
Kwek SS, Kahn J, Greaney SK, Lewis J, Cha E, Zhang L, Weber RW, Leonard L, Markovic SN, Fong 
L, et al. GM-CSF and ipilimumab therapy in metastatic melanoma: Clinical outcomes and 
immunologic responses. Oncoimmunology. 2015; 5:e1101204–e1101211. [PubMed: 27141383] 
Matloubian M, Lo CG, Cinamon G, Lesneski MJ, Xu Y, Brinkmann V, Allende ML, Proia RL, Cyster 
JG. Lymphocyte egress from thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs is dependent on S1P receptor 
1. Nature. 2004; 427:355–360. [PubMed: 14737169] 
Pelletier N, McHeyzer-Williams LJ, Wong KA, Urich E, Fazilleau N, McHeyzer-Williams MG. 
Plasma cells negatively regulate the follicular helper T cell program. Nature Immunology. 2010; 
11:1110–1118. [PubMed: 21037578] 
Porter DL, Levine BL, Kalos M, Bagg A, June CH. Chimeric Antigen Receptor–Modified T Cells in 
Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:725–733. [PubMed: 21830940] 
Restifo NP, Dudley ME, Rosenberg SA. Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer: harnessing the T cell 
response. Nature Reviews Immunology. 2012; 12:269–281.
Rosenberg SA. Decade in review—cancer immunotherapy: Entering the mainstream of cancer 
treatment. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014; 11:630–632. [PubMed: 25311350] 
Simpson TR, Li F, Montalvo-Ortiz W, Sepulveda MA, Bergerhoff K, Arce F, Roddie C, Henry JY, 
Yagita H, Wolchok JD, et al. Fc-dependent depletion of tumor-infiltrating regulatory T cells co-
defines the efficacy of anti-CTLA-4 therapy against melanoma. J Exp Med. 2013; 210:1695–1710. 
[PubMed: 23897981] 
Spitzer MH, Gherardini PF, Fragiadakis GK, Bhattacharya N, Yuan RT, Hotson AN, Finck R, Carmi Y, 
Zunder ER, Fantl WJ, et al. An interactive reference framework for modeling a dynamic immune 
system. Science. 2015; 349:1259425–1259425. [PubMed: 26160952] 
Spranger S, Koblish HK, Horton B, Scherle PA, Newton R, Gajewski TF. Mechanism of tumor 
rejection with doublets of CTLA-4, PD-1/PD-L1, or IDO blockade involves restored IL-2 
production and proliferation of CD8(+) T cells directly within the tumor microenvironment. 
Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer. 2014; 2:3. [PubMed: 24829760] 
Swain SL, McKinstry KK, Strutt TM. Expanding roles for CD4+ T cells in immunity to viruses. 
Nature Reviews Immunology. 2012; 12:136–148.
Topalian SL, Drake CG, Pardoll DM. Immune Checkpoint Blockade: A Common Denominator 
Approach to Cancer Therapy. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:450–461. [PubMed: 25858804] 
Tran E, Turcotte S, Gros A, Robbins PF, Lu YC, Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Somerville RP, Hogan 
K, Hinrichs CS, et al. Cancer immunotherapy based on mutation-specific CD4+ T cells in a patient 
with epithelial cancer. Science. 2014; 344:641–645. [PubMed: 24812403] 
Spitzer et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Wherry EJ, Ha SJ, Kaech SM, Haining WN, Sarkar S, Kalia V, Subramaniam S, Blattman JN, Barber 
DL, Ahmed R. Molecular Signature of CD8+ T Cell Exhaustion during Chronic Viral Infection. 
Immunity. 2007; 27:670–684. [PubMed: 17950003] 
Xie Y, Akpinarli A, Maris C, Hipkiss EL, Lane M, Kwon EKM, Muranski P, Restifo NP, Antony PA. 
Naive tumor-specific CD4 +T cells differentiated in vivo eradicate established melanoma. Journal 
of Experimental Medicine. 2010; 207:651–667. [PubMed: 20156973] 
Zunder ER, Finck R, Behbehani GK, Amir EAD, Krishnaswamy S, Gonzalez VD, Lorang CG, 
Bjornson Z, Spitzer MH, Bodenmiller B, et al. Palladium-based mass tag cell barcoding with a 
doublet-filtering scheme and single-cell deconvolution algorithm. Nat Protoc. 2015; 10:316–333. 
[PubMed: 25612231] 
Spitzer et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
System-wide models reveal coordinated anti-tumor immunity across the 
organism
•
Tumor eradication requires immune activation in the periphery
•
Network analysis identifies CD4 T cells sufficient to initiate immune 
responses
•
PD-L1 upregulation early post-therapy protects distal tumors from systemic 
immunity
Spitzer et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Tumor-binding antibodies and dendritic cell adjuvants induce rejection of spontaneous 
breast tumors
(A) MMTV-PyMT mice with tumors of 25mm2 treated with allogeneic IgG pooled from 
C57BL/6 and CD-1 mice, anti-CD40 and IFNγ or untreated. (B) H&E and (C) 
immunofluorescence of tumors from treated mice 8 days after therapy. (D) Mass cytometry 
experiment. (E) Binding of IgG antibodies from naïve CD-1 or C57BL/6 mice to MMTV-
PyMT tumor cells. (F) Tumor sizes, day 8 after therapy, for mass cytometry. See also Fig. 
S1, Table S1.
Spitzer et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The tumor microenvironment is remodeled and immune cells transiently proliferate 
during effective responses
(A) Statistical Scaffold map of the tumor on day 3. Black nodes are Landmark nodes, 
representing canonical cell populations identified manually. Other nodes reflect 
unsupervised clustering of live leukocytes (see Methods). Clusters in red denote populations 
significantly higher in frequency with effective therapy; blue clusters are significantly lower 
in frequency. pDC are in the dashed box to maximize space. Colored boxes are populations 
analyzed in B–E. (B) Expression profile of B cell, (C) cDC, (D) NK cell, or (E) Treg cell 
clusters expanding with effective therapy (red) versus those decreasing (blue). (F) Scaffold 
map of Ki67 expression in immune cells in the tumor on day 3. Subsets more proliferative 
Spitzer et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 after effective therapy in red. (G) Percent of Ki67+ Treg. (H) Percent of Ki67+ cDC. (I) 
Scaffold map of the tumor on day 8. (J) Expression profile of macrophage clusters 
expanding with effective therapy (red) versus those decreasing (blue). (K) Expression profile 
of ILC cluster increasing with effective therapy. (L) ILC1 frequencies. (M) Expression 
profile of CD4 T cell or (N) CD8 T cell cluster increasing with effective therapy. (O) 
Scaffold map of Ki67 expression in immune cells in the tumor on day 8. See also Fig. S2–
S4, Tables S2–S3.
Spitzer et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Cells in the tumor-draining lymph node display sustained activation
(A) Scaffold map of the draining lymph node on day 3. (B) Expression profile of B cell 
clusters expanding with effective therapy (red) versus those not changing (black). (C) 
Expression profile of Th1, (D) Treg or (E) CD8 T cell clusters increasing with effective 
therapy. (F) Scaffold map of Ki67 expression in cells in the draining lymph node on day 3. 
(G) Expression of CD44 and Ly6C in T cell clusters. (H) Scaffold map of the draining 
lymph node on day 8. (I) Expression profile of B cell, (J) CD4 T cell or (K) CD8 T cell 
clusters expanding with effective therapy (red) versus those decreasing (blue). (L) Frequency 
Spitzer et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of Treg clusters. (M) Scaffold map of Ki67 expression in the draining lymph node on day 8. 
See also Fig. S4–S5, Tables S2–S3.
Spitzer et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Immune responses are sustained in peripheral blood
(A) Scaffold map of blood on day 3. (B) Expression profile of B cell, pDC, (D) CD4 T cell, 
(E) Th1 cell,. (F) CD8 T cell, (G) Ly6C+ monocyte, or (H) Ly6C- monocyte clusters 
expanding with effective therapy (red histogram) versus those decreasing (blue histogram). 
(I) Scaffold map of Ki67 expression in immune cell clusters in blood on day 3. (J) Scaffold 
map of blood on day 8. (K) Frequency of platelets on day 8. (L) Scaffold map of Ki67 
expression in cells in blood on day 8. See also Fig. S4, S6, Tables S2–S3.
Spitzer et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Interfering with systemic immune responses prevents effective immunotherapy
(A) MMTV-PyMT tumor-bearing mice treated with alloIgG, anti-CD40, IFNγ and daily 
FTY720 or ethanol control starting one day before therapy. (B) Mice with orthotopic 4T1 
tumors treated as in A. (C) Immunofluorescence of 4T1 tumors 14 days after therapy. (D–E) 
4T1 lung metastases 20 days after therapy. (F) T cells from spleen and lymph nodes of mice 
with 4T1 tumors, treated with alloIgG, anti-CD40, IFNγ and FTY720 were transferred with 
IL-2 into naïve Balb/c mice. Controls only received IL-2. Recipients were challenged s.c. 
with 4T1 cells the next day. (G) MC38 tumor-bearing mice untreated or treated with anti-
PD-1 and ethanol control or FTY720. All p-values reflect two-tailed, heteroskedastic t-tests 
in R. Error bars represent S.D.
Spitzer et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. A CD4 T cell subset from the periphery is sufficient to mediate anti-tumor immunity
(A) Pairwise correlations and hierarchical clustering of immune cell frequencies across 
organs of mice treated with effective therapy. (B) Adjacency matrix from panel A ordered by 
connectivity. CD4 T cells in black; CD8 T cells in white. (C) CD44+ CD4 or CD8 T cells 
from the lymph node, spleen and blood of MMTV-PyMT mice treated with effective therapy 
were expanded and transferred into treatment-naïve MMTV-PyMT mice (n=3–4 per group). 
(D) Force-directed graph of T cells from each tissue, time and treatment. Colored by tissue 
of origin. Light colors indicate initiation phase; dark colors indicate rejection phase. Clusters 
from mice receiving no or ineffective therapy are black. Node size reflects the frequency of 
Spitzer et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 T cells in that cluster as a percent of T cells by tissue. (E) CD4 T cells enriched in the 
periphery after effective therapy. (F) Frequency of Tbet+CD44+CD62L-CD27low CD4 T 
cells in the draining lymph node of BP melanoma mice on day 8. (G) CD44+CD62L-
CD27low CD4 T cells were isolated from the lymph node, spleen and blood of MMTV-
PyMT mice treated with effective therapy. Treatment-naïve MMTV-PyMT mice were 
sublethally irradiated, and sorted T cells (n=4) or PBS control (n=3) was injected i.v. All p-
values reflect two-tailed, heteroskedastic t-tests in R. Error bars represent S.D. (H) Scaffold 
map of flow cytometry data from blood of melanoma patients treated with anti-CTLA-4 
antibodies and GM-CSF, 3 weeks after therapy began. Red nodes are cell subsets 
significantly expanded in responding patients compared to non-responders. (I) Frequency of 
CD4+PD-1-CD127low T cells (identified manually) of total leukocytes, analyzed by two-
tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test. See also Fig. S7.
Spitzer et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. PD-L1 blockade combined with tumor-binding antibody therapy enables distal tumor 
rejection in multifocal disease
(A) Scaffold map denoting PD-L1 expression in immune cells in the tumor between 
effective and ineffective groups on day 3. (B) Percent of tumor cells expressing PD-L1 on 
day 3. (C) Scaffold maps representing changes in PD-L1 expression in the draining lymph 
node or (D) blood. (E) PD-L1 expression in un-injected tumors in MMTV-PyMT mice with 
multi-focal disease on day 3. (F) Frequency of PD-L1+ leukocytes in un-injected tumors of 
treated or untreated mice. (G) Tumor burden in MMTV-PyMT animals with late-stage multi-
focal disease after tumor-binding antibody therapy alone or in combination with systemic 
Spitzer et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anti-PD-L1. (H) Number of palpable tumors in mice from G. All p-values reflect two-tailed, 
heteroskedastic t-tests in R. Error bars represent S.D.
Spitzer et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
