 Research Article
Autistic girls and school exclusion:
Perspectives of students and their parents
Kelda Sproston and Felicity Sedgewick
Centre for Research in Autism and Education (CRAE), UCL Institute of Education, University College
London, UK
Laura Crane
Centre for Research in Autism and Education (CRAE), UCL Institute of Education, University College
London, UK; Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK
Abstract
Background and aims: If a child’s behaviour does not conform to school policy or causes harm to either peers or staff,
they may be temporarily or permanently excluded from school. Whilst it is unlawful to exclude children due to their
needs, school exclusion is common amongst children with special educational needs, including autism. Currently, little is
known about experiences of school exclusion from the perspectives of autistic students and/or their parents. This is
particularly the case for girls on the autism spectrum.
Methods: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with eight autistic girls and their parents (seven mothers, one
father). Interviews explored experiences of mainstream schooling; alternative educational provisions that were offered
(if any); the school exclusion process; and the girls’ current educational provision. As well as asking the girls and their
parents about positive and negative aspects of their past and current experiences, participants were asked to reflect on
areas for potential improvements.
Results: Interviews were analysed using thematic analysis and three key themes emerged from the data: inappropriate
school environments (including problems with the sensory environment, difficulties when placed with inappropriate
peers and general pressures of mainstream classrooms), tensions in school relationships (including problems with staff
and peers, alongside a general lack of communication), and problems with staff responses (including a perceived lack of
understanding of the girls’ needs and a lack of appropriate support being provided, resulting in ‘battles’ between parents
and schools).
Conclusions: The themes and subthemes that emerged from the interviews were not unique to autistic girls. Indeed,
issues such as inappropriate school environments, a lack of staff understanding and breakdowns in relationships have
been repeatedly raised by parents and young autistic people (mostly boys) in other studies, albeit in different environ-
ments. Nevertheless, the results highlight that more needs to be done to positively influence the direction of the girls’
educational journeys.
Implications: To improve the inclusion of autistic girls, it is recommended that educational establishments be proactive
in developing inclusive environments, build positive relationships (both in and outside of the classroom) and, if exclusion
is unavoidable, better support students both before and after the process.
Keywords
Autism spectrum disorders, gender, education, female, exclusion
Corresponding author:
Laura Crane, Centre for Research in Autism and Education (CRAE), UCL Institute of Education, London WC1H 0AA, UK.
Email: L.Crane@ucl.ac.uk
Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial use, repro-
duction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open
Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
Autism & Developmental Language
Impairments
Volume 2: 1–14
! The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.
nav
DOI: 10.1177/2396941517706172
journals.sagepub.com/home/dli
 It has long been thought that autism spectrum disorder
(henceforth, autism) predominantly affects males, and a
fairly consistent male prevalence bias of 4:1 has been
reported in the literature (Kreiser & White, 2014; Lai,
Lombardo, Auyeung, Chakrabarti, & Baron-Cohen,
2015). However, these ratios fluctuate across the
autism spectrum, ranging from 2:1 in those with intel-
lectual disabilities (Holtmann, Bo
¨ lte, & Poustka, 2007)
to 5.1:1 in those without (Kim et al., 2011). Several
reasons for this discrepancy have been proposed,
including variations in behaviour and interests between
autistic1 boys and girls (Hiller, Young, & Weber, 2014;
Hsiao,
Tseng,
Huang,
&
Gau,
2013;
Koenig
&
Tsatsanis, 2006; Mandy et al., 2012), under- or misrec-
ognition of autism in females (Lai et al., 2016), genetics
(Lai et al., 2011), developmental differences across the
genders (Lai et al., 2015) and a male assessment bias
(Russell, Steer, & Golding, 2011).
It is thought that an early feminine advantage
(Koenig & Tsatsanis, 2006) enables autistic females to
assimiliate with typically developing peers (Hiller et al.,
2014; Sedgewick, Hill, Yates, Pickering, & Pellicano,
2015). However, this appears to diminish with the
onset of adolescence (McLennan, Lord, & Schopler,
1993; Ranson & Byrne, 2014), when physical, psycho-
logical and social changes cause difficulties in sustaining
friendships (Hsiao et al., 2013) and understanding
social conflict (Sedgewick et al., 2015). Despite such
factors rendering this group vulnerable to social isola-
tion (Dean et al., 2014), little is known of the experi-
ences of adolescent females, particularly in relation to
education.
Although the social requirements of the adolescent
classroom provide ample opportunities to identify atyp-
ical behaviours, autistic girls are frequently overlooked
(Hendrickx, 2015). Whilst autistic females can give the
illusion of coping (Hendrickx, 2015; Riley-Hall, 2012;
Wagner, 2006), a lack of support in the increasingly
pressured environment of secondary school (attended
between the ages of 11 and 18 years) poses a risk
to their well-being. Unstructured time, where social
fluency is paramount (Riley-Hall, 2012), is key in
exposing the behaviours of autistic females (Hiller
et al., 2014). However, teachers may be unaware of
the inconspicuous behaviour of females (Osler, 2006),
due to their more amenable classroom demeanour
(Wagner, 2006), their tendency to ‘camouflage’ their
social communication difficulties (Attwood, 2007; Lai
et al., 2016) and a lack of behavioural problems
(Dworzynski et al., 2012; Hiller et al., 2014; Mandy
et al., 2012). These behaviours may also place them at
risk of bullying, isolation and rejection (Dean et al.,
2014; Sofronoff, Dark, & Stone, 2011). This not only
limits their opportunities to succeed, but may contrib-
ute to school exclusion.
In England, the exclusion of pupils from school can
take the form of a fixed period exclusion (where the
child is temporarily removed from the school) or a per-
manent exclusion (expulsion). Such steps may be taken
if the child’s behaviour does not conform to the
school’s behaviour policy or causes harm to peers or
staff (Department for Education, 2012). Despite it
being unlawful to exclude children due to their needs
(Department for Education, 2012), children with spe-
cial educational needs (SEN) account for up to seven
of
every
ten
permanent
exclusions
in
England
(Department for Education, 2015). This is a significant
problem for autistic students, with 45% experiencing
school exclusion (Ambitious About Autism, 2016).
These figures may relate to teachers finding autistic stu-
dents hardest to include (Humphrey & Symes, 2013),
citing anxiety over training, knowledge and provision
to successfully facilitate inclusion (Glashan, MacKay,
& Grieve, 2004; Witmer & Ferreri, 2014).
With regard to girls and school exclusion, most of
the literature comes from typically developing students.
Osler, Street, Lall and Vincent (2002) questioned 81
girls regarding their experiences of school exclusion
and found that poor peer interactions impacted upon
the direction of their education. For autistic females,
who may be predisposed to anxiety (Albano & Krain,
2006), the role peer-conflict has upon exclusion is
potentially significant. In another study, Lloyd and
O’Regan (1999) investigated the views of 20 adolescent
girls with experience of exclusion in a variety of
Alternative Provisions (AP: school provisions for chil-
dren who cannot access mainstream education). Whilst
many girls in Lloyd and O’Regan’s (1999) study held
negative recollections of mainstream education, positiv-
ity was expressed about their experiences of AP.
There are some specialist educational provisions for
autistic children who have been excluded from school
(see Brede, Remington, Kenny, Warren & Pellicano,
2016), but the most common AP after exclusion is a
pupil referral unit (PRU) (Lawrence, 2011). PRUs pro-
vide education to children from a variety of back-
grounds, including excluded students, those at risk of
exclusion, those that are ill or those lacking appropriate
school placement (Michael & Frederickson, 2013).
Children with SEN, including autism, are frequently
educated in PRUs (Department for Education, 2016).
PRUs have the benefits of having high staff to pupil
ratios and a smaller, more personalised environment.
However, they also cater for a high number of students
with social, emotional and mental health issues and
exposure to these students may encourage ‘challenging’
or
‘troublesome’
behaviours
in
autistic
students
(Kaplan,
1982).
Although
PRUs
are
considered
short-stay schools, with the ultimate aim of transi-
tioning
children
back
into
mainstream
education
2
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
 (Hart, 2013), this is not always achievable (Lawrence,
2011). In addition, there has been no research assessing
the impact of PRUs on autistic females.
To date, much of the research on the educational
experiences of autistic students relies on the views of
parents and professionals, with children unable to
input on decisions affecting their own lives. This is
most evident regarding secondary education, where
there is little effective consultation with students
(Ben-Arieh, 2005; Clarke, Boorman, & Nind, 2011).
Yet students provide unique insights into the barriers
to, and facilitators of, their educational experiences.
Humphrey and Lewis (2008), for example, found that
anxiety, sensory-sensitivities, bullying and low self-
image contributed to negative secondary school experi-
ences in their sample of 20 autistic boys. More recently,
Dillon, Underwood and Freemantle (2016) reported
how 14 autistic secondary school students (11 boys,
3 girls) were positive about their environment and
appreciated good relationships with staff; reiterating
how calmer atmospheres and positive staff–pupil rela-
tionships are potentially crucial to inclusion (Brede
et al., 2016; Lloyd & O’Regan, 1999; Makin, Hill &
Pellicano,
2017;
Michael
&
Frederickson,
2013;
Robertson, Chamberlain, & Kasari, 2003).
The present study aimed to explore experiences of
school exclusion amongst autistic girls. Few studies
have consulted autistic girls to determine what contrib-
utes to their educational experiences. This is despite
research into women and girls, as well as education
and inclusion, being highlighted as priority areas
by the autism community (Pellicano, Charman, &
Dinsmore, 2014). Thus, by capturing the voices of
excluded autistic girls and their parents, it was hoped
that insight into their experiences of secondary school
education would be provided, adding to knowledge
concerning this under-studied population.
Method
Participants
The study was advertised by contacting PRUs and spe-
cial schools across South East England, and via char-
itable organisations (e.g. the National Autistic Society,
the Autism Education Trust). Autistic girls were invited
to participate if they were of secondary-school age
(11–18 years) and had experienced exclusion from
mainstream secondary education. A total of eight
parent–child dyads took part in the study (including
seven mothers and one father). Six of the girls lived in
single parent (maternal) families and all but one had
siblings. Of the two families whose siblings also held
additional diagnosis, only one was diagnosed with
an autism spectrum condition. The girls were aged
12–17 years (mean ¼ 14.75; SD ¼ 1.51). At the time of
the study, six had received a formal diagnosis of an
autism spectrum condition, one was undergoing assess-
ment (and subsequently received a formal diagnosis)
and one was assessed (by a clinician) as being on the
autism spectrum, but costs prohibited her parents from
securing an official diagnosis. For the seven girls who
had received a formal diagnosis of an autism spectrum
condition, the first author reviewed their educational
files (comprising psychologist reports and medical rec-
ords) to ensure that the girls met DSM-5 (American
Psychiatric
Association,
2013)
or
ICD-10
(World
Health Organisation, 1993) criteria for an autism spec-
trum condition. For the one girl who had not received a
formal diagnosis, her personal records were indicative
of an autism spectrum condition. None of the girls were
in receipt of a Statement of SEN or an Education,
Health and Care Plan (both official documents that
record the educational needs of young people in
England), despite parents attempting to seek formal
acknowledgment of their children’s needs. Four of the
girls were diagnosed with additional conditions: all four
had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD);
two had oppositional defiance disorder (ODD) and
one had dyspraxia. These diagnoses were received in
early childhood, before receiving an autism diagnosis.
Seven of the eight girls were currently situated in
PRUs, with one awaiting placement at an AP due to
recent (parental) withdrawal from school. All girls had
experienced exclusion in some form. Five had experi-
enced permanent exclusion; of these, four had been
placed in other schools (i.e. not the school they had
been excluded from) before their permanent exclusion.
This was undertaken as part of a strategy called a ‘man-
aged move’, in which pupils are sent to a different
school for a fresh start, usually with a set of achievable
targets (Bagley & Hallam, 2016). Similarly, one girl had
experienced a failed managed move, and was currently
situated at the PRU, as it was felt that this provision
was most suited to her needs. Two girls had self-
excluded, with one citing ongoing mental health issues
as a contributing factor.
Materials and procedure
Ethical approval for the study was obtained via the
Departmental Ethics Committee at UCL Institute of
Education. Semi-structured interviews were conducted
in calm environments, at either the resident PRU
(n ¼ 5) or at their home (n ¼ 3). Given the sensitivity
of the interview topic, and the fact that they had not
met the interviewer (KS) before, girls were provided
with the option of having their parent present during
the interview. This proved popular, with seven of the
eight girls opting for this approach. Whilst this may
Sproston et al.
3
 have influenced results (e.g. potentially, the girls could
have been less open about their experiences with their
parent present), the overarching priority was to ensure
that the girls felt safe and comfortable during the inter-
view. Six of the girls excused themselves from their par-
ent’s interview (at their own request), with only two
opting to remain in the room. In all cases, parental
interviews followed the girls’ interviews.
Interview schedules were developed after consulting
similar literature (Humphrey & Lewis, 2008; Tobin
et al., 2012). Interviews began with general rapport
building, in which the purpose of the study and key
ethical information was explained to the participants.
In all interviews, participants were presented with open-
ended questions, followed-up with prompts for further
information, if required. Parents and girls were ques-
tioned about: (a) the current classroom environment
(positive and negative aspects; whether it differs to pre-
vious mainstream environments; and views on the staff
in the current educational provision); (b) experiences of
exclusion from school (the factors leading to the
exclusion, and the exclusion process itself); (c) prior
expectations of their current educational provision
(knowledge of the reasons why the girls were placed
in their current educational provision; views about the
options offered to them, if any; and how they felt about
these options); and (d) the girls’ previous experiences of
mainstream education (positive and negative aspects;
their views on the staff in mainstream schools; and
how they felt mainstream education could be improved
to meet the needs of the girls). Parents were questioned
in the same broad areas but were also asked to reflect
on the impact of the autism diagnostic process upon
their child’s educational journey.
Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed ver-
batim. Interviews ranged in length from 14 to 57 min
for the girls (mean ¼ 31.38, SD ¼ 15.35) and between 30
and 72 min for the parents (mean ¼ 53.13, SD ¼ 13.56).
The length varied based on the nature of the girls’
experiences (e.g. number of exclusions, the range of
APs or strategies offered prior to exclusion), partici-
pants’ levels of sociability, and participants’ willingness
to provide additional information in response to
questions.
The resulting data were analysed, by two of the
authors (FS and LC), using thematic analysis (Braun
& Clarke, 2006). Data were interpreted within an essen-
tialist framework (to report the experiences, meanings
and reality of the participants), using an inductive
(‘bottom-up’) approach (i.e. without integrating the
themes within any pre-existing coding schemes, or pre-
conceptions of the researchers). This involved the
authors independently familiarising themselves with
the data, by reviewing the transcripts to develop an
initial set of themes and sub-themes. The authors met
several times to review these themes and subthemes,
discussing them using a semantic approach (identifying
themes at a ‘surface’ level, without theorizing beyond
the actual content of the data).
Results
Despite the girls and their parents having some differing
perspectives regarding the girls’ education experiences,
similar themes were found across the entire sample,
with (a) inappropriate school environments, (b) ten-
sions in school relationships and (c) problems with
staff responses all contributing to educational experi-
ences (see Figure 1).
Theme 1, Inappropriate School Environments, was
featured across both participant groups, with respond-
ents citing the ‘impersonal’ environment of mainstream
as being contributory to their experience. Difficult sen-
sory environments were commonly discussed, with one
parent remarking that this was akin to ‘psychological
enclosure’ in which ‘you are surrounded by all these
people, all this different noise. . .a big room and lots
of people in it’. Students similarly expressed concerns
regarding sensory demands impacting on their learning
experience: ‘it’s very difficult to learn when there is a lot
of noise going on’. Students also cited class size as a
barrier: ‘it’s very hard [to access support] when there’s
so many children in one place’. Parents reiterated these
concerns: ‘with 30 in a class they don’t offer one to one
support’; and felt it impacted on the girls’ experiences:
‘there’s a lot of people, there’s a lot of fighting for
attention, whether it be in the playground or in the
classroom’. In contrast, there was a sense of relief in
regards to smaller environments with girls explaining
that they were ‘really good ‘cause you do get to
learn. . . [you’re] more focused on what you’re doing’.
Yet transitioning to this environment might be challen-
ging: ‘its smallness could bring more attention on me
and I’m not used to that’.
Although the intimacy of the PRU was a positive
aspect, inappropriate classroom peers presented con-
cern for the girls, who were taught alongside students
with behavioural issues. Girls found this distracting due
to ‘dramas’ that took ‘learning time away from the
pupils who need it’, whilst others found these students
to
be
‘naughty’
and
to
‘bully’
them.
Parents
echoed these comments, explaining that ‘if one of
those people [is] disrupting the class it affects everyone
and it isn’t fair’. Parents felt that little could be done in
this regard, as PRUs were for students ‘who are
naughty at school and misbehave’. Girls felt that the
situation could be improved through greater levels of
teacher-student interactions, as teachers could ‘try to
[do] something the students want to do but at a learning
level as well’. Whilst not all girls and parents shared this
4
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
 view, it highlights that unsuitable peer groups may
threaten – and offset – the benefits of smaller environ-
ments such as the PRU. Indeed, this was a key concern
amongst parents, who were anxious about how these
influences would ‘impact on’ their child ‘because you
hear all these horror stories about PRUs’.
Despite these concerns, the girls valued the alterna-
tive opportunities that the PRU offered (e.g. ‘work
experience’, ‘animal class’, ‘offsite activities’). Girls
felt that such activities helped them progress and
would ‘open up opportunities’ for them. Parents also
sensed value in this type of provision: ‘going off site
and doing things that she wouldn’t normally do. . .she
seems a lot happier’. The girls were also pleased that
PRUs were flexible to their needs; for example, one
student could ‘listen to music to calm down or to
concentrate’. Another felt that the staff ‘understand
where I’m coming from and when I’m angry they
leave me alone’, resulting in areas of conflict being
removed: ‘they don’t moan at you as much. . .when
you’re late or when you’ve got a bit of wrong uni-
form’. Girls also alluded to adaptations not being
accommodated
in
mainstream
education.
As
one
(albeit not at a PRU) noted: ‘The value of being
somewhere where you feel safe, comfortable cannot
be underestimated’. Parents were also pleased that
the curriculum, despite yielding similar outcomes to
mainstream education, appeared to be tailored to
their child’s needs: ‘in mainstream school there isn’t
any of that, it’s normal curriculum and it’s not neces-
sarily helping each individual child, whereas at the
PRU it’s much more geared to the types of situation
that they are in’.
To the girls, the PRU provided ‘really fun ways to
learn’ and alleviated some of the pressures in main-
stream education. The girls were happy that they did
not have to ‘constantly remember things’ or ‘catch-
up’. When questioned why this was, students referred
to the staff: ‘[they] don’t put pressure on you as much,
they’re really relaxed’. Girls also felt able to ask for
support in smaller environments: ‘I can say ‘‘I don’t
get this’’ and they’ll go through it with me . . . it’s
easier because it’s in a smaller class’. The pressure of
mainstream
education
was
most
evident
in
the
responses of girls who had experienced self-exclusion,
with one remarking: ‘I put so much pressure on myself
because they were putting pressure on us’. Some indi-
cated a degree of performance anxiety in class, indicat-
ing a need for support: ‘I felt stupid for putting my
hand up in front of 30 people and asking for help. . .-
people look at you in a funny way’. Although these
fears were apparent in mainstream education, one girl
remarked that they felt it was better in smaller classes as
‘not everyone judges you’.
Parents also expressed concerns about the effect of
pressure on the girls in mainstream environments, stat-
ing that educational messages of: ‘if you are not in
school every lesson, every day, working really hard,
you will fail’ lead to detrimental mental health and
propagate a culture whereby targets are more import-
ant than the individual child: ‘they had targets they
needed to reach, she wasn’t performing to what they
needed her to do’. Another parent explained: ‘Because
the school is under pressure, they pass it down to the
teachers, who are under pressure who pass it down to
the students who are under pressure and that is just
Inappropriate School 
Environments
Difficult sensory 
environments
Classroom peers
Alternative 
opportunities
Pressures in 
mainstream 
education
Tensions in School 
Relationships
Staff 
relationships
Peer 
Relationships
Communication
Problems with Staff 
Responses
Lack of 
understanding
School support
Parent battles
Figure 1. Educational experiences of excluded autistic girls: Themes and subthemes.
Sproston et al.
5
 toxic’. This ‘toxic’ culture was also evident regarding
attendance, with both parents and girls commenting on
its impact. In one case, a child was set an unachievable
attendance target that jeopardised a managed move:
‘I was supposed to get 96% attendance but I’m quite
sick and I had 2% attendance. . .And then I had 60%
but I had a really severe injury and I had two weeks
off’. The parent complained that even though her
daughter’s emotional well-being had improved, this
had hindered a potentially successful transition: ‘if
that managed move was better, she’d still be at that
second school. If the pressure wasn’t so hard and the
attendance [target] wasn’t so high, she would still be
there’.
Although parents of self-excluded girls were ‘desper-
ate’ for their children to attend an educational provi-
sion, they lamented the focus on attendance: ‘[it is]
incredibly stressful to get a text every morning to say
that your child has not attended school’. Some felt that
mainstream provision did not fully understand the rea-
sons behind the students’ absence, with one parent
threatened with prosecution until the child received
medical intervention. Another parent highlighted the
lessened pressure in this regard when their child
attended the PRU: ‘I don’t feel so much of the pressure
about if she’s having a bad day and ringing up and
saying she can’t come in today . . . I felt was going to
break under at the other places’.
This example of parent–school understanding also
highlights the importance of Theme 2: Tensions in
School Relationships. Staff relationships were found to
be one of the most influential aspects regarding the
girls’ educational journeys. Girls were keen to share
positive experiences and all enjoyed it when teachers
took an interest in them as individuals. One appreciated
it when ‘they always say ‘‘Morning’’ and see how you
are throughout the day’ and another was pleased with
how ‘they always ask me what I’ve done and how I’ve
got on’. This approachability seemed to inspire teacher
confidence and enabled those who felt unable to seek
support (in mainstream) to do so: ‘I can kind of ask
them anything. . .we have a bond’. Students felt this
friendliness levelled the power dynamic: ‘because they
were more like students, than actual teachers’. It also
helped them feel valued: ‘they’ll make time for you,
which I really like because it makes you feel like they
actually care’. Girls viewed mainstream teachers who
had similar attitudes favourably: ‘I did like a few of the
teachers . . . there are some teachers that I became quite
close with’; as well as those who offered support:
‘there’s one teacher there who’s always try[ing] to help’.
Despite these positive relationships, there were sev-
eral examples of staff–student conflicts. Some were rela-
tively minor: ‘she just nitpicks. . .I sit sideways with my
back on the wall and she doesn’t like that’. Other girls
expressed general dislike, with comments such as:
‘the teachers annoy me’, ‘they didn’t understand me’
and ‘some [teachers] were really grumpy’. Others tried
to justify the reasoning behind their response, giving
further insight into their relationship with staff: ‘Some
of them I really hated. . .with mainstream schools espe-
cially there’s so many more different teachers. . .there’s
just more of an option for having people you don’t
like’; or commented on a breakdown of relationships:
‘some of them did try to help but then they gave up and
I didn’t like that’. Girls also alluded to teacher expect-
ations causing conflict: ‘they had high expectation of
me and they were like ‘‘why didn’t you finish that
work’’ and I’m like ‘‘I wasn’t feeling very well today’’
and they’re like ‘‘I don’t care’’. . .’ Some teachers
exposed students to ridicule in front of their peers
‘and often make an example of you in front of the
class’. This meant girls felt threatened, as if the teachers
were on: ‘a power trip and feel like they need to impose
themselves on everyone and you need to do exactly
what they say’. This placed barriers in their relation-
ships, and it caused the girls to internalise their experi-
ences: ‘I felt that they were all judging me when I got
into lessons and they’d all give me funny looks’; causing
apathy in establishing relationships: ‘if you want to ask
them a question they would ignore you. . .then it made
me feel a bit low because I wouldn’t ask for help cause
they wouldn’t really listen’. Despite these setbacks, girls
still desired a relationship with their teachers with one
despairing that: ‘they just really didn’t get to know me’.
Others commented that they liked feeling valued by the
staff: ‘being listened to. . .it’s nice when teachers get to
know the students because you get to know what they
like’, which they felt unachievable with such negative
interactions. Parents were acutely aware of the import-
ance
and
nature
of
student–teacher
relationships
and gave insight into areas that the girls neglected.
One parent reflected on how her child was exposed to
shouting as ‘she hadn’t covered her history book in
plastic’, which resulted in her withdrawal from educa-
tion. One parent also recalled an incident in which their
child had disclosed their SEN but was told ‘no, you’re
just lazy’.
Both girls and parents were also aware of the impact
peer
relationships
had
on
the
school
experience.
Bullying was an issue, with examples of social bullying:
‘I was a bitch for talking to other girls and being friends
with them and that I was abandoning them and betray-
ing them’; and physical bullying: ‘someone threw my
lunch round the room’. This caused the girls to retali-
ate: ‘I’d throw chairs at them, only once but then that
boy had been winding me up’; or withdraw: ‘I ended up
not responding at all because I didn’t feel like entering
that situation’. Parents were also aware to the impact of
bullying: ‘she was bullied daily, which ended up with
6
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
 her reacting, her reactions weren’t great’; and its rela-
tion to exclusion: ‘obviously the bullying, her assaulting
people or people doing to her ended up with her show-
ering the teacher [with pencils]’.
One parent was also concerned about how their
daughter’s desire to make friends put her in risky situ-
ations: ‘she was being groomed by an older pupil and
told to [do] naughty things like hold my baccy [tobacco]’.
Girls valued belonging: ‘nice to know you belong in a
group’. Nevertheless, adolescence is a difficult time (for
anyone) and the social difficulties associated with autism
may result in social isolation. One girl felt ‘angry and
annoyed’ at her inability to make friends. Another tried
to escape social rejection by making herself: ‘sound bet-
ter. . .so that they wouldn’t bully me’, which was unsuc-
cessful. However, girls did enjoy the social aspect of their
school lives and were pleased if they found positive,
albeit small, social groups in which they identified: ‘I
gained two very special friends . . . I have very close rela-
tionships with them individually’.
Whilst the girls’ experiences came from their every-
day interactions, parents’ main source of feedback
came from the school. Communication was a key
sub-theme, with parents calling for improvements
across all educational provisions (including main-
stream schools and PRUs). Parents disliked negative
contact, citing how they ‘dread[ed] the phone calls
from mainstream, because it’s only if there is an
issue’ and were eager for ‘positive confirmation as
well, you want your children to be happy’. Parents
were also dismayed when educational provisions did
not listen to their feedback, especially regarding their
children’s vulnerabilities: ‘I specifically said that she
wasn’t allowed to go out at lunchtime . . . I drove
past her when she was out one time’. In one instance,
a lack of consideration for a parental request for help
went unnoticed: ‘I called them up desperate for help,
and they could have told me [about what was happen-
ing] in any one of those conversations and they
didn’t’, leading to the child’s eventual exclusion from
the school. Parents also felt a sense of isolation once
their child was excluded: ‘I did feel like we were just
left to do whatever. . . there was no communication at
all’; having to rely on their own initiative to secure
resources: ‘I’ve had to phone them up and tell them
that she has a right to an education and I need some
work sent home for her’. If communication is effect-
ive, parents feel reassured about their children’s pro-
gress: If I had a problem with her at home that would
affect her day at school, I know I can ring up the
school . . . And if there is a problem at school they
can contact me so the communications always there.
One parent stated: ‘I think it’s the line of communi-
cation that makes you feel supported and it’s always
open which is very important in any aspect of life’.
Girls and parents voiced concerns in regards to
Theme 3: Problems with Staff Responses. Girls felt
that the staff’s lack of understanding of their individual
needs contributed to their experience. For example,
staff demonstrated limited understanding of the girls’
coping strategies: ‘I had music playing, it gave me the
distance I needed . . . I think that was one of the first
places conflicts with authority took place, because
you aren’t allowed music in school’. This was cited by
the students as contributory to their exclusion. One girl
explained that she was ‘out of lessons walking the
corridor sometimes blasting music out’. Another girl
related how promises of support were not upheld: the
head of year said ‘‘I promise if anything else happens
there I’ll send you home’’ . . . I had a very severe panic
attack when I was in the office . . . They phoned up the
teacher and said ‘‘I have her here in full meltdown
mode’’. . . and they just said ‘‘go back to your lesson,
you’re over reacting’’ . . . ’. The parent was similarly fru-
strated at the limited understanding displayed in this
instance, stating: ‘[they] really don’t understand how
she’s
feeling
at
all. . .they
would
just
say. . .‘‘stop
making yourself sick, we’re not going to send you
home’’. . .’. The parent of another child, who was also
severely affected by anxiety, tried to rationalise the
experience: ‘[whilst] they tried very hard to help . . . the
lack of understanding . . . really hurts them’. This was
often attributed to limited teacher knowledge as to
why anxiety was expressed; as one girl explained:
‘most innocuous things to everyone else . . . they were
normal but they affected me much worse than they
affected everyone else’. Another girl acknowledged
that ‘teachers can’t have knowledge of how every class-
room dynamic works and how every relationship
between students work’ but felt that the lack of this
understanding ‘makes you vulnerable’.
Experiences considered to be ‘frankly terrifying’
were common amongst the groups, with students and
their parents feeling that these incidents encouraged the
externalisation of anxiety and were contributory factors
to school exclusion: ‘[we] need somebody in a main-
stream school that is knowledgeable of children with
special needs and understands them’; ‘know how to
deal with people like me, with my disabilities, my prob-
lems and other people’s problems and what they have
as well’. However, there are concerns as to the number
of SEN-experienced school staff: ‘just one person in a
massive secondary school who was absolutely drown-
ing’. The girls noted that if they had access to ‘someone
they felt comfortable talking to’, it would have made a
difference to their ability to succeed: ‘I feel that would
have helped me so much’.
Despite calls for help, school support was deemed
unhelpful. Girls who were provided with the opportun-
ity to use SEN support were either chastised for using it
Sproston et al.
7
 too often: ‘I got told off for going to the place where
I got support too much’; felt isolated by the experience:
‘[they] shove you in the corner of the isolation room’; or
felt that it was ineffective: ‘I ended up not using them
because I found something more effective’. Some par-
ents felt that schools were frightened by the level of
support required: ‘she does need a lot of support’; or
placed barriers in accessing appropriate support: ‘I had
asked if she could go somewhere on her own to do her
[practice exams]. . .they [said] they’ve changed the rules,
you can only have it if you have medical evidence’.
However, in-class support assistants were appreciated
by some of the girls, who reported that these staff ‘don’t
just benefit me [they] benefit the class’. Conversely,
some girls felt that they interfered with their learning:
‘she would be doing the work for me but not telling me
how to do it’.
Similarly, support during transitions (i.e. prior to, or
following, school exclusion or withdrawal) was viewed
as either unsuitable or non-existent. Reduced time-
tables (in which students are given a bespoke timetable,
generally reduced in contact time) were applied to sev-
eral of girls, as a strategy to alleviate the more social
parts of the curriculum. Whilst this was successful for
some: ‘[it] completely cut out the social side of educa-
tion, so in free periods or times where I didn’t have
lessons I could leave the school, which was really valu-
able’; others found that it was unhelpful: ‘[they] gave
me options to do a part-time timetable but that
just wasn’t going to work for me because I’m quite all
or nothing’. Managed moves were also used as a
tactic to remove the child from their current educa-
tional provision, to give them a fresh start, but the out-
come of this was compromised by setting unachievable
targets on attendance or due to altercations that led to
their exclusion, for example: ‘there was this girl there
who was supposed to be my friend, she was on
the [autism spectrum], and she told a teacher that
I [swore at her]’. A student was also given temporary
respite at a PRU, but their parent noted that the origi-
nal school she attended was averse to her return and
kept providing conflicting information: ‘they kept mes-
sing her about saying yes she can go back, no she can’t’.
Following exclusion from school, parents expressed
concern about the long delays (up to 3 months) that it
took to access AP, with no set work provided in the
meantime: ‘They didn’t contact us to find out how she
was doing or anything. . .they just sort of washed their
hands of her, dumped her and said that’s where you are
going and that was that’. Parents were also anxious as
to the impact this had on their children’s well-being:
‘it’s not acceptable . . . it affects you socially, mentally,
emotionally and physically . . . she wasn’t socialising,
she wasn’t learning’. Only two girls were offered any
support through the transitional period, but these
arrangements were unsuitable. One girl stated: I got
the choice of returning to [school A] which is my first
mainstream and being home tutored . . . 5 hours a week,
I’ve been told I’m quite smart and . . . I need mental
stimulation so I decided I give the PRU [a chance].
The other girl remarked: ‘home schooling or home
tutoring [were offered] but those things just didn’t
really work ‘cause I couldn’t get out of bed to go down-
stairs and do work’.
Notably, parent battles were prominent in trying to
secure appropriate school for their children with one
parent stating: ‘We didn’t get any support and anything
that was initiated was initiated by myself’. Parents had
to contact agencies themselves due to limited school
support: ‘I spoke to [the] education inclusion [service]
myself on several occasions to try and find a best way
forward for her’. However, in some cases, parents were
unsure of the effectiveness of the support: ‘if I couldn’t
understand what was going on what hope did they have
really?’ Some parents also felt that barriers were placed
in the way of achieving success for their child, without
considering their needs: ‘[the school] set the bar in the
same place for a child with no difficulties. . .it was just
setting her up to fail’. Parents of autistic girls frequently
face challenges in securing an accurate diagnosis, and
understanding what this means for their child, and may
result in parents feeling isolated: ‘never been any sup-
port for us as parents’; ‘because I didn’t have that
support I did feel failed. We were just left on our own
to deal with it basically’. A strong desire for support,
to have someone to talk to ‘just even a shoulder to
cry on’ was indicative across all parent interviews.
Additionally, one parent identified that it is also
important for parents ‘to understand teachers a bit
better, because I think parents don’t understand how
much pressure teachers are under’. It was thought that
this could improve working relationships and poten-
tially avoid an oppositional stance when communica-
tion breaks down.
Discussion
Interviewing excluded adolescent autistic girls and their
parents provided insights into which factors contribu-
ted to the girls’ educational experiences. We found that
three key themes (inappropriate school environments,
tensions in school relationships and problems with staff
responses) influenced the direction of the girls’ educa-
tional journeys.
With regard to school environments, participants
valued the intimacy of the PRU. Whilst PRUs are
not designed for (and should not be used as a destin-
ation for) vulnerable autistic children, it was seen to
offer some protection from the sensory demands
found in mainstream education (Lloyd & O’Regan,
8
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
 1999; Michael & Frederickson, 2013). For autistic
children, an inability to effectively digest the sensory
environment may cause disruption to daily routines
(Schaff, Toth-Cohen, Johnson, Outten, & Benevides,
2011)
and
lead
to
withdrawal
or
aggression
(Bogdashina, 2016). It has also been linked to academic
achievement (Ashburner, Ziviani, & Rodger, 2008).
Mainstream schools should therefore be mindful to
the sensory needs of their students to enable effective
inclusion.
Flexible environments were beneficial in this regard.
When provisions were more accepting of the girls’ use
of coping strategies and actively sought to alleviate bar-
riers (e.g. uniform, lateness), engagement increased (see
also Dillon et al., 2016). The girls and their parents
were also appreciative of the experience-driven curricu-
lum of the PRU, which provided opportunities for the
girls to actively use their interests and take part in work
experience.
Such
opportunities
help
socio-cultural
development (Stern, 2012) and could protect against
poorer outcomes in later life (Howlin, 2013). Whilst it
would be harder to implement such initiatives in main-
stream schools (which have higher student numbers
than provisions such as PRUs), there may be scope
to preferentially offer such opportunities to vulnerable
students
(including
autistic
girls)
in
mainstream
schools.
Academic pressures also impacted the girls’ experi-
ences. Girls frequently referred to performance anxiety
and, whilst this is not solely an autistic trait, a feminine
predisposition to anxiety (Albano & Krain, 2006;
McLean, Asnaani, Litz, & Hoffman, 2011) may be
enhanced by the social difficulties experienced by aut-
istic students. Parents were equally aware of the pres-
sure faced by their children, lamenting that schools
were more concerned with meeting attendance and
achievement targets than their children’s well-being.
Although Sammons et al. (2014) suggest a positive cor-
relation between attendance and achievement, schools
should aim to understand reasons behind absence,
rather than applying pressure upon individuals who
are at higher risk of school refusal (Heyne & Sauter,
2013). Educational establishments should also not
ignore
other
statistically
significant
indicators
of
achievement (e.g. consistent behaviour policies, an
emphasis on learning and the value of pupils) in
their ethos (Sammons et al., 2014). If this is not
addressed, these vulnerable individuals will not achieve
inclusion.
Although adapting the environment is helpful for
autistic girls, the quality of interactions in educational
provisions was crucial to the success of inclusion, as
highlighted in the second theme, ‘Tensions in School
Relationships’.
Whilst
concerns
have
been
raised
about the impact of social difficulties on peer rejection
(Hebron & Humphrey, 2014; McLennan et al., 1993;
Sofronoff et al., 2011), autistic girls in this study were
not socially de-motivated (cf. Chevallier, Molesworth,
& Happe
´ , 2012) and enjoyed the company of small peer
groups (see also Sedgewick et al., 2015). To aid in iden-
tifying appropriate peer groups and preventing girls
from experiencing the long-term effects of social-isola-
tion (Dean et al., 2014; Hart, 2013), it may be helpful
for schools to develop children’s social skills using
socially motivated educational strategies (Moyse &
Porter, 2015; Myles & Simpson, 2001). Yet whilst
peer conflict was commonly reported in the interviews,
it was the attitudes of school staff that were of particu-
lar significance to the process of exclusion.
Teachers and school staff who demonstrated flexible,
accepting and approachable attitudes were viewed as
more inclusive than those who did not. Teachers have
considerable influence over the school experience, for
they (outside of parents) are one of the most significant
presences in a child’s life (Hewitt, 2007; Woolfson &
Brady,
2009).
When
teachers
harbour
poor
pre-
conceptions of difference, it can lead to detrimental
outcomes
for
SEN
children
(Sciutto,
Richwine,
Mentrikoski, & Niedzwiecki, 2012) and enhance con-
flict (Wainscot, Naylor, Suitcliffe, Tantan, & Williams,
2008). Further, whilst teachers’ prior knowledge of
SEN
may
encourage
attitudes
towards
inclusion
(Avramidis, Bayliss, & Burden, 2000; Park & Chitiyo,
2011; Robertson et al., 2003), this may not be inte-
grated within their practice (Woolfson & Brady,
2009). It is therefore important for efforts to be directed
towards ensuring that teachers have positive attitudes
towards their autistic pupils and that this translates into
practice. If not, the negative interactions evident in the
girls responses will continue to feature, and could have
detrimental knock-on effects (e.g. on their mental
health) (May, Cornish, & Rinehart, 2014).
Communication was central to the parental experi-
ence. Parents reported that when efficient communica-
tive strategies were used, this increased their confidence
in the school’s ability to include their child (see also
Tobias, 2009; Tobin et al., 2012). Despite the benefits
of establishing relationships with parents, parents
reported a distinct absence of efforts to do so across
educational provisions. Parents felt that schools often
communicated poorly or were unresponsive to requests
for support. Further, some parents began to fear
incoming school phone calls due to their negativity
(see also Dillon et al., 2016). If schools perpetuate nega-
tive interactions with families, parents feel isolated and
worry that they are considered ‘bad’ parents (Tobin
et al., 2012). Although busy educational environments
(especially in mainstream schools) may prohibit con-
sistent contact, schools must include families in their
children’s educational experiences. Communication is
Sproston et al.
9
 indicative of satisfaction for SEN families (Porter,
Georgeson, Daniels, Martin, & Feiler, 2014), so schools
should
persevere
in
establishing
good
working
relationships.
This absence of communication highlights an under-
current of the third theme, ‘Problems with Staff
Responses’. Girls reported that staff were often unable
to understand their needs, which led to conflict and
restricted access to support. While it may be easier to
identify crisis in autistic boys (due to their more overt
presentation) (May et al., 2014; Wagner, 2006), schools
must not judge children based on preconceptions.
While the current study did not assess the girls’ anxiety,
many in the sample expressed fears over performance,
peer acceptance and an increased perception of differ-
ence during classroom activities (see also Helverschou,
Bakken, & Martinsen, 2011; White, Bray, & Ollendick,
2012). For autistic girls undergoing the stress of
adolescence, this can potentially lead to detrimental
outcomes, such as the externalisation of this internal
stress (Kleinhansa et al., 2008). This can manifest
in withdrawal, panic attacks or aggression, which
could
be
missconstrued
as
behavioural
problems
(Helverschou et al., 2011) and possibly lead to exclu-
sion. It is important, therefore, for schools to adopt
more inclusive strategies for autistic students (especially
girls) to allow them to cope without fear of retribution.
Whilst both the girls and their parents expressed a
desire for more targeted support, it was felt that an
increased presence of knowledgeable staff that could
listen and understand their needs would have been
beneficial. Although supporting autism is to become a
stronger feature in initial teacher training in England
(from 2018; Department for Education, 2016), this
needs to address areas in which autistic students are
most vulnerable to improve inclusion for all.
It is also important that educationalists address the
quality of support offered before and after exclusion.
Girls and parents both felt that, currently, what the
schools provided was either unhelpful or non-existent.
Before exclusion, girls experienced either reduced time-
tables, managed moves or a combination of these.
Whilst reduction in contact time was initially success-
ful, it did not prevent their withdrawal from education.
Similarly, girls on managed moves were initially posi-
tive about this option, but were given unachievable tar-
gets
that
eventually
contributed
towards
their
exclusion. Following school exclusion, support from
the school largely vanished, with only two children
being offered home tuition (which was unsuitable for
their academic needs). This lack of consideration
regarding transitional stages further isolated families
from educational opportunities and heightened the
anxiety of the girls and their parents. It is therefore
recommended that, if exclusion from school is the
only option, post-exclusion transition plans are devel-
oped; to help mitigate against the substantial negative
outcomes associated with school exclusion.
Whilst the results of the current study highlight sev-
eral important factors regarding the school exclusion
experiences of autistic girls, the themes identified from
the interviews are not specific to girls. Although there is
a strong need to focus research efforts on girls and
women on the autism spectrum (Pellicano et al.,
2014), inappropriate school environments, a lack of
staff understanding and breakdowns in relationships
have been repeatedly raised by parents and young aut-
istic people (mostly boys) in other studies, albeit
in different environments (e.g. Brede et al., 2016;
Makin et al., 2017). Future studies could investigate
if/how variables such as social anxiety and friendship
affect exclusion in girls compared to boys, as while the
overall themes may be similar, the fine-grained content
may differ. For example, while both boys and girls
on the autism spectrum can face difficulties with
peer relationships and mental health, the form these
difficulties
take
are
gender-dependent;
with
girls
facing more relational conflict and anxiety, as in the
neurotypical
population
(Albano
&
Krain,
2006;
Crick & Grotpeter, 1995).
It is also important to address the limitations of this
research. Girls were difficult to source; given the prob-
lems with accurately diagnosing autism in females
(Gould & Ashton-Smith, 2011), and the fact we were
sampling a very specific sub-group of this population
(autistic girls who had been excluded from school). This
resulted in the inclusion of one student who had not
received a confirmed autism diagnosis. This is, how-
ever, likely to be a common occurrence in autistic
girls who are frequently undiagnosed (either through
a lack of identification, costs or due to issues with a
male biased presentation; Gould & Ashton-Smith,
2011). The lack of a confirmed diagnosis does not
necessarily mean that this participant should have
been excluded from the study; professionals had recog-
nised her high levels of autistic traits, but her parents
had opted not to pursue the referral further.
It is also likely that the girls taking part in this study
– who had confirmed diagnoses and were excluded
from mainstream provision – represent a specific sub-
group of girls on the spectrum. This is because many
autistic girls are overlooked altogether, and those
who are identified may remain in their original educa-
tional provision. Whilst this limits the generalizability
of these findings, the fact that the themes identified
from the interviews so strongly echo those of earlier
studies (e.g. Brede et al., 2016) supports the idea that
they are not entirely unique to this group (despite these
girls potentially having a more ‘severe’ presentation and
symptomology than other autistic girls).
10
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
 A further limitation is the absence of a comparison
group of typically developing girls to distinguish nuan-
ces in the autistic experience. A study on exclusion
experiences of typically developing girls (Osler, 2006)
highlighted similar themes to those identified in this
study (e.g. interpersonal conflict, lack of support).
However, without a comparison group, it is not pos-
sible to determine whether factors such as autistic
symptoms, co-occurring mental health issues or even
teacher’s
attitudes
or
behaviours
towards
autistic
girls, differ significantly from the neurotypical student
population.
Conclusion
Consulting excluded autistic girls and their parents per-
mitted insights into a relatively understudied area
and several recommendations can be proposed. First,
research needs to explore how mainstream schools can
adopt the flexibility seen in AP into their practice. This
will not be easy, as mainstream schools have less spe-
cialised teachers and larger class sizes (and therefore
larger teacher–pupil ratios). However, it appears to be
essential for successful inclusion. Second, educational
provision should actively promote positive, inclusive
attitudes in their staff. Importantly, this needs to
come from school leaders, who are best placed to influ-
ence the ethos of their staff (e.g. Charman et al., 2011;
Horrocks, White, & Roberts, 2008). Schools must also
try to establish positive relationships with families; not
only to reduce the burden placed on them but also to
access their valuable knowledge (McNerney, Hill &
Pellicano, 2015). Finally, it is recommended that – if
exclusion from school is the only remaining option –
educational establishments develop efficient transition
plans (for before and after exclusion). This should be
implemented for all children, but especially those on the
autism spectrum; to protect these individuals and their
families from the detrimental impact of exclusion from
school.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Liz Pellicano for helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial sup-
port for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: Research at the Centre for Research in Autism and
Education (CRAE) is supported by Pears Foundation.
Note
1. There has been a longstanding debate regarding the way
autism is – and should be – described. In this article, we
use both identity-first language (i.e. autistic boys and girls)
as well as person-first language (i.e. boys and girls on
the autism spectrum) to respect this diversity of views
(see Kenny et al., 2016).
References
Albano, A. M., & Krain, A. (2006). Anxiety and anxiety dis-
orders in girls. In D. J. Bell, S. L. Foster & E. J. Mash
(Eds.), Handbook of behavioral and emotional problems in
girls (pp. 79–116). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers.
Ambitious About Autism. (2016). When will we learn?
London, UK: Ambitious About Autism.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical
manual
of
mental
disorders
(5th
ed.).
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Ashburner, J., Ziviani, J., & Rodger, S. (2008). Sensory pro-
cessing and classroom emotional, behavioral, and educa-
tional outcomes in children with autism spectrum disorder.
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 62(6),
564–573.
Attwood, T. (2007). The complete guide to Asperger syndrome.
London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Avramidis, E., Bayliss, P., & Burden, R. (2000). A survey into
mainstream teachers’ attitudes towards the inclusion of
Children with Special Educational Needs in the Ordinary
School in one Local Education Authority. Educational
Psychology, 20(2), 191–211.
Bagley, C., & Hallam, S. (2016). Young people’s and parent’s
perceptions of managed moves. Emotional and Behavioural
Difficulties, 21, 205–227.
Ben-Arieh, A. (2005). Where are the children? Children’s role
in measuring and monitoring their well-being. Social
Indicators Research, 74, 573–596.
Bogdashina, O. (2016). Sensory perception issues in autism and
Asperger
syndrome.
London,
UK:
Jessica
Kingsley
Publishers.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in
psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2),
77–101.
Brede, J., Remington, A., Kenny, L., Warren, K., &
Pellicano, E. (2016). Back to school: Paving the path to
re-integration for autistic children previously excluded
from education. UCL London: Centre for Research in
Autism and Education.
Charman, T., Pellicano, E., Peacey, L. V., Peacey, N.,
Forward, K., & Dockrell, J. (2011). AET report: What is
good practice in autism education? IOE London: Centre for
Research in Autism and Education.
Chevallier,
C.,
Molesworth,
C.,
&
Happe
´ ,
F.
(2012).
Diminished social motivation negatively impacts reputa-
tion management: Autism spectrum disorders as a case
in point. PLoS One, 7(1), 1–6.
Clarke, G., Boorman, G., & Nind, M. (2011). ‘If they don’t
listen I shout, and when I shout they listen’: hearing the
voices of girls with behavioural, emotional and social
Sproston et al.
11
 difficulties. British Educational Research Journal, 37(5),
765–780.
Crick, N. R., & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995). Relational aggres-
sion, gender, and social-psychological adjustment. Child
Development, 66, 710–722.
Dean, M., Kasari, C., Shih, W., Frankel, F., Whitney, R.,
Landa, R., . . . Harwood, R. (2014). The peer relationships
of girls with ASD at school: comparison to boys and girls
with and without ASD. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 55(11), 1218–1225.
Department for Education. (2012). Exclusion from maintained
schools, academies and pupil referral units in England: A
guide for those with legal responsibilities in relation to exclu-
sion. London, UK.
Department
for
Education.
(2015).
Permanent
and
fixed
period
exclusions
in
England:
2013
to
2014.
London, UK.
Department for Education. (2016). SEN absence and exclu-
sions: national and local authority tables. London, UK.
Dillon, G. V., Underwood, J. D., & Freemantle, L. J. (2016).
Autism and the U.K. secondary school experience. Focus
on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 31(3),
221–230.
Dworzynski, K., Ronald, A., Bolton, P., & Happe
´ , F. (2012).
How different are girls and boys above and below the
diagnostic
threshold
for
autism
spectrum
disorders?
Journal
of
the
American
Academy
of
Child
and
Adolescent Psychology, 51(8), 788–797.
Glashan, L., MacKay, G., & Grieve, A. (2004). Teachers’
experience of support in the mainstream education of
pupils with autism. Improving Schools, 7(1), 49–60.
Gould, J., & Ashton-Smith, J. (2011). Missed diagnosis or
misdiagnosis? Girls and women on the autism spectrum.
Good Autism Practice (GAP), 12(1), 34–41.
Hart, N. (2013). What helps children in a pupil referral unit
(PRU)? An exploration into the potential protective fac-
tors of a PRU as identified by children and staff.
Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties, 18(2), 196–212.
Hebron,
J.,
&
Humphrey,
N.
(2014).
Mental
health
difficulties among young people on the autistic spectrum
in mainstream secondary schools: a comparative study.
Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 14(1),
22–32.
Helverschou, S. B., Bakken, T. L., & Martinsen, H. (2011).
Psychiatric disorders in people with autism spectrum dis-
orders phenomology and recognition. In J. L. Matson &
P. Sturmey (Eds.), International handbook of autism and
pervasive developmental disorders (pp. 53–76). New York:
Springer.
Hendrickx, S. (2015). Women and girls with autism spectrum
disorder. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Hewitt, J. P. (2007). Self and society. Boston, USA: Allyn and
Bacon.
Heyne, D. A., & Sauter, F. M. (2013). School refusal. In C.
A. Essau & T. H. Ollendick (Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell
handbook of the treatment of childhood and adolescent anx-
iety (pp. 472–517). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd.
Hiller, R. M., Young, R. L., & Weber, N. (2014). Sex differ-
ences in autism spectrum disorder based on DSM-5
criteria: Evidence from clinician and teacher reporting.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 41, 1381–1393.
Holtmann, M., Bo
¨ lte, S., & Poustka, F. (2007). Autism spec-
trum disorders: sex differences in autistic behaviour
domains and coexisting psychopathology. Developmental
Medicine & Child Neurology, 49(5), 361–366.
Horrocks, J. L., White, G., & Roberts, L. (2008). Principals’
attitudes regarding inclusion of children with autism in
Pennsylvania public
schools. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 38(8), 1462–1473.
Howlin, P. (2013). Social disadvantage and exclusion: Adults
with autism lag far behind in employment prospects.
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 52(9), 897–899.
Hsiao, M.-N., Tseng, W.-L., Huang, H.-Y., & Gau, S. S.-F.
(2013). Effects of autistic traits on social and school
adjustment in children and adolescents: The moderating
roles of age and gender. Research in Developmental
Disabilities, 34, 254–265.
Humphrey, N., & Lewis, S. (2008). ‘Make me normal’: The
views and experiences of pupils on the autistic spectrum in
mainstream secondary schools. Autism, 12(1), 23–46.
Humphrey, N., & Symes, W. (2013). Inclusive education for
pupils with autistic spectrum disorders in secondary main-
stream schools: teacher attitudes, experience and know-
ledge. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 17(1),
32–46.
Kaplan, H. B. (1982). Deviant behaviour and self-enhance-
ment in adolesence. In M. Rosenberg & H. B. Kaplan
(Eds.),
Social
psychology
of
the
self-concept
(pp. 466–482). Illinois, USA: Harlan Davidson Inc.
Kenny, L., Hattersley, C., Molins, B., Buckley, C., Povey, C.,
& Pellicano, E. (2016). Which terms should be used to
describe autism? Perspectives from the UK autism com-
munity. Autism, 20(4), 442–462.
Kleinhansa, N. M., Richards, T., Weaver, K., Johnson, L. C.,
Greenson,
J.,
Dawson,
G., . . . Aylward,
E.
(2008).
Association between amygdala response to emotional
faces and social anxiety in autism spectrum disorders.
Neuropsychologia, 48, 3665–3670.
Kim, Y. S., Leventhal, B. L., Koh, Y. J., Fombonne, E.,
Laska,
E.,
Lim,
E.
C., . . . Grinker,
R.
R.
(2011).
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders in a total popu-
lation sample. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168,
904–912.
Koenig, K., & Tsatsanis, K. D. (2006). Pervasive develop-
mental disorders in girls. In D. J. Bell, S. L. Foster & E.
J. Mash (Eds.), Handbook of behavioral and emotional
problems in girls (pp. 211–238). New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Kreiser, N. L., & White, S. W. (2014). ASD in females: Are
we overstating the gender difference in diagnosis? Clinical
Child Family Psychology, 17, 67–84.
Lai, M.-C., Lombardo, M. V., Auyeung, B., & Baron-Cohen,
B. C. (2015). Sex/gender differences and autism: Setting
the scene for future research. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 54(1), 11–24.
Lai, M.-C., Lombardo, M. V., Pasco, G., Ruigrok, A. N.,
Wheelwright, S. J., Sadek, S. A., . . . Baron-Cohen, S.
(2011). A behavioral comparison of male and female
12
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
 adults with high functioning autism spectrum conditions.
PLoS ONE, 6(6), 1–10.
Lai,
M.-C.,
Lombardo,
M.
V.,
Ruigrok,
A.
N.
V.,
Chakrabarti,
B.,
Auyeung,
B.,
Szatmari,
P., . . . Consortium, MRC AIMS (2016). Quantifying and
exploring camouflaging in men and women with autism.
Autism. Retrieved from http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
full/10.1177/1362361316671012.
Lawrence, N. (2011). What makes for a successful re-integra-
tion from a pupil referral unit to mainstream education?
An applied research project. Educational Psychology in
Practice, 27(3), 213–226.
Lloyd, G., & O’Regan, A. (1999). Education for social exclu-
sion? Issues to do with the effectiveness of educational
provision for young women with ‘social, emotional and
behavioural
difficulties’.
Emotional
and
Behavioural
Difficulties, 4(2), 38–46.
Makin, C., Hill, V., & Pellicano, E. (2017). The primary-to-
secondary
school
transition
for
children
on
the
autism
spectrum:
A
multi-informant
mixed-methods
study. Autism & Developmental Language Impairments, 2,
1-18.
Mandy, W., Chilvers, R., Chowdhury, U., Salter, G., Seigal,
A., & Skuse, D. (2012). Sex differences in autism spectrum
disorder: Evidence from a large sample of children and
adolescents.
Journal
of
Autism
and
Developmental
Disorders, 42, 1304–1313.
May, T., Cornish, K., & Rinehart, N. (2014). Does gender
matter? A one year follow-up of autistic, attention and
anxiety
symptoms
in
high-functioning
children
with
autism
spectrum
disorder.
Journal
of
Autism
and
Developmental Disorders, 44, 1077–1086.
McLean, C. P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B. T., & Hofmann, S. G.
(2011).
Gender
differences
in
anxiety
disorders:
Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of
illness. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45, 1027–1035.
McLennan, J. D., Lord, C., & Schopler, E. (1993). Sex dif-
ferences in higher functioning people with autism. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 23, 218–227.
McNerney, C., Hill, V., & Pellicano, E. (2015). Choosing a
secondary school for young people on the autism spec-
trum: a multi-informant study. International Journal of
Inclusive Education, 19(10), 1096–1116.
Michael, S., & Frederickson, N. (2013). Improving pupil
referral unit outcomes: pupil perspectives. Emotional and
Behavioural Difficulties, 18(4), 407–422.
Moyse, R., & Porter, J. (2015). The experience of the hidden
curriculum
for
autistic
girls
at mainstream
primary
schools. European Journal of Special Needs Education,
30(2), 187–201.
Myles, B. S., & Simpson, R. L. (2001). Understanding the
hidden curriculum: An essential social skill for children
and
youth
with
Asperger’s
disorder.
Intervention
in
School and Clinic, 36(5), 279–286.
Osler, A. (2006). Excluded girls: interpersonal, institutional
and
structural
violence
in
schooling.
Gender
and
Education, 18(6), 571–589.
Osler, A., Street, C., Lall, M., & Vincent, K. (2002). Not a
problem? Girls and exclusion from school. New Policy
Institute
and
Centre
for
Citizenship
Studies
in
Education, University of Leicester. Leicester: Joseph
Rowntree Foundation.
Park, M., & Chitiyo, M. (2011). An examination of teacher
attitudes
towards
children
with
autism.
Journal
of
Research in Special Educational Needs, 11(1), 70–78.
Pellicano, E., Dinsmore, A., & Charman, T. (2014). What
should autism research focus upon? Community views
and priorities from the United Kingdom. Autism, 18(7),
756–770.
Porter, J., Georgeson, J., Daniels, H., Martin, S., & Feiler, A.
(2014). Reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils: what
support do parents want for their child? European Journal
of Special Needs Education, 28(1), 1–18.
Ranson, N. J., & Byrne, M. K. (2014). Promoting peer
acceptance of females with higher-functioning autism in
a mainstream education setting: A replication and exten-
sion of the effects of an autism anti-stigma program.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 44,
2778–2796.
Riley-Hall, E. (2012). Education. In E. Riley-Hall (Ed.),
Parenting girls on the autism spectrum overcoming the chal-
lenges and celebrating the gifts (pp. 47–73). London:
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Robertson, K., Chamberlain, B., & Kasari, C. (2003).
General education teachers’ relationships with included
students
with
autism.
Journal
of
Autism
and
Developmental Disorders, 33(2), 123–130.
Russell, G., Steer, C., & Golding, J. (2011). Social and demo-
graphic factors that influence the diagnosis of autistic
spectrum disorders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 46(12), 1283–1293.
Sammons, P., Sylva, K., Melhuish, E., Siraj, I., Taggart, B.,
Toth, K., . . . Smees, R. (2014). Influences on students’
GCSE attainment and progress at age 16 Effective Pre-
School,
Primary
&
Secondary
Education
Project
(EPPSE)
Research
Report
September.
London:
Department for Education.
Schaff, R. C., Toth-Cohen, S., Johnson, S., Outten, G., &
Benevides, T. W. (2011). The everyday routines of families
of children with autism Examining the impact of sensory
processing
difficulties
on
the
family.
Autism,
15(3),
373–389.
Sciutto, M., Richwine, S., Mentrikoski, J., & Niedzwiecki, K.
(2012). A qualitative analysis of the school experiences of
students with Asperger syndrome. Focus on Autism and
Other Developmental Disabilities, 27(3), 177–188.
Sedgewick, F., Hill, V., Yates, R., Pickering, L., & Pellicano,
E. (2015). Gender differences in the social motivation and
friendship experiences of autistic and non-autistic adoles-
cents. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 46,
1–10.
Sofronoff, K., Dark, E., & Stone, V. (2011). Social vulner-
ability and bullying in children with Asperger syndrome.
Autism, 15(3), 355–372.
Stern, M. (2012). Introduction: How teens feel about school
and why we should care. In M. Stern (Ed.), Evaluating and
promoting positive school attitude in adolescents (pp. 1–17).
New York: Springer.
Tobias, A. (2009). Supporting students with autistic spectrum
disorder (ASD) at secondary school: a parent and student
Sproston et al.
13
 perspective. Educational Psychology in Practice, 25(2),
151–165.
Tobin, H., Staunton, S., Mandy, W., Skuse, D., Hellriegel, J.,
Baykaner, O., Anderson, S., . . . Murin, M. (2012). A quali-
tative examination of parental experiences of the transition
to mainstream secondary school for children with an aut-
ism spectrum disorder. Educational & Child Psychology,
29(1), 72–85.
Wagner, S. (2006). Educating the female student with
Aspergers. In T. Attwood (Ed.), Aspergers and girls
(pp. 15–32). Texas: Future Horizons.
Wainscot, J. J., Naylor, P., Sutcliffe, P., Tantam, D., &
Williams, J. V. (2008). Relationships with peers and
use
of
the
school
environment
of
mainstream
sec-
ondary school pupils with Asperger disorder (high func-
tioning autism): A case-controlled study. International
Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 8(1),
25–38.
White, S. W., Bray, B. C., & Ollendick, T. H. (2012).
Examining shared and unique aspects of social anxiety
disorder and autism spectrum disorder using factor ana-
lysis. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 42,
874–884.
World Health Organisation. (1993). The ICD-10 classification
of mental and behavioural disorders: Diagnostic criteria for
research. Geneva: World Health Organisation.
Witmer, S. E., & Ferreri, S. J. (2014). Alignment of instruc-
tion, expectations, and accountability testing for students
with autism spectrum disorder. Focus on Autism and Other
Developmental Disabilities, 29(3), 131–144.
Woolfson, L. M., & Brady, K. (2009). An investigation of
factors impacting on mainstream teachers’ beliefs about
teaching students with learning difficulties. Educational
Psychology, 29(2), 221–238.
14
Autism & Developmental Language Impairments
