 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 2 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Introduction
Immune tolerance (IT) is a transient state in cells of the innate 
immune system where repeated exposure to pathogen-associat-
ed molecular patterns (PAMPs) or damage-associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs) renders cells unresponsive to further PAMP/
DAMP exposure (1, 2). Removal of the PAMP/DAMP recalibrates 
the system with restoration of immune responses. An initial exces-
sive inflammatory response via TLRs can induce a tolerant state 
(1). IT has evolved to prevent excessive immune system mediated 
self-injury in response to infection, inflammation, or tissue injury. 
However, some bacteria exploit IT to evade immune system sur-
veillance. Repeated exposure to bacterial endotoxin chronically 
suppresses host proinflammatory immune responses, which caus-
es bacteria to overwhelm and kill the host.
In the central nervous system, the megadalton form of hyal-
uronan (MDa HA) is a major component of the extracellular 
matrix (ECM) (3). MDa HA accumulates in demyelinating lesions, 
where it promotes myelination failure by blocking maturation of 
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) (4), which would other-
wise mature into myelinating oligodendrocytes (5). HA fragments 
(HAf) are generated when white matter injury (WMI) triggers 
enhanced expression of hyaluronidases that depolymerize MDa 
HA (6, 7). In conditions such as sterile lung injury and wound 
healing, ECM breakdown results in release of proinflammatory 
HAf (8), which may function as an endogenous DAMP to regu-
late proinflammation via receptors that include CD44, TLR2, and 
TLR4 (8). It is unclear, however, whether HAf may also function 
as a DAMP in chronic WMI to disrupt myelination via a toler-
ance-like mechanism. OPCs express TLRs, but their stimulation 
does not promote proinflammatory cytokine release (9). Although, 
IκK/NF-κB signaling is the main proinflammatory pathway asso-
ciated with TLR activation, it does not regulate developmental 
myelination or remyelination (10). Despite evidence that HAf may 
mediate adult myelination failure by utilizing a proinflammatory 
signaling pathway (6), the proinflammatory actions of HAf have 
been recently questioned and attributed to bacterial endotoxin 
contamination (11). Consequently, the mechanistic roles for MDa 
HA and/or HAf in regulating OPC differentiation in chronic WMI 
remain poorly defined.
WMI in preterm human infants causes arrested matura-
tion of late OPCs (preOLs) in chronic lesions that contributes 
to cerebral palsy and chronic neurobehavioral disabilities (12). 
We report here that neonatal WMI results in ECM breakdown 
and a persistent reduction in MDa HA. To define potential roles 
of HAf in chronic neonatal myelination failure, we generated 
endotoxin-free HAf of narrowly restricted sizes. We identified 
a specific bioactive HAf (bHAf) of approximately 200 kDa that 
blocked OPC maturation cell autonomously. Sustained expo-
sure of OPCs to bHAf led to desensitization of AKT, a potent 
Cerebral white matter injury (WMI) persistently disrupts myelin regeneration by oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs). 
We identified a specific bioactive hyaluronan fragment (bHAf) that downregulates myelin gene expression and chronically 
blocks OPC maturation and myelination via a tolerance-like mechanism that dysregulates pro-myelination signaling via 
AKT. Desensitization of AKT occurs via TLR4 but not TLR2 or CD44. OPC differentiation was selectively blocked by bHAf in a 
maturation-dependent fashion at the late OPC (preOL) stage by a noncanonical TLR4/TRIF pathway that induced persistent 
activation of the FoxO3 transcription factor downstream of AKT. Activated FoxO3 selectively localized to oligodendrocyte 
lineage cells in white matter lesions from human preterm neonates and adults with multiple sclerosis. FoxO3 constraint 
of OPC maturation was bHAf dependent, and involved interactions at the FoxO3 and MBP promoters with the chromatin 
remodeling factor Brg1 and the transcription factor Olig2, which regulate OPC differentiation. WMI has adapted an immune 
tolerance–like mechanism whereby persistent engagement of TLR4 by bHAf promotes an OPC niche at the expense of 
myelination by engaging a FoxO3 signaling pathway that chronically constrains OPC differentiation.
A TLR/AKT/FoxO3 immune tolerance–like  
pathway disrupts the repair capacity of 
oligodendrocyte progenitors
Taasin Srivastava,1 Parham Diba,1 Justin M. Dean,1 Fatima Banine,2 Daniel Shaver,1 Matthew Hagen,1 Xi Gong,1 Weiping Su,2 Ben Emery,3 
Daniel L. Marks,1 Edward N. Harris,4 Bruce Baggenstoss,5 Paul H. Weigel,5 Larry S. Sherman,2,6 and Stephen A. Back1,3
1Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU), Portland, Oregon, USA. 2Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, Oregon, USA.  
3Department of Neurology, OHSU, Portland, Oregon, USA. 4Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA. 5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. 6Department of Cell, Developmental and Cancer Biology, OHSU, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: March 22, 2017; Accepted: February 28, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(5):2025–2041. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI94158.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 2 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
ers by interactions of FoxO3 with the chromatin-remodeling 
factor Brg1 and the TF Olig2, which are involved in control of 
OPC differentiation (14–16). Hence, central myelination fail-
ure is regulated by a noncanonical TLR4/AKT/FoxO3 signaling 
pathway utilized by bHAf to induce a tolerance-like state that 
selectively constrains OPC maturation and myelination.
Results
Neonatal hypoxic-ischemic WMI promotes MDa HA depolymer-
ization. To investigate the status of MDa HA in chronic neonatal 
WMI, we employed our preterm-equivalent rat hypoxia-ischemia 
(H-I) model, which generates myelination failure and replicates 
key features of human WMI (Figure 1A) (17). MDa HA turnover 
in the ECM after H-I was visualized with a biotinylated HA-bind-
ing protein (HABP) and costained with glial fibrillary acidic pro-
tein (GFAP) as a marker of WMI. Unlike in age-matched unin-
pro-myelination signal (13). This tolerance-like action of bHAf 
was mediated through TLR4 but not via CD44 or TLR2. As 
in TLR4-mediated IT, bHAf’s influence on myelination was 
reversible when MDa HA depolymerization was attenuated or 
bHAf was removed. AKT desensitization was similarly revers-
ible in vivo in neonatal WMI. Moreover, bHAf actions were 
mediated via a noncanonical TRIF-dependent pathway, also 
involved in IT, rather than the canonical MyD88 arm of TLR4 
signaling. AKT desensitization resulted in maturation-depen-
dent activation of the FoxO3 transcription factor (TF), which 
selectively constrained preOL maturation in a bHAf-dependent 
fashion. A role for activated FoxO3 in human myelination fail-
ure was supported by selective localization of nuclear FoxO3 
to OPCs in human preterm WMI and multiple sclerosis (MS) 
plaques. bHAf-mediated OPC maturation arrest appears to be 
regulated at the FoxO3 and myelin basic protein (MBP) promot-
Figure 1. Neonatal rat H-I WM lesions deplete MDa HA. (A) Schematic diagram of the H-I strategy and postnatal ages for tissue analysis. (B and C) Rep-
resentative images of the supracallosal WM of the corpus callosum (CC) and overlying cortex (Ctx) in control and H-I samples at P4 (B) and P14 (C) stained 
for GFAP and HABP. Diffuse reduction in MDa HA persisted until P14 (C). (D) Recovery of total HA from WM lesions after H-I. Comparison of true controls 
(Control), hypoxic controls (Hypoxia only), and H-I group (Lesion) versus contralateral hypoxic hemisphere (Contralateral). Only the lesion group had a 
significant reduction in HA recovery. (E) Incubation of MDa HA with the lesion lysate generated HAf below ~650 kDa. Lesion-lysate activity was sensitive  
to heat inactivation but insensitive to deferoxamine (50 μM). B and C: control n = 2; H-I n = 4 animals for each age group (P4 and P14). D: n = 6 (H-I),  
n = 5 (control), and n = 4 (hypoxia) animals (P7). E: n = 4 separate experiments on 4 different animals at P4 after H-I at P3; one representative experiment 
is shown. *P < 0.05 by ANOVA. Mean ± SD. Scale bars: 300 μm (B and C).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 2 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
with MBP-labeled oligodendrocytes (Supplemental Figure 2A). 
To confirm de novo progressive myelin generation, we undertook 
ultrastructural studies that identified axons wrapped with multila-
mellar myelin sheaths (Figure 2B).
In contrast to vehicle-treated slices, which displayed robust 
myelination of the corpus callosum, slices incubated with MDa 
HA until 21 days in vitro (DIV21) displayed a pronounced reduc-
tion in myelinated axons (Figure 2C). Myelination failure was not 
related to decreased OPC survival, since MDa HA treatment did 
not enhance OPC degeneration or decrease OPC density (Sup-
plemental Figure 2, B–D). Notably, myelination comparable to 
that in vehicle-treated controls was promoted by coincubation of 
slices with MDa HA and VCPAL, a potent hyaluronidase inhibitor 
(22) (Figure 2C). We confirmed that the effect of VCPAL was cell 
autonomous. Consistent with prior studies (4, 6, 19), incubation 
of differentiating primary OPC cultures with MDa HA induced a 
significant decrease in the percentage of mature MBP+ OLs, which 
was significantly reversed by coincubation of primary OPCs with 
MDa HA and VCPAL (Supplemental Figure 2E). Hence, the dis-
ruption of myelination by MDa HA appeared to be cell autono-
mous and mediated by MDa HA depolymerization induced by 
hyaluronidase activity.
Since we had identified an endogenous activity in neonatal 
WMI lysates that generated a range of smaller HAf (Figure 1E), 
we performed an in vitro screen for a bioactive size range of HAf 
that blocks OPC maturation. We first screened polydispersed frac-
tions of HAf, which contained a continuum of HA sizes, to define 
size ranges that blocked OPC differentiation. HAf sizes between 
175 and 300 kDa attenuated OPC maturation, whereas small 
(5–20 kDa) HAf ranges lacked activity (Figure 2D). To more nar-
rowly define the size of bHAf, we prepared endotoxin-free mon-
odisperse HAf (40, 106, 210, and 357 kDa) by SEC fractionation 
of polydispersed fractions of HA (23) and screened them in slice 
cultures. OPC maturation was not blocked by 40-, 106-, or 357-
kDa HAf (Figure 2E). In contrast, treatment with 210-kDa HAf 
decreased OPC maturation (Figure 2E). We confirmed that bHAf 
blocked maturation of primary OPC cultures in a cell-autonomous 
manner (Figure 2F). Moreover, after sonication of MDa HA and 
bHAf, these preparations failed to block OPC maturation (Supple-
mental Figure 2F). Notably, bHAf persistently blocked OPC matu-
ration and myelination in slice cultures up to DIV21 (Figure 2C and 
Supplemental Figure 2G).
We next determined whether the effect of bHAf on OPC 
maturation was concentration dependent or altered by coincuba-
tion with HAf of different sizes. Concentrations of 100–200 nM 
attenuated OPC maturation in slices, whereas lower or higher 
concentrations lacked activity, which suggested a narrow critical 
concentration range for biological activity (Figure 2G). To attempt 
to out-compete and block bHAf activity, we cotreated slices with 
100 nM bHAf and equimolar concentrations of inactive HAf (40, 
106, or 357 kDa). Neither HAf sizes smaller nor those larger than 
210 kDa disrupted bHAf activity, supporting the hypothesis that 
bHAf selectively blocks OPC maturation (Figure 2H). Hence, our 
findings indicate that attenuation of OPC maturation in the lesion 
microenvironment is dependent on generation of an effective con-
centration of bHAf by hyaluronidase activity, and that bHAf with a 
distinct size of about 200 kDa is required.
jured control white matter (WM), diffuse astrocyte activation was 
observed within 24 hours after H-I in the corpus callosum at P4 
(Figure 1B). HABP staining revealed uniform distribution of MDa 
HA in control gray and white matter at P4 (Figure 1B and Supple-
mental Figure 1A; supplemental material available online with this 
article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI94158DS1). However, MDa 
HA staining was markedly reduced throughout early WMI (Figure 
1B). In contrast to controls at P14, chronic WMI displayed exten-
sive reactive astrogliosis and a persistent diffuse reduction in MDa 
HA (Figure 1C).
To obtain a quantitative estimate of MDa HA depolymer-
ization in neonatal WMI, we isolated HA from neonatal brain 
tissue for analysis by size exclusion chromatography coupled to 
multi-angle light scattering (SEC-MALS). Lesions showed a sig-
nificant pronounced decrease in MDa HA content relative to true 
controls (Figure 1D). There was no significant reduction in MDa 
HA recovery from the contralateral hypoxic hemisphere or from 
exposure to hypoxia alone (Figure 1D).
We next examined expression of enzymes that regulate HA 
levels in neonatal WMI. We found no changes in expression of HA 
synthases 1–3 (Supplemental Figure 1B), which generate different 
HA sizes (8). De-polymerization of MDa HA by hyaluronidases can 
generate large (300 kDa–1 MDa), intermediate (20–300 kDa), or 
small (<20 kDa) HAf, which regulate distinct signaling pathways 
(18). Previous reports implicated MDa HA depolymerization by 
the hyaluronidase PH20 in regulation of re-myelination in adult 
models of WMI (refs. 6, 7; but also see ref. 19). We did not detect 
PH20 expression in neonatal rat brain (Supplemental Figure 1B). 
No changes in Hyal2 expression occurred after H-I, but there was 
a significant decrease in expression of Hyal1, which generates 
HAf oligomers (18). In contrast, expression of Tmem2, a recently 
described membrane-associated hyaluronidase (20), was signifi-
cantly elevated after H-I.
We next determined whether neonatal WMI had an enzymatic 
activity that could generate HAf. When protein lysates made from 
H-I lesions were incubated with exogenous MDa HA, HAf were 
generated in a broad range below approximately 650 kDa (Figure 
1E). However, HAf were not generated from pre-boiled protein 
lysates (Figure 1E). Since non-enzymatic MDa HA depolymeriza-
tion may occur by oxidative attack, we coincubated WMI lysates 
with deferoxamine, because neonatal WM is highly enriched in 
iron, which may catalyze production of superoxide radicals that 
nonspecifically generate HAf. Under these conditions, MDa HA 
depolymerization was still observed (Figure 1E). Hence, we isolated 
an endogenous activity in response to neonatal WMI whereby MDa 
HA is cleaved into a range of smaller fragments.
A distinct sized HA ligand is bioactive and mediates OPC mat-
uration arrest. To define a role for MDa HA depolymerization in 
myelination failure, we first determined whether myelination 
occurred in our in vitro slice culture model of chronic WMI. This 
model reproduces key features of neonatal WMI including OPC 
maturation arrest, which is enhanced by MDa HA (21). Since slice 
cultures were prepared from P1 animals, myelin was not present. 
However, between 14 and 21 days in culture, we visualized exten-
sive staining for the juxtaparanodal myelin marker CASPR, con-
sistent with formation of nodes of Ranvier (Figure 2A), and detect-
ed numerous neurofilament protein–labeled axons associated 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 2 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 2 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
We next determined whether chronic hypoxic-ischemic neo-
natal WMI is also associated with persistent AKT desensitization 
(Figure 3F). At 24 hours after H-I (P4), AKT phosphorylation at 
S473 and T308 was reduced versus that of age-matched uninjured 
controls. Attenuated AKT phosphorylation persisted at P7 and P10. 
However, at P14 and P21, AKT phosphorylation was comparable to 
that of controls. We thus hypothesized that if attenuation of AKT 
phosphorylation was related to myelination delay, recovery of AKT 
phosphorylation should coincide with the delayed onset of myelin-
ation. We quantified MBP staining as a surrogate marker of myelin-
ation at P10, P14, and P21 after H-I at P3 (Figure 3G). MBP staining 
was markedly reduced at P10, consistent with a reduction in AKT 
activation in chronic lesions. However, at P14 and P21, the levels of 
MBP in the WM and cortex increased significantly, consistent with 
a progressive partial increase in myelination. Moreover, in resolv-
ing WMI at P21, lesions did not display persistent digestion of MDa 
HA, but rather had more normalized MDa HA staining (Supple-
mental Figure 3). Given that H-I–induced AKT inactivation was 
reversible and coincided with MDa HA accumulation, we hypothe-
sized that bHAf generation during WMI creates a permissive state 
that negatively influences OPC maturation in a reversible fashion. 
We first treated slices with MDa HA and then cultured them with-
out MDa HA (Supplemental Figure 4, A and B), which resulted in 
an MBP+ OL density comparable to that in controls. Hence, the 
presence of bHAf in WM lesions is permissive to sustain a toler-
ance-like state of AKT desensitization, but upon its removal, OPCs 
remain competent to differentiate.
bHAf signals via TLR4 but not TLR2 or CD44 to mediate OL 
maturation arrest. Given that TLRs play prominent roles in regu-
lating IT (2) and CD44 can regulate either TLR2 or TLR4 signaling 
(8), we determined whether these receptors were involved in bHAf 
signaling. We adapted our rat slice culture model to knockout mice 
(Figure 4A). We confirmed that treatment of WT cultures with 
either MDa HA or bHAf blocked OPC maturation (Figure 4B). We 
next analyzed slices prepared from CD44–/– pups. MDa HA failed 
to block OPC maturation, but bHAf significantly decreased the 
density of MBP+ OLs (Figure 4C). Hence, bHAf action was not 
mediated via CD44, but CD44 appeared to play a role in the recog-
nition and size processing of MDa HA, as previously reported (27).
We next explored a potential role for TLR2 or TLR4 in bHAf 
actions. As in CD44–/– mice, MDa HA failed to block OPC matura-
tion but bHAf blocked OPC maturation in TLR2–/– mice (Figure 4D). 
However, OPC maturation in TLR4–/– mice was insensitive to either 
MDa HA or bHAf (Figure 4E). We next confirmed that bHAf signals 
in a cell autonomous manner via TLR4 but not TLR2. The matura-
tion of TLR2–/– primary OPCs was blocked by bHAf, but OPCs from 
TLR4–/– pups fully differentiated in the presence of bHAf (Supple-
mental Figure 5). Hence, TLR4 was required for mediation of the 
inhibitory effects of bHAf on OPC maturation. Given the previously 
reported complex signaling crosstalk between TLR2 and TLR4 in 
the brain (28), we determined whether this requirement for TLR4 
might be lost with TLR2 deletion by analyzing slices from TLR2–/– 
TLR4–/– mice. These animals were insensitive to either MDa HA or 
bHAf treatment, which further supported that even with TLR2 dele-
tion, TLR4 deletion still blocked the actions of bHAf (Figure 4F). 
Collectively, these observations support that bHAf signals via TLR4 
to block OPC maturation during chronic WMI.
bHAf regulates AKT in a tolerance-like manner. HAf-mediated 
downstream signaling has been linked to regulation of AKT and 
MAPK signaling pathways (8). MAPK and AKT also have well- 
documented roles in CNS myelination (24). Sustained constitutive 
AKT phosphorylation is linked with enhanced myelination (13). We 
first determined in slice cultures whether bHAf influences these 
signaling pathways. bHAf induced AKT phosphorylation at 15 min-
utes. However, phosphorylation of both T308 and S473, the two res-
idues associated with maximal AKT activation, was not sustained 
and returned to baseline by 4 hours (Figure 3A). In contrast, MAPK 
activation, as defined by ERK1/2 phosphorylation status, did not 
change significantly, even after 4 hours of bHAf treatment (Figure 
3A). AKT phosphorylation remained attenuated after a 24-hour 
exposure to bHAf (Figure 3B) and even at 9 days (Figure 3C).
To determine whether bHAf selectively induced a refractory 
state of AKT signaling, we incubated slices with brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which robustly stimulates AKT acti-
vation and protects against cerebral injury during neonatal H-I 
(25, 26). In contrast to bHAf, BDNF sustained AKT activation 
at 4 and 24 hours (Figure 3D). We next hypothesized that if per-
sistent exposure to bHAf causes chronic desensitization of AKT 
activation, then AKT should remain refractory to costimulation by 
another potent AKT activator, such as BDNF. Slices were exposed 
to bHAf or BDNF, followed by restimulation with the same factor 
(Figure 3E). Slices remained refractory to AKT activation upon 
restimulation with bHAf. However, restimulation with BDNF 
induced AKT activation, indicating that initial BDNF treatment 
does not induce a refractory state that renders subsequent insen-
sitivity to BDNF. Notably, BDNF treatment was unable to induce 
AKT activation in slices that were pretreated with bHAf. Hence, 
continuous bHAf exposure promoted sustained desensitization of 
AKT that could not be overcome by costimulation with BDNF.
Figure 2. A distinct bHAf blocks OPC maturation. (A–C) Rat slices cultured 
21 days display extensive myelination. (A) Nodes of Ranvier identified with 
CASPR (red arrowheads). (B) Representative ultrastructural images of early 
(left panel) and late (right panel) myelination and detail of multilamellar 
myelin sheaths (insets). (C) Schematic of strategy to analyze chronic in 
vitro myelination. prep, prepared from. Representative images of myelin-
ated axons in callosal WM visualized with MBP and 200 kDa neurofilament 
H (NFH) after treatment with DMSO (vehicle), MDa HA (50 nM) with or 
without VCPAL (25 μM), or bHAf (100 nM). (D) 175–300 kDa HAf regulates 
OPC maturation cell autonomously. Primary OPCs cultured 4 days under 
pro-differentiation conditions stained for OPCs (PDGFRα, green), OLs 
(MBP, red), and DAPI (blue). Cultures treated with PBS (vehicle), MDa HA 
(50 nM), HAf 175–300 kDa (500 nM), or HAf 5–20 kDa (500 nM). Quanti-
fication of total OPCs and OLs. (E) MBP+ OLs in DIV8 slices cultured with 
PBS (vehicle) or HAf of 40 (100 nM), 106 (100 nM), 210 (100 nM) or 357 kDa 
(100 nM). (F) Primary OPCs differentiated 4 days with or without bHAf 
(500 nM) visualized with cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (CNP), MBP, 
and DAPI (left). bHAF treatment decreased the percentage of OLs (right). 
(G) Density of OLs in DIV8 slices cultured with varying bHAf concentra-
tions. (H) OL quantification in DIV8 slices cultured with bHAf (100 nM) and 
equimolar concentrations of HAf at 357 or 106 kDa or combined with 357-
kDa and 106-kDa HAf (100 nM). A, C, and E: n = 3 animals/condition from 
separate litters; 3 slices/treatment condition/animal, 9 slices total. D and 
F: n = 2 separate culture preparations. G and H: n = 1 animal per condition; 
3 slices analyzed per treatment condition. *P < 0.05 by Student’s t test; 
**P < 0.001 by ANOVA; mean ± SD. Scale bars: 12 μm, A; 600 nm, B (insets: 
original magnification, ×33,000); 150 μm, C; 75 μm, D and F.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
bHAf signals via TRIF to regulate AKT. TLR4-mediated tol-
erance may be regulated at multiple levels via 2 distinct adap-
tors, MyD88 and TRIF (1, 2). We first determined which of these 
adaptor proteins participates in bHAf signaling (Figure 5A). Both 
MDa HA and bHAf caused a significant decrease in MBP+ OLs in 
MyD88–/– slices (Figure 5B), which was similar to the response of 
WT mice to bHAf (Figure 4B). Hence, the actions of neither MDa 
HA nor bHAf appeared to be mediated via the canonical MyD88 
signaling pathway. However, when we analyzed TRIF–/– pups, 
neither bHAf nor MDa HA blocked OPC maturation (Figure 5C). 
Hence, bHAf blocked OPC maturation through TLR4 via a nonca-
nonical signaling pathway that utilized the TRIF adaptor protein.
We next determined whether TRIF is involved in bHAf- 
mediated AKT activation. We treated slices from TRIF–/– or WT 
pups with bHAf and determined AKT phosphorylation status. 
Treatment with bHAf for 30 minutes did not cause significant 
changes in AKT phosphorylation in TRIF–/– cultures (Figure 5D), 
whereas AKT was phosphorylated in WT cultures (Supplemental 
Figure 6A). We also analyzed AKT activation after 24 hours of bHAf 
treatment in TRIF–/– (Figure 5E) and TLR4–/– (Figure 5F) slices and 
similarly found no change in AKT phosphorylation status, which 
further supported that bHAf signals via the TLR4/TRIF pathway.
We then determined whether negative regulators of TLR4 sig-
naling act through a complex with TRIF. We examined the role of 
TRAF6, an E3 ligase, which is a member of the TRIF signalosome 
complex that plays a role in AKT ubiquitination and activation 
(2, 29). Proteins with deubiquitinase activity, such as TNFAIP3/
A20 or β-arrestin2, can negatively regulate TRAF6 activity (29). 
Since we found that bHAf led to a progressive increase in total 
A20 protein levels in treated slices (Supplemental Figure 6B), 
we determined whether bHAf-mediated AKT inactivation was 
related to A20 recruitment into the TRIF-TRAF6 complex. We 
isolated the TRAF6 complex by co-IP. We confirmed that the iso-
lated complex contained the components of the signalosome by 
probing it with TRIF and Pellino1/2 antibodies. Pellino proteins 
are another member of the TRIF complex that can regulate TLR 
signaling (30). Western blot analysis demonstrated that both TRIF 
and Pellino1/2 were isolated as part of the TRAF6 co-IP, but we 
did not detect A20 as part of the signaling complex (Supplemental 
Figure 6C). These observations suggest that although bHAf influ-
ences A20 induction, bHAf does not appear to play a role in A20 
recruitment to the TRIF complex. We next investigated whether 
bHAf influenced the recruitment of β-arrestin2, another negative 
TRAF6 regulator, to the TRIF complex. bHAf did not change the 
total β-arrestin2 level but led to transient recruitment of β-arres-
tin2 to the TRIF-TRAF6 complex (Figure 5F). Collectively, these 
results support that β-arrestin2 is recruited to the TRIF-TRAF6 
complex to attenuate AKT signaling in response to bHAf.
bHAf signaling regulates OL lineage maturation at the preOL 
stage via FoxO3. To determine downstream targets of AKT activa-
tion, we first analyzed mTOR signaling, which plays a role in regu-
lating OPC maturation and myelination (24). However, there were 
no observed changes in mTOR phosphorylation status in response 
to bHAf that would suggest a role in bHAf signaling (Supplemen-
tal Figure 6D). Prior observations suggested that AKT inactivation 
results in GSK3β activation and that GSK3β inhibition enhances 
OPC maturation (31). We thus hypothesized that if bHAf blocked 
OPC maturation via GSK3β activation, treatment with a GSK3β 
kinase inhibitor should promote OPC maturation. bHAf treatment 
attenuated GSK3β Ser9 phosphorylation, which suggested activa-
tion of the kinase (Supplemental Figure 6E). We next attempted to 
block the effect of bHAf with pharmacological agents that target 
Ser9 phosphorylation of GSK3β to inhibit the kinase. However, the 
GSK3β inhibitors 6BIO (Supplemental Figure 6F) and LiCl (data 
not shown) failed to promote OPC maturation, which supported 
that GSK3β is not part of the bHAf signaling pathway.
We next explored a function for FoxO TFs, known AKT tar-
gets, which maintain tissue homeostasis and are sensitive to cel-
lular stress (32). Studies with FoxO3–/– mice found that FoxO3 
induces a program that prevents premature differentiation of oli-
godendrocytes by repressing myelination genes (32). Given that 
AKT phosphorylation was attenuated in chronic WMI until P10, 
we hypothesized that if FoxO3 contributed to myelination delay, 
FoxO3-labeled OPCs should be enriched in WM lesions arising 
from neonatal rat H-I. We determined whether FoxO3 displayed 
enhanced nuclear localization to PDGFRα-labeled OPCs in WMI 
at P4–P10. Little FoxO3 staining was detected in control WM at 
P7 (Figure 6A). However, robust FoxO3 staining localized to WM 
lesions but did not colocalize with PDGFRα-labeled OPCs (Figure 
6A). In chronic human neonatal WMI (17) and MS (33), myelin-
ation failure arises when OL lineage progression is blocked at the 
late OPC (preOL) stage. Since we previously found that preOLs 
also undergo arrested differentiation in chronic rodent WMI, 
we determined whether FoxO3 localized to preOLs visualized 
with the anti-O4 antibody. In controls at P7, a low level of cyto-
plasmic FoxO3 staining was detected that did not colocalize with 
O4-labeled cells (Figure 6B). However, many O4-labeled cells 
displayed robust FoxO3 nuclear label in WM lesions (Figure 6B). 
Hence, maturation arrest of preOLs in chronic WMI coincided 
with stage-dependent expression of FoxO3 in preOLs.
FoxO3 expression was similarly increased in slice cultures 
treated with MDa HA for 21 days (Figure 6C) or bHAf for 24 hours 
(Figure 6D and Supplemental Figure 7A). When we costained 
slices with FoxO3 and the OL lineage marker and TF Olig2, few 
FoxO3+Olig2+ colabeled cells were visualized in untreated slices, 
but both MDa HA (Figure 6C) and bHAf (Figure 6D) increased the 
Figure 3. bHAf regulates AKT in a tolerance-like manner. (A–C) bHAf 
induces persistent AKT dephosphorylation in rat slices treated with bHAf 
(100 nM). Representative blots and quantification after probing with 
pAKT-S473, pAKT-T308, pERK1/2, AKT (total AKT), and actin antibodies. 
Note the transient increase in AKT phosphorylation followed by persistent 
reduction to control levels at 4 hours (A), 24 hours (B), and 5 or 9 days 
(C). (D) BDNF (50 ng/ml) induces persistent AKT phosphorylation at 30 
minutes, and 4 or 24 hours. (E) Experimental design to determine whether 
BDNF can overcome bHAf-mediated AKT desensitization (left); and repre-
sentative blots (right). (F) Chronic WMI leads to persistent AKT dephos-
phorylation that normalizes with delayed partial myelination. Represen-
tative blots and quantification from 3 rats that underwent H-I at P3 versus 
control (C), comparing AKT phosphorylation in lesion hemisphere at P4, P7, 
P10, P14, and P21. Actin was the loading control. (G) Progressive recovery of 
myelination following WMI. Representative images depicting MBP staining at 
P10, P14, and P21 (asterisks indicate H-I hemisphere). A–E: n = 3 independent 
studies from 3 separate litters; 2 slices/condition. F: n = 3 animals (control) 
and n = 6 animals (H-I). G: n = 9 animals/condition. *P < 0.05 by Student’s  
t test; mean ± SEM. Scale bars: 600 μm, G.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
of bHAf treatment when compared with controls treated with bHAf 
(Figure 6E). Hence, bHAf is required for downstream activation of 
FoxO3, since transfection with FoxO3TM alone only mildly blocked 
OPC maturation and required additional stimulation by bHAf to 
promote significant OPC maturation arrest.
FoxO3 transcriptional regulation by bHAf involves Olig2 and the 
chromatin-remodeling factor Brg1. Since our results support that 
bHAf regulates FoxO3 expression, we examined bHAf-dependent 
interactions between FoxO3 and other transcriptional regulators 
of OPC differentiation. Olig2 can recruit Brg1, the ATPase subunit 
of switch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin-remod-
eling protein complexes, to gene enhancers that drive OL differ-
entiation (15). Furthermore, we recently demonstrated that Brg1 
regulates OPC specification and OL maturation by controlling 
expression of genes involved in early OL versus neuronal differen-
tiation (16). In Caenorhabditis elegans, a homolog of FoxO3, FOXO 
interacts with the SWI/SNF complex to regulate life span (35). We 
therefore tested the possibility that FoxO3, like other genes that 
influence OL differentiation, is regulated by SWI/SNF chroma-
tin-remodeling factors recruited by Olig2 and that FoxO3 inter-
acts with myelin gene promoters regulated by Olig2 and SWI/SNF 
complexes. We were unable to demonstrate any protein-protein 
interactions between Brg1 and FoxO3 by co-IP (data not shown). 
However, when we performed ChIP assays, we found that under 
conditions that promote OPC proliferation or differentiation in 
primary culture, Brg1 and Olig2 were both bound to the same 
number of Olig2+ cells that colocalized with FoxO3. As previously 
described (32), we also observed some FoxO3 staining that did not 
localize to OL lineage cells (Figure 6C and Supplemental Figure 
7A), which suggested that variable expression of FoxO3 may occur 
in different cell types in chronic WMI. Hence, bHAf regulates the 
expression and cellular distribution of FoxO3 in OL lineage cells 
during chronic WMI.
Activation of AKT inactivates and restrains FoxO3 in the cyto-
sol (34). To test whether bHAf-mediated desensitization of AKT is 
instructive in regulating FoxO3 activity in OPCs, we overexpressed 
a mutant construct of FoxO3 (FoxO3TM) that lacks AKT phosphor-
ylation sites and causes preferential nuclear localization (34). Pri-
mary OPCs were cotransfected with monomeric red fluorescent 
protein (mRFP; to label transfected cells) and either WT FoxO3 
(FoxO3WT) or mutant (FoxO3TM) plasmids and induced to dif-
ferentiate with or without bHAf (Figure 6E). Treatment with bHAf 
led to an approximately 50% decrease in MBP+ cells compared 
with untreated controls. Remarkably, the maturation of OPCs that 
were transfected with FoxO3TM but not treated with bHAf did not 
differ significantly from that of untreated control cells. Notably, 
treatment of FoxO3TM-transfected cells with bHAf had an additive 
effect, significantly decreasing OL maturation when compared with 
bHAf-treated control cells, which indicated that nuclear localization 
of FoxO3 is not sufficient to block OPC maturation and bHAf stim-
ulation is instructive and required. Importantly, when OPCs were 
transfected with WT FoxO3, there was no significant amplification 
Figure 4. bHAf signals via TLR4 but not TLR2 or CD44 to mediate OPC maturation arrest. (A) Strategy to analyze roles of CD44, TLR2, and TLR4 in 
myelination failure. Quantification of MBP+ OL density in corpus callosum from murine forebrain slices treated with PBS (vehicle), MDa HA (2,000 kDa; 
50 nM), or bHAf (210 kDa; 100 nM). (B) Treatment of slices from WT animals is compared against slices from mice with the following backgrounds: (C) 
CD44–/–, (D) TLR2–/–, (E) TLR4–/–, and (F) TLR2–/– TLR4–/–. B–F: n = 3 animals (P3/P4 mouse pups) per condition for each genotype from separate litters;  
3 slices analyzed/treatment condition/animal, 9 slices total. **P < 0.001 by ANOVA; mean ± SD.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
mediated by SWI/SNF complexes recruited to myelin promoters 
by Olig2. These data further indicate that bHAf inhibits OPC mat-
uration through a mechanism whereby FoxO3, Brg1, and Olig2 are 
all dissociated from myelin gene promoters under conditions that 
would otherwise favor OL differentiation.
FoxO3 expression is markedly increased in oligodendroglia in 
chronic human WMI from preterm neonates and adults with MS. Since 
our findings supported that nuclear FoxO3 localization is related 
to myelination failure, we determined whether this signaling par-
adigm was conserved in chronic human WMI and if FoxO3 could 
be used as a surrogate readout of tolerance-like dysregulation of 
human OPC maturation. We first determined the patterns of FoxO3 
expression in autopsy samples from 4 individuals with preterm 
WMI where we previously demonstrated that arrested preOL mat-
uration occurred in lesions enriched in reactive astrocytes and HA 
(17). Numerous FoxO3-labeled cells defined the boundaries of dif-
fuse WMI (Figure 7A, left panel), but FoxO3 staining was markedly 
reduced in normal-appearing WM adjacent to the lesion (Figure 7A, 
middle). In WM lesions (Figure 7A, right), diffuse FoxO3 staining 
localized to numerous reactive astrocytes and nuclei.
region of the FoxO3 promoter (Figure 6F). This interaction was 
disrupted by treatment of OPCs with bHAf, which displaced Brg1 
from the FoxO3 promoter.
Since the transcription of several myelin genes, including 
MBP, were inhibited in OPCs treated with bHAf (Supplemental 
Figure 7B), we hypothesized that FoxO3 might interact with the 
MBP promoter to influence Olig2-Brg1–dependent MBP transcrip-
tion. To begin to define the mechanism by which FoxO3 regulates 
MBP and other myelin genes, we analyzed interactions among 
Brg1, Olig2, and FoxO3 at the MBP promoter in OPCs. Under con-
ditions that promote OPC proliferation, Brg1, Olig2, and FoxO3 
were found to interact at the same regions of the MBP promoter, 
but under pro-differentiation conditions FoxO3 was displaced 
from the promoter (Figure 6G), consistent with the notion that 
FoxO3 acts as a transcriptional repressor of MBP. However, when 
pro-differentiation conditions were combined with bHAf treat-
ment, Brg1 and Olig2 were also displaced together with FoxO3 
from the MBP promoter (Figure 6, G and H). These results are 
consistent with the hypothesis that FoxO3 represses myelin gene 
expression at least in part by disrupting transcriptional activation 
Figure 5. bHAf signals via TRIF to regulate AKT. (A) Strategy to define roles for MyD88 and TRIF in myelination failure. (B) OPC maturation was blocked in 
MyD88–/– murine slices treated with MDa HA (50 nM) or bHAf (100 nM). (C) TRIF–/– slices treated with MDa or bHAf did not differ from those treated with 
vehicle (PBS). (D and E) bHAf-induced AKT phosphorylation (pAKT-S473) is TRIF and TLR4 dependent. Representative blots and quantification from stud-
ies with TRIF–/– (D) or TLR4–/– (E) animals. (F) β-Arrestin2 (Arrb2) is rapidly recruited to the TRIF-TRAF6 complex following bHAf treatment. Lysates were 
prepared from rat slices treated with or without bHAf (100 nM) at the indicated times and analyzed by IP using TRAF6 antibody. Representative blots were 
probed with TRIF, TRAF6, and β-arrestin2 antibodies: IP (upper panel); total cell lysate (lower panel). B and C: n = 3–4 mice (P3/P4) per condition for each 
genotype from separate litters; 3 slices/animal/treatment condition; 9–12 slices total. D and E: n = 2 mice (P3/P4) per condition for each genotype from 
separate litters; 2 slices/animal/treatment condition. F: n = 2 experiments from 2 separate litters; 2 slices/condition. *P < 0.05 by ANOVA; **P < 0.001 by 
ANOVA; mean ± SD (B and C) and mean ± SEM (D and E).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Discussion
IT induction in the innate immune system following repeated 
exposure to DAMPs is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism 
to prevent excessive inflammation in response to infection or tis-
sue injury (2). During early inflammation, depolymerization of 
MDa HA attenuates macrophage/monocyte activation and blocks 
inflammation in several contexts (1). Neonatal WMI also triggers 
early and persistent ECM breakdown in chronic lesions where 
delayed myelination occurs. We succeeded in isolating an endog-
enous activity in neonatal WMI lysates that cleaves exogenously 
added MDa HA into a range of fragment sizes. We defined a role 
for specific HAf that induce a tolerance-like state that attenu-
ates AKT activation and promotes myelination failure. Disrupted 
OPC maturation was selectively mediated via an approximately 
200-kDa bHAf and was reversed when MDa HA depolymeriza-
tion was blocked by a hyaluronidase inhibitor. bHAf signaled via 
a noncanonical TLR4/TRIF pathway to dysregulate AKT/FoxO3 
signaling. bHAf downregulated myelin gene expression through 
a mechanism that includes dissociation of a SWI/SNF chroma-
tin remodeling factor and Olig2 from myelin gene promoters. 
Hence, our findings support the action of an IT-like mechanism in 
response to WMI whereby chronic desensitization of AKT attenu-
ates pro-myelination signals, which promotes an OPC niche at the 
expense of myelination (Figure 6H).
During mammalian embryonic CNS development, hyaluro-
nidase expression coincides with low MDa HA accumulation, but 
postnatally MDa HA accumulates whereas hyaluronidase expres-
sion is undetectable (18). WMI was accompanied by a pronounced 
reduction in MDa HA. Decreased MDa HA may be mediated by 
HA synthases that are induced to generate only small HAf (37). 
Our analysis of neonatal H-I lesions supports that depletion of 
MDa HA was related to enhanced hyaluronidase expression. From 
in vitro models of adult WMI, hyaluronidase PH20 was proposed 
to play a role in delaying remyelination mediated by MDa HA (6, 
7). A recent report has questioned this role of PH20 (19). We did 
not detect PH20 expression in normal or injured neonatal brain, 
which may suggest that PH20 expression is maturation depen-
dent or transient. In response to neonatal WMI, we observed 
decreased expression of Hyal1, a hyaluronidase involved in secre-
tion of small-sized HAf from endocytosed HA (18) and increased 
Tmem2, a recently identified hyaluronidase that generates inter-
mediate-sized HAf (20). This prompted us to explore the hypoth-
esis that intermediate-sized HAf block OPC maturation. We 
screened highly pure endotoxin-free HAf sizes and identified a 
bHAf of approximately 200 kDa.
Emerging studies have identified unique conformational 
properties of the approximately 200-kDa bHAf that may account 
for its selective dysregulation of myelination after WMI (38). As 
a polymer in solution, MDa HA largely exists as a stiff random 
coil. However, multiple studies found that as HA size decreases 
it transitions from a random coil to a rod-like conformation (38). 
This size-dependent conformational transition occurs in the range 
of 100–300 kDa, and HAf of more than 300 kDa may essentially 
have the same conformation as MDa HA (38). That the effects of 
bHAf we observed were not attenuated in competition studies with 
other HAf sizes further suggests unique biological properties at this 
size range. The conformation of bHAf may also induce binding of 
We analyzed FoxO3 expression in autopsy samples from 4 indi-
viduals with chronic MS plaques. To assess FoxO3 expression in 
uninjured WM relative to demyelinated or partially remyelinated 
MS plaques, we costained for the myelin marker MBP. MBP stain-
ing defined both the chronic active (Figure 7B, left panel) and active 
remodeling (Figure 7C, left) MS plaques. In chronic active plaques, 
FoxO3-labeled nuclei were diffusely localized at the plaque borders, 
where sparse myelination and myelin debris were present (Figure 7B, 
middle), as well as in the demyelinated core (Figure 7B, right). FoxO3 
expression in reactive astrocytes demarcated the plaque borders and 
was also detected in the lesion core (Figure 7B, right, and Supplemen-
tal Figure 8A). Within active remodeling plaques, FoxO3 localized to 
numerous nuclei interspersed near sparse myelination (Figure 7C, 
middle). However, in heavily myelinated WM distal to the plaque, 
few FoxO3-labeled nuclei were detected (Figure 7C, right).
Since FoxO3 localized to the nuclei of OPCs that displayed 
arrested maturation in rat H-I lesions (36) (Figure 6B), we next 
determined whether FoxO3-labeled nuclei in human lesions also 
localized to the OL lineage. To visualize OL lineage cells in paraf-
fin-embedded neonatal tissue, we employed the pan-OL lineage 
marker Olig2, which robustly identified lesions where an expand-
ed pool of OL progenitors had arrested maturation (17). Numerous 
Olig2+ nuclei colocalized with FoxO3 in neonatal WM lesions (Fig-
ure 7D and Supplemental Figure 8B). Similarly, in chronic active 
MS plaques, numerous Olig2+ nuclei colocalized with FoxO3 
(Figure 7D and Supplemental Figure 8C). Hence, oligodendrogli-
al cells that expressed nuclear FoxO3 were present both in chron-
ic preterm human WMI and MS plaques, and the persistence of 
these cells may contribute to myelination disturbances after WMI.
Figure 6. bHAf signaling regulates OL lineage maturation at the preOL stage 
via FoxO3. (A) Elevated FoxO3 expression in chronic WMI in corpus callosum 4 
days after H-I. Insets: The number of FoxO3-labeled cells (green; open arrow-
heads) is increased in WMI, but they do not colocalize with PDGFRα-labeled 
progenitors (red; filled arrowheads). (B) Nuclear localization of FoxO3 was 
detected 4 days after H-I in O4-labeled cells in WMI but not controls. (C) Rat 
slices treated 21 days with or without MDa HA (50 nM). MDa HA significantly 
increased Olig2+FoxO3+ cells in corpus callosum (white arrowheads) versus PBS 
controls. (D) Total Olig2+ and Olig2+FoxO3+ cells in the entire corpus callosum 
from rat slices treated 24 hours with or without bHAf (100 nM). (E) Primary 
mouse OPC cultures were cotransfected with the indicated constructs and 
mRFP (red) and induced to differentiate for 4 days with or without bHAf (500 
nM). OPCs expressing FoxO3TM displayed a significant decrease in the total 
percentage of MBP-labeled OLs versus cells expressing FoxO3WT or control 
plasmids. (F and G) Molecular interactions among FoxO3, Brg1, and Olig2 in 
proliferating and differentiating OPCs and in response to bHAf (500 nM). ChIP 
assay defining Brg1 and Olig2 interactions with the FoxO3 promoter (F). ChIP 
assay defining FoxO3, Brg1, and Olig2 interactions with the MBP promoter (G). 
(H) Working model depicts that FoxO3 associates with SWI/SNF and Brg1 at 
the MBP promoter in proliferating OPCs but dissociates from the promoter 
(blue arrow) when pro-myelination signals induce OPC differentiation, con-
sistent with FoxO3 repression of MBP transcription. When bHAf inactivates 
AKT and drives FoxO3 nuclear localization, SWI/SNF and Olig2 dissociate 
from the MBP promoter, blocking its transcription. A and B: n = 2 control and 
n = 3 H-I animals. C: n = 2 animals/condition from 2 litters; 6 slices total, 3 
slices/condition/animal. D: n = 3 animals/condition; 3 litters; 9 slices total, 3 
slices analyzed/condition/animal. E: n = 3 separate experiments and culture 
preparations. F and G: n = 2 separate experiments from separate culture 
preparations. *P < 0.05 by Student’s t test (E); **P < 0.001 by Student’s t 
test (D); mean SEM. Scale bars: 300 μm, A (insets: original magnification, 
×40); 10 μm, B; 40 μm, C. Original magnification, ×20 (E).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
with human breast milk found it to be highly enriched in HA sizes 
from 100 to 1,500 kDa (40), which suggested a role for breast milk 
in regulation of gut innate immune responses (41). Human milk 
and a 35-kDa HAf similarly regulated gut immune responses, but 
biochemical analysis did not detect enrichment of 35-kDa HAf in 
human milk. In studies of bleomycin-induced murine lung fibrosis, 
an HAf of 540 kDa was initially identified (42). Although an in vitro 
a particular hyaladherin to form a complex that is recruited by a 
cell-surface or intracellular protein to form a unique signaling com-
plex (38). For example, cell surface CD44 has higher binding affin-
ity for HA in complex with the TSG-6 link module compared with 
HA alone (39). The formation of such complexes with HAf may 
explain why it has been technically challenging in multiple tissues 
to detect endogenous bHAf in vivo. For example, recent studies 
Figure 7. FoxO3 expression is markedly 
increased in oligodendroglia in chronic 
human WMI from preterm neonates and 
adults with MS. Robust FoxO3 expression 
localized differentially to the cytoplasm of 
astrocytes and nuclei of Olig2+ oligo-
dendroglia in chronic human WMI. (A) 
Left: Low-power image of preterm WMI 
(Supplemental Table 1A; case 3). Diffuse 
FoxO3 staining defined boundaries of this 
large lesion between the cortical mantle 
(arrowheads) and the lateral ventricle (not 
shown). Middle: Rare FoxO3-labeled cells 
(red arrowheads) in normal-appearing WM 
adjacent to the lesion. Right: FoxO3 local-
ized to numerous reactive astrocytes (red 
arrowheads) and nuclei (black arrowheads) 
in the lesion. (B) FoxO3 expression in a 
chronic active MS plaque (Supplemental 
Table 1B; case 1). Left: Low-power image of 
a chronic active plaque stained for FoxO3 
and MBP with markedly reduced MBP 
staining in the core versus the peri-plaque. 
Middle: Detail of the plaque edge shows 
scattered MBP-labeled myelin debris 
(brown) and numerous FoxO3-labeled 
nuclei (black arrowheads). Right: Within 
the plaque core, no myelination was visual-
ized, but many FoxO3-labeled nuclei (black 
arrowheads) were interspersed among 
reactive astrocytes (red arrowheads). (C) 
FoxO3 expression in an active remodeling 
MS plaque (Supplemental Table 1B; case 
1). Left: Low-power image of the plaque 
stained for FoxO3 and MBP with scattered 
islands of remyelination within the lesion. 
Middle: Numerous FoxO3-labeled nuclei 
(black arrowheads) localized among sparse-
ly myelinated axons (brown). Right: A heav-
ily myelinated peri-plaque region with rare 
FoxO3-labeled nuclei (black arrowheads). 
(D) FoxO3-labeled nuclei in a preterm WM 
lesion (Supplemental Table 1A; case 1) and 
MS plaques (Supplemental Table 1B; case 3) 
colocalized with the pan OL lineage marker 
Olig2. Colocalization of Olig2 fluorescence 
and FoxO3 colorimetric labeling is indicated 
in the merge in red. Scale bars: 200 μm, A, 
left; 20 μm, A, middle and right; 300 μm, B, 
left; 20 μm, B and C, middle and right; 300 
μm, C, left; 30 μm, D.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
tors of GSK3β Ser9 phosphorylation (e.g., LiCl, 6BIO) (46), which 
may account for observations that these inhibitors promoted OPC 
maturation (31).
Several findings supported that bHAf regulates FoxO3 to block 
preOL maturation. bHAf increased FoxO3+Olig2+ cells in chronic 
in vitro slices. Moreover, forced expression of FoxO3TM, which 
preferentially resides in the nucleus, did not block OPC matura-
tion without bHAf treatment, which supports that initiation of 
bHAf signaling is a requirement for FoxO3 activity. Olig2 and Brg1 
both bind to the FoxO3 promoter in a bHAf-dependent manner, 
which suggests that FoxO3, like other factors that regulate OL 
differentiation, is transcriptionally regulated by Olig2- 
recruited 
SWI/SNF complexes and that bHAf controls FoxO3 transcription 
by disrupting these interactions. Furthermore, FoxO3 interacts 
with the MBP promoter in a region where Olig2 and Brg1 also 
interact, and FoxO3 is dissociated from the MBP promoter as 
OPCs differentiate. This suggests a mechanism by which FoxO3 
acts to restrict OPC differentiation. Given that FoxO3 co-associ-
ates with Brg1 and Olig2 at the MBP promoter, it is possible that 
FoxO3 blocks MBP transcription by interfering with the activities 
of SWI/SNF complexes recruited to the promoter by Olig2. Inter-
estingly, our data also show that under differentiation conditions 
in the presence of bHAf, Brg1 and Olig2 are also dissociated from 
the MBP promoter, which suggests that bHAf signaling leads to 
dissociation of Olig2 from the promoter to block transcription.
The actions of nuclear FoxO3 in promoting OPC maturation 
arrest appeared to be exerted in a maturation-dependent fashion 
in vivo through selective nuclear localization to preOLs. In con-
trast, in chronic preterm WMI and MS plaques, cytoplasmic FoxO3 
demarcated lesion boundaries by robustly localizing to reactive 
astrocytes, as a potential marker of chronic ECM remodeling. 
Although our results support that bHAf blocks preOL matura-
tion via FoxO3, the role of other FoxO isoforms in neonatal WMI 
is unclear. FoxO TFs appear to exert redundant effects to coordi-
nately regulate diverse pathways to modulate neural stem cell or 
progenitor cell homeostasis (32, 47). In a mouse model of chronic 
neonatal hypoxia, FoxO1 was shown to promote OPC prolifera-
tion (48). It is thus interesting to note that TGF-β signaling regu-
lates the timing of myelination by mediating interactions between 
FoxO1 and Sp1, another TF that regulates OPC maturation (49). 
Wnt signaling is another negative regulator of OPC maturation 
during WMI that also downregulates Sp1-mediated transcription 
(50). However, TGF-β signaling does not regulate subcellular dis-
tribution of FoxO3 or AKT activation (51), whereas bHAf-mediated 
AKT desensitization drives FoxO3 activation. Given that activation 
of FoxO3 initiates a positive feedback loop that promotes transcrip-
tion of FoxO1 and FoxO4 (52), it will be interesting to determine 
the epigenetic relationships between different FoxO TFs and Sp1 
during chronic WMI and their influence on myelination failure.
Definition of the pathogenetic mechanisms that regulate the 
generation and actions of bHAf may suggest repair strategies in 
several neonatal and adult human disorders where WMI results in 
chronic myelination failure. Persistent signaling by bHAf via the 
TLR/TRIF pathway results in chronic desensitization of AKT, and 
FoxO3 activation sustains arrested preOL maturation and myelin-
ation failure. Strategies to reverse this tolerance-like state appear 
to represent a novel approach to promote myelin regeneration.
screen of purified HAf later identified a proinflammatory role for a 
135-kDa HAf (43), this size was not enriched in murine fibrotic lung 
tissue (42). Similarly, our in vivo biochemical analysis of H-I lesions 
found an overall decrease in total MDa HA, but no enrichment of 
the approximately 200-kDa bHAf.
Studies of noninfectious lung injury, skin lesions, wound healing, 
and activation of immune dendritic cells have indicated various roles 
for CD44, TLR2, and TLR4 in mediating HAf actions (8). We identi-
fied roles for CD44, TLR2, and TLR4 in regulation of OPC matura-
tion after WMI. When either CD44 or TLR2 was deleted, bHAf but 
not MDa HA retained activity to block OPC maturation.
However, TLR4–/– mice were insensitive to both bHAf and 
MDa HA. Hence, contributions from CD44 and TLR2 appeared to 
be required for MDa HA to block OPC maturation, whereas bHAf 
actions specifically required an interaction with TLR4. Notably, 
binding of larger-sized HA appears to be stabilized by multivalent 
interactions with CD44, whereas smaller HAf has distinct binding 
properties (44). Polydispersed HA of larger sizes in human milk 
also requires both CD44 and TLR4 to mediate their biological 
effects, whereas 35-kDa HAf works independently of CD44 (41). 
Our findings similarly support a primary role for bHAf in mediating 
OPC maturation arrest via TLR4 independent of CD44 and TLR2. 
Thus, targeting CD44 and/or TLR2 to prevent MDa HA de-polym-
erization or TLR4 to prevent bHAf signaling may be an attractive 
strategy to promote regeneration and repair of neonatal WMI.
In the context of neonatal WMI, TLR4 regulated AKT not but 
MAPK in a TRIF-dependent manner. Similarly, a prior study of 
normal myelination or remyelination did not support a role for the 
IKK/NF-κB pathway downstream of TLRs (10). Persistent bHAf 
treatment led to desensitization of AKT, which was not rescued by 
BDNF. BDNF potently induces AKT activation via the TrkB recep-
tor. Thus, bHAf-mediated desensitization of AKT signaling appears 
to share characteristics with IT induced by persistent activation of 
TLRs by endotoxins, which recruits negative regulators to dampen 
multiple downstream signaling effectors (1, 2, 29). We found that 
β-arrestin2, a known negative regulator of TLR signaling (29), was 
rapidly recruited to the TRIF-TRAF6 complex, upstream of AKT 
desensitization induced by bHAf. Attenuation of AKT activation 
persisted for at least 9 days in vitro, which suggests involvement of 
other signaling regulators in this pathway. Furthermore, the onset 
of delayed myelination after neonatal H-I followed a similar time 
course. That myelination was stimulated in neonatal WMI as AKT 
phosphorylation normalized suggests that myelination failure may 
be reversible when bHAf levels decline in chronic lesions. In fact, 
even after prolonged exposure to MDa HA in primary (4) or slice 
cultures, arrested OPC maturation was reversible when MDa HA 
was removed. Since our findings suggest that attenuation of AKT 
activation is reversibly dependent on ECM remodeling, it may be 
feasible to design therapeutic strategies to promote myelination 
by specifically targeting the signaling proteins that are involved in 
mediating the tolerance-like state induced by bHAf.
Attenuation of AKT activity results in activation of GSK3β 
kinase and FoxO TFs (34). Our results do not support a role for 
GSK3β kinase in bHAf-mediated myelination failure and agree 
with previous studies, using knockin mice, that found that regula-
tion of GSK3β Ser9 phosphorylation appears to have no physiolog-
ical actions in the nervous system (45). AKT is activated by inhibi-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
for organotypic cultures as described previously (21). Mouse slices 
were cultured without penicillin and streptomycin. Half-media chang-
es were done every other day up to DIV7–DIV8 or DIV21 (rat) or DIV3–
DIV4 (mouse).
Primary OPC cultures were derived from oligospheres (7) or by 
immunopanning (54). For OPC differentiation experiments, OPCs 
were plated at 5 × 104 cells per coverslip and differentiated in DMEM/
F12 medium containing 0.1% BSA plus triiodothyronine (T3; 30 nM; 
MilliporeSigma) and N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC; MilliporeSigma) for 
4 days with or without HAf (500 nM) of indicated sizes. Cells were 
fixed in ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour at room tempera-
ture prior to IHC.
Plasmids and cell transfection. HA-FoxO3WT and HA-FoxO3TM 
plasmids from Addgene were described previously (34). To verify 
whether FoxO3 influences bHAf signaling, we cotransfected oligo-
sphere-derived OPC cultures (5 × 104 cells) on glass coverslips with 
mRFP using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). The day after trans-
fection, differentiation was induced in the presence or absence of 
bHAf (500 nM) for 4 days. Cells were fixed at room temperature for 
15 minutes in 4% paraformaldehyde and 4% sucrose in PBS, permea-
bilized with 0.1% TX-100 in PBS for 10 minutes, and visualized with 
rat anti-MBP antibody (1:500; MAB386; EMD Millipore). Primary 
antibody was visualized with anti-rat–Alexa 463 (1:500; Invitrogen). 
Fluorescence images were acquired at 20× with a cooled CCD camera 
(Hamamatsu Photonics) attached to a Zeiss Imager.M2 upright micro-
scope. 2,000–3,000 cells were counted per coverslip; 4 coverslips 
were analyzed per condition from 2–3 independent experiments. Cell 
counts employed the cell counting plugin in FIJI software.
Real-time PCR analysis. P3 animals were analyzed at 24 hours 
after H-I. Control and WM lesion tissue were microdissected and 
resuspended in TRIzol (Life Technologies) to extract total RNA. 250 
ng RNA was used to make cDNA using the TaqMan Reverse Tran-
scription Kit (Applied Biosystems). cDNA was diluted 1:1 before real-
time PCR (qPCR) experiments (TaqMan Gene Expressions Master 
Mix, Applied Biosystems). All qPCR probes were FAM-MGB (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific): Tmem2 (Rn01498397-m1), PH20 (Rn01500727-m1; 
Rn01500728-m1; Rn00588656-m1), Hyal-1 (Rn02133715-S1), Hyal-2 
(Rn01521340-g1), Has1 (Rn00597231-m1), Has2 (Rn00565774-m1), Has3 
(Rn00597204-m1), MBP (Rn 
01399619-m1), Plp (Rn01410490-m1), 
and Mog (Rn 
00575354-m1). 18S RNA (Rn03928990-g1) was the 
endogenous control. Tissue was screened for WMI by analyzing chang-
es in GFAP (Rn01253033-m1) expression. Only H-I samples with 4- to 
10-fold changes in GFAP expression versus controls were analyzed in 
duplicate for HAS and Hyal transcripts using ABI 7300 System soft-
ware. Gene expression is presented as relative quantity or fold change 
versus control and calculated using the 2–ΔΔCt method. Statistical analysis 
was performed on the ΔCt values for each gene.
Co-IP and Western blotting. For Co-IP(s), total protein extracts were 
prepared in lysis buffer (1% TX-100, 10% glycerol, 1 mM β-glycerol-P, 
150 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaF, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) supplemented with 
complete protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma) and complete 
phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Homogenates were centri-
fuged (15,000 g, 10 minutes). 500 μg of supernatant total protein lysate 
was incubated with primary antibodies for 3 hours, followed by 1-hour 
incubation with Protein A/G Sepharose beads (Invitrogen) at 4°C. Pro-
teins were washed 3 times from the beads with lysis buffer before SDS-
PAGE. See complete unedited blots in the supplemental material.
Methods
Pharmacological reagents. Endotoxin-free, pharmaceutical-grade 
high-molecular-weight HA (MDa HA; >1.8 MDa; <0.1 EU/mg) and 
polydispersed HAf (5–20 kDa, <0.01 EU/mg; and 175–300 kDa, <0.05 
EU/mg) were from Lifecore Biomedical. HA of defined narrow-size 
ranges (monodispersed) were prepared from Lifecore polydispersed 
HA by SEC fractionation (23). Groups of 3 fractions with similar mass-
es, assessed by SEC-MALS, were pooled from multiple column runs 
and concentrated, and final HA weight-average molar mass (Mw), 
96% size distribution, concentration, and endotoxin levels were deter-
mined: 40-kDa HAf (<0.004 EU/mg), 106-kDa HAf (<0.002 EU/mg), 
210-kDa HAf (<0.002 EU/mg), and 357-kDa HAf (<0.002 EU/mg). 
All HA stocks were made in endotoxin-free PBS. 3-[1-[3-(dimethylami-
no)propyl]-5-methoxy-1H-indol-3-yl]-4-(1H-indol-3-yl)-1H-pyrrole-
2,5-dione (Go6983) and (2′Z,3′E)-6-bromoindirubin-3′-oxime (6BIO) 
were from TOCRIS Bioscience. LiCl was from MilliporeSigma. BDNF 
was from PeproTech.
Animals. The following strains were from the Jackson Laborato-
ry: CD44-KO (B6.129(Cg)-CD44tm1hbg/J; stock no. 005085); TLR2-KO 
(B6.129-Tlr2tm1Kir/J; stock no: 004650); TLR4-KO (B6.B10ScN- 
Tlr4lps-del/
JthJ; stock no: 007227); MyD88-KO (B6.129P2(SJL)-Myd88tm1.1Defr/J; stock 
no: 009088); TRIF-KO (C57BL/6J-Ticam1Lps2/J; stock no: 005037). WT 
C57BL/6 mice from the Jackson Laboratory served as strain-matched 
controls. TLR2–/–TLR4–/– mice were provided by Salman Qureshi 
(McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada) (53). E17 timed-preg-
nant Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were from Charles River.
Neonatal H-I. Unilateral cerebral H-I was studied in P3 rats as 
described previously (36). Untreated true controls and H-I animals 
survived until P4, P7, P10, P14, or P21. Only brains with grossly visible 
cerebral pallor or swelling were analyzed by IHC (36) or were rapidly 
dissected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80oC for RNA, 
protein, and HA analyses. A minimum of 5 brains were analyzed at 
each time point. Up to 20 animals from 2 separate litters were com-
bined without identifiers for H-I. Studies were repeated at least once 
for a minimum of 4 litters entered into each analysis.
In vitro hyaluronidase assay and SEC-MALS. For the in vitro hyal-
uronidase assay, protein lysates were prepared from WM lesions from 
P4 rats that underwent H-I at P3. Lysates were prepared in ice-cold 1× 
RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma). 
Lysates (40 μg) were incubated with MDa HA (8 μg) in buffer contain-
ing 1% TX-100, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM formic acid, pH 4.0, at 37°C 
for 4 hours. Some protein lysates were heat inactivated by boiling for 
30 minutes or treated with deferoxamine (10 μM; MilliporeSigma) 
before incubation with MDa HA. Samples were briefly centrifuged, 
and 10 μl of reaction solution was loaded onto 0.5% agarose gels for 
electrophoresis for 3 hours at 20 V at 4°C. Gels were stained with 
Stains-all (Polysciences Inc.) and imaged using the Odyssey Infrared 
system (Li-COR Biosciences).
HA concentration and Mw in brain tissues was determined by SEC-
MALS using 2 or 3 PL Aquagel-OH 60, 40, and 20 (Polymer Labs) size 
exclusion columns in series (7). MALLS analyses of the SEC column 
eluate was performed in-line using a Dawn DSP Laser Photometer in 
series with an Optilab DSP Interferometric Refractometer (both from 
Wyatt Technologies). Data were analyzed using ASTRA version 4.73, 
with dn/dc values of 0.153 ml/g, and first-order Berry fits.
Forebrain slice culture and primary OPC culture. Whole forebrain 
coronal slices (300 μm) were prepared from P0/P1 rats or P3/P4 mice 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 3 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Stereology. Cell counts of slice cultures were performed using a 
Stereo Investigator stereology system (MBF Bioscience). Within the 
10×-defined boundaries of the entire corpus callosum (defined by 
DAPI staining), MBP+, Olig2+, and FoxO3+ double-labeled cells were 
estimated using the optical fractionator probe (grid size, 300 × 400 
μm; counting frame, 40 × 40 μm; z-depth, 40 μm) at 40× magnifica-
tion in a minimum of 30 randomly selected WM fields per slice. Slice 
thickness was measured at each counting site. Cell density (mm2) 
was calculated by the formula (cell counts/[number of fields × count-
ing frame area (mm2)]). Estimates of MBP-labeled cells were also 
obtained using the meander scan function at 20×.
To estimate WM and cortex MBP area fractions, we assessed WMI 
using an unbiased approach where lesions were not specifically select-
ed. Montages were generated from frontal tissue sections fluorescently 
stained for MBP. Montages were captured at 10× magnification, and MBP 
staining was estimated using rolling-ball background subtraction with a 
150-pixel radius. A pixel-intensity histogram was generated for each ROI 
using ImageJ (NIH) and exported to R (R Project for Statistical Comput-
ing), and area fractions were obtained as described previously (17).
Human pathology. We studied 2 cohorts of human autopsy brains 
with either chronic diffuse preterm WMI or chronic stages of WMI in 
adult MS. Nine tissue blocks were retrospectively collected from archival 
cases (formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded). The 4 tissue blocks with 
preterm WMI were previously described in Table 1 of ref. 17 and corre-
spond to cases 7, 12, 13, and 17, with ages at birth of 32, 29, 25, and 26 
weeks, respectively. Tissue blocks selected for the adult MS cohort had 
chronic active or chronic remodeling (“shadow”) plaques, as previously 
described (ref. 7 and see Supplemental Table 1).
Statistics. Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 7 statisti-
cal software (GraphPad Software). Comparisons between 2 groups were 
made by 2-tailed Student’s t test. One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s 
multiple comparisons test was used to determine statistical significance 
for more than 2 groups. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
All experiments were repeated at least twice and performed with several 
independent biological samples, as indicated in the figure legends.
Study approval. All animal procedures were approved by the 
OHSU IACUC (protocol IP00000837) according to the NIH Guide for 
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All neonatal human WMI sam-
ples were obtained after full IRB review and approval from Children’s 
and Women’s Hospital, University of British Columbia (Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada) with the assistance of Glenda Hendson in 
the Department of Pathology. All pathological diagnoses were inde-
pendently confirmed by G. Hendson and Marjorie Grafe. All MS tissue 
blocks were obtained with the assistance of C. Dirk Keene, Depart-
ment of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA. Tissues were obtained with the approval of the human subject 
committee of the University of Washington.
Author contributions
TS, BE, DLM, PHW, LSS, and SAB were responsible for concep-
tion and design of the studies. TS, PD, DS, MH, and WS acquired 
and analyzed data from rodent H-I studies, primary OPCs, and 
in vitro slice culture for myelination status, gene expression, and 
actions of HAf. JMD and XG acquired and analyzed rodent H-I 
time course data to quantify myelination recovery. FB acquired 
and analyzed all data for promoter expression studies in primary 
OPCs. BB acquired and analyzed SEC-MALS data from rodent 
Antibodies were from the following sources: polyclonal rabbit 
AKT (1:1,000; C67E7; catalog 4691), A20 (1:1,000; D13H3; catalog 
5630), phospho-AKT T-308 (1:1,000; catalog 9275), phospho-AKT 
S473 (1:1,000; catalog 9271), phospho-ERK1/2 (1:1,000; catalog 9102), 
phospho-mTOR S2448 (1:1,000; D9C2; catalog 5536), phospho-GSK3β 
Ser9 (1:500; 5B3; catalog 9323) and mouse monoclonal actin (1:4,000; 
8H10D10; catalog 3700) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Tech-
nology; monoclonal mouse TRIF (1:200; E-7; catalog sc-514384), 
TRAF6 (1:200; D10; catalog sc-8409), β-arrestin2 (1:200; H-9; cata-
log sc-13140), and rabbit polyclonal Pellino1/2 (1:200; H-105; catalog 
sc-67025) antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. Equiva-
lent protein amounts were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and transferred to an 
Immobilon-FL membrane. Western blot detection employed IR700 or 
IR800 or a special IR800-conjugated (incapable of detecting IgG) sec-
ondary antibody (Rockland Inc.). The pixel band intensity was analyzed 
with the Odyssey Infrared system (Li-COR Biosciences).
ChIP assay. Mouse OPCs were grown in proliferation or differen-
tiation medium (7) and treated with vehicle (PBS) or bHAf (500 nM), 
followed by treatment with 1% formaldehyde (10 minutes; 37°C). Cells 
were washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS containing a protease inhibi-
tor cocktail (MilliporeSigma), lysed, and chromatin sheared to gener-
ate fragments of different sizes (14, 16). ChIP assays were performed 
as described previously (16). For preclearing and pull-downs, we used 
Protein A Sepharose (GE Healthcare) preblocked with yeast transfer 
RNA and BSA. The antibodies used were rabbit anti-Olig2 (catalog 
AB9610; Millipore), rabbit anti-Brg1 (D1Q7F; catalog 49360; Cell Sig-
naling Technology), rabbit anti-FoxO3 (D19A7; catalog 12829; Cell Sig-
naling Technology), and rabbit IgG (catalog 2729; Cell Signaling Tech-
nology). PCR was performed using Phusion Hot Start II High Fidelity 
DNA Polymerase and the following primers: for MBP, forward primer 
5′-AGAGGGAATGGACTTGCTGC, reverse primer 5′-GCGGTC-
GTTTGACAAAAGGT; for FoxO3, forward primer 5′-CGCAGTGGT-
GTGTTGTCTGA, reverse primer: 5′-CGGCAGCAGCACAAAGTTAT.
IHC. Antibodies used were as follows: mouse anti-MBP (1:500; 
SMI-99; NE1019; Calbiochem), rat anti-MBP (1:500; MAB386; 
EMD Millipore), mouse anti-GFAP (1:500; MAB360; EMD Mil-
lipore), mouse anti-O4 (1:500; from Steven Pfeiffer, University 
of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut, USA), 
rabbit anti-PDGFRα (1:500; from William Stallcup, Sanford Burn-
ham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, California, 
USA), mouse anti-CNPase (1:500; SMI-91; Covance), mouse anti-
CASPR/paranodin (1:250; K65/35; NeuroMab), mouse anti–NF-H 
(1:1,000; SMI312; BioLegend), rabbit anti–caspase-3 (1:200; 9662; 
Cell Signaling Technology), mouse anti–FoxO3 C-terminus (1:100; 
from Anne Brunet, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA), 
rabbit anti-FoxO3 (1:100; NB100-614; Novus Biologicals), goat 
anti-Olig2 (1:100; AF2418; R&D Systems), and mouse anti-Olig2 
(1:500; John Alberta, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA). HA was visualized with biotinylated HA-binding 
protein (bHABP; 1:200; 385911; EMD Millipore). Selectivity of 
HABP staining was confirmed with controls that excluded HABP or 
secondary antibody (Supplemental Figure1A). Antigen retrieval was 
employed for all antibodies (0.01 M citrate buffer pH 6.0, 85°C, 15 
minutes). All corresponding secondary antibodies were from Jack-
son ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc. Nuclei were counterstained 
with DAPI (Invitrogen). No-primary control studies for all antibod-
ies exhibited no specific staining.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 4 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
 1. Biswas SK, Lopez-Collazo E. Endotoxin tolerance: 
new mechanisms, molecules and clinical signifi-
cance. Trends Immunol. 2009;30(10):475–487.
 2. Morris MC, Gilliam EA, Li L. Innate immune 
programing by endotoxin and its pathological 
consequences. Front Immunol. 2014;5:680.
 3. Oohashi T, Edamatsu M, Bekku Y, Carulli D. The 
hyaluronan and proteoglycan link proteins: Orga-
nizers of the brain extracellular matrix and key 
molecules for neuronal function and plasticity. 
Exp Neurol. 2015;274(Pt B):134–144.
 4. Back SA, et al. Hyaluronan accumulates in 
demyelinated lesions and inhibits oligoden-
drocyte progenitor maturation. Nat Med. 
2005;11(9):966–972.
 5. Gallo V, Deneen B. Glial development: the cross-
roads of regeneration and repair in the CNS. 
Neuron. 2014;83(2):283–308.
 6. Sloane JA, Batt C, Ma Y, Harris ZM, Trapp B, 
Vartanian T. Hyaluronan blocks oligoden-
drocyte progenitor maturation and remyelin-
ation through TLR2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2010;107(25):11555–11560.
 
7. Preston M, et al. Digestion products of the PH20 
hyaluronidase inhibit remyelination. Ann Neurol. 
2013;73(2):266–280.
 8. Jiang D, Liang J, Noble PW. Hyaluronan as an 
immune regulator in human diseases. Physiol 
Rev. 2011;91(1):221–264.
 9. Taylor DL, et al. Attenuation of proliferation in 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells by activated 
microglia. J Neurosci Res. 2010;88(8):1632–1644.
 10. Raasch J, et al. IkappaB kinase 2 determines 
oligodendrocyte loss by non-cell-autonomous 
activation of NF-kappaB in the central nervous 
system. Brain. 2011;134(Pt 4):1184–1198.
 11. Dong Y, et al. Endotoxin free hyaluronan and 
hyaluronan fragments do not stimulate TNF-α, 
interleukin-12 or upregulate co-stimulatory mol-
ecules in dendritic cells or macrophages. Sci Rep. 
2016;6:36928.
 12. Back SA, Rosenberg PA. Pathophysiology of 
glia in perinatal white matter injury. Glia. 
2014;62(11):1790–1815.
 13. Flores AI, et al. Constitutively active Akt induces 
enhanced myelination in the CNS. J Neurosci. 
2008;28(28):7174–7183.
 14. Banine F, et al. SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling 
factors induce changes in DNA methylation to 
promote transcriptional activation. Cancer Res. 
2005;65(9):3542–3547.
 15. Yu Y, et al. Olig2 targets chromatin remodelers to 
enhancers to initiate oligodendrocyte differenti-
ation. Cell. 2013;152(1-2):248–261.
 16. Matsumoto S, et al. Brg1 directly regulates Olig2 
transcription and is required for oligodendro-
cyte progenitor cell specification. Dev Biol. 
2016;413(2):173–187.
 17. Buser JR, et al. Arrested preoligodendrocyte mat-
uration contributes to myelination failure in pre-
mature infants. Ann Neurol. 2012;71(1):93–109.
 18. Stern R, Jedrzejas MJ. Hyaluronidases: their 
genomics, structures, and mechanisms of action. 
Chem Rev. 2006;106(3):818–839.
 19. Marella M, et al. PH20 is not expressed in murine 
CNS and oligodendrocyte precursor cells. Ann 
Clin Transl Neurol. 2017;4(3):191–211.
 20. Yamamoto H, Tobisawa Y, Inubushi T, Irie F, Ohya-
ma C, Yamaguchi Y. A mammalian homolog of the 
zebrafish transmembrane protein 2 (TMEM2) is the 
long-sought-after cell-surface hyaluronidase. J Biol 
Chem. 2017;292(18):7304–7313.
 21. Dean JM, et al. An organotypic slice culture 
model of chronic white matter injury with matu-
ration arrest of oligodendrocyte progenitors. Mol 
Neurodegener. 2011;6:46.
 22. Botzki A, et al. L-Ascorbic acid 6-hexadecanoate, a 
potent hyaluronidase inhibitor. X-ray structure and 
molecular modeling of enzyme-inhibitor complex-
es. J Biol Chem. 2004;279(44):45990–45997.
 23. Pandey MS, Baggenstoss BA, Washburn J, Harris 
EN, Weigel PH. The hyaluronan receptor for 
endocytosis (HARE) activates NF-κB-mediated 
gene expression in response to 40-400-kDa, but 
not smaller or larger, hyaluronans. J Biol Chem. 
2013;288(20):14068–14079.
 24. Bercury KK, Macklin WB. Dynamics and 
mechanisms of CNS myelination. Dev Cell. 
2015;32(4):447–458.
 25. Han BH, et al. BDNF blocks caspase-3 activation 
in neonatal hypoxia-ischemia. Neurobiol Dis. 
2000;7(1):38–53.
 26. Fortin DA, et al. Brain-derived neurotrophic fac-
tor activation of CaM-kinase kinase via transient 
receptor potential canonical channels induces 
the translation and synaptic incorporation of 
GluA1-containing calcium-permeable AMPA 
receptors. J Neurosci. 2012;32(24):8127–8137.
 27. Harada H, Takahashi M. CD44-dependent intra-
cellular and extracellular catabolism of hyaluron-
ic acid by hyaluronidase-1 and -2. J Biol Chem. 
2007;282(8):5597–5607.
 28. Rolls A, et al. Toll-like receptors modulate 
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Nat Cell Biol. 
2007;9(9):1081–1088.
 29. Kondo T, Kawai T, Akira S. Dissecting negative 
regulation of Toll-like receptor signaling. Trends 
Immunol. 2012;33(9):449–458.
 30. Moynagh PN. The roles of Pellino E3 ubiq-
uitin ligases in immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2014;14(2):122–131.
 31. Azim K, Butt AM. GSK3β negatively regulates 
oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination 
in vivo. Glia. 2011;59(4):540–553.
 32. Renault VM, et al. FoxO3 regulates neural stem cell 
homeostasis. Cell Stem Cell. 2009;5(5):527–539.
 33. Chang A, Tourtellotte WW, Rudick R, Trapp 
BD. Premyelinating oligodendrocytes in chron-
ic lesions of multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 
2002;346(3):165–173.
 34. Brunet A, et al. Akt promotes cell survival by 
phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead tran-
scription factor. Cell. 1999;96(6):857–868.
 35. Riedel CG, et al. DAF-16 employs the chro-
matin remodeller SWI/SNF to promote 
stress resistance and longevity. Nat Cell Biol. 
2013;15(5):491–501.
 36. Segovia KN, et al. Arrested oligodendrocyte 
lineage maturation in chronic perinatal white 
matter injury. Ann Neurol. 2008;63(4):520–530.
 37. Baggenstoss BA, Harris EN, Washburn JL, Medina 
AP, Nguyen L, Weigel PH. Hyaluronan synthase 
control of synthesis rate and hyaluronan product 
size are independent functions differentially 
affected by mutations in a conserved tandem 
B-X7-B motif. Glycobiology. 2017;27(2):154–164.
 38. Weigel PH, Baggenstoss BA. What is special 
about 200 kDa hyaluronan that activates 
hyaluronan receptor signaling? Glycobiology. 
2017;27(9):868–877.
 39. Lesley J, et al. TSG-6 modulates the interaction 
between hyaluronan and cell surface CD44. J Biol 
Chem. 2004;279(24):25745–25754.
 40. Yuan H, Amin R, Ye X, de la Motte CA, Cowman 
MK. Determination of hyaluronan molecular 
mass distribution in human breast milk. Anal 
Biochem. 2015;474:78–88.
 41. Hill DR, et al. Human milk hyaluronan enhances 
innate defense of the intestinal epithelium. J Biol 
Chem. 2013;288(40):29090–29104.
 42. Teder P, et al. Resolution of lung inflammation by 
CD44. Science. 2002;296(5565):155–158.
 43. Jiang D, et al. Regulation of lung injury and repair 
by Toll-like receptors and hyaluronan. Nat Med. 
2005;11(11):1173–1179.
 44. Wolny PM, et al. Analysis of CD44-hyaluronan 
Sclerosis Society (RG 4843A5/1 to LSS). We are grateful to Susan Aic-
her and the OHSU EM core for ultrastructural studies supported by 
NIH grant P30NS061800. We are grateful to Mary Stenzel-Poore, 
Susan Stevens, and Dale Fortin for their invaluable discussions 
regarding mechanisms of IT and signaling and to Marjorie Grafe for 
valuable advice and review of human neuropathology specimens. TS 
was supported by a Huebner Family Postdoctoral Fellowship.
Address correspondence to: Stephen A. Back, Oregon Health and 
Science University, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric 
Neuroscience, 3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, Oregon 
97239-3098, USA. Phone: 503.494.0906; Email: backs@ohsu.edu.
H-I lesions; BB and ENH generated the endotoxin-free monodis-
persed HAf by SEC fractionation. TS, XG, and SAB analyzed the 
human postmortem samples
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke (NS054044; NS045737 to SAB), the Nation-
al Institute on Aging (AG-31892 to SAB and LSS), an NIH Directors 
award for the operation of the Oregon National Primate Research 
Center (P51OD01109), the American Stroke Association (grant-in-
aid 11GRNT7510072 to SAB), the Congressionally Directed Medical 
Research Programs (MS160144 to LSS), and the National Multiple 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 0 4 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
interactions in an artificial membrane system: 
insights into the distinct binding properties of 
high and low molecular weight hyaluronan.  
J Biol Chem. 2010;285(39):30170–30180.
 45. Hur EM, Zhou FQ. GSK3 signalling in neural devel-
opment. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010;11(8):539–551.
 46. Ding VW, Chen RH, McCormick F. Differential 
regulation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta 
by insulin and Wnt signaling. J Biol Chem. 
2000;275(42):32475–32481.
 47. Paik JH, et al. FoxOs cooperatively regulate 
diverse pathways governing neural stem cell 
homeostasis. Cell Stem Cell. 2009;5(5):540–553.
 48. Jablonska B, et al. Oligodendrocyte regen-
eration after neonatal hypoxia requires 
FoxO1-mediated p27Kip1 expression. J Neurosci. 
2012;32(42):14775–14793.
 49. Palazuelos J, Klingener M, Aguirre A. TGFβ sig-
naling regulates the timing of CNS myelination 
by modulating oligodendrocyte progenitor cell 
cycle exit through SMAD3/4/FoxO1/Sp1.  
J Neurosci. 2014;34(23):7917–7930.
 50. Fancy SP, et al. Parallel states of pathological Wnt 
signaling in neonatal brain injury and colon cancer. 
Nat Neurosci. 2014;17(4):506–512.
 51. Seoane J, Le HV, Shen L, Anderson SA, Massagué 
J. Integration of Smad and forkhead pathways in 
the control of neuroepithelial and glioblastoma 
cell proliferation. Cell. 2004;117(2):211–223.
 52. Essaghir A, Dif N, Marbehant CY, Coffer PJ, 
Demoulin JB. The transcription of FOXO genes 
is stimulated by FOXO3 and repressed by growth 
factors. J Biol Chem. 2009;284(16):10334–10342.
 53. Paun A, Fox J, Balloy V, Chignard M, Qureshi 
ST, Haston CK. Combined Tlr2 and Tlr4 defi-
ciency increases radiation-induced pulmonary 
fibrosis in mice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2010;77(4):1198–1205.
 54. Dugas JC, Tai YC, Speed TP, Ngai J, Barres 
BA. Functional genomic analysis of oligo-
dendrocyte differentiation. J Neurosci. 
2006;26(43):10967–10983.
