 Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
DOI 10.1038/s41398-017-0054-x
Translational 
Psychiatry
A R T I C L E
O p e n A c c e s s
Cerebral organoids reveal early cortical
maldevelopment in schizophrenia—
computational anatomy and genomics,
role of FGFR1
E. K. Stachowiak1, C. A. Benson1, S. T. Narla1, A. Dimitri1,2, L. E. Bayona Chuye1, S. Dhiman1,3, K. Harikrishnan1,3, S. Elahi1,
D. Freedman1, K. J. Brennand
4, P. Sarder1,3 and M. K. Stachowiak1,3
Abstract
Studies of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from schizophrenia patients and control individuals revealed that the
disorder is programmed at the preneuronal stage, involves a common dysregulated mRNA transcriptome, and
identified Integrative Nuclear FGFR1 Signaling a common dysregulated mechanism. We used human embryonic stem
cell (hESC) and iPSC-derived cerebral organoids from four controls and three schizophrenia patients to model the first
trimester of in utero brain development. The schizophrenia organoids revealed an abnormal scattering of proliferating
Ki67+ neural progenitor cells (NPCs) from the ventricular zone (VZ), throughout the intermediate (IZ) and cortical (CZ)
zones. TBR1 pioneer neurons and reelin, which guides cortico-petal migration, were restricted from the schizophrenia
cortex. The maturing neurons were abundantly developed in the subcortical regions, but were depleted from the
schizophrenia cortex. The decreased intracortical connectivity was denoted by changes in the orientation and
morphology of calretinin interneurons. In schizophrenia organoids, nuclear (n)FGFR1 was abundantly expressed by
developing subcortical cells, but was depleted from the neuronal committed cells (NCCs) of the CZ. Transfection of
dominant negative and constitutively active nFGFR1 caused widespread disruption of the neuro-ontogenic gene
networks in hESC-derived NPCs and NCCs. The fgfr1 gene was the most prominent FGFR gene expressed in NPCs and
NCCs, and blocking with PD173074 reproduced both the loss of nFGFR1 and cortical neuronal maturation in hESC
cerebral organoids. We report for the first time, progression of the cortical malformation in schizophrenia and link it to
altered FGFR1 signaling. Targeting INFS may offer a preventive treatment of schizophrenia.
Introduction
Although the primary onset of schizophrenia is during
adolescence to young adulthood, an early developmental
origin of schizophrenia has been implied by improperly
clustered immature neurons in cortical layers II, III, and
V1, changes in the hippocampal nonpyramidal CA2
neurons2, as well as hypoplastic midbrain dopamine
neurons3–6. Such changes in brain structure most likely
develop in utero during the late first and early second
trimester7–9. Additionally, disorganization of the white
matter tract has been observed in schizophrenia10, sug-
gesting that the disease affects not only the development
and function of neurons, but also their projections. The
variability in brain malformations are thought to underlie
the variety of clinical findings: positive symptoms (delu-
sions and hallucinations), negative symptoms (affective
flattening, amotivation, and anhedonia)11,12, and cognitive
symptoms (disorganized speech and cognitive deficits)
(DSM 4th edition). Abnormal development during the
© The Author(s) 2017
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Correspondence: E K Stachowiak (eks1@buffalo.edu) or M
K Stachowiak (mks4@buffalo.edu)
1Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
2Department of Biology, State University of New York at Fredonia, Fredonia,
NY, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Translational Psychiatry
1234567890
1234567890
 first trimester is also consistent with minor physical
anomalies associated with schizophrenia13.
According to the neurodevelopmental hypothesis, both
genetic and environmental factors broadly affect brain
development and thus, contribute to the etiology of
schizophrenia7. The ontogenic construction of the human
cortex is thought to proceed through a series of irrever-
sible cycles of neural stem and progenitor cell prolifera-
tion, differentiation to neuroblasts, migration to the brain
surface where early neuronal-like cells are formed, and
develop into mature neurons with intercellular connec-
tions and communicative pathways. Normal human brain
development begins with proliferation of neurogenic
neuroepithelial precursors, which act as neural stem cells
and give rise to the primary progenitor cells, radial glia,
that are capable of generating neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodendrocytes14. In the developing vertebrate brain,
the elongated bipolar radial glia are located at the apical
surface of the ventricular zone (VZ) and span the width of
the cortex. These cells generate translocating radial glia,
intermediate
progenitor
cells,
and
neuroblasts
that
migrate through the intermediate zone (IZ) to the outer
cortical zone (CZ), and populate cortical layers. Via this
inside-out process, the early born neurons occupy inner
layers while the late born neurons migrate out toward the
edge and occupy the superficial cortical layers15. Disrup-
tion of these processes has been hypothesized to underlie
the misconstruction of the cortex and subcortical circuits
observed in autism16 and schizophrenia (review-17).
Coordinated transition of cells from one neurodeve-
lopmental stage to another are needed to produce syn-
chronized
development
of
the
cortical
layers.
The
navigation through distinct developmental stages involves
concerted regulation of thousands of genes and is likely
overseen by some central guiding mechanism(s). Our
recent studies have revealed one such pan-ontogenic
mechanism,
Integrative
Nuclear
FGFR1
Signaling
(INFS) that controls general body and the brain devel-
opment18–20. The fgfr1 gene resides at the top of the gene
hierarchy that governs gastrulation, as well as the sub-
sequent development of the major body axes, nervous
system, muscles, and bones, by affecting downstream
genes that control the cell cycle, pluripotency, and dif-
ferentiation, as well as microRNAs (miRNAs)21–26. Stu-
dies show that this regulation is executed by nuclear
FGFR1 (nFGFR1), which integrates signals from diverse
development-initiating factors, cooperates with a multi-
tude of transcription factors (TFs), and targets thousands
of genes encoding for mRNAs, as well as miRNAs in top
ontogenic networks19,20. nFGFR1 binds to the promoters
of genes that control the transition from proliferation to
cell differentiation, as well as to the morphogens that
delineate the body and CNS axes, and construct the
nervous system18,19,27–29.
RNA-sequencing of differentiating neuronal progenitor
cells (NPCs) developed from the induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) of four different schizophrenia patients and
four control subjects revealed a common dysregulation of
1384 mRNAs and 18 miRNA genes, deconstruction of
coordinated mRNA, and miRNA–mRNA networks, and
the formation of aberrant networks29. The downregulated
genes reside within pathways that block neurogenesis, e.g.
Notch1 and Rest, while the upregulated genes were found
in pathways that initiate neural development, including
master genes, such as Ascl1, Nur77, and RXR, or genes of
the Wnt signaling pathway29. ChIPseq revealed that
nFGFR1 targets more than 80% of the dysregulated
mRNA genes and 31% of dysregulated miRNA genes29.
These results indicated an early (preneuronal) genomic
etiology of schizophrenia and designated INFS as a
common dysregulated mechanism in the Cannon and
Keller water-shed model of schizophrenia29,30. Analyses of
the differentiated neurons of the same schizophrenia and
control iPSC lines revealed impaired migration in 2D
cultures31,
polarity32,
decreased
neurite
numbers33,
reduced synaptic maturation33–36, and decreased activity
in the schizophrenia neurons35,36. These changes fore-
casted a potential disruption of early brain development
in schizophrenia. Therefore, in the present study we fol-
lowed the neuro-ontogenic potency of these characterized
iPSC lines, from the stem cell/progenitor stage through
the formation of cortical layers using the 3D cerebral
organoid model.
Pluripotent stem cells have the potential to differentiate
into various cell lines37 and to self-organize and develop
organ-like structures termed “organoids.” Recently, 3D
cerebral organoids have been generated, which recapitu-
late key aspects of human brain development during the
first and early second trimesters of embryogenesis38. The
pluripotent hESCs or iPSCs aggregate to form embryoid
bodies (EBs) capable of generating all three germ layers39.
EBs placed in neuroectodermal media form the neu-
roectoderm germ layer, the foundation for the develop-
ment of cerebral organoids. Neuroectoderm cultured in
matrigel scaffolds develop a 3D cerebral organoid tissue
with distinct germinal centers (rosettes) and cortical lay-
ers corresponding to the human brain structure at the end
of the first trimester38,40,41. This new technology applied
to iPSCs from microcephaly patients41 and patients with
autism16 revealed disruptions in early brain development
and
shed
light
on
underlying
cellular
mechanisms
involved.
In the present investigation, the cerebral organoid
technology
applied
to
control
and
schizophrenia
iPSCs29,31,33 provided for the first time, an insight into the
early stages of the telencephalic development and the role
of FGFR1 in schizophrenia.
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 2 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 These results showed an abnormal dispersion of the
proliferating stem-like cells outside the VZ into the IZ and
CZ, and a curtailed neuronal cortical development in the
CZ of the schizophrenia cerebral organoids accompanied
by turning off the expression of nFGFR1. The arrest of
cortical development was reproduced in control cerebral
organoids derived from hESCs, by blocking and depleting
FGFR1 with its specific antagonist, PD173074. This study
suggests that a reconstitution of nFGFR1 in developing
cortical
neurons
can
modify
the
developmental
malformations.
Materials and methods
Pluripotent stem cells
In the human embryonic stem cell (hESC) studies, line
H9 (WA09) (WiCell Research Institute, Inc.) and line
HUES8 (originated from Harvard University, Boston,
USA) were used. The iPSC lines used in the present study
(Table 1) were derived from different control individuals
and from individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia at
different ages33. In earlier studies these schizophrenia
lines displayed similar phenotypic changes in 2D cultures
as described in the section “Introduction”31,33,42. Recent
RNAseq investigation showed common dysregulation of a
global transcriptome in neural progenitor cells (NPCs)
differentiated from all schizophrenia lines and ChIPseq
showed similar changes in nFGFR1 genomic interactions
in two investigated schizophrenia iPSC lines29. In the
present study, we found no discernable differences
between the organoids generated from control female and
control male iPSC lines and between schizophrenia
female and control male iPSC lines. The differences
between
schizophrenia
and
control
organoids
were
reproduced in all control and schizophrenia iPSC lines
and were statistically evaluated.
Plasmids and transfections are described in Supple-
mental Methods.
Generation of cerebral organoids
Cerebral organoids were generated from hESCs (H9 and
HUES8) and from human iPSCs using a modified proto-
col of Lancaster et al.40, described in the Supplementary
Methods and in Supplementary Fig. 1. Eight-day hESC
(H9) cerebral organoids were treated with the FGFR1
inhibitor, PD173074 (Abcam), by adding fresh media with
100 nM PD173074 or drug-free media every 2 days for
10 days. On day 18, the cerebral organoids were har-
vested, fixed, and processed for immunocytochemistry.
Pulse BrdU labeling
At day 14, cerebral organoids (controls or PD173074
treated) were treated with 100 µM BrdU for 2 h (pulse
phase), washed with DMEM-F12 three times and then
incubated with media (control or PD173074) for an
additional 4 days (chase phase). At day 18, organoids were
harvested and double immunostained with rat anti-BrdU
and mouse anti-Pan-Neu antibodies, as described in the
next section.
Organoid sectioning and immunocytochemical staining
For all experimental conditions (four controls and three
schizophrenia iPSC lines, hESC H9 and HUES8) 4–5
organoids for each line were cryosectioned at 30 μm
thickness and processed as described in the Supplemen-
tary Methods. The antibodies used are listed in Supple-
mentary Table 1. The control and experimental organoid
sections were immunostained at the same time using
identical protocols28,43,44. Each stain was performed
independently four times.
Quantitative analyses of histological sections and images
Cell were counted using Visiopharm stereological soft-
ware45. Fluorescence intensity measurements (FIM) were
performed using Zen 2.0 Blue Imaging software in ran-
domly selected Regions of Interest (ROIs) within organoid
regions listed in the figure legends. All images acquired
were in the linear range of the camera. Images of sections
from control and schizophrenia organoids were acquired
under identical illumination conditions and identical
camera gain, offset, and exposure times. Background
images (outside the tissue sections) were taken and sub-
tracted from the images of stained sections. The total area
of each ROI image was recorded, as well as the number of
thresholded pixels and their integrated intensity. Each
channel was converted into the eight-bit grayscale and the
mean intensity was calculated. Statistical analysis was
performed using t-test in MiniTab software and data is
presented as mean ± Standard Error of the Mean (SEM).
For detailed protocols see Supplementary Methods.
Computational analyses were run on the combined sets
of images and the initial results were presented to cor-
responding
authors
without
identifying
the
groups
Table 1
iPSC lines used to generate organoids29,33
Cell line ID
Gender
Description
Age of diagnosis
2038
Male
iPSC SCZ
6 years
2497
Male
iPSC SCZ
15 years
1835
Female
iPSC SCZ
27 years
BJ #1
Male
iPSC Control
3440
Male
iPSC Control
2937
Male
iPSC Control
3651
Female
iPSC Control
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 3 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 (schizophrenia and control). The codes used in compu-
tational image analyses are provided on the following
GitHub repositories:
Ki67 Analysis: https://github.com/TheJaeger/CellStats-
Ki16
Calretinin
Analysis:
https://github.com/TheJaeger/
CellStats-Calretinin
The code version used belongs to the master branch,
any additional changes made reflect improvements to
code readability. The code can be accessed by down-
loading or cloning the repository and can be run by
opening main.m in MATLAB. Additonal instructions on
running the codes are provided in README.md at the
root of each repository.
All image files used in computational analyses can be
found in the link below. Each corresponding set of images
(Ki67 and calretinin) are grouped into control and schi-
zophrenia sets.
Images: http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~mks4/public_sha
ring/schizophrenia2/
RNAseq analysis
The analysis was performed using homogenous cultures
of NPCs differentiated from hESC H9, as described in
ref. 29. To induce neuronal committed cells (NCCs),
NPCs were treated with 20 ng ml−1 BDNF (Peprotech),
20 ng ml−1 GDNF (Peprotech), 1 mM dibutyryl-cyclic
AMP (Sigma), and 200 nM ascorbic acid (Sigma)29 for
two days. Plasmids and transfections of NPCs are
described in Supplemental Methods. NPCs were trans-
fected with control DNA or FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) and
24 h later were stimulated for 48 h with neuronal differ-
entiation
media
induced
by
cAMP/BDNF/GDNF.
Experiments
were
performed
using
three
biological
replicates of culture and transfection conditions. The
RNAseq protocol was described previously19,29 and is
summarized in the Supplementary Methods. The results
of RNAseq have been deposited on NCBI GEO with
accession code: GSE103307.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using two-sided t-test
(comparison of two groups), by one or two-way ANOVA
(comparison of four or more data groups) or by two-
sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. P < 0.05 was con-
sidered significant.
The RNAseq data were statistically evaluated using
Tuxedo pipeline as previously described29. The details of
the sample sizes are listed in figure legends and fulfill the
requirement of statistical significance.
Results
Cerebral organoids recapitulate cellular processes of
cortical development
Cerebral organoids from hESCs were developed using a
combination of two protocols (Supplementary Fig. 1a,
Supplementary Methods). At day 8 the organoids formed
stable cortical rosettes (Fig. 1, a1, a2) with proliferative
Ki67 positive cells in the inner layer and a mixture of
doublecortin positive (DCX+) neuroblasts and immature
βIII-tubulin positive neurons in the outer layers (Fig. 1, a3,
a4).
During the subsequent 10 days, the organoids increased
in size and the number of developed rosettes increased
two to three fold (Fig. 1,b1), as compared to 8-day old
organoids (Fig. 1, a1). The 18-day organoids formed
polarized structures with a distinguishable border that
separated a forebrain-like region containing multiple
rosettes from a hindbrain-like structure, which typically
lacked rosettes (Fig. 1, b1), as reported previously40. In all
of the 18-day organoids examined, the cortical rosettes
developed three major zones distinguished by DAPI
staining (Fig. 1, b2). The VZ contained a large ventricle-
like lumen surrounded by compact layers of vertically
aligned elongated cells. The area outside the VZ, the IZ,
contained uniform, predominantly round cells. The out-
ermost CZ contained horizontally aligned cortical layers
(Fig. 1, b2).
Structures of the female hESC H9 line-derived orga-
noids, internal rosettes, and the cellular organization
(Fig. 1), were reproduced using the male hESC HUES8
line (Supplementary Fig. 1b).
We investigated the neurodevelopmental stages of cells
in each zone by immunostaining for proliferating NPCs
with the nuclear Ki67 antigen46, doublecortin (DCX)
expressed by neuroblasts, and βIII-tubulin expressed by
young, immature neurons (NCCs)45. These stainings
revealed cellular organization consistent with the inside-
out pattern of human neocortex development15 (Fig. 1,
b3, b4 and b5). Proliferative Ki67+ cells (Fig. 1, b5, Sup-
plementary Fig. 1b3) and GFAP-expressing radial glia
(Supplementary Fig. 1b2) were mostly present in the VZ,
similar to the developing brain in the ventricular and sub-
VZs, where generation of new cells by the brain stem and
progenitor cells takes place. Few Ki67+ cells were found
in the IZ and proliferating cells were not detected in the
CZ (Fig. 1, b5, Supplementary Fig. 1b3). The doublecortin
+ neuroblasts were present in the IZ and the CZ, and the
βIII-tubulin+ NCCs were found predominantly in the CZ.
Organoids derived from schizophrenia iPSCs—dispersion
of proliferating cells in the cortex and blockade of cortical
neuronal development
After establishing the protocol for the generation of
hESC cerebral organoids, we applied this procedure to
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 4 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 human iPSCs. To analyze whether early brain develop-
ment may be altered in schizophrenia, we used iPSC lines
reprogrammed from three schizophrenia and four control
individuals,
in
which
common
dysregulated
tran-
scriptomes have been recently identified29. Our qualitative
observations were verified by computational and statis-
tical analyses of three schizophrenia and four control
patients and are described below. In general, the iPSC
cerebral organoids followed the developmental pattern
and displayed cortical rosettes that were similar to the
hESC organoids. At 5 weeks, the rosettes of both control
and schizophrenia iPSC organoids had only narrow resi-
dual lumens (Supplementary Fig. 2). No gross size dif-
ferences
were
observed
between
control
and
schizophrenia iPSC organoids. However, a detailed cel-
lular analysis revealed marked differences between control
and schizophrenia organoids (Fig. 2). The control iPSC
organoids, similar to hESC organoids, contained 2–3
layers of proliferating Ki67+ NPCs in the VZ, few Ki67+
cells in the IZ, and none or only single proliferating cells
in the CZ. These layers were already observed at week 2
(Fig. 2a) and were further developed at week 5 (Fig. 2b). In
contrast, in the 2-week schizophrenia organoids, only one
layer of Ki67+ cells was typically present and there were
no distinct palisades of proliferating cells surrounding the
VZ lumens observed. Instead, the Ki67+ cells were
strikingly dispersed in the IZ, as well as in the CZ (Fig. 2a).
Fig. 1 Representative hESC (H9) cerebral organoids at (a) 8 and (b) 18 days of development. (a1, b1) tile scanning of DAPI; yellow arrows point
to cortical rosettes, enlarged in a2 and b2; at day 18, zones are outlined—ventricular zone (VZ), intermediate zone (IZ), and cortical zone (CZ).
Immunostaining: (A4, B5) Ki67+ proliferating cells; (a3, b3, b4), doublecortin (DCX+) neuroblasts, βIII-tubulin+ immature neurons
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 5 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Staining with a monoclonal Pan-Neu antibody, which
reacts with key somatic, nuclear, dendritic, and axonal
proteins
of
the
pan-neuronal
architecture,
revealed
differentiated Pan-Neu+ neurons concentrated in the CZ
of the control iPSC organoids, forming a distinct cortical
layer at 2 weeks (Fig. 2a) and more pronounced at 5 weeks
Fig. 2 (See legend on next page.)
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 6 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 (Fig. 2b). These mature neurons formed a dense network
of long processes parallel, as well as perpendicular to the
cortical surface. At 2 weeks, the schizophrenia iPSC
organoids had noticeably fewer Pan-Neu neurons and
Pan-Neu positive dendrites in the CZ (Fig. 2a, Supple-
mentary Fig. 2b). Instead, the schizophrenia organoids
displayed differentiated Pan-Neu+ neurons deep within
the IZ and VZ regions. These mature subcortical neurons
were found already at 2 weeks in the schizophrenia
organoids, at the time when no such neurons were
observed in the control organoids (Fig. 2a, Supplementary
Fig. 2b). At 5 weeks, the basal cortical Pan-Neu positive
neurons in schizophrenia organoids displayed dense short
processes, different from the network of the long pro-
cesses formed in the cortex of the control organoids
(Fig. 2b). Overall, density of the Pan-Neu fibers in schi-
zophrenia appeared reduced. This decrease was verified
by measuring the Pan-Neu fluorescence intensity in the
basal CZ, as compared to the IZ. In three patients
(compared to three control individuals), we found a sig-
nificant reduction in Pan-Neu fluorescence in the basal
CZ and no significant change in the IZ (Fig. 2c, d).
The impaired development of the schizophrenia cortical
neurons was accompanied by a visible dispersion of the
proliferating NPCs (Fig. 2a, b). To quantitatively asses
these changes, we analyzed images of the organoids form
three controls and three patients (Fig. 3). Computer-based
cell identification and automated counting showed a sig-
nificant increase in the density of Ki67+ cells/area of the
schizophrenia ROIs (Fig. 3b). For each ROI (example in
Fig. 3, c1), we generated Minimum Spanning Tree graphs
(Fig. 3, c2) (Supplementary Methods). This analysis
revealed significant increases in the distances between
cells, i.e., NPC dispersion, in the schizophrenia organoids.
Two-Way ANOVA demonstrated a highly significant
relation between disease and cell migration (Fig. 3, c3).
To quantitatively assess changes involving the Ki67+
NPCs, we analyzed images of the organoids of three
controls
and
three
patients.
Computer-based
cell
identification and counting showed a significant increase
in the density of Ki67+ cells/area in the analyzed ROIs
(Fig. 2b). For each ROI, Minimum Spanning Tree graphs
were generated (Fig. 2, c1, c2), which showed significant
increases in the distances between cells, i.e., increased
NPC dispersion, in the schizophrenia organoids (Fig. 2,
c3). Two-Way ANOVA demonstrated a highly significant
relation between disease and cell migration.
Together, our observations showed proliferation and
migration of the schizophrenia NPCs, premature devel-
opment of neurons in the subcortical region, and
impaired neuronal development in the forming cortex of
the schizophrenia organoids.
Changes in NPCs in schizophrenia iPSC organoids
The antibody against autism-linked transcription factor
T-Box Brain 1 (TBR1), identifies developing neuroblasts
of the subplate (SP) and cortical plate (CP), which provide
the first pioneer neurons of the developing cerebral cor-
tex47. TBR1 is necessary for neuronal differentiation of
NPCs and is a potential master regulator in autism
spectrum disorders48. At 5 weeks of control iPSC orga-
noid development, cells expressing nuclear TBR1 were
distributed throughout the entire CZ and IZ (Fig. 4, a1). In
contrast, in schizophrenia organoids, TBR1+ cells were
absent from the upper cortical
region, while
cells
expressing high levels of TBR1 were found concentrated
predominantly in the cortical plate and IZ. The loss of
TBR1 expression from the upper cortical layers was
documented in all the three schizophrenia organoids, as
compared to three controls. Quantitative stereological
counting showed 32.2 + 2.0% of DAPI-stained nuclei were
positive for TBR1 in organoids from control subjects. This
number was significantly reduced in the schizophrenia
organoids to 17.1 + 1.4 (p < 0.001) (Fig. 4, a2, Supple-
mentary Fig. 5c). Thus, impaired development of the
cortical neurons is associated with an overexpression of
TBR1 in the cortical plate and the absence of the super-
ficial pioneer TBR1+ neuroblasts.
(see figure on previous page)
Fig. 2 Disorganized migration of proliferating cells and depletion of cortical neurons in schizophrenia iPSC cerebral organoids. Organoids
were coimmunostained for Ki67 (red) and Pan-Neu (green). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). a 2-week organoids—images show representative
sections of organoids, control (iPSC line BJ1) and schizophrenia (iPSC line 1835). In schizophrenia organoids, note the dispersion of proliferating (Ki67
+) cells outside the VZ into IZ and CZ, fewer mature Pan-Neu+ neurons in CZ, and the appearance of Pan Neu+ neurons in the IZ. b 5-week iPSC
organoids: control (line 2937) and schizophrenia (line 2038)—representative images of control and schizophrenia organoids. In schizophrenia
organoids, note dispersion of Ki67+ cells into CZ, reduced density of Pan Neu+ neurites in basal CZ and the presence of Pan Neu+ cells with neurites
in the IZ. 3D rotational confocal images of control (line 3651) and schizophrenia (line 1835) organoids are shown in Video 1a and b. Pan-Neu
immunofluorescence intensity was measured in multiple randomly selected ROI (1 × 102 μm2 in basal cortex (*) and in IZ (**)). c 5-week organoids—
Pan-Neu immunofluorescence intensity was measured in several ROIs (# shown on y-axis) of multiple organoids from three control and three
schizophrenia patients. Note, significantly reduced Pan-Neu fluorescence intensity in basal cortex of the schizophrenia organoids and the lack of
significant changes in the IZ. d Distribution of Pan-Neu intensity numbers in analyzed ROIs. Note the significant separation of the basal cortex plots in
control and schizophrenia organoids and the lack of separation of the IZ plots
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 7 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Fig. 3 (See legend on next page.)
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 8 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 We next analyzed expression of reelin, a secreted gly-
cosylated protein deposited by the neurons of the mar-
ginal zone and other neurons in the developing cortex.
Extracellular reelin supplies essential migratory cues to
the waves of the developing cortico-petal neuroblasts and
immature neurons and for the formation of the cortical
layers49. In 2-week control organoids, reelin was not
expressed, but at 5 weeks, reelin expression was detected
in cells dispersed within the CZ, including its marginal
layer, as well as in the IZ (Fig. 4b). Quantitative analysis of
reelin immunofluorescence intensity in organoids from
three patients and three controls showed a consistent
depletion (−40%, p < 0.001) of reelin in the schizophrenia
cortex (Fig. 4b, Supplementary Fig. 5b). A small reelin
decrease in the IZ was observed in some organoids, but
did not attain statistical significance (Fig. 4b, Supple-
mentary Fig. 5b).
Loss of directionality of calretinin interneurons in
schizophrenia organoids
Calretinin is a cytoplasmic protein abundantly expres-
sed by cortical and retinal interneurons50. At 5 weeks, the
calretinin interneurons were abundant in the CZ (Fig. 4c),
and less abundant in the IZ in control organoids (Fig. 4e).
The density of the calretinin neurons in schizophrenia
organoids appeared somewhat reduced, but this change
was not significant (Supplementary Fig. 3a and b). Also,
the length of calretinin neurons, including processes, was
not significantly different between the control and schi-
zophrenia organoids (Fig. 3, c1, c2). Calretinin inter-
neurons are known to form horizontal connections
between cortical neurons and cortical fields51. Consistent
with
this
function,
calretinin+
processes
ran
pre-
dominantly parallel or near parallel to the cortical surface
of the control organoids. In contrast, in schizophrenia
organoids, this preferential horizontal directionality was
lost. Thus, the formation of connections between cortical
fields by the calretinin interneurons was diminished in the
developing schizophrenia cortex.
Expression of FGFR1 protein is reduced in the cortex of
schizophrenia organoids
Given the role of cytoplasmic FGFR1 in cell prolifera-
tion and nFGFR1 in neuronal differentiation and devel-
opment, we analyzed the protein expression of FGFR1 in
2 and in 5-week-old iPSC organoids (Fig. 5). At 2 weeks,
strong FGFR1 expression and high density of FGFR1+
cells, were detected in the VZ of controls, as well as
schizophrenia iPSC organoids (Fig. 5a, Supplementary
Fig. 4, a4 and a5). Both control and schizophrenia orga-
noids displayed a less dense population of FGFR1
expressing cells in the IZ. The CZ cells of control orga-
noids expressed FGFR1 (Fig. 5a), with many cells pre-
dominantly expressing FGFR1 associated with prominent
nuclear speckles (Supplementary Fig. 4, a2). These
speckles were previously shown to represent sites of RNA
co-transcriptional processing and nFGFR1 interaction
with the common transcriptional co-activator, CREB-
binding protein (CBP)43.
In schizophrenia organoids, FGFR1 expression in the
CZ was greatly reduced, as compared to control iPSC
organoids at 2 weeks (Fig. 5a; Supplementary Fig. 4, a4
and a5), as well as at 5 weeks (Fig. 5b, Supplementary
Fig. 4b and c). Few or no FGFR1-expressing cells were
detected in the cortex of the schizophrenia organoids in
investigated iPSC lines. In three patients and three con-
trols, using multiple sections and ROIs, we counted the
percent of DAPI-stained nuclei that were positive for
nFGFR1. The number of nFGFR1-expressing cells was
reduced from 37% in control organoids to 6.9% in the
schizophrenia organoids (p < 0.0001) (Fig. 5c; Supple-
mentary Fig. 5d).
Supplementary Videos 2a and b further illustrate the
expression of FGFR1 in subcortical cells and the loss of
FGFR1 in cortical cells of schizophrenia organoids.
Thus, the maldevelopment of the cortex in schizo-
phrenia iPSC organoids was accompanied by a depletion
of FGFR1 in the cortical cells.
(see figure on previous page)
Fig. 3 Quantification of disorganized migration of proliferating NPCs in schizophrenia compared to control cerebral organoids. a
Exemplary images showing Ki67+ (red) proliferating NPCs in the center of the rosette of a control organoid (line 2937) and their dispersion in a
schizophrenia organoid (line 2038) (nuclei were stained with DAPI). b Increased density of proliferating cells in schizophrenia organoids. ROIs were
outlined on organoid images from three control and three schizophrenia patients, as shown in (c1). Bar graph shows significantly higher average
numbers of the KI67+ proliferating cells in schizophrenia ROIs than in control ROIs (17 control and 20 schizophrenia ROIs quantified). c Global
Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) analysis of Ki67+ NPC dispersion within ROIs (c1—examples) was carried out using 17 control and 20 schizophrenia
ROIs from three control cases and three schizophrenia patients (total of 649 and 1070 cells analyzed, respectively). The shortest connecting edges
between cells were identified in pixels (c2) using MST calculating program and were grouped into bins (c3). Bin 1 contains edges of 0–5 pixels, bin 2
of 5–10 pixels, etc. Frequency indicates average numbers of cells per bin in all ROIs measured. Schizophrenia organoids displayed a shift towards
longer MST distances. Two-Way ANOVA showed a significant interaction between organoid phenotype (control vs. disease) and the MST distances
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 9 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Fig. 4 (See legend on next page.)
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 10 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Loss of nFGFR1 signaling affects developmental genome
programing
Specifically blocking nFGFR1 signaling with a nuclear
dominant negative FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) in hESCs or in
human or mouse NPCs blocked their neuronal differ-
entiation and development. On the other hand, transfec-
tion of a nuclear constitutively active FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
was sufficient to induce neuron development, sometimes
producing unusually large neurons28,52. Together these
loss and gain of function experiments demonstrated the
importance of nFGFR1 homeostasis in neuronal devel-
opment. Similar observations, albeit limited by the effi-
ciency of in vivo transfection, were made upon nFGFR1
and nuclear FGF2 transfections of mouse brain stem
cells53,54.
We next inquired whether downregulation of nFGFR1
in differentiating cortical neurons (NCCs) and its robust
expression in subcortical NPCs (Fig. 5, Supplementary
Fig. 4; overexpression in schizophrenia iPSC-derived
NPCs
was
shown
in
ref.
55)
could
affect
neuro-
ontogenic gene activities. Toward this goal, we analyzed
the transcriptomes of homogenous 2D cultures of NPCs
derived from H9 hESCs and of their NCC progeny. NCCs
were induced by treatment (48 h) of NPCs with cAMP,
BDNF, and GDNF29 (see Supplementary Materials and
Methods). Loss of nFGFR1 function was instated by
transfection of the dominant negative nFGFR1(SP-/NLS)
(TK-). Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were
maintained in NPC medium or treated with the differ-
entiating factors, AMP/BDNF/GDNF, for an additional
48 h. To model excessive nFGFR1 signaling, NPC cultures
were transfected with constitutively active nFGFR1(SP-/
NLS) and treated with AMP/BDNF/GDNF. Parallel con-
trols were transfected with a β-galactosidase-expressing
plasmid.
Biological triplicates of each condition were used to
isolate RNA and were analyzed independently by RNA-
seq using an Illumina HiSeq2500 instrument. The raw
data were analyzed by the Tuxedo pipeline and aligned to
the UCSC genome hg38build. The expression levels of
over 24,331 genes were assessed and considered sig-
nificant (16,137 genes) when expressed in all samples
(Supplementary Table S2). The remaining 8194 genes
were not detected in all samples and were eliminated from
further analysis due to their near-threshold expression. A
total of 4704 genes showed expression levels that differed
significantly
(FC ≥ ± 1.5
and
q-value > 0.05)
between
nondifferentiated NPCs and their NCC progeny induced
by differentiating factors (cAMP/BDNF/GDNF) (Supple-
mentary Table S3). Three hundred and thirty-two genes
were differentially expressed between NPCs and NPCs+
FGFR1(SP-/NLS(TK-)
(Supplementary
Table
S4).
Expression of 861 genes differed significantly in NCCs
pre-transfected with FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-), as compared
to β-galactosidase (Supplementary Table S5). In NCCs,
440 genes were affected by transfection of active nFGFR1
(SP-/NLS).
Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed many develop-
mental categories overrepresented by the genes that were
differentially expressed in nondifferentiated NPCs and
NCCs (Table 2). The overrepresented categories included
development of the nervous system, of the brain and its
parts, cell pluripotency, proliferation, neuronal differ-
entiation,
axonal
guidance
and
growth,
synapse
(see figure on previous page)
Fig. 4 (a) Decreased nuclear TBR1 (red) expression in the upper cortical zone of 5-week schizophrenia organoids. Nuclei were stained with
DAPI. Images show representative sections of control (iPSC line BJ1) and schizophrenia (iPSC line 2038) organoids. Total number of DAPI-stained
nuclei and the number of nuclei expressing TBR1 were counted in multiple randomly selected ROI (5 × 103 μm2, ∼50 cells/ ROI) within the upper
cortical layers (*6 cells deep) of three control individuals and three patients. Percent of (TBR1 + DAPI)/DAPI-stained nuclei was determined for each
ROI. Graph shows distribution of the % of TBR1 expressing cells in the individual ROIs (26 control and 33 schizophrenia ROIs). The difference between
control and schizophrenia mean values was significant (t-test). Individual value plots are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5b. b Decreased reelin
expression in schizophrenia organoid cortex. Images show control (BJ1) and schizophrenia (1835) organoids. Note the lack of reelin staining in 2-
week organoids. In 5-week organoids, reelin immunofluorescence intensity was determined in randomly selected ROIs (3 × 103 μm2) in the upper CZ
(*) and in the IZ (**) regions of three control individuals and three patients using Zen 2.0 Blue Imaging software (22 control and 17 schizophrenia
upper CZ ROIs and the same number of IZ ROIs). ANOVA of four groups followed by Tukey posthoc test showed a significant decrease in the reelin
expression in the schizophrenia upper CZ and a lack of significant differences between control and schizophrenia in the IZ. Individual value plots are
shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. c Morphology and orientation of cortical calretinin interneurons. c1—images of control and schizophrenia organoids.
A total of 770 control and 547 schizophrenia calretinin interneurons were measured in 20 and 16 ROIs, respectively, in the organoids from three
control and three schizophrenia patients. The average cell density (d = number of cells/ROI) was not significantly different between control and
schizophrenia (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b). c2—graph shows cell distribution (cumulative frequency) relative to their total length, including the cell
body and neurites. An average cell body had a length of ∼50 pixels, 18 μm. A two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test of cumulative density function
(CDF shown in the inset) of control and schizophrenia groups found no significant difference between the length of control and schizophrenia
interneurons. c3—angles between the long axis of each cell and the cortical surface organoids were computed as described in the Supplementary
Methods. Graph shows distribution of cells (cumulative frequency) in bins corresponding to the deviation angles from the cortical surface. A two-
sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov CDF test (CDFs shown in the inset) of control and schizophrenia groups yielded a highly significant difference (p-value
of <13.9 × 10−7) between the orientation of control and schizophrenia interneurons, relative to the cortical surface
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 11 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Fig. 5 (See legend on next page.)
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 12 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 formation, glial development, and neuronal apoptosis.
The same categories, with the exception of glial devel-
opment, were overrepresented by genes affected by
FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) in NPCs and/or NCCs. Thus,
nFGFR1 appears to specifically control neuronal NPC
development. Overexpression of active nFGFR1(SP-/
NLS), along with the cAMP/BDNF/GDNF stimulation,
affected genes of brain development, cell proliferation,
neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, and apoptosis.
Thus, both insufficient and excessive nFGFR1 signaling
disrupt neuro-ontogenic gene programs.
The ontological gene categories affected by cAMP/
BDNF/GDNF,
FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-)
and/or
FGFR1
(SP-/NLS) included also general multicellular organism
development, morphogenesis, organ, cardiovascular, and
limb development, cell–cell signaling, retinoic acid, and
2nd messenger signal transduction (Table 2). These
findings
match
the
widespread
gene
targeting
by
nFGFR119,29 and its proposed pan-ontogenic function20.
Also, consistent with the established transcriptional
functions of nFGFR118, genes which were affected by
FGFR1(SP-NLS)(TK-)
and
FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
over-
represented
the
functional
category
of
RNA
PolII-
mediated transcription (Table 2).
The ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) (a proprietary
curation of pathways by Qiagen that estimates gene
overrepresentation within specific pathways), revealed
FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) dysregulation of many genes in
NPCs and/or NCCs involved in pathways controlling
neuronal and brain development, which were regulated
during the cAMP/BDNF/GDNF-induced NCC differ-
entiation (Table 3). These pathways included Wnt/β
catenin signaling, axonal growth and guidance, ephrin, G-
protein signaling, cAMP signaling, PKA signaling, CREB
signaling, ERB tyrosine kinase signaling, growth hormone
receptor signaling, interleukin signaling, prolactin, etc.
(Table 3). In addition, inhibition with FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
(TK-) revealed nFGFR1 regulation of additional develop-
mental pathways, which were not affected by cAMP/
BDNF/GDNF: Notch, Wnt/Ca++, neurotrophins/TRK,
ERK/MAPK, reelin, ephrin, glucocorticoid
receptors,
GDNF and PDGF, as well as cell cycle and p53 controlling
pathways. Overexpression of constitutively active nFGFR1
(SP-/NLS) in NCCs affected genes in Notch, Ca++, GH,
EGFR, CXCR4, pluripotency, and glucocorticoid signal-
ing, neurotrophin/Trk receptors, NGF, Erk/MAPK sig-
naling, ephrin signaling, FGF signaling, p53, and RAR
signaling. Blocking nFGFR1 signaling with FGFR1(SP-/
NLS)(TK-)
and/or
activation
with
FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
affected genes in pathways involved in neuronal functions,
such as GABA receptor signaling, calcium, melatonin,
LTP, and LTD (Table 3). Thus, loss of nFGFR1 and
excessive nFGFR1 signaling lead directly to dysregulation
of major developmental pathways.
Graphs of selected nFGFR1-dependent pathways and
their affected genes are shown in Supplementary Fig. 6.
Deconstruction of mRNA networks by loss of
nFGFR1 signaling
Genome function is organized into highly coordinated
and dynamically changing networks of genes. To detect
such networks among the FGFR1-controlled genes, we
performed a pairwise correlation29 of all differentially
regulated genes. Among 4704 genes that were regulated
during NPC differentiation to NCCs, we detected groups
of genes that displayed high-positive correlation (+0.9 to
+1.0; changing activities in the same direction) and genes
which showed high-negative correlation (−0.9 to −1.0;
changing activities in opposite direction) (Supplementary
Fig. 7a). In each category, the 200 most connected genes
from the differentiated NCCs were analyzed using circular
network graphs. A common feature of both positive and
negative networks was that their top 200 coordinate genes
were highly interconnected in NCCs (Supplementary
Fig. 7b, c). These networks formed during NCC differ-
entiation as they showed little or no connectivity in NPCs.
We then analyzed network formation by 861 NCC
genes, which were affected by FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-)
(Fig. 6). Significantly, the networks formed by the top 200
positively and 200 negatively correlated genes in control
β-galactosidase transfected NCCs were deconstructed in
the
NCCs
transfected
with
FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-)
(see figure on previous page)
Fig. 5 High expression of nuclear (n)FGFR1 in subcortical cells and the loss of nFGFR1 in cortical cells of schizophrenia organoids.. a 2-week
organoids: control (iPSC line BJ1) and schizophrenia (iPSC line 1835). Schizophrenia organoids have high FGFR1 expressing cells in VZ and dispersed
in IZ. Few nFGFR1+ cells are present in CZ of the schizophrenia organoids. Images of whole sections are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4, a4 and a5. b
5-week organoids—control (BJ1) organoids express nFGFR1 in CZ and IZ (inset shows negative control—omitted primary FGFR1 antibody), and
schizophrenia (1835) organoids show depletion of FGFR1 immunostaining in CZ. Arrow points to nuclei with FGFR1 speckles. 3D rotational confocal
images of control (line 3651) and schizophrenia (line 1835) organoids are shown in Video 2a and b. c Quantification of the % of DAPI-stained nuclei
that were immunopositive for nFGFR1 in multiple randomly selected ROI (3 × 103 μm2, ∼40 cells/ ROI) in the upper CZ. The % of nFGFR1+ DAPI-
stained nuclei was determined for multiple ROIs from the three control individuals and three patients. The difference between control and
schizophrenia mean values was significant (t-test). Plots show distribution of the % of nFGFR1 positive nuclei in individual control (18 ROIs) and
schizophrenia (12 ROIs). The individual value plots are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5d
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 13 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Table 2
Gene ontology analysis shows genes regulated between NPCs vs. NCCs, and genes affected by dominant
negative nuclear FGFR1(SP-/NLS)TK-) or constitutively active nuclear FGFR1(SP-/NLS) (RNAseq)
NPC vs. NCC
NPC vs. NPC+ FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
(TK-)
NCC+ vs. NCC+ FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
(TK-)
NCC vs. NCC+ FGFR1(SP-/
NLS)
Neural development
Synapse development, assembly
Yes
Synaptic plasticity
NS/CNS development
Yes
Yes
Brain parts development
Yes
Yes
Yes
Forebrain development
Yes
Cell proliferation, mitotic cycle
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cell migration
Yes
Yes
Neurogenesis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cell adhesion
Yes
Extracellular matrix, proteases
Yes
Yes
Cell, neuronal differentiation
Yes
Yes
Yes
Axon development
Yes
Axonal guidance
Yes
Oligodendrocyte development
Glial development
Neurotransmission
Neuronal projection
Yes
Learning and Memory
Response to retinoic acid
2nd messenger signaling
Regulation of signal transduction
Regulation of signal transduction
Cell–cell signaling
Apoptosis, neuron apoptosis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Development general
Organ and developmental
morphogenesis
Yes
Yes
Angiogenesis
Yes
Cardiovascular development
Yes
Multicellular organism development
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cellular response to TGFβ
Limb, organ morphogenesis
Yes
Yes
Eye development
Yes
Yes
Developmental induction
Gene expression
Transcription RNA PolII
Transcription RNA PolII
Categories affected only in FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) or FGFR1(SP-/NLS) transfected cells are listed by names
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 14 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Table 3
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA)—selected IPA identified pathways that were regulated during cAMP/BDNF/
GDNF-induced neuronal programming (NPC vs. NCC) and genes affected by dominant negative nuclear FGFR1(SP-/NLS)
TK-) or constitutively active nuclear FGFR1(SP-/NLS) (RNAseq)
NPC vs. NCC
NPC vs. NPC+ FGFR1
(SP-/NLS) (TK-)
NCC vs. NCC+ FGFR1
(SP-/NLS) (TK-)
NCC vs. NCC+ FGFR1
(SP-/NLS)
Wnt/β-catenin
Yes
Yes
cAMP signaling
Yes
Axonal guidance signaling
Yes
G-protein signaling
Yes
Yes
PKA signaling
Yes
Yes
Neuropathic pain signaling
Yes
Yes
Corticotropin releasing hormone signaling
Yes
Prolactin signaling
Yes
Yes
Yes
Glioma signaling
Yes
GABA receptors
Yes
Nos in neurons
Yes
VEGF
Yes
Synaptic LT Depression
Yes
Synaptic LT Potentiation
Yes
Yes
P2Y purinergic signaling
Yes
Yes
Yes
aldosterone
Yes
Yes
Calcium signaling
Yes
Yes
HIF1A
Yes
Yes
Growth Hormone signaling
Yes
Yes
IL-8
IL-8
Clathrin endocytosis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Catecholamine biosynthesis
ERB
Yes
Yes
EGFR
Melatonin signaling
Yes
CXCR4
Yes
GAP junction signaling
Yes
Yes
Ephrin receptor signaling
Yes
ESC pluripotency
Yes
Yes
Yes
Enos
Yes
Yes
TR/RXR
Yes
IL8
Yes
citruline
Yes
Macrophages, fibroblasts inflamation
Yes
Yes
Renin/Angiotensin
Yes
Yes
Huntington Disease signaling
Yes
Yes
endothelin
Endothelin
CREB
CREB
Yes
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 15 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Table 3 continued
NPC vs. NCC
NPC vs. NPC+ FGFR1
(SP-/NLS) (TK-)
NCC vs. NCC+ FGFR1
(SP-/NLS) (TK-)
NCC vs. NCC+ FGFR1
(SP-/NLS)
Catecholamine biosynthesis
Notch
Notch
Wnt/Ca
Agrin
Neurotrophin/TRK
Yes
Telomerase
Cyclin cell cycle
ERK/MAPkinase
Yes
AMPK signaling
Yes
Glucocorticoid
Yes
Yes
P53
Yes
FGF signaling
Yes
Yes
GDNF
Yes
EGF signaling
Yes
Actin cytoskeleton
Yes
Jak1,3
IGF
Glioma invasiveness
Yes
IL-6,17a
HMGB
Yes
LPS-MAPK
Yes
PDGF
Yes
RAR signaling
RAR activation
DNA repair
Acute myeloid leukemia signaling
Yes
CCK/Gastrin
EMT transition
NF-kB
nanog
II-2,4,3,8,9,15,12,
Wnt/GSK-3Beta
NGF
Reelin in neurons
Melanocyte development
Myc-apoptosis
STAT3
PKC
Epithelial adherence junction
Categories affected only in FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) or FGFR1(SP-/NLS) transfected cells are listed by names
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 16 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 (Fig. 7). Genes forming these nFGFR1-dependent positive
and negative correlative networks represented several of
the neuro-ontogenic categories (Fig. 6).
FGFR inhibitor, PD173074, models loss of nFGFR1 and
cortical maldevelopment in hESC cerebral organoids
Given the broad neuro-ontogenic functions of nFGFR1
in NPCs and NCCs, we next asked if the loss of nFGFR1
function could arrest the ongoing cortical development in
control hESC organoids, similar to as observed in cortical
cells of the schizophrenia organoids. We used PD173074,
which specifically inhibits FGFRs (R1 > R2 > R3 > R4)56.
Since fgfr1 was the highest expressed fgfr gene in NPCs
and NCCs (Supplementary Table 2; 1.0FGFR1 > 0.16FGFR2
> 0.26FGFR3 > 0.008FGFR4), the effects of PD173074 would
likely reflect the FGFR1 blockade. After the initial 8 days
of cortical development, structurally stable hESC cerebral
organoids were incubated with 100 nM PD173074 or in
drug-free medium for an additional 10 days, during the
ongoing CZ expansion.
In general, many changes induced by PD173074 treated
hESC H9 organoids were similar as in the schizophrenia
iPSC organoids. Expression of the cortical TBR1 marker
of early pioneer neuroblasts, was abolished by PD173074
(Supplementary Fig. 8a, b). Consistent with these findings,
the highly abundant doublecortin+ neuroblasts (Fig. 7a)
and the calretinin+ interneurons (Fig. 7b) in the IZ and
CZ of day 18 control organoids were markedly depleted
by the PD173074 treatment.
To determine if FGFR1 inhibition affected the ongoing
cortical neuronogenesis, we pulse labeled dividing cells
with BrdU in 14-day organoids (6th day of PD173074
treatment). After an additional 4 days, BrdU-labeled
control or PD173074-treated organoids were sectioned
and co-immunostained with rat anti-BrdU and with
mouse anti-Pan-Neu. In control organoids, the BrdU-
labeled cells were found in the VZ, as well as migrated
Fig. 6 (a) Histogram of pairwise mRNA correlations. Correlation was performed using three controls and three patients and triplicate cell samples.
NPCs were transfected with control DNA or FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) and 24 h later were stimulated for 48 h with neuronal differentiation inducing media
with cAMP/BDNF/GDNF (NCCs). Genes (861), which were affected by dominant negative nuclear FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) were analyzed. Genes that
showed the highest positive (+0.9 to +1.0) correlations (changing in the same direction) are represented by the gray bar. Genes that showed the
highest negative (−0.9 to −1.0) correlations (changing in the opposite directions) are shown as a black bar. b, c Among the FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-)
regulated genes, top 200 of the positively correlated genes (b) and top 200, which were negatively correlated genes (c) were selected for the circular
network analysis. Gray lines link pairs of genes whose correlation is greater than 0.9. In the control β-galactosidase set, three separate networks were
formed. In the FGFR1(SP-/NLS)(TK-) transfected cells, two weakly correlated networks and few individual correlated genes are observed. GO
categories overrepresented by 200 top connected genes are listed
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 17 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Fig. 7 (See legend on next page.)
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 18 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 into the IZ and CZ (Fig. 7c). Counting cells in multiple
rosettes showed BrdU+ cells abundantly present in all
zones of the control organoids in the following order: VZ
> IZ > CZ. In contrast, in PD173074-treated organoids,
BrdU+ cells were most abundant in the IZ with only few
cells present in the cortex (IZ > VZ > CZ) (Fig. 7c and
Table 4).
In control organoids, BrdU and Pan-Neu colocalized
predominantly in the same cells of the marginal CZ
(Fig. 7c, Supplementary Fig. 9a), indicating that the
dividing VZ cells had migrated out to cortical layers and
differentiated into neurons. Treatment with PD173074
markedly altered this process (Fig. 7c, Supplementary
Fig. 9b). The BrdU+ cells remained largely arrested in the
IZ. Relatively few BrdU+ cells that were found in the CZ
differentiated to Pan-Neu positive neurons (Table 4).
Thus, blocking FGFR1-inhibited cortical migration of the
newborn cells and formation of mature neurons.
PD173074 was shown previously to reduce nuclear
nFGFR1 accumulation observed in pancreatic tumors57.
Hence,
we
examined
the
PD173074
effect
on
FGFR1 subcellular distribution in the CZ of hESC H9
cerebral organoids. In several independent experiments,
the expression of FGFR1 in control hESC H9 organoids
showed similar patterns (Fig. 8a) as in the control iPSC
organoids (Fig. 5a). FGFR1 was highly expressed in the VZ
cells (Fig. 8a). The FGFR1 staining was less intense in the
IZ and stronger again in the CZ. In many CZ cells, FGFR1
localized within the cell nuclei (Fig. 8a) and in prominent
nuclear speckles (Fig. 8, b1). To quantify the changes in
FGFR1 subcellular distribution, we imaged DAPI and
FGFR1 co-stained sections using confocal microscopy
(Fig. 8b). In the CZ of control organoids, 52% of cells had
nFGFR1 colocalized with DAPI. In PD173074-treated
organoids there was over a three-fold reduction in the
number of cells with nFGFR1 in the CZ (Fig. 8c), likely
reflecting loss of the positive fgfr1 gene activation by its
protein19,57.
Discussion
In this study, we have expanded cerebral organoids as
an experimental platform to analyze the early human
cortical development in healthy and disease states and to
investigate disease mechanisms. Using the protocol of
Lancaster et al.,40 in which the first step, an efficient
generation of EBs, was modified as in Brennand et al.,33
we successfully generated cerebral organoids from hESCs
(H9 and HUES8 lines) and from seven human iPSC lines.
We observed time-dependent generation and develop-
ment of organoids, recapitulating the inside-out pattern of
human cortical development. The VZ in the center of the
rosettes contained proliferating GFAP+ radial glia, the IZ
contained
migrating
doublecortin+
neuroblasts
and
immature βIII-tubulin+ neurons, and the CZ incorpo-
rated pioneer neurons (TBR1+), and built cortical-like
layers of the βIII-tubulin+ and Pan-Neu+ neurons, and
calretinin+ interneurons. We employed quantitative cell
counting, image intensity measurements, and computa-
tional tools to quantify and analyze normal and patholo-
gical tissue samples.
An important observation made repeatedly during this
study was that the cellular structures and zones of the
organoid rosettes and their development were con-
sistently reproducible among hESC H9, HUES8, and the
four control iPSC line organoids, but were noticeably
disturbed in all schizophrenia iPSC organoids and after
Table 4
Effect of PD173074 on distribution of BrdU+ cells
and double labeled BrdU+ plus Pan-Neu+ cells in rosettes
and in the cortical zone
Control
PD173074
Rosette ROIs
BrdU
BrdU
47.7 ± 3.4 (77%)
136.2 ± 22.7 (98%)
P = 0.006
BrdU + Pan-Neu
BrdU + Pan-Neu
18.3 ± 1.7 (74%)
9.2 ± 2.6 (93%)
P = 0.008
Cortex ROIs
BrdU
BrdU
14.2 ± 2.1 (23%)
2.5 ± 0.9 (2%)
P = 0.0007
BrdU + Pan-Neu
BrdU + Pan-Neu
6.5 ± 1.2 (26%)
0.7 ± 0.3 (7%)
P = 0.002
Cells were counted in identical seven ROIs in sections of control and PD173074-
treated organoids. Numbers represent mean + SEM; % of cells in rosettes and
cortical ROI are shown. Pairwise comparisons were done using t-test with
unequal variances
(see figure on previous page)
Fig. 7 Treatment with PD173074 (days 8 and 18) affects cortical development in hESC H9 organoids. a Double staining for DAPI and
doublecortin (DBX, neuroblasts). b PD173074 reduces expression of calretinin in hESC organoids. c BrdU pulse-chase experiment. c—control hESC
organoids, d—PD173074 treated (days 8 and 18) organoids. PD173074 inhibits cortical migration and neuronal differentiation of newborn cells in
hESC organoids. Sections were coimmunostained for BrdU (red), Pan-Neu (green), and DAPI (blue). Merged and individual stains are shown. Inhibition
of FGFR1 with PD173074 inhibits migration and formation of new BrdU+ cortical neurons in the CZ
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 19 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Fig. 8 (See legend on next page.)
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 20 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 pharmacological inhibition of FGFR1. In the organoids
developed from either hESCs or control iPSCs, the pro-
liferating cells were restricted to 2–3 layers surrounding
the lumen of the VZ rosettes. Relatively few cells that
migrated to the IZ remained in a proliferative state, but
essentially, no such cells were found in the CZ. One of the
most striking features of the schizophrenia iPSC orga-
noids was the disruption of the developmental strata.
Specifically, we observed significantly increased pro-
liferation and movement of Ki67+ NPCs into the IZ, and
development of atypically placed deep subcortical neu-
rons. These changes were accompanied by significant loss
of the TBR1 pioneer neurons from the top cortical layers,
while they remained abundant deep in the IZ. Together,
these findings illuminated an abnormal subcortical neu-
ronogenesis in schizophrenia tissue and were consistent
with the increased, premature neuronal generation, pre-
dicted from the transcriptome studies of the NPCs
derived from schizophrenia iPSCs29.
The expanded subcortical neurogenesis was accom-
panied by opposite changes in the CZ, where fewer
mature neurons developed in schizophrenia organoids.
This was shown by a significant reduction in cortical Pan-
Neu intensity and was corroborated by visibly diminished
Pan-Neu fibers in the schizophrenia organoids. The spe-
cific depletion of the neurons in the cortex, but not in the
IZ, may reflect the loss of cortical signals that guide the
cortico-petal migration, i.e. reduced cortical deposition of
reelin and pioneer TBR1 neurons. The altered intracor-
tical connectivity in schizophrenia organoids was further
denoted by the changes in the orientation of the calretinin
+ interneurons. Unlike the horizontal organization of
calretinin+ neurites in the control cortex, the schizo-
phrenia interneurons displayed a random directionality of
neurites, indicating perturbed intercortical connectivity.
The relationship between glutamatergic pyramidal neu-
rons and GABAergic interneurons (of which calretinin-
positive neurons are a subtype of GABAergic inter-
neurons),
has
been
suggested
in
relation
to
the
development of schizophrenia in humans58. So far,
attempts to count calretinin neurons in the schizophrenia
brain showed lack of significant numerical changes59. Our
study suggests that changes in interneuron directionality
may disrupt cortical connections and communication in
schizophrenia.
In summary (Fig. 8d), the impaired development of
cortical neurons, interneurons, and cortical connections
in schizophrenia may be instigated by reduced cortico-
petal migration of the neuroblasts and immature neurons.
In addition, the disruption of cortical neuronal pro-
graming in schizophrenia organoids coincided with the
presence of the Ki67+ proliferating cells in the CZ, sug-
gesting that these cells have failed to exit the cell cycle and
differentiate.
Role of FGFR1
The impaired cortical development of schizophrenia
organoids correlated with a striking loss of nFGFR1 from
the CZ cells observed already at 2 weeks and was verified
by a statistically significant loss in 5-week organoids of all
investigated patients. The loss of nFGFR1 was limited to
cortical cells, as FGFR1 remained highly expressed in the
VZ and IZ of schizophrenia organoids throughout the
5 weeks of development. Given the well-established role
of nFGFR1 in cell differentiation and neuronal develop-
ment18,20 (-reviews), the loss of nFGFR1 from the nuclei
of differentiating cortical neuronal cells in schizophrenia
organoids likely underlies the impaired neuronal differ-
entiation and cortical maldevelopment observed in schi-
zophrenia. Furthermore, blocking of nFGFR1 in NPCs
and NCCs impacted a number of the key ontogenic and
neuro-ontogenic gene categories involved in neuronal
development, forebrain development, cell adhesion and
migration, axon formation, and guidance and in the
established
neuro-ontogenic
pathways.
Our
genomic
analyses also revealed that the loss of nFGFR1 function in
NPCs affected several of the reelin signaling genes (Sup-
plementary Fig. 6c), which together with the loss of reelin,
(see figure on previous page)
Fig. 8 a Distribution of FGFR1 in zones of hESC H9 organoids (fluorescent microscope images). b Reduction of nFGFR1 in CZ after PD173074
treatment (days 8–18)—confocal analysis of FGFR1 and DAPI co-staining; (b1) control and (b2) PD173074-treated cerebral organoids. (b3) control and
(b4) PD173074, areas zoomed 63×. c Percentage of nFGFR1 expressing cells in CZ was reduced by PD173074—nFGFR1+ nuclei were counted in sets
of 100 DAPI-stained nuclei. d Left—reference stratification of developing telencephalon and zones of cerebral organoids—ventricular (VZ),
intermediate (IZ), cortical (CZ), marginal (MZ); middle and right—summary of results—in schizophrenia organoids, we found the following changes:
(i) increased proliferation of Ki67 NPCs and migration outside the VZ into the IZ and CZ, (ii) diminished deposition of reelin in the developing cortex
(known to guide cortico-petal migration), (iii) reduced cortical accumulation of pioneer TBR1 neurons and reduced formation of cortical neurons, (iv)
stunted cortical neuronal development accompanied by a robust formation of the subcortical neurons, and (v) fewer calretinin interneurons forming
horizontal processes (known to connect cortical columns). The premature development of NPCs into subcortical neurons may reflect excessive
nFGFR1 (+)* signaling in differentiating schizophrenia NPCs (as found in earlier genomic studies55). On the other hand, stunted cortical development
likely reflects the loss of cortical nFGFR1 signaling. Modeling this loss in hESC organoids, by blocking FGFR1 signaling and depleting nFGFR1 with
PD173074, replicates the impaired cortical development observed in schizophrenia iPSC organoids. The loss of cortical nnFGFR1 may underlie the
stunted cortical development in schizophrenia
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 21 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 denotes the malfunctioning reelin mechanism in the
schizophrenia cortex.
The importance of these genomic findings transcends
the current investigation centered on schizophrenia.
Demonstration that the developmental gene programs
known to be targeted directly by nFGFR119,29 are indeed
regulated by the nuclear receptor, and further sub-
stantiates the panontogenic-INFS theory20.
In addition to investigating the loss of nFGFR1 function,
our experiments showed that overactive nFGFR1 also
affects the neuro-ontogenic programs. Excessive nFGFR1
gene targeting was shown in schizophrenia NPCs during
their
differentiation29.
Thus,
an
over-activation
by
nFGFR1 of neurodevelopment gene programs in sub-
cortical NPCs could lead to their premature migration
and differentiation observed in the subcortical regions of
the schizophrenia organoids.
Within the list of the nFGFR1-regulated genes (Sup-
plementary Table 7), ∼75% were previously shown to bind
to nFGFR1 in control and/or schizophrenia iPSC-derived
differentiating NCCs29. Thus, the effects of transfected
dominant negative and constitutively active nuclear forms
of FGFR1 predominantly reflect direct gene control by the
nuclear receptor.
As nFGFR1 has been designated as a central neuro-
ontogenic factor19,20, we propose that the depletion of
cortical nFGFR1 in schizophrenia organoids leads to
dysregulation of the key neuro-ontogenic programs and,
consequently,
arrests
cortical
neuronal development.
Indeed, the inhibition of FGFR1 signaling (the pre-
dominant FGFR expressed) with PD173074, depleted
nFGFR1 in the CZ of control hESC organoids, and
inhibited cortical development, similar to as observed in
the schizophrenia organoids. The BrdU pulse-chase
experiment showed that blocking FGFR1 reduced cor-
tical migration of new born cells and their differentiation
to neurons. Furthermore, PD173074 exposes the role of
FGFR1 in the formation of doublecortin expressing neu-
roblasts and TBR1 expressing neuroblasts/pioneer neu-
rons.
It
also
demonstrated
the
importance
of
FGFR1
signaling
in
the
development
of
calretinin
interneurons.
The early cortical malformations revealed by this
organoid study could underlie the disruption of cortical
layers, cell paucity, hypoplasia, abnormal connections, and
white matter tracks observed in adult schizophrenia
brains
by
pathological
examination
and/or
in
vivo
imaging17,60.
Why do schizophrenia symptoms appear in adolescence
or young adulthood if they are a consequence of early
prenatal
brain
maldevelopment?
In
schizophrenia
patients, the malformations are often found in the pre-
frontal cortex60,61, in which myelination and maturation
occur at the time when the first severe symptoms emerge.
As the prefrontal cortex becomes increasingly incorpo-
rated into the human brain circuitry, its developmental
malformations may reveal itself in a complex clinical
syndrome. Perhaps, the most severe forms of childhood
schizophrenia, with abundant hallucinations and motor
dysfunctions62, arise also in the cortical regions, which
mature earlier and are home to the sensory and motor
functions63. These and other compelling questions await
further investigation.
In the present study, we observed similar anatomical
changes in the organoids of all three patients that have
distinct genetic backgrounds and DNA sequences, which
could be linked to schizophrenia. However, the iPSC-
derived NPCs all showed a common disruption of 1376
genes in the developmental transcriptome29. Thus, our
studies reinforce the watershed model of schizophrenia,
whereby different mutations lead to the common dysre-
gulation of the neuro-ontogenic genome and to the
common cortical maldevelopment. Our findings designate
INFS as a common important mechanism in the disease.
According to the model shown in Fig. 8d, nFGFR1
hyperactivity leads initially to the excessive migration of
proliferating NPCs and then their premature differentia-
tion within subcortical regions. Later, during corticogen-
esis, turning off nFGFR1 in the schizophrenia cortical
cells disrupts their further development. Future investi-
gation, including restoration of INFS in the developing
schizophrenia
cortex,
will
test
this
hypothesis
and
potentially be used in preventive therapies.
Acknowledgements
We thank graduate students Brandon Decker and Christopher Handelmann for
critical discussion of this work and colleagues Drs. Yongho Bae and Aesha
Desai for help with statistical analyses. We thank Dr. John Tomaszewski for
inspiring discussion of the computational analysis of biological systems. This
work was supported by grants from New York State Department of Health
(NYSTEM C026415, C026714), National Science Foundation (CBET-1555720;
CBET-1706050), and by Patrick P. Lee Foundation (graduate student
fellowships) provided to M.K.S. Lester E. Bayona Chuye was supported by NIH
training grant T35 AI089693. K.B. was supported by grants from NIH (R01
MH101454 and R01 MH106056), and the New York Stem Cell Foundation.
Author details
1Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. 2Department of Biology, State University of
New York at Fredonia, Fredonia, NY, USA. 3Department of Biomedical
Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. 4Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Departments of Psychiatry and
Neuroscience, New York, NY, USA
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information
The online version of this article (doi:10.1038/s41398-017-0054-x) contains
supplementary material.
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 22 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 Received: 13 April 2017 Revised: 17 August 2017 Accepted: 23 September
2017
References
1.
Arnold, S. E., Ruscheinsky, D. D. & Han, L. Y. Further evidence of abnormal
cytoarchitecture of the entorhinal cortex in schizophrenia using spatial point
pattern analyses. Biol. Psychiatry 42, 639–647 (1997).
2.
Benes, F. M., Kwok, E. W., Vincent, S. L. & Todtenkopf, M. S. A reduction of
nonpyramidal cells in sector CA2 of schizophrenics and manic depressives.
Biol. Psychiatry 44, 88–97 (1998).
3.
Akbarian, S. et al. Altered distribution of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide
phosphate-diaphorase cells in frontal lobe of schizophrenics implies dis-
turbances of cortical development. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 50, 169–177 (1993).
4.
Bogerts, B., Hantsch, J. & Herzer, M. A morphometric study of the dopamine-
containing cell groups in the mesencephalon of normals, Parkinson patients,
and schizophrenics. Biol. Psychiatry 18, 951–969 (1983).
5.
Connor, S. E. et al. A study of hippocampal shape anomaly in schizophrenia
and in families multiply affected by schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Neu-
roradiology 46, 523–534 (2004).
6.
Schiller, D., Zuckerman, L. & Weiner, I. Abnormally persistent latent inhibition
induced by lesions to the nucleus accumbens core, basolateral amygdala and
orbitofrontal cortex is reversed by clozapine but not by haloperidol. J. Psy-
chiatr. Res. 40, 167–177 (2006).
7.
Kneeland, R. E. & Fatemi, S. H. Viral infection, inflammation and schizophrenia.
Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 42, 35–48 (2013).
8.
Fatemi, S. H. & Folsom, T. D. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizo-
phrenia, revisited. Schizophr. Bull. 35, 528–548 (2009).
9.
Rehn, A. E. & Rees, S. M. Investigating the neurodevelopmental hypothesis of
schizophrenia. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 32, 687–696 (2005).
10.
Davis, K. L. et al. White matter changes in schizophrenia: evidence for myelin-
related dysfunction. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 60, 443–456 (2003).
11.
Blanchard, J. J., Kring, A. M., Horan, W. P. & Gur, R. Toward the next generation
of negative symptom assessments: the collaboration to advance negative
symptom assessment in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 37, 291–299 (2011).
12.
Foussias, G. et al. Prediction of longitudinal functional outcomes in schizo-
phrenia: the impact of baseline motivational deficits. Schizophr. Res. 132,
24–27 (2011).
13.
Lloyd, T. et al. Minor physical anomalies in patients with first-episode psy-
chosis: their frequency and diagnostic specificity. Psychol. Med. 38, 71–77
(2008).
14.
Gotz, M. & Barde, Y. A. Radial glial cells defined and major intermediates
between embryonic stem cells and CNS neurons. Neuron 46, 369–372 (2005).
15.
Kriegstein, A. R. & Noctor, S. C. Patterns of neuronal migration in the
embryonic cortex. Trends Neurosci. 27, 392–399 (2004).
16.
Mariani, J. et al. FOXG1-dependent dysregulation of GABA/Glutamate neuron
differentiation in autism spectrum disorders. Cell 162, 375–390 (2015).
17.
Stachowiak, M. K. et al. Schizophrenia: a neurodevelopmental disorder—
integrative genomic hypothesis and therapeutic implications from a trans-
genic mouse model. Schizophr. Res. 143, 367–376 (2013).
18.
Stachowiak, M. K. et al. Nuclear FGF receptor-1 and CREB binding protein: an
integrative signaling module. J. Cell. Physiol. 230, 989–1002 (2015).
19.
Terranova, C. et al. Global developmental gene programing involves a nuclear
form of fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1). PLoS One 10, e0123380
(2015).
20.
Stachowiak, M. K. & Stachowiak, E. K. Evidence-based theory for integrated
genome regulation of ontogeny—an unprecedented role of nuclear
FGFR1 signaling. J. Cell. Physiol. 231, 1199–1218 (2016).
21.
Dequeant, M. L. & Pourquie, O. Segmental patterning of the vertebrate
embryonic axis. Nat. Rev. Genet. 9, 370–382 (2008).
22.
Partanen, J., Schwartz, L. & Rossant, J. Opposite phenotypes of hypomorphic
and Y766 phosphorylation site mutations reveal a function for Fgfr1 in
anteroposterior patterning of mouse embryos. Genes Dev. 12, 2332–2344
(1998).
23.
Ciruna, B. & Rossant, J. FGF signaling regulates mesoderm cell fate specifica-
tion and morphogenetic movement at the primitive streak. Dev. Cell 1, 37–49
(2001).
24.
Ciruna, B. G., Schwartz, L., Harpal, K., Yamaguchi, T. P. & Rossant, J. Chimeric
analysis of fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (Fgfr1) function: a role for FGFR1
in morphogenetic movement through the primitive streak. Development 124,
2829–2841 (1997).
25.
Bobbs, A. S., Saarela, A. V., Yatskievych, T. A. & Antin, P. B. Fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) signaling during gastrulation negatively modulates the abun-
dance of microRNAs that regulate proteins required for cell migration and
embryo patterning. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 38505–38514 (2012).
26.
Stuhlmiller, T. J. & Garcia-Castro, M. I. FGF/MAPK signaling is required in the
gastrula epiblast for avian neural crest induction. Development 139, 289–300
(2012).
27.
Lee, Y. W. et al. NGF-induced cell differentiation and gene activation is
mediated by integrative nuclear FGFR1 signaling (INFS). PLoS One 8, e68931
(2013).
28.
Lee, Y. W. et al. A novel nuclear FGF Receptor-1 partnership with retinoid and
Nur receptors during developmental gene programming of embryonic stem
cells. J. Cell. Biochem. 113, 2920–2936 (2012).
29.
Narla, S. T. et al. Common developmental genome deprogramming in schi-
zophrenia—role of Integrative Nuclear FGFR1 Signaling (INFS). Schizophr. Res.
185, 17–32 (2017).
30.
Cannon, T. D. & Keller, M. C. Endophenotypes in the genetic analyses of
mental disorders. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 2, 267–290 (2006).
31.
Brennand, K. J. et al. Phenotypic differences in hiPSC NPCs derived from
patients with schizophrenia. Mol. Psychiatry 20, 361–368 (2014).
32.
Yoon, K. J. et al. Modeling a genetic risk for schizophrenia in iPSCs and mice
reveals neural stem cell deficits associated with adherens junctions and
polarity. Cell Stem Cell 15, 79–91 (2014).
33.
Brennand, K. J. et al. Modelling schizophrenia using human induced plur-
ipotent stem cells. Nature 473, 221–225 (2011).
34.
Robicsek, O. et al. Abnormal neuronal differentiation and mitochondrial dys-
function in hair follicle-derived induced pluripotent stem cells of schizophrenia
patients. Mol. Psychiatry 18, 1067–1076 (2013).
35.
Yu, D. X. et al. Modeling hippocampal neurogenesis using human pluripotent
stem cells. Stem Cell Rep. 2, 295–310 (2014).
36.
Wen, Z. et al. Synaptic dysregulation in a human iPS cell model of mental
disorders. Nature 515, 414–418 (2014).
37.
Odorico, J. S., Kaufman, D. S. & Thomson, J. A. Multilineage differentiation from
human embryonic stem cell lines. Stem Cells 19, 193–204 (2001).
38.
Shamir, E. R. & Ewald, A. J. Three-dimensional organotypic culture: experi-
mental models of mammalian biology and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15,
647–664 (2014).
39.
Itskovitz-Eldor, J. et al. Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into
embryoid bodies compromising the three embryonic germ layers. Mol. Med.
6, 88–95 (2000).
40.
Lancaster, M. A. & Knoblich, J. A. Generation of cerebral organoids from human
pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Protoc. 9, 2329–2340 (2014).
41.
Lancaster, M. A. et al. Cerebral organoids model human brain development
and microcephaly. Nature 501, 373–379 (2013).
42.
Brennand, K. et al. Phenotypic differences in hiPSC NPCs derived from patients
with schizophrenia. Mol. Psychiatry 20, 361–368 (2015).
43.
Fang, X., Stachowiak, E. K., Dunham-Ems, S. M., Klejbor, I. & Stachowiak, M. K.
Control of CREB-binding protein signaling by nuclear fibroblast growth factor
receptor-1: a novel mechanism of gene regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 280,
28451–28462 (2005).
44.
Baron, O. et al. Cooperation of nuclear fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 and
nurr1 offers new interactive mechanism in postmitotic development of
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 19827–19840 (2012).
45.
Narla, S. T. et al. Activation of developmental nuclear fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 signaling and neurogenesis in adult brain by alpha7 nicotinic
receptor agonist. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2, 776–788 (2013).
46.
Kee, N., Sivalingam, S., Boonstra, R. & Wojtowicz, J. The utility of Ki67 and BrdU
as proliferative markers of adult neurogenesis. J. Neurosci. Methods 115,
97–105 (2002).
47.
Kolk, S. M., Whitman, M. C., Yun, M. E., Shete, P. & Donoghue, M. J. A unique
subpopulation of Tbr1-expressing deep layer neurons in the developing
cerebral cortex. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 32, 200–214 (2006).
48.
Chuang, H. C., Huang, T. N. & Hsueh, Y. P. T-Brain-1—a potential master
regulator in autism spectrum disorders. Autism Res. 8, 412–426 (2015).
49.
D’Arcangelo, G. Reelin in the years: controlling neuronal migration and
maturation in the mammalian brain. Adv. Neurosci. 2014, 19 (2014).
50.
Rogers, J. H. Calretinin: a gene for a novel calcium-binding protein expressed
principally in neurons. J. Cell Biol. 105, 1343–1353 (1987).
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 23 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
 51.
Barinka, F., Druga, R., Marusic, P., Krsek, P. & Zamecnik, J. Calretinin immunor-
eactivity in focal cortical dysplasias and in non-malformed epileptic cortex.
Epilepsy Res. 88, 76–86 (2010).
52.
Stachowiak, E. K., Fang, X., Myers, J., Dunham, S. & Stachowiak, M. K. cAMP-
induced differentiation of human neuronal progenitor cells is mediated by
nuclear fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1). J. Neurochem. 84,
1296–1312 (2003).
53.
Stachowiak, E. K. et al. Targeting novel integrative nuclear FGFR1 signaling by
nanoparticle-mediated gene transfer stimulates neurogenesis in the adult
brain. Integr. Biol. 1, 394–403 (2009).
54.
Bharali, D. J. et al. Organically modified silica nanoparticles: a nonviral vector for
in vivo gene delivery and expression in the brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102,
11539–11544 (2005).
55.
Narla, S. T. et al. Common developmental genome deprogramming in schi-
zophrenia - Role of Integrative Nuclear FGFR1 Signaling (INFS). Schizophr. Res.
185, 17–32 (2017).
56.
Gudernova, I. et al. Multikinase activity of fibroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR) inhibitors SU5402, PD173074, AZD1480, AZD4547 and
BGJ398 compromises the use of small chemicals targeting FGFR catalytic
activity for therapy of short-stature syndromes. Hum. Mol. Genet. 25, 9–23
(2016).
57.
Coleman, S. J. et al. Nuclear translocation of FGFR1 and FGF2 in pancreatic
stellate cells facilitates pancreatic cancer cell invasion. EMBO Mol. Med. 6,
467–481 (2014).
58.
Brisch, R. et al. Calretinin and parvalbumin in schizophrenia and affective
disorders: a mini-review, a perspective on the evolutionary role of calretinin in
schizophrenia, and a preliminary post-mortem study of calretinin in the septal
nuclei. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9, 393 (2015).
59.
Reynolds, G. P., Beasley, C. L. & Zhang, Z. J. Understanding the neurotransmitter
pathology of schizophrenia: selective deficits of subtypes of cortical
GABAergic neurons. J. Neural Transm. 109, 881–889 (2002).
60.
Mubarik, A. & Tohid, H. Frontal lobe alterations in schizophrenia: a review.
Trends Psychiatry Psychother. 38, 198–206 (2016).
61.
Pierri, J. N., Volk, C. L., Auh, S., Sampson, A. & Lewis, D. A. Decreased somal size
of deep layer 3 pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex of subjects with
schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 58, 466–473 (2001).
62.
Erlenmeyer-Kimling, L. et al. Attention, memory, and motor skills as childhood
predictors of schizophrenia-related psychoses: the New York High-Risk Project.
Am. J. Psychiatry 157, 1416–1422 (2000).
63.
Dorph-Petersen, K. A., Pierri, J. N., Wu, Q., Sampson, A. R. & Lewis, D. A. Primary
visual cortex volume and total neuron number are reduced in schizophrenia.
J. Comp. Neurol. 501, 290–301 (2007).
Stachowiak et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2017) 7:6 
Page 24 of 24
Translational Psychiatry
