 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Quantification of heterogeneity 
in lung disease with image-based 
pulmonary function testing
Charlene S. Stahr1,*, Chaminda R. Samarage2,*, Martin Donnelley3,4, Nigel Farrow3,4, 
Kaye S. Morgan5, Graeme Zosky6, Richard C. Boucher7, Karen K. W. Siu5, Marcus A. Mall8, 
David W. Parsons3,4, Stephen Dubsky1,2 & Andreas Fouras1,2
Computed tomography (CT) and spirometry are the mainstays of clinical pulmonary assessment. 
Spirometry is effort dependent and only provides a single global measure that is insensitive for regional 
disease, and as such, poor for capturing the early onset of lung disease, especially patchy disease such 
as cystic fibrosis lung disease. CT sensitively measures change in structure associated with advanced 
lung disease. However, obstructions in the peripheral airways and early onset of lung stiffening are 
often difficult to detect. Furthermore, CT imaging poses a radiation risk, particularly for young children, 
and dose reduction tends to result in reduced resolution. Here, we apply a series of lung tissue motion 
analyses, to achieve regional pulmonary function assessment in β-ENaC-overexpressing mice, a well-
established model of lung disease. The expiratory time constants of regional airflows in the segmented 
airway tree were quantified as a measure of regional lung function. Our results showed marked 
heterogeneous lung function in β-ENaC-Tg mice compared to wild-type littermate controls; identified 
locations of airway obstruction, and quantified regions of bimodal airway resistance demonstrating 
lung compensation. These results demonstrate the applicability of regional lung function derived from 
lung motion as an effective alternative respiratory diagnostic tool.
The assessment of lung function is critical in the diagnosis of lung diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and cystic fibrosis (CF). Structural changes in the lungs of patients with lung disease 
alter the flow of air and motion in the lungs, whether by obstruction, increasing airway resistance, or by changes 
to the lung parenchyma which alter the mechanical properties of the tissue. Current clinical assessments and 
treatments of lung disease are indirect and since many treatments have adverse side effects, they cannot be applied 
prophylactically. Therefore, earlier and more accurate disease diagnosis are keys to successful intervention.
Changes in lung function are typically tracked using spirometry with measures such as forced expiratory 
volume in 1-second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) being widely used to quantify airway obstruction. 
However measures from spirometry provide no structural information1–3, are global measures of lung function 
and as a result cannot capture the heterogeneity in lung diseases such as COPD and CF. As FEV1 is effort depend-
ent it is often a difficult test to perform in young children, the group where preventative measures should be 
applied. The forced oscillation technique (FOT) is a non-invasive method for assessing the resistive properties 
of the respiratory system4,5. FOT is effort independent, meaning that this test can be performed on children, the 
elderly, and ventilated patients. Furthermore, one of the more notable advantages of FOT over spirometry is 
its sensitivity to detecting peripheral airway obstructions6. However, clinical assessments using spirometry or 
FOT yield a global measure of lung function, thus concealing variations in lung disease, especially in cases with 
functional compensation from surrounding healthy lung tissue. Recently, multiple breath gas washout (MBW)7,8 
1Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. 24Dx Limited, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia. 3Robinson Research Institute, University of Adelaide, SA, Australia. 4Women’s and 
Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia. 5School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia. 6School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia. 7Department of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 8Department of Translational Pulmonology 
Translational Lung Research Center (TLRC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. *These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests 
for materials should be addressed to S.D. (email: stephen.dubsky@monash.edu) or A.F. (email: andreas.fouras@
monash.edu)
received: 04 March 2016
Accepted: 17 June 2016
Published: 27 July 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
measures such as lung clearance index (LCI) have also been shown to be more sensitive than FEV1 for assessing 
lung function in early stage lung disease9.
Imaging techniques such as conventional radiography and computed tomography (CT) continue to be used to 
profile lung disease. CT is increasingly used to evaluate lung health in humans10–12 and in small animal studies13. 
As CT provides excellent structural information, experienced radiologists are capable of identifying regions of the 
lung that are poorly aerated, as well as airways affected by mucus plugging. However, measures of lung stiffness 
and ventilation are not directly available, with the key surrogate being lung aeration. CT scoring systems such 
as CF-CT and PRAGMA-CF are currently used for quantifying the extent of lung disease at various stages11,14. 
Unsurprisingly, CT has become increasingly popular as an outcome measure to assess therapeutic efficacy and 
although there are questions about the danger of radiation from CT12,15, it is generally accepted there is increased 
cancer risk from repeated radiation exposures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an alternative to current 
X-ray based imaging modalities but its utility has not been exported to the general community16,17.
Phase contrast X-ray imaging (PCXI) is particularly suited to imaging lung dynamics18–20 since the air-tissue 
interfaces between the air sacs greatly increase image contrast. In this study, we combine PCXI with a volumetric 
 
particle image velocimetry (4DPIV) image processing technique to obtain highly sensitive measures of lung tis-
sue expansion, or local change in lung volume. Local lung tissue expansion (volume change) is utilised here to 
assess the functional capacity of lung tissue as it is physiologically proportional to regional ventilation. Using an 
airway tree linking process (ATL) we associate lung tissue ventilation with a segmented airway tree21, allowing the 
calculation of time-resolved regional airflow. Since lung disease alters airflow, this approach provides a sensitive 
technique for detecting, localising and quantifying regional lung function deficits. The aim of this study was to 
illustrate the possibilities of imaging altered lung motion to quantify the heterogeneous nature and subsequent 
phenotyping of lung disease. Here, we quantify the heterogeneity of lung function in live β 
-ENaC-Tg mice, a 
well-established model with CF-like lung disease22,23. Overexpression of the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) in 
the conducting airways causes airway surface liquid depletion and increased mucus concentration that produces 
reduced mucus clearance, airway mucus obstruction, chronic neutrophilic inflammation, structural lung damage 
and substantial pulmonary mortality24 all characteristic features of CF lung disease in humans.
Results
Imaging lung motion yields insight into regional airflow within the lungs. 
Four-dimensional 
computed tomography (4DCT) utilising phase contrast imaging (Fig. 1a) in live anaesthetised and intubated 
mice under mechanical ventilation produced images that were processed and analysed (see Methods) to provide 
local measures of airflow in the airway trees at 16 time points throughout the (0.45 seconds) respiratory cycle 
(Fig. 1b). Using 4DPIV, the lung tissue motion can be measured (Fig. 1b. II) from which local lung tissue expan-
sion is directly calculated (Fig. 1b. III). The airway tree, segmented from a single CT reconstruction, is associated 
with ventilation to determine airflow at each terminal airway tree point, or ‘endpoint’ (see Methods). In this 
study, these endpoints are the most distal branches of the tree that could be digitally segmented. Local measures 
of airflow at each endpoint are recursively summed up the tree to determine regional airflow at each segment of 
the airway structure (Fig. 1b. IV).
Global pulmonary function measures are limited. 
Physiological measures obtained from 
flexiVent-derived forced-oscillation pulmonary function testing (FOT) manoeuvres for normalised airway 
resistance of WT littermate controls versus β 
-ENaC-Tg mice are shown in Fig. 2a. To produce a surrogate for a 
global measure of lung function from the imaging data, regional airflows in each segment of the airway tree were 
recursively summed from the endpoints up the airway tree to the trachea. This allowed for the global expiratory 
time constant, τ 
exp, to be calculated (Fig. 2b). Both FOT and imaging through measures for airway resistance and 
expiratory time constant respectively, show the effect of obstructive lung disease on airflow resistance. However, 
as these analyses are global, the spatial distribution of lung disease is not fully captured by either FOT measures 
for airway resistance or our surrogate for a global measure, the global expiratory time constant.
Quantification of regional airflows along the airway trees allows for a detailed insight in to the regional nature 
of lung function. Fig. 2c shows the normalised peak expiratory flow (normalised to local tidal volume at each end-
point) plotted against normalised tidal volume at each endpoint for a single healthy WT littermate mouse (M15). 
Each point represents local airflow data at each endpoint in the airway tree (white dots in adjacent airway tree 
image) and is coloured by local expiratory time constant. When considering the two groups of mice in this study 
(Fig. 2d) the wealth of information available from assessing regional lung function is evident. β 
-ENaC-Tg mice 
(Fig. 2d right panel) show a significant regional decrease (p < 
 0.001 between polynomial fits to WT littermate and 
β 
-ENaC-Tg groups, see Supplementary Fig. 1a) and delay in the ventilation of lung tissue during the respiratory 
cycle (resulting in increased local expiratory time constant) in contrast to WT littermates (Fig. 2d left panel). 
The data also shows regions of lung (in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice) with increased ventilation (see Fig. 2d left panel and 
Supplementary Fig. 1b) indicating signs of lung compensation to maintain overall lung function. Fig. 2d shows 
that the β 
-ENaC-Tg mice produce lower peak expiratory flows and longer expiratory delays in peripheral airways 
in contrast to WT littermates.
Functional imaging shows the heterogeneity of patchy lung disease in β-ENaC-Tg mice. 
 
Segmented airway trees (Fig. 3a) exhibit the heterogeneity of CF-like lung disease in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice, as evi-
denced by patchy regions of increased expiratory time constants. Typical AB/PAS stained histological lung sec-
tions from a WT littermate mouse (Fig. 3b) and a β 
-ENaC-Tg mouse (Fig. 3c) show that not all β 
ENaC airways 
exhibit mucus blockages, consistent with heterogeneous lung disease. Regional tissue ventilation, subsequent 
time constant mapping, and matching histology showcase mucus obstruction detected in the right upper lobe 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
of the β 
-ENaC-Tg mouse (Fig. 3d, green arrows). Our analysis revealed mucus blockages restrict airflow, thus 
increasing the local time constant, leading to regions in the lung with low ventilation downstream of the blockage.
Extent of lung disease is classified using local pulmonary function measures. 
Scatterplots of 
normalised peak expiratory flow versus normalised tidal volume at the endpoints of the segmented airway tree, 
depict the variability of lung disease affecting the β 
-ENaC-Tg mice (Fig. 4a–c). Figure 4a shows disease that is 
highly heterogeneous consistent with mucus blockages in the peripheral airways. Figure 4b shows a case where 
Figure 1. Synchrotron experimental setup and data processing sequence. (a) A simplified schematic of the 
PCXI experimental setup is shown. The mouse is mechanically ventilated and imaged while rotated using a 
5-axis motor controller (Aerotech, USA). (b) (I) The raw image data is binned against the ventilation trace, pre-
processed and reconstructed. (II) 4DCT imaging followed by lung motion image processing yields a 4D map of 
the local displacement (blue = small displacement; red = larger displacement) of lung tissue between successive 
CT volumes. Only data at peak inspiration shown here. (III) Inter-volume displacement gradients are used to 
determine time-resolved regional ventilation (red = low ventilation, blue = higher ventilation). (IV) Using the 
ATL process, time-resolved regional ventilation measures are associated with the segmented airway tree from 
CT to obtain time-resolved regional airflow (airway tree segment colouring).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
the entire left lung is affected by a blockage in the upper bronchi, and Fig. 4c shows a case where both lungs are 
affected by an obstruction in the trachea.
Lung tissue expansion is the direct result of the air flowing through the airways, into and out of the tissue. As 
such, lung expansion as measured using the methods described here, is a direct consequence of lung ventilation, 
the movement of air in to and out of the lungs via inhalation and exhalation. In this study, we use the terms ‘lung 
expansion’ and ‘lung ventilation’ interchangeably as they are physiologically related. We use measures for regional 
airflow (local measures for tidal volume, peak expiratory flow and expiratory time constant for regional air-
flow) at the endpoints to determine regions of tissue within the lung that are functioning below that observed in 
healthy littermates. Each endpoint feeds a certain volume of lung tissue (see Supplementary Fig. 2) and therefore 
regional analysis on each mouse provides a wealth of information. Here we introduce a parameter termed lung 
disease index (LDI), to reduce this data to a single index. The LDI indicates the percentage of total lung volume 
that is functioning below (i.e. a lower local peak expiratory flow) the healthy littermate group (see Methods), 
therefore quantifying the extent of disease within the overall lung. LDI was calculated and shown to be higher 
in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice over WT littermate controls (Fig. 4c). LDI measures for all mice also correlate to the airway 
resistance function measures obtained from FOT (Fig. 4d). Supplementary Fig. 3 shows the airway trees coloured 
by expiratory time constant for all mice in the study. Supplementary Fig. 4 shows additional scatter plots of nor-
malised peak expiratory flow versus normalised tidal volume.
Distribution of local expiratory time constant measures reveal greater insight to lung function 
over global measures. 
The distribution of expiratory time constants, measured at the endpoints obtained 
from 4DPIV followed by ATL (see Methods), was further explored to quantify the spatial variation in lung dis-
ease across the mouse sample populations used in this study (Fig. 5). A plot of the median against the standard 
deviation of expiratory time constant distributions for all mice in the study (Fig. 5a), depicts clear distinction 
Figure 2. Global pulmonary function measures provide limited information. (a) Physiological lung function 
measures (flexiVent) of wild-type littermate controls (WT) versus β 
-ENaC overexpressing (β 
-ENaC-Tg) mice 
validates the regional pulmonary function method presented here. β 
-ENaC-Tg mice showed significantly 
increased specific airway resistance compared against littermates. While airway resistance was measured using a 
global forced oscillation measure, the dynamics of the lung tissue and the spatial distribution of disease are not 
captured by FOT. (b) Averaged global expiratory time constant, τ 
exp, measures in WT littermate and β 
-ENaC-Tg 
mice from 4DCT and lung motion analysis (4DPIV) followed by regional calculation of airflow using our ATL 
method. (c) Scatterplot of normalised local peak expiratory flow against normalised tidal volume at endpoints in 
the segmented airway tree of a single representative WT littermate mouse (M15). Each point on the scatterplot 
corresponds to each endpoint in the airway tree (white dots in adjacent airway tree image) and are coloured by 
the local expiratory time constant calculated using the regional lung motion data. (d) Scatterplot of normalised 
local peak expiratory flow against normalised tidal volume for endpoints in all WT littermate mice (left) and 
β 
-ENaC-Tg mice (right) used in this study. The scatter points are coloured by local expiratory time constant 
calculated using the methods discussed in this paper. The polynomial fit (solid lines: fit, dashed lines: 99% 
confidence interval limits) to WT littermate data (black lines shown in both panels) illustrates the effect of lung 
disease on lung function in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
between the closely grouped WT littermates and the widespread β 
-ENaC-Tg mice, indicative of the heterogeneity 
 
in lung function across each group. The point, P, denotes the average for the median and standard deviation 
expiratory time constant measures shown on the plot. Pulmonary function test results are plotted against the 
angle of each point on the plot from point P to differentiate between disease phenotypes (Fig. 5a-inset, Fig. 5b). 
The circles represent littermates and triangles denote β 
-ENaC-Tg mice. The colours represent the clusters into 
which these points are automatically grouped, using a k-means clustering algorithm25 implemented in MATLAB. 
K-means clustering is a popular method for cluster analysis in data mining and involve partitioning the data in 
to separate groups based on their statistics. Averaged histograms of expiratory time constants (individual data 
shown in Supplementary Fig. 5) are shown overlaid for all WT littermates and β 
-ENaC-Tg mice (Fig. 5c top) as 
well as three individual β 
-ENaC-Tg mice from each cluster (clusters B through D, Fig. 5c bottom three panels) 
selected using the k-means clustering algorithm on the basis that they exhibit similar airway resistance as meas-
ured using FOT (data points annotated in Fig. 5b). The blue line and red line (in top panel only) represent the 
mean expiratory time constants calculated for the WT littermate and β 
-ENaC-Tg mouse populations, respec-
tively. The dashed black line represents the average expiratory time constant calculated for each individual mouse 
and is a close proxy to a global measure. This analysis reveals that our regional function measurement technique 
fully captures the spatial distribution of lung disease over current clinical assessment techniques that provide only 
Figure 3. Functional imaging quantifies the extent to which β-ENaC-Tg mice express patchy lung disease. 
(a) 4DPIV followed by ATL (coloured by expiratory time constant) show that lung disease in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice 
is heterogeneous. Histological sections of the lung are obtained at different locations (white lines) and are 
shown in (b,c). (b) AB/PAS stained histological sections from the same WT littermate as 3a (M02) shows no 
mucus plugging (black arrows). (c) AB/PAS stained histological sections from the same β 
-ENaC-Tg mouse as 
3a (M11) shows clear airways (black arrows) as well as mucus obstructed airways (green arrow) within the same 
lobe, indicating non-homogenous disease. (d) Regional lung ventilation in β 
-ENaC-Tg mouse (M22) shows 
low ventilation in the right upper lobe of the lung (left panel, dashed box). (Middle panel) The corresponding 
histological section showing mucus blockage in the bronchial tree that feeds the right upper lobe of the lung. 
(Right panel) Airway tree coloured by expiratory time constant, the same analysis applied to data in a, shows the 
right upper region of the lung exhibits an increased resistance. This is validated by the mucus blockage evident 
in histology shown in the middle panel. Green arrow shows location of a mucus obstruction. Scale bars, 100 μ 
m.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
a global measure for lung function. Supplementary Fig. 5 shows the individual histograms for WT littermate and 
β 
-ENaC-Tg mice that contribute to the averaged histograms in the top panel of Fig. 5c.
Discussion
Here, we apply 4DPIV followed by ATL to quantify the heterogeneity of lung disease in β 
ENaC-Tg mice and compare 
 
disease distribution and severity to their WT littermates in vivo. The β 
ENaC-Tg mouse is a well-established 
model with patchy muco-obstructive lung disease characteristic of CF lung disease in humans.
Regional lung ventilation is determined from 4D lung motion analysis (4DPIV) and associated with the 
airway structure (ATL) to determine local airflow at each branch in the segmented airway tree21, allowing for 
detailed visualization of disease heterogeneity. Furthermore, our analysis revealed that a wealth of specific 
regional information on lung mechanics could be captured in addition to what can be provided by conventional 
global measurements.
Physiological lung function measures obtained from forced-oscillation testing (FOT) show that β 
-ENaC-Tg 
mice have significantly higher (p < 
 0.0001) specific airway resistance compared to their WT littermates. However, 
the airway resistance measured using spirometry is a global measure with major contributions from the con-
ducting airways. Therefore, the dynamics of the lung tissue, as well as the spatial distribution and severity of the 
disease cannot be captured using FOT on existing lung function assessment methods. Expiratory time constants 
calculated from tidal volume data obtained from the proposed ATL analysis method shows a significant increase 
of airway resistance among β 
-ENaC-Tg mice, confirming the presence of significant lung disease. This finding is 
consistent with previous reports of the muco-obstructive pulmonary phenotype of β 
ENaC-Tg mice, including 
substantial pulmonary mortality (45% in this study) in the first weeks of life22–24. Wongviriyawong et al.26 utilized 
a similar approach using PET imaging and airway tree morphology from high-resolution CT images, combined 
with a simple electrical analogy model of the airways to deduce regional resistance for lung segments in humans. 
In contrast, our method can provide dynamic data across the breath, allowing time-constant data to be calculated 
directly, which is not possible using a static PET image.
The volumetric analysis shown in this study extends previous work using 2D lung motion measurements of 
mice after bleomycin treatment20, which showed that regional lung expansion was a sensitive indicator of regional 
lung disease. Dubsky et al.21 applied this volumetric technique to healthy mice, and rabbit neonates. Here we 
combine and improve on these methods to quantify changes resulting from lung disease.
We show here, for the first time, a detailed and 3D view of the regional nature of lung function in β 
-ENaC-Tg 
mice. Airway mucus obstruction, typical in CF lung disease, produces higher resistances in the downstream air-
ways. Histological observations validated the presence of mucus obstructions inferred from our analysis. Other 
Figure 4. 4DPIV followed by ATL provides regional quantification of the distribution of disease. 
(a–c) Scatterplots of normalised local peak expiratory flow against normalised tidal volume at endpoints in 
segmented airway tree for three β 
-ENaC-Tg mice. (d) Lung disease index (LDI), a parameter that utilises local 
pulmonary function data to classify the extent of lung disease; of WT littermate control and β 
-ENaC-Tg mice  
as measured using the analysis methods presented in this paper, indicate greater extent of lung disease in  
β 
-ENaC-Tg mice over WT controls. (e) LDI versus specific airway resistance measures from pulmonary 
function testing for WT littermate control (blue circles) and β 
-ENaC-Tg mice (red circles), including line  
of best fit (solid black).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
parameters introduced in literature27–29 to capture lung disease heterogeneity do not properly describe the meas-
ure we can now provide. Therefore, we have introduced a new parameter, the lung disease index (LDI), derived 
from measures for regional ventilation, to quantify inhomogeneous lung disease.
Histogram analyses of expiratory time constants calculated at all the endpoints in the segmented airway tree 
shed further insight on the different phenotypes of lung disease in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice. WT littermate controls 
exhibit (see Supplementary Fig. 5) homogenous expiratory time constant (μ = 0.12s, σ = 0.022s) while the distri-
bution for the β 
-ENaC-Tg population in the study is bi-modal (μ 
1 = 
 0.13s, σ 
1 = 
 0.038s; μ 
2 = 
 0.22s, σ 
2 = 
 0.037s). 
Individual data sets were categorized into four distinct groups based on distribution parameters. There was 
good agreement (R2 = 
 0.7) between the categories and normalised airway resistance from FOT analysis. One 
β 
-ENaC-Tg (M14) was incorrectly categorized by this conventional FOT analysis as a healthy mouse. We showed 
here that a global FOT measurement could not reveal the large variations in lung disease that were captured by 
4DPIV followed by ATL. A bi-modal distribution of lung function, as shown in our results, has been previously 
demonstrated in other conditions such as asthma30, in which heterogeneity is potentially exacerbated by inter-
dependence effects between lung regions31. Our identification of bi-modal lung function in β 
-ENaC-Tg mice, 
similar to those in a variety of lung conditions reveals a strength of our technique, and highlights the importance 
of imaging for assessment of lung disease generally, as global measures by definition must result in the loss of 
information on regional differences in the presence of disease.
In conclusion, 4DCT in conjunction with lung motion measurement (4DPIV) followed by ATL, was used to 
successfully quantify regional airflow in the airways of β 
-ENaC-Tg mice. We used conventional FOT to show that 
WT littermates could be distinguished from β 
-ENaC-Tg mice using measures for specific airway resistance, and 
to act as a method to validate our new lung disease index (LDI) that uses local expiratory time constant of airflow 
to quantify regional lung function. Here, we have shown regional lung function allows the detection and quan-
tification of disease that is not available using global lung function tests such as spirometry or FOT. Our results 
suggest that this extra lung function information could aid early diagnosis of lung disease.
Figure 5. Distribution of time constant reveals severity of disease. (a) Standard deviation of expiratory time 
constant at endpoints versus median value of expiratory time constant at endpoints for WT littermate controls  
(blue circles) and β 
-ENaC-Tg mice (red triangles). Point, P, represents the intersection of the gross population’s 
mean values for median and standard deviation of expiratory time constant. (b) Specific airway resistance, as 
measured by pulmonary function test (flexiVent), plotted against the angle of each data point from point P in (a).  
Data points are clustered into 4 groups using the k-means algorithm, based on distribution of expiratory time 
constant in (a). (c) Averaged histograms of expiratory time constant at endpoints from WT littermate and β 
-ENaC-Tg populations (top panel) and histograms of expiratory time constant for three β 
-ENaC-Tg mice that have 
similar pulmonary function test results (bottom panels). The blue solid line in each inset shows the average time 
constant from entire littermate population from the top panel. The black dotted line shows the averaged expiratory 
time constant at the endpoints for each individual mouse. While function test results are similar, our method shows 
3 distinct phenotypes of pathology.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
Although there is some debate about the significance of medically-delivered radiation32, the use of 4DCT could 
significantly limit the clinical utility of using lung motion to derive a measure for lung function. Alternatively, 
4DPIV can be substituted with Computed Tomographic X-Ray Velocimetry (CTXV)33, an alternative low-dose 
flow (motion) measurement technique that can reconstruct the flow through an opaque vessel from as few as 
three projections34. Thereby CTXV followed by ATL would uniquely allow regional lung function mapping with 
much lower radiation dose than is delivered by 4DCT, which generally requires hundreds of projections (per 
time-point) for a good reconstruction. This reduced dose would make CTXV followed by ATL clinically applica-
ble with the capability of delivering results similar to those in this study.
Earlier and more accurate disease detection is the key to pro-active interventions with the ability to limit lung 
disease progression. Additionally, sensitive assessment of the progression of disease or subtle reversal of disease 
in response to treatment is critical information that physicians require for successful management of disease. 
Measurements of lung motion and associated analyses deliver rich functional information that could now be used 
in conjunction with other methods for early diagnosis and management to achieve better patient outcomes and 
accelerate the development of new treatments.
Methods
Ethics statement. 
Experiments were performed at the third generation SPring-8 Synchrotron Radiation 
Facility in Hyogo Prefecture, Japan. The experimental procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use 
Committees of the relevant institutions. Animal Ethics were approved by the Women’s and Children’s Health 
Network Animal Ethics Committee, Adelaide, South Australia. All the experiments were performed in accord-
ance with the approved guidelines and regulations.
Experimental animals. 
The β 
-ENaC mice (n = 
 11), aged between 44–57 days (median = 
 49 days) at time of 
imaging, originated from a mixed genetic background (C3H/HeN x C57Bl/6N bred with male C3B6F1 wild-type) 
breeding colony (University of Heidelberg, Germany). Littermate controls (n = 
 7) were used to eliminate the 
possible effects of strain background on lung phenotype. Offspring were genotyped at 3 weeks of age via PCR 
of genomic DNA as previously described22. The mice were bred and housed in a pathogen-free environment. 
Mice were anaesthetised by sodium pentobarbital (Somnopentil, Pitman-Moore, Washington Crossing, USA) 
i.p. injection, and non-surgically intubated for attachment to a computer-controlled custom-built small animal 
pressure-controlled ventilator (4Dx Limited, Australia); at 12 cmH2O PIP and 2 cmH2O PEEP with a respiratory 
rate of 133 breaths per minute (each cycle lasting 0.45 seconds with an inspiration time of 0.15 seconds and 
an expiration time of 0.3 seconds). Mice were mounted vertically in a custom rotational stage rig for imaging. 
Radiation dose was minimised by using a mechanical shutter synchronised to open only when images were being 
captured. Rectal temperature and ECG were monitored throughout the experiments. To preserve the normal 
dynamics of lung function, a paralytic was not administered.
Phase contrast X-ray imaging (PCXI). 
All PCXI was performed on the BL20B2 bending magnet beamline, 
 
with imaging performed in Experimental hutch 3 located in the Biomedical Imaging Center. A simplified experi-
mental setup schematic is shown in Fig. 1a. The broadband synchrotron radiation was filtered by a Si-111 double 
crystal monochromator, providing 28 keV of beam energy, with a sample to detector distance of 3 m. Images were 
acquired using a modified beam monitor (AA50, Hamamatsu, Japan) and a sCMOS digital detector (pco.edge, 
PCO Imaging, Germany) with an effective pixel size of 15.3 μ 
m. Images were captured at 37 frames per second 
 
(at an exposure time of 17 ms with a 10 ms delay between exposures) and synchronized with mechanical ventila-
tion to acquire 16 frames per respiratory cycle. The short exposure time was used to reduce motion blur. The mice 
were imaged upright and 6500 images were captured per data set over an arc of 180 degrees.
Pulmonary function measurement. 
Measurements of lung mechanics were performed in anaesthetised 
mice directly after X-ray imaging, using a computer controlled flexiVent (Scireq, Montreal, Canada) small animal 
ventilator to determine maximal vital capacity, airway resistance, dynamic compliance, tissue damping, tissue 
elasticity and hysteresivity. Airway resistance was divided by vital capacity to yield normalised airway resistance.
Histology. 
Animals were humanely killed with a lethal dose of sodium pentobarbital after functional 
imaging and pulmonary function testing. The lungs were excised and fixed in 10% formalin for histology. 
Paraffin-embedded 5 μ 
m sections were stained with AB/PAS.
4D X-ray lung velocimetry (4DPIV) and airflow calculation using Airway Tree Link (ATL). 
Image 
acquisition was synchronized with mechanical ventilation, providing known and corresponding time-points 
throughout the respiratory cycle for all animals. Images were pre-processed using a flat-dark correction and 
a single-image phase retrieval routine35. The pre-processed projections were reconstructed using an alge-
braic tomographic reconstruction to obtain 3D volumes of data at 16 time-points along the respiratory cycle. 
Fig. 1b (I) shows the segmented lungs and ribs from a reconstruction at a single time-point. A 3-dimensional 
(3D) cross-correlation based motion measurement technique was used to obtain a 3D map of the lung displace-
ment between two successive volumes in time (Fig. 1b (II)). The cross-correlation analysis was performed with 
interrogation regions of 64 × 
 64 × 
 64 voxels (representing a 980 μ 
m3 region) with a regular spacing of 16 voxels 
between the centres of adjacent interrogation regions. Analysis on 16 reconstructed volumes resulted in 16 3D 
displacement fields (last volume correlated with the first volume along the resp. cycle) per animal. The expansion 
field of lung tissue was calculated from the local gradients in the lung displacement and is shown for a single 
time-point in Fig. 1b (III). The segmented airway tree (see Fig. 1b (IV) and methods: airway tree segmentation) 
was associated with the lung expansion maps to calculate the time-varying airflow throughout the bronchial tree 
using the Airway Tree Link (ATL) analysis method previously described in Dubsky et al.21. The ATL technique 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
utilises the local ventilation values of lung tissue to directly infer the local airflow through each airway supplying 
a given region of tissue. A supplying airway, or ‘endpoint’
, is the most distal segment in the segmented airway tree; 
that is, a segment in the airway structure that has a parent segment but no daughter segments. Assuming negligi-
ble compressibility effects, the principle of continuity dictates that at each bifurcation, the flow through a parent 
segment must equal the sum of the flow through its daughter segments. As the flow in each endpoint is known, 
the flow through the entire tree can therefore be calculated by recursively summing the airflows in daughter seg-
ments at each bifurcation to calculate the airflow through the parent segment.
Airway tree segmentation. 
The airway tree was segmented from the CT volume at peak expiration. A 
vessel enhancing filter or ‘vesselness’ filter36 was applied to the CT volume. This filter produces a volume for the 
‘vesselness’ parameter; a measure relating to the likelihood that any given pixel belongs to a tubular structure. 
The airway tree was segmented using a flood fill segmentation method in Avizo 3D Software (FEI Visualization 
Sciences Group) on the MASSIVE supercomputing environment at Monash University. The binary-segmented 
volume was skeletonized to obtain 3D topological data necessary for association with the lung tissue ventilation 
map and subsequent calculation of regional airflow.
Expiratory time constant calculation. 
The expiratory time constant, τ 
exp, a standard measure for studying 
 
respiratory mechanics, contains information about the mechanical properties of the lung such as the resistance 
and compliance. τ 
exp is often expressed as the RC time constant where R is the resistance of the system and C its 
compliance37. While τ 
exp is a measure of the time required to empty the lungs, increased τe is indicative of airway 
obstruction and/or reduced lung recoil. Since the flow waveform (16 time-points) was controlled, integration of 
the flow waveform produced known volume waveforms. The expiratory time constant was then measurable at 
each branch of the airway tree, with τ 
exp expressed in seconds, representative of the time required for the local 
volume in an airway to reach 63% of its tidal volume.
Endpoint analysis and lung disease index. 
For each mouse in this study, a scatterplot (Fig. 2c) was 
created to show normalised local peak expiratory flow (local peak expiratory flow divided by local tidal volume 
at that endpoint) against normalised tidal volume (local tidal volume divided by volume at end expiration) at 
the endpoints in the airway structure. To obtain the behaviour of healthy mice, data from endpoints in the entire 
littermate control population (n = 7 mice, n = 1615 endpoints) was plotted (Fig. 2d left panel). Each point on the 
scatterplot represents a regional measure for lung function at each endpoint of the airway tree and are coloured 
by local expiratory time constant. A polynomial fit to littermate data was added (solid line) with 99% confidence 
intervals (CI; dotted lines). For any given data set, endpoints that correspond to lower peak expiratory flows than 
the 99% CI of the WT littermate data (see Supplementary Fig. 2), are considered to have air supplied from stiffer 
portions of lung tissue, i.e. diseased lung. Here we define a descriptor, the lung disease index (LDI), based on 
our regional measures for lung function. LDI indicates the percentage of total lung volume that is functioning 
below that observed in the WT littermate group, and allows to quantify the extent of lung disease between the 
two groups.
Statistics. 
Unpaired two-tailed t-tests were performed to compare normalised airway resistance, average 
expiratory time constants and disease indices arising from 4DPIV analysis. Results were considered statistically 
significant if p < 0.05. Values were reported as mean ± SEM unless stated otherwise.
References
1. Gurney, J. W. Pathophysiology of obstructive airways disease. Radiol. Clin. North Am. 36, 15–27 (1998).
2. Miller, M. R., Quanjer, P. H., Swanney, M. P., Ruppel, G. & Enright, P. L. Interpreting lung function data using 80% predicted and 
fixed thresholds misclassifies more than 20% of patients. Chest 139, 52–59 (2011).
3. Gardner, Z. S., Ruppel, G. L. & Kaminsky, D. A. Grading the severity of obstruction in mixed obstructive-restrictive lung disease. 
Chest 140, 598–603 (2011).
4. Oostveen, E. et al. The forced oscillation technique in clinical practice: methodology, recommendations and future developments. 
Eur. Respir. J. 22, 1026–1041 (2003).
5. Zosky, G. R. & Sly, P. D. Animal models of asthma. Clin. Exp. Allergy J. Br. Soc. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 37, 973–988 (2007).
6. Brashier, B. & Salvi, S. Measuring lung function using sound waves: role of the forced oscillation technique and impulse oscillometry 
system. Breathe 11, 57–65 (2015).
7. Aurora, P. et al. Multiple breath inert gas washout as a measure of ventilation distribution in children with cystic fibrosis. Thorax 59, 
1068–1073 (2004).
8. Gustafsson, P. M., Jong, P. A. D., Tiddens, H. a. W. M. & Lindblad, A. Multiple-breath inert gas washout and spirometry versus 
structural lung disease in cystic fibrosis. Thorax 63, 129–134 (2008).
9. Aurora, P. et al. Multiple-breath washout as a marker of lung disease in preschool children with cystic fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. 
Care Med. 171, 249–256 (2005).
10. Gattinoni, L., Caironi, P., Valenza, F. & Carlesso, E. The role of CT-scan studies for the diagnosis and therapy of acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. Clin. Chest Med. 27, 559–570, abstract vii (2006).
11. Rosenow, T. et al. PRAGMA-CF. A Quantitative Structural Lung Disease Computed Tomography Outcome in Young Children with 
Cystic Fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 191, 1158–1165 (2015).
12. Aziz, Z. A. et al. Computed tomography and cystic fibrosis: promises and problems. Thorax 62, 181–186 (2007).
13. Wielpütz, M. O. et al. In vivo monitoring of cystic fibrosis-like lung disease in mice by volumetric computed tomography. Eur. Respir. 
J. 38, 1060–1070 (2011).
14. de Jong, P. A. et al. Pulmonary Disease Assessment in Cystic Fibrosis: Comparison of CT Scoring Systems and Value of Bronchial 
and Arterial Dimension Measurements. Radiology 231, 434–439 (2004).
15. Tiddens, H. A. W. M. et al. Novel outcome measures for clinical trials in cystic fibrosis. Pediatr. Pulmonol. 50, 302–315 (2015).
16. Wielpütz, M. O. et al. Magnetic resonance imaging detects changes in structure and perfusion, and response to therapy in early 
cystic fibrosis lung disease. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 189, 956–965 (2014).
17. Wielpütz, M. O. & Mall, M. A. Imaging modalities in cystic fibrosis: emerging role of MRI. Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med. 21, 609–616 
(2015).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29438 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29438
18. Lewis, R. A. et al. Dynamic imaging of the lungs using x-ray phase contrast. Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 5031–5040 (2005).
19. Kitchen, M. J. et al. Phase contrast X-ray imaging of mice and rabbit lungs: a comparative study. Br. J. Radiol. 78, 1018–1027 (2005).
20. Fouras, A. et al. Altered lung motion is a sensitive indicator of regional lung disease. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 40, 1160–1169 (2012).
21. Dubsky, S., Hooper, S. B., Siu, K. K. W. & Fouras, A. Synchrotron-based dynamic computed tomography of tissue motion for 
regional lung function measurement. J. R. Soc. Interface 9, 2213–2224 (2012).
22. Mall, M., Grubb, B. R., Harkema, J. R., O’Neal, W. K. & Boucher, R. C. Increased airway epithelial Na+ absorption produces cystic 
fibrosis-like lung disease in mice. Nat. Med. 10, 487–493 (2004).
23. Zhou, Z. et al. The ENaC-overexpressing mouse as a model of cystic fibrosis lung disease. J. Cyst. Fibros. Off. J. Eur. Cyst. Fibros. Soc. 
10 Suppl 2, S172–S182 (2011).
24. Gehrig, S. et al. Lack of neutrophil elastase reduces inflammation, mucus hypersecretion, and emphysema, but not mucus 
obstruction, in mice with cystic fibrosis-like lung disease. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 189, 1082–1092 (2014).
25. Arthur, D. & Vassilvitskii, S. K-means+ 
+ 
: The Advantages of Careful Seeding. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual ACM-SIAM 
Symposium on Discrete Algorithms 1027–1035 (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2007).
26. Wongviriyawong, C., Harris, R. S., Greenblatt, E., Winkler, T. & Venegas, J. G. Peripheral resistance: a link between global airflow 
obstruction and regional ventilation distribution. J. Appl. Physiol. 114, 504–514 (2013).
27. Cederlund, K., Tylén, U., Jorfeldt, L. & Aspelin, P. Classification of emphysema in candidates for lung volume reduction surgery: a 
new objective and surgically oriented model for describing CT severity and heterogeneity. Chest 122, 590–596 (2002).
28. Chae, E. J. et al. Slope of emphysema index: an objective descriptor of regional heterogeneity of emphysema and an independent 
determinant of pulmonary function. AJR Am. J. Roentgenol. 194, W248–W255 (2010).
29. Zhao, Z., Fischer, R., Frerichs, I., Müller-Lisse, U. & Möller, K. Regional ventilation in cystic fibrosis measured by electrical 
impedance tomography. J. Cyst. Fibros. Off. J. Eur. Cyst. Fibros. Soc. 11, 412–418 (2012).
30. Venegas, J. G., Schroeder, T., Harris, S., Winkler, R. T. & Melo, M. F. V. The distribution of ventilation during bronchoconstriction is 
patchy and bimodal: a PET imaging study. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 148, 57–64 (2005).
31. Venegas, J. G. et al. Self-organized patchiness in asthma as a prelude to catastrophic shifts. Nature 434, 777–782 (2005).
32. Kuo, W. et al. Monitoring Cystic Fibrosis Lung Disease by Computed Tomography. Radiation Risk in Perspective. Am. J. Respir. Crit. 
Care Med. 189, 1328–1336 (2014).
33. Dubsky, S. et al. Computed tomographic x-ray velocimetry. Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 23702 (2010).
34. Dubsky, S. et al. Computed tomographic X-ray velocimetry for simultaneous 3D measurement of velocity and geometry in opaque 
vessels. Exp. Fluids 52, 543–554 (2010).
35. Irvine, S. C., Paganin, D. M., Dubsky, S., Lewis, R. A. & Fouras, A. Phase retrieval for improved three-dimensional velocimetry of 
dynamic x-ray blood speckle. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 153901 (2008).
36. Frangi, A. F., Niessen, W. J., Vincken, K. L. & Viergever, M. A. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interventation 
— MICCAI’98 (eds Wells, W. M., Colchester, A. & Delp, S.) 130–137 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998).
37. Brunner, J. X., Laubscher, T. P., Banner, M. J., Iotti, G. & Braschi, A. Simple method to measure total expiratory time constant based 
on the passive expiratory flow-volume curve. Crit. Care Med. 23, 1117–1122 (1995).
Acknowledgements
Japan Synchrotron Radiation Institute provided use of the beamline BL20B2 at the SPring-8 Synchrotron 
(Experiment: 2011B1182). Travel funding was provided by the International Synchrotron Access Program, 
managed by the Australian Synchrotron and funded by the Australian Government. This study was supported 
by the Australian Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust (Project Grant: Localized detection of early stage CF disease 
via quantitative imaging of lung motion), Women’s and Children’s Hospital Foundation, National Health and 
Medical Research Council (NHMRC Project Grant 626863 to D.W.P.), the Cure4CF Foundation, the Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation, and the Multi-modal Australian Sciences Imaging and Visualization Environment (Project: 
NCIy40). M.D. was supported by an M.S. McLeod Fellowship, K.S.M. by an Australian Research Council 
Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DE120102571), N.F. by an M.S. McLeod PhD Scholarship, and A.F. by 
a NHMRC Career Development Fellowship (1022721).
Author Contributions
C.S.S., D.W.P., M.D., K.K.W.S., M.A.M. and A.F. conceived and designed the experiments. C.S.S., D.W.P., M.D., 
N.F., K.S.M., K.K.W.S. and A.F. performed the experiments. C.R.S., S.D. and A.F. conceived and developed 
the analysis protocols. C.S.S., C.R.S., M.D., G.Z., S.D. and A.F. analysed the data. C.S.S., C.R.S. and A.F. wrote 
the manuscript. D.W.P., M.D., R.C.B., K.K.W.S., M.A.M. and S.D. co-wrote the manuscript. C.S.S. and C.R.S. 
contributed equally to this work.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: A.F., C.S.S., C.R.S. and S.D. have beneficial interests in 4Dx, which is 
commercializing respiratory diagnostics technology. A.F. and S.D. are listed on patents filed by Monash 
University and 4Dx Limited describing the lung imaging technology. R.C.B. and M.A.M. are listed on a patent 
filed by the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill describing the β -ENaC-overexpressing mouse.
How to cite this article: Stahr, C. S. et al. Quantification of heterogeneity in lung disease with image-based 
pulmonary function testing. Sci. Rep. 6, 29438; doi: 10.1038/srep29438 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
