 DIETFITS Study (Diet Intervention Examining The Factors 
Interacting with Treatment Success) – Study Design and 
Methods
Michael Stanton, PhD1,2, Jennifer Robinson, PhD1, Susan Kirkpatrick, MS, RD1, Sarah 
Farzinkhou, MS, RD1, Erin Avery, MS1, Joseph Rigdon, PhD, Lisa Offringa, PhD1, John 
Trepanowski, PhD1, Michelle Hauser, MD1, Jennifer Hartle, DrPH1, Rise Cherin, MS, RD1, 
Abby C. King, PhD1,3, John P.A. Ioannidis, MD, DSc1,3,4, Manisha Desai, PhD3,4, and 
Christopher D. Gardner, PhD1
1Stanford Prevention Research Center, Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical 
School, Stanford, CA
2War-Related Injury and Illness Study Center, Veterans Administration Palo Alto Health Care 
System
3 Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA
4 Department of Statistics, Stanford University School of Humanities and Sciences, Stanford, CA
Abstract
Numerous studies have attempted to identify successful dietary strategies for weight loss, and 
many have focused on Low-Fat vs. Low-Carbohydrate comparisons. Despite relatively small 
between-group differences in weight loss found in most previous studies, researchers have 
consistently observed relatively large between-subject differences in weight loss within any given 
diet group (e.g., ~25 kg weight loss to ~5 kg weight gain). The primary objective of this study was 
to identify predisposing individual factors at baseline that help explain differential weight loss 
achieved by individuals assigned to the same diet, particularly a pre-determined multi-locus 
genotype pattern and insulin resistance status. Secondary objectives included discovery strategies 
for further identifying potential genetic risk scores. Exploratory objectives included investigation 
of an extensive set of physiological, psychosocial, dietary, and behavioral variables as moderating 
and/or mediating variables and/or secondary outcomes. The target population was generally 
healthy, free-living adults with BMI 28-40 kg/m2 (n=600). The intervention consisted of a 12-
month protocol of 22 one-hour evening instructional sessions led by registered dietitians, with 
~15-20 participants/class. Key objectives of dietary instruction included focusing on maximizing 
Author responsible for correspondence: Christopher D. Gardner, Ph.D., 1265 Welch Road, Stanford, CA 94305-5411, Telephone: 
(650) 725-2751, Fax: (650) 725-6247, cgardner@stanford.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01826591
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Contemp Clin Trials. 2017 February ; 53: 151–161. doi:10.1016/j.cct.2016.12.021.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the dietary quality of both Low-Fat and Low-Carbohydrate diets (i.e., Healthy Low-Fat vs. 
Healthy Low-Carbohydrate), and maximally differentiating the two diets from one another. Rather 
than seeking to determine if one dietary approach was better than the other for the general 
population, this study sought to examine whether greater overall weight loss success could be 
achieved by matching different people to different diets. Here we present the design and methods 
of the study.
Keywords
Obesity; Low Fat; Low Carbohydrate; Nutrition; Diet; Weight Loss
INTRODUCTION
Obesity has become one of the most significant public health challenges of the 21st century 
[1, 2]. Numerous studies have attempted to identify successful dietary strategies for weight 
loss, with a particular emphasis on contrasting Low-Fat to Low-Carbohydrate (Low-Carb) 
diets. As summarized in multiple meta-analyses, the majority of these diet trials have 
reported only modest mean weight loss (i.e., < 5% initial body weight) after 12 months or 
longer, with limited influence of macronutrient differences on average weight loss (i.e., 
average between-group differences of 2-3 kg) [3, 4]. Notably, despite these relatively small 
between-group average differences, weight loss variability between subjects within any 
given diet group in these studies has been substantial, ranging from highly successful to 
highly unsuccessful (~25 kg weight loss to ~5 kg weight gain) [5-7].
In 2013, our research group received NIH funding (R01 DK 91831) to examine weight loss 
in overweight/obese adults after randomizing them to Healthy Low-Fat vs. Healthy Low-
Carb diets for 12 months. The objective was to identify predisposing and measureable 
individual differences at baseline that would explain significant amounts of the differential 
weight loss achieved by individuals assigned to the same weight loss diet. The study was 
designed to primarily address potential differences in genotype and insulin-glucose 
dynamics in particular, while also collecting data on an extensive set of potentially relevant 
physiological, psychosocial, dietary, and behavioral variables. Notably, the study was not 
designed to identify which of the two study diets was the one best for weight loss, but rather, 
which diet was best for which individuals for weight loss.- (i.e., the “whiches conundrum”) 
[8]. Preliminary data suggested there were three distinct multi-locus genotype patterns 
representing differential weight loss responses to different diets: a Low-Fat Genotype (LFG), 
a Low-Carbohydrate Genotype (LCG), and a Neither Genotype. The three single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) considered to be components of the multi-locus genotype included 
FABP2 (rs1799883), PPARG (rs1801282), and ADRB2 (rs1042714). An additional goal was 
to determine whether other genotypic profiles had a differential impact on the effects of a 
particular diet on weight loss.
Several additional significant objectives were considered of critical importance to the study 
design. First, the intervention approach was designed to achieve maximal differentiation in 
intakes of dietary fat and carbohydrate in the free-living individuals randomized to each of 
Stanton et al.
Page 2
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the two diet groups. Both groups were asked to make large initial changes from their 
baseline habitual diets, such that even after anticipated dietary recidivism over the duration 
of the protocol, the 12-month differentiation of fat vs. carbohydrate intake would be 
substantial.
Second, the intervention approach was designed to be comparably challenging for the two 
groups. There are no standard definitions of “Low-Fat” or “Low-Carb” in terms of 
grams/day or percent energy intake. Some studies comparing the two have had ambitious 
goals for one group compared to modest goals for the other, making the comparison 
unbalanced [9]. This study was designed so that both groups received equally demanding 
assignments.
Third, both diet approaches emphasized equally high dietary quality in terms of nutrient 
density (i.e., nutrients/Kcal). In this case, our objective was to avoid employing a study 
design that favored one diet over the other in terms of overall dietary quality. For example, 
both diet groups were instructed to incorporate significant variety and quantity of vegetables 
into their daily diets and to minimize added sugars and refined grains.
In summary, for the three-diet design objectives described above, the protocol was designed 
to compare two dietary approaches that were maximally differentiated, equally demanding, 
and equally focused on high quality nutrition.
STUDY DESIGN
Generally healthy women and men, 18-50 years of age, with a BMI between 28-40 kg/m2, 
were randomized to a Healthy Low-Fat or Healthy Low-Carb weight loss diet for 12 months. 
The target sample size was n=600. The intervention involved a series of 22 evening 
instructional sessions in groups of 12-22 participants per class. Participants attended classes 
with the same group of individuals over time. Classes were led by health educators who 
were all registered dietitians (Figure 1). To accommodate the large sample size, enrollment 
was spread out across five cohorts between the spring of 2013 and the spring of 2015. Target 
enrollment for the five cohorts was n=80 for Cohort 1, and n=130 for Cohorts 2 through 5. 
All health educators led a similar number of Low-Fat and Low-Carb classes (i.e., for every 
cohort, each health educator was assigned one Low-Fat and one Low-Carb class).
SCREENING
Participants were recruited primarily through media advertisements (e.g., radio, online), and 
e-mail lists. Interested participants were required to complete a 10-minute online survey to 
determine initial eligibility. Those who remained eligible and interested after the survey 
were invited to attend a clinical screening that required written informed consent. Potential 
participants who did not respond to the first invitation received just one additional phone call 
or email invitation; if there was no response after the second attempt, no additional efforts 
were made to schedule the clinical screening visit. The 30-minute in-person screening visit 
included measurements of height, weight, blood pressure, and a fasting fingerstick blood 
sample to measure glucose, triglycerides, LDL-, HDL-, and total-cholesterol. If ineligible, 
Stanton et al.
Page 3
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contact was discontinued after screening results were provided. Table 1 details the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria used in the screening process.
Eligible participants were required to attend an in-person, group-based, 60-75 minute 
orientation, where study details were explained and full study consent was obtained. Those 
who attended the orientation and provided written consent were then required to attend a 
pre-study workshop on the study's dietary assessment methodology using the Nutrition Data 
System for Research (NDSR). During the hour-long workshop, members of the dietary 
assessment team reviewed the NDSR program, methods for collecting the 24-hour recalls, 
and the instructions for using an accompanying Food Amounts Booklet. The workshop also 
included asking participants to fill out a phone call preference sheet indicating their 
preferred phone numbers and time of day (i.e., morning, lunch, mid-day, or evening) for 
their interviewer-administered dietary recalls.
RUN-IN
The intervention protocol began with a run-in period – between orientation date and the start 
date of the participants’ first class – of approximately one month (mean ± SD = 32 ± 10 
days). During this period potential participants were instructed to maintain their habitual 
diet, exercise, and body weight so as to maximize the stability of their baseline measures.
BASELINE DATA COLLECTION
Baseline data collection (see Table 2) included the following clinical measures: body weight, 
height, waist circumference, blood pressure, blood sampling (to later assess such biomarkers 
as insulin, glucose, lipids, inflammatory markers, genotype) including an oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT), resting energy expenditure (REE), and dual-energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA). To assess dietary composition, unannounced 24-hour dietary recalls 
were conducted. Physical activity was assessed by interviewer-administered 7-day recall 
[10]. Participants also completed a number of psychosocial questionnaires. There were 
optional sub-studies for which stool samples were collected and fat biopsies were obtained. 
More detailed information about each of these measures is provided below.
RANDOMIZATION
Participants who completed their baseline clinic visit and data collection were randomized to 
the Healthy Low-Fat or Healthy Low-Carb diet group using an allocation sequence set by a 
computerized random number generator as carried out by the study statistician. Once 
randomized, participants were informed by e-mail of the date and time of their first 
intervention class. This communication did not inform them of their diet group assignment. 
They were first informed of their diet group assignment at the start of the first class. The 
original randomization plan included stratification based on preliminary data on genotype 
predisposition. However, as will be described below in the section describing the analysis 
plan, a decision was made, prior to enrollment of the first participant, to simplify this as a 
straight randomization to one of the two study arms.
Stanton et al.
Page 4
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SINGLE BLIND
The study was single-blinded. It was not feasible to blind participants to Healthy Low-Fat 
vs. Healthy Low-Carb dietary assignment. However, for all staff collecting data (e.g., dietary 
assessment, DXA) and for all laboratory personnel assaying samples (e.g., insulin, glucose), 
diet group assignments were masked. Only a limited number of staff not involved in data 
collection or analysis, including the study coordinator and health educators, knew the diet 
assignments. Subjects were explicitly instructed to not divulge their intervention assignment 
with assessment staff.
STAGGERED COHORTS
The relatively large sample size of this single-site study required delivery of the intervention 
to five staggered cohorts so as to maximize efficiency of study staff and space requirements 
of intervention implementation. The start date of each cohort was staggered to minimize 
overlap of major data collection time points (baseline and 3, 6, and 12 months; see details in 
the Assessment Protocol section). Cohorts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 started in March 2013, September 
2013, April 2014, August 2014 and March 2015, respectively.
INTERVENTION PROTOCOL
CLASS BASED EDUCATION PROGRAM
A team of health educators led the class-based education intervention that was delivered 
over the 12-month protocol. Altogether there were 36 different class groups across all five 
cohorts – 18 Healthy Low-Fat class groups and 18 Healthy Low-Carb class groups. Each 
health educator taught one Healthy Low-Fat and one Healthy Low-Carb group in each 
cohort. In Cohort 1 there were two health educators and in Cohort 2 an additional two health 
educators were hired to lead the classes. Before Cohort 3 got started, one of the original 
health educators left the study, and a new health educator was hired. These four health 
educators then completed Cohorts 3, 4, and 5. All five health educators were registered 
dietitians (RDs), four of the five held Masters degrees, and two of the five were certified 
diabetes educators (CDE). Intervention fidelity across health educators was established 
through weekly staff meetings, during which time health educators shared information and 
class experiences and engaged in group problem-solving around any issues that came to 
light in the course of teaching the classes. Any behavioral issues with participants that arose 
were discussed with the study's senior behavioral scientist.
All class sessions were held in the evenings, Monday through Thursday. For the first eight 
weeks of each cohort, the sessions were held weekly. Class sessions then became less 
frequent – meeting once every two weeks for two months, then once every three weeks until 
the six-month mark, and finally once every month for the remaining six months. Overall, 
there were 22 instructional sessions throughout the year for each class group. The size of the 
class groups ranged from 12 to 22 participants (17 ± 2, mean +/− SD). Once assigned to a 
particular diet assignment and class group, on a specific night of the week and, at a specific 
time, participants were not allowed to switch and sit in on any other classes (i.e., not allowed 
to make-up for a missed class by sitting in on another group's class); the class they attended 
was always their originally assigned class day and time throughout the 22 sessions. Keeping 
Stanton et al.
Page 5
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the classes exclusive in this manner was done with the intention of maximizing overall 
engagement and retention through the promotion of social cohesion, comfort and privacy, 
and the minimization of vulnerability (i.e., avoiding newcomers in the class) among class 
members. For participants who missed a class session, they were provided with the specific 
information from that session via written materials, as well as through brief email or phone 
contacts with their health educator.
DIETARY STRATEGY – LIMBO-TITRATE-QUALITY
There were three central components to the dietary strategy that were repeatedly and 
consistently communicated to the participants regardless of diet assignment. The first was 
the “go as low as you can go” (Limbo) strategy for the first eight weeks. Participants were 
instructed to progressively cut back on fat or carbohydrate intake until they had achieved a 
daily intake of no more than 20 grams of fat or carbohydrate per day, depending on their 
group assignment. Participants received explicit instructions that the rate of restriction was 
not critical to the study, and that reaching the 20 grams per day in two vs. four vs. six vs. 
eight weeks was not considered to carry any advantage or disadvantage. Therefore, their rate 
could be variable and individually tailored. The instructions also included a clear statement 
that, even though 20 grams per day was the objective, any individuals who were unable to 
reach those low levels would not be dropped from the study or considered to be non-
compliant; rather, the expectation was more consistent with the concept of the party game 
Limbo – go as low as you can go. Once participants reached their lowest level of fat or 
carbohydrate intake, they were encouraged to maintain that level for at least a few weeks. 
There was no specific set time for maintaining the lowest level. Rather, it was explained to 
participants that the goal was to provide them with the personal experience of being 
anchored at the lowest level they could achieve and maintain, at least for a week or two.
The second component of the dietary strategy (Titrate) involved instructing participants to 
slowly add fat or carbohydrates back to their diet in increments of 5-15 grams/day, for 
periods of a week at a time, with no set endpoint goal for a specific level of fat or 
carbohydrate. For example, for participants who achieved 20 grams/day within the first eight 
weeks, and then maintained that level for at least a few weeks, they were encouraged to shift 
their daily goal to 25-35 grams/day for a week or for possibly more than one week. During 
this process they were instructed to assess how the increased level of fat or carbohydrate 
affected both their satisfaction with their daily intake (e.g., satiety, palatability, and 
enjoyment) and their weight loss progress. If satisfaction and weight loss progress were 
acceptable, they had the option of maintaining that level of fat or carbohydrate intake for 
another week or adding an incremental 5-15 grams/day. Importantly, while participants were 
encouraged to slowly add fat or carbohydrate to their diets in this manner, it was also made 
clear that they should not add back any more than would be necessary to keep them at the 
lowest possible level over the long term while simultaneously addressing any concerns about 
long-term satisfaction in areas related to satiety, palatability, and enjoyment. After adding 
back the designated grams/day, they could also consider reversing that decision and instead 
reduce their intake based on the factors mentioned above. At this point they could maintain 
that level for the remainder of the study, or try to add back small amounts of fat or 
carbohydrate later in the study. Thus, for the purpose of overall guidance, this Titrate 
Stanton et al.
Page 6
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 component of the dietary strategy was described to participants as having the ultimate 
objective of having each one of them eventually find their individualized level of fat or 
carbohydrate that was both:
1.
The lowest they could achieve, and
2.
The lowest they could conceivably maintain for many years to come after the 12-
month protocol ended.
Inherent in this approach was the idea that the final level of fat or carbohydrate intake 
achieved among individuals within both diet arms would vary substantially, with no single 
set target goal for fat or carbohydrate. It was explained to participants that this was 
acceptable to the study researchers and was even to be expected due to the central study 
hypothesis that each of the study diets would be easier for some participants and more 
difficult for others based on some combination of genetic and/or metabolic predispositions. 
It was for these reasons that “One Diet Does Not Fit All” was the name of the study used by 
the research team for communication purposes with participants.
The third component of the overall dietary strategy was promoting high dietary quality 
(Quality) for both groups for the full 12-month intervention period. Optimizing diet quality 
was emphasized by giving both diet groups similar instructions to focus on whole, real foods 
that were mostly prepared at home when possible, and specifically included as many 
vegetables as possible, every day, however they liked them - grilled, stir-fried, roasted, etc. 
They were also encouraged to choose lean grass-fed and pasture-raised animal foods as well 
as sustainable fish. With a focus on mostly consuming whole, real foods, both groups were 
likewise instructed to eliminate, as much as possible, processed food products, including 
those with added sugars, refined white flour products, or trans-fats. Participants were 
encouraged to prepare as much of their own food as possible, and to optimize the inclusion 
of fresh, seasonal foods. When eating out or traveling, they were encouraged to ask for 
modifications to standard menu items that would help them adhere to their diet assignment 
(e.g., ordering salad dressing on the side for the Healthy Low-Fat group or a side of greens 
instead of mashed potatoes for the Healthy Low-Carb group).
Several of the topics related to Quality were specific to each of the two different diet 
assignments. Those assigned to Healthy Low-Fat were instructed to choose whole-grain 
foods (e.g., rather than whole wheat flour products), including steel cut oats, farro, barley, 
quinoa, brown rice, and wild rice. Healthy Low-Fat participants were also encouraged to 
explore and consume a wide range of legumes and beans, fresh fruit, low-fat dairy products, 
and lean meats. Those assigned to Healthy Low-Carb were instructed to choose high quality 
oils and fats, avocados, hard cheeses, nut butters, and nuts & seeds. During the Titrate phase, 
and throughout the remainder of the 12-month protocol, as the Healthy Low-Fat group 
added small amounts of fat back to the diet, and as the Healthy Low-Carb group added small 
amounts of carbohydrate back to the diet, they were instructed to do so with these same 
quality foods.
Given that high quality foods can be more expensive than foods that are similar in type but 
lower in quality, the encouragement to choose quality was framed as a continuum as 
Stanton et al.
Page 7
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 opposed to an either/or (e.g., for the Healthy Low-Fat participants, organic wheat berries 
was at the highest level of quality, followed by conventional wheat berries, then whole wheat 
bread made with a minimal number of ingredients and no additives, then a more 
conventional whole wheat bread with many ingredients including additives, and, finally, 
refined white flour bread with many ingredients and additives was considered the lowest end 
of the quality continuum). In other words, participants were encouraged to choose the 
highest quality foods that they could reasonably find, realistically afford, and enjoy.
In summary, the diet strategy for both the Healthy Low-Fat and Healthy Low-Carb groups 
was a Limbo-Titrate-Quality approach, with the goal of having participants achieve an 
individualized, lowest-possible level of fat or carbohydrate intake of maximal dietary 
quality, and one that could conceivably be maintained long-term beyond the end of the 12-
month protocol. Notably, there were no specific caloric restriction goals for either diet and 
no single specific percentage of fat or carbohydrate to which they were told to strive as the 
final goal.
SIMILARITIES IN INTERVENTION STRATEGIES FOR THE TWO DIET GROUPS
Overall, there were four main foci of the instructional sessions: nutrition, behavior, 
emotions, and physical activity. While all of these were usually touched upon in each class, 
nutrition was typically the primary focus, and one other component per class was 
highlighted and explored in more detail. The nutrition focus was strongest in the first two 
months of the 12-month protocol, after which more and more emphasis was given to the 
non-dietary components of the sessions, and these were relatively similar in many regards 
for the two intervention groups (see Appendix for class topics). Specific class topics taught 
to both diet groups included mindful eating, food and mood, sleep and weight, food 
addiction, exercise, as well as tips and demonstrations on shopping, preparing, and cooking 
vegetables. All health educators taught their classes through the lens of helping participants 
to focus on making sustainable lifestyle changes, not simply following a temporary ‘diet.’ 
Beyond the classroom instruction, each health educator was available to offer individual 
contact with their class members via email and phone (e.g., ranging from several times a 
week to very rarely) to address specific dietary questions and review food logs.
The Quality principle was reinforced similarly for the two diet groups via class food 
demonstrations highlighting vegetables and the use of simple cooking equipment and 
techniques to inspire and encourage healthy eating at home. Recipes were provided by 
health educators via newsletters. Other recipes, selected by the participants and relevant to 
their dietary assignments, were shared via email and printed booklet. Participants were also 
encouraged to find and purchase food from local community supported agriculture (CSA) 
groups or take advantage of home delivery food services that promoted high quality food 
values (e.g., Good Eggs).
Efforts to maximize similar retention between the two groups included the health educators 
consistently sending reminder e-mails before class, summary e-mails after class with class 
materials and pertinent links to other items that came up during class, as well as reaching out 
via e-mail to individuals directly, as needed. Weekly emails were sent to the groups even 
Stanton et al.
Page 8
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 during the months when classes were meeting less often. Participants were able to post 
questions or comments to the whole group as well as privately to their health educator.
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
The promotion of regular, moderate- or more vigorous-intensity levels of physical activity 
was identical for the two diet arms and consistent with national guidelines related to weight 
control. Health educators recommended 60–90 min/day of moderate-intensity physical 
activity as a target goal [11-14] and encouraged any participants who were not meeting these 
guidelines at baseline to work up to this level in the first three months of the study. Those 
who were already exercising at this or a higher level were encouraged to add variety, 
increase intensity, time, or frequency. Consistent with evidence from recent national reports, 
health educators discussed the particular importance of physical activity for weight loss 
maintenance. In Cohorts 1 and 2, participants were provided with pedometers. For 
subsequent cohorts, while participants were not given pedometers, since health educators 
realized that they were largely unused due to widespread use among participants of other 
activity monitors (e.g., Fit Bit, Jawbone), they were encouraged to use these types of 
wearable devices to regularly track their activity levels. Health educators emphasized a mix 
of cardiovascular and strength training and proper form to prevent injury. They encouraged 
participants to start with moderate levels of physical activity (e.g., 10 min/day added to what 
they were currently doing) and increase activity according to their lifestyle. Lastly, health 
educators encouraged participants to find ways to be active that were truly enjoyable and 
practical for the participants, so that their physical activity could be sustainable for the long-
term.
PSYCHOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION
Health educators emphasized emotional awareness and behavior modification to support the 
diet and weight loss program. While the initial eight class sessions were focused mostly on 
nutritional knowledge and understanding what the food changes would be, the majority of 
the remaining class sessions focused on how to put this knowledge into practice. The 
behavioral modification strategies were based on a Social Cognitive Model, which views 
behavior, including health behaviors, as acquired and maintained through a complex set of 
behavioral, cognitive, and environmental conditions [15, 16]. Social cognitive intervention 
strategies have been found to be effective in promoting adoption and retention in a number 
of lifestyle intervention studies with a range of adult populations [17-21]. Health educators 
exposed participants to empirically-supported principles of self-regulatory behavior change 
(e.g., goal setting, self-efficacy building, supportive environments, healthful self-
reinforcement/rewards, relapse prevention) [18, 20, 22]. Class themes that addressed 
behavior included ‘the power of habit,’ ‘the practice of mindful eating,’ ‘how emotions drive 
food decisions,’ ‘the concept of bulk cooking,’ ‘grocery shopping,’ ‘meal planning,’ ‘meal 
timing,’ ‘dining out,’ and more. The impact of participants’ surrounding environments and 
contexts (e.g., at work, at home, with friends) and how to deal with the pressures that might 
derail them were also discussed in detail.
A key concept of behavior change was reinforcing the concept of “One Diet Does Not Fit 
All” as it applies to behavior change and motivation, as well as Healthy Low-Fat vs. Healthy 
Stanton et al.
Page 9
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Low-Carb diets. That is, what works for one individual, may not work for someone else. The 
12-month protocol involved helping participants find the right foods to meet individual goals 
and the personal behaviors and habits needed to allow for sustainable change.
ONGOING INTERVENTION ADAPTATION AND DEVELOPMENT
As the study progressed from Cohort 1 to Cohort 5, the intervention delivery was refined in 
several minor ways with the intent of maximizing treatment fidelity. Importantly, each of 
these minor refinements was implemented equally for both the Healthy Low-Fat and the 
Healthy Low-Carb groups. For example, based on participant feedback in the first and 
second cohorts, health educators determined that the in-class content could be improved by 
making it less dense, less didactic, and more interactive. Therefore, the scope of the in-class 
content was reduced and the interactivity of the material was increased, while retaining the 
guiding principles. Part of this transition was achieved by creating a set of videos for 
participants and instructing them to view the videos prior to class (e.g., a “flipped” 
classroom concept). As another example, in-class cooking activities were made more 
participatory by including more potlucks and demonstrations of participants’ own recipes.
Additionally, in Cohort 5, an SMS (text messaging) accountability tool was developed for 
both groups that was introduced after the 6-month data collection time point. Briefly, the 
tool involved three or four text messages per week with brief queries about adherence to 
their eating plan, emotions related to their adherence, general well-being, and intentions for 
any actionable steps to address any lapses in adherence or challenges with well-being. This 
addition was based on feedback from participants in earlier cohorts that had reported 
challenges remaining fully engaged in the study in the latter six months of the protocol when 
the frequency of class meetings was reduced to once per month.
ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL
As presented in Table 2, data were collected across a broad range of domains. The primary 
data collected for all participants across all five cohorts included demographics, personal and 
family health history, clinical measures (e.g., weight, waist circumference, and blood work), 
dietary intake, physical activity, and psychosocial variables. Resting energy expenditure and 
percent body fat (DXA) were assessed for Cohorts 2-5. Fat biopsies were obtained from a 
subset of participants who volunteered in Cohorts 2-5, and stool samples were collected 
from a subset of participants who volunteered from Cohorts 2 and 3. With few exceptions, 
which are noted below, all data were collected at four major study time points: baseline, 3, 6, 
and 12 months.
DIETARY ASSESSMENT METHODS
Primary dietary intake was assessed using three unannounced 24-hour dietary recalls within 
a two-week window at each of the four major data collection time points. Each participant 
was expected to complete two weekday dietary recalls and one weekend recall at each data 
collection time point for a total of 12 recalls. Data were collected using NDSR, a computer-
based software application developed at the University of Minnesota Nutrition Coordinating 
Center (NCC). Dietary recalls were collected in a standardized fashion using a multiple-pass 
Stanton et al.
Page 10
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interview approach consisting of five steps to ensure completeness and accuracy [23, 24]. 
First, participants were asked to list all foods and beverages consumed in the previous 24 
hours (i.e., midnight to midnight). Second, the interviewer reviewed the list with the 
participant. Third, the interviewer collected detailed information about each reported food 
and beverage (e.g. method of preparation and amount consumed). Fourth, the interviewer 
probed for commonly forgotten foods. Fifth, the information was reviewed for completeness, 
correctness, and marked as a typical or atypical day. Throughout the recall, the NDSR 
software searched for foods and brand name products by name and prompted the data 
collectors with requests for additional detailed information [25]. All data collectors were 
trained by NDSR certified lead staff and were blinded to the assigned diets.
The NCC Food and Nutrient Database serves as the source of food composition information 
in NDSR [26]. This database includes over 18,000 foods including 8,000 brand name 
products. Ingredients and preparation methods allow for more than 160,000 food variants. 
Values for 165 nutrients, nutrient ratios, and other food groups were generated by the 
database. The USDA Nutrient Data Laboratory is the primary source for nutrient 
composition for the database. These values are supplemented by food manufacturers' 
information and data available in the scientific literature [27]. Standardized, published 
imputation procedures were applied to minimize missing values [28]. In addition, to the 
extent possible, the interviewers entered recipes or ingredients for homemade, restaurant, 
and other items not included in the software. The lead dietary assessment nutritionist 
conducted a quality check for each cohort after data collection at each study collection point. 
This involved an in-depth review of both individual and composite reports for completeness 
and errors.
As mentioned previously, all participants attended a pre-randomization 60-minute, in-person 
training to learn the procedure for dietary recalls and were provided with a Food Amounts 
Booklet to be used at the time of each data collection to enhance estimating portion sizes. 
When an in-person meeting was not possible, this training was done via email and/or 
telephone (<1% of participants).
During each time point data collection window, participants received unannounced phone 
calls to complete dietary recalls. If participants could not be reached via phone by the 
interviewers after approximately five to seven attempted telephone calls, including voicemail 
messages, then the health educator for that specific participant was notified and assisted in 
communication by either bringing this to the participant's attention in the next class, or 
sending an email. If the participant still did not respond, the study coordinator and/or 
Principal Investigator attempted to contact the participant via email or phone. This process 
continued until the data were collected, the participant communicated with the study staff 
his/her wish to discontinue participation, or the data collection window closed.
PARTICIPANT SELF-MONITORING OF DIET
Study participants employed a variety of methods to self-monitor adherence to their diet 
group assignment throughout the study, particularly in the first eight weeks when the goal 
was to lower dietary fat or carbohydrate, depending on assignment, to 20 grams/day. The 
most common dietary monitoring method used was the on-line MyFitnessPal tool [29]. 
Stanton et al.
Page 11
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Many of the participants indicated experience with this tool prior to starting the study, and 
most participants who used it for the first time reported general satisfaction with its ease of 
use. Participants were able to share access of their MyFitnessPal results with their health 
educators, who were then able to review entries, as needed, to help guide participants in their 
diet adherence. Other methods used by those preferring an alternative approach included a 
paper food log provided by the health educators or one of several web-based tracking tools 
that are similar to MyFitnessPal, (e.g., MyNetDiary and Lose It!). As the study progressed, 
and with the increasing popularity of wearable devices, many participants reported tracking 
via their FitBit and UP wristbands.
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY ASSESSMENT
The Stanford Seven-Day Physical Activity Recall (PAR) was administered by trained study 
staff at the same time as one of the dietary recalls at each major data collection time point to 
assess participants’ self-reported level of physical activity [10]. Originally developed at 
Stanford University in the early 1980's, the PAR is a semi-structured interview that 
documents the time an individual engages in physical activity, strength, and flexibility 
activities during the 7 days preceding the interview. An interviewer guides the participant 
through the recall of daily activities to determine the length and intensity of the physical 
activities. Physical activity is measured as total energy expenditure and time spent in 
moderate, hard, and very hard physical activity. Hours per day spent in the various 
categories of physical activity intensity are then converted to a daily average of metabolic 
equivalents (METS) and then used to estimate total energy expenditure per day in units of 
Kcal/kg/day. The questionnaire also captures sleeping time, time spent cooking, and several 
other lifestyle behaviors.
WEIGHT, HEIGHT AND WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE
Body weight was recorded without shoes to the nearest 0.1 kg using a calibrated Scale-
tronix clinical scale. Height was measured to the nearest 0.1 cm using a Seca wall-mounted 
stadiometer. Waist circumference was measured on the skin at the umbilicus to the nearest 
0.1 cm. All measurements were taken by a nurse at the Stanford Clinical & Translational 
Research Unit (CTRU) at each time point. All clinic visits started between 7:00 and 9:30 
am, with participants in a fasted state for at least 10-12 hours.
BLOOD PRESSURE
After 5 minutes of sitting/resting, CTRU nurses obtained three blood pressure readings on 
the right arm one minute apart. These were collected automatically using a WelchAllyn, 
Spot Vital Signs LXi. If a participant's blood pressure was over 160 systolic or 90 diastolic, 
they rested another five minutes before taking the blood pressure again. If the blood pressure 
remained high after several readings, the study coordinator and sometimes the study 
physician were notified. In all cases, the participant was able to continue with the remainder 
of the clinic visit. For analysis purposes, the first measurement was disregarded, and the 
second and third measurements were averaged according to NHANES guidelines [30].
Stanton et al.
Page 12
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BLOOD SAMPLES
Blood was sampled by fingerstick during the screening clinic visit for all potential 
participants to assess a fasting lipid profile and blood glucose using the Cholestech LDX 
machine. For all participants determined eligible after screening that consented to participate 
in the study, subsequent blood samples were taken at baseline, 3, 6 and 12 months via 
venipuncture at the Stanford CTRU by trained nurses or phlebotomists. Aliquots of plasma 
and serum were obtained at all time points; buffy coats were collected at baseline, 6 and 12 
months.
LIPIDS AND LIPOPROTEINS
Lipids were assessed at all four times points (i.e., baseline, 3, 6, and 12 months) from a 
fasting blood sample. Blood was collected into purple top EDTA vacutainer tubes. Samples 
were processed, aliquoted, and frozen directly by the CTRU lab after being drawn. Samples 
were stored in a −80° freezer until the time of processing for analysis. Plasma triglycerides, 
total- and HDL-cholesterol were measured by enzymatic endpoint analysis on a clinical 
chemistry analyzer (Liasys 330) using methodology previously described [31-33]. LDL-
cholesterol was calculated using the Friedewald equation. Triglyceride and cholesterol 
measurements are standardized through the CDC-NHLBI lipid standardization program. 
Apolipoproteins B and AI were analyzed by immunoturbidimetric assay using the K-assay 
reagent kits (Kamiya Biomedical). Lipoprotein particle concentrations were measured by ion 
mobility, a process that allows for direct particle quantification as a function of particle 
diameter [34]. Ion mobility is based on the principle that particles of a given size behave in a 
predictable manner when carried in a laminar flow of air and subjected to an electric field. 
Briefly, a solution of lipoproteins, depleted of other serum proteins, is introduced into a flow 
of air by electrospray. In the electrospray chamber, the desolvated, highly charged 
lipoprotein particles are nearly neutralized by ionized air, resulting in a known fraction of 
singly-charged particles exiting the electrospray chamber. The particles are then carried by 
airflow to a differential mobility analyzer (DMA), where a variable electric potential, 
perpendicular to the direction of the airflow, causes the particles to drift toward a collection 
slit. The velocity of the particles across the airflow is proportional to the particle diameter 
and to the electrical potential. Only singly charged particles are detectable. Those with 
different diameters reach the collection slit at different electrical potentials and are then 
carried to a particle counter where they are detected by light scatter and are counted after 
transition through the DMA. As a result, lipoprotein particle concentrations are measured 
directly as a function of their particle diameters. The final numerical ion mobility output is 
reported in nanomoles per liter for combined bins of particles summed into commonly 
reported subclasses of lipoproteins. These include: HDL 3, HDL 2b, HDL 2a, LDL 4c, LDL 
4b, LDL 4a, LDL 3b, LDL 3a, LDL 2b, LDL 2a, LDL I, IDL 2, IDL 1 and VLDL sm, 
VLDL med, and VLDL large. The peak LDL particle diameter for each sample is reported 
as is the LDL phenotype associated with it: pattern A, I, or B. A full description of this 
method is published elsewhere [34]. All of the lipid assays were performed by the Krauss 
Lab at the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute (CHORI, Oakland, CA) for all 
cohorts.
Stanton et al.
Page 13
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GLUCOSE, INSULIN, ORAL GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST (OGTT)
Blood was collected to assess post-fasting plasma glucose and insulin via phlebotomy at the 
Stanford CTRU. Insulin levels were assessed by radioimmunoassay by the Core Laboratory 
for Clinical Studies Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri [35]. 
Glucose levels were analyzed using a Beckman Glucose Analyzer II (BGA II) by 
electrochemical technique [36]. For the OGTT, serial blood sampling was collected under 
fasting conditions and then at 30, 60 and 120 minutes after consuming 75 g of glucose 
solution [37, 38]. The Matsuda index was calculated to assess insulin sensitivity according to 
the methods of Matsuda et al. [39].
TARGETED PROTEOMICS: OLINK PROSEEK® TECHNIQUE
Candidate protein biomarkers were assessed using a high-throughput technique, the OLINK 
Proseek® Multiplex kits (www.olink.com). Each kit measures 92 disease-related proteins in 
plasma samples, and three arrays – CVD II, CVD III and Inflammation I – were used to 
assess samples. The method is based on a proximity extension assay (PEA) in which 92 
oligonucleotide-labeled antibody probe pairs can bind to their respective target, present in 
the sample. The PEA technique has an advantage over conventional multiplex 
immunoassays, since only correctly matched antibody pairs give rise to a signal, yielding an 
extremely high specificity. PEA is a homogeneous assay that uses pairs of antibodies 
equipped with DNA reporter molecules. When binding to their correct targets, they give rise 
to new DNA amplicons, each ID-barcoding their respective antigens. The amplicons are 
subsequently quantified using a Fluidigm BioMark™ HD real-time PCR platform. This 
PCR-based technique offers a high-throughput of simultaneous measurements of 92 protein 
biomarkers in just one microliter of sample, without any cross-reactivity. Proseek Multiplex 
provides accurate quantification below picogram per milliliter levels, even in small samples 
[40].
GENOTYPING
DNA extraction was carried out by the Stanford Cancer Institute (SCI) Biorepository. 
Briefly, high quality DNA samples were extracted from the buffy coat/red blood cell 
suspension using laborious phenol/chloroform purification method, a modified procedure of 
Baas et al. [41], Gustafson et al. [42] and Paul et al. [43]. Processing utilized lysis buffer 
(144 mM NH4Cl, 14 mM NH4HCO3), pellet buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 
150 mM NaCl), Proteinase K, 10% SDS, and RNAse, incubated at 50°C for ~16 hours, 
protein-denaturant buffers, phenol, and chloroform. Processing involved precipitation by 
NaCl (100-250 mM, 2 volumes of cold Ethanol) and resuspending the dry pellet in TE (10 
mM Tris, 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0). A series of QA&QC assays were carried out to determine 
the DNA purity, concentration, integrity, and digestibility after the DNA was completely 
dissolved. The working DNA solution was stored at 4°C and the original stock at −80°C.
The Affymetrix Axiom® Genotyping platform was used for analysis of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertions/deletions (indels). The specific microarray design 
used was the UK Biobank Axiom® Array [44]. There are 820,967 SNPs and indel markers 
on the array, which included the three SNPs from the original study design - FABP2 (rs 
1799883), PPARG (rs 1801282), and ADRB2 (rs 1042714). The array was designed with 
Stanton et al.
Page 14
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 imputation-aware algorithms, enabling characterization of millions of additional markers. 
Simulation results show high concordance between imputed genotypes and genotypes in the 
Phase I 1000GP release for between 6 and 9 million markers, depending on the population.
DNA extracted as described above was analyzed at the Affymetrix Research Services 
Laboratory facility using the Axiom® 2.0 Assay Automated Workflow [45]. Total genomic 
DNA (200 ng) was amplified and randomly fragmented into 25 to 125 base pair (bp) 
fragments. These fragments are purified, re-suspended, and hybridized to Axiom® Array 
Plates. Following hybridization, each polymorphic nucleotide was queried via a multi-color 
ligation event carried out on the array surface. After ligation, the arrays were stained and 
imaged on the GeneTitan MC Instrument. Data management was performed using Axiom™ 
Analysis Suite, Affymetrix® Genotyping Console™ Software (GTC) or Affymetrix® Power 
Tools (APT) and SNPolisher R package to perform quality control analysis (QC), for 
samples, plates, and SNPs filtering prior to downstream analysis, and advanced genotyping 
methods [46].
PSYCHOSOCIAL QUESTIONNAIRES
Participants completed a number of psychosocial instruments administered online at 
baseline, 3, 6 and 12 months (see Appendix B). The questionnaires covered a variety of 
topics including General Health [47], Sleep Quality [48], Outcome Expectations and 
Outcome Realizations [49], Diet Self-Efficacy [50], Social Support & Eating Habits [51], 
Stress [52], Dieting History [53], Eating Inventory [54], Reasons for Dieting [55], Eating 
Attitudes [56], Food Attitudes [57], Food Choices [58], Body Image [59], Depressive 
Symptoms [60], Food Addiction [61], Neighborhood Environment Walkability [62], Social 
Cohesion of Neighborhood [63], Group Cohesion Scale-Revised [64], Self-Control and Self-
Management [65], and Emotional Eating [66].
SUB-STUDIES
In addition to the above-mentioned measurements, participants had an opportunity to 
participate in several sub-studies. Some were only offered to certain cohorts but were 
required of all in that cohort, while others were optional.
DUAL ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY (DXA)
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA) scans were performed to examine whole body 
adiposity, lean body mass, and bone density at baseline, 6 and 12 months. Scans provided 
body composition measurements for six specific body areas (i.e., left arm, right arm, left leg, 
right leg, trunk, and head) as well as whole body composition. Each individual underwent 
DXA scans using a Hologic QDR-4500W fan-beam scanner (Bedford, MA) based on the 
manufacturer's guidelines. Quality control procedures were carried out regularly based on 
the manufacturer's recommendations and the instrument was calibrated weekly using 
appropriate phantoms supplied by the manufacturer. DXA data were collected for Cohorts 2 
through 5 (i.e., resources were not available at the onset of the study for cohort 1). One 
technician completed all scans for all participants at all time points to minimize potential 
variability.
Stanton et al.
Page 15
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESTING ENERGY EXPENDITURE (REE)
Respiratory gas exchange was measured at the Stanford CTRU. The assessment was 
performed at the same time (i.e., 7:00 am – 9:30 am) and in the same room at each visit to 
minimize deviations in environmental conditions. Participants were measured in a fasting 
state after lying supine for 5 minutes at their baseline, 6 and 12 month clinic visit. 
Specifically, measurements were taken after vitals but before the first blood draw for the 
OGTT protocol. This was done using the PravoMedics TrueOne 2400 metabolic cart [67, 
68]. Similar to the DXA data, REE data were collected for Cohorts 2 through 5 (i.e., 
resources were not available at the onset of the study for Cohort 1).
Due to the high volume of our study population, two separate metabolic carts at the CTRU 
were purchased and used to measure REE [69]. The equipment was allowed to warm up for 
30 minutes prior to calibration and testing. Flow and gas calibration was performed every 
morning the metabolic carts were to be used. Resting measurements were taken for a 
minimum of 20 minutes for each participant, and the first 5 minutes were discarded from 
analysis. Data were collected every 60 seconds. Output files included the following 
variables: VO2, VO2/kg, METS, VCO2, VE, RQ, RR, Vt, FEO2, FECO2, and REE. Our 
analyses focused on the average values for those variables from minute 6 to minute 20.
FAT BIOPSIES
Beginning in Cohort 2, fat biopsies were collected to assess fat cell biology from 
approximately 20% of participants. The procedure was offered on a rolling basis to the first 
20-30 volunteers per cohort. Participants were instructed to remain weight stable and to 
refrain from using any over the counter anti-inflammatories for a week before the procedure. 
Lower abdominal fat biopsies were taken at baseline. For all biopsies, participants were 
asked to fast from food and all non-water liquids for 12 hours prior to the procedure. Follow-
up fat biopsies were taken at 6 months from those meeting the following two eligibility 
criteria: (1) being in the Healthy Low-Carb group and consuming less than 55 g of 
carbohydrates per day on average, or being in the Healthy Low-Fat group and consuming 
less than 40 g of fat per day on average, as determined during the 3-month NDSR diet data 
collection, and (2) losing ≥10 lbs in the six months since baseline.
A subset of those who were eligible for the six month follow-up and met the additional 
eligibility criteria of having a TG:HDL-C ratio (at the time of their screening visit) of equal 
to or greater than 1.5 for women and 2.5 for men, were asked to participate in a more 
elaborate 6 month follow-up consisting of a meal tolerance test with fat biopsy. For those 
completing the meal tolerance test, similar to the OGTT, eligible participants fasted for 12 
hours prior to the appointment. Researchers took an initial fat biopsy at the beginning of the 
appointment, then provided participants with a Healthy Low-Fat or Healthy Low-Carb meal, 
depending on group assignment. A second fat biopsy was taken two hours after the meal. 
Blood was collected from each participant every hour for four hours, after the initial fasting 
blood draw was taking.
Stanton et al.
Page 16
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STOOL COLLECTION FOR MICROBIOME ANALYSES
Stool samples were collected from a subset of volunteers from Cohorts 2 and 3 to examine 
the microbiome. In Cohort 2, two samples of stool taken one week apart were collected from 
participants at baseline, and then subsequent samples were collected at 10 weeks and 6 
months. Participants were instructed to, “use the spoon attached to the cap to put several 
scoopfuls of stool into the collection tube until each tube has a portion of the stool specimen 
equivalent to large marble or a walnut.”
Stool sample collection in Cohort 3 involved five time points: baseline, 3, 6, 9 and 12 
months. For the majority of the sampling, two tubes of a walnut size sample of stool were 
taken from a single bowel movement. The baseline collection differed from the others in two 
ways. First, for baseline, two samples were collected one week apart (i.e., each with two 
tubes). Second, for approximately one quarter of the participants one of the two samples was 
a complete stool collection rather than just a walnut sized portion.
Participants from both cohorts were given ice packs and supplies to freeze the samples as 
soon as possible after collection and to keep the samples on ice until they were delivered to 
the research unit. Once samples were delivered to the research unit they were put into 
storage at –80°C.
ANALYSIS PLAN, INCLUDING EARLY MODIFICATIONS TO THE STUDY 
DESIGN
An overview of the original analysis plan as described in the grant application to the NIH is 
provided below. However, modifications have been made to this original plan due to four 
important developments.
•
First, after NIH funding was obtained in 2012, additional funding was acquired 
to augment the original study which enabled increasing the sample size from 
n=400 to n=600, as well as adding some of the metabolic and physiological 
assessments that are described above.
•
Second, and related, the racial/ethnic composition of the study sample was 
modified. The original study population was intended to be restricted to 
Caucasians because of the primary focus on a genetic interaction involving 
SNPs, for which allele frequencies have been established for Caucasians but not 
other racial/ethnic groups. The three SNPs of original interest were considered to 
be components of a multi-locus genotype that included FABP2 (rs 1799883), 
PPARG (rs 1801282), and ADRB2 (rs 1042714). Preliminary data[70] suggested 
that there were three distinct multi-locus genotype patterns with differential 
weight loss response to different diets: a Low-Fat Genotype (LFG), a Low-
Carbohydrate Genotype (LCG), and a Neither Genotype, with rough 
distributions among Caucasians of 40:40:20. To maintain the intent of the 
originally funded NIH study, it was decided to complete the enrollment of n=400 
Caucasians. In order to broaden the generalizability of the study, it was decided 
to recruit the additional n=200 from participants of all non-Caucasian race/
Stanton et al.
Page 17
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ethnicities (which included Hispanics) that met all other study inclusion/
exclusion criteria.
•
Third, the original plan to stratify randomization to the two diet groups by multi-
locus genotype pattern was altered. Prior to initiating the study we determined 
that the evidence supporting the proposed genotype patterns remained unclear, 
and we wanted to explore other possible genotype interactions and associations. 
We still plan to test the original multi-locus genotype patterns, but we will also 
evaluate other SNPs secondarily in an exploratory manner, as described in the 
original aims of the grant application.
•
Fourth, the original plan for primary analysis was to employ ANOVA to evaluate 
change in weight at 12 months as a function of study arm and genotype. This 
analysis – known as a complete-case analysis – includes only those subjects who 
contribute body weight data at both baseline and 12 months. To address this issue 
of missing data, we initially proposed secondary analyses that incorporated 
multiple imputation-based methods. This would allow insight into the effect of 
assumptions regarding the missing data on our primary findings. We currently 
propose using mixed effects regression methods to evaluate change in body 
weight at 12 months as the primary analysis, keeping the secondary analyses as 
proposed and adding the complete-case analysis as another secondary analysis. 
This allows us to better adhere to intent-to-treat principles as all subjects 
randomized will be included in the analysis, even if they do not contribute weight 
data at 12 months. We will use maximum likelihood techniques for estimation, 
allowing subjects with any data points to contribute to the analysis, and 
borrowing strength from data contributed across subjects.
HYPOTHESES
The first primary hypothesis of the study is that there will be a significant diet-genotype 
interaction for weight loss success. We predict that diet and genotype main effects will be 
non-significant and that only by taking into account an interaction between the two factors 
can we predict weight loss success.
We have planned a number of follow-up exploratory analyses as well. One hypothesis is that 
other obesity-relevant SNPs will predict weight loss success. This process includes 
evaluating the contribution of the newly identified SNPs in predicting weight change. These 
SNPs will each be evaluated in turn and also expressed as a weighted linear combination or 
score. The additional SNPs we will consider are those that have been previously and 
robustly documented to have genome-wide significant associations with weight, waist 
circumference, and/or metabolic phenotypes (e.g., lipid levels, type 2 diabetes, and insulin 
resistance) in previous studies We will systematically review these studies for these 
associated phenotypes using the database of the Catalog of Genome-Wide Association 
studies, which is continuously updated by the European Molecular Biology Laboratory-
European Bioinformatics Institute [71] and will include all independent genetic variants with 
corresponding p-values smaller than 5×10-8 for any of these phenotypes. These exploratory 
analyses would serve to identify additional potential gene loci that may regulate response to 
Stanton et al.
Page 18
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specific diets. We expect these exploratory associations to be studied in other larger studies 
in the future. There are currently almost 200 such independent genetic variants that have 
been discovered, and we anticipate that approximately 250 or more may be available in the 
next year or so.
A second primary hypothesis is that there will be a significant diet X insulin sensitivity 
interaction for weight loss success. Based on previous findings [5, 72-75], we predict that 
weight loss success will be greater for those on the Healthy Low-Carb diet who are more 
insulin resistant at baseline and greater for those on the Healthy Low-Fat diet who are more 
insulin sensitive.
Exploratory analyses will test whether various factors mediate the relationship between 
matched assignment and weight loss. We will use contemporary mediation analyses 
techniques [76, 77]. Selected mediators for these analyses include insulin sensitivity, energy 
intake, perceived appetite, satiety and hunger, resting energy expenditure, and physical 
activity.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES
To include subjects with missing data, the primary hypothesis of diet-genotype interaction 
will be assessed using a linear mixed model with weight as the outcome. The intention-to-
treat (ITT) principle will be followed. All participants who were randomized will be 
included in the analysis and analyzed according to their assigned treatment, irrespective of 
compliance. Weight change over time (i.e., baseline, 3, 6 and 12 months) between the 
intervention groups will be assessed using a linear mixed effects model with main effect 
terms for time and whether or not a subject was a “match” (i.e., assigned to the diet implied 
by their genotype). The model will include interaction terms for time and match and subject-
specific intercepts to account for within-subject correlation over time. Since participants 
were randomly assigned to diet groups, no baseline characteristics will be adjusted in the 
analysis. For the original genotypic classification of interest, statistical significance will be 
assessed at the 0.05 level. For all other SNPs, we will assess significance after controlling 
the false discovery rate to be no more than 0.05.
MISSING DATA, DROP-OUTS, AND INTENT-TO-TREAT
Analyses that do not account for missing data can lead to biased and inefficient estimates. To 
address such issues, our original plan was to perform both a complete-case analysis that 
excludes individuals missing at least one variable in the model as well as a multiple 
imputation-based model. The latter allows adherence to intention-to-treat principles in that 
all subjects randomized are included in the analysis regardless of drop out. Importantly, 
multiple imputation provides statistically valid results when the data are missing at random 
(i.e., the reason for missingness is related to observed variables only)[78]. Our current plan 
is to utilize mixed effects regression techniques that provide statistically valid results under 
the same condition (i.e., missing at random) as those upon which multiple imputation relies. 
In addition, these methods allow us to adhere to intention-to-treat principles as all subjects 
randomized will be included in the analysis, regardless of attrition.
Stanton et al.
Page 19
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CONCLUSION
At the core of the current study is a weight loss diet intervention comparing a Healthy Low-
Fat vs. a Healthy Low-Carb diet among non-diabetic and generally healthy adults ages 18-50 
years with a BMI in the range of 28-40 kg/m2. However, the study was not designed to 
simply test whether Healthy Low-Fat or Healthy Low-Carb is better overall for weight loss 
success. The study was designed with the recognition from more than a dozen previous 
Low-Fat vs. Low-Carb studies that the variability in weight loss within diet groups typically 
ranges from highly successful to very disappointing, while the difference in average weight 
loss between diet groups is typically negligible. Thus, this study was designed to examine 
interactions between diet group assignment and genotype and metabolism (e.g., insulin 
resistance). Beyond the primary hypotheses about interactions with genotype and 
metabolism, the current study will generate a rich data set to examine a wide range of 
physiological and psychosocial factors that likely contribute to the heterogeneity of response 
to weight loss diets. The study is intended to test these hypotheses and then generate many 
more. It has been designed to reframe a central question about diet and weight loss: Rather 
than searching for the one best diet to recommend to all, this study seeks to determine if 
overall success will be greater when different diets are matched to different people based on 
predisposing individual differences.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the many study team members who contributed to various aspects of the original 
design and/or implementation the study, and for either contributing sections to the manuscript or contributing 
helpful review. These team members include our health educators Jae Berman, Dalia Perelman, and Mandy Carroll, 
our diet assessment team of Molly Shimer-John, Valeria Alaimo and Diane Demis, Katherine Dotter who oversaw 
innovations and technology, Kyla Kent who provided expertise in DXA assessment, Alexandra Rossi who managed 
blood samples, and Dr. Kenji Nagao who provided helpful review of the manuscript. We would like to acknowledge 
the work early in the study of Antonella Dewell as the initial project coordinator and Josephine Lin as a research 
assistant. And, finally we would like to acknowledge the many participants who made this study possible.
Sources of Support: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases NIH 1R01DK091831, 
Nutrition Science Initiative, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute NIH T32HL007034, NIH 1 K12 GM088033, 
Stanford Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) to Spectrum NIH UL1 TR001085, and the War-Related 
Injury and Illness Study Center and VA Palo Alto Health Care System. The content is solely the responsibility of 
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or other funders.
REFERENCES
1. Swinburn BA, Sacks G, Hall KD, McPherson K, Finegood DT, Moodie ML, Gortmaker SL. The 
global obesity pandemic: shaped by global drivers and local environments. Lancet. 2011; 
378(9793):804–14. [PubMed: 21872749] 
2. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the 
United States, 2011-2012. JAMA. 2014; 311(8):806–14. [PubMed: 24570244] 
3. Johnston BC, Kanters S, Bandayrel K, Wu P, Naji F, Siemieniuk RA, Ball GD, Busse JW, Thorlund 
K, Guyatt G, Jansen JP, Mills EJ. Comparison of weight loss among named diet programs in 
overweight and obese adults: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2014; 312(9):923–33. [PubMed: 25182101] 
Stanton et al.
Page 20
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Nordmann AJ, Nordmann A, Briel M, Keller U, Yancy WS Jr. Brehm BJ, Bucher HC. Effects of 
low-carbohydrate vs low-fat diets on weight loss and cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med. 2006; 166(3):285–93. [PubMed: 16476868] 
5. Gardner CD, Kiazand A, Alhassan S, Kim S, Stafford RS, Balise RR, Kraemer HC, King AC. 
Comparison of the Atkins, Zone, Ornish, and LEARN diets for change in weight and related risk 
factors among overweight premenopausal women: the A TO Z Weight Loss Study: a randomized 
trial. JAMA. 2007; 297(9):969–77. [PubMed: 17341711] 
6. Greenberg I, Stampfer MJ, Schwarzfuchs D, Shai I, Group D. Adherence and success in long-term 
weight loss diets: the dietary intervention randomized controlled trial (DIRECT). J Am Coll Nutr. 
2009; 28(2):159–68. [PubMed: 19828901] 
7. Yancy WS Jr. Westman EC, McDuffie JR, Grambow SC, Jeffreys AS, Bolton J, Chalecki A, Oddone 
EZ. A randomized trial of a low-carbohydrate diet vs orlistat plus a low-fat diet for weight loss. 
Arch Intern Med. 2010; 170(2):136–45. [PubMed: 20101008] 
8. King AC. Behavioral medicine in the 21st century: transforming “the Road Less Traveled” into the 
“American Way of Life”. Ann Behav Med. 2014; 47(1):71–8. [PubMed: 24096957] 
9. Bazzano LA, Hu T, Reynolds K, Yao L, Bunol C, Liu Y, Chen CS, Klag MJ, Whelton PK, He J. 
Effects of low-carbohydrate and low-fat diets: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 161(5):
309–18. [PubMed: 25178568] 
10. Sallis JF, Haskell WL, Wood PD, Fortmann SP, Rogers T, Blair SN, Paffenbarger RS Jr. Physical 
activity assessment methodology in the Five-City Project. Am J Epidemiol. 1985; 121(1):91–106. 
[PubMed: 3964995] 
11. Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory 
Committee Report. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Washington, DC: 2008. 
12. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ, Brands M, Carnethon M, Daniels S, Franch HA, Franklin B, Kris-
Etherton P, Harris WS, Howard B, Karanja N, Lefevre M, Rudel L, Sacks F, Van Horn L, Winston 
M, Wylie-Rosett J. Diet and lifestyle recommendations revision 2006: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association Nutrition Committee. Circulation. 2006; 114(1):82–96. [PubMed: 
16785338] 
13. Saris WHM, Blair SN, van Baak MA, Eaton SB, Davies PSW, DiPierto L, Fogelholm M, Rissanen 
A, Schoeller D, Swinburn B, Temblay A, Westerterp KR, Wyatt H. How much physical activity is 
enough to prevent unhealthy weight gain? Outcome of the IASO 1st Stock Conference and 
consensus statement. Obes Rev. 2003; 4:101–104. [PubMed: 12760445] 
14. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines. 2005. <http://
www.healthierus.gov/dietaryguidelines>
15. Bandura, A. Social foundations of thought and action: a social cognitive theory. Prentice Hall; 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 1986. 
16. Bandura, A. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. W. H. Freeman and Company; New York, New 
York: 1997. 
17. Brownell KD, Cohen LR. Adherence to dietary regimens. 2: Components of effective 
interventions. Behav Med. 1995; 20(4):155–64. [PubMed: 7620227] 
18. Foreyt JP, Goodrick GK. Impact on behavior therapy on weight loss. Am J Health Promot. 1994; 
8(6):466–8. [PubMed: 10147276] 
19. Jeffery RW, Epstein LH, Wilson G, Drewnowski A, Stunkard AJ, Wing RR. Long-term 
maintenance of weight loss: Current status. Health Psychology. 2000; 19(Suppl 1):5–16. [PubMed: 
10709944] 
20. King AC, Frey-Hewitt B, Dreon DM, Wood PD. Diet vs exercise in weight maintenance. The 
effects of minimal intervention strategies on long-term outcomes in men. Arch Intern Med. 1989; 
149(12):2741–6. [PubMed: 2596943] 
21. Wing RR, Tate DF, Gorin AA, Raynor HA, Fava JL. A self-regulation program for maintenance of 
weight loss. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355(15):1563–71. [PubMed: 17035649] 
22. Brownell, KD. The LEARN Manual for weight management. 10th ed.. American Health 
Publishing Company; Dallas, TX: 2004. 
23. Feskanich D, Sielaff BH, Chong K, Buzzard IM. Computerized collection and analysis of dietary 
intake information. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 1989; 30(1):47–57. [PubMed: 2582746] 
Stanton et al.
Page 21
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Johnson RK, Driscoll P, Goran MI. Comparison of multiple-pass 24-hour recall estimates of energy 
intake with total energy expenditure determined by the doubly labeled water method in young 
children. J Am Diet Assoc. 1996; 96(11):1140–4. [PubMed: 8906138] 
25. Harnack L, Stevens M, Van Heel N, Schakel S, Dwyer JT, Himes J. A computer-based approach 
for assessing dietary supplement use in conjunction with dietary recalls. J Food Compost Anal. 
2008; 21:S78–S82. [PubMed: 19190705] 
26. Sievert YA, Schakel SF, Buzzard IM. Maintenance of a nutrient database for clinical trials. Control 
Clin Trials. 1989; 10(4):416–25. [PubMed: 2605960] 
27. Schakel S, Sievert YA, Buzzard IM. Sources of data for developing and maintaining a nutrient 
database. J Am Diet Assoc. 1988; 88(10):1268–71. [PubMed: 3171020] 
28. Schakel S, Buzzard I, Gebhardt S. Procedures for estimating nutrient values for food composition 
databases. J Food Comp Anal. 1997; 10:102–114.
29. Lee A, Lee M. MyFitnessPal, LLC. 2015 [December 1.2015] <www.myfitnesspal.com>. 
30. National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2000. Data Documentation, Codebook, and Frequencies: 
Blood Pressure (BPX). C.f.D.C.a.P. US Department of Health and Human Services. , editor. 
Hyattsville, MD: 2002. 
31. Allain CC, Poon LS, Chan CS, Richmond W, Fu PC. Enzymatic determination of total serum 
cholesterol. Clin Chem. 1974; 20(4):470–5. [PubMed: 4818200] 
32. Nagele U, Hagele EO, Sauer G, Wiedemann E, Lehmann P, Wahlefeld AW, Gruber W. Reagent for 
the enzymatic determination of serum total triglycerides with improved lipolytic efficiency. J Clin 
Chem Clin Biochem. 1984; 22(2):165–74. [PubMed: 6716056] 
33. Warnick GR, Nguyen T, Albers AA. Comparison of improved precipitation methods for 
quantification of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Clin Chem. 1985; 31(2):217–22. [PubMed: 
2578337] 
34. Caulfield MP, Li S, Lee G, Blanche PJ, Salameh WA, Benner WH, Reitz RE, Krauss RM. Direct 
determination of lipoprotein particle sizes and concentrations by ion mobility analysis. Clin Chem. 
2008; 54(8):1307–16. [PubMed: 18515257] 
35. Morgan CR, Lazarow A. Immunoassay of insulin: two antibody system: plasma insulin levels in 
normal, subdiabetic and diabetic rats. Diabetes. 1963; 12:115–126.
36. Kadish AH, Hall DA. A new method for the continuous monitoring of blood glucose by 
measurement of dissolved oxygen. Clin Chem. 1965; 11(9):869–75. [PubMed: 5835655] 
37. Mooy JM, Grootenhuis PA, de Vries H, Kostense PJ, Popp-Snijders C, Bouter LM, Heine RJ. 
Intra-individual variation of glucose, specific insulin and proinsulin concentrations measured by 
two oral glucose tolerance tests in a general Caucasian population: the Hoorn Study. Diabetologia. 
1996; 39(3):298–305. [PubMed: 8721775] 
38. Olijhoek JK, Banga JD, Doevendans PA, Visseren FL. Oral glucose tolerance test or metabolic 
syndrome criteria to predict risk in patients with coronary heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2005; 26(6):
623. author reply 623-4. [PubMed: 15713696] 
39. Matsuda M, DeFronzo RA. Insulin sensitivity indices obtained from oral glucose tolerance testing: 
comparison with the euglycemic insulin clamp. Diabetes care. 1999; 22(9):1462–70. [PubMed: 
10480510] 
40. Olink Proteomics. Proseek Multiplex Product Site. 2016. <http://www.olink.com/products/proseek-
multiplex/>
41. Baas F, Bikker H, van Ommen GJ, de Vijlder JJ. Unusual scarcity of restriction site polymorphism 
in the human thyroglobulin gene. A linkage study suggesting autosomal dominance of a defective 
thyroglobulin allele. Hum Genet. 1984; 67(3):301–5. [PubMed: 6088387] 
42. Gustafson S, Proper JA, Bowie EJ, Sommer SS. Parameters affecting the yield of DNA from 
human blood. Anal Biochem. 1987; 165(2):294–9. [PubMed: 3425899] 
43. Paul J, Froster-Iskenius U, Moje W, Schwinger E. Heterozygous female carriers of the marker-X-
chromosome: IQ estimation and replication status of fra(X)(q). Hum Genet. 1984; 66(4):344–6. 
[PubMed: 6586635] 
44. UK Biobank Array Design Group. UK Biobank. UK Biobank Array Content Summary Brochure. 
2014
Stanton et al.
Page 22
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Axiom 2.0 Assay Automated Workflow User Guide. Santa Clara, CA: 2016. Affymetrix. 
46. Analysis Guide: Axiom Genotyping Solution Data Analysis Guide. Santa Clara, CA: 2015. 
Affymetrix. 
47. Ware JE Jr. Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36). I. Conceptual 
framework and item selection. Med Care. 1992; 30(6):473–83. [PubMed: 1593914] 
48. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality 
Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. 1989; 28(2):193–
213. [PubMed: 2748771] 
49. Neff KL, King AC. Exercise Program Adherence in Older Adults: The Importance of Achieving 
One's Expected Benefits, Medicine, Exercise. Nutrition and Health. 1995; 4:355–362.
50. Garcia AW, King AC. Predicting long-term adherence to aerobic exercise: a comparison of two 
models. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology. 1991; 13:394–410.
51. Sallis JF, Grossman RM, Pinski RB, Patterson TL, Nader PR. The development of scales to 
measure social support for diet and exercise behaviors. Prev Med. 1987; 16(6):825–36. [PubMed: 
3432232] 
52. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 
1983; 24(4):385–96. [PubMed: 6668417] 
53. French SA, Jeffery RW. Current dieting, weight loss history, and weight suppression: behavioral 
correlates of three dimensions of dieting. Addict Behav. 1997; 22(1):31–44. [PubMed: 9022870] 
54. Stunkard AJ, Messick S. The three-factor eating questionnaire to measure dietary restraint, 
disinhibition and hunger. J Psychosom Res. 1985; 29(1):71–83. [PubMed: 3981480] 
55. Williams, GC., Deci, EL., Ryan, DH. Building health-care partnerships by supporting autonomy: 
promoting maintainted health behavior change and positive health outcomes. In: Suchman, 
AL.Hinton-Walker, P., Botelho, R., editors. Partnerships in healthcare: Transforming relational 
process. University of Rochester Press; Rochester, NY: 1998. p. 67-87.
56. Garner DM, Garfinkel PE. The Eating Attitudes Test: an index of the symptoms of anorexia 
nervosa. Psychol Med. 1979; 9(2):273–9. [PubMed: 472072] 
57. Frank RA, van der Klaauw NJ. The contribution of chemosensory factors to individual differences 
in reported food preferences. Appetite. 1994; 22(2):101–23. [PubMed: 8037436] 
58. Brug J, Lechner L, De Vries H. Psychosocial determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption. 
Appetite. 1995; 25(3):285–96. [PubMed: 8746967] 
59. Garner DM, Olmstead MP, Polivy J. Development and Validation of a Multidimensional Eating 
Disorder Inventory for Anorexia-Nervosa and Bulimia. Int J Eat Disorder. 1983; 2(2):15–34.
60. Beck AT, Ward CH, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J. An inventory for measuring depression. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1961; 4:561–71. [PubMed: 13688369] 
61. Gearhardt AN, Corbin WR, Brownell KD. Preliminary validation of the Yale Food Addiction 
Scale. Appetite. 2009; 52(2):430–6. [PubMed: 19121351] 
62. Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Black JB, Chen D. Neighborhood-based differences in physical activity: an 
environment scale evaluation. Am J Public Health. 2003; 93(9):1552–8. [PubMed: 12948979] 
63. Sampson RJ, Raudenbush SW, Earls F. Neighborhoods and violent crime: a multilevel study of 
collective efficacy. Science. 1997; 277(5328):918–24. [PubMed: 9252316] 
64. Treadwell T, Lavertue N, Kumar VK, Veeraraghavan V. The group cohesion scale-revised: 
reliability and validity. International Journal of Action Methods. 2001; 54(1):3.
65. Mezo PG. The self-control and self-management scale (SCMS): Development of an adaptive self-
regulatory coping skills instrument. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment. 
2008; 31:83–93.
66. Arnow B, Kenardy J, Agras WS. The Emotional Eating Scale: the development of a measure to 
assess coping with negative affect by eating. Int J Eat Disord. 1995; 18(1):79–90. [PubMed: 
7670446] 
67. Bassett DR Jr. Howley ET, Thompson DL, King GA, Strath SJ, McLaughlin JE, Parr BB. Validity 
of inspiratory and expiratory methods of measuring gas exchange with a computerized system. J 
Appl Physiol (1985). 2001; 91(1):218–24. [PubMed: 11408433] 
Stanton et al.
Page 23
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 68. Crouter SE, Antczak A, Hudak JR, DellaValle DM, Haas JD. Accuracy and reliability of the 
ParvoMedics TrueOne 2400 and MedGraphics VO2000 metabolic systems. Eur J Appl Physiol. 
2006; 98(2):139–51. [PubMed: 16896734] 
69. Macfarlane DJ, Wu HL. Inter-unit variability in two ParvoMedics TrueOne 2400 automated 
metabolic gas analysis systems. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013; 113(3):753–62. [PubMed: 22945269] 
70. Draper C, Wilkins L, Breton G, Perusse L, Debusk R, Ramakrishnan S, Krempin D. Genetic 
markers for weight management and methods of use thereof. Google Patents. 2012
71. Hindorff LA, MacArthur J, Morales J, Junkins HA, Hall PN, Klemm AK, Manolio T. E.M.B.L.-
E.B. Institute. A Catalog of Published Genome-Wide Association Studies. 2015
72. Cornier MA, Donahoo WT, Pereira R, Gurevich I, Westergren R, Enerback S, Eckel PJ, Goalstone 
ML, Hill JO, Eckel RH, Draznin B. Insulin sensitivity determines the effectiveness of dietary 
macronutrient composition on weight loss in obese women. Obes Res. 2005; 13(4):703–9. 
[PubMed: 15897479] 
73. Ebbeling CB, Leidig MM, Feldman HA, Lovesky MM, Ludwig DS. Effects of a low-glycemic 
load vs low-fat diet in obese young adults: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2007; 297(19):2092–102. 
[PubMed: 17507345] 
74. Gardner CD, Offringa LC, Hartle JC, Kapphahn K, Cherin R. Weight loss on low-fat vs. low-
carbohydrate diets by insulin resistance status among overweight adults and adults with obesity: A 
randomized pilot trial. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016; 24(1):79–86. [PubMed: 26638192] 
75. Pittas AG, Das SK, Hajduk CL, Golden J, Saltzman E, Stark PC, Greenberg AS, Roberts SB. A 
lowglycemic load diet facilitates greater weight loss in overweight adults with high insulin 
secretion but not in overweight adults with low insulin secretion in the CALERIE Trial. Diabetes 
care. 2005; 28(12):2939–41. [PubMed: 16306558] 
76. Jo B. Causal inference in randomized experiments with mediational processes. Psychol Methods. 
2008; 13(4):314–36. [PubMed: 19071997] 
77. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairburn CG, Agras WS. Mediators and moderators of treatment effects 
in randomized clinical trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002; 59(10):877–83. [PubMed: 12365874] 
78. Little, RJA., Rubin, DB. Statistical analysis with missing data. Wiley; New York: 2002. 
Stanton et al.
Page 24
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Summary of study protocol flow
Stanton et al.
Page 25
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stanton et al.
Page 26
Table 1
Inclusion and exclusion criteria (self-reported, unless otherwise indicated)
Inclusion
    ■ Age: ≥18 years of age
        - Women: Pre-menopausal (self-report) and ≤50 years of age
        - Men: ≤50 years of age
    ■ Race/Ethnicity: All
    ■ BMI (body mass index): 28-40 kg/m2 (Measured in clinic)
    ■ Body weight stable for the last two months, and not actively on a weight loss plan
    ■ No plans to move from the area over the next 12 months from start of study cohort
    ■ Available and able to participate in the evaluations and intervention for the study period
    ■ Willing to accept random assignment
    ■ To enhance study generalizability, people on medications not noted below as specific exclusions can participate if they have been stable on 
such medications for at least three months
    ■ Ability and willingness to give written informed consent
    ■ No known active psychiatric illness
Exclusion
    ■ Pregnant, lactating, within 6 months post-partum, or planning to become pregnant in the next year
    ■ Diabetes (type 1 and 2) or history of gestational diabetes or on hypoglycemic medications for any other indication
    ■ Prevalent diseases: Malabsorption, renal or liver disease, active neoplasms, recent myocardial infarction (<6 months)
    ■ Currently smoking
    ■ History of serious arrhythmias, or cerebrovascular disease
    ■ History of Bariatric Surgery
    ■ Uncontrolled hyper- or hypothyroidism (TSH not within normal limits, self-report)
    ■ Medications: Lipid lowering, antihypertensive medications, and those known to affect weight/energy expenditure
    ■ Excessive alcohol intake (self-reported, ≥ to 2 drinks/day for men or ≥1 drink/day for women)
    ■ Musculoskeletal disorders precluding regular physical activity
    ■ Unable to follow either of the two study diets for reasons of food restrictions (e.g., vegan)
    ■ Currently under psychiatric care, or taking psychiatric medications
    ■ Inability to communicate effectively with study personnel
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stanton et al.
Page 27
Table 2
Data Collection Chart
Assessment a
Screening
Baseline
3M
6M
9M
12M
Demographics
X
Screening Survey
X
Weight and Waist circumference
X
X
X
X
Height
X
X
X
Blood Pressure
X
X
X
X
Blood (i.e., OGTT insulin, OGTT glucose, lipids, inflammatory markers) b
X
X
X
X
Diet Composition – NDSR c
X
X
X
X
Physical Activity 7-Day Recall
X
X
X
X
Medication/Supplements taken
X
X
X
X
Questionnaires
X
X
X
X
Resting Energy Expenditure (REE) d
X
X
X
Body Composition (DXA) d
X
X
X
Fat Biopsy (subset of ~n=100) d
X
X
Stool Samples – Microbiome Sub-Study 1 e
X
X
Stool Samples – Microbiome Sub-Study 2 f
X
X
X
X
X
Notes:
aParticipant In-Class Weight and Attendance were recorded at each of the 22 classes.
bOGTT was not measured at 3M.
cDiet composition data was collected on two weekdays and one weekend day at each time point.
dCollected beginning in Cohort 2.
eStool samples in Sub-Study 1 were only collected in Cohort 2 and were also collected at 10 weeks.
fStool samples in Sub-Study 2 were only collected in Cohort 3, and included whole stool samples for 22 individuals at baseline.
Contemp Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 01.
