 The University of Notre Dame Australia
ResearchOnline@ND
Nursing Papers and Journal Articles
School of Nursing
2016
The male of the species: a profile of men in nursing
D Stanley
T Beament
D Falconer
The University of Notre Dame Australia, darren.falconer@nd.edu.au
M Haigh
R Saunders
See next page for additional authors
Follow this and additional works at: https://researchonline.nd.edu.au/nursing_article
Part of the Nursing Commons
This article was originally published as:
Stanley, D., Beament, T., Falconer, D., Haigh, M., Saunders, R., Stanley, K., Wall, P., & Nielson, S. (2016). The male of the species: a
profile of men in nursing. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 72 (5), 1155-1168.
Original article available here:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jan.12905/abstract
This article is posted on ResearchOnline@ND at
https://researchonline.nd.edu.au/nursing_article/103. For more
information, please contact researchonline@nd.edu.au.
 Authors
D Stanley, T Beament, D Falconer, M Haigh, R Saunders, K Stanley, P Wall, and S Nielson
This article is available at ResearchOnline@ND: https://researchonline.nd.edu.au/nursing_article/103
 This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: 
Stanley, D., Beament, T., Falconer, D., Haigh, M., Saunders, R., Stanley, K., Wall, P., and 
Nielson, S. (2016). The male of the species: a profile of men in nursing. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 72(5), 1155-1168. doi: 10.1111/jan.12905 
which has been published in final form 
at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jan.12905/abstract  
This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and 
Conditions for self-archiving. 
 The male of the species: a profile of men in nursing 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 Abstract: 
Aim: To establish a profile of men in nursing in Western Australia and explore the 
perception of men in nursing from the perspective of male and female nurses. 
Background: A project team, including some of the current authors, produced a YouTube 
video and DVD about men in nursing which led to further inquiry on this topic.   
Design: The study employed a non-experimental, comparative, descriptive research design 
focused on a quantitative methodology, using an online survey in early 2014.  
Method: A convenience sample incorporated registered and enrolled nurses and midwives in 
Western Australia.  
Findings: The range of data included demographic information and the respondents’ 
perceptions of men in nursing were collected. Findings indicated that the main reasons for 
choosing a career in nursing or midwifery were similar for both genders. Common mis-
perceptions of men in nursing included: most male nurses are gay; men are not suited to 
nursing and men are less caring and compassionate than women. Suggestions to promote 
nursing to men included: nurses are highly skilled professionals; there is the potential to make 
a difference for patients; nursing offers stable employment, professional diversity and 
opportunities for team work. There is a diminished awareness of opportunities for men in 
nursing and negative stereotypes related to men in nursing persist.  
Conclusion: The study produced recommendations which included: using the right message 
to target the recruitment for men and promoting a more realistic understanding of the profile 
and perception of men in nursing. 
Key Words: Men in Nursing, Quantitative Research, Survey, Workforce Issues, Nursing 
Labour Markets   
 
 
2 
 
 Summary Statement: 
Why is this research or review needed?  
• An empirically based profile and insight into the perceptions of men in nursing, by 
male and female nurses, in Australia is lacking.  
• Decisions to recruit more men into nursing should be based on an understanding of 
men’s concept of nursing and the challenges faced by men who enter nursing. 
• Recruiting men (or women) into nursing can be costly and understanding what will 
attract men and help them stay in the nursing profession may have a positive impact 
on recruitment processes and workforce stability.    
What are the key findings? 
• The main influencing factors for choosing a career in nursing were similar for men 
and women.  
• Significant misconceptions about men in nursing have existed and these continue to 
have a negative impact on recruiting men into nursing and on the men who are 
employed as nurses in the profession. 
• There is a perception about a limited awareness of the career opportunities offered to 
men in nursing, resulting in reduced recruitment potential.  
How should the findings be used to influence policy/practice/research/education? 
 
Findings should be used; 
• To help influence recruitment policies and retention practices for men in nursing.  
• To support men in nursing and bolster an understanding of the perceptions and 
experiences of being a man in nursing. 
• To offer targeted recruitment to attract more men into nursing.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 Introduction 
This paper provides a summary of the findings, implications and recommendations from a 
study that sought to establish a profile of men in nursing in Western Australia (WA) and 
gather information about how men in nursing perceive themselves and are perceived by their 
female colleagues.  
 
Background: 
During the production of the DVD and YouTube video, ‘Men in Nursing’, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kORSrMhsEzk&feature=youtube_gdata_player, 
(Beament et al., [JE1]2013) and following involvement at subsequent conferences, it became 
clear that there were limited empirical studies that explored issues related to men in nursing 
in Australia. Previous data has provided little towards an in-depth profile of the male nurse 
population in Australia and the experience of being male in nursing. 
 
At the time the study was undertaken, there were 354,399 registered and enrolled nurses in 
Australia, 10.41% of whom were men (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2011; 
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia 2014). At the start of the study, the total number 
of registered nurses, midwives, or enrolled nurses in Western Australia was, 36,440 with 
8.82% being men (Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia 2014). These figures are on par 
with comparable countries where the proportion of men in nursing is similarly low – 10.2% 
in the UK (Mohammed 2012), 9.0% in the US (O'Lynn 2013) and 6% in Canada (Rajacich et 
al. 2013), suggesting a potential issue of gender imbalance in nursing internationally.  
 
The nursing and midwifery workforce 2011 survey (Australian Institute of Health and 
Welfare 2011) and biannual reports from the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia 
4 
 
 (NMBA) provided limited data on men in nursing in Australia. Apart from highlighting 
absolute numbers and areas of practice, these reports shed little light on the men who work as 
nurses in Australia.   
 
The structure and direction of the research project was influenced by prior research projects, 
including, Hodes Research (2005) undertaken in California, United States of America and 
Bartfay et al.’s (2010) study undertaken in Canada. The Hodes Research was an online 
survey that sought to gain an understanding about a range of issues men faced in nursing. The 
study succeeded in providing a substantial body of quantitative and qualitative data that 
highlighted the challenges and opportunities male nurses faced and significantly, it 
successfully established a profile of men in nursing in California. Other literature frequently 
portrayed men as lazy, effeminate and/or homosexual (portrayed in a negative context), 
incompetent, uncaring or even cruel (Bartfay et al. 2010, Stanley 2012 & Stanley 2013)[JE2]. It 
was decided to test these previous study results and prevailing assumptions by further 
exploring the issue of men in nursing, specifically in Western Australia. 
 
A literature search was carried out using relevant key words to interrogate OneSearch, 
Academic Search Premier, CINAHL and Trove (at the National Library of Australia). Little 
Australian-based research, of an empirical nature was located. However, what was secured, 
pointed to key themes that addressed the masculinity of male nurses (Fisher 2011, Stanley 
2012), the perception and general stereotyping of men in nursing (Harding 2007, Stanley 
2012, Rajacich et al. 2013) and the barriers encountered by men entering or already in the 
nursing profession (Rajacich et al. 2013, O’Lynn 2013). Some literature was also found that 
examined the career development of men in nursing (McMillian, Morgan & Ament 2006, 
5 
 
 O’Lynn 2013). However, few sources revealed a deep insight into how men in nursing were 
perceived and none were from a Western Australian perspective. 
 
Recent literature about men in nursing claimed that nursing remained the realm of women 
(Maiolo 2014, White 2014) and that the path to nursing for men continued to be difficult; 
with the nursing culture dominated by women (Olson 2014). However, contemporary 
literature acknowledged that a paradigm shift was taking place, as men drove the campaign 
toward greater recruitment of male nurses (Olson 2014). There was increasing evidence that 
the percentage of men in nursing was increasing in the UK, the USA and Australia and that 
more men than ever were entering the nursing workforce (Marsh 2012, O'Lynn 2013, Pratt 
2014, Stanley et al. 2014). 
 
Brown (2009 p.120) and Kleinman (2004) examined the level of achievement by men in 
nursing and asserted that although men accounted for a small proportion of the nursing 
profession, they seemed to have a professional advantage resulting in a ‘glass escalator 
effect’ that enhanced men’s position in nursing (McMurry 2011 p.23).  
 
An examination of the gender and caring perceptions of Australian male nurses and male 
engineers by Loughrey (2008) demonstrated that the sample of male nurses adhered to female 
role norms more so than male engineers. This study reinforced the common pervasive gender 
stereotyping that Fisher (2011) argued needs to be eliminated if more men are to be attracted 
into the nursing profession. The media also played a role in further stigmatising male nurses. 
Stanley (2012) found the portrayal of male nurses in films to be generally negative with the 
men frequently shown as being morally corrupt, effeminate or simply incompetent, with few 
media depictions showing male nurses as competent or self-confident.  Harding (2007) 
6 
 
 supported the notion that the stereotyping of men in nursing as ‘gay’ was still evident. 
Portraying male nurses in such a negative light may have a deleterious effect on public 
perception of male nurses, which in turn, may create barriers for entry into the nursing 
profession and negatively impact on the recruitment of men into nursing (Meadus & Twomey 
2007, Roth & Coleman 2008, Stanley 2012 and Rajacich et al. 2013). Rajacich et al. (2013) 
concluded that a better understanding of the men’s experiences would benefit the healthcare 
system by providing policy makers with the strategies needed to attract and retain men in 
nursing. 
 
It was apparent that challenges existed for men, whether contemplating a career in nursing or 
if already established in the profession. Evidence showed that there continued to be a 
problem of acceptance of men in nursing by some of their female colleagues, with a report 
from McMillian et al. (2006) suggesting that traditional attitudes toward male nurses persist. 
O’Lynn (2013) reported that the main challenge faced by men in nursing was communication 
and working with female colleagues, an issue that is more prevalent nowadays, with the 
increased emphasis on teamwork in the fast paced health care environment. Although, 
substantial literature was available regarding men in nursing generally, there was a paucity of 
literature related to men in nursing that offered insight into the issues faced by men in nursing 
in Australia. Furthermore, the available literature highlighted a gap in the present knowledge 
about how men are perceived by their peers and how they see themselves. In addition, greater 
attention needs to be given to how nurses perceive the major issues impacting on recruitment 
into and retention of more men who are already in the nursing profession.    
 
Significance of the Study 
7 
 
 This study offers an outline of male and female nurse’s perceptions about male nurses and 
compares the differences between their perspectives about men in nursing. It displays 
information that supports strategies for increasing the recruitment of men into nursing and 
describes the respondent’s perceptions of how to positively promote the concept of men in 
nursing. As well, the study provides a wider understanding and profile of the population of 
men who are nurses in Western Australia. The study findings are thought to be valuable for 
future workforce planning as they address areas that impact on male nurse retention and the 
motivating factors for why men enter or stay in the nursing profession.  
 
The Study 
 
Aim  
The study aim was to establish a profile of men in nursing in Western Australia and gather 
information about how men in nursing perceive themselves and are perceived by their female 
colleagues (Box 1).  
 
Design 
The study used a non-experimental, comparative, descriptive research design with a focus on 
quantitative methodology. It employed a single point in time, on-line SurveyMonkey© 
questionnaire (distributed via email) to a convenience sample of registered nurses, enrolled 
nurses and midwives in Western Australia.  
 
Survey Instrument 
The self-reporting, SurveyMonkey© questionnaire consisted of 34 multiple choice questions 
with prescribed categorical responses that were predominantly quantitative in nature. There 
8 
 
 was a limited facility to elaborate and add comments which allowed some qualitative data to 
be captured in four of the 34 questions.  
 
The initial development and structure of the questionnaire was designed with reference to a 
web-based questionnaire used by Hodes Research (2005) that employed a similar style 
survey. The questions in Section E of this study, concerning attitudes and perceptions 
towards men in nursing employed six questions from a study carried out by Bartfay et al. 
(2010). Permission to use the survey questions was sought and secured from the previous 
study authors. The survey instrument was reviewed for content validity and structure by an 
expert panel of nurse academics, undertaken over several months until the intent meaning and 
phrasing were revised and agreed on.   
 
The questionnaire gathered descriptive data on the following topics: background information; 
path to nursing studies; views on nursing as a career and attitudes regarding the image of men 
in nursing; and promotion of men in nursing. The questionnaire structure meant that all 
respondents were asked to respond to the same questions in the same order, other than two 
final questions applicable to male nurses only.  
 
Recruitment 
Registered nurses, enrolled nurses and midwives in Western Australia were invited to 
participate in this study. Participants were informed about the study via an internal Western 
Australia, Department of Health, (WA DOH) email, an e-newsletter and via an article in the 
Western Nurse publication. The electronic link and email included a link to the questionnaire 
and the Participant Information Form. The latter explained the study purpose and addressed 
the ethical considerations, specifically the issues of consent and anonymity. Instructions on 
9 
 
 how to complete the questionnaire were included in the actual questionnaire. The 
questionnaires were sent to email addresses listed on the WA DOH system with the word; 
‘nurse’, ‘nursing’, ‘midwife’ or ‘midwifery’ in the title. 
 
Data Distribution and Collection Method 
It was estimated that the SurveyMonkey© questionnaire had the potential to reach the email 
inboxes of approximately 19,000 publicly employed registered nurses, enrolled nurses and 
midwives, although it was estimated that for a range of reasons (old email links, emails not 
being forwarded correctly etc.) only about one third of this number received the 
SurveyMonkey© email. At the time the survey began, there were 36,440 registered nurses, 
midwives and enrolled nurses registered to practice in WA (Nursing and Midwifery Board of 
Australia 2014), although many worked outside the public health service and were therefore 
outside the survey’s scope. It was difficult to estimate the exact number of nurses and 
midwives that either received or opened the link to the questionnaire. However, it was clear 
from the responses received that a representative sample of Western Australian nurses and 
midwives responded to the survey.  
 
Once distributed, the respondents had up to four weeks (mid-December 2013 to mid-January 
2014) to respond and were only able to complete the questionnaire once, capturing data at a 
particular point in time. A few respondents chose to print-off and return paper based versions 
of the questionnaire. These were posted to the chief researcher and entered by a research 
assistant into the electronic data record, maintaining respondent anonymity.  
 
Ethical Considerations: 
10 
 
 Ethical approval was granted from the University of Western Australia Human Research 
Ethics Committee (HREC) and participant anonymity was secured in the survey process 
(Approval Number: MBDP: M431).  
 
Setting:  
Predominantly Western Australian public health service environments, with some public, 
private, nursing education institutions and non-government providers across rural, remote and 
metropolitan locations were included in the study catchment. The study outline and process is 
summarised in Figure 1.   
 
Data analysis 
The data were analysed using Statistical Product and Service Solutions (SPSS 21). The 
quantitative analysis used a descriptive analysis which focused on the percentages in each of 
the groups. A chi-square test for independence was used to determine the relationship of 
various answers between genders. A significant p-value (< 0.05) indicated that the response 
was influenced by gender type. The chi-square test of independence has the requirement that 
the cell sizes are greater than or equal to five. This requirement was met for all analyses and 
P values were determined as a result.  
 
The four questions containing qualitative data were analysed by examining phrases for 
content. From these, categories and sub-categories were created, themes identified, patterns 
confirmed and an integrated picture about the data content was created. Qualitative data were 
analysed with an NVivo10 program. Findings from this section of the study are not 
specifically reported in this paper. 
 
11 
 
 Validity and reliability 
The survey instrument was influenced by two separately developed survey instruments which 
were used in studies by Hodes Research (2005) and Bartfay et al. (2010). The Hodes 
instrument was adapted from the original to suit its use in the Australian context. To ensure 
the validity of the survey instrument, content validity evaluation measures were used with an 
expert panel’s aid and the participation of nurse academics and researchers who were 
involved in the iterative review process which determined that the instrument had content 
validity. The survey questions from Barfay et al. (2010) were used, with permission and 
without change. Cronbach’s alpha was used to measure the homogeneity in the survey and a 
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.91 was associated with these questions.  
  
Results 
Results are offered from: Section A (gender composition); B (background information); C 
(path to nursing/midwifery); D (future nursing career); E (promotion of men in 
nursing/midwifery); and G (questions for male nurses only). Section F (about attitudes and 
perceptions towards men in nursing and other qualitative results were omitted from the paper, 
but are included in the study report (Stanley et al. 2014).  
 
Results indicate that a higher proportion of male nurses responded to the questionnaire 
(23.4%) than was typically represented in the general nursing population for Australia 
(10.41%) (Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia 2014) or compared with all employed 
nurses and midwives in the Western Australia nursing/midwifery population (8.82%) 
(Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia 2014) (Table 1). In other respects the 
respondents’ profile was broadly in line with the wider Australian nursing/midwifery 
population. The majority of the survey respondents (68.8%) were over the age of 41. This is 
12 
 
 consistent with the Australian national average percentage for nurses over 41 years of age 
(65.3%)  (Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia 2014). In general, the study and 
national percentages for nurses and midwives in all age categories were relatively close, apart 
from respondents under the age of 20, where the study offered much lower concentrations 
than the national percentage (Table 1).  
 
Over half the respondents (53.5%) (Table 2) had a length of service 21 years and over, 
however the proportion of females in this category, at 56.0% was significantly higher than the 
proportion of males at 45.3%. There was no other significant difference in the age profile of 
the male and female respondents, suggesting that perhaps male respondents came into 
nursing at an older age and although they may be similar in age to their female counterparts, 
they have fewer years’ service (Table 1). Table 1 also suggests that the majority of 
respondents came from metropolitan areas. This may reflect the poor cascade effect from the 
survey distribution path or imply fewer opportunities to access email outside metropolitan 
settings.  
 
The largest proportion of all respondents were born in Australia (56.1%) with the majority 
coming specifically from Western Australia (37.7%) (Table 1). Of the 43.9% of respondents 
who indicated they were born overseas, the majority were from the United Kingdom (50.2%) 
while the remainder came from a diverse range of other nations including, South Africa, 
Ireland, India, Malaysia and New Zealand. The Australian Bureau of Statistics (2011) data 
indicated that from the Australian population of 21,507,719 in 2011, roughly 30% were born 
overseas, with the largest proportion coming from the UK (Australian Bureau of Statistics 
2011). Significantly, this indicated that the West Australian nursing and midwifery workforce 
13 
 
 was populated by a higher proportion of overseas and culturally diverse nurses than was seen 
in the general Australian population.  
 
In terms of work settings, male nurses were more commonly working in Critical Care and 
Emergency Care (21.8%), Management (11.3%) and Mental Health (27.9%) (Table 2). This 
supported Brown’s (2009) view that many men in nursing tended to progress in their careers 
more quickly than women or that more men transitioned into management and senior 
positions. Some other work areas (e.g. ‘Aged care’ 0.8%, ‘General practice’ 0.4%, ‘Surgical’ 
4.4%, ‘Midwifery’ 0.8% and ‘Research’ 0.8%) were significantly under-represented by men 
in nursing (Table 2).  
 
Table 3 offers data that explored the path respondents took to nursing with variables such as 
previous activities, age at which nursing was first considered and started and the reasons for 
choosing a nursing career.  These results indicated that men came to nursing later or after 
other careers at nearly twice the rate of female nurses (men 51.2%/women 28.7%) who came 
to nursing predominantly from school (men 18.8%/women 49.2%). Table 4 outlines the 
advantages and disadvantages of nursing with differences identified between male and female 
respondents. As such, there was a significant difference in what men and women saw as the 
advantages of a nursing career. Male respondents valued a stable career (p = .011) and 
reasonable salary (p = .028) more highly than female respondents. In contrast, female nurses 
saw more advantages in making a difference (p = .001), flexible working hours and working 
in a team (p = .018). Table 5 offers data from one question, where respondents were asked if 
they would recommend a nursing career to males, with the majority of both males and 
females indicating that they would, although fewer men (71.7%) would make the 
recommendation than female nurses (76.8%).   
14 
 
  
Table 6 offers data from respondents about the misconceptions of men in nursing, the 
endorsement of various selling points to promote the ‘men in nursing’ message, why men 
might not be attracted to nursing and how more men might be attracted into nursing. In all 
categories men felt the misconceptions more acutely, although more women saw men in 
nursing as ‘lazy’.  As for the selling points of nursing as a profession, female respondents 
selected all options in greater proportions than did the males, with the marginal exception of 
the option relating to career stability (Table 6). In relation to the reasons men might not be 
attracted to nursing, men saw the issue of negative stereotypes as a more significant reason 
for men to be turned off nursing than did their female colleagues (p = .028). As for attracting 
more men into nursing, both men and women felt career guidance in schools, school visits 
and work shadow programs might offer the best approach for attracting more men.  
 
Table 7 outlines findings related to the challenges men face and continue to face in nursing, 
with male respondents indicating that the most common issues they deal with related to being 
seen as ‘muscle’ by their female colleagues (58.2%).  
 
Discussion 
Path to Nursing and Midwifery 
The hypothesis that male nurses enter nursing at an older age than their female colleagues 
was validated by the research findings (Table 3). Male respondents started to think about a 
career in nursing later in life and subsequently started their nursing careers later than their 
female counterparts. As such, 82.8% of female nurses had started to consider a career in 
nursing before their 20th birthday, compared with only 47.8% of male respondents. These 
findings were consistent with Hodes Research (2005) which found that only 16% of their 
15 
 
 male respondents had considered nursing as a career before 20 years of age. In terms of 
actually starting their career, well over two-thirds of females (71.3%) indicated that they 
began their nursing careers while younger than 20 years of age, while just over one third of 
males began their careers at this age (37.7%).  
 
The study results indicated that many female nurses commenced nursing directly from school 
(49.2%). As with our study, Hodes Research (2005) indicated that men came to nursing later 
in life and after other career experiences with 61% of men coming to nursing either from the 
‘military’ (17%) or from ‘another career’ (44%). This suggested a more diverse entry path to 
nursing than in the past. It may also indicate a failure on the part of the nursing profession or 
universities to market or make a career in nursing attractive to male school leavers and 
several respondents suggested improving male nurse recruitment by targeting high schools.  
 
Men also suggested that a desire to have a stable career was a significant factor in their career 
choice (39.6%). This reason also rated highly in the Hodes Research (2005) study findings. 
This was followed by being influenced by a family member or close friend who was already a 
nurse (25.5%) and a by a desire to secure a career with a variety of career paths in it (23.0%). 
Hodes Research (2005) suggested these reasons however, their findings added that the second 
most likely reason men chose a career in nursing was because nursing offered a diverse range 
of employment paths. They also suggested that a friend or family member’s influence was a 
less significant factor in choosing a nursing career (Hodes Research 2005). Other factors 
which brought men into nursing included, a desire to travel and a variety of geographical 
career choices. While the desire to secure a high salary was mentioned, it was the least 
significant factor with only 6.0% of male and 10.2% of female respondents citing salary as a 
16 
 
 factor in their choice to become a nurse. Interestingly, the Hodes Research (2005) placed 
salary as the fifth most likely reason for men to choose a career in nursing. 
 
It is noticeable that for men, the hope of a stable career, secure employment, career variety 
and a desire to help people all rated highly as motivating forces for choosing a career in 
nursing (Table 4). These findings were consistent with Hodes Research (2005). Both men and 
women cited altruistic reasons, e.g. ‘desire to help people’ and an ‘ability to make a 
difference’, as key reasons for why they chose nursing and the advantages they subsequently 
associated with a career in nursing.  
     
Nursing Career 
When men were asked to suggest reasons for leaving nursing, the most popular option, 
selected by 27.9% of the male respondents were perceptions about a poor salary. The next 
reason suggested was the impact of negative stereotypes (15.7%). However, despite a 
suggestion of lower job satisfaction among the male respondents compared with their female 
colleagues, it must be noted that a reasonable proportion of male respondents (22.2%) said 
that there were no reasons they could think of to make them consider leaving the nursing 
profession.  
 
Promoting men in nursing/midwifery 
When respondents were encouraged to endorse various selling points to promote the ‘men in 
nursing’ message, ‘career stability’ a ‘challenging and responsible profession’ and a ‘highly 
skilled profession’ were particularly popular options for both genders (Table 6). Suggesting 
that, respondents believed that these selling points are not widely understood among the 
wider public and require a higher profile.  
17 
 
 Table six also indicates that male and female respondents were emphatic that suitable 
approaches for attracting more men into nursing should involve, ‘better career guidance at 
school’ and ‘school visits/presentations by male nurses’. With responses supporting the 
notion that nursing should be more effectively promoted to school aged boys.   
 
Misperceptions 
According to the respondents, the most common misperceptions which exist in society about 
men in nursing related to gender stereotyping; the ‘inappropriateness’ of nursing for males 
and the assumptions made about a man’s sexuality as a consequence of his career choice. In 
particular, men felt that the sentiments, ‘most male nurses are gay’ (50.5%) and ‘nursing is a 
profession more appropriate for females’ (50.7%) are held by the public at large. There was 
broad agreement among respondents that the role the media plays in perpetuating these 
misperceptions, i.e. portraying nursing as being more suited for women and portraying male 
nurses as being ‘gay’, discouraged men from choosing nursing as a career. Male respondents, 
in particular, agreed strongly that the media was responsible for reinforcing these 
misperceptions. 
 
Men also appeared to have stronger views about the impact that these common 
misperceptions have on the recruitment and retention of men in nursing. As highlighted in the 
question asking why more men were not attracted to nursing. Men were more emphatic in 
their choice of ‘perception of negative stereotypes’ (53.4%) compared with the female 
response rate (45.3%). In addition, males responded with strong agreement at almost twice 
the level of females (13.7% compared with 7.4%) to Question 25 which stated that, ‘I believe 
that nursing is not perceived as a very masculine or a ‘macho-type’ of career for males to 
pursue in our society.’ Indeed, ‘negative stereotypes’ which exist were identified by male 
18 
 
 respondents as one of the main reasons that would make them think about leaving the 
profession. As Hodes Research (2005) found this was the most significant challenge that 
male nurses identified in their study with 73% of respondents citing negative stereotypes as 
an issue.  
 
Challenges  
Due to their status as a minority gender in the nursing profession a particular challenge 
identified by the male respondents included the issue of bullying by colleagues (36.8%) and 
other health professionals (21.8%) (Table 7). As well, they highlighted ways male nurses felt 
marginalised or victimised or were treated ‘differently’ purely on the basis of their gender. 
For example, 58.2% suggested that they were often used as ‘muscle’ by female colleagues, 
while others indicated that they had been considered inappropriate for some practice areas 
(e.g. midwifery) (36.8%). Other respondents suggested that there was reluctance on the part 
of some female patients to be cared for by males (31.9%).  
 
Other professional groups with small numbers of male members, such as primary school 
teachers, flight attendants and child care workers, cite similar challenges (Tiemeyer 2007; 
McKenzie et al. 2011, Jozwiak 2012, Paton 2013 & Donaldson-James 2013). However, there 
was one point of note about these careers that separates them from nursing. Nursing, the 
word, has feminine connotations. The word can be affiliated with breast feeding a baby and 
nursing, the activity, has for the past century or more been strongly associated with ‘women’s 
work.’ However, being a teacher or teaching, or indeed the new title for airline steward, 
‘flight attendant’ does not have any gender specific connotations overlayed on them. Teacher 
and flight attendant are neutral terms that can be respectably held by males or females. 
Therefore, recruiting men into these careers does not carry the burden or attendant 
19 
 
 stereotypes the title ‘nurse’ seems to. Several male respondents suggested that recruiting 
more men into nursing could be supported by addressing the title ‘nurse.’ As one respondent 
suggested, dropping the tag ‘male nurse’ may be one approach to a more gender friendly 
outcome.    
 
Many challenges men have faced or continue to face in the primary school teaching, 
kindergarten and flight attendant fields are in keeping with the perceptions offered by men in 
this study (Table 7). Views based on homophobic or stereotypical challenges also resonate, to 
some extent, with the findings from Hodes Research (2005), where a large majority of 
Hode’s respondents suggested that the main challenge to men in nursing arose from negative 
stereotypes.  
 
Limitations:  
Some limitations were identified in this study. These included; reduced access to the whole of 
the WA nursing and midwifery population; limited numbers of lower age nurses, enrolled 
nurse and more senior respondents; SurveyMonkey© challenges including issues with the 
process of sending out questionnaires. Primarily because the anticipated cascade system did 
not reach all of the target participants. Also, a degree of selection bias may exist as the study 
used a convenience sample that had the potential for respondents who had strong views about 
men in nursing to participate in the study.    
 
Conclusion:  
The study produced a profile of men in nursing in Western Australia. It described and 
compared male and female nurse and midwives’ perceptions of male nurses. It also gathered 
data about the experience of being a male nurse in Western Australia, with insights into the 
20 
 
 challenges faced by nurses and midwives and male nurses in particular. In addition, the study 
set out to explore the likely strategies that could be employed to support greater male nurse 
recruitment and retention.  
In terms of gaining an insight into the respondent’s perceptions about society’s view of men 
in nursing, the results suggested that nursing was seen as an intrinsically feminine 
occupation, together with the perception of negative gender stereotyping, exacerbated by the 
media. Men in nursing viewed themselves less positively and were viewed less positively by 
female nurses, by the media and society. As such, female participants were more positive 
with regard to validating the advantages associated with nursing as a profession. Many men 
reported ‘challenges’ associated with being the minority gender. The issues of job security, 
limited career advancement opportunities and poor morale dominated the reasons identified 
for why more men were not attracted to the profession.  
Recommendations included increasing efforts to seek a higher level of recruitment for male 
nurses. This should be achieved by targeted recruitment; greater high school focused 
promotion; getting the recruitment message right; and finding new approaches to getting the 
recruitment message across to men. In addition, the profile and perception of men in nursing 
could be enhanced by focusing research with a wider cultural mix; addressing ‘men in 
nursing’ issues on a wider platform and varying the study platform to seek a better and more 
representative response rate. 
 
 
21 
 
 References 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2011) Country of Birth of Person (by sex). Available at: 
http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/communit
yprofile/0?opendocument&navpos=220. 
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (2011) Nursing and midwifery workforce 2011. 
Available at: 
http://www.aihw.gov.au/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=10737422164 [Accessed 
1 March 2013]. 
Bartfay, W., Bartfay, E., Clow, K. & Wu, T. (2010) Attitudes and Perceptions towards Men 
in Nursing Education. The Internet Journal of Allied Health Sciences and Practice. 
Available at: http://ijahsp.nova.edu [Accessed 26 June 2013]. 
Beament, T., Falconer, D., Stanley, D., Stanley, K. (2013). Men in Nursing DVD. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kORSrMhsEzk&feature=youtube_gdata_player. 
Brown, B. (2009) Men in nursing: Re-evaluating masculinities, re-evaluating gender. 
Contemporary Nurse: A Journal for the Australian Nursing Profession, 33, 120-129. 
Donaldson-James, S. (2013) Why men don't teach elementary school. Available at: 
http://www.abcnews.go.com/Health/men-teach-elementary-school/story? 
Fisher, M. J. (2011) Sex differences in gender characteristics of Australian nurses and male 
engineers: A comparative cross-sectional survey. Contemporary Nurse: A Journal for 
the Australian Nursing Profession, 39, 36-50. 
Harding, T. (2007) The construction of men who are nurses as gay. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 60, 636-644. 
Hodes Research (2005) Men in Nursing Study. Available at: 
http://www.hodes.com/files/MenInNursing2005.pdf [Accessed 1 February 2013]. 
22 
 
 Jozwiak, G. (2012) Paedophilia fears 'deter men' from working in childcare. Available at: 
http://www.cypnow.co.uk/cyp/news/1075377/paediophilia-fears-deter-childcare 
[Accessed 6 August 2013]. 
Kleinman, C. (2004) Understanding and capitalizing on men's advantages in nursing. The 
Journal of nursing administration, 34, 78-82. 
Loughrey, M. (2008) Just how male are male nurses...? Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17, 
1327-1334. 
Maiolo, A. (2014) Nursing still seen as women's work. Available at: 
http://www.campusreview.com.au/blog/2014/02/nursing-still-seen-as-womens-work/ 
[Accessed 3 February 2014]. 
Marsh, B. (2012) More men than ever work as hospital nurses. Daily Mail. Available at: 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-145183/More-men-work-hospital-
nurse.html. 
McKenzie, P., Rowley, G., Weldon, P. R. & Murphy, M. (2011) Staff in Australia's schools 
2010 : main report on the survey. Available at: http://research.acer.edu.au/tll_misc/14. 
McMillian, J., Morgan, S. A. & Ament, P. (2006) Acceptance of Male Registered Nurses by 
Female Registered Nurses. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 38, 100-106. 
McMurry, T. B. (2011) The Image of Male Nurses and Nursing Leadership Mobility. 
Nursing Forum, 46, 22-28. 
Meadus, R. J. & Twomey, J. C. (2007) Men in Nursing: Making the Right Choice. The 
Canadian Nurse, 103, 13-6. 
Mohammed, J. (2012) On the lookout for men. Nursing Standard, 26, 64-64. 
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (2014) Nurse and Midwife Registrant Data: 
March 2014. Available at: 
23 
 
 www.nursingmidwiferyboard.gov.au/documents/default.aspx [Accessed 25 August 
2014]. 
O'Lynn, C. (2013) A Man's Guide To A Nursing Career. Springer Publishing Company, New 
York. 
Olson, M. (2014) Men in Nursing. Western Nurse, January, p. 4-5. 
Paton, G. (2013) Teaching in primary schools 'still seen as a woman's job'. The Telegraph. 
Available at: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/984997/teaching 
[Accessed 3 February 2014]. 
Pratt, N. (2014) 15 Reasons Why Nursing is a Great Profession for Young Men. Available at: 
http://www.nursetogether.com/15-reasons-why-nursing-is-a-great-professio 
[Accessed 23 August 2014]. 
Rajacich, D., Kane, D., Williston, C. & Cameron, S. (2013) If They Do Call You a Nurse, It 
Is Always a ‘Male Nurse’: Experiences of Men in the Nursing Profession. Nursing 
Forum, 48, 71-80. 
Roth, J. E. & Coleman, C. L. (2008) Perceived and Real Barriers for Men Entering Nursing: 
Implications for Gender Diversity Journal of Cultural Diversity, 15, 148-152. 
Stanley, D. (2012) Celluloid devils: a research study of male nurses in feature films. Journal 
of Advanced Nursing, 68, 2526-2537. 
Stanley, D. (2013) Does the portrayal of men in films affect male nurse recruitment? 
Available at: http://www.nursingtimes.net/opinion/does-the-portrayal-of-men-in-
films-affect-male-nurse-recruitment/5061644.article [Accessed 25 July 2013]. 
Stanley, D., Beament, T., Falconer, D., Haigh, M., Newton, R., Stanley, K., Saunders, R. & 
Wall, P. (2014) Profile and perceptions of men in nursing in Western Australia: 
Research Report 2014. UWA Print, Perth. 
24 
 
 Tiemeyer, P. (2007) Male Stewardesses. Male flight attendants as a queer miscarriage of 
justice. Genders. Available at: http://www.genders.org/g45/g45_tiemeyer.html. 
White, L. (2014) It's still a woman's world. Nursing Review, February, p. 11-15. 
 
 
25 
 
