 Bidirectional electromagnetic control of the hypothalamus 
regulates feeding and metabolism
Sarah A. Stanley1, Leah Kelly1, Kaamashri N. Latcha1, Sarah F. Schmidt1, Xiaofei Yu1, 
Alexander R. Nectow1, Jeremy Sauer2, Jonathan P. Dyke3, Jonathan S. Dordick2, and 
Jeffrey M. Friedman1,4
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA
2Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Center for Biotechnology & Interdisciplinary 
Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York 12180, USA
3Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA
4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, New York 10065, USA
Abstract
Targeted, temporally regulated neural modulation is invaluable in determining the physiological 
roles of specific neural populations or circuits. Here we describe a system for non-invasive, 
temporal activation or inhibition of neuronal activity in vivo and its use to study central nervous 
system control of glucose homeostasis and feeding in mice. We are able to induce neuronal 
activation remotely using radio waves or magnetic fields via Cre-dependent expression of a GFP-
tagged ferritin fusion protein tethered to the cation-conducting transient receptor potential 
vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) by a camelid anti-GFP antibody (anti-GFP–TRPV1)1. Neuronal inhibition 
via the same stimuli is achieved by mutating the TRPV1 pore, rendering the channel chloride-
permeable. These constructs were targeted to glucose-sensing neurons in the ventromedial 
hypothalamus in glucokinase–Cre mice, which express Cre in glucose-sensing neurons2. Acute 
activation of glucose-sensing neurons in this region increases plasma glucose and glucagon, lowers 
insulin levels and stimulates feeding, while inhibition reduces blood glucose, raises insulin levels 
and suppresses feeding. These results suggest that pancreatic hormones function as an effector 
mechanism of central nervous system circuits controlling blood glucose and behaviour. The 
method we employ obviates the need for permanent implants and could potentially be applied to 
study other neural processes or used to regulate other, even dispersed, cell types.
While electrode stimulation and lesioning studies suggest that hypothalamic neurons 
regulate blood glucose and feeding3, these methods affect both cells and fibres of passage4–6 
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.M.F. (; Email: friedj@mail.rockefeller.edu) 
Author Contributions J.M.F. conceived the project and supervised the studies. S.A.S. and L.K. designed and performed the 
experiments. K.L. and S.F.S. provided technical assistance. A.N. assisted with optogenetic studies, J.S. assisted with magnet activation 
studies and X.Y. assisted with cell culture studies. J.D. provided technical advice for in vivo magnet activation studies. J.S.D. provided 
technical advice. S.A.S., L.K. and J.M.F. wrote the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 March 31; 531(7596): 647–650. doi:10.1038/nature17183.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and do not define contributing cell types7. Previously we showed that radio waves or 
magnetic fields can control calcium (Ca2+) entry and gene expression using ferritin 
nanoparticles tethered to the temperature-sensitive TRPV1 channel1. In this report, we tested 
the utility of our approach for neural activation and investigate the function of hypothalamic 
glucose-sensing neurons. A replication-deficient adenovirus with Cre-dependent expression 
of anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin) was injected 
unilaterally into the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) of glucokinase–Cre (GK–Cre) 
mice, which express Cre in glucose-sensing neurons2 (Extended Data Fig. 1a), targeting 
~2,000 neurons (see Methods), similar to previous studies8,9. Radio frequency (RF) 
treatment (465 kHz) of these mice significantly increased blood glucose (change in blood 
glucose at 30 min: RF-treated, 48.9 ±16.9 mg dl−1 versus untreated, −0.7 ±12.9 mg dl−1; P < 
0.05; at 45 min: RF-treated, 91.3 ±28.2 mg dl−1 versus untreated, 8.7 ±11.1 mg dl−1; P 
<0.05) and the cumulative change in blood glucose (area under the curve (AUC; 0–90 min): 
RF-treated, 5,562 ±1,977 mg dl−1 min versus untreated, 62 ±1,184 mg dl−1 min; P <0.05) 
( Fig. 1b, c). The time course and extent of glucose changes after RF treatment were almost 
superimposable with those after optogenetic activation of VMH GK–Cre neurons, albeit 
with a slight delay (Fig. 1b, c). RF treatment of GK–Cre mice with VMH injection of anti-
GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin halved plasma insulin, increased plasma glucagon threefold and 
significantly induced expression of the hepatic gluconeogenic enzyme10, glucose-6-
phosphatase (Fig. 1d). Thus, remote activation of glucose-sensing neurons regulated 
pancreatic hormones to increase blood glucose. Blood glucose changes were dependent on 
RF field strength and duration (Extended Data Fig. 2a–d). RF treatment did not alter blood 
glucose in wild-type mice with VMH injection of anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (Extended 
Data Fig. 3). RF treatment induced c-Fos expression only in GFP-expressing neurons and 
not in RF-treated wild-type mice (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin 
expression, with or without RF, did not alter apoptotic cell count compared to control virus 
expressing GFP (Extended Data Fig. 1d, e).
Consistent with these in vivo data, RF significantly increased the number of cells with raised 
intracellular Ca2+ in a hypothalamic N38 cell line stably expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–
ferritin. These effects were blocked by the TRP channel inhibitor ruthenium red. The mode 
response time was 11–15 s after RF onset (Extended Data Fig. 4a–c). Calcium responses 
were proportional to RF field strength and a 10 s pulse significantly increased intracellular 
Ca2+ (Extended Data Fig. 4d–g). RF treatment of N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/
GFP–ferritin also significantly increased targets of Ca2+ signalling, phosphorylated-cAMP-
response element-binding protein (pCREB)11 and c-Fos12, and these effects were blocked by 
ruthenium red (Extended Data Fig. 4h, i). RF treatment of N38 cells without anti-GFP–
TRPV1/GFP–ferritin induced a small increase in c-Fos and no increase in pCREB 
(Extended Data Fig. 6). Immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy and immuno-electron 
microscopy confirmed co-expression and co-localization of anti-GFP–TRPV1 and GFP–
ferritin in vitro (Extended Data Fig. 5).
Non-invasive neural inhibition would provide a valuable research tool and potentially offer 
an alternative to deep brain stimulation which may act by neural inhibition13. An amino acid 
substitution, from isoleucine to lysine in the S6 pore region of TRPM2 and M8 changed 
ionic selectivity from cations to chloride (Cl−) ions14. We introduced and tested an 
Stanley et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analogous mutation in TRPV1 S6 region (I679K) (Fig. 2a) to create the TRPV1mutant 
channel. In N38 cells stably expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin, the TRP 
agonist 2-aminoethoxy-diphenyl borate (2-APB) significantly increased intracellular Cl− 
levels measured by MQAE quenching. This effect was blocked by ruthenium red (Fig. 2b 
and Extended Data Fig. 8). RF treatment of N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/
GFP–ferritin significantly reduced pCREB levels and failed to increase c-Fos expression 
(Extended Data Fig. 7a).
We next tested whether remote inhibition of hypothalamic glucose-sensing neurons altered 
glucose metabolism in vivo. RF treatment of fasted GK–Cre mice following VMH injection 
of adenovirus with Cre-dependent expression of anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin (Ad-
FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin) significantly reduced blood glucose (change in 
blood glucose at 20 min: RF-treated, −22.5 ± 5.5 mg dl−1 versus untreated, 6.8 ± 4.1 mg 
dl−1; P < 0.01; at 30 min: RF-treated, −26.5 ±7.8 mg dl−1 versus untreated, 9.9 ±13.1 mg 
dl−1; P <0.001; at 45 min: RF-treated, −20.3 ±8.2 mg dl−1 versus untreated, 20.6 ±12.9 mg 
dl−1; P < 0.0001) and the cumulative change in blood glucose (Fig. 2c–e). RF treatment of 
these mice significantly increased insulin without a rise in glucagon and significantly 
reduced hepatic glucose-6-phosphatase expression (Fig. 2f). Inhibition of these neurons also 
blunted the hyperglycaemic response to 2-deoxyglucose, a non-metabolizable form of 
glucose that mimics hypoglycemia15 (Fig. 2g and Extended Data Fig. 7c). RF treatment did 
not affect wild-type mice with VMH injection of anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin 
(Extended Data Fig. 7d). These results suggest that hypothalamic glucose-sensing neurons 
are necessary for the normal counter-regulatory response to hypoglycaemia and to maintain 
blood glucose after an overnight fast.
We previously showed that ferritin’s superparamagnetic properties allow ferritin-tethered 
TRPV1 to activate gene expression in a magnetic field1,16. We next tested whether a 
magnetic field could modulate neural activity. We were unable to make electrophysiological 
recordings using radio waves because of electrode heating and recording artefacts. Magnet 
treatment (5 s) induced a significant inward current in HEK or N38 cells expressing anti-
GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin and an outward current in HEK or N38 cells expressing 
TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin (Extended Data Fig. 8a–f). Peak magnet-induced current 
displayed a rise time of 0.62 ± 0.4 s and a 37% decay time of 1.1 ± 0.74 s for anti-GFP–
TRPV1/GFP–ferritin and 2.29 ± 1.8 s and 11.7 ± 4.9 s respectively for anti-GFP–
TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin. The current–voltage relationship of TRPV1mutant with different 
intracellular anions (Extended Data Fig. 8i, j) was consistent with analogous pore loop 
mutations in TRPM2 and TRPM814. Magnet treatment increased intracellular calcium in 
N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin and intracellular chloride in N38 cells 
expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin. These effects were blocked by ruthenium 
red (Extended Data Fig. 8k–o).
We next tested the effects of magnet treatment on neural activity ex vivo in slices from GK–
Cre mice crossed to the reporter strain Rosa-lox-stop-lox-tdTomato after VMH injection of 
Ad-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin or Ad-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin. In slices 
from mice injected with Ad-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, magnet treatment (5 s) 
depolarized neurons expressing tdTomato and GFP, significantly increasing membrane 
Stanley et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 potential (16.39 ±2.9 mV, P < 0.001) and firing rate (2.355 ±0.63 Hz, P < 0.001) in 76% of 
neurons. Magnet treatment (5 s) of slices from mice injected with Ad-anti-GFP-
TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin significantly hyperpolarized neurons by 4.7 ± 1.1 mV (P < 0.05) 
and decreased firing rate −2.552 ±1.17 (P < 0.05) in 71% of neurons (Fig. 3a–d, Extended 
Data Fig. 8g, h).
To test whether a magnetic field could remotely modulate neurons in vivo to control 
behaviour, we placed animals close to the electromagnetic coil of an MRI machine (Fig. 3e, 
f). We reasoned that since hypoglycaemia triggers feeding17, activation of hypothalamic GK 
neurons might increase food intake. Magnet treatment of GK–Cre mice with VMH injection 
of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin increased blood glucose (Extended Data Fig. 
9b–d) and significantly increased food intake after a fast to a similar extent as optogenetic 
activation of VMH GK–Cre neurons (Fig. 3g). We tested the effect of neural inhibition by 
magnet treatment of GK–Cre mice with VMH injection of Ad-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-
ferritin. Food intake was significantly decreased (Fig. 3h, i). Expression of the activating and 
inhibitory constructs did not alter baseline blood glucose or food intake (Extended Data Fig. 
10) and magnetic field treatment did not affect blood glucose or feeding in wild-type mice 
after VMH injection of either construct (Extended Data Fig. 9e, f).
Here we show that remote neural modulation of a subpopulation of hypothalamic glucose-
sensing neurons changes blood glucose in either direction by regulating pancreatic hormone 
levels, and that neural activation increases feeding while inhibition decreases it. VMH 
inhibition to reduce glucose and feeding could be beneficial in metabolic disease. Because 
activation of the GK neuronal subpopulation mimics the responses to low glucose and 
inhibiting them blunts this response, we hypothesize that we targeted glucose-inhibited 
neurons, though further studies will be needed to confirm this, as well as the mechanism by 
which glucose can inhibit GK-expressing neurons18,19. While local particle heating could 
independently affect mitochondrial UCP2 or other mechanisms, we consider this unlikely 
because of rapid heat dissipation with distance and the finding that wild-type and mutant 
TRPV1 had opposite effects20.
Radio-wave- or magnetic-field-controlled neural modulation provides distinct attributes 
relative to optogenetics or DREADDs (designer receptors exclusively activated by designer 
drugs). Unlike optogenetics, the approach does not require a permanent implant so may be 
suitable when an implant interferes with function or cannot be secured. Further, optogenetics 
and methods using exogenous nanoparticles21,22 only target local populations, whereas our 
genetically encoded system could potentially modulate dispersed populations and/or 
multiple sites in a circuit simultaneously without requiring multiple implants or nanoparticle 
injections. The system also enables more rapid responses than DREADDs23 which activate 
G protein signalling and the slower kinetics of which24,25 could affect their utility for neural 
modulation over short time intervals. Our method could also regulate calcium and/or 
chloride currents in other, even dispersed, populations such as immune, epithelial and 
endocrine cells. Pending further efficacy and safety studies and the development of suitable 
devices, the method could potentially provide a less invasive alternative to deep brain 
stimulation which requires permanent implants and are sometimes associated with 
complications26.
Stanley et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and 
Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these 
sections appear only in the online paper.
METHODS
Radiofrequency field and static magnetic field
A 465 kHz sinusoidal signal was provided by a signal generator and applied through an 
amplifier (both Ultraflex) to a 2-turn solenoid coil with a radius of 2.5 cm to produce an 
electromagnetic field. The field strengths tested were 31 mT, 27 mT and 23 mT. Samples 
were placed within the solenoid.
A static magnetic field for imaging experiments was produced using a neodymium-iron-
boron permanent magnet (0.25 × 1 inch, axially magnetized, K&J Magnetics). This was able 
to produce a magnetic flux density of over 5 kilogauss at the magnet surface. Field strengths 
of 280 mT and 130 mT were generated by increasing the distance from the cells to the 
magnet surface (2 mm and 5 mm, respectively). A N52 grade neodymium magnet (0.06 × 
0.25 inch, axially magnetized, K&J Magnetics) was used for electrophysiological studies. 
The magnetic field for in vivo studies was generated by the superconducting electromagnetic 
MRI field from a GE 3.0 Tesla Excite HDx MRI Scanner (GE Healthcare). The field 
strength was measured and regions with strengths of 0.5–1 T or 0.2–0.5 T were used for in 
vivo studies.
Plasmids
Anti-GFP nanobody-TRPV1–2A–GFP ferritin in pEGFPN1 and MSCV-hygro were 
generated as previously described1. Mutation of residue I679K in TRPV1 was performed by 
site-directed mutagenesis using QuikChange XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent). 
These sequences were cloned into pVQ Ad CMV KNpA for generation of replication 
deficient adenovirus. To construct Cre- activated recombinant adenovirus vectors, a DNA 
construct with two pairs of incompatible lox sites, loxN and lox2722, was synthesized and 
Anti-GFP nanobody-TRPV1–2A–GFP ferritin was cloned between the two pairs in the 
antisense orientation. The floxed inverted Anti-GFP nanobody-TRPV1–2A–GFP ferritin 
cassette was then cloned into pVQ Ad CMV KNpA for generation of replication deficient 
adenovirus. The fidelity of PCR products and cloning was confirmed by DNA sequencing.
Viruses
The recombinant adenoviruses (Ad-CMV-GFP, Ad-CMV-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, 
Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin and Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-
ferritin were packaged by Viraquest. The final titre was 4 × 1010 plaque-forming units 
(p.f.u.) per ml. AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP was purchased from UNC Viral 
Core.
Cell culture and in vitro studies
Human embryonic kidney (HEK 293T) cells (ATCC CRL-3216), mycoplasma testing and 
STR profiling for authentication performed by ATCC) were cultured in DMEM with 10% 
Stanley et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. HEK cells have been reported to be 
among cell lines that are commonly misidentified. We used HEK 293T cells obtained from 
and authenticated by ATCC. HEK 293T cells are readily transfected and express transgene 
products at high levels. Transfected cells were used to examine the sites of TRPV1 and GFP-
tagged ferritin expression, to generate stable cells to determine calcium responses to RF and 
magnetic stimulation and for electro-physiology studies. These studies were also performed 
in additional cell lines such as N38 (calcium responses), examined in vivo (protein 
expression) or in ex vivo slices (electrophysiology). Phoenix ecotropic packaging cells 
(Stanford University, no authentication or mycoplasma testing) were grown in DMEM with 
10% FBS (Gibco) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Embryonic mouse hypothalamic N38 cells 
(Cellutions Biosystems Inc., no authentication, mycoplasma testing performed by 
Cellultions Biosystems Inc.) were grown in DMEM with 10% FBS at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
Stable cell lines were produced by retroviral infection of N38 cells using the Phoenix 
system. Briefly, Phoenix eco cells (2 × 106 cells per 6-cm dish) were transfected with 
MSCV-hygro anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin or MSCV-hygro anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-
ferritin. After 24 h, the medium was replaced and the cells placed at 32 °C. Medium was 
aspirated after a further 24 h and spun to remove cell debris. The Phoenix cell supernatant 
was added to N38 cells (plated at 1 × 106 cells per 6-cm dish) using a 1:2 dilution in 
DMEM/10% FBS with polybrene (4 μg ml−1, Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were incubated at 
32 °C for a further 24 h before replacing the medium with DMEM/10% FBS. Selection 
medium was added 48 h after infection. Stably transfected N38 cells were maintained at 
32 °C.
For immunocytochemistry, electrophysiology, RF and magnet studies, stably transfected 
N38 cells or HEK cells were cultured on 12-mm cover glass (Fisher Scientific) coated with 
fibronectin (10 mg ml−1, Sigma). HEK cells were transfected with appropriate constructs 24 
h after plating using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Culture medium was replaced 18 h 
after transfection and holotransferrin (2 mg ml−1, Sigma) was added to the cells. Cells were 
studied 72–96 h after transfection or subculture.
Effect of RF or magnet on pCREB and c-Fos
24 h before the study, cells were placed in 1% FBS in optimem medium at 32 °C to ensure 
minimal activation of TRPV1 and calcium-dependent pathways. On the day of study, cells 
were incubated in 500 μl of calcium imaging buffer at room temperature (control) or in a RF 
field (31 mT) at room temperature. For magnet treatment, cells were treated with a static 
magnetic field (280 mT) for 5 s every 2 min for 1 h at room temperature. After 60 min, the 
cells were placed on ice, the supernatant removed and cells lysed with RIPA buffer (40 μl for 
western blot) or lysis buffer (100 μl Agilent Absolutely RNA microprep kit) and frozen at 
−80 °C until assay or RNA purification. Each study was repeated on three occasions each 
with four replicates. Control studies with N38 cells alone were performed on two occasions 
with four replicates.
Stanley et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Calcium imaging
TRPV1 is a non-selective cation channel with relatively high permeability to divalent 
cations, particularly calcium (Ca2+ > Mg2+ > Na+ ≈ K+ ≈ Cs+)27.
For studies examining the effects of RF (31 mT) or magnet (280 mT) with and without 
ruthenium red, stably transfected cells were washed three times in PBS then loaded with 
Fluo-4 3 μM (Invitrogen) in the presence of sulfinpyrazone 500 μM (Sigma) for 45–60 min 
at room temperature. Cells were washed again in PBS then incubated for 15–30 min in 
sulfinpyrazone in PBS. Cells were washed and then imaged in calcium imaging buffer. 
Imaging was performed using a Deltavision personal DV imaging system (Applied 
Precision) equipped with a custom-made ceramic lens. Images were acquired every 3 s for 3 
min. Cells were imaged without treatment (eight occasions), before and during RF treatment 
(nine occasions), before and during application of a neodymium magnet (for 45 s, three 
occasions) or before and after treatment with 200 μM 2-APB (two occasions). Imaging was 
repeated in the presence of ruthenium red (100 μM) (two occasions for each condition). 
Images were analysed using ImageJ software.
For studies to examine the effects of increasing RF or magnet field strength, to assess the 
effects of short RF treatment (10 s) on calcium responses and to examine the kinetics of the 
calcium response, cells were loaded with FluoForte 20 μM (Enzo Life Sciences) in the 
presence of Pluronic F-127 (0.02% vol/vol) and sulfinpyrazone 500 μM. Cells were washed 
and then imaged in calcium imaging buffer. Imaging was performed as above with images 
acquired every second for 1 min. Cells were imaged without treatment (four occasions), 
before and during RF treatment at 31, 27 and 23 mT (four occasions each), before and 
during application of a neodymium magnet at 280 or 130mT (magnet 2 mm or 5 mm from 
the cells, respectively, four occasions each) and before, during and after 10 s treatment with 
RF (31 mT) (four occasions). Images were analysed using ImageJ software.
Multiphoton chloride imaging
Stably transfected cells were washed with Krebs-HEPES buffer three times then loaded with 
MQAE (5 mM, Invitrogen) for 60 min at room temperature. The cells were washed with 
Krebs-HEPES buffer and then incubated in buffer for 15 min before imaging. Imaging was 
performed using LSM 510 NLO inverted multiphoton and confocal system (Zeiss) using a 
40× objective with two photon excitation at 750 nm. Cells were imaged without treatment 
(four occasions), before and during application of a neodymium magnet (280 mT) for 20 s 
(on six occasions), before and after treatment with 200 μM 2-APB (two occasions). Imaging 
was repeated in the presence of ruthenium red (100 μM) (two occasions for each condition). 
Images were analysed using ImageJ software.
Immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry
Immunocytochemistry (ICC) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were used to detect 
expression of TRPV1, GFP and Flag-tagged ferritin, to localize c-Fos expression and to 
quantify apoptosis in cells and tissue. Cells were washed twice in PBS and then fixed for 15 
min in 2% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Services). Tissue was fixed in 10% 
formalin (Sigma) at 4 °C overnight and 40-μm sections cut on a vibrating microtome. Fixed 
Stanley et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells or tissue sections were washed then incubated for 1 h in blocking buffer (3% BSA 
(Sigma) and 2% goat serum (Sigma) in PBS with 0.1% Triton-X (Sigma)). Cells and tissues 
were then incubated in primary antibody (rabbit anti-TRPV1 1:500 (AB95541, Chemicon), 
mouse anti-Flag 1:1,000 (Flag-tag mouse monoclonal antibody #F3165, Sigma28), chicken 
anti-GFP 1:1,000 (ab139701, Abcam), rabbit anti-activated-caspase-3 1:250 (G7481, 
Promega1) or rabbit anti-c-Fos 1:5,000 (PC38, Calbiochem2)) diluted in blocking buffer 
overnight at 4 °C. Cells or tissue were washed three times in PBS/0.1% Triton-X before 
incubation in secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit 594 (A1012) or goat anti-rabbit 488 
(A11008), goat anti-chicken 488 (A11039), goat anti-mouse 350 (A11045), all 1:1,000) 
diluted in blocking buffer for 2 h. To stain for cell membrane, Alexa 594 conjugated to 
wheat germ agglutinin (Invitrogen, 5 μg ml−1) was included in the blocking buffer with 
secondary antibodies. The cells or tissue were washed a further three times in PBS/0.1% 
Triton-X before mounting using Fluoromount (Southern Biotech).
Images were acquired using confocal microscopy (LSM 510 laser scanning confocal 
microscope; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.). Confocal fluorescence images were acquired 
on a scanning laser microscope using a 20×/0.70 NA objective or 100×/1.4 NA objective. To 
quantify GFP-positive and activated-caspase-3-positive cells, a 1,280 μm section of the brain 
with the injection site taken as the centre was imaged by taking tiled, serial stack images 
covering a depth of 40 μm every 320 μm. Quantification of GFP and activated-caspase-3 
immunostaining was performed by an investigator blinded to the treatment group using 
Imaris 3D quantification software. The image analysis software calculated the number of 
GFP- or activated-caspase-3-positive cells per volume by thresholding immunoreactivity 
above background levels. Confocal images to examine co-localization of TRPV1, GFP and 
Flag-tagged ferritin were acquired with a 40× objective.
Immuno-electron microscopy and electron microscopy
Mouse brains were perfused by 4% PFA and sectioned at 50 μm by vibratome (Leica VT 
100S). The sections were blocked by 4% BSA and 0.15% saponin in 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 
7.4) for 2 h at room temperature, then incubated with anti-GFP (1:1,000) (#1020, Aves Lab 
Inc.29) overnight at 4 °C, followed by biotinylated anti-chicken incubation (1:1,000, Vector 
Laboratories, Inc.), with Nanogold streptavidin (1:100, Nanoprobes), and treated with 
GoldEhance EM (#2114 Nanoprobes). Negative control was done with the same procedure, 
except for omitting the primary antibody incubation. The tissue sections underwent fixation 
with 2% glutaraldehyde in sodium cacodylate buffer, light osmication (0.5% osmium 
tetroxide) for 15 min and en bloc staining with 1% uranium acetate for 30 min. 
Subsequently tissues were dehydrated through an ethanol series followed by incubation with 
Eponate12 (Ted Pella Inc.) The samples were embedded in the resin and polymerized at 
60 °C for 48 h. Ultrathin (70 nm) sections were cut and examined under a JEOL JEM 
100CX transmission electron microscope in the electron microscopy centre in The 
Rockefeller University.
For double immuno-electron microscopy studies, HEK cells with stable expression of 
TRPV1 without fixation were subjected to high-pressure freezing (Leica EMPAC2) and 
freeze substitution in 0.2% uranyl acetate in 95% acetone and 5% water. Subsequently they 
Stanley et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were embedded in Lowicryl HM20 at −40 °C and cut into ultrathin sections. They were 
incubated with 4% BSA and 0.15% saponin, 0.15% cold fish skin gelatin in 20 mM TBS 
(pH 7.4) for 2 h at room temperature, a mixture of anti-GFP raised in chicken (1:300) (Aves 
Lab Inc.) and anti-TRPV1 raised in rabbit (1:300) (EMD Millipore Corp) overnight at 4 °C. 
Antigen–antibody complexes were recognized by biotinylated anti-chicken antibody and 
streptavidin tagged with 5 nm colloidal gold (1:20, Nanoprobes), or anti-rabbit tagged with 
12 nm colloidal gold (Jackson Immuno Research Lab Inc.) for 2 h at room temperature.
Electron microscopy was used to demonstrate ferritin in transfected HEK cells. Cells were 
fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde/2.5% glutaraldehyde/0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4, for 15 
min before pelleting and further fixation for 1 h. Cells were then treated with 1% osmium 
tetroxide (1 h, on ice) and 0.5% uranyl acetate (1 h) before dehydration with graded ethanol 
and treatment with propylene oxide (2 × 15 min). The cells were infiltrated with 50% EPON 
epoxy resin (Miller-Stephenson) and 50% propylene oxide overnight then 100% EPON (2 × 
2 h) before curing at 60 °C for 2 days. Blocks were cut with a diamond knife on a Leica 
UltracutE and ultrathin (~70 nm) sections were collected on uncoated 200-mesh grids and 
stained with uranium and lead. Grids were viewed with a Tecnai SpiritBT Transmission 
Electron Microscope (FEI) at 80 kV and pictures were taken with Gatan 895 ULTRASCAN 
Digital Camera in the electron microscopy centre in The Rockefeller University.
Electrophysiology
Cell culture—Whole-cell voltage clamp recordings were made at room temperature at −60 
mV from cultured HEK cells and N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin or 
anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin construct. Neurons expressing GFP were visualized 
using epifluorescence on an upright Zeiss Axioskop 2FS Plus microscope equipped with a 
Hamamatsu CCD camera. External solution contained (in mM): 140 NaCl, 2.8 KCl, 2 
CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 1 HEPES, 10 glucose, pH 7.4. Patch pipettes pulled from borosilicate glass 
(World Precision Instruments) had tip resistances of 5–10 MΩ and were filled with K-
gluconate internal containing (in mM): 135 potassium gluconate, 4 KCl, 0.05 EGTA, 10 
HEPES, 4 MgATP, 10 Na-phosphocreatine, pH adjusted to 7.3 with KOH, 290 OSM unless 
otherwise stated, in which case a CsCl internal solution was used containing (in mM):125 
CsCl, 10 HEPES, 10 EGTA, 4 MgATP, 0.5 CaCl2, 2-APB (200 μM) was prepared from a 10 
mM DMSO stock and was perfused though the bath when stated. I–V relationships were 
obtained by measuring current responses to increasing 5-mV steps in the presence of 200 
μM 2-APB. Cells were held at −60mV. Magnetic activation was applied by bringing a 
permanent magnet within 500 μm of the recorded cell for 5 s with a micromanipulator. 
Recordings were acquired with an Axopatch 200B amplifier, filtered to 2 kHz and digitized 
at 10 kHz (pClamp10 software, Molecular Devices). Data were analysed using IGOR Pro 
(Wavemetrics) and NeuroMatic (http://www.neuromatic.thinkrandom.com/). Series 
resistance was monitored and not compensated for. If there was more than a 20% change in 
series resistance the recording was excluded.
Slice electrophysiology—Glucokinase–Cre Rosa–tdTomato, injected with Ad-anti-GFP-
TRPV1/GFP-ferritin or Ad-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin in the VMH were deeply 
anaesthetized with isoflurane before decapitation and removal of the entire brain to be 
Stanley et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 immediately submerged in ice-cold ‘slicing’ solution containing (in mM): 85 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 
0.5 CaCl2, 4 MgCl2, 25 NaHCO3, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 64 sucrose, 25 glucose and 0.02 D-2-
amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid (D-AP5, Tocris Bioscience). This was bubbled with 95% 
O2 and 5% CO2, pH 7.4. Coronal hypothalamic slices (200 μm) were made with a moving 
blade microtome (VT1000S, Leica). The slices were kept at 32 °C for 40 min in recording 
solution containing (in mM) 125 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 10 glucose, 2 
CaCl2 and 1 MgCl2, pH 7.4 when bubbled with 95% O2 and 5% CO2. Whole-cell current-
clamp patch-clamp recordings were made at room temperature from neurons in the VMH 
expressing both tdTomato indicating GK–Cre expression and GFP indicating expression of 
the anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin or anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin construct. 
Neurons were visualized and recorded from as described above. In order to observe neuronal 
activation, neurons were hyperpolarized to below threshold.
Baseline characteristic for hypothalamic neurons are as follows. Mean series resistance for 
neurons expressing the construct was 18.4 ±1.1 MΩ (n = 37) and did not differ significantly 
from hypothalamic neurons that did not express the construct (18.0 ±1, n = 7). The mean 
capacitance was 5.1 ± 0.55 pF and did not differ significantly from neurons not expressing 
the channel (6.7 ± 0.8) The mean resting membrane potential in naive hypothalamic neurons 
was −48.21 ±4.7 mV (n =15) and in cells expressing the construct before manipulation was 
−52 ±1.9 mV (n =37), P > 0.5. Input resistances did not significantly differ in hypothalamic 
neurons; control neuron (without construct expression) =703 ±128 MΩ (n = 13), wild-type 
channel neuron = 555 ± 110 MΩ (n = 7), mutant neuron =866 ±220 MΩ (n =14).
Animals and in vivo studies
Male and female C57Bl6 mice (8–9-weeks-old, Jackson Laboratories), Nestin cre (8–9-
weeks-old, Jackson Labs), Rosa lox-stop-lox tdTomato (8–10-weeks-old, Jackson Labs) and 
GK-cre (8–16-weeks-old) mice were used and housed under controlled light conditions (12 
h light/12 h dark) and temperature (22 °C), single-caged, and fed ad libitum on standard 
mouse chow. Animal care and experimental procedures were performed with the approval of 
the Animal Care and Use Committee of Rockefeller University (protocols 12561 and 14712) 
under established guidelines. In all cases, mice were randomized according to body weight. 
The investigator was not blinded to the treatment group. The sample size required was 
estimated to be n = 8–10 per group on the basis of previous studies examining the effects of 
RF treatment on gene expression and protein release. No statistical methods were used to 
predetermine sample size.
All surgeries were performed under aseptic conditions. Mice were anaesthetized using 1.5% 
isoflurane and the top of the head was shaved then cleaned with 70% ethanol. An incision 
was made in the midline and small craniotomies were made using a dental drill.
Study 1—Wild-type mice underwent stereotacic injection into the striatum (coordinates: +1 
mm AP, +2.3 mm ML, −3.3 mm DV) with Ad-CMV-GFP or Ad-CMV-anti-GFP-TRPV1/
GFP-ferritin (4 × 108 p.f.u. per injection) over 10 min. The needle remained in position for a 
further 5 min before being withdrawn. Mice also received a lateral ventricle injection of iron 
dextran (4 μl, coordinates: −0.4 mm AP, +1.2 mm ML, −2.0 mm DV). After 1 week or 4 
Stanley et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 weeks, mice injected with Ad-CMV-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin were randomized to RF 
or no RF treatment (n = 4 per time point and per treatment group). All mice treated with Ad-
CMV-GFP were treated with RF (n = 4 per time point). Mice were anaesthetized with 
tribromoethanol (200 mg kg−1) and after 15 min mice were treated with RF (Ad-GFP and 
Ad-CMV-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, RF-treated group) for 30 min by placing in the RF 
solenoid. Ad-CMV-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, untreated group were anaesthetized and 
15 min after the induction of anaesthesia were placed in the RF solenoid without power for 
30 min. One hour after the being placed in the solenoid, mice were perfused, brains removed 
and tissue processed for GFP and activated-caspase-3 immuno-staining as described above.
Unilateral striatal injections were used to test our construct primarily because we thought 
that either basal activity in the absence of RF or significant toxicity and apoptosis would 
result in motor changes that are readily detectable. In addition, striatum does not express 
TRPV1 and we wanted to ensure any effect was the result of expressing our construct rather 
than a result of an effect of endogenous TRPV1. Finally, for RF treatment the mice needed 
to be anaesthetized and in pilot studies we found that anaesthetics often led to high levels of 
c-Fos activation in many central nervous system regions but not in the striatum. Thus, to 
minimize the possibility that the anaesthetic was contributing to either toxicity or non-
specific staining, we used striatal injections in addition to assessing the VMH.
Study 2—Nestin–Cre or wild-type mice received striatal injections of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-
TRPV1/GFP-ferritin (4 × 108 p.f.u. per injection) and ICV iron dextran as described above. 
After 1 week, mice were anaesthetized, treated with RF for 30 min and perfused after 1 h as 
described above. Tissue was processed for GFP and c-Fos immunostaining as described 
above.
Study 3—Glucokinase–Cre or wild-type mice were anaesthetized with isofluorane and 
underwent stereotactic injection of iron dextran into the lateral ventricle (as above) and 
unilateral injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin (4 × 108 p.f.u. per injection) 
into the VMH (coordinates: −0.9 mm AP, +0.32 mm ML and −5.48 mm DV). We performed 
unilateral injections of Cre-dependent adenovirus into the dorsomedial VMH of 
glucokinase–Cre mice. Construct expression was seen in this subdivision and in additional 
subdivisions of the VMH on the injected side. Virus expression is Cre-dependent as we did 
not see GFP expression in wild-type mice. After 1 week, half the mice in each group were 
studied using RF stimulation (31 mT) and half remained untreated. One week later, the 
previously treated mice were assessed without RF treatment and the previously untreated 
mice were treated with RF. Tail vein samples for blood glucose were taken at −5, 0, 5, 10, 
20, 30, 45, 60 and 90 min after the onset of RF treatment. After an additional week, mice 
were treated as described above but at 60 min after the onset of RF treatment, mice were 
killed and blood taken by cardiac puncture for hormone assessment and hepatic tissue was 
harvested and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for later assessment of gluconeogenic enzyme 
expression. Brains were fixed, sectioned and stained with GFP to check injection placement. 
Mice with injection sites outside the VMH were excluded from the analysis.
Study 4—GK–Cre mice were anaesthetized and injected with AAV-EF1a-DIO-
hChR2(H134R)-EYFP (1 μl) into the VMH using the coordinates above. An optic fibre was 
Stanley et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 then placed 200 nm above the injection site and fixed with adhesive cement followed by 
dental cement then the scalp was sealed back using tissue adhesive. After 4 weeks, half the 
mice were treated with 473 nm laser stimulation (5 Hz, 15 ms pulse width) for 30 min and 
half were attached to the optical cable but without light stimulation. One week later, the 
previously treated mice were assessed without light treatment and the previously untreated 
mice were treated with light. Tail vein samples for blood glucose were taken at −5, 0, 5, 10, 
20, 30, 45, 60 and 90 min after the onset of light treatment. Brains were fixed, sectioned and 
stained with GFP to check injection placement. Mice with injection sites outside the VMH 
were excluded from the analysis.
Study 5—GK–Cre or wild-type mice were anaesthetized with isofluorane and underwent 
stereotactic injection of iron dextran into the lateral ventricle (as above) and Ad-FLEX-anti-
GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin (4 × 108 p.f.u. per injection) into the VMH. After one week, 
half the mice in each group were studied using RF stimulation (31 mT) and half remained 
untreated. One week later, the previously treated mice were assessed without RF treatment 
and the previously untreated mice were treated with RF. Tail vein samples for blood glucose 
were taken at −5, 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60 and 90 min after the onset of RF treatment. After a 
further 3 days, mice were anaesthetized and at time 0 were treated with 2-deoxyglucose (400 
mg kg−1, intraperitoneal) then treated with RF for 45 min. Tail vein samples for blood 
glucose were taken at −5, 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60 and 90 min after the onset of RF treatment. 
One week later, mice were anaesthetized and RF treated (31 mT) and at 60 min after the 
onset of RF treatment, they were killed and blood taken by cardiac puncture for hormone 
assessment and hepatic tissue was harvested and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for later 
assessment of gluconeogenic enzyme expression. Brains were fixed, sectioned and stained 
with GFP to check injection placement. Mice with injection sites outside the VMH were 
excluded from the analysis.
Study 6—GK–Cre or wild-type mice were anaesthetized with isofluorane and underwent 
stereotactic injection of iron dextran into the lateral ventricle and Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-
TRPV1/GFP-ferritin (4 × 108 p.f.u. per injection) into the VMH (as above). After one week, 
mice were placed in a plastic chamber in a low-strength magnetic field (<0.005 T) for a 15 
min acclimation period, then half the mice were moved to a high-strength magnetic field 
(>0.5 T) for 30 min and half remained in the low-strength field. After 30 min, all mice were 
placed in a low-strength field for a further 30 min. Tail vein samples for blood glucose were 
taken at −5, 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min after the acclimation period. One week later, groups 
were crossed so the mice previously treated with high-strength magnetic field were treated 
with low-strength field and mice previously treated with low-strength field were treated with 
high-strength magnetic field. At the end of the study, mice were sacrificed and perfused. 
Brains were fixed, sectioned and stained with GFP to check injection placement. Mice with 
injection sites outside the VMH were excluded from the analysis.
Study 7—GK–Cre or wild-type mice were injected and recovered as in study 6. After one 
week, the effect of magnetic field stimulation on food intake was examined. After a 4-h fast, 
mice were acclimated to their chamber for 20 min then food intake was assessed after 20 
min at low-strength magnetic field. Food intake was then measured for 20 min with half the 
Stanley et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice in high-strength magnetic field (0.5–1 T) and half at low-strength magnetic field. Food 
intake was measure for a final 20 min period at low-strength magnetic field. One week later, 
the groups were crossed so mice previously treated with high-strength magnetic field were 
treated with low-strength field and mice previously treated with low-strength field were 
treated with high-strength magnetic field. At the end of the study, mice were sacrificed and 
perfused. Brains were fixed, sectioned and stained with GFP to check injection placement. 
Mice with injection sites outside the VMH were excluded from the analysis.
Study 8—GK–Cre mice underwent stereotactic injection as described in study 3. After one 
week, mice were anaesthetized and 15 min after the induction of anaesthesia were placed in 
the RF solenoid without power for 30 min (no RF treatment). After 3 days, the mice were 
divided into two equal groups, one group was treated with a field strength of 27 mT for 30 
min and the other group with a field strength of 23 mT for 30 min. After a further 4 days, the 
treatment groups were reversed. A week later, the first group of mice were treated with RF 
(31 mT) for 20 min and the second group of mice with RF (31 mT) for 10 min. After a 
further 3 days, the treatment groups were reversed. Tail vein samples for blood glucose were 
taken at −5, 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60 and 90 min after the onset of RF treatment for all studies. 
After an additional week, half the mice were treated with RF (31 mT) for 30 min and half 
the mice remained untreated. At 60 min after the onset of RF treatment, mice were sacrificed 
and brains were fixed, sectioned and stained for GFP and activated-caspase-3 to assess 
apoptosis in the VMH.
Study 9—GK–Cre mice underwent stereotactic injection as described in study 3. After 2 
weeks, the effects of lower magnetic strength (0.2–0.5 mT) on food intake were assessed. 
After a 4-h fast, mice were acclimated to their chamber for 20 min and then food intake was 
assessed after 20 min at low-strength magnetic field followed by food intake measurement 
after 20 min treatment with a 0.2–0.5 T magnetic field. Food intake was measure for a final 
20 min period at low-strength magnetic field. At the end of the study, mice were sacrificed 
and perfused. Brains were fixed, sectioned and stained with GFP to check injection 
placement.
Study 10—GK–Cre mice underwent stereotactic injection as described in study 5 but with 
bilateral injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin into the VMH. After a 
week, food intake was assessed in response to low-strength magnetic field treatment. After a 
4-h fast, mice were acclimated to their chamber for 20 min and then food intake was 
measured for three periods of 20 min at low field strength. One week later, the study was 
repeated with a 20 min acclimation period then food intake was measured for mice were 
treated with high strength magnetic field (0.5–1 T) for 20 min. Food intake was measured 
for a further two 20-min periods at low magnetic field strength. At the end of the study, mice 
were sacrificed and perfused. Brains were fixed, sectioned and stained with GFP to check 
injection placement.
Study 11—GK–Cre/Rosa–tdTomato mice underwent stereotactic surgery as described in 
study 3. After one week, three mice were anaesthetized and 15 min after the induction of 
anaesthesia were treated with RF (31 mT) for 30 min. At 60 min after the onset of RF 
Stanley et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment, mice were sacrificed. Brains from three mice were fixed, sectioned and stained 
for GFP and c-Fos. The fourth mouse was perfused without RF treatment and the brain was 
used for immune-electron microscopy.
Study 12—GK–Cre (n = 4) underwent stereotactic surgery as described in study 3. After 
one week, the mice were anaesthetized and perfused. Brains were fixed, sectioned and 
stained for GFP. Tiled z-stack images were taken using confocal microscopy (20× objective) 
and images analysed using Imaris 3D quantification software. The image analysis software 
calculated the number of GFP-positive cells per volume by thresholding immunoreactivity 
above background levels. Using this method the average number of GFP-positive cells was 
2,436 ± 841 cells per brain.
Assays
Blood glucose was determined using a Breeze 2 glucometer (Bayer). Blood was spun for 10 
min and plasma was collected. Plasma levels of insulin (Mercodia) and glucagon (Mercodia) 
were determined by ELISA.
Western blot
Protein was isolated by lysis in RIPA buffer and centrifugation at 16,000 r.p.m., 4 °C for 5 
min before addition of 4× Laemelli buffer. Samples were denatured for 5 min at 95 °C and 
frozen at −20 °C before assay. Samples (15 μl) were run on a 4–15% gel then transferred to 
PVDF membrane. Membranes were blocked (3% dried milk in TBST buffer) for 1 h at room 
temperature then incubated in primary antibody (pCREB (Ser133) (87G3) rabbit 
monoclonal antibody (1:1,000) or β-actin rabbit antibody (1:1,000), Cell Signaling) in TBST 
overnight at 4 °C. Membranes were washed three times in TBST then incubated in 
secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP, 1:5,000, Santa Cruz) in TBST for 2 h at 
room temperature. The membrane was washed a further five times then developed in 
substrate for 5 min (Supersignal West Femto maximum sensitivity substrate, Life 
Technologies) and imaged (C-DiGit blot scanner, Licor). The pCREB density signal was 
corrected for any variation in protein loading by dividing by the density signal for the 
housekeeping gene, actin.
Real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated by homogenizing tissue in TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) or cells in 
buffer RLT and purifying the RNA using Absolutely RNA microprep kit (Agilent). 
Complimentary DNA was synthesized using QIAGEN omniscript RT kit. Real-time PCR 
was performed using the TaqMan system (Applied Biosystems) according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol.
Statistics
Data over 2 s.d. outside the mean were excluded from further analysis as determined before 
the studies. All data were tested for Gaussian distribution and variance. Data with normal 
distribution and similar variance were analysed for statistical significance using two-tailed, 
unpaired Student’s t-tests unless otherwise indicated. Data with normal variation and 
Stanley et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 unequal variance were analysed by two-tailed Welch’s t-tests. Paired data were analysed by 
paired t-tests. Data with more than two groups were analysed by one-way ANOVA with 
post-hoc Tukey’s analysis for parametric data. Data which were not normally distributed 
were analysed by two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-tests or Kruskal–Wallis tests with post-hoc 
Dunn’s correction. P values are as indicated. Time course data were analysed by two-way 
ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons or repeated measures two-way ANOVA with 
Sidak’s multiple comparisons for paired data. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. unless 
otherwise stated.
Stanley et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Remote neural activation using RF in vivo
a, Construct design for Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin. CMV, cytomegalovirus 
promoter. loxN and lox2272 are orthogonal recombination sites. b, Immunostaining for 
eGFP in GK–Cre/tdTomato mice demonstrates expression of the GFP in glucokinase 
neurons after VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin. Scale bars, 100 
μm; 50 μm in magnification panel. c, Co-localization between eGFP and c-Fos after RF 
treatment of Nestin–Cre (upper panels) or wild-type (middle panels) mice injected with Ad-
FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin into the striatum (Scale bar, 80 μm) and of GK–Cre 
Stanley et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice injected with Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin into the VMH (lower panels). 
Scale bar, 100 μm. Quantification of GFP (d) and activated-caspase-3 (e) immunostaining in 
mice following injection of Ad-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin or Ad-GFP (1 μl) into the 
striatum of wild-type (WT) mice or injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin 
into the VMH of GK–Cre mice. In all cases, columns represent mean and error bars indicate 
s.e.m. Data were analysed by Kruskal–Wallis test with post-hoc Dunn’s correction. n = 4 
mice per group.
Extended Data Figure 2. Effects of RF field strength and treatment duration in vivo
a, Effect of increasing RF field strength on the change in blood glucose and b, the 
cumulative change in blood glucose in GK–Cre mice with VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-
GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin. Data are shown as mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were 
analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. * or # indicates P <0.05, 
** or ## indicates P <0.01, *** or ### indicates P <0.001, **** or #### indicates P < 
0.0001 between treated and untreated groups. c, Effect of increasing RF treatment duration 
on the change in blood glucose and d, the cumulative change in blood glucose in GK–Cre 
mice with VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin. Data are shown as 
Stanley et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s 
multiple comparisons. * or # indicates P <0.05, ** or ## indicates P <0.01, *** or ### 
indicates P <0.001, **** or #### indicates P < 0.0001 between treated and untreated groups.
Extended Data Figure 3. Neural activation in GK–Cre and wild-type mice in vivo
a, RF treatment of GK–Cre mice expressing anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin in the VMH 
significantly increases blood glucose compared to no RF treatment (n = 13). Data points 
indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with 
Sidak’s multiple comparisons. *P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001, ****P < 0.0001 between 
Stanley et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treated and untreated groups. b, Effects of RF treatment of wild-type mice injected with anti-
GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin in the VMH on change in blood glucose with time (n = 10). Data 
points indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA 
with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. c, Effects of RF treatment of wild-type mice injected 
with anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin in the VMH on blood glucose with time (n = 10). Data 
points indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA 
with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. d, Effect of RF treatment on cumulative change in blood 
glucose over the course of the study in wild-type mice with VMH injection of anti-GFP–
TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (n =10). Columns represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data 
were analysed by two-tailed, paired Student’s t-test.
Extended Data Figure 4. Remote neural activation of N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/
GFP–ferritin in vitro
Stanley et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Calcium imaging of RF-treated N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin 
showing the percentage of cells responding (>20% increase in fluorescence) to no treatment, 
RF or 2-APB (n = 8, 9 or 2 occasions, respectively), b, the increase in fluorescent signal 
with RF or 2-APB treatment that is inhibited by Ruthenium red and c, the response time (to 
reach 20% increase in fluorescence) to RF treatment (n = 38 cells). Data are represented as 
mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s 
multiple comparison test. *P <0.05 vs. untreated, **P < 0.01 vs. untreated, ***P < 0.001 vs. 
untreated and ****P < 0.0001 vs. untreated. d, Calcium imaging in stably transfected N38 
cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin demonstrates a field-strength-dependent 
increase in the percentage of responding cells (>20% increase in fluorescence) and e, the 
fluorescent signal in compared to untreated cells; n = 10, 33, 10 and 4 cells, respectively. 
Data points indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way 
ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. *P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001 ****P < 
0.0001 between treated and untreated groups. f, RF treatment of stably transfected N38 cells 
expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin for 10 s significantly increases the percentage of 
responding cells and g, the fluorescent signal compared to untreated cells (n = 10 and 11 
cells for treated vs. untreated). Data points indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data 
were analysed by unpaired Student’s t-test. *P <0.05, ***P < 0.001 between treated and 
untreated groups. h, RF treatment of N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin 
significantly increases pCREB levels and i, relative c-fos (also known as Fos) gene 
expression (measured by quantitative PCR) and these increases are blocked by Ruthenium 
red (30 and 100 μM). In all cases, columns represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. 
Data were analysed by one way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey’s analysis test. Columns 
marked with **, #, a or & indicate P <0.01. Each study was repeated on three occasions each 
with four replicates.
Stanley et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. RF treatment of N38 cells in vitro
a, Immunohistochemistry for Flag-tagged ferritin chimaera (red), TRPV1 (blue) and GFP 
(green) in N38 cells infected with adenovirus expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin. 
Scale bar represents 20 μm. b, Immunohistochemistry for cell membrane (Alexa-594-
conjugated wheat germ agglutinin, red), GFP–ferritin (green) and TRPV1 (blue) in 
transfected cells showing close proximity of TRPV1 and GFP–ferritin with the cell 
membrane (upper panels; scale bar, 4 μm) and separate from the cell membrane (lower 
panels; scale bar, 8 μm). c, Immunoelectron microscopy images from hypothalamic sections 
taken from GK–Cre mice with unilateral expression of anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin 
showing immunogold-labelled GFP-tagged ferritin (i; centre and right) from the injected 
side which are absent on the non-injected side (left, scale bar represents 500 nm and 250 nm 
for magnification). d, Electron micrograph of iron-loaded ferritin in HEK cells transfected 
Stanley et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with ferritin construct alone. e, Double immunoelectron microscopy images from stably 
transfected HEK cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin showing co-localization of 
GFP and TRPV1 at vesicle membranes and at the cell membrane with magnification on the 
right. Immuno-electron microscopy for GFP and TRPV1 are marked by 5 nm and 12 nm 
colloidal gold respectively. Scale bar represents 500 nm.
Extended Data Figure 6. RF treatment of N38 cells in vitro
a, RF treatment of N38 cells does not alter pCREB levels. In all cases, columns represent 
mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Each study was repeated on three occasions each with 
four replicates. b, RF treatment significantly increases relative c-fos gene expression. In all 
cases, columns represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-
tailed, unpaired Student’s t-test. *P < 0.05. Each study was repeated on three occasions each 
with four replicates.
Stanley et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Neural inhibition in GK–Cre and wild-type mice in vivo
a, Effect of RF treatment of N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin on 
pCREB levels and c-Fos expression. In all cases, columns represent mean and error bars 
indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-test. *P < 0.05. Each 
study was repeated on three occasions each with four replicates. b, RF treatment of GK–Cre 
mice expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin in the VMH significantly decreases 
blood glucose compared to no RF treatment (n = 13). Data points indicate mean and error 
bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple 
comparisons. *P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001, ****P < 0.0001 between treated and 
Stanley et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 untreated groups. c, RF treatment significantly decreases cumulative changes in blood 
glucose over the course of the study in GK–Cre mice with VMH expression of anti-GFP–
TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin (n =6) compared to wild-type mice with VMH injection of Ad-
FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin (n = 9) after administration of 2-deoxyglucose to 
mimic hypoglycaemia. Data are shown as mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were 
analysed by unpaired Student’s t-test. *P <0.05. d, Effects of RF treatment of wild-type 
mice injected with anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin in the VMH on changes in blood 
glucose with time (n =8). Data points indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were 
analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. e, Effects of RF treatment 
of wild-type mice injected with anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin in the VMH on 
cumulative changes in blood glucose with time (n = 8). Data points indicate mean and error 
bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple 
comparisons. f, Effect of RF treatment on blood glucose over the course of the study in wild-
type mice with VMH injection of anti-GFP– TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (n = 8). Data points 
represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with 
Sidak’s multiple comparisons.
Stanley et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Magnetic field activation and inhibition of N38 cells in vitro
Electrophysiological recordings of cultured cells. a, Current trace from a whole-cell voltage-
clamp recording (−60 mV) showing the inward current induced with TRPV1 agonist (2-APB 
200 μM) in a HEK cell expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (representative of four 
recordings). b, Current trace from a whole-cell voltage-clamp recording (−60 mV) induced 
with a magnetic field (5 s) showing the inward current in stably transfected N38 cells 
expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (representative of 15 recordings). c, Bar chart 
summary of mean peak current induced by TRPV1 agonist 2-APB (200 nM, n = 4) and 
magnet activation in cultured cells (HEK, n =10; N38, n = 15) expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/
Stanley et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GFP–ferritin. Columns represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Electrophysiological 
recordings of cultured cells. d, Current trace from a whole-cell voltage-clamp recording 
(−60 mV) showing the outward current induced with TRPV1 agonist (2-APB 200 μM) in a 
HEK cell expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin (representative of 19 recordings). 
e, Current trace from a whole-cell voltage-clamp recording (−60 mV) induced with a 
magnetic field (5 s) showing the outward current stably transfected N38 cells expressing 
anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin (representative of 12 recordings). f, Bar chart summary 
of mean peak current induced by TRPV1 agonist 2-APB (200 nM, n = 19) and magnet 
activation in cultured cells (HEK, n =3; N38, n = 12) expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/
GFP–ferritin. Columns represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. g, Summary data 
showing magnet-induced changes in membrane potential and firing rate for GK VMH 
neurons expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin and h, anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–
ferritin. Open circles denote values for individual cells and closed circles denote mean 
values. Error bars denote s.e.m. For neurons expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin 
mean membrane potential significantly increased from −70.20 ±7.246 mV to −53.81 ±5.349 
mV (n =14, P <0.0001, paired t-test). Mean firing rate significantly increased from 0.7084 
± 0.2311 to 3.063 ±0.5632 ( n =16, P <0.002, paired t-test; includes data from 2 cell-
attached recordings). For neurons expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin mean 
membrane potential significantly decreased from −51.2 ±5.519 mV to −55.93 ±5.636 mV (n 
=6, P = 0.03; Wilcoxon matched pairs). Mean firing rate significantly decreased from 2.868 
± 1.177 to 0.3167 ±0.2685 (n =6, P = 0.03; Wilcoxon matched pairs). Current–voltage 
relationship of 2-APB-activated TRPV1mutant channels shows limited cation permeability 
and increased chloride permeability. i, Limited conductance of TRPV1mutant channels 
compared to wild-type when the predominant internal ions are K+ and gluconate. j, 
Conductance is increased for anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant channels when the predominant 
internal ions are Cs and Cl (isometrical chloride). k, Calcium imaging in stably transfected 
N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin demonstrates a magnetic field-
strength-dependent increase in the percentage of responding cells (>20% increase in 
fluorescence) (n = 7, 10, 3 imaging studies, respectively) and l, the fluorescent signal 
compared to untreated cells (n = 11, 48, 12 cells, respectively). The effects of magnet 
stimulation were blocked by Ruthenium red. Data points indicate mean and error bars 
indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. 
*P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001 ****P <0.0001 between treated and untreated groups. m, 
Histogram representing the response time (to reach 20% increase in fluorescence) in 
magnet-treated N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (n =68 cells). n, 
Treatment of N38 cells expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin with magnet (n = 6 
occasions) significantly increased the percentage of responding cells (i) (>10% decrease in 
chloride indicator, MQAE, fluorescence) compared to untreated cells (n =4 occasions) and 
o, the reduction in MQAE signal. Ruthenium red reduced both the percentage of responding 
cells and the magnitude of the response (n =2 occasions). In all cases, columns represent 
mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s 
multiple comparison test. Columns marked with **P < 0.01 vs. untreated, columns marked 
with ****P < 0.001 vs. untreated.
Stanley et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Non-invasive neural activation in vivo using a static magnetic field
a, The effect of moderate (0.2–0.5 T) magnetic field strength on food intake in GK–Cre 
mice expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin in the VMH (n = 5). Columns represent 
mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. b, Schema of the crossover protocol used to examine the 
effect of neural activation with a static magnetic field on blood glucose. c, Magnetic field 
treatment of GK–Cre mice following VMH injection of anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin 
significantly increases blood glucose compared to no magnet treatment (n = 6). Data points 
indicate mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with 
Sidak’s multiple comparisons. d, Magnet treatment significantly increases cumulative 
change in blood glucose over the course of the study in GK–Cre mice with VMH injection 
of anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (n = 6) compared to the same mice without magnet 
treatment. In all cases, columns represent mean and error bars indicate s.e.m. Data were 
Stanley et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysed by Wilcoxon matched pairs signed rank test. *P <0.05. e, Effects of static magnetic 
field treatment of wild-type mice with VMH injection of anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin on 
changes in blood glucose with time (n = 6). Data points indicate mean and error bars 
indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. 
f, Effects of static magnetic field treatment of wild-type mice injected with anti-GFP–
TRPV1/GFP–ferritin in the VMH on food intake (n =6). Data points indicate mean and error 
bars indicate s.e.m. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple 
comparisons.
Extended Data Figure 10. Baseline characteristics in mice expressing anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–
ferritin or anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin
a, Non-fasting blood glucose did not differ significantly between wild-type, GK–Cre and 
GK–Cre mice injected with anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin or anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/
GFP–ferritin (n = 10, 8, 8 and 5, respectively). Columns represent mean and error bars 
Stanley et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 indicate s.e.m. b, Food intake following a 4 h fast did not differ significantly between wild-
type, GK–Cre and GK–Cre mice injected with anti-GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin or anti-GFP–
TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin (n = 6, 4, 6 and 13 respectively). *P < 0.05. Columns represent 
mean and error bars indicate s.e.m.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank A. North, P. Ariel and K. Thomas for help with confocal imaging, D. Acehan and K. Uryu 
for performing EM studies and S. Korres for assistance with the manuscript. This work was funded by Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, the JPB Foundation, the National Institutes of Health (GM095654 and MH105941) and a 
Rensselaer Fellowship (to J.S.) under an NIH predoctoral training grant (GM067545). Support for this project was 
provided by a grant from the Robertson Foundation.
References
1. Stanley SA, Sauer J, Kane RS, Dordick JS, Friedman JM. Remote regulation of glucose homeostasis 
in mice using genetically encoded nanoparticles. Nature Med. 2015; 21:92–98. [PubMed: 
25501906] 
2. Stanley S, et al. Profiling of glucose-sensing neurons reveals that GHRH neurons are activated by 
hypoglycemia. Cell Metab. 2013; 18:596–607. [PubMed: 24093682] 
3. Davies R, Nakajima S, White N. Enhancement of feeding produced by stimulation of the 
ventromedial hypothalamus. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1974; 86:414–419. [PubMed: 4592493] 
4. Goto Y, Carpenter RG, Berelowitz M, Frohman LA. Effect of ventromedial hypothalamic lesions on 
the secretion of somatostatin, insulin, and glucagon by the perfused rat pancreas. Metabolism. 1980; 
29:986–990. [PubMed: 6106879] 
5. Shimazu T, Fukuda A, Ban T. Reciprocal influences of the ventromedial and lateral hypothalamic 
nuclei on blood glucose level and liver glycogen content. Nature. 1966; 210:1178–1179. [PubMed: 
5964188] 
6. Schwartz MW, et al. Cooperation between brain and islet in glucose homeostasis and diabetes. 
Nature. 2013; 503:59–66. [PubMed: 24201279] 
7. Kang L, Routh VH, Kuzhikandathil EV, Gaspers LD, Levin BE. Physiological and molecular 
characteristics of rat hypothalamic ventromedial nucleus glucosensing neurons. Diabetes. 2004; 
53:549–559. [PubMed: 14988237] 
8. Aponte Y, Atasoy D, Sternson SM. AGRP neurons are sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior 
rapidly and without training. Nature Neurosci. 2011; 14:351–355. [PubMed: 21209617] 
9. Anthony TE, et al. Control of stress-induced persistent anxiety by an extra-amygdala 
septohypothalamic circuit. Cell. 2014; 156:522–536. [PubMed: 24485458] 
10. Nordlie RC, Foster JD, Lange AJ. Regulation of glucose production by the liver. Annu Rev Nutr. 
1999; 19:379–406. [PubMed: 10448530] 
11. Bito H, Deisseroth K, Tsien RW. CREB phosphorylation and dephosphorylation: a Ca2+- and 
stimulus duration-dependent switch for hippocampal gene expression. Cell. 1996; 87:1203–1214. 
[PubMed: 8980227] 
12. Ghosh A, Ginty DD, Bading H, Greenberg ME. Calcium regulation of gene expression in neuronal 
cells. J Neurobiol. 1994; 25:294–303. [PubMed: 7910846] 
13. Lozano AM, Eltahawy H. How does DBS work? Suppl Clin Neurophysiol. 2004; 57:733–736. 
[PubMed: 16106676] 
14. Kühn FJ, Knop G, Luckhoff A. The transmembrane segment S6 determines cation versus anion 
selectivity of TRPM2 and TRPM8. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:27598–27609. [PubMed: 17604279] 
15. Landau BR, Lubs HA. Animal responses to 2-deoxy-d-glucose administration. Proc Soc Exp Biol 
Med. 1958; 99:124–127. [PubMed: 13601788] 
16. Kim T, Moore D, Fussenegger M. Genetically programmed superparamagnetic behavior of 
mammalian cells. J Biotechnol. 2012; 162:237–245. [PubMed: 23036923] 
Stanley et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Rowland NE, Bellush LL, Carlton J. Metabolic and neurochemical correlates of glucoprivic 
feeding. Brain Res Bull. 1985; 14:617–624. [PubMed: 3896410] 
18. Evans ML, et al. Hypothalamic ATP-sensitive K+ channels play a key role in sensing 
hypoglycemia and triggering counter regulatory epinephrine and glucagon responses. Diabetes. 
2004; 53:2542–2551. [PubMed: 15448082] 
19. Murphy BA, Fakira KA, Song Z, Beuve A, Routh VH. AMP-activated protein kinase and nitric 
oxide regulate the glucose sensitivity of ventromedial hypothalamic glucose-inhibited neurons. 
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009; 297:C750–C758. [PubMed: 19570894] 
20. Horvath TL, et al. Brain uncoupling protein 2: uncoupled neuronal mitochondria predict thermal 
synapses in homeostatic centers. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:10417–10427. [PubMed: 10575039] 
21. Chen R, Romero G, Christiansen MG, Mohr A, Anikeeva P. Wireless magnetothermal deep brain 
stimulation. Science. 2015; 347:1477–1480. [PubMed: 25765068] 
22. Stanley SA, et al. Radio-wave heating of iron oxide nanoparticles can regulate plasma glucose in 
mice. Science. 2012; 336:604–608. [PubMed: 22556257] 
23. Armbruster BN, Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, Roth BL. Evolving the lock to fit the key to create a 
family of G protein-coupled receptors potently activated by an inert ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2007; 104:5163–5168. [PubMed: 17360345] 
24. Alexander GM, et al. Remote control of neuronal activity in transgenic mice expressing evolved G 
protein-coupled receptors. Neuron. 2009; 63:27–39. [PubMed: 19607790] 
25. Nawaratne V, et al. New insights into the function of M4 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors gained 
using a novel allosteric modulator and a DREADD (designer receptor exclusively activated by a 
designer drug). Mol Pharmacol. 2008; 74:1119–1131. [PubMed: 18628403] 
26. Falowski SM, Ooi YC, Bakay RA. Long-term evaluation of changes in operative technique and 
hardware-related complications with deep brain stimulation. Neuromodulation. 2015; 18:670–677. 
[PubMed: 26245633] 
27. Caterina MJ, et al. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. 
Nature. 1997; 389:816–824. [PubMed: 9349813] 
28. Wu SY, Chiang CM. Expression and purification of epitope-tagged multisubunit protein complexes 
from mammalian cells. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2002; Chapter 16(Unit 16.13)
29. Nakaya N, Sultana A, Lee HS, Tomarev SI. Olfactomedin 1 interacts with the Nogo A receptor 
complex to regulate axon growth. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:37171–37184. [PubMed: 22923615] 
Stanley et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Remote neural activation in vivo using radio waves
a, Schema of activation system. b, c, Change in blood glucose (b) and cumulative blood 
glucose (c) with RF treatment of GK–Cre mice (VMH injection Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-
TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, n = 13; VMH injection rAAV-FLEX-ChR2, n = 4). Values are mean ± 
s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test; *P <0.05, **P <0.01, 
****P <0.0001. ChR2, channelrhodopsin 2. d, RF treatment of GK–Cre (GK) or wild-type 
(WT) mice with VMH Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin on plasma insulin (GK–
Cre, n = 8; wild type, n = 8), glucagon (GK–Cre, n = 6; wild type, n = 11) and hepatic 
glucose-6-phosphatase expression (GK–Cre, n = 12; wild type, n = 9). Values are mean 
±s.e.m.; two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t-test or Mann–Whitney U-test; *P <0.05, ***P < 
0.005. WT nanoV1 refers to wild-type mice with VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-
TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, Gck NanoV1 indicates GK-Cre mice with VMH injection of Ad-
FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin.
Stanley et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Remote neural inhibition in vitro and in vivo using radio waves
a, Amino acid sequences for TRPM2 and TPRV1 S6 regions indicating substitution site. b, 
Responding cells (>10% decrease in MQAE (N-(ethoxycarbonylmethyl)-6-
methoxyquinolinium bromide) fluorescence) with 2-APB (4 replicates, 20 cells) alone or 
with ruthenium red (2 replicates, 6 cells). Values are mean ±s.e.m. Kruskal–Wallis with 
Dunn’s multiple comparison test; **P <0.01, ****P <0.001 versus untreated. c, Construct 
for Cre-dependent expression of anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/GFP–ferritin. d, e, Change in blood 
glucose (d) and cumulative blood glucose (e) with RF treatment of GK–Cre mice with VMH 
injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin (n = 13). Values are mean ± 
s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test and two-tailed Student’s t-
test; *P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001, ****P <0.0001. f, RF treatment of GK–Cre (GK) or 
wild-type (WT) mice with VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin 
on plasma insulin (GK–Cre, n = 9; wild type, n =9), glucagon (GK–Cre, n = 5; wild type, n 
= 9) and hepatic glucose-6-phosphatase expression (GK–Cre, n = 4; wild type, n = 8). 
Values are mean ±s.e.m.; two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t-test; *P <0.05. g, RF treatment of 
GK–Cre (n = 6) or wild-type (n = 9) mice with VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-
TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin on blood glucose with 2-deoxyglucose treatment. Values are 
mean ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test; *P <0.05, ***P 
<0.001.
Stanley et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Remote neural modulation in vitro and in vivo using magnetic field
a, b, Representative whole-cell current-clamp trace with magnet treatment (5 s) from GK–
Cre VMH neurons in ex vivo slices expressing (a) anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin and (b) 
anti-GFP-TRPV1Mutant/GFP-ferritin (of 14 and 6 recordings, respectively). c, d, Magnet 
treatment on membrane potential (c) and firing rate (d) in VMH neurons expressing anti-
GFP–TRPV1/GFP–ferritin (n =14 and 16 cells, respectively) and anti-GFP–TRPV1mutant/
GFP–ferritin (n =6 and 6 cells, respectively). Values are mean ± s.e.m.; Wilcoxon matched 
pairs. e, f, Schema (e) and protocol (f) for magnetic field neural activation to examine food 
intake. g, Food intake with magnet treatment in GK–Cre mice (VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-
anti-GFP-TRPV1/GFP-ferritin, n =6; VMH injection of rAAV-FLEX-ChR2, n = 4). No 
replicates. Values are mean ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons; 
**P <0.01. h, Protocol for magnetic field neural inhibition to examine food intake. i, Food 
intake with magnet treatment in GK–Cre mice with VMH injection of Ad-FLEX-anti-GFP-
TRPV1mutant/GFP-ferritin (n =6). No replicates. Values are mean ± s.e.m.; two-way ANOVA 
with Sidak’s multiple comparisons; *P <0.05.
Stanley et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
