 Recognition of DHN-melanin by MelLec, is required for 
protective immunity to Aspergillus
Mark H.T. Stappers#a, Alexandra E. Clark#a, Vishukumar Aimanianda#b, Stefan Bidulaa, 
Delyth M. Reida, Patawee Asamaphana, Sarah E. Hardisona, Ivy M. Dambuzaa, Isabel 
Valsecchib, Bernhard Kerschera, Anthony Platoa, Carol A. Wallacea, Raif Yuecelc, Betty 
Hebeckera, Maria da Glória Teixeira Sousaa, Cristina Cunhad, Yan Liue, Ten Feizie, Axel A. 
Brakhagef, Kyung J. Kwon-Chungg, Neil A. R. Gowa, Matteo Zandaa,$, Monica Pirasa,$, 
Chiara Zanatoa,$, Martin Jaegerh, Mihai G. Neteah, Frank L. van de Veerdonkh, João F. 
Lacerdai, António Campos Jr.j, Agostinho Carvalhod, Janet A. Willmenta, Jean-Paul 
Latgéb,k, and Gordon D. Browna,*
aMedical Research Council Centre for Medical Mycology at the University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen 
Fungal Group, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK $Institute of Medical Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK bUnité des Aspergillus, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France cIain Fraser Cytometry Centre, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK dLife and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of 
Medicine, University of Minho, and ICVS/3B’s - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/
Guimarães, Portugal eGlycosciences Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, London, W12 0NN, UK fDepartment of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Leibniz 
Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology (HKI), Friedrich Schiller University, 
D-07745 Jena, Germany gMolecular Microbiology Section, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and 
Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America hDepartment of Internal Medicine, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands iInstituto de Medicina Molecular, 
Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; and Serviço de Hematologia e 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to GDB (gordon.brown@abdn.ac.uk).
kPresent address: State Key Laboratory, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Author contributions
GDB, JPL and JAW conceived and designed the study and guided the interpretation of the results. AEC, MHTS, and VA performed 
the majority of the experiments and data analysis. SB, DMR, PA, SEH, ID, BK, AP, JAW, CC, MGS, CW, RY, BH conducted 
experiments and data analysis. YL and TF performed the glycan microarray experiments and data analysis. MJ, MN, FLvdV, JFL, AC 
Jr and AC provided the human patient data and analysis. AAB, KJK, IV, MP, CZ, MZ and NG provided critical conceptual input and 
reagents. GDB drafted the manuscript. All authors discussed the results, edited and approved the draft and final versions of the 
manuscript.
Author Information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2018 March 15; 555(7696): 382–386. doi:10.1038/nature25974.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Transplantação de Medula, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal jServiço de Transplantação 
de Medula Óssea (STMO), Instituto Português de Oncologia do Porto, Porto, Portugal
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Our resistance to infection is critically dependent upon the ability of pattern recognition receptors 
to recognise microbial invasion and induce protective immune responses. One such family of 
receptors are the C-type lectins, which play central roles in antifungal immunity1. These receptors 
activate key effector mechanisms upon recognition of conserved fungal cell wall carbohydrates. 
However, several other immunologically active fungal ligands have been described, including 
melanin2,3, whose mechanisms of recognition remain largely undefined. Here we identify a C-
type lectin receptor, Melanin sensing C-type Lectin receptor (MelLec), that plays an essential role 
in antifungal immunity through recognition of the naphthalene-diol unit of 1,8-
dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN)-melanin. MelLec recognises melanin in conidial spores of 
Aspergillus fumigatus, as well as other DHN-melanised fungi and is ubiquitously expressed by 
CD31+ endothelial cells in mice. MelLec is also expressed by a sub-population of these cells in 
mice that co-express EpCAM and which were detected only in the lung and liver. In mouse 
models, MelLec was required for protection against disseminated infection with A. fumigatus. In 
humans, MelLec is also expressed by myeloid cells, and we identified a single nucleotide 
polymorphism of this receptor that negatively affected myeloid inflammatory responses and 
significantly increased susceptibility of stem-cell transplant recipients to disseminated Aspergillus 
infections. Thus MelLec is a receptor recognising an immunologically active component 
commonly found on fungi and plays an essential role in protective antifungal immunity in both 
mice and humans.
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) involved in antifungal immunity belong primarily to the 
Dectin-1 and Dectin-2 clusters of receptors located near the Natural Killer Gene complex 
(NKC)1. To identify new CLRs within these clusters that recognise fungi, we generated 
soluble protein chimeras consisting of the C-type lectin-like domain (CTLD) of murine 
receptors fused to the Fc region of human IgG14 (Fc-MelLec, Extended data Fig. 1a) and 
used these chimeric proteins as probes to screen for recognition of fungi by flow cytometry. 
Using this approach, we identified the CTLD of MelLec (CLEC1A5, Extended data Fig. 
1b), which bound Aspergillus fumigatus conidia (Fig. 1a). MelLec did not recognise other 
commonly occurring fungi, such as Candida albicans yeast and filamentous cells or 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeasts, but did recognise other melanised fungal species, 
including Fonsecaea pedrosoi and Cladosporium cladosporioides (Fig. 1b, Extended data 
Fig. 1c,e). This indicated that the ligand recognised by MelLec was not ubiquitously found 
in all fungi, unlike the ligands of other anti-fungal CLRs, such as Dectin-11. Notably, the 
ability of MelLec to recognise A. fumigatus was restricted to conidia, and recognition was 
rapidly lost following conidial swelling, germination and hyphal growth (Fig. 1a,c and 
Extended data Fig. 2d). Visualising binding to conidia by immunofluorescence microscopy, 
revealed a punctate staining pattern suggestive of restricted distribution of the moiety 
recognised by MelLec on these spores (Fig. 1c). Conidia are covered by a hydrophobic 
Stappers et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 rodlet layer which masks underlying cell wall components from immune recognition6. 
Removal of this rodlet layer with NaOH6 led to increased and uniform binding of MelLec 
over the entire conidial surface (Fig. 1d). Indeed, uniform staining was obtained with rodlet-
deficient conidia (ΔrodA), confirming that the ligand of MelLec was being partially masked 
by the surface hydrophobin layer (Fig. 1e). Recognition of A. fumigatus conidia by MelLec 
could also be demonstrated in a cellular context using MelLec reporter cells4 (Extended data 
Fig. 1f).
All characterised CLRs involved in fungal sensing recognise carbohydrate components of 
the fungal cell wall1. Consistent with this possibility, MelLec ligand(s) were detected by 
ELISA primarily in the alkali insoluble fraction of the A. fumigatus conidial cell wall whose 
primary constituents are carbohydrates (β-glucan, chitin and galactomannan) and melanin7 
(Fig. 2a). Using the Fc-MelLec fusion protein as a probe to screen a neoglycolipid-based 
glycan microarray containing almost 500 structures, including oligosaccharides derived from 
glucans and chitin that are found in fungi8 (Supplementary Table 1), did not reveal any 
carbohydrate ligands for MelLec, unlike the C-type lectin Langerin, which was used as a 
control (Extended data Fig. 2). We then used Fc-MelLec to screen A. fumigatus conidia that 
were mutated in a variety of relevant cell-wall biosynthetic pathways by flow cytometry and 
immunofluorescence microscopy. Using this approach, we found that the ability of Fc-
MelLec to detect conidia was lost specifically in the ΔpksP mutant, which is deficient in the 
ability to synthesise heptaketide naphthopyrone (YWA1), the first intermediate of the DHN-
melanin biosynthetic pathway2,9 (Fig. 2b and Extended data Fig. 3a). We could also confirm 
loss of the MelLec ligand on ΔrodAΔpksP double mutant conidia10, lacking both melanin 
and the hydrophobin layer, using flow cytometry, immunofluorescence microscopy and our 
MelLec reporter cells (Extended data Fig. 1f and 3b,c). Loss of pksP did not affect conidial 
recognition by Fc-Dectin-1 (Extended data Fig. 3c,d). Moreover, we could demonstrate a 
direct interaction of MelLec with A. fumigatus melanin ghosts (Extended data Fig. 3e). 
MelLec specifically recognised DHN-melanin, since this receptor did not detect melanin 
synthesised via other pathways, such as the L-Dopa pathway that is present in Cryptococcus 
neoformans, and in mammalian B16 melanoma cells11 (Extended data Fig. 3f). In addition 
to A. fumigatus, we could show that MelLec recognised other pigmented fungi that 
produced DHN-melanin, including F. pedrosoi and C. cladosporioides12 (Fig. 1b and 
Extended data Fig. 1e).
Although its tertiary structure is unresolved11, the biosynthetic pathway of DHN-melanin is 
well characterised in A. fumigatus3. To determine at which stage MelLec ligand(s) were 
being synthesised in the pathway, we screened mutants of A. fumigatus that were deficient 
in the enzymes catalysing each step, using Fc-MelLec and immunofluorescence microscopy, 
or ELISA. We confirmed that MelLec recognition was lost in ΔpksP conidia, however, 
MelLec recognition was unaffected in mutants deficient in all other stages of the DHN-
melanin biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 2c and Extended data Fig. 4a). Using a pre-adsorption 
assay, we could show that recognition of wild-type conidia could be inhibited by pre-treating 
Fc-MelLec with Δayg1 ghosts (defective in the second biosynthetic step, where MelLec 
ligands are still present), but not ghosts of ΔpksP (the first biosynthetic step, which lack 
MelLec ligands; Extended data Fig. 4b). We purified heptaketide naphthopyrone (YWA1) 
from Δayg1 conidia13 and demonstrated that pre-treatment with this compound inhibited the 
Stappers et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 ability of Fc-MelLec, but not Fc-Dectin-1, to detect ΔrodA or NaOH-treated wild-type 
conidia (Extended data Fig. 4c-d). Moreover, we could demonstrate a direct interaction of 
MelLec with purified YWA1 (Fig. 2d) by ELISA. This suggested that the ability of MelLec 
to recognise this compound, as well as all the other melanin biosynthetic intermediates (Fig. 
2c), was through recognition of the conserved naphthalene-diol unit, present in each of the 
intermediates. Indeed, we were able to show direct interaction of MelLec with 1,8-
dihydronaphthalene (1,8-DHN), another upstream intermediate of the melanin biosynthetic 
pathway, by ELISA (Extended data Fig. 4e). Moreover, the structural isomers 1,2-DHN and 
1,4-DHN, which contain the naphthalene-diol unit but are not melanin intermediates, were 
also recognised by MelLec (Extended data Fig. 4f). This suggests that the position of at least 
one of the hydroxyls (on carbon 2, 4 or 8) on the naphthalene-diol unit is not important for 
MelLec recognition. In contrast, naphthalene and 1-naphthol were not recognised by MelLec 
(Extended data Fig. 4g), indicating that the ligand of MelLec is a naphthalene-diol.
CLRs involved in fungal recognition are predominantly expressed by myeloid cells and are 
detectable in most tissues1. By RT-PCR, MelLec was widely expressed in mice, with the 
highest levels of transcript detected in the lung (Extended data Fig. 5a). To explore 
expression at a cellular level, we generated monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) by immunising 
rats with murine Fc-MelLec and then screening ELISA positive hybridoma supernatants by 
flow cytometry on NIH3T3 cells transfected to express full length HA-tagged murine 
MelLec. In these transfected cells, we found MelLec to be expressed as a glycosylated 
monomer at the cell surface, demonstrating that this CLR did not require an adaptor for 
surface expression1,14 (Extended data Fig. 5b,c). Although able to sense melanin (Fig. 2 
and Extended data Fig. 1f), expression of MelLec did not confer the ability to capture A. 
fumigatus conidia to the cell surface of the transfected NIH3T3 cells (Extended data Fig. 
5d).
Two mAbs (18E4 and 14C8) specific for MelLec were chosen for further characterisation of 
receptor expression on murine cells and tissues (Extended data Fig. 5e). Surprisingly, 
MelLec was not expressed by any murine myeloid cell population examined (either ex-vivo 
or in vitro bone marrow-derived), even following microbial stimulation, nor was this 
receptor expressed by cells in peripheral blood, bone marrow, lymphoid tissues or on 
platelets15 (Extended data Fig. 6a-c). Given the abundance of transcript, we next examined 
disaggregated lung tissue by flow cytometry which revealed a distinct population of cells 
that expressed MelLec (Fig. 3a). Histological visualisation of MelLec expression by 
immunofluorescence microscopy revealed broad punctate expression of this receptor 
throughout the lung tissue (Fig. 3b and Extended data Fig. 7m). A similar punctate staining 
pattern was also observed in the MelLec-expressing transfected NIH3T3 fibroblasts 
(Extended data Fig. 7a). By flow cytometry, we could show that MelLec expression was 
restricted to non-hematopoietic (CD45-) cells (Fig. 3c and Extended data Fig. 7b). Further 
characterisation of these cells revealed that MelLec was expressed by CD31+ EpCAM- 
endothelial cells (Fig. 3d). Expression of MelLec was also detected on CD31+ endothelial 
cells in all other tissues tested, including the liver, heart, kidney and small intestine 
(Extended data Fig. 7c-f). However, we also detected a unique population of CD31+ cells 
which co-expressed EpCAM+, but only in the lung and liver, and these cells also expressed 
Stappers et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 MelLec (Fig. 3d and Extended data Fig. 7c). MelLec was not expressed on EpCAM+ cells in 
other tissues, including the epidermis (Extended data Fig. 7g-j).
To gain insight into the physiological functions of MelLec, we generated mice deficient in 
this receptor using a conventional gene-targeting vector (Extended data Fig. 7k,l). Exons 1–5 
of the gene encoding MelLec (CLEC1A) were deleted, which correspond to the cytoplasmic 
tail, transmembrane, stalk and part of the CRD region. Flow cytometry of disaggregated lung 
tissue, and immunofluorescence microscopy of whole lung, confirmed the lack of MelLec 
expression in cells from knockout mice (Fig. 3b and Extended data Fig. 7m,n). The MelLec-
knockout mice were viable, had no gross abnormalities and had normal peripheral leucocyte 
counts (Supplementary Table 2). Intratracheal (i.t.) challenge of immunocompetent MelLec-
knockout mice with wild type A. fumigatus conidia revealed no alterations in survival or 
other physiological parameters, including weight (Extended data Fig. 8a). However, a 
significantly reduced influx of neutrophils into the lungs of MelLec-knockout mice could be 
detected shortly (4 h) after i.t. challenge (Extended data Fig. 8b-d), before the conidia had 
germinated16. This alteration in cellular recruitment in the MelLec-knockout mice was 
associated with alterations in selected neutrophil-related cytokines, including KC and GM-
CSF (Extended data Fig. 8e). Similar alteration in neutrophil recruitment was also observed 
in the MelLec-knockout mice following i.t. challenge with melanin ghosts of A. fumigatus 
(Extended data Fig. 8f). There were no alterations in other pulmonary myeloid populations 
following conidial challenge and by 24 h post challenge the difference in neutrophil influx 
was no longer apparent (Extended data Fig. 8g-h). There were also no changes in expression 
of MelLec during infection with A. fumigatus (Extended data Fig. 8i). Notably, the early 
neutrophil recruitment defect in the MelLec-knockout mice was lost upon i.t. challenge with 
ΔpksP conidia, which lack melanin (Extended data Fig. 8j,k).
We next examined the role of MelLec during infections in corticosteroid-treated mice, to 
model the effects of immunosuppression17. Under these conditions, loss of MelLec did not 
significantly alter susceptibility to infection (Extended data Fig. 9a). However, when we 
intravenously (i.v.) infected immunocompetent MelLec-knockout mice with A. fumigatus 
conidia17, we observed substantially increased susceptibility in these mice compared to 
wild-type animals (Fig. 4a). This increased susceptibility was associated with increased 
fungal burdens in several tissues, including the brain (Fig. 4b and Extended data Fig. 9b-d), 
as well as alterations in inflammatory responses (Fig. 4c). IL-17 responses were 
unaffected18. Consistent with a role in melanin recognition, there was no difference in 
susceptibility or fungal burdens between wild-type and MelLec-knockout mice following 
systemic infection with ΔpksP conidia (Fig. 4d and Extended data Fig. 9e).
Our murine data suggested that MelLec plays a key role in immunity to disseminated 
infections with Aspergillus. Therefore, we next explored the role of this receptor in humans. 
In humans, MelLec has previously been detected on endothelial cells19,20 but also myeloid 
cells5,18–20, and we could demonstrate that a human MelLec Fc fusion protein (Fc-
hMelLec) recognises DHN-melanised conidia (Extended data Fig. 10a). A common 
missense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the coding region of CLEC1A 
(rs2306894, global MAF=0.3295) results in an amino acid change (Gly26Ala) in the 
cytoplasmic tail of hMelLec. Strikingly, we found a highly significant association between 
Stappers et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 this SNP and the risk of aspergillosis in stem-cell transplant recipients (Fig. 4e). This 
increased risk occurred when the variant was carried by the donor, but not when carried by 
the recipient. This suggests that in humans, the protective functions of MelLec are primarily 
mediated by myeloid cells. In our mouse model, there was no difference in resistance to 
infection upon adoptive transfer of MelLec-deficient bone-marrow into irradiated wild-type 
recipients (Extended data Fig. 10b).
To demonstrate a functional effect of the SNP in MelLec on myeloid cell function, we 
analysed the responses of monocyte-derived macrophages isolated from healthy genotyped 
donors. We found that macrophages from the individuals carrying this SNP produced 
significantly less IL-1β and IL-8 following in vitro stimulation with A. fumigatus conidia 
compared to controls (Fig. 4f), whereas there was no difference in response upon stimulation 
with LPS (Extended data Fig. 10c). We verified the inflammatory defect caused by this SNP 
in PBMCs isolated from an independent cohort (Extended data Fig. 10d). Moreover, using 
transduced RAW264.7 macrophages, we could directly demonstrate that this SNP results in 
an inflammatory defect upon stimulation with melanin-containing conidia (Extended data 
Fig. 10e).
In summary, melanin is considered a fungal virulence factor, providing protection against 
reactive oxygen species and inhibiting host cell phagocytosis, cytokine production and 
apoptosis3,10,21. Here we show that fungal DHN-melanin is also sensed by the host, 
through a Melanin sensing C-type Lectin receptor (MelLec) that plays a crucial role in 
controlling systemic A. fumigatus infection in both mice and humans. However, the data 
presented here, as well as early studies in rats18,22, show that the cellular expression of this 
receptor differs between species. Critically, we define a polymorphism of this receptor that, 
when present in donor cells, increases the susceptibility of stem-cell transplant recipients to 
disseminated aspergillosis. Our data therefore suggest that identifying donors carrying this 
SNP could significantly help reduce the incidence of this disease in transplant recipients. It 
is likely that MelLec will have an important role in immunity to other melanised fungi and 
black yeasts23, especially those that cause phaeohyphomycosis, mycetoma, and 
chromoblastomycosis.
Methods
Mice and fungal strains
C57BL/6 and MelLec-/- mice (8-12 weeks old) were obtained from the specific pathogen-
free facility at the University of Aberdeen. Animal experiments were performed using age-
matched female mice and conformed to the animal care and welfare protocols approved by 
UK Home Office (project license 70/8073) in compliance with all relevant local ethical 
regulations. MelLec-/- mice were generated commercially (TaconicArtemis) by conventional 
gene targeting in C57BL/6 embryonic stem cells as detailed in Extended data Fig. 7. Mice 
were randomly assigned to experimental or control groups, co-housed, and experiments 
were not blinded.
A. fumigatus isolate 13073 (American Type Culture Collection) and a clinical isolate CBS 
144-8924 were used as wild-type strains. Melanin mutant strains (Δalb1(pksP1), Δayg1, 
Stappers et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Δabr1, Δabr2, Δarp1 and Δarp2 in the B5233 wild-type background) were generated 
previously25. ΔrodA and ΔpksPΔrodA deletion mutants were generated as described9,10,24. 
Wild-type CBS110.4626 and CBS386.7526 strains with white conidia were also used, as 
indicated. All strains were maintained on 2% (w/v) malt-agar slants or potato dextrose agar 
in culture flasks; conidia were harvested and washed before use. Swollen/germinating 
morphotypes were obtained upon incubating conidia in Sabouraud liquid culture medium at 
37°C for different time intervals, as indicated.
Fc-MelLec production and immunolabelling
Soluble chimeric proteins containing the stalk and CTLD of murine and human MelLec 
fused to the mutated Fc portion of human IgG1 were generated essentially as described 
previously27. Briefly, the relevant portions of the MelLec encoding genes were amplified by 
PCR (mouse primers, GAATTCCTCGAGCTGGAGCTCTCCAGGTAC and 
AAGCTTTCTACCAGCTGTCTAAT; human primers; 
GGGATCCACTACTACCAGCTCTCC and 
TGGATATCTGTCACCTTCGCCTAATGTTTC), and cloned into the pSecTag2 expression 
vector (Invitrogen Life Technologies) containing the mutated form of human IgG128. 
Sequenced constructs were transfected into HEK293T cells using Fugene 6 (Promega), as 
per manufacturer’s instructions. Fusion proteins were purified from conditioned supernatants 
by chromatography on protein A Sepharose and dialysed against PBS. Fc-Dectin-127 and 
Fc-CLEC12b29 were generated similarly and used as controls.
For flow cytometry, fungi were incubated in 1-3% (w/v) BSA in PBS and Fc-proteins were 
added to a final concentration of 5 µg/mL. Following incubation at 4°C, fungal particles 
were washed in FACS buffer (0.5% (w/v) BSA and 2 mM EDTA in PBS), and bound Fc-
proteins detected with allophycocyanin (APC) or phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated donkey 
anti-human antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch), fixed in 1% (v/v) formaldehyde, and 
analysed.
For microscopy, para-formaldehyde fixed conidia were taken for immunolabelling6. To 
obtain NaOH treated conidia, 1 M NaOH was added to conidia and heated in a boiling water 
bath for 1 h, followed by centrifugation to collect conidia and extensive washing. Melanin 
ghosts were isolated from conidia (B5233 as well as melanin mutant strains) by harsh 
chemical treatments that degrade other cellular components and result in hollow spherical-
shaped melanin shells (“melanin ghosts”), as described before30. For immunostaining, 
fungal particles were incubated with 5 µg/mL Fc-MelLec in PBS containing 1% (w/v) BSA 
for 1 h. Following washing, bound Fc-MelLec was detected with fluorescein isothiocyanate 
(FITC)-labelled goat anti-human Fc-specific IgG (Sigma) in PBS containing 1% (w/v) BSA 
and washed with PBS-Tween. Conidia incubated with FITC-labelled anti-human Fc-specific 
IgG only were used as a negative control (data not shown). Labelled conidia were observed 
by fluorescence microscopy (Leica DMLB, USA).
In some experiments, Fc-proteins were pre-treated with either ghosts of melanin mutant 
strains, as indicated, or heptaketide naphthopyrone (YWA1), which was isolated from AYG1 
deletion mutant conidia as described previously13.
Stappers et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Monoclonal antibody production
The generation of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to MelLec was performed essentially as 
described previously31. In brief, Sprague Dawley rats were immunised with Fc-MelLec in 
Freund’s complete adjuvant. After a final intraperitoneal boost, without adjuvant, rat 
splenocytes were harvested and fused with Y3 myeloma cells, as described32. Hybridoma 
supernatants were screened by ELISA and positives were then tested by 
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry, as described below, against Fc-MelLec as well 
as MelLec transduced NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Two mAbs (14C8 and 18E4; both IgG1) were 
selected for further use. Where required, mAbs were biotinylated with Sulfo-NHS-LC Biotin 
(Pierce), as described by the manufacturer.
Cell culture and growth conditions
Cells were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in DMEM or RPMI medium supplemented with 
10% heat-inactivated foetal calf serum, 100 units/mL penicillin, 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin, 
and 2 mM L-glutamine. Phoenix ecotropic packaging cells (Plat-E) were maintained with 
the addition of 1 µg/mL puromycin and 10 µg/mL blasticidin (Life Technologies, Inc.).
NIH3T3 fibroblasts stably expressing full length murine or human MelLec were generated 
essentially as described for Dectin-133. Briefly, hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged MelLec was 
generated through PCR amplification (mouse primers, 
GGATCCACCATGCAGGCCAAATACAGCA and 
CTCGAGCTACTGGAGCTCTCCAGGTAC; human primers, 
AAAGGATCCACCATGCAGGCCAAGTACAGCAGCAC and 
AGCGTAATCCGGAACATCGTATGGGTACTCGAG) and subcloning into pFb-neo 
(Stratagene). Constructs were transfected into Plat-E retroviral packaging cell lines using 
Fugene 6 and retrovirus containing supernatants were used to transduce NIH3T3 fibroblasts 
in the presence of polybrene (Sigma). Stably transfected cells were selected using 600 
µg/mL G418 (ThermoFisher Inc.). The expression of the receptor was confirmed by flow 
cytometry and Western Blotting, using the anti-HA antibody (Covance). In some 
experiments, NIH3T3 cells expressing murine CLEC12A31 were used as controls.
ELISA assays
Alkali-insoluble and soluble fungal cell wall fractions were obtained as described 
previously34. For the ELISA, wells were coated overnight with 20-200 µg/mL of the cell 
wall fractions, melanin ghosts (in house generated), purified YWA1 (in house generated), 
1,8-DHN, 1,2-DHN, 1,4-DHN, naphthalene, 1-naphthol (all from Sigma) in 50 mM 
carbonate buffer pH 9.6, and then blocked with 1% BSA in PBS. Fc-MelLec (5 µg/mL) was 
added to the wells and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Following washing with PBS-
Tween-20 (0.5% (v/v)), peroxidase-conjugated human Fc-specific IgG (Sigma) was added to 
the wells and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Following further washing, 
quantification of Fc-MelLec binding was detected using ortho-phenylenediamine (OPD, 
Sigma) and H2O2 detection system (Merck). The reaction was stopped using 4% (v/v) 
H2SO4 and optical densities measured at 492 nm.
Stappers et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Expression analysis
Peripheral blood leucocytes, resident and thioglycolate-elicited inflammatory peritoneal 
cells, alveolar macrophages and bone marrow cells were isolated essentially as described 
previously35. For platelets, peripheral blood was collected in 3.8% (w/v) sodium citrate 
buffer and centrifuged at 200xg at 25°C. The supernatant, containing platelet rich plasma, 
was used for subsequent analysis. Bone marrow-derived macrophages or dendritic cells, 
generated using L929 conditioned medium or 20 ng/mL GM-CSF (R&D Systems), 
respectively, were prepared as described31. In some experiments, cells were stimulated with 
100 ng/mL lipopolysaccharide from Escherichia coli (Sigma).
Tissues isolated from mice were cut into small pieces and incubated for 30 min at 37°C with 
Liberase (Roche) and DNAse (Roche) in RPMI (Gibco), except for the small intestine which 
was incubated with Collagenase VIII (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were disaggregated using the 
gentleMACS™ Dissociator (Miltenyi), strained through 70 µm nylon cell strainers (Fisher 
Scientific) and collected by centrifugation. Red blood cells were removed using Pharm Lyse 
(BD Biosciences).
For flow cytometry, isolated cells were washed in FACS wash (PBS with 0.5% (w/v) BSA 
and 5-10 mM EDTA) containing anti-CD16/CD32 (Clone 2.4G2, prepared in house). The 
following antibodies (all from BD Biosciences, eBioscience or Abcam) were used for FACS 
analysis of cell surface antigen expression following standard methodology: anti-MelLec-
Biotin (described above), Streptavidin-PE-CF594 or Streptavidin-APC, anti-CD45.2-FITC 
(Clone 104), biotinylated anti-CD61 (clone 2C9.G2), anti-CD326-APC (EpCAM; Clone 
G8.8), anti-CD31-PE-Cyanine7 (PECAM-1; Clone 390), anti-Ly6G-APC (clone 1A8), anti-
CD11b-PE-Cy7 (clone M1/70), CD11c-PerCP-Cy5.5 (clone HL3), anti-Siglec-F-BV421 
(clone E50-2440), anti-CD45-PE-Cy7 (clone 30-F11), anti-CD11b-PerCP-Cy5.5 (clone 
M1/70), anti-CD11c-BV421 (clone HL3), anti-Siglec-F-PE (clone E50-2440) and anti-
F4/80-AF700 (clone CL:A3-1) and isotype control AFRC MAC 49 (ECACC 85060404; 
isotype for anti-MelLec). Cell viability was detected using the fixable viability dye 
eFluor-780 (eBioscience) in PBS, and the cells were fixed with 1% formaldehyde prior to 
acquisition on a LSRII, LSR Fortessa or FACS Calibur (Becton Dickinson). Data were 
analysed using FlowJo. All contour plots are made using 2% probability contouring with 
outliers.
For immunofluorescence microscopy 6 μm alcohol fixed frozen lung sections were treated 
with Liberase (Roche) for 4 min at room temperature. Sections were blocked with 2% (v/v) 
normal goat serum, and incubated with anti-MelLec or isotype control for 1 h followed by 
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rat (Invitrogen) for 30 min. Vectashield with DAPI or PI (Vector 
Laboratories Inc.) was used as a mountant for fluorescence, and slides were visualised using 
a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope. Visualisation of transfected NIH3T3 cells was 
performed similarly, except the cells were fixed in 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde prior to 
analysis.
Detection of MelLec in complementary DNA (cDNA) (Multiple Tissue Panels, Clontech) 
was performed using the Titanium Taq PCR kit (Clontech) with the following primers 
Stappers et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 CAGAGCCCAGGCACTCAGAGAATG and TGCGGGAGAGCCCTGTCCAAT. 
Expression of G3PDH was detected, as described previously36.
Murine infection models
For pulmonary infections, 105 (corticosteroid model) or 107 A. fumigatus ATCC 13073 
conidia were administered to the caudal oropharynx of anesthetized mice. In some 
experiments, mice were administered with 0.6 mg of the corticosteroid, triamcinolone 
acetonide37 (Bristol-Myers Squibb), on days -1, 1 and 3, relative to infection on day 0. For 
systemic infections, 106 A. fumigatus ATCC 13073 conidia were administered to the lateral 
tail vein of mice. Mice were culled when they had lost 30% body weight or had become 
moribund. Pulmonary cellular inflammation was assessed by flow cytometry following total 
lung enzymatic digest, as described above, or in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples, 
isolated with PBS containing 5 mM EDTA (Gibco). Organs were homogenized in PBS and 
used for determination of fungal burdens and levels of inflammatory cytokines. Fungal 
burdens were determined by serial dilution onto potato dextrose agar plates and normalised 
to organ weights. Cytokines were measured by ELISA (R&D DuoSet), as described by the 
manufacturer, and normalized to protein concentration. Bone marrow chimeric mice were 
generated as described previously38.
Glycan microarray analyses
Microarray analyses were carried out using the neoglycolipid (NGL)-based microarray 
system 39. Details of the glycan probe library, the generation of the microarrays, imaging 
and data analysis are in the Supplementary Glycan Microarray Document (Supplementary 
Table 3) in accordance with the MIRAGE (Minimum Information Required for A 
Glycomics Experiment) guidelines for reporting glycan microarray-based data. The 
microarray contained 496 lipid-linked glycan probes (Supplementary Table 1). Microarray 
analysis of the soluble Fc-MelLec was performed essentially as described8. In brief, after 
blocking arrayed slides with 0.04% (v/v) Blocker Casein (Pierce), 1% (w/v) bovine serum 
albumin (Sigma A8577) in HEPES buffered saline (5 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 
mM CaCl2), murine Fc-MelLec was precomplexed with biotinylated anti-human IgG 
(Vector) at a 1:3 ratio (w/w) before application onto the slides at a final concentration of 10 
μg/mL. FLAG-tagged human Langerin was included as a positive control. The protein and 
rat anti-FLAG antibody mAb L5 were kindly provided by Chae Gyu Park (Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul). For analysis, the FLAG-tagged Langerin, was precomplexed 
with the rat anti-FLAG at a 1:3 ratio (w/w) and applied onto the slides at a final 
concentration of 5 μg/mL, followed by biotinylated anti-rat IgG (Pierce) (5 μg/mL). To 
detect binding Alexa Fluor-647-labeled streptavidin from Molecular Probes was used at 1 
μg/mL. Data analysis and presentation was performed with dedicated glycan microarray 
software40.
Human studies
A total of 310 hematologic patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation at the Hospital of Santa Maria, Lisbon and Instituto Português de Oncologia 
(IPO), Porto, between 2009 and 2014 were enrolled in the study. The cases of invasive 
aspergillosis were identified and classified as “probable” or “proven” according to the 
Stappers et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 revised standard criteria from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer/Mycology Study Group (EORTC/MSG)41. Exclusion criteria included diagnosis of 
“possible” invasive aspergillosis, infection with invasive moulds other than Aspergillus spp. 
or history of pre-transplant mould infection. Study approval was obtained from the 
institutional review boards (SECVS-125/2014, HSM-632/14 and CES.26/015) and from the 
National Data Protection Commission (CNPD, 1950/2015) and was in compliance with all 
local relevant ethical regulations.
Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood of recipients and donors (before 
transplantation) using the QIAcube automated system (Qiagen) at the regional centres of the 
Instituto Português do Sangue e Transplantação (Portugal). Genotyping of the 
nonsynonymous rs2306894 SNP in the CLEC1A gene was performed using KASPar assays 
(LGC Genomics) according to manufacturer’s instructions in an Applied Biosystems 7500 
Fast real–time PCR system (Thermo Fisher). Genotyping sets included randomly selected 
replicates of previously typed samples, and agreement between original and duplicate 
samples was ≥99%.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy genotyped donors were enriched from 
buffy coats using Histopaque®-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich) and contaminating erythrocytes 
removed using Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (Sigma-Aldrich). Participants gave written 
informed consent prior to blood collection. Monocytes were isolated by positive selection 
using magnetically labelled CD14+ MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) on a MiniMACS 
separator and seeded at 106 cells/mL in 24-well plates for 7 days in RPMI-1640 medium 
supplemented with 10% (v/v) human serum and 20 ng/mL recombinant human granulocyte 
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF, Gibco). Acquisition of macrophage 
morphology was confirmed by phase contrast microscopy (Axiovert 135, Zeiss). For 
infection, macrophages were washed and then infected with live conidia of A. fumigatus 
strain A1163 at a ratio of 1:10 (cells/fungus) for 20 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cytokines in 
supernatants were detected using DuoSet ELISA systems (BioLegend), according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. At least two technical replicates were performed for each donor.
For the independent cohort, genomic DNA was isolated from EDTA venous blood of healthy 
Dutch volunteers using the Gentra Pure Gene Blood kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) 
and genotyped for CLEC1A polymorphisms using the Illumina Immunochip SNP array 
platform, described previously42. Participants gave written informed consent prior to blood 
collection. As the CLEC1A SNP of interest (exonic rs2306894) was not represented on the 
genotyping platform, two intronic polymorphisms (rs7972187 and rs3825300) were used as 
markers. Linkage analysis revealed complete linkage disequilibrium of these two 
polymorphisms with the SNP of interest43 (R2=1). 105 PBMCs isolated from genotyped 
donors were stimulated with 107 killed conidia/mL of the clinical isolate A. fumigatus 
V05-2744. After 24 h incubation in the presence of 10% human pooled serum at 37°C and 
5% CO2 supernatants were collected and IL-1β and IL-8 were measured by ELISA (R&D 
Systems, UK, and PeliKine, Sanquin, The Netherlands, respectively).
Stappers et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Statistical analysis
The probability of invasive aspergillosis resulting from CLEC1A rs2306894 SNP was 
analysed using the cumulative incidence method and compared using Gray's test45. 
Cumulative incidences were computed with the cmprsk package for R version 2.10.146, 
with censoring of data at the date of last follow–up visit and defining relapse and death as 
competing events. A period of 24 months after transplant was chosen to include all cases of 
fungal infection. Murine survival data were analysed with the log rank test using GraphPad 
Prism. No data was excluded.
In vitro and ex-vivo data were analysed using the GraphPad Prism software. Two-tailed 
student’s t-tests or Mann-Whitney U tests were used to determine statistical significance. All 
experiments were independently repeated at least once, unless otherwise indicated. Sample 
sizes of at least five per group were chosen as this would allow the detection of a 25% 
difference in the mean between experimental and control groups with a probability of 
greater than 95% (p < 0.05), assuming a standard deviation of around 15% and a minimum 
power value of 0.8.
Stappers et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended data Figure 1. MelLec recognises ligands on selected fungi and fungal morphotypes.
Cartoon representation of the structure of Fc-MelLec (a) and the full length receptor (b). 
Lollipop structures represent predicted glycosylation sites. c, Fc-MelLec or Fc-CLEC12b 
(Fc-control) staining of C. albicans hyphae, generated in RPMI with 10% foetal bovine 
serum for 90 min. Fungal particles were analysed by flow cytometry. Experiment was 
repeated independently twice, with similar results. d, Representative light microscope 
Stappers et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 images and immunofluorescence micrographs using Fc-MelLec or anti-galactomannan (GM, 
control) as probes to detect ligands on A. fumigatus mycelium. e, Representative light 
microscope and immunofluorescence micrographs showing the surface distribution of 
MelLec ligands on Cladosporium cladosporioides using Fc-MelLec as a probe. Lower 
panels show fungal cells following treatment with 1M NaOH. d-e Experiments were 
repeated 3 times independently, with similar results. f, IL-2 production by MelLec-
expressing BWZ reporter cells following stimulation by αMelLec antibody crosslinking or 
with ΔrodA (1:1, 5:1, 10:1) or ΔrodAΔpksP (5:1, 10:1) A. fumigatus conidia, as indicated. 
Values shown are mean ± SD. Experiment was repeated 3 times independently, with similar 
results.
Stappers et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data Figure 2. Glycan microarray analyses of murine Fc-MelLec and human 
Langerin.
These 496 lipid-linked probes are arranged according to their backbone sequences as 
annotated in the coloured panels below the figure. Lac, lactose; LacNAc, N-
acetyllactosamine; LNnT, lacto-N-neotetraose; LNT, lacto-N-tetraose; PolyLac, 
polylactosamine; GAGs, glycosaminoglycans; Misc., miscellaneous. The signals are means 
of fluorescence intensities of duplicate spots, printed at 5 fmol per spot level with error bars 
representing half of the difference between the two values. The signals shown together with 
the probe sequences are in Supplementary Table 1. ns, not significant.
Stappers et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data Figure 3. MelLec recognises DHN-melanin.
a, Representative immunofluorescence micrographs using Fc-MelLec as a probe showing 
the surface distribution of MelLec-ligands on A. fumigatus wild-type and a variety of 
melanin deficient mutants, as indicated. Lower panels show conidia treated with 1M NaOH. 
b, Representative immunofluorescence and light micrograph images of ΔrodAΔpksP A. 
fumigatus conidia stained with Fc-MelLec or ConA-FITC, as indicated. c, Representative 
histograms showing the presence or absence of MelLec or Dectin-1 ligands on ΔrodA or 
ΔrodAΔpksP A. fumigatus conidia, as indicated. Fungal particles were stained with Fc-
MelLec (red) or Fc-Dectin-1 (green) and analysed by flow cytometry. Grey histograms 
indicate secondary only control. d, Representative histogram showing the presence Dectin-1 
Stappers et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 ligands on ΔpksP A. fumigatus conidia. Fungal particles were stained with Fc-Dectin-1 
(green) or Fc-CLEC12b (Fc-control; blue) and analysed by flow cytometry. e, 
Representative histogram showing the presence MelLec ligands on melanin ghosts of A. 
fumigatus conidia. Fungal particles were stained with Fc-MelLec (red) or Fc-CLEC12b (Fc-
control; blue) and analysed by flow cytometry. a-e, Experiments were repeated 3 times 
independently, with similar results. f, Flow cytometric analysis of melanised (red) and non-
melanised (grey) Cryptococcus neoformans yeast and melanin ghosts, and B16 melanoma 
cells47, stained with Fc-MelLec, as indicated. Experiment was repeated independently 
twice, with similar results.
Extended data Figure 4. MelLec recognises naphthalene-diol.
a, Detection of MelLec ligands in ghosts of melanin mutants of A. fumigatus by ELISA, as 
indicated. Values show mean ± SD. b, Representative immunofluorescence and light 
Stappers et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 micrograph images of Fc-MelLec ligands on NaOH-treated A. fumigatus B5233 conidia 
following pre-treatment with ghosts of ΔpksP or Δayg1 conidia, as indicated. c, 
Representative immunofluorescence and light micrograph images of MelLec ligands on 
NaOH-treated wild-type A. fumigatus conidia following pre-treatment with or without 
heptaketide naphthopyrone (YWA1). a-c, Experiments were repeated at least 3 times 
independently, with similar results. d, Detection of Fc-MelLec or Fc-Dectin-1 ligands on 
ΔrodA conidia following pre-treatment with (blue) or without (red) heptaketide 
naphthopyrone (YWA1). Experiment was repeated independently twice, with similar results. 
Detection of 1,8-DHN (e) and 1,2-DHN and 1,4-DHN (f) by Fc-MelLec and Fc-control 
using ELISA, as indicated. Values show mean ± SD. g, Detection of 1,8-DHN, naphthalene 
and 1-naphthol by Fc-MelLec using ELISA, as indicated. Values show mean ± SD. e-g, 
Experiments were repeated at least 3 times independently, with similar results.
Stappers et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data Figure 5. MelLec is expressed at the cell surface.
a, RT-PCR detection of MelLec expression in various tissues, as indicated. The expression 
of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) in these samples, also used for the 
characterization of MCL36, is shown as a control. Experiment was performed once (for gel 
source data, see Supplementary Figure 1). b, Flow cytometric analysis of surface expression 
of HA-tagged murine and human MelLec on the surface of NIH3T3 fibroblasts (black open 
histograms). NIH3T3 cells transfected with vector only served as controls (grey filled 
histograms). c, Western blot analysis of lysates of HA-tagged mMelLec expressing NIH3T3 
Stappers et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 cells under reducing and non-reducing conditions and with and without N-glycosidase. HA-
tagged mCLEC12A31 expressing NIH3T3 cells served as controls (for blot source data, see 
Supplementary Figure 1). d, Relative binding of FITC-labelled ΔrodA A. fumigatus conidia 
to NIH3T3 cells transduced with vector only, Dectin-1 or MelLec, as determined by flow 
cytometry. Values shown are mean ± SD, analysed by one-way ANOVA. e, Screening of 
hybridoma supernatants on mMelLec-expressing (red) and parental (black) NIH3T3 cells. b-
e, Experiments were repeated at least 3 times independently, with similar results. *, p≤0.05; 
Ns, not significant.
Extended data Figure 6. Murine MelLec is not expressed by myeloid cells.
Flow cytometric analysis of MelLec expression on various ex vivo and in vitro derived 
myeloid cells (a) and peripheral blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes and spleen (b), as 
indicated. a-b, Experiments were repeated at least twice independently, with similar results. 
c, Flow cytometric analysis of MelLec expression on CD61+ platelets. Experiment was 
repeated at least 3 times independently, with similar results. BM, bone marrow; DC, 
dendritic cell; mø, macrophage; LPS, lipopolysaccharide.
Stappers et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data Figure 7. MelLec expression in tissues and generation of MelLec-/- mice.
a, Immunofluorescence microscopy of MelLec-expressing versus control NIH3T3 cells 
labelled with αMelLec (green). Nuclei are stained with DAPI (blue). Experiments were 
repeated at least 3 times independently, with similar results. b, Exemplar flow cytometric 
gating strategy for identification of live cells from tissue. c, Flow cytometric analysis of 
MelLec expression on live CD45- CD31+ EpCAM- and EpCAM+ populations in the liver, as 
indicated. Flow cytometric analysis of MelLec expression on live CD45- CD31+ cells in the 
heart (d), kidney (e) and small intestine (f). Flow cytometric analysis of MelLec expression 
Stappers et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 on live CD45-EpCAM+ cells in the heart (g), kidney (h), small intestine (i) and epidermis 
(j). b-j Experiments were repeated at least twice independently, with similar results. Black 
lines, isotype controls. k, Schematic representation of the wild-type CLEC1A locus, gene 
targeting vector, PCR primer sites, and correctly targeted recombinant gene-targeted allele. l, 
PCR analysis of gene-targeted mice (for gel source data, see Supplementary Figure 1). +/+, 
wild-type, +/- heterozygous and -/- homozygous for the targeted allele. m, 
Immunofluorescence microscopy of naïve lung tissue from MelLec-/- mice (labelling of 
wild-type lung is shown in Fig. 3b). n, Analysis of MelLec expression in disaggregated lung 
tissue from wild-type (wt) or MelLec-/- mice by flow cytometry. l-n, Experiments were 
repeated at least 3 times independently, with similar results.
Stappers et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data Figure 8. MelLec-/- mice show early inflammatory defects upon challenge with A. 
fumigatus.
a, Survival (left) and weight measurements (right) of immunocompetent mice following 
intratracheal (i.t.) infection with 107 A. fumigatus conidia (n=4 animals per group). Values 
shown are mean ± SD. b, Exemplar flow cytometric gating strategy for identification of 
CD45+ cells from BAL. c, Representative FACS profiles of pulmonary CD11b+ Ly6Ghigh 
neutrophils in wild-type and MelLec-/- mice 4 h after challenge with 107 A. fumigatus 
conidia (wt n=29 animals; MelLec-/- n=26 animals). Pulmonary CD11b+ Ly6Ghigh 
Stappers et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 neutrophils (wt n=29 animals, MelLec-/- n=26 animals) (d) and cytokines (n=25 animals per 
group) (e) in mice 4 h after challenge with 107 A. fumigatus conidia, as indicated. f, 
Pulmonary CD11b+ Ly6Ghigh neutrophils in mice 4 h after challenge with melanin ghosts 
(160 µg) of A. fumigatus (wt n=15 animals; MelLec-/- n=10 animals). Samples with blood 
contamination were excluded. g, Pulmonary CD11b+ Ly6Ghigh neutrophils in mice 24 h 
after challenge with 107 A. fumigatus conidia (wt n=33 animals, MelLec-/- n=30 animals). h, 
Cellular inflammatory profiles of mice after 24 h challenge with 107 A. fumigatus conidia, 
as indicated (wt n=33 animals, MelLec-/- n=30 animals). Alveolar macrophages were 
defined as CD11c+ Siglec-F+, inflammatory macrophages as CD11b+ F4/80+ and 
eosinophils as CD11b+ Siglec-F+. d-h, Values shown are mean ± SEM of pooled data from 
at least two independent experiments, analysed by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. i, 
Expression of MelLec on pulmonary CD45- CD31+ cells isolated from uninfected mice 
(black) and mice 24 h after infection with A. fumigatus conidia (red). Grey line, isotype 
control (n=3 animals per group). j, Pulmonary CD11b+ Ly6Ghigh neutrophils in mice 4 h 
after challenge with 107 ΔpksP A. fumigatus conidia (wt n=7 animals, MelLec-/- n=8 
animals). Values shown are mean ± SEM of pooled data from two independent experiments, 
analysed by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. k, Representative FACS profiles of pulmonary 
CD11b+ Ly6Ghigh neutrophils in wild-type and MelLec-/- mice 4 h after challenge with 107 
ΔpksP A. fumigatus conidia (wt n=7 animals, MelLec-/- n=8 animals). *, p≤0.05; ns, not 
significant.
Stappers et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended data Figure 9. MelLec-/- mice show alterations in anti-fungal immunity during 
systemic infection.
a, Survival of corticosteroid treated mice following intratracheal (i.t.) infection with 105 A. 
fumigatus conidia (n=15 animals per group). Pooled data from two independent 
experiments, analysed by log-rank test. b, Fungal burdens in various mouse tissues, as 
indicated, 4 days after i.v. infection with 106 A. fumigatus conidia (n=12 animals per group). 
Values shown are mean ± SEM of pooled data from two independent experiments, analysed 
by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. c, Tissue section of kidney from day 4 infected 
MelLec-/- mouse stained with Grocott's methenamine silver stain and haematoxylin (n=3 
animals per group). d, Immunofluorescence microscopy of brain from day 2 infected 
MelLec-/- mouse (n=3 animals per group). Fungi are stained with calcofluor white (blue), 
Stappers et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 leukocytes with Gr1 (green), and DNA with propidium iodide (red). e, Fungal burdens in 
various mouse tissues, as indicated, 4 days after i.v. infection with 106 ΔpksP A. fumigatus 
conidia (n=4 animals per group). Values shown are mean ± SD, analysed by two-sided 
Mann-Whitney U test. *, p≤0.05; ns, not significant.
Extended data Figure 10. A SNP in human MelLec influences anti-Aspergillus inflammatory 
responses.
a, Representative histograms showing the presence or absence of human MelLec ligands on 
ΔrodA or ΔrodAΔpksP A. fumigatus conidia, as determined by flow cytometry. Fc-
CLEC12b was used as a control (Fc-control). Experiment was repeated at least 3 times 
independently, with similar results. b, Survival of irradiated wild-type mice reconstituted 
with wild-type or MelLec-/- bone-marrow (BM), as indicated, following i.v. infection with 
106 A. fumigatus conidia (n=16 animals per group). Pooled data from two independent 
experiments, analysed by log-rank test. c, Inflammatory cytokine production in monocyte-
derived macrophages isolated from genotyped individuals, following stimulation with LPS 
(wild-type n=14 individuals, SNP allele n=5 individuals). Values shown are mean ± SD, 
Stappers et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 analysed by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. d, Inflammatory cytokine production in 
PBMCs isolated from genotyped Dutch individuals, following stimulation with heat-killed 
A. fumigatus conidia (wild-type n=72 individuals, SNP allele n=17 individuals). Boxes 
represent the median values and interquartile ranges; whiskers represent minimum and 
maximum values, analysed by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. e, Inflammatory cytokine 
production in transduced RAW264.7 macrophages expressing wild-type or SNP allele 
following stimulation with ΔrodA or ΔrodAΔpksP A. fumigatus conidia, as indicated. Values 
shown are mean ± SD, analysed by one-way ANOVA and repeated at least 3 times 
independently, with similar results. *, p≤0.05; ns, not significant.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the staff of the University of Aberdeen animal facility for their support and care for our 
animals, and Chae Gyu Park, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul for providing recombinant Langerin. 
We thank Scott Filler and Robert Cramer for advice. Funding was provided by the Wellcome Trust (102705, 
097377, 093378, 099197, 108430, 101873), the MRC Centre for Medical Mycology and the University of 
Aberdeen (MR/N006364/1). KJK is supported by the intramural program of the National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, VA by ANR-DST COMASPIN grant (ANR-13-ISV3-0004), BH 
by German Science Foundation (www.dfg.de) grant no. HE 7565/1-1, JPL, IV and VA by the ANR and FRM 
DEQ2015-331722, AC by the Northern Portugal Regional Operational Programme (NORTE 2020), under the 
Portugal 2020 Partnership Agreement, through the European Regional Development Fund (FEDER) 
(NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000013), and by the Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT) (IF/00735/2014 and 
SFRH/BPD/96176/2013).
References
1. Hardison SE, Brown GD. C-type lectin receptors orchestrate antifungal immunity. Nat Immunol. 
2012; 13:817–822. [PubMed: 22910394] 
2. Nosanchuk JD, Casadevall A. The contribution of melanin to microbial pathogenesis. Cell 
Microbiol. 2003; 5:203–223. [PubMed: 12675679] 
3. Heinekamp T, et al. Aspergillus fumigatus melanins: interference with the host endocytosis pathway 
and impact on virulence. Front Microbiol. 2012; 3:440. [PubMed: 23346079] 
4. Pyz E, Brown GD. Screening for ligands of C-type lectin-like receptors. Methods Mol Biol. 2011; 
748:1–19. [PubMed: 21701963] 
5. Colonna M, Samaridis J, Angman L. Molecular characterization of two novel C-type lectin-like 
receptors, one of which is selectively expressed in human dendritic cells. Eur J Immunol. 2000; 
30:697–704. [PubMed: 10671229] 
6. Aimanianda V, et al. Surface hydrophobin prevents immune recognition of airborne fungal spores. 
Nature. 2009; 460:1117–1121. [PubMed: 19713928] 
7. Latge JP, Beauvais A. Functional duality of the cell wall. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2014; 20:111–117. 
[PubMed: 24937317] 
8. Palma AS, et al. Ligands for the beta-glucan receptor, Dectin-1, assigned using "designer" 
microarrays of oligosaccharide probes (neoglycolipids) generated from glucan polysaccharides. J 
Biol Chem. 2006; 281:5771–5779. [PubMed: 16371356] 
9. Jahn B, et al. Isolation and characterization of a pigmentless-conidium mutant of Aspergillus 
fumigatus with altered conidial surface and reduced virulence. Infect Immun. 1997; 65:5110–5117. 
[PubMed: 9393803] 
10. Akoumianaki T, et al. Aspergillus Cell Wall Melanin Blocks LC3-Associated Phagocytosis to 
Promote Pathogenicity. Cell Host Microbe. 2016; 19:79–90. [PubMed: 26749442] 
Stappers et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 11. Nosanchuk JD, Stark RE, Casadevall A. Fungal Melanin: What do We Know About Structure? 
Front Microbiol. 2015; 6:1463. [PubMed: 26733993] 
12. Llorente C, et al. Cladosporium cladosporioides LPSC 1088 produces the 1,8-
dihydroxynaphthalene-melanin-like compound and carries a putative pks gene. Mycopathologia. 
2012; 174:397–408. [PubMed: 22714980] 
13. Tsai HF, et al. Pentaketide melanin biosynthesis in Aspergillus fumigatus requires chain-length 
shortening of a heptaketide precursor. J Biol Chem. 2001; 276:29292–29298. [PubMed: 
11350964] 
14. Sancho D, Reis e Sousa C. Signaling by myeloid C-type lectin receptors in immunity and 
homeostasis. Annu Rev Immunol. 2012; 30:491–529. [PubMed: 22224766] 
15. Rambach G, et al. Identification of Aspergillus fumigatus Surface Components That Mediate 
Interaction of Conidia and Hyphae With Human Platelets. J Infect Dis. 2015; 212:1140–1149. 
[PubMed: 25810442] 
16. Faro-Trindade I, et al. Characterisation of innate fungal recognition in the lung. PLoS ONE. 2012; 
7:e35675. [PubMed: 22536422] 
17. Clemons KV, Stevens DA. The contribution of animal models of aspergillosis to understanding 
pathogenesis, therapy and virulence. Med Mycol. 2005; 43(Suppl 1):S101–110. [PubMed: 
16110800] 
18. Lopez Robles MD, et al. Cell-surface C-type lectin-like receptor CLEC-1 dampens dendritic cell 
activation and downstream Th17 responses. Blood Advances. 2017; 1:557–568. [PubMed: 
29296975] 
19. Sobanov Y, et al. A novel cluster of lectin-like receptor genes expressed in monocytic, dendritic 
and endothelial cells maps close to the NK receptor genes in the human NK gene complex. Eur J 
Immunol. 2001; 31:3493–3503. [PubMed: 11745369] 
20. Sattler S, et al. The human C-type lectin-like receptor CLEC-1 is upregulated by TGF-beta and 
primarily localized in the endoplasmic membrane compartment. Scand J Immunol. 2012; 75:282–
292. [PubMed: 22117783] 
21. Chai LY, et al. Aspergillus fumigatus conidial melanin modulates host cytokine response. 
Immunobiology. 2010; 215:915–920. [PubMed: 19939494] 
22. Thebault P, et al. The C-type lectin-like receptor CLEC-1, expressed by myeloid cells and 
endothelial cells, is up-regulated by immunoregulatory mediators and moderates T cell activation. 
J Immunol. 2009; 183:3099–3108. [PubMed: 19667084] 
23. Seyedmousavi S, et al. Black yeasts and their filamentous relatives: principles of pathogenesis and 
host defense. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2014; 27:527–542. [PubMed: 24982320] 
24. Thau N, et al. Rodletless mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus. Infect Immun. 1994; 62:4380–4388. 
[PubMed: 7927699] 
25. Tsai HF, Wheeler MH, Chang YC, Kwon-Chung KJ. A developmentally regulated gene cluster 
involved in conidial pigment biosynthesis in Aspergillus fumigatus. J Bacteriol. 1999; 181:6469–
6477. [PubMed: 10515939] 
26. Sarfati J, et al. A new experimental murine aspergillosis model to identify strains of Aspergillus 
fumigatus with reduced virulence. Nihon Ishinkin Gakkai Zasshi. 2002; 43:203–213. [PubMed: 
12402022] 
27. Graham LM, et al. Soluble Dectin-1 as a tool to detect beta-glucans. J Immunol Methods. 2006; 
314:164–169. [PubMed: 16844139] 
28. Ettinger R, Browning JL, Michie SA, van Ewijk W, McDevitt HO. Disrupted splenic architecture, 
but normal lymph node development in mice expressing a soluble lymphotoxin-beta receptor-IgG1 
fusion protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996; 93:13102–13107. [PubMed: 8917551] 
29. Hoffmann SC, et al. Identification of CLEC12B, an inhibitory receptor on myeloid cells. J Biol 
Chem. 2007; 282:22370–22375. [PubMed: 17562706] 
30. Bayry J, et al. Surface structure characterization of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia mutated in the 
melanin synthesis pathway and their human cellular immune response. Infect Immun. 2014; 
82:3141–3153. [PubMed: 24818666] 
31. Pyz E, et al. Characterisation of murine MICL (CLEC12A) and evidence for an endogenous ligand. 
Eur J Immunol. 2008; 38:1157–1163. [PubMed: 18350551] 
Stappers et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 32. Galfre G, Milstein C, Wright B. Rat x rat hybrid myelomas and a monoclonal anti-Fd portion of 
mouse IgG. Nature. 1979; 277:131–133. [PubMed: 310519] 
33. Willment JA, Gordon S, Brown GD. Characterisation of the human {beta}-glucan receptor and its 
alternatively spliced isoforms. J Biol Chem. 2001; 276:43818–43823. [PubMed: 11567029] 
34. Richie DL, et al. A role for the unfolded protein response (UPR) in virulence and antifungal 
susceptibility in Aspergillus fumigatus. PLoS Pathog. 2009; 5:e1000258. [PubMed: 19132084] 
35. Taylor PR, Brown GD, Geldhof AB, Martinez-Pomares L, Gordon S. Pattern recognition receptors 
and differentiation antigens define murine myeloid cell heterogeneity ex vivo. Eur J Immunol. 
2003; 33:2090–2097. [PubMed: 12884282] 
36. Kerscher B, et al. Mycobacterial receptor, Clec4d (CLECSF8, MCL), is coregulated with Mincle 
and upregulated on mouse myeloid cells following microbial challenge. Eur J Immunol. 2016; 
46:381–389. [PubMed: 26558717] 
37. Shepardson KM, et al. Myeloid derived hypoxia inducible factor 1-alpha is required for protection 
against pulmonary Aspergillus fumigatus infection. PLoS Pathog. 2014; 10:e1004378. [PubMed: 
25255025] 
38. Redelinghuys P, et al. MICL controls inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016; 
75:1386–1391. [PubMed: 26275430] 
39. Liu Y, et al. Neoglycolipid-based oligosaccharide microarray system: preparation of NGLs and 
their noncovalent immobilization on nitrocellulose-coated glass slides for microarray analyses. 
Methods Mol Biol. 2012; 808:117–136. [PubMed: 22057521] 
40. Stoll MS, Feizi T. Proceeding of the Beilstein Symposium on Glyco-Bioinformatics. 2009:123–
140.
41. De Pauw B, et al. Revised definitions of invasive fungal disease from the European Organization 
for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Invasive Fungal Infections Cooperative Group and the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) 
Consensus Group. Clin Infect Dis. 2008; 46:1813–1821. [PubMed: 18462102] 
42. Kumar V, et al. Immunochip SNP array identifies novel genetic variants conferring susceptibility to 
candidaemia. Nature communications. 2014; 5:4675.
43. Johnson AD, et al. SNAP: a web-based tool for identification and annotation of proxy SNPs using 
HapMap. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24:2938–2939. [PubMed: 18974171] 
44. Netea MG, et al. Aspergillus fumigatus evades immune recognition during germination through 
loss of toll-like receptor-4-mediated signal transduction. J Infect Dis. 2003; 188:320–326. 
[PubMed: 12854089] 
45. Gray RT. A Class of K-Sample Tests for Comparing the Cumulative Incidence of a Competing 
Risk. Ann Stat. 1988; 16:1141–1154.
46. Scrucca L, Santucci A, Aversa F. Competing risk analysis using R: an easy guide for clinicians. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007; 40:381–387. [PubMed: 17563735] 
47. Leibundgut-Landmann S, Osorio F, Brown GD, Reis e Sousa C. Stimulation of dendritic cells via 
the dectin-1/Syk pathway allows priming of cytotoxic T-cell responses. Blood. 2008; 112:4971–
4980. [PubMed: 18818389] 
Stappers et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. MelLec recognises selected fungi.
Representative histograms showing (a) A. fumigatus conidia and germlings (cultured for 8 h 
at 37°C), or (b) yeasts of C. albicans and S. cerevisiae, and conidia of F. pedrosoi, stained 
with Fc-MelLec or Fc-CLEC12b29 (Fc-control) and analysed by flow cytometry. 
Representative light microscope images and immunofluorescence micrographs using Fc-
MelLec to detect ligands on A. fumigatus following conidial swelling and germination over 
time, as indicated (c), following treatment with 1M NaOH (d), and on rodlet-deficient 
(ΔrodA) conidia (e). a-e, Experiments were repeated at least 3 times independently, with 
similar results.
Stappers et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. MelLec recognises DHN-melanin.
a, Detection of MelLec ligands in alkali insoluble or soluble A. fumigatus cell wall fractions 
by ELISA. Values show mean ± SD. b, Representative histograms showing ΔrodA or ΔpksP 
A. fumigatus conidia, stained with Fc-MelLec or Fc-CLEC12b (Fc-control) and analysed by 
flow cytometry. c, The biosynthetic pathway of DHN-melanin (left) and representative 
immunofluorescence micrographs using Fc-MelLec to detect ligands on A. fumigatus strains 
deficient in these enzymes (right). The conidial rodlet layer was removed with 1M NaOH 
prior to staining. d, Detection of YWA1 by Fc-MelLec and Fc-control by ELISA. Values 
Stappers et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 show mean ± SD. a-d, Experiments were repeated at least 3 times independently, with 
similar results.
Stappers et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. MelLec is expressed on non-myeloid cells in mouse.
a, Analysis of disaggregated lung tissue by flow cytometry with αMelLec. b, 
Immunofluorescence microscopy of lung tissue stained with αMelLec (green). Nuclei are 
stained with DAPI (blue). Flow cytometric analysis of MelLec expression on live CD45+ 
and CD45- cells (c), and CD45- CD31+ EpCAM- and EpCAM+ cells (d) in the lung. a-d, 
Experiments were repeated at least 3 times independently, with similar results.
Stappers et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. MelLec is required to prevent disseminated infection in mice and humans.
a, Survival of mice following intravenous (i.v.) infection with 106 A. fumigatus conidia 
(n=16 animals per group). Pooled data from two independent experiments, analysed by log-
rank test. Tissue fungal burdens (b) and brain cytokine levels (c) of mice 4 days after i.v. 
infection with 106 A. fumigatus conidia (n=12 animals per group). b-c, Values shown are 
mean ± SEM of pooled data from two independent experiments, analysed by two-sided 
Mann-Whitney U test. d, Survival of mice following i.v. infection with 106 ΔpksP A. 
fumigatus conidia (n=15 animals per group). Pooled data from two independent 
Stappers et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 experiments, analysed by log-rank test. e, Cumulative incidence analysis of invasive 
aspergillosis after transplantation according to donor (wildtype, n=238 individuals; SNP 
allele, n=72 individuals) or recipient (wildtype, n=228 individuals; SNP allele, n=80 
individuals) CLEC1A rs2306894 genotypes, analysed by two-sided Gray’s test. f, Cytokine 
production in monocyte-derived macrophages, following stimulation with A. fumigatus 
conidia (wildtype, n=14 individuals; SNP allele, n=5 individuals). Values shown are mean ± 
SD, analysed by two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. *, p≤0.05; ns, not significant; HR, hazard 
ratio.
Stappers et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
