  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
 
DOI:
10.1136/gutjnl-2017-313750
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Staudacher, H., & Whelan, K. (2017). The low FODMAP diet: Recent advances in understanding its
mechanisms and efficacy in IBS. Gut, 66(8), 1517-1527. https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2017-313750
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jun. 2019
 1 
 
The low FODMAP diet: recent advances in understanding its mechanisms and efficacy in 
irritable bowel syndrome 
 
Heidi M Staudacher and Kevin Whelan 
 
King’s College London, Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences Division, London, United Kingdom 
 
Corresponding author:  
Professor Kevin Whelan 
King’s College London 
150 Stamford Street 
London, SE1 9NH United Kingdom 
kevin.whelan@kcl.ac.uk 
 +44 207 848 3858 
 
Word count: 5935 
 
Key words: FODMAP, microbiota, diet, irritable bowel syndrome 
 
Contributions: KW and HS conceived the theme of the manuscript; HS and KW wrote the 
manuscript; HS led the editing of the manuscript, HS and KW approved the final manuscript prior to 
submission. 
 
Acknowledgment: We thank Dr Ellen Lever for medical illustration of Figure 1 
 
Funding: HS was funded by the National Institute for Health Research 
 
Abbreviations 
DP 
 
degree of polymerisation 
FODMAPs 
fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols 
GI 
 
gastrointestinal 
GOS 
 
galacto-oligosaccharides 
IBS 
 
irritable bowel syndrome 
IBS-SSS 
irritable bowel syndrome Symptom Severity Scale 
MRI 
 
magnetic resonance imaging 
NSP 
 
non-starch polysaccharides 
RCT 
 
randomised controlled trial 
SCFA  
short-chain fatty acid 
 2 
 
 
Abstract  
There is an intensifying interest in the interaction between diet and the functional gastrointestinal 
symptoms experienced in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Recent studies have used magnetic 
resonance imaging to demonstrate that short-chain fermentable carbohydrates increase small intestinal 
water volume and colonic gas production that, in those with visceral hypersensitivity, induces 
functional gastrointestinal symptoms. Dietary restriction of short-chain fermentable carbohydrates 
(the low FODMAP diet) is now increasingly utilised in the clinical setting. Initial research evaluating 
the efficacy of the low FODMAP diet was limited by retrospective study design and lack of 
comparator groups, but more recently well-designed clinical trials have been published. There are 
currently at least 10 randomised controlled trials or randomised comparative trials showing the low 
FODMAP diet leads to clinical response in 50-80% of IBS patients, in particular with improvements 
in bloating, flatulence, diarrhoea and global symptoms. However, in conjunction with the beneficial 
clinical impact, recent studies have also demonstrated that the low FODMAP diet leads to profound 
changes in the microbiota and metabolome, the duration and clinical relevance of which are as yet 
unknown. This review aims to present recent advances in the understanding of the mechanisms by 
which the low FODMAP diet impacts on symptoms in IBS, recent evidence for its efficacy, current 
findings regarding the consequences of the diet on the microbiome, and recommendations for areas 
for future research. 
 
Key words: irritable bowel syndrome, intestinal microbiology, colonic microflora, diet 
 
 3 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a chronic gastrointestinal (GI) disorder characterised by recurrent 
abdominal pain related to defaecation or a change in bowel habit.(1) It is a common condition 
worldwide, with a meta-analysis of 260,960 people across America, Asia, Europe and Africa 
reporting a pooled prevalence of 14% in females and 9% in males.(2) The Rome IV criteria identify 
four IBS subtypes based on predominant stool form (1), with diarrhoea predominant IBS (IBS-D) 
generally reported as being the most common (40-60% of all IBS).(3, 4) The pathophysiology of IBS 
is complex and multifactorial; visceral hypersensitivity, altered brain-gut signalling, immune 
dysregulation, the microbiota and psychosocial factors are recognised as important. Subtypes of IBS 
may differ in their pathophysiology, highlighting the importance of subtyping patients for targeting 
treatment. 
 
Although there is no impact of IBS on mortality, it is likely that the morbidity associated with its 
chronic nature and the high incidence of GI and extra-intestinal comorbidities, such as anxiety and 
depression,(5) contribute to its negative impact on health-related quality of life (HRQOL).(6, 7) IBS 
results in considerable healthcare utilisation, with 30% of consultations in primary care relating to 
gastroenterology,(8) up to 60% of referrals to gastroenterology in secondary care (9) being due to 
IBS, and annual national healthcare costs related to IBS totalling £45-200 million in the United 
Kingdom (10) and $1.66 billion in the United States.(11) Despite the burden of IBS to both patients 
and the healthcare system, there is a lack of effective pharmacological treatments available, with a 
technical review reporting high quality of evidence for only one of nine pharmacological 
treatments.(12) Furthermore, pharmacological therapy for IBS usually targets only one symptom, 
which may necessitate polypharmacy in patients with IBS, many of whom report multiple symptoms.  
 
THE ROLE OF DIET IN THE MANAGEMENT OF IBS 
Numerous studies show the majority of patients with IBS (70-89%) report specific foods exacerbate 
symptoms and consequently many patients limit or exclude some food items.(13, 14) There is a lack 
of evidence regarding the underlying mechanisms by which food provokes symptoms in IBS, which 
has limited the development of validated diagnostic tests to identify specific food triggers. First line 
dietary advice in IBS usually focuses on modification of dietary fibre intake and restriction of 
potential triggers such as caffeine, alcohol and fat (15). Two recent meta-analyses identified between 
14 (16) and 22 (17) randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of dietary fibre, and reported moderate 
quality evidence for fibre supplementation in IBS, with greater global symptom improvement 
compared with placebo, in particular for soluble fibre. In contrast, evidence for the effect of caffeine, 
alcohol and fat have only been reported in cross-sectional studies,(13, 18, 19) and no RCTs investi-
gating the effect of their lone restriction have been performed.(15)  
 4 
 
 
Regarding exclusion diets, the effect of gluten restriction in IBS is unclear. Evidence from 
uncontrolled studies (20,21) and a controlled trial (22) suggests a gluten-free diet leads to 
symptomatic benefit in patients with diarrhoea-predominant IBS with HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ-8 
genotype. A short-term double-blind placebo-controlled crossover trial that controlled for background 
diet, however, failed to show any benefit (23). Further clarification of the role of gluten restriction in 
managing IBS symptoms is required. Historic trials involving multiple food restrictions followed by 
reintroduction suggest individual foods (e.g. milk, wheat) exacerbate symptoms,(24, 25) but most 
trials are uncontrolled and the mechanism by which individual foods induced symptoms was not 
identified. More recently, food hypersensitivity has been demonstrated in response to oral challenge 
with specific foods (soya, milk, wheat, yeast), the first fascinating real-time demonstration that food 
antigens might lead to immune activation and altered permeability of the intestinal mucosa.(26) 
Prospective controlled trials that challenge with specific food antigens followed by customised dietary 
exclusion are required to corroborate these findings.  
 
Dietary modification of the GI microbiota through probiotics or prebiotics presents another potential 
approach for the management of IBS. Although the extent and quality of evidence for prebiotic 
supplementation in IBS to date is limited, there is some evidence for the efficacy of probiotic 
supplementation (27), with up to nine systematic reviews of 35 RCTs indicating small, but 
statistically significant, effects for some strains.(28) Rigorous trials of individual probiotic strains are 
required to delineate the most effective probiotic strains for particular symptoms.  
 
Dietary restriction of short-chain fermentable carbohydrates or fermentable oligosaccharides, 
disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols (low FODMAP diet) is a relative newcomer to dietary 
management in IBS. Over the past 10 years the magnitude of evidence for the mechanisms and 
clinical efficacy of the low FODMAP diet has surpassed any other dietary intervention for IBS, 
except for probiotics.(29) Although initial research was limited in study design, there has been a 
recent surge in well-designed clinical trials published. The aim of this review is to provide a critical 
review of the mechanisms by which short-chain fermentable carbohydrates impact on symptoms in 
IBS, the evidence for the efficacy of the low FODMAP diet, and the unintended consequences of the 
diet, as well as provide recommendations for areas for future research. 
 
THE LOW FODMAP DIET 
Carbohydrates are an important component of the human diet and consist of a range of molecules with 
diverse chemical and physical structures and consequently varied physiological and functional 
properties. Digestibility of carbohydrates varies due to the absence of (or reduced production of) 
 5 
 
hydrolase enzymes for their digestion; such non-digestible carbohydrates include non-starch 
polysaccharides (NSP), resistant starch oligosaccharides and some polyols.(30) In addition, some 
disaccharides and monosaccharides are not completely absorbed in the small intestine. The degree of 
carbohydrate digestion and absorption is further influenced by the presence of disease (e.g. 
malabsorption disorders), inter-individual variation, and in some cases, transit time and the dose 
consumed.(30)  
 
Up to 40 g/d of undigested and/or unabsorbed carbohydrate enters the colon.(31) Long-chain 
polysaccharides contribute to a substantial proportion of this indigestible dietary carbohydrate, and 
include plant cell wall NSP (e.g. cellulose, hemicelluloses and pectin), psyllium and resistant starch. 
Along with these long chain carbohydrates, smaller quantities of protein and fat also enter the colon 
from exogenous (dietary) and endogenous sources (e.g. red blood cells, sloughed epithelial cells), 
although their fate is less well studied than carbohydrates.(31) On entering the colon, carbohydrates 
with a high number of monomers (degree of polymerisation, DP>10 e.g. inulin) are fermented more 
slowly and produce a lower volume of gas than carbohydrates with fewer monomers (DP<10, e.g. 
oligofructose).(32) 
 
It has long been acknowledged that ingestion of specific carbohydrates (e.g. fructose, lactose) can lead 
to exacerbation of GI symptoms in IBS.(33, 34) Furthermore, short-chain fermentable carbohydrates 
(FODMAPs) have been shown to induce symptoms in patients with IBS in a blinded re-challenge 
trial.(35) In contrast, the low FODMAP diet involves the restriction of multiple fermentable 
oligosaccharides (fructans, galacto-oligosaccharides), disaccharides (lactose), monosaccharides 
(fructose when in excess of glucose) and polyols (e.g. sorbitol, mannitol). The chemical nature, key 
dietary sources and dietary intake of these carbohydrates in patients with IBS are reviewed 
elsewhere.(29)  
 
Clinical implementation of the low FODMAP diet involves in-depth dietary advice on FODMAP 
restriction followed by dietary exclusion of FODMAPs for 4-8 weeks in order to test for response to 
the diet. Where symptomatic response has been achieved, these carbohydrates are then reintroduced 
into the diet individually to tolerance whilst monitoring symptoms, with the ultimate aim of achieving 
a diverse and nutritionally adequate diet alongside long-term symptom control. 
 
Mechanisms of action of the low FODMAP diet 
A key limitation of most exclusion diets for IBS is a lack of identification of the specific mechanisms 
by which the food components induce symptoms.(24, 25) However, there is an expanding evidence 
base for the mechanisms of the effects of FODMAPs on GI function (Figure 1).  
 6 
 
 
Small intestinal water 
One of the two most established mechanisms by which FODMAPs are proposed to provoke 
symptoms in IBS is the augmentation of small intestinal water, which has been clearly demonstrated 
by both ileostomy recovery and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies (Table 1, Figure 1). One 
randomised, single-blind, crossover feeding study in 10 ileostomates showed effluent water increased  
by 20% after a 4-day very high FODMAP diet (112 g/d) compared with a with very low FODMAP 
diet (6 g/d).(36) An even more pronounced effect on small intestinal water has been demonstrated in 
response to acute challenges using MRI. Healthy individuals exhibited a 4-fold higher small intestinal 
water volume 60 minutes after consumption of a 17.5 g mannitol solution compared with an 
equimolar glucose solution.(37) The same magnitude of effect was seen 60 minutes after 
administration of 40 g fructose, (38, 39) and this was partially resolved through contemporaneous 
ingestion of 40 g glucose, (38) thought to be due to enhanced co-transport of fructose and glucose via 
the GLUT-2 transporter. Conversely, inulin (a high DP fructan), had no effect on small intestinal 
water in healthy individuals (38) or in patients with IBS.(39) Further study is needed on the effect on 
small intestinal water of smaller DP fructans that are more representative of those found in the diet. In 
addition, the effects of other oligosaccharides (e.g. galacto-oligosaccharides, GOS), the disaccharide 
lactose, and other polyols (e.g. sorbitol) on small intestinal water are unknown. 
 
The impact of increased small intestinal water on functional gastrointestinal symptoms in IBS is 
unclear. Firstly, the increase in luminal water may induce abdominal pain and bloating in those with 
visceral hypersensitivity, although recent research failed to demonstrate a correlation between peak 
small intestinal water and symptom exacerbation in IBS following blinded challenge with fructose 
(n=11) or inulin (n=13), perhaps related to the relatively small additional luminal volume (<100 
ml).(39) Secondly, the additional small intestinal water has been hypothesised to contribute to loose 
stool and diarrhoea, however, the maximal colonic water volume tolerated, albeit in healthy 
volunteers (40), has been shown to be much greater than the additional water induced by these 
FODMAPs. 
 
Colonic gas production 
The availability of non-digested and/or non-absorbed short-chain carbohydrates for colonic 
fermentation leads to accumulation of colonic gas including hydrogen and methane (Figure 1). This is 
likely to lead to luminal distension, and therefore provocation of symptoms in IBS, specifically in 
those with visceral hypersensitivity. Table 1 summarises studies that have investigated the effect of 
FODMAPs on fermentation. A controlled, crossover feeding study demonstrated that a high 
FODMAP diet (50 g/d) led to a marked increase in 14-hour breath hydrogen production after two 
 7 
 
days compared with a low FODMAP diet (<10 g/d) in 15 patients with IBS and 15 healthy 
individuals,(41) which was paralleled by higher symptoms scores in those with IBS. Furthermore, a 
recent crossover study in IBS  
 8 
 
 
Table 1:  
Studies investigating the effect of FODMAPs (or FODMAP restriction) on small intestinal water content and colonic gas production 
Reference Study design 
Participants 
Intervention 
Outcome measures 
Findings 
Small intestinal water content 
(36) 
Randomised crossover 
(single blind) 
Ileostomates  
n=10  
4-day HFD (112 g/d) 
4-day LFD (6 g/d) 
Effluent weight 
Effluent water content 
Greater effluent weight (HFD 409 g vs LFD 504 g; p=0.01) 
Greater water content HFD vs LFD (mean difference 58 ml; p=0.013) 
(37) 
Randomised crossover 
(single blind) 
Healthy n=11 
17.5 g glucose (control) 
17.5 g mannitol  
SBWC using MRI  
Greater SBWC at 40 minutes (mannitol 381ml vs glucose 47 ml; p<0.001)  
(38) 
Randomised crossover 
(single blind) 
Healthy n=16 
40 g glucose (control) 
40 g fructose  
40 g inulin  
40 g fructose + 40g glucose  
SBWC using MRI  
 
Greater SBWC fructose (67 ml/min) vs glucose (36 l/min; p<0.005) 
No difference  fructose + glucose vs fructose (mean difference 16 l/min) 
No difference inulin (33 l/min) vs glucose (36 l/min; p>005) 
(39) 
Randomised crossover 
(double blind) 
IBS n=29 
Healthy n=29 
40 g glucose (control) 
40 g fructose  
40 g inulin  
SBWC using MRI 
Greater change in SBWC fructose (73 ml) vs glucose (21 ml; p<0.005) 
Similar patterns in SBWC between IBS and healthy 
Colonic gas production 
(38) 
Randomised crossover 
(single blind) 
Healthy n=16 
40 g glucose (control) 
40 g fructose  
40 g inulin  
40 g fructose + 40g glucose  
Breath H2 over 400min 
Colonic gas using MRI 
Greater  H2 production inulin (18000 ppm/min) vs glucose (3009 ppm/min; 
p<0.0001)  
Greater colonic gas inulin (33 l/min) vs glucose (19 l/min; p<0.05)  
 
(39) 
Randomised crossover 
(double blind) 
Healthy n=29 
IBS n=29 
 
40 g glucose (control) 
40 g fructose  
40 g inulin  
Breath H2 over 300 min 
Colonic gas using MRI 
Greater change H2 production inulin (34 ppm) vs glucose (-2 ppm; p<0.005)  
Greater change colonic gas inulin (23 au) vs glucose (5 au; p<0.005)  
Similar patterns H2 production and colonic gas IBS and healthy 
(41) 
Randomised  crossover 
(single blind) 
IBS n=15 
Healthy n=15 
2-day HFD (50 g/d) 
2-day LFD (9 g/d) 
Breath H2 14 hours on 
day 2 
Greater H2 production (HFD 242 ppm vs LFD 62ppm; p<0001) in IBS  
Greater  H2 production (HFD 181 ppm vs LFD 43 ppm; p<0.001) in healthy 
HFD, high FODMAP diet; LFD, low FODMAP diet; SBWC, small bowel water content; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; H2, hydrogen 
 9 
 
showed that a 3-week low FODMAP diet (unknown total FODMAP dose) reduced 5-hour breath 
hydrogen following a lactulose challenge compared with a high FODMAP diet (unknown total 
FODMAP dose),(42) suggesting the low FODMAP diet leads to a shift in colonic fermentation 
patternindependent of acute fermentable carbohydrate intake (i.e. lactulose challenge), which is likely 
mediated by an alteration in microbiota composition.   
 
Quantification of the effect of fermentable carbohydrates on colonic fermentation has been elegantly 
demonstrated by MRI. For example, inulin challenge (40 g/d) leads to an approximate two-fold 
greater colonic volume at four hours compared with glucose in healthy individuals and patients with 
IBS.(38, 39) It is also clear that there are distinct patterns of gas production elicited by individual 
FODMAPs. Specifically, inulin leads to a later and overall almost double the total gas production 
compared with fructose according to hydrogen breath testing in healthy individuals.(38) This is likely 
due to differences in degree of absorption of individual carbohydrates and differences in GI transit 
time that leads to variable availability for fermentation in the proximal colon. Fermentation rates also 
vary between carbohydrates of different molecular geometry.(32)  
 
However, this recent research using MRI to investigate symptom induction in IBS challenges the 
assumption that people with IBS have elevated response to FODMAP ingestion (in terms of colonic 
gas production) compared with healthy controls, as both breath hydrogen production and colonic 
volume kinetics were almost identical in patients compared with healthy individuals.(39) 
Interestingly, this research also questions the extent to which increased colonic gas is responsible for 
symptoms induction  in IBS. Patients with IBS who developed symptoms on FODMAP challenge did 
not, in fact, have greater colonic volume than those that do not report symptoms, suggesting that 
visceral hypersensitivity to luminal distension, rather than increased luminal distension per se, is key 
to symptom provocation during colonic fermentation.(39) However, these associations were only 
measured in a limited subgroup of 12 patients and therefore replication of this work in a larger sample 
is required to verify these findings. Importantly, measurement of visceral hypersensitivity (e.g. by 
barostat) is also required to confirm its role in the causality of symptom provocation in response to 
FODMAP administration. 
 
Other proposed mechanisms 
There is preliminary evidence of mechanisms by which FODMAPs might induce symptoms in IBS, 
beyond small intestinal water volume and colonic fermentation. Firstly, some FODMAPs increase GI 
motility. Small intestinal transit time is decreased following ingestion of a 30 g fructose-sorbitol 
mixture in healthy individuals,(43) which further reduces opportunity for small intestinal absorption 
and increases availability for colonic fermentation. However, the evidence for the effect of a low 
 10 
 
FODMAP diet on transit time per se is lacking. One crossover RCT demonstrated no effect of a 3-
week low FODMAP diet on whole gut transit time compared with a standard diet in patients with 
IBS.(44) This is surprising considering the aforementioned effects of FODMAPs on small intestinal 
water, however this study included both constipation and diarrhoea-predominant IBS subtypes, which 
may have masked potential differences between specific subtypes. The effect of FODMAP restriction 
on transit time, whilst controlling for fibre intake and other dietary factors that stimulate motility, 
requires clarification in large studies of specific IBS subtypes. 
 
Secondly, there is now data to suggest that adherence to a low FODMAP diet is accompanied by 
changes in the GI microbiota and its metabolic output . The effect of a 3-week low FODMAP diet was 
compared with a high FODMAP diet (actual intakes unknown) in 37 patients with all IBS subtypes in 
a recent parallel design RCT.(42) A higher abundance of the hydrogen-utilising genus Adlercreutzia 
was reported in the low FODMAP group compared with the high FODMAP group. This may have 
contributed to the reduction in symptoms and the diminished hydrogen response to lactulose 
challenge. Metabolomic analysis of urine was able to discriminate the low FODMAP and high 
FODMAP groups based on three key urinary metabolites including histamine, a modulator of 
inflammation and immune function. Several associations were also found between abundance of 
various taxa, the metabolome and clinical symptoms, suggesting that the observed diet-induced 
changes in the microbiota and metabolome may be in part responsible for clinical outcomes.  
 
A major limitation of this study was the absence of dietary composition assessment and therefore only 
an arbitrary assessment of dietary adherence. However, this is the first evidence to suggest that 
reducing the availability of fermentable substrate in the colon impacts the metabolomic output of the 
microbiota, which may plausibly be involved in the generation of GI symptoms. Taxonomic 
correlations with clinical and metabolic markers are important in contributing to our understanding of 
the mechanisms and/or potential detrimental effects of the low FODMAP diet, but causality is more 
difficult to ascertain and longitudinal follow up studies are needed to determine if diet-induced 
microbiota shifts lead to change in long-term health outcomes. 
 
The low FODMAP diet may also reduce production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). This is 
important, as there may be a higher stool concentration of SCFAs in IBS and an association with IBS 
symptomatology,(45) 
with 
an 
animal 
study 
demonstrating 
SCFAs 
induce 
visceral 
hypersensitivity.(46) Reducing luminal SCFAs could present another pathway by which the low 
FODMAP diet has its effect, although this has yet to be extensively studied, and findings are 
inconsistent. Reduction in total stool SCFAs,(47,49) acetate (47, 48) and butyrate (47, 49) have been 
 11 
 
demonstrated in some studies in IBS, although no differences in SCFA between the low FODMAP 
diet and controls were reported in two small RCTs.(44,50)  
 
Reduction in stool SCFA concentration in patients on a low FODMAP diet is likely the result of 
reduced availability of fermentable substrate and shifts in the abundance of taxa involved in SCFA 
production and/or cross-feeding reactions.(51) The potential effect of diet-induced alteration in 
SCFAs, especially butyrate, on various factors including epithelial barrier function, risk of colorectal 
cancer is of significance particularly if dietary restriction is prolonged. However, current evidence 
regarding the effect of the low FODMAP diet on SCFA is limited by conflicting findings between 
studies,(44,48,49,50) small patient numbers, differences in study design and SCFA quantification 
methodology. Furthermore, stool SCFA concentration is not an accurate measure of in vivo SCFA 
production due to the effect of colonic transit time on SCFA absorption (52) and stool volume on 
SCFA dilution (53), and thus variations across IBS subtypes.(52) Importantly, without assessment of 
SCFA concentration at the major site of production in the ascending colon, which requires technically 
demanding and invasive techniques,(54) it will be difficult to confirm the interaction between the low 
FODMAP diet, SCFA production and symptom provocation in IBS.  
 
Finally, others have suggested alternative mechanisms by which a low FODMAP diet improves 
symptoms. One RCT of patients provided low FODMAP advice in combination with other dietary 
advice (n=13) reported normalisation of colonic serotonin cell density after 3-9 months.(55) It was 
suggested that this may have mediated symptom improvement by modulating transit time and visceral 
sensitivity. Furthermore, normalisation of stool lipopolysaccharide to levels comparable with healthy 
controls has been demonstrated in patients reporting a symptomatic response to a low FODMAP 
diet.(56) A series of animal and in vitro studies using the stool supernatant of these patients showed 
beneficial effects on visceral sensitivity and colonic mucosal integrity.  
 
These latter human studies are limited by very small patient numbers and/or substantial attrition 
rate,(55, 56) and the absence of the assessment of dietary composition or dietary control during the 
intervention period.(55, 56) Crucially, it is unknown whether these findings are causal or merely 
epiphenomena. However, they present preliminary findings suggesting that the low FODMAP diet 
may have effects over and above reducing luminal distension, through effecting changes in epithelial 
integrity and inflammatory processes that have been implicated in IBS symptomatology.(57) Much 
research is required in this area, including in vitro studies that aim to identify discrete effects of 
individual FODMAPs on intestinal physiology, larger studies of homogenous IBS cohorts that 
identify key microbiome and metabolomic effects linked with response to the low FODMAP diet, and 
how these changes alter gut function.  
 12 
 
 
Efficacy of the low FODMAP diet 
Short-term clinical endpoints 
The last decade has seen publication of numerous trials of the efficacy of the low FODMAP diet in 
reducing IBS symptoms. Publication of two recent systematic reviews, albeit with different 
conclusions, confirms the growing interest in the area.(58, 59) Many studies of the low FODMAP diet 
in IBS are limited due to their retrospective design,(60-63) lack of control or comparator groups,(64-
66) and where these existed a lack of randomisation,(58) the use of low FODMAP diet in conjunction 
with other dietary advice,(67, 68) and the widespread lack of dietary assessment to confirm 
adherence. However some well-designed RCTs have been undertaken, with promising findings, many 
which have only recently been published, and only these will be reviewed in detail here. 
 
At least 10 RCTs have been undertaken investigating the efficacy of a low FODMAP diet in adults 
with IBS (Table 2). Five studies were unblinded and involved patients being randomised to low 
FODMAP dietary advice from a dietitian for 4-6 weeks, with all five studies reporting improvements 
in functional GI symptoms using various symptom scoring tools (60,68,69,71,72) as well as 
improvement in quality of life.(69, 72) There are inevitable limitations with unblinded intervention 
studies, particularly in a disorder with a reportedly high placebo response.(73)  
 
However, recently two blinded placebo-controlled studies have been performed evaluating the effect 
of the low FODMAP diet on IBS symptoms. In the first, a 21-day crossover feeding study that 
compared the low FODMAP diet with a “typical diet”, showed the low FODMAP diet led to an 
improvement in overall GI symptoms, and resulted in a response (defined as 10 mm reduction on a 
visual analogue scale) in 70% of patients (response in “typical diet” group not reported).(74) An 
advantage of a feeding study such as this is the ability to carefully control dietary intake, however 
controlled feeding does not mimic the real-life challenges experienced by free living individuals 
undergoing dietary change. Furthermore, the crossover nature of the study carries questions regarding 
the minimum washout period required between interventions. Furthermore, symptoms worsened 
during the “typical diet” control, which may have been the result of increased FODMAP intake 
compared with habitual diet, leading to an artificially greater difference in symptoms between groups. 
Nevertheless, this was the first placebo- controlled low FODMAP intervention trial and a vital 
contribution to the current evidence-base for the low FODMAP diet in the management of functional 
GI symptoms. 
 
The second placebo-controlled RCT used dietary advice in order to evaluate the effect of the low 
FODMAP diet as it would be used in clinical practice.(48) In total, 104 patients with IBS were 
 13 
 
randomised to either low FODMAP dietary advice or to sham (placebo) dietary advice for four weeks, 
with lower Irritable Bowel Syndrome Severity Scale (IBS-SSS) scores and greater numbers 
experiencing a response (≥50 point reduction in IBS-SSS) in the low FODMAP group (73%) 
compared 
 14 
 
Table 2:  
Randomised trials investigating the clinical efficacy of the low FODMAP diet in adults with IBS 
Ref 
Study design 
Participants 
Intervention vs 
Control/comparator (n) 
Duration Symptom scoring 
Findings 
Controlled trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(48)  Placebo-controlled 
dietary advice RCT 
(single blind) 
Rome III IBS-
D, IBS-M, 
IBS-U 
LFD n=51 
Sham diet n=53 
4 weeks 
AR 
IBS-SSS 
IBS-QOL 
Primary outcome:  
No difference in AR (LFD 57% vs control 38%; p=0.051). 
Secondary outcomes: Lower IBS-SSS score (LFD 173 vs control 224; 
p=0.001) and greater numbers achieving MCID for IBS-QOL (LFD 51% vs 
control 26%; p<0.023) 
(50) 
Dietary advice RCT  
(unblind) 
 
Rome III IBS 
with bloating 
or diarrhoea 
LFD n=19 
Habitual diet n=22 
4 weeks 
AR 
GSRS 
Bristol Stool Form  
Primary outcome: luminal microbiota (see table 3) 
Secondary outcomes:  
Greater numbers reporting AR (LFD 68% vs control 23%; p=0.005) 
Lower bloating, borborygmi, overall symptoms LFD vs control (p<0.05) 
Greater number of normal stools (LFD 24% vs control 7%; p=0.02) 
(69)  Dietary advice RCT 
(unblind) 
 
Rome III IBS 
 
LFD n=23  
Waiting list n=27 
 
3 months IBS-SSS 
IBS-QOL 
Outcomes: 
Greater reduction in IBS-SSS (LFD 276 to 129 pts vs control 247 to 204 
pts; p<0.01), frequency of pain episodes (p<0.01) 
Greater increase in IBS-QOL score for LFD vs control (p<0.0001) 
(70) 
Dietary advice RCT  
(unblind) 
Rome III IBS 
 
LFD n=42 
Probiotic  n=41 
Habitual diet n=40 
6 weeks 
IBS-SSS 
IBS-QOL 
Primary outcome:  
Greater reduction in IBS-SSS (LFD -75 pts vs control -32 pts; p<0.01)  
Secondary outcome: No change in IBS-QOL for all groups 
(74) 
Placebo-controlled 
feeding RCT, 
crossover  
(single blind) 
Rome III IBS 
LFD n=27  
Typical diet n=27 
21 days 
100 mm symptom VAS  
Stool frequency 
Stool water content 
Primary outcome: Lower overall GI symptoms (LFD 23 mm vs control 45 
mm; p<0.001).  
Secondary outcome: Lower stool frequency in IBS-D in LFD vs control 
Comparative trials 
 
 
 
 
 
(42) 
Dietary advice RCT  
(single blind) 
Rome III IBS 
 
LFD n=20 
HFD n=20 
3 weeks 
Responder: ≥50 pt reduction 
IBS-SSS 
Primary outcome: area under the curve for lactulose breath test 
Secondary outcomes:  
Greater number of responders (LFD 72% vs HFD  21%; p<0.009) 
Lower IBS-SSS in LFD vs HFD (p=0.01)  
(49) 
Dietary advice RCT, 
crossover  
(double blind) 
Rome III  
IBS-D, IBS-M 
LFD+placebo n=20  
LFD+fructans n=20 
6 weeks 
IBS-SSS 
100mm symptom VAS  
Outcomes: Lower IBS-SSS (LFD 80% vs control 30%; p=0.014) and 
severity of nausea/vomiting, belching, flatulence in LFD vs control 
(p<0.05) 
(71) 
Dietary advice RCT  
(unblind) 
Rome III IBS-
D 
LFD=45  
Modified NICE guideline 
n=39 
4 weeks 
Responder: AR ≥50% of 
weeks 3,4 
Composite pain & stool score 
Primary outcome: No difference in numbers of responders (LFD 52% vs 
control 41%; p=0.31) 
Secondary outcomes: No difference in those achieving composite score 
endpoint (LFD 27% vs control 13%; p=0.13) 
Greater reduction in pain (LFD 51% vs control 23%; p=0.008) 
 15 
 
(72) 
Dietary advice RCT  
(unblind) 
Rome III IBS 
 
LFD n=24  
Hypnotherapy n=25 
Combined LFD and 
hypnotherapy n=25 
6 weeks 
Responder: ≥20mm VAS 
improvement in symptoms  
IBS-QOL 
Primary outcome:  
No difference in numbers of responders (LFD 71% vs hypnotherapy 72% 
vs combination 72%; p=0.67). 
Secondary outcomes: 
Lower symptom severity in LFD and hypnotherapy vs baseline (p<0.05) 
and higher IBS-QOL scores in all groups compared with baseline 
(p<0.001) but no differences between groups for symptoms or IBS-QOL  
(76) 
Dietary advice RCT  
(single blind) 
 
Rome III IBS 
 
LFD n=38 
NICE guideline n=37 
4 weeks 
Responder: ≥50 pt reduction 
IBS-SSS 
Stool frequency and 
consistency 
Primary outcome: No difference in number of responders (LFD 50% vs 
control 46%; p=0.72) 
 
RCT, randomised controlled trial; LFD, Low FODMAP diet; AR, adequate relief; GSRS, Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale; GI, gastrointestinal; FFQ, food frequency questionnaire; IBS-
SSS, IBS severity scoring system; IBS-QOL, IBS quality of life questionnaire; LGG, Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG; VAS, visual analogue scale; MCID, minimal clinically important difference; 
HFD, high FODMAP diet; NICE, National institute for Health and Care Excellence; FOS, fructo-oligosaccharide 
 16 
 
with sham dietary advice (42%, p=0.005) although adequate relief was reported by similar numbers in 
the low FODMAP (57%) group compared with sham (38%, p=0.051). This trial presents the first 
evidence that the low FODMAP diet is superior to placebo when administered as dietary advice. 
 
Five RCTs have compared the low FODMAP diet with active interventions. Two randomised 
comparative trials have been undertaken comparing low FODMAP dietary advice with standard 
dietary guidelines for IBS (e.g. small frequent meals, limit caffeine and alcohol, restrict intake of fatty 
or spicy food).(75) One study randomised 38 patients to low FODMAP advice and 37 to standard 
dietary advice for 4 weeks with a clinical response (≥50-point reduction in IBS-SSS) reported in 50% 
in the low FODMAP group and 46% in the standard advice group, with no difference between 
groups.(76) In the second RCT, although there was no difference in proportion of patients achieving 
the adequate relief endpoint, there were a greater number of pain responders in the low FODMAP 
group (51%) compared with standard advice (23%, p=0.008), as well as a greater magnitude of 
response of multiple individual symptoms (abdominal pain, bloating, stool consistency frequency and 
urgency).(71) This data on individual symptom response is consistent with previous findings of a non-
randomised comparative trial that reported a significant difference in the numbers responding to low 
FODMAP dietary advice (76%) compared with standard NICE guideline dietary advice (54%).(63) 
One recent trial also compared the low FODMAP diet with hypnotherapy in IBS.(72) Both 
interventions improved symptoms, although there was no difference in symptom severity between 
groups at 6 weeks.  
 
Finally, two RCTs have compared symptom response to the low FODMAP diet with interventions not 
intended to improve symptoms. The comparator group in one study was a high FODMAP diet (42) 
and in the other was a low FODMAP diet supplemented with fructo-oligosaccharide (fructans) to 
achieve a “normal” FODMAP intake.(49) Whilst the primary aim of these studies was not to 
investigate symptom response, both found the low FODMAP diet led to symptomatic benefit 
compared with the comparator interventions, both of which were high in fermentable carbohydrates. 
 
In summary, evidence to date suggests 50-80% of patients with IBS report symptomatic benefit on a 
low FODMAP diet in the short term, and data from comparative trials suggests it is at least as 
effective as general dietary and lifestyle interventions. Preconceived expectations about a treatment 
may prime patients to sense and record symptom outcomes differently, and this is a particular 
problem in IBS where outcomes are subjectively assessed, highly sensitive to participant behaviour, 
and where placebo effect is considerable (20-40%).(73) Therefore, recent placebo-controlled trials 
provide robust evidence for its clinical efficacy over placebo, and the first meta-analysis of low 
FODMAP RCTs reports a greater odds of reduction of abdominal pain (OR 1.81), abdominal bloating 
 17 
 
(OR 1.75) and overall GI symptoms (OR 1.81) compared with controls.(59) In line with these 
findings, national guidelines for the dietary management of IBS in the UK now advise consideration 
of a low FODMAP diet where basic diet and lifestyle measures (e.g. NICE guideline advice) have 
been unsuccessful.(17, 75)  
 
Long term clinical endpoints 
The majority of clinical trials of the low FODMAP diet evaluate short term clinical endpoints (≤ 12 
weeks). The durability of the diet over the longer term is arguably more meaningful given the 
chronicity of symptoms in IBS, but there is limited data available. This is particularly important given 
that standard practice is to systematically reintroduce FODMAPs to tolerance once symptoms are 
controlled. A retrospective study suggests the continued effectiveness of the diet in the longer term. 
Follow up of patients consuming a FODMAP modified diet suggests clinical benefit in 57-74% of 
patients at 14-16 months,(62) although the results are likely subject to significant recall bias. 
 
The RCT previously described comparing low FODMAP advice with hypnotherapy examined the 
long term symptomatic outcomes of patients.(72) Lower severity scores were evident for overall 
symptoms in 24 patients in the low FODMAP group at six months compared with baseline, with an 
impressive 82% categorised as responders. However, the improvement in symptoms in patients was 
not different to 25 patients who had originally been randomised to receive hypnotherapy or combined 
low FODMAP diet-hypnotherapy treatment (p=0.32). Further high quality long term RCTs are 
required to clarify the longevity of symptom response in patients who receive low FODMAP dietary 
advice, especially following reintroduction of FODMAPs to individual tolerance. Furthermore, 
considering the chronicity of patients’ symptoms, the impact of long term dietary manipulation on 
nutrient intake requires evaluation. 
 
Potential hazards of the low FODMAP diet 
Gastrointestinal microbiota  
Despite the clinical efficacy of a low FODMAP diet in IBS, some potentially unfavourable 
consequences have been reported. In particular, the low FODMAP diet leads to a considerable 
reduction in intake of prebiotic fructans and GOS,(50, 76) and therefore a sizeable reduction in 
substrate available for colonic fermentation. Significant dietary restriction will alter the composition 
and functioning of the GI microbiota. Six studies, including a number already reviewed in the clinical 
section, have investigated the effect of the low FODMAP diet on the gut microbiota in IBS (Table 3). 
 
Two studies, undertaken by our group, have investigated the effect of a 4-week low FODMAP diet on 
stool microbiota in patients with IBS. Using fluorescence in situ hybridisation, the first demonstrated 
 18 
 
that a 50% reduction in FODMAP intake led to a marked six-fold reduction in relative abundance of 
Bifidobacteria compared with controls who maintained their habitual diet.(50) There were no 
 19 
 
Table 3:  
Studies investigating the effect of the low FODMAP diet on the microbiota and microbiota metabolites 
Reference Study design 
Participants 
Duration 
Microbiota 
Microbiota metabolite 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Findings 
Method 
Findings 
(42) 
Dietary advice RCT 
(single blind) 
Rome III IBS 
LFD n=19  
HFD n=18  
 
3 weeks 
16S rRNA 
sequencing 
(Illumina) 
 
Microbiota:  
Increased richness of Actinobacteria, 
Firmicutes, Clostridiales in LFD vs HFD 
No difference in α-diversity or β-diversity 
after LFD vs baseline but higher richness in 
LFD vs HFD  
Increased abundance of Clostridiales family 
XIII Incertae sedis spp. and Porphyromonas 
spp. in LFD vs baseline  
Decreased abundance of Propionibacteriaceae, 
Bifidobacteria in LFD vs baseline 
MS 
No difference in urinary metabolomic 
profile at baseline in LFD vs HFD but 
separation after intervention  
Three metabolites (histamine, p-
hydroxybenzoic acid and azelaic acid) 
discriminated groups 
Metabolite concentrations correlated with 
abundance of various taxa 
(44) 
Feeding RCT, 
crossover (single 
blind) 
Rome III IBS and 
healthy 
LFD vs typical diet 
IBS n=27 
Healthy n=6 
3 weeks 
qPCR 
Lower absolute abundance of Bifidobacteria, 
F. prausnitzii, Clostridium Cluster IV in LFD 
vs typical diet and baseline 
Lower relative abundance A. muciniphila in 
LFD vs typical diet  
Lower total bacteria in LFD vs baseline  
Greater diversity Clostridium Cluster XIV in 
LFD vs typical diet and baseline 
GLC 
No difference in total or individual stool 
SCFAs in LFD vs typical and baseline 
(47) 
Dietary advice 
uncontrolled trial 
(unblind) 
Rome III IBS 
n=63 
4-week  
- 
- 
GLC 
Lower total stool SCFAs, acetate, 
butyrate vs baseline  
 
(48) 
Dietary advice RCT 
(single blind) 
Rome III IBS 
LFD n=51 
Sham n=53 
4 weeks 
qPCR 
 
Lower abundance of Bifidobacteria in LFD vs 
sham  
GLC 
Lower stool acetate concentration in LFD 
vs control  
(50) 
Dietary advice RCT 
(unblind) 
 
Rome III IBS  
LFD n=19 
Habitual diet n=22 
4 weeks 
FISH 
Lower absolute and relative abundance of 
Bifidobacteria in LFD vs habitual  
No difference in total abundance of other 
groups e.g. F. prausnitzii  
GLC 
No difference in total or individual stool 
SCFAs in LFD vs habitual 
 
(77) 
Dietary advice 
uncontrolled trial 
(unblind) 
Paediatric Rome III  
n=12 
1 week 
454 
pyrosequencing 
 
No difference in α-diversity after LFD 
No changes in distribution of taxa 
UPLC/MS 
GC/MS 
A number of stool metabolites (L-urobilin) 
associated with response to LFD 
 20 
 
RCT, randomised controlled trial; low FODMAP diet; HFD, high FODMAP diet; MS, mass spectrometry; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridisation; GLC, gas liquid chromatography; SCFA, 
short chain fatty acid;  qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction; UPLC/MS, ultra-performance liquid chromatography tandem  mass spectroscopy; GC/MS, gas chromatography mass 
spectroscopy 
All differences reported are significant (p<0.05)  
 21 
 
differences in total bacteria or other bacterial groups such as Lactobacillus or Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii, or fermentation byproducts such as stool SCFA concentration or pH between groups. 
These findings were corroborated in a recent large, placebo-controlled RCT where low FODMAP 
dietary advice led to reduction in Bifidobacteria concentration using quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction.(48)  
 
The third study was the previously described 3-week feeding study that used quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction to show lower absolute Bifidobacteria concentration, F. prausnitzii and Clostridium 
Cluster IV accompanied by a substantially lower total bacterial load of 47% during the low FODMAP 
diet compared with habitual diet.(44) Diversity of Clostridium Cluster XIV was greater after low 
FODMAP intervention compared with habitual diet, which was postulated to be due to species 
adaptation to altered substrate availability. This was a crossover study, and therefore the potential of 
carryover effects cannot be ruled out and the 80% reduction in FODMAP intake, which was achieved 
through total food provision, is unlikely to be reflective of the reductions achieved in dietary advice in 
routine practice.  
 
In addition to these studies, two others have evaluated microbiota composition in response to 
FODMAP restriction in IBS using metagenomic sequencing methods.(42, 77) Deep analysis of 
microbiota composition and structure revealed no change in α-diversity (number of operational 
taxonomic units [OTU] i.e. number of species) in children after a 1-week low FODMAP diet in a 
small uncontrolled study.(77) Furthermore, the previously described 3-week study that reported low 
FODMAP-induced metabolomic alterations in adults demonstrated no effect on α-diversity or β-
diversity (differences in species composition between samples at baseline and follow-up) compared 
with baseline.(42) In the latter study, the abundance of several taxa increased (Clostridiales XIII 
Incertae sedis spp. and Porphyromonas spp.) and decreased (Propionibacteriaceae, Bifidobacteria) in 
the low FODMAP group.  
 
Whether quantitative analysis of the microbiota could be harnessed as a predictor of response to the 
low FODMAP diet is an exciting proposition, and has been evaluated in a limited number of studies. 
In one study, increased baseline abundance of taxa such as Bacteroides, Ruminococcaceae and F. 
prausnizii predicted response to a 2-day low FODMAP diet in children, where response was based on 
pain frequency.(78) This was a crossover feeding study, however, and symptom response occurred in 
only 24% of patients, but it did suggest patients with a higher abundance of saccharolytic microbiota 
may benefit the most from a reduction in dietary fermentable substrates. No such association has been 
demonstrated in adult patients,(44) and more data is required from large parallel-arm trials. 
 
 22 
 
Clearly, there is still much to understand regarding the impact of the low FODMAP diet on the GI 
microbiota. Whether the effect of the low FODMAP diet on the specific bacterial groups (e.g. 
Bifidobacteria) or overall microbiota community has identifiable downstream effects on their 
metabolic output or has detrimental effects on colonic health is unknown. Furthermore, it is not yet 
known whether the mucosal compartment is affected, whether there is a definitive effect on SCFA 
concentration and luminal pH in the proximal colon, or if there is a critical time point at which 
microbiota alterations might have functional consequences and whether these changes alter short or 
long-term health outcomes. The vast majority of studies thus far are descriptive observations of the 
microbiome and metabolome in clinical trials of the low FODMAP diet. In vitro studies will be 
important in guiding investigations of low FODMAP-induced alterations in the microbiome and its 
output in humans.  Reintroduction of FODMAPs to tolerance may attenuate some of these changes, 
and studies of FODMAP restriction combined with probiotic or prebiotic supplementation are 
underway. 
 
Nutrient intake 
Most patients with IBS meet nutrient requirements,(14, 79) and their nutrient intake does not differ 
from that of healthy controls.(80) The clinical effectiveness of a therapeutic diet must always be 
weighed against the impact it has on maintaining appropriate nutrient intake, as well as the difficulties 
of following the diet. In relation to macronutrients, three dietary advice studies have reported that the 
low FODMAP diet leads to a lower total carbohydrate intake compared with habitual diet,(50, 71,76) 
although the effect sizes are small and result in carbohydrate intakes reflect those of healthy 
individuals (150-200 g/d).(81) One study previously mentioned reports a considerable reduction in 
energy intake in patients following low FODMAP advice,(76) which may be of concern particularly if 
the diet is followed in the longer term. However, the same change was seen in patients following 
standard IBS advice, and therefore it is unlikely this effect is specific to the low FODMAP diet, and 
may instead be due to dietary vigilance. 
 
The 4-week study evaluating the effect of low FODMAP dietary advice compared with controls 
following habitual diet is the only RCT to date that has examined micronutrient intake.(50) Iron 
intake was not different to controls, suggesting that iron-rich foods restricted on the low FODMAP 
diet (e.g. iron-fortified cereal, pulses, nuts) were adequately substituted when advice was given by a 
registered dietitian. However, a lower calcium intake was reported (600 mg/d in the low FODMAP 
group vs 730 mg/d in controls, p=0.016), and it is likely that this was due to restriction of lactose-
containing dairy products with insufficient replacement of high calcium alternatives. Measurement 
error due to lack of low lactose food composition data may also be a contributing factor. Nevertheless, 
further larger studies are required to confirm whether the intake of calcium and/or other 
 23 
 
micronutrients is compromised when patients with IBS follow a low FODMAP diet. Importantly, 
evaluation of nutrient intake and dietary diversification at sequential periods following FODMAP 
reintroduction will be important to establish whether the low FODMAP diet poses any nutritional risk 
in IBS in the long term. 
 
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
Future research on the low FODMAP diet must move away from simply assessing clinical responses. 
Careful characterisation of patients in clinical trials and clarification of mechanisms of action will 
help in the identification of phenotypes most likely to respond, which is important when considering a 
diet that is complex to implement. Long term follow-up of patients who have liberalised their diet 
require further formal evaluation. The low FODMAP diet co-administered with a microbiota-targeted 
therapy may be a novel approach to inducing clinical response whilst preventing a detrimental impact 
on the microbiota and metabolome. Future research must also focus on the use of the diet in other 
clinical conditions characterised by functional GI symptoms. For example, preliminary research  
shows the low FODMAP diet results in reduction in functional gut symptoms in co-existent 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),(64) but microbiota composition shifts also occur (82), including 
alterations in the abundance of species already reduced in IBD e.g. Akkermansia muciniphila (83) and 
F. prausnitzii.(84) A bottom-up approach (limited restriction of high FODMAP foods at the outset) 
may be more appropriate in these patients.(85) In addition, studies that compare the low FODMAP 
diet with single sugar exclusion (e.g. fructose, lactose) would enable understanding of whether the 
effects of the diet are due to restriction of all FODMAPs or just individual sugars. Whether a long 
term low FODMAP diet is appropriate in specific disease states requires clarification. Future work 
will need to acknowledge that microbiota and metabolomic response to dietary intervention is highly 
individually variable, and evaluating these differences may be important in informing whether subsets 
of patients are more likely to respond clinically. 
 
Methods of implementation of the diet are also important areas for future work. The rapid rise in 
evidence for the efficacy of the diet has increased demand for clinical services. Preliminary data 
suggests low FODMAP group education by a dietitian is just as effective as 1:1 education, (61) and 
this may represent a more practical method for treating large patient numbers, although long term 
effectiveness and nutritional consequences of this approach requires evaluation.  
 
The strength of future evidence will rely on precise implementation of the low FODMAP diet using 
established published food composition data (86-88) and measurement of adherence by careful 
measurement of dietary intake. Studies should be suitably powered and apply validated instruments to 
measure clinical outcomes. Evaluation of the impact on the microbiota and metabolome will always 
 24 
 
be constrained by confounding factors, but effort must be made to control for certain variables if 
possible (e.g. stress, concurrent medications), including dietary components known to have 
considerable effects on microbiota composition (e.g. fibre, polyphenols).  
 
CONCLUSION 
Convincing evidence exists for the clinical efficacy of the low FODMAP diet in IBS, which represents 
a therapeutic milestone for a condition that has historically been difficult to treat by either medical or 
dietary means. There is mounting evidence of the profound effect of the low FODMAP diet on the 
microbiota and its metabolites, but further research is necessary to clarify the duration, nature and 
implications of this in the short and long term. Interventions used in conjunction with the low 
FODMAP diet to prevent potentially deleterious impacts on the microbiota may become key dual 
prophylactic and co-therapeutic measures. Furthermore, predicting response to the diet will assist in 
optimising management of patients with IBS, and limit unnecessary dietary restriction in those less 
likely to respond.  
 
 
 25 
 
 
Competing interests: KW is co-inventor of a mobile application to assist patients in following the 
low FODMAP diet 
 
 
 
 26 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Mearin F, Lacy BE, Chang L, et al. Bowel Disorders. Gastroenterology 2016;150:1393-1407. 
2. 
Lovell RM, Ford AC. Global prevalence of and risk factors for irritable bowel syndrome: A 
meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10(7):712-21. 
3. 
Yao X, Yang YS, Cui LH, et al. Subtypes of irritable bowel syndrome on Rome III criteria: A 
multicenter study. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;27(4):760-5. 
4. 
Engsbro AL, Simren M, Bytzer P. Short-term stability of subtypes in the irritable bowel 
syndrome: Prospective evaluation using the Rome III classification. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2012;35(3):350-9. 
5. 
Pinto-Sanchez MI, Ford AC, Avila CA, et al. Anxiety and depression increase in a stepwise 
manner in parallel with multiple FGIDs and symptom severity and frequency. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2015;110(7):1038-48. 
6. 
Gralnek IM, Hays RD, Kilbourne A, et al. The impact of irritable bowel syndrome on health-
related quality of life. Gastroenterology 2000;119(3):654-60. 
7. 
Monnikes H. Quality of life in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. J Clin Gastroenterol 
2011;45Suppl:S98-101. 
8. 
Thompson WG, Heaton KW, Smyth GT, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome in general practice: 
Prevalence, characteristics, and referral. Gut 2000;46(1):78-82. 
9. 
Jones J, Boorman J, Cann P, et al. British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines for the 
management of the irritable bowel syndrome. Gut 2000;47(2):ii1-19. 
10. 
Canavan C, West J, Card T. Review article: The economic impact of the irritable bowel 
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2014;40(9):1023-34. 
11. 
Maxion-Bergemann S, Thielecke F, Abel F, et al. Costs of irritable bowel syndrome in the 
UK and US. Pharmacoeconomics 2006;24(1):21-37. 
12. 
Chang L, Lembo A, Sultan S. American Gastroenterological Association Institute Technical 
Review on the pharmacological management of irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 
2014;147(5):1149-72.e2. 
13. 
Monsbakken KW, Vandvik PO, Farup PG. Perceived food intolerance in subjects with 
irritable bowel syndrome: Etiology, prevalence and consequences. Eur J Clin Nutr 
2006;60(5):667-72. 
14. 
Bohn L, Storsrud S, Simren M. Nutrient intake in patients with irritable bowel syndrome 
compared with the general population. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2013;25(1):23-30.e1. 
15. 
McKenzie YA, Bowyer RK, Leach H, et al. British Dietetic Association systematic review 
and evidence-based practice guidelines for the dietary management of irritable bowel 
syndrome in adults (2016 update). J Hum Nutr Diet 2016;29(5):549-75. 
 27 
 
16.  
Moayyedi P, Quigley EM, Lacy BE, et al. The effect of fiber supplementation on irritable 
bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 
2014;109(9):1367-74. 
17. 
Nagarajan N, Morden A, Bischof D et al. The role of fiber supplementation in the treatment 
of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2015;27:1002-1010. 
18. 
Hayes P, Corish C, O'Mahony E, et al. A dietary survey of patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet 2014;27(2):36-47. 
19. 
Reding KW, Cain KC, Jarrett ME, et al. Relationship between patterns of alcohol 
consumption and gastrointestinal symptoms among patients with irritable bowel syndrome. 
Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108(2):270-6. 
20. 
Aziz I, Trott N, Briggs R, et al. Efficacy of a gluten-free diet in subjects with irritable bowel 
syndrome-diarrhea unaware of their HLA-DQ2/8 genotype. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2016;14(5):696-703.e.1. 
21. 
Wahnschaffe U, Schulzke JD, Zeitz M, et al. Predictors of clinical response to gluten-free diet 
in patients diagnosed with diarrhea-predoinant irritable bowel syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2007;5(7):844-50. 
22.  
Vazquez-Roque MI, Camilleri M, Smyrk T, et al. A controlled trial of gluten-free diet in 
patients with irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhea: Effects on bowel frequency and intestinal 
function. Gastroenterology 2013;144(5):903-11.e3. 
23. 
Biesiekierski JR, Peters SL, Newnham ED, et al. No effects of gluten in patients with self-
reported non-celiac gluten sensitivity after dietary reduction of fermentable, poorly absorbed, 
short-chain carbohydrates. Gastroenterology 2013;145(2):320-8.e1-3. 
24. 
Nanda R, James R, Smith H, et al. Food intolerance and the irritable bowel syndrome. Gut 
1989;30(8):1099-104. 
25. 
Parker TJ, Naylor SJ, Riordan AM, et al. Management of patients with food intolerance in 
irritable bowel syndrome: The development and use of an exclusion diet. J Hum Nutr Diet 
1995;8:159-66. 
26. 
Fritscher-Ravens A, Schuppan D, Ellrichmann M, et al. Confocal endomicroscopy shows 
food-associated changes in the intestinal mucosa of patients with irritable bowel syndrome. 
Gastroenterology 2014;147(5):1012-20.e4. 
27. 
Ford AC, Quigley EM, Lacy BE, et al. Efficacy of prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics in 
irritable bowel syndrome and chronic idiopathic constipation: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109(10):1547-61. 
28. 
McKenzie YA, Thompson J, Gulia P, et al. British Dietetic Association systematic review of 
systematic reviews and evidence-based practice guidelines for the use of probiotics nit he 
 28 
 
management of irritable bowel syndrome in adults (2016 update). J Hum Nutr Diet 
2016;29:576-592. 
29. 
Staudacher HM, Irving PM, Lomer MC, et al. Mechanisms and efficacy of dietary FODMAP 
restriction in IBS. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;11(4):256-66. 
30. 
Elia M, Cummings JH. Physiological aspects of energy metabolism and gastrointestinal 
effects of carbohydrates. Eur J Clin Nutr 2007;61(1):S40-74. 
31. 
Scott KP, Gratz SW, Sheridan PO, et al. The influence of diet on the gut microbiota. 
Pharmacol Res 2013;69(1):52-60. 
32. 
Hernot DC, Boileau TW, Bauer LL, et al. In vitro fermentation profiles, gas production rates, 
and microbiota modulation as affected by certain fructans, galactooligosaccharides, and 
polydextrose. J Agric Food Chem 2009;57(4):1354-61. 
33. 
Evans PR, Piesse C, Bak YT, et al. Fructose-sorbitol malabsorption and symptom provocation 
in irritable bowel syndrome: Relationship to enteric hypersensitivity and dysmotility. Scand J 
Gastroenterol 1998;33(11):1158-63. 
34. 
Gudmand-Høyer E. The clinical significance of disaccharide maldigestion. Am J Clin Nutr 
1994;59(3Suppl):735S-41S. 
35. 
Shepherd SJ, Parker FC, Muir JG, et al. Dietary triggers of abdominal symptoms in patients 
with irritable bowel syndrome: Randomized placebo-controlled evidence. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2008;6(7):765-71. 
36. 
Barrett JS, Gearry RB, Muir JG,et al. Dietary poorly absorbed, short-chain carbohydrates 
increase delivery of water and fermentable substrates to the proximal colon. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 2010;31(8):874-82. 
37. 
Marciani L, Cox EF, Hoad CL, et al. Postprandial changes in small bowel water content in 
healthy subjects and patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 
2010;138(2):469-77, 77. 
38. 
Murray K, Wilkinson-Smith V, Hoad C, et al. Differential effects of FODMAPs (fermentable 
oligo-, di-, mono-saccharides and polyols) on small and large intestinal contents in healthy 
subjects shown by MRI. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109(1):110-9. 
39. 
Major G, Pritchard S, Murray K, et al. Colon hypersensitivity to distension, rather than 
excessive gas production, produces carbohydrate-related symptoms in individuals with 
irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 2017;152(1):124-133.e2 
40.  
Spiller RC, Brown ML, Phillips SF. Decreased fluid tolerance, accelerated transit, and 
abnormal motility of the human colon induced by oleic acid. Gastroenterol 1986;91:100-7. 
41. 
Ong DK, Mitchell SB, Barrett JS, et al. Manipulation of dietary short chain carbohydrates 
alters the pattern of gas production and genesis of symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;25(8):1366-73. 
 29 
 
42. 
McIntosh K, Reed DE, Schneider T, et al. FODMAPs alter symptoms and the metabolome of 
patients with IBS: A randomised controlled trial. Gut. Published Online First: 14 March 2016. 
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-311339. 
43. 
Madsen JL, Linnet J, Rumessen JJ. Effect of nonabsorbed amounts of a fructose-sorbitol 
mixture on small intestinal transit in healthy volunteers. Dig Dis Sci 2006;51(1):147-53. 
44. 
Halmos EP, Christophersen CT, Bird AR, et al. Diets that differ in their FODMAP content 
alter the colonic luminal microenvironment. Gut 2015;64(1):93-100. 
45.  
Tana C, Umesaki Y, Imaoka A, et al. Altered profiles of intestinal microbiota and organic 
acids may be the origin of symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome. Neurogastroenterol Motil 
2010;22(5):512-9,e114-5. 
46.  
Bourdu S, Dapoigny M, Chapuy E, et al. Rectal instillation of butyrate provides a novel 
clinically relevant model of noninflammatory colonic hypersensitivity in rats. 
Gastroenterology 2005;128(7):1996-2008. 
47. 
Valeur J, Røseth AG, Knudsen T, et al. Fecal fermentation in irritable bowel syndrome: 
Influence of dietary restriction of fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, 
monosaccharides and polyols. Digestion 2016;94(1):50-6. 
48. 
Staudacher HM, Lomer MCE, Louis P, et al. The low FODMAP diet reduces symptoms in 
irritable bowel syndrome compared with placebo diet and the microbiota alterations may be 
prevented by probiotic co-administration: A 2x2 factorial randomised controlled trial. 
Gastroenterology 2016;150(4):S230. 
49. 
Hustoft TN, Hausken T, Ystad SO, et al. Effects of varying dietary content of fermentable 
short-chain carbohydrates on symptoms, fecal microenvironment, and cytokine profiles in 
patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2017;29:e12969.  
50.  
Staudacher HM, Lomer MC, Anderson JL, et al. Fermentable carbohydrate restriction reduces 
luminal bifidobacteria and gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome. J Nutr 2012;142(8):1510-8. 
51. 
Duncan SH, Holtrop G, Lobley GE, et al. Contribution of acetate to butyrate formation by 
human faecal bacteria. Br J Nutr 2004;91(6):915-23. 
52. 
Ringel-Kulka T, Choi CH, Temas D, et al. Altered colonic bacterial fermentation as a 
potential pathophysiological factor in irritable bowel syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol 
2015;110(9):1339-46. 
53.  
Cummings JH, Macfarlane GT. The control and consequences of bacterial fermentation in the 
human colon. J Appl Bacteriol 1991;70(6):443-59. 
54. 
Millet S, Van Oeckel MJ, Aluwe M, et al. Prediction of in vivo short-chain fatty acid 
production in hindgut fermenting mammals: Problems and pitfalls. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 
2010;50(7):605-19. 
 30 
 
55. 
Mazzawi T, Hausken T, Gundersen D, et al. Dietary guidance normalizes large intestinal 
endocrine cell densities in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Eur J Clin Nutr 
2016;70(2):175-81. 
56. 
Zhou S, Eswaran SL, Wu X, et al. Low FODMAP diet modulates visceral nociception by 
changing gut microbiota and intestinal permeability in IBS. Gastroenterology 
2016;150(4):S63-S4. 
57. 
Ohman L, Tornblom H, Simren M. Crosstalk at the mucosal border: Importance of the gut 
microenvironment in IBS. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;12(1):36-49. 
58. 
Rao SS, Yu S, Fedewa A. Systematic review: Dietary fibre and FODMAP-restricted diet in 
the management of constipation and irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2015;41(12):1256-70. 
59. 
Marsh A, Eslick EM, Eslick GD. Does a diet low in FODMAPs reduce symptoms associated 
with functional gastrointestinal disorders? A comprehensive systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Nutr 2016;55(3):897-906. 
60. 
Staudacher HM, Whelan K, Irving PM, et al. Comparison of symptom response following 
advice for a diet low in fermentable carbohydrates (FODMAPs) versus standard dietary 
advice in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet 2011;24(5):487-95. 
61. 
Whigham L, Joyce T, Harper G, et al. Clinical effectiveness and economic costs of group 
versus one-to-one education for short-chain fermentable carbohydrate restriction (low 
FODMAP diet) in the management of irritable bowel syndrome. J Hum Nutr Diet 
2015;28(6):687-96. 
62. 
Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR. Fructose malabsorption and symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome: 
Guidelines for effective dietary management. J Am Diet Assoc 2006;106(10):1631-9. 
63. 
Maagaard L, Ankersen DV, Végh Z, et al. Follow-up of patients with functional bowel 
symptoms treated with a low FODMAP diet. World J Gastroenterol 2016;22(15):4009-19. 
64. 
Prince AC, Myers CE, Joyce T, et al. Fermentable carbohydrate restriction (low FODMAP 
diet) in clinical practice improves functional gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2016;22(5):1129-36. 
65. 
Wilder-Smith CH, Materna A, Wermelinger C, et al. Fructose and lactose intolerance and 
malabsorption testing: The relationship with symptoms in functional gastrointestinal 
disorders. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;37(11):1074-83. 
66. 
de Roest RH, Dobbs BR, Chapman BA, et al. The low FODMAP diet improves 
gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with irritable bowel syndrome: A prospective study. Int 
J Clin Pract 2013;67(9):895-903. 
 31 
 
67. 
Mazzawi T, Hausken T, Gundersen D, et al. Effects of dietary guidance on the symptoms, 
quality of life and habitual dietary intake of patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Mol Med 
Rep 2013;8(3):845-52. 
68. 
Østgaard H, Hausken T, Gundersen D, et al. Diet and effects of diet management on quality 
of life and symptoms in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Mol Med Report 
2012;5(6):1382-90. 
69. 
Harvie R, Chisholm A, Schultz M. A reduction in FODMAP intake correlates strongly with a 
reduction in IBS symptoms:  The FIBS study. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;28(Suppl3):352. 
70. 
Pedersen N, Andersen NN, Vegh Z, et al. Ehealth: Low FODMAP diet vs Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus GG in irritable bowel syndrome. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20(43):16215-26. 
71.  
Eswaran SL, Chey WD, Han-Markey T, et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing the 
low FODMAP diet vs. modified NICE guidelines in US adults with IBS-D. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2016;111(12):1824-1832. 
72. 
Peters SL, Yao CK, Philpott H, et al. Randomised clinical trial: The efficacy of gut-directed 
hypnotherapy is similar to that of the low FODMAP diet for the treatment of irritable bowel 
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016;44(5):447-59. 
73. 
Elsenbruch S, Enck P. Placebo effects and their determinants in gastrointestinal disorders. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;12(8):472-85. 
74. 
Halmos EP, Power VA, Shepherd SJ, et al. A diet low in FODMAPs reduces symptoms of 
irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 2014;146(1):67-75.e5. 
75. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: 
diagnosis and management of irritable bowel syndrome in primary care (2015). Retrieved 
from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg61. Date accessed August 2016. 
76. 
Bohn L, Storsrud S, Liljebo T, et al. A diet low in FODMAPs reduces symptoms of irritable 
bowel syndrome as well as traditional dietary advice: A randomized controlled trial. 
Gastroenterology 2015;149(6):1399-1407.e2. 
 
77. 
Chumpitazi BP, Hollister EB, Oezguen N, et al. Gut microbiota influences low fermentable 
substrate diet efficacy in children with irritable bowel syndrome. Gut Microbes 
2014;5(2):165-75. 
78. 
Chumpitazi BP, Cope JL, Hollister EB, et al. Randomised clinical trial: Gut microbiome 
biomarkers are associated with clinical response to a low FODMAP diet in children with the 
irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;42(4):418-27. 
79. 
Williams EA, Nai X, Corfe BM. Dietary intakes in people with irritable bowel syndrome. 
BMC Gastroenterol 2011;11:9. 
80. 
Saito YA, Locke GR, 3rd, Weaver AL, et al. Diet and functional gastrointestinal disorders: a 
population-based case-control study. Am J Gastroenterol 2005;100(12):2743-8. 
 32 
 
81. 
Public Health England and Food Standards Agency. National Diet and Nutrition Survey: 
appendices and tables. Retrieved from: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/national-
diet-and-nutrition-survey-results-from-years-1-to-4-combined-of-the-rolling-programme-for-
2008-and-2009-to-2011-and-2012. Date accessed August 2016. 
82. 
Halmos EP, Christophersen CT, Bird AR, et al. Consistent prebiotic effect on gut microbiota 
with altered FODMAP intake in patients with Crohn's disease: A randomised, controlled 
cross-over trial of well-defined diets. Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2016;7:e164. 
83. 
Png CW, Lindén SK, Gilshenan KS, et al. Mucolytic bacteria with increased prevalence in 
IBD mucosa augment in vitro utilization of mucin by other bacteria. Am J Gastroenterol 
2010;105(11):2420-8. 
84. 
Sokol H, Seksik P, Furet JP, et al. Low counts of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii in colitis 
microbiota. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2009;15(8):1183-9. 
85. 
Halmos EP. A low FODMAP diet in patients with Crohn's disease. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2016;31 Suppl1:14-5. 
86. 
Biesiekierski JR, Rosella O, Rose R, et al. Quantification of fructans, galacto-oligosacharides 
and other short-chain carbohydrates in processed grains and cereals. J Hum Nutr Diet 
2011;24(2):154-76. 
87. 
Prichard R, Rossi M, Muir J,et al. Fermentable oligosaccharide, disaccharide, 
monosaccharide and polyol content of foods commonly consumed by ethnic minority groups 
in the United Kingdom. Int J Food Sci Nutr 2016;67(4):383-90. 
88. 
Muir JG, Rose R, Rosella O, et al. Measurement of short-chain carbohydrates in common 
Australian vegetables and fruits by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). J Agric 
Food Chem 2009;57(2):554-65. 
 
 
 33 
 
Figure 1: Mechanisms of the effects of FODMAPs on gastrointestinal function.  
Some short-chain fermentable carbohydrates are absorbed. For example, fructose is absorbed via 
GLUT2 or GLUT5 and lactose is absorbed if hydrolysed by lactase. Unabsorbed fructose, polyols and 
lactose lead to increased small intestinal water. Unabsorbed carbohydrates, including fructans and 
GOS, are fermented in the colon leading to gas production. The resulting luminal distension leads to 
functional gastrointestinal symptoms in those with visceral hypersensitivity and IBS. 
 
 
 
