 REVIEW
published: 21 June 2016
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00246
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
Edited by:
Francis Degache,
University of Applied Sciences of
Western Switzerland, Switzerland
Reviewed by:
Noah J. Marcus,
Des Moines University, USA
Marcello Traina,
University of Palermo, Italy
*Correspondence:
Johnny Padulo
sportcinetic@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Exercise Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 11 February 2016
Accepted: 03 June 2016
Published: 21 June 2016
Citation:
Stefani L, Galanti G, Padulo J,
Bragazzi NL and Maffulli N (2016)
Sexual Activity before Sports
Competition: A Systematic Review.
Front. Physiol. 7:246.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00246
Sexual Activity before Sports
Competition: A Systematic Review
Laura Stefani 1, Giorgio Galanti 1, Johnny Padulo 2, 3*, Nicola L. Bragazzi 4 and
Nicola Maffulli 5, 6
1 Sports Medicine Center, School of Sports Medicine, Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy, 2 University eCampus, Novedrate, Italy, 3 Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Split, Split, Croatia,
4 Department of Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 5 Department of Musculoskeletal
Disorders, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy, 6 Centre for Sports and Exercise Medicine,
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Sexual activity before competition has been considered as a possible cause for
reduced performance since ancient Greece and Rome. Recently, the hypothesis that
optimal sport performance could be influenced by a variety of factors including sexual
activity before competition has been investigated. However, few scientific data are
available, with the exception of anecdotal reports of individual experiences. The present
systematic review focused on the current scientific evidence on the effects of sexual
activity on sport performance regardless of sport type. Data were obtained following
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA)
guidelines, using PubMed/MEDLINE, ISI/Web of Science, the Cochrane Collaboration
Database, Cochrane Library, Evidence Database (PEDro), Evidence Based Medicine
(EBM) Search review, National Guidelines, ProQuest, and Scopus, all searched from
inception further, to broaden the search, no time filter nor language restriction have
been applied. Also, the gray literature was mined using Google Scholar. Only relevant
scientific articles reporting outcomes of athletic performance after sexual activity were
considered. The impact of sexual activity before a sport competition is still unclear, but
most studies generally seem to exclude a direct impact of sexual activity on athletic
aerobic and strength performance. The most important aspect seems to be the interval
from the time of the sports competition that affects negatively the performance if it is
shorter than 2 h. There are possible negative effects from some possible concurrent
wrong behaviors such as smoking or alcohol abuse. There are no investigations about
the effect of masturbation in this context. There is a need to clarify the effects of sexual
activity on competition performance. The present evidence suggests that sexual activity
the day before competition does not exert any negative impact on performance, even
though high-quality, randomized controlled studies are urgently needed.
Keywords: athletes, abstinence, circadian rhythm, competition, performance, sex, time of day
BACKGROUND
In ancient times, abstinence was considered the best method to ensure athletic performance and
communion between body and spirit. Roman and Greek educators believed that great sacrifices
could sustain success. This is probably the main reason why many coaches support the importance
of sexual abstinence before sports competition (Oman et al., 2003), believing that sexual frustration
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
leads to increased aggression. They believe that ejaculation
draws testosterone away from the body (Krieger, 1997), reducing
aggression and muscle strength.
However, the relationship between sexual activity and athletic
performance is still controversial. The first scientific publications
date back several decades, when some psychological and
physiological aspects related to sexual activity were considered
in the sport environment (Anshel, 1981). Nevertheless, no
controlled data are available about the possible role of
masturbation or climax. The role of sexual activity on sport
performance has not anyway been examined in a scientific
fashion, using a rigorous, reproducible approach, and few studies
have been specifically dedicated to this matter up to now (Cooper,
1975).
The relationship between sexual hormones and physical
function has been on the contrary studied for both power and
endurance performance (Johnson, 1968; Hengevoss et al., 2015).
Few authors studied the effects of sexual activity the night before
a competition, and most coaches believe that it can have a
negative influence on athletic results because of excess energy
expenditure (Ferraz and Costa, 2014). The problem it is not yet
sufficiently clarified, though the energy expenditure of sexual
activity remains low (Krieger, 1997; Baume et al., 2006; Ferraz
and Costa, 2014). The lack of sleep associated with such activity
may however be remarkable, and contribute to greater energy
loss and a reduction in sports performance. It is not yet clear
for how long this hypothetical negative impact would last. Some
differences on the effects on sports activity could be hypothesized
when masturbation or sexual intercourse are considered. The
relationship between sexual activity and sports is indeed complex
and mutual. Butt (1990) demonstrated that sexual activity could
be interpreted as a sort of physical activity, positively impacting
on health and wellbeing.
This systematic review evaluates the current scientific
evidence in the field of the sexual activity of athletes before sports
competition.
METHODS
Information Sources
The
current
systematic
review
was
conducted
following
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines (Liberati et al., 2009).
A
specific
checklist
and
an
ad-hoc
algorithm
with
the
screening questions were designed and pilot tested within
a subset of studies before implementation. The following
databases/thesauri were extensively searched from inception:
namely, PubMed/MEDLINE, ISI/Web of Science, the Cochrane
Collaboration Database, Cochrane Library, Evidence Database
(PEDro), Evidence Based Medicine (EBM) Search review,
National Guidelines, ProQuest, and Scopus. We used a string
made up of the following key words with proper Boolean
connectors: coitus, sexual intercourse, sexual activity, sexual
climax, orgasm, masturbation, abstinence, sports, competition,
exercise, physical activity, strength, speed, endurance, and
performance. Truncated words with wild card option and
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms were used when
appropriate. The platform “Primo Central Ex Libris UNO per
tutti” was used.
Screening Strategy
The studies were independently screened by two reviewers (LS
and GG), to avoid any bias. Disagreement was assessed using
κ statistics, and resolved through discussion; a third reviewer
(NLB) was involved if necessary.
Eligibility Criteria
All manuscripts initially considered relevant by title and abstract
were eligible for inclusion. The full text of the manuscripts
was obtained to ascertain whether they satisfied the following
inclusion criteria, detailed according to the PICO standard:
P
(population):
athletes
(at
any
level,
national
and
international and practicing any sports discipline);
I (intervention/exposure): having sexual activity before a
competition/match;
C (comparison): studies comparing athletes reporting sexual
activity vs. athletes not having sexual intercourse before
a competition/match, where such comparison has been
performed;
O (outcome): impact of sexual activity on performance.
Other inclusion criteria concerned the design (original primary
articles of any type—case report, case series, observational
study, randomized controlled trial, etc.), language (all languages
available), and time filter (none applied).
In addition, to broaden our research, the references section
of the selected articles was searched by hand to try and identify
other relevant articles. Also, target journals were hand-searched.
Further, to identify as many potentially relevant manuscripts
as possible, a gray literature search using Google Scholar was
performed. Finally, a search of theses and dissertations databases
was performed.
The search strategy is detailed in Table 1.
Appraisal of Study Quality
Two
reviewers
were
contents
experts
(LS
and
GG),
and
one
reviewer
(NLB)
was
an
experienced
biostatistician/epidemiologist. The contents experts only assessed
potential publications with respect to the appropriateness of the
research questions tested. The biostatistician only evaluated the
appropriateness of the methods employed. Disagreement was
resolved by consensus.
Strength Assessment of the Scientific
Evidence
The strength of the body of evidence was assessed using the
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluations (GRADE) evidence system (accessible at http://
clinicalevidence.bmj.com/x/set/static/ebm/learn/665072.html).
RESULTS
The
initial
search
produced
512
references:
95
from
PubMed/MEDLINE, 120 from Scopus, 98 from ISI/Web of
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
TABLE 1 | Details of search strategy used in the current systematic review.
Search strategy items
Details
Used keywords
(coitus OR “sexual intercourse” OR “sexual activity” OR “sexual climax” OR orgasm OR masturbation OR abstinence) AND (sports OR
athlete) AND (competition OR exercise OR physical activity OR strength OR speed OR endurance OR performance)
Searched databases
PubMed/MEDLINE, ISI/Web of Science, the Cochrane Collaboration Database, Cochrane Library, Evidence Database (PEDro), Evidence
Based Medicine (EBM) Search review, National Guidelines, Scopus, ProQuest Research Library, ProQuest Health and Medical Complete,
ProQuest Nursing and Allied Health Source, ProQuest Science Journals, ProQuest Health Management, Google Scholar
Inclusion criteria
Original primary article meeting with the established PICO criteria
Exclusion criteria
Editorial, letter to editor, commentary, opinion, expert opinion, review (of any type), article not pertinent with the review question(s)
Time filter
None applied
Language filter
None applied
Target journals
Asian Journal of Sports Medicine; British Journal of Sports Medicine; Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine; International journal of sports
medicine; Journal of Sports Sciences; Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise; Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health;
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice; Research in Sports Medicine; Sex Roles; Sports Medicine; The American journal of sports
medicine; The Journal of Sexual Medicine; The Journal of sports medicine and physical fitness; The Physician and Sportsmedicine
Science, 52 from ProQuest Research Library, 51 from ProQuest
Health and Medical Complete, 29 from ProQuest Nursing and
Allied Health Source, 16 from ProQuest Science Journals, 14
from ProQuest Health Management, 7 from the Cochrane
Library, 11 from PEDro, 17 from the National Guidelines, 2
from the EBM. After removing duplicates, the search yielded 142
unique results. One further study was added after mining Google
Scholar.
One hundred and thirty studies were rejected because of off-
topic abstracts, failure to fulfill the inclusion criteria, or both.
After reading the full text, four studies were excluded, not being
relevant to the subject at hand. Finally, nine studies were included
in the current systematic review. Fort further detsails, the reader
is referred to Figure 1 and Table 2.
Study Selection
From the general point of view, none of the studies selected
have approached this aspect systematically, and there is no
evidence of a methodical investigation of the possible differences
by gender, or intensity, or the type of the sports practiced. In
most of the few manuscripts identified, males are more frequently
investigated than females. Some specific aspects emerge however
in a study from the analysis of the female athletes population
with respect of male. The authors (Johnson, 1968) studied a
group of 14 female former athletes, ages 24–49 years, to test the
impact of sexual intercourse on strength performance, and some
features of the muscular and aerobic performance were found.
The study was conducted in two different sessions: the first time
the morning after coitus the previous night, and then at least 6
days after the last coitus (Johnson, 1968). Muscle strength was
tested using dynamometry: no influence of sexual intercourse
on muscle strength was found (Johnson, 1968). Similar data
regarding the effects of coitus on muscle strength were confirmed
in 1995 in another study despite involving a population of male
sedentary subjects (Boone and Gilmore, 1995). In this study,
aerobic performance was studied, and the possible impact of
sexual intercourse was evaluated using cyclo-ergometry: sexual
intercourse does not impact negatively when it takes place at
least 10 h before the competition. A negative effect, however,
occurs if there is an interval of less than 2 h between sexual
intercourse and the test (Boone and Gilmore, 1995). The effects of
sexual intercourse were studied in terms of possible modifications
of the cardiovascular variables such as maximal aerobic power
and oxygen pulse (Boone and Gilmore, 1995). All the variables
considered were not influenced by sexual intercourse, which
did not decrease maximal exercise performance. Significant
differences were achieved for post-effort heart rate (HR) values
at 5 (p < 0.01) and 10 min (p < 0.01) during the recovery
phase of a morning test 2 h after sexual activity. These differences
disappeared during the recovery phase of the afternoon stress test
performed approximately 10 h after sexual intercourse (Boone
and Gilmore, 1995). Despite the major differences found in the
recovery phase, where higher values of HR were found 2 h
after sexual intercourse, no significant differences were found in
workload achieved and in mental concentration of the athletes.
The data support the role of sexual activity in activating the
sympathetic system, and the same mechanism can be advocated
in increasing testosterone blood levels after sexual activity.
The possible impact of sexual intercourse was evaluated
in well-trained male amateur runners. Sztajzel et al. (2000)
evaluated, in addition to the impact of sexual intercourse, also
the possible impact of additional four incorrect health behaviors
on marathon performance. The study supports the potential
beneficial effect of sexual activity on running performance, and
it underlines the negative impact of other incorrect lifestyle
habits such as smoking and alcohol intake (Sztajzel et al.,
2000). However, the number of subjects investigated was small,
and some other variables such as sleeping, nutrition habits
and recreational activities need to be considered to be able to
speculate accurately.
Sexual intercourse may have a negative impact on athletes’
strength and muscular performance (McGlone and Shrier,
2000), estimated by the handgrip test. Strength was tested the
morning after nocturnal coitus, and the results were compared
undertaking the same test after at least 6 days of sexual
abstinence (McGlone and Shrier, 2000). Handgrip strength
was not affected by sexual activity the night before each test.
McGlone and Shrier (2000) reported the possible influence of
sexual activity on coordination and maximal aerobic power.
Other unreferenced and referenced studies investigated the
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
FIGURE 1 | Flow diagram of the current systematic review conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines.
influence of sexual intercourse on athletes’ performance in a
group of 14 married males, with no evidence of a negative
effect on VO2 max and coordination (Nemec et al., 1975;
Thornton, 1990). The authors suggests investigating in parallel
some other variables, particularly in the presence of prolonged
abstinence, to exclude a possible negative impact (Thornton,
1990). Despite no evident impact of sexual intercourse on
athletes’ performance, the sample investigated was too small to
allow generalization.
Few studies specifically distinguish possible difference in
the impact of sexual activity in different types of sports.
Fisher (1997) analyzed the effects of different sexual behaviors
in two different sports, soccer and baseball. Soccer players
practiced abstinence more frequently than baseball players, and
the possible positive results on their performance may have
resulted from more frequent abstinence before competition
(Fisher, 1997). In addition, considering the potential effect of
regular sport activity on blood hormones regulation, several
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
TABLE 2 | Details of the studies included.
Authors
Study group
Age
Study
design
Tests used
Aerobic power Strength power
Psychological hormonal
findings
Boone and
Gilmore, 1995
11 sedentary
male
Not specified
Cross-over
Treadmill test
O2max, DP
Not tested
No differences
Dabbs and
Mohammed,
1992
11 M/F
Not specified
Not controlled Blood sample
Not tested
Not tested
No modifications in blood
testosterone levels
Fisher, 1997
166 varsity
athletes (n = 83
football; n = 73
baseball)
Not specified
Controlled
General investigation
Not tested
Not tested
Religion has an impact on
sexual behavior, depending
also on the kind of sport
(team vs. individual)
Frauman, 1982
144 subjects +
78 undergraduate
subjects
Not specified
Exploratory
Questionnaire
Not tested
Not tested
Physical exercise modifies
sex behavior in a statistically
significant way (Pearson’s
correlation p < 0.001)
Johnson, 1968
14married
Female Athletes
24–49 years,
mean 28 years
Randomized
Hand grip–dynamometer
Not tested
No modifications
Not tested
Meston and
Gorzalka, 1995
Female
Not specified
Not controlled Vaginal
photoplethysmograph
Not tested
Not tested
Acute exercise increase
arousal in female
Pour et al., 2013
Not tested (brief
revision of
literature
Since 18 years
Revision
Anonymous
questionnaire, Mental
Health
Mental Health
Not tested
Positive psychological
impact
Sztajzel et al.,
2000
15 male athletes
high level
20–40 years
Randomized
Cycloergometer Ex Test
HR
Not tested
No significant differences
Mental Test
Vouyoukas, 2011
8 participants
Not specified
Thesis,
observational
Cardiovascular and
muscular test
VO2max, DP
Hand grip flexibility, No differences
AP
, Aerobic Power; SP
, Strength Power; H, Hormonal; Psy, Psycological; DP
, Double Product; HR, Heart Rate.
modifications should be expected in hormone blood levels.
Before competition, a rapid hormonal variation in individuals
can be linked to variation in physiology, and can also be
species related (Wobber et al., 2010). Indeed, experiments in
chimpanzees, as a model close to humans, demonstrate rapid
changes of testosterone and cortisol during competition (Wobber
et al., 2010). These experiments also highlight inter-individual
and inter-species differences: one individual’s own perception of
a given situation may induce different hormonal responses.
The issue of testosterone level after sex is debated: some
studies found no changes in testosterone levels after sex
(Hengevoss et al., 2015) in males. The study reports some
examples of investigations where testosterone blood levels were
tested at different times following sexual intercourse. Sexual
activity does not affect testosterone levels, in the short or long
term. In that study, some athletes showed worse or improved
performance after intercourse, but no systematic effect of sexual
intercourse was demonstrated.
Salivary testosterone concentrations were measured in male
and female members of four heterosexual couples on 11 evenings
before and after sexual intercourse, and on 11 evenings when no
intercourse took place. Testosterone levels increased across the
evenings when the couples engaged in intercourse, and decreased
when they did not. The data suggest that sexual activity affects
testosterone more than initial testosterone affects sexual activity
(Dabbs and Mohammed, 1992).
On the contrary, a complete different point of view is
evident from international competitions such as the Olympics:
the traditional idea of the importance of sexual abstinence
before competition had generally been supported (James, 1990;
Anderson et al., 2001). More recently, the opinion of most
athletes and coaches is shifting toward the fact that sex itself
has little or no impact on sporting performance, on the basis
of the possible psychological motivations related to normal
sexual behavior (Chidley, 1996; Pupiš et al., 2010). The authors
underline generally that sexual activity does involve physical
activity (Gordon, 1988), and psychological and emotional
involvements are part of sexual behavior. Sexual activity has a
relaxing effect, and the frustration to limit one’s own sexual desire
is probably more detrimental than to actually engage in sexual
activity.
McGlone and Shrier (2000) demonstrated no evidence
of a direct negative impact of sexual intercourse in sports
performance: the authors consider some specific psychological
aspects (McGlone and Shrier, 2000). For example, considering
the inverted “U sport psychology hypothesis,” the frustration
from prolonged abstinence can promote the desire to better
athletic activity, while being sufficiently fulfilled sexually can
reduce such desire for better sports performance (Thornton,
1990). There is an optimal level of alertness/anxiety before
a competition, and therefore sex may produce a relaxing
distraction effect the night before competition.
A special aspect of sex behavior regards therefore the
psychological impact of sexual activity on sport performance
(Frauman, 1982). The authors confirm the scarcity of data
available, the diversity of opinions, and the necessity to carefully
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
study the relationship between sexual behavior and sport.
Sexual intercourse expends generally only an average of 25
calories, corresponding to walking up two flights of stairs. Even
from the psychological point of view, the sports world leans
toward abstinence, believing that sexual activity can impair sport
performance (Vouyoukas, 2011). Nevertheless, most studies in
this field conclude that sexual expression may have a strong
relationship with quality of life (Sayfollahpour et al., 2013).
Sexual satisfaction is directly associated to a higher level of
quality of life, while prolonged abstinence can be associated to
depression (Vouyoukas, 2011). There is a strong relationship
between regular sex and mental health levels, comparing the
tendency to maintain abstinence to a sort of homophobia. This
aspect is far from the evaluation of the specific aspect where
sexual intercourse is directly linked with an increase or decrease
of performance in athletes. Some other possible influences on
sports performance of different sexual habits, such the effects of
viewing pornographic films, are reported (Pour et al., 2013). The
findings suggest activation of the sympathetic system associated
to physiological arousal (Meston and Gorzalka, 1995). The
authors support the strong relationship between sexual activity
and physical exercise. Some studies investigated whether exercise
can be used as therapy in case of reduced arousal, and have
shown a positive association between regular sexual activity and
increased blood testosterone levels (Kraemer et al., 1976).
Sexual abstinence has been indirectly investigated in terms
of the potential impact on well-being. A special investigation
has reported the effects of sexual activity on maintaining well-
being, with no evidence of a negative impact of sexual activity on
sport performance (Levin, 2007). In addition, more extensively,
a doctoral thesis evaluated the influence of sexual activity on
athletic performance, comparing sexually active subjects with
subjects who practiced abstinence. There were no substantial
differences in terms of physiological variables: (heart rate and
blood pressure), sport specific parameters (all out test, upper and
lower limb strength, reaction time, hamstring flexibility), and
biochemical variables (testosterone, cortisol, and glucose levels;
Vouyoukas, 2011).
There are marked differences between individual and team
sports athletes: team sports athletes were more prone to pre-
marital sexual intercourse, and thus had more sexual partners,
while individual sports athletes were more conservative in this
respect (Pour et al., 2013).
In general, there is a global positive impact of sex the night
before competition on athlete’s performance. Especially from the
psychological point of view, sex has a relaxing effect, which may
help to relieve competition stress in endurance (marathon) or
concentration (archery or pistol shooting) sports. Some coaches
support the role of relaxation in improving coordination and
peak athletic performance.
DISCUSSION
The impact of sexual activity in sport, especially before sport
competition, has been studied for the last 60 years. Many
questions relate to athletes’ performance, and several are not yet
solved. Considering that top sports competition is undertaken
by young adults, and therefore the expectancy of success is
high, it is not surprising that the prospect that decreased
athletic performance from sexual activity has been the object
of interest by governing bodies, officials and coaches (Catania
and White, 1982). Few authors have studied this aspect of
sports participation in a systematic fashion. Many studies did
not use appropriate scientific methods on the possible impact
of sexual intercourse; it appears that there is no evidence of
a negative impact in males and females. It appears important
to maintain an athlete’s own sexual activity in terms of normal
physiological behavior, and to avoid possible association with
incorrect lifestyle habits, such as tobacco, alcohol or drugs abuse.
At least a few hours should pass between sexual intercourse
and sports competition. The available investigations have not
considered the possible role of confounding factors. There are
no trials conducted with acute exercise and laboratory test to
study the possible hormonal modifications induced by sexual
intercourse in this context. Also, the design of the available
studies is not strong, and probably they do not reflect real
life situations. In some sports and in several cultures, coaches
continue to support sexual abstinence before sports competition.
On the other hand, in major competitions such as the Olympics
and the Commonwealth Games, contraceptive devices are
freely available, acknowledging that sexual activity is normally
practiced by the athletes during the games.
Areas of Agreement
The idea of a possible benefit of abstinence before sports
competition is ancient, based on anecdotal evidence, and not
sufficiently supported by the recent scientific literature. Only
one study (Fisher, 1997) promotes abstinence on the basis of
a possible influence of frustration in maintaining high level
sports performance. On the contrary, most studies identified
support the absence of negative effects of sexual activity on
sports performance (James, 1990; Thornton, 1990; Pupiš et al.,
2010). Others studies often underline the importance to maintain
sexual experiences within an athlete’s normal sex life (Kraemer
et al., 1976; Frauman, 1982; Hengevoss et al., 2015). Any possible
association of sexual activity with incorrect lifestyle habits, such
as abuse of alcohol or smoking, can produce adverse effects and
worse performance.
Areas of Controversy
From the present review, the major area of controversy concerns
the principal aspect of the sexual intercourse and therefore if it
can be considered correct on not, in terms of sports performance,
to permit to have sexual intercourse before the sport competition.
While some coaches continue to highlight the importance of
abstinence, the literature does not support this belief. From
the present review, only low powered studies of relatively poor
scientific design have investigated the impact of sexual activity
using specific tests to evaluate the effects on aerobic power and
strength (Boone and Gilmore, 1995). No data are available about
the possible diverse effects of sexual activity on different sports.
Some data are available on the possible psychological impact of
sexual activity on athletic performance (Catania and White, 1982;
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
Vouyoukas, 2011) and all support a positive effect or at worse no
impact.
Growing Points and Areas Timely for
Developing Research
At present, there has been little methodologically well-performed
research on this topic. Also, given the variety of sports, and their
different metabolic and situational differences, generalization is
not possible. Most studies seem to have focused on male athletes:
at present, there is a growing population of female athletes, and it
is unclear whether gender differences could be evident. Finally,
the attitude to sexual activity changes according to different
cultures, countries and religions: this is a further variable that
should be investigated.
CONCLUSIONS
From the present review, doubts remain regarding the possible
negative impact of sexual activity the night before competition.
This aspect is considered important in sports, but there is
insufficient evidence of the possible specific detrimental effect
on the sports performance. In addition, no exhaustive data are
available about the possible impact of the sexual activity on
different kinds of sports, in terms of endurance or resistance
performance, or in terms of team or individual sports. There
are few scientifically sound data about the effect masturbation
(Catania and White, 1982) on sports performance. This is a
specific aspect not yet investigated in a scientific fashion. Some
anecdotal reports support positive experiences in competitive
athletes. Cultural and religious beliefs influence the approach
to sex and sport. The sexual sphere is individual, and in this
context athletes should likely feel free to live their sexual activity
in complete freedom. The present review demonstrates that
sex activity in sport is poorly investigated in both males and
females. However, the data available do not really support the
misconception that sex activity can produce a negative effect
on the athlete’s performance. Anecdotal experiences sustain, on
the contrary, a positive effect of performance if sexual activity
is undertaken at least 10 h before sports competition, and
particularly if it is not associated to incorrect life style habits
such alcohol and drugs abuse, and smoking. Future investigations
should clarify in greater depth some specific aspects related to
ethnical, gender and sport differences.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LS conceived, designed and wrote the paper; GG revised the
final version of the paper; JP and NB revised and contributed
to improve the statistical analysis and approach of the
systematic review. NM continuously supervised the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Anderson, P. B., Wei, P., and Shyu, I. (2001). The relationship between sexual
activity (and four other health behaviors) and marathon performance among
non-elite runners. Electron. J. Hum. Sex 4.
Anshel, M. H. (1981). Effects of sexual activity on athletic performance. Physician
Sports Med. 1, 64–66.
Baume, N., Schumacher, Y. O., Sottas, P. E., Bagutti, C., Cauderay, M., Mangin, P.,
et al. (2006). Effect of multiple oral doses of androgenic anabolic steroids on
endurance performance and serum indices of physical stress in healthy male
subjects. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 98, 329–340.
Boone, T., and Gilmore, S. (1995). Effects of sexual intercourse on maximal aerobic
power, oxygen pulse, and double product in male sedentary subjects. J. Sports
Med. Phys. Fit. 35, 214–217.
Butt, D. S. (1990). The sexual response as exercise. A brief review and theoretical
proposal. Sports Med. 9, 330–343. doi: 10.2165/00007256-199009060-00002
Catania, J. A., and White, C. B. (1982). Sexuality in an aged sample:
cognitive determinants of masturbation. Arch. Sex. Behav. 11, 237–245. doi:
10.1007/BF01544992
Chidley, J. (1996). Sex and the modern athlete. Maclean’s 109, 36–37.
Cooper, D. L. (1975). Can scoring influence athletic performance? Sex and the
athlete. J. Am. Coll. Health Assoc. 23, 197–199.
Dabbs, J. M., and Mohammed, S. (1992). Male and female salivary and testosterone
concentrations before and after sexual activity. Physiol. Behav. 52, 195–197. doi:
10.1016/0031-9384(92)90453-9
Ferraz, L., and Costa, P. O. (2014). Sexo na noite anterior a competiciao influentia
o rendimiento do atleta? Mitos o realidade. Rev. Med. Desportiva Inform. 5,
21–22.
Fisher, G. J. (1997). Abstention from sex and other pre-game rituals used by college
male varsity athletes. J. Sport Behav. 20, 176–184.
Frauman, D. C. (1982). The relationship between physical exercise, sexual
activity, and desire for sexual activity. J. Sex. Res. 18, 198–129. doi:
10.1080/00224498209551133
Gordon, M. (1988). College coaches’ attitudes toward pregame sex. J. Sex Res. 24,
256–262. doi: 10.1080/00224498809551421
Hengevoss, J., Piechotta, M., Müller, D., Hanft, F., Parr, M. K., Schänzer, W., et al.
(2015). Combined effects of androgen anabolic steroids and physical activity
on the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 19,
86–96. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.03.003
James, S. T. (1990). Sexual activity and athletic performance: is there a relationship?
Phys. Sportsmed. 8, 148–154.
Johnson, W. R. (1968). Muscular performance following coitus. J. Sex Res. 3,
247–248. doi: 10.1080/00224496809550576
Kraemer, H. C., Becker, H. B., Brodie, H. K. H., Doering, C. H., Moos, R. H., et al.
(1976). Orgasmic frequency and plasma testosterone levels in normal human
males. Arch. Sex. Behav. 5, 125–132. doi: 10.1007/BF01541869
Krieger, L. (1997). Scoring before a big event. Winning 1, 88–89.
Levin, R. J. (2007). Sexual activity, health and well-being – the beneficial
roles of coitus and masturbation. Sex. Relation. Ther. 22, 135–148. doi:
10.1080/14681990601149197
Liberati, A., Altman, D. J., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gotzsche, P. C., Joannidis, J. P.
A., et al. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and
elaboration. PLoS Med. 6:e1000100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000100
McGlone, S., and Shrier, I. (2000). Does sex the night before competition decrease
performance? Editorial. Clin. J. Sport Med. 10, 233–234. doi: 10.1097/00042752-
200010000-00001
Meston, C. M., and Gorzalka, B. B. (1995). The effects of sympathetic activation
on physiological and subjective sexual arousal in women. Behav. Res. Ther. 33,
651–664. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(95)00006-J
Nemec, E. D., Mansfield, L., and Kennedy, J. W. (1975). Heart rate and blood
pressure response during sexual activity in normal males. Am. Heart J. 89,
246–252.
Oman, R. F., Vesely, S. K., Kegler, M., McLeroy, K., and Aspy, Cheryl, B. A. (2003).
Youth development approach to profiling sexual abstinence. Am. J. Health
Behav. 27, S80–S93.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
 Stefani et al.
Sex before Sport Competition
Pour, P. S., Heidary, M., and Mousavi, M. A. (2013). Psychological consideration
of sexual activity impact upon sporting performance: an overview. Int. J. Acad.
Res. Bus. Soc. 3, 672–677.
Pupiš, M., Rakovi´
c, A., Stankovi´
c, D., Miodrag, K., and Savanovic, V. (2010). Sex
and endurance performance. Sport SPA 7, 21–25.
Sayfollahpour, P., Heidary, M., and Mousavi, M. (2013). A Psychological
consideration of sexual activity impact upon sporting performance: an
overview. Int. J. Acad. Res. Bus. Soc. Sci. 3, 672–676.
Sztajzel, J., Périat, M., Marti, V., Krall, P., and Rutishauser, W. (2000). Effect
of sexual activity on cycle ergometer stress test parameters, on plasmatic
testosterone levels and on concentration capacity. A study in high-level male
athletes performed in the laboratory. J. Sports Med. Phys. Fit. 40, 233–239.
Thornton, J. (1990). Sexual activity and athletic performance: is there a
relationship? Phys. Sport Med. 18, 148–153.
Vouyoukas, E. (2011). The Influence of Sexual Activity on Athletic Performance .
Doctoral thesis, Degree of Master Applied Science (Exercise Science) Concordia
University-Montreal (Quebec) Canada.
Wobber,
V.,
Hare,
B.,
Maboto,
J.,
Lipson,
S.,
Whrangham,
R.,
and
Ellison,
P.
T.
(2010).
Differential
changes
in
steroid
hormones
before
competition
in
bonobos
and
chimpanzees.
Proc.
Natl.
Acad.
Sci.U.S.A.
107,
12457–12462.
doi:
10.1073/pnas.10074
11107
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Stefani, Galanti, Padulo, Bragazzi and Maffulli. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
June 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 246
