 Engaging Patients, Providers and Community Members to 
Develop a Tool to Improve Preoperative Decision Making for 
Older Adults Facing High-Risk Surgery
Nicole M. Steffens, MPH1,2, Jennifer L. Tucholka, BS1, Michael J. Nabozny, MD1, Andrea E. 
Schmick, BA3,4, Karen J. Brasel, MD, MPH5, and Margaret L. Schwarze, MD, MPP1,6
1Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
2Denver Public Health, Denver Health and Hospital Authority. Denver, Colorado
3Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, University of Wisconsin. Madison, 
Wisconsin
4Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
5Department of Surgery, Oregon Health & Science University. Portland, Oregon
6Department of Medical History and Bioethics, University of Wisconsin. Madison, Wisconsin
Abstract
Importance—Older patients are at greater risk for postoperative complications yet they are less 
likely than younger patients to ask questions about surgery.
Objective—To design an intervention to improve preoperative decision making and manage 
postoperative expectations.
Design—We created a Patient and Family Advisory Council (PFAC) to help identify preoperative 
decisional needs. We met monthly for one year to examine findings from a prior qualitative study 
and to integrate themes with PFAC members’ lived experience. PFAC members and other 
stakeholders evaluated 118 publically available questions and selected 12 corresponding to 
identified needs to generate a question prompt list. To refine this intervention, we conducted focus 
groups and a clinical pilot.
Setting—The local library and one outpatient surgical clinic in Madison and three community 
centers in Madison and Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Participants—Four men and women who had previous experience with high-risk surgery as 
either older patients or family members participated in our PFAC. Three focus groups included 31 
Correspondence: Margaret L. Schwarze, MD, MPP, G5/315 CSC, 600 Highland Ave, Madison, WI 53792, Phone: (608) 265-4420, 
Fax: (608) 265-1148, schwarze@surgery.wisc.edu. 
Data Access: Dr. Schwarze had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the 
accuracy of the data analysis.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest—including relevant financial interests, activities, relationships, and 
affiliations—to report.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
JAMA Surg. 2016 October 1; 151(10): 938–945. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2016.1308.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 community members from diverse backgrounds. We pilot tested the intervention with 42 patients 
considering surgery.
Exposure(s)—None
Main Outcome and Measure(s)—Generation of an intervention to address patients’ 
preoperative informational and decisional needs.
Results—Through exploration of qualitative data the PFAC noted three critical problems; 
patients and family members believed surgery “had to be done,” were surprised that postoperative 
recovery was difficult and lacked knowledge about the use of advance directives perioperatively. 
The PFAC identified a need for more information and decisional support during preoperative 
conversations including clarification of treatment options, setting postoperative expectations and 
advance care planning. Three question prompt categories arose: “Should I have surgery?”, “What 
should I expect if everything goes well?”, and “What happens if things go wrong?” The final list 
includes 11 questions within these domains, was understandable in English and Spanish, and was 
acceptable to patients in clinic.
Conclusions and Relevance—Through direct engagement of stakeholders, we created a 
question prompt list to address core decisional and informational needs of surgical patients. Future 
testing will evaluate whether this list can be used to improve patient engagement and reduce 
postoperative regret and conflict about postoperative treatments.
Introduction
Each year, approximately 500,000 Americans age 65 and older will have a high-risk 
operation, such as heart bypass or major cancer surgery.1–3 Although many patients benefit 
from high-risk surgery, it carries real potential for mortality and serious complications, 
particularly for older patients with multiple comorbidities. High-risk surgery can have other 
unintended consequences including postoperative suffering, conflict about additional 
aggressive treatments and receipt of unwanted interventions.4,5 Thus, much is at stake for 
patients in the decision to proceed.
Surgeons play an important role helping patients make preference-sensitive decisions. Yet, 
they often miss opportunities for these discussions.6–11 Patients report that “explanations are 
rushed, issues are not explained, and choices are not understood.”12 While patients generally 
prefer involvement in the decision-making process, they frequently do not know how to 
engage.13,14 Patients who are activated receive more patient-focused care and are more 
likely to take part in collaborative decision making.15,16 This is especially critical for older 
patients, who are less likely to ask questions and less effective in ensuring that physicians 
attend to their concerns than younger patients.17
In other settings, question prompt lists (QPLs) can effectively improve patient 
engagement.18–22 Questions “to ask your surgeon” exist, but patients who have experience 
with surgery rarely participate in their development. To improve patient engagement in 
surgical decision making, we need to bridge the gap between patients’ need to make the 
consequences of surgery relevant to their lives and the surgeon’s goal of setting realistic 
expectations. The objective of this study was to design an intervention to improve 
Steffens et al.
Page 2
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 preoperative decision making. By formalizing a partnership between patients, family 
members and researchers, our Patient and Family Advisory Council (PFAC) developed a 
QPL to help older adults with high-stakes surgical decisions.
Methods
Development of a PFAC
We engaged with our PFAC as consultants to provide feedback and reflection on our 
research, specifically to clarify concepts from previously generated qualitative data and 
integrate the PFAC’s lived experiences with identified priorities. We enlisted PFAC members 
through clinic nurses, surgeons and hospital patient relations. We invited patients and family 
members of older patients who had experience with high-risk surgery and purposely selected 
a small group with strong literacy skills who could critically interpret abstracted data. Two 
members previously had major surgery (cardiac, neurologic) and two members were primary 
care givers for patients who had surgery (vascular, oncologic). This group of two men and 
two women met monthly at a public library and received $1000 for attendance at twelve 90-
minute meetings, reviewing materials independently, and travel.
Origins of Qualitative Data
Before conception of our PFAC, we conducted an observational qualitative study over a 
three-year period that included 91 audio recorded preoperative conversations between 
patients and 11 surgeons described in-depth elsewhere.10,23,24 We also interviewed patients 
before (n=34) and after (n=27) surgery. We used an inductive coding strategy and 
deliberative adjudication process among researchers to support higher-level analysis 
whereby codes were expanded and refined to capture phenomena present in the data.
PFAC Process
Meeting agendas included an opening question, a statement of the meeting objectives, and a 
wrap-up forecasting next steps. (Table 1) Our first meetings established project goals, 
timeline, and expectations. Members also shared their experience with surgery. Next, we 
presented themes from our qualitative analysis and linked each theme with a deidentified 
patient story. Members discussed their reactions and connected study data with their 
personal experience with high-risk surgery. This member-checking process25 enriched data 
integration with the lived experience of members of our PFAC (Figure 1).
QPL Development
Discussions from the first three PFAC meetings generated key informational and decisional 
deficits to guide development of the QPL. We then collected 271 “questions to ask your 
doctor” from publically available websites26–29 and published literature.21,30–32 and 
excluded duplicate questions and concerns irrelevant to our targets (e.g. “Is there anything 
specific I need to bring to the hospital?”) We asked PFAC members, two surgeons who 
routinely perform high-risk operations on older patients, a patient advocate and a hospital 
administrator to score the remaining 118 questions on a 5-point Likert scale.
Steffens et al.
Page 3
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We brought the 20 highest-rated questions to the PFAC. Members deliberated about the 
meaning of each question, whether they could ask each question, and whether the surgeon’s 
answer would be valuable. Using these criteria, they generated a 12-question prototype.
Community Focus Groups
We presented the prototype QPL to focus groups and iteratively revised it in response to 
feedback. We engaged a well-established panel of people (6 participants) specifically trained 
to provide feedback to researchers and hailing from difficult-to-reach populations recruited 
from service programs such as food pantries and parenting groups.33 A facilitator presented 
each question and asked: “Does this question make sense?” “Would you feel comfortable 
asking this question?” and, “If you ask this question, what information are you hoping to 
get?” We brought the revised prototype to a second group (6 participants) and a Spanish 
version to 19 Spanish-speaking seniors who reflected on the appearance, comprehensibility, 
and whether they could ask the questions to a surgeon.
Because QPLs are effective only when physicians endorse their use,20 we employed this 
same iterative process with our stakeholders: the PFAC, two surgeons and community 
groups, to generate a letter from the surgeon to accompany the QPL.
QPL Pilot
To evaluate the acceptability of our QPL, we tested pre-visit mail delivery of the QPL and 
surgeon letter at a local vascular surgery clinic We then informally interviewed patients who 
had received the intervention about its use and ascertained their comfort asking the 
questions. We also solicited feedback from surgeons.
Human Subjects Considerations
Collection of qualitative data was approved by the Institutional Review Boards (IRB) of the 
University of Wisconsin and Partners Health Care System and the Research Ethics Board 
(REB) of University of Toronto. We did not pursue IRB approval for the work described by 
the PFAC or community groups as they did not have access to protected health information 
and are considered research advisors. All PFAC members were apprised of the extent of this 
project in advance, their compensation and participated voluntarily. The QPL clinical pilot 
was exempted from IRB review.
Results
PFAC members identified informational and decision support failures in the qualitative data 
including misunderstandings about treatment options and postoperative expectations. They 
then integrated this with their lived experience to generate a QPL to address these 
deficiencies. After examining the qualitative data, PFAC members felt patients and family 
members were unprepared for surgery. They were concerned that patients believed surgery 
“had to be done,” were surprised that postoperative recovery was difficult and lacked 
knowledge about the use of advance directives. (Table 2)
Steffens et al.
Page 4
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Choices
PFAC members examined qualitative data that exposed a lack of choice about whether to 
have surgery. Patients in the qualitative study reported their surgeon had not presented 
alternatives or that the alternatives presented were unacceptable. This notion was linked to 
belief that the surgeon felt strongly surgery should be done or a personal understanding that 
their illness required surgery. These data showed patients and families had developed an 
understanding that the disease itself compelled the need for surgery, thereby determining the 
absence of alternatives.
Furthermore, in the setting of an unwanted outcome this inextricable link between surgery 
and disease provided reassurance about the choice to proceed with surgery. For example, the 
wife of a patient whose cognitive impairment progressed markedly with surgery sought 
comfort with their decision: “… because we asked the doctor… because he said about the 
confusion [dementia], it could have been worse with the surgery. I said, well, what's my 
option? Does he really need the surgery…and he goes, no, he did need it.” Another patient 
who spent months in the hospital after resection of a benign pancreatic mass reported, “I 
wouldn’t have had surgery if I didn’t have to have the tumor removed.” Belief that there was 
“no choice” or surgery “had to be done” appeared comforting to patients with serious illness 
and generated concern from the research team that this conviction should not be disrupted by 
efforts to improve decision making.
PFAC members were distressed that our qualitative study patients appeared uninformed 
about alternatives. Simultaneously they empathized with the notion that surgery had to be 
done. One member told us “[patients] already have one foot into the surgery room” before 
meeting a surgeon, as the referral process promotes a message that surgery is essential. Still, 
they were clear that informed decision making was crucial for all patients even if they 
ultimately concluded surgery “had to be done.” They stressed that patients need to be “told 
all the ramifications and possibilities of both having [surgery] and not having it” which 
requires a clear explanation about what could be gained and what would happen without 
surgery.
These discussions generated the first decision support target for our QPL: “Should I have 
surgery?” Our PFAC wanted patients to deliberate about having surgery and receive explicit 
information about how surgery might improve symptoms or longevity. To address this need, 
our stakeholders selected the question prompts: “What are my options?” “What is likely to 
happen if I do have surgery? If I don’t have surgery?” “Will surgery make me feel better?” 
and “Will surgery help me live longer? If so, how much longer?”
Expectations
The PFAC explored qualitative data suggesting patients were unprepared for what occurred 
postoperatively. For example, one patient noted she had been apprised of specific risks, but 
did not recognize this information could be used to prepare for complications or prolonged 
recuperation. She described how frightened she was by her slow recovery and postoperative 
weakness:
Steffens et al.
Page 5
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 No, no I wasn’t expecting anything. They didn’t tell me there could be 
[complications]. They did say you could develop A-fib and they did say that after 
the operation you could have a stroke or heart attack… So I didn’t really, I did ask 
questions, but I guess I didn’t ask if it would be a long recovery or what could 
happen…I mean you’re not expecting, and I don’t think you know all the questions 
you should ask…
Although surgeons named risks and described operations under consideration as “big 
surgery” patients struggled to translate this information. Patients assumed they would return 
to normal postoperatively: “If I can’t come back normal, I don’t want to come back.”
The PFAC expressed concern that patients underestimated the impact and had a naive 
outlook about the seriousness of surgery, leading to surprise or distress when recovery was 
arduous. This notion was familiar to PFAC members who reported feeling “blindsided” 
postoperatively. They worried that what was “normal” after surgery for the surgeon was not 
“normal” for the patient and this might cause distress when the surgeon’s expected outcome 
was unexpected by the patient.
This discussion generated the target, “What should I expect if everything goes well?” The 
PFAC chose question prompts to prepare for recovery and long-term physical changes 
including: “How do you think my daily life will look after surgery? Right after surgery, three 
months later, one year later?” “Will I have any tubes or drains put in during or after surgery? 
Will I need them at home?” “How will this surgery affect my other health problems?” and 
“After I leave the hospital, what type of care do you think I will need?”
Complications
The PFAC reviewed qualitative data that exposed wide variation in treatment preferences for 
serious postoperative complications. Patients believed the surgeon knew their wishes despite 
lack of explicit discussion. For example, one study patient stated, “The only thing I don’t 
want, if I do die, I don’t want to be revived…” This type of information was not discussed 
with surgeons. A few patients mentioned their advance directive, but the surgeon did not 
explore their preferences further. Thus it was unclear how to proceed in the event of a 
postoperative complication. Some believed family members were familiar with their 
preferences and could make decisions if needed.
PFAC members were concerned that patients needed more advance care planning. They 
expressed dismay that patients’ treatment preferences were not communicated: “There is a 
disconnect between what the patients want and who is the right person to tell these wishes.” 
The PFAC struggled to understand how specific directives might need to be tailored to the 
surgical setting, and were shocked by the lack of standard procedures for notifying all 
providers about existing directives. They identified a critical need for patients to clarify their 
preferences with the surgeon and discuss how directives might be interpreted during the 
perioperative period.
The PFAC sought questions to promote conversation about “What happens if things go 
wrong?” They chose question prompts to encourage this type of discussion: “Can you 
describe serious complications and explain what those might mean for me?” “If I’m too sick 
Steffens et al.
Page 6
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to speak for myself, how can I make sure you know my wishes?” and “If I decide to appoint 
someone to make medical decisions for me, what do I need to do to make those 
arrangements official?”
Acceptability of the QPL
English and Spanish-speaking community members endorsed the questions on the QPL and 
felt they could ask all questions on the list. Surgeon stakeholders agreed they could answer 
the questions.
We iteratively revised words that community members felt were difficult to understand or 
use in conversation. Community members worried that “Will surgery help me live longer?” 
was difficult to answer because it suggested surgeons can guarantee specific outcomes. They 
did not want patients to “hold doctor[s] accountable” for unreasonable information and 
suggested we add “In your opinion” to three questions. Community members praised the 
brochure’s clarity and understood they did not need to ask every question. They were not 
frightened by questions about advance care planning. Our final QPL intervention is a 
brochure with 11 questions (Figure 2) and a letter from the surgeon endorsing its use.
Pilot testing
In clinic, patients used the QPL to assist communication and felt confident they were well 
informed. They noted “it puts questions in your mind,” “…questions you never would have 
thought to ask.” They felt they were able to explore how surgery might impact their quality 
of life and to secure formal designation of a health care proxy – “just in case.” One patient 
reported nervousness upon receiving the QPL because he did not know “surgery was on the 
table” and had inferred his problem was serious. Still, this patient understood surgical 
consultation was an opportunity to get his questions answered. During consultations 
surgeons noted patients would pull the list out to ensure their questions were answered.
Discussion
Through engagement of patients, family members and other stakeholders we created a QPL 
to address core decisional and informational needs of patients considering high-risk surgery. 
The intervention, which includes both the list of questions and a supportive letter from the 
surgeon (available at http://www.hipxchange.org/SurgicalQPL), targets elements of primary 
importance for informed decision making, including discussion of treatment options, 
clarification of goals and preparation for both expected and unexpected outcomes. Although 
these elements seem to be covered during traditional informed consent, this intervention is 
designed to rectify gaps in communication identified by patients and family members that 
current practices fail to address. These results have important implications for surgeons, 
patients and their family members.
For surgeons, this intervention will require translating professionally defined notions of risk 
and benefit into patient-centered outcomes, specifically goals and expectations. We have 
previously documented that surgeons skillfully describe the gravity of high-risk surgery and 
routinely disclose risk,24 yet we find it remarkable that this process inadequately supports 
patients as they decide about surgery or prepare for expected outcomes. Although surgeons 
Steffens et al.
Page 7
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 work hard to provide critical information, the meaning of “big surgery” and “risk of heart 
attack” is unfamiliar to patients and families who struggle to imagine how such events may 
be experienced. Rather than more information, they need more interpretation of the 
information surgeons currently provide.34 QPL questions are framed to help patients access 
surgeons’ knowledge in a way they can understand.
For patients, the QPL aims to promote informed decision making by supporting inquiry with 
questions they would not have thought to ask. Traditional models of clinical decision making 
theorize that patient preferences for decisional control are unique and decision dependent: 
some prefer complete physician control whereas others want equally shared decisions or 
complete control.35,36 Newer theoretical models propose most patients want to be involved; 
they simply do not know how.14 This problem can be mediated by pre-visit education or 
coaching with interventions like the QPL. Because the patient experience is transactional, 
i.e., it is determined by the actions of both surgeons and patients,37 patients who are 
motivated to be involved are more likely to participate in collaborative decision making.
Although many lists of “questions to ask your surgeon” exist, they contain questions that 
patients ask spontaneously. In our observation, surgeons regularly inquire whether patients 
have questions and patients respond with logistic or technical concerns: “Can my wife sleep 
in my room?” and “Will you use stiches or staples?”24 While these concerns are important to 
patients, these questions do little to engage patients in a discussion about trade-offs, or set 
realistic expectations for what life might be like after surgery. The QPL addresses specific 
needs that aren’t routinely queried by patients and families.
For family members, the QPL provides an opportunity to discuss unwanted outcomes at a 
time when the patient, surgeon and family are together and able. Postoperative conflict about 
life supporting treatment is distressing38 as patients aren’t always clear about their 
preferences preoperatively23 and surgeons are surprised when patients have not bought in to 
the use of prolonged life support.8 While some patients may be too anxious to have such 
conversations before major surgery, we found many patients who desired this type of 
discussion.23 Furthermore, respondents in our focus groups and patients in the pilot 
understood they did not need to ask every question.
Our study has strengths and limitations. Our qualitative data was collected in multiple sites 
in order to capture geographic variation and demonstrated robust patterns of preoperative 
conversation.10 However, there may be regional differences in how surgery is presented and 
understood by patients not captured by our sample. Although we have piloted the QPL and 
others have demonstrated the efficacy of such interventions, the effectiveness of this QPL is 
unknown. We need evidence about how the QPL might improve these high-stakes 
conversations, support value-directed deliberation, set realistic postoperative expectations 
and avoid conflict in the setting of an unwanted outcome. We have recently received funding 
from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute to test these effects in a randomized 
controlled trial.
Steffens et al.
Page 8
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Conclusion
We integrated the experiences of patients and family members through observational study 
and direct stakeholder engagement to create a QPL for older adults considering high-risk 
surgery. This intervention aims to overcome gaps in current practice by activating patients 
and family members before surgical consultation in order to promote deliberation about 
treatment choices and prepare patients for both expected and unexpected outcomes.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Betty Kaiser, PhD, RN, and Gay Thomas, MA, from the Wisconsin Network for 
Research Support for their guidance in creating our Patient and Family Advisory Council and support with meeting 
planning and evaluation. We would also like to thank the Qualitative Research Group supported by the Institute for 
Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR) at the University of Wisconsin and Nora Jacobson, PhD, for assistance 
with the study research design and analysis.
Financial Support: Dr. Schwarze is supported by 1) Training Award KL2TR000428 from the Clinical and 
Translational Science Award program, in part by grant UL1TR000427 to UW ICTR from NIH/NCATS; 2) through 
the University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health’s Wisconsin Partnership Program, 
WPP-ICTR grant #3086; and 3) the Greenwall Foundation (Kornfeld). The project described was also supported by 
the National Institute for Minority Health and Health Disparities Center of Excellence program through University 
of Wisconsin Collaborative Center for Health Equity Grant 5P60MD003428. Research reported in this article was 
partially funded through a Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) Award (CDR-1502-27462). The 
statements in this article are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), its Board of Governors or Methodology Committee. These 
funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and 
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript 
for publication.
References
1. Goodney PP, Stukel TA, Lucas FL, Finlayson EV, Birkmeyer JD. Hospital volume, length of stay, 
and readmission rates in high-risk surgery. Ann Surg. 2003; 238(2):161–167. [PubMed: 12894006] 
2. Finks JF, Osborne NH, Birkmeyer JD. Trends in hospital volume and operative mortality for high-
risk surgery. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364(22):2128–2137. [PubMed: 21631325] 
3. Schwarze ML, Barnato AE, Rathouz PJ, Zhao Q, Neuman HB, Winslow ER, Kennedy GD, et al. 
Development of a List of High-Risk Operations for Patients 65 Years and Older. JAMA Surg. 2015
4. Scarborough JE, Pappas TN, Bennett KM, Lagoo-Deenadayalan S. Failure-to-pursue rescue: 
explaining excess mortality in elderly emergency general surgical patients with preexisting"do-not-
resuscitate" orders. Ann Surg. 2012; 256(3):453–461. [PubMed: 22868360] 
5. Paul Olson TJ, Pinkerton C, Brasel KJ, Schwarze ML. Palliative Surgery for Malignant Bowel 
Obstruction From Carcinomatosis: A Systematic Review. JAMA Surg. 2014
6. Braddock C 3rd, Hudak PL, Feldman JJ, Bereknyei S, Frankel RM, Levinson W. "Surgery is 
certainly one good option": quality and time-efficiency of informed decision-making in surgery. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008; 90(9):1830–1838. [PubMed: 18762641] 
7. Fagerlin A, Sepucha KR, Couper MP, Levin CA, Singer E, Zikmund-Fisher BJ. Patients' knowledge 
about 9 common health conditions: the DECISIONS survey. Med Decis Making. 2010; 30(5 Suppl):
35s–52s. [PubMed: 20881153] 
8. Schwarze ML, Bradley CT, Brasel KJ. Surgical "buy-in": the contractual relationship between 
surgeons and patients that influences decisions regarding life-supporting therapy. Crit Care Med. 
2010; 38(3):843–848. [PubMed: 20048678] 
9. Schwarze ML, Redmann AJ, Alexander GC, Brasel KJ. Surgeons expect patients to buy-in to 
postoperative life support preoperatively: results of a national survey. Crit Care Med. 2013; 41(1):1–
8. [PubMed: 23222269] 
Steffens et al.
Page 9
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Kruser JM, Pecanac KE, Brasel KJ, Cooper Z, Steffens NM, McKneally MF, Schwarze ML. "And 
I Think That We Can Fix It": Mental Models Used in High-risk Surgical Decision Making. Ann 
Surg. 2015; 261(4):678–684. [PubMed: 25749396] 
11. Nabozny MJ, Kruser JM, Pecanac KE, Chittenden EH, Cooper Z, Steffens NM, McKneally MF, et 
al. Do Patients Buy-In to the Use of Postoperative Life Supporting Treatments? A Qualitative 
Study. Academic Surgical Congress Abstracts. 2015
12. Institute of Medicine. Dying in America: Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences 
Near the End of Life. 978-0-309-31174-8. 
13. Couet N, Desroches S, Robitaille H, Vaillancourt H, Leblanc A, Turcotte S, Elwyn G, et al. 
Assessments of the extent to which health-care providers involve patients in decision making: a 
systematic review of studies using the OPTION instrument. Health Expect. 2013
14. Joseph-Williams N, Elwyn G, Edwards A. Knowledge is not power for patients: a systematic 
review and thematic synthesis of patient-reported barriers and facilitators to shared decision 
making. Patient Educ Couns. 2014; 94(3):291–309. [PubMed: 24305642] 
15. Butow PN, Dunn SM, Tattersall MH, Jones QJ. Patient participation in the cancer consultation: 
evaluation of a question prompt sheet. Ann Oncol. 1994; 5(3):199–204. [PubMed: 8186168] 
16. Hibbard JH, Stockard J, Mahoney ER, Tusler M. Development of the Patient Activation Measure 
(PAM): conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers. Health Serv Res. 
2004; 39(4 Pt 1):1005–1026. [PubMed: 15230939] 
17. Maly RC, Frank JC, Marshall GN, DiMatteo MR, Reuben DB. Perceived efficacy in patient-
physician interactions (PEPPI): validation of an instrument in older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
1998; 46(7):889–894. [PubMed: 9670878] 
18. Walczak A, Butow PN, Clayton JM, Tattersall MH, Davidson PM, Young J, Epstein RM. 
Discussing prognosis and end-of-life care in the final year of life: a randomised controlled trial of 
a nurse-led communication support programme for patients and caregivers. BMJ Open. 2014; 
4(6):e005745.
19. Brandes K, Linn AJ, Butow PN, van Weert JC. The characteristics and effectiveness of Question 
Prompt List interventions in oncology: a systematic review of the literature. Psychooncology. 2014
20. Brown R, Butow PN, Boyer MJ, Tattersall MH. Promoting patient participation in the cancer 
consultation: evaluation of a prompt sheet and coaching in question-asking. Br J Cancer. 1999; 
80(1–2):242–248. [PubMed: 10390003] 
21. Smets EM, van Heijl M, van Wijngaarden AK, Henselmans I, van Berge Henegouwen MI. 
Addressing patients' information needs: a first evaluation of a question prompt sheet in the 
pretreatment consultation for patients with esophageal cancer. Dis Esophagus. 2012; 25(6):512–
519. [PubMed: 22054056] 
22. Clayton JM, Butow PN, Tattersall MH, Devine RJ, Simpson JM, Aggarwal G, Clark KJ, et al. 
Randomized controlled trial of a prompt list to help advanced cancer patients and their caregivers 
to ask questions about prognosis and end-of-life care. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25(6):715–723. 
[PubMed: 17308275] 
23. Nabozny MJ, Kruser JM, Steffens NM, Pecanac KE, Brasel KJ, Chittenden EH, Cooper Z, et al. 
Patient Reported Limitations to Surgical Buy-in: A Qualitative Study of Patients Facing High-Risk 
Surgery. Annals of Surgery. 2015 In press. 
24. Pecanac KE, Kehler JM, Brasel KJ, Cooper Z, Steffens NM, McKneally MF, Schwarze ML. It's 
Big Surgery: Preoperative Expressions of Risk, Responsibility, and Commitment to Treatment 
After High-Risk Operations. Ann Surg. 2014; 259(3):458–463. [PubMed: 24253139] 
25. Patton, MQ. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Fourth. SAGE Publications, inc; 2001. 
26. [Accessed November 26, 2014] Questions To Ask Your Doctor. Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality. http://www.ahrq.gov/patients-consumers/patient-involvement/ask-your-doctor/
index.html
27. Questions to Ask the Doctor. American Association of Retired Persons. [Accessed November 26, 
2014] http://www.aarp.org/relationships/caregiving-resource-center/info-08-2010/
pc_questions_to_ask_the_doctor.html. 
Steffens et al.
Page 10
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 28. [Accessed November 26, 2014] Having Surgery? What You Need to Know: Questions to Ask Your 
Doctor and Your Surgeon. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville MD. http://
archive.ahrq.gov/patients-consumers/diagnosis-treatment/surgery/questions/index.html
29. Doctella. [Accessed November 26, 2014] https://www.doctella.com/. 
30. Clayton J, Butow P, Tattersall M, Chye R, Noel M, Davis JM, Glare P. Asking questions can help: 
development and preliminary evaluation of a question prompt list for palliative care patients. Br J 
Cancer. 2003; 89(11):2069–2077. [PubMed: 14647140] 
31. Brandes K, Butow PN, Tattersall MH, Clayton JM, Davidson PM, Young J, Epstein RM, et al. 
Advanced cancer patients' and caregivers' use of a Question Prompt List. Patient Educ Couns. 
2014; 97(1):30–37. [PubMed: 25023487] 
32. Questions to Ask Before Surgery. John Hopkins Medicine. [Accessed November 26, 2014] http://
www.hopkinsmedicine.org/healthlibrary/conditions/surgical_care/
questions_to_ask_before_surgery_85,P01409/. 
33. Wisconsin Network for Research Support. Community Advisors on Research Design and 
Strategies. [Accessed February 16, 2015] http://winrs.son.wisc.edu/index.php/services/cards/. 
34. Russ AJ, Kaufman SR. Family perceptions of prognosis, silence, and the "suddenness" of death. 
Cult Med Psychiatry. 2005; 29(1):103–123. [PubMed: 16108205] 
35. Singh JA, Sloan JA, Atherton PJ, Smith T, Hack TF, Huschka MM, Rummans TA, et al. Preferred 
Roles in Treatment Decision Making Among Patients With Cancer: A Pooled Analysis of Studies 
Using the Control Preferences Scale. The American journal of managed care. 2010; 16(9):688–
696. [PubMed: 20873956] 
36. Degner LF, Sloan JA, Venkatesh P. The Control Preferences Scale. Can J Nurs Res. 1997; 29(3):
21–43.
37. Greene J, Hibbard JH, Sacks R, Overton V. When Seeing The Same Physician, Highly Activated 
Patients Have Better Care Experiences Than Less Activated Patients. Health Affairs. 2013; 32(7):
1299–1305. [PubMed: 23836747] 
38. Danjoux Meth N, Lawless B, Hawryluck L. Conflicts in the ICU: perspectives of administrators 
and clinicians. Intensive Care Med. 2009; 35(12):2068–2077. [PubMed: 19756499] 
Steffens et al.
Page 11
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Process and activities for engaging patients, family members and community members in 
creating a question prompt list.
Steffens et al.
Page 12
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Front, middle, and back of question prompt list brochure.
Steffens et al.
Page 13
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Steffens et al.
Page 14
Table 1
Patient and Family Advisory Council (PFAC) Meeting Timeline, Objectives, Activities, and Outcomes.
Meeting Objectives
Meeting Activities
Meeting Outcomes
Months 1–2
Establish
expectations and
group harmony
•
Introduce members
•
Establish standards for 
engagement
•
State project goals, timeline 
and expectations
•
Share personal experiences 
with surgery
•
Clear understanding 
of group conduct, 
PFAC expectations 
and researcher roles
•
Recognition that 
PFAC member’s 
experience can 
contribute to the 
research project
Months 3–5
Integrate preliminary
qualitative study
results with PFAC
experience with
high-risk surgery
•
Learn about qualitative 
research methods
•
Reflect on study patients’ 
stories and integrate with 
personal experience
•
Identify personally 
important themes extant in 
qualitative data
•
Identification of core 
decisional and 
informational needs
•
Identification of 
targets for 
intervention: choices, 
expectations and 
complications
Months 6–8
Create question
prompt list
•
Brainstorm questions to ask 
a surgeon
•
Discuss top 20 questions 
from 118 that PFAC and 
other stakeholders ranked in 
pre-meeting online survey
•
Explore question 
applicability to preoperative 
decisional needs
•
Provide feedback on 12 
question prompt list 
prototype
•
Question prompt list 
prototype
Months 8–12
Gain input on design
for future
comparative
effectiveness study
•
Assess measures and 
outcomes that are valuable 
and meaningful to patients 
and family members
•
Provide feedback on grant 
application
•
Provide feedback on study 
recruitment materials
•
Research protocol 
that is acceptable and 
relevant to 
stakeholders
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Steffens et al.
Page 15
Table 2
Informational and decision support failures identified in qualitative data by the PFAC.
Perception
Qualitative Study:
Preoperative Interview
Qualitative Study:
Postoperative Interview
PFAC Discussion
Surgery “has to be
done”
I didn’t really decide I 
wanted to have
it… after all those tests…sent 
me to the
heart surgeon… he said, well 
it should
be done.
… there wasn’t really any other 
options, and
then so, you know, there wasn’t 
uh, nothing to
think about really.
•
Patients need more 
information about 
alternatives.
•
Patients “already have one 
foot into the surgery room” 
because the surgical 
referral process implies 
that surgery is the only 
option.
•
Patients may still conclude 
surgery “has to be done” 
but need to have more 
information about what 
would happen if they did 
not have surgery.
I don't know. Just get it done 
and go on
with your life, I guess.
But, you know, what, what’s the 
option? Um, do
you not have the surgery and 
wait for a heart
attack and then your recovery is 
going to be a
whole lot more complicated and 
probably
protracted…So, to me it was 
like a no brainer,
you know.
Surprise: recovery
is arduous
Just to fix the problem which 
I am
having…That is my 
expectation.
Hey if I’m gonna feel like I got 
hit by a truck, tell
me before. So it was more, it 
was more
intensive… than I realized it 
would be.
•
Patients are not fully 
prepared for the intensity 
of surgery and the recovery 
process.
•
Patients should know what 
to expect postoperatively.
•
Patients who are surprised 
postoperatively may be 
upset with the surgeon.
[Surgery is] going to be the 
easiest,
best opportunity for me to 
live a couple
more years…It's just a little 
treatment
here and there afterward.
I thought it was going to be an 
in and out thing.
Unclear advance
directive
They just know what they got 
to do. I
don't want to be laying 
around being a
vegetable.
Should I let him go ahead and 
do the CPR? …I
didn't want to put him through 
that… It's the
hardest decision I've ever made.
•
Patients do not have the 
opportunity to clearly 
express their preferences 
for postoperative life 
supporting treatments.
•
PFAC member:“There is a 
disconnect between what 
the patients want and who 
is the right person to tell 
these wishes” to.
Yeah I think [the surgeon] 
knows [what
to do in an event of a
complication]…Whatever he 
thinks is
best.
…if you were going to get good 
results, it’s one
thing, but if you’re going to 
come home and do
nothing… stick your finger in a 
light socket.
JAMA Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
