 September 20, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e236
ABSTRACT: This document provides a pediatric-focused companion 
to “Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardiovascular Health 
Promotion and Disease Reduction: The American Heart Association’s 
Strategic Impact Goal Through 2020 and Beyond,” focused on 
cardiovascular health promotion and disease reduction in adults and 
children. The principles detailed in the document reflect the American 
Heart Association’s new dynamic and proactive goal to promote 
cardiovascular health throughout the life course. The primary focus 
is on adult cardiovascular health and disease prevention, but critical 
to achievement of this goal is maintenance of ideal cardiovascular 
health from birth through childhood to young adulthood and beyond. 
Emphasis is placed on the fundamental principles and metrics that define 
cardiovascular health in children for the clinical or research setting, and 
a balanced and critical appraisal of the strengths and weaknesses of the 
cardiovascular health construct in children and adolescents is provided. 
Specifically, this document discusses 2 important factors: the promotion 
of ideal cardiovascular health in all children and the improvement of 
cardiovascular health metric scores in children currently classified as 
having poor or intermediate cardiovascular health. Other topics include 
the current status of cardiovascular health in US children, opportunities 
for the refinement of health metrics, improvement of health metric 
scores, and possibilities for promoting ideal cardiovascular health. 
Importantly, concerns about the suitability of using single thresholds to 
identify elevated cardiovascular risk throughout the childhood years and 
the limits of our current knowledge are noted, and suggestions for future 
directions and research are provided.
Julia Steinberger, MD, MS, 
FAHA, Chair
Stephen R. Daniels, MD, PhD, 
FAHA
Nancy Hagberg, RN, MS, 
FNP
, FAHA
Carmen R. Isasi, MD, PhD, 
FAHA
Aaron S. Kelly, PhD, FAHA
Donald Lloyd-Jones, MD, 
ScM, FAHA
Russell R. Pate, PhD
Charlotte Pratt, PhD, RD, FAHA
Christina M. Shay, PhD, FAHA
Jeffrey A. Towbin, MD, FAHA
Elaine Urbina, MD, MS, FAHA
Linda V. Van Horn, PhD, RD, 
FAHA
Justin P
. Zachariah, MD, MPH
On behalf of the American 
Heart Association Athero-
sclerosis, Hypertension, 
and Obesity in the Young 
Committee of the Council 
on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young; Council 
on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing; Council on 
Epidemiology and Preven-
tion; Council on Functional 
Genomics and Translational 
Biology; and Stroke Council
Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children: 
Challenges and Opportunities for 2020 and Beyond
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2016 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ blood pressure  
◼ body mass index ◼ cholesterol 
◼ diet ◼ glucose ◼ pediatrics  
◼ physical activity ◼ smoking
AHA SCientiFiC StAtement
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e237
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
t
he “Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardio-
vascular Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: 
The American Heart Association’s Strategic Impact 
Goal Through 2020 and Beyond” statement, published 
in 2010, provides guidance on cardiovascular health 
promotion and disease reduction in adults and children.1 
It also offers a novel definition of cardiovascular health 
and identifies metrics to enable cardiovascular health 
monitoring in the pediatric and adult populations over 
time. The principles detailed in the document reflect the 
American Heart Association’s (AHA’s) new dynamic and 
proactive goal to promote cardiovascular health through-
out the life course. The primary focus is on adult cardio-
vascular health and disease prevention, but critical to 
achievement of this goal is maintenance of ideal cardio-
vascular health from birth through childhood to young 
adulthood and beyond.
This document provides a pediatric-focused compan-
ion document emphasizing the fundamental principles 
and metrics that define cardiovascular health in children 
for the clinical or research setting. The authors offer 
a balanced and critical appraisal of the strengths and 
weaknesses of the cardiovascular health construct in 
children and adolescents and discuss 2 important fac-
tors: the promotion of ideal cardiovascular health in all 
children and the improvement in cardiovascular health 
metric scores in children currently classified as having 
poor or intermediate cardiovascular health. Other top-
ics include the current status of cardiovascular health in 
US children, opportunities for the refinement of health 
metrics, improvement in health metric scores, and 
possibilities for promoting ideal cardiovascular health. 
Concerns about the suitability of using single thresholds 
to identify elevated cardiovascular risk throughout the 
childhood years and the limits of our current knowledge 
are noted, and suggestions for future directions and re-
search are provided.
Despite a comprehensive definition of cardiovascular 
health, it is now widely recognized that the development 
of childhood cardiovascular and metabolic disease risk 
factors and the consequent loss of cardiovascular health 
are accelerated in childhood primarily in conjunction with 
weight gain and obesity.2–9 The number of overweight 
children (defined as a body mass index [BMI] ≥85th per-
centile using the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention [CDC] Growth Charts) and the prevalence of obe-
sity (defined as a BMI ≥95th percentile using the CDC 
Growth Charts) have risen dramatically over the past 
4 decades for youth 2 to 19 years of age,10,11 with a 
recognized epidemic occurring between the mid-1980s 
and mid-1990s in the United States.11,12 US data from 
2009 to 2010 indicate that 17% of 2- to 19-year-olds 
are obese and an additional 15% are overweight.13,14 
Youth with obesity have significantly worse circulating 
lipid profiles (higher total and low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, higher triglycerides, and lower high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol) and higher blood pressure (BP), 
glucose, and insulin concentrations than their nonobese 
peers.3,7–9,15 Obesity in youth is also linked to increased 
left ventricular mass in childhood16,17 and adulthood,18 
as well as increased carotid intima-media thickness mea-
sured in adulthood.19–24 Although obesity prevalence has 
plateaued in the past decade, the rates in minority, low-
income, and rural populations remain high.25
Moreover, rates of pediatric severe obesity are in-
creasing; the prevalence is ≈6% in the United States.26 
Youth with severe obesity are at much higher risk of 
developing cardiovascular disease even compared with 
their overweight or obese peers.27
There is also evidence that childhood levels of cardio-
vascular risk factors predict early subclinical atheroscle-
rosis and cardiac pathology28,29 and adult morbidity and 
mortality.30,31 The Bogalusa Heart Study demonstrated 
that in youth who died at an average age of 19.6 years, 
there was a direct association between degree of athero-
sclerosis in the coronary arteries and levels of antemor-
tem cardiovascular risk factors, including BMI, lipids, 
and BP.28 The PDAY Study (Pathobiologic Determinants 
of Atherosclerosis in Youth), which included autopsies of 
nearly 3000 individuals 15 to 34 years of age, provided 
results in postmortem examination similar to the Boga-
lusa Heart Study findings.29
The stages of cardiovascular disease prevention in-
clude primordial (the prevention of risk factor develop-
ment), primary (the prevention of cardiovascular disease 
and stroke among individuals at risk), and secondary 
(the prevention of recurrent disease and complications). 
Most children are born with ideal cardiovascular health, 
which the AHA defines as the simultaneous presence of 
4 favorable health behaviors (related to smoking, BMI, 
physical activity, and healthy diet status) and 3 favorable 
health factors (total cholesterol, BP, and fasting blood 
glucose levels; Table 1).1 Unfortunately, over time, most 
children experience a decline in health factors and be-
haviors, resulting in loss of ideal cardiovascular health 
as they reach adulthood. It is well known that achieving 
sustained lifestyle changes in adults is difficult, and risk 
factor control through the use of medication cannot fully 
restore the low-risk state present in ideal cardiovascular 
health. Therefore, maintaining better levels of cardiovas-
cular health through childhood is a desirable goal.1 The 
advancement and sustainability of the AHA’s goal (“By 
2020, to improve the cardiovascular health of all Ameri-
cans by 20% while reducing deaths from cardiovascu-
lar diseases and stroke by 20%”)1 hinge directly on the 
promotion of ideal health behaviors for the maintenance 
of (or improvement in nonideal) health factors in chil-
dren and adolescents. The collective goal of pediatric 
healthcare providers and researchers, and for society 
as a whole, should be to understand how ideal health be-
haviors and health factors are lost and how this decline 
might be prevented.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e238
For the pediatric population, the following AHA 
health behavior criteria are suggested in AHA’s defini-
tion of cardiovascular health: abstinence from smok-
ing, a BMI <85th percentile, ≥60 minutes of moderate 
or vigorous physical activity daily, and adherence to a 
diet emphasizing fruits, vegetables, fish, whole grains, 
low sodium, and few sugar-laden foods and drinks. 
AHA-recommended health factor metrics for ideal 
cardiovascular health in children are as follows: total 
cholesterol <170 mg/dL, BP <90th percentile, and a 
fasting plasma glucose level <100 mg/dL.1 Although 
the authors recognize that BMI could more objectively 
be viewed as a health factor, for purposes of agree-
ment with “Defining and Setting National Goals for Car-
diovascular Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: 
The American Heart Association’s Strategic Impact 
Goal Through 2020 and Beyond,” in this document, we 
have maintained its classification as a behavior. The 
issue of BMI classification merits further consideration 
in future definitions.
Although normal levels for childhood cardiovascu-
lar health factors have been defined using population-
based distributions, definitions for elevated or high-risk 
levels have been based on clinical expert consen-
sus32–37 as a result of the lack of long-term data relating 
elevated childhood cardiovascular risk factor levels to 
adult cardiovascular end points. Significant develop-
mental changes during maturation are likely to reduce 
the strength of the associations between cardiovascu-
lar risk factors measured in childhood and adult car-
diovascular risk factors and outcomes. For example, 
fluctuations in cardiovascular risk factor levels during 
puberty are well known.38–41 The International Child-
hood Cardiovascular Cohort Consortium data indicate 
that current childhood risk thresholds for lipids have 
low sensitivity and specificity for identifying elevated 
lipid classification in adulthood.42–45 The use of cross-
sectional population-based cut points for defining risk 
in childhood can contribute to significant risk misclas-
sification later in life. Thus, longitudinal data that track 
cardiovascular health metrics from very early in life 
through maturation and are linked to adult cardiovas-
cular health metrics are essential for establishing im-
proved surveillance tools.
ReFinement OF tHe CARDiOvASCULAR 
HeALtH metRiCS
In “Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardiovascu-
lar Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: The Amer-
ican Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal Through 
2020 and Beyond,” pediatric cut points defining ideal 
cardiovascular health were provided as a first step to-
ward improving primordial prevention of CVD.1 Some of 
these cut points are imperfect and pose challenges to 
the accurate identification of the at-risk child. These cut 
points are less than optimal because they are based 
on percentiles from general populations rather than on 
relations to outcomes. The values were chosen to coin-
cide with definitions used in current guidelines and are 
available in NHANES (National Health and Nutritional 
Examination Surveys). Nevertheless, such metrics will 
aid in the assessment of educational and preventive 
programs and provide data on improvements in health 
behaviors (ie, as healthy diets and physical activity) and 
for reporting declines in prevalence of smoking, over-
weight, and obesity, as well as improvement in values 
for total cholesterol, BP, and the presence of elevated 
fasting blood glucose.46 Clearly, many aspects of ideal 
cardiovascular health are challenging to define and 
measure. The sections below offer perspectives on 
the challenges for addressing specific cardiovascular 
health factors.
table 1. Poor, intermediate, and ideal Definitions: Health metrics in Children and Adolescents
metric
Poor
intermediate
ideal
Smoking status
Tried >30 d ago
…
Never tried; never smoked  
whole cigarette
BMI
>95th percentile
85th–95th percentile
<85th percentile
Physical activity level
None
>0 and <60 min/d moderate or  
vigorous activity every day
≥60 min/d moderate or  
vigorous activity every day
Healthy Diet Score*
0–1 components
2–3 components
4–5 components
Total cholesterol
≥200 mg/dL
170–199 mg/dL
<170 mg/dL
Blood pressure
>95th percentile
90-95th percentile
<90th percentile
Fasting blood glucose
≥126 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
<100 mg/dL
BMI indicates body mass index.
*The Healthy Diet Score is based on adherence to the following dietary recommendations: fruits and vegetables, ≥4.5 cups per day; fish, 2 or 
more 3.5-oz servings per week; sodium, ≤1500 mg/d; sugar-sweetened beverages, ≤450 kcal (36 oz) per week; and whole grains, ≥3 servings a 
day scaled to a 2000-kcal/d diet. Reprinted from Lloyd-Jones et al.1 Copyright © 2010, American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e239
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
Smoking
In “Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardiovascu-
lar Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: The Ameri-
can Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal Through 
2020 and Beyond,”1 the ideal metric for smoking behav-
ior is defined for youth 12 to 19 years of age as “never 
tried; never smoked a whole cigarette.” Determination 
of smoking habits, particularly in children and adoles-
cents, is challenging. Questionnaires may underestimate 
the true smoking rate because of the perceived loss 
of confidentiality when parents or others are present.47 
However, the CDC data may circumvent some of these 
limitations.48 Assessment is also affected by factors 
such as varying definitions of smoking, fear of reprisal, 
or desire to inflate one’s status in the eyes of others. 
To successfully estimate smoking behavior in pediatric 
populations, objective measurement techniques can be 
used (eg, cotinine levels) to estimate secondhand smoke 
exposure, light smoking, and heavy smoking.
The ability to perform such assessments in pediat-
ric populations is particularly pertinent because ≈4.8 
million US children <12 years of age are exposed to 
secondhand smoke in their homes. Furthermore, a re-
port on neurobehavioral disorders in children exposed 
to secondhand smoke has shown a 2-fold increase in 
prevalence compared with those not exposed to sec-
ondhand smoke in their homes.49 Although cotinine 
levels are available in many population-based investiga-
tions, including in a subset of participants in NHANES, 
exposure to secondhand smoke was not included as 
a primary cardiovascular health metric in “Defining and 
Setting National Goals for Cardiovascular Health Pro-
motion and Disease Reduction: The American Heart 
Association’s Strategic Impact Goal Through 2020 and 
Beyond”1 because of insufficient evidence linking sec-
ondhand smoke exposure to adverse cardiovascular 
health among youth.
The number of youth who have used electronic ciga-
rettes (or e-cigarettes) is also notably increasing.50 This 
is particularly concerning for the cardiovascular health 
of US children and adolescents because the use of e-cig-
arettes is associated with increased intention to smoke 
cigarettes among those who never smoked conventional 
cigarettes.50,51 E-cigarette use was also not listed as a 
primary cardiovascular health metric in “Defining and Set-
ting National Goals for Cardiovascular Health Promotion 
and Disease Reduction: The American Heart Associa-
tion’s Strategic Impact Goal Through 2020 and Beyond”1 
because insufficient data were available to evaluate its 
contribution to adverse cardiovascular health.
Body mass index
BMI is the most widely used measure of weight status 
in public health surveillance and in epidemiological re-
search in children and adolescents. In large, diverse 
groups, BMI is well correlated with adiposity (ie, body 
composition). BMI is widely used to screen children and 
adolescents for overweight and obesity and is an easy-
to-calculate metric. The CDC Growth Charts provide sex-
specific BMI-for-age growth curves for children 2 to 20 
years of age.52 With these charts, normal weight status 
is defined as an age/sex-specific BMI <85th percentile; 
Overweight is defined as an age/sex-specific BMI ≥85th 
and <95th percentile; and obesity is defined as an age/
sex-specific BMI ≥95th percentile.34 The criterion set for 
ideal cardiovascular health is a BMI <85th percentile. 
The recommended method for determining BMI is to ob-
jectively measure height and weight, calculate BMI as 
kilograms per meters squared, and either plot BMI on 
the CDC Growth Charts52 or use statistical analysis soft-
ware to calculate the age/sex-specific BMI percentile. 
Although BMI is highly correlated with adiposity,52 it is 
not an ideal measure of fatness (ie, percent body fat) in 
children and adolescents.53,54 It is known that variability 
in lean weight is a source of error in estimates of adipos-
ity that are based on BMI.54,55 A criterion measure of adi-
posity is provided by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry, 
which provides highly reliable estimates of lean mass, fat 
mass, and percent body fat.56,57 Furthermore, skin-fold 
thicknesses58 and bioelectric impedance59 have been 
widely used to estimate percent body fat in research 
studies.
Healthy Diet
Healthy dietary behaviors directly influence multiple cardio-
vascular risk factors such as obesity, dyslipidemia, hyper-
tension, and hyperglycemia. Two of the primary features of 
healthy eating include diet quality and energy balance; the 
latter is defined as caloric consumption matched with en-
ergy expenditure. Unfortunately, compared with the other 
6 ideal health behaviors/factors categories, children in the 
United States score most poorly in regard to a healthy 
diet. Approximately 91% of US children are classified as 
having a poor diet score, 9% are classified as having an 
intermediate diet score, and <0.5% are classified as hav-
ing an ideal diet score.1 Moreover, a higher percentage of 
children than adults are ranked in the poor category for 
diet quality.1 This worrisome finding is consistent across 
all pediatric age groups, races, and sex.60
Dietary recommendations in “Defining and Setting Na-
tional Goals for Cardiovascular Health Promotion and Dis-
ease Reduction: The American Heart Association’s Stra-
tegic Impact Goal Through 2020 and Beyond” are clear 
but need to be scaled to account for the varying energy 
requirements across childhood.1 Avoidance of obesity in 
children is key. Balancing energy intake to match growth 
and activity needs can mean the difference between suc-
cessful and compromised management of lifetime risk. 
Diet assessment remains challenging in the absence of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e240
standardized, simple-to-use, age-appropriate, validated 
tools. Available diet measures have poor reliability,61,62 
and many youth consume a major portion of their diet 
outside the home, unobserved by parents/guardians, 
making assessment of diet in children difficult for provid-
ers and researchers.63,64 In addition, commercially avail-
able food frequency questionnaires may not be appropri-
ate across race/ethnicity groups and are challenging in 
situations of low literacy.65–67
The majority of US children do not meet the recom-
mendations for a healthy diet. Sodium, sugar, solid fats, 
and refined carbohydrates are overconsumed and fruits, 
vegetables, whole grains, dairy, and dietary fiber are 
underconsumed by the majority of children. The 2015 
US Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee68 emphasized 
the role of the macroenvironment, including economic 
and price structures, food production and distribution 
systems, transportation, and agricultural practices and 
policies, as major influences driving personal choices in 
the various settings where food is prepared and served. 
On the basis of a thorough review of the literature, the 
US Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee prioritized 4 
key settings that were considered especially relevant in 
obesity prevention: neighborhood and community food 
access, childcare (early care and education), schools, 
and worksites. Two of these 4 areas concern environ-
ments relevant to children. The AHA is actively engaged 
in addressing heart-healthy diet and lifestyle in early 
childcare through the Healthy Way to Grow program in-
volving underserved communities. In addition, the Voices 
for Healthy Kids policy research program, in conjunction 
with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, is addressing 
policy levers in community, schools, and early childcare 
that target key factors considered strategic in improv-
ing adherence to the recommended diet and lifestyle 
behaviors. Included are healthy food financing initiatives, 
healthy restaurant meals, school foods, school market-
ing, and water access throughout schools and other 
environments where children are active. For maximum 
adoption, the recommended heart-healthy diet for chil-
dren requires personal choice on the part of parents 
and ideally is reinforced throughout the community and 
school settings.
Physical Activity
Physical activity has been defined as any bodily move-
ment produced by skeletal muscles that requires en-
ergy expenditure.69 The “2008 Physical Activity Guide-
lines for Americans” recommend that children 6 to 17 
years of age engage in ≥60 minutes of moderate- to 
vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity per day.70 
Furthermore, the guidelines recommend that this pe-
riod of activity include muscle-strengthening and bone-
loading activities at least 3 days a week.70 Physical ac-
tivity is a complex behavior that is performed for many 
different purposes, in many different settings, and in a 
wide range of forms. Accordingly, no single measure 
of physical activity can validly assess all elements of a 
child’s physical activity pattern.
To determine compliance with the aforementioned 
federal physical activity guideline, the preferred method 
of assessment is accelerometry. An accelerometer is an 
electromechanical motion sensor that provides an objec-
tive measure of a child’s participation in physical activity 
across the entire range of physical activity intensities. 
The device is small and relatively unobtrusive and thus 
can be used to measure physical activity for multiple 
days, thereby providing a reliable reflection of a child’s 
usual physical activity level. Accelerometry has been in-
corporated into the protocol for NHANES, so this proce-
dure now serves as the basis for producing prevalence 
estimates for compliance with physical activity guide-
lines in US children and adolescents.71 Accelerometry 
has been used to measure physical activity in children 
across the developmental continuum, and this method 
has been used extensively with children as young as 3 
years of age to evaluate physical activity behavior of chil-
dren attending childcare centers and preschools.72,73 A 
positive attribute of accelerometry is that raw data can 
be stored indefinitely and reanalyzed as new data reduc-
tion strategies are developed.
Accelerometry, although providing an objective and 
reliable assessment of physical activity in children and 
adolescents, has some significant limitations. Acceler-
ometry underdetects non–weight-bearing activity (eg, bi-
cycle riding) and cannot be used to assess water-based 
activities (eg, swimming). There are also challenges 
with compliance in wearing accelerometers, particularly 
among children and adolescents. Importantly, accel-
erometry does not provide any contextual information 
about the type, location, and social setting in which 
physical activity is performed.
To complement accelerometry, self-report and sur-
rogate report instruments have been developed to pro-
vide information about activity types and contexts. An 
example is the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance Sys-
tem, which includes several items on physical activity 
behavior. This instrument is administered at regular 
intervals to nationally representative samples of Ameri-
can high school students. The Youth Risk Behavior Sur-
veillance System provides student-reported information 
on frequency of participation in moderate- and vigor-
ous-intensity physical activity, muscle-strengthening 
activities, physical education classes, and organized 
sports.74 In addition, SHPPS (School Health Policies 
and Practices Study), a CDC-managed surveillance sys-
tem, provides information on the availability of school-
based physical activity programs, including physical 
education, school sports, recess, and other physical 
activity opportunities, at the elementary, middle, and 
high school levels.75
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e241
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
Blood Lipids/total Cholesterol
The 2011 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Ex-
pert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular 
Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents 
noted that the 1992 guidelines targeted the identifica-
tion of children with elevated low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, whereas the current guidelines address 
the increasingly predominant combined dyslipidemic 
pattern detected in children and adolescents, includ-
ing moderate to severe elevation in triglyceride level, 
normal to mild elevation in low-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol, and lower high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
levels.33 Key findings of this report are summarized in 
Table 2.
“Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardiovas-
cular Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: The 
American Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal 
Through 2020 and Beyond”1 establishes a total cho-
lesterol level of 170 mg/dL as ideal for children 6 to 
19 years of age, but this wide age range presents 
some challenge. For example, during puberty, there is 
typically a reduction in total blood cholesterol of 10% 
to 15%, regardless of diet, and the mechanisms are 
poorly understood.76 Additionally, race and sex differ-
ences in lipids become more pronounced after puberty. 
Higher levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and 
lower levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol are 
noted after puberty, especially in white boys. Counter-
intuitively, lower levels of triglycerides are documented 
in black girls after puberty despite a higher prevalence 
of obesity.77 These effects of puberty may contribute 
to the differences noted by race in the postpubertal 
clustering of risk factors that typically occurs.78 Al-
though total blood cholesterol level remains the stron-
gest predictor of cardiovascular outcomes in NHANES, 
the increasingly more prevalent detection of combined 
dyslipidemia that accompanies the development of an 
obesity pattern (high triglycerides/low high-density li-
poprotein cholesterol) may represent an important risk 
factor that should be addressed.
Blood Pressure
“Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardiovascular 
Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: The American 
Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal Through 2020 
and Beyond”1 defines ideal BP as a level <90th percen-
tile for children 8 to 19 years of age. As with BMI, the 
practitioner should evaluate BP levels using the sex/
height-specific percentile charts,32 with the caveat that 
the charts do not account for known differences in BP 
levels by race.33,79,80 A major challenge of this definition 
is its reliance on the statistical distribution of BP levels 
from pooled epidemiological data rather than linking cut 
points to hard cardiovascular events.
Although 24-hour ambulatory BP monitoring is consid-
ered the most accurate method to evaluate hypertension 
and to define BP-related cardiovascular risk81 and can 
reduce the uncertainty in classification resulting from 
day-to-day variability of BP levels, the cost and burden 
table 2. Key Findings From the 2011 national 
Heart, Lung, and Blood institute’s “expert Panel on 
integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health 
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents: 
Summary Report”33
Abnormal lipid levels in childhood are associated with increased 
evidence of atherosclerosis.
Early identification and control of dyslipidemia, including heterozygous 
familial hypercholesterolemia, throughout youth and into adulthood can 
reduce clinical cardiovascular disease risk beginning in young adult life.
Normal lipid and lipoprotein distributions have been documented 
in childhood, adolescence, and young adult life, and studies have 
revealed significant tracking of total cholesterol and LDL-C levels from 
childhood into adulthood, with the strongest correlation seen between 
results in late childhood and the third to fourth decades of life.
Puberty has a strong influence, with total and LDL-C levels falling 
10%–20% or more. Nine to 11 y of age is considered a stable period 
for measuring blood lipids because most children in this age range 
will not have started puberty.
Relying on a family history of premature cardiovascular disease or 
dyslipidemia as the primary rationale for screening misses 30%–60% 
of children with dyslipidemia; thus, universal lipid assessment is 
recommended.
Non–HDL-C is considered a significant predictor of the presence of 
atherosclerosis and is more predictive of persistent dyslipidemia than 
total cholesterol, LDL-C, or HDL-C levels alone. Another advantage is 
that non–HDL-C can be accurately calculated in a nonfasting state.
In terms of other lipid measurements, most studies report that 
apolipoprotein A-1 and B levels provide no additional advantage 
over non–HDL-C, LDL-C, or HDL-C levels, although measurement of 
apolipoprotein(a) is useful in the assessment of children with both 
hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke. The offspring of parents with 
premature cardiovascular disease and no other identifiable risk factors 
have been noted to have elevations of apolipoprotein A1 and B and 
lipoprotein(a). More advanced measurement of lipoprotein subclasses 
and their sizes has not been shown to have clinical utility in children.
Obesity is often associated with a combined dyslipidemia pattern,  
with mild elevations in total cholesterol and LDL-C, moderate to 
severe elevation in triglycerides, and low HDL-C. This is the most 
common dyslipidemic pattern seen in childhood.
Dyslipidemia can occur secondary to disorders such as diabetes 
mellitus, nephrotic syndrome, chronic renal disease, postorthotopic 
heart transplantation, Kawasaki disease, chronic inflammatory 
disease, and hypothyroidism, among others, and requires evaluation.
Some inherited disorders are not completely phenotypically expressed 
until adulthood. The evaluation of children from high-risk families with 
familial combined hyperlipidemia can lead to earlier detection.
HDL-C indicates high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; and LDL-C, 
 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e242
on patients to use this method make it less appealing as 
a technique for defining ideal cardiovascular health on 
a population basis. Furthermore, there is a lack of nor-
mative data across races and ethnicities.82 Therefore, 
replicative measures of casual (office) BP starting at 3 
years of age may be a reasonable approach to track a 
child’s BP over time.
Fasting Blood Glucose
A fasting blood glucose level of <100 mg/dL was set as 
the ideal for pediatric patients in “Defining and Setting 
National Goals for Cardiovascular Health Promotion and 
Disease Reduction: The American Heart Association’s 
Strategic Impact Goal Through 2020 and Beyond.”1 
This is a challenging metric because measurement of 
fasting blood glucose is not a current or proposed rec-
ommendation for routine pediatric care. Additionally, it 
is known that hyperinsulinism is the first abnormality 
seen in obese pediatric patients developing metabolic 
derangement, with impaired fasting glucose occurring 
at a much later stage in the progression toward type 2 
diabetes mellitus.83 The current definition of ideal car-
diovascular health does not capture this aspect of car-
diovascular risk.
The American Diabetes Association developed 
clear guidelines, applicable to both children and 
adults, that define impaired glucose tolerance as a 
fasting blood glucose between 100 and 125 mg/dL 
and diabetes mellitus as a fasting blood glucose ≥126 
mg/dL).84 Whereas defining the upper limits of normal 
for diagnostic purposes is supported by high-quality 
evidence, establishing ideal levels for glucose and in-
sulin is challenging because of differences in insulin 
levels based on measurement method,85–87 observed 
racial/ethnic differences in metabolic parameters 
in healthy children,79,88,89 and the physiological rise 
in insulin levels during puberty that makes a single 
cut point unreliable.40,90 Fortunately, puberty-related 
changes in glucose have not been documented, sug-
gesting that the use of a single cut point for glucose 
may be reasonable.91
CURRent StAtUS OF CARDiOvASCULAR 
HeALtH in US CHiLDRen: UnDeRStAnDinG 
tHe StAte OF CARDiOvASCULAR HeALtH  
in ALL US PeDiAtRiC AnD YOUtH 
POPULAtiOnS
Developing strategies toward achieving the AHA Strate-
gic Impact Goal1 in youth populations depends largely 
on estimating the current prevalence of cardiovascular 
health behaviors and factors and identifying the target 
behaviors and factors and the populations in need of im-
provement. “Defining and Setting National Goals for Car-
diovascular Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: 
The American Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal 
Through 2020 and Beyond”1 presented the “baseline” 
prevalence of each component and category of cardio-
vascular health based on both youth and adult data from 
the 2007 to 2008 NHANES. NHANES data are collected 
biannually and have proven to be reliable and valid as-
sessments of the health and nutritional status of adults 
and children in the United States. NHANES prevalence 
estimates will be the primary data source for monitor-
ing progress toward achieving the AHA Strategic Impact 
Goal. However, despite the strengths of NHANES, these 
data are limited in several ways in the estimation of the 
prevalence of cardiovascular health, particularly in chil-
dren and adolescents. Although NHANES participants 
are strategically sampled to estimate the health status 
of the US population, only 4000 to 5000 children and 
adolescents <19 years of age are recruited for each ex-
amination. These sample sizes are further reduced when 
the population is stratified by age groups: ≈30% are 0 to 
5 years old, ≈30% are 6 to 11 years old, and ≈30% are 
12 to 19 years old. Furthermore, a subsample of only 
10% to 15% of participants are selected for laboratory-
based assessments such as fasting blood glucose and 
blood lipids. The number of NHANES participants rep-
resenting the cardiovascular health status of different 
race/ethnicity groups is also very limited: Non-Hispanic 
whites make up the largest proportion of participants 
(≈40%), followed by non-Hispanic blacks (≈25%) and His-
panic–Mexican Americans (≈25%). The remaining partici-
pants are Hispanics-other (≈20%) and a combined group 
of American Indians, Alaskan Natives, Asians, Native Ha-
waiians, and Other Pacific Islanders (≈10%), limiting dif-
ferentiation between these racial/ethnic groups. Overall, 
these limitations in sample sizes become very restric-
tive in attempts to examine the status of cardiovascular 
health according to age, sex, and race/ethnicity. This 
issue becomes particularly evident in the estimation of 
poor and intermediate cardiovascular health as a result 
of the lower prevalence of these categories compared 
with adults.
To remain consistent with the baseline data used in 
“Defining and Setting National Goals for Cardiovascular 
Health Promotion and Disease Reduction: The Ameri-
can Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal Through 
2020 and Beyond”1 for the 2020 goal baseline, in this 
document, the current status of cardiovascular health in 
children and adolescents was estimated from NHANES 
2007 to 2008 data. However, additional population-
based sources will be presented to gain additional es-
timates of cardiovascular health prevalence in areas 
where NHANES data may be limited. NHANES preva-
lence estimates for the status of cardiovascular health in 
US children and adolescents according to age, sex, and 
race/ethnicity are presented in Figure 1.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e243
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
Smoking
The NHANES 2007 to 2008 survey includes questions 
about tobacco use for participants ≥12 years of age. 
Among participants 12 to 19 years of age, approxi-
mately one third were categorized as having poor cur-
rent smoking status (ie, had tried a cigarette in the prior 
30 days), with a slightly higher prevalence in boys (34%) 
than in girls (31%). When tobacco use was examined 
across major racial/ethnic groups, non-Hispanic black 
adolescents had the lowest prevalence of poor cardio-
vascular health status for smoking (26%), and Mexican 
Americans exhibited the highest prevalence of poor cur-
rent smoking status (36%).
Body mass index
Obesity continues to be a challenging problem among 
children and adolescents. According to the NHANES 
2007 to 2008 estimates, the prevalence of poor BMI 
(≥95th percentile) is higher across older age groups, 
ranging from 9% to 11% in 2- to 5-year-olds to 19% to 
27% in 12- to 19-year-olds. At younger ages, girls have 
a higher prevalence of poor BMI status compared with 
Figure 1. Prevalence of cardiovascular health components in children and adolescents according to age, sex, 
and race/ethnicity: nHAneS (national Health and nutritional examination Surveys) 2007 to 2008. 
Information presented in the text of the Current Status Physical Activity section includes data based on accelerometry from 
NHANES 2003 to 2004: prevalence of meeting the Physical Activity Guidelines by sex and prevalence by race/ethnicity.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e244
boys, but at 6 to 19 years of age, boys consistently ex-
hibit a higher prevalence of poor BMI than girls. Younger 
children (2–5 years of age) also exhibit the highest prev-
alence of ideal BMI (78%–80%), whereas adolescents 
(12–19 years of age) exhibit the lowest prevalence of 
ideal BMI (girls, 52%; boys, 60%). Mexican American 
and non-Hispanic black children 2 to 5 years of age 
exhibit a notably greater prevalence of poor BMI than 
non-Hispanic white children. Mexican American children 
6 to 11 years of age exhibit the highest prevalence of 
poor BMI (24%) compared with non-Hispanic white and 
non-Hispanic black youth. However, at 12 to 19 years 
of age, non-Hispanic black youth exhibit similar levels of 
poor BMI status compared with Mexican American youth 
(≥30%). Non-Hispanic black adolescents 12 to 19 years 
of age exhibit the lowest prevalence of ideal BMI (42%) 
compared with Mexican American (52%) and non-Hispan-
ic white (56%) adolescents.
Physical Activity
The prevalence of compliance with the current physical 
activity guideline (≥60 minutes of moderate- to vigorous-
intensity aerobic physical activity a day)70 was assessed 
via accelerometry in the 2003 to 2004 cycle of NHANES. 
Among children 6 to 11 years of age, 48.9% of boys and 
34.7% of girls met the physical activity guideline.71 The 
prevalence of compliance was much lower among 12- to 
15-year-olds in that only 11.9% of boys and 3.4% of girls 
met the guideline, and among 16- to 19-year-olds, only 
10.0% of boys and 5.4% of girls met the guideline. In 
an examination of the prevalence of meeting the physi-
cal activity guideline in selected race/ethnicity groups, 
among 6- to 11-year-olds, compliance with the guideline 
was highest among non-Hispanic black children (50.4%) 
compared with non-Hispanic white (39.9%) and Mexican 
American (41.3%) children.92 Among 12- to 15-year-olds 
and 16- to 19-year-olds, compliance with the guideline 
was much lower than among 6- to 11-year-old children 
for each of the racial/ethnic groups and was not mark-
edly different across racial/ethnic groups. The NHANES 
protocol also included child self-report of physical activ-
ity, which produced higher prevalence estimates of com-
pliance with the physical activity guidelines compared 
with accelerometry. For example, self-reported data 
from 2007 to 2008 NHANES for adolescents 12 to 19 
years of age showed that approximately two thirds of 
boys but only 50% of girls report ideal levels of physical 
activity, whereas 13% of boys and 21% of girls report 
poor levels of physical activity (ie, report no physical ac-
tivity over the past 30 days).
Healthy Diet
The 2010 US Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee 
reviewed the most recent NHANES data in determining 
mean dietary intake across all age groups. For children 
2 to 18 years of age, the highest sources of energy 
intake (kcal/day) are simple carbohydrates (grain-based 
desserts, sugar-sweetened beverages). The impact of a 
diet based on these energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods 
is further heightened by inadequate intakes of vegeta-
bles, whole grains, and fiber.93 The components of the 
Healthy Diet Score and adherence to dietary recommen-
dations in children are illustrated in Figure 2. Prevalence 
estimates for children and adolescents who meet the 
ideal levels of the Healthy Diet Score are the lowest of 
all cardiovascular health metrics. On the basis of 2007 
to 2008 NHANES data, <1% of 2- to 19-year-olds report 
dietary intakes consistent with meeting 4 or 5 compo-
nents of the Healthy Diet Score. At 5 to 11 years of 
age, the majority of children (boys, 86%; girls, 83%) met 
either 0 or 1 Healthy Diet Score component (ie, exhibited 
a poor Healthy Diet Score); these estimates were consis-
tent with estimates in the 12- to 19-year age range. At 
5 to 19 years of age, Mexican Americans were the least 
likely to have a poor diet score (79%–85%), whereas 
non-Hispanic white boys were most likely (88%–89%).
total Cholesterol
In NHANES 2007 to 2008 children 6 to 11 years of age, 
more than one third have total cholesterol levels that are 
not ideal. Specifically, 27% of girls and 28% of boys 6 to 
11 years of age exhibit intermediate status for total cho-
lesterol, and 10% to 11% exhibit poor status. Prevalence 
is similar for adolescents 12 to 19 years of age, with 
65% of girls and 73% of boys categorized as ideal and 
26% to 35% of adolescents categorized as intermediate 
or poor for levels of total cholesterol. Across racial/eth-
nic groups, the prevalence of ideal total cholesterol was 
similar (63%–65%); Mexican American children exhibited 
the highest prevalence of ideal and non-Hispanic whites 
had the lowest prevalence of ideal total cholesterol. At 
12 to 19 years of age, non-Hispanic adolescents exhib-
ited the lowest prevalence of poor total cholesterol (7%) 
compared with Mexican Americans (9%) and non-Hispan-
ic blacks (10%).
Blood Pressure
The prevalence of ideal BP for children and adolescents 
is the highest of all cardiovascular health metrics. Ap-
proximately 93% of boys and 90% of girls 8 to 11 years 
of age and 91% of boys and 88% of girls 12 to 19 years 
of age exhibit ideal BP. Differences in the prevalence of 
intermediate and poor status for BP are most notable 
when examined across racial/ethnic groups. Among 
children 8 to 11 years of age of age, the prevalence of 
poor BP is consistently ≈4% across non-Hispanic white, 
non-Hispanic black, and Mexican American youth. At 12 
to 19 years of age, 6% of non-Hispanic white adoles-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e245
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
cents are categorized as having poor BP status com-
pared with 3% of Mexican Americans and <1% of non-
Hispanic blacks. Despite the low prevalence of poor BP 
status among non-Hispanic black adolescents (12–19 
years of age), non-Hispanic black adolescents exhibit 
the highest prevalence of intermediate BP status (15%) 
compared with Mexican Americans (12%) and non-His-
panic whites (1%).
Fasting Blood Glucose
At 12 to 19 years of age, the prevalence of ideal fast-
ing blood glucose is notably higher in girls (80%) than 
boys (63%), and between 20% and 38% of children 
exhibit intermediate or poor fasting plasma glucose. 
Mexican Americans exhibit the lowest prevalence of 
ideal fasting blood glucose (58%) compared with non-
Hispanic whites (73%) and non-Hispanic blacks (79%) 
at the same age. Because a very small number of 
NHANES 2007 to 2008 participants 12–19 years of 
age were noted to have poor status for fasting blood 
glucose levels (n=5), the accuracy of the prevalence 
estimates from this sample is limited, and it is likely 
that many were not fasting. Another data source with 
specific prevalence estimates for type 2 diabetes mel-
litus (which is consistent with the AHA definition of poor 
fasting plasma glucose) is the SEARCH for Diabetes in 
Youth study. SEARCH is an observational, multicenter 
study focusing on physician-diagnosed diabetes mel-
litus in individuals <20 years of age. It provides esti-
mates of the population prevalence of diabetes mel-
litus by type, age, sex, and ethnicity in a nationally 
representative sample of US children with wide ethnic 
and socioeconomic representation from 4 geographi-
cally defined populations and 2 national health plans. In 
2009, the SEARCH estimate94 of the prevalence of type 
2 diabetes mellitus among adolescents 10 through 19 
years of age was 0.046%, with lower rates in boys 
(0.038%) than girls (0.058%). The highest prevalence 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children 10 to 19 years 
of age was observed in American Indians (0.120%), 
followed by black (0.106%), Hispanic (0.079%), and 
Asian/Pacific-Islander (0.034%) youth, and the low-
est prevalence was seen in non-Hispanic white youth 
(0.017%). Children 10 to 14 years of age exhibited 
lower prevalence (0.023%) compared with those 15 
to 19 years of age (0.068%). These estimates more 
precisely represent the prevalence of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus in youth. Estimates from the population-based 
surveillance study should be used in conjunction with 
estimates from the NHANES data to monitor changes 
in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (eg, poor 
Figure 2. Components of the Healthy Diet Score and adherence to dietary recommendations by age, sex, and race.  
The Healthy Diet Score is based on adherence to the following dietary recommendations: fruits and vegetables, ≥4.5 cups per 
day; fish, 2 or more 3.5-oz servings per week; sodium, ≤1500 mg/d; sugar-sweetened beverages, ≤450 kcal (36 oz) per week; 
and whole grains, ≥3 servings a day scaled to a 2000-kcal/d diet. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e246
status in levels of fasting blood glucose) in children 
<20 years of age.
HOw tO imPROve inteRmeDiAte AnD POOR 
CARDiOvASCULAR HeALtH
Engaging in ideal health behaviors early in life can have a 
beneficial impact on all of the health factors. The mainte-
nance of ideal health from birth throughout the life course 
is the prime goal. However, many children born healthy 
will, unfortunately, develop unhealthy behavioral patterns 
early in life. The life-course approach is an important te-
net of the concept of ideal cardiovascular health. That 
is, a premium should be placed on assisting children to 
maintain the standards of ideal cardiovascular health ear-
ly in life (primordial prevention) instead of taking a “wait 
and see” approach by addressing or treating health and 
risk factors later in adulthood when they have become 
entrenched. Although the level of intensity required to im-
prove cardiovascular health classification (from poor to 
intermediate and from intermediate to ideal) may differ, 
the core principles and approaches are the same.
Healthy Diet
The eating pattern recommended to achieve nutrient 
adequacy while reducing sources of solid fats, added 
sugars, and non–nutrient-dense foods is the DASH (Di-
etary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet. The DASH 
diet is a plant-focused diet rich in fruits, vegetables, 
and nuts that includes low-fat and nonfat dairy prod-
ucts, lean meats, fish, poultry, mostly whole grains, and 
heart-healthy fats. It is ideal for growing children. This 
eating pattern was incorporated into the Cardiovascular 
Health Integrated Lifestyle Diet (CHILD 1) diet recom-
mended by the 2011 Expert Panel on Integrated Guide-
lines.95,96 Rather than targeting nutrient-specific goals, 
this approach recommends servings of foods that meet 
nutrient needs.
Strengths of the CHILD 1 diet are the inclusion of 
evidence-based recommendations beginning at birth 
through 18 years of age that are consistent with US Di-
etary Guidelines and the DASH-type diet recommended 
for adults, as well as an emphasis on the benefits of 
breastfeeding and delayed introduction of solid foods. 
The CHILD 1 diet provides nutritious, preventive, energy-
balanced guidelines appropriate for children, adults, and 
families.
Research is needed to address the influence of envi-
ronmental, behavioral, and cultural factors that can en-
hance or detract from the adoption of the recommended 
guidelines and to develop methods for pediatric provid-
ers to best assess and address these factors within a 
busy clinical setting. Limited research has been initiated 
to test and evaluate possible approaches.97
To help children develop healthy eating habits, they 
should be introduced early and often to a wide variety 
of fruits, vegetables, fish, and whole grains. This re-
quires help from parents and caregivers who need to 
recognize the advantages of role modeling. Our imme-
diate goal should be to educate parents and children 
about the advantages of a diet that includes 2 to 3 
age-appropriate servings of healthy diet components 
at each meal with a goal of achieving the following by 
18 years of age: ≥4.5 cups of fruits and vegetables 
per day, 2 or more 3.5-oz servings of fish per week, 
3 or more 1-oz servings of fiber-rich whole grains per 
day, <1500 mg sodium per day, and ≤450 kcal of 
sugar-sweetened beverages per week,1 as illustrated 
in the age-specific CHILD 1 diet.95 Parents are impor-
tant change agents in achieving these goals and in 
contributing to halting and reversing adolescent obe-
sity. There is consistent and growing evidence that the 
DASH-style eating pattern offers many advantages in 
providing nutrient quality and risk-reduction potential 
in growing children despite continuing questions about 
the role of specific nutrients or foods that may have 
the most effective impact long term.98
Healthcare providers can use motivational inter-
viewing principles by asking parents what foods their 
children most enjoy. The healthcare providers can 
then help parents choose reasonable goals and ap-
proaches that the parents would be willing to initiate 
to improve their child’s diet. A practical first step for 
many children is to include at least 1 more serving of 
a favorite fruit or vegetable or a fiber-rich whole-grain 
food on a daily basis. Gradual reduction of high-sodium 
foods and sugar-sweetened beverages is encouraged 
without a focus on immediate elimination of unhealthy 
foods. Creative approaches to food preparation (eg, 
finger-sized cut-up fruits served on colorful plates or 
in different shapes or made into faces or animals, fruit 
salsa served with whole-grain crackers, vegetable-
laced pastas, pizza, lasagna) and encouraging the 
child to participate with the parent in food preparation 
and vegetable gardening and harvesting can enhance 
adherence to good dietary practices and habits. Simi-
larly, preparing and serving mixed dishes that contain 
 
mild-flavored fish (eg, fish sticks or in a soft taco with 
salsa) increases the attraction while enhancing nutrient 
quality and energy balance (unless fried) and expanding 
nutritious meal options.
The documented association between sugar-sweet-
ened beverages and childhood obesity has now been 
established.99,100 The “Defining and Setting National 
Goals for Cardiovascular Health Promotion and Dis-
ease Reduction: The American Heart Association’s 
Strategic Impact Goal Through 2020 and Beyond” 
healthy diet advocates consumption of ≤450 kcal of 
sugar-sweetened beverages per week1 or no more 
than 70 kcal daily. (This is about half a 12-oz soda 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e247
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
a day.) The American Academy of Pediatrics and the 
CHILD 1 Diet recommend avoidance of all sugar-
sweetened beverages. Although zero consumption is 
ideal, this may require gradual reduction, depending 
on the age of the child. In the youngest children, bev-
erages should include primarily water and low-fat milk 
(except in the case of infants who are recommended 
to consume only breast milk in the first 6 months of 
life or formula if breast milk is not an option). If con-
sumed at all, sugar-sweetened beverages should be 
reserved only for special occasions and consumed in 
small amounts.
Physical Activity
A large majority of children in the United States do not 
meet recommendations for physical activity, and their 
time spent in sedentary activities is higher than recom-
mended.101,102 The Physical Activity Guidelines for Ameri-
cans Midcourse Report: Strategies to Increase Physical 
Activity Among Youth summarized the evidence on the 
effectiveness of interventions to increase physical activ-
ity and youth.103 Interventions were categorized by set-
tings: school, preschool and childcare center, commu-
nity, family and home, and primary care. An expert panel 
conducted a literature review using a review-of-reviews 
approach.
A major conclusion of the report was that the stron-
gest evidence of effectiveness is for school-based 
intervention strategies.103 Within the school setting, 
solid evidence exists to recommend multicompo-
nent school interventions. Multicomponent school 
interventions typically include strategies such as en-
hanced physical education classes, classroom activ-
ity breaks, activity sessions before and after school, 
and active transportation to and from school. In addi-
tion, interventions that focused specifically and singly 
on enhanced physical education classes were found 
to be effective in increasing physical activity levels 
of youth. Several other school-based strategies were 
considered, but supportive evidence was either less 
robust or lacking. Some evidence supports strategies 
based on promotion of active transport to school and 
classroom exercise breaks. Evidence was insufficient 
for afterschool programs and physical environmental 
changes at the school site. The review of physical 
environmental interventions included consideration of 
modifications to children’s play spaces. Interventions 
in preschools and childcare settings have produced 
some positive results, and the same is true for com-
munity-based enhancements of the built environment. 
At the present time, there is insufficient evidence to 
support home/family-based interventions and strate-
gies implemented through healthcare settings. The 
report included a strong endorsement for more re-
search on physical activity interventions to increase 
physical activity in youth, particularly in settings out-
side the school environment.
Smoking
Smoking is a clear and still present danger to the cardio-
vascular health of America’s children. Although tobacco 
use has declined,48,104,105 many youth are exposed to sec-
ondhand smoke or are primary tobacco or e-cigarette 
smokers.48,51,106 It is a risk factor that is eminently modi-
fiable with a variety of techniques, including behavioral 
interventions, pharmacological interventions, and policy 
tools. A major goal for health professionals is to encour-
age smoking cessation in primary users, to reduce sec-
ondhand exposure, and to prevent smoking initiation. 
This could help those considered in the poor range of 
cardiovascular health metrics for smoking to move to-
ward the ideal cardiovascular health metric for smoking.
A wealth of behavioral modification tools have been 
developed and have shown varying degrees of effective-
ness.107,108 Behavioral change depends on the motiva-
tion of the smoker; therefore, interventions generally use 
a cognitive behavioral approach. Interventions include 
counseling, motivational enhancement, and, more re-
cently, text message– or Internet-based messaging, as 
well as pharmacological approaches such as the use of 
bupropion or nicotine replacement therapies.109–113 In a 
recent meta-analysis, state-of-change interventions and 
motivational enhancement interventions were associat-
ed with a roughly 50% to 60% improvement in smoking 
cessation rates.108 The few studies available for review 
found that pharmacological interventions were not effec-
tive in smoking cessation for youth.
Secondhand smoking exposure renders multiple in-
dividuals vulnerable, including passersby, coworkers, 
spouses, and children (after birth and in utero). Educa-
tion efforts to prevent smoking and intervention efforts 
to achieve nonexposure in children and adolescents have 
included messaging to pregnant women about the health 
risks to their unborn child. It is important to note that 
40% of children worldwide are exposed to smoke.114 A 
recent study on the effectiveness of parent-directed in-
terventions to protect children from secondhand smoke 
revealed that parent-reported outcomes improved by 
only 12% for individual smokers and 7% for intervention 
families, with some evidence for publication bias.115 How-
ever, modest effects over a broad base can add up to 
substantial change.
Broad-based effects can be achieved through as-
siduously implemented individual therapies or group- or 
population-based interventions. Population interven-
tions are generally disincentives, including prohibition 
on smoking in public places or private locations likely 
to offer high exposure, taxes on cigarette purchases, 
and health insurance penalties. Policy-based incentive 
approaches are less common but include cessation-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e248
treatment subsidies and inducements.116,117 The zenith 
of broad-based interventions is the prevention cam-
paign. School-based prevention is modestly effective, 
reducing smoking initiation by ≈12%.118 Mass media 
messaging campaigns are popular, low-intensity ave-
nues of intervention, but formal investigations into their 
effectiveness are warranted. The myriad health effects 
associated with smoking may call for the implementa-
tion of the World Health Organization’s Framework Con-
vention on Tobacco Control mPOWER initiative in com-
munities across America.119
The 2012 “Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and 
Young Adults” report of the Surgeon General (http://
www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-
youth-tobacco-use/factsheet.html)120 summarizes the 
continued need to address this important issue because 
for every death of an adult caused by smoking there 
are 2 new replacement smokers <26 years of age. Evi-
dence on the urgency of addressing youth in this cardio-
vascular health promotion initiative is compelling: 9 of 
10 smokers start by 18 years of age, with rare smokers 
starting after 26 years of age.
HOw tO ACHieve iDeAL CARDiOvASCULAR 
HeALtH: FUtURe DiReCtiOnS
Historically, avoidance of excessive risk has been the 
basis for improvement of cardiovascular health. The 
lack of cardiovascular disease outcomes in childhood 
makes it difficult to rely on dichotomized levels of car-
diovascular risk metrics and underscores the impor-
tance of addressing these metrics as a continuum of 
poor-intermediate-ideal levels. Future research needs to 
address whether current recommended cutoffs of ideal 
health metrics are appropriate.
In addition to the clear need for prevention strategies 
for outcomes with long lag times, continuing efforts are 
needed with respect to improved surveillance and public 
policy. There is a paucity of valid, large-scale, longitu-
dinal assessments of cardiovascular health factors and 
behaviors. The benefits of surveillance are 2-fold: Data 
can assess the effects of interventions and can assist in 
predicting future health risks and health-related budgets. 
Rollout of tools and surveys to assess ideal cardiovas-
cular health is urgently needed and should focus on con-
tinuous measurements as opposed to measuring only 
abnormal cardiovascular risk factors. Additionally, there 
is limited information in the literature on short-term im-
provements in cardiovascular health metrics in children 
as a result of lifestyle changes.
Although the application of primary and secondary 
prevention strategies has clearly played a role in the ob-
served reduction, more attention to the retention of car-
diovascular health metrics from childhood through the 
course of life is a rational strategy to pursue.121 Data 
are needed to translate that rational strategy to proven 
interventions. Core data needed to promote ideal car-
diovascular health in children include differentiating 
between physiological maturation and pathological ab-
erration, disentangling intertwined cardiovascular risk 
behaviors and factors, and quantifying effects across 
the long latency between childhood risk factor and adult 
outcome events.
imPROveD CARDiOvASCULAR HeALtH 
SURveiLLAnCe iS neeDeD in US CHiLDRen 
AnD ADOLeSCentS
The AHA Strategic Impact Goal targets improving the 
cardiovascular health of all Americans, including indi-
viduals of all ages and races/ethnicities. However, the 
major data source for health surveillance of Americans 
(ie, NHANES) is limited with regard to the age rang-
es of children surveyed. Although BMI is assessed in 
NHANES participants as young as 2 years of age, no 
assessments are available that allow categorization of 
cardiovascular health status in children <12 years of 
age for smoking or fasting blood glucose.122 NHANES 
data are also limited in that surveillance of dietary in-
take is available for children <5 years of age but no 
surveillance of total cholesterol is available for children 
<6 years of age and no surveillance of BP is available 
for children <8 years of age. Because of the small 
numbers of individuals sampled across various racial/
ethnic groups, NHANES data are also limited in pro-
viding prevalence estimates for the status of cardio-
vascular health in Asians/Pacific Islanders, American 
Indians, Alaskan Natives, and other Hispanic individuals 
besides Mexican Americans. More detailed surveillance 
of the majority of cardiovascular health components in 
all early childhood populations is needed, particularly 
across a wider range of race/ethnicities, to assess the 
effectiveness of current and future population-based 
strategies aimed at improving the cardiovascular health 
among children of all ages.
One potential opportunity to improve on current sur-
veillance methods is to take advantage of “big data” 
and analytics to track trends in various health factors 
and health behaviors. In regard to health factors, data 
from the electronic health record could be used to com-
plement data generated from ongoing studies such 
as NHANES to further refine surveillance. In addition, 
patient-generated data, including data obtained from 
wearable technologies such as accelerometers, could 
be prospectively collected and examined in the context 
of epidemiological studies of cardiovascular health. A 
recent scientific statement on mobile health illustrated 
a dearth of research validating wearable technology, 
although a large proportion of the adult population is 
already using it.123 Harnessing the power of big data 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e249
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
and patient-generated data will address some of the 
limitations of existing cohort studies and form the ba-
sis for refining many of the ideal health factors and 
behaviors. Big data can also be harnessed to assist 
with problems inherent in existing data sets such as the 
lack of childhood cohort data with sufficient events for 
analyses. The personal and public health perspective 
on ideal health should include assessment beginning at 
birth and consideration for genomic basis for cardio-
vascular health.
COnCLUSiOnS
In this document, we identified important strengths and 
limitations with the current approach to ideal cardiovas-
cular health in children and adolescents. Although the 
overall concept is a very important one, the choice of 
health metrics and the development of the poor, interme-
diate, and ideal categories are limited by currently avail-
able national survey data. A new process by which car-
diovascular health factors are identified independently of 
available data, with that process then driving decisions 
for NHANES and other population-based studies, would 
be an improvement. Optimally, availability of longitudinal 
data on these factors would allow evaluation of the pro-
cess of loss of ideal cardiovascular health and connect 
that loss with later adverse cardiovascular health out-
comes.
Overall, it is clear that much of the benefit of ideal 
cardiovascular health factors is lost in childhood and 
adolescence. This is due in large part to the adoption 
of unhealthful diet and physical activity behaviors. As-
sessment of best practices to maintain ideal cardio-
vascular health behaviors and factors is beyond the 
scope of this statement. Subsequent analyses should 
address the evidence base for counseling and other 
behavior change methods for young individuals and 
their families to maintain ideal cardiovascular health 
in practice.
ACKnOwLeDGmentS
We want to thank Annabel Kornblum, MPH, and Mindi Khan, 
MPH, RD, for conducting literature search, compiling and or-
ganizing the sections, ensuring cohesiveness of the sections, 
and assisting with tables and figures. We would like to extend 
our appreciation to Hongyan Ning for her endless and expedi-
ent support on this work.
FOOtnOteS
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifical-
ly, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such rela-
tionships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts 
of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Asso-
ciation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on Janu-
ary 15, 2016, and the American Heart Association Executive 
Committee on February 23, 2016. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-
2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Steinberger J, Daniels SR, Hagberg 
N, Isasi CR, Kelly AS, Lloyd-Jones D, Pate RR, Pratt C, Shay 
CM, Towbin JA, Urbina E, Van Horn LV, Zachariah JP; on behalf 
of the American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hyperten-
sion, and Obesity in the Young Committee of the Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovas-
cular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Epidemiology and Pre-
vention; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational 
Biology; and Stroke Council. Cardiovascular health promo-
tion in children: challenges and opportunities for 2020 and 
beyond: a scientific statement from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000441.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is con-
ducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more 
on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit http://
professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & 
Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Devel-
opment.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en-
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not per-
mitted without the express permission of the American Heart 
Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located 
at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permis-
sion-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copy-
right Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of 
the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e250
writing Group Disclosures
writing Group 
member
employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
expert 
witness
Ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Julia 
Steinberger
University of 
Minnesota
NIH†
None
None
None
None
Sanofi*
None
Stephen R. 
Daniels
University of 
Colorado School  
of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
Sanofi*; Novo 
Nordisk*
None
Nancy Hagberg
Child Heart 
Associates
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Carmen  
R. Isasi
Albert Einstein 
College of 
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Aaron S. Kelly
University of 
Minnesota
National Institutes 
of Health/NHLBI†; 
Novo Nordisk*; 
Takeda*; Astra 
Zeneca†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Donald  
Lloyd-Jones
Northwestern 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Russell R. Pate
University of  
South Carolina
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Charlotte Pratt
National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood 
Institute
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Christina  
M. Shay
University of  
North Carolina  
at Chapel Hill
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jeffrey  
A. Towbin
Le Bonheur 
Children’s Hospital/
The Heart Institute
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Elaine Urbina
Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Linda V. Van 
Horn
Northwestern 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Justin  
P. Zachariah
Baylor College  
of Medicine
NHLBI/NIH (K23 
award)†
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
DiSCLOSUReS
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e251
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
ReFeRenCeS
 1. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel LJ, 
Van Horn L, Greenlund K, Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Ar-
nett DK, Fonarow GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi FA, Robert-
son RM, Roger V, Schwamm LH, Sorlie P, Yancy CW, Rosamond 
WD; American Heart Association Strategic Planning Task Force 
and Statistics Committee. Defining and setting national goals 
for cardiovascular health promotion and disease reduction: the 
American Heart Association’s strategic Impact Goal through 2020 
and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192703.
 2. Cali AM, Caprio S. Obesity in children and adolescents. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93(suppl 1):S31–S36. doi: 10.1210/
jc.2008-1363.
 3. Chiarelli F, Marcovecchio ML. Insulin resistance and obesity 
 
in childhood. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008;159(suppl 1):S67–S74. 
doi: 10.1530/EJE-08-0245.
 4. Freedman DS, Dietz WH, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS. The relation 
of overweight to cardiovascular risk factors among children and 
adolescents: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Pediatrics. 1999;103(pt 
1):1175–1182.
 5. Freedman DS, Mei Z, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS, Dietz WH. Car-
diovascular risk factors and excess adiposity among overweight 
children and adolescents: the Bogalusa Heart Study. J Pediatr. 
2007;150:12–17.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.08.042.
 6. Goodman E, Dolan LM, Morrison JA, Daniels SR. Factor analysis of 
clustered cardiovascular risks in adolescence: obesity is the predom-
inant correlate of risk among youth. Circulation. 2005;111:1970–
1977. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000161957.34198.2B.
 7. Nathan BM, Moran A. Metabolic complications of obesity in 
childhood and adolescence: more than just diabetes. Curr Opin 
 
Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2008;15:21–29. doi: 10.1097/MED. 
0b013e3282f43d19.
 8. Sinaiko AR, Steinberger J, Moran A, Prineas RJ, Vessby B, Basu S, 
Tracy R, Jacobs DR Jr. Relation of body mass index and insulin resis-
tance to cardiovascular risk factors, inflammatory factors, and ox-
idative stress during adolescence. Circulation. 2005;111:1985–
1991. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000161837.23846.57.
 9. Wärnberg J, Marcos A. Low-grade inflammation and the meta-
bolic syndrome in children and adolescents. Curr Opin Lipidol. 
2008;19:11–15. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e3282f4096b.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
expert 
witness
Ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Anthony C. Chang
Children’s Hospital of 
Orange County
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Samuel S. Gidding
Alfred I. duPont 
Hospital for Children 
Nemours Cardiac 
Center
NIH (TODAY 
and CARDIA 
studies, 
echo reading 
center)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michele  
Mietus-Snyder
Children’s National 
Health System
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Significant.
 
10. Jolliffe D. Extent of overweight among US children and adolescents 
from 1971 to 2000. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004;28:4–9. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0802421.
 
11. Freedman DS, Khan LK, Serdula MK, Ogden CL, Dietz WH. Ra-
cial and ethnic differences in secular trends for childhood BMI, 
weight, and height. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14:301–308. 
doi: 10.1038/oby.2006.39.
 
12. Strauss RS, Pollack HA. Epidemic increase in childhood over-
weight, 1986-1998. JAMA. 2001;286:2845–2848.
 
13. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb MM, Flegal KM. Preva-
lence of high body mass index in US children and adolescents, 
2007-2008. JAMA. 2010;303:242–249. doi: 10.1001/jama. 
2009.2012.
 
14. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity 
and trends in body mass index among US children and adoles-
cents, 1999-2010. JAMA. 2012;307:483–490. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2012.40.
 
15. Sinaiko AR, Jacobs DR Jr, Steinberger J, Moran A, Luepker R, Roc-
chini AP, Prineas RJ. Insulin resistance syndrome in childhood: as-
sociations of the euglycemic insulin clamp and fasting insulin with 
fatness and other risk factors. J Pediatr. 2001;139:700–707. 
doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.118535.
 
16. Urbina EM, Gidding SS, Bao W, Pickoff AS, Berdusis K, Berenson 
GS. Effect of body size, ponderosity, and blood pressure on left 
ventricular growth in children and young adults in the Bogalusa 
Heart Study. Circulation. 1995;91:2400–2406. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.91.9.2400.
 
17. Urbina EM, Gidding SS, Bao W, Elkasabany A, Berenson GS.  
Association of fasting blood sugar level, insulin level, and obesity 
with left ventricular mass in healthy children and adolescents: the 
Bogalusa Heart Study. Am Heart J. 1999;138(pt 1):122–127.
 
18. Li X, Li S, Ulusoy E, Chen W, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS. Child-
hood adiposity as a predictor of cardiac mass in adulthood: the 
Bogalusa Heart Study. Circulation. 2004;110:3488–3492. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000149713.48317.27.
 
19. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Berenson GS, Venn A, Burns TL, Sa-
bin MA, Srinivasan SR, Daniels SR, Davis PH, Chen W, Sun C, 
Cheung M, Viikari JS, Dwyer T, Raitakari OT. Childhood adiposity, 
adult adiposity, and cardiovascular risk factors. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365:1876–1885. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1010112.
 
20. Chen 
W, 
Srinivasan 
SR, 
Li 
S, 
Xu 
J, 
Berenson 
GS. 
Metabolic 
syndrome 
variables at low levels in childhood are beneficially associated 
 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e252
with adulthood cardiovascular risk: the Bogalusa Heart Study. 
Diabetes Care. 2005;28:126–131.
 
21. Raitakari OT, Juonala M, Kähönen M, Taittonen L, Laitinen T, Mäki-
Torkko N, Järvisalo MJ, Uhari M, Jokinen E, Rönnemaa T, Akerb-
lom HK, Viikari JS. Cardiovascular risk factors in childhood and 
carotid artery intima-media thickness in adulthood: the Cardiovas-
cular Risk in Young Finns Study. JAMA. 2003;290:2277–2283. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.290.17.2277.
 
22. Raitakari OT, Juonala M, Viikari JS. Obesity in childhood and vas-
cular changes in adulthood: insights into the Cardiovascular Risk 
in Young Finns Study. Int J Obes (Lond). 2005;29(suppl 2):S101–
S104.
 
23. Freedman DS, Dietz WH, Tang R, Mensah GA, Bond MG, Urbina 
EM, Srinivasan S, Berenson GS. The relation of obesity throughout 
life to carotid intima-media thickness in adulthood: the Bogalusa 
Heart Study. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004;28:159–166. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0802515.
 
24. Oikonen M, Laitinen TT, Magnussen CG, Steinberger J, Sinaiko AR, 
Dwyer T, Venn A, Smith KJ, Hutri-Kähönen N, Pahkala K, Mikkilä 
V, Prineas R, Viikari JS, Morrison JA, Woo JG, Chen W, Nicklas T, 
Srinivasan SR, Berenson G, Juonala M, Raitakari OT. Ideal cardio-
vascular health in young adult populations from the United States, 
Finland, and Australia and its association with cIMT: the Interna-
tional Childhood Cardiovascular Cohort Consortium. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2013;2:e000244. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000244.
 
25. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of child-
hood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011-2012. JAMA. 
2014;311:806–814. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.732.
 
26. Skinner AC, Skelton JA. Prevalence and trends in obesity and 
 
severe obesity among children in the United States, 1999-2012. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168:561–566. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics. 
2014.21.
 
27. Kelly AS, Barlow SE, Rao G, Inge TH, Hayman LL, Steinberger 
J, Urbina EM, Ewing LJ, Daniels SR; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in 
the Young Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young, Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabo-
lism, and Council on Clinical Cardiology. Severe obesity in children 
and adolescents: identification, associated health risks, and treat-
ment approaches: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
 
Association. Circulation. 2013;128:1689–1712. doi: 10.1161/CIR. 
0b013e3182a5cfb3.
 
28. Berenson GS, Srinivasan SR, Bao W, Newman WP 3rd, Tracy RE, 
Wattigney WA. Association between multiple cardiovascular risk 
factors and atherosclerosis in children and young adults: the Bo-
galusa Heart Study. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1650–1656. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199806043382302.
 
29. McGill HC Jr, McMahan CA, Gidding SS. Preventing heart disease 
in the 21st century: implications of the Pathobiological Deter-
minants of Atherosclerosis in Youth (PDAY) study. Circulation. 
2008;117:1216–1227. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107. 
717033.
 
30. Engeland A, Bjørge T, Søgaard AJ, Tverdal A. Body mass index 
in adolescence in relation to total mortality: 32-year follow-up of 
227,000 Norwegian boys and girls. Am J Epidemiol. 2003;157: 
517–523.
 
31. Must A, Jacques PF, Dallal GE, Bajema CJ, Dietz WH. Long-term 
morbidity and mortality of overweight adolescents: a follow-up 
of the Harvard Growth Study of 1922 to 1935. N Engl J Med. 
1992;327:1350–1355. 
doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199211053271904.
 
32. National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group 
on High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. The fourth 
report on the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of high blood 
pressure in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(suppl 
4th report):555–576.
 
33. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health 
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents; National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines 
for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Ado-
lescents: summary report. Pediatrics. 2011;128:S213–S256. 
doi: 10.1542/peds.2009-2107C.
 
34. Barlow SE; Expert Committee. Expert Committee recommenda-
tions regarding the prevention, assessment, and treatment of 
child and adolescent overweight and obesity: summary report. 
Pediatrics. 2007;120(suppl 4):S164–S192. doi: 10.1542/peds. 
2007-2329C.
 
35. American Academy of Pediatrics, National Cholesterol Educa-
tion Program: report of the Expert Panel on Blood Cholesterol 
Levels in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 1992;89(pt 2): 
525–584.
 
36. Type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents: American Diabetes 
Association. Diabetes Care. 2000;23:381–389. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2337/diacare.23.3.381.
 
37. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Guo SS, Grummer-Strawn LM, Flegal 
KM, Mei Z, Wei R, Curtin LR, Roche AF, Johnson CL. 2000 CDC 
Growth Charts for the United States: methods and development. 
Vital Health Stat 11. 2002:1–190.
 
38. Berenson GS, Srinivasan SR, Cresanta JL, Foster TA, Web-
ber LS. Dynamic changes of serum lipoproteins in children 
during adolescence and sexual maturation. Am J Epidemiol. 
1981;113:157–170.
 
39. deGroot I, Morrison JA, Kelly KA, Rauh JL, Mellies MJ, Edwards 
BK, Glueck CJ. Lipids in schoolchildren 6 to 17 years of age: up-
per normal limits. Pediatrics. 1977;60:437–443.
 
40. Moran A, Jacobs DR Jr, Steinberger J, Hong CP, Prineas R, Luep-
ker R, Sinaiko AR. Insulin resistance during puberty: results from 
clamp studies in 357 children. Diabetes. 1999;48:2039–2044.
 
41. van Stiphout WA, Hofman A, de Bruijn AM, Valkenburg HA. Dis-
tributions and determinants of total and high-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol in Dutch children and young adults. Prev Med. 
1985;14:169–180.
 
42. Huang TT, Nansel TR, Belsheim AR, Morrison JA. Sensitivity, 
specificity, and predictive values of pediatric metabolic syndrome 
components in relation to adult metabolic syndrome: the Princ-
eton LRC Follow-Up Study. J Pediatr. 2008;152:185–190. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.08.007.
 
43. Friedman LA, Morrison JA, Daniels SR, McCarthy WF, Sprecher DL. 
Sensitivity and specificity of pediatric lipid determinations for adult 
lipid status: findings from the Princeton Lipid Research Clinics 
Prevalence Program Follow-up Study. Pediatrics. 2006;118:165–
172. doi: 10.1542/peds.2005-2968.
 
44. Magnussen CG, Thomson R, Cleland VJ, Ukoumunne OC, Dw-
yer T, Venn A. Factors affecting the stability of blood lipid and 
lipoprotein levels from youth to adulthood: evidence from the 
Childhood Determinants of Adult Health Study. Arch Pediatr 
 
Adolesc Med. 2011;165:68–76. doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics. 
2010.246.
 
45. Magnussen CG, Raitakari OT, Thomson R, Juonala M, Patel DA, 
Viikari JS, Marniemi J, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS, Dwyer T, 
Venn A. Utility of currently recommended pediatric dyslipidemia 
classifications in predicting dyslipidemia in adulthood: evidence 
 
from the Childhood Determinants of Adult Health (CDAH) study, Car-
diovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, and Bogalusa Heart Study. 
Circulation. 2008;117:32–42. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
107.718981.
 
46. Steinberger J, Daniels SR, Eckel RH, Hayman L, Lustig RH, Mc-
Crindle B, Mietus-Snyder ML. Progress and challenges in meta-
bolic syndrome in children and adolescents: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hyper-
tension, and Obesity in the Young Committee of the Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular 
 
Nursing; and Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism. 
 
Circulation. 2009;119:628–647. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
108.191394.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e253
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
 
47. Greenlund KJ, Johnson C, Wattigney W, Bao W, Webber LS, Beren-
son GS. Trends in cigarette smoking among children in a southern 
community, 1976-1994: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Ann Epide-
miol. 1996;6:476–482.
 
48. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Smoking and tobac-
co use: data and statistics. 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/
data_statistics/. Accessed August 15, 2015.
 
49. Kabir Z, Connolly GN, Alpert HR. Secondhand smoke expo-
sure and neurobehavioral disorders among children in the 
United States. Pediatrics. 2011;128:263–270. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2011-0023.
 
50. Bunnell RE, Agaku IT, Arrazola RA, Apelberg BJ, Caraballo RS, 
Corey CG, Coleman BN, Dube SR, King BA. Intentions to smoke 
cigarettes among never-smoking US middle and high school 
electronic cigarette users: National Youth Tobacco Survey, 2011-
2013. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17:228–235. doi: 10.1093/ntr/
ntu166.
 
51. Wills TA, Knight R, Williams RJ, Pagano I, Sargent JD. Risk fac-
tors for exclusive e-cigarette use and dual e-cigarette use and 
tobacco use in adolescents. Pediatrics. 2015;135:e43–e51. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2014-0760.
 
52. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Grummer-Strawn LM, Flegal KM, Guo 
SS, Wei R, Mei Z, Curtin LR, Roche AF, Johnson CL. CDC Growth 
Charts: United States. Adv Data. 2000:1–27.
 
53. Heo M, Wylie-Rosett J, Pietrobelli A, Kabat GC, Rohan TE, Faith 
MS. US pediatric population-level associations of DXA-measured 
percentage of body fat with four BMI metrics with cutoffs. Int J 
Obes (Lond). 2014;38:60–68. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.134.
 
54. Wells JC. Toward body composition reference data for infants, 
children, and adolescents. Adv Nutr. 2014;5:320S–329S. doi: 
10.3945/an.113.005371.
 
55. Wells JC, Williams JE, Chomtho S, Darch T, Grijalva-Eternod C, 
Kennedy K, Haroun D, Wilson C, Cole TJ, Fewtrell MS. Pediat-
ric reference data for lean tissue properties: density and hydra-
tion from age 5 to 20 y. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91:610–618. doi: 
10.3945/ajcn.2009.28428.
 
56. Pintauro SJ, Nagy TR, Duthie CM, Goran MI. Cross-calibration of 
fat and lean measurements by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry 
to pig carcass analysis in the pediatric body weight range. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 1996;63:293–298.
 
57. Wells JC, Williams JE, Chomtho S, Darch T, Grijalva-Eternod C, 
Kennedy K, Haroun D, Wilson C, Cole TJ, Fewtrell MS. Body-com-
position reference data for simple and reference techniques and 
a 4-component model: a new UK reference child. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2012;96:1316–1326. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.036970.
 
58. Addo OY, Himes JH. Reference curves for triceps and subscapular 
skinfold thicknesses in US children and adolescents. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2010;91:635–642. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28385.
 
59. Chumlea WC, Guo SS, Kuczmarski RJ, Flegal KM, Johnson CL, 
Heymsfield SB, Lukaski HC, Friedl K, Hubbard VS. Body composi-
tion estimates from NHANES III bioelectrical impedance data. Int 
J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2002;26:1596–1609. doi: 10.1038/
sj.ijo.0802167.
 
60. Shay CM, Ning H, Daniels SR, Rooks CR, Gidding SS, Lloyd-Jones 
DM. Status of cardiovascular health in US adolescents: prevalence 
estimates from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur-
veys (NHANES) 2005-2010. Circulation. 2013;127:1369–1376. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.001559.
 
61. Del Pino DL, Friedman R. Adaptation and validation of an FFQ for 
6-10-year-old children. Public Health Nutr. 2011;14:826–834. 
doi: 10.1017/S1368980010003538.
 
62. Lillegaard IT, Løken EB, Andersen LF. Relative validation of a pre-
coded food diary among children, under-reporting varies with re-
porting day and time of the day. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2007;61:61–68. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602487.
 
63. Paxton A, Baxter SD, Fleming P, Ammerman A. Validation of the 
school lunch recall questionnaire to capture school lunch intake of 
third- to fifth-grade students. J Am Diet Assoc. 2011;111:419–424. 
 
doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2010.11.017.
 
64. Wilson A, Magarey A, Mastersson N. Reliability of question-
naires to assess the healthy eating and activity environment of 
a child’s home and school. J Obes. 2013;2013:720368. doi: 
10.1155/2013/720368.
 
65. Hernández-Avila M, Romieu I, Parra S, Hernández-Avila J, Madrigal 
H, Willett W. Validity and reproducibility of a food frequency ques-
tionnaire to assess dietary intake of women living in Mexico City. 
Salud Publica Mex. 1998;40:133–140.
 
66. Lyons GK, Woodruff SI, Candelaria JI, Rupp JW, Elder JP. De-
velopment of a protocol to assess dietary intake among His-
panics who have low literacy skills in English. J Am Diet Assoc. 
1996;96:1276–1279. doi: 10.1016/S0002-8223(96)00333-1.
 
67. Mayer-Davis EJ, Vitolins MZ, Carmichael SL, Hemphill S, Tsarou-
cha G, Rushing J, Levin S. Validity and reproducibility of a food 
frequency interview in a Multi-Cultural Epidemiology Study. Ann 
Epidemiol. 1999;9:314–324.
 
68. US Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans, 2015. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Of-
fice; 2015. http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/. Accessed 
 
November 16, 2015.
 
69. Caspersen CJ. Physical activity epidemiology: concepts, meth-
ods, and applications to exercise science. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 
1989;17:423–473.
 
70. US Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical Activ-
ity Guidelines for Americans. 2008. http://health.gov/paguidelines/. 
Accessed November 16, 2015.
 
71. Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell 
M. Physical activity in the United States measured by accelerom-
eter. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:181–188. doi: 10.1249/
mss.0b013e31815a51b3.
 
72. Pate RR, O’Neill JR, Mitchell J. Measurement of physical activity 
in preschool children. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010;42:508–512. 
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181cea116.
 
73. Trost SG, McIver KL, Pate RR. Conducting accelerometer-based 
activity assessments in field-based research. Med Sci Sports Ex-
erc. 2005;37(suppl):S531–S543.
 
74. Eaton DK, Kann L, Kinchen S, Shanklin S, Flint KH, Hawkins J, Har-
ris WA, Lowry R, McManus T, Chyen D, Whittle L, Lim C, Wechsler 
H; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Youth 
risk behavior surveillance: United States, 2011. MMWR Surveill 
Summ. 2012;61:1–162.
 
75. US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Results from the School Health Policies 
and Practices Study 2012. http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/
shpps/2012/pdf/shpps-results_2012.pdf. Accessed November 
 
16, 2015.
 
76. Cresanta JL, Srinivasan SR, Webber LS, Berenson GS. Serum lipid 
and lipoprotein cholesterol grids for cardiovascular risk screening 
of children. Am J Dis Child. 1984;138:379–387.
 
77. Webber LS, Srinivasan SR, Wattigney WA, Berenson GS. Track-
ing of serum lipids and lipoproteins from childhood to adult-
hood: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1991;133: 
884–899.
 
78. de Ferranti SD, Gauvreau K, Ludwig DS, Neufeld EJ, Newburger 
JW, Rifai N. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in American 
adolescents: findings from the Third National Health and Nutri-
tion Examination Survey. Circulation. 2004;110:2494–2497. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000145117.40114.C7.
 
79. Messiah SE, Carrillo-Iregui A, Garibay-Nieto G, Lopez-Mitnik G, 
Cossio S, Arheart KL. Inter- and intra-ethnic group comparison 
of metabolic syndrome components among morbidly obese 
adolescents. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2010;12:645–652. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7176.2010.00337.x.
 80. Bao W, Threefoot SA, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS. Essential 
 
hypertension predicted by tracking of elevated blood pressure from 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Steinberger et al
September, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441
e254
childhood to adulthood: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Am J Hypertens. 
1995;8:657–665. doi: 10.1016/0895-7061(95)00116-7.
 
81. Flynn JT, Daniels SR, Hayman LL, Maahs DM, McCrindle BW, 
Mitsnefes M, Zachariah JP, Urbina EM; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension and Obesity in 
Youth Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the 
Young. Update: ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in children 
and adolescents: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Hypertension. 2014;63:1116–1135. doi: 10.1161/
HYP.0000000000000007.
 
82. Wühl E, Witte K, Soergel M, Mehls O, Schaefer F; German Working 
Group on Pediatric Hypertension. Distribution of 24-h ambulatory 
blood pressure in children: normalized reference values and role 
of body dimensions [published correction appears in J Hypertens. 
2003;21:2205–2206]. J Hypertens. 2002;20:1995–2007.
 
83. Sharma S, Lustig RH, Fleming SE. Identifying metabolic syndrome 
in African American children using fasting HOMA-IR in place of glu-
cose. Prev Chronic Dis. 2011;8:A64.
 
84. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in dia-
betes–2014. Diabetes Care. 2014;37:S14–S80.
 
85. Cassidy JP, Luzio SD, Marino MT, Baughman RA. Quantification 
of human serum insulin concentrations in clinical pharmacoki-
netic or bioequivalence studies: what defines the “best meth-
od”? Clin Chem Lab Med. 2012;50:663–666. doi: 10.1515/ 
cclm-2011-0860.
 
86. Cook PR, Glenn C, Armston A. Effect of hemolysis on insulin 
determination by the Beckman Coulter Unicell DXI 800 immunoas-
say analyzer. Clin Biochem. 2010;43:621–622. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.clinbiochem.2010.01.002.
 
87. Vogeser M, Parhofer KG. Comparison of automated insulin assays. 
 
Clin Lab. 2007;53:557–560.
 
88. Buse JB, Kaufman FR, Linder B, Hirst K, El Ghormli L, Willi S; 
HEALTHY Study Group. Diabetes screening with hemoglobin 
 
A(1c) versus fasting plasma glucose in a multiethnic middle-
school cohort. Diabetes Care. 2013;36:429–435. doi: 10.2337/ 
dc12-0295.
 
89. Svec F, Nastasi K, Hilton C, Bao W, Srinivasan SR, Berenson 
GS. Black-white contrasts in insulin levels during pubertal de-
velopment: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Diabetes. 1992;41: 
313–317.
 
90. Burke GL, Webber LS, Srinivasan SR, Radhakrishnamurthy B, 
Freedman DS, Berenson GS. Fasting plasma glucose and in-
sulin levels and their relationship to cardiovascular risk fac-
tors in children: Bogalusa Heart Study. Metabolism. 1986;35: 
441–446.
 
91. Jolliffe CJ, Janssen I. Development of age-specific adoles-
cent metabolic syndrome criteria that are linked to the Adult 
Treatment Panel III and International Diabetes Federation cri-
teria. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:891–898. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2006.08.065.
 
92. Whitt-Glover MC, Taylor WC, Floyd MF, Yore MM, Yancey AK, Mat-
thews CE. Disparities in physical activity and sedentary behaviors 
among US children and adolescents: prevalence, correlates, and 
intervention implications. J Public Health Policy. 2009;30(suppl 
1):S309–S334. doi: 10.1057/jphp.2008.46.
 
93. US Department of Agriculture, US Department of Health and Human 
Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Office; December 2010.
 
94. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Saydah S, Imperatore G, Linder B, 
Divers J, Bell R, Badaru A, Talton JW, Crume T, Liese AD, Mer-
chant AT, Lawrence JM, Reynolds K, Dolan L, Liu LL, Hamman 
RF; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Prevalence of type 
1 and type 2 diabetes among children and adolescents from 
2001 to 2009. JAMA. 2014;311:1778–1786. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2014.3201.
 
95. Regis A. The CHILD 1 diet: from strategy to practicality. Pediatr 
Ann. 2013;42:178–180. doi: 10.3928/00904481-20130823-08.
 96. Van Horn L, Vincent E. The CHILD 1 and DASH diets: rationale 
and translational applications [published correction appears in 
Pediatr Ann. 2013;42:427]. Pediatr Ann. 2013;42:372–374. 
doi: 10.3928/00904481-20130823-11.
 97. LaBresh KA, Lazorick S, Ariza AJ, Furberg RD, Whetstone 
L, Hobbs C, de Jesus J, Bender RH, Salinas IG, Binns HJ. 
Implementation of the NHLBI integrated guidelines for cardio-
vascular health and risk reduction in children and adolescents: 
rationale and study design for young hearts, strong starts, a 
cluster-randomized trial targeting body mass index, blood pres-
sure, and tobacco. Contemp Clin Trials. 2014;37:98–105. doi: 
10.1016/j.cct.2013.11.011.
 98. Faith MS, Van Horn L, Appel LJ, Burke LE, Carson JA, Franch 
HA, Jakicic JM, Kral TV, Odoms-Young A, Wansink B, Wylie-Rosett 
J; on behalf of the American Heart Association Nutrition and 
Obesity Committees of the Council on Nutrition; Physical Activity 
and Metabolism; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular 
Nursing; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, and Council 
on the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease. Evaluating parents 
and adult caregivers as “agents of change” for treating obese 
children: evidence for parent behavior change strategies and 
research gaps: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2012;125:1186–1207. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31824607ee.
 99. Johnson RK, Appel LJ, Brands M, Howard BV, Lefevre M, 
Lustig RH, Sacks F, Steffen LM, Wylie-Rosett J; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Nutrition Committee of the Council 
on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism and the Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention. Dietary sugars intake and cardio-
vascular health: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2009;120:1011–1020. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192627.
 
100. Van Horn L, Obarzanek E, Barton BA, Stevens VJ, Kwiterovich 
PO Jr, Lasser NL, Robson AM, Franklin FA Jr, Lauer RM, Kimm 
SY, Dorgan JF, Greenlick MR. A summary of results of the Dietary 
Intervention Study in Children (DISC): lessons learned. Prog 
Cardiovasc Nurs. 2003;18:28–41.
 
101. Fakhouri TH, Hughes JP, Burt VL, Song M, Fulton JE, Ogden CL. 
Physical activity in U.S. youth aged 12–15 years, 2012. NCHS 
Data Brief. 2014:1–8.
 
102. Song M, Carroll DD, Fulton JE. Meeting the 2008 Physical Activity 
Guidelines for Americans among U.S. youth. Am J Prev Med. 
2013;44:216–222. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2012.11.016.
 
103. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans Midcourse Report 
Subcommittee of the President’s Council on Fitness, Sports 
& Nutrition. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans 
Midcourse Report: Strategies to Increase Physical Activity 
Among Youth. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and 
Human Services; 2012. http://health.gov/paguidelines/mid-
course/pag-mid-course-report-final.pdf. Accessed November 
16, 2015.
 
104. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Current tobac-
co use among middle and high school students–United States, 
2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61:581–585.
 
105. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Tobacco prod-
uct use among middle and high school students–United States, 
2011 and 2012 [published correction appears in MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62:940]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2013;62:893–897.
 
106. Callahan-Lyon P. Electronic cigarettes: human health effects. Tob 
Control. 2014;23(suppl 2):ii36–ii40. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol- 
2013-051470.
 
107. Grimshaw GM, Stanton A. Tobacco cessation interventions for 
young people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006:CD003289.
 
108. Stanton A, Grimshaw G. Tobacco cessation interventions for 
young people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD003289.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Cardiovascular Health Promotion in Children
Circulation. 2016;134:e236–e255. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000441 
September, 2016
e255
CLiniCAL StAtementS 
AnD GUiDeLineS
 
109. Ebbert JO, Hatsukami DK, Croghan IT, Schroeder DR, Allen 
SS, Hays JT, Hurt RD. Combination varenicline and bupropion 
SR for tobacco-dependence treatment in cigarette smokers: a 
randomized trial. JAMA. 2014;311:155–163. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2013.283185.
 
110. Elrashidi MY, Ebbert JO. Emerging drugs for the treatment of 
tobacco dependence: 2014 update. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 
2014;19:243–260. doi: 10.1517/14728214.2014.899580.
 
111. Free C, Knight R, Robertson S, Whittaker R, Edwards P, Zhou W, 
Rodgers A, Cairns J, Kenward MG, Roberts I. Smoking cessation 
support delivered via mobile phone text messaging (txt2stop): 
a single-blind, randomised trial. Lancet. 2011;378:49–55. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60701-0.
 
112. Gordon JS, Mahabee-Gittens EM, Andrews JA, Christiansen SM, 
Byron DJ. A randomized clinical trial of a web-based tobacco ces-
sation education program. Pediatrics. 2013;131:e455–e462. 
doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-0611.
 
113. Severson HH, Danaher BG, Ebbert JO, van Meter N, Lichtenstein 
E, Widdop C, Crowley R, Akers L, Seeley JR. Randomized trial of 
nicotine lozenges and phone counseling for smokeless tobacco 
cessation. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17:309–315. doi: 10.1093/
ntr/ntu145.
 
114. Oberg M, Jaakkola MS, Woodward A, Peruga A, Prüss-Ustün A. 
Worldwide burden of disease from exposure to second-hand 
smoke: a retrospective analysis of data from 192 countries. Lancet. 
2011;377:139–146. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61388-8.
 
115. Rosen LJ, Myers V, Hovell M, Zucker D, Ben Noach M. Meta-analysis 
of parental protection of children from tobacco smoke exposure. 
Pediatrics. 2014;133:698–714. doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-0958.
 
116. Been JV, Nurmatov UB, Cox B, Nawrot TS, van Schayck CP, Sheikh 
A. Effect of smoke-free legislation on perinatal and child health: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2014;383:1549–
1560. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60082-9.
 
117. Meyers DG, Neuberger JS, He J. Cardiovascular effect of bans 
on smoking in public places: a systematic review and meta-
analysis [published correction appears in J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1009;54:1902]. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1249–1255. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2009.07.022.
 
118. Thomas RE, McLellan J, Perera R. School-based programmes 
for preventing smoking. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013: 
CD001293.
 
119. Song Y, Zhao L, Palipudi KM, Asma S, Morton J, Talley B, Hsia 
J, Ramanandraibe N, Caixeta R, Fouad H, Khoury R, Sinha D, 
Rarick J, Bettcher D, Peruga A, Deland K, D’Espaignet ET; Global 
Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS) Collaborative Group. Tracking 
MPOWER in 14 countries: results from the Global Adult Tobacco 
Survey, 2008–2010 [published online ahead of print September 
 
16, 2013]. Glob Health Promot. http://ped.sagepub.com/content/ 
early/2013/09/16/1757975913501911.full.pdf. doi: 10.1177/ 
1757975913501911. Accessed January 1, 2015.
 
120. Surgeon General. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and 
Young Adults Fact Sheet. http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/factsheet.html. Accessed 
January 1, 2015.
 
121. Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, Critchley JA, Labarthe DR, Kottke 
TE, Giles WH, Capewell S. Explaining the decrease in U.S. 
deaths from coronary disease, 1980-2000. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356:2388–2398. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa053935.
 
122. Ning H, Labarthe DR, Shay CM, Daniels SR, Hou L, Van Horn L, Lloyd-
Jones DM. Status of cardiovascular health in US children up to 11 
years of age: the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 
2003-2010. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2015;8:164–171. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.114.001274.
 
123. Burke LE, Ma J, Azar KM, Bennett GG, Peterson ED, Zheng 
Y, Riley W, Stephens J, Shah SH, Suffoletto B, Turan TN, 
Spring B, Steinberger J, Quinn CC; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Publications Committee of the Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention, Behavior Change Committee of the 
Council on Cardiometabolic Health, Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing, Council on Functional Genomics and Translational 
Biology, Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research, and 
Stroke Council. Current science on consumer use of mobile health 
for cardiovascular disease prevention: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association [published correction appears 
in Circulation. 2015;132:e233]. Circulation. 2015;132:1157–
1213. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000232.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
