 Adolescence is one of the most rapid phases of human 
development, associated with marked physical, neuro­
developmental, psychological and social changes. The 
WHO defines an adolescent as a young person in 
the second decade of life (10–19 years)1. Adolescent 
obesity has become a globally prevalent health problem 
affecting young people from low­ 
income and middle­ 
income countries, as well as those from high­ 
income 
countries2,3. Figure 1shows the trends in obesity for 
children and adolescents aged 5–19 years from differ­
ent regions over 40 years from 1975 to 2016 (reF.3). A 
widening social disparity is recognized in economi­
cally advanced countries, with an increased prevalence 
of obesity in more socially disadvantaged adolescents 
compared with adolescents from higher socioeconomic 
groups4. Additionally, growing evidence indicates that 
the prevalence of severe or morbid obesity is increas­
ing in this age group in several countries, including the 
United States and Australia5–7.
Obesity in adolescence is often complicated by 
psychosocial distress and can be associated with a range 
of other health problems; the normal neurobiological 
development that occurs in this age group also has a con­
siderable effect1. Furthermore, the rate of spontaneous 
remission of obesity to a healthy weight is low; at least 
90% of adolescents with obesity will have overweight or 
obesity in young adulthood8,9.
For all these reasons, both the prevention and the 
treatment of adolescent obesity are important. In this 
Review, we focus on obesity treatment and detail the 
evidence for, and elements of, behavioural management, 
the use of adjunctive therapies (such as more intensive 
dietary therapies, pharmacotherapy and bariatric sur­
gery) and the management of the metabolic complica­
tions of obesity such as insulin resistance and polycystic 
ovaries. The opportunities and challenges presented by 
the management of obesity specifically in adolescents 
are highlighted.
Clinical assessment
A thorough clinical history and physical examination 
of the adolescent is essential to assess current obesity­ 
associated complications, the risk of future compli­
cations and whether the patient has any modifiable 
lifestyle practices. It is beyond the scope of this Review 
to provide further details on clinical assessment, and 
readers are referred to recent reviews and clinical guide­
lines for additional information10–14. Key recommenda­
tions for history­ 
taking and physical examination are 
outlined in Boxes 1,2.
Factors that affect management
Neurocognitive development
The pace of brain development in adolescence and into 
young adulthood is second only to that of early child­
hood15. Pruning of previous synaptic proliferation to 
optimize neural networks and increasing myelination 
of nerve fibres for rapid neural messaging are impor­
tant for the development of mature and efficient neu­
ral networks. The maturation of the emotional brain 
 
 
T
reatment of adolescent obesity
Katharine S. Steinbeck1, Natalie B. Lister1,2, Megan L. Gow2 and Louise A. Baur1,3*
Abstract | The increased prevalence of adolescent obesity and associated short- 
term and long- 
term complications emphasize the need for effective treatment. In this Review 
, we aim to 
describe the evidence for, and elements of, behaviour management and adjunctive therapies and 
highlight the opportunities and challenges presented by obesity management in adolescence. 
The broad principles of treatment include management of obesity- 
associated complications; a 
developmentally appropriate approach; long- 
term behaviour modification (dietary change, 
increased physical activity 
, decreased sedentary behaviours and improved sleep patterns); long- 
term weight maintenance strategies; and consideration of the use of pharmacotherapy 
, more 
intensive dietary therapies and bariatric surgery. Bariatric surgery should be considered in those 
with severe obesity and be undertaken by skilled bariatric surgeons affiliated with teams 
experienced in the medical and psychosocial management of adolescents. Adolescent obesity 
management strategies are more reliant on active participation than those for childhood obesity 
and should recognize the emerging autonomy of the patient. The challenges in adolescent 
obesity relate primarily to the often competing demands of developing autonomy and not yet 
having attained neurocognitive maturity.
1Discipline of Child and 
Adolescent Health, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
2Institute of Endocrinology 
and Diabetes, The Children’s 
Hospital at Westmead, 
Westmead, New South Wales, 
Australia.
3Weight Management 
Services, The Children’s 
Hospital at Westmead, 
Westmead, New South Wales, 
Australia.
*e- 
mail: louise.baur@
health.nsw.gov.au
https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41574-018-0002-8
REvIEwS
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
 with its associated reward­ 
seeking, hyperexcitability 
and proneness to impulse occurs in mid­ 
adolescence 
 
(14–16 years). The development of the prefrontal 
cortex, which is responsible for planning, organiza­
tion, risk versus benefit assessment and the ability to 
delay immediate gratification for future gain, occurs 
later with final maturation in the mid­20s16 and 
has important implications for the management of 
adolescent obesity.
Choices based on emotion or impulse, difficulty in 
consistently following through with action plans, ina­
bility to comprehend future health risks, the need to be 
like their peers (which makes lifestyle change challeng­
ing) and the need to be independent (which reduces 
responsiveness to adult directives and advice as a result 
of prefrontal cortex immaturity16) are all likely to derail 
attempts at lifestyle change. The concept that lifestyle 
change programmes for adolescents need to be formu­
lated differently from those of adults now has a strong 
neurocognitive rationale and an emerging clinical trial 
evidence base17,18.
Puberty
Puberty is an early adolescent event that results in dra­
matic changes in body composition and has long­ 
term 
implications for health and well­ 
being19. Puberty might 
have both positive and negative effects on weight man­
agement. Positives include increasing lean body mass 
in males and, for both sexes, if obesity management is 
undertaken before the height growth spurt, then the 
caloric deficit induced with weight maintenance in a 
situation where weight would naturally increase with 
height increase results in reduced adiposity. Negatives 
include increasing adiposity in females as a result of 
gonadal hormones and, in both sexes, the possibility that 
the insulin resistance that occurs during puberty (related 
in part to increased secretion of growth hormone) 
might persist after puberty is complete if there are other 
drivers such as obesity present20,21. These factors need 
to be taken into account when managing individuals 
 
with obesity.
Stigmatization
Weight stigmatization is widespread and leads to 
psycho 
logical, social and physical health consequences. 
Discussion of the causes and effects of weight bias and 
stigmatization are beyond the scope of this Review, 
and readers are referred to recent reviews for further 
details22–25. Health­ 
care professionals have an important 
role in reducing the negative effects of obesity stigma­
tization. The American Academy of Pediatrics recom­
mends that clinical care can be improved through role 
modelling, using appropriate language, good clinical 
documentation and ensuring a safe and welcoming 
environment22. Elements of behavioural health screening 
and behaviour change counselling, as outlined in more 
detail in subsequent sections, can identify and address 
weight­ 
based victimization to improve outcomes.
Overview of treatment principles
Effective obesity treatment in adolescents can be defined 
in various ways, including a reduction in BMI or weight 
outcomes, improvement in obesity­ 
associated compli­
cations, a reduction in markers of risk of future com­
plications or a changed weight gain trajectory. In adult 
studies, effectiveness is often categorized into ‘success’ or 
‘failure’; however, no standard definition of effectiveness 
exists26,27, and different criteria have been used between 
and within studies to classify weight maintenance or 
regain. Calculations can also include initial weight, 
initial weight loss, postintervention weight, postinter­
vention weight change or final weight. In adolescents, 
dichotomizing success is even more difficult given the 
need to normalize measures for age and sex in adoles­
cents aged <18 years (hence the frequent reporting of 
BMI z­ 
scores) and the variability in the reporting of 
treatment outcomes. A systematic review and meta­ 
regression published in 2016 reports how weight loss 
in children and adolescents translates to favourable car­
diometabolic outcomes28 (such as blood pressure and 
HDL cholesterol levels), which might be more clinically 
meaningful than weight loss perse.
Findings from systematic reviews
The 2017 Cochrane Review on diet, physical activity 
and behavioural interventions for the treatment of obe­
sity in adolescents aged 12–17 years included 44 rand­
omized controlled trials (RCTs) with follow­ 
up periods 
of 6–24 months17. A range of trials that mostly used 
multibehavioural change interventions were included 
in the review, with no specific programme being rec­
ommended over another. A meta­ 
analysis of studies 
comparing intervention groups versus wait­ 
list or no­ 
treatment control groups showed that, at the longest 
follow­ 
up period, there was a mean reduction in BMI of 
 
−1.18 kg/m2 (95% CI −1.67 to −0.69), in BMI z­ 
score 
 
of −0.13 units (95% CI −0.21 to −0.05) and in body 
weight of −3.67 kg (95% CI −5.21 to −2.13). The effect 
on weight outcomes persisted in those trials with longer 
follow­ 
up periods of 18–24 months, a finding that is 
somewhat at variance with those from studies in adults, 
which show more weight regain25.
The authors of the Cochrane Review noted that, 
where measured, there were improvements in percentage 
Key points
• The preferred treatment approach for adolescent patients with obesity includes 
management of obesity- 
associated complications, a developmentally appropriate 
approach, support for long- 
term behavioural change, long- 
term weight maintenance 
strategies and consideration of other therapies.
• Long- 
term weight maintenance therapy, through face- 
to-face or electronic support, 
phone coaching or group programmes, is likely to be required.
• Bariatric surgery should be considered in adolescents with severe obesity (BMI >40 kg/m2, 
or >35 kg/m2 in the presence of complications), and patients should be treated in 
centres experienced in bariatric surgery.
• Pharmacotherapy should be used as adjunctive therapy, particularly in the 
maintenance of weight loss, and for the treatment of obesity- 
associated 
complications.
• Clinicians should understand where the adolescent is in puberty development — age 
does not equal stage — and not support beliefs that young people will grow out of 
obesity with the onset of puberty.
• Clinicians must work within the contexts of both the normal rapid changes in 
adolescent brain development and the psychosocial tasks of adolescence that are 
necessary for mature adulthood.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
 body fat, waist circumference and total fat mass follow­
ing behavioural change interventions17. Improvements 
in quality of life, although not in self­ 
esteem, were also 
noted at the longest follow­ 
up. However, outcomes for 
dietary intake and physical activity were inconsistent 
across the included studies. The review reported no sub­
group differences in interventions with or without paren­
tal involvement or by intervention type, setting (such as 
school, clinic or community) or mode of delivery (group 
versus individual). The overall quality of evidence for the 
primary outcomes of interest was rated as low, except 
for body weight, which was rated as moderate. Adverse 
effects were only infrequently reported and hence could 
not be reliably assessed.
The findings of this most recent systematic review 
add to the evidence base from previous reviews12,18,29,30. 
The 2017 Cochrane Review did not report outcomes for 
cardiometabolic parameters from behavioural change 
interventions, although they were previously reported in 
a 2012 systematic review18. This review showed that life­
style interventions led to statistically significant improve­
ments in levels of LDL cholesterol (−0.30 mmol/l, 95% 
CI −0.45 to −0.15), triglycerides (−0.15 mmol/l, 95% CI 
−0.24 to −0.07), fasting insulin (−55 pmol/l, 95% CI −71 
to −39) and blood pressure (systolic −3.72 mmHg, 95% 
CI −4.74 to −2.69; diastolic −1.69 mmHg, 95% CI −3.15 
to −0.24) up to 12 months from baseline.
Adapting the findings from such studies to ‘real­ 
world’ obesity clinics that might be more poorly 
resourced is often difficult25. For example, in comparison 
with clinical trials, in usual clinical practice it might not 
be possible to review patients as frequently and suffi­
cient specialist nursing, allied health or medical exper­
tise might not be available. Further, the patients in usual 
clinical practice might have additional comorbidities or 
be more socially disadvantaged than those who partic­
ipate in clinical trials, raising challenges in optimizing 
treatment adherence. Nevertheless, the principles of 
management are well recognized10–14 (Box 3).
Elements of treatment of obesity
Behavioural management
Behavioural strategies are routinely used to support 
changes in dietary intake, physical activity levels and 
sedentary behaviours and to facilitate long­ 
term main­
tenance of these changes31,32. Although most RCTs 
of adolescent obesity management include a behav­
ioural component, these details are often inadequately 
described in publications17,33.
A 2015 evidence update of behavioural strategies 
for obesity treatment in children and adolescents 
identified much stronger evidence (‘well­ 
established 
interventions’) in children than in adolescents for both 
parent­ 
only interventions and family­ 
based behavioural 
60
40
20
0
1980
1990
2000
2010
Number of girls with obesity (millions)
60
40
20
0
1980
1990
2000
2010
Number of boys with obesity (millions)
Year
Year
West Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa
East Africa
Middle East and 
North Africa
Central Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
East Asia
High-income Asia Pacific
Melanesia
Polynesia and 
Micronesia
Caribbean
Andean Latin America
Central Latin America
Southern Latin America
High-income English-speaking countries
Northwestern Europe
Southwestern Europe
Central Europe
Eastern Europe
Fig. 1 | Trends in the number of girls (left panel) and boys (right panel) aged 5–19 years with obesity 
, by region, 
from 1975 to 2016. There has been a dramatic increase in the number of children and adolescents affected by obesity 
over more than four decades. Middle Eastern, East Asian, high- 
income English- 
speaking and central and southern Latin 
American countries are especially affected. Adapted with permission from reF.3, CC- 
BY-4.0.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
Reviews
 treatments in which parents are specifically targeted 
to change their own behaviours and achieve weight 
loss31. The update included 11 studies involving both 
children and adolescents undergoing behavioural 
weight­ 
loss treatment with family involvement during 
which the parent facilitates the lifestyle changes. Nine 
of these studies demonstrated improvements in weight 
outcomes compared with the control condition. The 
evidence for family­ 
based interventions in adolescent­ 
only interventions was, however, far more limited 
in that few studies looked specifically at adolescents. 
Overall, the authors rated the evidence for behavioural 
weight­ 
loss treatment with family involvement in ado­
lescents as “possibly efficacious” while commenting 
that treatment is optimized if parents are included in 
the treatment programme.
Several common behaviour change techniques 
are used in obesity treatment31,32,34. Some commonly 
used techniques include goal­ 
setting, stimulus control 
(modifying or restricting environmental influences) 
Box 1 | Key elements of history taking in adolescents with obesity
general history
• Consider prenatal and birth — including history of gestational diabetes and birthweight
• Current medications — including glucocorticoids, some antiepileptics (for example, sodium valproate) and 
antipsychotics (for example, risperidone or olanzapine)
Weight history
• Onset of obesity and duration of parental and adolescent concerns about the patient's weight
• Previous weight management interventions
• Previous and current dieting behaviours
complications history
• Psychological effects of obesity, including bullying, poor self- 
esteem, anxiety and depression
• Sleep routine, presence of snoring and/or possible sleep apnoea (for example, lack of refreshment after sleep, daytime 
somnolence and witnessed apnoeas)
• Exercise tolerance
• Specific symptoms, including
- Acne and hirsutism
- Morning headache and visual disturbance (potential benign intracranial hypertension)
- Gastrointestinal: vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation and gastrointestinal reflux
- Nocturnal enuresis and daytime dribbling
- Hip and knee joint pain
- Menstrual history (girls)
Family history
• Ethnicity (high- 
risk groups for cardiometabolic complications include Native American, Hispanic, Maori, Pacific 
Islander, Australian Aborigine, South Asian, East Asian, Mediterranean and Middle Eastern)
• Family members with a history of
- Obesity
- Type 2 diabetes mellitus and gestational diabetes
- Hypertension, dyslipidaemia and cardiovascular disease
- Obstructive sleep apnoea
- Polycystic ovary syndrome
- Bariatric surgery
- Eating disorders
• Home environment, including
- Household members
- Parental relationship
- Parental employment, hours and home supervision
lifestyle factors
• Diet and diet- 
related behaviours
- Breakfast consumption
- Eating patterns, including snacking, sneaking food, fast- 
food intake and binge eating
- Beverage consumption (sodas, juice and other sugary drinks)
- Family routines around food and eating
• Physical activity
- Transport to and from school
- Sports participation
- After- 
school and weekend recreation
- Family activities
• Sedentary behaviours
- Screen time per day (TV, video game, cell phone, tablet and computer use)
- Number of TVs, computers, tablets, laptops, cell phones and gaming consoles in the house and bedrooms
- Pattern of TV or other screen viewing (for example, during meals)
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
 and self­ 
monitoring (Box 4). Note that goals need to be 
concrete, developmentally relevant and achievable and 
might take considerable time to set and review in clin­
ical sessions. Reward systems support the repetition of 
a desired behaviour and can include rewards based on 
improvements in lifestyle behaviours as well as in weight 
outcomes. Importantly, behaviour change strategies 
should be used by all treating clinicians.
Further research is needed to develop a stepped 
model of care for treatment (especially for adolescents), 
to identify the optimal intensity and frequency of behav­
ioural treatments for long­ 
term sustainability and to 
enhance scalability and implementation into community 
and clinical settings.
Dietary interventions
Following dietary interventions is effective for mod­
est weight loss in adolescents with obesity18. Caloric 
restriction is usually incorporated into multicomponent 
lifestyle­ 
based interventions for weight management. 
Importantly, lifestyle interventions that include a dietary 
component can improve cardiometabolic outcomes in 
adolescents with obesity even in the absence of weight 
loss or changes in body composition18,29,33.
Various dietary manipulations can achieve caloric 
restriction and resultant weight loss in adolescents, 
most commonly by using the ‘stop/traffic light approach’ 
but also by altering macronutrient distributions and/or 
improving carbohydrate quality. No dietary intervention 
has been shown to be optimal, and adherence to die­
tary protocols is the most effective predictor of weight 
loss35. Dietary interventions with evidence of being 
effective for weight management are discussed in the 
following sections.
Stop/traffic light approach. This calorie­ 
controlled inter­
vention categorizes foods according to caloric density 
and uses these groups to guide intake frequency (Fig. 2). 
Low­ 
calorie foods are labelled ‘green’ and can be eaten 
freely, moderate­ 
calorie foods are labelled ‘yellow’ and 
should be eaten judiciously and high­ 
calorie foods are 
labelled ‘red’ and should be eaten rarely36. This approach 
can produce effective weight loss (BMI decreases range 
from 0.18 to 2.6 kg/m2)37,38 in adolescents in the short to 
medium term (6 months to 2 years)18.
Macronutrient distribution. Altering the macro 
nutrient 
ratio of a calorie­ 
restricted diet is purported to improve 
dietary adherence, weight­ 
loss outcomes and cardi­
ometabolic measures39. Common diet interventions 
have different macronutrient distributions (Fig. 3). 
Conventional interventions are typically referred to as 
‘low fat’ and aim for <35% daily energy from fat. A low­ 
carbohydrate diet, aiming for <50 g carbohydrate per day, 
has often been compared to a low­ 
fat approach; however, 
a 2014 systematic review found no evidence that either 
approach was more effective for long­ 
term weight loss 
in adolescents39. Even so, low­ 
carbohydrate diets might 
provide some benefit for short­ 
term weight loss (BMI 
decreases from baseline range from 1.2 to 5.2 kg/m2)39 
and insulin concentrations (the decrease in fasting insu­
lin levels from baseline range from 6.0 to 7.5 μU/l)40,41 
compared with low­ 
fat interventions. In longer­ 
term 
studies of >12 months, weight loss was not significantly 
different, possibly owing to eventual migration to a more 
typical carbohydrate intake35,39.
Increasing protein from a typical 15% of daily energy 
in conventional diets to 20–40% of daily energy has 
no demonstrated benefit for weight loss in adolescents 
under isocaloric conditions39. Increasing protein intake 
is hypothesized to improve satiety and reduce hunger, 
thereby resulting in a lower ad libitum energy intake 
and greater weight loss42. However, studies in free­ 
living 
adolescents demonstrate that achieving higher dietary 
protein targets is difficult43, which might contribute to 
the lack of effect of increased levels of dietary protein in 
adolescents. The unique challenges to dietary compliance 
Box 2 | notable findings on physical examination10–14
Skin or subcutaneous tissues
• Acanthosis nigricans (neck, axillae, skin folds and over joints)
• Keratosis pilaris
• Acrochordons (skin tags)
• Hirsutism
• Acne
• Striae
• Pseudo- 
gynaecomastia in males
• Intertrigo with or without secondary infection
• Xanthelasmas (hypercholesterolaemia)
neurological
• Papilloedema and/or reduced venous pulsations on fundoscopy (pseudotumour 
cerebri)
Head and neck
• Tonsillar size and obstructed breathing
cardiovascular
• Hypertension
• Heart rate (cardiorespiratory fitness)
respiratory
• Exercise intolerance
• Wheeze (asthma)
gastrointestinal
• Hepatomegaly and hepatic tenderness (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)
• Abdominal pain (secondary to gallstones or gastro- 
oesophageal reflux)
Musculoskeletal
• Pes planus
• Groin pain and painful or waddling gait (slipped capital femoral epiphysis)
• Lower limb arthralgia and restriction of joint movement
Endocrine
• Goitre
• Extensive striae, hypertension, dorsocervical fat pad or ‘buffalo hump’ (signs of 
Cushing syndrome)
• Pubertal staging
• Reduced growth velocity
Psychosocial
• Flat affect and low mood (depression)
• Poor self- 
esteem and social isolation
other — evidence of a possible underlying genetic syndrome
• Short stature or disproportion
• Dysmorphism
• Developmental delay
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
Reviews
 during adolescence are not well defined in the literature 
but include peer influences, reliance on parental support 
(including the provision of meals) and the neurocognitive 
development issues outlined in a previous section.
Carbohydrate quality. Glycaemic index (GI) and gly­
caemic load are used to describe carbohydrate qual­
ity. Although low­ 
GI diets do not seem to confer any 
weight­ 
loss benefit for adolescents, a 2015 systematic 
review found that lower­ 
GI diets improved insulin 
resistance (HOMA index mean difference of −0.70, 95% 
CI −1.37 to −0.04, P = 0.04) and triglyceride concentra­
tions (mean difference −15.14 mg/dl, 95% CI −26.26 to 
−4.00, P = 0.008)44. The major limitation with manipulat­
ing GI to improve carbohydrate quality is that lower­ 
GI 
foods do not always translate to ‘healthy’ options; for 
example, high­ 
fat discretionary foods such as ice cream 
and potato chips have a low GI.
Intermittent fasting. Over the past decade, intermit­
tent energy­ 
restricted diets have gained popularity as 
a weight­ 
loss approach in adults45,46. Limited evidence 
is available for their use in adolescents; however, these 
diets have been used in clinical practice. Dietary model­
ling and nutrient analysis show that, over a 7­day period 
 
(3 days restricted to ~2.5–2.9 MJ or 600–700 kcal), inter­
mittent energy­ 
restricted meal plans can be designed to 
meet adolescents’ unique micronutrient requirements47.
More intensive dietary therapies
A very­ 
low­energy diet (VLED) is an intensive die­
tary regimen, typically consisting of <800 kcal per day, 
with <50 g of carbohydrate and adequate provision of 
micronutrients often being achieved using meal replace­
ments such as shakes and bars. Owing to the difficulty 
of achieving the strict calorie prescription, this diet is 
typically recommended only for short periods of time 
(8–12 weeks)48.
In adolescents with obesity, a VLED can safely induce 
rapid weight loss in the short term (4–15 kg over 3–12 
weeks) while preserving lean body mass49,50. VLEDs 
also lead to short­ 
term improvements in common met­
abolic risk factors49,51. Published in 2016, a small pilot 
study demonstrated that VLED reversed type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) in newly diagnosed adolescents with 
obesity50. However, the long­ 
term (>12 months after 
completion of VLED) outcomes remain unclear. The 
severe nature of the diet requires intensive monitoring 
by health professionals; however, these diets could be 
an alternative to pharmacological therapies or surgical 
interventions to treat adolescents with severe obesity.
Eating behaviours
An emerging area of research is the role of eating behav­
iours in obesity, defined as “self­ 
perceived behaviour and 
attitudes towards eating behaviour and food” (reF.52), 
which could partly explain the different responses to 
dietary interventions seen in patients. Longitudinal data 
on eating behaviours and weight gain are limited, and 
few intervention studies directly assess more than one 
eating behaviour53. In adolescents, prescriptive dietary 
advice consisting of hypocaloric nutrition coaching by a 
trained dietician can normalize eating behaviours in the 
short to medium term54. However, more data are needed 
to prospectively examine the long­ 
term effects of dietary 
interventions on the eating behaviours of adolescents.
Physical activity
Adolescent obesity is associated with suboptimal physi­
cal activity levels, poor fitness and excessive time in sed­
entary behaviours55. Despite the certain contributions to 
energy deficit, the specific weight­ 
reducing effect of the 
physical activity component of a lifestyle intervention 
in adolescents with obesity is not clear. However, phys­
ical activity is still an integral part of obesity treatment 
owing to the additional health benefits attained through 
regular exercise, including improved body composi­
tion, psychological profile and functional capacities55–62 
(Fig. 4). Physical activity is also associated with improve­
ments in the cardiometabolic profile of an adolescent 
with obesity, including improved insulin sensitivity, 
blood pressure and cholesterol levels55–62. Hence, regu­
lar physical activity has an important role in preventing 
the development of the metabolic syndrome and T2DM 
in adolescents with obesity, irrespective of a change in 
weight. One systematic review comparing diet­ 
only 
with diet­ 
plus­exercise or an exercise­ 
only interven­
tion found that, although weight loss was not different 
between the groups, the addition of exercise training to 
a dietary intervention led to a greater improvement in 
levels of HDL cholesterol and fasting insulin concentra­
tions in the short term (over 6 months) than a diet­ 
only 
programme29.
Several national guidelines recommend that all ado­
lescents partake in at least 60 minutes of daily moderate­ 
to­vigorous physical activity and that no more than 2 h 
per day is spent using electronic media for entertainment 
(for example, computer games, TV and Internet)63–66. 
However, few adolescents achieve these targets55. This 
challenge is exemplified in adolescents with obesity, 
who often report negative peer experiences around 
exercise67 and have reduced exercise tolerance, which 
presents a barrier to participation in physical activity 
owing to the early onset of fatigue68. Reduced capacity 
to perform basic physical functioning tasks, including 
walking and climbing stairs, has led to obesity in adoles­
cents being described as a disability69. Exercise capacity 
in adolescents with obesity can be enhanced through 
Box 3 | Principles of obesity treatment
• Assess and manage obesity- 
associated disorders
• Ensure a developmentally appropriate approach
• Support long- 
term behaviour change
• Dietary change
• Increased physical activity
• Decreased sedentary behaviours, including screen 
behaviours
• Improved sleep
• Strategies for long- 
term weight maintenance
• Consider more intensive dietary interventions
• Consider pharmacotherapy
• Consider bariatric surgery
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
 participation in a 12­week exercise intervention of twice 
weekly 45–60 minute sessions, including resistance and 
aerobic exercise, supervised by a personal trainer62.
By increasing adolescents’ participation in physical 
activity, it is anticipated that a flow­ 
on effect will occur, 
resulting in reduced recreational screen time. However, 
both issues need to be addressed. A recreational screen 
time allowance of 2 h per day is increasingly difficult to 
implement given the prominence and accessibility of 
digital technologies. Effective interventions for reducing 
screen time in adolescents with obesity are still needed. 
Utilization of technologies, such as smartphone apps, is 
a popular avenue of research in this area70.
Sleep behaviours
Cross­ 
sectional studies show an association between 
short sleep duration and an increased risk of over­
weight or obesity in children and adolescents, with a 
pooled odds ratio of 1.89 (95% CI 1.43–1.68) for short 
sleep duration (different definitions used in the vari­
ous studies, including <5 h, <6 h and <10 h) and obesity 
being noted in a systematic review of 12 studies71. In a 
systematic review of 22 longitudinal studies, an inverse 
association was found between short sleep duration and 
subsequent BMI in both children and adolescents72. On 
the basis of adult studies73,74, interventions targeting 
sleep in the management of adolescents with obesity 
might result in improved weight and body composi­
tion outcomes. Trial data in adolescents are limited, and 
no trials have been conducted in young people already 
affected by obesity75,76. Strategies might include an earlier 
adolescent bedtime, removal of electronic screen devices 
from the bedroom and family rules about exposure to 
screens before bedtime. Importantly, targeting sleep has 
additional benefits in terms of general health, mood, 
school performance and quality of life77.
Digital technologies
High­ 
quality studies using digital technologies to man­
age obesity are lacking78. A 2017 meta­ 
analysis of all 
mobile health interventions in youth concluded that 
these “appear to be a viable behaviour change interven­
tion modality for youth” (reF.70). Digital technologies 
represent a promising area of future clinical research 
in adolescent obesity, including apps and activity track­
ers as lifestyle monitors. Apps and activity trackers 
can give instant feedback on levels of physical activity, 
sleep and active versus sedentary time, with little input 
required from the user. Popular apps are also used for 
tracking diet or providing healthy food alternatives. 
Technologies including image or photo upload of foods 
and/or barcode scanning are designed to minimize the 
time required for input from the user and enable instant 
feedback on dietary intake or advice on more appro­
priate choices. However, the capacity of such devices to 
assist weight loss is not yet clear, with a study published 
in 2016 demonstrating that adults randomly assigned 
to the ‘wearable device’ (activity tracker) arm achieved 
less weight loss at 24 months than those in the con­
trol arm79. Furthermore, these technologies will never 
replace a clinician, but they might be a useful tool to 
enhance motivation and assist in weight­ 
loss mainte­
nance, particularly in adolescents, who generally enjoy 
digital devices. Discoveries from research in mental 
health provide support for the use of the Internet to 
deliver interventions80. In order to be engaging and 
to be considered for long­ 
term use, such interventions 
(including apps) should be co­ 
designed with adolescents 
and undergo regular updates. Their commercial viability 
is questionable.
Long- 
term weight outcomes
Few high­ 
quality trials report long­ 
term outcomes of 
obesity treatment in adolescents, as opposed to chil­
dren17,18,81. However, in a large central European health­ 
care database from 157 paediatric specialist centres 
managing obesity (patients aged 5–25 years), 2­year 
outcomes were reviewed for 3,135 patients82. Compared 
with children aged 5–11 years, adolescents aged 
12–15 years had a 41% lower odds of successful weight 
reduction and maintenance, defined as a decrease in 
BMI z­ 
score of at least 0.2 from baseline. These findings 
emphasize the importance of early treatment of estab­
lished obesity. In a 12 month and 24 month follow­ 
up of 
adolescents participating in a trial of two different types 
of dietary intervention, weight loss in the first 3 months 
predicted long­ 
term weight outcomes83, a finding con­
sistent with those from other studies. Such studies sug­
gest that interventions with a focus on early weight loss 
might have better outcomes than interventions started 
after the patient has had obesity for some time.
Box 4 | Examples of common behavioural change techniques
goal- 
setting — performance goals
• “I will decrease my discretionary screen time from 6 h per day to 4 h over the next 
month. I will do this by moving my cell phone out of my room at night (I will charge it 
in the family room) and by agreeing to move my laptop to the family room. When I 
have done this, I will work out some new screen time goals.”
• “I will go to bed an hour earlier on school nights (11 pm instead of midnight). I will do 
this by charging my cell phone in the family room overnight.”
• “I will get an extra half hour of physical activity into my day. I will do this by catching 
the train and bus to and from school instead of asking my parents to drive me. I will 
also ask my friend to go to the school gym with me twice a week after school.”
goal- 
setting — outcomes goals
• Specific weight- 
loss goals (amount of weight loss or reduction in waist circumference 
over a specified time), developed in consultation with the therapist
Self- 
monitoring
• Daily monitoring and recording of physical activity via pedometer or other activity 
monitor
• Daily recording of screen time
• Daily recording of eating habits (for example, eating breakfast and eating lunch) or of 
specific food intake (for example, vegetable intake and soda drink intake)
• Weekly recording of weight
Stimulus control
• Parent agrees to not offer to drive the young person to school
• Television, laptops, cell phones and other mobile devices are out of the bedroom at 
night
• Parent and young person agree to not store unhealthy foods (for example, processed 
snack foods and soda drinks) in the house
• Parent agrees to serve evening meal using smaller- 
sized plates
• Parent agrees to have a family rule about eating the evening meal at the table without 
the television being on
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
Reviews
 In adults, a comprehensive weight maintenance pro­
gramme is recommended for those who have had initial 
weight loss32. This programme might entail continued 
support from a therapist, via phone or face to face, pos­
sibly on at least a monthly basis for ≥12 months. The 
sustainability of such an approach in usual health­ 
care 
settings and the applicability to the adolescent popula­
tion remain unclear. However, given the importance of 
digital technologies to young people, this might prove to 
be of relevance in weight maintenance strategies.
Pharmacotherapy
In the long term, safe anti­ 
obesity drugs must be a 
therapeutic goal given that the condition is chronic 
and lifestyle therapies have had limited results. Current 
anti­ 
obesity agents are universally limited in both num­
ber and availability, with few subsidized by govern­
ment agencies (TaBle 1). Trials are mostly performed in 
adults, and use in adolescents is often off­ 
label. A 2016 
Cochrane Review provided data for trials of current 
(and some previously available) anti­ 
obesity agents in 
children and adolescents84. The authors also identified 
ongoing trials for topiramate and glucagon­ 
like peptide 
1 receptor (GLP1R) agonists. Metformin and orlistat 
both result in a reduction in weight in favour of the 
active intervention, albeit around 2 kg. The review also 
describes a greater overall attrition rate for adolescents 
than reported in adult trials. Metformin and orlistat 
are available for adolescent use in most jurisdictions, 
although use of metformin generally remains off label 
in those without diabetes mellitus.
Some antidepressants have weight loss as a bene­
fit but are not first­ 
line obesity pharmacotherapies. In 
some countries, bupropion is used as an antidepressant 
and in others it is licensed only for addiction therapies. 
When bupropion is combined with naltrexone as a slow­ 
release preparation, there is benefit compared with pla­
cebo for weight loss85. The data for topiramate's effect 
on body weight in adults are positive but compromised 
by adverse effects such as dizziness and drowsiness86. 
Topiramate is currently marketed for epileptic seizures 
and migraine and could be considered in adolescents 
with obesity who fulfil prescribing criteria. Topiramate 
has been trialled for weight loss in adults in combination 
with phentermine, with a significant dose­ 
dependent 
percentage change in body weight of 7–9% compared 
with placebo85. However, a pilot RCT in 30 adolescents 
consisting of 24 weeks of topiramate following 4 weeks 
of meal replacement therapy did not result in significant 
BMI reduction87.
Glucagon­ 
like peptide 1 (GLP1) is a naturally occur­
ring incretin produced by the gut88. GLP1R agonists 
were originally marketed for the treatment of T2DM. 
An additional effect is appetite suppression and weight 
loss89, and obesity management has become an addi­
tional indication for the use of this drug class. In adults, 
the effects of liraglutide, which is approved for weight 
loss in many countries as a once­ 
a­day injection, are 
impressive compared with the effects of standard oral 
anti­ 
obesity therapy. Published in 2017, the results of 
an RCT showed that the oral GLP1R agonist semaglu­
tide had a statistically significant effect on weight loss 
of 2–7 kg as well as control of diabetes mellitus in par­
ticipants with T2DM and a mean age of 57 years. This 
finding suggests that oral therapy is a future, adolescent­ 
attractive weight­ 
loss option90. In a pilot RCT, 3 months 
of exenatide therapy in 26 adolescent patients with 
severe obesity led to a greater percentage reduction in 
BMI, as well as absolute weight and BMI, than placebo91.
Bariatric surgery
In adults, bariatric surgery is a well­ 
recognized form of 
therapy for severe obesity as an adjunct to behavioural 
therapy and pharmacotherapy92. The role of bariatric 
surgery in adolescents is being established.
Evidence for bariatric surgery
To date, there has been only one published RCT of bar­
iatric surgery in adolescents: an Australian study of 
50 patients aged 14–18 years (25 patients in both the 
intervention and the comparator groups)93. The study 
compared laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding 
(LAGB) with a multicomponent lifestyle programme. 
At 2 years, weight in the surgery group was reduced by 
a mean of 34.6 kg (95% CI 30.2–39.0) compared with 
3.0 kg (95% CI 2.1–8.1) in the lifestyle group. Although 
both groups had improvements in the quality­ 
of­life 
subscore of gene 
ral health, the surgical group had bet­
ter performance in four additional subscores (physical 
functioning score, self­ 
esteem, family activities and 
change in health score), with no difference between the 
groups for three other subscores. Revisional procedures 
were required in 28% of the surgical group. The authors 
commented that although this incidence is within the 
range of other studies, there might be a need, in adoles­
cents, for additional education and supervision of eat­
ing to ensure they eat small meals slowly. This approach 
might help reduce the need for revision. This study was 
the only one included in the 2015 Cochrane Review of 
bariatric surgery in adolescents94.
A systematic review with broader inclusion cri­
teria than the 2015 Cochrane Review investigated 
Red foods
Greater than 20kcal of the 
average serving for foods 
within that food group
• Sweets
• Desserts
• Fast food
• High-fat meat or 
meat substitutes
Eaten rarely
Examples
Yellow foods
Within 20kcal of the average 
serving for foods within that 
food group (i.e. fruit=40kcal 
and milk and dairy=80kcal)
• Full-fat milk
• Whole-grain breads 
and cereals
Eaten judiciously
Examples
Green foods
Less than 20 kcal of the 
average serving within that 
food group 
• Fruits
• Vegetables
• Legumes
• Low-fat milk
• Lean meat or meat
substitutes
Eaten freely
Examples
Fig. 2 | Traffic light diet categories18,36,37,113. Foods are categorized according to high (top 
panel), moderate (middle panel) or low (bottom panel) caloric density. These categories 
are used to guide frequency of intake, with the aim to reduce overall calorie intake.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
 prospective clinical trials and observational studies of 
bariatric surgery in patients ≤18 years old published up 
to early 2014 (reF.95). The review included 37 studies, 
with 15 being prospective and 1 being the RCT noted in 
the previous paragraph. The mean BMI loss after LAGB 
was 11.6 kg/m2 (95% CI 9.8–13.4), compared with 
16.6 kg/m2 (95% CI 13.4–19.8) after Roux­ 
en­Y gas­
tric bypass (RYGB) and 14.1 kg/m2 (95% CI 10.8–17.5) 
after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG). The review 
authors noted that adverse effects and long­ 
term com­
plications, including nutritional deficiencies, were more 
frequent and serious after RYGB than the other two 
procedures, although there were fewer data for LSG, a 
procedure that has gained prominence more recently 
than RYGB or LAGB. All forms of surgery resulted in 
improvements in a range of obesity­ 
associated com­
plications, such as dyslipidaemia and T2DM, and in 
quality of life.
Subsequent to this systematic review, the 3­year 
outcomes of the Teen­ 
Longitudinal Assessment of 
Bariatric Surgery (Teen­ 
LABS) study were published. 
The Teen­ 
LABS study is a prospectively enrolled study 
of adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery in five cen­
tres in the United States96. A total of 242 patients (75% 
female patients and 72% white patients) were enrolled, 
with 67% undergoing RYGB, 28% LSG and 6% LAGB. 
At 3 years after surgery, there was an overall mean weight 
loss of 27% (95% CI 25–29) and marked improvement 
or remission in T2DM, prediabetes, kidney disease, 
elevated blood pressure and dyslipidaemia as well as 
improvement in quality­ 
of­life measures. However, 
the majority of patients had low iron concentrations 
and 13% had undergone one or more additional intra­ 
abdominal procedures. Such findings indicate that 
there are risks associated with bariatric surgery in this 
age group and highlight the importance of ensuring 
that appropriate nutrient supplementation is provided 
to adolescents after bariatric surgery.
Further high­ 
quality long­ 
term studies of bariatric 
surgery in adolescents are required to monitor potential 
surgical and nutritional complications, to determine 
whether weight and cardiometabolic risk improvements 
are maintained well into adulthood and to identify 
which patients benefit most from surgery97.
Clinical guidelines
Consensus guidelines on bariatric surgery in adolescents 
have been established by various medical professional 
bodies in several countries11,98–101. In terms of patient 
characteristics, the recommendations generally cover: a 
minimum age, usually in mid­ 
adolescence; the patient to 
have reached sexual maturity; the presence of severe obe­
sity, usually BMI >35 kg/m2 with an obesity­ 
associated 
complication, or BMI >40 kg/m2; the persistence of obe­
sity despite involvement in a formal multidisciplinary 
programme of lifestyle modification and pharmaco­
therapy; the patient being able to give informed consent; 
and the adolescent and family being willing to partici­
pate actively in the treatment programme and agreeing 
to ongoing review following the surgery.
Recommendations generally specify that the sur­
gery should be performed by a skilled bariatric surgeon 
affiliated with a team experienced in the medical and 
behavioural management of adolescents with obesity. 
The specific recommendations for the type of sur­
gery vary depending upon regional expertise but have 
included LAGB, RYGB and LSG. Finally, in terms of 
postoperative management and follow­ 
up, recom­
mendations tend to specify the following: that more 
frequent postoperative follow­ 
up is generally required 
with adolescents than with adult patients; that there is 
a need for ongoing care by a multidisciplinary team; 
that contraception be considered owing to improved 
fertility following weight loss; that clinicians be aware 
that adolescent patients, especially, might not adhere 
to nutritional supplementation; that very long­ 
term 
follow­ 
up is required; and that the patient should be 
enrolled in a bariatric surgery registry.
One of the major challenges in many countries is 
the need to ensure equitable access to such services for 
affected adolescents, because, in most health systems, 
bariatric surgery remains largely available only in the 
private sector, and bariatric surgery services for adoles­
cents are sparse25. Thus, specific strategies for the pro­
vision of bariatric surgery for adolescents in the public 
sector are likely to be needed in most jurisdictions.
Treatment of complications
Many obesity­ 
associated complications, such as dys­
lipidaemia, fatty liver disease and elevated blood pres­
sure, will improve following weight loss. Nevertheless, 
depending on the type and severity of such complica­
tions, it might be appropriate to manage these when 
identified and not to wait until weight loss has occurred, 
as weight loss might be difficult to achieve12.
During adolescence, the prevalence of individual 
obesity­ 
associated complications increases, as does the 
clustering of such complications. In addition, adoles­
cence sees the emergence of components of the met­
abolic syndrome and the development of sex­ 
specific 
differences in risk factors for cardiovascular disease102. 
No long­ 
term data are available in contemporary cohorts 
Increased-protein diet
Low-carbohydrate diet
Conventional diet
0
20
40
60
80
100
Carbohydrate
Protein
Fat
Energy contribution from macronutrient (%)
Energy intake required 
for weight loss
Fig. 3 | Macronutrient distribution of common diet interventions39,42,43.  
The percentage of energy contributions from carbohydrate, protein and fat can be 
manipulated to achieve an energy intake level for weight loss. The purple and green areas 
indicate overlap between the percentage energy contributions.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
Reviews
 that enable quantification of future combined or specific 
risk of obesity­ 
associated complications or the cost of 
that risk.
Multiple definitions of the metabolic syndrome in ado­
lescence exist, all of which have agreed core elements — 
 
obesity, dyslipidaemia, abnormal glucose metabo­
lism and hypertension — but these vary in the spe­
cifics of cut points and reference standards103–106. The 
International Diabetes Federation definition, which uses 
age­ 
specific cut points for the core metabolic elements 
listed above for 10–16 years of age (adult cut points for 
those >16 years) and which specifies abdominal obe­
sity as defined by waist measure, is probably the most 
common in use106,107. Concerns about which definition 
to use, or whether the metabolic syndrome is present 
or not103–106, should never impede management of the 
individual components. The prevalence of the met­
abolic syndrome rises over the decade of adolescence 
and might be present in up to 50% of adolescents with 
obesity, depending on both the definition used and the 
population being studied103–106.
Medication doses used in the treatment of obesity­ 
associated complications will be closer to adult rec­
ommendations given their body weight. An important 
adolescent proviso is that some of these medications are 
not considered safe in pregnancy, and countries vary in 
their labelling of safety recommendations. Many drugs 
recommended for the treatment of metabolic morbid­
ity in obesity have not been trialled in the reproductive 
age group; studies of safety in pregnancy will never be 
undertaken and translating animal exposure results to 
humans is not always reliable. Given that these newer 
medications remain the optimal choice for treatment 
of metabolic complications of obesity, a more nuanced 
approach than previously used is being advocated 
by the FDA, which introduced a new labelling system, 
the PLLR (Pregnancy and Lactation Labelling)108, pub­
lished in 2016. The European Medicines Agency is due 
to release its updated pregnancy guidelines for consul­
tation in 2018 (reF.109). TaBle 1 shows data from the cate­
gorization system of the Australian Therapeutic Goods 
Administration (TGA), which provides currently acces­
sible and regularly updated110 ratings for some common 
medications used in the management of obesity and 
its complications.
The most common obesity­ 
associated complications 
in adolescence are primarily related to metabolic abnor­
malities and mental health concerns (Fig. 5). Here, we 
provide a brief overview of the management of the met­
abolic complications associated with obesity. Readers 
are referred to recent reviews or clinical guidelines for 
details of the management in the context of adolescent 
obesity, obstructive sleep apnoea111, nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease112, slipped capital femoral epiphysis113, 
depression114 and anxiety115.
The International Society for Paediatric and 
Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD) Clinical Guideline 
acknowledges the limited evidence for diagnosis, man­
agement and monitoring of prediabetes and T2DM in 
adolescents116,117. The prevalence of T2DM varies with 
ethnicity, with T2DM occurring in 6% of adolescents 
with diabetes mellitus in the United States and 40% of 
adolescents with diabetes mellitus in Asia and the Pacific 
Islands117. The prevalence of insulin resistance is less well 
characterized, but increasing age and weight, abdom­
inal distribution of obesity, the presence of acanthosis 
nigricans and a family history of T2DM should raise the 
level of clinical suspicion118. Prediabetes might be tran­
sient, coinciding with the insulin resistance often seen in 
puberty19, with continuing weight gain predicting pro­
gression to T2DM. Other than metformin, drugs used 
in T2DM usually require off­ 
label use in those under 
18 years of age. The rising community prevalence of 
obesity and the tighter target range for diabetes mellitus 
control mean that more than one­ 
third of adolescents 
with confirmed type 1 diabetes mellitus might also have 
overweight or obesity119, and metformin could be added 
to their therapy to address insulin resistance.
In a study published in 2015 that examined trends 
in dyslipidaemia and hypertension in youth, 20.2% had 
adverse levels of total and HDL cholesterol and 11.0% 
had elevated or borderline blood pressure recordings120. 
The US National Lipid Association121 provides an 
annual update of lipid­ 
lowering therapies, hyperlinks to 
resources and separate recommendations for children, 
adolescents and adults <21 years of age. The common 
dyslipidaemias of adolescent obesity are low levels of 
HDL cholesterol, in which the effective treatments are 
weight loss and physical activity, and elevated levels of 
triglycerides. The risk of pancreatitis is increased with 
Musculoskeletal
• Improved body composition
• Increased caloric expenditure 
   and metabolic rate
• Improved bone health
• Increased skeletal muscle mass
Psychosocial
• Improved cognition
• Reduced depressive symptoms
• Improved academic performance
• Better confidence and self-esteem
Functional
• Improved physical fitness
• Enhanced exercise tolerance
• Increased strength and 
    proprioception
Cardiometabolic
• Improved insulin sensitivity
• Improved blood pressure and 
    endothelial function
• Reduced inflammation
• Improved lipid profile
Fig. 4 | Benefits of exercise in adolescents with obesity55–62. A range of elements contributes to the musculoskeletal, 
cardiometabolic, functional and psychosocial health improvements resulting from increased exercise.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
 concentrations of triglycerides >5 mmol/l, and if life­
style change is ineffective and aggravating factors are 
excluded, omega­3 fatty acids, niacin or fibrates should 
be trialled122.
Elevated blood pressure is defined as blood pres­
sure (adjusted for age, sex and height) >90th percen­
tile to <95th percentile or 120/80 mmHg (whichever 
is lower), stage 1 hypertension is blood pressure >95th 
percentile to <95th percentile + 12 mmHg, or 130/80 to 
139/89 mmHg (whichever is lower) and stage 2 hyper­
tension is blood pressure >95th percentile + 12 mmHg, 
or >140/90 mmHg (whichever is lower)123. Pharmaco­
therapy should not be withheld if weight loss does 
not occur. The updated 2017 American Academy of 
Pediatrics guidelines123 provide a management guide 
and discussion around drug choices.
The Endocrine Society's Clinical Guideline for pol­
ycystic ovary syndrome124 considers adolescents sepa­
rately. The diagnosis should be based on clinical and/or 
biochemical hyperandrogenism in the presence of per­
sistent oligomenorrhoea and should not rely on multi­
cystic ovarian change, which might be developmentally 
normal. Although obesity and insulin resistance are 
present in most patients with polycystic ovary syndrome, 
insulin resistance at the receptor level is not present in 
the ovary, and high insulin concentrations drive ovar­
ian androgen production and subsequent hirsutism and 
menstrual cycle disturbances. Metformin prescribed 
together with the combined oral contraceptive pill might 
ameliorate any weight gain associated with the use of 
combined oral contraceptives125.
Access to health care
One of the six major recommendations of the 2016 
Report of the WHO Ending Childhood Obesity 
Commission was the provision of weight management 
services for both children and young people as part of 
Universal Health Coverage126. Given that health sys­
tems vary considerably between countries and that 
there is little published on obesity models of care in 
young people, there will be a range of challenges 
in the delivery of treatment services for this group. 
Importantly, the report highlighted the potential for 
weight bias by health professionals and hence the need 
for strategies to avoid stigmatization of young people 
with obesity.
Adolescent obesity can be managed in paediatric or 
adult care teams. Neither of these approaches is likely to 
Table 1 | Medications for the management of obesity and its complications
name
indication
comments
Safety in 
pregnancy1
Orlistat
Obesity
Inhibits gut lipase with resulting steatorrhoea with high- 
fat 
meals — easy to manipulate
B1
Phentermine
Obesity
Sympathomimetic amine that has addictive potential. 
Rejected by some agencies in its combination with 
topiramate owing to mental health and cardiovascular 
system concerns
B3
Topiramate
Obesity
If epilepsy or severe migraine are present, this fulfils 
prescribing indications. If prescribed off- 
label, cost might be 
prohibitive
D
GLP1R agonists
Obesity
Mostly by daily injection. Nausea and vomiting are 
significant adverse effects
B3
Metformin
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, prediabetes 
and insulin resistance, polycystic ovary 
syndrome, acanthosis nigricans and 
adjunctive treatment for weight loss
Gastrointestinal upset if not up- 
titrated slowly. Induces 
ovulation; consider contraception needs. Monitor vitamin 
B12 levels128
Approved for use (C)
Statins
Hypercholesterolaemia (LDL cholesterol)
No data on long- 
term adverse effects, including myopathy 
and increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
Teratogenic in 
animals, but risk 
appears lower in 
humans (D)
ACE inhibitors and 
ARBs
Hypertension and diabetic nephropathy
Single daily dose and low adverse effect profile improve 
compliance
Might increase 
malformation risk 
and pregnancy loss 
in second and third 
trimesters (D)
SSRIs
Depression and anxiety in which talking 
therapy is not successful
Package warnings that these antidepressants may increase 
risk of suicidal ideation and behaviours
C
COCP
Polycystic ovary syndrome: lower 
oestrogen doses and newer gestagens 
have fewer adverse effects
COCP- 
induced weight gain is disputed129. Contraindicated 
in paralytic migraine or thromboembolism
B3
Australian categories for prescribing medicines in pregnancy: the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) system is currently accessible and regularly 
updated110, providing ratings from A (the safest drugs to take during pregnancy 
; no known adverse reactions) to D (adverse reactions have been found in humans)110. 
The TGA system provides guidance that aims to assist both clinicians and the women who use the medications and is reliable evidence- 
based information for 
patients who use the Internet for health advice. Health professionals should refer to the TGA website for further information (Australian Government Department of 
Health). Practitioners should also be aware of local approvals and prescribing rules for medications in pregnancy. ACE, angiotensin- 
converting enzyme; ARBs, 
angiotensin receptor blockers; COCP, combined oral contraceptive pill; GLP1R 
, glucagon- 
like peptide 1 receptor 
; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
Reviews
 be optimal for adolescents, in whom health care is best 
served by clinicians with expertise in treating adoles­
cents and young adults127. Supported transitional care 
from paediatric to adult care has not been reported in 
the literature128, which is of concern given the preva­
lence of obesity and the need for ongoing management 
to avoid further weight gain in young adulthood.
Conclusions
The importance of effective management of adolescent 
obesity is underscored by its high prevalence in many 
countries and the short­ 
term and long­ 
term impacts 
of the condition. Although the evidence base for the 
management of adolescent obesity is growing, more 
pragmatic clinical trials in young people are needed. 
These trials are needed because of the acknowledged 
challenges in conducting traditional RCTs at this devel­
opmental stage and in this condition and because prag­
matic trials offer information that informs the real­ 
world 
implementation of therapies. Additionally, improved 
data are needed on how best to manage young people 
with obesity who are from disadvantaged environments 
and those from low­ 
income and middle­ 
income coun­
tries. Finally, it is vital that obesity in young people is 
not dismissed as being too difficult to be addressed 
by clinicians. Instead, there should be a recognition of 
the WHO concept of adolescence as “a key decade in the 
life­ 
course” where there is “a second chance in the sec­
ond decade” to improve health outcomes and provide 
high­ 
quality clinical services1.
Published online xx xx xxxx
Affective disorders, depression and anxiety
Depression and anxiety increase in prevalence in 
adolescence, with a female preponderance. 
Treatment in adolescents with obesity is along 
standard lines. Fluoxetine is less likely to be 
associated with weight gain than the newer 
antipsychotics, which are associated with weight
gain and insulin resistance, and should be avoided.
Benign intracranial hypertension
Patients without visual defects are 
treated with acetazolamide, a carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor.
Skin
Skin tags might require physical removal. For 
intertrigo, keep dry and use topical antifungals. 
Metformin seems to be effective for acanthosis 
nigricans, but much of the evidence is case-based.
Clinically, this effect might be positive for 
adolescents and metformin might assist in 
reduction in BMI in combined obesity treatment 
regimens.
Lipids and other cardiovascular 
risk factors
Statins are suggested for nonfamilial 
hypercholesterolaemia if LDL 
cholesterol is >4.1 mmol/l and if 
additional risk factors are present, such 
as obesity, hypertension and diabetes 
mellitus. Concerns regarding long-term 
safety exist, and data in younger 
patients with secondary lipid disorders 
are lacking.
Obstructive sleep apnoea
The American Academy of Pediatrics 
Clinical Guidelines give the evidence for 
weight management in obstructive sleep 
apnoea as grade C. CPAP therapy should be 
initiated if symptoms and/or signs of 
objective evidence of obstructive sleep 
if adenotonsillectomy is not performed 
(grade B). Intranasal glucocorticoids might 
also assist as adjuvant therapy. 
Hypertension
Preferred agents are thiazide diuretics 
and/or ACE inhibitors or angiotensin 
receptor blockers. Once-a-day dosing 
and a low adverse effect profile make 
these drugs particularly useful in 
adolescents.
Fatty liver
Weight loss is the only proven therapy. 
Insulin sensitizers and vitamin E have 
been used. 
Insulin resistance, prediabetes and 
diabetes mellitus
Lifestyle intervention is essential in all 
three conditions. Metformin also has a 
role in all three conditions. Metformin is 
a first-line therapy for type 2 diabetes 
mellitus in adolescents, but medical 
instability at presentation might require 
insulin. Continuation of insulin use 
should be reviewed at regular intervals 
as weight gain, accompanied by 
worsening insulin resistance, is an 
undesirable effect of long-term therapy.
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Metformin will produce a more regular 
menstrual cycle and induce ovulation, 
of which the adolescent should be 
warned. Weight loss, physical hair 
removal, and the combined oral 
contraceptive pill to suppress ovarian 
androgen production are all standard 
therapies. Weight gain induced by the 
combined oral contraceptive pill might 
occur in susceptible individuals. 
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
High index of suspicion if pain and/or limp 
are present. Orthopaedic intervention. 
Strength and balance training 
might be useful.
Pes planus
Supportive shoes and orthotics.
Fig. 5 | Management of comorbidities122,129–134. Obesity- 
associated complications are multisystemic, and the summarized 
treatment recommendations should be considered when the complication is identified in conjunction with weight- 
loss 
advice. ACE, angiotensin- 
converting enzyme; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
 1. 
World Health Organization. Health for the world’s 
adolescents: a second chance in the second decade. 
WHO http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/
documents/second- 
decade/en/ (2014).
2. 
Ng, M. et al. Global, regional, and national prevalence 
of overweight and obesity in children and adults 
during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for the 
global burden of disease study 2013. Lancet 384, 
766–781 (2014).
3. 
NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD- 
RisC). Worldwide 
trends in body- 
mass index, underweight, overweight, 
and obesity from 1975 to 2016: a pooled analysis of 
2416 population- 
based measurement studies in 
128.9 million children, adolescents, and adults. 
Lancet 390, 2627–2642 (2017).
4. 
Chung, A. et al. T
rends in child and adolescent obesity 
prevalence in economically advanced countries 
according to socioeconomic position: a systematic 
review. Obes. Rev. 17, 276–295 (2016).
5. 
Skinner, A. C. & Skelton, J. A. Prevalence and trends 
in obesity and severe obesity among children in the 
United States, 1999–2012. JAMA Pediatr. 168, 
561–566 (2014).
6. 
Garnett, S. P
., Baur, L. A., Jones, A. M. & Hardy, L. L. 
T
rends in the prevalence of morbid and severe obesity 
in Australian children aged 7–15 years, 1985–2012. 
PLoS ONE 11, e0154879 (2016).
7. 
Skinner, A. C., Perrin, E. M. & Skelton, J. A. 
Prevalence of obesity and severe obesity in US 
children, 1999–2014. Obesity 24, 1116–1123 
(2016).
8. 
Gordon- 
Larsen, P
., Adair, L. S., Nelson, M. C. & 
Popkin, B. M. Five- 
year obesity incidence in the 
transition period between adolescence and adulthood: 
the national longitudinal study of adolescent health. 
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 80, 569–575 (2004).
9. 
Patton, G. C. et al. Overweight and obesity between 
adolescence and young adulthood: a 10-year 
prospective cohort study. J. Adolesc. Health 48,  
275–280 (2011).
10. Baur, L. A., Hazelton, B. & Shrewsbury, V. A. 
Assessment and management of obesity in childhood 
and adolescence. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 8, 
635–645 (2011).
11. National Health and Medical Research Council. 
Clinical practice guidelines for the management of 
overweight and obesity in adults, adolescents and 
children in Australia. NHMRC www.nhmrc.gov.au/
guidelines/publications/n57 (2013).
12. National Clinical Guideline Centre (UK). Obesity: 
identification, assessment and management. NICE 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg189 (2014).
13. Parkin, P
. et al. Recommendations for growth 
monitoring, and prevention and management of 
overweight and obesity in children and youth in 
primary care. CMAJ 187, 411–421 (2015).
14. Styne, D. M. et al. Pediatric obesity — assessment, 
treatment, and prevention: an endocrine society 
clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 
102, 709–757 (2017).
15. Blakemore, S.-J. Imaging brain development: the 
adolescent brain. Neuroimage 61, 397–406 (2012).
16. Shulman, E. P
. et al. The dual systems model: review, 
reappraisal, and reaffirmation. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 
17, 103–117 (2016).
17. Al- 
Khudairy, L. et al. Diet, physical activity and 
behavioural interventions for the treatment of 
overweight or obese adolescents aged 12 to 17 years. 
Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 6, CD012691 (2017).
18. Ho, M. et al. Effectiveness of lifestyle interventions in 
child obesity: systematic review with meta- 
analysis. 
Pediatrics 130, e1647–e1671 (2012).
19. Patton, G. C. & Viner, R. Pubertal transitions in health. 
Lancet 369, 1130–1139 (2007).
20. Moran, A. et al. Insulin resistance during puberty: 
results from clamp studies in 357 children. Diabetes 
48, 2039–2044 (1999).
21. Kelsey, M. M. & Zeitler, P
. S. Insulin resistance of 
puberty. Curr. Diab. Rep. 16, 64 (2016).
22. Pont, S. J., Puhl, R., Cook, S. R. & Slusser, W. Stigma 
experienced by children and adolescents with obesity. 
Pediatrics 140, e20173034 (2017).
23. Puhl, R. M. & Latner, J. D. Stigma, obesity, and the 
health of the nation’s children. Psychol. Bull. 133, 
557 (2007).
24. T
ang- 
Péronard, J. & Heitmann, B. Stigmatization of 
obese children and adolescents, the importance of 
gender. Obes. Rev. 9, 522–534 (2008).
25. Dietz, W. H. et al. Management of obesity: 
improvement of health- 
care training and systems for 
prevention and care. Lancet 385, 2521–2533 
(2015).
26. Berger, S. E., Huggins, G. S., McCaffery, J. M. & 
Lichtenstein, A. H. Comparison among criteria to 
define successful weight- 
loss maintainers and 
regainers in the action for health in diabetes (Look 
AHEAD) and diabetes prevention program trials.  
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 106, 1337–1346 (2017).
27. MacLean, P
. S. et al. NIH working group report: 
innovative research to improve maintenance of weight 
loss. Obesity 23, 7–15 (2015).
28. Rajjo, T
. et al. The association of weight loss and 
cardiometabolic outcomes in obese children: 
systematic review and meta- 
regression. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 102, 758–762 (2016).
29. Ho, M. et al. Impact of dietary and exercise 
interventions on weight change and metabolic 
outcomes in obese children and adolescents: a 
systematic review and meta- 
analysis of randomized 
trials. JAMA Pediatr. 167, 759–768 (2013).
30. Ruotsalainen, H., Kyngäs, H., T
ammelin, T
. & 
Kääriäinen, M. Systematic review of physical activity 
and exercise interventions on body mass indices, 
subsequent physical activity and psychological 
symptoms in overweight and obese adolescents. 
J. Adv. Nurs. 71, 2461–2477 (2015).
31. Altman, M. & Wilfley, D. E. Evidence update on the 
treatment of overweight and obesity in children and 
adolescents. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 44,  
521–537 (2015).
32. Webb, V. L. & Wadden, T
. A. Intensive lifestyle 
intervention for obesity: principles, practices, and 
results. Gastroenterology 152, 1752–1764 (2017).
33. Oude Luttikhuis, H. et al. Interventions for treating 
obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 21, 
CD001872 (2009).
34. Samdal, G. B., Eide, G. E., Barth, T
., Williams, G. & 
Meland, E. Effective behaviour change techniques for 
physical activity and healthy eating in overweight and 
obese adults; systematic review and meta- 
regression 
analyses. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 14, 42 (2017).
35. Gow, M. L., Garnett, S. P
., Baur, L. A. & Lister, N. B. 
The effectiveness of different diet strategies to reduce 
type 2 diabetes risk in youth. Nutrients 8, 486 
(2016).
36. Díaz, R. G., Esparza- 
Romero, J., Moya- 
Camarena, S. Y., 
Robles- 
Sardín, A. E. & Valencia, M. E. Lifestyle 
intervention in primary care settings improves obesity 
parameters among Mexican youth. J. Am. Diet Assoc. 
110, 285–290 (2010).
37. Epstein, L. H., Wing, R. R., Koeske, R. & Valoski, A. 
Effects of diet plus exercise on weight change in 
parents and children. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 52, 
429 (1984).
38. Jiang, J. X., Xia, X., Greiner, T
., Lian, G. & Rosenqvist, 
U. A two year family based behaviour treatment for 
obese children. Arch. Dis. Child. 90, 1235–1238 
(2005).
39. Gow, M. L. et al. Impact of dietary macronutrient 
distribution on BMI and cardiometabolic outcomes in 
overweight and obese children and adolescents: a 
systematic review. Nutr. Rev. 72, 453–470 (2014).
40. Demol, S. et al. Low- 
carbohydrate (low and high- 
fat) 
versus high- 
carbohydrate low- 
fat diets in the 
treatment of obesity in adolescents. Acta Paediatr. 98, 
346–351 (2009).
41. Kirk, S. et al. Role of carbohydrate modification in 
weight management among obese children: a 
randomized clinical trial. J. Pediatr. 161, 320–327 
(2012).
42. Westerterp- 
Plantenga, M. S., Nieuwenhuizen, A., 
T
ome, D., Soenen, S. & Westerterp, K. R. Dietary 
protein, weight loss, and weight maintenance. Annu. 
Rev. Nutr. 29, 21–41 (2009).
43. Papadaki, A. et al. The effect of protein and glycemic 
index on children’s body composition: the DiOGenes 
randomized study. Pediatrics 126, E1143–E1152 
(2010).
44. Schwingshackl, L., Hobl, L. P
. & Hoffmann, G. Effects 
of low glycaemic index/low glycaemic load versus high 
glycaemic index/ high glycaemic load diets on 
overweight/obesity and associated risk factors in 
children and adolescents: a systematic review and 
meta- 
analysis. Nutr. J. 14, 87 (2015).
45. Seimon, R. V. et al. Do intermittent diets provide 
physiological benefits over continuous diets for weight 
loss? a systematic review of clinical trials. Mol. Cell. 
Endocrinol. 418, 153–172 (2015).
46. Headland, M., Clifton, P
. M., Carter, S. & Keogh, J. B. 
Weight- 
loss outcomes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of intermittent energy restriction trials lasting 
a minimum of 6 months. Nutrients 8, 354 (2016).
47. Lister, N. et al. Nutritional adequacy of diets for 
adolescents with overweight and obesity: 
considerations for dietetic practice. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 
71, 646–651 (2017).
48. Mulholland, Y., Nicokavoura, E., Broom, J. & Rolland, 
C. Very- 
low-energy diets and morbidity: a systematic 
review of longer- 
term evidence. Br. J. Nutr. 108,  
832–851 (2012).
49. Berkowitz, R. I. et al. Meal replacements in the 
treatment of adolescent obesity: a randomized 
controlled trial. Obesity (Silver Spring) 19,  
1193–1199 (2011).
50. Gow, M. L., Baur, L. A., Johnson, N. A., Cowell, C. T
. & 
Garnett, S. P
. Reversal of type 2 diabetes in youth who 
adhere to a very- 
low-energy diet: a pilot study. 
Diabetologia 60, 406–415 (2016).
51. Willi, S. M., Martin, K., Datko, F. M. & Brant, B. P
. 
T
reatment of type 2 diabetes in childhood using a 
very- 
low-calorie diet. Diabetes Care 27, 348–353 
(2004).
52. Moldovan, A. R. & David, D. Effect of obesity 
treatments on eating behavior: psychosocial 
interventions versus surgical interventions. a 
systematic review. Eat Behav. 12, 161–167 (2011).
53. Webber, L., Hill, C., Saxton, J., Van Jaarsveld, C. & 
Wardle, J. Eating behaviour and weight in children.  
Int. J. Obes. 33, 21 (2009).
54. Ho, M. et al. Effect of a prescriptive dietary 
intervention on psychological dimensions of eating 
behavior in obese adolescents. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. 
Phys. Act 10, 119 (2013).
55. O´Malley, G. et al. Physical activity and physical fitness 
in pediatric obesity: what are the first steps for 
clinicians? Expert conclusion from the 2016 ECOG 
workshop. Int. J. Exerc. Sci. 10, 487–496 (2017).
56. Ekelund, U. et al. Independent associations of physical 
activity and cardiorespiratory fitness with metabolic 
risk factors in children: the European youth heart 
study. Diabetologia 50, 1832–1840 (2007).
57. Janssen, I. & LeBlanc, A. G. Systematic review of the 
health benefits of physical activity and fitness in 
school- 
aged children and youth. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. 
Phys. Act. 7, 40 (2010).
58. Lubans, D. et al. Physical activity for cognitive and 
mental health in youth: a systematic review of 
mechanisms. Pediatrics 33, e20161642 (2016).
59. Raitakan, O. T
. et al. Effects of persistent physical 
activity and inactivity on coronary risk factors in 
children and young adults the cardiovascular risk in 
young Finns study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 140, 195–205 
(1994).
60. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  
The association between school- 
based physical 
activity, including physical education, and academic 
performance. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/
health_and_academics/pdf/pa- 
pe_paper.pdf (2010).
61. Paes, S. T
., Marins, J. C. B. & Andreazzi, A. E. 
Metabolic effects of exercise on childhood obesity: a 
current view. Rev. Paul Pediatr. 33, 122–129 (2015).
62. Gow, M. L. et al. Sustained improvements in fitness 
and exercise tolerance in obese adolescents after a 12 
week exercise intervention. Obes. Res. Clin. Pract. 10, 
178–188 (2016).
63. Australian Government Department of Health. 
Australia’s physical activity and sedentary behaviour 
guidelines. Australian Government Department of 
Health. http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/
publishing.nsf/content/health- 
pubhlth-strateg- 
phys-act- 
guidelines (2014).
64. Department of Health (UK). UK physical activity 
guidelines. GOV.UK https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/uk- 
physical-activity- 
guidelines (2011).
65. The Public Health Agency of Canada. 24 
h movement 
guidelines for children and youth: an integration of 
physical activity, sedentary behaviour, and sleep. 
Government of Canada. https://www.canada.ca/en/
public- 
health/services/health- 
promotion/healthy- 
living/
physical- 
activity/24-hour- 
movement-guidelines- 
children-youth.html (2016).
66. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. health.gov 
https://health.gov/paguidelines/guidelines/ (2008).
67. Stearns, J. A., Carson, V., Spence, J. C., Faulkner, G. & 
Leatherdale, S. T
. The role of peer victimization in the 
physical activity and screen time of adolescents: a 
cross- 
sectional study. BMC Pediatr. 17, 170 (2017).
68. T
siros, M. et al. Day- 
to-day physical functioning and 
disability in obese 10-to 13-year- 
olds. Pediatr. Obes. 
8, 31–41 (2013).
69. T
siros, M. D., Coates, A. M., Howe, P
., Grimshaw, P
. & 
Buckley, J. D. Obesity: the new childhood disability? 
Obes. Rev. 12, 26–36 (2011).
70. Fedele, D. A., Cushing, C. C., Fritz, A., Amaro, C. M. & 
Ortega, A. Mobile health interventions for improving 
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Endocrinology
Reviews
 health outcomes in youth: a meta- 
analysis. JAMA 
Pediatr. 171, 461–469 (2017).
71. Cappuccio, F. P
. et al. Meta- 
analysis of short sleep 
duration and obesity in children and adults. Sleep 31, 
619–626 (2008).
72. Fatima, Y. & Mamun, A. Longitudinal impact of sleep 
on overweight and obesity in children and adolescents: 
a systematic review and bias- 
adjusted meta- 
analysis. 
Obes. Rev. 16, 137–149 (2015).
73. Thomson, C. A. et al. Relationship between sleep 
quality and quantity and weight loss in women 
participating in a weight- 
loss intervention trial. 
Obesity 20, 1419–1425 (2012).
74. Chaput, J.-P
. & T
remblay, A. Sleeping habits predict the 
magnitude of fat loss in adults exposed to moderate 
caloric restriction. Obes. Facts 5, 561–566 (2012).
75. Capers, P
. L., Fobian, A. D., Kaiser, K. A., Borah, R. & 
Allison, D. B. A systematic review and meta- 
analysis of 
randomized controlled trials of the impact of sleep 
duration on adiposity and components of energy 
balance. Obes. Rev. 16, 771–782 (2015).
76. Yoong, S. L. et al. Systematic review and meta- 
analysis 
of interventions targeting sleep and their impact on 
child body mass index, diet, and physical activity. 
Obesity 24, 1140–1147 (2016).
77. Chaput, J.-P
. & Dutil, C. Lack of sleep as a contributor 
to obesity in adolescents: impacts on eating and 
activity behaviors. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act 13, 
103 (2016).
78. Carroll, J. K. et al. Who uses mobile phone health 
apps and does use matter? a secondary data analytics 
approach. J. Med. Internet Res. 19, e125 (2017).
79. Jakicic, J. M. et al. Effect of wearable technology 
combined with a lifestyle intervention on long- 
term 
weight loss: the IDEA randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
316, 1161–1171 (2016).
80. van der Zanden, R., Kramer, J., Gerrits, R. & Cuijpers, P
. 
Effectiveness of an online group course for depression 
in adolescents and young adults: a randomized trial.  
J. Med. Internet Res. 14, e86 (2012).
81. Mead, E. et al. Diet, physical activity and behavioural 
interventions for the treatment of overweight or obese 
children from the age of 6 to 11 years. Cochrane 
Database Syst. Rev. 6, CD012651 (2017).
82. Wiegand, S. et al. Predicting weight loss and 
maintenance in overweight/obese pediatric patients. 
Horm. Res. Paediatr. 82, 380–387 (2014).
83. Gow, M. L. et al. Can early weight loss, eating 
behaviors and socioeconomic factors predict 
successful weight loss at 12- and 24-months in 
adolescents with obesity and insulin resistance 
participating in a randomised controlled trial?  
Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 13, 1–11 (2016).
84. Mead, E. et al. Drug interventions for the treatment of 
obesity in children and adolescents. Cochrane 
Database Syst. Res. 11, CD012436 (2016).
85. Van Gaal, L. & Scheen, A. Weight management in type 
2 diabetes: current and emerging approaches to 
treatment. Diabetes Care 38, 1161–1172 (2015).
86. Paravattil, B., Wilby, K. J. & T
urgeon, R. T
opiramate 
monotherapy for weight reduction in patients with type 
2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 114, 9–14 (2016).
87. Fox, C. K. et al. Meal replacements followed by 
topiramate for the treatment of adolescent severe 
obesity: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Obesity 
24, 2553–2561 (2016).
88. Joao, A., Reis, F. & Fernandes, R. The incretin system 
ABCs in obesity and diabetes–novel therapeutic 
strategies for weight loss and beyond. Obes. Rev. 17, 
553–572 (2016).
89. T
ong, J. & Sandoval, D. A. Is the GLP-1 system a viable 
therapeutic target for weight reduction? Rev. Endocr. 
Metab. Disord. 12, 187–195 (2011).
90. Davies, M. et al. Effect of oral semaglutide compared 
with placebo and subcutaneous semaglutide on glycemic 
control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA 318, 1460–1470 (2017).
91. Kelly, A. S. et al. The effect of glucagon- 
like peptide-1 
receptor agonist therapy on body mass index in 
adolescents with severe obesity: a randomized, 
placebo- 
controlled, clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr. 167, 
355–360 (2013).
92. Vidal, J., Corcelles, R., Jiménez, A., Flores, L. &  
Lacy, A. M. Metabolic and bariatric surgery for 
obesity. Gastroenterology 152, 1780–1790 (2017).
93. O’Brien, P
. E. et al. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric 
banding in severely obese adolescents: a randomized 
trial. JAMA 303, 519–526 (2010).
94. Ells, L. J. et al. Surgery for the treatment of obesity in 
children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst. 
Res. 6, CD011740 (2015).
95. Paulus, G. F. et al. Bariatric surgery in morbidly obese 
adolescents: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. 
Obes. Surg. 25, 860–878 (2015).
96. Inge, T
. H. et al. Weight loss and health status 3 years 
after bariatric surgery in adolescents. N. Engl. J. Med. 
374, 113–123 (2016).
97. Beamish, A. J. & Reinehr, T
. Should bariatric surgery 
be performed in adolescents? Eur. J. Endocrinol. 176, 
D1–D15 (2017).
98. Inge, T
. H. et al. Bariatric surgery for severely 
overweight adolescents: concerns and 
recommendations. Pediatrics 114, 217–223 (2004).
99. International Pediatric Endosurgery Group. IPEG 
guidelines for surgical treatment of extremely obese 
adolescents. J Laparoendosc. Adv. Surg. T
ech. 19 
(Suppl. 1), xiv–xvi (2009).
100. Baur, L. A. & Fitzgerald, D. A. Recommendations for 
bariatric surgery in adolescents in Australia and New 
Zealand. J. Paediatr. Child Health 46, 704–707 (2010).
101. Michalsky, M., Reichard, K., Inge, T
., Pratt, J. & 
Lenders, C. ASMBS pediatric committee best practice 
guidelines. Surg. Obes. Relat. Dis. 8, 1–7 (2012).
102. Pulgarón, E. R. Childhood obesity: a review of 
increased risk for physical and psychological 
comorbidities. Clin. Ther. 35, A18–A32 (2013).
103. Agirbasli, M., T
anrikulu, A. M. & Berenson, G. S. 
Metabolic syndrome: bridging the gap from childhood 
to adulthood. Cardiovasc. Ther. 34, 30–36 (2016).
104. Cook, S., Weitzman, M., Auinger, P
., Nguyen, M. & 
Dietz, W. H. Prevalence of a metabolic syndrome 
phenotype in adolescents: findings from the third 
national health and nutrition examination survey, 
1988–1994. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 157, 
821–827 (2003).
105. Ford, E. S. & Li, C. Defining the metabolic syndrome in 
children and adolescents: will the real definition please 
stand up? J. Pediatr. 152, 160–164 (2008).
106. Reinehr, T
. Metabolic syndrome in children and 
adolescents: a critical approach considering the 
interaction between pubertal stage and insulin 
resistance. Curr. Diab. Rep. 16, 8 ( 
20 
16 
).
107. Zimmet, P
. et al. The metabolic syndrome in children 
and adolescents–an IDF consensus report. Pediatr. 
Diabetes 8, 299–306 (2007).
108. Pernia, S. & DeMaagd, G. The new pregnancy and 
lactation labeling rule. P
. T
. 41, 713 (2016).
109. European Medicines Agency. Good pharmacovigilance 
practices. EMA http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.
jsp?curl=pages/regulation/document_listing/document_
listing_000345.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058058f32c 
(2017).
110. Therapeutic Goods Administration (Australia). 
Prescribing medicines in pregnancy database. TGA 
https://www.tga.gov.au/australian- 
categorisation-system- 
prescribing-medicines- 
pregnancy (2017).
111. Andersen, I. G., Holm, J. C. & Homøe, P
. Obstructive 
sleep apnea in obese children and adolescents, 
treatment methods and outcome of treatment–a 
systematic review. Int. J. Pediatr. Otorhinolaryngol. 
87, 190–197 (2016).
112. Doycheva, I., Watt, K. D. & Alkhouri, N. Nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease in adolescents and young adults: the 
next frontier in the epidemic. Hepatology 65,  
2100–2109 (2017).
113. Bitersohl, B., Hosalkar, H. S., Zilkens, C. & Krauspe, R. 
Current concepts in management of slipped capital 
femoral epiphysis. Hip. Int. 25, 104–114 (2015).
114. Lewandowski, R. E. et al. Evidence for the 
management of adolescent depression. Pediatrics 
132, e996–e1009 (2013).
115. Wehry, A. M., Beesdo- 
Baum, K., Hennelly, M. M., 
Connolly, S. D. & Strawn, J. R. Assessment and 
treatment of anxiety disorders in children and 
adolescents. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 17, 52  
(2015).
116. Zeitler, P
. et al. T
ype 2 diabetes in the child and 
adolescent. Pediatr. Diabetes 15, 26–46 (2014).
117. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent 
Diabetes. ISPAD clinical practice consensus  
guidelines 2014. ISPAD http://www.ispad.
org/?page=ISPADClinicalPract (2014).
118. Caprio, S., Perry, R. & Kursawe, R. Adolescent obesity 
and insulin resistance: roles of ectopic fat 
accumulation and adipose inflammation. 
Gastroenterology 152, 1638–1646 (2017).
119. van Vliet, M. et al. Overweight is highly prevalent in 
children with type 1 diabetes and associates with 
cardiometabolic risk. J. Pediatr. 156, 923–929 (2010).
120. Kit, B. K. et al. Prevalence of and trends in 
dyslipidemia and blood pressure among US children 
and adolescents, 1999–2012. JAMA Pediatr. 169, 
272–279 (2015).
121. Bays, H. E., Jones, P
. H., Orringer, C. E., Brown, W. V. 
& Jacobson, T
. A. National lipid association annual 
summary of clinical lipidology 2016. J. Clin. Lipidol. 
10, S1–S43 (2016).
122. Oh, R. C. & Lanier, J. B. Management of 
hypertriglyceridemia. Am. Fam. Physician. 75,  
1365–1371 (2007).
123. Flynn, J. T
. et al. Clinical practice guideline for screening 
and management of high blood pressure in children 
and adolescents. Pediatrics 140, e20171904  
(2017).
124. Legro, R. S. et al. Diagnosis and treatment of 
polycystic ovary syndrome: an endocrine society 
clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 
98, 4565–4592 (2013).
125. Glintborg, D. et al. Body composition is improved 
during 12 months’ treatment with metformin alone or 
combined with oral contraceptives compared with 
treatment with oral contraceptives in polycystic ovary 
syndrome. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 99, 2584–2591 
(2014).
126. World Health Organization. Report of the commission on 
ending childhood obesity. WHO http://www.who.int/end- 
childhood-obesity/publications/echo- 
report/en/ (2016).
127. Steinbeck, K., T
owns, S. & Bennett, D. Adolescent and 
young adult medicine is a special and specific area of 
medical practice. J. Paediatr. Child Health 50,  
427–431 (2014).
128. Shrewsbury, V., Baur, L., Nguyen, B. & Steinbeck, K. 
T
ransition to adult care in adolescent obesity: a 
systematic review and why it is a neglected topic. Int. 
J. Obes. 38, 475 (2014).
129. Chapman, L., Darling, A. & Brown, J. Association 
between metformin and vitamin B 12 deficiency in 
patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and 
meta- 
analysis. Diabetes Metab. 42, 316–327  
(2016).
130. Gallo, M. F. et al. Combination contraceptives: effects 
on weight. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 25, 
CD003987 (2014).
131. Romo, A. & Benavides, S. T
reatment options in insulin 
resistance obesity–related acanthosis nigricans. Ann. 
Pharmacother. 42, 1090–1094 (2008).
132. McDonagh, M. S., Selph, S., Ozpinar, A. & Foley, C. 
Systematic review of the benefits and risks of 
metformin in treating obesity in children aged 18 
years and younger. JAMA Pediatr. 168, 178–184 
(2014).
133. Marcus, C. L. et al. Diagnosis and management of 
childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. 
Pediatrics 130, e714–e755 (2012).
134. National Institute for Health Care and Excellence. 
Depression in children and young people: identification 
and management: clinical guideline [CG28]. NICE. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg28 (2017).
Author contributions
All authors contributed to researching data for the article, 
discussion of content, writing the article and reviewing and/
or editing the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Review criteria
This narrative review is based upon data from systematic 
reviews, review papers and individual studies known to the 
authors. Other studies were identified by a MEDLINE search 
of English language papers published up to 2017 using the 
search terms “obesity” and “adolescent” and then further 
refined using such terms as “bariatric surgery”, “behaviour 
therapy”, “drug therapy”, “diet”, “exercise”, “physical activity”, 
“weight maintenance” or “sleep”
. Where appropriate, reviews 
or studies of obesity treatment involving children or adults 
were included in the Review. Reference lists of key papers 
were also checked to identify additional papers of interest. 
We also searched for clinical guidelines on the management 
of adolescent obesity. For the latter to be considered, the 
guidelines had to be developed or endorsed by a national or 
international health professional body or government agency 
and available in English.
RELATEd Links
Australian Government Department of Health: https://www.
tga.gov.au/australian- 
categorisation-system- 
prescribing-medicines- 
pregnancy
CC- 
BY-4.0: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrendo
Reviews
