 Short Communication
Health and societal effects from exposure to fragranced consumer products
Anne Steinemann
Department of Infrastructure Engineering, Melbourne School of Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia
College of Science, Technology and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, Queensland 4811, Australia
Climate, Atmospheric Sciences, and Physical Oceanography, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 25 September 2016
Received in revised form 5 November 2016
Accepted 12 November 2016
Available online 14 November 2016
Fragranced consumer products—such as air fresheners, cleaning supplies, and personal care products— pervade
society. This study investigated the occurrence and types of adverse effects associated with exposure to
fragranced products in Australia, and opportunities for prevention. Data were collected in June 2016 using an
on-line survey with a representative national sample (n = 1098). Overall, 33% of Australians report health prob-
lems, such as migraine headaches and asthma attacks, when exposed to fragranced products. Of these health ef-
fects, more than half (17.1%) could be considered disabling under the Australian Disability Discrimination Act.
Additionally, 7.7% of Australians have lost workdays or a job due to illness from fragranced product exposure
in the workplace, 16.4% reported health problems when exposed to air fresheners or deodorizers, 15.3% from
being in a room after it was cleaned with scented products, and 16.7% would enter but then leave a business
as quickly as possible due to fragranced products. About twice as many respondents would prefer that work-
places, health care facilities and professionals, hotels, and airplanes were fragrance-free rather than fragranced.
While 73.7% were not aware that fragranced products, even ones called green and organic, emitted hazardous
air pollutants, 56.3% would not continue to use a product if they knew it did. This is the first study in Australia
to assess the extent of adverse effects associated with exposure to common fragranced products. It provides com-
pelling evidence for the importance and value of reducing fragranced product exposure in order to reduce and
prevent adverse health effects and costs.
© 2016 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Keywords:
Fragranced consumer products
Migraines
Asthma
Fragrance-free policies
Indoor air quality
1. Introduction
Contrary to popular belief, most exposure to hazardous pollutants
that affect health and well-being occurs indoors (Ott et al., 2007;
Brown, 2007). A primary source of these indoor pollutants and expo-
sures is common fragranced consumer products, such as air fresheners,
cleaning products, laundry supplies, and personal care products (Cheng
et al., 2015; Nazaroff and Weschler, 2004; Steinemann et al., 2011).
Exposure to fragranced products has been associated with a range of
adverse human health effects, including migraine headaches, contact
dermatitis, asthma attacks, respiratory difficulties, and mucosal symp-
toms (e.g., Kelman, 2004; Caress and Steinemann, 2009; Elberling et
al., 2005; Millqvist et al., 1999; Johansen, 2003; Kumar et al., 1995). In
two previous surveys, Caress and Steinemann (2009) found that 17.5%
and 20.5% of the general US population (between 2002–3 and 2005–6
respectively) reported breathing difficulties, headaches, or other health
problems when exposed to air fresheners and deodorizers.
Fragranced consumer products emit dozens of different volatile
compounds, including terpenes (e.g., limonene, alpha-pinene, and
beta-pinene) that are primary pollutants, and that react with ozone to
generate secondary pollutants such as formaldehyde and acetaldehyde
(Nazaroff and Weschler, 2004). Even so-called green and organic
fragranced products emit hazardous pollutants, similar to regular
fragranced products. Little information exists, however, on potentially
hazardous compounds emitted from fragranced products, in part be-
cause
products
are
not
required
to
disclose
all
ingredients
(Steinemann, 2015). Thus, knowledge of potential exposures and effects
is essential to effective risk reduction.
This study investigates the occurrence and types of exposures to
fragranced products and associated health and societal effects in the
Australian population. Further, it investigates the potential for preven-
tive measures, such as fragrance-free policies, to reduce health risks
and costs.
2. Methods
An on-line survey was conducted of the adult Australian population,
using a national random sample representative of age, gender, and state
(n = 1098, 95% confidence level with a 3% margin of error). The survey
instrument, a 35-item questionnaire, was developed and tested over a
two-year period, including cognitive testing with 10 individuals and
Preventive Medicine Reports 5 (2017) 45–47
E-mail address: anne.steinemann@unimelb.edu.au.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.11.011
2211-3355/© 2016 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Preventive Medicine Reports
journal homepage: http://ees.elsevier.com/pmedr
 piloting with over 100 individuals, before full implementation in June
2016. The survey drew upon participants from a large web-based Aus-
tralian panel (over 200,000 people) held by Survey Sampling Interna-
tional. Participant recruitment followed a randomized process (SSI,
2016) with an open invitation, rather than a direct invite, to the pool
of panelists available at the time. The pool was filtered to achieve a rep-
resentative sample through a set of initial questions for basic demo-
graphic characteristics. All responses were anonymous. Average
survey completion time was approximately 10 min. Survey response
rate was 93%. Only completed questionnaires were included in the
final data analysis. The research study received ethics approval from
the University of Melbourne. Details of the survey methodology, as
well as statistical analyses of questionnaire data and for results summa-
rized below, are provided as supplemental documents.
The questionnaire investigated both personal and public exposure to
fragranced products, health effects related to exposures, impacts of fra-
grance exposure in the workplace and in public places, awareness of
fragranced product ingredients and labeling, preferences for fra-
grance-free environments and policies, and demographic information.
The questionnaire provided one question on each page, with multiple
choice and open format answers; five sets of questions were random-
ized for their multiple choice items, and eight questions were condition-
ally displayed based on responses to other items. Data were collected
and analyzed in June 2016.
Fragranced consumer products were investigated in the following
categories: (a) Air fresheners and deodorizers; (b) Personal care prod-
ucts; (c) Cleaning supplies; (d) Laundry products; (e) Household prod-
ucts; (f) Fragrance; and (g) Other. Health effects were investigated in
the following categories: (a) Migraine headaches; (b) Asthma attacks;
(c) Neurological problems; (d) Respiratory problems; (e) Skin prob-
lems; (f) Cognitive problems; (g) Mucosal symptoms; (h) Immune sys-
tem problems; (i) Gastrointestinal problems; (j) Cardiovascular
problems; (k) Musculoskeletal problems; (j) Other health problems.
The categories of fragranced products and health effects were devel-
oped from prior studies (Steinemann, 2015; Caress and Steinemann,
2009; Miller and Prihoda, 1999), and pre-tested and piloted with over
100 individuals, including health care professionals, before full survey
implementation.
3. Results
Overall, 98.5% of the Australian population is exposed to fragranced
products at least once a week from either their own use (98%), others'
use (88.1%), or both. From their own use, 66.8% are exposed to air fresh-
eners and deodorizers at least once a week; 91.6% personal care prod-
ucts; 83.2% cleaning supplies; 84.3% laundry products; 77.1%
household products; 69.6% fragrance; 2.3% other. From others' use,
50.8% are exposed to air fresheners and deodorizers at least once a
week; 61.5% personal care products; 50.7% cleaning supplies; 44.3%
laundry products; 49.6% household products; 67.8% fragrance; 1.8%
other.
Importantly, 33% of the general population reported one or more
types of health problems associated with exposure to one or more
types of fragranced products. The most common types of adverse health
effects were as follows: 16.7% of the population reported respiratory
problems; 14.0% mucosal symptoms; 10.0% migraine headaches; 9.5%
skin problems; 7.6% asthma attacks; 4.5% neurological problems; 4.1%
cognitive problems; 3.3% gastrointestinal problems; 3.3% immune sys-
tem problems; 3.0% cardiovascular problems; 2.6% musculoskeletal
problems; and 1.9% other.
When exposed to air fresheners or deodorizers, 16.4% experience
health problems; these include respiratory problems (9.1%), mucosal
symptoms (6.2%), skin problems (4.8%), asthma attacks (4.5%), mi-
graine headaches (4.2%), neurological problems (2.2%), among other
adverse effects. In addition, in other types of exposure situations,
15.3% reported health problems from being in a room after it was
cleaned with scented products, 6.1% from the scent of laundry products
from dryer vents, and 19.4% from being near someone wearing a
fragranced product. For 17.1% of the population, the severity of the
health problems was reported to “result in a total or partial loss of bodily
or mental functions,” which is a criterion for determining disability
under the Australia Disability Discrimination Act (DDA, 1992).
Fragranced products also hindered access in society. Of the general
population, 11.6% are unable or reluctant to use the toilets in a public
place, because of the presence of an air freshener, deodorizer, or scented
product. Also, 10.3% are unable or reluctant to wash their hands with
soap in a public place, because they know or suspect that the soap is
fragranced. Further, 15.0% have been prevented from going to some
place because they would be exposed to a fragranced product that
would make them sick. Interestingly, 16.7% of the population reported
that if they enter a business, and smell air fresheners or some fragranced
product, they want to leave as quickly as possible. Finally, 7.7% have lost
work days or a job (in the past 12 months) due to exposures to
fragranced products in the workplace.
Fragranced products emit a range of chemicals, including hazardous
air pollutants, but ingredients do not need to be fully disclosed on the
product label or material safety data sheet. Even so-called green and or-
ganic fragranced products can emit hazardous pollutants, similar to reg-
ular products (Steinemann, 2015). Of the population surveyed, 47.2%
were not aware that a “fragrance” in a product is typically a chemical
mixture of several dozen to several hundred chemicals, 68.6% were
not aware that fragrance chemicals do not need to be fully disclosed
on the product label or material safety data sheet, 68.9% were not
aware that fragranced products typically emit hazardous air pollutants
such as formaldehyde, and 73.7% were not aware that even so-called
natural, green, and organic fragranced products typically emit hazard-
ous air pollutants. However, 56.3% would not still use a fragranced prod-
uct if they knew it emitted hazardous air pollutants.
Fragrance-free indoor environments received widespread support.
Of the general population, 42.8% would be supportive of a fragrance-
free policy in the workplace (compared with 22.2% that would not),
43.2% would prefer that health care facilities and health care profes-
sionals be fragrance-free (compared with 25.2% that would not). Also,
57.7% would prefer flying on an airplane without scented air pumped
through the passenger cabin (compared with 16.3% with scented air),
and 55.6% would prefer staying in a hotel without fragranced air (com-
pared with 22.7% with fragranced air).
4. Discussion
The problem of fragranced products is sweeping Australia and other
countries, resulting in adverse health effects, lost workdays, and inabil-
ity to access public places, such as restrooms and businesses. While the
use of fragranced products may be premised on that they improve in-
door air quality, the contrary is actually the case; that is, fragranced
products emit and generate a complex mixture of chemical pollutants,
including carcinogenic hazardous air pollutants, but nearly all are undis-
closed. While further research is needed to better understand which
chemicals and mixtures are associated with the effects, what is known
is that the products are reportedly causing adverse effects in a sizeable
(33%) percentage of the population. Further, the effects can be immedi-
ate, severe, and potentially disabling.
Important implications for prevention arise from this study. First, for
workplaces and other environments, fragrance-free policies would be a
logical step, benefiting employees, employers, and the public. Such pol-
icies have been implemented in workplaces, schools, hospitals, and
public and private buildings around the world. As an example, the US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Indoor Environmental Qual-
ity Policy (CDC, 2009) states that “Scented or fragranced products are
prohibited at all times in all interior space owned, rented, or leased by
CDC.” Second, for individuals, fragranced products can be removed
from use, or swapped out for fragrance-free products with similar
46
A. Steinemann / Preventive Medicine Reports 5 (2017) 45–47
 functionality. A fragrance in a product is not intended to clean the air or
reduce air pollutants. Thus, it could be asked whether the perceived
benefits of use are dwarfed by the costs to personal and public health.
Third, for businesses, fragranced products may actually repel more cus-
tomers than attract, as well as create potential liability; e.g., the use of air
fresheners in a business can cause potentially disabling effects in cus-
tomers. Fourth, for medical professionals and patients, when faced
with health problems such as headaches, respiratory difficulties, muco-
sal symptoms, rashes, asthma, and others, consider the possibility that
fragranced products could be a contributor. Finally, for public officials,
the problem of “secondhand scents,” or indirect exposure to fragranced
products, has parallels to secondhand tobacco smoke. Prevention from
fragrance product exposure will enable individuals to work in their
workplaces, attend school, and function in society without suffering in-
voluntary harm.
5. Conclusion
This study found that common fragranced products can trigger ad-
verse effects throughout the Australian population, with consequences
for public health, workplaces, businesses, and societal wellbeing. It
also indicates that some relatively straightforward and inexpensive ap-
proaches, such as fragrance-free policies, could not only reduce health
risks but also increase revenues and societal access. While research is
needed to fully understand why fragranced products are associated
with a range of adverse health effects, and in a substantial portion of
the population, it is important to take steps in the meantime to reduce
or eliminate exposure for prevention and public health.
Conflicts of interest
None.
Acknowledgments
I thank Amy Davis and Jim Repace for their very helpful reviews of
this article. I also thank Amy Davis, Jim Repace, Alison Johnson, John
Branco, Susan Felderman, Claudia Miller, Rudy Rodolfo, Lynn Heilbrun,
Robert Damiano, Taylor Williams for their valuable reviews of the sur-
vey and results. The research received funding from Clean Air and Urban
Landscapes Hub, at the University of Melbourne, through the Australia
Department of the Environment. Finally, I thank the staff of Survey Sam-
pling International for their superb work.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.11.011.
References
Brown, S.K., 2007. Indoor Air Quality, Australia: State of the Environment Technical Paper
Series (Atmosphere). Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories,
Canberra.
Caress, S.M., Steinemann, A.C., 2009. Prevalence of fragrance sensitivity in the American
population. J. Environ. Health 71 (7), 46–50.
CDC, 2009. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Indoor Environmental Quality
Policy, pages. :pp. 9–10 Available:. http://www.drsteinemann.com/Resources/CDC%
20Indoor%20Environmental%20Quality%20Policy.pdf.
Cheng, M., Galbally, I.E., Molloy, S.B., et al., 2015. Factors controlling volatile organic com-
pounds in dwellings in Melbourne, Australia. Indoor Air 26 (2), 219–230.
DDA, 1992. Australian Disability Discrimination Act, Australian Government. Act No. 135
of 1992. Availalble at:. https://www.legislation.gov.au/Series/C2004A04426.
Elberling, J., Linneberg, A., Dirksen, A., et al., 2005. Mucosal symptoms elicited by fra-
grance products in a population-based sample in relation to atopy and bronchial
hyper-reactivity. Clin. Exp. Allergy 35 (1), 75–81.
Johansen, J.D., 2003. Fragrance contact allergy: a clinical review. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 4
(11), 789–798.
Kelman, L., 2004. Osmophobia and taste abnormality in migraineurs: a tertiary care study.
Headache 44 (10), 1019–1023.
Kumar, P., Caradonna-Graham, V.M., Gupta, S., Cai, X., Rao, P.N., Thompson, J., 1995. Inha-
lation challenge effects of perfume scent strips in patients with asthma. Ann. Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 75 (5), 429–433.
Miller, C.S., Prihoda, T.J., 1999. The environmental exposure and sensitivity inventory
(EESI): a standardized approach for measuring chemical intolerances for research
and clinical applications. Toxicol. Ind. Health 15 (34), 370–385.
Millqvist, E., Bengtsson, U., Löwhagen, O., 1999. Provocations with perfume in the eyes in-
duce airway symptoms in patients with sensory hyperreactivity. Allergy 54 (5),
495–499.
Nazaroff, W.W., Weschler, C.J., 2004. Cleaning products and air fresheners: exposure to
primary and secondary air pollutants. Atmos. Environ. 38, 2841–2865.
Ott, W., Steinemann, A., Wallace, L. (Eds.), 2007. Exposure Analysis. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL.
SSI (Survey Sampling International), 2016. Dynamix Sampling Approach.Available at:.
https://www.surveysampling.com/technology/ssi-dynamix/ (accessed August 3,
2016).
Steinemann, A., 2015. Volatile emissions from common consumer products. Air Qual.
Atmos. Health 8 (3), 273–281.
Steinemann, A.C., MacGregor, I.C., Gordon, S.M., et al., 2011. Fragranced consumer prod-
ucts: chemicals emitted, ingredients unlisted. Environ. Impact Assess. Rev. 31 (3),
328–333.
47
A. Steinemann / Preventive Medicine Reports 5 (2017) 45–47
