  
 
 
 
 
Stenvinkel, P., Painer, J., Kuro-o, M., Lanaspa, M., Arnold, W., Ruf, T., 
Shiels, P. G. and Johnson, R. J. (2018) Novel treatment strategies for 
chronic kidney disease: insights from the animal kingdom. Nature Reviews 
Nephrology, 14, pp. 265-284. (doi:10.1038/nrneph.2017.169) 
 
This is the author’s final accepted version. 
 
There may be differences between this version and the published version. 
You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from 
it. 
 
 
 
 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/156444/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposited on: 26 February 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk 
  
 
1 
Novel treatment strategies for chronic kidney disease: insights from 
the animal kingdom  
Peter Stenvinkel1, Johanna Painer2, Makoto Kuro-o3, Miguel Lanaspa4, Walter Arnold2, Thomas 
Ruf2, Paul G Shiels5 and Richard J. Johnson4  
1Divison of Renal Medicine M99, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Hälsovägen 
13, 14157 Huddinge, Sweden  
2Konrad Lorenz Institute of Ethology and Research Institute of Wildlife Ecology, Department of 
Integrative Biology and Evolution at the University of Veterinary Medicine, Savoyenstreet 1, 1160 
Vienna, Austria  
3Division of Anti-Aging Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 
Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan  
4Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, 12700 East 19th Ave, Room 7015 Mail Stop C281, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora CO, 80045 USA  
5Wolfson Wohl Translational Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, 
Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK  
Correspondence to: P.S.  
peter.stenvinkel@ki.se 
 
 
  
 
2 
Abstract  
Many of the >2 million animal species that inhabit earth have developed survival mechanisms 
that aid in the prevention of obesity, kidney disease, starvation, dehydration and vascular 
ageing; however, some animals remain susceptible to these complications. Domestic and 
captive felids, for example, show susceptibility to chronic kidney disease (CKD), potentially 
linked to the high protein intake of these animals. By contrast, naked mole rats are a model of 
longevity and are protected from extreme environmental conditions through mechanisms that 
provide resistance to oxidative stress. Biomimetic studies suggest that the transcription factor 
NRF2 may offer protection in extreme environmental conditions and promote longevity in the 
animal kingdom. Similarly, during months of fasting, immobilization and anuria, hibernating 
bears are protected from muscle wasting, azotaemia, thrombotic complications, organ damage 
and osteoporosis — features that are often associated with CKD. Improved understanding of 
susceptibility and protective mechanisms of these animals and others could provide insights 
into novel strategies to prevent and treat several human diseases, such as CKD and ageing-
associated complications. An integrated collaboration between nephrologists and experts from 
other fields, such as veterinarians, zoologists, biologists, anthropologists and ecologists, could 
introduce a novel approach for improving human health and help nephrologists to find novel 
treatment strategies for CKD. 
  
 
 
  
 
3 
The evolution of species — mediated by genetic and epigenetic modifications over the past 3.8 
billion years — has given rise to a wide variety of adaptations to different environments. This 
observation has led to the proposal that insights into adaptive mechanisms observed in nature 
could aid the development of therapeutic approaches for human disease (1). Comparative 
physiology — a subdiscipline of physiology that is based on Krogh’s principle, which states ”for 
such a large number of problems there will be some animal of choice, or a few such animals, on 
which it can be conveniently studied” — involves the comparison of organ systems within 
different taxa (2). Homer Smith’s insightful work, for example, used a comparative physiology 
approach based on studies of fish and amphibians (3) to form the basis of many aspects of renal 
physiology. Similarly, Ivan Sperber (4) studied correlations between dietary habits, ecological 
distribution, urine-concentrating ability and kidney morphology in 1944. The emerging field of 
biomimetics explores adaptative mechanisms of a given species and imitates — or takes 
inspiration from — these mechanisms to solve human problems (Table 1; Supplementary 
information S1 (table)). Biomimetics is a particularly interdisciplinary field that can be used to 
identify new approaches to disease (Figure 1), such as the underlying mechanisms of longevity 
in naked mole rats (5), resistance to long-term renal hypoxia in seals (6) and preserved renal 
function in hibernating bears (7, 8). However, it is important to emphasize that when 
interpreting data from biomimetic studies, one should consider the likelihood of comparative 
animal data offering meaningful solutions when extrapolated to human disease. The 
physiological mechanisms that have evolved to enable healthy animals to adapt to extreme 
environments may not necessarily be the same mechanisms that should be harnessed to avoid 
disease in humans.  
The prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is rising worldwide. Approximately 10–
15% of the global population suffer from CKD and its associated complications (9), particularly 
cardiovascular disease, infectious complications, osteoporosis, muscle wasting, frailty and 
premature ageing (10) (11). Nephrologists are faced with limited treatment options for patients 
with CKD, and advances in dialysis technology have not yet translated into markedly better 
outcomes (10). As the majority of randomized controlled trials for CKD therapies have been 
negative (10), an urgent need exists to find novel treatment options for this patient group. 
  
 
4 
Here, we discuss some examples of renal biomimetics, and how studies of the mechanisms by 
which animals adapt to hypoxia, oxidative stress, food deprivation and conversely to high-
protein, or high-phosphate diets, may result in a better understanding of the uraemic 
phenotype (Figure 1). Although biomimetic studies usually focus on the adaptive mechanisms 
that protect species from disease, changing environments — such as global warming, water 
availability or salinity in the oceans — can also lead to adaptations that may not offer full 
protection from these changes but may still shed light on disease mechanisms. Examples 
include the study of mechanisms that lead to the extinction of a species and the inability of that 
species to adapt to a changing environment.  
[H1] High-protein diets and dehydration  
High-protein diets that are rich in red meat accelerate the progression of both experimental 
and human CKD (12, 13). The link between a high-protein diet and CKD (Figure 2) suggests that 
one might obtain mechanistic insights from studying mammals that live almost exclusively on a 
high-protein diet, such as the Felidae family (felids) and Desmodontinae (vampire bats). 
Interestingly, one group (felids) seems to be susceptible to CKD, while the other (vampire bats) 
seems to be protected.  
 
[H2] CKD in felids. Felids consist of 37 species in the wild. Although they are considered among 
the world’s most successful carnivore families, they are particularly susceptible to kidney 
diseases, including polycystic kidney disease (14), glomerulonephritis (15), acute pyelonephritis, 
hypertension-associated CKD (16) and nephrolithiasis (17). The most common kidney pathology 
in domestic felids is chronic tubulointerstitial fibrosis, which is sometimes observed with 
glomerulosclerosis (14). The prevalence of CKD in domestic cats has increased 75-fold (from 
0.04% to 3%) during the last four decades, although this increase might be partially due to 
improved diagnostics (18, 19) (22) and also due to increased nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drug (NSAID) consumption in the last decade (20). Even so, CKD is thought to affect 35–80% of 
geriatric domestic cats and is the most common cause of death in domestic cats >5 years of age 
(19). Likewise, a necropsy study found renal lesions in 87% of big felids (mainly tigers, leopards 
and lions) held at zoos and safari parks in Germany (21). In the wild, free-ranging felids 
  
 
5 
experience a range of kidney diseases of differing origins, such as viral infections or amyloid 
deposition; however, free-ranging animals typically die from other causes before renal disese 
manifests or only show a mild form of disease (22). Extrinsic environmental or dietary factors 
that might promote the development of kidney disease among felids in captivity, seem to be 
absent among wild felids (22).  
 
 
As mentioned above, the most common renal pathology among captive and domestic 
felids is chronic tubulointerstitial fibrosis, which is associated with minimal or mild proteinuria, 
normal blood pressure, hypokalaemia, hypo- or hypernatraemia, polydipsia and polyuria (18, 
23) and an absence of diabetes mellitus (24). Hypertension, if present, is usually thought to be 
secondary to the renal disease (18). Microvascular lesions observed in chronic hypertensive 
renal injury are absent or only minimally present (25). The cause of this type of CKD remains 
unknown; however, it is unlikely that felids have evolved a selective susceptiblity to CKD. 
Hence, one might hypothesize that the dramatic increase in felid CKD might reflect a new 
environmental exposure to which felids are particularly susceptible. Insights into the underlying 
mechanisms might be gained from comparisons with populations of humans and other animals 
that are either affected by or protected from renal disease, as discussed in further detail below. 
As CKD among felids has been best described in domestic cats and felids in wildlife parks, one 
possibility is that this disease might reflect the contamination of meat with a nephrotoxic 
substance. This scenario is similar to the epidemic of renal disease that occurred in vultures in 
India and Pakistan, which was ascribed to the practice of treating cattle with NSAIDs that 
contaminated the cattle meat (26) .  
 
[H3] The effect of red meat intake. Another potential mechanism of the high prevalence of CKD 
in felids might relate to their high intake of red meat (Figure 2). To meet the high energy 
demands of their brain, which is relatively large in comparison with body size (27), greater 
quantities of proteins are required, predominantly to generate glucose from amino acids 
through de novo gluconeogenesis. High-protein diets induce vasodilation of afferent renal 
arterioles, glomerular hypertension and hyperfiltration, which together accelerate the 
progression of pre-existing CKD in a variety of domestic and laboratory animals, including mice, 
  
 
6 
rats and dogs (28). A high consumption of salt and animal proteins has also been linked to 
progression of CKD in humans (12, 29), with increasing evidence indicating a greater effect of 
red meat consumption compared with that of other animal and vegetable protein sources (12, 
13).  
Whether high-protein diets can induce de novo renal disease is less certain. One study 
reported that a commercial diet low in potassium and high in meat (40% protein) and 
phosphoric acid led to the development of tubulointestitial lesions in five of nine domestic cats 
(30). In a human study, maintenance of a high-protein diet for 6 weeks increased estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) by 4 ml/min/1.73 m² compared with a carbohydrate and 
unsaturated fat diet in healthy individuals (31); however, whether long-term consumption of a 
high-protein diet promotes CKD is unclear. Although felids are obligate carnivores, their dietary 
acquisition of protein in the wild is intermittent and separated by days of fasting (25). By 
contrast, domestic cats and felids kept in zoos are often fed high-protein diets on a daily basis.  
An examination of published data on 12 biochemical parameters of serum that can be 
used to evaluate renal functions in 97 mammalian species shows that differences in patterns of 
these parameters result in a clustering of species, separating carnivorous mammals from 
omnivorous or herbivorous mammals (Supplementary information S2 (figure)). This clustering 
is mainly due to higher levels of urea (+57%), and chloride (+13%), as well as reduced levels of 
alkaline phosphatase (-56%) among carnivores compared with mean values of the other 
species. This finding highlights the importance of diet, including protein source, on parameters 
of renal function, and leads to the hypothesis that in humans, different types of diets (for 
example, vegetarian or highly carnivorous) might lead to similar differences in parameters of 
renal function(s). 
 
 Although the classic view is that renal injury induced by a high-protein diet is caused by 
changes in glomerular haemodynamics  (32) (Figure 2), increasing evidence suggests that CKD 
risk is associated with protein originating from red meat and not with protein from dairy or 
vegetable-based sources (33). For example, epidemiological studies conducted in Singapore 
(34) and the USA (35) (36) have shown that among different protein sources (including red 
meat, poultry, dairy products, fish eggs and legumes) only red meat (beef, pork and lamb) and 
  
 
7 
processed meat increased the risk of CKD. In one study, individuals in the highest quartile of 
dietary red-meat intake had a 1.4-fold greater risk of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) than those 
in the lowest quartile of red-meat intake (34). Interestingly, diets rich in other protein sources, 
such as legumes and low-fat dairy products, were actually protective against CKD (35). Red and 
processed meat therefore seem to have direct nephrotoxic effects that increase the risk of CKD. 
Indirect support for differences in plant and animal proteins comes from studies in vegetarians. 
A study conducted in Taiwan showed that eGFR did not differ among 102 vegetarian Buddhist 
nuns compared with an equal number of age-matched omnivorous females (37) However, 
serum levels of sodium, glucose, urea and cholesterol, as well as blood pressure and urinary 
specific gravity, were lower among individuals in the vegetarian group (37). As vegetable 
proteins have different renal effects (lower GFR and renal plasma flow) than meat proteins (38), 
and plant-based diets might protect against the development of CKD (39) and its complications 
(40), patients with CKD should be encouraged to consider a vegetarian diet (41).  
In addition to CKD, red and processed meat have been linked to an increased mortality 
(42) and risk of other chronic diseases, such as cancer (43), stroke (44), coronary heart disease 
(45) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (46). Moreover, one study reported that the 
withdrawal of red meat from the diet of patients with T2DM reduced albuminuria and 
improved their serum fatty acid profile compared with their usual diet (47). Another study in 
patients with T2DM showed that adherence to a chicken meat-based diet for 1 year reduced 
urinary albumin excretion to levels comparable to those achieved by treatment with an 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (48). These findings imply that renal toxicity is 
generated by red meat per se, and not total protein intake. Dietary management of CKD in 
domestic cats with a low-protein and low-PO4 diet was associated with increased survival 
compared with that of cats that did not undergo the dietary change (49). Further investigation 
is required to elucidate potential differential effects of processed red meat, game meat and 
white meat (that is, chicken or fish) on renal function in felids.  
 
[H3] Mechanism of red meat-induced CKD. Several factors have been proposed to be implicated 
in the disease-promoting effects of red meat (50) (Figure 2). These include an associated high 
  
 
8 
intake of NaCl (which increases blood pressure and stimulates vasopressin production and 
release by increasing serum osmolality), saturated fats (which drive mitochondrial oxidative 
stress), increased net acid production (which causes metabolic acidosis and acidic urine), the 
pro-oxidative effects of haem iron (which promotes oxidative stress), DNA damage caused by N-
nitroso compounds , (which leads to purine degradation and uric acid formation), the 
incorporation of non-human sialic acid into tissue (which promotes interaction with 
inflammation-provoking antibodies) and changes in the composition and/or metabolism of gut 
microbiota. For example, trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) - which is produced from the 
metabolism of red meat, eggs and fish by gut microbiota - induces renal fibrosis in animal 
models (51) and inflammation in endothelial cells (52). Although diminished renal function 
impairs the ability to eliminate TMAO, it predicts outcome in patients with CKD even after 
adjustment for other risk factors (53). Inhibition of gut microbial trimethylamine (TMA) 
production prevented the development of atherosclerotic lesions in Apoe–/– mice (54). 
Moreover, exposure to carnitine (a major nutrient in red meat) in mice affects the composition 
of gut microbiota via the proatherogenic intermediate -butyrobetaine that is converted into 
TMA and TMAO (55). Alterations in gut microbiota might also affect processes, such as haem-
induced lipoperoxidation (56). Red meat consumption is also associated with increased intake 
of phosphate, which is associated with decreased renal function, inflammation and premature 
ageing (57). Moreover, phosphate activates nuclear factor-B (NF-B) signalling and promotes 
the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) (58). 
This observation implies that the putative protective effects of antioxidative factors, such as 
nuclear respiratory factor (NRF2) (Box 1), on renal function should be investigated in the 
context of a diet rich in red meat.  
 
The high content of nucleic acids in animal proteins probably also contributes to the 
nephrotoxic effects of red meat diets in humans and felids. Animal proteins are much more 
likely to raise serum uric acid levels than are proteins from vegetable and dairy sources (59). In 
domestic cats, a transient (up to 50-fold) increase in urine uric acid occurs following the 
ingestion of purine-rich animal proteins compared with a purine-free diet, despite the presence 
of a uric acid-degrading enzyme (uricase) (60). In humans, consumption of animal proteins 
  
 
9 
and/or purines also results in an acute rise in serum and urine uric acid levels (61, 62), which is 
accompanied with a substantial acid load in urine that leads to a decrease in urine pH (13). A 
urine pH of <5 is extremely common in cats with uraemic manifestations (23), and a low urine 
pH (5.0–5.5) predicts stage 3 CKD in humans (63). Although urate stones are relatively rare in 
cats (64), urate crystalluria is a common problem in felids (65). Coupled with dehydration and 
heat exposure, we propose that urate crystalluria and/or uricosuria resulting from high protein 
intake could facilitate tubulointerstitial injury. Both soluble and crystalline forms of urate have 
been shown to induce inflammation in rat tubular cells in vitro (66). Indeed, signs of 
dehydration in felids with CKD is common (23) and predictive for the development of CKD in 
domestic cats (67). In humans, although the aetiology of CKD in populations from Central 
America and Sri Lanka remains a subject of debate (68), we propose a role for heat stress and 
recurrent dehydration in the presence of high uric acid levels in disease pathophysiology (69) .  
 
[H2] Protein metabolism in vampire bats. Vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) feed mostly on 
the blood of warm-blooded mammals. However, in contrast to man and felids, they seem to be 
resistant to the detrimental metabolic effects of a high-protein intake. Their protein intake 
would be comparable to a daily intake of about 6 kg protein in a 70-kg man (as compared to a 
normal daily intake of 50–120 g in humans). As the consumption of >20 g of blood in a 20-min 
feed increases the body weight of vampire bats by 20–30%, they rapidly absorb the blood 
plasma and start urine production within 2 min of feeding (70). The blood urea concentration of 
vampire bats is 27–57 mmol/L (compared with 3–8 mmol/L in healthy humans), depending on 
the time point after feeding (71). Despite this high protein intake, the vampire bat does not 
have larger kidneys than mammals of similar size (72), which suggests no difference in 
glomerular number and glomerular capillary surface area. Indeed, indirect allometric 
calculations indicate that the vampire bat's GFR is not greater than that of similarly sized 
mammals (71); however, to our knowledge, GFR measurements have not been carried out. Of 
interest, mammalian blood has a lower relative purine content than does red meat (73); 
however, whether this difference accounts for the differential risk of CKD between felids and 
vampire bats is speculative. 
  
 
10 
 
[H1] Ageing and longevity  
Ageing has been defined as an accumulation of deficits occuring in different individuals in 
different ways, and with varied rates in different organs (74). Ageing is an actively regulated 
process influenced by genetics, epigenetics, lifestyle, nutrition and psychosocial factors (75), 
which may act synergistically, independently or cumulatively. The ageing process is 
characterized by a series of hallmarks, including genomic instability, telomere attrition , 
epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, dysregulated nutrient sensing, stem cell exhaustion, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, altered intercellular communication and cellular senescence (76), 
which are common across different taxa and affected by the uraemic milieu (75) (77) (78).  
 
 
[H2] Ageing and kidney disease. In addition to the progressive loss of renal function, ageing in 
humans, rats and many other mammals is associated with the development of 
glomerulosclerosis and interstitial fibrosis (79, 80), which are linked to impaired autoregulation 
of renal blood flow and impaired angiogenesis, epigenetic modifications, endothelial 
dysfunction, oxidative stress and inflammation (75). Chronic inflammation (also known as 
‘inflammageing’) is an important driver of premature uraemic ageing (81) and manifests with an 
increased frequency of age-related complications, such as vascular stiffening, osteoporosis, 
muscle wasting, depression, cognitive dysfunction and fraility (81). In addition, persistent 
mitochondrial dysfunction with increased generation of ROS features in both normative ageing 
(82) and progressive CKD (83).  
 
Whether ageing-associated renal disease is inevitable (84) or modifiable (85) remains 
controversial. The use of senolytic agents , which selectively remove senescent cells , in pre-
clinical models suggests that ageing-associated renal disease is modifiable (77), and direct 
improvement of physiological function following removal of these cells indicates causality. 
These cells are non-proliferative, resistant to apoptosis and are generated in response to 
genotoxic stress and resulting DNA damage, as part of normative ageing. Loss of age-related 
regenerative capacity in tissues and organs occurs as a direct consequence, and a senescence-
associated pro-inflammatory milieu subsequently develops. The selective removal of senescent 
  
 
11 
cells from tissues and organs via immune-mediated clearance is dysregulated during normative 
ageing, and contributes to inflammaging (86). The accumulation of these cells has been 
observed across a broad spectrum of non-communicable diseases.  
 
 
[H2] Ageing in the animal kingdom. One way to improve our understanding of ageing processes 
and senescence is to study animals with unusual longevity. Long-lived animals are found across 
the taxonomic spectrum, such as in certain mammals, birds, sea turtles and fish. For example, 
extreme longevity is observed in the ocean quahog (Arctica islandica; >500 years) (87) and the 
Greenland shark (Somniousus microcephalus; ~400 years) (88). The study on the ocean quahog 
supports the notion that chronic low-grade inflammation in the cardiovascular system is an 
ubiquitous feature of ageing (87). Other interesting candidates for studies of reduced 
senescence include the rougheye rockfish (Sebastes aleutianus) and the bowhead whale 
(Balaena mysticetus), both with documented life spans of >200 years. Interestingly, ageing 
rockfish do not show signs of organ degeneration or a decline in liver lysosomal function (89), 
which are typically observed in normative ageing. By contrast, examples of exceptionally short-
lived species that exhibit an accelerated expression of ageing biomarkers are found in the 
family of Cyprinodontidae (killifish), which have a maximal lifespan of only 13 weeks (90). Thus, 
a better understanding of the mechanisms by which some animals have delayed or accelerated 
ageing processes (91, 92) may provide insights into not only the process of ageing in humans 
but also ageing-related kidney disease.    
[H3] Insights from the naked mole rat. Naked mole rats (Heterocephalus glaber) have emerged 
as a good model organism to study ageing and ageing-related diseases. These subterranean 
rodents are rarely exposed to sunlight and have no obvious dietary source of vitamin D (93). 
However, despite having undetectable calcifediol levels (the precursor of vitamin D), their 
calcium phosphate homeostasis is adequately maintained (94). Although they have a small 
body size and are constantly exposed to hypoxia, oxidative stress and hypercapnia, they can live 
>30 years and maintain a healthy cardiovascular and reproductive status as well as body 
composition throughout their life (5). Interestingly, the structure and function of their proteins 
is not affected by their substantial exposure to oxidative stress (95), and they display high levels 
  
 
12 
of autophagy and efficient removal of stress-damaged proteins throughout life (96). In contrast 
to humans and other rodents, (97) these animals preserve normal vascular and cardiac function 
with ageing (98, 99) and are resistant to the development of cancer (100). Moreover, their bone 
mineral density, articular cartilage and nitric oxide sensitivity of VSMCs is not affected by ageing 
(101). Whereas most nephropathologies seem to be absent in naked mole rats, cases of 
nephrocalcinosis have been reported (102).  
 
[H3] NRF2-mediated antioxidant activity. Some of the molecular pathways that protect these 
animals from cancer have been elucidated. For example, one study reported that the 5-fold 
higher production of high-molecular-weight hyaluronan  in fibroblasts protects naked mole rats 
from cancer (103). High expression levels of the transcription factor NRF2, which stimulates 
intracellular antioxidant activity by regulating the expression of many target genes involved in 
the antioxidant response (Box 1), may also protect the naked mole rat from cellular damage. In 
addition to antioxidative activities, NRF2 has other important functions, such as regulating 
nuclear factor B (NF-B) activity, which may play a part in mitochondrial homeostasis (104) 
and may decelerate the ageing process (105). As NRF2 expression correlates positively with 
maximum lifespan in long-lived rodents (106), diminshed NRF2 activity may be important for 
the ageing phenotype of organisms as diverse as worms, flies and mammals (107) .  
Evidence for a role of NRF2 in ageing has also been reported in humans. For example, 
children with the rare Hutchinson Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS), which is caused by a 
mutation in prelamin A/C, age extremely prematurely, are subject to increased oxidative stress 
and have a repressed NRF2 pathway (108). As reactivation of NRF2 reversed the cellular ageing 
defects in HGPS patient cells and in an animal model of HGPS repression, NRF2-mediated 
transcription seems to have a pathogenic role in the progeric phenotype (108). As HGPS shares 
many features common to age-associated diseases it has been regarded as a model system to 
better understand ageing processes in chronic diseases (109). For unknown reasons at present, 
children with HGPS do not seem to have an increased risk of CKD despite a prematurely aged 
phenotype, which may reflect a feature of antagonistic pleiotropy (109). Despite apparent 
differences in the pathways underlying HGPS and CKD, we suggest that models of ageing and 
  
 
13 
longevity, such as HGPS and the naked mole rat, can be used to study factors that underlie 
progeric processes in CKD (Figure 3).  
 
[H2] Vascular calcification and phosphate  
[H3] Phosphate and calcification in vertebrates. The composition of seawater is similar to that 
of the human body in regard to the abundance of elements (110) (Supplementary information 
S2 (Table)), consistent with the view that life originated from the sea (111). Of the 10 most 
abundant elements in the human body, only phosphorous is not among the 10 most abundant 
elements present in sea water (112), indicating that organisms selectively accumulated 
phosphorus (in form of phosphate within cells) at some point in time during evolution 
(Supplementary information S4 (figure)). Phosphate is a major component of nucleic acids and 
membrane phospholipids, and has a key role in numerous intracellular functions, including ATP 
synthesis and function and kinase-mediated signal transduction (113). Phosphate is so 
fundamental to life that its deficiency can be fatal, which may be a reason for the evolution of 
‘phosphate appetite’ (114).  
 
Although intracellular phosphate is essential to all forms of life, accumulation of 
extracellular phosphate first emerged in bony fish during the evolution of skeletons (115). 
Unlike invertebrates, which have a calcium carbonate (CaCO3)-based exoskeleton, most 
skeletons of vertebrates consist of calcium and phosphate, especially in the form of calcium 
hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2) (116). This acquisition was likely required for terrestrial 
vertebrates to support their body weight on land. The extracellular fluid of vertebrates consists 
of a highly saturated solution of calcium and phosphate (117), which enables bone formation 
simply by controlling where to provide a ‘cue’ for nucleation of calcium phosphate, such as 
production and secretion of bone matrix proteins by osteoblast lineage cells. Undesired 
nucleation within the extraosseous tissues is achieved by maintaining extracellular phosphate 
concentration within a narrow range, in a process that is partially controlled by fibroblast 
growth factor 23 (FGF23) and its obligate co-receptor Klotho (encoded by Kl) (115). 
Interestingly, Kl-knockout mice have a 12-fold reduction in lifespan and a 2-fold increase in 
extracellular phosphate concentration compared with wild-type mice (118). Secreted Klotho 
  
 
14 
also exerts multiple functions independently of FGF23, such as inhibition of insulin-like growth 
factor 1 activity and upregulation of anti-oxidant enzyme expression levels. These additional 
functions may contribute to the anti-ageing properties of Klotho (119). Furthermore, Klotho 
induces NRF2 expression and subsequent anti-oxidant defence mechanisms (120), which links 
altered NRF2 expression to bone mineral metabolism and phosphate homeostasis (121).  
 
[H3] Phosphate in ageing and calcification. Vascular calcification is a common feature of the 
progeric uraemic phenotype (122) and linked to senescence (123). High extracellular phosphate 
levels, which often occur in combination with elevated calcium levels, increase the risk of 
calcium phosphate deposition in the vasculature and vascular calcification (122). Cell culture 
studies have shown that a high phosphate concentration induces cellular senescence (124) and 
leads to the conversion of VSMC to osteoblastic cells (125, 126); a process that can be 
prevented by inhibiting calcium phosphate precipitation by pyrophosphate, phosphonoformic 
acid (127, 128) and phosphate-binders (129). Consistent with the observation that a high 
phosphate concentration induces cellular senescence and that accumulation of senescent cells 
accelerates ageing of the organism (130) a negative correlation exists between extracellular 
phosphate levels and longevity across mammalian species (131) (Supplementary information S4 
(figure)). For example, children with HGPS have elevated phosphate levels, develop rapid 
vascular calcification and typically die of stroke or myocardial infarction as teenagers (132). 
Furthermore, expression of progerin (the mutated form of prelamin A associated with HGPS) in 
VSMCs leads to a decrease in extracellular pyrophosphate (133). As pyrophosphate protects 
VSMCs from calcification, high serum phosphate and low extracellular pyrophosphate may 
contribute to accelerated vascular calcification in HGPS. In the general population, high 
phosphate levels are associated with premature vascular ageing (134), shortened telomere 
length, reduced DNA methylation content and elevated IL-6 (57), which are all biological 
markers of ageing.  
Studies from the past few years have provided insights into the mechanisms by which 
high extracellular phosphate levels lead to vascular calcification. Under conditions of 
inflammation, oxidative stress and high extracellular phosphate levels, nanoparticle calcium 
  
 
15 
phosphate precipitates can develop in the vasculature, despite the presence of multiple 
endogenous inhibitors of calcium phosphate deposition (135, 136) and can grow to form 
calciprotein particles (CPPs). CPPs are aggregates of serum protein fetuin A (also known as 
AHSG) loaded with calcium phosphate precipitates and dispersed as colloids in the blood. These 
CPPs may play a part in CKD progession, as recent clinical studies showed that serum CPP levels 
correlated with vascular calcification and/or stiffness (135, 137), and predict mortality in 
patients on dialysis (138). Of interest, tigers have particularly high levels of phosphate (1.7±0.3 
mmol/L) and serum creatinine (265±62 µmol/L), suggesting it would be of interest to determine 
levels of serum CPP and FGF23 in these animals (139).  
  
[H3] Therapeutic strategies to prevent vascular calcification in CKD. The best current approach 
to prevent vascular calcification in CKD is dietary phosphate restriction or chelation through the 
use of phosphate binders (140). However, a consequence of dietary phosphate restriction is 
reduced protein intake, which can lead to protein–energy wasting and inadvertently increased 
mortality (141). A major problem with phosphate binder therapies is patient non-adherence 
due to the high pill burden and gastrointestinal adverse effects (142). Alternative treatment 
strategies to prevent vascular calcification could potentially be derived from comparative 
physiology studies. For example, agents that stimulate NRF2 (Box 1), block mTORC1 signalling 
(143) or reduce phosphate absorption, such as by inducing calcium phosphate precipitation in 
the gut with magnesium (144), should be tested for their ability to decrease extracellular 
phosphate levels.  
  
Of interest, a diet of highly fermentable carbohydrates (for example, starch) in captive 
ruminants, such as giraffes (Giraffa camelopardalis) — in combination with low calcium, high 
phosphate and low magnesium levels in the serum — is associated with premature death in 
these animals (145). Since introduction of a diet with lower starch content, led to higher 
magnesium and lower phosphate levels (145), one potential approach would be to use 
‘resistant starch’, which is a complex carbohydrate fermented by gut microbiota that increases 
colonic absorption of minerals in animals. Indeed, resistant starch has been suggested to be a 
novel dietary method to prevent diabetic CKD (146).  
  
 
16 
 
[H2] Caloric restriction and ageing. Although dietary phosphate restriction is one mechanism to 
slow vascular calcification and ageing, a more effective approach to extend the lifespan of 
animals is by caloric restriction  (147), which has demonstrated efficacy in both short-lived 
species, including flies, worms, rats, mice (148), and more long-lived species, such as primates 
(149). Fat stores, especially those generated during fructose metabolism, result in fructose-
induced oxidative stress, which is associated with increased translocation of NRF2 to the 
nucleus, decreases in mitochondrial DNA content and mitochondrial dysfunction, with 
subsequent cellular apoptosis (150, 151). In most animals, excess fat stores are maintained as a 
protective mechanism for periods of food shortage (152). Thus, as long as food is available on a 
daily basis, caloric restriction would be expected to reduce mitochondrial oxidative stress and 
preserve mitochondrial metabolism. Other ways to mimic caloric restriction would be to 
administer agents that modulate cellular metabolism, including sirtuin  agonists (153, 154) and 
AMPK agonists (155), the effects of which are mediated in part by the activties of FOXO family 
and the insulin signalling pathways (156). For example, resveratrol prolongs lifespan in the 
extremely short-lived killifish (90). We found that mice that cannot generate fructose, which are 
therefore protected from mitochondrial oxidative stress, were also protected from developing 
age-related renal disease (157). In theory, elevated expression of NRF2 also mimics caloric 
restriction, as knockdown of KEAP1 in mice results in accumulation of NRF2 and thus augments 
the activation of cellular stress responses, including fatty acid oxidation and lipogenesis (158) . 
 
 
[H3] Methionine restriction and ageing. In addition to caloric restriction, dietary restriction of 
proteins — especially the sulphur-containing amino acid methionine — also promotes longevity 
in various animal models (159) (Figure 4). This effect is likely to be mediated through the 
cytoprotectant hydrogen sulphide (H2S) gas and increased activation of the transsulphuration 
pathway , prevention of electron leakage from mitochondria, and possible hermetic effects on 
the mTOR pathway and NRF2 activity (160). Under conditions of cellular stress, H2S-mediated S-
sulfhydration of KEAP1 leads to its disassociation from NRF2 and enhanced NRF2 nuclear 
translocation. (Box 1) This increases mRNA expression of NRF2-targeted downstream genes, 
  
 
17 
such as glutamate cysteine ligase (GSH1) and glutathione reductase and upregulates a range of 
cellular defenses. In addition, methionine restriction increases expression of the 
transsulphuration pathway enzyme cystathionine γ-lyase (CTH), resulting in increased H2S 
production, which leads to AMPK activation and mTORC1 repression, thus reducing cellular 
stress and promoting physiological longevity (161). H2S also binds iron and captures electrons 
leaked from mitochondria, which reduces mitochondrion-mediated ROS formation (162, 163). 
In support of a role for H2S activity in longevity, lower circulating methionine levels have been 
reported in naked mole rats compared with levels in shorter-lived laboratory rodents (164). The 
recent finding of low sulphide levels in naked mole rats and the inverse correlation between 
circulating sulphide levels and maximum longevity in six different species (165) add to 
complexity of understanding the role of H2S in ageing. Thus, for prolonging life span, 
interconnections between methionine and caloric restriction in the context of comparative 
biology need to be investigated further.  
 
Methionine restriction might be particularly important in preventing ageing and age-
associated renal dysfunction (57). For example, an inverse correlation between methionine 
content in tissue proteins and longevity was reported in eight different species (166). Although 
circulating methionine levels do not differ between patients with CKD and healthy controls 
(167), oral methionine loading in patients on haemodialysis leads to an accumulation of 
homocysteine and other methionine metabolites in plasma and red blood cells, indicating 
impairment of the transsulphuration pathway. High doses of vitamin B6 and folic acid failed to 
mitigate this phenotype, indicating that it most probably was not due to a lack of these co-
factors (168). Methionine restriction also increases the replicative lifespan and decelerates the 
accumulation of senescent cells across taxa from yeast to man (169). Consistent with these 
observations, we reported lower methionine levels in wild brown bears (Ursus Arctos) (8) and 
observed a 4-fold increase in the methyl donor betaine during hibernation (P.S. et al., 
unpublished work). Thus, it could be speculated that an increased production of H2S protects 
the bears from ROS-mediated DNA damage. Moreover, dietary supplementation of H2S in mice 
alleviates inflammation, abberant methylation and dysfunction in a model of hypertensive 
kidney disease (170), suggesting this cytoprotective gas should be investigated as a novel 
  
 
18 
treatment strategy in CKD. A diet rich in one-carbon methyl donor units relative to calories, 
such as betaine (found in fruits, cereals and vegetables) can be used as an epigenetic switch 
and, via DNA hypermethylation and transmethylation in the methionine cycle, promotes 
longevity (171). This mechanism merits further investigation, as low betaine levels have been 
observed in humans with poor renal function and accelerated biological ageing (P.G.S. et al., 
unpublished work). 
 
[H1] Hypoxia and ischaemia  
Naked mole rats survive constant exposure to hypoxic conditions by generating ATP through 
glycolysis. This process is mediated in part by using endogenously produced fructose, which 
preferentially stimulates glycolysis and lactate production (172). We have found that fructose 
metabolism commonly leads to glycogen accumulation in the liver in mice and rats (R. J. J. and 
M.L., unpublished work). This metabolic mechanism might also protect the kidneys of diving 
marine mammals that are subject to periods of prolonged hypoxia during deep dives. Harbour 
seals (Phoca vitulina) and whales (Cetacea) for example, have large amounts of glycogen in 
their proximal tubules, along with high levels of glycolytic enzymes to generate ATP during 
hypoxia (173, 174). The kidneys of Weddel seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) are protected from 
hypoxia despite severe renal vasoconstriction upon diving (175). Likewise, kidneys of 
hibernating squirrels are protected from ischaemic injury, in a process that is probably 
mediated via an abscence of caspase-3-like mediated activity (176).  
 
One potential mechanism by which glycolysis protects against hypoxia could occur 
through the upregulation of antioxidants. Fasting seals have high expression levels of NRF2, 
(177) antioxidant enzymes (178) and glutathione levels (179) compared with the non-fasting 
state. In support of a protective role for antioxidants, hyperactivation of NRF2 prevents 
progression of tubular damage after renal ischaemic injury in mice (180). Thus, NRF2 might be a 
therapeutic target to prevent acute kidney injury and could activate a hypoxia survival pathway 
(Box 1). By contrast, very high intracellular concentrations of dietary or endogenously produced 
fructose leads to rapid and transient ATP depletion, resulting in a strong pro-inflammatory 
response and substantial oxidative stress in human proximal tubular cells (181). Indeed, a high-
  
 
19 
fructose diet inhibits KEAP1–NRF2 antioxidant signalling and increases the risk of non-alcoholic 
hepatosteatosis in mice (182). Thus, high concentrations of fructose may be injurious whereas 
low concentrations may carry survival functions. 
 
Last, although hypoxia and ischaemia usually occur in conjunction, some species, such as 
the turtle are tolerant to hypoxia but still sensitive to brain ischaemia (183). A better 
understanding of hypoxic tolerance in turtles and naked mole rats may provide novel 
therapeutic interventions to combat the harmful effects of cerebral, renal and cardiac 
ischaemia in humans.  
[H1] Seasonal acclimatization and hibernation 
 [H2] Seasonal acclimatization of metabolic activity. Many small mammals escape food shortage 
during winter by hibernation or daily torpor  (184). Other species that do not hibernate or go 
into daily torpor in the classical sense, such as red deer (Cervus elaphus) or Alpine ibex (Capra 
ibex), adopt a similar hypometabolic state during winter. The reduction in energy expenditure is 
therefore, similarly to hibernators and species undergoing daily torpor, mainly accomplished by 
lowering endogenous heat production and increasing the tolerance to a lower body 
temperature. Although the 2–3°C change in core body temperature is only moderate (185, 186) 
a substantially lower body temperature down to 15°C is present at the body’s periphery (187), 
which is indicative of a substantial reduction in the mean temperature of the entire body mass. 
The winter phenotype of mammals further includes a shift from an anabolic metabolism during 
summer to the use of body fat reserves to fuel metabolism during winter (188, 189). As a result, 
many hibernators do not eat during winter (188), and non-hibernating species like red deer 
reduce their food intake substantially, even when fed ad libitum (190). The endogenous nature 
of the seasonal cycle of appetite and its entrainment by photoperiod has been shown 
experimentally for many wild species (191). Decreased food intake during winter leads to a 
reduction of the size of the gut and visceral organs, like the kidney (190, 192), which further 
contributes to lower energy expenditure. 
 
Major differences exist in levels of serum biomarkers of microbiota metabolites between 
wild bears and bears in captivity (P.S., unpublished work), suggesting that nutrients and feeding 
patterns might contribute to the metabolic changes required for hibernation. A transition in 
  
 
20 
energy metabolism from carbohydrates during summer to lipids during winter is facilitated by a 
switch from insulin sensitivity in the summer to insulin resistance during hibernation (193). The 
observation that central administration of leptin to captive grizzly bears leads to reduced food 
intake in October, but not in August, implies that seasonal variations exist in the sensitivity of 
the bear brain to the anorexic effects of leptin (193). In addition, seasonal variations in gut 
microbiota might also contribute to changes in energy metabolism in hibernating bears, as 
transplantation of summer gut microbiota from wild bears promoted adiposity without 
affecting glucose tolerance in germ-free mice (194). Although humans do not hibernate, 
investigating the processes that trigger fat accumulation in the summer followed by the switch 
to reduced energy intake and a fat-burning state occuring immediately before animals 
hibernate (195) may help to understand the mechanisms driving obesity.   
 [H2] Seasonal changes in membrane composition. Seasonal variation in body temperature is 
preceded by changes in the composition of cellular membranes, which consists of the 
integration of nutritionally acquired polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) into phopsholipids 
during periods of cold acclimatization (196). In addition to seasonal changes, even daily 
rhythmic changes in the phospholipid fatty acid composition of membranes have been found in 
humans along with changes in body temperature (197). Furthermore, physical exercise can 
alter the lipid composition of membranes, for example by increasing the concentration of 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) in skeletal muscle phospholipids (198) and by enhancing insulin 
sensitivity, probably through increasing insulin receptor expression levels. Of interest, the 
composition of membrane phospholipids has also been reported to contribute to the 
outstanding longevity in naked mole rats (199). 
 
The composition of membrane lipids influences the activity of membrane-bound 
enzymes, for example, sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA) activity is increased in 
membranes that are rich in linolenic acid (LA). Therefore, incorporation of LA into phospholipids 
of cardiac myocytes can compensate for reduced SERCA activity due to low temperatures and 
enable adequate Ca2+ handling in cardiac myocytes even at body temperatures close to freezing 
point (196, 200). High concentrations of LA in membranes also improve muscle performance at 
a high body temperature, as suggested by a positive relationship between LA content of 
  
 
21 
membrane phospholipids of muscle cells and maximum running speed, found in a comparative 
study of 36 mammal species (201). By contrast, DHA incorporation into phospholipids 
decreases SERCA activity (200) but seems to increase the activity of key enzymes of the Krebs 
cycle and fatty acid ß-oxidation (202). Accordingly, an increase of the DHA content into 
phospholipids during hibernation in Alpine marmots is paralleled by an increase of thermogenic 
capacity (196).  
As all PUFAs are of dietary origin in mammals and birds, uptake influences the fatty acid 
composition of membranes. However, the balance of ω-6 to ω-3 PUFA in phospholipids seems 
to be regulated more by deacylation/reacylation processes, that is, membrane remodelling, 
rather than directly by dietary intake (190, 203). The different effects of ω-6 and ω-3 PUFA on 
membrane-bound enzymes hint at intriguing molecular conflicts. There probably is no optimal 
“all-purpose” PUFA composition in tissues, which creates a trade-off between costs and 
benefits of each fatty acid that is influenced by metabolic state, for example fasting or 
fattening, and hence is subject to seasonal and even daily variations (190).  
In rats with adenine-induced CKD, a pro-inflammatory fatty acid pattern (low PUFA and 
high saturated fatty acid concentrations) was associated with downregulation of NRF2 activity 
and increased activation of NF-B and its downstream cytoprotective and anti-oxidant proteins 
(204). As oxidation of eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA generate concentrations high enough to 
induce NRF2-directed gene expression (205), this may explain the anti-oxidative and anti-
inflammatory properties of -3 PUFAs. Burmese pythons (Python molurus) were reported to 
display 40% cardiac hypertrophy with increased cardiac output 48–72 hrs after large meals 
(206). Since consumption of these meals activates expression of fatty acid transport pathways 
and cardioprotecive enzymes, and injection of a combination of python fatty acids found in 
plasma promotes physiological hypertrophy in mammalian cardiomyocytes (207), targeted fatty 
acid supplementation may be a novel strategy to modulate cardiac gene expression and 
function in heart failure .  
 [H2] Circadian clock and kidney functions. Oscillating molecules that regulate circadian clocks is 
common in most if not all animal species (208). Disruptions of the circadian clock  leads to 
metabolic syndrome with dyslipidaemia, hyperleptinaemia, hyperglycaemia and hepatic 
  
 
22 
steatosis in Clock–/–mice (209). As the circadian clock activates NRF2–gluthatione-mediated 
antioxidant defense pathways and arrhythmic Clock∆19 mice have low NRF2 expression (210), 
this network might have an important role in regulating energy balance and anti-oxidative 
protection. Circadian fluctuations are also known to affect renal blood flow, glomerular 
filtration, blood pressure and water and sodium excretion (211). Thus, whether CKD 
progression is affected by circardian disruption and the potential benefits of chronotherapy  
should be investigated (212). In addition, further investigations are warranted into the reasons 
for seasonal variations in the incidence, progression and mortality of ESRD (213). 
 
[H2] Insights from hibernating bears. Osteoporosis, poor wound healing, vascular disease, 
inflammation and muscle loss, together with substantial metabolic dysfunction (Figure 1), are 
common features of the uraemic phenotype (10). The metabolism of bears is suppressed to 
about 25% of basal rates during hibernation (195). Nevertheless, hibernating bears tolerate 
extended periods of an extremely low heart rate (~10 beats/min) (214) without developing 
congestive heart failure, atherosclerosis (215) thromboembolic events or cardiac dilation; which 
are common features in CKD. The protection against vascular disease may in part be mediated 
by changes in the coagulation pathway, in which traditionally intrinsic cascades (initiated when 
blood comes in contact with exposed collagen from damaged endothelial cells) are suppressed 
and extrinsic tissue factor pathways (initiated by vascular wall trauma) are maintained, to 
prevent thromboembolic events while enabling external injuries to be healed (216).  
  
The fact that hibernating bears do not develop azotaemia or uraemic complications (8) 
is remarkable, considering that they have a 90% reduction in renal blood flow, anuria (70–180 
ml of urine per day is reabsorbed through the urinary bladder wall (217)), mild hypothermia 
(30–36°C), a 50–70% reduction in GFR, and experience fasting and immobilisation for 5–6 
months of winter sleep. It is even more intriguing that females are able to give birth to cubs and 
nurse them during hibernation. Although a histological study in Romanian brown bears 
reported signs of glomerular fibrosis after awakening from wintersleep (218) the reduced renal 
function is normalised within weeks (8). Thus, studies of the profound metabolic changes that 
occur in bears from summer to winter may provide clues that point towards novel therapeutic 
  
 
23 
strategies for patients with CKD (7) (Figure 1). Bears and marine mammals have a reniculated 
kidney system (renal lobulation)  (Supplementary information S5 (figure)). Proximal convoluted 
tubules in multilobulated and reniculated kidneys are comparatively short, which decreases the 
resistance to intraluminal flow. The large body size in combination with the limitation of length 
of the proximal convoluted tubules (219), seem to be the most likely explanation for 
multilobulation of large terrestrial and marine mammalian kidneys. Similar to the protection 
from hypoxia during deep dives of seals, bears might benefit from reniculated kidneys during 
hibernation, when their blood flow is reduced. 
 
[H3] Applications for transplantation. Kidneys are particularly susceptible to ischaemic injury 
because of their high metabolic rate and oxygen consumption. Ischaemia–reperfusion injury is 
common in donor organs used for renal transplantation, in part due to mitochondrial 
dysfunction, oxidative stress, ATP depletion and apoptosis following rewarming of the donor 
kidney. Despite extensive and repetitive periods of low metabolism, starvation and low cardiac 
output (220) bears return from hibernation without signs of persisting organ damage. Hence, 
studying the molecular changes in hibernating bears may lead to novel pharmacological 
approaches that could mimic hibernation and limit organ damage during renal transplantation 
(220). As active suppression of metabolism during hibernation preceeds the lowering the body 
temperature it can be speculated that lowering the basal metabolic rate may be more effective 
at preventing ischaemia–reperfusion injury to the donor organ than would therapeutic 
hypothermia (195). Intriguingly, the metabolic switch(es) that occurs in preparation for 
hibernation shares features with the metabolic changes associated with longevity in the animal 
kingdom (discussed in further detail below) (221). Indeed, hibernating species have an 
approximately 15% higher annual survival rate compared with non-hibernators of similar size 
(222). The observation that animals initiate hibernation due to a lack of food (or other 
environmental cues) and not because of a lower body temperature (223), and terminate 
hibernation due to physiological factors (214), can guide future research on the ”metabolic 
switches” that induce and terminate hibernation. 
  
  
 
24 
On the basis of metabolic pathways that are altered in hibernation and associated with 
longevity approaches that might preserve organ function during transplantation could be 
proposed: for example, the cytoprotective gas H2S induces a torpor-like state in mice (224), 
protects against lethal hypoxia (225) and as mentioned earlier activates anti-inflammatory and 
anti-oxidant pathways via mTOR and Nrf2 (226). Thus, H2S treatment might confer organ 
cytoprotection via creation of a hibernation-like environment (238). Furthermore, injection of 
the AMPK agonist 5'-AMP, induces torpor independently of H2S (227), although the mechanism 
underpinning this observation remains to be defined. Therefore, pretreatment of donor organs 
with agents that inhibit inflammatory responses and activate anti-oxidant pathways, such as 
H2S gas, sirtuin agonists, mTOR inhibitors and AMPK agonists, might prevent renal ischaemia–
reperfusion injury more effectively than current approaches (228) (229).  
 
[H3] Applications for muscle wasting. The loss of skeletal muscle mass that can occur in patients 
with CKD is caused by a combination of sedentary behaviour , anorexia and the activation of 
catabolic pathways in the uremic mileu. In contrast to humans — whose muscle mass and 
strength may be reduced by >90% during extended periods of immobilization — hibernating 
black bears show minor loss in skeletal muscle cell number or size (230). One mechanism by 
which bears retain muscle strength is by de novo amino acid and protein synthesis from urea 
(231), coupled with a unique ability to recycle urea during hibernation that has not yet been 
observed in other hibernating animals (7). Metabolic recycling of nitrogenous waste products 
seems to be a conceivable mechanism to prevent loss of muscle protein (Figure 5). In addition, 
the skeletal muscle of hibernating bears seems more resistant to denervation  than skeletal 
muscle of non-hibernating bears (232), suggesting that hibernation is associated with changes 
in the neural regulation of skeletal muscle catabolic pathways, and that targeting these 
pathways could offer novel solutions for the treatment of disuse atrophy .  
The plasma of hibernating bears has an anti-proteolytic effect that inhibits wasting of 
isolated skeletal muscle (233). Serum–glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) is activated by 
insulin and growth factors and helps prevent loss of muscle mass via downregulation of 
proteolysis and autophagy and increased protein synthesis (234). As high SGK1 expression 
  
 
25 
levels have been reported in hibernating ground squirrels (235), mice lacking SGK1 have muscle 
atrophy (234) and low SGK1 expression levels are found in patients with CKD (236) this 
serine/threonine kinase may be a novel therapeutic target to prevent uraemic muscle loss. 
Moreover, expression levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated γ-receptor coactivator 1α 
(PGC1α), which activates metabolic pathways associated with endurance exercise (such as 
running), are induced by cold exposure (237) and are elevated in hibernating squirrels (238). 
This master regulator plays a major part in renal recovery from acute kidney injury through 
regulation of NADH synthesis (239). Hence, stimulation of PGC1αsuch as through exercise 
(240), might also promote skeletal muscle homeostasis in CKD. Since activation of NRF2 by 
sulforaphane also increases endurance exercise capacity (241) , multiple targets and pathways 
to prevent uraemic muscle loss exist.  
 
[H3] Applications for bone loss. In addition to being protected from muscle wasting, hibernating 
bears are protected from poor wound healing and osteoporosis. Unlike humans and other 
mammals (including small hibernating mammals), hibernating bears can withstand physical 
inactivity (mechanical unloading ) and nutritional deprivation for ≤6 months without any 
negative effects on bone strength (242). Maintenance of calcium homeostasis is considered the 
most important contributing factor in bone health, but many other factors, such as growth 
hormones and cytokines, also have a role. Hibernating bears maintain eucalcemia  during 
immobilization (8) and have decreased markers of bone resorption and formation (243), which 
indicates precise balancing of bone remodelling activity. The suppression of bone remodelling 
during hibernation is likely an important mechanism to conserve energy during a long period of 
inactivity, decreased renal function and fasting (204). Other contributing factors probably 
include the differential reglulation of gene expression and hypothalamic control of hormones 
involved in bone remodelling, as higher expression levels of hormones that reduce bone 
formation, such as cocaine and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) (243). An elevated 
expression of anabolic genes but not bone resorption genes (244), have also been reported.  
Changes in vitamin D metabolism may also preserve bone mass during hibernation (245). 
In contrast to humans, 25(OH)D-vitamin levels do not change between seasons in bears (246) 
  
 
26 
and bear kidneys continue to produce calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D3; the active metabolite of vitamin 
D) despite a marked reduction in renal function during hibernation (245). Black bear 
parathyroid hormone activates cAMP, mitigates apoptosis in osteoblast cultures and increases 
trabecular bone volume (247); hence, the anabolic effects of bear parathyroid hormone might 
also prevent disuse osteoporosis. In addition, NRF2 was reported to have a role in bone 
microarchitecture in a mouse model of osteoporosis (248) and inhibits receptor activator of NF-
B ligand (RANKL)-mediated osteoclastogenesis in osteolysis-induced mice (249). Given the fact 
that increased NRF2 expression plays a major part in the antioxidant defences that are required 
for hibernation success in ground squirrels (250), the potential role of NRF2 in maintaining 
skeletal mass in hibernating bears warrants investigation. Taken together, studies of 
hibernating bears can provide novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of intracellular 
calcium disorders and prevention of bone loss during immobilization in humans. 
 
 [H3] Applications for wound healing. Bears also have the ability to heal wounds despite 
immobilisation, hypothermia and anuria — conditions that are usually unfavourable for wound 
healing (251). Elevated levels of δ-opioid receptor agonists and ursodeoxycholic acid have been 
linked to the wound-healing capabilities of hibernating bears (251), but further insights into the 
underlying mechanisms involved might provide strategies to enhance wound healing. Changes 
in the coagulation pathways that occur during hibernation (216) may also contribute to better 
wound healing.  
[H3] Applications for azotaemia. The unique ability of hibernating bears to recycle urea back 
into proteins not only protects the bear from muscle wasting but also from azotaemia (Figure 
5). Since little urea is generated during hibernation (252) minimal amounts of urine need to be 
excreted (231). When [14C] urea and heavy water (D2O) were administered into the bladder of 
hibernating bears, reabsorption of both isotopes occured across urothelia with rapid 
appearance in plasma (253). Although small quantities of solute and water transport across 
urinary tract urothelia is a feature of most mammalian species (254), the mechanism(s) by 
which bears accomplish this transport during hibernation remains unknown (254). One 
hypothesis is that the passage of recycled urea from the intestine contributes to de novo amino 
  
 
27 
acid synthesis, since urease-expressing gut bacteria release ammonia that can be used by the 
host to synthetize glutamine for protein synthesis (252). In contrast to bears, humans cannot 
recyle urea, and urea degradation in the human gut does not stimulate the conservation of 
nitrogen (255). In addition, glycerol prevents azotaemia in hibernating black bears by serving as 
a carbon source for de novo amino acid synthesis (256). As urea levels decrease in the autumn 
before hibernation (257), a dietary shift may contribute to this change. The metabolic 
regulation of fasting is, in part, mediated by the activities of sirtuin 5 (SIRT5). SIRT5 exhibits 
deacetylase, desuccinylase and demalonylase activities and regulates the urea cycle enzyme 
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1  (CPS1) in liver mitochondria. Since Sirt5–/– mice fail to 
upregulate CPS1 and exhibit hyperammonaemia during fasting (258), this implies a role for 
SIRT5 in urea metabolism and the metabolic regulation of fasting. Thus, the long-term effects of 
sirtuin activators, such as resveratrol, on urea handling should be tested in patients with CKD.  
 
 [H3] Protective compounds in berries. Bears can ingest up to 200,000 berries per day in peak 
season, which occurs in late summer (259). There is a synchronous timing of food resources 
that triggers to switch from salmon to berries during the summer (260). Blueberries  have 
potent anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties (for example, through the actions of 
phenol-like antioxidants) and contain anthocyanins . Berries are also an important source of 
sirtuin agonists (such as pterostilbene and resveratrol), quercetin, vitamin K, vitamin C and 
fibers. In addition, berries contain fructose and linolenic acid that may stimulate fat storage in 
preparation for hibernation. Polyphenols are secondary metabolites in plants that are needed 
not only for plant growth but also as a defense mechanism against UVB exposure and agression 
by insects and fungal pathogens (261). In a mouse model of polygenic obesity, consumption of 
berries results in a shift in gut microbiota towards obligate anaerobes, which correlates with a 
decrease in gastrointestinal luminal oxygen and oxidative stress (262). Potential implications on 
human health of the nearly anoxic conditions observed in the mouse gut lumen after berry 
consumption should be investigated.  
In addition, resveratrol preserves bone mass in old male rats (263), anthocyanins in 
berries increases serum alkaline phosphatase levels in obese male mice (264) and the 
  
 
28 
anthocyanin delphinidin inhibits excessive osteoclastogenesis in a mouse model of osteoporosis 
(265). Notably, delphinidin also prevents muscle atrophy in mice (266) and lowers fasting 
glycaemia in prediabetic individuals (267). Moreover, dietary supplementation with 
anthocyanins isolated from roselle (Hibiscus sabdarrifa) attenuated progression of adenine-
induced CKD in rats (268). Since a causal role for senescent cells in ageing-related bone loss has 
been demonstrated in mice (269) nutritional compounds with senolytic effects , such as 
quercetin and fisetin (270) — found in fruits, capers, vegetables and berries — may also 
contribute to the capacity of bears to maintain their bone mass (242). Quercetin also blocks 
phosphate-induced apoptosis and VSMC calcification via inhibition of mitochondrial fission and 
oxidative stress (271). As polyphenols that stimulate sirtuins and PGC1α prevent muscle 
wasting induced by mechanical unloading (272) or in streptozotocin-induced diabetes in rats 
(273), their long-term effects should be tested in patients with CKD who experience muscle 
wasting. Resveratrol and grape seed proanthocyanidin extract facilitate VEGF expression and 
angiogenesis in different wound models (274). Hence, the long-term effects of sirtuin activators 
and antocyanins on wound healing require further investigation. In healthy humans and 
patients with the metabolic syndrome, blueberry supplementation decreases cardiovascular 
risk factors (275), increases HDL–cholesterol (276) and improves insulin sensitivity (277). 
Moreover, a study based on validated food-frequency questionnaires in 93,600 women (Nurses 
Health Study) showed that a high intake of anthocyanins (highest versus lowest quintile) was 
associated with a decreased risk of myocardial infarction (278). Finally, since many plants that 
are consumed by bears contain melatonin (279) the effect of plants, such as tall fescue (Setvca 
arundinaces), on the metabolic changes that occur between seasons in hibernating bears 
should be investigated further. Taken together, the potential beneficial effects of berries and 
other plants on the uraemic phenotype should be assessed. 
[H1] Conclusions 
Species living in extreme habitats have acquired adaptive mutations through natural selection 
and epigenetic calibration to survive in challenging environments. Environmental factors and 
stressors - such as infections, toxins, starvation, climate change and psychosocial factors - have 
modified the epigenetic landscape throughout evolution to enable dynamically responsive 
  
 
29 
changes in gene expression and associated biochemical networks to help mitigate the effects of 
these changes (75). Although humans have a common ancestry with mammals and share the 
same vulnerability to infections, environmental toxins and illnesses, most physicians have 
regarded animal diseases as different and of minor interest in the understanding of complex 
human diseases. However, almost all diseases that affect humans have an equivalent in the 
animal kingdom, although treatment options may differ. Thus, we propose a multidisciplinary 
approach to improve health care of patients with CKD by sharing new discoveries and tools 
from the fields of zoology, botany, ecology, veterinary medicine, anthropology and biology.  
  
References 
1. Stenvinkel P, Johnson RJ. Kidney biomimicry--a rediscovered scientific field that could 
provide hope to patients with kidney disease. . Arch Med Res 2013;44:584-90. 
2. Krogh A. The progress of physiology. Am J Physiol 1929;90:243-51. 
3. Smith HW. Comparative physiology of the kidney. J Am Med Assoc 1953. 1953;153:1512-
14. 
4. Sperber I. Studies on the mammalian kidney. Uppsala: Uppsala University; 1944. 
5. O'Connor TP, Lee A, Jarvis JU, Buffenstein R. Prolonged longevity in naked mole-rats: age-
related changes in metabolism, body composition and gastrointestinal function. Comp Biochem 
Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2002;133:835-42. 
6. Davis RW, Castellini MA, Kooyman GL, Maue R. Renal glomerular filtration rate and hepatic 
blood flow during voluntary diving in Weddell seals. Am J Physiol 1983;245:R743-8. 
7. Stenvinkel P, Jani AH, Johnson RJ. Hibernating bears (ursidae): metabolic magicians of 
definite interest for the nephrologist. Kidney Int. 2013;83:207-12. 
8. Stenvinkel P, Fröbert O, Anderstam B, Palm F, Eriksson M, Bragfors-Helin A, et al. Metabolic 
changes in summer active and anuric hibernating free-ranging brown bears (Ursus arctos). PLoS 
One. 2013;8:e72934. 
9. Levin A, Tonelli M, Bonventre J, Coresh J, Donner JA, Fogo AB, et al. Global kidney health 
2017 and beyond: a roadmap for closing gaps in care, research, and policy. Lancet 2017;2017 
Apr 20. pii: S0140-6736(17)30788-2. . 
10. Stenvinkel P. Chronic kidney disease: a public health priority and harbinger of premature 
cardiovascular disease. J Intern Med. 2010;268:456-67. 
11. Kooman JP, Kotanko P, Schols AM, Shiels PG, Stenvinkel P. Chronic kidney disease and 
premature ageing. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2014;10:732-42. 
12. Lew QJ, Jafar TH, Koh HW, Jin A, Chow KY, Yuan JM, et al. Red Meat Intake and Risk of 
ESRD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28(1):304-12. 
13. Goraya N, Wesson DE. Is Dietary Red Meat Kidney Toxic? J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28(1):5-7. 
14. Reynolds BS, Lefebvre HP. Feline CKD: Pathophysiology and risk factors--what do we know? 
. J Feline Med Surg. 2013;15 (Suppl 1):3-14. 
  
 
30 
15. Jiménez A, Sánchez B, Pérez Alenza D, García P, López JV, Rodriguez A, et al. Membranous 
glomerulonephritis in the Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus). Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 
2008;121:34-43. 
16. Chetboul V, Lefebvre HP, Pinhas C, Clerc B, Boussouf M, Pouchelon JL. Spontaneous feline 
hypertension: clinical and echocardiographic abnormalities, and survival rate. J Vet Intern Med. 
2003;17(1):89-95. 
17. Cannon AB, Westropp JL, Ruby AL, Kass PH. Evaluation of trends in urolith composition in 
cats: 5,230 cases (1985-2004). J Am Vet Assoc. 2007;231:570-6. 
18. Reynolds BS, Lefebvre HP. Feline CKD: Pathophysiology and risk factors--what do we know? 
J Feline Med Surg. 2013;15 Suppl 1:3-14. 
19. Brown CA, Elliott J, Schmiedt CW, Brown SA. Chronic Kidney Disease in Aged Cats: Clinical 
Features, Morphology, and Proposed Pathogeneses. Vet Pathol. 2016;53(2):309-26. 
20. Waki MF, Martorelli CR, Mosko PE, Erdmann P, Kogika MM. Classification into stages of 
chronic kidney disease in dogs and cats - clinical, laboratorial and therapeutic approach. Cienia 
Rural. 2010;40:2226-34. 
21. Junginger J, Hansmann F, Herder V, Lehmbecker A, Peters M, Beyerbach M, et al. Pathology 
in Captive Wild Felids at German Zoological Gardens. PLos One. 2015;10:e0130573. 
22. Munson L, Terio KA, Worley KA, Jago M, Bagot-Smith A, Marker L. Extrinsic factors 
significantly affect patterns of disease in free-ranging and captive cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) 
populations. J Wildl Dis. 2005;41:542-8. 
23. Elliott J, Barber PJ. Feline chronic renal failure: clinical findings in 80 cases diagnosed 
between 1992 and 1995. J Small Anim Pract. 1998;39(2):78-85. 
24. Zini E, Benali S, Coppola L, Guscetti F, Ackermann M, Lutz TA, et al. Renal morphology in 
cats with diabetes mellitus. Vet Pathol 2014;51:1143-50. 
25. Bolton LA, Munson L. Glomerulosclerosis in captive cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus). Vet 
Pathol. 1999;36(1):14-22. 
26. Oaks JL, Gilbert M, Virani MZ, Watson RT, Meteyer CU, Rideout BA, et al. Diclofenac 
residues as the cause of vulture population decline in Pakistan. Nature. 2004;427(6975):630-3. 
27. Eisert R. Hypercarnivory and the brain: protein requirements of cats reconsidered.  
. J Comp Physiol B 2011;181:1–17. 
28. Meyer TW, Lawrence WE, Brenner BM. Dietary protein and the progression of renal 
disease. Kidney Int Suppl. 1983;16:S243-S7. 
29. Kramer H. Kidney disease and the westernization and industrialization of food. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2017;70:111-21. 
30. DiBartola SP, Buffington CA, Chew DJ, McLoughlin MA, Sparks RA. Development of chronic 
renal disease in cats fed a commercial diet. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;202(5):744-51. 
31. Juraschek SP, Appel LJ, Anderson CA, Miller ER. Effect of a high-protein diet on kidney 
function in healthy adults: results from the OmniHeart trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:547-54. 
32. Brenner BM, Meyer TW, Hostetter TH. Dietary protein intake and the progressive nature of 
kidney disease: the role of hemodynamically mediated glomerular injury in the pathogenesis of 
progressive glomerular sclerosis in aging, renal ablation, and intrinsic renal disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1982;307(11):652-9. 
33. Mafra D, Borges N, Ferreira L, de Franca Cardozo M, Anjos JS, Black AP, . , et al. Red meat 
intake in chronic kidney disease patients: Two sides of the coin. . Nutrition. 2018;46:26-32. 
  
 
31 
34. Lew QJ, Jafar TH, Koh HW, Jin A, Chow KY, Yuan JM, et al. Red Meat Intake and Risk of 
ESRD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:304-12. 
35. Haring B, Selvin E, Liang M, Coresh J, Grams ME, Petruski-Ivleva N, et al. Dietary Protein 
Sources and Risk for Incident Chronic Kidney Disease: Results From the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities (ARIC) Study. J Ren Nutr. 2017;In Press. 
36. Rebholz CM, Crews DC, Grams ME, Steffen LM, Levey AS, Miller ER, et al. DASH (Dietary 
Approaches to Stop Hypertension) Diet and Risk of Subsequent Kidney Disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2016;68:853-61. 
37. Lin CK, Lin DJ, Yen CH, Chen SC, Chen CC, Wang TY, et al. Comparison of renal function and 
other health outcomes in vegetarians versus omnivores in Taiwan. J Health Popul Nutr. 
2010;28:470-5. 
38. Kontessis P, Jones S, Dodds R, Trevisan R, Nosadini R, Fioretto P, et al. Renal, metabolic and 
hormonal responses to ingestion of animal and vegetable proteins. Kidney Int. 1990;38:136-44. 
39. Azadbakht L, Atabak S, Esmaillzadeh A. Soy protein intake, cardiorenal indices, and C-
reactive protein in type 2 diabetes with nephropathy: a longitudinal randomized clinical trial. 
Diabetes Care. 2008;31:648-54. 
40. Nongouch A, Davenport A. The effect of vegetarian diet on skin autofluorescence 
measurements in haemodialysis patients. Br J Nutr. 2015;113:1040-3. 
41. Gluba-Brzózka A, Franczyk B, Rysz J. Vegetarian diet in chronic kidney disease - a friend or 
foe. Nutrients. 2017;9:doi: 10.3390/nu9040374. 
42. Larsson SC, Orsini N. Red meat and processed meat consumption and all-cause mortality: a 
meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;179:282-9. 
43. Crippa A, Larsson SC, Discacciati A, Wolk A, Orsini N. Red and processed meat consumption 
and risk of bladder cancer: a dose-response meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Eur J 
Nutr. 2016;In Press. 
44. Kaluza J, Wolk A, Larsson SC. Red meat consumption and risk of stroke: a meta-analysis of 
prospective studies. Stroke. 2012;43:2556-60. 
45. Micha R, Wallace SK, Mozaffarian D. Red and processed meat consumption and risk of 
incident coronary heart disease, stroke, and diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Circulation. 2010;121:2271-83. 
46. Micha R, Michas G, Mozaffarian D. Unprocessed red and processed meats and risk of 
coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes--an updated review of the evidence. Curr 
Atheroscler Rep. 2012;14:515-24. 
47. de Mello VD, Zelmanovitz T, Perassolo MS, Azevedo MJ, Gross JL. Withdrawal of red meat 
from the usual diet reduces albuminuria and improves serum fatty acid profile in type 2 
diabetes patients with macroalbuminuria. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83:1032-8. 
48. de Mello VD, Zelmanovitz T, Azevedo MJ, de Paula TP, Gross JL. Long-term effect of a 
chicken-based diet versus enalapril on albuminuria in type 2 diabetic patients with 
microalbuminuria 
. J Renal Nutr. 2008;18:440-7. 
49. Elliott J, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, Barber PJ. Survival of cats with naturally occurring 
chronic renal failure: effect of dietary management. J Small Anim Pract. 2000;41:235-42. 
  
 
32 
50. Alisson-Silva F, Kawanishi K, Varki A. Human risk of diseases associated with red meat 
intake: Analysis of current theories and proposed role for metabolic incorporation of a non-
human sialic acid. Molecular Aspects of Medicine. 2016;51:16-30. 
51. Tang WH, Wang Z, Kennedy DJ, Wu Y, Buffa JA, Agatisa-Boyle B, et al. Gut microbiota-
dependent trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) pathway contributes to both development of renal 
insufficiency and mortality risk in chronic kidney disease. Circ Res. 2015;116:448-55. 
52. Sun X, Jiao X, Ma Y, Liu Y, Zhang L, He Y, et al. Trimethylamine N-oxide induces 
inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in human umbilical vein endothelial cells via 
activating ROS-TXNIP-NLRP3 inflammasome. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016;481:63-70. 
53. Missailidis C, Hällqvist J, Qureshi AR, Barany P, Heimbürger O, Lindholm B, et al. Serum 
Trimethylamine-N-Oxide Is Strongly Related to Renal Function and Predicts Outcome in Chronic 
Kidney Disease. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0141738. 
54. Wang Z, Roberts A, Buffa J, Levison B, Zhu W, Org E, et al. Non-lethal Inhibition of Gut 
Microbial 
Trimethylamine 
Production 
for 
the 
Treatment 
of 
Atherosclerosis. 
Cell. 
2015;163:1585-95. 
55. Koeth RA, Levison BS, Culley MK, Buffa JA, Wang Z, Gregory JC, et al. γ-Butyrobetaine is a 
proatherogenic intermediate in gut microbial metabolism of L-carnitine to TMAO. Cell Metab. 
2014;20:799-812. 
56. Martin OC, Lin C, Naud N, Tache S, Raymond-Letron I, Corpet DE, et al. Antibiotic 
suppression of intestinal microbiota reduces heme-induced lipoperoxidation associated with 
colon carcinogenesis in rats. Nutr Cancer. 2015;67:119-25. 
57. McClelland R, Christensen K, Mohammed S, McGuinness D, Cooney J, Bakshi A, et al. 
Accelerated ageing and renal dysfunction links lower socioeconomic status and dietary 
phosphate intake. Aging (Albany NY). 2016;8:1135-49. 
58. Martínez-Moreno JM, Herencia C, de Oca AM, Díaz-Tocados JM, Vergara N, Gómez-Luna 
MJ, et al. High phosphate induces a pro-inflammatory response by vascular smooth muscle cells 
and modulation by vitamin D derivatives. Clin Sci. 2017;131:1449-63. 
59. Choi HK, Atkinson K, Karlson EW, Willett W, Curhan G. Purine-rich foods, dairy and protein 
intake, and the risk of gout in men. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1093-103. 
60. Hammett FS. The nitrogen excretion of the cat during a purine-free and a purine-rich diet. J 
Biol Chem. 1915;22:551-8. 
61. Villegas R, Xiang Y-B., Elasy T, Xu W-H., Cai H., Cai Q, et al. Purine-rich foods, protein intake, 
and the prevalence of hyperuricemia: The Shanghai Men’s Health Study. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc 
Dis. 2012;22:409-16. 
62. Clifford AJ, Riumallo JA, Youn VR, Scrimshaw NS. Effect of Oral Purines on Serum and 
Urinary Uric Acid of Normal, Hyperuricemic and Gouty Humans. J Nutr  1976;106:428-50. 
63. Nakanishi N, Fukui M, Tanaka M, Toda H, Imai S, Yamazaki M, et al. Low urine pH Is a 
predictor of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2012;35:77-81. 
64. Appel SL, Houston DM, Moore AE, Weese JS. Feline urate urolithiasis. Can Vet J. 
2010;51(5):493-6. 
65. Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Ulrich LK, Bird KA. Feline crystalluria. Detection and interpretation. 
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1996;26:369-91. 
  
 
33 
66. Ryu ES, Kim MJ, Shin HS, Jang YH, Choi HS, Jo I, et al. Uric acid-induced phenotypic 
transition of renal tubular cells as a novel mechanism of chronic kidney disease. Am J Physiol 
Renal Physiol. 2013;304:F471-80. 
67. Greene JP, Lefebvre SL, Wang M, Yang M, Lund EM, Polzin DJ. Risk factors associated with 
the development of chronic kidney disease in cats evaluated at primary care veterinary 
hospitals. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2014;244(3):320-7. 
68. Campese VM. Con: Mesoamerican nephropathy: is the problem dehydration or 
rehydration? . Nephrol Dial Transplant 2017;32:603-6. 
69. Johnson RJ. Heat stress as a potential etiology of Mesoamerican and Sri Lankan 
nephropathy: a late night consult with Sherlock Holmes. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2017;32:598-
602. 
70. McFarland W, N., , Wimsatt W, A. Urine flow and composition in the vampire bat. Am Zool. 
1965;5:662-7. 
71. Singer MA. Vampire bat, shrew, and bear: comparative physiology and chronic renal 
failure. Am J Physiol Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol. 2002;282:R1583-R92. 
72. Horst R. Observations on the structure and function of the kidney of the vampire bat 
(Desmodus rotundus murinus). In: Hoff CC, Reidesel ML, editors. Physiological Systems in 
Semiarid Environments. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press; 1969. p. 73-83. 
73. Holloway BW, Ripley SH. Nucleic acid content of reticulocytes and its relation to uptake of 
radioactive leucine in vitro. J Biol Chem. 1952;196(2):695-701. 
74. Fulop T, Larbi A, Witkowski JM, McElhaney J, Loeb M, Mitnitski A, et al. Aging, frailty and 
age-related diseases. Biogerontology. 2010;11:547-63. 
75. Shiels PG, McGuiness D, Eriksson M, Kooman JP SP. The role of epigenetics in renal ageing. 
Nature Rev Nephrol. 2017;13:471-82. 
76. López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell 
Metab. 2013;153:1194-217. 
77. Sturmlechner I, Durik M, Sieben CJ, Baker DJ, van Deursen JM. Cellular senescence in renal 
ageing and disease. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2017;13:77-89. 
78. Stenvinkel P, Larsson T. Chronic kidney disease: a clinical model of premature aging. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2013;62:339-51. 
79. Karam Z, Tuazon J. Anatomic and physiologic changes of the aging kidney. Clin Geriatr Med. 
2013;29(3):555-64. 
80. Kaplan C, Pasternack B, Shah H, Gallo G. Age-related incidence of sclerotic glomeruli in 
human kidneys. Am J Pathol. 1975;80(2):227-34. 
81. Kooman J, Dekker M, Usvyat L, Kotanko P, Schalkwijk CG, Shiels PG, et al. Inflammation and 
premature aging in advanced chronic kidney disease. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2017. 
82. Schriner SE, Linford NJ, Martin GM, Treuting P, Ogburn CE, . , Emond M, et al. Extension of 
murine life span by overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria. Science. 
2005;308:1909-11. 
83. Bhargava P, Schnellmann RG. Mitochondrial energetics in the kidney. Nat Rev Nephrol. 
2017; doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2017.107. 
84. Glassock RJ, Rule AD. The implications of anatomical and functional changes of the aging 
kidney: with an emphasis on the glomeruli. Kidney Int. 2012;82(3):270-7. 
  
 
34 
85. Roncal-Jimenez CA, Ishimoto T, Lanaspa MA, Milagres T, Hernando AA, Jensen T, et al. 
Aging-associated renal disease in mice is fructokinase dependent. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 
2016;311:F722-F30. 
86. Childs BG, Gluscevic M, Baker DJ, Laberge RM, Marquess D, Dananberg J, et al. Senescent 
cells: an emerging target for diseases of ageing. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017;doi: 
10.1038/nrd.2017.116. . 
87. Sosnowska D, Richardson C, Sonntag WE, Csiszar A, Ungvari Z, Ridgway I. A heart that beats 
for 500 years: age-related changes in cardiac proteasome activity, oxidative protein damage 
and expression of heat shock proteins, inflammatory factors, and mitochondrial complexes in 
Arctica islandica, the longest-living noncolonial animal. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2014;69:1448-61. 
88. Nielsen J, Hedeholm RB, Heinemeier J, Bushnell PG, Christiansen JS, Olsen J, et al. Eye lens 
radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus). 
Science 2016;353(6300):702-4. 
89. Finch CE. Update on slow aging and negligible senescence - a mini-review. Gerontology. 
2009;55:307-13. 
90. Valenzano DR, Terzibasi E, Genade T, Cattaneo A, Domenic iL, Cellerino A. Resveratrol 
prolongs lifespan and retards the onset of age-related markers in a short-lived vertebrate. . Curr 
Biol 2006;16:296-300. 
91. Finch CE. Update on slow aging and negligible senescence - a mini review. . Gerontology. 
2009;55:307-11. 
92. Buffenstein R. Negligible senescence in the longest living rodent, the naked mole-rat: 
insights from a successfully aging species. J Comp Physiol B. 2008;4:439-45. 
93. Jarvis JUM, Bennet NC. Ecology and behaviour of the family Bathyergiade. In: Sherman PW, 
Jarvis JUM, Alexander RD, editors. The Biology of the Naked Mole Rats. Princeton NJ: Princeton 
University Press; 1991. 
94. Yahav S, Buffenstein R, Pettifor JM. Calcium and inorganic phosphorus metabolism in naked 
mole rats Hetercephalus glaber is only indirectly affected by cholecalciferol. . Gen Comp 
Endocrinol 1993;89:161-6. 
95. De Waal EM, Liang H, Pierce A, Hamilton RT, Buffenstein R, Chaudhuri AR. Elevated protein 
carbonylation and oxidative stress do not affect protein structure and function in the long-living 
naked-mole rat: A proteomic approach. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2013;434:815-9. 
96. Triplett JC, Tramutola A, Swomley A, Kirk J, Grimes K, Lewis  K, et al. . Age-related changes 
in the proteostasis network in the brain of the naked mole-rat: Implications promoting healthy 
longevity. . Biochim Biophys Acta 2015;1852:2213-24. 
97. Dai DF, Wessells RJ, Rabinovitch. Cardiac aging. In: Wolf NS, editor. The comparative 
biology of aging. Seattle: Springer; 2010. p. 259-86. 
98. Grimes KM, Lindsey ML, Gelfond JA, Buffenstein R. Getting to the heart of the matter: age-
related changes in diastolic heart function in the longest-lived rodent, the naked mole rat. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2012;67:384-94. 
99. Grimes KM, Reddy AK, Lindsey ML, Buffenstein R. And the beat goes on: maintained 
cardiovascular function during aging in the longest-lived rodent, the naked mole-rat. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014;307:H284-91. 
  
 
35 
100. 
Lagunas-Rangel FA, Chávez-Valencia V. Learning of nature: The curious case of the naked 
mole rat. Mech Ageing Dev. 2017;164:76-81. 
101. 
Skulachev VP, Holtze S, Vyssokikh MY, Bakeeva LE, Skulachev MV, Markov AV, et al. 
Neoteny, prolongation of youth: From naked mole rats to "Naked Apes" (Humans). Physiol Rev. 
2017;97:699-720. 
102. 
Comfort A. The biology of senescence. 3rd ed. New York: Elsevier; 1979. p. 414. 
103. 
Tian X, Azpurua J, Hine C, Vaidya A, Myakishev-Rempel M, Ablaeva J, et al. High-molecular-
mass hyaluronan mediates the cancer resistance of the naked mole rat. Nature. 2013;499:346-
9. 
104. 
Itoh K, Ye P, Matsumiya T, Tanji K, Ozak iT. Emerging functional cross-talk between the 
Keap1-Nrf2 system and mitochondria. . J Clin Biochem Nutr 2015;56:91-7. 
105. 
Lewis KN, Mele J, Hayes JD, Buffenstein R. Nrf2, a guardian of healthspan and gatekeeper 
of species longevity. Int Comp Biol 2010;50:829-43. 
106. 
Lewis KN, Wason E, Edrey YH, Kristan DM, Nevo E, Buffenstein R. Regulation of Nrf2 
signaling and longevity in naturally long-lived rodents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112:3722-
7. 
107. 
Pomatto LCD, Tower J, Davies KJA. Sexual dimorphism and aging differentially regulate 
adaptive homeostasis. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2017;In Press. 
108. 
Kubben N, Zhang W, Wang L, Voss TC, Yang J, Qu J, et al. Repression of the antioxidant Nrf2 
pathway in premature aging. . Cell 2016;165:1361-74. 
109. 
Kubben N, Misteli T. Shared molecular and cellular mechanisms of premature ageing and 
ageing-associated diseases. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2017;doi: 10.1038/nrm.2017.68. . 
110. 
Chopra A, Lineweaver CH. Proceedings of the 8th Australian Space Science Conference. In: 
Short W, Cairns I, editors.: National Space Society of Australia Ltd; 2008. 
111. 
Ohno S. The reason for as well as the consequence of the Cambrian explosion in animal 
evolution. Journal of molecular evolution. 1997;44 Suppl 1:S23-7. 
112. 
Bowen HJM. Environmental chemistry of the elements. London: Achademic Press; 1979. 
113. 
Benner SA, Ellington AD, Tauer A. Modern metabolism as a palimpsest of the RNA world. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989;86(18):7054-8. 
114. 
Blair-West JR, Denton DA, McKinley MJ, Radden BG, Ramshaw EH, Wark JD. Behavioral and 
tissue responses to severe phosphorus depletion in cattle. Am J Physiol. 1992;263(3 Pt 2):R656-
63. 
115. 
Hu MC, Shiizaki K, Kuro-o M, Moe OW. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and klotho: physiology 
and pathophysiology of an endocrine network of mineral metabolism. Annu Rev Physiol. 
2013;75:503-33. 
116. 
Swapna M. Applied Mineralogy: Applications in Industry and Environment: Springer 
Netherlands; 2011. 
117. 
Lenton S, Nylander T, Teixeira SC, Holt C. A review of the biology of calcium phosphate 
sequestration with special reference to milk. Dairy Sci Technol. 2015;95:3-14. 
118. 
Kuro-o M, Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, Kawaguchi H, Suga T, Utsugi T, et al. Mutation of the 
mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling ageing. Nature. 1997;390:45-51. 
119. 
Kuro-o M. The FGF23 and Klotho system beyond mineral metabolism. Clin Exp Nephrol. 
2017;21:64-9. 
  
 
36 
120. 
Maltese G, Psefteli P-M, Rizzo B, Srivastava S, Gnudi L, Mann GE, et al. The anti-ageing 
hormone klotho induces Nrf2-mediated antioxidant defences in human aortic smooth muscle 
cells. . J Cell Mol Med 2017;21:621-7. 
121. 
Beck GR, Moran E, Knecht N. Inorganic phosphate regulates multiple genes during 
osteoblast differentiation, including Nrf2. . Exp Cell Res 2003;. 2003;288(2):288-300. 
122. 
Shanahan CM. Mechanisms of vascular calcification in CKD - evidence for premature 
ageing? Nat Rev Nephrol. 2013;9:661-70. 
123. 
Stenvinkel P, Luttropp K, McGuineness D, Witasp A, Qureshi A, Wernerson A, et al. 
CDKN2A/p16INK4a expression is associated with vascular progeria in chronic kidney disease. . 
Aging (Albany NY). 2017;9:494-507. 
124. 
Troyano N, Nogal MD, Mora I, Diaz-Naves M, Lopez-Carrillo N, Sosa P, et al. 
Hyperphosphatemia induces cellular senescence in human aorta smooth muscle cells through 
integrin linked kinase (ILK) up-regulation. . Mech Ageing Dev 2015;152:43-55. 
125. 
Di Marco GS, Hausberg M, Hillebrand U, Rustemeyer P, Wittkowski W, Lang D, et al. 
Increased inorganic phosphate induces human endothelial cell apoptosis in vitro. Am J Physiol 
Renal Physiol. 2008;294(6):F1381-F7. 
126. 
Jono S, McKee MD, Murry CE, Shioi A, Nishizawa Y, Mori K, et al. Phosphate regulation of 
vascular smooth muscle cell calcification. Circ Res. 2000;87(7):E10-7. 
127. 
Sage AP, Lu J, Tintut Y, Demer LL. Hyperphosphatemia-induced nanocrystals upregulate the 
expression of bone morphogenetic protein-2 and osteopontin genes in mouse smooth muscle 
cells in vitro. Kidney Int. 2011;79(4):414-22. 
128. 
Villa-Bellosta R, Sorribas V. Phosphonoformic acid prevents vascular smooth muscle cell 
calcification by inhibiting calcium-phosphate deposition. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2009;29(5):761-6. 
129. 
Yamada S., Tatsumato N, Tokumoto M, Noguchi H, Ooboshi H, Kitazono T, et al. Phosphate 
binders prevent phosphate-induced cellular senescence of vascular smooth muscle cells and 
vascular calcification in a modified, adenine-based uremic rat model. Calcif Tissue Int 
2015;96:347-58. 
130. 
Jeyapalan JC, Sedivy JM. Cellular senescence and organismal aging. Mech Ageing Dev. 
2008;129:467-74. 
131. 
Kuro-o M. A potential link between phosphate and aging--lessons from Klotho-deficient 
mice. Mech Ageing Dev. 2010;131:270-5. 
132. 
Merideth MA, Gordon LB, Clauss S, Sachdev V, Smith AC, Perry MB, et al. Phenotype and 
course of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. . N Engl J Med. 2008;358:592-604. 
133. 
Villa-Bellosta R, Rivera-Torres J, Osorio FG, Acín-Pérez R, Enriquez JA, López-Otín C, et al. 
Defective extracellular pyrophosphate metabolism promotes vascular calcification in a mouse 
model of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome that is ameliorated on pyrophosphate 
treatment. . Circulation 2013 127(24):2442-51. 
134. 
Chang AR, Lazo M, Appel LJ, Gutierrez OM, Grams ME. High dietary phosphorus intake is 
associated with all‐cause mortality: results from NHANES III. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99:320-7. 
135. 
Hamano T, Matsui I, Mikami S, Tomida K, Fujii N, Imai E, et al. Fetuin-mineral complex 
reflects extraosseous calcification stress in CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;21(11):1998-2007. 
  
 
37 
136. 
Smith ER, Ford ML, Tomlinson LA, Rajkumar C, McMahon LP, Holt SG. Phosphorylated 
fetuin-A-containing calciprotein particles are associated with aortic stiffness and a procalcific 
milieu in patients with pre-dialysis CKD. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27(5):1957-66. 
137. 
Smith ER, Hanssen E, McMahon LP, Holt SG. Fetuin-A-containing calciprotein particles 
reduce mineral stress in the macrophage. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60904. 
138. 
Smith ER, Ford ML, Tomlinson LA, Bodenham E, McMahon LP, Farese S, et al. Serum 
calcification propensity predicts all-cause mortality in predialysis CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2014;25(2):339-48. 
139. 
Teare JA. ISIS reference ranges for physiological values in captive wildlife. Apple 
￼2002. 
140. 
Moe SM, Drüeke TB, Block GA, Cannata-Andía JB, Elder GJ, Fukagawa M, et al. KDIGO 
clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, prevention, and treatment of Chronic 
Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD). Kidney Int Suppl. 2009(113):S1-130. 
141. 
Fouque D, Horne R, Cozzolino M, Kalantar-Zadeh K. Balancing nutrition and serum 
phosphorus in maintenance dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;64(1):143-50. 
142. 
Peter WLS, Wazny LD, Weinhandl E, Cardone KE, Hudson JQ. A Review of Phosphate 
Binders in Chronic Kidney Disease: Incremental Progress or Just Higher Costs? Drugs. 
2016;14:329-45. 
143. 
Kawai M, Kinoshita S, Ozono K, Michigami T. Inorganic Phosphate Activates the 
AKT/mTORC1 Pathway and Shortens the Life Span of an α‑Klotho-Deficient Model. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2016;27:2810-24. 
144. 
ter Braake AD, Shanahan CM, de Baaij JHF. Magnesium counteracts vascular calcification: 
Passive interference or active modulation? Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2017: doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA. 
145. 
Miller M, Weber M, Valdes EV, Neiffer D, Fontenot D, Fleming G, et al. Changes in serum 
calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium levels in captive ruminants affected by diet manipulation. 
J Zoo Wildl Med. 2010;41:404-8. 
146. 
Koh GY, Rowling MJ. Resistant starch as a novel dietary strategy to maintain kidney health 
in diabetes mellitus. Nutr Rev. 2017;75:350-60. 
147. 
Bilinski T, Paszkiewicz, Zadrag-Ecza R. Energy excess is the main cause of accelerated aging 
of mammals. . Oncotraget 2016; 6:12090-919. 
148. 
Stenvinkel P, Kooman JP, Shiels PG. Nutrients and ageing: what can we learn about ageing 
interactions from animal biology? . Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2016;19:19-25. 
149. 
Mattison JA, Colman RJ, Beasley TM, Allison DB, Kemnitz JW, Roth GS, et al. Caloric 
restriction improves health and survival of rhesus monkeys. Nat Commun. 2017;8:14603. 
150. 
Lanaspa MA, Sanchez-Lozada LG, Choi YJ, Cicerchi C, Kanbay M, Roncal-Jimenez CA, et al. 
Uric acid induces hepatic steatosis by generation of mitochondrial oxidative stress: potential 
role in fructose-dependent and -independent fatty liver. J Biol Chem. 2012;287(48):40732-44. 
151. 
Sanchez-Lozada LG, Lanaspa MA, Cristobal-Garcia M, Garcia-Arroyo F, Soto V, Cruz-Robles 
D, et al. Uric Acid-Induced Endothelial Dysfunction Is Associated with Mitochondrial Alterations 
and Decreased Intracellular ATP Concentrations. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2012;121(3-4):e71-e8. 
152. 
Johnson RJ. The Fat Switch. Hoffman Estates: mercola.com; 2012. 311 p. 
  
 
38 
153. 
Dolinsky VW, Jones KE, Sidhu RS, Haykowsky M, Czubryt MP, Gordon T, et al. 
Improvements in skeletal muscle strength and cardiac function induced by resveratrol during 
exercise training contribute to enhanced exercise performance in rats. J Physiol. 
2012;590:2783-99. 
154. 
Hall JA, Dominy JE, Lee Y, Puigserver P. The sirtuin family's role in aging and age-associated 
pathologies. J Clin Invest 2013;123:973-9. 
155. 
Narkar VA, Downes M, Yu RT, Embler E, Wang YX, Banayo E, et al. AMPK and PPARdelta 
agonists are exercise mimetics. Cell. 2008;134(3):405-15. 
156. 
Canto C, Auwerx J. Caloric restriction, SIRT1 and longevity. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 
2009;20:325-31. 
157. 
Roncal-Jimenez CA, Ishimoto T, Lanaspa MA, Milagres T, Hernando AA, Jensen T, et al. 
Aging-associated renal disease in mice is fructokinase dependent. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 
2016;311(4):F722-F30. 
158. 
Kulkarni SR, Armstrong LE, Slitt A. Caloric restriction-mediated induction of lipid 
metabolism gene expression in liver is enhanced by Keap1-knockdown. Pharm Res. 
2013;30:2221-31. 
159. 
Sanchez-Roman I, Barja G. Regulation of longevity and oxidative stress by nutritional 
interventions: role of methionine restriction. Exp Gerontol. 2013;48:1030-42. 
160. 
Yang G, Zhao K, Ju Y, Mani S, Cao Q, Puukila S, et al. Hydrogen sulfide protects against 
cellular senescence via S-sulfhydration of Keap1 and activation of Nrf2. Antioxid Redox Signal. 
2013;18:1906-19. 
161. 
Hine C., Harputlugil E, Zhang Y, Ruckenstuhl C, Lee BC, Brace L, et al. Endogenous hydrogen 
sulfide production is essential for dietary restriction benefits. Cell. 2015;160:132-44. 
162. 
Pietri R, Román-Morales E, López-Garriga J. Hydrogen sulfide and hemeproteins: 
knowledge and mysteries. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011;15:393-404. 
163. 
Wallace JL, Wang R. Hydrogen sulfide-based therapeutics: exploiting a unique but 
ubiquitous gasotransmitter. Nat Rev Drug Discov,. 2015;14:329-45. 
164. 
McIsaac RS, Lewis KN, Gibney PA, Buffenstein R. From yeast to human: exploring the 
comparative biology of methionine restriction in extending eukaryotic life span. Ann NY Acad 
Sci. 2016;1363:155-70. 
165. 
Dziegelewska M, Holtze S, Vole C, Wachter U, Menzel U, Morhart M, et al. Low sulfide 
levels and a high degree of cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) activation by S-adenosylmethionine 
(SAM) in the long-lived naked mole-rat. Redox Biol. 2016;8:192-8. 
166. 
Pamplona R, Barja G. Mitochondrial stress, aging and caloric restriction: The protein and 
methionine conenction. Biochim et Biophys Acta. 2006;1757:496-508. 
167. 
Valli A, Carrero JJ, Qureshi AR, Garibotto G, Bárány P, Axelsson J, et al. Elevated serum 
levels of S-adenosylhomocysteine, but not homocysteine, are associated with cardiovascular 
disease in stage 5 chronic kidney disease patients. Clin Chim Acta 2008;395:106-10. 
168. 
Suliman ME, Filho JC, Bárány P, Lindholm B, Bergström J. Effects of methionine loading on 
plasma and erythrocyte sulphur amino acids and sulph-hydryls before and after co-factor 
supplementation in haemodialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2001;16:102-10. 
169. 
Brown-Borg HM, Buffenstein R. Cutting back on the essentials: Can manipulating intake of 
specific amino acids modulate health and lifespan? Aging Res Rev. 2016; doi: 
10.1016/j.arr.2016.08.007. [Epub ahead of print]. 
  
 
39 
170. 
Weber GJ, Pushpakumar SB, Sen U. Hydrogen sulfide alleviates hypertensive kidney 
dysfunction through an epigenetic mechanism. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2017;312:H874-
H85. 
171. 
Cooney CA. Are somatic cells inherently deficient in methylation metabolism? A proposed 
mechanism for DNA methylation loss, senescence and aging. . Growth Dev Aging. 1993;57:261-
73. 
172. 
Park TJ, Reznick J, Peterson BL, Blass G, Omerbašić D, Bennett NC, et al. Fructose-driven 
glycolysis supports anoxia resistance in the naked mole-rat. Science. 2017;356:307-11. 
173. 
Pfeiffer CJ. Renal cellular and tissue specializations in the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops 
truncatus) and the beluga whale (Delphinapteras leucas). Aquatic mammals. 1997;23:75-84. 
174. 
Andrews MT, Russeth KP, Drewes LR, Henry PG. Adaptive mechanisms regulate preferred 
utilization of ketones in the heart and brain of a hibernating mammal during arousal from 
torpor. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009;296(2):R383-93. 
175. 
Davis RW, Castellini MA, Kooyman GL, Maue R. Renal glomerular filtration rate and hepatic 
blood flow during voluntary diving in Weddell seals. . Am J Physiol 1983;245:R743-8. 
176. 
Jani A, Epperson E, Martin J, Pacic A, Ljubanovic D, Martin SL, et al. Renal protection from 
prolonged cold ischemia and warm reperfusion in hibernating squirrels. Transplantation. 
2011;92(11):1215-21. 
177. 
Vázquez-Medina JP, Soñanez-Organis JG, Rodriguez R, Viscarra JA, Nishiyama A, Crocker DE, 
et al. Prolonged fasting activates Nrf2 in post-weaned elephant seals. J Exp Biol 2013;216:2870-
8. 
178. 
Vázquez-Medina JP, Zenteno-Savín T, Elsner R, Ortiz RM. Coping with physiological 
oxidative stress: a review of antioxidant strategies in seals. . J Comp Physiol B. 2012;182:741-50. 
179. 
Vázquez-Medina JP, Zenteno-Savín T, Forman HJ, Crocker DE, Ortiz RM. Prolonged fasting 
increases glutathione biosynthesis in postweaned northern elephant seals. J Exp Biol. 
2011;214:1294-9. 
180. 
Nezu M, Souma T, Yu L, Suzuki T, Saigusa D, Ito S, et al. Transcription factor Nrf2 
hyperactivation in early-phase renal ischemia-reperfusion injury prevents tubular damage 
progression. Kidney Int. 2017;91:387-401. 
181. 
Cirillo P, Gersch MS, Mu W, Scherer PM, Kim KM, Gesualdo L, et al. Ketohexokinase-
dependent metabolism of fructose induces proinflammatory mediators in proximal tubular 
cells. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20(3):545-53. 
182. 
Nigro D, Menotti F, Cento AS, Serpe L, Chiazza F, Dal Bello F, et al. Chronic administration of 
saturated fats and fructose differently affect SREBP activity resulting in different modulation of 
Nrf2 and Nlrp3 inflammasome pathways in mice liver. J Nutr Biochem. 2017;42:160-71. 
183. 
Perez-Pinzon MA. Mechanisms of neuroprotection during ischemic preconditioning: 
lessons from anoxic tolerance. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2007;147:291-9. 
184. 
Geiser F, Ruf T. Hibernation versus Daily Torpor in Mammals and Birds: Physiological 
Variables and Classification of Torpor Patterns. Physiological Zoology. 1995;68(6):935-66. 
185. 
Turbill C, Ruf T, Mang T, Arnold W. Regulation of heart rate and rumen temperature in red 
deer: effects of season and food intake. Journal of Experimental Biology. 2011;214(6):963-70. 
186. 
Signer C, Ruf T, Arnold W. Hypometabolism and basking: The strategies of Alpine ibex to 
endure harsh over-wintering conditions. Functional Ecology. 2011;25(3):537-47. 
  
 
40 
187. 
Arnold W, Ruf T, Reimoser S, Tataruch F, Onderscheka K, Schober F. Nocturnal 
hypometabolism as an overwintering strategy of red deer (Cervus elaphus). Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2004;286(1):R174-R81. 
188. 
Arnold W. Energetics of social hibernation. In: Carey C, Florant GL, Wunder BA, Horwitz B, 
editors. Life in the Cold: Ecological, Physiological, and Molecular Mechanisms. Boulder: 
Westview Press; 1993. p. 65-80. 
189. 
Parker KL, Barboza PS, Gillingham MP. Nutrition integrates environmental responses of 
ungulates. Functional Ecology. 2009;23(1):57-69. 
190. 
Arnold W, Beiglböck C, Burmester M, Guschlbauer M, Lengauer A, Schröder B, et al. 
Contrary seasonal changes of rates of nutrient uptake, organ mass, and voluntary food intake in 
red deer (Cervus elaphus). American Journal of Physiology - Regulatory and Integrative 
Comparative Physiology. 2015;309(3):R277-R85. 
191. 
Loudon ASI. Photoperiod and the regulation of annual and circannual cycles of food intake. 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 1994;53(3):495-507. 
192. 
Hume D, Beiglböck C, Ruf T, Frey-Roos F, Bruns U, Arnold W. Seasonal changes in 
morphology and function of the gastrointestinal tract of free-living alpine marmots (Marmota 
marmota). Journal of Comparative Physiology B: Biochemical Systemic and Environmental 
Physiology. 2002;172(3):197-207. 
193. 
Rigano KS, Gehring JL, Evans Hutzenbiler BD, Chen AV, Nelson OL, Vella CA, et al. Life in the 
fat lane: seasonal regulation of insulin sensitivity, food intake, and adipose biology in brown 
bears. J Comp Physiol B. 2017;187:649-76. 
194. 
Sommer F, Ståhlman M, Ilkayeva O, Arnemo JM, Kindberg J, Josefsson J, et al. The gut 
microbiota modulates energy metabolism in the hibernating brown bear Ursus arctos. Cell Rep. 
2016;14:1655-61. 
195. 
Toien O, Blake J, Edgar DM, Grahn DA, Heller HC, Barnes BM. Hibernation in black bears: 
independence of metabolic suppression from body temperature. Science. 2011;331:906-9. 
196. 
Arnold W, Ruf T, Frey-Roos F, Bruns U. Diet-Independent remodeling of cellular membranes 
precedes seasonally changing body temperature in a hibernator. PLoS One. 2011;6(4):e18641. 
197. 
Arnold W, Giroud S, Valencak TG, Ruf T. Ecophysiology of Omega Fatty Acids: A Lid for 
Every Jar. Physiology. 2015;30(3):232-40. 
198. 
Helge JW, Wu BJ, Willer M, Daugaard JR, Storlien LH, Kiens B. Training affects muscle 
phospholipid fatty acid composition in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology. 2001;90(2):670-
7. 
199. 
Mitchell TW, Buffenstein R, Hulbert AJ. Membrane phospholipid composition may 
contribute to exceptional longevity of the naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber): a 
comparative study using shotgun lipidomics. Exp Gerontol. 2007;42:1053-62. 
200. 
Giroud S, Frare C, Strijkstra A, Boerema A, Arnold W, Ruf T. Membrane phospholipid fatty 
acid composition regulates cardiac SERCA activity in a hibernator, the Syrian hamster 
(Mesocricetus auratus). PLoS One. 2013;8(5):e63111. 
201. 
Arnold W, Ruf T, Kuntz R. Seasonal adjustment of energy budget in a large wild mammal, 
the Przewalski horse (Equus ferus przewalskii) II. Energy expenditure. Journal of Experimental 
Biology. 2006;209(22):4566-73. 
  
 
41 
202. 
Maillet D, Weber JM. Relationship between n-3 PUFA content and energy metabolism in 
the flight muscles of a migrating shorebird: evidence for natural doping. Journal of 
Experimental Biology. 2007;210(3):413-20. 
203. 
Hulbert AJ, Kelly MA, Abbott SK. Polyunsaturated fats, membrane lipids and animal 
longevity. J Comp Physiol B. 2014;184(2):149-66. 
204. 
Chen DQ, Chen H, Chen L, Vaziri ND, Wang M, Li XR, et al. The link between phenotype and 
fatty acid metabolism in advanced chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2017;In 
Press. 
205. 
Gao L, Wang J, Sekhar KR, Yin H, Yared NF, Schneider SN, et al. Novel n-3 fatty acid 
oxidation products activate Nrf2 by destabilizing the association between Keap1 and Cullin3. J 
Biol Chem. 2007;282:2529-37. 
206. 
Andersen JB, Rourke BC, Caiozzo VJ, Bennett AF, Hicks JW. Postprandial cardiac 
hypertrophy in pythons. Nature. 2005;434:37. 
207. 
Riquelme CA, Magida JA, Harrison BC, Wall CE, Marr TG, Secor SM, et al. Fatty acids 
identified in the Burmese python promote beneficial cardiac growth. . Science. 2011;334:528-
31. 
208. 
Hall JC, Rosbash M. Oscillating molecules and how they move corcadian clocks across 
evolutionary boundaries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993;90:5382-3. 
209. 
Turek FW, Joshu C, Kohsaka A, Lin E, Ivanova G, McDearmon E, et al. Obesity and metabolic 
syndrome in circadian Clock mutant mice. Science. 2005;308:1043-5. 
210. 
Pekovic-Vaughan V, Gibbs J, Yoshitane H, Yang N, Pathiranage D, Guo B, et al. The circadian 
clock regulates rhythmic activation of the NRF2/glutathione-mediated antioxidant defense 
pathway to modulate pulmonary fibrosis. Genes dev. 2014;28:548-60. 
211. 
Gumz ML. Molecular basis of circadian rhythmicity in renal physiology and 
pathophysiology. Exp Physiol. 2016;101:1025-9. 
212. 
Smolensky MH, Hermida RC, Reinberg A, Sackett-Lundeen L, Portaluppi F. Circadian 
disruption: New clinical perspective of disease pathology and basis for chronotherapeutic 
intervention. Chronobiol Int. 2016;33:1101-19. 
213. 
Obi Y, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Streja E, Rhee CM, Reddy UG, Soohoo M, et al. Seasonal variations 
in transition, mortality and kidney transplantation among patients with end-stage renal disease 
in the USA. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2017;32 (Suppl 2):ii99-ii105. 
214. 
Evans AL, Singh NJ, Friebe A, Arnemo JM, Laske TG, Fröbert O, et al. Drivers of hibernation 
in the brown bear. Front Zool. 2016;doi: 10.1186/s12983-016-0140-6. eCollection 2016. 
215. 
Arinell K, Sahdo B, Evans AL, Arnemo JM, Baandrup U, Fröbert O. Brown bears (Ursus 
arctos) seem resistant to atherosclerosis despite highly elevated plasma lipids during 
hibernation and active state. Clin Transl Sci. 2012;5:269-72. 
216. 
Iles TL, Laske TG, Garschelis DL, Iaizzo PA. Blood clotting behavior is innately modulated in 
Ursus americanus during early and late denning relative to summer months. J Exp Biol. 
2017;220:455-9. 
217. 
Brown DC, Mulhausen RO, Andrew DJ, Seal US. Renal function in anesthetized dormant and 
active bears. . Am J Physiol. 1971;220:293-8. 
218. 
Prunescu C, Serban-Parau N, Brock JH, Vaughan DM, Prunescu P. Liver and kidney structure 
and iron content in romanian brown bears (Ursus arctos) before and after hibernation. Comp 
Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2003;134:21-6. 
  
 
42 
219. 
Ortiz RM. Osmoregulation in marine mammals. J Exp Biol. 2001;204:1831-44. 
220. 
Dugbartey GJ, Hardenberg MC, Kok WF, Boerema AS, Carey HV, Staples JF, et al. Renal 
mitochondrial response to low temperature in non-hibernating and hibernating species. 
Antioxid Redox Signal 2017;In Press. 
221. 
Walford RL, Spindler SR. The response to caloric restriction in mammals shows features 
also common to hibernation: A cross-adaption hypothesis. J Gerontol. 1997;52A:B179-B83. 
222. 
Turbilli C, Bieber C, Ruf T. Hibernation is associated with increased survival and the 
evolution of slow life histories among mammals. Proc R Soc 2011;278:3355-63. 
223. 
Storey KB, Storey JM. Metabolic rate depression and biochemical adaptation in 
anaerobiosis, hibernation and estivation. . Quarterly Rev Biol. 1990;65:145-74. 
224. 
Blackstone E, Morrison M, Roth MB. H2S induces a suspended animation-like state in mice. 
Science. 2005;308:518. 
225. 
Blackstone E, Roth MB. Suspended animation-like state protects mice from lethal hypoxia. 
Shock. 2007;27:370-2. 
226. 
Shimada S, Fukai M, Wakayama K, Ishikawa T, Kobayashi N, Kimura T, et al. Hydrogen 
sulfide augments survival signals in warm ischemia and reperfusion of the mouse liver. Surg 
Today. 2015;45:892-903. 
227. 
Dugbartey GJ, Bouma HR, Strijkstra AM, Boerema AS, Henning RH. Induction of a torpor-
like state by 5'-AMP does not depend on H2S production. Plos One. 2015;21:e01366113. 
228. 
Huang L, Dai K, Chen M, Zhou W, Wang X, Chen J, et al. The AMPK agonist PT1 and mTOR 
Inhibitor 3HOI-BA-01 protect cardiomyocytes after ischemia through induction of autophagy. J 
Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2016;21:70-81. 
229. 
Ratigan ED, McKay DB. Exploring principles of hibernation for organ preservation. Transpl 
Rewiews. 2016;30:13-9. 
230. 
Harlow HJ, Lohuis T, Beck TDI, Iaizzo PA. Muscle strength in overwintering bears. Nature. 
2001;409:997. 
231. 
Nelson R, Wahner HW, Jones JD, Ellefson RD, Zollman PE. Metabolism of bears before, 
during, and after winter sleep. Am J Physiol 1973;224:491-6. 
232. 
Lin DC, Hershey JD, Mattoon JS, Robbins CT. Skeletal muscles of hibernating brown bears 
are unusually resistant to effects of denervation. J Exp Biol 2012;215:2081-7. 
233. 
Fuster G, Busquets S, Almendro V, Lopez-Soriano FJ, Argile ́s JM. Antiproteolytic effects of 
plasma from hibernating bears: A new approach for muscle wasting therapy? . Clin Nutr. 
2007;26:658-61. 
234. 
Andres-Mateos E, Brinkmeier H, Burks TN, Mejias R, Files DC, Steinberger M, et al. 
Activation of serum/glucocorticoid-induced kinase 1 (SGK1) is important to maintain skeletal 
muscle homeostasis and prevent atrophy. EMBO Mol Med. 2013;5:80-91. 
235. 
Ivakine EA, Cohn RD. Maintaining skeletal muscle mass: lessons learned from hibernation. 
Exp Physiol. 2014;99.4:632-7. 
236. 
Luo J, Liang A, Liang M, Xia R, Rizvi Y, Wang Y, et al. Serum glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 
1 blocks CKD-Induced muscle wasting via inactivation of FoxO3a and Smad2/3. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2016;27:2797-808. 
237. 
Chung N, Park J, Lim K. The effects of exercise and cold exposure on mitochondrial 
biogenesis in skeletal muscle and white adipose tissue. J Exerc Nutrition Biochem. 2017;21:39-
47. 
  
 
43 
238. 
Xu R, Andres-Mateos E, Mejias R, MacDonald EM, Leinwand LA, Merriman DK, et al. 
Hibernating squirrel muscle activates the endurance exercise pathway despite prolonged 
immobilization. Exp Neurol 2013;247:392-401. 
239. 
Tran MT, Zsengeller ZK, Berg AH, Khankin EV, Bhasin MK, Kim W, et al. PGC1α drives NAD 
biosynthesis linking oxidative metabolism to renal protection. Nature. 2016;531:528-32. 
240. 
Gidlund EK, Ydfors M, Appel S, Rundqvist H, Sundberg CJ, Norrbom J. Rapidly elevated 
levels of PGC-1α-b protein in human skeletal muscle after exercise: exploring regulatory 
factors in a randomized controlled trial. J Appl Physiol. 2015;119:374-84. 
241. 
Oh S, Komine S, Warabi E, Akiyama K, Ishii A, Ishige K, et al. Nuclear factor (erythroid 
derived 2)-like 2 activation increases exercise endurance capacity via redox modulation in 
skeletal muscles. Sci Rep. 2017;7:doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-12926-y. 
242. 
McGee Lawrence ME, Wojda SJ, Barlow LN, Drummer TD, Bunnel K, Auger J, et al. Six 
months of disuse during hibernation does not increase intracortical porosity or decrease 
cortical bone geometry, strength or mineralization in black bears (ursus americanus) femurs. J 
Biomech. 2009;42:1378-83. 
243. 
McGee-Lawrence M, Buckendahl P, Carpenter C, Henriksen K, Vaughan M, Donahue S. 
Suppressed bone remodeling in black bears conserves energy and bone mass during 
hibernation. J Exp Biol. 2015;218:2067-74. 
244. 
Fedorov VB, Goropashnaya AV, Tøien O, Stewart NC, Chang C, Wang H, et al. Preservation 
of bone mass and structure in hibernating black bears (Ursus americanus) through elevated 
expression of analoic genes. Funct Integr Genomics. 2012;12:357-65. 
245. 
Seger R, Cross RA, Rosen CJ, Causey RC, Gundberg CM, Carpenter TO, et al. Investigating 
the mechanisms for maintaing eucalcemia despite immobility and anuria in the hibernating 
American black bear (Ursus americanus). Bone. 2011;49:1205-12. 
246. 
Donahue SW, Galley SA, Vaughan MR, Patterson-Buchendahl P, Demers LM, Vance JL, et al. 
Parathyroid hormone may maintain bone formation in hibernating black bears (Ursus 
americanus) to prevent disuse osteoporosis. J Exp Biol. 2006;209:1630-8. 
247. 
Gray SK, McGee-Lawrence ME, Sanders JL, Condon KW, Tsai CJ, Donahue SW. Black bear 
parathyroid hormone has greater anabolic effects on trabecular bone in dystrophin-deficient 
mice than in wild type mice. Bone. 2012;51:578-85. 
248. 
Ibánez L, Ferrándiz ML, Brines R, Guede D, Cuadrado A, Alcaraz MJ. Effects of Nrf2 
deficiency on bone microarchitecture in an experimental model of osteoporosis. Oxid Med Cell 
Longev. 2014;2014:726590. 
249. 
Thummuri D, Naidu VGM, Chaudhari P. Carnosic acid attenuates RANKL-induced oxidative 
stress and osteoclastogenesis via induction of Nrf2 and suppression of NF-κB and MAPK 
signalling. J Mol Med (Berl). 2017;doi: 10.1007/s00109-017-1553-1. 
250. 
Ni Z, Storey KB. Heme oxygenase expression and Nrf2 signaling during hibernation in 
ground squirrels. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2010;88:379-87. 
251. 
Iaizzo PA, Laske TG, Harlow HJ, McClay CB, Garshelis DL. Wound healing during hibernation 
by black bears (Ursus americanus) in the wild: elicitation of reduced scar formation. Integr Zool 
2012;7:48-60. 
252. 
Barboza PS, Farley SD, Robbins CT. Whole-body urea cycling and protein turnover during 
hyperphagia and dormancy in growing bears (Ursus americanus and U. arctos). Canadian J 
Zoology. 1997;75:2129-36. 
  
 
44 
253. 
Nelson RA, Jones JD, Wahner HW, McGill DB, Code CF. Nitrogen metabolism in bears: urea 
metabolism in summer starvation and in winter sleep and role of urinary bladder in water and 
nitrogen conservation. Mayo Clin Proc 1975;50:141-6. 
254. 
Spector DA, Deng J, Coleman R, Wade JB. The urothelium of a hibernator: the American 
black bear. Physiol Rep. 2015;3:e12429. 
255. 
Walser M. Urea metabolism in chronic renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1998;9:1544-51. 
256. 
Ahlquist DA, Nelson RA, Steiger DL, Jones JD, Ellefson RD. Glycerol metabolism in the 
hibernating black bear. J Comp Physiol. 1984;155:75-9. 
257. 
Nelson RA, Beck TDI, Steiger DL. Ratio of serum urea to serum creatinine in wild black 
bears. Science. 1984;226:841-2. 
258. 
Nakagawa T, Lomb DJ, Haigis MC, Guarente L. SIRT5 Deacetylates carbamoyl phosphate 
synthetase 1 and regulates the urea cycle. Cell. 2009;137:560-70. 
259. 
http://www.bearsmart.com/about-bears/food-diet/.  [ 
260. 
Carlson SM. Synchronous timing of food resources triggers bears to switch from salmon to 
berries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114:10309-11. 
261. 
Lattanzio V, Lattanzio VMT, Cardinali A. Role of phenolics in the resitsnace mechanisms of 
plants against fungal pathogens and insects. In: Imperato F, editor. Phytochemistry: Advances in 
reserach2006. p. 23-67. 
262. 
Overall J, Bonney SA, Wilson M, Beermann A, Grace MH, Esposito D, et al. Metabolic effects 
of berries with structurally diverse anthocyanins. Int J Mol Sci. 2017;15:E422. 
263. 
Durbin SM, Jackson JR, Ryan MJ, Gigliotti JC, Alway SE, Tou JC. Resveratrol supplementation 
preserves long bone mass, microstructure, and strength in hindlimb-suspended old male rats. J 
Bone Miner Metab. 2014;32:38-47. 
264. 
Lee SG, Kim B, Soung do Y, Vance T, Lee JS, Lee JY, et al. Relationship between oxidative 
stress and bone mass in obesity and effects of berry supplementation on bone remodeling in 
obese male mice: an exploratory study. J Med Food. 2015;18:476-82. 
265. 
Moriwaki S, Suzuki K, Muramatsu M, Nomura A, Inoue F, Into T, et al. Delphinidin, one of 
the major anthocyanidins, prevents bone loss through the inhibition of excessive 
osteoclastogenesis in osteoporosis model mice. PLoS One. 2014;13:e97177. 
266. 
Murata M, Nonaka H, Komatsu S, Goto M, Morozumi M, Yamada S, et al. Delphinidin 
prevents muscle atrophy and upregulates miR-23a expression. J Agric Food Chem 2017;65:45-
50. 
267. 
Alvarado JL, Leschot A, Olivera-Nappa Á, Salgado AM, Rioseco H, Lyon C, et al. Delphinidin-
Rich Maqui Berry Extract (Delphinol®) Lowers Fasting and Postprandial Glycemia and 
Insulinemia in Prediabetic Individuals during Oral Glucose Tolerance Tests. Biomed Res Int. 
2016;2016:9070537. 
268. 
Ali BH, Cahliková L, Opletal L, Karaca T, Manoj P, Ramkumar A, et al. Effect of aqueous 
extract and anthocyanins of calyces of Hibiscus sabdariffa (Malvaceae) in rats with adenine-
induced chronic kidney disease. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2017;69:1219-29. 
269. 
Farr JN, Xu M, Weivoda MM, Monroe DG, Fraser DG, Onken JL, et al. Targeting cellular 
senescence prevents age-related bone loss in mice. Nat Med. 2017;23:1072-9. 
270. 
Zhu Y, Tchkonia T, Pirtskhalava T, Gower AC, Ding H, Giorgadze N, et al. The Achilles' heel of 
senescent cells: from transcriptome to senolytic drugs. Aging Cell. 2015;14:644-59. 
  
 
45 
271. 
Chang XY, Cui L, Wang XZ, Zhang L, Zhu D, Zhou XR, et al. Quercetin Attenuates Vascular 
Calcification through Suppressed Oxidative Stress in Adenine-Induced Chronic Renal Failure 
Rats. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:5716204. 
272. 
Momken I, Stevens L, Bergouignan A, Desplanches D, Rudwill F, Chery I, et al. Resveratrol 
prevents the wasting disorders of mechanical unloading by acting as a physical exercise mimetic 
in the rat. FASEB J. 2011;10:3646-60. 
273. 
Cheng KH, Cheng ML, Ing YH, Chiu DT, Shiao M.S., Chen JK. Resveratrol ameliorates 
metabolic disordes and muscle wasting in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. . Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab 2011;301:E853-63. 
274. 
Sen CK, Khanna S, Gordillo G, Bagchi D, Bagchi M, Roy S. Oxygen, oxidants, and antioxidants 
in wound healing: an emerging paradigm. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002;957:239-49. 
275. 
Basu A, Du M, Leyva MJ, Sanchez K, Betts N.M., Wu M, et al. Blueberries decrease 
cardiovascular risk factors in obese men and women with metabolic syndrome. J Nutr. 
2010;140:1582-7. 
276. 
Erlund I, Koli R, Alfthan G, Marniemi J, Puukka P, Mustonen P, et al. Favorable effects of 
berry consumption on platelet function, blood pressure, and HDL cholesterol. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2008;87:323-31. 
277. 
Stull AJ, Cash KC, Johnson WD, Champagne CM, Cefalu WT. Bioactives in blueberries 
improve insulin sensitivity in obese, insulin-resistant men and women. J Nutr. 2010;140:1764-8. 
278. 
Cassidy A, Mukamal KJ, Liu L, Franz M, Eliassen AH, Rimm EB. High anthocyanin intake is 
associated with a reduced risk of myocardial infarction in young and middle-aged women. 
Circulation. 2013;127:188-96. 
279. 
Reiter RJ, Tan DX, Manchester LC, Simopoulos AP, Maldonado MD, Flores LJ, et al. 
Melatonin in edible plants (phytomelatonin): Identification, concentrations, bioavailability and 
proposed functions. World Rev Nutr Diet. 2007;97:211-30. 
280. 
Pedruzzi LM, Cardozo LF, Daleprane JB, Stockler-Pinto MB, Monteiro EB, Leite M, et al. 
Systemic inflammation and oxidative stress in hemodialysis patients are associated with down-
regulation of Nrf2. J Nephrol 2015 Aug;. 2015;28(4) 495-501. 
281. 
Himmelfarb J, Stenvinkel P, Ikizler TA, Hakim RM. The elephant of uremia: oxidative stress 
as a unifying concept of cardiovascular disease in uremia. Kidney Int. 2002;62:1524-38. 
282. 
Noel S, Hamad AR, Rabb H. Reviving the promise of transcription factor Nrf2-based 
therapeutics for kidney diseases. Kidney Int 2015;88(6) 1217-8). 
283. 
Axelsson AS, Tubbs E, Mecham B, Chacko S, Nenonen HA, Tang Y, et al. Sulforaphane 
reduces hepatic glucose production and improves glucose control in patients with type 2 
diabetes. Science Transl med. 2017;doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah4477. 
284. 
Sun W, Yan C, Frost B, Wang X, Hou C, Zeng M, et al. Pomegranate extract decreases 
oxidative stress and alleviates mitochondrial impairment by activating AMPK-Nrf2 in 
hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus of spontaneously hypertensive rats. Sci Rep. 2016;doi: 
10.1038/srep34246. 
285. 
Ali BH, Al-Salam S, Al Suleimani Y, Al Kalbani J, Al Bahlani S, Ashique M, et al. Curcumin 
Ameliorates Kidney Function and Oxidative Stress in Experimental Chronic Kidney Disease. Basic 
Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 2017;doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12817. 
  
 
46 
286. 
Han CW, Kwun MJ, Kim KH, Choi JY, Oh SR, Ahn KS, et al. Ethanol extract of Alismatis 
Rhizoma reduces acute lung inflammation by suppressing NF-κB and activating Nrf2. J 
Ethnopharmacol 2013;146:402-10. 
287. 
Wondrak GT, Villeneuve NF, Lamore SD, Bause AS, Jiang T, Zhang DD. The cinnamon-
derived dietary factor cinnamic aldehyde activates the Nrf2-dependent antioxidant response in 
human epithelial colon cells. Molecules. 2010;15:3338-55. 
288. 
Esgalhado M, Stenvinkel P, Mafra D. Nonpharmacologic strategies to modulate nuclear 
factor eryhroid 2-related factor 2 pathway in chronic kidney disease. . J Ren Nutr 2017;S1051-
2276(17)30030-4)  
289. 
Kwon JS, Joung H, Kim YS, Shim YS, Ahn Y, Jeong MH, et al. Sulforaphane inhibits restenosis 
by suppressing inflammation and the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells. 
Atherosclerosis. 2012;225:41-9. 
290. 
Juurlink BH. Dietary Nrf2 activators inhibit atherogenic processes. Atherosclerosis. 
2012;225:29-33. 
291. 
Pomatto LCD, Wong S, Carney C, Shen B, Tower J, Davies KJ. The age- and sex-specific 
decline of the 20s proteasome and the Nrf2/CncC signal transduction pathway in adaption and 
resistance to oxidative stress in Drosophila melanogaster. Aging (Albany NY). 2017;9:1153-85. 
292. 
de Zeeuw D, Akizawa T, Audhya P, Bakris GL, Chin M, Christ-Schmidt H, et al. Bardoxolone 
methyl in type 2 diabetes and stage 4 chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2013;369:2492-503. 
293. 
O'Mealey GB, Plafker KS, Berry WL, Janknecht R, Chan JY, Plafker SM. A PGAM5-KEAP1-Nrf2 
complex is required for stress-induced mitochondrial retrograde trafficking. J Cell Sci. 2017;doi: 
10.1242/jcs.203216. 
294. 
Vaziri ND, Liu S, Farzaneh SH, Nazertehrani S, Khazaeli M, Zhao YY. Dose-dependent 
deleterious and salutary actions of the Nrf2 inducer dh404 in chronic kidney disease. Free Radic 
Biol Med. 2015;86:374-81. 
295. 
Tebay LE, Robertson H, Durant ST, Vitale SR, Penning TM, Dinkova-Kostova AT, et al. 
Mechanisms of activation of the transcription factor Nrf2 by redox stressors, nutrient cues, and 
energy status and the pathways through which it attenuates degenerative disease. Free Radic 
Biol Med. 2015;88:108-46. 
 
 
 
  
 
47 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors want to thank the Scandinavian Brown Bear Project (in specific O. Fröbert, J.E. 
Swenson, S. Brunberg, J.M. Arnemo and A. Zedrosser). P. Stenvinkel’s research benefits from 
support from Swedish Medical Research Council, Heart and Lung Foundation, Njurfonden and 
EU-funded INTRICARE projects. R.J. Johnson and M. Lanaspa benefit from research support 
from the Veterans Administration (BX002586), Department of Defense (PR130106), NIH 
(DK108859 and DK109408), La Isla Foundation, Solidaridad, and the Danone Research 
Foundation. M. Kuro-o is supported by AMED-CREST, the Japan Agency for Medical Research 
and Development, and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (16H05302, 16K15470). 
W. Arnold’s research has benefited from the grant “Polyunsaturated fatty acids and seasonal 
acclimatization (30061-B25). 
 
Author contributions 
P.S. and R.J.J. launched the idea of studying renal biomimetics. P.S., J.P., M.K., M.L., W.A., T.R., 
P.G.S. and R.J.J. researched the literature, discussed the article's content and wrote the text. All 
authors reviewed or edited the article before submission.  
 
Competing interests 
 
P. S. received grants and honararia from Baxter, Bayer, Astra Zeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Pfizer, Akeiba and Corvidia. M. K. has received grants and honararia from Bayer, Astellas, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb and Kissei Pharmaceuticals. R.J.J. has grants from the National Institute of 
Health, Department of Defence and the Veteran’s Administration. He also is a member of 
Colorado Research Partners, LLC that is developing inhibitors of fructose metabolism. The other 
authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 
Publisher's note 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations. 
 
 
  
 
48 
Key Points 
• Biomimetic studies of non-laboratory wild animals are useful for identifying mechanisms that 
protect or increase susceptibility to disease.  
• Domestic and captive felids are vulnerable to chronic kidney disease (CKD), supporting the 
hypothesis that a high-protein intake — particularly from red meats and in combination with 
dehydration — is nephrotoxic.  
• Extreme models of ageing, such as Hutchinson–Gilford Progeria syndrome and the naked mole 
rat, can be used to investigate the mechanisms of vascular progeric processes in CKD.  
• Current evidence suggests that elevated serum phosphate levels promote ageing and cellular 
senescence.  
• The transcription factor NRF2 may offer protection against diseases in extreme environmental 
conditions and may promote longevity in the animal kingdom; NRF2 agonists (such as resveratrol 
and sulforaphane) might improve the uraemic complications of CKD.  
• Lipid composition of membranes has a role in seasonal acclimatization of metabolic activities 
in the animal kingdom. 
• Hibernating wild bears with anuria are protected against many of the complications observed 
in humans with CKD, such as muscle wasting, osteoporosis and azotaemia; future studies should 
investigate the mechanisms behind these protective effects.  
 
 
  
 
49 
Box 1: The cytoprotective effects of the transcription factor NRF2  
The transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) upregulates 
the expression of cell-detoxifying enzymes in response to oxidative stress. Activators of NRF2 
induce structural changes in Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1), which allows nuclear 
translocation of NRF2. In the nucleus, NRF2 initiates the transcription of >250 target genes, 
such as haemoxygenase, catalase and glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase, which are 
important for antioxidant defences, through binding to antioxidant response elements (see the 
figure).  
Nrf2-knockout mice have increased susceptibility to kidney damage. As impaired NRF2 
activation is observed in renal fibrosis, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and hypertensive 
kidney disease, NRF2-targeting therapies should be of interest for the study of CKD progression. 
Patients on haemodialysis have downregulated levels of NRF2 coupled with an upregulation of 
nuclear factor B (NF-B) (280), and display a phenotype characterized by persistent systemic 
inflammation (81) and increased oxidative stress (281). Given the potential contribution of a 
repressed NRF2 system in premature ageing, both synthetic compounds, such as bardoxolone 
methyl (282) and natural nutrigenomic compounds , such as sulforaphane (283), pomegranate 
polyphenols (284), curcumin (285), ethanol extract of Alisma orientale tubers (286) and 
cinnamon polyphenols (287) that restore NRF2 expression could slow progression and ageing-
related CKD (288). Indeed, since sulforaphane (found in broccoli) inhibits restenosis by 
suppressing inflammation and proliferation of VSMCs in a carotid injury model (289) it has been 
suggested that dietary activators of NRF2 inhibit atherogenesis (290). Moreover, sulforaphane 
suppresses NRF2-mediated hepatic glucose production and attenuates exaggerated glucose 
intolerance by an order of magnitude similar to that of metformin in patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (283). However, forced overexpression of NRF2 might not always be 
enough to restore adaptive responses (291). For example, the potent NRF2 agonist bardoxolone 
methyl increases the risk of heart failure compared with placebo in a clinical trial with patients 
with T2DM and stage 4 CKD (292), which highlights potential limitations of manipulating 
transcription factors. Although activation of NRF2 leads to improved anti-oxidant defences, 
whether this effect is independent of any influence on mitochondrial dynamics remains to be 
  
 
50 
determined. Sulforaphane, for example, modulates the KEAP1–NRF2 antioxidant element 
response signalling pathway, yet is a NRF2-independent inhibitor of mitochondrial fission (293). 
Whether such an effect for bardoxolone contributed to its failure due to excess mortality (292) 
remains to be proven. In future clinical trials of bardoxolone methyl, attention should be given 
to the dose-dependent effects on CKD progression (294). Whereas too little NRF2 activity can 
result in loss of cytoprotection, diminshed β-oxidation of fatty acids and lower antioxidant 
capacity, too much NRF2 activity may perturb the homeostatic balance and promote 
overproduction of reduced glutathione and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADPH) (295) .  
 
 
 
  
 
51 
Figure 1: Novel insights to treatment strategies of CKD from studies of wild animals. Several 
species in the animal kingdom have developed protective mechanisms against environmental 
stresses, and studying these mechanisms can provide insights into novel approaches to chronic 
kidney disease (CKD). For example, despite a long period of immobilization during hibernation, 
bears do not develop azotaemia, osteoporosis, thrombosis, atherosclerosis and muscle wasting, 
which could provide clues for better organ preservation. Naked mole rats (Heterocephalus 
glaber) are protected from oxidative stress, which could help to develop strategies to prevent 
or slow down premature ageing. As weddel seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) are protected 
against prolonged episodes of kidney ischaemia, they could provide insights to prevent acute 
kidney injury. Vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) are protected against the consequences of a 
high-protein intake, whereas felids (such as tigers) are particularly susceptible to CKD, most 
likely due to their high intake of red meat.  
Figure 2: Effect of red meat intake on kidney functions. Epidemiological studies suggest that 
red meat (but not other sources of protein) promotes chronic kidney disease (CKD). Several 
factors have been proposed to be implicated in the disease-promoting effects of a diet rich in 
red meat. Besides hyperfiltration due to a high-protein load (causing a haemodynamic insult), 
elevated levels of trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) generated from gut microbiota and the 
metabolism of trimethylamine (TMA) in the liver could contribute to CKD via renal fibrosis and 
indirectly via atherosclerosis. Additional pathophysiological mechanisms linking a high intake of 
red meat to cardiovascular disease, cancer and CKD have been reported. Increased intake of 
salt, phosphate (PO4), saturated fats, acid production, haeme iron, uric acid, nucleic acids and 
N-nitroso compunds with a high consumption of red meat may also contribute to the observed 
associations between increased red meat consumption and CKD. The intestinal microbiome 
represents a new potential therapeutic target for the prevention of CKD and for treatment of 
cardio-metabolic complications in CKD.  
Figure 3: Extreme models of ageing with a marked discrepancy between chronological and 
biological age can be used to learn more about progeric processes in CKD. Children with the 
rare Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) express truncated lamin (progerin) that 
  
 
52 
mediates premature ageing, especially in the cardiovascular system, resulting in premature 
death from stroke or myocardial infarction. On the other hand, naked mole rats undergo 
negligible senescence and can live for >30 years without signs of cardiovascular ageing. 
Integration of data from these two extreme models of ageing can reveal detailed mechanisms 
of the progeric phenotype. A high biological age is characterized by a premature ageing 
phenotype; which includes vascular stiffness, frailty, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, as well as high 
levels of inflammation, carbonylation and oxidative stress. CKD, chronic kidney disease; SASP, 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype. 
 
Figure 4: Strategies to increase life span, protect organs and avoid renal ischaemia–
reperfusion injury. Premature cardiovascular death and vascular progeria are prominent 
features of CKD. Based on insights from long-lived animals and basic research, several 
treatment strategies have been identified that could be tested for their effect on longevity. 
Activation of the cytoprotectant functions of hydrogen sulphide (H2S), via restriction of the 
sulphur-containing amino acid methionine, is of major interest. Other potential treatment 
strategies that activate anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant pathways include dietary restriction, 
senotherapies, sirtuin (NAD+-dependent protein deacetylases) agonists, 5'-AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK) agonists, mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) agonists, extracellular 
secretory vesicles and H2S-releasing salts. Studies suggest that activation of mTOR and nuclear 
factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (NRF2) signalling by such therapies may increase longevity, 
aid organ protection and decrease the risk for renal ischaemia and reperfusion injuries. Because 
hibernation shares some features and pathways associated with longevity, it can also be 
speculated that hibernation depends on these pathways. 
 
Figure 5: Nitrogen metabolism in hibernating bears. To conserve mobility and muscle strength, 
hibernating bears minimize muscle protein loss and re-utilize the vast majority of urea 
produced, which is mediated by microbial ureolysis and urea-N resorption. Multiple 
mechanisms are responsible for the reduction in serum urea levels during hibernation. Lower 
urea production during hibernation leads to reduced amino acid degradation. Moreover, urea is 
  
 
53 
reabsorbed from urine via solute and water channels, such as urea transporters and aquaporin 
channels, in a leaky bladder wall. The reabsorbed urea is believed to be recycled back into 
skeletal muscle. Urea is also hydrolyzed by urease-expressing gut bacteria into ammonia, which 
is used by enterocytes to synthetize glutamine for incorporation into proteins. Other factors 
that may prevent muscle loss in hibernating animals include activation of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated γ-receptor coactivator 1α (PGC1), for example by cold environmental 
temperature and the low-energy state, and serum-glucocorticoid kinase 1 (SGK1). Urea levels 
decrease in the autumn when food is still available, and the metabolic changes that determine 
urea metabolism may occur already before the bear enter hibernation. Since sirtuin (SIRT) 
stimulators, such as polyphenols in berries and plants, stimulate carbamoyl phosphate 
synthetase 1 (CPS1), which is the first and rate-limiting step of the urea cycle, this may decrease 
urea generation and prepare the animal for low urine output during hibernation. 
 
 
  
 
54 
Table 1: Selected animal models that are useful for comparative physiology studies.  
Species/family 
Area 
Mechanisms and possibilities 
 
 
 
Naked mole rat 
(Heterocephalus glaber) 
Gerontology 
Nephrology 
Oncology 
Cardiology 
These animals have developed protective 
mechanisms against cancer, hypoxia, 
cardiovascular ageing and oxidative stress 
(high NRF2 expression levels).  
Vampire bat (Desmodus 
rotundus) 
Nephrology 
Blood-ingesting bats have a very high intake 
of proteins, which causes azotaemia (high 
serum urea levels). Studies of vampire bats 
may help to better understand how kidneys 
can be protected against protein overload. 
Ursidae family (bears)  
Nephrology 
Endocrinology 
Cardiology 
Orthopedics 
Transplantology 
Bears do not develop insulin resistance 
during summer despite a 25-50% 
accumulation in body weight (fat mass) from 
spring to autumn. Moreover, despite 
prolonged fasting, anuria and immobilisation 
during hibernation, bears are protected 
from muscle wasting, pressure ulcers, 
thrombotic complications and osteoporosis. 
Studies of hibernating bears may help 
identify novel strategies to handle and 
prevent these complications as well as 
better ways of organ preservation. 
Felidae family (cats) 
Nephrology 
Domestic and captive felids have a high 
incidence of CKD. As members of this family 
are obligate carnivores, studies of felids may 
provide information on links between red 
meat consumption, gut microbiota and renal 
disease. 
Phocidae family (seals)  
Nephrology 
Seals can survive prolonged asphyxia during 
underwater dives up to 120 min. Although 
their kidneys are subjected to prolonged 
vasoconstriction during diving, seals do not 
develop acute kidney injury. 
Elephantidae family 
(elephants) 
Oncology 
The risk of elephants developing cancer is 
only 5% compared with 25% in humans, 
although they have 100x as many cells. This 
protection may be due to the 20 copies of 
the tumour suppressor gene TP53, whereas 
humans only have 1 copy (2 alleles).  
Chimpanzee (Pan 
troglodytes) 
Pharmacology 
Chimpanzees have developed ways to 
protect themselves against pathogens by 
  
 
55 
self-medicating with various plant leaves. 
Since one of these plants (thiarubine A) 
contains an antibiotic, systematic studies of 
these plants may help us find novel 
antibiotics. 
Trochilidae  
family 
(hummingbirds) 
Diabetology 
Hummingbirds can switch their energy 
source from glucose to fructose, which 
maximizes fat storage and optimizes energy 
use to power their high-energy lifestyle 
(their heart rate can reach >1200 
beats/min). Despite hyperglycaemia, they 
do not seem to develop diabetic 
complications. 
Testudine family (turtles) 
Neurology 
Turtles have a high anoxic tolerance and 
studies of these animals may help scientists 
to develop novel therapeutic strategies for 
cerebral ischaemia. 
Wood frog (Lithobates 
sylvaticus) 
 
Physiology 
Frozen wood frogs have 10–13-fold higher 
glucose concentrations in muscle and heart 
than other frog species that have been 
frozen in the laboratory and have natural 
antifreeze glycolipids in muscle and internal 
organs to protect their cells. These 
mechanisms help them to survive over-
wintering in average temperatures of -6.3°C 
(minimum -18.1°C) between October and 
May in the interior of Alaska. Studying wood 
frogs can help to understand limits to 
freezing tolerance.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
56 
Glossary terms 
 
Uraemic phenotype 
This phenotype includes several physical characteristics, such as vascular stiffness, sarcopenia, 
frailty, osteoporosis and left ventricular hypertrophy.  
 
Chronic tubulointerstitial fibrosis 
Diseases that affect the physiology of non-glomerular structures (tubules and/or the 
interstitium) in the kidney.  
 
Glomerular haemodynamics  
Regulation of efferent and afferent glomerular arteriolar resistance required to maintain a 
stable GFR. 
 
Urinary specific gravity 
A urine specific gravity test compares the density of urine to that of water.  
 
N-nitroso compounds  
Compounds found in processed meat and are formed endogenously from the intake of nitrite 
and nitrate. 
 
Telomere attrition 
Telomeres are the protective end caps of chromosomes. Attrition, or shortening, of telomeres 
is a form of tumour supression and may be due to inflammation, oxidative stress as well as 
exposure to infectious agents, resulting in limited stem cell function, regeneration and organ 
maintenance during ageing.  
 
Uraemic milieu  
The toxic internal milieu in patients with uraemia is characterized by accumulation of uraemic 
toxins and waste products that promote inflammation, oxidative stress, carbonylation, 
calcification and endothelial dysfunction. 
 
Senescent cells 
Cellular senescence is an irreversible cell cycle arrest mechanism that acts to protect against 
cancer. Senescent cells also have a role in complex biological processes, such as development, 
tissue repair, and age-related disorders. 
 
Hypercapnia 
Abnormally elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) levels in the blood. 
 
High molecular weight hyaluronan 
A high-molecular-weight polysaccharide found in the extracellular matrix, especially in soft 
connective tissues. 
 
  
 
57 
Antagonistic pleiotropy 
Scenarios in which one gene contributes to multiple traits, whereby at least one of these traits 
is beneficial and at least one is detrimental to the organism's health.  
 
PO4 appetite  
A well-documented behaviour in animals that is induced by phosphate deficiency, which is 
especially common amongst herbivores.  
 
Protein–energy wasting  
A process characterized by a decline in body protein mass and energy reserves, including 
muscle and fat wasting and loss of visceral proteins. Protein energy wasting is often associated 
with inflammation and is a strong predictor of mortality. 
 
Caloric restriction 
A reduction in calorie intake without incurring malnutrition or a reduction in essential nutrients. 
In a variety of species, such yeast, fish, rodents and dogs, calorie restriction has been shown to 
slow the biological ageing process. 
 
Sirtuin  
Sirtuins (or NAD+-dependent histone deacetylases) are a class of proteins that possess 
deacylase activity and regulate important biological pathways and cellular processes, including 
ageing, inflammation, transcription and apoptosis. Sirtuin agonists include pterostilbene and 
resveratrol.  
 
Transsulfuration pathway 
A metabolic pathway that involves the interconversion of homocysteine and cysteine via the 
intermediate cystathionine.  
 
Protein sulfhydration 
A post-translational modification that increases the catalytic activity of proteins. Physiological 
actions of sulfhydration include the regulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress signalling, 
inflammation and vascular tension. 
 
One-carbon methyl donor units  
DNA methylation influences the expression of some genes and depends upon the availability of 
methyl groups. Dietary methyl groups are derived from food sources that contain methionine, 
one-carbon units, choline or betaine (a choline metabolite).  
 
Torpor  
A state of reduced body temperature and metabolic rate in animals that enables them to 
survive periods of reduced food availability.  
 
Circadian clock  
  
 
58 
The circadian clock regulates the internal and external activities of organisms, such as sleep and 
changes in metabolism, based on the day–night cycle.  
 
Chronotherapy 
The science of timing drugs according to the circadian clock. This approach is used in various 
clinical conditions, such as cancer, hypertension, seasonal affective disorder and bipolar 
disorder. 
 
Renal lobulation  
Carnivores and most small mammals have smooth-surfaced and uni-pyramidal kidneys, 
whereas primates and Suidae (hogs and pigs) have a smooth-surfaced and multi-pyramidal 
kidney system. Large terrestrial mammals have multi-lobulated and multi-pyramidal kidneys to 
keep the proximal convoluted tubules short. Most marine mammals and bears have each lobe 
separated into renules (reniculated kidney system).  
 
Therapeutic hypothermia (also known as targeted temperature management).  
The induction of mild hypothermia (32–35°C) after cardiac arrest for neuroprotection. 
 
Sedentary behaviour 
A type of behaviour that is characterized by an energy expenditure ≤1.5 metabolic equivalents 
while in a lying, reclining or sitting posture. Typical sedentary behaviours include watching TV, 
computer work, driving and reading. 
 
Denervation 
Loss of nerve supply to a part of the body, which can be due to multiple causes, such as surgery, 
physical injury, chemical toxicity or diseases.  
 
Disuse atrophy 
A type of muscle atrophy that occurs when a muscle is less active than usual. Disuse atrophy is 
a common feature in chronic debilitating diseases and immobility.  
 
Mechanical unloading 
A mechanical manoeuvre or therapy that decreases tissue growth and regeneration. Whereas 
mechanical loading of mammalian tissues is a potent promoter of tissue growth and 
regeneration, mechanical unloading in microgravity causes reduced tissue regeneration via 
stem cell tissue progenitors. 
 
Eucalcaemia  
The maintenance of normal and constant serum calcium levels.  
 
Blueberries 
Blueberries comprise all blue-coloured berries of the vaccinum genus, of which the most 
common is bilberries. Blueberries have a low glycaemic index and are a rich source of fibers, 
  
 
59 
vitamin K, manganese, >15 different anthocyanins (especially delphinidin and malvidin), 
quercetin, myricetin and resveratrol.  
 
Anthocyanins  
Anthocyanins (>600 molecular structures) belong to a class of molecules called flavonoids that 
are universal plant colorants responsible for the red, purple and blue colours in many fruits, 
berries, vegetables and flowers. Due to their contribution in multiple physiological activities, 
the consumption of these molecules is believed to have a substantial role in preventing 
lifestyle-related diseases. 
 
Senolytic effects  
Senolytic compounds selectively induce the death of senescent cells.  
 
Nutrigenomic compounds 
Bioactive nutrients that have an effect on or interact with the genome. Nutrigenomics also 
encompasses the effect of genetic variations on the absorption, metabolism, elimination or 
biological effects of various nutrients.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
60 
Biographies 
 
• Peter Stenvinkel serves as a full professor and senior lecturer at Dept. of Renal Medicine 
Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. He received hos MD 
and PhD from the Karolinska Institutet. His major research interests are vascular aging in CKD, 
risk factors for protein energy wasting and vascular calcification, inflammation, obesity in CKD, 
epigenetics and biomimetics.  
 
• Johanna Painer is a Wildlife Veterinarian (DVM) at the Dep. for Integrative Biology and 
Evolution at the University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. She received her PhD in 
Biomedical Sciences at the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research, Berlin, Germany. She 
works clinically as Wildlife Veterinarian in Zoos and Wildlife Projects worldwide, performing 
diagnostic imaging, anaesthesia and abdominal surgery. Her research interests are 
ultrasonography, anaesthesia, nephrology, biomimetics, seasonal changes, and reproduction in 
wild animals. 
 
• Makoto Kuro-o is a Professor of the Center for Molecular Medicine at the Jichi Medical 
University, Japan. He also has an appointment to the Pathology Department and the Pak Center 
for Mineral Metabolism at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 
U.S.A. He received his MD and PhD from the University of Tokyo, Japan. His major contribution 
is discovery of the endocrine axes mediated by endocrine FGFs and Klothos. His major research 
interests include molecular mechanisms of aging and age-related diseases with special 
reference to chronic kidney disease. 
 
• Miguel A. Lanaspa is an Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Colorado. He 
received his DVM and PhD from the University of Zaragoza, Spain.  His research interest focus 
on the role of dietary and endogenously produce fructose in the development and progression 
of metabolic syndrome and kidney disease. He has also particular interest in the understanding 
of the interplay between nucleotide turnover and purine degradation in leptin signaling and 
food craving in hibernating animals.  
 
• Walter Arnold is full professor at the University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, and head of 
the Research Institute of Wildlife Ecology. He received his PhD from the University of Munich, 
Germany. His major research interest is the ecology-physiology nexus. He studies in various 
large mammals, energetics, thermoregulation, seasonal acclimatization, hibernation, seasonal 
and circadian rhythms, and the physiological functions of polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
 
• Thomas Ruf, Dipl. Biol., Dr rer. nat., is a professor and graduated from the University of 
Marburg, Germany, with distinction in biology. He trained in Mammalian Energetics and 
Reproductive Physiology at Kent State University, USA. Since 2000 he has been Associate 
Professor of Animal Physiology and Ecology at the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 
Austria. His research interests include seasonal adaptation of mammals, hibernation and 
torpor, energetics of reproduction and the physiological roles of polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
 
  
 
61 
• Paul G. Shiels is Professor of Cellular Gerontology at the University of Glasgow and a member 
of GARNER. A graduate of Trinity College Dublin, he obtained his PhD from the University of 
Glasgow, followed by an EMBO fellowship at the NKI (Amsterdam) and work on ageing in 
cloned animals at PPL Therapeutics, Roslin (UK). His research interests include developing the 
kidney as a model of ageing and identifying age-associated genetic and epigenetic determinants 
of health in the general population. 
 
• Richard Johnson is a Professor of Medicine at the University of Colorado who practices clinical 
medicine as well as performs basic and clinical research on kidney disease, hypertension and 
diabetes, with a special interest in sugar (especially fructose) and uric acid. He has an interest in 
comparative physiology, climate change and the emerging epidemics of kidney disease 
worldwide. 
 
 
 
TOC blurb 
 
Some animals have developed mechanisms to protect them from environmental stresses, 
whereas others remain susceptible. Here, Stenvinkel et al. discuss how a better understanding 
of susceptibility and protective mechanisms could provide insights to novel strategies for the 
prevention and treatment of several human diseases, such as chronic kidney disease and 
ageing-associated complications.  
 
 
Subject ontology 
 
Health sciences / Nephrology / Kidney diseases / Chronic kidney disease 
[URI /692/4022/1585/104] 
Biological sciences / Biotechnology / Biomimetics 
[URI /631/61/2049] 
Biological sciences / Physiology / Cardiovascular biology / Cardiovascular diseases / 
Vascular diseases / Calcification 
[URI /631/443/592/75/593/2193] 
Biological sciences / Physiology / Ageing 
[URI /631/443/7] 
 
 
