 Multimodal Imaging and Spatial Analysis of Ebola Retinal
Lesions in 14 Survivors of Ebola Virus Disease
Paul J. Steptoe, MBChB; Fayiah Momorie, CON; Alimamy D. Fornah, DON; Sahr P. Komba, CON;
Elizabeth Emsley, BMBS; Janet T. Scott, BM BCh, PhD; Simon P. Harding, FRCOphth, MD; Matthew J. Vandy, MSc;
Foday Sahr, DSc; Nicholas A. V. Beare, FRCOphth, MD; Malcolm G. Semple, BM BCh, PhD
IMPORTANCE Differentiation between Ebola retinal lesions and other retinal pathologies in
West Africa is important, and the pathogenesis of Ebola retinal disease remains poorly
understood.
OBJECTIVE To describe the appearance of Ebola virus disease (EVD) retinal lesions using
multimodal imaging to enable inferences on potential pathogenesis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS This prospective case series study was carried out at 34
Military Hospital in Freetown, Sierra Leone. Ophthalmological images were analyzed from 14
consecutively identified survivors of EVD of Sierra Leonean origin who had identified Ebola
retinal lesions.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Multimodal imaging findings including ultra-widefield
scanning laser ophthalmoscopy, fundus autofluorescence, swept-source optical coherence
tomography (OCT), Humphrey visual field analysis, and spatial analysis.
RESULTS The 14 study participants had a mean (SD) age of 37.1 (8.8) years; 6 (43%) were
women. A total of 141 Ebola retinal lesions were observed in 22 of 27 eyes (81%) of these 14
survivors on ultra-widefield imaging. Of these, 41 lesions (29.1%) were accessible to OCT
imaging. Retinal lesions were predominantly nonpigmented with a pale-gray appearance.
Peripapillary lesions exhibited variable curvatures in keeping with the retinal nerve fiber layer
projections. All lesions respected the horizontal raphe and spared the fovea. The OCT imaging
demonstrated a V-shaped hyperreflectivity of the outer nuclear layer overlying
discontinuities of the ellipsoid zone and interdigitation zone in the smaller lesions. Larger
lesions caused a collapse of the retinal layers and loss of retinal thickness. Lesion shapes were
variable, but sharp angulations were characteristic. Perilesional areas of dark without
pressure (thinned ellipsoid zone hyporeflectivity) accompanied 125 of the 141 lesions (88.7%)
to varying extents.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE We demonstrate OCT evidence of localized pathological
changes at the level of the photoreceptors in small lesions among survivors of EVD with
retinal lesions. The relevance of associated areas of dark without pressure remains
undetermined.
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2018;136(6):689-693. doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2018.1248
Published online May 3, 2018.
Invited Commentary
page 693
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Paul J.
Steptoe, MBChB, St. Paul’s Eye
Department, Royal Liverpool
University Hospital, Prescot Road,
Liverpool, Merseyside L7 8XP, United
Kingdom
(paul.steptoe@liverpool.ac.uk).
Research
JAMA Ophthalmology | Brief Report
(Reprinted)
689
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 W
e previously conducted a case-control study that
identified retinal characteristics specific to survi-
vors of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in Sierra Leone
using ultra-widefield (UWF) retinal imaging. Of all retinal
lesions characterized in the previous study, only 1 lesion of
characteristic morphological appearance was exclusively
identified in Ebola survivors by 2 masked graders.1 On this
basis, this lesion was deemed most likely to be associated
with Ebola virus infection. Identical lesions have been iden-
tified in other cohort studies of survivors of EVD.2,3 This
expanded analysis provides optical coherence tomography
(OCT) interpretation and functional visual field (VF) analy-
sis to provide further insights into the pathophysiology of
Ebola retinal sequelae.
Methods
A total of 160 survivors of EVD attended the ophthalmology
clinic at 34 Military Hospital in Freetown, Sierra Leone, be-
tween January 2016 and April 2017. Of these, 14 survivors of
EVD (8.8%) met the eligibility criterion derived from the
findings of our previous study, which was having at least 1
Ebola retinal lesion identified on UWF retinal imaging.1 All
14 patients were recalled to the clinic and attended exami-
nations that included OCT of accessible Ebola retinal
lesions. Thirteen of these 14 survivors (93%) were recruited
to this study, and 1 (7%) was excluded because of increased
lens opacity that prevented fundus imaging. One further eli-
gible patient was identified in March 2017 and directly
enrolled into the study.
Informed consent was obtained from all participants. The
study was approved by the Office of Sierra Leone Ethics and
Scientific Review Committee on January 31, 2017, and fol-
lowed the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.4
The appearance of lesions on OCT was categorized, and le-
sion grading concordance was compared by 2 ophthalmolo-
gists (P.J.S. and N.A.V.B.) who were each masked to the grades
of the other grader. The examination protocol is summarized
in eMethods 1 and eFigure 1 in the Supplement.
Results
The 14 participants had a mean (SD) age of 37.1 (8.8) years. Six
(43%) were women. The participants had a total of 27 eyes (1
patient had no view of the fundus available for retinal exami-
nation in 1 eye as a result of previous ocular trauma that had
led to corneal and lens opacity followed by complicated sur-
gery before Ebola infection). We analyzed 141 Ebola retinal le-
sions in 22 of the 27 eyes (81%; including 16 eyes of 8 patients
with bilateral involvement and 6 eyes of 6 patients with uni-
lateral involvement). Images were obtained by OCT of 41 of
the 141 lesions (29.1%) in 20 of the 22 eyes (74% of the 27
total eyes). Characteristics of all 14 patients are summarized
in eTable 1 in the Supplement. Corresponding multimodal
imaging and VF images are available in eFigures 2 through
23 in the Supplement.
Retinal Lesions
Ebola retinal lesions varied in size and shape, but distinctive
linear borders with sharp angulations were characteristic
(eFigure 11 in the Supplement). Multimodal imaging features
varied according to severity and extent of retinal structures in-
volved.Alesionseveritygradingfrom1to5isoutlinedineTable
2 in the Supplement; results are shown in eTable 3 of the
Supplement. The Cohen κ statistic of intergrader agreement
was 0.77 (eTable 4 in the Supplement).
The OCT images of the smallest lesions demonstrated
multiple vertical discontinuities of the ellipsoid zone (EZ)
and interdigitation zone (IZ) with overlying V-shaped
increased reflectance of the outer nuclear layer (Figure 1 and
eFigure 21 in the Supplement). Lesions appeared light gray
in color on fundus photography and were predominantly
nonpigmented.
Peripapillarylesionsdemonstratedvariablecurvaturesde-
pending on the optic disc perimeter location and resembled
thearcuateanatomicalpathwaysoftheretinalnervefiberlayer
(ganglion cell axons) (eFigures 4, 10, 11, and 15 in the Supple-
ment).Visualacuityandcolorvisionwerepreservedinallcases
in the absence of other pathology. Corresponding absolute VF
defects that respected the anatomical horizontal raphe were
observed on 24-2 Humphrey visual field analysis (eFigure 10
in the Supplement) and with a peripheral nasal 24-2 test pro-
tocol (eMethods 2 and eFigure 10 in the Supplement).
Dark Without Pressure
Well-defined areas of dark without pressure (DWP) that
corresponded on OCT imaging to a thinned, hyporeflective EZ
and absent IZ (Figure 2) were seen adjacent to 125 of 141 Ebola
retinal lesions (88.7%) in this series. The extent of DWP was
variable,rangingfromaconfinedcircumferentialmarginalzone
(eFigures 2, 6, 8, 14, 19, and 20 in the Supplement) to larger
defined areas (eFigures 5, 7, and 15 in the Supplement and
Figure 2) and in some cases 360° panretinal involvement
(eFigure16intheSupplement).TheextentofDWPinsomeeyes
appearedtobeassociatedwiththedensityofEbolaretinallesions
(Figure 2 and eFigure 15 in the Supplement). In all cases, DWP
appearedtosparethemacula.Noassociatedvitreousinflamma-
tion or vitreous traction were visible on OCT imaging.
Key Points
Question Can multimodal imaging of Ebola retinal lesions inform
our understanding of their pathogenesis?
Findings In this case-series study of 14 survivors, optical
coherence tomography demonstrated a V-shaped increased
reflectivity of the outer nuclear layer overlying discontinuities of
the ellipsoid zone and interdigitation zone in the smallest lesions.
A collapse of the overlying retinal structures was detected in larger
lesions, corresponding visual field defects respected the
horizontal raphe, and perilesional areas of dark without pressure
(ellipsoid zone hyporeflectivity) accompanied 89% of lesions.
Meanings These findings are consistent with a neuronal rather
than vascular pathogenesis; the relevance of dark without
pressure is undetermined.
Research Brief Report
Multimodal Images and Spatial Analysis of Retinal Lesions in 14 Survivors of Ebola
690
JAMA Ophthalmology
June 2018
Volume 136, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 The 120-point screen, 60-4 threshold tests, and periph-
eral nasal 24-2 protocol (eFigure 10 in the Supplement) were
unable to conclusively identify any definitive VF defect cor-
responding to areas of DWP. The 24-2 Humphrey visual field
analysis of 1 survivor with right hemiparesis after acute
infection demonstrated a right-sided homonymous hemi-
anopia and left inferior quadrantanopia (eFigures 19 and 20
in the Supplement).
Spatial Analysis
Aligned and amalgamated retinal images with corresponding
Ebola retinal lesion loci and longitudinal axis are shown in
eFigure 24 in the Supplement. No overlapping axes or cross-
ing of the horizontal raphe was observed.
Discussion
We present a multimodal imaging analysis of a series of 14 sur-
vivors of EVD with Ebola retinal lesions, as characterized in
our previous case-control study.1 While OCT analysis of larger
lesions involving all retinal layers provides little insight into
pathogenesis, OCT observations of small lesions revealed mul-
tifocal fine discontinuities of the EZ and IZ with overlying in-
creased reflectivity of the outer nuclear layer (Figure 1). These
findingsmirrorthehistologicalappearanceofearlyherpessim-
plex virus retinopathy observed in the contralateral retina via
aretrogradeaxonaltransmissionafterunilateralanteriorcham-
ber viral inoculation.5,6 They have also been observed in the
Figure 2. Extensive Dark Without Pressure
Optical coherence tomographic image through
an Ebola retinal lesion
A
Right eye ultra-widefield retinal image
C
Optical coherence tomographic image between normal
retina and an area of dark without pressure
B
A
B
A, An optical coherence tomographic image through an Ebola retinal lesion;
arrowhead indicates an area of perilesional dark without pressure that
corresponds to a thinned hyporeflective ellipsoid zone and absent
interdigitation zone. B, An optical coherence tomographic image shows the
transition between the normal retina and the circumferential extension of an
area of dark without pressure near the nose. The enlarged inset highlights the
transitional zone. C, Multiple Ebola retinal lesions and associated areas of dark
without pressure are visible in a right-eye ultra-widefield retinal image. The
specific length and direction of the line labeled “
A”precisely correlates to the
length and direction of the cross-sectional optical coherence tomographic slice
shown in image A, and the line labeled “B”correlates to the length and direction
of image B.
Figure 1. Ebola Retinal Lesions
Color fundus image
A
Series of 3 optical coherence tomography images through Ebola retinal lesions
B
1
2
3
1
2
3
A, In the color fundus image, green lines indicate optical coherence
tomographic scan locations for corresponding optical coherence tomographic
images; black arrowheads indicate lesion sites. B, Three optical coherence
tomographic images through Ebola retinal lesions demonstrate the proximity of
multifocal discontinuities of the ellipsoid zone with an overlying V-shaped
increased reflectance of the outer nuclear layer (equal to the reflectance of the
adjacent outer plexiform layer). Black arrowheads indicate lesion sites.
Multimodal Images and Spatial Analysis of Retinal Lesions in 14 Survivors of Ebola
Brief Report Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
June 2018
Volume 136, Number 6
691
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 ipsilateral retina following unilateral anterior chamber viral
inoculation,6 although in all cases in this study, we did not
identify signs of previous anterior chamber uveitis that
would suggest a direct anterior to posterior dissemination.
Peripapillary curvilinear lesions resembling the arcuate
path of the ganglion cell axons were shown on both imaging
and VF analysis to respect the horizontal raphe. Their pres-
ence provides further evidence that EVD involves retinal
ganglion cells and creates a lasting insult to their afferent
photoreceptors.
Possiblepathogenicmechanismsforthecharacteristicreti-
nal lesions observed in survivors of EVD could include retro-
grade neuronal transmission. Vascular ocular dissemination
and involvement of the optic nerve leptomeninges has been
demonstrated in a rhesus monkey model with acute fulmi-
nant Ebola infection.7
Dark Without Pressure
Although nonspecific to Ebola retinal lesions, the frequency
of circumferential marginal zones of DWP around Ebola reti-
nal lesions strongly suggests an association. This is sup-
ported by the correlation between Ebola retinal lesion den-
sity and the extent of DWP in some eyes (eFigure 15 in the
Supplement). Areas of DWP in this study correspond to a hy-
poreflective thinning of the second hyperreflective band and
loss of the third hyperreflective band on OCT imaging, cur-
rently termed the ellipsoid zone and interdigitation zone,
respectively.8 Although controversy continues over the pre-
cise anatomical correlates of these bands,9,10 recent cellular
characterization using immunohistochemistry markers con-
curs that the second band is generated by the photoreceptor
ellipsoids and is probably the result of the high number of mi-
tochondria that they contain, while the third band corre-
sponds to the cone phagosomes located in the top of the reti-
nal pigment epithelium.11
Limitations
Because of the lack of histological evidence, preinfection
imaging, and retinal imaging during acute infection, an abso-
lute temporal association with EVD and the Ebola retinal le-
sions and associated DWP has yet to be established. We have
not compared the OCT findings presented in this study with a
control group of patients with retinal lesions associated with
other pathologies to confirm that these characteristics are
unique to Ebola retinal lesions.
Conclusions
In this study, we demonstrate pathological changes seen at the
level of the photoreceptors on OCT in small lesions. We dem-
onstrate associated areas of DWP that appear as a hyporeflec-
tive, thinned EZ in combination with an absence of the IZ on
OCT imaging. The importance of this finding remains to be de-
termined, and follow-up observations are ongoing. These find-
ings suggest that survivors of EVD in future outbreaks would
benefit from ophthalmologic evaluation, including via OCT
analysis and visual field assessment.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 4, 2018.
Published Online: May 3, 2018.
doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2018.1248
Open Access: This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the CC-BY License.
© 2018 Steptoe PJ et al. JAMA Ophthalmology.
Author Affiliations: Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom (Steptoe, Scott, Semple); St. Paul’s Eye
Unit, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool,
United Kingdom (Steptoe, Emsley, Harding, Beare);
National Institute of Health Research Health
Protection Research Unit in Emerging and Zoonotic
Infections, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
United Kingdom (Steptoe, Scott, Semple); 34
Military Hospital, Freetown, Sierra Leone (Momorie,
Fornah, Komba, Sahr); Department of Eye and
Vision Science, Institute of Ageing and Chronic
Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom (Harding, Beare); Connaught Hospital,
Freetown, Sierra Leone (Vandy).
Author Contributions: Drs Steptoe and Semple
had full access to all of the data in the study and
takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and
the accuracy of the data analysis. Drs Beare and
Semple are co–last authors.
Study concept and design: Steptoe, Scott, Vandy,
Sahr, Beare, Semple.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Steptoe, Momorie, Komba, Emsley, Harding, Beare,
Semple.
Drafting of the manuscript: Steptoe, Momorie,
Komba, Emsley, Beare, Semple.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Steptoe, Scott, Harding, Vandy,
Sahr, Beare, Semple.
Statistical analysis: Steptoe, Scott.
Obtained funding: Steptoe, Scott, Semple.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Momorie, Komba, Emsley, Scott, Vandy, Sahr,
Semple.
Study supervision: Harding, Vandy, Sahr, Beare,
Semple.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Dr
Steptoe reports grants from Global Ophthalmology
Awards Programme Grant supported by Bayer, the
Dowager Countess Eleanor Peel Trust, and
Enhancing Research in Epidemic Situations funded
by Wellcome Trust; nonfinancial support from
Optos, CBM Italia, and Topcon during the conduct
of the study; and grants from National Institute for
Health Research Health Protection Research Unit in
Emerging and Zoonotic Infections and British
Medical Association Humanitarian Fund outside the
submitted work. Dr Sahr reports grants from
Wellcome Trust Enhancing Research Activity in
Epidemic Situations Programme award, Wellcome
Trust, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, USA
Department of Defense HIV/AIDS Prevention
Program, Save the Children UK, US National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, the
World Health Organization, US Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, and European
Commission–Research Seventh Framework
Programme, outside the submitted work. Dr Scott
reports grants from the Wellcome Trust Enhancing
Research Activity in Epidemic Situations
Programme, National Institute for Health Research
Health Protection Research Unit in Emerging and
Zoonotic Infections during the conduct of the
study. Dr Beare reports personal fees from AbbVie,
Wellcome Trust, and Santen, outside the submitted
work. Dr Semple reports grants from National
Institute for Health Research Health Protection
Research Unit in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections
at the University of Liverpool and Wellcome Trust
Enhancing Research Activity in Epidemic Situations
Programme award during the conduct of the study
and grants from Wellcome Trust and Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundations outside the submitted
work. No other disclosures were reported.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding bodies
and organizations who provided equipment
support for this research had had no role in the
design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis, and interpretation of the
data; preparation, review, or approval of the
manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript
for publication.
Additional Contributions: We thank Optos PLC for
their generous donation of the Daytona
Ophthalmoscope, which continues to improve
patient care for the people of Sierra Leone; Topcon
for the loan of their OCT device; Onlime Sierra
Leone Ltd for supplying the clinic with internet
access; CBM Italia for their 2WIN autorefractor
donation; the administration at 34 Military Hospital,
Freetown, Sierra Leone, for facilitating the study;
Research Brief Report
Multimodal Images and Spatial Analysis of Retinal Lesions in 14 Survivors of Ebola
692
JAMA Ophthalmology
June 2018
Volume 136, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jamaophthalmology.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 and Ian Pearce, FRCOphth, MB ChB, BSc, St. Paul's
Eye Unit, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, for
institutional peer review. Dr Pearce was not
compensated for his contribution to the study.
REFERENCES
1. Steptoe PJ, Scott JT, Baxter JM, et al. Novel
retinal lesion in Ebola survivors, Sierra Leone, 2016.
Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(7):1102-1109.
2. Shantha JG, Crozier I, Varkey JB, et al. Long-term
management of panuveitis and iris heterochromia
in an Ebola survivor. Ophthalmology. 2016;123(12):
2626-2628.e2.
3. Hereth-Hebert E, Bah MO, Etard JF, et al;
Postebogui Study Group. Ocular complications in
survivors of the Ebola outbreak in Guinea. Am J
Ophthalmol. 2017;175:114-121.
4. World Medical Association. World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical
principles for medical research involving human
subjects. JAMA. 2013;310(20):2191-2194.
5. Holland GN, Togni BI, Briones OC, Dawson CR.
A microscopic study of herpes simplex virus
retinopathy in mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1987;
28(7):1181-1190.
6. Vann VR, Atherton SS. Neural spread of herpes
simplex virus after anterior chamber inoculation.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1991;32(9):2462-2472.
7. Zeng X, Blancett CD, Koistinen KA, et al.
Identification and pathological characterization of
persistent asymptomatic Ebola virus infection in
rhesus monkeys. Nat Microbiol. 2017;2:17113.
8. Staurenghi G, Sadda S, Chakravarthy U, Spaide
RF; International Nomenclature for Optical
Coherence Tomography (IN•OCT) Panel. Proposed
lexicon for anatomic landmarks in normal posterior
segment spectral-domain optical coherence
tomography: the IN•
OCT consensus. Ophthalmology.
2014;121(8):1572-1578.
9. Spaide RF. Outer retinal bands. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015;56(4):2505-2506.
10. Jonnal RS, Kocaoglu OP, Zawadzki RJ, Lee S-H,
Werner JS, Miller DT. Author response: outer retinal
bands. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015;56(4):2507-
2510.
11. Cuenca N, Ortuño-Lizarán I, Pinilla I. Cellular
characterization of OCT and outer retinal bands
using specific immunohistochemistry markers and
clinical implications. Ophthalmology. 2018;125(3):
407-422.
Invited Commentary
The Ophthalmic Sequelae of Ebola
Gary N. Holland, MD; Anne W. Rimoin, PhD, MPH
In this issue of JAMA Ophthalmology, Steptoe et al1 describe
in detail the characteristics of a specific retinal lesion type
found in 14 survivors of Ebola virus disease, using various
imaging techniques, including ultra-widefield scanning laser
ophthalmoscopy, fundus au-
tofluorescence, and swept-
source optical coherence to-
mography. Structural analysis demonstrated disruption of the
outer retina with perilesional ellipsoid zone hyporeflectivity.
Spatial analysis suggested that lesions are located along axons
in the nerve fiber layer. This article is a follow-up to their 2017
article,2 in which they found several types of retinal lesion in
survivors of Ebola virus disease. But among those lesion types,
the particular type in this article1 was found only in survivors
compared with a large group of control participants.
Readersareundoubtedlyfamiliarwiththemostrecentepi-
demic of Ebola virus disease in west Africa, which lasted from
2013 to 2016 and was notable for the large number of people
affected and for its high mortality rate. By the end of the epi-
demic in mid-2016, the World Health Organization had re-
ported 28 616 Ebola virus disease cases in Guinea, Liberia, and
Sierra Leone, with 11 310 deaths3; however, that leaves a large
pool of survivors, many of whom have experienced ongoing,
debilitating sequelae collectively termed post-Ebola virus
disease clinical syndrome. It includes arthralgias, myalgias,
weakness, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, cardiac
problems, orchitis, increased susceptibility to infections, neu-
rologicalimpairmentsincludinghearinglossandtinnitus,men-
tal health problems, and eye problems with vision loss.
Ebola virus infection can be subclinical, and among those
with Ebola virus disease, manifestations range from mild to
severe. Close contacts may also have long-term health prob-
lems, suggesting that even those who are initially asymptom-
atic may experience the effects of Ebola virus infection. But
the extent to which postinfection sequelae occur in individu-
als with unrecognized Ebola virus disease is unknown, to our
knowledge. Health care workers are also at risk. The magni-
tude of the outbreak in West Africa necessitates a better un-
derstanding of the long-term complications of Ebola virus dis-
ease, which will allow improved estimates of the future health
needs of affected individuals.
Less well known are the long-term survivors of previous
Ebola virus disease outbreaks. We are aware of 34 outbreaks
of Ebola virus disease since 1976 (when the first human cases
were reported), most of which have occurred in the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo or other areas of Central Africa. Eye
involvement has contributed to the long-term morbidity of
these survivors, but the nature of the ophthalmic disorders is
not well understood. There are a few known individuals who
have survived for up to 40 years after being infected during
past epidemics,4 but to our knowledge, the longest reported
follow-up period with a description of Ebola virus disease fea-
tures is only 2 to 3 years.5
Shantha et al6 have summarized a number of reports about
the ophthalmic sequelae of Ebola virus disease in the recent
and past outbreaks. The prevalence of uveitis has ranged from
18% to 34% of survivors; in their own series (from the recent
outbreakinwestAfrica),morethanone-thirdofthosewithuve-
itis were blind. In addition to cases of posterior uveitis, which
can result in the retinal lesions described by Steptoe et al,1,2
there were cases of isolated anterior uveitis and intermediate
uveitis. Other ophthalmic problems included optic neuropa-
thy and other neuroophthalmic problems.6,7 Some affected
eyes have progressed to phthisis.
In 1999, Kibadi et al8 described late ocular complications
in a small number of people who survived a 1995 outbreak of
Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of Congo, but
they provided no detailed descriptions of ocular findings. For
themostpart,bothearlyandlateophthalmiccomplicationshave
beendescribedonlyingeneralterms;specificcharacteristicsof
disease have not been included. Causes of vision loss have of-
ten not been reported for lack of detailed eye examinations.
Related article page 689
Multimodal Images and Spatial Analysis of Retinal Lesions in 14 Survivors of Ebola
Brief Report Research
jamaophthalmology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Ophthalmology
June 2018
Volume 136, Number 6
693
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
