 Life skills, wealth, health, and wellbeing in later life
Andrew Steptoea,1 and Jane Wardlea,2
aDepartment of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom
Edited by Eileen M. Crimmins, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, and approved March 9, 2017 (received for review September 26, 2016)
Life skills play a key role in promoting educational and occupational
success in early life, but their relevance at older ages is uncertain.
Here we measured five life skills—conscientiousness, emotional sta-
bility, determination, control, and optimism—in 8,119 men and
women aged 52 and older (mean 66.7 y). We show that the number
of skills is associated with wealth, income, subjective wellbeing, less
depression, low social isolation and loneliness, more close relation-
ships, better self-rated health, fewer chronic diseases and impaired
activities of daily living, faster walking speed, and favorable objec-
tive biomarkers (concentration of high-density lipoprotein choles-
terol, vitamin D and C-reactive protein, and less central obesity).
Life skills also predicted sustained psychological wellbeing, less
loneliness, and a lower incidence of new chronic disease and phys-
ical impairment over a 4-y period. These analyses took account of
age, sex, parental socioeconomic background, education, and cog-
nitive function. No single life skill was responsible for the associa-
tions we observed, nor were they driven by factors such as
socioeconomic status or health. Despite the vicissitudes of later life,
life skills impact a range of outcomes, and the maintenance of these
attributes may benefit the older population.
life skills | aging | resources | personality | health
L
ife skills refer to a set of personal characteristics and capa-
bilities that are thought to increase chances of success and
wellbeing in life. They include persistence and determination
(“grit”), conscientiousness, self-control, social skills, self-confidence,
optimism, and emotional stability (1–3). They are often described as
“noncognitive” to distinguish them from cognitive abilities and in-
tellectual capacity. The term “skill” is used instead of trait in part to
highlight the notion that these characteristics are malleable rather
than fixed characteristics, although many life skills are partly heri-
table (4, 5). Various life skills have individually been found in
childhood and adolescence to predict greater academic success,
future employment, prosocial behavior, and health (2, 6, 7). Fos-
tering of life skills in early life is of major interest to policy-makers
in education, crime prevention, public order, employment, and
health (8).
Studies of middle-aged and older people have documented as-
sociations between individual characteristics such as conscientious-
ness, optimism, and emotional stability and a range of social and
health outcomes (9–14). However, there have been few investiga-
tions of combinations of attributes (15, 16), and little is known about
the importance of the accumulation of life skills for economic, so-
cial, health, and biological outcomes in later life. We therefore in-
vestigated whether the number of skills manifest at older ages is
related to a broad range of outcomes after taking childhood cir-
cumstances, education, and cognitive ability into account.
Results
We assessed five core life skills in 2010 in a sample of 8,119 men
and women aged 52 to over 90 y old (mean 66.7 y) from the
English Longitudinal Study of Aging (17), a nationally repre-
sentative population cohort. The five skills were conscientious-
ness, emotional stability, determination, optimism, and sense of
control, and an index of the number of life skills was derived
based on the highest response category for each facet (Table 1).
With this classification, 29.4% of respondents had low life skills
(not scoring high on any characteristic), 30.8% had one, 20.6%
two, 11.9% three, and 7.4% four or five skills. Binary logistic
regression and ordinary least squares (OLS) regression were used
to investigate the relationship between the number of life skills
and economic, psychosocial, health, physical capability, and bi-
ological outcomes. All analyses took into account age, gender,
family socioeconomic background, educational attainment, and
current cognitive function, so as to establish that associations be-
tween life skills and outcomes were not due to early socioeco-
nomic endowments or cognitive ability. We observed moderate
associations between the number of life skills and all covariates
except gender (SI Appendix, Table S1); when we regressed each
life skill on the covariates, r2 ranged from 0.009 to 0.056, with an r2
of 0.025 for the accumulated measure of life skills. The intercor-
relations between the five skills were also low to moderate, as
shown in SI Appendix, Table S2, where mean scores for each skill
at every level of the cumulative index are also detailed.
The associations of life skills with economic and psychosocial
factors are summarized in Fig. 1 (SI Appendix, Table S3). The
proportion of participants in the highest quintile of wealth was
positively associated with the number of life skills, ranging from
18.7% for the low to 26.4% in the four- or five-skill category. The
odds ratio (OR) adjusted for covariates rose from 1.22 (95%
confidence intervals, CI, 1.04–1.43, P = 0.015) for participants
with one skill to 1.62 (95% CI 1.29–2.04) for those with four or
five skills, in comparison with those having low life skills. We
found a similar gradient across life skill categories for net family
income, with significantly increased odds of being in the top
income quintile for those with two (OR = 1.23), three (OR =
1.27), and four or five (OR 1.48) skills. Parental occupation,
educational attainment, and cognitive scores were also in-
dependently associated with wealth and income in these analyses
(SI Appendix, Table S3).
Significance
Life skills such as persistence, conscientiousness, and control
are important in early life. Our findings suggest that they are
relevant in later life as well. Higher scores on five life skills
(conscientiousness, emotional stability, determination, control,
and optimism) were associated both cross-sectionally and
longitudinally with economic success, social and subjective
wellbeing, and better health in older adults. No single attribute
was especially important; rather, effects depended on the ac-
cumulation of life skills. Our results suggest that fostering and
maintaining these skills in adult life may be relevant to health
and wellbeing at older ages.
Author contributions: A.S. and J.W. designed research; A.S. and J.W. performed research;
A.S. analyzed data; and A.S. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited with the UK Data
Service, https://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk/ (accession no. GN33368).
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: a.steptoe@ucl.ac.uk.
2Deceased October 20, 2015.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1616011114/-/DCSupplemental.
4354–4359
|
PNAS
|
April 25, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 17
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616011114
 Subjective wellbeing was assessed in terms of enjoyment of life
by using a measure previously shown to predict reduced mortality
and functional impairment (18, 19). Mean scores adjusted for
covariates were higher among respondents with more life skills,
with a significant gradient across skills categories (P < 0.001, Fig. 1).
Conversely, the proportion of participants reporting significant
depressive symptoms declined from 22.8% among those with low
life skills to 3.1% in those with four or five skills. This difference
corresponded to a substantial 93% reduction in multivariate ad-
justed odds of depressive symptoms in the four or five compared
with the low category (SI Appendix, Table S3).
Life skills were associated with a range of social outcomes,
with less social isolation, more close relationships, lower loneli-
ness, and more volunteering among participants with a larger
number of skills (Fig. 1 and SI Appendix, Table S4). In all cases,
we observed a linear gradient across skill categories (P < 0.001).
For example, the proportion of respondents in the highest
loneliness tertile was 49.6% of those with low skills, declining to
10.5% in those with four or five skills. Regular volunteering rose
from 28.7 to 40.0% with increasing numbers of life skills.
The relevance of life skills is evident in the health domain as
well (Fig. 2 and SI Appendix, Table S5). Self-rated health is a
widely used indicator of general health that predicts future mor-
tality (20). The proportion of respondents who rated their own
health as fair or poor (compared with excellent, very good, or
good) was 36.7% among those with low life skills, falling to 6% in
participants with four or five skills. The presence of one of more
serious chronic diseases (e.g., coronary heart disease, cancer, di-
abetes; see SI Appendix for more details) also showed a linear
gradient with increasing life skills, so the adjusted odds of chronic
disease were 0.53 (95% CI 0.44–0.65) in those with the most life
skills. Life skills were inversely associated with the prevalence of
impaired activities of daily living (ADL). By contrast, gait or
walking speed, an objective measure that predicts future mortality
in older population samples (21), was significantly faster among
individuals with more skills.
Objective biomarkers including blood analytes were recorded in
the majority of respondents during a home visit by a study nurse in
2012. Four indicators are shown in Fig. 2, and all demonstrate
favorable associations with life skills (SI Appendix, Table S6).
Thus, the proportion of respondents with low levels of high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) “good” cholesterol decreased from
12.7 to 8.8% across life skill categories. Number of life skills was
positively associated with vitamin D concentration, whereas levels
of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein were lower among
participants with more skills. Central obesity, an indicator of fat
distribution that is particularly relevant to metabolic and cardio-
vascular diseases, was greatest in people with few life skills.
Compared with individuals with low skills according to our cate-
gorization, the odds for central obesity adjusted for covariates
were 0.71 (95% CI 0.59–0.84) in those with three and 0.78 (95%
CI 0.64–0.97) in respondents with four or five skills.
Firm conclusions about the temporal sequence of associations
between life skills cannot be drawn from these cross-sectional
analyses. We therefore carried out longitudinal analyses over a
4-y period (2010–2014) to discover whether life skills at baseline
predicted changes over time in economic, wellbeing, social, and
health outcomes (SI Appendix, Tables S7 and S8). These analyses
were weighted to take account of nonresponse in 2014. Number
of life skills did not predict changes in wealth or income over this
period. However, a greater number of life skills predicted higher
enjoyment of life and less depression at 4-y follow-up even after
controlling statistically for baseline enjoyment and depression,
respectively (Fig. 3). In the social domain, life skills predicted the
number of close relationships and loneliness ratings in 2014,
controlling for 2010 levels.
Life skills at baseline were inversely associated with fair or
poor self-rated health on follow-up, controlling statistically for
baseline self-rated health (SI Appendix, Table S8). Life skills also
predicted the onset of serious illness over the 4-y period; 51.7%
of participants with low life skills developed one or more chronic
disease, falling to 40.4% of the four- or five-skill group, with a
significant gradient across intermediate categories (Fig. 3). Ar-
thritis was the most common new disease in this older pop-
ulation; however, the gradient was preserved when arthritis was
excluded from the analysis. Number of life skills predicted the
emergence of impaired ADLs over the 4-y period in participants
who had no problems with ADLs at baseline; 16% of individuals
in the low skill category developed incident ADL impairment
compared with 9.2% in the 4 or 5 category. Finally, we also
analyzed gait speed in 2014 in respondents aged 60 and older.
Gait speed fell markedly on average in this population, but
remained significantly faster in those with more life skills, even
after baseline differences had been taken into account. It should
be noted that in all of the analyses detailed in SI Appendix, Ta-
bles S3–S8, the unadjusted associations between life skills and
outcomes were greater than in the fully adjusted models.
These findings are based on the accumulation of five life skills,
but it is plausible that one particular attribute dominates the
associations with other outcomes. We therefore conducted a
series of analyses in which we successively removed one of the
attributes from the life skill index. The results (SI Appendix,
Table S9) indicate that the significant linear gradients across
outcomes with the various reduced life skill indices remained
strong. There is little evidence that any one of the five skills is
substantially more important than the others.
We considered three further alternative explanations of re-
sults. The first is that these associations between life skills and
outcomes are driven by variations in socioeconomic resources.
Because we found that a greater number of life skills is corre-
lated with greater wealth, it is plausible that wealth is responsible
for the other associations. Consequently, we repeated all analy-
ses adjusting statistically for wealth at baseline. The findings (SI
Appendix, Table S10) show little evidence for such an effect, in
that both cross-sectional and longitudinal gradients across life
skill categories were maintained when wealth was taken into
account. A second possibility is that health is the key de-
terminant of these findings, with the better health of those with
more life skills accounting for other associations. When we re-
peated the analyses adjusting statistically for self-rated health,
some of the associations between life skills and health-related
outcomes were reduced, presumably because these measures are
Table 1.
Definitions of life skills
Factor
Measure
Proportion of respondents defined
as possessing the skill, %
Conscientiousness
Highest quartile (allowing for ties) on the four-item conscientiousness scale
23.3
Emotional stability
Lowest quartile (allowing for ties) on the six-item neuroticism scale
29.5
Persistence
Maximum ratings to the question about feeling determined
20.5
Optimism
Maximum scores on two optimism items: “I feel that life is full of
opportunities” and “I feel that the future looks good for me.”
24.7
Control
Maximum scores on the statement about having control in most situations
40.7
Steptoe and Wardle
PNAS
|
April 25, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 17
|
4355
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 directly correlated, but gradients across most outcomes remained
robust (SI Appendix, Table S10). Finally, instead of defining the
presence of life skills by categorizing each component, we com-
puted average normalized scores across the entire distribution of
each life skill. When we analyzed aggregate life skills as a con-
tinuous variable, the pattern of results was the same as that
found in the main analyses, as shown in SI Appendix, Table S10.
Discussion
It is well recognized that some highly intelligent people or those
who come from privileged backgrounds may not succeed because
they lack character strengths, whereas less well-endowed individ-
uals who are reliable and self-disciplined do attain their goals (22).
So-called noncognitive life skills are crucial in early life, but our
findings indicate that they continue to be relevant at older ages.
Although causal conclusions cannot be drawn from observational
results, we took cognitive function, education, and family back-
ground into account, ruling them out as being responsible for
associations with life skills. Furthermore, our finding that the
number of life skills is related to favorable patterns across a variety
of domains including economic success, mental wellbeing, social
function, health, physical capacity, and biomarkers argues against
confounding by unmeasured factors. The longitudinal analyses
add further support to the relevance of life skills, although we
cannot control for any trends that took place before the baseline.
The concept of life skill embraces several aspects of personal
capability, and not all were assessed here. We did not have mea-
sures of social skills, empathy, or self-efficacy that are commonly
regarded as relevant skills (1, 7, 22). The study builds not only on
the childhood life skill literature, but on evidence from psychology
Fig. 1.
Cross-sectional associations between life skills and economic, psychological, and social outcomes. The horizontal axis in each graph represents the
number of life skills ranging from low to 4 or 5 (4,5). (A) Proportion of respondents in the top quintile for total nonpension wealth. (B) Proportion of re-
spondents in the top quintile for total weekly net income. (C) Mean enjoyment of life ratings. (D) Proportion of individuals with depressive symptom
scores ≥4. (E) Proportion of respondents with social isolation scores ≥1. (F) Mean number of close relationships. (G) Proportion of respondents with loneliness
scores in the highest tertile. (H) Proportion of respondents who volunteered at least once per month. All analyses were adjusted for age, gender, parental
occupation, educational attainment, and cognitive function. Error bars are SEM.
4356
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616011114
Steptoe and Wardle
 on traits and capabilities that are related to many different adult
outcomes including health, marital stability, labor market outcomes,
credit ratings, and health-related biology (11, 23–25). Combined
associations between optimism, self-esteem, and social support and
self-rated and objective health indicators have been reported (16,
26), whereas optimism, personal control, and self-esteem have been
associated with reduced systemic inflammation in lower socioeco-
nomic status men but not women (15). Research among older men
and women on combinations of the skills measured here is limited
at present. Many other factors are of course relevant to later life
experience, including early life adversity, external circumstances in
adult life, healthy lifestyles, genetic risk, and uncontrollable losses
and events. Cognitive capabilities are also crucial for health and
wellbeing (27), and for success in many domains of life (28), and
interactions between life skills and cognition may be important. This
investigation was focused on documenting associations between life
skills and outcomes, and the processes underlying these relationships
require further study. Apart from the biomarkers, other variables
were based on self-report, so they may be susceptible to reporting
bias. Nevertheless, this work opens up possibilities for exploring ways
in which a range of life skills might be enhanced in people at older
ages, for the possible improvement of health, wellbeing, and social
function in the later stages of life.
Materials and Methods
Data were analyzed from the English Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSA), a
longitudinal panel study of men and women aged 50 and older living in
England that started in 2002 (17). Fuller details are provided in SI Appendix,
SI Materials and Methods. The questionnaires and general methods of data
collection are detailed at www.elsa-project.ac.uk. The primary data for these
analyses were collected on wave 5 of ELSA in 2010, because that was the
occasion on which the measures of life skills were administered. Biomarkers
were assessed in wave 6 (2012), whereas longitudinal analyses of changes in
psychosocial and health outcomes over a 4-y period involved comparison of
wave 5 (2010) with data collected in wave 7 (2014). ELSA was approved by
London Multicentre Research Ethics Committee (MREC/01/2/91), and in-
formed consent was obtained from all participants.
Fig. 2.
Cross-sectional associations between life skills and health and biological outcomes. The horizontal axis in each graph represents the number of life
skills ranging from low to 4 or 5. (A) Proportion of respondents who stated that they were in fair or poor health. (B) Proportion of respondents with one or
more serious chronic diseases. (C) Proportion of respondents with impaired activities of daily living. (D) Mean gait speed on a standardized walking test.
(E) Proportion of respondents reporting fair or poor health adjusted with HDL cholesterol levels below the critical threshold. (F) Mean plasma vitamin D
concentration. (G) Proportion of respondents with central (abdominal) obesity. (H) Mean plasma C-reactive protein concentration. All values were adjusted
for age, gender, parental occupation, educational attainment, and cognitive function. Error bars are SEM.
Steptoe and Wardle
PNAS
|
April 25, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 17
|
4357
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 Measurement of Life Skills. Conscientiousness and emotional stability were
assessed by using the Midlife Development Inventory Personality Scales (29).
Persistence or determination was assessed with a single item, participants
being asked the extent to which they had felt “determined” over the past
30 d (responses ranged from “not at all” to “very much”). Optimism was
measured with two items; participants were asked to rate their agreement
with the statements “I feel that life is full of opportunities” and “I feel that
the future looks good for me.” Sense of control was indexed by the single
item “At home, I feel I have control over what happens in most situations.”
The life skills index was created by summing the number of characteristics on
which participants were in the highest category as detailed in Table 1.
Covariates. Childhood socioeconomic status was assessed in terms of the
occupation of the participant’s father or main carer when they were 14 y old.
Educational attainment was measured as the individual’s highest educa-
tional qualification and divided into five categories. Cognitive capacity at
baseline was measured by aggregating performance on five objective tests
administered by face-to-face interviewers. These tests were immediate re-
call, delayed recall, verbal fluency, and speed and accuracy on a letter can-
cellation task (30). We z transformed scores on the five tests and averaged
these to generate an index of cognitive function. Marital status was not
included as a covariate, because preliminary analyses indicated that it did
not modify associations between noncognitive life skills and social, eco-
nomic, or other outcomes.
Economic and Psychosocial Outcomes. Wealth was derived from a detailed
assessment of the participant’s economic resources, and included financial,
housing, and physical wealth but excluded pension wealth. Income was
computed as total weekly net family income from all sources including
employment, state benefits, pensions, and other assets. Positive subjective
wellbeing was assessed with four items from the CASP19 as detailed (19).
Depressive symptoms were measured by using the eight-item Centre for
Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, with a score of ≥4 being used to
indicate significant symptomatology. Social isolation was assessed by using
Fig. 3.
Longitudinal associations between life skills and psychological, social, health, and functional outcomes. The horizontal axis in each graph represents
the number of life skills ranging from low to 4 or 5 recorded at baseline (2010). (A) Mean enjoyment of life scores in 2014 adjusted for enjoyment of life in
2010. (B) Proportion of individuals with depressive symptom scores ≥4 in 2014 adjusted for 2010 scores. (C) Mean number of close relationships in
2014 adjusted for close relationships in 2010. (D) Mean loneliness in 2014 adjusted for loneliness in 2010. (E) Proportion of respondents reporting fair or poor
health adjusted for self-rated health in 2010. (F) Proportion of respondents with one or more incident serious chronic diseases between 2010 and 2014.
(G) Proportion of respondents with incident impaired activities of daily living between 2010 and 2014. (H) Mean gait speed on the standardized walking test
in 2014 adjusted for gait speed in 2010. All values were additionally adjusted for age, gender, parental occupation, educational attainment, and cognitive
function. Error bars are SEM.
4358
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616011114
Steptoe and Wardle
 an index related to extent of contact with children, other family members,
and friends, and participation in organizations and clubs. Number of close
relationships was determined by self-report, and loneliness by using the
three-item short form of the Revised UCLA loneliness scale (31). Volunteer-
ing was assessed as a measure of prosocial behavior. Participants were asked
whether they carried out any volunteer work, and those who volunteered at
least once per month were classified as volunteers.
Health, Disability, and Biomarkers. Self-rated health was assessed on a five-
point rating, and we analyzed the proportion of individuals giving fair/
poor ratings. Information about six doctor-diagnosed chronic diseases (cor-
onary heart disease, stroke, cancer, diabetes, chronic lung disease, and ar-
thritis) was collected. Participants were questioned about the presence of
impairments in six ADLs (e.g., difficulty in bathing or showering) that lasted at
least 6 mo. Gait speed was assessed with two eight-foot walking tests from a
standing start by respondents aged ≥60 y. The health-related biomarkers
were obtained during a separate home visit by a study nurse. Central obesity
was measured as waist circumference, with gender-specific cut-points used
to define central obesity. Blood samples were analyzed for HDL cholesterol,
vitamin D (plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D), and high-sensitivity plasma C-reactive
protein.
Statistical Analysis. The proportion of respondents who possessed all five life
skills was small (137 or 1.7%), so we combined the groups with four or five skills
in a single category, making five categories in all. We used OLS regression to
analyze associations between life skills and continuously distributed outcomes,
whereas binary logistic regression was used to analyze the categorical out-
comes, with the low skill group as the reference category. All models included
age, sex, parental occupation, educational attainment, and cognition. SI Ap-
pendix, Tables S3–S8 detail unadjusted and fully adjusted associations be-
tween life skills and outcomes. Like all panel studies of the general population,
ELSA shows attrition across waves of data collection, with older, less affluent,
and less educated participants being more likely to drop out (17). We there-
fore used weights in the longitudinal analyses to correct for sampling proba-
bilities and for differential nonresponse and to calibrate back to the 2011
National Census population distributions for age and sex.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The English Longitudinal Study of Ageing was
developed by a team of researchers based at the University College London,
NatCen Social Research, the Institute for Fiscal Studies, and the University of
Manchester. The data were collected by NatCen Social Research. The funding
is provided by National Institute of Aging Grant R01AG017644 and a
consortium of UK government departments coordinated by the Economic
and Social Research Council. A.S. is supported by the British Heart
Foundation, and J.W. was funded by Cancer Research UK. The developers
and funders of the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing and the UK Data
Archive do not bear any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations
presented here.
1. Gutman LM, Schoon I (2013) The Impact of Non-Cognitive Skills on Outcomes for
Young People (Educ Endowment Fund Cabinet Office, London).
2. Heckman JJ, Stixrud J, Urzua S (2006) The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. J Labor Econ 24:411–482.
3. Putnam RD (2015) Our Kids: The American Dream in Crisis (Simon & Schuster, New
York).
4. Bergeman CS, et al. (1993) Genetic and environmental effects on openness to expe-
rience, agreeableness, and conscientiousness: An adoption/twin study. J Pers 61:
159–179.
5. Belsky DW, et al. (2016) The genetics of success: How single-nucleotide polymor-
phisms associated with educational attainment relate to life-course development.
Psychol Sci 27:957–972.
6. Moffitt TE, et al. (2011) A gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth,
and public safety. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:2693–2698.
7. Kautz T, Heckman JJ, Diris R, ter Weel B, Borghans L (2014) Fostering and Measuring
Skills: Improving cognitive and non-cognitive skills to promote lifetime success. OECD
Education Working Papers (Organ for Econ Co-operation Dev, Paris).
8. Heckman JJ, Mosso S (2014) The economics of human development and social mo-
bility. Annu Rev Econ 6:689–733.
9. Hill PL, Turiano NA, Hurd MD, Mroczek DK, Roberts BW (2011) Conscientiousness and
longevity: An examination of possible mediators. Health Psychol 30:536–541.
10. Rasmussen HN, Scheier MF, Greenhouse JB (2009) Optimism and physical health: A
meta-analytic review. Ann Behav Med 37:239–256.
11. Roberts BW, Kuncel NR, Shiner R, Caspi A, Goldberg LR (2007) The power of per-
sonality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic status, and
cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspect Psychol Sci 2:
313–345.
12. Bogg T, Roberts BW (2013) The case for conscientiousness: Evidence and implications
for a personality trait marker of health and longevity. Ann Behav Med 45:278–288.
13. Steptoe A, Poole L (2016) Control and stress. Stress: Concepts, Cognition, Emotion,
and Behavior, ed Fink G (Academic, London), pp 73–80.
14. Jokela M, et al. (2013) Personality and all-cause mortality: Individual-participant
meta-analysis of 3,947 deaths in 76,150 adults. Am J Epidemiol 178:667–675.
15. Elliot AJ, Chapman BP (2016) Socioeconomic status, psychological resources, and in-
flammatory markers: Results from the MIDUS study. Health Psychol 35:1205–1213.
16. Matthews KA, Räikkönen K, Gallo L, Kuller LH (2008) Association between socio-
economic status and metabolic syndrome in women: Testing the reserve capacity
model. Health Psychol 27:576–583.
17. Steptoe A, Breeze E, Banks J, Nazroo J (2013) Cohort profile: The English longitudinal
study of ageing. Int J Epidemiol 42:1640–1648.
18. Steptoe A, Wardle J (2012) Enjoying life and living longer. Arch Intern Med 172:
273–275.
19. Zaninotto P, Wardle J, Steptoe A (2016) Sustained enjoyment of life and mortality at
older ages: Analysis of the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. BMJ 355:i6267.
20. DeSalvo KB, Bloser N, Reynolds K, He J, Muntner P (2006) Mortality prediction with a
single general self-rated health question. A meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med 21:
267–275.
21. Studenski S, et al. (2011) Gait speed and survival in older adults. JAMA 305:50–58.
22. Heckman JJ, Rubinstein Y (2001) The importance of noncognitive skills: Lessons from
the GED testing program. Am Econ Rev 91:145–149.
23. Israel S, et al. (2014) Translating personality psychology to help personalize pre-
ventive medicine for young adult patients. J Pers Soc Psychol 106:484–498.
24. Israel S, et al. (2014) Credit scores, cardiovascular disease risk, and human capital. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 111:17087–17092.
25. Matthews KA, Gallo LC (2011) Psychological perspectives on pathways linking socio-
economic status and physical health. Annu Rev Psychol 62:501–530.
26. Schöllgen I, Huxhold O, Schüz B, Tesch-Römer C (2011) Resources for health: Differ-
ential effects of optimistic self-beliefs and social support according to socioeconomic
status. Health Psychol 30:326–335.
27. Schaefer JD, et al. (2016) Early-life intelligence predicts midlife biological age.
J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 71:968–977.
28. Deary IJ, Weiss A, Batty GD (2010) Intelligence and personality as predictors of illness
and death: How researchers in differential psychology and chronic disease epidemi-
ology are collaborating to understand and address health inequalities. Psychol Sci
Public Interest 11:53–79.
29. Lachman ME, Weaver SL (1997) Midlife Development Inventory (MIDI) Personality
Scales: Scale Construction and Scoring (Brandeis Univ, Waltham, MA).
30. Marmot M, Banks J, Blundell R, Lessof C, Nazroo J, eds (2003) Health, Wealth and
Lifestyles of the Older Population in England (Inst Fiscal Studies, London).
31. Hughes ME, Waite LJ, Hawkley LC, Cacioppo JT (2004) A short scale for measuring
loneliness in large surveys: Results from two population-based studies. Res Aging 26:
655–672.
Steptoe and Wardle
PNAS
|
April 25, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 17
|
4359
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
