 Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2018) 48:4287–4292 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-018-3664-0
BRIEF COMMUNICATION
“Life is Much More Difficult to Manage During Periods”: Autistic 
Experiences of Menstruation
Robyn Steward1 · Laura Crane1 · Eilish Mairi Roy1 · Anna Remington1 · Elizabeth Pellicano1,2 
Published online: 7 July 2018 
© The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
Although menarche and menstruation are perceived to be overwhelmingly negative events for developmentally-disabled 
women, women’s health issues remain under-researched in autism. Here, we conducted a preliminary investigation of 
the experiences of post-menarcheal autistic (n = 123) and non-autistic (n = 114) respondents to a brief online survey. 
Although autistic respondents reported many overlapping issues and experiences with non-autistic respondents, they 
also highlighted distinct—and sometimes-distressing—issues relating to menstruation, especially a cyclical ampli-
fication of autistic-related challenges, including sensory differences and difficulties with regulating emotion and 
behavior, which had a significant, negative impact on their lives. These initial findings call for systematic research on 
the potential causes, correlates and consequences of menstrual-related problems in autistic individuals—across the 
spectrum and the lifespan.
Keywords Autism · Women’s health · Menstruation · Menarche · Self-regulation · Sensory sensitivities
Introduction
The onset of menses (menarche) is an important—and often 
challenging (Burrows and Johnson 2005)—transition in any 
woman’s life. This is especially the case for developmen-
tally-disabled women, who may experience menarche and 
menstruation differently—and more negatively—compared 
to non-disabled women (Ditchfield and Burns 2004; Rodg-
ers and Lipscombe 2005). These include frequent reports 
of dysmenorrhoea (painful periods), menorrhagia (heavy 
periods), menstrual hygiene issues and cyclical mood and 
behavioral changes, akin to premenstrual syndrome (PMS) 
[and its more severe form, premenstrual dysphoric disorder; 
American Psychiatric Association (APA) 2013] (Burke et al. 
2010; Jeffery et al. 2013; Mason and Cunningham 2008; 
Rodgers et al. 2006).
Remarkably little is known, however, about the men-
strual experiences of women on the autism spectrum. This 
paucity of research may be unsurprising given the male 
predominance in autism (see Loomes et al. 2017) but the 
few existing studies in this area give cause for concern. 
Although there are apparently no significant differences in 
the age of menarche between autistic girls and girls with 
other developmental conditions (Burke et al. 2010), there 
are several reports (including case studies) of marked 
changes linked to menarche and menstruation in autistic 
girls and women (the majority with additional intellectual 
disabilities), including cyclical self-injurious behaviors 
(Lee 2004), mood symptoms and emotional dysregulation 
(Burke et al. 2010; Hamilton et al. 2011; Lee 2004; Obaydi 
and Puri 2008), and an amplification of autistic symptoms 
(sensory issues and repetitive behaviors; Hamilton et al. 
2011; Lee 2004).
One observational study with women with additional 
intellectual disabilities living in residential homes and 
care units in England reported an alarming result: of the 
26 autistic women sampled, 92% (n = 24) fulfilled DSM-
IV (APA 2000) criteria for late luteal phase dysphoric 
disorder (a severe form of PMS), compared with only 
four (11%) of the 36 non-autistic women (Obaydi and 
Puri 2008). The lack of research on, and awareness of, 
 
* Elizabeth Pellicano 
 
l.pellicano@ucl.ac.uk; liz.pellicano@mq.edu.au
1 
Centre for Research in Autism and Education (CRAE), UCL 
Institute of Education, University College London, London, 
UK
2 
Department of Educational Studies, Macquarie University, 
29 Wally’s Walk, Sydney 2109, Australia
 4288
 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2018) 48:4287–4292
1 3
these purportedly higher rates of premenstrual symptoms 
in autistic women means both that their potential cause(s) 
remain unknown and that, worryingly, autistic women are 
unlikely to receive the gynaecological care they may need. 
Moreover, to our knowledge, no existing study has directly 
examined whether these apparent premenstrual symptoms 
are a problem for the person concerned, from their own 
perspective.
This preliminary study—co-produced by an autistic 
woman (RS) and non-autistic female researchers (LC, ER, 
AR, LP)—sought to redress the imbalance in research, by 
asking autistic and non-autistic people about their expe-
riences of menstruation through an online survey. Spe-
cifically, we sought to understand the kind of information 
they would have liked to have known at menarche, and 
whether, for autistic participants specifically, they felt being 
autistic affected, or was affected by, menstruation and its 
manifestations.
Method
The survey began with a series of background items, includ-
ing participants’ age, gender and connection with autism. 
These items were followed by questions on their experi-
ences of menstruation and of growing up more broadly. 
The three most relevant to the current report are analysed 
below,1 including (1) “How did you first learn about peri-
ods?” (closed question), (2) “What information do you think 
would have been important to have before you started your 
period?” (open question), and (3) “Do you think that you 
have experienced difficulties with periods that are related to 
autism?” (open question).
Participants were recruited via a convenience sam-
pling method (using website posts and social media). In 
all, 459 people completed the survey. People were allowed 
to identify more than one connection—as being autistic 
themselves, a parent, a professional or a sibling—to reflect 
potential multiple roles, but were also asked to identify the 
perspective from which they responded to the survey (e.g., 
as autistic). For this report, we focus on those participants 
who identified themselves to be ‘formally diagnosed as 
autistic’ (n = 144)2 or ‘non-autistic’ (n = 132). Of these 276 
participants, 39 reported never having experienced periods 
(n = 11) or did not answer all relevant questions (n = 28) 
and were excluded from the dataset. Subsequent analyses 
were therefore based on complete responses from 237 par-
ticipants (autistic: n = 123; non-autistic: n = 114), ranging 
in age from 16 to over 60 years (see Table 1 for participant 
details).
The survey took approximately 10 min to complete 
and was hosted by SurveyMonkey between February and 
August 2016. All participants gave informed consent to 
take part prior to participation. Ethical approval for this 
study was granted by the Research Ethics Committee at 
UCL Institute of Education, University College London 
(REC 874).
Data Analysis
Descriptive results for the initial, closed questions are pre-
sented first. Next, we analysed the qualitative responses 
across the two open-ended questions using thematic analy-
sis (Braun and Clarke 2006). We used an inductive (“bot-
tom up”) approach, providing descriptive overviews of the 
key features of the semantic content of the data within an 
essentialist framework. We independently familiarised our-
selves with the data, and met several times to agree the initial 
codes, review the results, resolve discrepancies and decide 
on final themes and subthemes.
Table 1  Background information for respondents to the online survey 
for each (autistic, non-autistic) group
a 
Gender categories were identified in direct consultation with the 
autistic community
Autistic 
(n = 123)
Non-
autistic 
(n = 114)
Age range (in years)
 16–18
9
6
 19–25
33
26
 26–31
33
20
 32–45
36
44
 46–59
12
13
 60+
0
5
Gendera
 Female (including transgender women)
83
96
 Male (including transgender men)
7
0
 Non-binary
26
15
 Other
6
3
 Prefer not to say
1
0
Also identified as a:
 Parent
14
18
 Professional
14
16
 Sibling
13
5
1 Two further questions were asked, relating to growing up more gen-
erally and about strategies for helping school-age children to access 
the toilet during their period. These questions were not analyzed in 
this current study, but were designed for use by the first author, to 
inform the content of a forthcoming book (Steward, in press).
2 Note that some individuals reported that they either were going 
through the process of a clinical diagnosis (n = 32) or were self-diag-
nosed as autistic (n = 88). These participants were excluded from all 
analyses.
 4289
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2018) 48:4287–4292 
1 3
Results
Quantitative Results
The majority of participants first obtained information 
about periods through either their parents or through 
school (see Table 2), with some finding out about menstru-
ation from friends and printed material, and, for a handful 
of people, from medical professionals or the internet. This 
pattern was similar across groups, with the exception of 
fewer autistic women discovering information from friends 
than non-autistic women.
Qualitative Results
Figure 1 displays themes and subthemes identified from the 
analysis. For the sake of brevity, we report the themes below 
collapsed across both groups (subthemes are italicised). 
When attributing quotes, ‘A’ refers to autistic respondents, 
‘NA’ to non-autistic respondents. Participant numbers are 
included to illustrate the breadth of responses.
It’s a Normal and Natural Part of Life
Respondents spoke of the taboo associated with having 
periods. They emphasised the need to reassure young 
people that periods are “not dirty” (A23) or “something 
to fear or be ashamed of” (NA36) or “embarrassed by” 
(NA65); rather, they are a “healthy” (NA96), “natural” 
(A6) and “normal part of growing up” (NA68). They also 
felt that it was important for everyone—even those who 
have not experienced periods—to understand this, so 
that they “understand what their mum/sister/etc. is going 
Table 2  Participants’ responses to the question, “How did you first 
learn about periods?”
The total numbers exceed the number of participants in each group 
because participants could endorse more than one category. Most 
of the responses in the ‘other’ category related to printed material 
(books, magazines or leaflets), “my sister” or “when it happened”
Autistic (n = 123)
Non-autis-
tic (n = 114)
The internet
3
3
Friends
13
26
Parents
70
66
School
55
46
Doctor or other medical profes-
sional
1
5
I don’t know
6
6
Other
19
25
Fig. 1  Respondents’ experiences of menstrual-related issues: themes and subthemes
 4290
 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2018) 48:4287–4292
1 3
through” (A71). Both autistic and non-autistic respond-
ents further reported that young people need to under-
stand “how their body works and why” (NA94), including 
biological information about “how the menstrual cycle 
and organs work, and the anatomy of the vagina/vulva/
uterus etc.” (NA59), and “why [periods] happen” (A57). 
Autistic respondents in particular wanted “more detail 
about this” (A73).
Understanding the Varied Ways it Can Affect You
Respondents highlighted the need for young people to 
know “what happens before their first period” (A8) so that 
it “doesn’t come as a terrifying surprise” (NA16). In par-
ticular, they should understand that the cramps that come 
with periods “can be painful” (NA48), and that there 
can be other physical symptoms, too, including bloating 
(water retention), “tender breasts” (A22), “skin changes” 
(A110) or acne, changes to eating habits, constipation, and 
“the way it affects your weight” (NA60). Several autistic 
respondents noted specifically that “it was helpful to know 
beforehand that I wasn’t dying” (A7) from the bleeding 
and/or pain.
Respondents also cited the many ways that “it can affect 
your moods” (NA60)—“before and possibly after your 
period, not just during” (A29)—and that these changes 
“are normal” (A66). Some respondents noted the impor-
tance of providing an explanation of these “mood swings” 
(A78) and “the reason one is acting in a particular way” 
(NA52). Indeed, one autistic participant described, “about 
once a month, I get anxious and melancholic for no reason. 
This mood lasts for a day or two, at which point my period 
arrives, and my ‘normal’ mood resumes. Understanding 
that about myself makes that melancholy a lot more bear-
able/manageable and helps my partner understand my 
behavior/mood” (A52).
Both autistic and non-autistic participants emphasised 
the need to improve knowledge on “how long it lasts, how 
often it happens, how heavy/light it will be” (A84) but, 
critically, that periods vary widely from person to person. 
Indeed, they felt that knowing that “everyone gets them 
differently” (A85) would have been helpful for them to 
understand “that what’s normal for me is not what’s nor-
mal for everyone else” (NA41). One autistic respondent 
summed it up: “Some people get them heavy, some people 
get them light, not everybody gets them regularly, not eve-
rybody gets them exactly 28 days apart, some people get 
pains, some people get moody, sometimes medical condi-
tions make them irregular, some people get them for more 
than a week at a time, some people get them for only a 
couple of days” (A85).
Understanding What’s Not “My Normal”
Respondents felt that it was important to “pay attention to 
what normal is for me, and to know how to react if my nor-
mal changes” (NA41). They spoke of the need for young 
people to “know how to track their cycles effectively so that 
they can be aware of how their body is … and be prepared 
for any irregularities that might occur” (A22), including 
the amount of pain, the amount of blood and the frequency 
between periods. They stressed the need to know how to dis-
tinguish between, for example, “normal period cramps and 
unusually painful periods” (NA60) to identify “how much 
is acceptable before you need to worry” (NA71) and “what 
could be a warning sign of a medical problem” (A65).
Knowing What to Expect is Key
Respondents suggested that young people needed practical 
information on the many varied products to use, including a 
“chance to familiarize themselves with a variety of products 
before they start” (A50), information on “how to choose 
menstrual hygiene products” (NA19), where to get them, and 
“disposal methods” (A28). They stressed that introductory 
information should be accessible, “breaking down initial 
concepts” (A15) with a “step-by-step ‘this is how you deal’ 
instructions and tips” (A42), particularly for young autistic 
people. They also wanted young people to know about the 
different strategies available to relieve pain (including medi-
cation), and how to deal with mood swings and other symp-
toms or issues like “acne, cramps, bloating, nausea” (NA35).
Respondents also noted that being prepared is essential. 
This preparation could include a “script for what to say to a 
nurse or parent when you start your first one or are unpre-
pared” (A50), knowing “what to do at school, if you are out 
in a public place, if you are on holiday” (NA113) and having 
an “action plan for mishaps (stains, stains in public places, 
forgot supplies, etc.)” (NA50). They also wanted to reas-
sure them that “it’s ok to tell your teachers if you need more 
time for the bathroom” (NA38) and that it was important to 
identify “who to ask questions about periods” (NA13) and 
who to turn to for support, especially “if you might feel there 
is a problem” (A104).
Periods Exacerbate Autism‑Related Challenges
Although some participants were unsure whether their men-
strual experiences were related to being autistic (“I have 
only ever been an autistic person having a period!”; A80), 
many autistic participants felt that their “symptoms worsen 
dramatically” (A47), often making “life much more difficult 
to manage during periods” (A93). One participant stated: 
“autism does play a role. It can become much more over-
whelming and harder to maintain control of the things that 
 4291
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2018) 48:4287–4292 
1 3
already take a lot of effort for us to keep on top of, during 
a period” (A13). Participants highlighted sensory and self-
regulation difficulties in particular.
Respondents felt that sensory issues are intensified during 
menstruation, as described above. For the most part, these 
related to pre-existing hypersensitivities becoming “extra 
sensitive during my period” (A107), such that “everything is 
magnified when it’s that time of the month” (A78). Partici-
pants described “being sensitive to the smell of the blood” 
(A17), “finding my skin and body more sensitive in general” 
(A43), being “more sensitive and reactive to noise, touch 
and visual stimuli” (A99), and “struggling the most with the 
physical pain from cramps” (A22). Pain could be particu-
larly difficult to bear: “When it’s at its worst, I find myself 
unable to focus well because all I can focus on is the ache 
and the sense of where in my body that pain lives” (A44). 
Participants also reported how these hypersensitivities and 
the “sensory overload [that] happens far more frequently 
just before and during a period” (A103) further exacerbated 
other autistic experiences, including “dealing with unrelated 
problems caused by my autism (harder to filter noise etc.)” 
(A28) and being “more prone to self-injurious behavior” 
(A94).
Participants also highlighted how difficulties regulat-
ing emotions and behavior worsened during their period. 
Some noted that “executive dysfunction gets worse when 
I have cramps” (A98), which “made dealing with periods 
difficult—keeping clean and changing pads” (A74). They 
also highlighted difficulties “recognising and managing my 
emotions, which is amplified just before and during my peri-
ods” (A45) and even “an inability to describe my emotions 
while experiencing PMS” (A41). One participant explained: 
“understanding my own emotions has always been difficult 
for me so any mood swings made life even more difficult” 
(A17). They also reported that exaggerated difficulties often 
led to “heightened anxiety” (A99) and, most commonly, 
meltdowns: “I have more meltdowns, and worse meltdowns, 
just before my period” (A30). One participant also noted that 
their epilepsy was affected, with increased seizures during 
menstruation. These cyclical symptoms were often so severe 
that participants sought (usually hormonal) medication to 
manage them.
Discussion
This preliminary study directly elicited, for the first time, 
autistic people’s views and experiences on menarche and 
menstruation. Notably, autistic and non-autistic respond-
ents cited many similar issues, including needing to under-
stand what was “normal” in terms of menstrual cycle 
length, amount and duration of flow, the often-dramatic 
effects that menstruation can have on mood, behavior and 
bodily symptoms and, importantly, what was normal for 
them. The importance of educating young people and their 
parents in what to expect at menarche has been empha-
sized previously (American Academy of Pediatrics 2006) 
but rarely so for young autistic people, who may be at 
increased risk for serious premenstrual-related disorders 
(Obaydi and Puri 2008). The current study suggests that, 
consistent with the albeit-limited research (Burke et al. 
2010; Hamilton et al. 2011; Lee 2004; Obaydi and Puri 
2008), autistic people’s menstrual experiences are in some 
ways distinct from those of non-autistic people, placing 
extra strain on what can be already-challenging lives.
Indeed, for the autistic participants sampled here, men-
struation was seen as a particularly difficult and distressing 
event (akin to women with other developmental disabili-
ties; Ditchfield and Burns 2004), during which their pre-
existing challenges—especially regarding sensory hyper-
sensitivies and difficulties with regulating emotions and 
behavior—become exacerbated before, during and after 
menses. The amplification of pre-existing autistic fea-
tures has been reported previously (e.g., Hamilton et al. 
2011; Lee 2004) but no study has sought to understand 
the impact of menstruation on the individuals themselves. 
Those sampled here described overwhelmingly negative 
experiences, especially exaggerated sensory issues and 
intensified executive and emotion-regulation problems, 
which had often-serious consequences, including “shut-
down”, withdrawal and heightened anxiety—and there-
fore reduced participation in work, social and community 
life. Understanding the prevalence of premenstrual-related 
symptoms in individuals across the autism spectrum, the 
causes of such symptoms (which may be related to higher 
levels of hormonal fluctuations; Obaydi and Puri 2008), 
and their associated impact (including the potential treat-
ment side-effects of cyclical changes) is critical for further 
research.
One important step to mitigate potential problems follow-
ing menarche is to increase knowledge of menstrual-related 
issues in young people and their parents (see American 
Academy of Pediatrics 2006), particularly in the form of 
accessible, step-by-step guides and strategies for how to 
deal with pain and mood changes in particular (see Stew-
ard, in press). This is especially important for young autistic 
people, who may be less likely to gather information about 
sexual topics from informal social settings (with peers—as 
evidenced in Table 2), whose parents might be reticent to 
discuss puberty and sexual health and may begin these con-
versations later (Pownall et al. 2012; Sedgewick et al. 2018; 
Cridland et al. 2014, for discussion), and whose clinicians 
may fail to notice (or prioritize) any link between menstrua-
tion and mood- or behavior-related features (Kaminer et al. 
1988). The current absence of this knowledge rather worry-
ingly means that the particularly severe symptoms reported 
 4292
 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2018) 48:4287–4292
1 3
by some girls and women may be going unrecognised by 
clinicians and therefore not treated appropriately.
Given the nature of the current methodology, it was possi-
ble neither to confirm, for self-declared autistic respondents, 
where they lie on the autism spectrum nor to ensure that 
we did not oversample those with particularly problematic 
menstrual experiences. Notwithstanding, these preliminary 
findings serve to stress the importance of these issues for 
autistic people and call for greater attention on women’s 
health issues across the lifespan, including systematic inves-
tigations on the causes, correlates and consequences of men-
struation (particularly with regard to mental health) for autis-
tic young people and adults—from their own perspectives 
and the perspectives of supportive others (parents, teachers).
Acknowledgments We are grateful to all of our participants for taking 
part in this study.
Author Contributions RS and AR designed the study; RS implemented 
the study; RS, ER, LC and EP analysed and interpreted the data; EP 
drafted the manuscript; all authors contributed to, and approved, the 
final manuscript.
Funding This study was funded by grants from Pears Foundation (RS) 
and a Philip Leverhulme Prize 2015 awarded to EP from the Lever-
hulme Trust.
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of 
interest of which they are aware.
Ethical Approval All procedures performed in studies involving human 
participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the insti-
tutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki 
declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Informed Consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual 
participants prior to participation in this study.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat 
iveco 
mmons 
.org/licen 
ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2006). Menstruation in girls and 
adolescents: Using the menstrual cycle as a vital sign. Pediatrics, 
118, 2245–2250.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (revised 4th ed.). Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (revised 5th ed.). Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. 
Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3, 77–101.
Burke, L. M., Kalpakjian, C. Z., Smith, Y. R., & Quint, E. H. (2010). 
Gynecologic issues with Down Syndrome, autism, and cerebral 
palsy. Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, 23, 
11–15.
Burrows, A., & Johnson, S. (2005). Girls’ experiences of menarche 
and menstruation. Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychol-
ogy, 23, 235–249.
Cridland, E. K., Jones, S. C., Caputi, P., & Magee, C. A. (2014). Being 
a girl in a boys’ world: Investigating the experiences of girls with 
autism spectrum disorders during adolescence. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders, 44, 1261–1274.
Ditchfield, H., & Burns, J. (2004). Understanding our bodies, under-
standing ourselves: The menstrual cycle, mental health and 
woman with learning disabilities. Tizard Learning Disability 
Review, 9, 24–32.
Hamilton, A., Marshal, M. P., & Murray, P. J. (2011). Autism spectrum 
disorders and menstruation. Journal of Adoelscent Health, 49, 
443–445.
Jeffery, E., Kayani, S., & Garden, A. (2013). Management of menstrual 
problems in adolescents with learning and physical disabilities. 
The Obstetrician and Gynaecologist, 15, 106–112.
Kaminer, Y., Feinstein, C., Barrett, R. P., Tylenda, B., & Hole, W. 
(1988). Menstrually related mood disorder in developmentally 
disabled adolescents: Review and current status. Child Psychiatry 
and Human Development, 18, 239–249.
Lee, D. O. (2004). Menstrually related self-injurious behavior in ado-
lescents with autism. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 1193.
Loomes, R., Hill, L., & Mandy, W. (2017). What is the male-to-female 
ratio in autism spectrum disorder? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 56, 466–474.
Mason, L., & Cunningham, C. (2008). An exploration of issues around 
menstruation for women with Down Syndrome and their carers. 
Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 21, 
257–267.
Obaydi, H., & Puri, B. K. (2008). Prevalence of premenstrual syn-
drome in autism: A prospective observer-rated study. The Journal 
of International Medical Research, 36, 268–272.
Pownall, J. D., Jahoda, A., & Hastings, R. P. (2012). Sexuality and 
sex education of adolescents with intellectual disability: Mothers’ 
attitudes, experiences and support needs. Intellectual and Devel-
opmental Disabilities, 50, 140–154.
Rodgers, J., & Lipscombe, J. (2005). The nature and extent of help 
given to women with intellectual disabilities to manage menstrua-
tion. Journal of Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 30, 
45–52.
Rodgers, J., Lipscombe, J., & Santer, M. (2006). Menstrual problems 
experienced by women with learning disabilities. Journal of 
Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 19, 364–373.
Sedgewick, F., Hill, V., & Pellicano, E. (2018). Parent perspectives 
on autistic girls’ friendships and their futures. Manuscript in 
submission.
Steward, R. (in press). The autism friendly guide to periods. London: 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
