 Wide field-of-view, multi-region two-photon imaging of neuronal 
activity in the mammalian brain
Jeffrey N. Stirman1,2, Ikuko T. Smith1,5, Michael W. Kudenov6, and Spencer L. Smith1,2,3,4
1Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599
2Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
3Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
4Neurobiology Curriculum, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599
5Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599
6Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University, University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Abstract
Two-photon calcium imaging provides an optical readout of neuronal activity in populations of 
neurons with subcellular resolution. However, conventional two-photon imaging systems are 
limited in their field of view to ~1 mm2, precluding the visualization of multiple cortical areas 
simultaneously. Here, we demonstrate a two-photon microscope with an expanded field of view 
(>9.5 mm2) for rapidly reconfigurable simultaneous scanning of widely separated populations of 
neurons. We custom designed and assembled an optimized scan engine, objective, and two 
independently positionable, temporally multiplexed excitation pathways. We used this new 
microscope to measure activity correlations between two cortical visual areas in mice during 
visual processing.
Ensemble neuronal activity is of key interest in system neuroscience to understand sensory 
coding, motor output, and cognitive function. Measuring neuronal activity in populations of 
neurons in vivo is technically challenging, due to the densely packed neuropil and sensitive 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to: slab@unc.edu (S.L.S.). 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.L.S. conceived the Trepan2p imaging system. J.N.S. and S.L.S. designed and engineered the system. J.N.S. developed the 
demultiplexing electronics, designed and optimized the optical systems, wrote the software, and constructed the system. M.W.K. 
consulted on optical optimizations. J.N.S., I.T.S., and S.L.S. performed the animal experiments. J.N.S. and S.L.S. analyzed and 
interpreted the data. J.N.S. and S.L.S. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. I.T.S. and S.L.S. supervised the project.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biotechnol. 2016 August ; 34(8): 857–862. doi:10.1038/nbt.3594.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuroanatomy that is best probed with minimally invasive approaches. Two-photon1 
population calcium imaging in vivo2 supports dense optical sampling of neuronal activity 
deep in scattering tissue such as mammalian neocortex, and unambiguous identification of 
recorded neurons, particularly when genetically encoded indicators are employed3,4. Two-
photon population calcium imaging is used to measure single cell-level stimulus selectivity 
in dense local ensembles of neurons5,6 and learning and task-related activity in awake mice7, 
including those navigating in a virtual reality environment8.
However, conventional two-photon imaging systems retain cellular resolution over only a 
restricted field of view (FOV) of ~1 mm2. This limitation precludes the simultaneous 
examination of areas large enough to encompass multiple cortical areas. Neuronal activity 
that supports sensory coding and motor output is distributed across multiple areas and 
millimeters of neocortex even in mice9,10 (Fig. 1a), thus new instrumentation is needed to 
obtain a cellular-resolution view into ongoing neural activity across extended cortical 
networks, which is essential for elucidating principles of neural coding.
Here we present a two-photon imaging system that preserves individual neuron resolution 
across a wide FOV (>9.5 mm2) and can simultaneously scan neuronal populations over 
extended cortical networks. The system uses custom optics (objective and scan engine) and 
dynamically and independently repositionable temporally multiplexed imaging beams. We 
refer to the system as a Trepan2p (Twin Region, Panoramic 2-photon) microscope. We 
demonstrate the utility and flexibility of this system with ultra-wide FOV imaging, arbitrary 
line scan imaging, dual region imaging offset in XY and/or Z, quad area imaging, and 
imaging with resonant scanning. As an example application, we used this new imaging 
system to measure activity correlations between neurons in different cortical areas in awake 
mice.
In the design of the Trepan2p imaging system, two criteria needed to be met: (1) optical 
access to an area > 9 mm2, and (2) the ability to measure neuronal activity across cortical 
areas at rates relevant for neuroscience analysis (e.g., activity correlations). The large FOV 
of the imaging system provides optical access to neurons in multiple cortical areas (Fig. 1b) 
without the need to move the imaging system or the sample. However, the increase in space-
bandwidth product (compared to conventional two-photon imaging systems) naturally 
increases the time required for raster scanning the large FOV. Temporal multiplexing is the 
fastest method to simultaneously acquire multiple signals, but prior implementations have 
been fixed and not easily repositionable during an imaging session, or did not offer 
completely arbitrary beam positioning11–13. Therefore we designed a new optical scheme for 
temporal multiplexing in which two beams are fully independently repositionable (Fig. 1c). 
These beams can be directed toward any region and depth within the large FOV to 
simultaneously scan and sample neuronal activity at time resolutions relevant for behavior 
and neural coding.
The imaging pathway is as follows (Fig. 1d). The light from an 80 MHz laser (Mai Tai, 
Coherent) is first split into two beams through polarization optics. One path (Pathway 2) is 
delayed 6.25 ns relative to the other path (Pathway 1). In this way the two pathways each 
have 80 MHz pulse trains delayed relative to one another by one half of the period 
Stirman et al.
Page 2
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Fig. 1a). Custom motorized steering mirrors (SM1 and SM2) impart 
independent solid angle deflections (Ω1 or Ω2) for the two beams and are located in 
conjugate planes to the scan mirrors using afocal relays. Adjustments to the focal plane for 
each pathway are made using an electronically tunable lens (ETL; Optotune)14. Thus, each 
path is independently positionable in X, Y, and Z during imaging without moving the 
microscope or the preparation. Single photon PMT pulses are demultiplexed using a 
synchronization signal from the laser module, assigning detected photons to pixels in the 
associated imaging pathway (1 or 2)(Supplementary Fig. 1b,c) with minimal crosstalk 
between pathways (Online Methods, Supplementary Fig. 2).
Commercial microscope objectives and scan engines often used in two-photon imaging were 
insufficient for this application because they are designed for small scan angles and beam 
diameters, which ultimately limit the FOV over which individual neurons can be resolved in 
vivo to ~1 mm2 (larger FOV two-photon imaging has been limited to lower resolution 
applications such as blood flow imaging15). Commercial macroscope objectives offer large 
FOVs for one-photon imaging, but they are not optimized for multiphoton excitation. 
Therefore, to provide high resolution imaging over a larger FOV, both a new scan engine and 
a new objective had to be designed in concert, along with optics for rapidly reconfiguring the 
multiplexed imaging pathways.
Multi-element optical subsystems (afocal relays, scan lens, tube lens, and objective) were 
designed (Supplementary Figs. 3–6, Online Methods) to minimize aberrations at the 
excitation wavelength (910 ± 10 nm) across scan angles up to ± 4 degrees at the objective 
back aperture (Supplementary Fig. 7a). In designing the custom optics, we prioritized the 
uniform performance (RMS wavefront error, Supplementary Fig. 7) over the entire designed 
scanning range. In this way we could preserve cellular resolution anywhere within the large 
FOV. Subsystems can be diffraction limited on their own, but demonstrate additive 
aberrations when used together in a full imaging system. Optimizing the system as a whole 
(including all relays, scan lens, tube lens, and the objective), rather than optimizing 
components individually, ensured we would meet the desired performance. Because the 
imaging system would be used in volumetric imaging applications, small variations of the 
focal plane across the large FOV (field curvature) were allowed (Supplementary Fig. 7b). 
Additionally, we relaxed requirements for F-theta distortion (Supplementary Fig. 7c). 
Together, these strategies facilitated the design process.
We evaluated the experimental resolution of the Trepan2p microscope by measuring the 
excitation point spread function (PSFex) as the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the 
intensity profile of 0.2 μm beads (Fig. 2a–c, Online Methods). Radial FWHM was ~1.2 
± 0.1 μm (mean ± SD) both at the center and at the edges of the FOV. The axial FWHM was 
12.1 ± 0.3 μm at the center, and 11.8 ± 0.4 μm at the edges of the FOV (both measurements 
are mean ± SD; Fig. 2d). Because the custom objective is air immersion, changes in imaging 
depth (from the designed imaging depth) will introduce additional spherical aberrations. 
However, this is largely minimized due to the moderate NA and thus the PSFex shows only 
minor changes as a function of imaging depth (Fig. 2d). The use of the tunable lens for focal 
plane alterations can affect the PSFex14, though in the range it was typically used (±50 μm) it 
has a small impact on the PSFex (Supplemental Table 1).
Stirman et al.
Page 3
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The Trepan2p system enables structural and functional imaging with individual neuron 
resolution in mouse neocortex (Supplementary Video 1, Supplementary Figs. 8, 9, 10)16, 
including structural imaging of cell bodies > 700 μm below the cortical surface in vivo in an 
animal sparsely expressing GFP (Thy1-GFP O-line, Supplementary Fig. 8, Supplementary 
Video 2). To demonstrate the functionality of the Trepan2p, we performed two sets of in 
vivo imaging in transgenic mice that expressed the genetically encoded calcium indicator, 
GCaMP6s3, in neocortical pyramidal neurons (Emx1-IRES-Cre x RCL-GCaMP6s/Ai96). In 
the first set of experiments, we explored the optical access to neurons across the large FOV. 
To locate primary visual cortex (V1) and higher visual areas (HVAs) in the mouse10, we 
used intrinsic signal optical imaging17 (Online Methods, Supplementary Fig. 11). We then 
imaged neuronal activity-related GCaMP6s signals in a large cortical region (Fig. 3a–c, 
Supplementary Fig. 12, Supplementary Video 3). The full large FOV was scanned with a 
single beam at ~0.1 frame/s (3.5 mm wide FOV; 2048 × 2048 pixels; 3 μs dwell time per 
pixel), and contained in it V1 and at least six HVAs. Undersampling and alternative scan 
strategies such as arbitrary line scanning (Supplementary Fig. 13) can increase the temporal 
resolution18,19, and stimulus presentation durations can facilitate the capture of stimulus-
related events. Neurons were readily detected throughout the entire FOV based on spiking 
activity reported by GCaMP6s (5361 neurons detected, Online Methods; Fig. 3d, e). Thus 
the Trepan2p system provides cellular-resolution optical access across the entire FOV (9.6 
mm2), which encompasses more than six different mouse cortical areas within a single FOV.
For many neuroscience experiments, the activity dynamics of interest are restricted to two or 
more subregions of the large FOV. To capture neuronal activity correlations, these regions 
should be imaged simultaneously. The fastest approach to simultaneously image multiple 
regions is temporal multiplexing, as implemented here. To demonstrate the flexibility of this 
approach, we performed experiments with a variety of configurations of the twin imaging 
pathways (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Video 4) in animals expressing GCaMP6s in neocortical 
pyramidal neurons (TITL-GCaMP6s x Emx1-IRES-Cre x ROSA:LNL:tTA). While 
presenting visual stimuli to the mouse (a naturalistic movie), we simultaneously recorded 
activity in several different pairs of cortical areas, and at different depths (512 × 512 pixels, 
3.8 frames/s per region, Fig. 4b). The imaging regions can be placed arbitrarily close to each 
other. To demonstrate this, we placed the two imaging paths at the same XY location, but 
offset their positions in Z (512 × 256 pixels, 9.5 frames/s per region, Fig. 4c, Supplementary 
Video 5). Next we explored quad region imaging. Each of the dual imaging pathways were 
configured to alternate (every other frame) between two different regions. Thus, we imaged 
four different XY regions, each at 10 frames/s per region (250 × 100 pixels, Fig. 4d; 512 × 
512 pixels, 1.9 frames/s per region, Supplementary Videos 6). We also imaged four regions 
that differed in the XY locations and Z (250 × 100 pixels, 10 frames/s per region, Fig. 4e). 
Resonant scanners provide a way to increase the frame rate in raster scanning modes, and 
this is completely compatible with the optical system we present here. We used a resonant 
scanner to achieve 30 frames/s imaging in two regions simultaneously (512 × 256 pixels, 30 
frames/s per region, Fig. 4f).
As an example experiment, we imaged neuronal activity in different cortical areas 
simultaneously, V1 and in medial higher visual areas (HVAs) AM and PM (250 × 100 
Stirman et al.
Page 4
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pixels, 20 frames/s, Fig. 4g) while presenting a two different visual stimulus videos (a 
naturalistic movie or drifting gratings). Pairwise correlations between cortical areas were 
calculated from spike time courses inferred20 from the GCaMP6s signals. This analysis 
revealed an increase in correlated activity between neurons in V1 and neurons in areas AM 
and PM when the naturalistic movie is presented, compared to gratings (cross-correlation 
with gratings (mean ± SEM): 0.0157 ± 0.0003; with naturalistic movie: 0.0218 ± 0.0003; N 
= 12160 neuron pairs; P < 10−10; rank-sum test; Fig. 4h). Such cross-area correlation 
analysis between densely sampled populations of neurons was made possible with both the 
large FOV and temporally multiplexed scanning. These imaging regions can be as large or 
small as needed for the experiment and temporal resolution (for example, a 2.5 mm FOV at 
two different z-depths; 2048 × 1024 pixels; 0.8 frames/s); Supplementary Fig. 14; 
Supplementary Video 7), and two regions can be set to scan complementary halves of the 
FOV (as in ref. 11). Thus, the repositionable temporally multiplexed imaging beams can be 
reconfigured within an experiment for a variety of measurements.
In this work we have addressed a major barrier to progress in two-photon imaging of 
neuronal activity: the limited FOV. Using novel optical systems, the Trepan2p has expanded 
optical access to neurons in an area greater than 9.5 mm2 using mostly cost-effective COTS 
components. This large FOV can contain, in mice, primary visual cortex and six higher 
visual areas. Rapidly repositionable multiplexed imaging paths make it possible to capture 
neural activity in two arbitrarily selected subregions simultaneously within the large FOV.
The results presented in this manuscript demonstrate the utility of the Trepan2p system. The 
large working distance (8 mm) of the air-immersion objective can facilitate integration with 
head-fixed behavior experiments. Moreover, in principle the same instrumentation can be 
applied to image neural activity in many animal models whose cortical organization extends 
beyond the spatial limits of conventional 2p microscopy, such as multiple orientation 
columns in primary visual cortex of cats or non-human primates. The methodological 
approach and technologies presented here provide a flexible platform for measuring neural 
activity correlations and dynamics across extended cortical circuitry with individual neuron 
resolution. Beyond measuring neural activity, the Trepan2p can be applied for other 
physiological measurements such as blood flow and structural imaging in cleared tissue.
ONLINE METHODS
Optical design and simulations
Relay, scan, tube, and objective lens systems were modeled in OpticStudio (Zemax, LLC). 
Three optical subsystems ([1] Relay, [2] Scan and Tube Lens, [3] Objective) were first 
designed, modeled, and optimized individually. After initial isolated design, the system was 
simulated and optimized as a whole to ensure there would be no unforeseen additive 
aberrations between subsystems. One of the main difficulties in designing a highly corrected 
optical system is dealing with chromatic aberrations. We decided to focus our design around 
a narrow wavelength range suitable for GCaMP excitation (910 ± 10 nm). This eased our 
requirements for correction of chromatic aberrations. For the relay and scan and tube 
systems, all commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) lenses (Thorlabs and OptoSigma) were used 
Stirman et al.
Page 5
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to minimize cost (Supplementary Figs. 3–5). These lenses were coated with an IR anti-
reflective coating that had <0.5% reflectance at 910 nm.
To obtain diffraction limited performance (Supplementary Fig. 7a) in the simulated design 
and sufficient performance with in-house assembly, the cost-effective COTS components 
were supplemented with two custom cemented doublets in the objective (Supplementary 
Fig. 6). The custom cemented doublets were manufactured by Rainbow Research Optics, 
Inc. (Centennial, CO) and were coated with a broad-band anti-reflective coating (<1% 400–
1100 nm). The other elements were COTS (Thorlabs and OptoSigma) and coated with a 
broad-band anti-reflective coating (<1% 525–925 nm; OptoSigma). We relaxed the 
requirement to have the focal plane be flat as slight deviations of the focal plane across the 
FOV would not affect our ability to capture neural dynamics. The resulting Trepan2p field 
curvature is <20 μm (Supplementary Fig. 7b). Additionally, the F-theta distortion is minor 
(<5%) (Supplementary Fig. 7c). After the individual sub-systems were designed and 
optimized, the system was optimized as a whole, while further refinement of spacing was 
made to allow for optomechanical limitations (lens housing, scanning mirrors). Complete 
lens data of the Trepan2p system is given in Supplementary Figures 3–6.
Assembly
To assemble the lens subassemblies, we used Thorlabs slotted lens tube system (2 inch) and 
retaining rings. Axial separations between elements were measured using digital calipers 
along with a custom metrology system using a digital camera (Thorlabs, DCC1545M) and 
telecentric lens. All lenses were mounted and measured based on the plano or concave side 
to minimize tip/tilt and secured on the convex side with a retaining ring after alignment. 
Decenter of lens elements was done manually with aid of the camera measurement system. 
The smaller negative elements (surfaces 1,3,23,25,28,30,48,50,53,68; Supplementary Fig. 3–
6) were mounted in the 2 inch lens tube system using a 3D printed adapter (Quickparts). 
Subassemblies were mounted on 60mm cage system (Thorlabs). Galvonometer and resonant 
scanners were mounted on a XY translator (Thorlabs, CXY2) and this was attached to a 
60mm cage cube (Thorlabs, LC6W), which was in turn connected to the other optical 
subassemblies through the cage system. The XY translator allowed for precise positioning of 
the scanning mirrors and allowed for offset due to the thickness of the mirror.
Within the systems there are natural axial separations between subassemblies that can be 
utilized as compensators. As the system is assembled, locations of afocal space at conjugate 
planes (Supplemental Figs. 3–6) are checked for collimation as designed in the system 
(Thorlabs, SI100).
Tolerancing and sensitivity analysis
A key component in optical design and manufacturing is tolerance analysis21. A system may 
have high simulated performance, but if the required precision of optical alignment is too 
high, the system may not be easily manufactured or too costly. For rapid turnaround and to 
keep costs low, we sought to design and build the Trepan2p system in house, and to use 
primarily commercial off the shelf (COTS) components. The RMS wavefront error of the 
designed system shows diffraction limited performance across the field of view 
Stirman et al.
Page 6
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Fig. 7a). The predicted excitation PSF measurements are ~8.8 μm on axis, 
and ~8.9 μm at a radial distance of 1.75 mm (edge of the 3.5 mm field of view) 
(Supplementary Table 1). These excitation PSF measurements are the FWHM of the square 
of the illumination PSF (Huygens PSF) output of the Zemax simulation of the system 
(Online Methods: Excitation PSF and individual neuron resolution).
To ensure adequate performance of the system, we performed tolerancing analysis and 
designed in compensating features to adjust for residual aberrations after assembly. For the 
COTS elements used, we used the following tolerances: radius of curvature = 5 fringes, 
element thickness = 0.1 mm, tip/tilt (X and Y) = 0.05 degrees, S + A irregularity = 0.25, and 
index of refraction = 0.001. For the element to element tolerances we used the following: 
axial separation = 0.175 mm, decenter (X and Y) = 0.11 mm, and tip/tilt (X and Y) = 0.150 
mm. Within the systems there are natural axial separations between subassemblies that can 
be utilized as compensators (red boxed spacing, Supplemental Figs. 3–6). Setting these axial 
separations to be compensators, Monte Carlo simulations of the system performance 
(tolerance analysis) was performed, utilizing a merit function that measured RMS wavefront 
error across the FOV and penalized the system for vignetting. The nominal merit function 
value for the designed system is 0.043. We performed 2500 cycles of Monte Carlo 
simulation for the system with only axial displacement compensators (blue distribution, 
Supplementary Fig. 7d), and found that the expected system performance would not be 
sufficient. To increase the system performance, we designed into the objective 
optomechanical assembly two additional compensators: the axial separation between 
surfaces 76 and 77 and the XY decenter of custom element 1 (Supplementary Fig. 6). This 
was accomplished by mounting custom element 1 in an XY translator (Thorlabs, CXY2) and 
by using an adjustable adapter attached to this translator (Thorlabs, SM2P). With these three 
additional degrees of freedom, the Monte Carlo simulated performance significantly 
improved (green distribution, Supplementary Fig. 7d). The measured performance 
(resolution) of the system as assembled (Fig. 2), best matches simulated systems with merit 
functions in the range of 0.14–0.15 (red bar, Supplementary Fig. 7d). The inclusions of 
designed compensators (especially those within the objective) were critical to the success of 
our in-house assembly strategy.
The inclusion of the compensators in the assembly process provide a way to approach ideal 
performance, yet these cannot completely compensate for all imprecisions in the optical 
system. Tolerances in element manufacturing and misalignments in assembly remain and 
will lead to deviations from simulated ideal performance. During sensitivity analysis on this 
system, with the inclusion of the compensators, we found that the worst offenders are the 
decenter of the elements within the objective assembly. Decentering of these elements leads 
to an increased level of coma aberration. During exploration of the Monte Carlo simulations 
(part of the tolerancing process), we observed the aberrations in the simulated wavefront. 
The most common aberrations were typically coma aberration with some level of spherical 
aberration. This is likely true in our assembled system leading to the differences between 
simulated and experimental excitation PSF.
Stirman et al.
Page 7
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Animals
All procedures involving living animals were carried out in accordance with the guidelines 
and regulations of the US Department of Health and Human Services and approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of North Carolina. C57Bl/6 
mice were housed under a reversed 12 hr-light/12 hr-dark light cycle with ad libitum access 
to food and water. Two lines of transgenic mice were used that express GCaMP6s in cortical 
pyramidal neurons: (1) Cre-dependent GCaMP6s mice, Ai96 (RCL-GCaMP6s), crossed 
with Emx1-Cre mice (Jackson Labs stock #005628; Fig. 3) and (2) Cre/Tet-dependent 
GCaMP6s mice, Ai94 (TITL-GCaMP6s) triple crossed with Emx1-Cre and ROSA:LNL:tTA 
mice (Jackson Labs stock #011008; Figs. 4, 5)22. Ai94 and Ai96 lines were kindly provided 
by H. Zeng and the Allen Institute. We used a transgenic mouse in which a tyrosine 
hydroxylase (TH) promoter directs expression of Cre recombinase (TH-Cre; (Jackson Labs 
stock #008601). In this mouse, the ventral tegmental area (VTA) was injected with adeno-
associated virus particles (AAV5-DIO-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP; 500 nL bilateral at an infusion 
rate of 100 nL/min). The animal was sacrificed three months post-surgery. TH-expressing 
terminals arising from the VTA were imaged in the striatum (Supplementary Fig. 2). 
Additionally, a Thy1-GFP O-line mouse, which expresses GFP largely in Layer V, was used 
to generate Supplementary Video 2.
Surgery
Mice were deeply anesthetized using isoflurane (5% for induction, 1–2% for surgery) 
augmented with acepromazine (0 – 0.4 mg/kg body weight, i.p.). Physically-activated heat 
packs (SpaceGel, Braintree Scientific) were used to maintain the body temperature during 
surgery. The scalp overlaying right visual cortex was removed, and a custom head-fixing 
imaging chamber23 with 5-mm diameter opening was mounted to the skull with 
cyanoacrylate-based glue (Oasis Medical) and dental acrylic (Lang Dental). A 4-mm 
diameter craniotomy was performed over visual cortex. Carprofen (4.4mg/kg body weight, 
s.c.) was administered postoperatively to all mice that underwent recovery surgeries before 
returning to the home cage. Mice were mounted on a holder via the chamber23. For intrinsic 
signal optical imaging, this chamber was filled with a physiological saline containing (in 
mM): 150 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 10 HEPES, 2 CaCl2 and 1 MgCl2.
Intrinsic signal optical imaging (ISOI)
Custom instrumentation was adapted from the work of Kalatsky and Stryker17. Briefly, two 
F-mount lenses with respective focal lengths of 135 and 50 mm (Nikon) formed a tandem 
lens macroscope, which was attached to Dalsa 1M30 CCD camera (Teledyne DALSA). This 
configuration provided a 4.7 mm × 4.7 mm field of view (21.2 mm2). Acquired images were 
binned 2 × 2 spatially, resulting in a final pixel size of 9.2 μm × 9.2 μm. The pial vasculature 
was illuminated through a green filter (550 ± 50 nm, Edmund Optics) and the vasculature 
map was captured through a second green filter (560 ± 5 nm). From the pial surface, the 
macroscope was then focused down 600 μm where intrinsic signals were illuminated with 
halogen light (Asahi Spectra) delivered via light guides and focusing probes (Oriel) through 
a red filter (700 ± 38 nm, Chroma). Reflected light was captured through a second red filter 
(700 ± 5 nm, Edmund Optics) at the rate of 30 frames per second with custom-made image 
Stirman et al.
Page 8
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 acquisition software (adapted by J.N.S. from code kindly provided by Dr. David Ferster, 
Northwestern University). Mice were head-fixed 20 cm from a flat 60 cm × 34 cm (width × 
height) monitor which was tilted towards the mouse 17.5° from vertical with their head 
angled to their right to cover the visual field (110° by 75°) of the contralateral eye. A light 
anesthetic plane was maintained with 0.5% isoflurane during imaging, augmented with 
acepromazine (1.5 – 3mg/kg), and the body temperature was kept at 37°C using feedback-
controlled electric heat pad systems (custom-built).
Visual stimuli
A drifting white bar on a black background (elevation and azimuth direction; 3° thick) was 
used to map retinotopy during ISOI. These were produced and presented using MATLAB 
and the Psychophysics Toolbox24,25. A corrective distortion was applied to compensate for 
the flatness of the monitor26 (code is available online, http://labrigger.com/blog/2012/03/06/
mouse-visual-stim/). During calcium imaging, drifting gratings (0.04 cycles/°, 2 Hz, 8 
directions, 10 s /direction) or a naturalistic movie were displayed on a small video display 
located 6.3 cm from the left eye. The naturalistic movie was from a helmet-mounted camera 
during a mountain biking run. This movie, while not something a mouse would typically 
encounter, provided a visual stimulus with a large amount of optic flow. Light from the 
display was shielded from the imaging apparatus using a shroud over the monitor.
Image analysis for mapping cortical areas
Retinotopic maps obtained from intrinsic signal optical imaging were used to locate V1 and 
HVAs (Supplementary Fig. 11). Borders between these areas were drawn at the meridian of 
elevation and azimuth retinotopy. Magnitude response maps for grating patches were 
consulted for cross-verification. The vasculature acquired from Trepan2p imaging was 
compared to that acquired during ISOI and provided landmarks for identification of the 
locations within V1 and the HVAs.
In vivo two photon imaging
All imaging was performed on the custom Trepan2p system. Control of the instrumentation 
(see Trepan2p instrumentation below) and image acquisition were controlled by custom 
LabVIEW software. Animals were lightly anesthetized (0.25% isoflurane) for the imaging in 
Figure 1; Figure 4b, c; Supplementary Figures 8, 9, 10, 12; and Supplementary Videos 1–4. 
Animals were awake for the imaging in Figure 4d–f; Figure 5; Supplementary Figure 13, 14; 
and Supplementary Videos 5. The imaging was performed with <200 mW out of the front of 
the objective to minimize crosstalk (see Crosstalk below; Supplementary Fig. 2). Estimating 
the focal volume to be an ellipsoid with semi-axes of 6 μm, 0.6 μm, and 0.6 μm (Fig. 2), this 
equates to a power density of ~21.5 mW/μm3. For a typical high NA objective (e.g. 16x, 
NA=0.8) the ellipsoid volume is ~1.0 μm3 (semi-axes of 1.5 μm, 0.4 μm, and 0.4 μm). Thus 
< 200 mW in the Trepan2p provides the same power density as 21.5 mW in a high NA 
imaging system. The larger excitation volume allows us to increase the imaging power 
without the damage seen in higher NA objectives27. With typical imaging parameters 
(512×512 at 3.8 frames/s, 0.5 mm imaging region) up to 250 mW per channel could be used 
with no observed damage when imaging somas ~250 microns deep. Damage was observed 
Stirman et al.
Page 9
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with these parameters if the imaging plane was moved to the surface of the dura. When 
imaging superficially, the power was kept below 100 mW. Assessment of damage due to 
laser intensity was based on visual morphological changes to the appearance of the dura 
mater and/or continuously bright cell bodies. As a positive control, we used high (>300 mW 
at ~200 μm below the pial surface) continuous laser illumination, which caused 
photodamage evidenced by bright cell bodies and brighter-than-normal fluorescence of the 
dura (mouse was not used for subsequent activity imaging). At the laser powers used for the 
imaging in this manuscript (<200 mW) such damage was not observed.
Image analysis for neuronal calcium signals
Ca2+ signals were analyzed using custom software in MATLAB (Mathworks). Neurons were 
identified and segmented using either a pixel-wise correlation map6 or a pixel-wise kurtosis 
map. For the kurtosis map, each imaging frame of the calcium imaging video was first 
Gaussian filtered in XY (sigma = 2 pixels), and then the kurtosis for the time series of each 
pixel location was computed using the filtered version of the video. This yields a single real-
valued map with enhanced contrast for regions of interest that exhibit larger fluorescence 
transients. The maps were segmented into individual ROIs (neurons and processes) using a 
locally adaptive threshold and ΔF/F traces were calculated from the raw, unfiltered data. An 
exponential moving average of time width ~150 ms was applied to the high speed ΔF/F 
traces in Fig. 4d–f and Fig. 5a, all other data was left unfiltered. The activity transients 
shown in Fig. 3 are typically captured in only one frame due to acquisition frame rate. For 
the correlation analysis, spike inference6,20,28 was performed on the raw F/F traces prior to 
computing correlations. For pairwise correlations >0.5, traces were inspected for crosstalk. 
If the ROIs were present in the same XY positions in both imaging pathways and had high 
correlation values, the ROI with the weaker signal was determined to be due to crosstalk and 
was omitted (see Crosstalk below).
Arbitrary line scan analysis
Line scan data was arranged into a location-on-path versus time plot. The kurtosis of the 
data was taken along the time axis to yield a vector containing peaks (high values of kurtosis 
along the scan path). A small portion of the path (3–5 pixels) surrounding a peak of kurtosis 
was summed along the path length axis to yield a fluorescence time series for an active 
neuron. Each potential active region was manually inspected. This yielded 172 active cells 
distributed over the field of view (Supplementary Fig. 13c). An exponential moving average 
of time width ~150ms was applied to the traces in Supplementary Figure 13a, b.
Excitation point spread function measurements and simulations
In two-photon imaging, the optical resolution of the system is evaluated by the excitation 
point spread function (PSFex), which is the square of the illumination point spread function 
(IPSF2)(Ref.29). To evaluate the PSFex, sub-micron beads were imaged. Sub-micron 
fluorescent beads (0.2 μm, Invitrogen F-8811) were imbedded in a thick (~1.2 mm) 0.75% 
agarose gel. 50 μm z-stacks were acquired, each centered at one of three depths (55 μm, 275 
μm, 550 μm). The stage was moved axially in 0.4 μm increments (Δstage). At each focal 
plane 5 frames were acquired and averaged to yield a high signal to noise image. Due to the 
Stirman et al.
Page 10
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 difference between the refractive index of the objective immersion medium (air) and the 
specimen medium (water), the actual focal position within the specimen was move an 
amount Δfocus = 1.38 × Δstage (Ref. 30). The factor 1.38 was determined in Zemax and 
slightly differs from the paraxial approximation of 1.33. These images were imported into 
ImageJ and the μm/pixel scaling for the XY and μm/frame (step) were input. For the axial 
PSFex, XZ and YZ images were created at the center of a bead and a line plot was made at 
an angle maximizing the axial intensity spread thereby preventing underestimation of the 
PSFex due to tilted focal shifts. For the radial PSFex, an XY image was found at the 
maximum intensity position axially. A line scan in X and Y was made. Gaussian curves 
were fit to the individual line scans to extract FWHM measurements. The radial PSFex 
values are an average of the X PSFex and Y PSFex and the axial PSFex is an average of the 
axial PSFex found from the XZ and YZ images. Excitation PSF measurements were 
performed both on axis and at the edges of the field of view for both imaging pathways. For 
measurements using the electronically tunable lens (Supplementary Table 1), the focal plane 
was first set at 275 μm using the XYZ stage with a current to the tunable lens of ~75 mA for 
zero offset. The focal plane was then shifted to either 225 μm or 325 μm (for a ±50 um 
change in focal plane) by applying a previously calibrated current to the tunable lens. A z-
stack was then acquired as previously described. The minimal laser power for excitation was 
used to minimize the effects of non-linear expansion of the apparent excitation PSF29. Data 
reported (Fig. 2, Supplementary Table 1) are the mean ± standard deviation of 8 beads.
For the simulated PSF measurements (Supplementary Table 1), at each of the three 
simulated depths (Surface 85 in Supplementary Fig. 6) the optimal focus (Surface 83 in 
Supplementary Fig. 6) was found (minimal RMS wavefront error). At this location and at 
simulated locations ±25 μm from this location in 0.4 μm steps (this represents the steps of 
the stage as explained previously, Δstage), the Huygens illumination PSF (IPSF) was 
simulated. These images were imported into ImageJ and processed as previously described 
(accounting for the step size change: Δfocus = 1.38 × Δstage) to generate a Gaussian curve fit. 
This Gaussian was then squared to yield the excitation PSF (= IPSF2). The FWHM of this 
squared Gaussian is reported as the simulated PSFex.
Trepan2p instrumentation
Laser pulses from a Ti:Sapphire laser (Mai-Tai; Newport) with an automated pre-chirper unit 
(DeepSee; Newport) were attenuated using a half wave plate followed by a polarization 
beam splitting cube. Similar polarization optics were used to split the beam into two paths 
and control the relative power between the two paths. Prior to splitting, the beam was 
expanded using a 3x beam expander (Thorlabs). One beam travels directly to a custom 
motorized steering mirror, and the other beam is first diverted to a delay arm, and 
subsequently to a separately controlled steering mirror (Fig. 1d). The delay arm is designed 
to impart a 6.25 ns temporal offset to the pulses in one beam (1.875 m additional path 
length). Since the laser pulses are delivered at 12.5 ns intervals (80 MHz), they are evenly 
spaced in time at 160 MHz after the two beams are recombined (Supplementary Fig. 1a).
The steering mirror in each pathway imparts a solid angle (Ω1 or Ω2) deflection to the beam 
prior to recombination (Fig. 1d). It is this angle that determines the central locations (X1, Y1; 
Stirman et al.
Page 11
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 X2, Y2) of individual imaging subareas within the larger FOV. The two beams are combined 
and relayed to the X-axis galvanometer scanner using the third polarization cube located in 
the middle of an afocal pupil relay (Supplementary Fig. 3). The 2-inch polarization beam 
combining cube (Edmund Optics) was positioned in the afocal relay such that the focal point 
of the relay was outside the cube. This was to avoid high intensity damage to the cemented 
surface within the cube. A similar afocal pupil relay (Supplementary Fig. 4) is present 
between the X-axis and Y-axis galvanometers (Cambridge Technologies). In this manner the 
two beams are simultaneously raster scanned (field size determined by scan amplitude), but 
with independently controlled spatial positions (determined by Ω1, Ω2). Immediately prior to 
the steering mirror in Pathways 1 and 2 are electrically tunable lenses (Optotune)14 which 
provides a z-range of ~450 μm.
A scan lens and tube lens form a 4x telescope (Supplementary Fig. 5) and relayed the 
expanded beams (24 mm) to the back aperture of the custom objective (EFL = 27.5 mm; NA 
= 0.43; Supplementary Fig. 6). The entrance scan angles at the objective back aperture were 
~±3.7 degrees yielding our 3.5 mm FOV. Overall, the system transmitted 41% of entering 
laser power (Supplementary Fig. 15). The main factors influencing this figure were the 
galvanometer or resonant scanners and the objective, which were both overfilled. The 
system was not power limited in this configuration. Decreasing the overfilling of these 
elements can increase power transmission, though with a possible decrease in excitation 
efficiency (effective NA). Fluorescence was collected using a dichroic mirror, two lenses31, 
and a GaAsP photomultiplier tube (PMT; H10769PA-40, Hamamatsu).
Photon counting electronics
Output from the photomultiplier tube (PMT; H10769PA-40, Hamamatsu) was first amplified 
with a high bandwidth amplifier (C5594-44, Hamamatsu) and then split into two channels 
(ZFSC-2-2A, Mini-Circuits) (Supplementary Fig. 1b). One channel was delayed relative to 
the other by 6.25 ns by using different lengths of BNC cable (~ Δ122 cm) (Supplementary 
Fig. 1b, c). These were connected to a NIM discriminator (4608C octal discriminator, 
LeCroy). The ~80 MHz synchronization output pulses from the laser was amplified (Mini-
Circuits ZFL-1000) and then delivered to a second NIM discriminator (161L dual 
discriminator, LeCroy) (Supplementary Fig. 1b) which has a continuous potentiometer 
adjustment to adjust the output NIM pulse width from ~5 ns to >150 ns. This output pulse 
was delivered to the common veto input on the LeCroy 4608C discriminator where the PMT 
outputs were collected. The veto width was adjusted by the potentiometer on the LeCroy 
161L discriminator and the relative phase of the veto window was adjusted by time delaying 
the synchronization pulses from the laser module using small lengths of cables (~0.5 ns 
resolution). Two photon detection schemes were used. The first directly counts output 
pulses32 (digital counting) and the second is an analog counting scheme33. To implement 
digital counting, the demultiplexed output pulses from the LeCroy 4608C were sent to a 
NIM-to-TTL converter (PRL-350-TTL-NIM, Pulse Research Labs) before going to the 
counter inputs on a fast counter (PCI-6110, National Instruments) (Supplementary Fig. 15b). 
Counter measurements were organized into images in the custom LabView software. Pixel 
dwell time was determined by setting the counting window time in software. The maximum 
count rate for the PCI-6110 is 20 MHz therefore it is possible some pulses are missed, 
Stirman et al.
Page 12
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lowering the overall signal amplitude. In the analog counting mode output from the LeCroy 
4608C is passed through a low-pass filter (EF508, EF516; Thorlabs) before being digitized 
at 5 MHz (PCI-6110, National Instruments) or 25 MHz (ATS860, AlazarTech). Analog 
measurements were arranged into images with the indicated pixel count in the custom 
LabView software. In this manner we could demultiplex the single PMT output into two 
channels corresponding to the two excitation pathways (Supplementary Fig. 1c).
Scanning hardware and strategy
Multiple scanning strategies were employed in this work: raster scanning using 
galvanometer and resonant scanners, and arbitrary line scanning.
Galvanometer scanning—The galvanometer based scanning was performed using 6 mm 
galvanometers (6210H, Cambridge). Angular positions of the galvanometer were controlled 
by sending analog commands (PCI-6110, National Instruments) to the galvanometer driver 
board. The common reference clock on the PCI-6110 was used to synchronize the analog 
out commands and either the counters (digital counting) or the analog digitizer (analog 
counting) on the PCI-6110.
Resonant scanning—Only the analog counting scheme was used with resonant 
scanning. Resonant scanning was accomplished using a galvanometer scanner on the slow X 
axis (6210H, Cambridge) and a 4kHz resonant scanner (CRS04K-S4-S-045) on the fast Y 
axis. The resonant scanner was controlled using a CRS driver (Cambridge). This driver 
outputs a 50% duty cycle pulse with the rising edge occurring every period (~4kHz) thus 
outputting a rising edge every other line and a falling edge on the alternate line. This 
synchronization signal from the CRS driver was input to an Arduino Uno board that output a 
5 μs pulse on every rising and falling edge thus converting the signal to an ~8kHz signal. 
This signal was input to the PCI-6110 as the clock for the analog output which drove the 
slow X-axis galvanometer. In this way the X and Y axes were synchronized. Additionally, 
the CRS diver synchronization pulse was used as a trigger for analog acquisition (ATS860, 
AlazarTech). After a trigger event occurs, a number of digitization events occur. This forms 
the pixels along a bidirectional line and the number is found by dividing the digitization 
frequency by the resonant scan frequency and subtracting the re-arm time. For example, in 
this system the resonant scanner had a measured frequency of 3941.8 Hz and for a 
digitization clock of 5 MHz and a re-arm time of 64 clock ticks = 5,000,000/3941.8 – 64 = 
1204. This number plus 16 must be divisible by 32 as required by the digitizer and thus is 
rounded down to 1200. Therefore 1200 pixels make up every two lines. Interlacing is 
accomplished by finding the best line alignment offline and then subsequently using these 
settings online. Because of the small re-arm time of the digitizer, some pixels are lost at the 
edge of every even line (~70). These are given a value of 0 in the reconstructed image. As 
higher digitization frequencies are used, the percentage of these pixels becomes less. For 
digitization at 25 MHz, every two lines contain ~6256 pixels and the even lines have ~86 
pixels given a value of 0. Additionally, for image synchronization, we use the counter on the 
PCI-6110 to output a pulse every # lines/2 pulses of the CRS synchronization signal. This is 
used as an arm-trigger input into the ATS860 board. These signals ensure synchronization 
between the galvanometer scanner, resonant scanner, and the digitization board. An 
Stirman et al.
Page 13
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 additional analog output on the PCI-6110 is used to control the amplitude of the resonant 
scanner. Corrections for the sinusoidal scanning path were performed online in software34.
Arbitrary line scanning—The line scan pathway was drawn in custom LabVIEW 
software and converted to voltage commands for the galvanometer scanners. The imaging 
rate (28.7 Hz; Supplementary Fig. 13b) was determined to yield approximately equivalent 
pixel dwell time as the slower raster scans.
Crosstalk
Many factors affect the crosstalk between the two pathways including GCaMP6 
fluorescence lifetime, veto pulse width, veto pulse phase, PMT gain, and excitation power. 
The veto width was set to inhibit pulses arising from the off-target pathway while 
maximizing the signal from the desired pathway. The working value is ~6.25 ns though 
small deviations from this made little difference. The phase of the veto (inhibit counting) 
signal relative to the PMT signal played a more significant role and was adjusted to give 
maximal signal in one channel arising from the non-delayed excitation path (Pathway 1) and 
maximal signal in the other channel arising from the 6.25 ns delayed excitation path 
(Pathway 2), while at the same time minimizing the signal from pathway 1 excitation when 
Pathway 2 was blocked and similarly for Pathway 2 into Pathway 1 (Supplementary Fig. 2a). 
With increases in the laser power and decreases in gain, the effective crosstalk was greatly 
diminished (Supplementary Fig. 2a–c) due to changes in the instrument response function 
(IRF). By adjusting the laser intensity and gain on the PMT, we can minimize the level of 
crosstalk, while still obtaining high signal-to-noise measurements of fluorescence transients. 
For the experiments shown in this study, the laser power was <200 mW out of the front of 
the objective (also see In vivo two photon imaging in Methods) yielding <5% crosstalk 
between pathways.
For crosstalk to influence the acquired Ca2+ imaging and measured correlations there must 
be an ROI identified in the off-target pathway that is in the same XY position as a true ROI 
(neuron) in the on target pathway. False ROIs can occur, and these are ROIs that arise from 
the off-target pathway and are solely due to crosstalk. These can be identified by correlations 
in neural activity Ca2+ transients that satisfy two criteria: (1) have a high degree of 
correlation (>0.5), and (2) occur in the same XY locations in both images (pathway 1 and 
pathway 2). Thus, identification of the false ROIs is computationally simple, and they can be 
automatically removed from further analysis. Crosstalk was not detected in the data set 
displayed in Figure 4. A more subtle form of crosstalk can occur when two neurons, one in 
each pathway, are scanned simultaneously. To determine whether this form of crosstalk is 
affecting cross-correlation measurements, we searched the data set for pairs of neurons, one 
in each pathway, that overlap in XY position, and thus are simultaneously scanned and could 
contaminate each other’s signals. For these pairs, we computed the correlation between 
amount of overlap (the intersection of XY pixel locations between the two neurons’ ROIs) 
and activity cross-correlation. If activity signals from one neuron are contaminating the 
other, there should be a trend for more overlapped neurons to also exhibit higher cross-
correlations. However, this relationship was not significant (R2 = 0.0094, P = 0.55, N = 40 
Stirman et al.
Page 14
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pairs), and thus even when cells are simultaneously scanned, crosstalk is low and high 
fidelity measurements of neural activity are obtained.
Excitation PSF and individual neuron resolution
To compare the effect of different axial PSFex on acquired data, we simultaneously imaged 
GCaMP6s activity with two different excitation PSF (Ref. 16): 14.0 ± 0.3 μm and 4.4 ± 0.2 
μm (Supplementary Figure 9a). To establish the two different PSFex, we used a Nikon 16x 
objective (NA = 0.8) and under-filled the back aperture of the objective using Pathway 1 
(14.0 ± 0.3 μm, which is slightly larger than that obtained in the Trepan2p), and over-filled 
the back aperture of the objective using Pathway 2 (4.4 ± 0.2 μm). The PSFex measurements 
were made as described above (see Methods: Excitation point spread function 
measurements). The XY locations of the two pathways were slightly offset in order to 
ensure crosstalk due to multiplexing (though minimal) did not influence our measurements 
and to minimize the potential photo-damage. The two pathways scanned (~3 frames/s) the 
same neurons in V1 (Supplementary Fig. 9b) while the mouse was shown the naturalistic 
video. Calcium transients were extracted from the same cells in both pathways from 3 
different fields of view (Supplementary Fig. 9c, Supplementary Fig. 10). The correlation 
coefficients (n = 456 cells) were calculated between the two different excitation PSF 
pathways for the raw ΔF/F traces (Supplementary Fig. 9d).
These findings agree with a prior report16, which showed that in mammalian neocortex 
(imaging signals from pyramidal neurons expressing GCaMP6s), excitation PSF that are ~10 
microns in the axial dimension can be sufficient to keep potential crosstalk between cells < 
10%. They found that although crosstalk can occur, in practice, the signals are rarely and 
minimally contaminated. Nearby cell bodies could conceivably contribute to crosstalk, but 
typically do not. This is because in mouse cortex, < 10% of neurons are located axially < 30 
microns from each other16. Thus, the Nyquist criterion for keeping maximal potential 
crosstalk below 10% is an axial resolution that is < 15 microns. In summary, since the vast 
majority of neurons are separated axially, crosstalk due to PSFex that are ~10–15 microns in 
the axial dimension do not preclude single neuron resolution.
In addition to the spatial distribution of neurons, these results can also be influenced by the 
staining pattern and the fluorescence of the indicator in the low calcium state. Thus other 
indicators, staining patterns, and imaged structures can impose different requirements on the 
imaging system.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Hongkui Zeng for kindly providing transgenic mice, Kei Eto for providing mice for imaging in 
pilot experiments, Janet Berrios for providing the YFP labeled brain section, Sally Kim and Ben Philpot for 
providing the Thy1-GFP O-line mouse, and Zemax LLC for providing upgraded software. This work was supported 
by the following: the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (T32-HD40127) and Burroughs 
Wellcome Fund Career Award at the Scientific Interface (J.N.S.); a Helen Lyng White Fellowship (I.T.S.); a Career 
Development Award from the Human Frontier Science Program (00063/2012), and grants from the National 
Stirman et al.
Page 15
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Science Foundation (1450824), the Whitehall Foundation, the McKnight Foundation, the Kingenstein Foundation, 
the Simons Foundation (SCGB 325407SS), and the NIH (R01NS091335, R01EY024294) (S.L.S.).
References
1. Denk W, Strickler JH, Webb WW. Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence microscopy. Science. 
1990; 248:73–6. [PubMed: 2321027] 
2. Stosiek C, Garaschuk O, Holthoff K, Konnerth A. In vivo two-photon calcium imaging of neuronal 
networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:7319–24. [PubMed: 12777621] 
3. Chen TW, et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature. 2013; 
499:295–300. [PubMed: 23868258] 
4. Theer P, Denk W. On the fundamental imaging-depth limit in two-photon microscopy. J Opt Soc Am 
A Opt Image Sci Vis. 2006; 23:3139–49. [PubMed: 17106469] 
5. Ohki K, Chung S, Ch’ng YH, Kara P, Reid RC. Functional imaging with cellular resolution reveals 
precise micro-architecture in visual cortex. Nature. 2005; 433:597–603. [PubMed: 15660108] 
6. Smith SL, Hausser M. Parallel processing of visual space by neighboring neurons in mouse visual 
cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:1144–9. [PubMed: 20711183] 
7. Komiyama T, et al. Learning-related fine-scale specificity imaged in motor cortex circuits of 
behaving mice. Nature. 2010; 464:1182–6. [PubMed: 20376005] 
8. Dombeck DA, Khabbaz AN, Collman F, Adelman TL, Tank DW. Imaging large-scale neural activity 
with cellular resolution in awake, mobile mice. Neuron. 2007; 56:43–57. [PubMed: 17920014] 
9. Fuster JM. The cognit: a network model of cortical representation. Int J Psychophysiol. 2006; 
60:125–32. [PubMed: 16626831] 
10. Wang Q, Burkhalter A. Area map of mouse visual cortex. J Comp Neurol. 2007; 502:339–57. 
[PubMed: 17366604] 
11. Cheng A, Goncalves JT, Golshani P, Arisaka K, Portera-Cailliau C. Simultaneous two-photon 
calcium imaging at different depths with spatiotemporal multiplexing. Nat Methods. 2011; 8:139–
42. [PubMed: 21217749] 
12. Amir W, et al. Simultaneous imaging of multiple focal planes using a two-photon scanning 
microscope. Opt Lett. 2007; 32:1731–3. [PubMed: 17572762] 
13. Voigt FF, Chen JL, Krueppel R, Helmchen F. A modular two-photon microscope for simultaneous 
imaging of distant cortical areas in vivo. Proc SPIE. 2015; 9329
14. Grewe BF, Voigt FF, van ‘t Hoff M, Helmchen F. Fast two-layer two-photon imaging of neuronal 
cell populations using an electrically tunable lens. Biomed Opt Express. 2011; 2:2035–46. 
[PubMed: 21750778] 
15. Tsai PS, et al. Ultra-large field-of-view two-photon microscopy. Opt Express. 2015; 23:13833–47. 
[PubMed: 26072755] 
16. Lecoq J, et al. Visualizing mammalian brain area interactions by dual-axis two-photon calcium 
imaging. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:1825–9. [PubMed: 25402858] 
17. Kalatsky VA, Stryker MP. New paradigm for optical imaging: temporally encoded maps of 
intrinsic signal. Neuron. 2003; 38:529–45. [PubMed: 12765606] 
18. Gobel W, Kampa BM, Helmchen F. Imaging cellular network dynamics in three dimensions using 
fast 3D laser scanning. Nat Methods. 2007; 4:73–9. [PubMed: 17143280] 
19. Cotton RJ, Froudarakis E, Storer P, Saggau P, Tolias AS. Three-dimensional mapping of 
microcircuit correlation structure. Front Neural Circuits. 2013; 7:151. [PubMed: 24133414] 
20. Vogelstein JT, et al. Fast nonnegative deconvolution for spike train inference from population 
calcium imaging. J Neurophysiol. 2010; 104:3691–704. [PubMed: 20554834] 
21. Nelson JD, Youngworth RN, Aikens DM. The cost of tolerancing. Proc SPIE 7433, Optical System 
Alignment, Tolerancing, and Verification III. 2009; 7433
22. Madisen L, et al. Transgenic mice for intersectional targeting of neural sensors and effectors with 
high specificity and performance. Neuron. 2015; 85:942–58. [PubMed: 25741722] 
23. Judkewitz B, Rizzi M, Kitamura K, Hausser M. Targeted single-cell electroporation of mammalian 
neurons in vivo. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:862–9. [PubMed: 19444243] 
Stirman et al.
Page 16
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Brainard DH. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spat Vis. 1997; 10:433–6. [PubMed: 9176952] 
25. Pelli DG. The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: transforming numbers into 
movies. Spat Vis. 1997; 10:437–42. [PubMed: 9176953] 
26. Marshel JH, Garrett ME, Nauhaus I, Callaway EM. Functional specialization of seven mouse 
visual cortical areas. Neuron. 2011; 72:1040–54. [PubMed: 22196338] 
27. Hopt A, Neher E. Highly nonlinear photodamage in two-photon fluorescence microscopy. Biophys 
J. 2001; 80:2029–36. [PubMed: 11259316] 
28. Vogelstein JT, et al. Spike inference from calcium imaging using sequential Monte Carlo methods. 
Biophys J. 2009; 97:636–55. [PubMed: 19619479] 
29. Zipfel WR, Williams RM, Webb WW. Nonlinear magic: multiphoton microscopy in the 
biosciences. Nat Biotechnol. 2003; 21:1369–77. [PubMed: 14595365] 
30. Visser TD, Oud JL. Volume measurements in three-dimensional microscopy. Scanning. 1994; 
16:198–200.
31. Zinter JP, Levene MJ. Maximizing fluorescence collection efficiency in multiphoton microscopy. 
Opt Express. 2011; 19:15348–62. [PubMed: 21934897] 
32. Driscoll JD, et al. Photon counting, censor corrections, and lifetime imaging for improved 
detection in two-photon microscopy. J Neurophysiol. 2011; 105:3106–13. [PubMed: 21471395] 
33. Moon S, Kim DY. Analog single-photon counter for high-speed scanning microscopy. Opt Express. 
2008; 16:13990–4003. [PubMed: 18773010] 
34. Tian, X.; Xu, L.; Li, X.; Shang, G.; Yao, J. IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and 
Techniques. IEEE, Thessaloniki; 2010. Geometric distortion correction for sinusoidally scanned 
atomic force microscopic images; p. 398-402.
Stirman et al.
Page 17
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Treapn2p system layout
(a) In the mouse, primary visual cortex (V1) is surrounded by higher visual areas (HVAs; 
PM = posteromedial; AM = anteromedial; A = anterior; RL = rostrolateral; AL = 
anterolateral; LM = lateromedial; LI = laterointermediate), which are distributed across 
several millimeters of cortex (M1,M2 = primary and secondary motor cortex; S1,S2 = 
primary and secondary somatosensory cortex; Au = auditory cortex). A wide field of view 
(FOV) is required to image neuronal activity in these distributed cortical areas 
simultaneously. (b) The 3.5 mm FOV can encompass V1 and HVAs. (c) The individual 
imaging regions can be independently positioned and repositioned anywhere within the full 
FOV by the steering mirrors (SM1, SM2 in d) for XY position, and the tunable lenses (ETL 
in d) for independent Z positioning. (d) Two imaging beams are temporally multiplexed and 
independently positioned in XY and Z prior to the scan mirrors (SM-X, SM-Y). First, 
overall power is attenuated using a half-wave plate (λ/2), a polarizing beam splitting cube 
(PBS) and a beam block (BB). After a second λ/2 (used to determine the power ratio sent to 
the two pathways) and a beam expander (BE), a second PBS divides the beam into two 
pathways. Pathway 1 (in blue, p-polarization, indicated by the arrows) passes directly to a 
motorized steering mirror (SM1) for positioning in XY. Pathway 2 (in orange, s-polarization, 
indicated by the circles) passes to a delay arm where it travels 1.87 meters further than 
pathway 1 using mirrors (M), thus delaying it by 6.25 ns before being directed to SM2. 
Directly prior to SM1 and SM2 are electrically tunable lenses (ETL) that can adjust the Z 
position (focal plane) of the pathways independently. The two pathways are recombined 
(beam recombination relay), and sent to X and Y galvanometer scanners (GS) that are 
connected by an afocal relay (expanded view inset). A scan lens (SL) and tube lens (TL) 
Stirman et al.
Page 18
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 focuses the two multiplexed beams onto the back aperture of the objective (Obj). 
Fluorescence is directed to a photomultiplier tube (PMT) via an infrared-passing dichroic 
mirror (DM) and two collection lenses (CL1, CL2).
Stirman et al.
Page 19
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Focal excitation PSF profile of the Trepan2p system
(a) 0.2 μm fluorescent beads were embedded in 0.75% agarose gel. 50 μm z-stacks were 
acquired, each centered at one of three depths (55 μm, 275 μm, 550 μm). This was done on 
axis, and at the edges of the 3.5 mm field of view. (b,c) Radial and axial excitation PSF 
measurements were made at the indicated locations and depths by fitting a Gaussian curve to 
the intensity profiles of the beads in the XY plane (measured in both the X and Y directions 
and averaged) and in the Z direction (measured in Z in both the XZ and YZ planes and 
averaged). (d) A summary of the excitation PSF measurements at three depths, for three 
locations, and for both of the temporally multiplexed beam pathways are shown (full width 
at half maximum of the Gaussian fits +/− the standard deviation for measurements from 8 
different beads). The excitation PSF typically increases in axial extent with imaging depth 
beyond the optimized focal plane (275 μm), but the optimized aberration correction and 
moderate NA combine to largely mitigate that effect and preserves the excitation PSF across 
the full field and hundreds of microns of imaging depth.
Stirman et al.
Page 20
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Two-photon imaging of neural activity across 9.6 mm2 of mouse cortex with single 
neuron resolution
(a) The wide FOV provides optical access to thousands of neurons and multiple cortical 
areas. (b) A transgenic mouse expressing the genetically encoded fluorescent calcium 
indicator GCaMP6s in excitatory neurons was used to examine neuronal activity (maximum 
projection). Prior to 2p imaging, intrinsic signal optical imaging was used to map out the 
higher visual areas (yellow outlines). The expanded inlays (white) show cellular resolution is 
preserved across the FOV (also see Supplementary Figure 12 and Supplementary Video 3). 
(c) Segmenting the image sequence yields 5,361 active neurons, (d) whose visually-evoked 
responses were recorded, and (e) revealing clear fluorescence transients (traces for the first 
50 neurons in panel d). Imaging depth was 265 μm. The animal was shown the naturalistic 
movie during these recordings.
Stirman et al.
Page 21
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Temporally multiplexed, independently repositionable imaging pathways for 
simultaneous scanning two regions
(a) The individual imaging regions can be independently positioned and repositioned 
anywhere within the full FOV. (b) Within the same session, without moving the mouse or 
the microscope, the two pathways were moved to various configurations (left) to image 
neuronal activity (3.8 frames/s per region) (left, segmented active ROIs within the 500 μm 
imaging region; right, five example traces from each region). (c) There is no lower limit to 
the XYZ separation between imaging pathways (from the mechanical point-of-view). In this 
imaging session (9.5 frames/s per region), the XY locations were identical and the pathways 
only differed in the Z depth (left, segmented active ROIs within the 500 μm imaging region; 
right, five example traces from each region; Supplementary Video 5). (d, e) By combing 
temporal multiplexing (Pathways 1 and 2) with serially changing the offset voltage on the 
galvanometer scanner, four regions can be rapidly imaged (10 frames/s per region). (d) 
Pathway 1 and 2 are positioned at the same XY location and offset in Z. The galvanometers 
serially position the imaging region (of each pathway) anywhere within the larger field of 
view (left, segmented active ROIs within the 400 μm imaging region; right, five example 
traces from each region; Supplementary Video 6) (e) Pathway 1 and 2 are positioned at 
different XY locations as well as offset in Z. The galvanometers serially position the 
imaging region (of each pathway) anywhere within the larger field of view (left, segmented 
active ROIs within the 400 μm imaging region; right, five example traces from each region). 
(f) Resonant scanning was performed for faster frame rates (30 frames/s per region) (left, 
segmented active ROIs within the 500 μm imaging region; right, six example traces from 
each region; Supplementary Video 7). (g) Neuronal activity was imaged in two regions (20 
Stirman et al.
Page 22
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 frames/s per region), V1 and in an ROI encompassing retinotopically matched regions of 
AM and PM, simultaneously. Visual stimuli, either drifting gratings or a naturalistic movie, 
were used to evoke responses (left, segmented active ROIs within the 400 μm imaging 
region; right, five example traces from each region and for each visual stimulus). (h) Ca2+ 
signals were used to infer spike times and examine correlations. Activity correlations were 
measured between pairs of cells, each pair consisting of a V1 neuron and a neuron in AM or 
PM. These correlations were higher during presentation of the naturalistic movie compared 
to those during the drifting gratings (cross correlation with gratings, mean ± SEM: 0.0157 
± 0.0003; with naturalistic movie: 0.0218 ± 0.0003; N = 12,160 neuron pairs; P < 10–10; 
rank-sum test). The neurons on both axes were ordered from low to high average correlation 
for presentation clarity on the left (naturalistic movie), and the same ordering is used on the 
right (gratings). Imaging depth for both pathways was 235 μm. For all panels the vertical 
scale bar is 200% ΔF/F and the horizontal scale bar is 10 s. All imaging depths are indicated 
in the panels. The depth offset in Pathway 2 (orange) was accomplished using the tunable 
lens.
Stirman et al.
Page 23
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
