 Transmission of risk from parents with chronic pain to offspring: 
an integrative conceptual model
Amanda L. Stonea and Anna C. Wilsonb,*
aDepartment of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
bDepartment of Pediatrics, Institute on Development & Disability, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA
Abstract
Offspring of parents with chronic pain are at increased risk for pain and adverse mental and 
physical health outcomes (Higgins et al, 2015). Although the association between chronic pain in 
parents and offspring has been established, few studies have addressed why or how this relation 
occurs. Identifying mechanisms for the transmission of risk that leads to the development of 
chronic pain in offspring is important for developing preventive interventions targeted to decrease 
risk for chronic pain and related outcomes (eg, disability and internalizing symptoms). This review 
presents a conceptual model for the intergenerational transmission of chronic pain from parents to 
offspring with the goal of setting an agenda for future research and the development of preventive 
interventions. Our proposed model highlights 5 potential mechanisms for the relation between 
parental chronic pain and pediatric chronic pain and related adverse outcomes: (1) genetics, (2) 
alterations in early neurobiological development, (3) pain-specific social learning, (4), general 
parenting and family health, and (5) exposure to stressful environment. In addition, the model 
presents 3 potential moderators for the relation between parent and child chronic pain: (1) the 
presence of chronic pain in a second parent, (2) timing, course, and location of parental chronic 
pain, and (3) offspring’s characteristics (ie, sex, developmental stage, race or ethnicity, and 
temperament). Such a framework highlights chronic pain as inherently familial and 
intergenerational, opening up avenues for new models of intervention and prevention that can be 
family centered and include at-risk children.
Keywords
Chronic pain; Parents; Offspring; Children
*Corresponding author. Address: Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd, Mailstop CDRC, Portland, 
OR97239, USA. Tel.: 1-503-494-0333. longann@ohsu.edu (A. C. Wilson). 
Supplemental media
A supplemental video associated with this article can be found online at http://links.lww.com/PAIN/A298.
Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML 
and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s Web site (www.painjournalonline.com).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Pain. 2016 December ; 157(12): 2628–2639. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000637.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Chronic pain poses a significant burden to affected individuals, their families, and society.66 
Estimates of chronic pain not associated with disease in the general adult population range 
from 10% to 40%,68 whereas persistent, severe, and disabling chronic pain occurs in 3% to 
8% of the population and incurs additional burden and cost 9,150,154 Similarly, in 
adolescents, moderate-to-severe chronic pain costs the United States approximately $19.5 
billion a year.52 Although the societal cost of chronic pain in families has not been 
calculated, there is some evidence that it would be high as chronic pain symptoms tend to 
aggregate in families.59
A recent systematic review and meta-analysis identified increased risk for pain and adverse 
mental and physical health outcomes for offspring of parents with chronic pain.59 Although 
there is increasing evidence for the relation between parent and child chronic pain, this 
systematic review identified gaps in the literature regarding how and why certain children 
with a parent with chronic pain may be at greater risk for poor outcomes than others. 
Identifying mechanisms for the transmission of risk for chronic pain in offspring is 
important for developing preventive interventions to decrease risk for chronic pain and 
common comorbidities (eg, functional disability, other somatic symptoms, and poor 
psychological functioning).
The current review aims to provide an integrative conceptual model for the transmission of 
risk for chronic pain from parents to offspring. The literature on the relation between 
parental chronic pain and outcomes in offspring contains substantial heterogeneity regarding 
study methodology, sample populations, and research questions.59 Thus, our model serves to 
provide a hypothesized overarching framework to spur, guide, and organize future research 
in the field. We do not advocate that these proposed relationships are rigid, but instead fluid 
and plausible based on underlying theoretical frameworks and the existing literature.
Our goals for outlining a conceptual framework specific to the transmission of risk for 
chronic pain are to (1) set an agenda for future interdisciplinary research on risk and 
resiliency for chronic pain and related outcomes in children of parents with chronic pain and 
(2) lay a foundation for the development of preventive interventions. First, we provide a 
brief overview of the theoretical underpinnings, key terms, and components of our model. 
Next, we devote sections to describing research relevant to hypothesized mechanisms and 
moderators in the model. Finally, we draw conclusions regarding the current state of the 
research and future directions.
1. Overview of the model
Our model is adapted from (1) a model of the intergenerational transmission of maternal 
depression49; (2) models of family coping with maternal illness4,88; (3) an integrative model 
of parent and family factors in pediatric chronic pain103; and (4) a model of pain 
vulnerability mechanisms.33 Our conceptual model proposes that having a parent with 
chronic pain heightens a child’s risk for chronic pain through genetic, neurobiological, pain-
specific social learning, general parenting and family health, and family stress pathways. We 
provide an overview of the existing literature supporting plausible mechanisms (eg, genetics, 
modeled pain, and disability) that contribute to vulnerabilities within the child (eg, pain-
Stone and Wilson
Page 2
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 related cognitions and pain sensitivity), ultimately leading to adverse outcomes (eg, chronic 
pain, pain-related disability, and poor psychological functioning). Although our model and 
review of the literature focus on chronic pain not related to disease, similar mechanisms may 
also operate in disease-related pain (eg, arthritis, sickle cell disease, inflammatory bowel 
disease, etc.) or in other contexts (eg, pain chronification after surgery or acute injury).
The model focuses on parental chronic pain as a specific risk factor that may increase the 
probability that offspring will develop chronic pain and related comorbidities (Fig. 1). There 
are likely many families where a parent may have chronic pain and offspring do not develop 
chronic pain or other adverse outcomes. Thus, our model focuses on outlining mechanisms, 
moderators, and vulnerabilities that may explain why some offspring of parents with chronic 
pain are at increased risk and develop adverse outcomes while others do not.
The outcomes addressed in our model correspond with the adverse outcomes identified in 
the meta-analysis on offspring of parents with chronic pain.59 We focus on the development 
of pediatric chronic pain and associated disability as the primary outcome and also highlight 
poor psychological functioning (eg, internalizing or externalizing behavior problems, poor 
social competence, or low self-esteem) as an outcome that may occur in combination with or 
independent from children’s pain outcomes. Many of the proposed mechanisms and 
vulnerabilities are associated with psychological outcomes in addition to pain outcomes.49
We posit that parental chronic pain influences the development of chronic pain in offspring 
through specific mechanisms or mediators (ie, how or why a specific effect occurs). Our 
proposed model highlights 5 potential mechanisms for the relation between parental chronic 
pain and children’s outcomes: (1) genetics, (2) alterations in early neurobiological 
development, (3) pain-specific social learning, (4), general parenting and family health, and 
(5) exposure to stressful environment. Next, we focus on moderators or variables that might 
explain when, and under what circumstances, offspring are at greatest risk for developing 
chronic pain in the context of parental chronic pain. We discuss 3 possible moderators of this 
relation: (1) the presence of chronic pain in a second parent, (2) timing, course, and location 
of parental chronic pain, and (3) offspring’s characteristics (ie, sex, developmental stage, 
race or ethnicity, and temperament).
In our model, vulnerabilities refer to factors that could be influenced by having a parent with 
chronic pain. These vulnerabilities could also be influenced by other biological, 
psychological, or contextual processes outside of parental chronic pain; thus, there is not a 
direct correspondence between mechanisms and vulnerabilities. Although we will not devote 
entire sections to these vulnerabilities, which are commonly proposed in models of pediatric 
chronic pain,5,152 we highlight within our discussion of mechanisms and moderators 5 
potential vulnerabilities that could characterize offspring at greatest risk for the development 
of chronic pain: (1) altered pain processing, (2) offspring’s own pain-related cognitions and 
affect, (3) paincoping behaviors, (4) physical health factors, and (5) difficulty processing and 
regulating emotions.
The outlined mechanisms, moderators, and vulnerabilities likely interact over time to 
influence the development of chronic pain and related outcomes in offspring of parents with 
Stone and Wilson
Page 3
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chronic pain. The current state of the literature allows for few conclusive statements 
regarding timing of effects or specific interactions. We propose that the development of 
chronic pain in offspring is the result of multiple complex interactions among mechanisms, 
child vulnerabilities, and moderators.
2. Potential mechanisms for the transmission of risk
2.1. Mechanism 1: genetics
Offspring of a parent with chronic pain may be at increased genetic risk for heightened 
sensory and psychological components of pain which could contribute to the development of 
chronic pain. Heritability estimates for genetic influences on the development of chronic 
pain in children and adolescents vary depending on the type of pain and age.58,97,132,136 
These studies generally rely on twin designs and compute estimates for the amount of 
variability accounted for by genetic, shared environmental, and nonshared environmental 
factors. For example, a study of Danish twins computed heritability estimates for low back 
pain by age and found for young adolescents (age: 12–15 years), common environmental 
factors represented the strongest component.58 However, for older adolescents (age: 16–18 
years), genetic and nonshared environmental factors comprised the model with the best 
overall fit. Thus, for children and young adolescents, shared environmental factors (eg, 
family context) may have greater influence on chronic pain development than genetic factors 
in some pain phenotypes. The studies mentioned above represent the few that have examined 
genetic influences on the presentation of pediatric chronic pain.
Genetic research from studies on the development of chronic pain in adults may inform 
future research on genetic mechanisms that influence the development of pediatric chronic 
pain. Genetic factors contribute to roughly 50% of the risk for chronic pain in adults and 
influence both sensory and psychological factors that commonly co-occur with chronic 
pain.35 Alterations in pain processing represents one vulnerability in our model which may 
have more genetic influence than others. Indeed, heightened pain sensitivity has been linked 
with genetic variants of the catecholamine-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene.36 There is 
some evidence that variants of the COMT gene interact with psychological factors (eg, 
perceived stress) to increase risk of chronic pain development.127 For children, genetic 
components likely interact with the parent and child’s life experiences, environment, and 
characteristics to influence the development of chronic pain.
Psychological components that often predict or co-occur with chronic pain are also 
influenced by genetic factors.35 With regards to pain-specific psychological factors, a recent 
twin study139 estimated genetic factors to account for 37% of the variance in pain 
catastrophizing. In further analyses, the genetic factors influencing pain catastrophizing 
were found to be unrelated to genetic factors influencing cold-pressor task outcomes. Thus, 
the genetic risk for some psychological components of the pain experience may be distinct 
from the genetic risk for sensory components of the pain experience (ie, laboratory pain 
sensitivity).44 In a study of genetic risk for temporomandibular disorder (TMD) onset, 
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 (PTGS1, rs3842803) was associated with global 
psychological symptoms, and amyloid-β (A4) precursor protein (APP, rs466448) was 
associated with stress and negative affectivity,130 indicating that more global psychological 
Stone and Wilson
Page 4
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 factors predictive of chronic pain development are influenced by genetic factors. In addition 
to pain, offspring of parents with chronic pain are more likely to experience externalizing 
and internalizing problems.70 Genetic contributions to these intermediate psychological 
phenotypes could help elucidate the transmission of risk for multiple outcomes in the 
context of parental chronic pain.
2.2. Mechanism 2: early neurobiological development
Having a parent with chronic pain has the potential to impact neurobiological features and 
function during critical periods early in development. These neurobiological changes, in 
turn, may increase vulnerability to chronic pain, particularly pain processing and ability to 
process and regulate emotions. Although we primarily address mothers in this section, 
parents of both sexes certainly contribute to their children’s ongoing neurobiological 
functioning across development. First, we address 2 important factors through which 
maternal chronic pain may influence the neurobiological development of their offspring 
during the prenatal and perinatal periods: (1) maternal stress and (2) maternal health 
behaviors. Then, we discuss how neurobiological features may influence vulnerabilities for 
the development of chronic pain and related outcomes in offspring of mothers with chronic 
pain.
2.2.1. Maternal stress during prenatal and perinatal periods—Disruptions of fetal 
neurobiological development may be due to maternal chronic pain or comorbidities such as 
somatic and depressive symptoms altering maternal neuroendocrine or hypothalamic—
pituitary—adrenal (HPA) axis function,137,163 which in turn may alter fetal neuroendocrine 
systems and DNA methylation.13 Similar mechanisms have been demonstrated in the case of 
maternal depression.13,89 Maternal stress and cortisol levels during pregnancy impact the 
development of infant cardiac vagal tone,111 which is strongly associated with children’s 
later abilities to regulate emotions. Higher maternal cortisol levels during pregnancy were 
associated with infants’ slower behavioral distress recovery and larger cortisol responses in 
response to a painful procedure at age 2.30 There is also some evidence that early life pain 
responses (at age 5) are associated with somatic symptoms at age 12,115 suggesting 
increased pain response vulnerability can lead to poor outcomes across development.
2.2.2. Maternal health behaviors during prenatal and perinatal periods—Early 
neurobiological development could be disrupted due to maternal health and health behaviors 
that co-occur with chronic pain. There is a growing body of the literature demonstrating that 
maternal physical activity, obesity, and high-fat diets affect offspring health and 
development.93 These processes are important to consider as obesity is associated with 
chronic musculoskeletal pain and multisite pain in community and epidemiological samples 
of adolescents and adults.31,60,100
Classes of medications commonly prescribed for chronic pain management have the 
potential to negatively impact fetal development. Opioid pain medications disrupt endocrine 
system and HPA axis function.3,28,32 Prenatal exposure to opioids is associated with 
negative behavioral and cognitive outcomes for offspring, in both human and animal 
studies,34,45,106 and changes in analgesia in animals,138 suggesting opioid exposure might 
Stone and Wilson
Page 5
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lead to changes in a child’s pain processing system; note that the majority of human research 
in this area has focused on prenatal opioid exposure among offspring of mothers addicted to 
opioids.45 Antiepileptic medications also carry increased risk of congenital abnormalities, 
preterm delivery, and low birth weight.6,46,147 A meta-analysis showed that antidepressant 
use during pregnancy is related to increased risk for low birth weight and low Apgar 
scores116 and is associated with increased anxiety in offspring at 3 years of age.14 Thus, 
exposure to medications commonly used to treat chronic pain or comorbid conditions might 
lead to increases in a number of vulnerabilities for chronic pain development, including 
difficulty regulating emotions.
2.2.3. Neurobiological features in offspring of parents with chronic pain 
during childhood and adolescence—Minimal work has been done to examine 
neurobiological features or functioning of the offspring of parents with chronic pain. A 
recent review outlines brain networks that are likely candidates for increasing vulnerability 
for pain chronicity, including the descending pain modulatory system and the reward-
motivation network.33 Similar networks may be vulnerable in children with parents of 
chronic pain, and examining them early in life and across development will be key. Initial 
work in this area has shown that 11- to 15-year-old children of mothers with chronic pain 
show differences in brain activity during positive and negative emotion processing and 
differences during emotional inhibition tasks compared with controls.27 One other study 
found that healthy children with stronger inhibitory control and working memory reported 
less stress and unpleasantness during painful stimuli,148 suggesting that inhibition and 
attention networks may play a role in chronic pain development.
2.3. Mechanism 3: pain-specific social learning
Pain-specific social learning mechanisms that contribute to pain vulnerabilities in children 
are likely to be interdependent and mutually influence each other. Social learning theory7 is 
a theoretical framework that can guide hypotheses regarding how children may learn 
responses to pain from parents. According to this theory, children learn behaviors through 
observations of models and reinforcement. Parents with chronic pain may model 
maladaptive pain behaviors and reinforce children’s maladaptive pain behaviors through 
protective or solicitous responding to children’s pain complaints. Both parental modeling of 
pain behaviors and parental reinforcement of children’s pain behaviors may contribute to the 
development of children’s pain beliefs and responses to pain which could increase risk for 
the development of chronic pain and related disability. Similarly, transmission of resilience, 
including pain acceptance, could occur through modeling and reinforcement.
Evidence for the hypothesis that parental modeling of pain behavior influences children’s 
pain responses comes from one experimental study that manipulated parental responses to 
laboratory pain in the presence of their children.48 The effect of modeling has also been 
inferred based on the identification of pain models.101 Because evidence for the role of 
parental modeling of pain behaviors is limited, the goal of this section is to place parental 
pain behaviors in the broader context of parents’ own cognitive and affective responses to 
pain to set an agenda for further research. When a parent with chronic pain holds strong 
beliefs that pain represents a significant threat, this could lead to increased vulnerability for 
Stone and Wilson
Page 6
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chronic pain and related disability in their children through parental modeling of 
maladaptive pain behaviors (eg, activity avoidance) and protective responses to children’s 
pain.
Pain catastrophizing is a cognitive—affective factor that could influence parental pain 
behaviors and responses to children’s pain behaviors and is associated with poor outcomes 
such as reduced quality of life, higher functional disability, and higher depressive symptoms 
in adults and adolescents.90,107 Pain catastrophizing refers to the negative cognitive tendency 
to magnify the threatening value of pain sensations and functions to facilitate avoidance of 
pain and communicate distress to others.25 Parents who catastrophize about their own pain 
or their children’s pain likely communicate high threat information about pain to children 
through verbal and nonverbal means.81,99,107,159 In turn, parental verbal and nonverbal pain 
behaviors are observed by children and may influence the development of children’s pain-
related beliefs. Parent catastrophizing about children’s pain and children’s own 
catastrophizing about pain have consistently been associated with higher levels of pain-
related disability in youth,50,90,160 and mothers and children have similar tendencies to 
catastrophize.90 Pain treatment can reduce catastrophizing in both parents and children.156
Parents high in catastrophizing about their own pain or their children’s pain behave 
differently toward their children in pain situations through restricting activities that might be 
painful.16,81 Parental responses to children’s pain and distress may be informed by their own 
pain experiences and beliefs. In a study comparing children of adult patients with chronic 
pain with children of adults without chronic pain, parents with chronic pain reported higher 
levels of catastrophizing about their children’s pain and protective responses to children’s 
pain.158 Parental responses that are solicitous or protective (eg, letting their child stay home 
from school and giving their child special treats or gifts) are associated with higher levels of 
pain, disability, and catastrophizing in pediatric patients with chronic pain.124 Children’s 
own levels of pain catastrophizing and emotional distress are associated with parents’ 
solicitous or protective responses to children’s pain and may drive the relation between 
parents’ responses to children’s pain and children’s symptoms and disability.19,54,151 
Laboratory studies have further corroborated the relation between parental attention or 
solicitousness and children’s laboratory pain responses.18,153
In contrast, parents with chronic pain who are able to accept their own pain may respond to 
their children’s pain with acceptance which could facilitate higher levels of emotional and 
physical functioning for both parents and children.92,126 Parents’ acceptance of children’s 
pain has been associated with fewer attempts to engage in protective responses to children’s 
pain and lower levels of functional disability in the child.129 Acceptance of children’s pain 
likely parallels parents’ acceptance of their own pain, but to our knowledge, this has not 
been studied. Parents who are able to accept pain likely exhibit higher physical and 
emotional functioning than parents who struggle to accept both their own pain and their 
children’s pain. In addition to acceptance, a number of other pain-specific psychological 
factors in parents may contribute to resilient child outcomes, including active coping, 
problem solving skills, and optimism.23,63,64,105
Stone and Wilson
Page 7
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.4. Mechanism 4: general parenting and health habits
2.4.1. General parenting—Parents with chronic pain may influence the development of 
chronic pain and other poor outcomes in their children through engaging in a number of 
general parenting behaviors often linked with adverse child outcomes (eg, permissive 
parenting, difficulties providing consistency and warmth, and difficulty responding 
effectively to child distress43,158). Parental warmth is consistently associated with 
psychological outcomes for children, including lower levels of warmth being related to 
increased internalizing problems.74,82 Maternal responsiveness to distress is positively 
associated with a child’s ability to regulate negative affect and emotions effectively.29,75 
Parents with chronic pain may be less able to respond to their child’s distress,158 which can 
impact children’s ability to develop negative affect regulation.76 Negative affect regulation 
has been tightly linked with pain in neuroanatomy40,121 and is also associated with pain 
experiences on a day-to-day basis.22 Poor negative affect regulation increases risk for the 
development of internalizing problems.38,39,125 Parent—child communication and 
interaction styles investigated in the context of pediatric chronic pain have found 
associations between high conflict and low adolescent autonomy with increased depressive 
symptoms86 and lower autonomy than expected for age in youth with pain.42
Attachment is also an important domain of parent—child relationships to consider,2,12 as 
adult attachment style has been linked with parenting behaviors20 and a number of pain 
outcomes, including pain self-efficacy.96 Children with a parent with chronic pain may form 
insecure attachment styles, such as anxious attachment, that may increase their tendency to 
respond to a threat, such as pain, with passive coping strategies which may increase risk for 
the development of chronic pain.79,95 Investigating the extent to which parental chronic pain 
affects overall parenting behaviors and responsiveness to their children is important for 
further understanding how parental chronic pain may contribute to the development of 
pediatric chronic pain and comorbid conditions. Many of these parenting and parent—child 
relationship mechanisms have the potential to be protective, and in that capacity might act as 
mechanisms for resilience, or as moderators that might attenuate the impact of other risk 
factors.
2.4.2. Physical activity and general health habits—One’s family strongly influences 
the development of health and illness-related attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors,73 and parents 
are salient models of health behaviors for their children.47,142 Because of impairments in 
physical functioning, parents with chronic pain may model less physical activity and engage 
in less physical activity with their children. Parenting that includes logistical support for 
physical activity and modeling or joint physical activity participation is associated with 
lower child body mass index (BMI) and increased child activity levels.128 Low levels of 
physical activity have a negative impact on physical fitness and function,65,164 important 
factors in the development and persistence of pain.15 In epidemiological samples, higher 
levels of sedentary activity are associated with increased pain in girls,60 whereas higher 
activity is associated with reduced risk for chronic pain.80 In addition, objectively measured 
activity levels have shown that lower physical activity is associated with greater pain and 
disability among youth with chronic pain and healthy youth.72,108,161 Thus, engagement in 
physical activity may be particularly important for youth at risk for chronic pain.155 Parents 
Stone and Wilson
Page 8
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 who have chronic pain may be less involved in their children’s activities and provide fewer 
opportunities for physical activity for their children.158
A number of other general health factors will be important to examine as potential 
mechanisms, including BMI, diet, and health care utilization. Higher BMI is a risk factor in 
and of itself for the persistence of chronic musculoskeletal8 or headache pain57,112 in 
children and adolescents and is associated with activity limitations in youth with pain.162 In 
addition, dietary interventions have been shown to reduce pain in adults with irritable bowel 
syndrome,55 and pain and psychological distress in adults with headache,110 suggesting that 
diet and nutrition habits within a family might influence pain outcomes. Health care 
utilization may also play a role, as parental health status has been associated with pain-
related medical visits in children,141 and mother and child health care visit frequency are 
positively correlated in families in which the mother has irritable bowel syndrome.146 
Families who catastrophize about pain may be more likely to seek frequent medical care 
which, in turn, may further increase pain catastrophizing. Examination of these health 
factors as potential mechanisms might yield additional targets for preventive interventions.
2.5. Mechanism 4: exposure to stressful environment
The environmental context surrounding a family where a parent has chronic pain, 
particularly stressors, could contribute to the development of chronic pain in their children. 
Chronic pain is both influenced by stress and poses a significant chronic stressor for 
individuals suffering with chronic pain syndromes and their families.67 Poor family 
functioning and family stress, such as low cohesion (ie, low positive emotional bonding) and 
high levels of marital conflict, chronic sources of stress, have consistently been shown to 
contribute to pain-related disability in youth.87 Children raised in families with high conflict 
and low warmth are at high risk for mental and physical health disorders because of 
vulnerabilities for alterations in stress response systems, difficulties with emotion 
processing, and poor health behaviors.113 Chronic stressors give the body little or no time to 
adapt or recover from the cognitive and physiological demands of the stressor and can 
produce a prolonged stress response associated with physiological dysregulation and stress-
related diseases.69 The extent to which an event, such as parental chronic pain or financial 
challenges associated with parental pain-related disability, represents a stressor and is 
associated with adverse consequences can be modulated by one’s appraisal of the situation 
and attempts to cope with the situation.83
Children of parents with chronic pain likely experience unique stressors related to their 
parents’ health.143 Parents with chronic pain and pain-related disability may have difficulties 
completing household chores and everyday tasks that parents often complete to care for their 
families. Children of parents with chronic pain may feel pressure to help take care of their 
family and assume adult roles at an early age or try to assume responsibility for their 
parent’s pain.144 In addition, the financial burden of chronic pain due to health care 
utilization and lost productivity for adults could create additional stress for the family.66 
Thus, the unique challenges of children with parents with chronic pain represent significant 
chronic stressors.
Stone and Wilson
Page 9
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Potential moderators of risk
3.1. Moderator 1: pain status and the presence of second parent
The number of parents with chronic pain may influence the development of chronic pain in 
their children in a dose—response relation where having 1 parent with chronic pain 
increases risk for pediatric chronic pain, but having 2 parents with chronic pain poses 
greatest risk for pediatric chronic pain. The cumulative effect of having 2 parents with 
chronic pain has been reported in both clinical and community populations.61,123 Having a 
healthy co-parent may buffer children from the negative effects of parental pain, as he or she 
may be able to provide support for the other parent or provide children with positive 
parenting that may be difficult for the parent with pain to provide at times (eg, physical 
activity parenting). In some families where a parent has chronic pain, a healthy co-parent 
may not be present or available (eg, single-parent homes). There is some evidence that 
pediatric patients with chronic pain are more likely to come from single-parent homes1,71 
and living in a single-parent home may be an important moderator when examining the 
association between parental chronic pain and the development of chronic pain in children.
3.2. Moderator 2: timing, course, and location of parental chronic pain
The timing, course, and location of parental chronic pain may moderate the relation between 
parental chronic pain and the development of pediatric chronic pain, though to our 
knowledge, no studies have examined this association. Longer duration of exposure to 
parental chronic pain provides additional repeated opportunities for children to observe and 
adopt pain-related behaviors, fears, and responses. In addition, early life exposure to 
maternal distress is consistently associated with poor psychological and physical health 
outcomes in children,78,131 and early life exposure to maternal pain may be similar. Timing 
of parental chronic pain with regards to children’s developmental stages may be most 
relevant for determining when in childhood to target preventive interventions for both the 
parent and child.
Regarding the bodily location of parental chronic pain, some studies have found a stronger 
relation between parent and child chronic pain for congruent pain locations than incongruent 
locations,53,119 whereas others have not.102 Some studies test multiple pain locations and 
find a relation between parent and child chronic pain for a specific congruent body location 
(eg, head pain), but not for other congruent body locations.11,133 Social Learning Theory 
would suggest that a child would be more likely to learn pain and pain behaviors from their 
parents when sharing the same pain location. Indeed, the literature examining illness 
behaviors has identified that childhood learning may be illness specific and may not 
generalize to other conditions.84,157 Thus, stronger relations between pediatric chronic pain 
and parental chronic pain may occur when pain locations are the same.
However, chronic pain may represent a unitary disease state regardless of location, 
especially when pain is reported across multiple pain sites.165 In some cases, the number of 
parental chronic pain sites may be related to children’s chronic pain severity more than a 
specific body location.119,120 The presence of multiple pain sites may be a marker of central 
sensitization which reflects alterations in the central nervous system with regards to pain 
Stone and Wilson
Page 10
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 processing.134 Therefore, parents with multiple chronic pain sites, reflecting possible central 
sensitization, may have children at greatest risk for developing widespread chronic pain 
because of underlying genetic bases and social learning that may be specific to multisite pain 
or comorbid pain conditions.
3.3. Moderator 3: children’s characteristics
A number of child characteristics may moderate the relation between parental chronic pain 
and the development of pediatric chronic pain.
3.3.1. Sex—Girls seem to be more vulnerable to the influence of maternal pain and 
illness,77 as well as to the influence of maternal responses to child pain.17,153 Girls also have 
a greater risk of musculoskeletal pain persisting from preadolescence to adolescence 
compared with boys and seem to be more likely to develop persistent pain in the context of 
other risk factors (eg, depressive symptoms and hypermobility) than boys.41 However, 
nonexperimental studies of the relation between parent and child chronic pain have not 
found differences between male and female offspring.61,123 Because chronic pain is most 
common in females, many of these larger studies have unequal numbers of males and 
females reporting chronic pain and may have insufficient power to detect sex-specific 
effects.
3.3.2. Race or ethnicity—African Americans, compared with non-Hispanic whites, 
report higher chronic pain ratings and greater evoked pain responsiveness in 
adulthood.37,109,114 In adolescence, African Americans have been shown to exhibit similar 
heightened evoked pain responsiveness compared with non-Hispanic whites.98 Thus, a 
child’s race or ethnicity may increase risk for heightened pain or the development of chronic 
pain in the context of parental pain. In addition, the extent to which certain mechanisms (eg, 
parental modeling or reinforcement) influence the intergenerational transmission of risk for 
chronic pain may differ by a child’s ethnicity or culture.
3.3.3. Developmental stage—Children’s developmental stage may influence both 
parental responses to children’s pain and children’s tendencies to express chronic pain 
complaints. The relation between parent and child pain may be strongest for children in 
early puberty stages vs those in later puberty stages.140 As children become adolescents, 
they strive to achieve more autonomy from their parents and thus may direct more attention 
to peers than parents.94 Thus, parental chronic pain may have greater influence on the 
development of children’s pain than adolescents’ pain. Similarly, the exposure to parental 
pain during critical early developmental periods may be more relevant for neurobiological 
mechanisms.
3.3.4. Temperament—Temperament is evident early in infancy and refers to individual 
differences in affective, attentional, and motor responses.117 These individual differences 
have been categorized into 3 broad factors commonly studied in early and middle childhood: 
(1) positive affectivity, (2) negative affectivity, and (3) effortful control.117,118 These factors 
could all moderate the extent to which offspring of parents with chronic pain are at risk for 
the development of pediatric chronic pain.
Stone and Wilson
Page 11
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Children’s positive affectivity may serve as a resilience resource in the context of chronic 
pain and may be one factor that could buffer the relation between parental chronic pain and 
risk for the development of pediatric chronic pain.24 However, children characterized by 
high levels of negative affectivity, which is often linked with neuroticism, tend to experience 
higher levels of fear, anger, and sadness and have more difficulty engaging in coping efforts 
to modulate their own affect intensity in the face of challenges, such as pain.21 Pediatric 
patients with chronic pain experience higher rates of lifetime anxiety and depressive 
disorders than pain-free individuals122 suggesting higher levels of negative affectivity may 
confer greater risk for pediatric chronic pain, but whether these factors result from or 
contribute to the development of chronic pain in children is unknown.
Effortful control refers to the ability to modulate attention and inhibit automatic responses. 
Children with an attentional bias towards pain could be more susceptible parental modeling 
and pain responses because of their attentional bias towards threatening pain information 
and difficulty shifting attention in the context of a threat such as pain.51 This may be 
particularly true for children with low effortful control and a high tendency to catastrophize 
about pain.56
4. Summary and future directions
The comprehensive intergenerational framework described here provides a starting point for 
examining potential mechanisms and moderators through which parental chronic pain might 
increase the risk for pain and related poor outcomes in children. Such a framework 
highlights chronic pain as inherently familial and intergenerational, opening up avenues for 
new models of intervention and prevention that can be family centered and include at-risk 
children. Parents suffering from chronic pain are not simply isolated patients who need 
effective treatment for themselves, but as parents may also hold the key to improving 
outcomes for their own children and for future generations. We have proposed a number of 
possible mechanistic pathways that might contribute to the development of chronic pain and 
related outcomes in the offspring of parents with chronic pain. This model has strong 
theoretical underpinnings from Social Learning Theory, as well as from existing models of 
intergenerational transmission of depression and physical illness. Although some portions of 
the model are supported by the existing literature, it has been inferred that many of these 
mechanisms exist based on high rates of pain in offspring. By elucidating specific pathways 
that can be tested, knowledge can be gained which will provide avenues and targets for 
prevention efforts, which have not traditionally been pursued in chronic pain. Additional 
research will help support or refute aspects of this conceptual model.
Many of these mechanisms and moderators have been studied in the context of other mental 
and physical health conditions (eg, depression and obesity), but the chronic pain literature 
lags behind. Drawing from these other knowledge bases and our review of the literature, we 
propose future directions in 3 key areas: (1) basic science, (2) prevention, and (3) 
intervention (Fig. 2). Finally, we will address current methodological issues that need to be 
addressed to move this area of research forward.
Stone and Wilson
Page 12
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4.1. Basic science
Although there is a growing body of work focused on biological factors contributing to the 
development of chronic pain, these factors have rarely been examined in the development of 
chronic pain in children. In adults, results from a large candidate gene study examining the 
development of TMD suggest that genetic polymorphisms may be associated with 
intermediate clinical, psychological, and sensory phenotypes predictive of TMD onset in the 
absence of direct associations with the onset of the disorder.130 Similar methodologies could 
help discover genetic polymorphisms present in children of parents with chronic pain which 
confer greater risk for chronic pain development. In addition, research examining gene by 
environment interactions could elucidate when and under what circumstances each of these 
mechanisms increases risk for the development of chronic pain in children.
Work is also needed to better understand the potential impact of parental chronic pain on 
early neurobiological development and the potential long-term consequences of these early 
changes in childhood or adolescence. Examining brain networks proposed to contribute to 
pain chronicity (eg, descending pain modulatory system and reward-motivation network) 
early in development and over time among the offspring of parents with chronic pain may 
provide additional information about the ways in which parental chronic pain influences 
children’s neurobiology. In addition to neuroimaging, assessment of HPA axis functioning, 
physiological responses, and laboratory pain responses might inform this area of study.
There is a great need for intergenerational and longitudinal studies. Although a few studies 
have examined samples of parents with chronic pain, eg,85 the majority of this research has 
consisted of cross-sectional studies of group differences in the children of parents with a 
chronic pain condition compared with children of healthy control parents. Following high-
risk children over time will allow for testing the proposed mechanisms and establishing 
targets for preventive interventions.
4.2. Prevention
Although our framework has primarily focused on mechanisms which increase risk, many 
children of parents with chronic pain do not develop pediatric chronic pain or related 
outcomes. Understanding protective factors in both parents with chronic pain and their 
offspring will help identify targets for promoting resilience in parents with chronic pain and 
at-risk children and adolescents with the goal of pediatric chronic pain prevention. 
Prevention of the onset of chronic pain is a new frontier in pediatric pain. Existing 
treatments that are effective for youth with chronic pain might be adapted to serve as 
preventive interventions. Consideration should also be given to circumstances (eg, surgery 
and presentation in primary care with pain) and points in development that might provide 
good opportunities to deliver these preventive interventions to high-risk youth. Developing 
and testing preventive interventions through randomized controlled trials could also advance 
our understanding of timing effects and causal mechanisms in the intergenerational 
transmission of risk for chronic pain.
Stone and Wilson
Page 13
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4.3. Intervention
Close to 50% of pediatric patients with chronic pain presenting to tertiary medical clinics 
have at least 1 parent with chronic pain.91 We primarily discussed our model in the context 
of the development of chronic pain, but many of these mechanisms could also operate to 
maintain chronic pain and related comorbidities in children. For pediatric patients with 
chronic pain, it may be difficult to make lifestyle changes and maintain gains when parents 
hold strong beliefs regarding their own pain and engage in disability behaviors. 
Supplementing current interdisciplinary interventions for pediatric chronic pain with 
components that target parents’ own chronic pain and disability may improve treatment 
efficacy. Researching and understanding barriers to treatment in families with chronic pain 
could provide targets for improving current treatments to address the needs of these families.
4.4. Methodological considerations
To conduct longitudinal studies on mechanisms for the intergenerational transmission of 
chronic pain from parents to offspring, greater attention is needed on how we measure and 
assess chronic pain in families. Although a number of epidemiological studies have 
examined the impact of the presence of chronic pain in mothers and fathers on offspring,62 
additional work is needed to assess the impact of other important dimensions of parental 
pain (eg, pain behaviors and pain-related disability) when considering chronic pain and other 
poor outcomes in offspring.104 Additional information about heritability might also be 
gleaned by assessing the presence of chronic pain in first- and second-degree biological 
relatives. Interview methods have been used successfully to assess family history of 
alcoholism and yield continuous scores of family history density which are associated with 
offspring risk for substance use disorders.26,135 Measuring the timing of parental chronic 
pain in relation to children’s developmental stage, duration of parental chronic pain, and 
chronic pain location and severity will help further our knowledge of these moderators. In 
addition, it will be important to include both mothers and fathers in this research with 
careful attention to family compositions as a potential moderating variable. The development 
of additional measures is needed to test specific mechanisms (eg, social learning) in the 
model.
Currently, measures of parent responses to children’s pain are limited and have typically 
been investigated with a single-parent self-report measure.145 Observational tasks and 
measures that assess moment-to-moment interactions between parent—child dyads are 
needed to establish the behaviors that parents exhibit in response to children’s pain, and 
behavioral or emotional responses that children may exhibit in response to parents’ pain. A 
number of studies have examined parent—child dyads in the context of acute pain or 
laboratory tasks,10,149 but this research has yet to be conducted in the context of parental 
chronic pain. In addition, using data collection and analytic techniques (eg, electronic 
momentary assessment and actigraphy) to capture daily variations in parental pain 
characteristics and stressors and child responses to parental pain might yield unique 
perspective on the synchrony of parent—child experiences and may provide insight into the 
implementation of prevention programs that could target symptoms and behaviors in daily 
life.
Stone and Wilson
Page 14
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Finally, execution of many of these future research directions requires the creation of 
interdisciplinary teams to conduct complex studies examining interactions among 
mechanisms. These interdisciplinary research teams should be comprised a variety of 
disciplines, such as geneticists, neurobiologists, medical providers, psychologists, and 
physical therapists. Many of the pathways outlined interact, and thus researchers must 
interact to examine these specific interactive components between biology, psychology, and 
clinical presentation. These interdisciplinary teams will also be needed to execute effective 
family-based preventive interventions and interventions for children of parents with chronic 
pain. It is also important to note that this topic bridges both pediatric and adult chronic pain 
research. Teams comprised both pediatric and adult pain researchers could help bridge this 
gap to design studies that effectively capture mechanisms operating to maintain pain in both 
parents and their children. Forming diverse teams of researchers committed to carrying out 
this vision and addressing these current methodological issues and gaps is one of the first 
steps. It will take years of research to establish or refute each of these mechanisms, but the 
potential benefit of developing effective preventive interventions and interventions for 
children of parents with chronic pain is a worthwhile pursuit.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The first author thanks her dissertation committee chair, Lynn Walker, as well as committee members Stephen 
Bruehl, Judy Garber, and Craig Smith for their helpful input. The authors additionally thank Tonya Palermo and 
Christine Chambers for their feedback on early versions of the theoretical model.
Conflict of interest statement
A. L. Stone is an international trainee with Pain in Child Health (PICH), a Strategic Training Initiative in Health 
Research of the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR). A. C. Wilson’s work on this project was supported 
by the National Institutes of Health/Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development (R01HD082200).
References
1. Aasland A, Flato B, Vandvik IH. Psychosocial factors in children with idiopathic musculoskeletal 
pain: a prospective, longitudinal study. Acta Paediatr. 1997; 86:740–6. [PubMed: 9240883] 
2. Ainsworth MS. Infant—mother attachment. Am Psychol. 1979; 34:932–7. [PubMed: 517843] 
3. Aloisi AM, Buonocore M, Merlo L, Galandra C, Sotgiu A, Bacchella L, Ungaretti M, Demartini L, 
Bonezzi C. Chronic pain therapy and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis impairment. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011; 36:1032–9. [PubMed: 21256679] 
4. Armistead L, Klein K, Forehand R. Parental physical illness and child functioning. Clin Psychol 
Rev. 1995; 15:409–22.
5. Asmundson GJ, Noel M, Petter M, Parkerson HA. Pediatric fear-avoidance model of chronic pain: 
foundation, application and future directions. Pain Res Manag. 2012; 17:397–405. [PubMed: 
23248813] 
6. Ban L, Fleming KM, Doyle P, Smeeth L, Hubbard RB, Fiaschi L, Tata LJ. Congenital anomalies in 
children of mothers taking antiepileptic drugs with and without periconceptional high dose folic 
acid use: a population-based cohort study. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0131130. [PubMed: 26147467] 
7. Bandura, A. Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall; 1977. 
Stone and Wilson
Page 15
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Bell LM, Byrne S, Thompson A, Ratnam N, Blair E, Bulsara M, Jones TW, Davis EA. Increasing 
body mass index z-score is continuously associated with complications of overweight in children, 
even in the healthy weight range. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007; 92:517–22. [PubMed: 17105842] 
9. Blyth FM, March LM, Brnabic AJM, Cousins MJ. Chronic pain and frequent use of health care. 
PAIN. 2004; 111:51–8. [PubMed: 15327808] 
10. Boerner KE, Noel M, Birnie KA, Caes L, Petter M, Chambers CT. Impact of threat level, task 
instruction, and individual characteristics on cold pressor pain and fear among children and their 
parents. Pain Pract. 2015; doi: 10.1111/papr.12306
11. Borge AI, Nordhagen R. Recurrent pain symptoms in children and parents. Acta Paediatr. 2000; 
89:1479–83. [PubMed: 11195240] 
12. Bowlby, JA. Secure base: parent-child attachment and healthy human development. New York: 
Basic Books; 1988. 
13. Braithwaite EC, Kundakovic M, Ramchandani PG, Murphy SE, Champagne FA. Maternal prenatal 
depressive symptoms predict infant NR3C1 1F and BDNF IV DNA methylation. Epigenetics. 
2015; 10:408–17. [PubMed: 25875334] 
14. Brandlistuen RE, Ystrom E, Eberhard-Gran M, Nulman I, Koren G, Nordeng H. Behavioural 
effects of fetal antidepressant exposure in a Norwegian cohort of discordant siblings. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2015; 44:1397–1407. [PubMed: 25873178] 
15. Burns JW, Johnson BJ, Mahoney N, Devine J, Pawl R. Cognitive and physical capacity process 
variables predict long-term outcome after treatment of chronic pain. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1998; 
66:434–9. [PubMed: 9583347] 
16. Caes L, Vervoort T, Eccleston C, Vandenhende M, Goubert L. Parental catastrophizing about 
child’s pain and its relationship with activity restriction: the mediating role of parental distress. 
PAIN. 2011; 152:212–22. [PubMed: 21126822] 
17. Chambers CT, Craig KD, Bennett SM. The impact of maternal behavior on children’s pain 
experiences: an experimental analysis. J Pediatr Psychol. 2002; 27:293–301. [PubMed: 11909936] 
18. Chambers CT, Craig KD, Bennett SM. The impact of maternal behavior on children’s pain 
experiences: an experimental analysis. J Pediatr Psychol. 2002; 27:293–301. [PubMed: 11909936] 
19. Claar RL, Simons LE, Logan DE. Parental response to children’s pain: the moderating impact of 
children’s emotional distress on symptoms and disability. PAIN. 2008; 138:172–9. [PubMed: 
18221837] 
20. Cohn DA, Cowan PA, Cowan CP, Pearson J. Mothers’ and fathers’ working models of childhood 
attachment relationships, parenting styles, and child behavior. Dev Psychopathol. 1992; 4:417–31.
21. Compas BE, Connor-Smith J, Jaser SS. Temperament, stress reactivity, and coping: implications 
for depression in childhood and adolescence. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2004; 33:21–31. 
[PubMed: 15028538] 
22. Connelly M, Keefe FJ, Affleck G, Lumley MA, Anderson T, Waters S. Effects of day-to-day affect 
regulation on the pain experience of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. PAIN. 2007; 131:162–70. 
[PubMed: 17321049] 
23. Cousins LA, Cohen LL, Venable C. Risk and resilience in pediatric chronic pain: exploring the 
protective role of optimism. J Pediatr Psychol. 2015; 40:934–42. [PubMed: 25355543] 
24. Cousins LA, Kalapurakkel S, Cohen LL, Simons LE. Topical review: resilience resources and 
mechanisms in pediatric chronic pain. J Pediatr Psychol. 2015; 40:840–45. [PubMed: 25979085] 
25. Crombez G, Bijttebier P, Eccleston C, Mascagni T, Mertens G, Goubert L, Verstraeten K. The child 
version of the pain catastrophizing scale (PCS-C): a preliminary validation. PAIN. 2003; 104:639–
46. [PubMed: 12927636] 
26. Cservenka A, Casimo K, Fair D, Nagel B. Resting state functional connectivity of the nucleus 
accumbens in youth with a family history of alcoholism. Psychiatry Res. 2014; 221:210–19. 
[PubMed: 24440571] 
27. Cservenka A, Stein H, Wilson AC, Nagel BJ. Neurobiological phenotypes of familial chronic pain 
in adolescence: a pilot fMRI study. J Pain. 2015; 16:913–25. [PubMed: 26117812] 
28. Daniell HW. Opioid endocrinopathy in women consuming prescribed sustained-action opioids for 
control of nonmalignant pain. J Pain. 2008; 9:28–36. [PubMed: 17936076] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 16
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Davidov M, Grusec JE. Untangling the links of parental responsiveness to distress and warmth to 
child outcomes. Child Dev. 2006; 77:44–58. [PubMed: 16460524] 
30. Davis EP, Glynn LM, Waffarn F, Sandman CA. Prenatal maternal stress programs infant stress 
regulation. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2011; 52:119–29. [PubMed: 20854366] 
31. Deere KC, Clinch J, Holliday K, McBeth J, Crawley EM, Sayers A, Palmer S, Doerner R, Clark 
EM, Tobias JH. Obesity is a risk factor for musculoskeletal pain in adolescents: findings from a 
population-based cohort. PAIN. 2012; 153:1932–8. [PubMed: 22805779] 
32. Demarest SP, Gill RS, Adler RA. Opioid endocrinopathy. Endocr Pract. 2015; 21:190–8. [PubMed: 
25536970] 
33. Denk F, McMahon SB, Tracey I. Pain vulnerability: a neurobiological perspective. Nat Neurosci. 
2014; 17:192–200. [PubMed: 24473267] 
34. Desai RJ, Huybrechts KF, Hernandez-Diaz S, Mogun H, Patorno E, Kaltenbach K, Kerzner LS, 
Bateman BT. Exposure to prescription opioid analgesics in utero and risk of neonatal abstinence 
syndrome: population based cohort study. BMJ. 2015; 350:h2102. [PubMed: 25975601] 
35. Diatchenko L, Fillingim RB, Smith SB, Maixner W. The phenotypic and genetic signatures of 
common musculoskeletal pain conditions. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2013; 9:340–50. [PubMed: 
23545734] 
36. Diatchenko L, Slade GD, Nackley AG, Bhalang K, Sigurdsson A, Belfer I, Goldman D, Xu K, 
Shabalina SA, Shagin D, Max MB, Makarov SS, Maixner W. Genetic basis for individual 
variations in pain perception and the development of a chronic pain condition. Hum Mol Genet. 
2005; 14:135–43. [PubMed: 15537663] 
37. Edwards RR, Doleys DM, Fillingim RB, Lowery D. Ethnic differences in pain tolerance: clinical 
implications in a chronic pain population. Psychosom Med. 2001; 63:316–23. [PubMed: 
11292281] 
38. Eisenberg N, Cumberland A, Spinrad TL, Fabes RA, Shepard SA, Reiser M, Murphy BC, Losoya 
SH, Guthrie IK. The relations of regulation and emotionality to children’s externalizing and 
internalizing problem behavior. Child Dev. 2001; 72:1112–34. [PubMed: 11480937] 
39. Eisenberg N, Spinrad TL, Eggum ND. Emotion-related self-regulation and its relation to children’s 
maladjustment. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2010; 6:495–525. [PubMed: 20192797] 
40. Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD. Why rejection hurts: a common neural alarm system for physical 
and social pain. Trends Cogn Sci. 2004; 8:294–300. [PubMed: 15242688] 
41. El-Metwally A, Salminen JJ, Auvinen A, Kautiainen H, Mikkelsson M. Prognosis of non-specific 
musculoskeletal pain in preadolescents: a prospective 4-year follow-up study till adolescence. 
PAIN. 2004; 110:550–9. [PubMed: 15288395] 
42. Evans S, Meldrum M, Tsao JCI, Fraynt R, Zeltzer LK. Associations between parent and child pain 
and functioning in a pediatric chronic pain sample: a mixed methods approach. Int J Disabil Hum 
Dev. 2010; 9:11–21. [PubMed: 21643522] 
43. Evans S, Shipton EA, Keenan T. The relationship between maternal chronic pain and child 
adjustment: the role of parenting as a mediator. J Pain. 2006; 7:236–43. [PubMed: 16618467] 
44. Fillingim RB. Heritability of catastrophizing: the biopsychosocial model in action. PAIN. 2015; 
156:357–8. [PubMed: 25687537] 
45. Fodor A, Tímár J, Zelena D. Behavioral effects of perinatal opioid exposure. Life Sci. 2014; 
104:1–8. [PubMed: 24746901] 
46. Fujii H, Goel A, Bernard N, Pistelli A, Yates LM, Stephens S, Han JY, Matsui D, Etwell F, 
Einarson TR, Koren G, Einarson A. Pregnancy outcomes following gabapentin use: results of a 
prospective comparative cohort study. Neurology. 2013; 80:1565–70. [PubMed: 23553472] 
47. Gallant AR, Tremblay A, Perusse L, Despres JP, Bouchard C, Drapeau V. Parental eating behavior 
traits are related to offspring BMI in the Quebec Family Study. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013; 37:1422–
6. [PubMed: 23399776] 
48. Goodman JE, McGrath PJ. Mothers’ modeling influences children’s pain during a cold pressor 
task. PAIN. 2003; 104:559–65. [PubMed: 12927628] 
49. Goodman SH, Gotlib IH. Risk for psychopathology in the children of depressed mothers: a 
developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission. Psychol Rev. 1999; 
106:458–90. [PubMed: 10467895] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 17
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 50. Goubert L, Eccleston C, Vervoort T, Jordan A, Crombez G. Parental catastrophizing about their 
child’s pain. The parent version of the Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS-P): a preliminary 
validation. PAIN. 2006; 123:254–63. [PubMed: 16644128] 
51. Goubert L, Vlaeyen JW, Crombez G, Craig KD. Learning about pain from others: an observational 
learning account. J Pain. 2011; 12:167–74. [PubMed: 21111682] 
52. Groenewald CB, Essner BS, Wright D, Fesinmeyer MD, Palermo TM. The economic costs of 
chronic pain among a cohort of treatment seeking adolescents in the United States. J Pain. 2014; 
15:925–33. [PubMed: 24953887] 
53. Groholt EK, Stigum H, Nordhagen R, Kohler L. Recurrent pain in children, socio-economic factors 
and accumulation in families. Eur J Epidemiol. 2003; 18:965–75. [PubMed: 14598927] 
54. Guite JWP, McCue RLBA, Sherker JLP, Sherry DDMD, Rose JBMD. Relationships among pain, 
protective parental responses, and disability for adolescents with chronic musculoskeletal pain: the 
mediating role of pain catastrophizing. Clin J Pain. 2011; 27:775–81. [PubMed: 21593664] 
55. Halmos EP, Power VA, Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR, Muir JG. A diet low in FODMAPs reduces 
symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2014; 146:67–75.e65. [PubMed: 
24076059] 
56. Heathcote LC, Vervoort T, Eccleston C, Fox E, Jacobs K, Van Ryckeghem DM, Lau JY. The 
relationship between adolescents’ pain catastrophizing and attention bias to pain faces is 
moderated by attention control. PAIN. 2015; 156:1334–41. [PubMed: 25830926] 
57. Hershey AD, Powers SW, Nelson TD, Kabbouche MA, Winner P, Yonker M, Linder SL, Bicknese 
A, Sowel MK, McClintock W. Obesity in the pediatric headache population: a multicenter study. 
Headache. 2009; 49:170–7. [PubMed: 18783447] 
58. Hestbaek L, Iachine IA, Leboeuf-Yde C, Kyvik KO, Manniche C. Heredity of low back pain in a 
young population: a classical twin study. Twin Res. 2004; 7:16–26. [PubMed: 15053850] 
59. Higgins KS, Birnie KA, Chambers CT, Wilson AC, Caes L, Clark AJ, Lynch M, Stinson J, 
Campbell-Yeo M. Offspring of parents with chronic pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
pain, health, psychological, and family outcomes. PAIN. 2015; 156:2256–66. [PubMed: 
26172553] 
60. Hoftun GB, Romundstad PR, Rygg M. Factors associated with adolescent chronic non-specific 
pain, chronic multisite pain, and chronic pain with high disability: the Young-HUNT Study 2008. J 
Pain. 2012; 13:874–83. [PubMed: 22832694] 
61. Hoftun GB, Romundstad PR, Rygg M. Association of parental chronic pain with chronic pain in 
the adolescent and young adult family linkage data from the HUNT study. Jama Pediatr. 2013; 
167:61–9. [PubMed: 23403843] 
62. Hoftun GB, Romundstad PR, Rygg M. Association of parental chronic pain with chronic pain in 
the adolescent and young adult: family linkage data from the HUNT Study. JAMA Pediatr. 2013; 
167:61–9. [PubMed: 23403843] 
63. Hunt MA, Keefe FJ, Bryant C, Metcalf BR, Ahamed Y, Nicholas MK, Bennell KL. A 
physiotherapist-delivered, combined exercise and pain coping skills training intervention for 
individuals with knee osteoarthritis: a pilot study. Knee. 2013; 20:106–12. [PubMed: 22921688] 
64. Hurley MV, Walsh NE, Mitchell HL, Pimm TJ, Patel A, Williamson E, Jones RH, Dieppe PA, 
Reeves BC. Clinical effectiveness of a rehabilitation program integrating exercise, self-
management, and active coping strategies for chronic knee pain: a cluster randomized trial. 
Arthritis Rheum. 2007; 57:1211–19. [PubMed: 17907147] 
65. Hussey J, Gormley J, Bell C, Roche EF, Hoey H. Exercise tolerance and physical activity levels in 
children referred to a weight reduction clinic. Ir Med J. 2006; 99:46–7. [PubMed: 16548219] 
66. Institute of Medicine. Relieving pain in America: a blueprint for transforming prevention, care, 
education, and research. Washington: Institute of Medicine of the National Academies; 2011. 
67. Jensen MP, Turner JA, Romano JM, Karoly P. Coping with chronic pain: a critical review of the 
literature. PAIN. 1991; 47:249–83. [PubMed: 1784498] 
68. Johannes CB, Le TK, Zhou X, Johnston JA, Dworkin RH. The prevalence of chronic pain in 
United States adults: results of an Internet-based survey. J Pain. 2010; 11:1230–9. [PubMed: 
20797916] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 18
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 69. Juster RP, McEwen BS, Lupien SJ. Allostatic load biomarkers of chronic stress and impact on 
health and cognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010; 35:2–16. [PubMed: 19822172] 
70. Kaasboll J, Lydersen S, Indredavik MS. Psychological symptoms in children of parents with 
chronic pain-the HUNT study. PAIN. 2012; 153:1054–62. [PubMed: 22444189] 
71. Karabulut GS, Beser OF, Erginoz E, Kutlu T, Cokugras FC, Erkan T. The incidence of Irritable 
Bowel Syndrome in children using the Rome III criteria and the effect of trimebutine treatment. J 
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2013; 19:90–3. [PubMed: 23350053] 
72. Kashikar-Zuck S, Flowers SR, Verkamp E, Ting TV, Lynch-Jordan AM, Graham TB, Passo M, 
Schikler KN, Hashkes PJ, Spalding S, Banez G, Richards MM, Powers SW, Arnold LM, Lovell D. 
Actigraphy-based physical activity monitoring in adolescents with juvenile primary fibromyalgia 
syndrome. J Pain. 2010; 11:885–93. [PubMed: 20418183] 
73. Kerns RD, Rosenberg R. Pain-relevant responses from significant others: development of a 
significant-other version of the WHYMPI scales. PAIN. 1995; 61:245–9. [PubMed: 7659434] 
74. Khaleque A. Perceived parental warmth, and children’s psychological adjustment, and personality 
dispositions: a meta-analysis. J Child Fam Stud. 2012; 22:297–306.
75. Kiff CJ, Lengua LJ, Zalewski M. Nature and nurturing: parenting in the context of child 
temperament. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2011; 14:251–301. [PubMed: 21461681] 
76. Kim S, Kochanska G. Child temperament moderates effects of parent—child mutuality on self-
regulation: a relationship-based path for emotionally negative infants. Child Dev. 2012; 83:1275–
89. [PubMed: 22670684] 
77. Korneluk YG, Lee CM. Children’s adjustment to parental physical illness. Clin Child Fam Psychol 
Rev. 1998; 1:179–93. [PubMed: 11324306] 
78. Kozyrskyj AL, Mai X-M, McGrath P, HayGlass KT, Becker AB, MacNeil B. Continued exposure 
to maternal distress in early life is associated with an increased risk of childhood asthma. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med. 2008; 177:142–7. [PubMed: 17932381] 
79. Laird KT, Preacher KJ, Walker LS. Attachment and adjustment in adolescents and young adults 
with a history of pediatric functional abdominal pain. Clin J Pain. 2015; 31:152–8. [PubMed: 
24751542] 
80. Landmark T, Romundstad P, Borchgrevink PC, Kaasa S, Dale O. Associations between 
recreational exercise and chronic pain in the general population: evidence from the HUNT 3 study. 
PAIN. 2011; 152:2241–7. [PubMed: 21601986] 
81. Langer SL, Romano JM, Levy RL, Walker LS, Whitehead WE. Catastrophizing and parental 
response to child symptom complaints. Child Health Care. 2009; 38:169–84. [PubMed: 21423794] 
82. Lansford JE, Sharma C, Malone PS, Woodlief D, Dodge KA, Oburu P, Pastorelli C, Skinner AT, 
Sorbring E, Tapanya S, Tirado LMU, Zelli A, Al-Hassan SM, Alampay LP, Bacchini D, Bombi 
AS, Bornstein MH, Chang L, Deater-Deckard K, Di Giunta L. Corporal punishment, maternal 
warmth, and child adjustment: a longitudinal study in eight countries. J Clin Child Adolesc 
Psychol. 2014; 43:670–85. [PubMed: 24885184] 
83. Lazarus, RS., Folkman, S. Stress, appraisal, coping. New York: Springer Publishing Company; 
1984. 
84. Levy RL, Whitehead WE, Von Korff MR, Feld AD. Intergenerational transmission of 
gastrointestinal illness behavior. Am J Gastroenterol. 2000; 95:451–6. [PubMed: 10685749] 
85. Levy RL, Whitehead WE, Walker LS, Von Korff M, Feld AD, Garner M, Christie D. Increased 
somatic complaints and health-care utilization in children: effects of parent IBS status and parent 
response to gastrointestinal symptoms. Am J Gastroenterol. 2004; 99:2442–51. [PubMed: 
15571594] 
86. Lewandowski AS, Palermo TM. Parent-teen interactions as predictors of depressive symptoms in 
adolescents with headache. J Clin Psychol Med Settings. 2009; 16:331–38. [PubMed: 19680791] 
87. Lewandowski AS, Palermo TM, Stinson J, Handley S, Chambers CT. Systematic review of family 
functioning in families of children and adolescents with chronic pain. J Pain. 2010; 11:1027–38. 
[PubMed: 21055709] 
88. Lewis FM, Hammond MA, Woods NF. The family’s functioning with newly diagnosed breast 
cancer in the mother: the development of an explanatory model. J Behav Med. 1993; 16:351–70. 
[PubMed: 8411142] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 19
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 89. Liu Y, Murphy SK, Murtha AP, Fuemmeler BF, Schildkraut J, Huang Z, Overcash F, Kurtzberg J, 
Jirtle R, Iversen ES, Forman MR, Hoyo C. Depression in pregnancy, infant birth weight and DNA 
methylation of imprint regulatory elements. Epigenetics. 2012; 7:735–46. [PubMed: 22677950] 
90. Lynch-Jordan AM, Kashikar-Zuck S, Szabova A, Goldschneider KR. The interplay of parent and 
adolescent catastrophizing and its impact on adolescents’ pain, functioning, and pain behavior. 
Clin J Pain. 2013; 29:681–8. [PubMed: 23370064] 
91. Lynch AM, Kashikar-Zuck S, Goldschneider KR, Jones BA. Psychosocial risks for disability in 
children with chronic back pain. J Pain. 2006; 7:244–51. [PubMed: 16618468] 
92. McCracken LM, Carson JW, Eccleston C, Keefe FJ. Acceptance and change in the context of 
chronic pain. PAIN. 2004; 109:4–7. [PubMed: 15082120] 
93. McCullough LE, Mendez MA, Miller EE, Murtha AP, Murphy SK, Hoyo C. Associations between 
prenatal physical activity, birth weight, and DNA methylation at genomically imprinted domains in 
a multiethnic newborn cohort. Epigenetics. 2015; 10:597–606. [PubMed: 25928716] 
94. McElhaney, KB., Allen, JP., Stephenson, JC., Hare, AL. Attachment and autonomy during 
adolescence. In: Lerner, RM., Steinberg, L., editors. Handbook of adolescent psychology. 3rd. Vol. 
1. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2009. p. 358-403.Chapter 11
95. Meredith P, Ownsworth T, Strong J. A review of the evidence linking adult attachment theory and 
chronic pain: presenting a conceptual model. Clin Psychol Rev. 2008; 28:407–29. [PubMed: 
17719157] 
96. Meredith P, Strong J, Feeney JA. Adult attachment, anxiety, and pain self-efficacy as predictors of 
pain intensity and disability. PAIN. 2006; 123:146–54. [PubMed: 16644132] 
97. Mikkelsson M, Kaprio J, Salminen JJ, Pulkkinen L, Rose RJ. Widespread pain among 11-year-old 
Finnish twin pairs. Arthritis Rheum. 2001; 44:481–5. [PubMed: 11229481] 
98. Morris MC, Walker L, Bruehl S, Hellman N, Sherman AL, Rao U. Race effects on temporal 
summation to heat pain in youth. PAIN. 2015; 156:917–22. [PubMed: 25734994] 
99. Muris P, Field AP. The role of verbal threat information in the development of childhood fear. 
“Beware the Jabberwock!”. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2010; 13:129–50. [PubMed: 20198423] 
100. Okifuji A, Hare BD. The association between chronic pain and obesity. J Pain Res. 2015; 8:399–
408. [PubMed: 26203274] 
101. Osborne RB, Hatcher JW, Richtsmeier AJ. The role of social modeling in unexplained pediatric 
pain. J Pediatr Psychol. 1989; 14:43–61. [PubMed: 2723955] 
102. Oster J. Recurrent abdominal pain, headache and limb pains in children and adolescents. 
Pediatrics. 1972; 50:429–36. [PubMed: 5056416] 
103. Palermo TM, Chambers CT. Parent and family factors in pediatric chronic pain and disability: an 
integrative approach. PAIN. 2005; 119:1–4. [PubMed: 16298492] 
104. Palermo TM, Holley AL. The importance of family environment in pediatric chronic pain. JAMA 
Pediatrics. 2013; 167:93–4. [PubMed: 23403868] 
105. Palermo TM, Law EF, Bromberg M, Fales J, Eccleston C, Wilson AC. Problem-solving skills 
training for parents of children with chronic pain: a pilot randomized controlled trial. PAIN. 
2016; 157:1213–23. [PubMed: 26845525] 
106. Patrick SW, Dudley J, Martin PR, Harrell FE, Warren MD, Hartmann KE, Ely EW, Grijalva CG, 
Cooper WO. Prescription opioid epidemic and infant outcomes. Pediatrics. 2015; 135:842–50. 
[PubMed: 25869370] 
107. Quartana PJ, Campbell CM, Edwards RR. Pain catastrophizing: a critical review. Expert Rev 
Neurother. 2009; 9:745–58. [PubMed: 19402782] 
108. Rabbitts JA, Holley AL, Karlson CW, Palermo TM. Bidirectional associations between pain and 
physical activity in adolescents. Clin J Pain. 2014; 30:251–8. [PubMed: 23669450] 
109. Rahim-Williams B, Riley JL III, Williams AK, Fillingim RB. A quantitative review of ethnic 
group differences in experimental pain response: do biology, psychology, and culture matter? 
Pain Med. 2012; 13:522–40. [PubMed: 22390201] 
110. Ramsden CE, Zamora D, Makriyannis A, Wood JT, Mann JD, Faurot KR, MacIntosh BA, 
Majchrzak-Hong SF, Gross JR, Courville AB, Davis JM, Hibbeln JR. Diet-induced changes in 
n-3- and n-6-derived endocannabinoids and reductions in headache pain and psychological 
distress. J Pain. 2015; 16:707–16. [PubMed: 25958314] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 20
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 111. Rash JA, Campbell TS, Letourneau N, Giesbrecht GF. Maternal cortisol during pregnancy is 
related to infant cardiac vagal control. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2015; 54:78–89. [PubMed: 
25686804] 
112. Ravid S, Shahar E, Schiff A, Gordon S. Obesity in children with headaches: association with 
headache type, frequency, and disability. Headache. 2013; 53:954–61. [PubMed: 23574609] 
113. Repetti RL, Taylor SE, Seeman TE. Risky families: family social environments and the mental 
and physical health of offspring. Psychol Bull. 2002; 128:330. [PubMed: 11931522] 
114. Riley JL III, Wade JB, Myers CD, Sheffield D, Papas RK, Price DD. Racial/ethnic differences in 
the experience of chronic pain. PAIN. 2002; 100:291–8. [PubMed: 12468000] 
115. Rocha EM, Prkachin KM. Temperament and pain reactivity predict health behavior seven years 
later. J Pediatr Psychol. 2007; 32:393–9. [PubMed: 17038414] 
116. Ross LE, Grigoriadis S, Mamisashvili L, Vonderporten EH, Roerecke M, Rehm J, Dennis CL, 
Koren G, Steiner M, Mousmanis P, Cheung A. Selected pregnancy and delivery outcomes after 
exposure to antidepressant medication: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 
2013; 70:436–43. [PubMed: 23446732] 
117. Rothbart, MK. Temperament: A developmental framework. In: Strelau, J., Angleitner, A., editors. 
Explorations in temperament: International perspectives on theory and measurement. New York: 
Plenum Press; 1991. p. 61-74.
118. Rothbart, MK., Bates, JE. Temperament. In: Eisenberg, N., editor. Handbook of child 
psychologyâ Volâ 3â Social, emotional, and personality development. New York: Wiley; 1998. p. 
105-76.
119. Saunders K, Von Korff M, Leresche L, Mancl L. Relationship of common pain conditions in 
mothers and children. Clin J Pain. 2007; 23:204–13. [PubMed: 17314578] 
120. Schanberg LE, Keefe FJ, Lefebvre JC, Kredich DW, Gil KM. Social context of pain in children 
with juvenile primary fibromyalgia syndrome: parental pain history and family environment. The 
Clin J Pain. 1998; 14:107–15. [PubMed: 9647451] 
121. Shackman AJ, Salomons TV, Slagter HA, Fox AS, Winter JJ, Davidson RJ. The integration of 
negative affect, pain and cognitive control in the cingulate cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011; 
12:154–67. [PubMed: 21331082] 
122. Shelby GD, Shirkey KC, Sherman AL, Beck JE, Haman K, Shears AR, Horst SN, Smith CA, 
Garber J, Walker LS. Functional abdominal pain in childhood and long-term vulnerability to 
anxiety disorders. Pediatrics. 2013; 132:475–82. [PubMed: 23940244] 
123. Sherman AL, Bruehl S, Smith CA, Walker LS. Individual and additive effects of mothers’ and 
fathers’ chronic pain on health outcomes in young adults with a childhood history of functional 
abdominal pain. J Pediatr Psychol. 2013; 38:365–75. [PubMed: 23335355] 
124. Sieberg CB, Williams S, Simons LE. Do parent protective responses mediate the relation between 
parent distress and child functional disability among children with chronic pain? J Pediatr 
Psychol. 2011; 36:1043–51. [PubMed: 21742755] 
125. Silk JS, Steinberg L, Morris AS. Adolescents’ emotion regulation in daily life: links to depressive 
symptoms and problem behavior. Child Dev. 2003; 74:1869–80. [PubMed: 14669901] 
126. Simons LE, Sieberg CB, Kaczynski KJ. Measuring parent beliefs about child acceptance of pain: 
a preliminary validation of the Chronic Pain Acceptance Questionnaire, parent report. PAIN. 
2011; 152:2294–300. [PubMed: 21783324] 
127. Slade GD, Sanders AE, Ohrbach R, Bair E, Maixner W, Greenspan JD, Fillingim RB, Smith S, 
Diatchenko L. COMT diplotype amplifies effect of stress on risk of temporomandibular pain. J 
Dent Res. 2015; 94:1187–95. [PubMed: 26198390] 
128. Sleddens EF, Kremers SP, Hughes SO, Cross MB, Thijs C, De Vries NK, O’Connor TM. Physical 
activity parenting: a systematic review of questionnaires and their associations with child activity 
levels. Obes Rev. 2012; 13:1015–33. [PubMed: 22845791] 
129. Smith AM, Sieberg CB, Odell S, Randall E, Simons LE. Living life with my child’s pain: The 
Parent Pain Acceptance Questionnaire (PPAQ). Clin J Pain. 2015; 31:633–41. [PubMed: 
25119514] 
130. Smith SB, Mir E, Bair E, Slade GD, Dubner R, Fillingim RB, Greenspan JD, Ohrbach R, Knott 
C, Weir B, Maixner W, Diatchenko L. Genetic variants associated with development of TMD and 
Stone and Wilson
Page 21
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 its intermediate phenotypes: the genetic Architecture of TMD in the OPPERA prospective cohort 
study. J Pain. 2013; 14(suppl 12):T91–101.e103. [PubMed: 24275226] 
131. Spence SH, Najman JM, Bor W, O’Callaghan MJ, Williams GM. Maternal anxiety and 
depression, poverty and marital relationship factors during early childhood as predictors of 
anxiety and depressive symptoms in adolescence. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2002; 43:457–69. 
[PubMed: 12030592] 
132. Stahl MK, El-Metwally AA, Mikkelsson MK, Salminen JJ, Pulkkinen LR, Rose RJ, Kaprio JA. 
Genetic and environmental influences on non-specific neck pain in early adolescence: a classical 
twin study. Eur J Pain. 2013; 17:791–8. [PubMed: 23139100] 
133. Stanford EA, Chambers CT, Biesanz JC, Chen E. The frequency, trajectories and predictors of 
adolescent recurrent pain: a population-based approach. PAIN. 2008; 138:11–21. [PubMed: 
18093737] 
134. Staud R, Rodriguez ME. Mechanisms of disease: pain in fibromyalgia syndrome. Nat Clin Pract 
Rheum. 2006; 2:90–8.
135. Stoltenberg SF, Mudd SA, Blow FC, Hill EM. Evaluating measures of family history of 
alcoholism: density versus dichotomy. Addiction. 1998; 93:1511–20. [PubMed: 9926555] 
136. Svensson DA, Larsson B, Bille B, Lichtenstein P. Genetic and environmental influences on 
recurrent headaches in eight to nine-year-old twins. Cephalalgia. 1999; 19:866–72. [PubMed: 
10668105] 
137. Tak LM, Cleare AJ, Ormel J, Manoharan A, Kok IC, Wessely S, Rosmalen JGM. Meta-analysis 
and meta-regression of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity in functional somatic 
disorders. Biol Psychol. 2011; 87:183–94. [PubMed: 21315796] 
138. Timár J, Sobor M, Király KP, Gyarmati S, Riba P, Al-Khrasani M, Fürst S. Peri, pre and postnatal 
morphine exposure: exposure-induced effects and sex differences in the behavioural 
consequences in rat offspring. Behav Pharmacol. 2010; 21:58–68. [PubMed: 20038835] 
139. Trost ZA, Strachan EB, Sullivan MC, Vervoort TD, Avery ARE, Afari NF. Heritability of pain 
catastrophizing and associations with experimental pain outcomes: a twin study. PAIN. 2015; 
156:514–20. [PubMed: 25599234] 
140. Tsao JC, Li N, Parker D, Seidman LC, Zeltzer LK. Pubertal status moderates the association 
between mother and child laboratory pain tolerance. Pain Res Manag. 2014; 19:23–9. [PubMed: 
24367794] 
141. Tsao JCI, Evans S, Seidman LC, Zeltzer LK. Health care utilization for pain in children and 
adolescents: a prospective study of laboratory and non-laboratory predictors of care-seeking. Int J 
Adolesc Med Health. 2011; 23:287–92. [PubMed: 22191197] 
142. Turbin MS, Jessor R, Costa FM, Dong Q, Zhang H, Wang C. Protective and risk factors in health-
enhancing behavior among adolescents in china and the United States: does social context 
matter? Health Psychol. 2006; 25:445–54. [PubMed: 16846319] 
143. Umberger WA, Risko J, Covington E. The forgotten ones: challenges and needs of children living 
with disabling parental chronic pain. J Pediatr Nurs. 2015; 30:498–507. [PubMed: 25557986] 
144. Umberger WA, Risko J, Covington E. The forgotten ones: challenges and needs of children living 
with disabling parental chronic pain. J Pediatr Nurs. 2015; 30:498–507. [PubMed: 25557986] 
145. Van Slyke DA, Walker LS. Mothers’ responses to children’s pain. Clin J Pain. 2006; 22:387–91. 
[PubMed: 16691093] 
146. van Tilburg MAL, Levy RL, Walker LS, Von Korff M, Feld LD, Garner M, Feld AD, Whitehead 
WE. Psychosocial mechanisms for the transmission of somatic symptoms from parents to 
children. World J Gastroenterol. 2015; 21:5532–41. [PubMed: 25987776] 
147. Veiby G, Daltveit AK, Engelsen BA, Gilhus NE. Fetal growth restriction and birth defects with 
newer and older antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy. J Neurol. 2014; 261:579–88. [PubMed: 
24449062] 
148. Verhoeven K, Dick B, Eccleston C, Goubert L, Crombez G. The role of executive functioning in 
children’s attentional pain control: an experimental analysis. PAIN. 2014; 155:413–21. [PubMed: 
24231653] 
149. Vervoort T, Caes L, Trost Z, Notebaert L, Goubert L. Parental attention to their child’s pain is 
modulated by threat-value of pain. Health Psychol. 2012; 31:623–31. [PubMed: 22888823] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 22
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 150. Von Korff M, Dworkin SF, Le Resche L. Graded chronic pain status: an epidemiologic evaluation. 
PAIN. 1990; 40:279–91. [PubMed: 2326094] 
151. Vowles KE, Cohen LL, McCracken LM, Eccleston C. Disentangling the complex relations among 
caregiver and adolescent responses to adolescent chronic pain. PAIN. 2010; 151:680–6. 
[PubMed: 20833472] 
152. Walker LS, Smith CA, Garber J, Claar RL. Testing a model of pain appraisal and coping in 
children with chronic abdominal pain. Health Psychol. 2005; 24:364. [PubMed: 16045372] 
153. Walker LS, Williams SE, Smith CA, Garber J, Van Slyke DA, Lipani TA. Parent attention versus 
distraction: impact on symptom complaints by children with and without chronic functional 
abdominal pain. PAIN. 2006; 122:43–52. [PubMed: 16495006] 
154. Webb R, Brammah T, Lunt M, Urwin M, Allison T, Symmons D. Prevalence and predictors of 
intense, chronic, and disabling neck and back pain in the UK general population. Spine (Phila Pa 
1976). 2003; 28:1195–202. [PubMed: 12782992] 
155. Wedderkopp N, Kjaer P, Hestbaek L, Korsholm L, Leboeuf-Yde C. High-level physical activity in 
childhood seems to protect against low back pain in early adolescence. Spine J. 2009; 9:134–41. 
[PubMed: 18495545] 
156. Welkom JS, Hwang WT, Guite JW. Adolescent pain catastrophizing mediates the relationship 
between protective parental responses to pain and disability overtime. J Pediatr Psychol. 2013; 
38:541–50. [PubMed: 23471361] 
157. Whitehead WE, Crowell MD, Heller BR, Robinson JC, Schuster MM, Horn S. Modeling and 
reinforcement of the sick role during childhood predicts adult illness behavior. Psychosom Med. 
1994; 56:541–50. [PubMed: 7871110] 
158. Wilson AC, Fales JL. Parenting in the context of chronic pain: a controlled study of parents with 
chronic pain. Clin J Pain. 2015; 31:689–98. [PubMed: 25232862] 
159. Wilson AC, Lewandowski AS, Palermo TM. Fear-avoidance beliefs and parental responses to 
pain in adolescents with chronic pain. Pain Res Manag. 2011; 16:178–82. [PubMed: 21766067] 
160. Wilson AC, Moss A, Palermo TM, Fales JL. Parent pain and catastrophizing are associated with 
pain, somatic symptoms, and pain-related disability among early adolescents. J Pediatr Psychol. 
2014; 39:418–26. [PubMed: 24369365] 
161. Wilson AC, Palermo TM. Physical activity and function in adolescents with chronic pain: a 
controlled study using actigraphy. J Pain. 2012; 13:121–30. [PubMed: 22099608] 
162. Wilson AC, Samuelson B, Palermo TM. Obesity in children and adolescents with chronic pain: 
associations with pain and activity limitations. Clin J Pain. 2010; 26:705–11. [PubMed: 
20664337] 
163. Wingenfeld K, Nutzinger D, Kauth J, Hellhammer DH, Lautenbacher S. Salivary cortisol release 
and hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis feedback sensitivity in fibromyalgia is associated with 
depression but not with pain. J Pain. 2010; 11:1195–202. [PubMed: 20627822] 
164. Wittmeier KD, Mollard RC, Kriellaars DJ. Physical activity intensity and risk of overweight and 
adiposity in children. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008; 16:415–20. [PubMed: 18239653] 
165. Yunus MB. Central Sensitivity Syndromes: a new paradigm and group nosology for fibromyalgia 
and overlapping conditions, and the related issue of disease versus illness. Semin Arthritis 
Rheum. 2008; 37:339–52. [PubMed: 18191990] 
Stone and Wilson
Page 23
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Conceptual model of Intergenerational transmission of chronic pain risk.
Stone and Wilson
Page 24
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Future directions for research on the intergenerational transmission of chronic pain risk.
Stone and Wilson
Page 25
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
