 A Bioengineered Living Cell Construct Activates an Acute 
Wound Healing Response in Venous Leg Ulcers
Rivka C. Stone1,2,†, Olivera Stojadinovic1,†, Ashley M. Rosa1, Horacio A. Ramirez1,3, 
Evangelos Badiavas1,4, Miroslav Blumenberg5, and Marjana Tomic-Canic1,3,*
1Wound Healing and Regenerative Medicine Research Program, Department of Dermatology and 
Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136
2The Research Residency Program, Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136
3Human Genetics and Genomics Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136
4Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 
33136
5The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, 
NY 10012
6John P
. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL 33136
Abstract
Chronic non-healing venous leg ulcers (VLUs) are widespread and debilitating, with high 
morbidity and associated costs; approximately $15 billion is spent annually on the care of VLUs in 
the US. Despite this, there is a paucity of treatments for VLUs, due to the lack of pathophysiologic 
insight into ulcer development as well as the lack of knowledge regarding biologic actions of 
existing VLU-targeted therapies. The bioengineered bilayered living cellular construct (BLCC) 
skin substitute is an FDA-approved biologic treatment for healing VLUs. To elucidate the 
mechanisms through which the BLCC promotes healing of chronic VLUs, we conducted a clinical 
trial (NCT01327937) in which patients with non-healing VLUs were treated with either standard 
care (compression therapy) or the BLCC together with standard care. Tissue was collected from 
the VLU edge before and 1 week after treatment, and samples underwent comprehensive 
*Address correspondence to: mtcanic@med.miami.edu.
†Contributed equally to this work.
Overline: Wound healing
Author contributions: Clinical trial design: EB, MTC, OS. Execution of clinical trial protocol: EB. Specimen collection: EB, OS. 
Experimental design: RCS, OS, MTC. Execution of experiments: RCS, OS, AMR, HR, MTC. Analysis of microarray data: RCS, HR, 
MB, MTC. Pathway analysis: RCS. Writing of manuscript: RCS, OS, EB, MB, AMR, HR, MTC.
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability: Microarray data files are Minimum Information About a Microarray Experiment (MIAME) 
compliant and have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE84571, accessible at http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Transl Med. 2017 January 04; 9(371): . doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf8611.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 microarray, mRNA, and protein analyses. Ulcers treated with the BLCC skin substitute displayed 
three distinct transcriptomic patterns, suggesting that BLCC induced a shift from a non-healing to 
a healing tissue response involving modulation of inflammatory and growth factor signaling, 
keratinocyte activation, and attenuation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. In these ways, BLCC 
application orchestrated a shift from the chronic non-healing ulcer microenvironment to a 
distinctive healing milieu resembling that of an acute, healing wound. Our findings provide in vivo 
evidence in patient VLU biopsies of pathways that can be targeted in the design of new therapies 
to promote healing of chronic VLUs.
Introduction
Chronic non-healing venous leg ulcers (VLUs) continue to be a cause of substantial 
morbidity, straining healthcare budgets and negatively impacting quality of life. Over 70% 
of VLUs fail to heal with standard care compression therapy and have high recurrence rates, 
posing additional burden to wound care professionals. The chronicity, frequent relapses and 
associated complications of non-healing VLUs heavily impact patients’ quality of life and 
increase healthcare expenditures for millions of people worldwide.
Deciphering the network of de-regulated wound healing processes present in chronic VLUs 
is challenging, and many therapies showing promise in the laboratory and in initial clinical 
trials have failed to improve clinical outcomes. The histologic hallmark of chronic VLUs is a 
hyperproliferative wound edge, which is characterized by non-migratory keratinocytes, 
decreased angiogenesis, an increase in proteases, increased bacterial colonization and/or 
infection, and inflammatory infiltrates (1, 2). We have shown that the non-healing VLU edge 
displays loss of genes controlling the fate of local stem cells and their niche, as well as 
aberrant activation of ß-catenin and c-Myc (2, 3). Moreover, genomic profiling of VLUs has 
revealed de-regulation of epidermal activation and differentiation, including attenuation of 
EGF and TGF-beta receptor signaling (4). However, the molecular pathophysiology of 
VLUs has not yet been fully elucidated, which has slowed development and validation of 
targeted therapies (5). There is an urgent need for therapeutic approaches which target 
multiple aberrantly regulated cellular processes simultaneously, successfully converting the 
non-healing VLU to a healing wound phenotype. Furthermore, enhanced understanding of 
the molecular pathophysiology of chronic VLUs is critical in identifying relevant clinical 
trial endpoints that can be used to evaluate new treatments, paving the way for delivery of 
maximally efficacious therapies to VLU patients.
An FDA-approved bioengineered bilayered living cellular construct (BLCC) has 
demonstrated efficacy in promoting healing of chronic ulcers (6, 7). The BLCC skin 
substitute consists of human foreskin-derived neonatal fibroblasts in a bovine type I collagen 
matrix below a layer of human foreskin-derived neonatal epidermal keratinocytes. The 
BLCC has been suggested to interact with the surrounding environment to promote wound 
healing. In vitro, the BLCC produces growth factors and cytokines that are indispensable for 
a successful wound healing process (8–10), but the precise in vivo mechanism of action is 
unknown. To this end, we designed a randomized controlled post-marketing clinical trial to 
investigate the effects of a commercially available BLCC (Apligraf, Organogenesis, Inc.) on 
Stone et al.
Page 2
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gene expression in chronic VLUs. We analyzed human wound edge biopsies obtained from 
non-healing VLUs at baseline and one week after BLCC treatment. We hypothesized that 
treatment with the BLCC might activate responsiveness to cellular signals similar to those 
that facilitate successful healing of acute wounds, thus changing a non-healing to a healing 
phenotype.
Results
Randomized controlled trial of the non-healing VLU edge response to BLCC treatment
The study design and participant information for clinical trial no. NCT01327937 is 
summarized in Figure 1 and described further in the supplementary materials and methods. 
Briefly, potential study participants with VLUs (n = 30) were treated with the standard of 
care compression therapy for 4 weeks. Patients with non-healing VLUs, defined as those that 
did not have 40% reduction in ulcer size with compression therapy over this time period, 
were enrolled and randomly assigned to receive either ongoing standard of care treatment 
with compression dressings (control group, n = 9) or up to five weekly BLCC applications in 
addition to the standard of care (treatment group, n = 15). Biopsies from the wound edge 
were obtained at baseline (week 0) and week 1 for all ulcers, capturing the interval of the 
first week after study allocation, and ulcer size was monitored over time. At this time point, 
insufficient RNA quality or quantity was one of the exclusion criteria. Of the patients from 
whom tissue specimens were obtained, approximately one third yielded sufficient high 
quality RNA from paired week 0/week 1 biopsies to enable microarray analysis (Fig. 1; 
tables S1–S2).
BLCC skin substitute provides immune signals and growth stimuli to chronic VLUs
The primary outcome measure of our clinical trial was to evaluate changes in gene 
expression in wound biopsies from subjects with non-healing VLUs one week after BLCC 
application compared to gene expression in wound biopsies from subjects with non-healing 
VLUs one week after standard care. To this end, we examined paired microarray profiles of 
biopsies from the patients with non-healing VLUs before and after a single application of 
the BLCC (week 0 to week 1) and compared those to biopsies from the VLU controls 
receiving standard care compression therapy (Fig. 1). The peak of the BLCC-mediated effect 
was expected in the first week of treatment, based on dosing in previous clinical trials (7, 8). 
Importantly, to exclude the possibility that BLCC as opposed to wound tissue was evaluated, 
DNA genotypes from week-1 biopsies were examined and compared to cellular genotypes 
of the BLCC used, to ensure that no cells from the BLCC were detectable in the biopsy 
specimens at the 1-week time point. We found 559 microarray probes (corresponding to 424 
unique genes) significantly differentially expressed between week 0 and week 1 after BLCC 
treatment, compared to differential expression in control biopsies, which showed a change in 
only 92 probes (70 genes) (paired t-test, P <0.05; fold change >1.5). There were 5 genes that 
overlapped between BLCC treated and control biopsies (Fig. 2A, table S3).
Although some variability in gene expression among individual study subjects was evident, 
a clear BLCC-specific consensus transcriptional signature emerged (fig. S1). Gene ontology 
analysis of differentially expressed entities post-BLCC application highlighted a strong 
Stone et al.
Page 3
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 enrichment in immune system biological processes, with 18.1% (101/559) of the modulated 
genes related to the immune response (P=2.83 × 10−26) (Fig. 2B). The highly enriched 
biological processes also included “regulation of response to wounding”, as well as 
“epithelium development,” consistent with the demonstrated clinical role for the BLCC in 
accelerating wound healing.
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) of the differentially expressed genes post-BLCC treatment 
identified multiple enriched pathways (Fig. 2C, table S4), all of which related to various 
aspects of the innate and adaptive immune response. In contrast, in the standard of care 
VLUs, no significantly enriched pathways were identified using this approach. Using 
published algorithms (11), IPA Core Analysis generated predicted networks connecting 
upstream regulators to downstream biological processes that were significantly enriched 
among the BLCC-stimulated genes. One such network is shown in Figure 2D, in which the 
upstream regulator interleukin-1 beta (IL1β) induced a set of chemokines, which were 
significantly upregulated after BLCC treatment, to increase chemotaxis, an enriched and 
activated biological process (Fig. 2B). These pathway and network data provide initial 
support for the hypothesis that BLCC application introduces an alternate inflammatory 
response distinct from chronic inflammatory infiltrates typically found in non-healing VLUs 
(12).
IPA analysis also predicted multiple upstream regulators whose targets were enriched among 
BLCC-modulated genes, including such key wound healing factors as transforming growth 
factor beta (TGFβ), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) (Fig. 2E). Moreover, the directionality of 
downstream gene expression (i.e., induction vs. inhibition) supported active signaling states 
of these growth factors (table S5 and fig. S2).
Generation of acute and chronic wound reference gene expression profiles
We hypothesized that the inflammation triggered by BLCC application was similar to that 
invoked during the acute wound healing response. To explore this possibility, we needed to 
differentiate the inflammation during acute wound healing, which leads to successful wound 
closure, from the chronic inflammation present in the background of non-healing VLUs. To 
do so, we generated three reference gene expression profiles comparing intact skin, acute 
wounds at day 3 post-wounding, and chronic VLUs (Fig. 3A, table S7). We used these 
reference gene expression profiles to explore possible mechanisms through which 
application of BLCC might uniquely shift chronic, non-healing VLUs to an acute wound 
healing-like phenotype.
To obtain an acute wound healing profile that could be coordinately analyzed head-to-head 
with our chronic VLU profiles, we used the raw in vivo full-thickness acute wound 
microarray data previously generated from human skin graft donor site wounds ((13), GEO 
accession number GSE28914). We downloaded paired data from 6 patients, comparing 
intact vs. healing skin at day 3 post-wounding (13), to capture the early response and 
inflammatory phase of acute wound healing (acute vs. intact, Fig. 3A and table S6–S7). A 
reference expression profile of the prototypic non-healing chronic VLUs was obtained from 
the pre-treatment (week 0) biopsies of 3 patients with VLUs that displayed poorest healing 
Stone et al.
Page 4
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 trajectories during the 4-week screening period prior to randomization (fig. S3, patients C2, 
C3, and T6), as compared with biopsies of healthy (intact, unwounded) skin (chronic vs. 
intact, Fig. 3A and table S6–S7). Finally, we compared the acute wound profiles to 
transcriptional profiles of the baseline chronic VLUs to enable discrimination of the acute 
response from the background of chronic VLU inflammation (acute vs. chronic, Fig. 3A and 
table S6). The three reference profiles contained distinct as well as overlapping genes (Fig. 
3A).
We used these reference profiles to propose the following mechanisms for BLCC effects. 
For genes modulated in both acute and chronic wounds, changes may occur in expression 
but in opposite directions when compared to intact skin, but BLCC treatment might revert 
the expression in VLUs towards the acute wound phenotype (Fig. 3B, “a”). For genes with 
consistently altered expression in both acute wounds and chronic VLUs, but pathologically 
over- or under-expressed in VLUs, the BLCC may normalize this perturbed gene expression 
back to expression levels observed in acute healing wounds (Fig. 3B, “b”). For genes 
modulated during acute wound healing, but not in chronic VLUs, the BLCC may regulate 
the response in the direction consistent with acute wound levels, which are associated with a 
beneficial healing outcome (Fig. 3B, “c”).
BLCC reverses gene dysregulation in non-healing chronic VLUs towards an acute wound 
healing phenotype
We proceeded to examine the BLCC and control gene expression profiles (week 1 vs. week 
0, table S3) for evidence of the proposed mechanisms in Figure 3B. We identified caspase 14 
(CASP14) as a BLCC-modulated gene representing model “a” in Figure 3B. CASP14 is a 
non-apoptotic caspase with a critical role in the terminal differentiation of keratinocytes 
(14). As expected, its expression was lower in acutely healing wounds and, consistent with 
previous reports (4), was higher in non-healing chronic VLUs (Fig. 4A). CASP14 transcript 
levels were down-regulated in VLUs after BLCC treatment, adopting the direction of acutely 
healing wounds (Fig. 4A).
Model “b” in Figure 3B was represented by the expression of integral membrane protein 2A 
(ITM2A) and type 2 thyroid deiodinase (DIO2) (Fig. 4B–C). ITM2A is an integral 
transmembrane protein that is variably expressed in T-cell lineage hematopoietic cells, with 
high expression in select subsets of activated T cells and lower expression in stimulated 
regulatory T cells (15, 16). BLCC application induced expression of ITM2A in the chronic 
VLUs to an expression level consistent with an acutely healing wound. DIO2 was induced 
during acute wounding and even further overexpressed in chronic non-healing VLUs (Fig. 
4C). DIO2 catalyzes the conversion of thyroid hormone to its active form (T3) and functions 
as the key regulator of thyroid hormone action on target tissues, including the skin (17). 
Thyroid hormone broadly influences epidermal development and function and has a 
demonstrated role in wound healing (18). DIO2 expression in BLCC-treated VLUs was 
similar to that in healing acute wounds (Fig. 4C). ITM2A and DIO2 expressions were 
unchanged in the VLUs from control patients receiving the standard of care; in fact, none of 
the genes expressed in the group receiving compression therapy alone showed the expression 
pattern in model “b” of Figure 3B (table S3).
Stone et al.
Page 5
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We identified multiple up-regulated and down-regulated genes (Fig. 4D) corresponding to 
model “c” of Figure 3B. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) demonstrated a shift in 
BLCC-treated VLUs but not control VLUs towards a gene expression profile consistent with 
acute wounds during the inflammatory wound healing phase (day 3) (Fig. 4E). Moreover, 
when plotted against each other, changes in gene expression in acute wounds correlated 
significantly with changes in gene expression in BLCC-treated VLUs (Fig. 4F).
BLCC recapitulates biological processes of acute wound healing
Pathway analysis also supported the global hypothesis that BLCC treatment, in contrast to 
standard-of-care compression therapy alone, reverted the chronic non-healing VLUs to an 
acute wound healing phenotype. We performed IPA on the reference gene profiles 
established in Figure 3A and compared them with biological pathways enriched in BLCC-
treated and control VLUs (week 1 vs. week 0) (see tables S3 and S7). Although a small 
number of genes were modulated in both BLCC- and control-treated VLUs, acute wound 
healing biologic pathways including innate and adaptive immunity and their interaction were 
enriched exclusively in acute and BLCC- treated VLUs (Fig. 5A, table S8). Biological 
processes of B cell proliferation, antibody production, calcium mobilization, and T cell 
differentiation, activation, migration, and signaling were present in BLCC-treated wounds 
but absent in chronic VLUs at baseline or after compression treatment (Fig. 5B, table S9).
BLCC treatment induces acute inflammatory wound healing in chronic VLUs
To validate our microarray findings, we used Ingenuity knowledge base to identify a 
literature-supported network of genes and biological processes enriched in acute healing and 
BLCC-treated wounds but not chronic VLUs at baseline or after standard-care treatment 
(Fig. 6A). An expanded pool of biopsies from BLCC-treated (n=8) and control treated (n=4) 
VLUs were used to validate the expression of IL1β, CXCL1, CXCL2, and CXCL3 using 
qPCR (Fig. 6B). We used a well-characterized ex vivo model of acute wound healing (19) 
using healthy human skin samples (n=2) to confirm the induction of all four genes during 
the acute wounding response (Fig. 6C; fig. S4). Qualitative immunofluorescence analysis of 
protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type C (PTPRC), which encodes the CD45 receptor 
expressed on the surfaces of leukocytes, identified an increased dermal infiltrate of CD45+ 
cells in BLCC-treated tissue samples (Fig. 6D). We confirmed that BLCC treatment induced 
toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) expression in the upper spinous and granular layers of the 
epidermis (Fig. 6E). TLR4 functions in both innate and adaptive immunity and is an 
important player in the inflammatory phase of early wound healing (20).
Healing BLCC-treated VLUs are distinguished by attenuated Wnt/β-catenin signaling
The BLCC skin substitute has demonstrated efficacy in healing chronic ulcers in conjunction 
with standard therapy (6, 7), but VLUs that do not respond to initial applications of BLCC 
are unlikely to derive additional clinical benefit from repeated BLCC treatments (21). To 
determine whether gene expression could be retrospectively correlated with a successful 4-
week healing trajectory, we performed regression analysis on the healing curves of the 
control and BLCC-treated VLUs from week 0 through week 4 (Fig. 7). We identified 
changes in gene expression from week 0 to week 1 in the BLCC-treated VLUs that 
correlated with the trajectory slope of the “healers,” but not with the slope of the “non-
Stone et al.
Page 6
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 healers” or controls receiving compression therapy alone (table S10). One of these genes 
was CSNK2A2, a casein kinase with an essential role in Wnt/β-catenin signaling (22). 
BLCC treatment decreased CSNK2A2 expression in VLUs and the magnitude of down 
regulation correlated with healing extent in the “healers” (R2=0.9980, correlation P=0.02) 
but not in “non-healers” and/or control VLUs (Fig. 7A). Interestingly, reduced expression of 
CSNK2A2 is a shared feature of BLCC-healing VLUs and acute wound healing, as 
CSNK2A2 expression decreased in vivo by approximately 3-fold at 72 hours post-wounding 
(Fig. 7B; table S7, “Acute vs. Intact”). Furthermore, WNT3, which regulates CSNK2A2 
activity (22), decreased in BLCC-treated chronic VLUs and in vivo and ex vivo models of 
acute wound healing (Fig. 7C). Finally, while immunofluorescence of phosphorylated β-
catenin in non-healing VLUs confirmed previously described intense nuclear staining in 
wound edge keratinocytes (2), nuclear β-catenin was absent in portions of BLCC-treated 
“healer” VLUs (Fig. 7D).
Discussion
Our clinical trial was designed to understand the mechanisms of action of an FDA-approved 
skin substitute that has already demonstrated clinical efficacy in healing chronic ulcers (6). 
We found that BLCC application induces genes and processes of acute inflammatory 
healing, activates keratinocytes, and diminishes WNT/β-catenin signaling, thus 
recapitulating features of the acute wound phenotype. Our data therefore suggest that 
therapeutic approaches which can successfully activate an acute wound healing response 
have the greatest likelihood of being efficacious in the clinical setting. As such, our findings 
provide representative testable genomic and molecular endpoints that can be incorporated 
into the design of the future clinical trials testing the efficacy of VLU therapies.
Our data demonstrate that BLCC application triggers an inflammatory response that is 
distinct from the chronic inflammation present in the non-healing VLUs at baseline. It is 
unlikely that we are capturing acute rejection of the allogeneic cells of the BLCC, i.e., graft 
versus host response, for several reasons. First, well-documented clinical signs of rejection 
such as pain, erythema, and necrosis are absent from both acute and chronic wounds that 
have been treated with BLCC (6, 23). Second, the BLCC does not contain resident skin 
antigen-producing cells such as Langerhans cells or melanocytes, and keratinocytes and 
fibroblasts do not express HLA Class II antigens or other immune co-stimulatory molecules 
(6). Third, antibodies signifying a BLCC-specific immune rejection (e.g., anti-HLA type I 
BLCC alloantigens) were not detectable in VLU patients treated with BLCC (6).
Rather than reflecting a rejection response, comparison of the BLCC gene expression profile 
to in vivo acute wound profiles illustrated that this BLCC-invoked inflammation 
recapitulated features of the inflammatory phase of acute wound healing which is an 
essential stage of successful wound closure. We demonstrated this at the level of individual 
genes as well as at the level of coordinately enriched pathways and biologic processes in 
acute wounds and BLCC-treated chronic ulcers. Their expression in healing vs. non-healing 
wounds might thus reflect fine-tuning of the adaptive immune response. Moreover, our data 
may indicate that prolonged inflammation present in non-healing VLUs does not facilitate 
progression of healing found in acute wounds. Further, our data support the hypothesis that 
Stone et al.
Page 7
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BLCC application reverts this sub-optimal inflammation to activate acute inflammatory 
signaling similar to that seen in an acute wound healing environment.
The gene expression changes in paired VLU biopsies before and after treatment illustrated 
that BLCC triggered therapeutic reprogramming, reversing the non-healing phenotype and 
activating pro-healing pathways. Importantly, these changes were not present in the control 
VLU group treated with standard-care compression therapy alone, indicating BLCC-specific 
effects. The only exception was RARRES1 (retinoic acid receptor responder 1), an acute 
wound healing gene that was upregulated in both BLCC and control groups one week after 
treatment, perhaps reflecting continued optimal standard-care compression therapy, which 
both groups received, rather than a BLCC-unique mechanism. There are three possible 
mechanisms by which BLCC-initiated activation of healing may occur: 1) as demonstrated 
in vitro (8–10), the BLCC secretes growth factors and cytokines common to the pro-healing 
pathways; 2) the BLCC stimulates patients’ VLU cells to activate pro-healing signaling 
pathways; or 3) the BLCC both secretes growth factors and activates pro-healing signaling 
pathways within the VLUs. Although it is not possible to test which of these three options 
occurred in our study, our gene expression data confirm that these important wound healing 
signaling pathways are activated and successfully executed in VLUs only upon BLCC and 
not standard compression treatment. Similarly, our findings do not pinpoint the exact cellular 
source(s) of the acute wound healing signals captured by our post-BLCC microarrays, as 
there are several cell types which could contribute to the gene expression changes detected 
in the VLU edge post-BLCC. However, because no BLCC DNA material was present in the 
VLUs after 1 week of treatment, our data indicate that the resident chronic VLU cells altered 
their transcriptomes in response to BLCC application.
Our study design was limited by the lack of repeated sampling and profiling of BLCC-
treated VLUs at later time points. However, consistent with previous reports (24), we note 
again that no detectable BLCC cellular DNA remained in any of the VLU edge biopsies 
after one week of treatment. This observation implies that any direct BLCC-triggered effects 
are more likely to be detected within the initial week of treatment, which was the interval 
captured by our study, than at later time points. Interestingly, given that original clinical 
trials of the BLCC’s efficacy in VLUs only demonstrated a healing response months (rather 
than weeks) after treatment (6), the BLCC’s early in vivo disappearance suggests that its 
initial therapeutic activity must be of sufficient intensity to effect sustained changes in the 
resident cells of the chronic wound, which then go on to gradually orchestrate successful 
wound closure.
The drawbacks of our study highlight a question that is of great importance to the field of 
chronic wound healing: should one perform in vivo “mechanism of action” studies in 
humans knowing that direct demonstration of causality cannot be attributed to anything 
more precise than the tissue response to presence or absence of a particular therapeutic 
intervention? More to the point, the field of chronic wound healing is challenged by lack of 
validated pre-clinical models, a factor that severely impedes translation of therapies to 
clinical practice. Given this reality, we believe that there are two choices: to continue to use 
products without attempting to elucidate their mechanisms of action in this complex multi-
factorial disease and thus impede development of second-generation products for chronic 
Stone et al.
Page 8
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 wounds; or, to accept the limitations of more descriptive, less mechanistic approaches to 
deciphering how patients’ tissues respond to therapies in order to gain potential valuable 
clinical insights.
We argue that our clinical trial findings have direct clinical relevance. We were able to 
provide initial validation for specific biologic processes through which placement of the 
BLCC converts chronic non-healing VLUs into an acute wound healing phenotype. These 
biologic processes may serve as specific targets and testable endpoints in the design and 
testing of future VLU therapies, which are sorely needed in the clinical setting. Moreover, 
we identified early changes in gene expression that, upon further validation in larger patient 
groups, may be predictive of healing outcomes after BLCC application. These early 
indicator genes could help identify subsets of patients with chronic wounds who are most 
likely to derive clinical benefit from BLCC therapy. For instance, Wnt/β-catenin signaling is 
highly dysregulated in chronic VLUs (2, 3), and we found that expression of Wnt family 
member CSNK2A2 correlated with healing in BLCC-treated ulcers. CSNK2A2 might thus 
serve as a molecular marker that indicates commencement of healing with an initial 
application of the BLCC, warranting repeated treatments.
Taken together, fifteen years after initial pivotal clinical trials demonstrated efficacy of 
BLCC in healing chronic VLUs, data from our study provide new insights into how and why 
this occurs. We believe that similar studies can be integrated into clinical trials, providing 
new foundations upon which existing and novel therapeutic and diagnostic approaches for 
chronic wound healing can be examined. This has the potential to positively impact the lives 
of millions of patients that suffer from non-healing VLUs.
Materials and Methods
Study design
Study participants (ClinicalTrial.gov NCT01327937) were recruited from patients presenting 
to the wound clinic at the University of Miami (Miami, FL) with VLUs. Written informed 
consent was obtained from all subjects enrolled in the clinical trial and the study protocol 
and informed consent were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of 
Miami. All subjects (n=30), from screening (day −28) through day 0 visit, received the 
standard-of-care including a dressing regimen of a foam dressing and a 4 layered 
compression bandage system. Participants with non-infected target ulcers of >5 cm2 that had 
not reduced in area by >40% during the 4-week screening period were randomized to either 
the control group receiving standard of care compression therapy (foam dressing plus four 
layered compression bandage system, changed weekly by the investigator) (n=9), or to the 
treatment group receiving weekly BLCC applications (Apligraf, Organogenesis, Inc.) along 
with standard of care compression therapy (n=15). Prior to all applications, the BLCC was 
fenestrated in a standardized manner using a #11 blade with 6 fenestrations per 44 cm2. Skin 
biopsy specimens were obtained from the non-healing edges of VLUs at the time of 
randomization (week 0) as well as one week later (week 1). Specimens were clinically 
designated by a physician as the most proximal skin edge to the ulcer bed. All patients were 
debrided and local lidocaine injection was used for anesthesia. After week 5, all patients 
were monitored in the wound clinic for 12 weeks or until wound closure was achieved. In 
Stone et al.
Page 9
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 addition, to confirm the acute wound profile, ex vivo human skin experiments were 
performed on discarded human skin tissue obtained from voluntary surgeries (n=2 donors) at 
the University of Miami Hospital and were found to be exempt under 45 CFR46.101.2 by 
the IRB at the University Of Miami Miller School Of Medicine. See supplementary 
materials and methods for full clinical study protocol and ex vivo experiment details.
Sample processing
Skin biopsies were processed as follows: (a) samples were embedded in OCT compound 
(Fisher Scientific) and/or (b) stored in formalin for paraffin embedding and/or (c) stored in 
RNAlater or homogenized in Trizol (Ambion/Applied Biosystems) or snap frozen for 
subsequent RNA/protein isolation. Tissue morphology was evaluated using hematoxylin and 
eosin staining. Genotyping of a portion of each week 1 biopsy in the BLCC treatment group 
was performed by an outside laboratory (Esoterix Clinical Trials Services).
VLU morphology assessment
Biopsies obtained from VLU wound edges were formalin fixed and paraffin embedded. 5μm 
thick sections were stained using hematoxylin & eosin following standard protocol and 
assessed for the presence of epidermis and dermis thus confirming characteristic VLUs 
morphology as previously described (2).
Gene expression microarrays
Microarray experiments were performed at the University of Miami’s Genomic Facility 
Core. RNA was amplified, fragmented and hybridized to arrays using GeneChip 3′ IVT 
Express kits by following the manufacturer’s protocol (Affymetrix). 100 ng of total RNA 
were used as input for the Ambion WT Expression Kit (Ambion, Austin, TX) to produce 
labeled single-stranded cDNA according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled 
products were hybridized to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays (Affymetrix, 
USA). The staining, washing and scanning of the arrays was carried out using a Fluidics 450 
station, GeneChip Operating Software and GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G (Affymetrix, USA). 
For quality control, Bioanalyzer analysis after the generation of cRNA, cDNA, and 
fragmentation was carried out using the Nano 6000 kit (Agilent). Microarray data were 
analyzed as described in the supplementary methods.
Pathway analysis
Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the Gene Ontology tool contained within 
the Genespring 13.0 Suite. Further pathway analysis and downstream target/functional 
predictions were performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Qiagen; 
www.ingenuity.com). Microarray probes were mapped to corresponding genes using 
Ingenuity software; if multiple probes mapped to the same gene, the gene was used only 
once in enrichment calculations. Counts and lists of genes used as inputs for pathway 
analysis are found in tables S3 and S6. Statistical tools within the IPA software package used 
Fisher’s exact test to detect the reported significantly enriched pathways, biologic processes, 
and upstream regulators; in all cases, enrichment P-values were Benjamini-Hochberg-
corrected for multiple testing.
Stone et al.
Page 10
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ex vivo acute wound model
Skin from two independent healthy donors was wounded and processed as described (19). 
RNA and formalin-fixed/paraffin-embedded sections were used for qPCR analyses. Please 
refer to the supplementary methods for full details of experimental design and donor 
demographics.
Statistical Analysis
Statistics for microarray data were performed as described in the supplementary methods. 
For qPCR validation studies, technical triplicates were included and groups were compared 
using 2-sided paired t-test. Correlation of nonparametric data was assessed using 
Spearman’s test. Gene ontology enrichment P-values were calculated within the Genespring 
13.0 software package which utilizes Broad Institute’s Gene Set Enrichment Analysis 
algorithms. Pathway enrichment statistics were calculated within the Ingenuity software 
package using Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing. 
Growth factor upstream regulator overlap P-values were similarly calculated within IPA 
using Fisher’s exact test. Two-sided testing was performed with alpha <0.05 for all reported 
analyses, as specified in corresponding figure legends.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to many of our colleagues: H. Brem (Winthrop Medical Center), R. S. Kirsner (University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine), C. Attinger (Georgetown University), J.Steinberg (Georgetown University), and 
the Organogenesis representatives: P. Golden, M. Sabolinski T. Bollenbach D. Bates, N. Parsons and K. Giovino for 
their helpful suggestions and contributions to clinical design and execution of this trial. We are very grateful to the 
members of the Wound Healing Clinical Research Team of the University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine 
especially to A. Espinosa, C. Kittles, and A.Vivas for their work on all aspects of the clinical protocol. We are also 
very grateful to the members of the Dermatopathology Unit including C. Perez for their dedicated service and 
support in tissue specimen processing. Finally, we thank E. Capobianco of the Center for Computational Science at 
the University of Miami for his expert review of the experimental design and statistical analyses reported in this 
work.
Funding: This study was funded in part by a research grant from Organogenesis Inc., 09-MOA-002-AG (to EB and 
MTC), the NIH (NR015649, DK098055, NR013881 to MTC), and the UMSDRC Department of Dermatology and 
Cutaneous Surgery of the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami SAC-2013-19 
award (to MTC) and SAC-2016-9R1 award (to RCS).
References and Notes
1. Brem H, Stojadinovic O, Diegelmann RF, Entero H, Lee B, Pastar I, Golinko M, Rosenberg H, 
Tomic-Canic M. Molecular markers in patients with chronic wounds to guide surgical debridement. 
Molecular medicine. 2007; 13:30–39. [PubMed: 17515955] 
2. Stojadinovic O, Brem H, Vouthounis C, Lee B, Fallon J, Stallcup M, Merchant A, Galiano RD, 
Tomic-Canic M. Molecular pathogenesis of chronic wounds: the role of beta-catenin and c-myc in 
the inhibition of epithelialization and wound healing. The American journal of pathology. 2005; 
167:59–69. [PubMed: 15972952] 
3. Stojadinovic O, Pastar I, Nusbaum AG, Vukelic S, Krzyzanowska A, Tomic-Canic M. Deregulation 
of epidermal stem cell niche contributes to pathogenesis of nonhealing venous ulcers. Wound repair 
Stone et al.
Page 11
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue 
Repair Society. 2014; 22:220–227.
4. Stojadinovic O, Pastar I, Vukelic S, Mahoney MG, Brennan D, Krzyzanowska A, Golinko M, Brem 
H, Tomic-Canic M. Deregulation of keratinocyte differentiation and activation: a hallmark of 
venous ulcers. Journal of cellular and molecular medicine. 2008; 12:2675–2690. [PubMed: 
18373736] 
5. Eming SA, Martin P, Tomic-Canic M. Wound repair and regeneration: mechanisms, signaling, and 
translation. Science translational medicine. 2014; 6:265sr266.
6. Falanga V, Margolis D, Alvarez O, Auletta M, Maggiacomo F, Altman M, Jensen J, Sabolinski M, 
Hardin-Young J. Rapid healing of venous ulcers and lack of clinical rejection with an allogeneic 
cultured human skin equivalent. Human Skin Equivalent Investigators Group. Archives of 
dermatology. 1998; 134:293–300. [PubMed: 9521027] 
7. Falanga V, Sabolinski M. A bilayered living skin construct (APLIGRAF) accelerates complete 
closure of hard-to-heal venous ulcers. Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the 
Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society. 1999; 7:201–207.
8. Brem H, Young J, Tomic-Canic M, Isaacs C, Ehrlich HP. Clinical efficacy and mechanism of 
bilayered living human skin equivalent (HSE) in treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Surgical 
technology international. 2003; 11:23–31. [PubMed: 12931279] 
9. Spiekstra SW, Breetveld M, Rustemeyer T, Scheper RJ, Gibbs S. Wound-healing factors secreted by 
epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts in skin substitutes. Wound repair and regeneration : 
official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society. 2007; 
15:708–717.
10. Falanga V, Isaacs C, Paquette D, Downing G, Kouttab N, Butmarc J, Badiavas E, Hardin-Young J. 
Wounding of bioengineered skin: cellular and molecular aspects after injury. The Journal of 
investigative dermatology. 2002; 119:653–660. [PubMed: 12230509] 
11. Kramer A, Green J, Pollard J Jr, Tugendreich S. Causal analysis approaches in Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:523–530. [PubMed: 24336805] 
12. Rosner K, Ross C, Karlsmark T, Petersen AA, Gottrup F, Vejlsgaard GL. Immunohistochemical 
characterization of the cutaneous cellular infiltrate in different areas of chronic leg ulcers. APMIS : 
acta pathologica, microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica. 1995; 103:293–299.
13. Nuutila K, Siltanen A, Peura M, Bizik J, Kaartinen I, Kuokkanen H, Nieminen T, Harjula A, 
Aarnio P, Vuola J, Kankuri E. Human skin transcriptome during superficial cutaneous wound 
healing. Wound repair and regeneration: official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] 
the European Tissue Repair Society. 2012; 20:830–839.
14. Eckhart L, Ban J, Fischer H, Tschachler E. Caspase-14: analysis of gene structure and mRNA 
expression during keratinocyte differentiation. Biochemical and biophysical research 
communications. 2000; 277:655–659. [PubMed: 11062009] 
15. Marson A, Kretschmer K, Frampton GM, Jacobsen ES, Polansky JK, MacIsaac KD, Levine SS, 
Fraenkel E, von Boehmer H, Young RA. Foxp3 occupancy and regulation of key target genes 
during T-cell stimulation. Nature. 2007; 445:931–935. [PubMed: 17237765] 
16. Kirchner J, Bevan MJ. ITM2A is induced during thymocyte selection and T cell activation and 
causes downregulation of CD8 when overexpressed in CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive thymocytes. 
The Journal of experimental medicine. 1999; 190:217–228. [PubMed: 10432285] 
17. Williams GR, Bassett JH. Deiodinases: the balance of thyroid hormone: local control of thyroid 
hormone action: role of type 2 deiodinase. The Journal of endocrinology. 2011; 209:261–272. 
[PubMed: 21292729] 
18. Safer JD. Thyroid hormone and wound healing. Journal of thyroid research. 2013; 2013:124538. 
[PubMed: 23577275] 
19. Stojadinovic O, Tomic-Canic M. Human ex vivo wound healing model. Methods in molecular 
biology. 2013; 1037:255–264. [PubMed: 24029940] 
20. Chen L, Guo S, Ranzer MJ, DiPietro LA. Toll-like receptor 4 has an essential role in early skin 
wound healing. The Journal of investigative dermatology. 2013; 133:258–267. [PubMed: 
22951730] 
Stone et al.
Page 12
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. Cavorsi J, Vicari F, Wirthlin DJ, Ennis W, Kirsner R, O’Connell SM, Steinberg J, Falanga V. Best-
practice algorithms for the use of a bilayered living cell therapy (Apligraf) in the treatment of 
lower-extremity ulcers. Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing 
Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society. 2006; 14:102–109.
22. Gao Y, Wang HY. Casein kinase 2 Is activated and essential for Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. The 
Journal of biological chemistry. 2006; 281:18394–18400. [PubMed: 16672224] 
23. Donohue KG, Carson P, Iriondo M, Zhou L, Saap L, Gibson K, Falanga V. Safety and efficacy of a 
bilayered skin construct in full-thickness surgical wounds. The Journal of dermatology. 2005; 
32:626–631. [PubMed: 16334861] 
24. Hu S, Kirsner RS, Falanga V, Phillips T, Eaglstein WH. Evaluation of Apligraf persistence and 
basement membrane restoration in donor site wounds: a pilot study. Wound repair and 
regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair 
Society. 2006; 14:427–433.
Stone et al.
Page 13
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 One Sentence Summary
A bioengineered bilayered living cellular construct promotes ulcer healing by modulating 
inflammation, stimulating wound edge keratinocytes, and attenuating Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling to activate an acute wound response.
Stone et al.
Page 14
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Editor’s Summary: Activating healing in chronic wounds
Effective therapies for chronic venous leg ulcers (VLUs) remain elusive, in part due to 
incomplete understanding of the pathophysiology of non-healing wounds. Stone et al. 
conducted a post-market clinical trial using transcriptomics to understand the 
mechanisms of action of an FDA-approved bilayered living cell construct (BLCC) in 
non-healing VLUs. After one week of BLCC treatment in addition to standard of care 
compression therapy, non-healing VLUs showed changes in inflammation and gene 
expression characteristic of acutely healing wounds. This study provides mechanistic 
insight into how the acute healing process can be activated by a cell therapy in chronic, 
non-healing wounds.
Stone et al.
Page 15
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Participant characteristics
(A) Flow diagram of subjects that were assessed and analyzed for the primary outcome of 
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01327937. (B). Subject demographics; ulcer size at screening was 
determined at time of enrollment (study week –4), whereas size at allocation was determined 
at week 0, when patients were randomly assigned to BLCC or control treatment groups. 
Asterisk (*) indicates the sample biomaterial was of insufficient quality for sensitive 
microarray analysis but was available for validation of study findings.
Stone et al.
Page 16
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. Transcriptional response of chronic VLUs to BLCC treatment or compression therapy
(A) Venn diagram of significantly regulated probes and corresponding genes in BLCC and 
Control-treated VLUs (fold change >1.5; paired t-test P<0.05). (B) Gene ontology analysis 
of enriched biological processes among the BLCC-modulated genes. Using Broad Institute 
GSEA Algorithm, significantly overrepresented functions are grouped by category and listed 
with enrichment P values (left column) as well as number of corresponding BLCC-
influenced genes (parentheses). (C) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of BLCC-modulated 
genes. The top 10 pathways are shown with corresponding Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected 
Stone et al.
Page 17
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 enrichment P values; dotted lines represent genes that are common to the linked pathways. 
See also table S4. (D) IPA-predicted mechanistic network for BLCC stimulation of immune 
cell chemotaxis via IL1β; fold changes in IL1β target gene expression after BLCC treatment 
are shown. (E) Growth factors with IPA-predicted active downstream signaling in response 
to BLCC treatment, as indicated by overlap of their known targets with BLCC-modulated 
genes (Fisher’s exact test, P<0.05) as well as by activation (Z) score > 2 reflecting consistent 
gene expression changes in response to BLCC treatment (11). TGFB1= transforming growth 
factor beta 1; HGF=hepatocyte growth factor; VEGFA= vascular endothelial growth factor; 
PDGF=platelet-derived growth factor. See also fig. S2 and table S5.
Stone et al.
Page 18
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. Models for BLCC-triggered acute wound healing response
(A) Venn Diagram of three reference profiles generated using microarray data from intact 
unwounded skin (n=6), healing acute wounds on post-injury day 3 (n=6), and the non-
healing edge of chronic venous leg ulcers (n=3) as described in tables S6–S7. Letters a–c 
indicate aggregates from which genes in Fig. 2B were obtained. (B) Proposed mechanisms 
by which BLCC might accelerate healing of chronic VLUs: (a) reversing expression of 
genes with divergent expression in acutely healing wounds vs. chronic VLUs; (b) shifting 
genes that are pathologically hyper-regulated in chronic VLUs back to acute healing wound 
levels; or (c) inducing expression of genes modulated in acute healing wounds that are 
quiescent in chronic VLUs.
Stone et al.
Page 19
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. Model validation for BLCC-induced gene expression changes in chronic VLUs
Expressions of gene aggregates identified in Fig. 2A were explored in the context of the 
models proposed in Fig. 2B by comparing reference profiles of intact unwounded skin, 
healing acute wounds on post-injury day 3, and the non-healing edge of chronic venous leg 
ulcers to pairs of non-healing VLUs before and after BLCC treatment. Data are represented 
as box and whisker plots of microarray probe expression intensities in the unwounded skin 
(“Intact”, n=6), healing acute wounds (“Acute”, n=6), non-healing chronic VLUs 
(“Chronic”, n=3), as well as 6 pairs of BLCC-treated VLUs (“W0” and “W1”). (A) Model 
Stone et al.
Page 20
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 “a”: Caspase 14 (CASP14) expression in intact, acute, and chronic reference samples 
compared to BLCC-treated VLUs at W0 and W1. (B- C). Model “b”: Integral membrane 
protein 2A (ITM2A) and thyroid hormone deiodinase (DIO2) expression in intact, acute, and 
chronic reference samples compared to BLCC-treated VLUs at W0 and W1. P values were 
determined by 2-tailed paired t-test (Acute vs. Intact, BLCC W1 vs W0) or 2-tailed 
moderated t-test (Acute vs. Chronic, BLCC W1 vs. Acute). (D–E) Model “c”: 4-component 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of 168 microarray probes common to healing acute 
wounds and chronic VLUs post-BLCC (shaded in grey); plot of components 1 and 2 which 
comprise over 70% of the variation. Arrow represents the trend towards acute wound 
expression in 1+ PCA components for pairs of BLCC-treated VLUs (BLCC Week 0 to 1) 
which is absent in Control-treated pairs (dotted rectangles). (F) Plot of changes in gene 
expression for BLCC-treated VLUs (fold change, W0 to W1) and changes in gene 
expression between acute wounds and intact skin as determined by Spearman’s 
nonparametric rank order correlation (2-tailed P<0.0001).
Stone et al.
Page 21
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. Biologic pathways and processes common to acutely healing wounds and BLCC-treated 
VLUs. (A)
IPA identified pathways and (B) biologic processes significantly enriched in acutely healing 
wounds (Acute vs. Intact, n=6 pairs) and in chronic VLUs after 1 week of BLCC application 
(BLCC Week 1 vs. Week 0, n=6 pairs), but not enriched in VLUs treated with standard of 
care compression alone (Control Week 1 vs. Week 0, n=3 pairs) nor in non-healing VLUs at 
baseline (n=3 chronic VLU vs n=8 intact (unwounded) skin). Histograms reflect P values of 
enrichment for each pathway or process assessed by Fisher’s exact test after Benjamini-
Stone et al.
Page 22
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hochberg (B–H) correction for multiple testing. Dotted line denotes thresholds for 
significance at B–H P=0.05. See tables S8–S9 for corresponding genes.
Stone et al.
Page 23
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. Recapitulation of immune features of the acute wound healing phenotype in chronic VLUs 
following BLCC treatment
(A) Interplay of genes and biological functions jointly enriched in acute wounds (n=6) and 
in BLCC-treated VLUs (n=6). Links (arrows) are based on IPA-categorized literature 
findings. (B) qPCR expression of IL1B, CXCL1, CXCL2 and CXCL3 in non-healing VLUs 
one week after standard of care compression therapy (control, n=4, unshaded bars) or 
compression therapy plus BLCC (n=8, shaded bars). Dots represent fold expression change 
in individual paired samples one week post treatment, with bar height at the group mean. 
See also fig. S4. (C) IL1B, CXCL1, CXCL2, and CXCL3 expression in an ex vivo model of 
acute wound healing in skin from n=2 healthy donors, as determined by qPCR at 0, 1, 2, and 
7 days post-wounding. Gray and black bars represent expression in individual donors (mean 
± SEM of n=3 technical replicates). (D) PTPRC-encoded CD45 receptor 
immunofluorescence staining of wound edge sections before (week 0) and after (week 1) 
Stone et al.
Page 24
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BLCC treatment. Scale bar, 200 um. (E) Immunofluorescence staining of wound edge 
sections for epidermal TLR4 expression before (week 0) and after (week 1) BLCC 
treatment. Scale bar, 20 um. Images in D–E are representative of n=5 study subjects before 
and after BLCC application (Week 0 vs. Week 1).
Stone et al.
Page 25
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway in BLCC-treated VLUs and correlation with healing 
trajectory
(A) CSNK2A2 expression changes and correlation with wound closure trajectory slope in 3 
BLCC-responsive “Healers” (shaded area, dashed line) compared to 3 “Nonhealers” and 3 
controls. See also fig. S5. (B) CSNK2A2 expression in healing acute wounds (n=6) and in 
chronic VLUs treated with BLCC (n=6), as represented by box-and-whisker plots of 
microarray probe intensity; paired t-test. (C) Relative WNT3 expression in chronic VLUs 
(n=7) before and after BLCC treatment and in acute wound healing (n=2 healthy donor skin, 
Stone et al.
Page 26
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ex vivo assay). Bars represent mean and SEM of 3 technical replicates after normalization to 
ARPC2 internal control. Inset: WNT3 microarray probe expression in paired biopsies of 
chronic VLUs pre- vs. post-BLCC treatment (n=6) as well as acute wounds pre- vs. 3 days 
post-wounding (n=6); paired t-test P<0.05. (D) Immunofluorescence of phospho-β catenin 
cellular localization in keratinocytes at the wound edge of a “Nonhealer” VLU treated with 
standard of care (control), versus a BLCC-treated “Healer” VLU. Images are representative 
of 3 controls and 3 BLCC-treated VLU “Healers”. Scale bar 20μm.
Stone et al.
Page 27
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
