 LSHSS
Research Article
Interactive Book Reading to Accelerate
Word Learning by Kindergarten Children
With Specific Language Impairment:
Identifying an Adequate Intensity and
Variation in Treatment Response
Holly L. Storkel,a Krista Voelmle,a Veronica Fierro,a Kelsey Flake,a
Kandace K. Fleming,a and Rebecca Swinburne Rominea
Purpose: This study sought to identify an adequate intensity
of interactive book reading for new word learning by children
with specific language impairment (SLI) and to examine
variability in treatment response.
Method: An escalation design adapted from nontoxic drug
trials (Hunsberger, Rubinstein, Dancey, & Korn, 2005) was
used in this Phase I/II preliminary clinical trial. A total of
27 kindergarten children with SLI were randomized to 1
of 4 intensities of interactive book reading: 12, 24, 36, or
48 exposures. Word learning was monitored through a
definition task and a naming task. An intensity response
curve was examined to identify the adequate intensity.
Correlations and classification accuracy were used to examine
variation in response to treatment relative to pretreatment
and early treatment measures.
Results: Response to treatment improved as intensity
increased from 12 to 24 to 36 exposures, and then no
further improvements were observed as intensity increased
to 48 exposures. There was variability in treatment response:
Children with poor phonological awareness, low vocabulary,
and/or poor nonword repetition were less likely to respond
to treatment.
Conclusion: The adequate intensity for this version of
interactive book reading was 36 exposures, but further
development of the treatment is needed to increase the
benefit for children with SLI.
S
pecific language impairment (SLI) affects 7.4%
of kindergarten children (Tomblin et al., 1997).
Children with SLI experience significant deficits in
language acquisition relative to their peers in the absence
of any obvious causal factor. Although many aspects of
language can be affected in SLI, word learning deficits are
frequently observed (Alt & Plante, 2006; Alt, Plante, &
Creusere, 2004; Dollaghan, 1987; Gathercole, 1993; Gray,
2003, 2004, 2005; Nash & Donaldson, 2005; Rice, Buhr, &
Nemeth, 1990; Rice, Oetting, Marquis, Bode, & Pae, 1994).
In fact, children with SLI appear to need two to three
times as many exposures as their peers to learn a new word
(Gray, 2003; Rice et al., 1994). This is troubling given that
spoken language vocabulary is a strong predictor of later
success in reading (Catts, Fey, Tomblin, & Zhang, 2002;
Scarborough, 1998). Thus, ameliorating vocabulary deficits
by accelerating word learning may assist in preventing
future reading deficits and subsequent academic failure.
Although there are numerous empirical studies of word
learning by children with SLI, there are few, if any, inter-
ventions with demonstrated effectiveness (Cirrin & Gillam,
2008; Steele & Mills, 2011). To illustrate, a systematic review
by Cirrin and Gillam (2008) located only six intervention
studies of vocabulary, and all were nonrandomized com-
parison studies.
One effective treatment for word learning generally is
interactive book reading, which involves an adult reading a
storybook to a child and deviating from the text to provide
additional explicit instruction (e.g., define the new word).
It is important to note that randomized clinical trials, meta-
analyses, and systematic reviews show that interactive book
reading has moderate to large effects on word learning by
aUniversity of Kansas, Lawrence
Correspondence to Holly L. Storkel: hstorkel@ku.edu
Editor: Shelley Gray
Associate Editor: Margaret Kjelgaard
Received February 23, 2016
Revision received May 24, 2016
Accepted May 27, 2016
DOI: 10.1044/2016_LSHSS-16-0014
Disclosure: The authors have declared that no competing interests existed at the time
of publication.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017 • Copyright © 2017 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
16
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 typically developing children and children with low vocabu-
lary due to environmental differences in input (i.e., children
from low-income families; Justice, Meier, & Walpole, 2005;
Marulis & Neuman, 2010; Mol, Bus, & de Jong, 2009; Mol,
Bus, de Jong, & Smeets, 2008; Whitehurst et al., 1988).
Moreover, the intervention can be administered by a variety
of adults (e.g., parents, teachers) with minimal training—a
desirable quality given the shortage of speech-language pa-
thologists (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
[ASHA], 2011). Although interactive book reading demon-
strates compelling results in these groups of children and has
particularly desirable delivery features, initial tests of this
intervention with children with different types of language
impairments show less clear and compelling results (Crain-
Thoreson & Dale, 1999; Dale, Crain-Thoreson, Notari-
Syverson, & Cole, 1996; Pile, Girolametto, Johnson, Chen,
& Cleave, 2010; Whitehurst et al., 1991). As a consequence,
interactive book reading needs to be optimized in a Phase I/II
preliminary clinical trial before it will be effective in ad-
dressing the word learning deficits of children with SLI. A
Phase I/II preliminary clinical trial is a preliminary study
addressing core design and clinical issues (e.g., intensity,
dosing regimen, magnitude, and extent of benefit) necessary
to establish the feasibility of a Phase III/IV definitive clinical
trial that, in turn, tests the efficacy and effectiveness of the
intervention (Fey & Finestack, 2009; Robey, 2004). The
current study has elements of both Phase I and Phase II
preliminary clinical trials. In terms of Phase I, the study
used a specialized research design to establish the adequate
intensity of interactive book reading for children with SLI.
This does not establish the efficacy or effectiveness of the
treatment but rather uses data to empirically establish one
parameter of the treatment: treatment intensity. In terms
of Phase II, this study explored the extent of benefit of the
treatment across children. Again, this does not establish
the efficacy or effectiveness but rather determines whether
the treatment needs further modifications to improve the
extent of benefit before moving to a large-scale and costly
definitive clinical trial.
Treatment Intensity
To apply interactive book reading to the treatment
of word learning deficits experienced by children with SLI,
it is crucial to consider whether the intensity of prior inter-
active book reading treatments is likely to be adequate for
children with SLI. Warren, Fey, and Yoder (2007) defined
intensity as the total number of teaching episodes accumu-
lated at the end of treatment. This definition is an improve-
ment over past definitions, which have focused on proxy
measures such as the number of treatment sessions, which
do not precisely reflect the amount of teaching. For inter-
active book reading, intensity is defined as the total number
of exposures to each word being taught. An intensity that
is effective for typically developing children is unlikely to
be adequate for children with SLI. Children with SLI learn
significantly fewer words than typically developing children
when given the same intensity of training (Alt & Plante,
2006; Alt et al., 2004; Dollaghan, 1987; Gray, 2003, 2004,
2005; Rice et al., 1990, 1994). Moreover, intensities that are
effective for children with low vocabulary due to differences
in input (i.e., children from low-income homes) are unlikely
to be adequate for children with SLI. Low-income children
do not appear to have deficits in learning characteristic of
SLI (Horton-Ikard & Weismer, 2007). Taken together, it is
unclear what intensity of interactive book reading would be
adequate for children with SLI. Thus, the current research
used a Phase I escalation strategy previously used in drug
trials (Hunsberger, Rubinstein, Dancey, & Korn, 2005) to
hone in on an adequate treatment intensity of interactive
book reading for word learning by children with SLI. The
hypothesis was that children with SLI will need an intensity
that is two or three times greater than the effective intensity
for typically developing children.
Phase I trials that address issues of treatment intensity
are standard in the drug treatment literature but surprisingly
rare in the development of behavioral treatments. Identifying
an adequate treatment intensity is a critical early step in
clinical research. That is, when a treatment is given at too
low of an intensity, minimal improvement will be observed
on outcome measures, making it impossible to evaluate the
efficacy or effectiveness of the overall treatment or of spe-
cific manipulations of treatment components. This study
adapted an intensity escalation strategy used in nontoxic
Phase I drug trials (Hunsberger et al., 2005) to interactive
book reading. There are two basic tenets of this design.
The first is to use as few participants as possible, limiting
the number of children who potentially receive ineffective
intensities of the treatment. The second is to identify an
adequate—rather than optimal—intensity. An adequate in-
tensity is an intensity in the plateau of an intensity–response
curve. That is, it is the point where simply providing more
of the intervention fails to produce greater benefit. The basis
of this tenet is that finding an optimal intensity typically
requires many more participants than finding an adequate
intensity. The overall goal of these designs is to move as
quickly as possible from Phase I intensity-finding studies
to trials that evaluate efficacy. In this study, we attempted
to identify the point where simply providing more expo-
sures to the words during interactive book reading fails to
produce more children with SLI responding to the treatment
and/or more words being learned during treatment.
Variability in Response to Treatment
An important related issue when developing inter-
active book reading for children with SLI is the uniformity
of treatment response across children. There is controversy in
interactive book reading research regarding which typically
developing children benefit the most from the intervention.
Some studies show that children with poorer pretreatment
vocabulary test scores benefit more than children with better
pretreatment scores (Elley, 1989; Justice et al., 2005), whereas
other studies report the opposite pattern (Blewitt, Rump,
Shealy, & Cook, 2009; Penno, Wilkinson, & Moore, 2002;
Robbins & Ehri, 1994). It is notable that only the study
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
17
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 by Justice et al. (2005) tested children with vocabulary
scores in a clinically significant range (i.e., scores 1 SD or
more below the mean). Thus, it is unclear how variation in
language characteristics of children with SLI would affect
treatment outcomes. It is useful to explore variability in
treatment response early in developing an intervention (i.e., in
Phase II) so that components of the intervention can be modi-
fied to increase the benefit across the population prior to
conducting a large-scale clinical trial. Therefore, this study
explored how pretreatment or early treatment characteristics
were related to treatment response to facilitate further devel-
opment of interactive book reading for children with SLI.
Method
Additional details about the method, as referenced
below, are available in the KU ScholarWorks archive at
http://hdl.handle.net/1808/20313. Additional details relevant
to the participant characteristics and results, as referenced
below, are available in the online supplemental materials.
Participants
Twenty-seven kindergarten children with SLI (age:
M = 5;8 [years;months], SD = 0;6, range = 5;0–6;5) partic-
ipated. Of these children, one child missed posttesting.
Thus, this child’s data appear in analyses using treatment
data but not in analyses that are based on posttreatment
data. Children were recruited by language screenings (52%),
referral from speech-language pathologists or teachers
(41%), or public announcement (7%). This mix of recruit-
ment sources yielded a relatively equal sample of girls
(52%) and boys (48%), which differs from prevalence rates
reported in epidemiology studies (e.g., 8% vs. 6% prevalence
of SLI in boys vs. girls according to Tomblin et al., 1997).
Although it is thought that differing prevalence of SLI by
gender is not due to referral bias (Tomblin et al., 1997), our
screenings yielded greater recruitment of girls (57%) than
boys (43%), and referrals by speech-language pathologists
or teachers yielded greater recruitment of boys (55%) than
girls (45%).
Children were required to (a) be enrolled in or eligible
for kindergarten; (b) pass a hearing screening (ASHA, 1997);
(c) score at or above the 16th percentile for nonverbal cog-
nition as measured by the Reynolds Intellectual Assessment
Scale (Reynolds & Kamphaus, 2003); (d) have a Core
Language Score at or below the 10th percentile on the Clini-
cal Evaluation of Language Fundamentals–Fourth Edition
(Semel, Wiig, & Secord, 2003); and (e) score at or below the
10th percentile on at least one of three vocabulary measures:
Diagnostic Evaluation of Language Variation (DELV)
Semantic subtest (Seymour, Roeper, de Villers, & de Villers,
2005), Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals–
Fourth Edition Word Classes subtest (Semel et al., 2003),
or Comprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary
Test–Third Edition (Wallace & Hammill, 2013). Multiple
measures of vocabulary were used to identify word learning
deficits due to the inherent difficulty in identifying word
learning deficits (e.g., Gray, Plante, Vance, & Henrichsen,
1999) and due to variability in the measures that predict
word learning success (Gray, 2003, 2004). Table 1 shows the
participant characteristics on these inclusionary measures as
well as additional measures intended to further characterize
the abilities of these children. The majority of participants
(67%) qualified as having poor word learning on the basis of
one vocabulary test. Fewer children qualified as having poor
word learning on the basis of two (26%) or all three (4%)
vocabulary tests. Table 1 shows the percentage of children
who qualified on each vocabulary test (i.e., the percentage
of children with a percentile rank at or below 10), with the
majority of children qualifying on the basis of the DELV
Semantic subtest. One child did not meet the vocabulary
criteria but was allowed to participate. This child earned
a raw score of 1 on the Comprehensive Receptive and
Expressive Vocabulary Test–Third Edition (Wallace &
Hammill, 2013), which corresponded to the 13th percentile.
A raw score of 0 on the test corresponded to the 7th percen-
tile. Thus, there was a gap in the scale such that the child
could not score at the 10th percentile.
Race, ethnicity, parent marital status, and parent
education of the children generally matched the demo-
graphics of the recruitment area (i.e., eastern Kansas).
Participants had the following characteristics: 63% White–
non-Hispanic, 19% White–Hispanic, 11% Black/African
American–non-Hispanic, 4% White–unknown ethnicity,
and 4% unknown race and ethnicity. In terms of parent
characteristics, 70% of parents were married, 19% were
single, and 11% were divorced. In terms of the mothers’
education, 37% had partial college, 30% were college grad-
uates, 22% were high school graduates, 4% had partial
high school, 4% had graduate degrees, and 4% were un-
known. In terms of the fathers’ education, 37% were not
reported (mostly from the single or divorced families), 22%
were high school graduates, 22% had partial college, 7%
were college graduates, 4% completed junior high school,
4% had partial high school, and 4% had graduate degrees.
Children were randomly assigned to one of four
treatment intensity conditions (described below). Supple-
mental Tables S1a and S1b show that participants in dif-
ferent conditions were relatively similar.
Treatment
The treatment was based on Justice et al.’s (2005)
clinical trial of interactive book reading with kindergarten
children from low-income homes. Results of the prior
study showed a large effect (d = 1.34) of interactive book
reading (with elaboration) compared with a no-treatment
control condition for the children with low vocabulary.
Likewise, 77% of children made meaningful gains, opera-
tionalized as a minimum gain of 4 points on a pretreatment–
posttreatment definition test of the treated words.
Treatment Materials
Materials were taken from Justice et al. (2005), who se-
lected 10 commercially available and kindergarten-appropriate
18
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 books that contained “colorful illustrations that helped
narrate the story” and “vocabulary words in the text that
were unlikely to be known by the children” (p. 21). Six
potentially unknown words were identified for each book
using common criteria (Beck, McKeown, & Kucan, 2002).
The target words identified were a mix of nouns (n = 16),
verbs (n = 25), and adjectives (n = 19). The morphological
form of the word was based on the form used in the book
text. For example, heaved was presented in the book text as
past tense, and thus heaved was used consistently through-
out treatment. For the current study, the 10 books (i.e.,
60 total target words) were divided into two sets of books
that were matched on word type. One set contained nine
nouns, 12 verbs, and nine adjectives, whereas the other set
contained seven nouns, 13 verbs, and 10 adjectives. The
two sets of books and words were randomized to treatment
(five books, 30 treated words) or no-treatment control (five
books, 30 untreated control words) for each child. Although
this was not a study of treatment efficacy, including un-
treated control words for each child provides a benchmark
for the effect of repeated testing of words over time. Limited
growth is expected in untreated control words. The list of
books and words is available in the KU ScholarWorks
archive (see the Summary of the Stimuli file), and more
detailed item-level data are available in Supplemental
Table S2.
Treatment Form
The elaboration condition from the prior study (Justice
et al., 2005) served as the treatment form. Treatment form
refers to the “typical activity within which teaching episodes
are delivered” (Warren et al., 2007, p. 71). In the prior study,
children heard the target word in the book, a definition of
the target word, and use of the target word in a supportive
context sentence. A fourth element—a synonym for the tar-
get word—was added to increase elaboration. The book text,
definition, supportive context sentence, and synonym for
each word are shown in the KU ScholarWorks archive (see
the Summary of Stimuli file).
Given the need to test higher intensities of the treat-
ment than that used by Justice et al. (2005), exposures for
the current treatment were distributed across pre–book
reading, book reading, and post–book reading activities
within a treatment session. An example of the highest in-
tensity exposure is shown in Table 2 for the target word
decided. As shown in Table 2, during the pre–book reading
activity, children are shown a printed color picture intended
to illustrate the target word and are told the synonym and
definition of the word. Once all six target words have been
previewed, the book is read to the child. As shown in
Table 2, the examiner departs from the text after a target
word has been read and provides the synonym for the
word. Once the entire book has been read, the post–book
reading activity is initiated. As shown in Table 2, a second,
different printed color picture intended to illustrate the
target word is shown and the child hears the supportive
context sentence as well as a definition. This activity is
completed for all six target words. Note that the form of
the word—in this case, past tense (i.e., decided)—is used
consistently throughout the treatment so that the child
does not have to recognize consistency across changing
forms (e.g., decide, deciding, decided). An additional example
and further details are provided in Voelmle and Storkel
(2015). Administration of the treatment was supported
by printed scripts, which are available in the KU Scholar-
Works archive (see the Treatment and Naming Scripts file).
Treatment was provided by research assistants and
occurred in a one-on-one format in a quiet area at the
child’s school, after-school program, home, or other agreed-
upon location (e.g., small room at a local library). Each
treatment session focused on two books. All activities
were completed for one book, and then the same types of
Table 1. Percentile scores for participants on standardized clinical tests.
Test
M
SD
Range
At or below
10th percentile (%)
RIAS Nonverbal IQ
55
25
23.0–99.0
0
CELF Core Language
3
3
0.1–10.0
100
Vocabulary: DELV Semantic
9
8
0.1–25.0
74
Vocabulary: CELF Word Classes
24
19
1.0–75.0
37
Vocabulary: CREVT Expressive
26
16
1.0–63.0
19
CELF Concepts and Following Directionsa
7
7
0.1–25.0
85
CELF Word Structurea
11
8
0.4–25.0
52
CELF Recalling Sentencesa
5
6
0.1–25.0
93
CELF Formulating Sentencesa
8
7
0.1–25.0
78
CELF Understanding Spoken Paragraphs
7
8
0.1–25.0
81
CTOPP Nonword Repetition
22
21
1.0–75.0
44
CTOPP Phonological Memory
15
17
1.0–75.0
52
CTOPP Phonological Awareness
8
8
1.0–30.0
74
GFTA
30
21
1.0–67.0
19
Note.
RIAS = Reynolds Intellectual Assessment Scale; CELF = Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals–Fourth Edition; DELV = Diagnostic
Evaluation of Language Variation; CREVT = Comprehensive Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test–Third Edition; CTOPP = Comprehensive
Test of Phonological Processing–Second Edition; GFTA = Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation–Second Edition (Goldman & Fristoe, 2000).
aScores on this subtest contributed to the CELF Core Language omnibus score.
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
19
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 activities were completed for the second book. Each session
lasted approximately 20 to 30 min.
Treatment Intensity
The primary independent variable was treatment
intensity, operationally defined as the cumulative number
of exposures to a target word at the end of treatment.
Treatment intensity is a function of the number of exposures
to a target word in a book (i.e., dose) and the number of
repeated readings of a book (i.e., dose frequency). As a ref-
erence, the prior study (Justice et al., 2005) provided three
exposures to each target word in a book (i.e., dose = 3).
Each book was read four times (i.e., dose frequency = 4).
Thus, at the end of treatment, children had heard each
target word 12 times. The current study used this intensity
(12 cumulative exposures), twice this intensity (24 exposures),
three times this intensity (36 exposures), and four times this
intensity (48 exposures). These choices were based on the
prior studies indicating that children with SLI need two to
three times as many exposures as their peers to learn a new
word (Gray, 2003; Rice et al., 1994). Table 3 lists the dose and
dose frequency for the treated words in each intensity condi-
tion. Table 3 also shows that untreated control words were
tested but were never taught. The KU ScholarWorks archive
contains the treatment schedules (see the Treatment Sched-
ules file) showing which books were read during each session.
Table 4 shows a comparison of the exposure for one
treated word (marsh) across the lowest and highest inten-
sity conditions. For intensity 12, during pre–book reading,
a child hears the word one time and is provided with a
synonym and a definition. During book reading, the child
again hears the word one time while the book is read.
During post–book reading, the child hears the word one
time in a supportive context sentence. Thus, for the lowest
intensity, the child hears the word three times during a
session (i.e., dose = 3) and these same activities are repeated
on four different days (i.e., dose frequency = 4). Turning to
the illustration of intensity 48 in Table 4, during pre–book
reading, a child hears the word two times when provided
with a synonym and a definition. During book reading, the
child hears the word another two times via reading the book
and a reminder of the synonym. During post–book reading,
the child hears the word a final two times via a supportive
context sentence and a reminder of the definition. Thus, for
the highest intensity, the child hears the word six times dur-
ing a session (i.e., dose = 6), and these same activities are
Table 2. Sample treatment form for high-intensity treatment for the target word decided.
Activity
Verbal input
Visual input
Pre–book reading
Decided is like chose. [synonym]
©dreamstime.com/skypixel
Decided means to make up one’s mind. [definition]
Reprinted with permission.
Book reading
“Then William and Mom decided to scare the bear that lived under
the stairs.” (Cooper, 1993, p. 21) [text from book]
Storybook picture
Decided is like chose. [synonym]
Post–book reading
The boy decided to play with the yellow cup. [context sentence]
©istock.com/peterbooth
Decided means to make up one’s mind. [definition]
Reprinted with permission.
Table 3. Treatment intensity conditions.
Intensity
Treatment
(five books, 30 words)
Untreated control
(five books, 30 words)
Treatment time
(two to three sessions/week)
Dose
Dose frequency
Dose
Dose frequency
Sessions
Weeks
12
3
4
0
0
10
4–5
24
4
6
0
0
15
5–8
36
6
6
0
0
15
5–8
48
6
8
0
0
20
7–10
Note.
Children were randomized to intensities in blocks such that four children were enrolled in a block and each child was randomized to
a different intensity. For a given child, half the books and words were randomly assigned to the treatment condition and the other half were
assigned to an untreated control condition. Dose is the number of exposures to a target word in a book; dose frequency is the number of
repeated readings of a book across time.
20
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 repeated on eight different days (i.e., dose frequency = 8).
Note that in comparing the lowest and highest intensities, the
form of the treatment is exactly the same—that is, all chil-
dren hear at least one synonym, definition, book text, and
supportive context sentence during a session. Higher intensi-
ties are achieved by simply repeating these treatment forms.
Treatment Fidelity
Treatment fidelity was checked for 20% of sessions.
An observer watched the video of selected sessions and
used a checklist to tally that each target word was adminis-
tered and that the intended treatment form was used (e.g.,
text or script read correctly). Two scores were derived. The
first score, derived by dividing the total number of expo-
sures administered by the intended number of exposures,
was 99.92%. The second score, derived by dividing the
total number of correct treatment forms administered by
the intended number of treatment forms, was 99.67%.
Outcome Measure
Research assistants who collected and scored the
primary outcome measure were blind to the participant’s
assigned treatment intensity. The secondary outcome mea-
sure was collected by the research assistant who adminis-
tered the treatment, but the research assistant who scored
that measure was blind to the participant’s assigned treat-
ment intensity. Study data were collected and managed
using Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) tools
hosted at the University of Kansas Medical Center (for
more information, see Harris et al., 2009).
Primary Outcome Measure: Definition Task
The primary outcome measure was a definition task,
similar to that used by Justice et al. (2005), because the
goal was to find an intensity of this treatment that leads
to similarly positive outcomes in children with SLI. Thus,
using the same task as Justice et al. provided a clear bench-
mark for success. The definition task was administered
prior to and immediately following treatment. The task
was administered across two sessions, with 15 treated and
15 untreated control words being tested in each session.
Each session began with three practice words (bed, ball,
candy), which were words that children with SLI were likely
to know. Then, treated (n = 15) and untreated (n = 15) con-
trol words were intermixed with each other and with easy
known words (n = 10; e.g., cat, dirty, sleep). Each word was
introduced with the prompt “Tell me what [word] means.”
Responses were audio recorded and transcribed.
Definitions were scored following the procedures of
McGregor, Oleson, Bahnsen, and Duff (2013). Potential
judges (i.e., principal investigator, project coordinator, five
graduate research assistants) met to create an agreed-upon
scoring rubric for each word by consulting dictionaries to
identify critical elements for a complete and accurate defini-
tion (e.g., flashing = “light” and “transient”). The rubric
awarded 0 points for an incorrect or absent definition (e.g.,
flashing = “flashlight”), 1 point for clearly appropriate use
of the word in a sentence (e.g., flashing = “You’re flashing
your camera on”) or for a vague definition (e.g., flashing =
“change”), 2 points for a conventional definition that con-
tains at least one critical element but lacks other critical
elements (e.g., flashing = “lights go on” [critical element =
“light”]), and 3 points for a complete and accurate defini-
tion including all critical elements (e.g., flashing = “bright
light on and off” [critical elements = “light” and “transient”).
The scoring rubrics are available in the KU ScholarWorks
archive (see the Definition Scoring Rubric file). Two judges
independently scored each response using the rubric. Their
independent scores were then compared, and disagreements
were resolved by consensus. In the event that consensus
could not be reached, a third judge was consulted. These
Table 4. Illustration of minimum and maximum intensity for the word marsh.
Variable
Intensity 12
Intensity 48
Session activities
(i.e., dose)
Pre–book reading
Synonym definition: “Let’s listen and look for these
words in our book. [turn to marsh page] Marsh is
like a swamp. It means a low, wet land, often thick
with tall grasses.”
Synonym definition: “Let’s listen and look for these
words in our book. [turn to marsh page] Marsh is
like a swamp. Marsh means a low, wet land, often
thick with tall grasses.”
Book reading
Text: “They came down to a marsh where they saw a
muskrat spring-cleaning his house.”
Text synonym: “They came down to a marsh where they
saw a muskrat spring-cleaning his house. Marsh is
like a swamp.”
Post–book reading
Context sentence: “Let’s think about the words in our
book. [show different picture of marsh] Ducks and
beavers live in a marsh because they like the water.”
Context sentence definition: “Let’s think about the words
in our book. [show different picture of marsh] Ducks
and beavers live in a marsh because they like the water.
Marsh means a low, wet land, often thick with tall
grasses.”
Number of repetitions
of session activities
(i.e., dose frequency)
4
8
Intensity summary
Dose 3 × dose frequency 4 = 12 cumulative exposures Dose 6 × dose frequency 8 = 48 cumulative exposures
Note.
Dose is the number of exposures to a target word in a book; dose frequency is the number of repeated readings of a book across time.
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
21
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 types of disagreements were not formally tracked but oc-
curred rarely.
For comparison to Justice et al. (2005), words with
scores of 2 or 3 (i.e., an at least minimally accurate definition)
were counted as correct, and words with scores of 0 or 1
were counted as incorrect. Table 5 shows the percentage
of responses scored as 0, 1, 2, or 3 for treated and untreated
words pretreatment and posttreatment. As shown in Table 5,
scores of 2 tended to predominate the correct category, and
scores of 0 tended to predominate the incorrect category.
The final score for the definition task was computed by
counting the number of words with at least minimally accu-
rate definitions (i.e., score of 2 or 3). Overall, learning was
relatively low, with an average of 3.73 (SD = 3.45, range =
0–14) treatment words correct posttreatment.
Secondary Outcome Measure: Naming Task
A definition task is heavily reliant on learning the mean-
ing of a word. Thus, a naming task was administered during
treatment to tap learning of the pronunciation of a word.
The naming task was administered at four predetermined
points, including the last treatment session. The naming task
tested the words that were the focus of treatment for the
session as well as a paired set of untreated control words.
Children were shown the pre–book reading picture used in
treatment and were given a prompt specific to the picture
and the target word. For example, for the target word ruffle,
children were shown a picture of a bird and asked “What
does the bird do to his feathers?” Naming prompts for each
target word are shown in the KU ScholarWorks archive (see
the Treatment and Naming Scripts file). Responses were
transcribed and scored as correct if the child named the target
word (e.g., said “ruffle” for the target word ruffle) or incorrect
if the child failed to name the target word (e.g., said “bird”
for the target word ruffle) or failed to provide any response.
Changes in grammatical form (e.g., “ruffled” or “ruffling”
for the target word ruffle) and common misarticulations
(e.g., “wuffle” for the target word ruffle) were ignored (i.e.,
responses with these differences were scored as correct). The
naming score was computed by counting the number of
words that were named correctly at the last test. Overall,
children on average named 6.07 (SD = 4.08, range = 2–18)
treatment words correctly at the last test.
Treatment Intensity: Escalation Design Procedures
Children were enrolled in the study in blocks of four
children. Within a block, each child was randomly assigned
to one of the four intensities (12, 24, 36, or 48 exposures).
In most cases, two blocks were run in parallel, and data
were examined to determine whether changes were needed
(e.g., drop or add intensities). As has been done in other
escalation designs (Hunsberger et al., 2005), data analysis
and decision making occurred block by block by plotting
the percentage of children in each intensity who responded
to the treatment. Responding to the treatment was opera-
tionally defined as a posttest score of 5 or greater for the
treated words. This cut-off was selected because it was similar
to that of Justice et al. (2005) in a parallel analysis (which
used a cut-off of 4 or higher) and it was outside the range
of scores observed for untreated control words (M = 1,
SD = 0.9, range = 0–4). A pattern was considered to have
been established when it had been replicated across at least
three blocks. The block-by-block data are shown in Supple-
mental Figure S1. Intensity 12 was dropped after the fifth
block. All data collection stopped after the seventh block.
Thus, five children completed intensity 12, and seven chil-
dren each completed intensities 24, 36, and 48.
Results
Treatment Intensity
The first goal of this study was to identify an adequate
or promising intensity of interactive book reading for chil-
dren with SLI. Three analyses were conducted to address this
goal. The first analysis examined the percentage of children
responding to the treatment on the basis of the definition
task. The second analysis examined the number of words
learned on the basis of the definition task. The third analysis
examined the percentage of children responding to treatment
on the basis of the naming task.
Definition Task: Percentage of Children
Responding to Treatment
Figure 1 reports the percentage of children responding
to treatment on the basis of the definition task (i.e., post-
treatment score of 5 or more for treated words) for each
intensity. Note that these are the same data that were used
to make decisions in the escalation design procedures and
that the block-by-block data are shown in Supplemental
Figure S1. As shown in Figure 1, 0% of children in intensity 12
responded to the treatment. Recall that this is the intensity
that was effective in promoting word learning by typically
developing children from low-income homes (Justice et al.,
Table 5. Percentage (%) of definition responses receiving a score
of 0, 1, 2, or 3 at pretreatment and posttreatment for untreated
control words and treated words.
Variable
0
1
2
3
Pretreatmenta
Untreated control words
96
3
1
0
Treated words
97
2
1
0
Posttreatmentb
Untreated control words
95
3
2
0
Treated words
79
8
9
4
Note.
Scoring was as follows: 0 points for an incorrect or absent
definition, 1 point for clearly appropriate use of the word in a
sentence or for a vague definition, 2 points for a conventional
definition that lacks one or more critical elements, and 3 points
for a complete and accurate definition including all critical elements.
For analysis, scores of 0 and 1 were aggregated (i.e., incorrect) and
scores of 2 and 3 were aggregated (i.e., correct).
aPercentage out of 810 responses (27 children × 30 words).
bPercentage out of 780 responses (26 children × 30 words).
22
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 2005). This intensity did not appear to be sufficient to pro-
mote word learning by children with SLI. As intensity in-
creased from 12 to 24 exposures, the percentage of children
responding to the treatment increased. When intensity
increased from 24 to 36 exposures, even more children
responded to treatment. At 36 exposures, 43% of children
with SLI responded to the treatment. In contrast, as in-
tensity increased from 36 to 48 exposures, the percentage
of children responding to treatment decreased. This pattern
is a desirable pattern in an escalation design because it indi-
cates that a plateau has been reached where further increases
in intensity are unlikely to result in more children responding
to treatment. Taken together, the adequate intensity of the
four intensities tested is 36 exposures because this yielded the
highest percentage of children responding to the treatment,
although treatment response was modest (43%) and lower
than that of Justice et al. (2005; 77%).
Definition Task: Number of Words Defined Correctly
Although the magnitude of the treatment response
has not typically been examined in escalation studies, it is
possible that children could vary widely in the number of
words learned beyond the minimal threshold used to define
a treatment response. Thus, the actual number of words
learned (which was based on a correct definition) was
examined to complement the previous analysis of treatment
response. The block-by-block data are shown in Supple-
mental Figure S2. Figure 2 shows the number of treated
and untreated words defined correctly pretreatment and
posttreatment. As shown in Figure 2, the average number
of correct control words was low (i.e., < 1) across intensities
at pretreatment (open bars; M = 0.50, SD = 0.76, range =
0–3) and posttreatment (light shaded bars; M = 0.50, SD =
0.95, range = 0–4). This indicates that children with SLI did
not know the untreated control words prior to treatment
and did not learn the control words from environmental
exposure or from repeated testing during this study. In
addition, the average number of correct treated words at
pretreatment (medium shaded bars) was low across all inten-
sities (M = 0.42, SD = 0.76, range = 0–3). This verifies
that the treated words were unknown prior to treatment.
Turning to the average number of treated words with
correct definitions posttreatment (dark shaded bars), chil-
dren in intensity 12 on average learned one treated word
(SD = 2, range = 0–3), which is relatively similar to perfor-
mance on untreated control words. This corroborates the
prior analysis indicating that 12 exposures was not sufficient
to support word learning by children with SLI. As intensity
increased from 12 to 24 exposures, the average number of
treated words learned also increased. Children in intensity
24 on average learned four treated words (SD = 1, range =
1–5), which appears to be better than performance on un-
treated control words. Number of words learned continued
to increase as intensity increased from 24 to 36 exposures.
Children in intensity 36 on average learned five treated words
(SD = 5, range = 0–14). In contrast, no further increase in
number of words learned was observed as intensity increased
beyond 36 exposures. Children in intensity 48 on average
learned four treated words (SD = 4, range = 0–11). This
analysis converges on the conclusion that 36 exposures
was the adequate intensity out of the four intensities tested,
although the number of treated words defined correctly
posttreatment was modest even in this condition (i.e., five
out of 30 words learned).
Naming Task: Percentage of Children
Responding to Treatment
The final analysis used data from the naming task
to determine whether the intensity that was adequate for
learning of semantics (as measured by the definition task)
Figure 1. Percentage of children responding to the treatment on the
basis of a posttreatment definition score of 5 or higher for treated
words in block 7 (the last block) for each treatment intensity condition
(12, 24, 36, and 48). The trend line illustrates the polynomial trend
also depicted by the regression equation. Posttreatment treated
words are shown in shaded bars.
Figure 2. The average number of words with correct definitions in
block 7 (the last block) for each treatment intensity (12, 24, 36, and
48). Open bars = pretreatment control words; light shaded bars =
posttreatment control words; medium shaded bars = pretreatment
treated words; dark shaded bars = posttreatment treated words.
The trend line illustrates the polynomial trend for posttreatment
treated words, also depicted by the regression equation.
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
23
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 also was adequate for learning phonology (as measured
by the naming task). This analysis examined the percentage
of children responding to the treatment on the basis of the
final naming test. Responding to the treatment was opera-
tionally defined as a score of 4 or greater for the treated
words. This cut-off was selected because it was outside the
range of performance observed for untreated control words
(M = 1, SD = 0.7, range = 0–3). The block-by-block data
are shown in Supplemental Figure S3. Note that this analysis
ontains an extra child in intensity 24 compared with the
prior analyses of definitions. This is the child who did not
complete a posttreatment definition test but did complete
treatment, including all naming tests. As shown in Figure 3,
60% of children in intensity 12 responded to the treatment.
This is a more favorable picture of the benefit of intensity
12 than shown by the definition data. Although 12 exposures
was not sufficient to produce the deep semantic learning
needed to provide an adequate definition, 12 exposures
did produce word learning when a less difficult measure of
learning (i.e., naming) was used. However, greater learning
was still observed with higher intensities. As intensity in-
creased from 12 to 24 exposures, the percentage of children
who responded to treatment increased slightly. It is important
to note that a more marked increase in treatment response
was observed as intensity increased from 24 to 36 exposures.
In particular, 86% of children in intensity 36 responded to
the treatment. No added benefit was observed as intensity
increased beyond 36 exposures. The percentage of children
responding to treatment decreased as exposures increased
from 36 to 48. Thus, data from the naming test (which em-
phasizes phonology) converge with the findings from the
definition task (which emphasizes semantics), indicating
that 36 exposures is the adequate intensity. Here, the extent
of benefit of the treatment (i.e., 86% of children responding
to treatment) was more robust and compelling than observed
for the definition data.
Variability in Response to Treatment
As shown in the intensity analysis, response to treat-
ment varied across children (i.e., response to treatment is
never 100% in any intensity). To better understand this vari-
ability, data from children in intensities 24, 36, and 48 were
examined. Intensity 12 was excluded because 0% of children
in intensity 12 responded to treatment on the basis of post-
treatment definition scores for treated words. Thus, data
from these children cannot help us understand the character-
istics of children who respond to treatment and those who
do not. In total, 21 children with posttreatment definition
scores who received 24, 36, or 48 exposures were analyzed.
Pretreatment Characteristics Associated
With Posttreatment Definition Scores
Correlation between pretreatment test scores and the
posttreatment definition score for treated words was exam-
ined. Also, the score for treated words on the first naming
test during treatment was included to determine whether
early treatment performance was related to posttreatment
scores. Supplemental Table S3a shows the correlations,
with the first column being the primary interest. Here,
the DELV Semantic score, r(21) = .52, p < .05, r2 = .27,
the Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing–Second
Edition (CTOPP; Wagner, Torgesen, Rashotte, & Pearson,
2013) Nonword Repetition score, r(21) = .44, p < .05, r2 =
.20, and the CTOPP Phonological Awareness subtest score,
r(21) = .48, p < .05, r2 = .23, correlated significantly with
the number of treated words accurately defined posttreatment.
Children with higher vocabulary scores, higher Nonword
Repetition scores, or higher Phonological Awareness scores
defined more treated words correctly posttreatment than
did children with lower vocabulary, lower Nonword Repe-
tition, or lower Phonological Awareness scores. Supplemen-
tal Table S3b examines the association between demographic
characteristics (i.e., gender, race, ethnicity, parent marital
status, parent education) and treatment response. No statis-
tically significant effects were identified.
Classification Accuracy on the Basis
of Pretreatment Characteristics
The three measures that were significantly correlated
with posttreatment definition scores (i.e., DELV Semantic
score, CTOPP Nonword Repetition score, and CTOPP
Phonological Awareness score) were analyzed as a classifi-
cation function. Classification functions typically are used
to evaluate diagnostic measures. Here, the diagnostic status
of participants is known (i.e., SLI vs. typical language), and
then scores on a new diagnostic measure are used to predict
the child’s language status on the basis of an optimized
cut-off score. The alignment between the known and pre-
dicted disorder status is then examined for overall accuracy,
sensitivity, specificity, positive likelihood ratios, and nega-
tive likelihood ratios, with each of these measures having
established criteria for interpretation. Table 6 provides a
review of the computation and interpretation of these mea-
sures as applied to treatment response. As shown in Table 6,
Figure 3. Percentage of children responding to the treatment on
the basis of naming data (i.e., posttreatment naming score of 4
or higher for treated words) in block 7 (the last block) for each
treatment intensity (12, 24, 36, and 48). The trend line illustrates
the polynomial trend also depicted by the regression equation.
24
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 whether a child responded to our treatment is known using
our cut-off of five or more treated words correctly defined
posttreatment. Receiver operating characteristic curves are
used to identify cut-off scores on the pretreatment measures
to maximize accuracy in predicting which children will
respond to treatment. The alignment between the actual
treatment response and the predicted treatment response
can then be evaluated.
Of the 21 children available for analysis, 14 were
classified as not responding to treatment (i.e., four or fewer
treated words defined correctly posttreatment), and seven
were classified as responding to treatment (i.e., five or more
words defined correctly posttreatment). Table 7 shows the
selected cut-off score for each pretreatment measure (i.e.,
DELV Semantic score, CTOPP Nonword Repetition score,
and CTOPP Phonological Awareness score) in the first col-
umn. These cut-off scores for standardized tests ranged
from the sixth to the ninth percentiles.
In Table 7, the three pretreatment measures are sorted
on the basis of their classification accuracy. Desirable
values for accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, positive likelihood
ratio, and negative likelihood ratio are marked. As shown
in Table 7, sensitivity and negative likelihood ratios were
good for all three measures. In contrast, specificity and
positive likelihood ratios were good only for the CTOPP
Phonological Awareness subtest. Focusing on the top left
panel of Figure 4, CTOPP Phonological Awareness scores
are plotted against the number of treated words defined
correctly posttreatment. The cut-off score for the CTOPP
is shown by a horizontal line, and the cut-off definition
score for a treatment response is shown by a vertical line.
The CTOPP Phonological Awareness score sorts children
relatively accurately into those who responded to the treat-
ment (filled circles) and those who did not (unfilled circles).
The majority of children who scored at or above the CTOPP
Phonological Awareness cut-off score did respond to treat-
ment (i.e., true positive), and the majority of children who
scored below the CTOPP Phonological Awareness cut-off
score did not respond to treatment (i.e., true negative). Very
few children fall into the false positive or false negative
quadrants in Figure 4. Overall, pretreatment CTOPP Phono-
logical Awareness scores predicted treatment response rela-
tively accurately.
In contrast, the other two measures did not sort chil-
dren as accurately into those who responded to treatment
and those who did not. This is shown in the other two
panels of Figure 4. For the seven children who responded
to treatment, the majority of these children scored at or
above the cut-off score on the DELV or Nonword Repetition
(true positive), and very few children who responded to
treatment scored below the cut-off score on the DELV or
Nonword Repetition (false negative). This indicates good
sensitivity. Focusing now on the children who scored below
the cut-off score on the DELV or Nonword Repetition, the
Table 6. Classification table and measures for analysis.
Pretreatment test score
Treatment outcome
Did not respond
to treatment (−)
Did respond to
treatment (+)
At or above the criterion
score (predicted to
respond to treatment; +)
False positive
True positive
Below the criterion score
(predicted to not respond
to treatment; −)
True negative
False negative
Note.
Treatment outcome criteria = five or more treated words
with correct definitions. Accuracy = (true positive + true negative)/
total. Sensitivity = true positive/(true positive + false negative);
probability that the score on the pretreatment measure predicts
a child will respond to the treatment when the child actually did
respond to treatment (> 80% is desirable). Specificity = true negative/
(true negative + false positive); probability that the score on the
pretreatment measure predicts a child will not respond to the
treatment when the child actually does not respond to treatment
(> 80% is desirable). Positive likelihood ratio = true positive/false
positive; indicates how likely a child is to respond to treatment as
opposed to not respond to treatment given a pretreatment score at
or above the cut-off (≥ 3.0 is suggestive, ≥ 10.0 is informative).
Negative likelihood ratio = false negative/true negative; indicates how
likely a child is to respond to treatment rather than not respond to
treatment given a pretreatment score below the cut-off (≤ 0.30 is
suggestive, ≤ 0.10 is informative). See https://www.medcalc.org/calc/
diagnostic_test.php for a program to calculate these measures.
Table 7. Classification measures for significant pretreatment measures.
Variable
Accuracy (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Positive
likelihood ratio
Negative
likelihood ratio
CTOPP Phonological Awareness
(cut-off = SS 77, PR 6)
86a
86a
86a
6.00a
0.17a
Vocabulary: DELV Semantic
(cut-off = SS 6, PR 9)
71
86a
64
2.40
0.22a
CTOPP Nonword Repetition
(cut-off = SS 6, PR 9)
57
100a
36
1.56
0.00a
Note.
Cut-off refers to the criterion score used to predict the presence versus absence of a response to treatment. CTOPP = Comprehensive
Test of Phonological Processing–Second Edition; DELV = Diagnostic Evaluation of Language Variation; SS = standard score; PR = percentile
rank. Scores at or above the cut-off predict that the child will respond to treatment, whereas scores below the cut-off predict that the child will
not respond to treatment.
aDesirable value.
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
25
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 majority of those children did not respond to treatment
(true negative), and very few did respond to treatment
(false negative), indicating a desirable negative likelihood
ratio. Thus, a score below the cut-off on the DELV or Non-
word Repetition accurately ruled out a response to treatment.
However, the poorer specificity and positive likelihood
ratio indicate that a score at or above the cut-off on the
DELV or Nonword Repetition was less informative. Focusing
on the 14 children who did not respond to treatment (un-
shaded circles), an almost equal number scored at or above
the cut-off (false positive) as scored below the cut-off (true
negative) on the DELV or Nonword Repetition, indicating
poor specificity. Focusing on the children who scored at or
above the cut-off score on the DELV or Nonword Repetition,
an almost equal number of children responded to treatment
(true positive) as did not respond to treatment (false posi-
tive), indicating poor positive likelihood ratio. Taken to-
gether, a score below the cut-off on the DELV or Nonword
Repetition indicates that a child is relatively unlikely to
respond to treatment, whereas a score at or above the cut-off
on the DELV or Nonword Repetition indicates that a re-
sponse to treatment could occur, but there is uncertainty in
this prediction.
Discussion
The current study had two main goals: (a) to identify
an adequate intensity of interactive book reading to support
new word learning by children with SLI and (b) to examine
variability in treatment response across children with SLI.
Figure 4. Posttreatment definition scores for treated words plotted by pretreatment Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing–Second
Edition (CTOPP) Phonological Awareness standard scores (top left), Diagnostic Evaluation of Language Variation (DELV) Semantic standard
scores (top right), and CTOPP Nonword Repetition standard scores (bottom left). The vertical line indicates the criteria for a treatment
response on the basis of the posttreatment definition score, which also is shown by the color of the circles (unfilled = no treatment response;
filled = treatment response). The horizontal line indicates the cut-off score on the pretreatment test for predicting a positive or negative
response to treatment.
26
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 Results showed that response to treatment and number
of words learned improved as intensity increased up to
36 exposures and then plateaued as intensity increased
beyond 36 exposures. Thus, 36 exposures was deemed the
adequate intensity for this version of interactive book reading.
However, there was variability in treatment response. Chil-
dren with lower Phonological Awareness, vocabulary, and/or
Nonword Repetition scores were less likely to respond posi-
tively to the treatment. In contrast, children with higher
Phonological Awareness, vocabulary, and/or Nonword
Repetition scores were more likely to respond to the treatment,
but this was difficult to predict reliably. These findings have
implications for further development of this treatment as
well as for future preliminary clinical trials of language
interventions.
Development of Interactive Book Reading
There is clear evidence that 36 exposures is the ade-
quate intensity (of the four intensities tested). Thus, future
research with this treatment for children with SLI should
incorporate 36 exposures to the treated words. However,
gains were modest, with a small number of new words
learned (i.e., an average of five new words defined correctly)
and with few children responding to treatment (i.e., 43%
compared with 77% in Justice et al., 2005). Some could
argue that these modest gains are attributable to the diffi-
culty of the outcome measure used. This, undoubtedly, is
true. In fact, a slightly more favorable picture of the treat-
ment emerges in this study when naming data—rather than
definition data—were examined. Rather than changing the
outcome measure, further enhancement of the treatment is
recommended. Children with SLI, like typically developing
children, need rich word knowledge to support necessary
language functions (e.g., reading comprehension) to set the
foundation for better life outcomes (e.g., greater academic
and vocational success). Thus, rather than lowering the bar
on an acceptable treatment response, the treatment needs
to be improved so that greater success is achieved.
Several possible avenues may enhance treatment
outcomes. First, the current treatment is entirely receptive.
That is, children are provided with high-intensity input but
are never required to respond to that input. Prior research
on children and adults with typical language has suggested
that testing enhances learning over and above gains made
simply through study or input (Eisenkraemer, Jaeger, &
Stein, 2013; Roediger & Butler, 2011; Rowland, 2014). For
example, Karpicke and Roediger (2008) showed that re-
peated testing increased final recall by 4 SD compared with
repeated study. In that same study, 80 extra study trials
had no effect on retention, whereas 80 extra test trials led
to a 150% improvement in retention. It is important to
note that the testing effect has been observed in children
(Bouwmeester & Verkoeijen, 2011; Fritz, Morris, Nolan, &
Singleton, 2007; Goossens, Camp, Verkoeijen, & Tabbers,
2014; Goossens, Camp, Verkoeijen, Tabbers, & Zwaan,
2014; Marsh, Fazio, & Goswick, 2012; Rohrer, Taylor, &
Sholar, 2010). In addition, children with SLI are known to
have difficulty retrieving words (Lahey & Edwards, 1996;
McGregor, 1997, 2014; McGregor & Leonard, 1989); there-
fore, dividing the 36 exposures across receptive input and
expressive retrieval practice via testing may strengthen
retrieval, thus augmenting word learning outcomes. This
hypothesis warrants empirical testing.
Second, predictors of a positive treatment response
included elements of phonology (i.e., phonological aware-
ness, nonword repetition) as well as semantics (i.e., DELV
Semantic subtest). This makes intuitive sense because learn-
ing a word requires learning the sound form (i.e., phonology)
and the meaning (i.e., semantics). It is unclear in this small
sample whether subgroups of nonresponding children had
difficulty with only one or with both of these elements. A
larger study would be useful in understanding these individ-
ual differences because there would be enough power to
statistically disentangle the contribution of phonological
and semantic measures to treatment outcomes. At the same
time, it seems wise to better support and track phonological
and semantic learning during treatment. To accomplish this,
both phonological (e.g., naming) and semantic (e.g., defining)
measures could be incorporated into the retrieval practice
described previously. This phonological and semantic re-
trieval practice could enhance learning but also would track
learning of phonology and semantics during treatment to
better identify how each contributes to treatment outcomes.
Third, there are multiple ways to accumulate 36 expo-
sures by the end of treatment. The current study used a
balanced approach in which children heard the words six
times during each book reading session and then each
book was read on six different occasions (i.e., 6 × 6 = 36).
It is possible that a different approach to achieving 36 expo-
sures might be more beneficial. For example, research with
adults with developmental language impairments has indi-
cated that their primary difficulty may be with extracting
word form and meaning during training—referred to as
encoding (McGregor, Licandro, et al., 2013). This suggests
that it could be better to increase the number of times a child
hears a word in a book reading session so that he or she has
ample exposure (and practice) to form an initial representa-
tion of the word before the end of a treatment session. Thus,
achieving 36 exposures through more exposures during a
session (e.g., nine exposures) but fewer repeated readings
of the same book (e.g., four book readings) could enhance
treatment outcomes. However, the alternative hypothesis
also is supported by the literature. That is, one of the most
robust findings in cognitive psychology is that distributed
training, where learning from input is interspersed with
gaps in training (e.g., weekly training), leads to more
robust long-term learning than massed practice, where
learning from input is done all at once (i.e., one training
session; Philips, Kopec, & Carew, 2013). Moreover, the
finding is applicable to children with SLI, who learn
more new words when the same number of exposures is
distributed across four training days rather than massed
in one training day (Riches, Tomasello, & Conti-Ramsden,
2005). The current treatment does use a distributed expo-
sure (i.e., repeated readings of books), but the question is
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
27
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 whether more distributed practice would enhance learning.
For example, would children with SLI learn more words if
they received fewer exposures during a book reading session
(e.g., four exposures) but read the books more times (e.g.,
nine readings of the same book)? The best regimen for
achieving 36 exposures remains to be discovered.
Last, it is possible that interactive book reading
ultimately may not be effective, even when the treatment
approach is enhanced further, for children with lower
phonological awareness (i.e., less than the sixth percentile
on CTOPP), vocabulary (i.e., less than the ninth percentile
on DELV), or nonword repetition (i.e., less than the ninth
percentile on CTOPP) scores. These specific measures may
be tapping elements of online processing that are founda-
tional to learning through interactive book reading. The
phonological awareness measure taps the ability to manip-
ulate sounds, and the nonword repetition measure taps
the ability to hold novel sound sequences in memory. The
vocabulary measure (i.e., DELV Semantic subtest) differs
from many commercially available vocabulary measures in
that half of the items focus on fast mapping. That is, both
known and novel words are presented in a context before
the child is asked questions about the words. This difference
in the vocabulary measure may explain why vocabulary
score in the current study positively correlated with treat-
ment outcome, whereas vocabulary score on the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test–Third Edition (a measure of recep-
tive vocabulary knowledge; Dunn & Dunn, 1997) negatively
correlated with treatment outcome in the prior study (Justice
et al., 2005). However, note that cut-off scores also varied
across studies (i.e., ninth percentile for current study; 16th
percentile in Justice et al., 2005). All of the actions tapped
by these measures presumably are necessary for learning
new words from interactive book reading. That is, during
interactive book reading, the child must identify that a new
word was heard, hold the novel sound sequence in working
memory while extracting the meaning from the visual and
auditory input, and create an initial mental representation
of both the word form and the meaning. As a consequence,
a child with weak online processing may not be able to
accomplish some or all of these steps, limiting word learn-
ing during interactive book reading. A less naturalistic
treatment that minimizes online processing could be more
appropriate for children with low phonological awareness,
vocabulary, or nonword repetition scores.
Future Clinical Research
The intensity required for a word learning treatment
likely will vary depending on the form of the treatment,
the number of words targeted in a treatment session, the
age of the target population, the language and cognitive
abilities of the target population, and various other factors.
This suggests that alternative versions of this treatment
that manipulate or vary any of these factors may require
a different intensity of the treatment. As noted previously,
identifying the adequate intensity of a treatment for a par-
ticular population is a crucial first step in clinical research.
The current study demonstrates that an escalation design
can be applied successfully to a behavioral treatment to
identify relatively quickly an adequate intensity for a new
treatment or a new variation on an existing treatment. As
a first application of this design to language treatment, our
approach was somewhat conservative. For example, we
continued to enroll children in the lowest intensity condi-
tion even though there was little evidence to support its
effectiveness. Further development of the escalation design
for behavioral interventions would assist in facilitating
future clinical research. In particular, it would be helpful
to have clearer procedures, similar to those developed
for nontoxic drug trials (Hunsberger et al., 2005), so that
data could be collected from even fewer participants while
still successfully identifying the adequate intensity.
Likewise, the current study demonstrates the logic
of applying a classification approach to understanding var-
iation in treatment response. This approach has potential
value to clinical practice in that the question of which
treatment to use for a given client can be informed by having
data to make predictions concerning the likelihood of a
treatment response. Current approaches to examining vari-
ability in treatment response tend not to translate the data
into a metric that can be applied to clinical decision making,
but a classification approach may be able to accomplish
this, providing more useful information to practitioners.
Conclusions
This study tested four intensities of interactive book
reading for kindergarten children with SLI and determined
that the adequate intensity for word learning is 36 exposures
to the treated words. It is notable that children with lower
phonological awareness, vocabulary, and/or nonword rep-
etition scores were unlikely to respond to the treatment. In
contrast, children with higher phonological awareness, vo-
cabulary, and/or nonword repetition scores were somewhat
likely to respond to the treatment, but this prediction was
not definitive. Taken together, further development of
this treatment is needed to increase the number of words
learned as well as the percentage of children with SLI
benefitting from the treatment. This study demonstrates
the applicability of an escalation design for identifying an
adequate treatment intensity of a language intervention
and shows the utility of a classification approach to under-
standing potential predictors of treatment response.
Acknowledgments
This project was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grants DC012824, DC05803, HD02528, and NCATS-UL1TR000001.
The contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes
of Health. We thank the staff of the Participant Recruitment and
Management Core of the Center for Biobehavioral Neurosciences
of Communication Disorders (supported by DC05803) for assis-
tance with recruitment of schools and children; the staff of the
Research Design and Analysis Unit of the Lifespan Institute (sup-
ported by HD02528) for assistance with study design; Frontiers:
The Heartland Institute for Clinical and Translational Research
28
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 for REDCap support (supported by NCATS-UL1TR000001);
and the staff of the Word and Sound Learning Lab (supported by
DC012824) for their contributions to stimulus creation, participant
recruitment, data collection, data processing, and reliability calcu-
lations. Portions of the data were presented previously at the 2015
Kansas Speech-Language-Hearing Association Convention, the
2015 Annual Convention of the American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association, and the 2015 Symposium for Research in
Child Language Disorders. Clinical application of the methods
and findings was described previously in Voelmle and Storkel (2015)
and Komesidou and Storkel (2015).
References
Alt, M., & Plante, E. (2006). Factors that influence lexical and
semantic fast mapping of young children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
49, 941–954.
Alt, M., Plante, E., & Creusere, M. (2004). Semantic features in
fast-mapping: Performance of preschoolers with specific language
impairment versus preschoolers with normal language. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 407–420.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (1997). Guidelines
for screening for hearing impairment—School-age children,
5 through 18 years. ASHA, 4, IV-74ff–IV-74hh.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2011). Supply
and demand resource list for school-based speech-language pathol-
ogists. Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/
2011-School-SLP-Supply-Demand.pdf
Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G., & Kucan, L. (2002). Bringing words
to life. New York, NY: Guilford.
Blewitt, P., Rump, K. M., Shealy, S. E., & Cook, S. A. (2009).
Shared book reading: When and how questions affect young
children’s word learning. Journal of Educational Psychology,
101, 294–304.
Bouwmeester, S., & Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L. (2011). Why do some
children benefit more from testing than others? Gist trace
processing to explain the testing effect. Journal of Memory and
Language, 65, 32–41. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2011.02.005
Catts, H. W., Fey, M. E., Tomblin, J. B., & Zhang, X. (2002). A
longitudinal investigation of reading outcomes in children
with language impairments. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 45, 1142–1157.
Cirrin, F. M., & Gillam, R. B. (2008). Language intervention prac-
tices for school-age children with spoken language disorders: A
systematic review. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 39, S110–S137.
Cooper, H. F. (1993). The bear under the stairs. London,
United Kingdom: Doubleday.
Crain-Thoreson, C., & Dale, P. S. (1999). Enhancing linguistic
performance: Parents and teachers as book reading partners
for children with language delays. Topics in Early Childhood
Special Education, 19, 28–39.
Dale, P. S., Crain-Thoreson, C., Notari-Syverson, A., & Cole, K.
(1996). Parent-child book reading as an intervention technique
for young children with language delays. Topics in Early
Childhood Special Education, 16, 213–235.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1987). Fast mapping in normal and language-
impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders,
52, 218–222.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody picture vocabulary
test—Third edition. Circle Pines, MN: AGS.
Eisenkraemer, R. E., Jaeger, A., & Stein, L. M. (2013). A system-
atic review of the testing effect in learning. Paideia, 23, 397–406.
Elley, W. B. (1989). Vocabulary acquisition from listening to
stories. Reading Research Quarterly, 24, 174–187.
Fey, M. E., & Finestack, L. H. (2009). Research and development
in child language intervention: A five-phase model. In R. G.
Schwartz (Ed.), Handbook of child language disorders
(pp. 513–531). New York, NY: Routledge.
Fritz, C. O., Morris, P. E., Nolan, D., & Singleton, J. (2007).
Expanding retrieval practice: An effective aid to preschool
children’s learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy, 60, 991–1004. doi:10.1080/17470210600823595
Gathercole, S. E. (1993). Word learning in language-impaired
children. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 9, 187–199.
Goldman, R., & Fristoe, M. (2000). Goldman-Fristoe Test of
Articulation–Second Edition. Circles Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Goossens, N. A. M. C., Camp, G., Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L., &
Tabbers, H. K. (2014). The effect of retrieval practice in pri-
mary school vocabulary learning. Applied Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 28, 135–142. doi:10.1002/Acp.2956
Goossens, N. A. M. C., Camp, G., Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L., Tabbers,
H. K., & Zwaan, R. A. (2014). The benefit of retrieval practice
over elaborative restudy in primary school vocabulary learn-
ing. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3,
177–182.
Gray, S. (2003). Word-learning by preschoolers with specific lan-
guage impairment: What predicts success? Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 46, 56–67. doi:10.1044/1092-
4388(2003/005)
Gray, S. (2004). Word learning by preschoolers with specific
language impairment: Predictors and poor learners. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 1117–1132.
doi:10.1044/1092-4388(2004/083)
Gray, S. (2005). Word learning by preschoolers with specific
language impairment: Effect of phonological or semantic
cues. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48,
1452–1467. doi:10.1044/1092-4388(2005/101)
Gray, S., Plante, E., Vance, R., & Henrichsen, M. (1999). The
diagnostic accuracy of four vocabulary tests administered to
preschool-age children. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services
in Schools, 30, 196–206.
Harris, P. A., Taylor, R., Thielke, R., Payne, J., Gonzalez, N.,
& Conde, J. G. (2009). Research electronic data capture
(REDCap)—A metadata-driven methodology and workflow
process for providing translational research informatics support.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42, 377–381.
Horton-Ikard, R., & Weismer, S. E. (2007). A preliminary exami-
nation of vocabulary and word learning in African American
toddlers from middle and low socioeconomic status homes.
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16, 381–392.
Hunsberger, S., Rubinstein, L. V., Dancey, J., & Korn, E. L.
(2005). Dose escalation trial designs based on a molecularly
targeted endpoint. Statistics in Medicine, 24, 2171–2181.
doi:10.1002/sim.2102
Justice, L. M., Meier, J., & Walpole, S. (2005). Learning new
words from storybooks: An efficacy study with at-risk kinder-
gartners. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools,
36, 17–32.
Karpicke, J. D., & Roediger, H. L., III. (2008, February 5). The
critical importance of retrieval for learning. Science, 319, 966–
968. doi:10.1126/science.1152408
Komesidou, R., & Storkel, H. L. (2015). Learning and remem-
bering new words: Clinical illustrations from children with spe-
cific language impairment. Perspectives on Language Learning
and Education, 22, 138–146.
Storkel et al.: Interactive Book Reading
29
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
 Lahey, M., & Edwards, J. (1996). Why do children with specific
language impairment name pictures more slowly than their
peers? Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 1081–1098.
Marsh, E. J., Fazio, L. K., & Goswick, A. E. (2012). Memorial
consequences of testing school-aged children. Memory, 20,
899–906. doi:10.1080/09658211.2012.708757
Marulis, L. M., & Neuman, S. B. (2010). The effects of vocabulary
intervention on young children’s word learning: A meta-analysis.
Review of Educational Research, 80, 300–335. doi:10.3102/
0034654310377087
McGregor, K. K. (1997). The nature of word-finding errors of
preschoolers with and without word-finding deficits. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40, 1232–1244.
McGregor, K. K. (2014). What a difference a day makes: Change
in memory for newly learned word forms over twenty-four
hours. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
57, 1842–1850. doi:10.1044/2014_JSLHR-L-13-0273
McGregor, K. K., & Leonard, L. B. (1989). Facilitating word-
finding skills of language-impaired children. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Disorders, 54, 141–147.
McGregor, K. K., Licandro, U., Arenas, R., Eden, N., Stiles, D.,
Bean, A., & Walker, E. (2013). Why words are hard for adults
with developmental language impairments. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 1845–1856. doi:10.1044/
1092-4388(2013/12-0233)
McGregor, K. K., Oleson, J., Bahnsen, A., & Duff, D. (2013).
Children with developmental language impairment have vocab-
ulary deficits characterized by limited breadth and depth. Inter-
national Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 48,
307–319. doi:10.1111/1460-6984.12008
Mol, S. E., Bus, A. G., & de Jong, M. T. (2009). Interactive book
reading in early education: A tool to stimulate print knowl-
edge as well as oral language. Review of Educational Research,
79, 979–1007.
Mol, S. E., Bus, A. G., de Jong, M. T., & Smeets, D. J. H. (2008).
Added value of dialogic parent-child book readings: A meta-
analysis. Early Education & Development, 19, 7–26.
Nash, M., & Donaldson, M. (2005). Word learning in children
with vocabulary deficits. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 48, 426–438.
Penno, J. F., Wilkinson, I. A., & Moore, D. W. (2002). Vocabulary
acquisition from teacher explanation and repeated listening to
stories: Do they overcome the Matthew effect? Journal of Edu-
cational Psychology, 94, 23–33.
Philips, G. T., Kopec, A. M., & Carew, T. J. (2013). Pattern and
predictability in memory formation: From molecular mecha-
nisms to clinical relevance. Neurobiology of Learning and
Memory, 105, 117–124. doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2013.05.003
Pile, E. J. S., Girolametto, L., Johnson, C. J., Chen, X., & Cleave,
P. J. (2010). Shared book reading intervention for children
with language impairment: Using parents-as-aides in language
intervention. Canadian Journal of Speech-Language Pathology
and Audiology, 34, 96–109.
Reynolds, C. R., & Kamphaus, R. W. (2003). Reynolds Intellectual
Assessment Scales and the Reynolds Intellectual Screening Test.
Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Rice, M. L., Buhr, J. C., & Nemeth, M. (1990). Fast mapping
word-learning abilities of language-delayed preschoolers. Jour-
nal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 33–42.
Rice, M. L., Oetting, J. B., Marquis, J., Bode, J., & Pae, S.
(1994). Frequency of input effects on word comprehension of
children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 37, 106–121.
Riches, N. G., Tomasello, M., & Conti-Ramsden, G. (2005).
Verb learning in children with SLI: Frequency and spacing
effects. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
48, 1397–1411.
Robbins, C., & Ehri, L. C. (1994). Reading storybooks to kinder-
gartners helps them learn new vocabulary words. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 86, 54–64.
Robey, R. R. (2004). A five-phase model for clinical-outcome
research. Journal of Communication Disorders, 37, 401–411.
Roediger, H. L., & Butler, A. C. (2011). The critical role of retrieval
practice in long-term retention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
15, 20–27. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2010.09.003
Rohrer, D., Taylor, K., & Sholar, B. (2010). Tests enhance the trans-
fer of learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 36, 233–239. doi:10.1037/A0017678
Rowland, C. A. (2014). The effect of testing versus restudy on
retention: A meta-analytic review of the testing effect. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 140, 1432–1463. doi:10.1037/a0037559
Scarborough, H. S. (1998). Early identification of children at risk
for reading disabilities: Phonological awareness and some
other promising predictors. In B. K. Shapiro, P. J. Accardo, &
A. J. Capute (Eds.), Specific reading disability: A view of the
spectrum (pp. 75–119). San Diego, CA: Singular.
Semel, E., Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. A. (2003). Clinical Evalua-
tion of Language Fundamentals–Fourth Edition. Bloomington,
MN: Pearson.
Seymour, H. N., Roeper, T. W., de Villers, J., & de Villers, P. A.
(2005). Diagnostic Evaluation of Language Variation–Norm-
Referenced. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Steele, S. C., & Mills, M. T. (2011). Vocabulary intervention for
school-age children with language impairment: A review of
evidence and good practice. Child Language Teaching and
Therapy, 27, 354–370.
Tomblin, J. B., Records, N. L., Buckwalter, P., Zhang, X., Smith,
E., & O’Brien, M. (1997). Prevalence of specific language
impairment in kindergarten children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 40, 1245–1260.
Voelmle, K., & Storkel, H. L. (2015). Teaching new words to
children with specific language impairment using interactive
book reading. Perspectives on Language Learning and Educa-
tion, 22, 131–137.
Wagner, R. K., Torgesen, J., Rashotte, C., & Pearson, N. A. (2013).
Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing–Second Edition.
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Wallace, G., & Hammill, D. D. (2013). Comprehensive Receptive
and Expressive Vocabulary Test–Third Edition. Austin, TX:
Pro-Ed.
Warren, S. F., Fey, M. E., & Yoder, P. J. (2007). Differential treat-
ment intensity research: A missing link to creating optimally
effective communication interventions. Mental Retardation and
Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 13, 70–77.
Whitehurst, G. J., Falco, F. L., Lonigan, C. J., Fischel, J. E.,
DeBaryshe, M. C., Valdez-Menchaca, M. C., & Caulfield, M.
(1988). Accelerating language development through picture
book reading. Developmental Psychology, 24, 552–559.
Whitehurst, G. J., Fischel, J. E., Lonigan, C. J., Valdez-Menchaca,
M. C., Arnold, D. S., & Smith, M. (1991). Treatment of early
expressive language delay: If, when, and how. Topics in Lan-
guage Disorders, 11, 55–68.
30
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools • Vol. 48 • 16–30 • January 2017
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org 77.173.35.219 on 06/04/2019, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 
