 Neural Function Before and After Mindfulness-Based
Cognitive Therapy in Anxious Adolescents
at Risk for Developing Bipolar Disorder
Jeffrey R. Strawn, MD,
1,2 Sian Cotton, PhD,
3 Christina M. Luberto, MA,
3
L. Rodrigo Patino, MD, MS,
1 Lauren A. Stahl, PhD,
1 Wade A. Weber, MS,
1
James C. Eliassen, PhD,
3 Richard Sears, PsyD,
1 and Melissa P. DelBello, MD, MS1,2
Abstract
Objective: We sought to evaluate the neurophysiology of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for children (MBCT-C) in
youth with generalized, social, and/or separation anxiety disorder who were at risk for developing bipolar disorder.
Methods: Nine youth (mean age: 13 – 2 years) with a generalized, social, and/or separation anxiety disorder and a parent with
bipolar disorder completed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing a continuous processing task
with emotional and neutral distractors (CPT-END) prior to and following 12 weeks of MBCT-C.
Results: MBCT-C was associated with increases in activation of the bilateral insula, lentiform nucleus, and thalamus, as well
as the left anterior cingulate while viewing emotional stimuli during the CPT-END, and decreases in anxiety were correlated
with change in activation in the bilateral insula and anterior cingulate during the viewing of emotional stimuli ( p < 0.05,
uncorrected; p < 0.005 corrected; cluster size, 37 voxels).
Conclusions: MBCT-C treatment in anxious youth with a familial history of bipolar disorder is associated with increased
activation of brain structures that subserve interoception and the processing of internal stimuli—functions that are ostensibly
improved by this treatment.
Introduction
A
nxiety disorders are among the most common psychiatric
conditions affecting children and adolescents (Kessler et al.
2012) and increase the risk of suicide attempts (Husky et al. 2012;
Nock et al. 2013) as well as of secondary mood and other anxiety
disorders (Pine et al. 1998; Beesdo et al. 2007; Beesdo-Baum and
Knappe 2012). Additionally, anxiety disorders are common in
youth at risk for developing bipolar disorder (Henin et al. 2005;
Hirshfeld-Becker et al. 2006; Duffy et al. 2007) and anxious youth
with a bipolar parent have three times the normal risk of developing
mania, the onset of which occurs typically during adolescence
(Singh et al. 2007). In youth with anxiety disorders, psychothera-
peutic interventions are recommended in treatment guidelines,
although when pharmacotherapy is considered, the first-line psy-
chopharmacologic interventions for youth with anxiety disorders –
antidepressants – are the mainstay of treatment (Connolly and
Bernstein 2007; Strawn et al. 2012b). However, antidepressants
may worsen the outcome and accelerate the onset of mania or
hypomania in some youth with a familial risk of bipolar disorder
(Reichart and Nolen 2004). Nonetheless, antidepressants are
commonly used to treat anxiety disorders in youth at high risk for
developing bipolar disorder (Strawn et al. 2014a). Additionally, the
emergence of an earlier age of onset of manic episodes may be
associated with increased use of antidepressant medications in
patients who may already be at risk of developing bipolar disorder
(Reichart and Nolen 2004). However, not all data support this as-
sociation (Chang et al. 2010; Goldsmith et al. 2011).
Although there are few data that directly or prospectively ad-
dress the safety and tolerability of antidepressants in pediatric pa-
tients who are at risk for developing bipolar disorder, one
prospective study of nine patients (7–16 years of age) with a family
history of bipolar disorder treated with the selective serotonin re-
uptake inhibitor (SSRI), paroxetine, or with paroxetine and dival-
proex, found that >50% of youth experienced manic or hypomanic
symptoms or developed suicidality (Findling et al. 2008). Ad-
ditionally, we observed, in patients 9–20 years of age, that 50% of
patients experienced an antidepressant-related adverse event
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
2Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Department of Psychiatry, Cincinnati, Ohio.
3Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Center for Imaging Research, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
Funding: This study was funded with support from the Cincinnati Center for Clinical & Translational Science & Training, the University of Cincinnati
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, and the University of Cincinnati Center for Integrative Health and Wellness. Dr. Strawn was
supported by a career development award from the National Institute of Mental Health (K23 MH106037).
JOURNAL OF CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY
Volume 26, Number 4, 2016
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Pp. 372–379
DOI: 10.1089/cap.2015.0054
372
 leading to discontinuation (Strawn et al. 2014a). Therefore, given
the poor tolerability of antidepressants—the first-line psycho-
pharmacologic interventions for anxiety disorders (Connolly and
Bernstein 2007; Strawn et al. 2012b)—in youth at high risk for
developing bipolar disorder, innovative nonpharmacologic treat-
ments are urgently needed.
Mindfulness is a dynamic process involving the self-regulation
of attention toward present moment experiences with an attitude of
openness, curiosity, and non-judgment (Kabat-Zinn 2003, 2011).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) is an evidence-
based, manualized treatment for emotional disorders in adults that
combines features of mindfulness training and cognitive-behavior
therapy (CBT) (Segal and Williams 2001; Hofmann et al. 2010).
This protocol has recently been adapted specifically for use in
children and adolescents with anxiety disorders (MBCT-Child
version [MBCT-C]), and shows promising efficacy data (Semple
et al. 2005; Lee et al. 2008; Semple and Lee 2008; Paul et al. 2012).
Involving weekly group sessions, regular home practice, and the
core curriculum of formal mindfulness practices (e.g., body scan,
sitting, movement, and walking meditations), MBCT-C guides
patients through mindfulness meditation practices, facilitator-led
discussions of experiences, and psychoeducation. Most impor-
tantly, and in contrast to antidepressants in youth with a familial
risk for bipolar disorder, MBCT-C is associated with minimal ad-
verse effects.
In pediatric patients with the most prevalent anxiety disorders,
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), social anxiety disorder, and
separation anxiety disorder (SAD) (i.e., the pediatric anxiety triad,
[Strawn et al., 2015]), functional and structural abnormalities are
present in prefrontal emotional processing circuits. These circuits,
which modulate emotional and social behavior and, ultimately,
maintain emotional homeostasis (Strakowski et al. 2011), include
the amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area [BA] 10/
11), rostral insula, subgenual/rostral anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) (BA 25, BA 24/32), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(VLPFC) (BA 10/47), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, structures
that are frequently implicated in pediatric anxiety disorders
(Blackford and Pine 2012; Strawn et al. 2012c, 2013, 2014b).
Additionally, recent neuroimaging data implicate a variety of
these structures in both the practice of mindfulness and MBCT in
adults. Specifically, during the practice of mindfulness, task-
specific activation occurs in a constellation of medial structures that
subserve reflective function and interoception (e.g., the anterior
insula, ACC, medial prefrontal cortex, and bilateral precuneus)
(Ives-Deliperi et al. 2011). Functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies in subjects with affective and anxiety disorders, as
well as in healthy subjects, reveal treatment-related effects of
MBCT. In this regard, Allen and colleagues (2012) noted that, in
the context of a longitudinal trial of MBCT in adults, employing a
visual Stroop task, treatment increased dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex activation. Also, in this sample, individuals with large im-
provements in mindfulness demonstrated increased use of the
dorsal ACC, medial prefrontal cortex, and right anterior insula
while processing negative stimuli.
To date, one study examined a related mindfulness-based ther-
apy (i.e., mindfulness-based stress reduction [MBSR]) and found
that in adults with social phobia (n = 16) – in whom amygdala
activation is increased compared with healthy subjects -10 weeks
of MBSR was associated with decreased amygdala activation
(Goldin and Gross 2010). Finally, a study of adults with bipolar
disorder (n = 23), observed that improvements in anxiety and de-
pressive symptoms were associated with increased, posttreatment
activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex,
and found a relationship between activation in the medial prefrontal
cortex and increases in mindfulness (Ives-Deliperi et al. 2013).
Given 1) the poor tolerability of antidepressants in anxious youth
who are at risk for developing bipolar disorder (Findling et al. 2008;
Strawn et al. 2013) and 2) the heterogeneity in response to cognitive
behavioral therapy, which although a first-line psychotherapeutic
intervention in youth with anxiety disorders, may not be effective in
all patients (Connolly and Bernstein 2007), we conducted a pilot of
trial of MBCT-C with 10 anxious youth at familial risk for bipolar
disorder, and have previously reported the effects on mood and
anxiety (Cotton et al. 2015). Clinician-rated anxiety ( p < 0.01) and
youth-rated trait anxiety ( p = 0.03) were significantly reduced fol-
lowing treatment. In addition, parent-rated emotion regulation
significantly increased after the MBCT-C intervention ( p = 0.05)
and increases in mindfulness were associated with decreases in
anxiety ( p = 0.03) (Cotton et al. 2015). A second aim of this pilot
trial was to examine the neurofunctional changes in emotional
processing associated with mindfulness training for anxious youth
who are at high risk for developing bipolar disorder. Specifically,
we hypothesized that MBCT-C would be associated with increases
in activation in prefrontal structures, which have been implicated in
the pathophysiology of anxiety disorders (Strawn et al. 2014), in-
cluding the VLPFC and insula. These two structures were exam-
ined given their central role in the pathophysiology of anxiety. In
this regard, most fMRI studies of youth with anxiety disorders
suggest increased activation of the VLPFC (Monk et al. 2006;
McClure et al. 2007; Guyer et al. 2008; Monk et al. 2008; Beesdo
et al. 2009; Strawn et al. 2012a) and also suggest structural deficits
in this region in children and adolescents with anxiety disorders
(Strawn et al. 2015). The VLPFC subserves a number of regulatory
functions, including modulation of amygdala activity (Monk et al.
2008) and is responsible for conscious regulation of affect (Phillips
et al. 2008). The insula is implicated in interoception, a process that
is directly affected by MCBT-C, and that is neurofunctionally
implicated in the neurobiology of pediatric anxiety disorders (Roy
et al. 2013).
Methods
Study design
Children and adolescents with a family history of bipolar disorder
who met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
ed. (DSM-IV) (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) criteria for
at least one of the pediatric triad anxiety disorders (i.e., GAD, social
anxiety disorder, and/or separation anxiety disorder) were recruited
from an ongoing naturalistic, longitudinal study of youth with a
familial history of bipolar disorder. Participants underwent fMRI at
the Center for Imaging Research at the University of Cincinnati prior
to and following 12 sessions of MBCT-C, as previously described
(American Psychiatric Association 1994; Cotton et al. 2015).
Assessments and analyses
Clinical diagnoses were confirmed with the Kiddie Schedule for
Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia, and all subjects were
evaluated using the Crovitz Handedness Questionnaire, the Duke
Tanner stage self-assessment, the Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale
(PARS) (2002), and the Child and Adolescent Mindfulness Mea-
sure (CAMM) as previously described, obtained at baseline and
end-point (week 12, or early termination) (Cotton et al. 2015). The
PARS, a clinician-administered scale, includes a 50 item symptom
fMRI AND MINDFULNESS-BASED COGNITIVE THERAPY
373
 checklist, as well as a second section consisting of 7 severity and
impairment items that are rated on a six point scale, with higher
scores representing more severe symptoms and impairment. The
CAMM, a patient-reported scale, assess the use of mindfulness
skills, particularly one’s ability to observe internal experiences, act
with awareness of the present moment, and accept internal expe-
riences without judgment. Scores on the CAMM range from 0 to 40
(higher scores indicate greater levels of mindfulness).
Neuroimaging
All subjects were scanned on a 4.0 Tesla Varian Unity INOVA
Whole Body MRI system (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA). To provide
anatomical localization for activation maps, a high-resolution, T1-
weighted, three-dimensional (3-D) brain scan was obtained using a
modified driven equilibrium Fourier transform (MDEFT) sequence
after which a multiecho reference scan was obtained. Subjects
completed the fMRI session in which whole-brain images (vol-
umes) were acquired every 2 seconds while they were performing
the continuous processing task with emotional and neutral dis-
tracters (CPT-END) (Yamasaki et al. 2002) using a T2*-weighted
gradient-echo echoplanar imaging (EPI) pulse sequence. The CPT-
END, which has been utilized in pediatric patients with anxiety
disorders (Strawn et al. 2012a), utilizes a visual oddball paradigm
in which 70% of the cues are simple, colored squares, 10% are
simple colored circles (targets), 10% are emotionally neutral pic-
tures, and 10% are emotionally unpleasant pictures, with the neutral
and emotional distractors (fear and disgust-evoking images) that
originated from the International Affective Picture System (Uni-
versity of Florida, Gainesville, Florida). In response to each visual
cue, participants provided a unique response: Button 2 when pre-
sented with a colored circle (target) and button 1 when presented
with the other stimuli. Each session consisted of two runs, each
consisting of 158 visual cues (at 3 ond intervals, for 2 seconds’
duration of presentation). Blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD)
signal was acquired by means of an echo planar single-shot gradient
echo pulse sequence (matrix, 64 · 64; repetition time, 3000 ms;
echo time, 30 ms; field of view, 240 mm; 256 · 256 voxels,
4 · 4 · 4 mm).
fMRI analysis
The CPT-END allows the ventral (emotional) and dorsal (cog-
nitive) prefrontal networks—which are putatively affected by
MBCT-C and subserve processes that are affected by MBCT-C
(e.g., self-regulation, attention)—to be evaluated. In this task,
subjects distinguished targets from frequent background shapes and
interspersed novel images varied for emotional valence. Conse-
quently, the CPT-END is an ideally suited cognitive-emotional
probe for studying treatment-associated changes in pediatric pa-
tients with anxiety disorders (Strawn et al. 2012a). Anatomic and
fMRI data were co-registered and fMRI data were motion cor-
rected. The fMRI data were analyzed using analysis of functional
neuroimages, and magnetic resonance images were reconstructed
to convert raw scanner data into AFNI format. Individual voxel-
wise event-related activation maps were created following standard
AFNI procedures using an algorithm that compared the actual he-
modynamic response to a canonical hemodynamic response func-
tion. Event-related response functions were calculated for the
emotional pictures, neutral pictures, and circles. Squares provided
the baseline against which hemodynamic responses were assessed.
A voxelwise statistical analysis was performed to identify regions
that exhibited significant differences (group-by-cue [groups,
baseline or posttreatment; cue, circle, emotional, or neutral image])
to identify treatment-associated differences in response patterns.
Based on a Monte Carlo simulation using 10,000 iterations, we
performed individual group-by-cue voxelwise contrasts at a sig-
nificance level of p < 0.005 with a cluster of 37 voxels, which re-
sulted in a corrected threshold of p < 0.05.
A post-hoc examination of the relationship between baseline
functional activity and improvement in anxiety was also under-
taken. Specifically, regression analyses were performed for PARS
score and BOLD signal (in response to emotional images) in re-
gions of interest (ROIs) based on regions in which significant
treatment-related differences were observed in the more conser-
vative voxelwise analysis. The ROI activation in response to
emotional images was extracted from measurements obtained from
the neuroanatomic scans using semiautomatic segmentation (gray
and white matter) and volumetric analyses performed as previously
described (Strakowski et al, 2011; Strawn et al. 2012a). Findings
were considered statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level.
Results
Subject characteristics
As previously described, the participants were 10 children and
adolescents 9–16 years (mean age: 13.2 – 1.8 years, eight female)
(Cotton et al. 2015); however, in this analysis, only nine patients
completed pre- and posttreatment fMRI (mean age: 12.9 – 2). Ad-
ditional characteristics of these patients are described in Table 1.
Changes in emotional processing during the CPT-END
Treatment with MBCT-C was associated with increases in acti-
vation of the bilateral insula, lentiform nucleus, and thalamus, as well
as the left anterior cingulate, while viewing emotional stimuli
(compared with baseline [squares], Fig. 1) during the CPT-END
( p < 0.05, uncrorrected; p < 0.005 corrected; cluster size, 37 voxels).
Attentional processing during the CPT-END
No statistically significant differences in accuracy were noted
between the baseline and posttreatment CPT-END (baseline per-
cent correct, 92.7 – 12.9; posttreatment percent correct, 90.7 – 16).
Similarly, reaction times did not differ between the baseline and
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics of Patients
n (%)
Mean
Age
12.9 – 2
Sex (male)
2 (22)
Race
Caucasian
3 (33)
African American
4 (44)
Mixed
2 (22)
Baseline Pediatric Anxiety Rating
Scale (PARS) score
11.3 – 2.9
Baseline Child and Adolescent Mindfulness
Measure (CAMM) Score
21.7 – 8.47
Co-occurring conditions
ADHD
6 (66)
Depressive disorder
3 (33)
Means are expressed – standard deviations, and these demographics
relate to the patients who completed baseline and end-point fMRI (n = 9).
ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
374
STRAWN ET AL.
 posttreatment scans (0.7 – 0.2 sec vs. 0.7 – 0.2 sec). Finally, no
differences in activation in any brain region were observed for
circles (compared with squares [baseline]) or for the neutral images
(compared with squares [baseline]).
Relationship among anxiety, mindfulness,
and activation during emotional processing
In the voxelwise analysis, decreases in PARS score were asso-
ciated with decreased functional activity in the anterior insula bi-
laterally (right, p = 0.012; left, p = 0.009), change in left ACC
activation ( p = 0.009), and a trend toward significance in the left
ACC ( p = 0.052). No significant associations were observed be-
tween changes in CAMM scores activation in these structures.
Baseline neurofunctional predictors of change
in anxiety symptom severity
A post-hoc ROI-based analysis of activation in prefrontal
structures in which treatment-related changes were observed in the
voxelwise analysis described, revealed a statistically significant
relationship among baseline activation (in response to emotional
images), change in anxiety symptom severity in the left anterior
cingulate (r = 0.795, p = 0.011), and right anterior insula (r = 0.876,
p = 0.002); however, this relationship only trended toward signifi-
cance in the left anterior insula (r = 0.63, p = 0.071) (Fig. 2).
Discussion
This is the first pilot trial in children and adolescents to dem-
onstrate that MBCT-C treatment in anxious youth with a familial
history of bipolar disorder may be associated with increased acti-
vation of structures (e.g., insula and anterior cingulate) that sub-
serve the interoceptive representation of one’s affective state and
the processing of internal and extrapersonal stimuli: functions that
are ostensibly improved by MBCT-C.
Our preliminary observation that MBCT-C increased activation
in the cingulate cortex is noteworthy, given that this structure
subserves the contemporaneous processing of cognitive and emo-
tional information, and integrates these two streams (Yamasaki
et al. 2002). fMRI studies of this region in youth with GAD have
revealed increased activation during the viewing of fearful faces
(McClure et al. 2007) and ACC activation correlates with amyg-
dala and VLPFC activation in youth with GAD. Further, in the
present sample, baseline activation of this structure predicted
treatment-associated changes in anxiety symptoms. Taken to-
gether, these findings raise the possibility that a treatment-related
increase in ACC activity – during emotional processing – may
represent increased functioning of this region and, possibility,
improved integrative capacity with regard to emotional processing
in anxious youth at risk for developing bipolar disorder.
Our findings of treatment-associated increases in functional in-
sula activity during the processing of emotional images are of
significant interest for several reasons. First, the insula is involved
in cognitive (i.e., attentional), affective, and regulatory (e.g., in-
teroceptive awareness, emotional responsivity) processes (Menon
and Uddin 2010) that are putatively disrupted in patients with
anxiety disorders. Second, and likely of central relevance to
mindfulness-based treatments, accumulating data implicate the role
of the insula in interoception and representation of bodily states.
Insula activation in adults correlates with the perception of somatic
states of arousal (Straube and Miltner 2011). Third, anticipatory
anxiety in response to threat-related stimuli is associated with ac-
tivation of the insula in adult patients with a myriad anxiety dis-
orders ranging from social anxiety disorder to GAD to specific
phobia (Boshuisen et al. 2002; Simmons et al. 2004; Nitschke et al.
2006; Simmons et al. 2006; Stein et al. 2007; Straube et al. 2007;
Boehme et al. 2014). Moreover, in anxious adolescents, 11–17
years of age, using the same task as in the present study (i.e., CPT-
END), insula activity inversely correlates with the severity of
FIG. 1.
Treatment-related changes in activation following mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT). Increased activation was observed
in the bilateral insula and left thalamus as well as in the left anterior cingulate cortex following treatment with MBCT (p<0.05, uncrorrected;
p<0.005 corrected; cluster size, 37 voxels). A color version of this figure is available in the online article at www.liebertpub.com/cap.
fMRI AND MINDFULNESS-BASED COGNITIVE THERAPY
375
 anxiety symptoms, suggesting a compensatory role for this struc-
ture in anxiety (Strawn et al. 2012a). This finding is consistent with
one prior study of mindfulness training in marines who demon-
strated training-associated changes in anterior insula and ACC
activation during loaded breathing, a paradigm that assesses re-
sponsiveness to aversive stimuli, suggesting modification of a
neural substrate for the processing of aversive and interoceptive
stimuli (Haase et al. 2014), at least in young adults. Additionally, it
has recently been hypothesized that the insula (and in particular the
anterior insula) may orchestrate an ‘‘integral hub’’ (p. 655) function
coordinating interactions among attentional networks and those
that subserve self-oriented cognition (Menon and Uddin 2010)
which – if the increased activity in this region is related to increased
functioning – would be consistent with the notion that MBCT en-
hances the internally oriented processing of fear or anxiety. Last,
the increases in bilateral insula activation observed in the present
study highlight a complex relationship between the insula and
anxiety symptoms in youth (Strawn et al. 2015). Specifically, ac-
tivation of the insula during the CPT-END in prior studies of
anxious youth (Strawn et al, 2012a) supports the possibility that the
insula and VLPFC operate as a coordinated system to compensate
for the increased amygdala activity seen in other studies of anxious
youth. Consistent with this notion, several studies reveal that both
insula and VLPFC activation – although increased in anxious youth
– inversely correlate with the severity of anxiety symptoms (Monk
et al. 2008; Strawn et al. 2012a).
In the present study, we also observed differences between pre-
treatment and posttreatment activation in the thalamus/lentiform
nucleus (in response to emotional images). The thalamus and lenti-
form nuclei, which subtend diverse functions, including information
transfer to the prefrontal cortex, reward processing (Singh et al.
2013), and visuospatial processing, have been implicated in neuro-
functional and neuroanatomic studies of pediatric patients with bi-
polar disorder (Chang et al. 2004). Additionally, in adults with fear-
based anxiety disorders, a multitude of thalamic nuclei appear to
exhibit disorder-specific connectivity compared with healthy sub-
jects (Etkin et al. 2009). In this regard, in adults with GAD, the
basolateral amygdala exhibits increased connectivity with targets
typically associated with the centromedial amygdala, including the
thalamus (Etkin et al. 2009). Importantly, however, the posttreatment
neurofunctional changes observed herein in the thalamus/lentiform
nucleus may relate to either ‘‘at risk’’ or anxiety neurocircuitry, or
could be an effect of treatment. Given the diversity of thalamic
functions and the central role of this structure within the prefrontal
amygdala circuitry, additional studies will be critical.
The path from an initial understanding of the neurobiological
effects of psychotherapeutic treatments to the identification of
neurophysiologic markers of treatment response (as well as mod-
erators or predictors of treatment response) is fraught with chal-
lenges, and will almost certainly represent a highly iterative process
(i.e., relying on successive studies, each necessarily probing spe-
cific aspects of the emotional processing circuits).
Limitations
There are several limitations of this investigation. First, in the
present pilot study, we lacked a control group; therefore, future
studies will require comparison samples so that the specificity of
neurofunctional changes with regard to either treatment or fluctua-
tion in anxiety symptoms can be examined. Additionally, we cannot
exclude the possibility that practice effects may have contributed to
the baseline–end-point differences observed herein. Third, we ex-
amined a small number of patients, which limits statistical power,
and, as such, null results may result from a lack of power. Ad-
ditionally, the small sample size precludes correction for multiple
comparisons. Fourth, there was no blinding with regard to treatment;
all subjects knew that they were receiving an active psychothera-
peutic treatment, which may bias the results toward positive out-
comes by introducing expectancy effects. Fifth, common factor
components (e.g., alliance, therapeutic expectation) (Plakun et al.
2009), which are increasingly acknowledged to be important deter-
minants of psychotherapy-related change, were not measured in the
present study and, therefore, the degree to which the neurofunctional
changes are specific to the mindfulness, cognitive, or common
components of the psychotherapy are unclear. Sixth, it is of interest
FIG. 2.
Relationship between region of interest (ROI) activation
in response to emotional images and anxiety symptom severity.
Correlations between baseline activation in each ROI identified in
the voxelwise analysis, and changes in symptom severity are
shown for the left anterior cingulate (A) and for the insula, bi-
laterally (B, C).
376
STRAWN ET AL.
 that the CAMM – a measure of mindfulness – did not correlate with
changes in brain activation, particularly given that mindfulness
correlated with the reduction in anxiety symptoms (Cotton et al.
2015). This lack of a direct relationship may be attributable to several
factors, including 1) an indirect or moderating relationship between
mindfulness and the brain activation, 2) nonspecific effects of psy-
chotherapeutic treatment on brain activation, or 3) type II error,
particularly in this small, pilot study. However, despite these limi-
tations, this study is a novel contribution to the extant research, given
that the current data represent a rare, within-subject fMRI study of
pediatric anxiety disorders and the effects of mindfulness training.
Conclusions
These preliminary data suggest that MBCT-C alters brain acti-
vation in anxious youth who are at risk for bipolar disorder. Ad-
ditionally, the treatment-related neurofunctional changes observed
herein occur in a constellation of structures that subserve fear
processing and emotional regulation. The findings described
herein, despite their preliminary nature, guide us toward important
areas for future research.
Clinical Significance
This study suggests that MBCT-C in anxious youth who are at
risk for developing bipolar disorder is associated with increased
activation of structures (e.g., insula and anterior cingulate) that
subserve the interoceptive representation of one’s affective state
and the processing of internal and extrapersonal stimuli functions.
Importantly, these processes are ostensibly improved by MBCT-C.
Moreover, this study provides initial evidence putatively linking
treatment-related changes in specific structures with treatment-
related changes in anxiety and mindfulness.
Disclosures
Dr. Strawn has received research support from Edgemont
Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly, Forest Research Institute, Lundbeck,
the National Institute of Mental Health, and Shire. Dr. Cotton has
received research support from the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, Pfizer, and the University of
Cincinnati Neuroscience Institute. Dr. Patino has received
funding from American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psy-
chiatry (AACAP). Dr. Sears receives royalties from the publi-
cation of books on mindfulness. Dr. DelBello has received
research support from Amylin, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline,
Lundbeck, Martek, Merck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Purdue, Shire, and
Sunovion. She is on the lecture bureau for Otsuka and has pro-
vided consultation or advisory board services for Actavis, Dey,
Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Sunovian, Supernus, and Takeda. Drs.
Stahl and Eliassen, Mr. Weber, and Ms. Luberto report no bio-
medical conflicts of interest.
References
Allen M, Dietz M, Blair KS, van Beek M, Rees G, Vestergaard-Poulsen
P, Lutz A, Roepstorff A: Cognitive-affective neural plasticity fol-
lowing active-controlled mindfulness intervention. J Neurosci 32:
15601–15610, 2012.
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. (DSM-IV). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association; 1994.
Beesdo K, Bittner A, Pine DS, Stein MB, Ho
¨fler M, Lieb R, Wittchen
H-U: Incidence of social anxiety disorder and the consistent risk for
secondary depression in the first three decades of life. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 64:903–912, 2007.
Beesdo K, Knappe S, Pine DS: Anxiety and anxiety disorders in
children and adolescents: Developmental issues and implications
for DSM-V. Psychiatr Clin North Am 32:483–524, 2009.
Beesdo-Baum K, Knappe S: Developmental epidemiology of anxiety
disorders. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 21:457–478, 2012.
Blackford JU, Pine DS: Neural substrates of childhood anxiety dis-
orders: A review of neuroimaging findings. Child Adolesc Psychiatr
Clin N Am 21:501–525, 2012.
Boehme S, Ritter V, Tefikow S, Stangier U, Strauss B, Miltner WHR,
Straube T: Brain activation during anticipatory anxiety in social
anxiety disorder. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 9:1413–1418, 2014.
Boshuisen ML, Ter Horst GJ, Paans AMJ, Reinders AATS, Den Boer
JA: rCBF differences between panic disorder patients and control
subjects during anticipatory anxiety and rest. Biol Psychiatry 52:
126–135, 2002.
Chang K, Adleman NE, Dienes K, Simeonova DI, Menon V, Reiss A:
Anomalous prefrontal-subcortical activation in familial pediatric
bipolar disorder: A functional magnetic resonance imaging inves-
tigation. Arch Gen Psychiatry 61:781–792, 2004.
Chang KD, Saxena K, Howe M, Simeonova D: Psychotropic medi-
cation exposure and age at onset of bipolar disorder in offspring of
parents with bipolar disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol
20:25–32, 2010.
Connolly SD, Bernstein GA: Practice parameter for the assessment
and treatment of children and adolescents with anxiety disorders. J
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 46:267–283, 2007.
Cotton S, Luberto CM, Sears RW, Strawn JR, Stahl L, Wasson RS,
Blom TJ, Delbello MP: Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
youth with anxiety disorders at risk for bipolar disorder: a pilot trial.
Early Interv Psychiatry, 2015 [epub ahead of print].
Duffy A, Alda M, Crawford L, Milin R, Grof P: The early manifes-
tations of bipolar disorder: A longitudinal prospective study of the
offspring of bipolar parents. Bipolar Disord 9:828–838, 2007.
Etkin A, Prater KE, Schatzberg AF, Menon V, Greicius MD: Dis-
rupted amygdalar subregion functional connectivity and evidence
of a compensatory network in generalized anxiety disorder. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 66:1361–1372, 2009.
Findling RL, Lingler J, Rowles BM, McNamara NK, Calabrese JR: A
pilot pharmacotherapy trial for depressed youths at high genetic
risk for bipolarity. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 18:615–621,
2008.
Goldin PR, Gross JJ: Effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction
(MBSR) on emotion regulation in social anxiety disorder. Emotion
10:83–91, 2010.
Goldsmith M, Singh M, Chang K: Antidepressants and psychosti-
mulants in pediatric populations: Is there an association with ma-
nia? Pediatr Drugs 13:225–243, 2011.
Guyer AE, Lau JYF, McClure-Tone EB, Parrish J, Shiffrin ND,
Reynolds RC, Chen G, Blair RJR, Leibenluft E, Fox NA, Ernst M,
Pine DS, Nelson EE: Amygdala and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
function during anticipated peer evaluation in pediatric social
anxiety. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65:1303–1312, 2008.
Haase L, Thom NJ, Shukla A, Davenport PW, Simmons AN, Paulus
MP, Johnson DC: Mindfulness-based training attenuates insula
response to an aversive interoceptive challenge. Soc Cogn Affect
Neurosci, 2014 [Epub ahead of print].
Henin A, Biederman J, Mick E, Sachs GS, Hirshfeld-Becker DR,
Siegel RS, McMurrich S, Grandin L, Nierenberg AA: Psycho-
pathology in the offspring of parents with bipolar disorder: A
controlled study. Biol Psychiatry 58:554–561, 2005.
Hirshfeld-Becker DR, Biederman J, Henin A, Faraone S V., Dowd
ST, De Petrillo LA, Markowitz SM, Rosenbaum JF: Psycho-
fMRI AND MINDFULNESS-BASED COGNITIVE THERAPY
377
 pathology in the young offspring of parents with bipolar disorder: A
controlled pilot study. Psychiatry Res 145:155–167, 2006.
Hofmann SG, Sawyer AT, Witt AA, Oh D: The effect of mindfulness-
based therapy on anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic review.
J Consult Clin Psychol 78:169–183, 2010.
Husky MM, Olfson M, He J, Nock MK, Swanson SA, Merikangas
KR: Twelve-month suicidal symptoms and use of services among
adolescents: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Psy-
chiatr Serv 63:989–996, 2012.
Ives-Deliperi VL, Howells F, Stein DJ, Meintjes EM, Horn N: The
effects of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy in patients with
bipolar disorder: A controlled functional MRI investigation. J Af-
fect Disord 150:1152–1157, 2013.
Ives-Deliperi VL, Solms M, Meintjes EM: The neural substrates of
mindfulness: An fMRI investigation. Soc Neurosci 6:231–242,
2011.
Kabat-Zinn J: Mindfulness-based interventions in context: Past,
present, and future. Clin Psychol Sci Pract 10:144–156, 2003.
Kabat-Zinn J: Why mindfulness matters. In: Barry Boyce, Ed., The
mindfulness revolution/ Leading psychologists scientists artists and
meditation teachers on the power of mindfulness in daily life.
Shambhala Publications, Inc, Boston, MA, 2011, pp 57–62.
Kessler RC, Avenevoli S, Costello J, Green JG, Gruber MJ,
McLaughlin KA, Petukhova M, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky AM,
Merikangas KR: Severity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication Adolescent Supplement.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 69:381–389, 2012.
Lee J, Semple RJ, Rosa D, Miller L: Mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy for children: Results of a pilot study. J Cogn Psychother
22:15–28, 2008.
McClure EB, Monk CS, Nelson EE, Parrish JM, Adler A, Blair
RJR, Fromm S, Charney DS, Leibenluft E, Ernst M, Pine DS:
Abnormal attention modulation of fear circuit function in pedi-
atric generalized anxiety disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 64:97–
106, 2007.
Menon V, Uddin LQ: Saliency, switching, attention and control: A
network model of insula function. Brain Struct Funct 1–13,
2010.
Monk CS, Nelson EE, McClure EB, Mogg K, Bradley BP, Leibenluft
E, Blair RJR, Chen G, Charney DS, Ernst M, Pine DS: Ven-
trolateral prefrontal cortex activation and attentional bias in re-
sponse to angry faces in adolescents with generalized anxiety
disorder. Am J Psychiatry 163:1091–1097, 2006.
Monk CS, Telzer EH, Mogg K, Bradley BP, Mai X, Louro HMC,
Chen G, McClure-Tone EB, Ernst M, Pine DS: Amygdala and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activation to masked angry faces in
children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 65:568–576, 2008.
Nitschke JB, Sarinopoulos I, MacKiewicz KL, Schaefer HS, Davidson
RJ: Functional neuroanatomy of aversion and its anticipation.
Neuroimage 29:106–116, 2006.
Nock MK, Green JG, Hwang I, McLaughlin KA, Sampson NA, Za-
slavsky AM, Kessler RC: Prevalence, correlates, and treatment of
lifetime suicidal behavior among adolescents: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication Adolescent Supplement.
JAMA Psychiatry 70:300–310, 2013.
Paul HA, Semple RJ, Lee J: Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
anxious children: A manual for treating childhood anxiety. Child
Fam Behav Ther 34:167–172, 2012.
Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale (PARS): Development and psycho-
metric properties. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 41:1061–
1069, 2002.
Phillips ML, Ladouceur CD, Drevets WC: A neural model of vol-
untary and automatic emotion regulation: implications for under-
standing the pathophysiology and neurodevelopment of bipolar
disorder. Mol Psychiatry 13:829, 833–857, 2008.
Pine DS, Cohen P, Gurley D, Brook J, Ma Y: The risk for early-
adulthood anxiety and depressive disorders in adolescents with
anxiety and depressive disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry 55:56–64,
1998.
Plakun EM, Sudak DM, Goldberg D: The Y model: An integrated,
evidence-based approach to teaching psychotherapy competencies.
J Psychiatr Pract 15:5–11, 2009.
Reichart CG, Nolen WA: Earlier onset of bipolar disorder in children
by antidepressants or stimulants? An hypothesis. J Affect Disord
78:81–84, 2004.
Roy AK, Fudge JL, Kelly C, Perry JS a, Daniele T, Carlisi C, Benson
B, Castellanos FX, Milham MP, Pine DS, Ernst M: Intrinsic
functional connectivity of amygdala-based networks in adolescent
generalized anxiety disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
52:290–299.e2, 2013.
Semple RJ, Lee J: Treating anxiety with mindfulness: Mindfulness-
based cognitive therapy for children. In: Acceptance and Mind-
fulness Treatments for Children and Adolescents. A Practitioners
Guide. New Harbinger Publications, Oakland, CA, 2008, pp. 63–87.
Semple RJ, Reid EFG, Miller L: Treating anxiety with mindfulness:
An open trial of mindfulness training for anxious children. J Cogn
Psychother 19:379–392, 2005.
Simmons A, Matthews SC, Stein MB, Paulus MP: Anticipation of
emotionally aversive visual stimuli activates right insula. Neu-
roreport 15:2261–2265, 2004.
Simmons A, Strigo I, Matthews SC, Paulus MP, Stein MB: Antici-
pation of aversive visual stimuli is associated with increased insula
activation in anxiety-prone subjects. Biol Psychiatry 60:402–409,
2006.
Singh MK, Chang KD, Kelley RG, Cui X, Sherdell L, Howe ME,
Gotlib IH, Reiss AL: Reward processing in adolescents with bipolar
I disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 52:68–83, 2013.
Singh MK, DelBello MP, Stanford KE, Soutullo C, McDonough-Ryan
P, McElroy SL, Strakowski SM: Psychopathology in children of
bipolar parents. J Affect Disord 102:131–136, 2007.
Stein MB, Simmons AN, Feinstein JS, Paulus MP: Increased amyg-
dala and insula activation during emotion processing in anxiety-
prone subjects. Am J Psychiatry 164:318–327, 2007.
Strakowski SM, Eliassen JC, Lamy M, Cerullo MA, Allendorfer JB,
Madore M, Lee J-H, Welge JA, DelBello MP, Fleck DE, Adler
CM: Functional magnetic resonance imaging brain activation in
bipolar mania: Evidence for disruption of the ventrolateral
prefrontal-amygdala emotional pathway. Biol Psychiatry 69:381–
388, 2011.
Straube T, Mentzel HJ, Miltner WHR: Waiting for spiders: Brain
activation during anticipatory anxiety in spider phobics. Neuro-
image 37:1427–1436, 2007.
Straube T, Miltner WHR: Attention to aversive emotion and specific
activation of the right insula and right somatosensory cortex.
Neuroimage 54:2534–2538, 2011.
Strawn JR, McReynolds DJ: An evidence-based approach to treating
pediatric anxiety disorders. 16–21, 2012.
Strawn JR, Adler CM, McNamara RK, Welge JA, Bitter SM, Mills
NP, Barzman DH, Cerullo MA, Chang KD, Strakowski SM, Del-
Bello MP: Antidepressant tolerability in anxious and depressed
youth at high risk for bipolar disorder: A prospective naturalistic
treatment study. Bipolar Disord 16:523–30, 2014a.
Strawn JR, Bitter SM, Weber WA, Chu WJ, Whitsel RM, Adler C,
Cerullo MA, Eliassen J, Strakowski SM, Delbello MP: Neuro-
circuitry of generalized anxiety disorder in adolescents: A pilot
functional neuroimaging and functional connectivity study. Depress
Anxiety 29:939–947, 2012a.
378
STRAWN ET AL.
 Strawn JR, Dominick KC, Patino LR, Doyle CD, Picard LS, Phan KL:
Neurobiology of pediatric anxiety disorders. Curr Behav Neurosci
Rep 1:154–160, 2014b.
Strawn JR, Hamm L, Fitzgerald DA, Fitzgerald KD, Monk CS, Phan
KL: Neurostructural abnormalities in pediatric anxiety disorders. J
Anxiety Disord 32:81–88, 2015.
Strawn JR, Sakolsky DJ, Rynn MA: Psychopharmacologic treatment
of children and adolescents with anxiety disorders. Child Adolesc
Psychiatr Clin N Am 21:527–539, 2012b.
Strawn JR, Wehry AM, Chu WJ, Adler CM, Eliassen JC, Cerullo MA,
Strakowski SM, Delbello MP: Neuroanatomic abnormalities in
adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder: A voxel-based
morphometry study. Depress Anxiety 30:842–848, 2013.
Strawn JR, Wehry AM, Delbello MP, Rynn MA, Strakowski S: Estab-
lishing the neurobiologic basis of treatmentinchildren and adolescents
with generalized anxiety disorder. Depress Anxiety 29:328–339,
2012c.
Yamasaki H, LaBar KS, McCarthy G: Dissociable prefrontal brain
systems for attention and emotion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:
11447–11451, 2002.
Zindel V. Segal, J. Mark G. Williams JDT: Mindfulness-Based
Cognitive Therapy for Depression: A New Approach to Preventing
Relapse: Medicine & Health Science Books. New York: The
Guilford Press; 2001.
Address correspondence to:
Jeffrey R. Strawn, MD
University of Cincinnati
Department of Psychiatry
Box 670559
Cincinnati, OH 45267-0559
E-mail: strawnjr@uc.edu
fMRI AND MINDFULNESS-BASED COGNITIVE THERAPY
379
