 Impact of nutrition on social decision making
Sabrina Stranga, Christina Hoeberb, Olaf Uhlc, Berthold Koletzkoc, Thomas F. Münted,e, Hendrik Lehnertb,f,
Raymond J. Dolang,h, Sebastian M. Schmidb,f, and Soyoung Q. Parka,1
aDepartment of Psychology I, University of Lübeck, 23562 Luebeck, Germany; bDepartment of Internal Medicine I, University of Lübeck, 23562 Luebeck,
Germany; cDr. von Hauner Children’s Hospital, University of Munich Medical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany;
dDepartment of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, 23538 Luebeck, Germany; eDepartment of Psychology II, University of Lübeck, 23562
Luebeck, Germany; fDeutsches Zentrum für Diabetes, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; gWellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London,
WC1N 3BG London, United Kingdom; and hMax Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, WC1B 5EH
London, United Kingdom
Edited by Matthew D. Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Michael S. Gazzaniga May 8, 2017
(received for review December 9, 2016)
Food intake is essential for maintaining homeostasis, which is
necessary for survival in all species. However, food intake also
impacts multiple biochemical processes that influence our behavior.
Here, we investigate the causal relationship between macronutrient
composition, its bodily biochemical impact, and a modulation of
human social decision making. Across two studies, we show that
breakfasts with different macronutrient compositions modulated
human social behavior. Breakfasts with a high-carbohydrate/protein
ratio increased social punishment behavior in response to norm
violations compared with that in response to a low carbohydrate/
protein meal. We show that these macronutrient-induced behav-
ioral changes in social decision making are causally related to a
lowering of plasma tyrosine levels. The findings indicate that, in a
limited sense, “we are what we eat” and provide a perspective on
a nutrition-driven modulation of cognition. The findings have impli-
cations for education, economics, and public policy, and emphasize
that the importance of a balanced diet may extend beyond the mere
physical benefits of adequate nutrition.
nutrition | social decision | tyrosine | decision making | ultimatum game
F
ood intake is a fundamental basis for survival in all living
organisms insofar as an adequate daily food intake secures
energy levels (1). Each meal contains a different macronutrient
composition that in turn influences a variety of biochemical
processes (2, 3). In addition to supplying the body with nutrients,
these biochemical processes also influence brain processes, in-
cluding higher-level cognition, such as social decision making (4,
5). Therefore, it is not only whether and when we eat that is
important, but equally what we eat.
Macronutrient composition, the relation of fat, protein, and
carbohydrates, is known to modify endocrine signals (6–8). More
specifically, large neutral amino acids (LNAAs) (9) can act to
modulate brain neurotransmitter dynamics (10). Specifically,
consuming protein-rich food has been shown to alter blood tyro-
sine levels (a LNAA and precursor of dopamine) (2), whereas the
intake of carbohydrate-rich food increases blood tryptophan levels
(a LNAA and precursor of serotonin) (2). Furthermore, this
change in peripheral LNAA levels has been linked to brain do-
pamine and serotonin synthesis (Food and LNAAs) (11–13).
On the other hand, social decisions, such as helping, trusting, or
social punishment [usually assessed as rejection rates in the ulti-
matum game (UG)] are susceptible to influences from hormonal
and neurotransmitter states (3, 5, 14). Human studies on neuro-
modulation typically induce supraphysiological effects, for exam-
ple, through pharmacological manipulations that are beyond that
induced by regular food intake (e.g., ref. 2 vs. ref. 4). Other studies
have attempted to manipulate blood glucose concentrations either
by drinks containing glucose or through cognitive exercises
thought to deplete glucose resources (3, 15). In contrast to highly
selective pharmacological interventions or the impact of glucose-
containing drinks, a balanced meal contains a mixture of proteins
and carbohydrates, leading to physiological fluctuations evident
across a range of metabolic parameters. However, it is unknown
whether the macronutrient composition of a simple Western-style
meal is sufficient to change metabolic parameters that in turn
impact social decision making.
In this study, we investigated the impact of the macronutrient
composition of a typical Western-style meal on social decision
making. First, we tested whether the macronutrient composition of
breakfast influences social decision-making behavior. In a second
study, we experimentally manipulated the macronutrient composi-
tion of a standardized breakfast and monitored metabolic pa-
rameters while assessing social decisions. As a primary outcome, we
assessed rejection rates (as a proxy for social punishment) that
target nonnorm-compliant behavior in a UG (16). We hypothesized
that a meal with a high-carbohydrate/protein (carb/protein) ratio
would induce distinct metabolic and hormonal changes that trans-
lated into different social punishment rates. We predicted that
blood glucose concentrations, as well as tryptophan levels, would be
higher in a high-carb/protein compared with a low-carb/protein
condition. In contrast, we predicted tyrosine levels would be lower
in a high-carb/protein compared with a low-carb/protein condition.
For all other parameters we did not have an a priori hypotheses.
In study 1, we assessed the relationship between the subject’s
breakfast macronutrient composition and social rejection rates
after the subject’s natural breakfast intake. Before lunch (between
1100 hours and 1300 hours), subjects submitted a detailed food list
of their breakfast on that day. In addition, they played a one-shot
UG, in which they could punish a norm violator who had made an
unfair offer. We computed each individual breakfast’s carbohydrate
Significance
Food intake is essential for survival in all species for meeting
energetic demands. However, food intake also modulates
various biochemical processes underlying cognition. Across
two studies, we showed that different macronutrient compo-
sitions in standard European meals affect plasma neurotrans-
mitter precursor levels, and these in turn influence social
decision making. Our results provide evidence that variations
in the macronutrient content of a normal European meal exert
a significant impact on high-level human cognition. This study
opens perspectives on nutrition-driven cognition modulation.
The results have implications for education, economics, and
public policy by emphasizing the importance of a balanced diet
on fundamental expressions of cognition.
Author contributions: S.S., S.M.S., and S.Q.P. designed research; S.S., C.H., and S.Q.P.
performed research; S.S., C.H., O.U., B.K., and S.Q.P. analyzed data; and S.S., T.F.M.,
H.L., R.J.D., S.M.S., and S.Q.P. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. M.D.L. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: soyoung.q.park@gmail.com.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1620245114/-/DCSupplemental.
6510–6514
|
PNAS
|
June 20, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 25
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620245114
 and protein ratio for group subjects as high-carb/protein ratio or
low-carb/protein ratio based on a median split. When comparing
rejection rates, we observed a significant difference between groups
[χ2 (1) = 6.926, P = 0.011, ϕ = 0.302) (Fig. 1A). Within the low-carb/
protein group, 24% of subjects decided to reject unfair offers. In
contrast, 53% of the high-carb/protein group decided to reject un-
fair offers. A point–biserial correlation analysis confirmed this
finding by indicating a positive correlation between the carb/protein
ratio and rejection rates (rpb = 0.22, P = 0.03). Of note, there were
no differences between the groups for age, gender, body-mass index
(BMI), or total energy of breakfast (see Additional Results, Study 1
for more results).
Motivated by the findings of study 1, we designed a randomized,
balanced, cross-over intervention experiment with a double-blind
design that enabled us to test for a causal relationship between the
macronutrient composition of a controlled meal and rejection
rates (study 2). Because our aim was to induce physiological
fluctuations in metabolic parameters because of food consump-
tion, we offered subjects breakfasts that differed in macronutrient
composition, albeit within a range present in real-life Western-
style breakfasts. This approach enabled us to assess the impact
of a controlled low- (50%/25%) vs. high- (80%/10%) carb/protein
ratio of a standard breakfast meal on subsequent rejection deci-
sions and individual metabolic parameters.
In line with predictions from study 1, we hypothesized higher
rejection rates following a high-carb/protein breakfast compared
with a low-carb/protein breakfast. To be considered as a candidate
metabolic parameter for explaining food-related behavior modi-
fications, we required that two criteria must be met. First, the
metabolic parameter should show a significant change depending
on the breakfast’s macronutrient composition. Second, the sig-
nificant parameter change between breakfast conditions should
predict significant behavioral changes across the conditions.
Confirming the finding from study 1 in a controlled experi-
mental setting, in study 2 the macronutrient composition of
breakfast significantly modulated rejection rates in response to
unfair offers. The results indicated a main effect for both break-
fast [F(1, 2,090) = 7.77, P = 0.005] and fairness categories
[F(2, 2,090) = 209.859, P < 0.001]. Rejection rates were signifi-
cantly higher in the high-carb/protein condition (mean = 0.69)
compared with the low-carb/protein condition (mean = 0.60) for
unfair offers [t(2,090) = 2.82, P = 0.005] (Fig. 1B). Thus, subjects
rejected unfair offers more often after a high-carb/protein
breakfast.
We then analyzed whether the macronutrient composition of
breakfast had an influence on postprandial tryptophan and ty-
rosine levels. Ingesting the high-carb/protein breakfast signifi-
cantly increased plasma tryptophan [t(15) = 4.873, P < 0.001]
(Fig. 2A and Additional Results, Study 2) and significantly low-
ered plasma tyrosine levels [t(15) = 2.13, P = 0.025] (Fig. 2B and
Additional Results, Study 2) compared with the low-carb/protein
breakfast. Furthermore, peak blood glucose concentrations were
significantly higher in the high-carb/protein condition [t(21) =
4.675, P < 0.001]. Additionally, we documented a steeper decline
after a high-carb/protein breakfast [t(21) = 2.26, P = 0.035] (Fig.
2C and Additional Results, Study 2).
No other metabolic parameters [insulin, testosterone, cortisol,
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and leptin] were significantly
modulated by the different breakfasts (Table S1). Postprandial tyro-
sine, tryptophan, and glucose thus all fulfill the first criteria for can-
didate parameter underlying food-related changes in behavior.
To test whether any metabolic parameter fulfilled the second
criteria—that is, to predict behavioral changes across conditions—a
regression model was implemented that included the differences in
metabolic parameters between conditions as predictors of change in
rejection rates. In detail, the differences in areas under the curve
(AUCs; 0830–1045 hours) for cortisol, ACTH, insulin, leptin, and
free androgen index (FAI), the differences in AUCs (0830–
1315 hours) for tryptophan and tyrosine/LNAA ratios, and the
difference in glucose slope between 0915 and 1000 hours were used
as predictors. The analysis revealed tyrosine, insulin, and cortisol as
significant negative predictors and ACTH as a significant positive pre-
dictor for rejection rates in the UG (model: R2 = 0.648, f2 = 1.99;
tyrosine: P = 0.012; insulin: P = 0.023; cortisol: P = 0.021; ACTH:
P = 0.044) (Table S2). Thus, differences in tyrosine, insulin, cortisol,
and ACTH predict changes in rejection rates between both condi-
tions, thereby fulfilling the second criteria for a candidate mecha-
nism underlying food-related changes in behavior. Strikingly, only
tyrosine fulfilled both criteria because its levels were significantly
modulated by the breakfasts and this difference significantly pre-
dicted changes in rejection rates (Fig. 2D; the correlation between
changes in tyrosine and rejection rate is shown).
Finally, we checked for changes in mood across conditions to
rule out the possibility that induced differences in rejection be-
havior are explained as a secondary consequence of a change in
mood. We did not observe any statistically significant differences
in mood between the conditions [positive affect/negative affect
scale (PANAS) negative: P = 0.99; PANAS positive: P = 0.156;
SHS; P = 0.163)]. Moreover, the change in rejection rates was
not influenced by personality traits (Table S3).
We provided converging evidence from two studies showing
that a relatively small variation in breakfast’s macronutrient
composition has a striking impact on social decisions. In study 1,
we showed a significant behavioral difference depending on the
carb/protein ratio of a subject’s natural breakfast, with subjects
reporting a higher-carb/protein breakfast intake exhibiting higher
rejection rates in a subsequent UG.
A limitation of study 1 is its restricted explanatory power con-
cerning the effect of time and the exact macronutrient composi-
tion. Some subjects reported more than one breakfast time,
because they consumed snacks after their actual breakfast. Fur-
thermore, we only have the information about when subjects
started the online questionnaire, but not when exactly they per-
formed the UG. Additionally, not only was the computation of the
macronutrient composition based on self-report, there was also a
large individual difference in reported macronutrient composition.
These considerations motivated us to conduct study 2, where we
could control both the timing of ingestion and its exact macronutrient
composition.
Fig. 1.
Decision making depends on breakfast carb/protein ratio. (A) In study 1,
subjects were grouped in low- vs. high-carb/protein groups depending on the
macronutrient composition of their breakfast on that morning. Yellow bars in-
dicate the fraction of subjects who decided to reject. Subjects with high-carb/
protein ratio breakfasts showed significantly more rejection behavior (*P < 0.05).
(B) Differences (high-carb/protein minus low-carb/protein condition) in rejection
rates separated for fairness categories (fair, medium, unfair) during the UG in the
intervention experiment (study 2). Subjects showed an increase in rejection rates
after a high-carb/protein ratio breakfast compared with after a low-carb/protein
ratio breakfast. The values indicated are mean changes (±SEM, *P < 0.05).
Strang et al.
PNAS
|
June 20, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 25
|
6511
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
NEUROSCIENCE
 In study 2, we were able to go one step further than was
possible in study 1 by testing the direct causality of distinct
macronutrient compositions on rejection rates while controlling
time and macronutrient composition. This approach also allowed
us to characterize the specific metabolic dynamics underlying a
change in decisions. We again replicated the results from study
1 by showing that a high-carb/protein breakfast increases rejection
behavior, and this effect is explained as arising out of a decrease in
plasma tyrosine.
Across both studies, rejection rates in the UG were higher after
a high-carb/protein breakfast. An equicaloric breakfast with a
higher-carb/protein ratio led to markedly different postprandial
blood glucose and neurotransmitter precursor levels. Specifically,
a high-carb/protein meal caused lower tyrosine levels, higher
tryptophan levels, and a steeper decline in postprandial blood
glucose. No other blood parameters differed significantly between
conditions. The observed changes in rejection decisions correlated
with several metabolic parameters, but only tyrosine fulfilled both
defined criteria to be an underlying factor driving the change in
behavior. First, tyrosine levels were significantly different between
conditions: that is, being lower after the high-carb/protein break-
fast. Second, changes in tyrosine levels significantly predicted
changes in rejection rates.
The observed macronutrient-driven changes in glucose, tyro-
sine, and tryptophan levels are in line with the literature (1, 12).
Furthermore, our data shed new light on previous findings on
food-related changes in metabolic and hormonal parameters and
their impact on behavior. So far, food-related changes in be-
havior have often been explained by the ego-depletion theory,
implying that an overall energy (glucose) decline below optimal
levels changes behavior by decreasing self-control (3, 17).
However, it is important to highlight that in most studies, blood
glucose was not assessed, and recent evidence indicates rather
inconsistent results (18). Although we observed a significantly
steeper glucose decline in the high- compared with the low-carb/
protein condition, we did not find a direct link between glucose
decline and social decisions. Altered neurotransmitter concen-
trations after food intake have been previously demonstrated by
measuring differences in brain tryptophan and tyrosine levels
engendered by food consumption (2, 9). However, a possible
impact on behavior was not assessed.
Previous studies have already shown that brain tyrosine and its
neurotransmitter product dopamine are involved in a variety of
social decisions (19). Genetic studies indicate a link between the
dopamine system and social punishment (20), suggesting a dose-
dependent dopamine effect. Furthermore, fMRI studies have
suggested a role for mesolimbic dopamine in social decisions
(21). Dopamine neurons encode reward prediction errors: that
is, deviations between predicted and experienced reward. The
UG induces robust reward prediction errors as a consequence of
unexpected unfair offers (22). Thus, differences in tyrosine levels
might alter rejection rates via an influence on this dopamine
prediction error signaling.
Although suggested by previous studies, we did not find a di-
rect link between meal-induced changes in tryptophan on sub-
sequent punishment rates. Previous studies reported higher
rejection rates after tryptophan depletion and lower rates after
pharmacological increase (4, 23). Of note, in these studies
tryptophan concentrations, although associated with punishment
rates, failed to significantly predict the rejection rates (4). Thus,
it is difficult to rule out a possibility that tryptophan changes
were not the causal underlying factor. An alternative explanation
is that the significant changes in blood tryptophan levels in our
study might not have been sufficient to cause changes in
behavior.
One limitation of study 2 is its constrained generalizability.
Because previous studies have shown gender differences in me-
tabolism (24), only male subjects were included in study 2. The
reported results thus only apply for men. Furthermore, the
present results only apply for a very specific macronutrient
composition. Although findings of study 1 suggest that results
might be similar for women and for varying macronutrient
compositions, the exact impact of varying macronutrient com-
positions as well as their effect on female metabolism and be-
havior need to be the focus of future studies.
In this study, we demonstrated that the macronutrient com-
position of food acutely influences our social decisions, showing
a modulation in the dopamine precursor as the underlying
mechanism. Our results shed new light on the striking relevance
of food intake. This opens new perspectives on problems, such as
antisocial behavior as well as the global problem of poor nutri-
tion. The latter may not only have negative consequences on
physical health but also on social decisions. With that back-
ground, popular diets—as for example low-carb diets—might be
treated with caution. Independent of a diet’s effectiveness for
losing weight, it could have potential side effects on people’s
social behavior. By emphasizing the importance of educational
and support campaigns to establish a balanced diet, our results
have implications for society, economics, and policy formation.
Specifically, the nature of large-scale food distribution—such as in
kindergarten, schools, and the military—would merit reconsideration.
Finally, our results hint at possibilities inherent in targeted food
Fig. 2.
Macronutrient composition-dependent changes in postprandial tryptophan, tyrosine, and glucose and the correlation of tyrosine with rejection rates.
Blue lines indicate low- and yellow lines indicate high-carb/protein condition for (A) tryptophan/LNAA, (B) tyrosine/LNAA, and (C) glucose values (±SEM in
shadowed area, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.001). For visualization purposes, the data points were interpolated. (C) Shadowed area represents the time window of
glucose decline, which significantly differs between the conditions. (D) Triangles indicate single data points for change in rejection rates and change in
tyrosine/LNAA values od high- vs. low-carb/protein conditions.
6512
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620245114
Strang et al.
 interventions as possible additional treatments in the clinical context
that might support established behavioral modification programs.
Materials and Methods
The Ultimatum Game (UG) is a two person game in which one person (the
proposer) suggests how to share a sum of money with another player (the re-
ceiver; see Fig. S1). If the receiver accepts the proposed offer, both players are
paid accordingly. However, if the receiver rejects the offer, neither receives any
payment. Studies show that receivers usually reject unfair offers, which is
interpreted as a form of social punishment (16).
Study 1
Subjects. Eighty-seven subjects (54 woman; mean age = 23.74 y, SD = 4.40;
mean BMI = 22.28, SD = 2.98) participated in an online survey using the
online platform Soci Survey (©2006–2015 SoSci Survey GmbH). Subjects were
students of the University of Lübeck recruited via an internal mailing list.
Before participation, all subjects were informed about the procedure and
data handling, that they could stop the questionnaire at any time point, and
that they gave their consent for participation. The study was approved by
the local Medical Ethical Commission of the University of Lübeck.
Procedure. The online survey was accessible only between 1100 and 1300 hours,
and subjects were instructed beforehand to complete the survey before lunch.
First, subjects received instructions about the UG and were informed that the
decisions of 20 randomly selected subjects would be paid accordingly. Sub-
sequently, subjects played a one-shot version of the UG. Here, subjects were in
the role of the receiver. All subjects were told that the proposer, who par-
ticipated in the online study before them, was endowed with 10V and that the
proposer decided to offer 2V to the subject. Thus, all subjects received an
unfair offer of 2V and could decide whether to accept or reject this offer.
After the UG, subjects submitted a detailed description of all food items they
consumed previously on that day (breakfast and snacks). The ratio of carbohy-
drates and proteins (carb/protein) as a percentage of total energy intake was
calculated using the DGExpert algorithm (25).
Data Analysis. Eleven subjects were excluded from the analyses because they
indicated that they had no breakfast on the corresponding day. Therefore,
subsequent analyses included the data of 76 subjects. To test whether there is
an association between a subject’s macronutrient composition and rejection
rates in the UG, we compared the rejection behavior of subjects who had a
high-carb/protein ratio with those who had a low ratio (groups were de-
termined by median split). A χ2 test was applied to compare rejection rates
between groups. Additional tests were conducted to control whether
groups differed concerning age, BMI, gender, or total energy intake. Be-
cause age, BMI, and total energy intake were not normally distributed,
Mann–Whitney U tests were used. To compare the gender distribution be-
tween the groups, a χ2 test was applied. Furthermore, a point–biserial cor-
relation was applied to determine the relationship between carb/protein
ratio and punishment and to support the median-split analysis. For this
analysis, three outliers (mean ± 2 SD) were excluded and one-sided P values
are reported.
Study 2
Subjects. Twenty-four male subjects participated in the experimental study (mean
age = 24.64 y, SD = 4.06; mean BMI = 22.59, SD = 1.82). The sample size was
chosen based on previous metabolic studies (4, 26–28). Because other studies
have shown gender differences in metabolism, only male subjects were included
(24). Before experimental participation, every subject underwent a medical
screening with a special focus on metabolic diseases. The medical screening
consisted of a blood sample, a questionnaire, and a complete physical exam-
ination, including a visual examination of the mouth, eyes, and skin; manual
palpation of the lymph nodes, thyroid gland, and abdomen; manual tapping
of the spinal column and kidneys; auscultation of the heart, lungs, and ab-
domen; measurement of body weight, blood pressure, and heart rate; and an
electrocardiogram. The following blood parameters were examined: full blood
count, glucose, liver enzymes, thyroid function, kidney function, electrolytes,
and blood lipids. Exclusion criteria were any abnormalities in the blood results
or physical examination, any physical or psychological disease, shifted day/
night rhythm, being a high-performance athlete, BMI under 18 kg/m2 or above
25 kg/m2, smoking, or food allergies. Before participation, all subjects gave
written informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki. The study
was approved by the local Medical Ethical Commission of the University
of Lübeck.
Experimental Procedure. Subjects were tested in a randomized, balanced,
within-subject design during two sessions separated by at least 7 days (maxi-
mum 9 days). Both sessions were identical except for the macronutrient
composition in the breakfast subjects had. On one day, subjects received a
breakfast with a low-carbohydrate and high-protein content (low-carb/protein
condition), and on the other day they received a breakfast with a high-
carbohydrate and low-protein content (high-carb/protein condition). In the
low-carb/protein condition the breakfast contained 50% carbohydrates, 25%
lipids, and 25% proteins, and the high-carb/protein condition was 80% car-
bohydrates, 10% lipids, and 10% proteins (Fig. S2). In detail, the high-carb/
protein breakfast contained: 88-g “Vital-Fit” whole-grain bread, 20-g ham, 5-g
cream cheese, 30-g strawberry marmalade, 130-mL milk, 200-mL apple juice,
110-mL water, 225-g banana, and 225-g apple. The low-carb/protein breakfast
contained: 70-g sunflower seed bread, 70-g Vital-Fit whole-grain bread, 40-g
ham, 30-g “Bresso” (cream cheese), 40-g Camembert, 240-mL milk, 200-mL
water, 250-mL yogurt, and 120-g banana. Both breakfasts had the same
total amount of calories (850 kcal) and subjects had to consume the
whole breakfast.
After arrival at the research unit at 0800 hours, an intravenous catheter was
inserted into a vein of the participant’s nondominant distal forearm and at
0830 hours the first blood sample was obtained. At 0845 hours subjects received
breakfast in a single room according to the respective high-carb/protein or low-
carb/protein condition. From 0900 hours until 1045 hours, blood samples were
drawn in 15-min intervals with additional blood samples at 1130 and 1315 hours
(Fig. S3). During the whole procedure subjects could either lie in bed or sit on
a chair but were not allowed to leave their room or perform any type of
physical exercise.
At 1200 hours, subjects were guided to a different room where they
completed a test battery including the UG, the interpersonal reactivity index
(29), the social value orientation (30), the PANAS (31), the subjective happiness
scale (SHS) (32), the state-trait anxiety inventory (33), and the behavioral in-
hibitory system/behavioral approach system (34). These assessments were
performed at 1215 hours because the maximum difference in neurotrans-
mitter precursor concentrations between conditions was expected to be pre-
sent 3.5–4 h after the food intake (2, 4). Subjects first received written
instructions on the UG and were asked to answer a set of comprehension
questions before starting the game.
In study 2 all subjects were in the role of the receiver and played 48 trials of
the UG with 48 different proposers via a computer interface. In each trial,
subjects sequentially observed the picture of the proposer (1,500 ms), the
endowment of the proposer (1,500 ms), and the offer of the proposer
(3,000 ms). By pressing one of two buttons, subjects could indicate whether
they accepted or rejected the offer. Their response was highlighted on the screen
(Fig. S1). Proposer pictures were randomly matched with the offers. Eight “fair,”
eight “medium,” and eight “unfair” offers were all presented twice in a ran-
domized order. The fair offers ranged between 40% and 50% of the proposer’s
endowment, the medium offers between 27% and 33%, and the unfair be-
tween 18% and 22%. Thus, in different trials the same amount could either be a
fair or an unfair offer, depending on the proposer’s endowment. This way we
could investigate fairness independent of monetary reward. The dependent
variable was the punishment decision (yes or no) with respect to rejected fair,
medium, and unfair offers. Subjects were told that the proposers in the picture
previously participated in the experiment and that they would receive their
money according to the receiver’s decisions. Each trial started with a picture of
the alleged proposer. Half of the pictures showed male and the other half
showed female faces.
After completing the UG, subjects again filled in the respective question-
naires and were guided back to their room where the last blood sample was
obtained (1315 hours). Subjects received a fee for their participation in the
whole study. They were told that, in addition, one of all trials of the test battery
of both sessions would randomly be picked and payed out after the
second session.
Blood Samples. Twenty-two plasma amino acids were determined from blood
samples drawn at 0830, 1045, 1130, and 1315 hours. From the blood samples
drawn at 0830, 0900, 0915, 0930, 0945, 1000, 1015, 1030, and 1045 hours, the
following parameters were determined: glucose, testosterone, sex hormone-
binding globulin (SHGB), cortisol, ACTH, leptin, and insulin. All blood samples
were immediately centrifuged at 4 °C and stored at −80 °C until analysis.
Measurement of plasma amino acids was performed according to the
method of Harder et al. (35). Harder et al. combine precipitation, de-
rivatization, and chromatographic separation to determine all proteinogenic
amino acids, citrulline, and ornithine. For a detailed description, see ref. 35.
Blood glucose was measured by an enzymatic-amperometric method (EKF
Diagnostics) [coefficient of variability (CV) ≤ 1.5%]. Leptin concentrations were
Strang et al.
PNAS
|
June 20, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 25
|
6513
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
NEUROSCIENCE
 assessed by a radioimmunoassay (RIA Kit, EMD Millipore) (within-CV < 8.3%,
between-CV < 6.2%). Insulin, cortisol, ACTH, and SHGB were assessed by im-
munoassays (Immulite 2000, Siemend Healthcare Diagnostics). The assessed
within- and between-assay variations were as follows: insulin within-CV 3.3–
3.9%, between-CV 4.1–5.0%; SHGB within-CV 2.5–2.7%, between-CV < 5.2%;
ACTH within-CV < 8.7%, between-CV < 10.0%; cortisol within-CV < 5.2%, be-
tween-CV < 6.8% and testosterone within-CV 8.3–7.2%, between-CV 9.1–8.2%.
Data Analysis. Two subjects were excluded from the UG analyses, one because
of technical recording problems and one because he was aware of the study
design and hypothesis before participating, yielding a final sample size
of 22 subjects.
First, we tested for a difference in rejection rates between the two breakfast
conditions using a mixed logistic model to analyze the effect of macronutrient
content on UG decisions. Rejection rates were used as dependent variable,
breakfast (high carb/protein and low carb/protein) and fairness category (fair,
medium, and unfair) were used as fixed effects, and a random intercept was
allowed for each subject. Corresponding post hoc tests were applied to in-
vestigate the exact relationship between the factors.
Second, the influence of breakfast’s macronutrient composition on tryp-
tophan and tyrosine levels was examined. Ratios between plasma concen-
trations of tryptophan and tyrosine and the other LNAAs were used as a
proxy for brain tryptophan and tyrosine levels and ultimately brain seroto-
nin and dopamine levels (2, 9). One subject was excluded from this analysis
because of technical problems. Furthermore, blood data of five participants
could not be analyzed for every time point. Differences in AUC values (0830–
1315 hours) of tryptophan- or tyrosine/LNAA ratios were tested using de-
pendent sample t tests (one-sided tested according to a priori hypothesis).
To check at which time points the values differed, repeated-measures
ANOVA was conducted with the factor’s time (1045–1315 hours) and con-
dition as within-subject factors and either tryptophan- or tyrosine/LNAA
ratio (corrected for baseline) as the dependent variable. Corresponding post
hoc tests were applied to investigate the exact relationship between factors.
Next, we tested for differences in glucose drop between conditions. Because
the decline in blood glucose was shown to be a better predictor for hypoglycemia
symptoms (36), we used a dependent sample t test to test for differences in
glucose decline between 0915 and 1000 hours. A repeated-measures ANOVA
with the within-subject factor’s time (0830–1045 hours) and condition (respective
breakfast condition) was used to address differences in blood glucose over time.
Corresponding post hoc tests were performed to investigate the exact re-
lationship between the factors.
Moreover, we analyzed the effect of the respective condition on cortisol,
ACTH, insulin, leptin concentrations, and FAI. FAI as the ratio of total testos-
terone and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) × 100 is used as a proxy of
free (bioactive) testosterone. Differences in AUC (0830–1045 hours) of cortisol,
ACTH, insulin, leptin, and FAI were tested using dependent sample t tests. To
test at which time points values differed between the breakfast conditions, a
repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with the factor’s time (0845–
1045 hours) and condition as within-subject factors and either cortisol, ACTH,
insulin, or FAI (corrected for baseline) as the dependent variable.
To test if any of the parameters had an influence on rejection rates, a re-
gression model including all blood parameters as predictors and rejection rates
as the dependent variable was applied. In detail, changes in the parameter
values (differences in AUCs; 0830–1045 hours) for cortisol, ACTH, insulin,
leptin, and FAI; AUCs for tryptophan- and tyrosine/LNAA ratios (0830–
1315 hours); glucose slope between 0915 and 1000 hours, and rejection rates
between both breakfast conditions (high carb/protein minus low carb/protein)
were used for this analysis. Furthermore, we tested whether mood was
influenced by the different conditions when comparing the PANAS (because it
is not normally distributed, a Wilcoxon test for dependent samples was used)
and SHS (t test for dependent samples) scores. All questionnaire results were
corrected for multiple comparisons, resulting in a Bonferroni-corrected sig-
nificance threshold of 0.003.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft Grants INST 392/125-1 and PA 2682/1-1 (to S.Q.P.) and European
Research Council Advanced Grant META-GROWTH (ERC-2012-AdG 322605).
1. Wolever TM, Jenkins DJ (1986) The use of the glycemic index in predicting the blood
glucose response to mixed meals. Am J Clin Nutr 43:167–172.
2. Wurtman RJ, et al. (2003) Effects of normal meals rich in carbohydrates or proteins on
plasma tryptophan and tyrosine ratios. Am J Clin Nutr 77:128–132.
3. Gailliot MT, et al. (2007) Self-control relies on glucose as a limited energy source:
Willpower is more than a metaphor. J Pers Soc Psychol 92:325–336.
4. Crockett MJ, Clark L, Tabibnia G, Lieberman MD, Robbins TW (2008) Serotonin
modulates behavioral reactions to unfairness. Science 320:1739.
5. Colzato LS, et al. (2013) Tryptophan promotes interpersonal trust. Psychol Sci 24:2575–2577.
6. Hartmann S, Lacorn M, Steinhart H (1998) Natural occurrence of steroid hormones in
food. Food Chem 62:7–20.
7. Knerr I, Gröschl M, Rascher W, Rauh M (2003) Endocrine effects of food intake: In-
sulin, ghrelin, and leptin responses to a single bolus of essential amino acids in hu-
mans. Ann Nutr Metab 47:312–318.
8. Markus R, Panhuysen G, Tuiten A, Koppeschaar H (2000) Effects of food on cortisol
and mood in vulnerable subjects under controllable and uncontrollable stress. Physiol
Behav 70:333–342.
9. Fernstrom JD, Wurtman RJ (1971) Brain serotonin content: Physiological dependence
on plasma tryptophan levels. Science 173:149–152.
10. Lehnert H, Wurtman RJ (1993) Amino acid control of neurotransmitter synthesis and
release: Physiological and clinical implications. Psychother Psychosom 60:18–32.
11. Wurtman RJ, Fernstrom JD (1976) Control of brain neurotransmitter synthesis by
precursor availability and nutritional state. Biochem Pharmacol 25:1691–1696.
12. Acworth IN, During MJ, Wurtman RJ (1988) Tyrosine: Effects on catecholamine re-
lease. Brain Res Bull 21:473–477.
13. Lehnert H, Reinstein DK, Strowbridge BW, Wurtman RJ (1984) Neurochemical and
behavioral consequences of acute, uncontrollable stress: Effects of dietary tyrosine.
Brain Res 303:215–223.
14. Margittai Z, et al. (2016) Exogenous cortisol causes a shift from deliberative to in-
tuitive thinking. Psychoneuroendocrinology 64:131–135.
15. Halali E, Bereby-Meyer Y, Ockenfels A (2013) Is it all about the self? The effect of self-
control depletion on ultimatum game proposers. Front Hum Neurosci 7:240.
16. Strang S, Park SQ (2016) Human cooperation and its underlying mechanisms. Curr Top
Behav Neurosic 30:223–239.
17. Masicampo EJ, Baumeister RF (2008) Toward a physiology of dual-process reasoning and
judgment: Lemonade, willpower, and expensive rule-based analysis. Psychol Sci 19:255–260.
18. Vadillo MA, Gold N, Osman M (2016) The bitter truth about sugar and willpower: The
limited evidential value of the glucose model of ego depletion. Psychol Sci 27:1207–1214.
19. Rutledge RB, Skandali N, Dayan P, Dolan RJ (2015) Dopaminergic modulation of
decision making and subjective well-being. J Neurosci 35:9811–9822.
20. Reuter M, et al. (2013) The influence of dopaminergic gene variants on decision
making in the ultimatum game. Front Hum Neurosci 7:242.
21. Rilling JK, King-Casas B, Sanfey AG (2008) The neurobiology of social decision-making.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 18:159–165.
22. Pessiglione M, Seymour B, Flandin G, Dolan RJ, Frith CD (2006) Dopamine-dependent
prediction errors underpin reward-seeking behaviour in humans. Nature 442:1042–1045.
23. Crockett MJ, Clark L, Lieberman MD, Tabibnia G, Robbins TW (2010) Impulsive choice
and altruistic punishment are correlated and increase in tandem with serotonin de-
pletion. Emotion 10:855–862.
24. Dionne I, Després JP, Bouchard C, Tremblay A (1999) Gender difference in the effect
of body composition on energy metabolism. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 23:
312–319.
25. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Ernährung (2015) DGExpert algorithm (Deutsche Gesellschaft
für Ernährung, Bonn), Version 1.7.4.1.26.
26. Akhavan T, Luhovyy BL, Brown PH, Cho CE, Anderson GH (2010) Effect of premeal
consumption of whey protein and its hydrolysate on food intake and postmeal gly-
cemia and insulin responses in young adults. Am J Clin Nutr 91:966–975.
27. Beulens JWJ, Bindels JG, de Graaf C, Alles MS, Wouters-Wesseling W (2004) Alpha-
lactalbumin combined with a regular diet increases plasma Trp-LNAA ratio. Physiol
Behav 81:585–593.
28. Pal S, Ellis V (2010) The acute effects of four protein meals on insulin, glucose, ap-
petite and energy intake in lean men. Br J Nutr 104:1241–1248.
29. Davis MH (1980) A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy.
JSAS Catalogue of Selected Documents in Psychology 10:85.
30. Van Lange P (1999) The pursuit of joint outcomes and equality in outcomes: An in-
tegrative model of social value orientation. J Pers Soc Psychol 77:337–349.
31. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A (1988) Development and validation of brief measures
of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol 54:1063–1070.
32. Lyubomirsky S, Lepper HS (1999) A measure of subjective happiness: Preliminary re-
liability and construct validation. Soc Indic Res 46:137–155.
33. Spielberger CD, Gorsuch RL, Lushene RE (1970) State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Con-
sulting Psychologists, Palo Alto, CA).
34. Carver CS, White TL (1994) Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective
responses to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. J Pesonality Soc
Psychol 67:319–333.
35. Harder U, Koletzko B, Peissner W (2011) Quantification of 22 plasma amino acids
combining derivatization and ion-pair LC-MS/MS. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol
Biomed Life Sci 879:495–504.
36. Hadji-georgopoulos A, Schmidt I, Kowarski AA (2015) Elevated hypoglycemic index
and late hyperinsulinism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 50:371–376.
37. Fernstrom JD (2013) Large neutral amino acids: Dietary effects on brain neuro-
chemistry and function. Amino Acids 45:419–430.
38. Pardridge WM, Oldendorf WH (1975) Kinetic analysis of blood-brain barrier transport
of amino acids. Biochim Biophys Acta 401:128–136.
6514
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620245114
Strang et al.
