 ARTICLE
Neural representation of visual concepts in people
born blind
Ella Striem-Amit
1,2, Xiaoying Wang3, Yanchao Bi3 & Alfonso Caramazza1,4
How do we represent information without sensory features? How are abstract concepts like
“freedom”, devoid of external perceptible referents, represented in the brain? Here, to
address the role of sensory information in the neural representation of concepts, we used
fMRI to investigate how people born blind process concepts whose referents are imper-
ceptible to them because of their visual nature (“rainbow”, “red”). Activity for these concepts
was compared to that of sensorially-perceptible referents (“rain”), classical abstract concepts
(“justice”) and concrete concepts (“cup”), providing a gradient between fully concrete and
fully abstract concepts in the blind. We find that anterior temporal lobe (ATL) responses
track concept perceptibility and objecthood: preference for imperceptible object concepts
was found in dorsal ATL, for abstract (non-object, non-referential) concepts in lateral ATL,
and for perceptible concepts in medial ATL. These findings point to a new division-of-labor
among aspects of ATL in representing conceptual properties that are abstract in different
ways.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
OPEN
1 Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 2 Department of Psychology, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva
8410501, Israel. 3 State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing 100875, China. 4 Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, 38068 Rovereto, Italy. These authors contributed equally: Ella Striem-Amit,
Xiaoying Wang. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.S-A. (email: striemamit@fas.harvard.edu)
or to Y.B. (email: ybi@bnu.edu.cn)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 H
ow do we represent concepts that extend beyond our
perceptual experience, concepts like “freedom” and “jus-
tice”, which have no clear external referent? And how do
blind people represent concepts such as rainbow, whose referent
is perceptible only visually and comprised of colors, which are
uniquely visual qualia?
Various studies have addressed the neural correlates of
concrete and abstract concepts1–4. Because concrete concepts,
like “cup”, have perceptible features, such as shape, size and
color, whereas abstract concepts, like “freedom”, lack sensory
features, it has been proposed that the latter type of concepts
rely more heavily on semantic or verbal information5,6. The
investigation of how abstract concepts are represented has been
considered an important way to understand knowledge repre-
sentation in the brain. Traditionally, this has been tested by
comparing brain responses to abstract and concrete words. This
comparison has revealed large-scale networks of regions asso-
ciated with abstract concepts involving language and more
broadly multimodal processing areas and concrete concepts
involving modality-specific areas2,7–9. Among these areas, the
left anterior temporal lobe (ATL) has been deemed to play a
central role in the representation and retrieval of semantic and
conceptual information1,4,7,9–11.
However, there are additional differences between abstract
and concrete concepts beyond the existence of external sensory
referents. Abstract concepts tend to be learned later in life, to be
less familiar12,13, and some of them refer to social or emotional
contents14,15. The latter factor, emotional responses associated
with particular concepts, has been argued to provide an emo-
tional (internal) “sensory” referent for some concepts16. The
involvement of differential emotional arousal for different words
may be thought to provide sensorially perceptible features for
certain domains of abstract concepts, contributing to an ongoing
debate
about
the
role
of
sensory
features
in
concept
representation3,17–21. Furthermore, abstract words differ from
concrete ones in their linguistic properties, in that they are more
ambiguous and their interpretation depends more on context-
dependent variation22,23. Therefore, the difference between
classical abstract and concrete concepts in terms of their sensory
features is confounded by additional factors. Furthermore,
abstract and concrete concepts differ in an additional important
dimension, beyond their sensory perceptibility: their mere
referentiality. Concrete concepts generally refer to external
objects or referents which can be “pointed” to in the world,
whereas abstract concepts do not. Nevertheless, these two
dimensions are nearly impossible to be teased apart in most
circumstances as most referents are intrinsically sensible.
How can the effects of sensory perceptibility and experience, as
well as that of referentiality/ objecthood, be tested then? Here we
take a unique approach to overcome the various confounds listed
and investigate the roles of these conceptual dimensions directly,
by using a special population that does not have access to sen-
sorially perceptible referents for otherwise concrete object con-
cepts, thereby eliminating the confounds mentioned above. In
this study we chose to focus on the effect of imperceptibility. To
this aim we studied a group of people born blind as they were
presented with concepts that have both object referents and
sensory-accessible features (“cup”); concepts that have external
referents but are perceivable through vision alone, and thus are
sensorially-inaccessible
referents
to
the
congenitally
blind
(“rainbow”); and abstract concepts without referents or sensory
features, which do not refer to emotional or social relations
(“freedom”). This gradient of concepts between fully concrete
object and fully abstract non-object concepts in the blind allows
us to separate sensory components from those of objecthood and
study their neural correlates.
Results
Abstract concept preference in the brain. Two experiments
(Experiment 1, block design; Experiment 2, event-related design)
were conducted to inspect how abstract information, in particular
those aspects relating to imperceptibility (“rainbow” vs. “rain” in
congenitally blind) and objecthood (“rainbow” vs. “freedom”), is
represented in the brain.
To explore the effect of these factors within the hypothesized
network involved in processing abstract information, we first
localized brain preference for classical abstract concepts, chosen
carefully as to not arouse strong emotional responses (see
Supplementary Table 2). We plotted the preferential response to
abstract concepts in the data from Experiment 1. Similar to
previous reports7,8, abstract concepts (“freedom”, compared to
concrete every-day objects that are similarly familiar to the blind;
“cup”; see Fig. 1a two right-most columns) evoked significant
activation in multiple regions, mainly left-lateralized, in the
combined subject group (Fig. 1b; for similar findings in each
group separately and the reverse contrast see Supplementary
Fig. 1). These included the inferior frontal lobe, superior temporal
sulcus and anterior temporal lobe (ATL), both in the anterior
superior temporal plane, as well as below it towards the temporal
pole. These regions did not show a significant difference between
the groups (See Supplementary Fig. 2), supporting the validity of
using the blind group to study the representation of abstract
concepts. A more stringent contrast, in which the abstract
concepts condition was further required to also elicit significant
positive activation (abstract > concrete AND abstract > baseline),
limited this network to the left hemisphere, and within the ATL,
mainly to the dorsal and lateral aspects (Fig. 1c).
Imperceptibility – dorsal ATL. We then investigated which of
those regions showing preference for abstract concepts were
sensitive to the absence of sensory information, as opposed to
sensitivity to the existence of external referents or to other con-
founding factors. To do so, we examined brain activity in people
blind from birth (Table 1) for concepts that have external refer-
ents in the world, but are perceptible only through the visual
sensory modality, and are thus imperceptible to a congenitally
blind person (e.g. “rainbow”). For the blind, these stimuli do not
have sensory correlates for their defining characteristics. We
compared these concepts to other concepts from the same con-
tent domain (in the case of rainbow, astral/weather phenomena)
which also have external referents with sensory features in other
senses, and are thus sensorially available, perceptible, to the blind
(for example, “rain”; sensory perceptibility was rated by blind
subjects; see methods). Imperceptible and perceptible concepts
were chosen from three different content domains to avoid
domain-specific effects: astral/weather phenomena (e.g. “rain-
bow” vs. “rain”), scenes (“island” vs. “beach”) and object features
(colors vs. shapes, e.g. “red” vs. “square”). Importantly, the
imperceptibility comparison – ANOVA of the full design, com-
paring the perceptible and imperceptible concepts across domains
(Fig. 1a, comparing dark red and blue across the first three left-
most columns) – did not significantly differ in any of the various
potentially confounding factors: general concreteness/abstract-
ness, imageability, age of acquisition, familiarity, semantic
diversity, emotional valence or arousal (mixed effects ANOVA,
F(1,58) = 0.1, p = 0.76, η2 = 0.0017, for stimuli ratings see Sup-
plementary Table 1, for complete post hoc t test results see
Supplementary Table 2).
Given that the imperceptible concepts are sensorially inacces-
sible only to the blind, we expected regions differentially engaged
due to the sensory imperceptibility of concepts to show different
responses for the blind and sighted subjects in our experimental
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 design. We computed an ANOVA model for a domain X
imperceptibility X group effect in Experiment 1 (a block-design
experiment) and looked for areas showing a group X impercept-
ibility interaction, different responses based on perceptibility in
the two groups, across concept domains. Among the brain
regions showing preference for abstract concepts in both groups,
only the left ATL also showed such an interaction, in two clusters
in the superior ATL (Fig. 2a; see the overlap between these
contrasts in Fig. 3c, for activation profile of the other regions,
such as STS and IFG, see Supplementary Fig. 3). Therefore, we
focused our analyses to the ATL, long suggested to play a major
role in the processing of abstract concepts1,4,7,10,11.
To further explore the activation pattern in this region, we
sampled the areas showing interaction in Experiment 1 using an
Table 1 Blind subjects characteristics
Subject
Gender
Age
Years of education
Handedness
Cause of blindness
Light perception
B1
M
36
12
Bi
Congenital microphthalmia
None
B2
M
22
15
R
Congenital microphthalmia
None
B3
M
33
12
R
Congenital microphthalmia; microcornea
None
B4
M
48
12
R
Congenital glaucoma
None
B5
F
46
9
R
Congenital glaucoma
None
B6
M
40
12
R
Congenital leukoma
Faint
B7
F
50
12
R
Cataracts; congenital eyeball dysplasia
Faint
B8
M
57
12
R
Congenital eyeball dysplasia
None
B9
F
43
12
R
Congenital glaucoma
None
B10
M
48
12
R
Congenital microphthalmia; cataracts; leukoma
None
B11
M
63
9
R
Congenital glaucoma; leukoma
None
B12
F
41
12
R
Congenital optic nerve atrophy
Faint
Experimental design
Inperceptibility
contrast
Object
features
“Square”
“Red”
“Rainbow”
“Rain”
“Beach”
“Island”
“Cup”
“Freedom”
Abstract-concrete
contrast
Objecthood contrast
Abstract > Concrete (n = 26, Exp 1)
Abstract > Concrete (n = 26, Exp 1, positive activations)
p < 0.005
p < 0.05
(corr.)
LH
STS
Concrete
No referent
Abstract
Astral
phenomena
Scenes
Perceptible
(to both groups)
Imerceptible
(to both groups)
Imperceptible
(to the blind only)
Has referent
a
b
c
Perceptible
Imperceptible
Has referent
No referent
Fig. 1 Abstract concept preference found in ATL. a The experimental design is depicted, along with examples of the stimuli. The row effect is that of
perceptibility: items which are either at least partially perceptible to both blind and sighted (red color), imperceptible completely to the blind (blue color),
or Imperceptible to both groups (light blue). The column effect is that of objecthood/referentiality. The first four columns have external referents (dark red
or blue colors, depending on perceptibility), whereas the fifth one (abstract concepts; e.g. “freedom”; light color) does not. Within the first three columns,
different content domains of concepts which have external referents are shown (object features, astral phenomena and scenes). For the imperceptibility
contrast, all three content domains are compared between imperceptible and perceptible concepts (dark blue vs. dark red; based on the perceptual abilities
of the blind). For the objecthood contrast, imperceptible concepts without referent (abstract concepts, light blue) are compared with imperceptible
concepts with referents (dark blue), and particularly with the astral objects. Data was collected from two experiments: Experiment 1, a block-design, and
Experiment 2, an event-related design. b A contrast of typical abstract words (e.g. “freedom”) with concrete everyday objects (e.g., “cup”) in the combined
subject group (n = 26) shows a left-lateralized fronto-parietal network consistent with previous findings2,7,8. This and all other univariate statistical
parametric maps originate from Experiment 1. c A more stringent contrast requiring the abstract concepts to also generate significantly positive activation
focuses the activation to the left hemisphere, and in the ATL to its dorsal and lateral aspects (data from Exp. 1). This contrast is also presented in an
anterior view, focusing on the anterior temporal lobe (ATL)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 additional independent data set: Experiment 2, an event-related
design with the same participants scanned in a separate session.
Henceforward, all univariate map analyses originate from data
from Experiment 1, and the bar plots of activity provide
confirmatory evidence from Experiment 2.
In the anterior cluster of the interaction map, in left anterior
dorsal ATL (cluster labeled adATL), we find that the interaction
manifested in heightened activity in the blind group for
imperceptible concepts across the three content domains (Fig. 2b,
data sampled from the independent experiment 2 in adATL). For
detail of the exploration of the posterior cluster (labeled pdATL in
Fig. 2a), which does not show an activation pattern consistent
with an overall effect of imperceptibility in the blind, see Supple-
mentary Notes and Supplementary Figure 6. A post hoc contrast
of imperceptible concepts as compared to the perceptible
counterparts in the blind in adATL (in Experiment 1 data)
showed a significant effect of imperceptibility, in a slightly more
dorsal part of ATL, in the anterior superior temporal plane
(Fig. 2c). The same area was found also as a main effect in an
imperceptibility X domain ANOVA model analysis in the blind
(Supplementary Figure 6C). Specifically, when inspecting this
superior ATL imperceptibility cluster in the data from Experi-
ment 2, it showed a main effect of imperceptibility in the blind (F
(1,11) = 8.63, p < 0.05; see sampled data in Fig. 2d), a significant
preference for imperceptible concepts, but no domain effect (p >
0.4) or interaction (p > 0.61). That is, sensory perceptibility affects
this region independently of content domains. Importantly, the
sighted group showed no such effect in this region (all effects and
interaction p > 0.82), and a combined ANOVA with both groups
in this ROI in Experiment 2 revealed an imperceptibility X group
Group × Imperceptibility
interaction (Exp 1) 
ROI analysis: adATL
Blind (Exp 2)
ROI analysis: Imperceptibile concept preference cluster
Blind (Exp 2)
Imperceptibile > Perceptible
Blind (Exp 1)
0.35
pdATL
adATL
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.05
0
Feature
GLM parameter estimate (beta)
GLM parameter estimate (beta)
Astral
Scene
Feature
Astral
Scene
Feature
Astral
Scene
Feature
Astral
Scene
0.1
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.05
0
0.1
0.3
*
*
*
*
*
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.05
0
0.1
0.3
0.35
Sighted (Exp 2)
Sighted (Exp 2)
Perceptible
Imperceptible
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.05
0
0.1
0.3
a
b
c
d
Fig. 2 Imperceptible concepts processing is supported by the left dorsal ATL. a To probe for the effect of sensory feature perceptibility, we compared brain
activity in people blind from birth and sighted controls, in response to concepts which have external referents in the world, but are perceptible only through
the visual sensory modality, and are thus imperceptible to a blind person (e.g. “rainbow”) as compared to concepts whose referents are sensorially
perceptible also to the blind (through other modalities; e.g., “rain”). An area which is sensitive to imperceptibility of concepts should respond differently in
the two groups for this contrast, as visually-dominant concepts are fully perceptible to the sighted subjects. The ANOVA effect of Group X Imperceptibility
interaction across content domains shows two clusters in dorsal ATL which respond differently in the blind and sighted to the presented words based on
their perceptibility (adATL and pdATL; data from Exp. 1). b The anterior cluster shown in Fig. 2A, labeled adATL, shows a preference for imperceptible
concepts across concept domains (object features, astral phenomena and scenes) only in the blind group (data from independent Exp. 2). Error bars
represent standard error of the difference between means for the perceptible and imperceptible words in each content domain. Asterisks represent
statistically significant difference between perceptible and imperceptible concepts (paired t test, t(22) > 3.505, p < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected for multiple
comparisons). c Preferential activation for imperceptible vs perceptible concepts in the blind group, affects the left dorsal ATL (data from Exp. 1). d The
dorsal ATL cluster showing preferential activation for imperceptible concepts (shown in Fig. 2C) shows a preference for imperceptible concepts across
concept domains (object features, astral phenomena and scenes) only in the blind group (data from independent Exp. 2). Error bars represent standard
error of the difference between means for the perceptible and imperceptible words in each content domain. In addition to the significant main
imperceptibility effect in the blind, asterisks represent statistically significant difference between perceptible and imperceptible concepts (paired t test, t
(22) > 3.505, p < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 interaction (F(1,24) = 5.46, p < 0.05), supporting the absence of
visual experience as the factor behind the imperceptible/
perceptible category differences.
The univariate analyses reported here show a preference for
imperceptible concepts in left dorsal ATL. Converging evidence
from multivariate analyses further supports the role of impercept-
ibility in determining concept property preferences in dorsal
ATL. Using behavioral ratings of the perceptible and impercep-
tible objects in the congenitally blind group, we computed a
dissimilarity matrix of the stimuli based on their sensory
perceptibility and accessibility (Fig. 3a). A multivariate compar-
ison of the neural similarity matrices from the single-item-level
event-related data (Experiment 2) in the blind, with this model of
imperceptibility (searchlight representational similarity analysis;
RSA), shows that the anterior dorsal ATL response pattern indeed
varies based on this parameter (Fig. 3b; peak values t(11) = 5.46,
p < 0.0005). This cluster overlaps the area showing the abstract >
concrete effect as well as the group X imperceptibility interaction
(Fig. 2a, adATL; see overlap in Fig. 3c). The RSA effect in dorsal
ATL is found both when using ratings of sensory perceptibility
produced by the blind participants scanned in this study and a
group of blind participants who did not participate in the fMRI
experiment (n = 6, Supplementary Figure 4A,B, see blind subject
characteristics
in
Supplementary
Table
3).
Moreover,
the
“visualness” of a stimulus (as rated by an external group of
sighted participants, ratings which are negatively correlated to the
blind sensory perceptibility ratings; Supplementary Figure 4C,D)
also correlated with the neural pattern of the activity in dorsal
ATL in the blind. Lastly, to control for any collinearity of the
sensory perceptibility of the concepts with other behavioral
ratings, we replicated the RSA of the sensory perceptibility of the
concepts while using behavioral ratings of abstractness, imagin-
ability, manipulability, emotional valence and emotional arousal,
as well as referentiality/objecthood (which is correlated with
imperceptibility;
Pearson’s
r2 = 0.3,
p < 0.001)
as
nuisance
regressors. A sensory perceptibility correlation was still found
in the dorsal ATL, controlling for other factors which may affect
abstract concept processing (Supplementary Figure 4F,G). As
these ratings do not reflect the absence of sensory perceptibility
for these concepts in the sighted, it is not surprising that no
similar correlation between these behavioral matrices is found for
the sighted neural data in dorsal ATL (t(13) < 1.53, p > 0.15).
Therefore, evidence from both univariate and multivariate
analyses support the role of left dorsal ATL in processing
imperceptible concepts in the blind, suggesting that this region’s
response to abstract concepts is affected by the absence of sensory
information regardless of objecthood/referentiality and other
confounding factors.
Objecthood and referentiality – Lateral ATL. Is there also a
preference for abstract concepts over concrete ones that can be
explained by other dimensions of abstractness, such as the
absence of an external referent or the absence of objecthood? To
study these possibilities, we compared abstract concepts that are
both physical referent-free and devoid of sensory correlates (e.g.,
“freedom”) to concepts that have referents but no sensory
Most similar
RSA - Sensory accessibility model
Blind
Overlap of imperceptibility effects
RSA - Sensory accessibility
Blind (Exp 2)
a
b
c
Least similar
Abstract > Concrete
Imperceptibility × Group interaction
Sensory accessibility RSA
pdATL
adATL
Imperceptible
features
Imperceptible
features
Perceptible
features
Perceptible
features
Perceptible
scenes
Perceptible
scenes
Perceptible
astral
Perceptible
astral
Imperceptible
scenes
Imperceptible
scenes
Imperceptible
astral
Imperceptible
astral
Fig. 3 Concepts’ Imperceptibility is mapped in left dorsal ATL pattern. a, b Multivariate representational similarity analysis (RSA) was computed comparing
a behavioral matrix based on ratings of the blind subjects of the sensory perceptibility of the concepts (a; representational dissimilarity matrix) with the
neural patterns in Exp. 2 in a searchlight manner across the brain. Sensory perceptibility correlation (b) was found in the dorsal ATL, overlapping the effects
of imperceptibility X group interaction and abstract concepts preference. For additional control RSA analyses see Supplementary Fig. 4. c The main effects
from Figs. 1–3 are shown together, to reveal the overlap in the dorsal ATL between preference for abstract concepts (over concrete ones; Fig. 1c; depicted in
blue; data from Exp. 1), Imperceptibility X Group interaction (Fig. 2a; depicted in green; data from Exp. 1) and the sensory perceptibility RSA (b; depicted in
orange; data from Exp. 2)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 correlates (e.g., “red”, “island”, “rainbow”, imperceptible in the
blind; see Fig. 1a, comparing light and dark blue). This com-
parison allows us to discount the contribution of sensory infor-
mation. The contrast activated the more lateral ATL regions,
extending anteriorly towards the temporal pole (Fig. 4a). Since
some of our imperceptible concept domains are object features
(“red”) and scenes (“island”) rather than classical objects them-
selves, we further explored separately the role of objecthood. For
this contrast we compared astral/weather imperceptible concepts
such as “rainbow” and “moon”, which are more classical figura-
tive objects24, to abstract concepts (Fig. 4b). This contrast repli-
cated the preference for abstract concepts in lateral ATL,
extending anteriorly towards the temporal pole. Note that these
astral concepts are also comparable to abstract concepts in all
relevant behavioral measures (see details in methods and Sup-
plementary Table 2). Since the objecthood difference, indepen-
dently from imperceptibility, applies to the sighted individuals as
well (abstract concepts are referent-free and figurative objects
have referents), we tested if the objecthood effect could be found
across groups. We computed a 2-way ANOVA with objecthood
and group main effects, replicating the main effect of objecthood
in the lateral ATL without interaction with the group effect
(Fig. 4c, see also Supplementary Figure 5 for the absence of
interaction or group effect in ATL).
Lastly, although our experimental design focused on imper-
ceptibility, and we did not have a sufficient range of item
variation for this property, we carried out exploratory RSA
analyses based on the behavioral ratings of referentiality/
objecthood in the blind. No RSA correlation was found in ATL
(Supplementary Fig 4H-J).
Overall, the lateral and anterior (pole) ATL’s preference for
abstract concepts over concrete ones (“freedom” over “cup”; in
Fig. 1b) seems to result from a preference for external-referent-
free concepts, even within imperceptible concepts. Interestingly,
the effect of objecthood overlapped to some extent with areas
showing the differential effect of imperceptibility between the
groups, suggesting that these two dimensions are not completely
orthogonal. The overlap area, the upper banks of the anterior
superior temporal sulcus, appears to be affected by both factors.
“Concrete” concepts – medial ATL. What of the reverse effect, of
having sensorially accessible properties? Again, we started by
inspecting the preference in the classical contrast between con-
crete objects (“cup”) vs. abstract concepts (“freedom”) and looked
within these regions for the role of perceptibility. The concrete vs.
abstract contrast highlighted a known network of multisensory
object processing25,26, including the medial ATL (perirhinal
cortex) in both groups (Fig. 5a; see also separately in the sighted
group; Fig. 5b; Supplementary Fig. 1). If this region has a role in
processing sensory features of objects, we can expect to find a
preference for perceptible (“rain”) over imperceptible (“rainbow”)
concepts in the blind, and this is indeed the case in the medial
ATL (Fig. 5c; across all three content domains; comparing dark
blue and red across the first three left-most columns in Fig. 1a). In
analyzing Experiment 1 data we find that the medial ATL region
shows a perceptibility effect in the blind (Fig. 5d) and a group X
perceptibility interaction (mATL; Fig. 5e; sampled data from this
ROI in Experiment 2 in Fig. 5f showed a similar non-significant
trend). Therefore, the medial ATL appears to have an opposite
preference than the dorsal ATL, as it prefers concepts which have
perceptible sensory features. Lastly, we attempted to use RSA
analysis based on the behavioral ratings of sensory perceptibility
Abstract > Imperceptible
Blind (Exp 1)
Abstract > Imperceptible astral
Blind (Exp 1)
Objecthood effect
Across groups (Exp 1)
IATL
a
b
c
p < 0.005
p < 0.05
(corr.)
p < 0.005
p < 0.05
(corr.)
p < 0.005
p < 0.05
(corr.)
Fig. 4 Lateral ATL shows preference for concepts without
external referents. a The lateral ATL shows a preference for
abstract, referent-free, concepts (“freedom”) over imperceptible
concepts (whose external referents are not sensorially accessible;
“rainbow”, “red” and “island”) in the blind, suggesting this region’s
preference for abstract concepts relates to the absence of objecthood
(data from Exp. 1). No areas showed significant activation for the
opposite contrast, preference for imperceptible concepts over abstract
ones. b The preference for referent-free concepts in lateral ATL is
replicated as compared to the astral imperceptible concepts domain
alone (“rainbow”), which are more typical (figurative) objects (data from
Exp. 1). c The objecthood effect is found across groups when computing
an Objecthood X Group ANOVA, as the difference in referentiality
between abstract concepts and astral figurative objects is not limited to
the blind (data from Exp. 1)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 by the blind and ratings of visual perceptibility by the sighted.
While a small area in the medial ATL displayed RSA correlation
for both analyses, this cluster was not sufficiently significant to
survive the multiple comparisons correction.
Different functional networks for aspects of ATL. Given the
different functional roles we find for different regions of ATL, we
further tested if this dissociation of preferences would also
manifest in having different network connectivity patterns, based
on resting-state data acquired from the same participants.
We first tested the dissociation between the dorsal and lateral
ATL, which appear to represent different attributes of abstract
concepts (imperceptibility and non-objecthood, respectively). We
computed resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) from
seeds at the peaks of the cluster showing the group X
imperceptibility interaction in the dorsal ATL (adATL; Fig. 2a)
and the peak of the cluster showing the abstract > imperceptible
concepts in the lateral ATL (lATL; Fig. 4a) in the sighted group.
Despite their difference in functional preferences, the dorsal and
lateral ATL seem to belong largely to the same functional
network, which includes large parts of the dorsolateral ATL and
inferior frontal lobe (Fig. 6a; note the prevalence of shared RSFC
marked in yellow). The spatial overlap of the activation (see detail
above) and shared network suggest that these regions may be part
of the same system for the processing of semantic, non-sensorially
derived information. Similar connectivity patterns are found in
the blind group (see Supplementary Fig. 7A,C,D), with few areas
showing group differences in RSFC. This suggests that the blind
brain is not differently wired in these regions, again supporting
the validity of using the blind group to investigate ATL.
We investigated the potential dissociation in brain functional
networks between the dorsal and medial ATL, which show
contrasting roles regarding perceptibility. We plotted their joint
and partial functional connectivity (RSFC; Fig. 6b) based on
seeds from the peaks of the cluster showing the group X
imperceptibility interaction in the dorsal ATL (adATL; shown in
Fig. 2a; also used for Fig. 6a) and of the cluster showing the
group X imperceptibility interaction in medial ATL (mATL;
shown in Fig. 5e). The partial RSFC shows that the medial ATL
is better connected to multisensory object-related regions in the
frontal lobe, parietal lobe, as well as in the ventral visual cortex.
This connectivity profile is consistent with the literature linking
medial structures in ATL, mainly the perirhinal cortex, as the
mechanism of sensory feature integration of object features27–29.
In contrast, the dorsal ATL is more strongly connected to the
lateral and anterior ATL towards the temporal pole, as well as to
the inferior frontal lobe, parts of the language network.
Therefore, the RSFC analysis also supports the distinct roles of
these subregions of ATL. The connectivity profiles of these two
Concrete > Abstract
n = 26, both groups (Exp 1)
Concrete > Abstract
Sighted (Exp 1)
Perceptible > Imperceptible
Blind (Exp 1)
p < 0.005
p < 0.05
(corr.)
a
b
c
d
e
f
Feature
Astral
Scene
0
0.1
0.2
Feature
Astral
Scene
0
0.1
0.2
*
*
mATL
GLM parameter estimate (beta)
Imperceptibility effect
Blind (Exp 1)
Group × Imperceptibility
interaction (Exp 1)
ROI analysis: mATL
Blind (Exp 2)
Sighted (Exp 2)
Perceptible
Imperceptible
Fig. 5 Perceptible concepts processing is supported by the medial ATL. a A
contrast of concrete everyday objects as compared with typical abstract
words in the combined subject group (n = 26, in a; see b for sighted group
separately) shows a network of regions associated with multisensory object
perception (data from Exp. 1). In the ATL, the medial ATL shows preference
for processing concrete objects. b The contrast of concrete everyday
objects as compared with typical abstract words in the sighted group
replicates the effect of both groups (panel A) in medial ATL (data from Exp.
1). c The contrast for perceptible vs. imperceptible concepts in the blind
shows medial ATL prefers perceptible concepts (data from Exp. 1). d Medial
ATL shows a perceptibility effect in the blind group across content domains
(2-way ANOVA, perceptibility and content domain; data from Exp. 1). e The
perceptibility effect differs between the groups in medial ATL (cluster
labeled mATL), as evident from a group X imperceptibility interaction (data
from Exp. 1). f Data sampled from mATL (the cluster shown in e) in the
independent Experiment 2 replicates the preference for perceptible (e.g.,
“rain”) over imperceptible (“rainbow”) concepts in the blind in medial ATL,
although the concepts are perceptible via non-visual modalities. Error bars
represent standard error of the difference between means for the
perceptible and imperceptible words in each content domain. Asterisks
represent statistically significant difference between perceptible and
imperceptible concepts (paired t test, t(22) > 3.505, p < 0.05, Bonferroni
corrected for multiple comparisons)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 regions do not show large-scale differences in the blind group
(Supplementary Fig. 7B,C,E).
Discussion
We find that the response of various parts of the ATL to abstract
concepts can be broken down into effects of imperceptibility and
of objecthood/referentiality. Words devoid of sensorially-acces-
sible, tangible features, either classical abstract concepts (“free-
dom”)
or
words
depicting
visually
dominant
phenomena
(“rainbow”) in congenitally blind people, show preferred activa-
tion in the left dorsal superior ATL (Fig. 2). Supporting evidence
for this are the results of the multivariate RSA which found that
the activation pattern in this region correlated negatively with the
level of sensory perceptibility of the concepts in the blind
(Fig. 3b), even when controlling for multiple other factors,
including referentiality (Supplementary Fig. 4F,G). In contrast,
the lateral areas in anterior STS and the temporal pole show a
preference for abstract concepts without a consistent corre-
sponding preference for imperceptible concepts in the blind
(Supplementary Fig. 6A). Instead, their activation in response to
abstract concepts exceeds that of even imperceptible concepts
(Fig. 4), suggesting a role for the absence of referents altogether—
the absence of objecthood—in determining this regions’ repre-
sentational preference. These two regions are partly overlapping
and strongly functionally connected (Fig. 6a), suggesting parallel
involvement in processing different but similarly amodal contents
of conceptual information. Our results also further support the
role of the medial ATL, the perirhinal cortex and nearby regions,
in processing sensorially derived properties of concepts, as it
shows a combined preference for concrete objects as well as
perceptible objects in the blind (Fig. 5). This medial aspect of ATL
is more strongly connected functionally to multisensory object-
processing regions than the dorsal and lateral aspects of ATL
(Fig. 6b). The findings reported here reveal a richly articulated
neural organization of the various dimensions of the repre-
sentation of abstract and concrete concepts.
First, these findings support the role of ATL in processing
semantic content related to aspects of sensorially derived prop-
erties, including objecthood, while controlling for common con-
founds associated with the typical items used to evaluate the
representation of abstract versus concrete concepts2,12,13,16.
Multiple neuroimaging studies have emphasized the role of the
superior, dorsolateral ATL, and specifically the anterior STG, in
the representation and retrieval of semantic and conceptual
information1,4,7,10,11,30. Furthermore, studies of the temporal
variant of frontotemporal dementia, which results in the selective
deterioration of semantic knowledge, have implicated the bilateral
ATL in encoding semantic knowledge1,10,11,31–34. Our findings
support the ATL’s role in the representation of conceptual
knowledge and show that the content processed in these regions
can be such that it extends beyond sensory experience and object
referents.
Second, this study reveals functional dissociations within the
ATL—dorsal, lateral, and medial aspects of ATL—based on the
RSFC - dorsal and lateral ATL peaks
FC to dorsal ATL (adATL)
All p < 0.05 (corr.)
All p < 0.05 (corr.)
FC to lateral ATL (IATL)
FC to dorsal ATL (adATL)
FC to both
FC to both
FC to medial ATL (mATL)
a
b RSFC - dorsal and medial ATL peaks
Fig. 6 Different functional networks for different aspects of ATL. a Partial
RSFC was computed from the dorsal (red; adATL) and lateral (green; lATL)
ATL peaks in the sighted. Overlapping RSFC to both seeds (in yellow) is
predominant, showing that these two regions belong largely the same
functional network. Similar findings were evident in the blind group, and
group differences in the connectivity to these seeds were minimal (see
Supplementary Fig. 7A,C,D). b The dorsal and medial ATL regions, which
show opposite preferences for perceptibility in the blind (adATL and mATL)
belong to largely different functional networks in the sighted. Partial RSFC is
plotted for the dorsal (red) and medial (green) ATL. Overlapping RSFC to
both seeds is depicted in yellow. Similar findings were evident in the blind
group, and group differences in the connectivity to these seeds were
minimal (Supplementary Fig. 7B,C,E)
Dorsal ATL: Non-sensory object processing
Lateral ATL: Abstract, non-object concepts
Medial ATL: (perirhinal): Sensory object processing
Fig. 7 Summary of ATL division-of-labor. Our results indicate that different
aspects of dorsolateral ATL are engaged in the processing of abstract
concepts due to a preference for imperceptible concepts (dorsal ATL,
marked green) and for reference-free concepts (lateral ATL, marked blue).
Medial ATL (red) shows a preference for perceptible concepts
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 effects of perceptibility and objecthood (see Fig. 7 for illustration).
This division is more fine-grained in nature within the dorso-
lateral cortex. Both dorsal and lateral (middle) ATL show a
preference for abstract over concrete concepts, linking them to
abstract conceptual knowledge. The ATL’s most dorsal aspect
showed a preference for abstract concepts due to their sensory
imperceptibility whereas the lateral aspects were sensitive to the
absence of object referents altogether. A partial overlap between
these two concept types was found in the dorsal banks of the STS,
suggesting that the crucial factor is the absence of different
aspects of sensory reference. Consistent with this view is the
findings of functional connectivity (Fig. 6a), showing that dorsal
and lateral ATL are found to belong largely to the same functional
network (see also35,36). Therefore, it appears that both regions
process abstract conceptual information, one concerning pri-
marily imperceptible object concepts, and the other concerning
concept domains which do not correspond to objects.
The distinction reported here between the roles of dorsal and
lateral ATL in conceptual processing is subtle, reflecting the
contribution of different aspects of abstract concepts. Much more
substantial are the distinct roles of dorsolateral and ventromedial
ATL in conceptual processing, reflecting the distinction between
“abstract” and “concrete” concepts, respectively. This finding is in
accord with research linking the medial aspect of ATL, and
particularly the perirhinal cortex, to processing of sensorially
derived conceptual properties of objects1,27,37–39. The functional
dissociation we find between dorsolateral and ventromedial ATL
is also in agreement with the neuropsychological literature where
cases have been reported of greater deficit for concrete concepts
than abstract ones in semantic dementia, some stroke patients40–
42, and in patients with ATL resection43—the reverse concrete-
ness effect. Based on our results, such a phenomenon would occur
in cases where temporal lobe damage involves the ventro-medial
aspect of ATL, sparing (at least initially in progressive disorders)
its left dorsal aspects. Evidence for medial ATL damage being
associated with a deficit in processing sensorially derived con-
ceptual properties has been demonstrated in semantic dementia
patients28. Our results additionally provide evidence for the role
of medial ATL in processing sensorially derived features of
objects beyond vision and visual experience, as they revealed a
preference in the blind for processing (non-visually) perceptible
objects as opposed to imperceptible ones (Fig. 5). Although this
region’s role has been linked especially to vision and visual
representations1,44–46, we found that perceptibility, beyond the
visual modality, is the critical component in activating this region.
This region is distinct from the lateral and dorsal aspects of ATL
and belongs to different functional networks, linking it more
robustly to multisensory, object-related regions (Fig. 6b; see also
ref. 36).
Although not tested in our design, there is much evidence that
object domain (e.g., animate versus inanimate29,47–52) and other
concept properties such as their emotional/social value16,17,53–57
play a role in the organization of conceptual processing in ATL
and more posterior regions of the temporal lobe. Our findings are
silent on the role of these factors, which are controlled for in our
experimental design and analyses (e.g., Supplementary Fig. 4F,G).
Importantly, our findings about the role of imperceptibility and
objecthood in shaping the organization of abstract concepts are
independent of the factors emotional response18,24 and semantic
diversity and contextual variation22,23, which have been cited as
confounding variables in investigations of abstract concepts. For
non-object concepts an additional conceptual domain is that of
predicates, as opposed to arguments, such as jump, plan, know,
and admire. Processing these concepts involves posterior middle
and superior aspects of the temporal lobe7,58–60, reflecting a
further articulation of conceptual representations across the
temporal lobes. Thus, multiple factors contribute to shaping the
organization of conceptual information in ATL and the temporal
lobe more generally.
The findings reported here may extend beyond the organiza-
tion of the ATL and conceptual processing in the blind to reflect
general principles about the factors that shape the neural orga-
nization of concepts in the sighted population. We chose to study
the blind as an experimental strategy to probe into the roles of
perceptibility and objecthood. There are multiple types of con-
cepts, such as materials (e.g. colorless gases like carbon dioxide),
phenomena (e.g., radiation), invisible particles (e.g., hadrons and
quarks), astral remote objects (e.g., black holes), and more, which
are imperceptible to us all. We did not use these types of stimuli
in our design due to the difficulty in controlling for other sti-
mulus parameters such as age of concept acquisition, word fre-
quency, and so forth between perceptible and imperceptible
concepts. Still, there is no reason to think that processing of these
concept would not be supported by the same ATL regions as the
imperceptible concepts to the blind. The blind showed similar
activity in left ATL to traditionally abstract (“freedom”) and
concrete concepts (“cup”, note the absence of group effects and
interaction in Supplementary Fig. 2), and their connectivity in the
ATL appears to be largely the same as in sighted individuals
(Supplementary Fig. 7), suggesting that these brain structures do
not significantly reorganize as a result of blindness, and that the
findings in this group are likely to be applicable more broadly for
the processing of imperceptible and non-object concepts. That
said, further empirical validation would strengthen the conclu-
sions reached here.
To summarize, the approach of studying a sensorially deprived
population (the blind) has allowed us to disentangle major
components of conceptual knowledge of objects and their prop-
erties: those related to perceptual properties and representations
and those related to non-sensory, modality-independent infor-
mation. These findings provide evidence for the neural correlates
of semantic representations devoid of sensorially derived features,
when controlling for multiple potential confounds, including
emotional correlates. This is found across specific content
domains in the blind, through both univariate and multivariate
analyses, and using both dimensions of sensory perceptibility and
objecthood. This amodal, sensory-independent level of concept
knowledge representation is supported by the dorsolateral ATL.
An additional, finer distinction reflects objecthood (e.g., “free-
dom” versus “rainbow” in the blind) within the larger area
representing imperceptible concepts. In contrast, a preference for
concrete concepts due to their sensory feature perceptibility
regardless of sensory modality is supported by the medial ATL.
Thus, the current findings provide important support to the
neural dissociation between abstract semantic knowledge and its
sensory properties.
Methods
Participants. A total of 12 congenitally blind and 14 sighted subjects participated
in the experiment. Participants in the blind group were between the age of 22 and
63 (mean age = 44.2 years, 8 males), and did not differ from the sighted partici-
pants in age or years of education (two-sample Welch t test, df = 24, age: p > 0.85,
years of education; p > 0.83). All sighted participants had normal or corrected-to-
normal vision. Subjects had no history of neurological disorder. See Table 1 for
detailed characteristics of the blind participants. All experimental protocols were
approved by institutional review board of Department of Psychology Peking
University, China, as well as by the institutional review board of Harvard Uni-
versity, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and all subjects gave written
informed consent.
Functional Imaging. Images were acquired using a Siemens Prisma 3-T scanner
with a 20-channel phase-array head coil at the Imaging Center for MRI Research,
Peking University. The participants lay supine with their heads snugly fixed with
foam pads to minimize head movement. Functional imaging data for Experiment 1
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 were comprised of four functional runs, each containing 251 continuous whole-
brain functional volumes that were acquired with a simultaneous multi-slice (SMS)
sequence supplied by Siemens: slice planes scanned along the rectal gyrus, 64 slices,
phase encoding direction from posterior to anterior; 2 mm thickness; 0.2 mm gap;
multi-band factor = 2; TR = 2000 ms; TE = 30 ms; FA = 90°; matrix size = 112 ×
112; FOV = 224 × 224 mm; voxel size = 2 × 2 × 2 mm.
Functional imaging data for the single-item-level event-related Experiment 2
were comprised of eight functional runs, each containing 209 continuous whole-
brain functional volumes using the same sequence parameters as the block-design
scans. The functional scans were conducted in oblique slices to overcome some of
the susceptibility artifacts affecting the ATL. Temporal signal-to-noise ratio (tSNR,
the ratio of the average signal intensity to the signal standard deviation) maps were
calculated and averaged across subjects for each group to assess data quality
(Supplementary Fig. 8). tSNR maps show signal coverage over the anterior
temporal lobes at acceptable levels for existing scan durations61 (tSNR > 70
throughout ATL), though lowest at the temporal pole and could thus lead to lower
detection power in that area. T1-weighted anatomical images were acquired using a
3D MPRAGE sequence: 192 sagittal slices; 1 mm thickness; TR = 2530 ms; TE =
2.98 ms; inversion time = 1100 ms; FA = 7°; FOV = 256 × 224 mm; voxel size =
0.5 × 0.5 × 1 mm, interpolated; matrix size = 512 × 448.
Experimental paradigm and stimuli. The stimuli for the experiment were spoken
words, each a two-character word in Mandarin Chinese, belonging to eight concept
categories (see Fig. 1a): abstract concepts (e.g., “freedom”), concrete everyday
objects (e.g., “cup”), and three additional content domains, astral/weather phe-
nomena, scenes and object features (shape and color names). Those three domains
had two different categories each, one which is perceptible through non-visual
senses (e.g., “rain”, “beach” and “square”, respectively) and the other which is
perceptible only visually (e.g., “rainbow”, “island” and “red”, respectively), and
therefore imperceptible to the blind. We used three different content domains for
testing the effect of perceptibility such that domain-specific effects would be neg-
ligible. Broadly, the visually-dominant categories are those that fit the definition of
“figurative”, following the distinction between operative and figurative objects24.
Operative objects, used for the perceivable categories here, are defined as those
which were relatively discrete and separate from the surrounding context, and
easily available to several sense modalities. Figurative elements, in contrast, are
those which did not meet these criteria but were nonetheless picturable and known
primarily by their visual configuration. For scenes, operative, perceptible scenes
were chosen such that their defining characteristics can be explored non-visually
(e.g. “beach”) and figurative, imperceptible, ones chosen to be too large for their
overall configuration or defining features to be perceived in non-visual sensory
modalities (e.g., “island”). Perceptibility ratings (the extent to which the words have
associated sensory information) of the stimuli for the astral and scene categories
were collected prior to the experiment by an independent group of six early-onset
blind subjects without visual memory (characteristics detailed in Supplementary
Table 3, subjects BS1-6) who could not participate in the fMRI study due to MR
safety issues or difficulty to reach the scanning site. These subjects did not differ in
education from the main sample of blind participants (two-sample Welch t test, t
(6) = 0.18, p < 0.86). Additionally, all the perceptible and imperceptible concepts
were rated by the blind fMRI subjects for their sensory perceptibility several
months after the scan, and were confirmed to be significantly different for all three
categories (2-way ANOVA, significant perceptible-imperceptible difference across
all three categories; F(1,54) = 344, p < 0.00001, η2 = 0.69, post hoc Welch t tests
corrected for multiple comparisons for each category perceptible-imperceptible
difference two-sample t test t(22) > 3.32, p < 0.005 in all three cases).
Each category included 10 words, matched as best as possible for imageability,
age of acquisition (AoA), familiarity and concreteness/abstractness, as assessed in
an independent sample of 45 sighted Chinese subjects with similar levels of
education (see average stimulus ratings in Supplementary Table 1). Subjects were
introduced with each word separately and asked to rate it, in a scale of 1–7 for these
characteristics, as reported previously62. Age of acquisition and familiarity are
expected to be similar in the sighted and blind subjects for these concepts; even for
color concepts which are a uniquely visual qualia, blind adults have shown
extensive familiarity63,64, such that they can create an approximated Newton color
wheel65, know the colors of everyday objects66,67 (in line with a generally intact
vocabulary acquisition68) and only a sensitive similarity measure of one specific
concept category (fruit and vegetables) based on color proved to be affected by
blindness66. Emotional valence and arousal levels were assessed in a similar
manner69 in Mandarin Chinese directly in the blind subjects, several months after
the scan. Semantic diversity values were derived from previous literature22.
Concrete objects and abstract concepts differed significantly in concreteness/
abstractness, imageability and semantic diversity but not in AoA, familiarity,
emotional arousal or valence (see detail for all statistical tests in Supplementary
Table 2). No figurative-operative (imperceptible-perceptible) condition pairs
showed significant difference in these parameters (post hoc t tests, corrected for
multiple comparisons; see Supplementary Table 2). Importantly, the overall
imperceptible vs. perceptible design (relevant for fMRI effect depicted in Fig. 2a, c,
Fig. 5c, d, e) did not significantly differ (mixed-effects ANOVA, F(1,58) = 0.1, p =
0.76, η2 = 0.0017), nor did it significantly differ in post hoc contrasts in any of the
behavioral parameters (post hoc Welch t -tests, Bonferroni corrected, t(18) < 2.19,
p > 0.03, corrected α = 0.007). The comparison of the imperceptible astral concepts
to the abstract concepts (relevant for fMRI effect depicted in Fig. 4b) differed in the
abstractness/ concreteness and imageability ratings but not in any other parameter
(see Supplementary Table 2).
During Experiment 1, the participants kept their eyes closed and heard short
lists of words in a block design paradigm (8 s blocks with 8 words each, baseline
between blocks 8 s). They were instructed to detect and respond to semantic catch
trials, a fruit name appearing within blocks (which occurred three times in each
run; these blocks were removed from further analysis). Each run began with a 12 s
rest period. Each block contained words from one of the eight concept categories.
Experiment 2 was an item-level slow event-related design and was carried out to
conduct representational similarity analysis (RSA;70), as well as to be used as an
independent data set for sampling ROI data (as the ROIs were defined from maps
plotted from Experiment 1). Experiment 2 was conducted at a different scanning
session on the same subjects. The stimuli were eight of the ten words the
perceptible, imperceptible and abstract categories from the main, block-design
experiment stimuli. During each of the eight slow event-related runs, the subjects
heard each word once, in a random order, followed by a 5 s baseline period. The
subjects task was, as in Experiment 1, to detect fruit names, trials which were not
further analyzed.
Data analysis. Data analysis was performed using the Brain Voyager QX
2.8 software package (Brain Innovation, Maastricht, Netherlands) using standard
preprocessing procedures. The first two images of each scan were excluded from
the analysis because of non-steady state magnetization. Functional MRI data
preprocessing included head motion correction, slice scan time correction and
high-pass filtering (cutoff frequency: 3 cycles/scan) using temporal smoothing in
the frequency domain to remove drifts and to improve the signal to noise ratio. No
data included in the study showed translational motion exceeding 2 mm in any
given axis, or had spike-like motion of more than 1 mm in any direction. Func-
tional and anatomical datasets for each subject were aligned and fit to standardized
Talairach space71. Single subject data were spatially smoothed with a three-
dimensional 6 mm full-width at half- maximum Gaussian in order to reduce inter-
subject anatomical variability, and then grouped using a general linear model
(GLM) in a hierarchical random effects analysis (RFX;72). Group analyses were
conducted for the blind and sighted group separately (e.g. Supplementary Fig. 1)
and for the combined blind and sighted subject group (n = 26, e.g., Fig. 1b, c). An
ANOVA model was computed for group, stimulus domain and perceptibility,
including the perceptible and imperceptible stimuli for the object features, scenes
and weather/astral phenomena (Figs. 2a and 5e; comparing dark red and dark blue
three left-most columns in Fig. 1a). An imperceptibility X domain ANOVA model
were computed for the blind group separately to assess the direction of the
interaction with the group (Supplementary Fig. 6). The minimum significance level
of all results presented in this study was set to p < 0.05 corrected for multiple
comparisons, using the spatial extent method73 (a set-level statistical inference
correction). This was done based on the Monte Carlo simulation approach,
extended to 3D datasets using the threshold size plug-in for BrainVoyager QX. The
correction was applied in the entire cortex for the abstract vs. concrete contrast
(and vice versa; e.g., Figs. 1b and 5a) and for the group X imperceptibility inter-
action, as well as for supplementary analyses in figures presented on entire cortical
hemispheres. The correction was applied in the anatomically defined left ATL (the
temporal lobe anterior to Heschl’s gyrus) for the rest of the analyses which focused
on this region. To assess the different conditions contribution to the impercept-
ibility effects, we also sampled the activation GLM parameter estimates for each
group and experimental condition several regions of interest. These ROIs were
defined from contrasts/voxel-wise effects from Experiment 1, and sampled from
the independent Experiment 2.
RSA70 from the event-related data was computed as using CoSMoMVPA, an
toolbox in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA)74. Dissimilarity matrices were
built from behavioral ratings of the stimuli for their sensory perceptibility, as rated
by the blind fMRI subjects several months after the scan (Fig. 3a). Searchlight
pattern correlation analysis was computed for the unsmoothed neural patterns in
the blind and sighted controls, based on the median ratings of the blind group. The
mean Fisher-transformed correlation for each participant was entered into a two-
tailed one-sample t test against the correlation expected by chance (0) for each
group. The resulting map (Fig. 3b) was corrected for multiple comparisons using
the spatial extent method, as described above. A similar analysis was applied based
on behavioral ratings of sensory perceptibility collected from the blind subjects
who did not participate in the fMRI experiment (Supplementary Fig. 4A,B; Subjects
BS1-BS6 in Supplementary Table 3), and based on behavioral ratings of visual
perceptibility of the concepts as rated by an independent group of sighted
participants (S3 C,D; n = 45). To control for any collinearity of the sensory
perceptibility of the concepts with other behavioral ratings, we replicated the RSA
of the sensory perceptibility of the concepts (as rated by the fMRI blind
participants) while using behavioral ratings of abstractness, imaginability,
manipulability, emotional valence, emotional arousal and referentiality (see below)
as nuisance regressors (Supplementary Fig. 4F,G). RSA based on ratings of
referentiality/objecthood collected from the blind fMRI participants and three
additional congenitally blind people (total n = 15; see additional subject
characteristics in Supplementary Table 3), while using behavioral ratings of
perceptibility, abstractness, imaginability, manipulability, emotional valence and
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 emotional arousal as nuisance regressors. Referentiality was defined as the extent to
which each concept describes something that could be pointed out in the external
world (Supplementary Fig. 4H).
Functional connectivity data analysis and MRI acquisition. In addition to task-
based data, a data set of spontaneous BOLD fluctuations for the investigation of
intrinsic (rest state75) functional connectivity was collected while the blind and
sighted subjects lay in the scanner without any external stimulation or task. Data
was comprised of one functional run, containing 240 continuous whole-brain
functional volumes that were acquired with the same EPI sequence and parameters
as the task experiments. The first two images of each scan were excluded from the
analysis because of non-steady state magnetization. After registration to individual
anatomies in Talairach space, ventricles and white matter signal were sampled
using a grow-region function embedded in the Brain Voyager from a seed in each
individual brain. Using MATLAB ventricle and white matter time-courses were
regressed out of the data and the resulting time course was filtered to the frequency
band-width of 0.1–0.01 Hz. The resulting data were then imported back onto
BrainVoyager for further analyses. Single subject data were spatially smoothed with
a three-dimensional 6 mm half-width Gaussian. Seed regions-of-interest (ROIs)
were defined from the group-level analyses of the task-data from Experiment 1.
Resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) was computed from the following: (1)
a cluster showing group X imperceptibility interaction in the dorsal ATL (Fig. 2a;
adATL), (2) a cluster showing group X imperceptibility interaction in medial ATL
(Fig. 5e; mATL), (3) a cluster in lateral anterior ATL showing preference to con-
cepts without external referents (“freedom”) over imperceptible astral ones
(“rainbow”; Fig. 4a; lATL). Individual time courses from these seed ROIs were
sampled from each of the sighted participants, z-normalized and used as individual
predictors in group random-effect GLM analysis. Partial correlation was also
computed for seeds 1 and 2 (Fig. 6b), and seeds 1 and 3 (Fig. 6a), to observe the
common and separate networks to which these seeds belong. The results were
corrected for multiple comparisons using the spatial extent method within the
entire cortex as detailed above. Identical analysis was conducted in the blind group
separately, and the joint group data was used to compute the difference in RSFC
between the groups (sighted RSFC > blind RSFC, p < 0.05 corrected for multiple
comparisons; see Supplementary Fig. 7).
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corre-
sponding authors upon reasonable request.
Received: 29 March 2018 Accepted: 7 November 2018
References
1.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Patterson, K. & Rogers, T. T. The neural and
computational bases of semantic cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 42–55
(2017).
2.
Hoffman, P., Binney, R. J. & Lambon Ralph, M. A. Differing contributions of
inferior prefrontal and anterior temporal cortex to concrete and abstract
conceptual knowledge. Cortex 63, 250–266 (2015).
3.
Shallice, T. & Cooper, R. P. Is there a semantic system for abstract words?
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 175 (2013).
4.
Simmons, W. K. & Martin, A. The anterior temporal lobes and the functional
architecture of semantic memory. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 15, 645–649
(2009).
5.
Paivio, A. Imagery and Verbal Processes (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Oxford,
1971).
6.
Beauvois, M. F. The neuropsychology of cognitive function - Optic aphasia: a
process of interaction between vision and language. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. Biol. Sci. 298, 35–47 (1982).
7.
Binder, J. R., Desai, R. H., Graves, W. W. & Conant, L. L. Where Is the
semantic system? a critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional
neuroimaging studies. Cereb. Cortex 19, 2767–2796 (2009).
8.
Wang, J., Conder, J. A., Blitzer, D. N. & Shinkareva, S. V. Neural
representation of abstract and concrete concepts: a meta-analysis of
neuroimaging studies. Hum. Brain. Mapp. 31, 1459–1468 (2010).
9.
Noppeney, U. & Price, C. J. Retrieval of abstract semantics. Neuroimage 22,
164–170 (2004).
10. Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J. & Rogers, T. T. Where do you know what you
know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 8, 976–987 (2007).
11. Mirman, D. et al. Neural organization of spoken language revealed by lesion-
symptom mapping. Nat. Commun. 6, 6762 (2015).
12. Carroll, J. B. & White, M. N. Word frequency and age of acquisition as
determiners of picture-naming latency. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 25, 85–95 (1973).
13. Feyereisen, P., Borght, V. D. & Seron, X. The operativity effect in naming: a re-
analysis. Neuropsychologia 26, 401–415 (1988).
14. Kousta, S. T., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Andrews, M. & Del Campo, E. The
representation of abstract words: why emotion matters. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.
140, 14–34 (2011).
15. Wiemer‐Hastings, K. & Xu, X. Content differences for abstract and concrete
concepts. Cogn. Sci. 29, 719–736 (2005).
16. Vigliocco, G. et al. The neural representation of abstract words: the role of
emotion. Cereb. Cortex 24, 1767–1777 (2013).
17. Borghi, A. A. & Binkofski, F. Words As Social Tools: An Embodied View On
Abstract Concepts. (Springer, New York, US, 2014).
18. Barsalou, L. W. Grounded cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 59, 617–645 (2008).
19. Kiefer, M. & Pulvermüller, F. Conceptual representations in mind and brain:
theoretical developments, current evidence and future directions. Cortex 48,
805–825 (2012).
20. Martin, A. GRAPES—Grounding representations in action, perception, and
emotion systems: How object properties and categories are represented in the
human brain. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 23, 979–990 (2016).
21. Leshinskaya, A. & Caramazza, A. For a cognitive neuroscience of concepts:
moving beyond the grounding issue. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 23, 991–1001 (2016).
22. Hoffman, P., Lambon Ralph, M. & Rogers, T. Semantic diversity: a measure of
semantic ambiguity based on variability in the contextual usage of words.
Behav. Res. Methods 45, 718–730 (2013).
23. Schwanenflugel, P. J. & Shoben, E. J. Differential context effects in the
comprehension of abstract and concrete verbal materials. J. Exp. Psychol.
Learn. Mem. Cogn. 9, 82 (1983).
24. Gardner, H. The contribution of operativity to naming capacity in aphasic
patients. Neuropsychologia 11, 213–220 (1973).
25. Lacey, S. & Sathian, K. Visuo-haptic multisensory object recognition,
categorization and representation. Front. Psychol. 5, 00730 (2014).
26. Bizley, J. K. & Cohen, Y. E. The what, where and how of auditory-object
perception. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 693–707 (2013).
27. Coutanche, M. N. & Thompson-Schill, S. L. Creating concepts from
converging features in human cortex. Cereb. Cortex 25, 2584–2593 (2014).
28. Hoffman, P., Evans, G. A. & Lambon Ralph, M. A. The anterior temporal
lobes are critically involved in acquiring new conceptual knowledge: evidence
for impaired feature integration in semantic dementia. Cortex 50, 19–31
(2014).
29. Clarke, A. & Tyler, L. K. Understanding what we see: how we derive meaning
from vision. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 677–687 (2016).
30. Wang, X. et al. Organizational principles of abstract words in the human
brain. Cereb. Cortex 28, 4305–4318 (2017).
31. Bozeat, S., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Patterson, K., Garrard, P. & Hodges, J. R.
Non-verbal semantic impairment in semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia 38,
1207–1215 (2000).
32. Hodges, J. R., Patterson, K., Oxbury, S. & Funnell, E. Semantic dementia.
Progressive fluent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy. Brain 115(Pt 6),
1783–1806 (1992).
33. Mesulam, M.-M., Thompson, C. K., Weintraub, S. & Rogalski, E. J. The
Wernicke conundrum and the anatomy of language comprehension in
primary progressive aphasia. Brain 138, 2423–2437 (2015).
34. Bi, Y. et al. The role of the left anterior temporal lobe in language processing
revisited: evidence from an individual with ATL resection. Cortex 47, 575–587
(2011).
35. Xu, Y., Lin, Q., Han, Z., He, Y. & Bi, Y. Intrinsic functional network
architecture of human semantic processing: modules and hubs. Neuroimage
132, 542–555 (2016).
36. Jackson, R. L., Hoffman, P., Pobric, G. & Lambon Ralph, M. A. The semantic
network at work and rest: differential connectivity of anterior temporal lobe
subregions. J. Neurosci. 36, 1490–1501 (2016).
37. Clarke, A. & Tyler, L. K. Object-specific semantic coding in human perirhinal
cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 4766–4775 (2014).
38. Martin, C. B., Douglas, D., Newsome, R. N., Man, L. L. Y. & Barense, M. D.
Integrative and distinctive coding of visual and conceptual object features in
the ventral visual stream. eLife 7, e31873 (2018).
39. Tamura, K. et al. Conversion of object identity to object-general semantic
value in the primate temporal cortex. Science 357, 687–692 (2017).
40. Warrington, E. K. The selective impairment of semantic memory. Q. J. Exp.
Psychol. 27, 635–657 (1975).
41. Crutch, S. J. & Warrington, E. K. Abstract and concrete concepts have
structurally different representational frameworks. Brain 128, 615–627 (2005).
42. Papagno, C., Capasso, R. & Miceli, G. Reversed concreteness effect for nouns
in a subject with semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia 47, 1138–1148 (2009).
43. Loiselle, M. et al. Comprehension of concrete and abstract words in patients
with selective anterior temporal lobe resection and in patients with selective
amygdalo-hippocampectomy. Neuropsychologia 50, 630–639 (2012).
44. Rice, G. E., Lambon Ralph, M. A. & Hoffman, P. The roles of left versus right
anterior temporal lobes in conceptual knowledge: an ALE meta-analysis of 97
functional neuroimaging studies. Cereb. Cortex 25, 4374–4391 (2015).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
 45. Skipper, L. M., Ross, L. A. & Olson, I. R. Sensory and semantic category
subdivisions within the anterior temporal lobes. Neuropsychologia 49,
3419–3429 (2011).
46. Visser, M., Jefferies, E. & Lambon Ralph, M. A. Semantic processing in the
anterior temporal lobes: a meta-analysis of the functional neuroimaging
literature. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22, 1083–1094 (2009).
47. Caramazza, A. & Shelton, J. R. Domain-specific knowledge systems in the
brain the animate-inanimate distinction. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 10, 1–34 (1998).
48. Warrington, E. K. & Shallice, T. Category specific semantic impairments.
Brain 107(Pt 3), 829–854 (1984).
49. Blundo, C., Ricci, M. & Miller, L. Category-specific knowledge deficit for
animals in a patient with herpes simplex encephalitis. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 23,
1248–1268 (2006).
50. Malone, P. S., Glezer, L. S., Kim, J., Jiang, X. & Riesenhuber, M. Multivariate
pattern analysis reveals category-related organization of semantic
representations in anterior temporal cortex. J. Neurosci. 36, 10089–10096
(2016).
51. Bi, Y., Wang, X. & Caramazza, A. Object domain and modality in the ventral
visual pathway. Trends Cogn. Sci.20, 282–290 (2016).
52. Brambati, S. M. et al. The anatomy of category-specific object naming in
neurodegenerative diseases. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 18, 1644–1653 (2006).
53. Mellem, M. S., Jasmin, K. M., Peng, C. & Martin, A. Sentence processing in
anterior superior temporal cortex shows a social-emotional bias.
Neuropsychologia 89, 217–224 (2016).
54. Lin, N. et al. Fine Subdivisions of the semantic network supporting social
and sensory–motor semantic processing. Cereb. Cortex 28, 2699–2710
(2017).
55. Binney, R. J., Hoffman, P. & Lambon Ralph, M. A. Mapping the multiple
graded contributions of the anterior temporal lobe representational hub to
abstract and social concepts: evidence from distortion-corrected fMRI. Cereb.
Cortex 26, 4227–4241 (2016).
56. Zahn, R. et al. Social concepts are represented in the superior anterior
temporal cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 104, 6430–6435 (2007).
57. Olson, I. R., McCoy, D., Klobusicky, E. & Ross, L. A. Social cognition and the
anterior temporal lobes: a review and theoretical framework. Soc. Cogn. Affect.
Neurosci. 8, 123–133 (2013).
58. Bedny, M. & Caramazza, A. Perception, action, and word meanings in the
human brain: the case from action verbs. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1224, 81–95
(2011).
59. Martin, A., Haxby, J. V., Lalonde, F. M., Wiggs, C. L. & Ungerleider, L. G.
Discrete cortical regions associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of
action. Science 270, 102–105 (1995).
60. Damasio, H. et al. Neural correlates of naming actions and of naming spatial
relations. Neuroimage 13, 1053–1064 (2001).
61. Murphy, K., Bodurka, J. & Bandettini, P. A. How long to scan? The
relationship between fMRI temporal signal to noise ratio and necessary scan
duration. Neuroimage 34, 565–574 (2007).
62. Barca, L., Burani, C. & Arduino, L. S. Word naming times and
psycholinguistic norms for Italian nouns. Behav. Res. Methods Instrum.
Comput. 34, 424–434 (2002).
63. Bedny, M. & Saxe, R. Insights into the origins of knowledge from the cognitive
neuroscience of blindness. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 29, 56–84 (2012).
64. Landau, B. & Gleitman, L. R. Language and Experience: Evidence From
The Blind Child. Vol. 8 (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, US,
1985).
65. Marmor, G. S. Age at onset of blindness and the development of the semantics
of color names. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 25, 267–278 (1978).
66. Connolly, A. C., Gleitman, L. R. & Thompson-Schill, S. L. Effect of congenital
blindness on the semantic representation of some everyday concepts. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 8241–8246 (2007).
67. Mills, A. E. Language Acquisition in the Blind Child: Normal and Deficient.
(Croom Helm, 1983).
68. Bigelow, A. Early words of blind children. J. Child Lang. 14, 47–56 (2009).
69. Bradley, M. M. & Lang, P. J. Affective norms for English words (ANEW):
Instruction Manual And Affective Ratings. Technical Report C-1 (Tthe center
for research in psychophysiology, University of Florida, 1999).
70. Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M. & Bandettini, P. Representational similarity analysis
- connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2, 4
(2008).
71. Talairach, J. & Tournoux, P. Co-planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain.
(Thieme, New York, USA, 1988).
72. Friston, K. J., Holmes, A. P. & Worsley, K. J. How many subjects constitute a
study? Neuroimage 10, 1–5 (1999).
73. Friston, K. J., Worsley, K. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., Mazziotta, J. C. & Evans, A.
C. Assessing the significance of focal activations using their spatial extent.
Hum. Brain. Mapp. 1, 210–220 (1993).
74. Oosterhof, N. N., Connolly, A. C. & Haxby, J. V. CoSMoMVPA: multi-modal
multivariate pattern analysis of neuroimaging data in Matlab / GNU Octave.
Front. Neuroinform. 10, 27 (2016).
75. Biswal, B., Yetkin, F. Z., Haughton, V. M. & Hyde, J. S. Functional
connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar
MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 34, 537–541 (1995).
Acknowledgements
We are thankful to the blind subjects who participated in our experiment, and to Hila
Zadka for statistical advising. This work was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (31500882 to X.Y.W., 31671128 to Y.B.); Società Scienze Mente
Cervello–Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Trento e Rovereto, by a grant from the
Provincia Autonoma di Trento, and by a Harvard Provostial postdoctoral fund (to A.C.);
and by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under
Marie Sklodowska-Curie Grant Agreement 654837 and the Israel National Postdoctoral
Award Program for Advancing Women in Science (to E.S-A.); National Program for
Special Support of Top-notch Young Professionals (to Y.B.); the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities (2017XTCX04, to Y.B.) and Interdisciplinary Research
Funds of Beijing Normal University (to Y.B.).
Author contributions
E.S-A., X.W., Y.B. and A.C. designed research; X.W. performed research; E.S-A. analyzed
the data; and E.S-A., X.W., Y.B. and A.C. wrote the paper.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-07574-3.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2018) 9:5250 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07574-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
