 IAGG 2017 World Congress
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 5. Ministry of Health, Singapore, 
Singapore
Singapore is one of the fastest-aging populations in the 
world. Predictions show that the percentage of citizens aged 65 
and above will increase from 12.4% in 2014 to 24.0% in 2030. 
In addition, obesity and the burden of chronic diseases are both 
increasing as lifestyles change. Future health expenditures are 
determined by multiple factors: age, sex, health status, obesity 
and smoking. Resource allocation and cost-containment pose 
growing challenges to policy makers. The goal of this paper 
is to model future healthcare expenditures based on current 
trends and evaluate the impact of alternative interventions that 
aim to reduce smoking prevalence and obesity.
To project the health and functional status of future 
cohorts of the elderly and to understand their cost impli-
cations, we have developed a version of the Future Elderly 
Model (FEM) adapted to the context of Singapore. FEM-
Singapore is a dynamic Markov micro-simulation model 
that allows individual health states to evolve over time and 
accounts for trends in background drivers such as aging, obe-
sity, diseases and disability. Our main source of population 
data is the Singapore Chinese Health Study (SCHS), a cohort 
study of over 63,000 respondents followed in three waves 
from 1993–2010. The SCHS is linked with a detailed cost 
database from the Ministry of Health, Singapore that cap-
tures all hospitalization episodes for the same period. Our 
simulation model projects inpatient healthcare costs into 
2050.
UN AGENDA 2030: ADULT VACCINATIONS AS 
A PUBLIC HEALTH INTEREST FOR HEALTHY 
AGEING
C. Stuen1, J. Barratt1, K. Bluestone3, E. Dhar2, 1. United 
Nations, International Federation on Ageing, New York, 
New York, 2. AARP International Office, New York, New 
York, 3. Age International, London, England, United 
Kingdom
The United Nations adopted a 15 year Sustainable 
Development Agenda for 2016–2030 (Agenda 2030). The 
prior agenda, known as the Millennium Development Goals, 
made no reference to older persons, however a Stakeholder 
Group on Ageing advocated so that Agenda 2030 has an 
overarching principle of “leaving no one behind.” There 
are 17 Goals and 169 Targets and accompanying indicators 
that contain specific and implied references to older persons. 
Specific attention will be given to Goal 3 of Agenda 2030-
”to ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at 
all ages.” The implementation of one of its targets such as 
“Achieve universal health coverage...access to safe, effective, 
quality, and affordable, essential medicines and vaccines for 
all” provides a global opportunity to develop and seek ways 
to promote healthy ageing including adult vaccinations. 
Research has shown that adult immunizations can drive 
healthy ageing initiatives however obstacles still remain to 
successful implementation. This poster presents the oppor-
tunities and strategies to convince policymakers to adopt a 
lifecourse approach to healthy ageing including adult immu-
nizations. The Stakeholder Group on Ageing members from 
across the globe will identify programmes to influence poli-
cies on ways to promote healthy ageing and reablement in 
this poster.
SOCIAL VALUE OF PREVENTING ELDERLY 
DEPRESSION WITH COLLABORATIVE STEPPED 
CARE AND PRODUCTIVE AGEING
T. Lum, A.C. Cheung, J. Tang, P.W. Wong, V. Lou, W. Chan, 
S. Ng, G. Wong, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong
Approximately 10% of older adults living in the com-
munity has clinically significant depression in Hong Kong. 
The associated societal costs (e.g., years of life lost, direct 
healthcare and long-term care costs, disease complications) 
are huge. Previous analysis of Medicare and Medicaid claims 
data has suggested an additional direct healthcare costs 
for late-life depression ranging from US$5,771 to up to 
US$17,607 per person per year depending on care setting.
Indicated prevention (targeting older persons with high 
risk factors) and selective prevention (targeting those with 
high risk factors and mild symptoms) can reduce suffering 
and societal costs. Funded by the Hong Kong Jockey Club 
Charities Trust, this study aims to test a best practice model 
for effective outreach, engagement, and prevention of late-
life depression in 3,840 community-dwelling older adults. 
The 3-year project has three components: (1) collaborative 
stepped care between elderly and mental health services; (2) 
productive ageing for active outreach and engagement; and 
(3) community empowerment for mental health literacy.
The overall social value of the model will be assessed 
using social return on investment (SROI) method, a type 
of cost-benefit analysis, to provide evidence for further ser-
vice rollout. Following standard SROI study method, focus 
groups and interviews will be conducted to identify areas of 
changes and map outcomes/financial proxies with stakehold-
ers, and quantitative data will be collected for evidencing, 
establishing impact and calculating SROI. We report here the 
service model, preliminary findings from focus groups and 
interviews, and the forecast SROI of the model.
U.S. RESOURCES FOR DELIVERING CHRONIC 
DISEASE-SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION: THE 
NATIONAL RESOURCE CENTER
C. Plass1, M. Altpeter2, K. Kulinski3, 1. National Chronic 
Disease Self-Management Resource Center, National 
Council on Aging, Arlington, Virginia, 2. University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 3. 
Administration for Community Living/AoA, Washington, 
District of Columbia
Effective interventions, such as chronic disease self-
management education (CDSME) programs, are neces-
sary to address the growing epidemic of chronic diseases in 
the US and abroad. Funded by the US Administration for 
Community Living (ACL), the National Council on Aging 
(NCOA) serves as the National Resource Center to support 
the expansion and sustainability of evidence-based CDSME 
programs countrywide. This poster is designed for profes-
sionals interested in exploring CDSME program delivery 
resources that are accessible at the Center. It will showcase 
the ways NCOA provides training and technical assistance 
to a nationwide network of state and community-based 
organizations that offer CDSME programs. It will describe 
and explain how to access the range of webinars that cover 
a variety of topics on CDSME programming, including out-
reach to underserved populations, health care integration, 
Innovation in Aging, 2017
, Vol. 1, No. S1
407
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/innovateage/article-abstract/1/suppl_1/407/3898317 by guest on 04 June 2019
