 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 15 November 2016
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00498
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
Edited by:
Atsushi Masamune,
Tohoku University, Japan
Reviewed by:
Yuji Naito,
Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Japan
Yoichi Kakuta,
Tohoku University Hospital, Japan
*Correspondence:
Stephen J. Pandol
stephen.pandol@cshs.org
Yuan-Ping Han
hanyp@scu.edu.cn
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work.
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Gastrointestinal Sciences,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 22 August 2016
Accepted: 12 October 2016
Published: 15 November 2016
Citation:
Su D, Nie Y, Zhu A, Chen Z, Wu P
,
Zhang L, Luo M, Sun Q, Cai L, Lai Y,
Xiao Z, Duan Z, Zheng S, Wu G, Hu R,
Tsukamoto H, Lugea A, Liu Z,
Pandol SJ and Han Y-P (2016) Vitamin
D Signaling through Induction of
Paneth Cell Defensins Maintains Gut
Microbiota and Improves Metabolic
Disorders and Hepatic Steatosis in
Animal Models. Front. Physiol. 7:498.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00498
Vitamin D Signaling through
Induction of Paneth Cell Defensins
Maintains Gut Microbiota and
Improves Metabolic Disorders and
Hepatic Steatosis in Animal Models
Danmei Su 1 †, Yuanyang Nie 1 †, Airu Zhu 1 †, Zishuo Chen 1, Pengfei Wu 1, Li Zhang 1,
Mei Luo 1, 2, Qun Sun 1, Linbi Cai 1, Yuchen Lai 1, Zhixiong Xiao 1, Zhongping Duan 3,
Sujun Zheng 3, Guihui Wu 2, Richard Hu 4, Hidekazu Tsukamoto 5, Aurelia Lugea 6,
Zhenqui Liu 6, Stephen J. Pandol 6* and Yuan-Ping Han 1, 6*
1 The Center for Growth, Metabolism and Aging, and the Key Laboratory for Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of
Education of Ministry, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, 2 Chengdu Public Health Clinical Center,
Chengdu, China, 3 Beijing YouAn Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 4 Olive View-University of California,
Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 5 Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine of the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 6 Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Metabolic
syndrome
(MetS),
characterized
as
obesity,
insulin
resistance,
and
non-alcoholic
fatty
liver
diseases
(NAFLD),
is
associated
with
vitamin
D
insufficiency/deficiency in epidemiological studies, while the underlying mechanism
is poorly addressed. On the other hand, disorder of gut microbiota, namely dysbiosis,
is known to cause MetS and NAFLD. It is also known that systemic inflammation
blocks insulin signaling pathways, leading to insulin resistance and glucose intolerance,
which are the driving force for hepatic steatosis. Vitamin D receptor (VDR) is highly
expressed in the ileum of the small intestine, which prompted us to test a hypothesis
that vitamin D signaling may determine the enterotype of gut microbiota through
regulating the intestinal interface. Here, we demonstrate that high-fat-diet feeding
(HFD) is necessary but not sufficient, while additional vitamin D deficiency (VDD) as
a second hit is needed, to induce robust insulin resistance and fatty liver. Under the
two hits (HFD+VDD), the Paneth cell-specific alpha-defensins including α-defensin 5
(DEFA5), MMP7 which activates the pro-defensins, as well as tight junction genes,
and MUC2 are all suppressed in the ileum, resulting in mucosal collapse, increased
gut permeability, dysbiosis, endotoxemia, systemic inflammation which underlie insulin
resistance and hepatic steatosis. Moreover, under the vitamin D deficient high fat
feeding (HFD+VDD), Helicobacter hepaticus, a known murine hepatic-pathogen,
is substantially amplified in the ileum, while Akkermansia muciniphila, a beneficial
symbiotic, is diminished. Likewise, the VD receptor (VDR) knockout mice exhibit
similar phenotypes, showing down regulation of alpha-defensins and MMP7 in the
ileum, increased Helicobacter hepaticus and suppressed Akkermansia muciniphila.
Remarkably, oral administration of DEFA5 restored eubiosys, showing suppression of
Helicobacter hepaticus and increase of Akkermansia muciniphila in association with
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
resolving metabolic disorders and fatty liver in the HFD+VDD mice. An in vitro analysis
showed that DEFA5 peptide could directly suppress Helicobacter hepaticus. Thus, the
results of this study reveal critical roles of a vitamin D/VDR axis in optimal expression
of defensins and tight junction genes in support of intestinal integrity and eubiosis to
suppress NAFLD and metabolic disorders.
Keywords:
vitamin
D,
metabolic
syndrome,
non-alcoholic
fatty
liver
disease
(NAFLD),
non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH), gut microbiota, defensins, helicobacter, Akkermansia muciniphila
INTRODUCTION
Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is becoming increasingly prevalent
worldwide, and in many countries about 15–20% population
bears metabolic disorders (Ford, 2005). Although clinically
characterized and diagnosed as different diseases, MetS, non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), and type-II diabetes (T2D)
share the common causes and biogenesis events. A “two hit
theory” has been proposed to explain the transition from simple
steatosis to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), characterized
by persistent hepatic inflammation, fibrosis and increased risk
for cirrhosis or/and liver cancer (Day and James, 1998). On
the other hand, insulin resistance (IR) underlies the foundation
of systemic metabolic complications, such as hyperglycemia,
dyslipidemia, hyperinsulinemia, and diabetes (Shoelson et al.,
2006). Evidence exists showing a causal role of chronic low-grade
inflammation in development of IR and NASH (Biddinger and
Kahn, 2006; Cani et al., 2007). The cellular basis of IR is mediated
in part through impairment of insulin signaling pathways, caused
by pro-inflammatory cytokines produced in inflamed tissues
including visceral fat (Hotamisligil et al., 1993).
Gut microbiota exist in a symbiotic relationship with the host,
and have critical roles in development of systemic immunity and
protecting the host from colonization of pathogenic microbes
(Ley et al., 2005; Brown et al., 2012). Particular enterotypes of
gut microbiota are determined or influenced by multiple factors
including their maternal source, host genomic polymorphisms,
immune status, and dietary composition (Rawls et al., 2006;
Nicholson et al., 2012). Unbalanced gut microbiota (dysbiosis),
on the other hand, may lead to alteration of immunity and
increased risk of diverse diseases, including type-2 diabetes and
obesity (Bäckhed et al., 2004; Ley et al., 2005; Larsen et al., 2010).
Dysbiosis is often associated with loss of the integrity of intestinal
mucosa, which may result in gut impairment and consequent
endotoxemia, hepatic bacterial translocation, low-grade systemic
inflammation, all of which may drive pathogenesis of insulin
resistance, which consequently cause hepatic steatosis and MetS
(Cani et al., 2007; Creely et al., 2007; Pendyala et al., 2012).
On the other hand, due to air pollution, insufficient sunlight
exposure, and altered dietary composition, vitamin D deficiency
(VDD) or insufficiency affects 30–60% of population worldwide,
and is increasingly found in association with many diseases
including autoimmune diseases, hepatitis, and cancer (Holick
Abbreviations: HFD, high fat diet; VDD, vitamin D deficiency or depletion;
DEFA, alpha-defensin; DEFA5, alpha-defensin 5; VDR, vitamin D receptor; VDRE,
vitamin D receptor response element.
et al., 2011). Addition to its classical roles in promoting calcium
and phosphorus adsorption, vitamin D in its active format
as calcitriol functions like sterol hormones to regulate diverse
biological functions from the host immune response to cell
differentiation (Adams and Hewison, 2010). Although, high
calorie diet including high fat diet (HFD) is thought to be
a major cause of IR, NAFLD, and MetS, the epidemiologic
evidence also shows an association of VDD in development of
MetS (Botella-Carretero et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2009; Barchetta
et al., 2011; Bea et al., 2015). In animal experiments, dietary
vitamin D deficiency was found to exacerbate Toll-like receptor
activation and hepatic inflammation in obese rats (Roth et al.,
2012). In a mouse model, we previously demonstrated that
vitamin D-deficient-high-fat diet (HFD+VDD) hampers the
enterohepatic circulation of bile acids, leading to NASH (Kong
et al., 2014). Furthermore, we recently found that long-
term dietary vitamin D depletion could generate spontaneous
liver fibrosis in a mice model (Zhu et al., 2015). However,
the causal role of vitamin D deficiency in the pathogenesis
of NAFLD and its underlying mechanism remain largely
unknown.
In present study, we investigated the mechanistic roles of
vitamin D signaling in maintaining the “gut interface,” namely
the interplay between the intestinal epithelium and the adjacent
microbiota in the ileum. We found that in presence of sufficient
vitamin D supplement (standard AIN93 diet), the mice were
tolerant to HFD feeding, showing relatively less insulin resistance
and moderate hepatic steatosis. In contrast, feeding the mice
with a vitamin D-deficient-high-fat diet (HFD+VDD) led to
overt insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis and even signs of
NASH. The insulin resistance under the double hits was closely
related to a sequential chain of events that start from the VDD-
mediated down regulation of ileal Paneth cell specific α-defensins
(DEFA), their converting enzyme MMP7, and tight junction
genes, to increase of endotoxemia and systemic inflammation,
and consequent insulin resistance. Moreover, the HFD-initiated
primary dysbiosis was exacerbated by additional VDD, showing
overgrowth of the Helicobacter hepaticus, a known hepatic
pathogen, and suppression of the symbiotic species Akkermansia
muciniphila. In vitro treatment with human DEFA5 peptide
inhibited H. hepaticus growth. Oral administration of DEFA5 in
vivo to the HFD+VDD mice restored ileal eubiosis and intestinal
epithelial integrity, and insulin sensitivity. Similar to what we
observed in the dietary impact, the genetic ablation of the vitamin
D receptor (VDR KO) resulted in reduced DEFA5 and MMP7
expression in the ileum, increased intestinal permeability, ileal
dysbiosis, and hepatic steatosis, which collectively demonstrates
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
a critical role for vitamin D signaling in maintaining intestinal
integrity, eubiosis, and metabolic homeostasis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and Treatment
All animal experiments in this study were complied with the
guidelines from “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals” published by the USA National Institutes of Health,
and the procedures were approved by The Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) in Sichuan University. Briefly,
4–6 weeks old BALB/c male mice (Beijing HFK Bioscience) were
maintained in a controlled environment (12:12 light-dark cycle)
with free access to food and water. The mice were fed for 18–
20 weeks by four types of diet (n = 20 for each condition):
(1) control chow with VD3 at 1000 IU/kg (standard AIN93
formula), C; (2) vitamin D depleted control chow, VDD; (3) high
fat diet (60% calorie from fat) with VD3 supplement at 1000
IU/kg, HFD; (4) high fat chow without vitamin D supplement,
HFD+VDD. The compositions of the four types of diet and
vitamin kit are listed in Tables 1, 2, respectively. Food intake and
body weight were recorded weekly. For one experiment, the mice
fed with HFD+VDD for 18 weeks were given synthetic human
α-defensin-5 (DEFA5, PDF-4415, Peptides International) via oral
gavage (10 µg/dose in 0.1 ml saline) for four doses equally spaced
over 25 days, or saline as a vehicle control. As another control,
a synthetic mutant DEFA5, by which the conserved cysteines
and lysines were replaced by alanine and serine, respectively, was
also administered in an equal amount via gavage. During the
treatment the mice were maintained on HFD+VDD diet; and in
additional 10 days the mice were euthanized for measurements.
To determine the responsiveness of ileum to vitamin D challenge,
the male BALB/c mice fed under vitamin D depletion for 1
month were treated with Rocaltrol (Roche, 5 ng/g body weight)
through intraperitoneal injection; and the mice were sacrificed at
0, 6, 12, and 24 h, respectively. VDR knockout mice (B6.129S4-
Vdrtm1Mbd/J, the Jackson Laboratory) were fed with a high
phosphorus high calcium diet (2% calcium, 1.25% phosphorus)
since post-weaning. The VDR−/− (VDR KO) mice and the
littermates at the age of 5 month old were sacrificed for
measurement. As a standard procedure, all the mice were fasted
for 12 h before sacrifice. Under anesthesia, blood was collected
and centrifuged to obtain plasma, then stored at −20◦C for
further measurement. The liver, pancreas, adipose, ileum at the
distal region, and ileal lumen microbe contents were harvested
and immersed in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80◦C for further
analysis.
Glucose Tolerance Test (GTTs), Insulin
Tolerance Test (ITTs), and HOMA-IR
Analysis
Mice were fasted for 6 or 4 h for GTTs or ITTs, respectively.
Glucose (1 g/kg body weight, 20% glucose solution) or insulin
(1 U/kg body weight) was injected intraperitoneally. Blood
glucose was tested by a glucose meter (Accu-Chek Active, Roche)
with 5 µL blood was collected from the tip of the tail vein. Plasma
insulin concentration was measured by ELISA kit (DRE30417,
RB China). HOMA-IR = (glucose conc. × insulin con.)/22.5.
Plasma Biochemistry
The plasma LPS concentration was determined by Limulus
Amebocyte Extract kit (CE80545, Chinese Horseshoe Crab
Reagent Manufactory Co., Ltd., Xiamen, China). After dilution in
sample processing buffer into 1/10 and heated for 10 min at 70◦C,
plasma LPS content was analyzed following the manufacture’s
instruction. Plasma insulin and TNF-α concentration were
analyzed in 10 µL plasma using ELISA kit (Mercodia, Uppsala,
Sweden; DRE30030, China). Plasma levels of lipase, low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c), high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-c), total cholesterol (CHOL), total bile acids,
and ALT levels were measured by automation instrument in the
Chengdu Public Health Clinical Medical Center.
TABLE 1 | Composition of four types of diet used in the study.
Ingredient
Control (g/kg)
VDD (g/kg)
HFD (g/kg)
HFD+VDD (g/kg)
Amino acids
195.6
195.6
238.8
238.8
Cornstarch
397.5
397.5
0
0
Dextrinized cornstarch
132
132
179.7
179.7
Sucrose
100
100
92.6
92.6
Fiber
50
50
66.3
66.3
Soybean oil (no additives)
70
70
33.1
33.1
Lard
0
0
319.7
319.7
Mineral mix
35
35
46.4
46.4
Vitamin mix
10 (VD3 1000 IU/kg)
10 (−VD3)
10 (VD3 1000 IU/kg)
10 (−VD3)
NaHCO3
7.4
7.4
9.8
9.8
Choline bitartrate (41.1% choline)
2.5
2.5
3.3
3.3
Tert-butylhydroquinon
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Total
1000
1000
1000
1000
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
TABLE 2 | Composition of vitamin kit.
Vitamin
mg or U/kg diet
Nicotinic acid, mg
30
Pantothenate, mg
15
Pyridoxine, mg
6
Thiamin, mg
5
Riboflavin, mg
6
Folic acid, mg
2
Vitamin K, mg
750
D-Biotin, mg
200
Vitamin B-12, mg
25
Vitamin A, IU
4000
Vitamin D3, IU
1000
Vitamin E, IU
75
Intestinal Permeability
The intestinal permeability was assessed through measuring
the plasma appearance of 4000-Da fluoresceinisothiocyanate
(FITC)-dextran
(FD4-1G,
Sigma-Aldrich,
St.
Louis,
MO)
administered through oral gavage. Briefly, the 6 h fasting
mice were administered FITC-dextran (500 µg/kg body wt.,
100 µg/ml in PBS) by oral gavage. At 1 h post gavage, 120 µL
orbital venous plexus blood was collected and centrifuged at 4◦C,
12,000 g, for 8 min. Plasma was diluted with an equal volume
of PBS (pH 7.4) and measured the FITC-dextran concentration
by a Multiskan Spectrum (Thermo Varioskan Flash) with an
excitation wavelength of 485 nm and emission wavelength of
535 nm.
Histology, Immunofluorescence, and
Immunohistochemistry
Liver sections (5 micron) (fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
and paraffin-embedded) were stained with Hematoxylin/Eosin
solution. The intestinal mucus layer was measured with a
Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) red stain kit (ab150680, Abcam),
following the manufacture’s protocol. For defensins estimation,
paraffin-embedded ileum sections (5 micron) were stained with
anti-mouse α-defensin1 (provided by Dr. Yoshihiro Eriguchi
at University of Southern California). Briefly, deparaffinized
sections were rehydrated; the antigen was retrieved with boiled
Tris-EDTA buffer for 18 min and blocked with 3% BSA for
1 h at room temperature. Then samples were incubated with
antibodies to α-defensin1 overnight at 4◦C. After incubation
with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (ZSGB Bio PV-6000)
for 1 h at room temperature, the sections were developed
with DAB (ZSGB Bio ZLI-9017), and mounted with Neutral
Balsam for analysis under Nikon eclipse Ti-U microscope.
Immunofluorescent staining was applied to assess Paneth cells
with goat anti-MMP7 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa
Cruz, sc-8832), followed by secondary fluorescent antibodies
(A24431, donkey anti-goat), and DAPI. Slides were mounted
with FluoromoutIM Aqueous Mounting Medium (F4680-25 ML,
Sigma). Digital imaging fluorescence microscopy of the ileum
was performed using a Leica TCS SP5 II system.
RT-qPCR Analysis
Total RNA was isolated using Trizol (Transgen, China) and
reverse transcribed into cDNA with PrimeScriptTM RT reagent
Kit (TaKaRa, Cat. RR047A). Real-time qPCR contained 2 µl of
cDNA, 200 nM primers, and 5 µL of FastStart Essential DNA
Green Master (06924204001, Roche) in a final volume of 10 µl;
and was performed using Bio-Rad cfx96. Primer sequences are
listed in Table 3. Relative mRNA levels were normalized to
RPL-19 mRNA expression.
PCR-Based Denaturing Gradient Gel
Electrophoresis (DGGE) Analysis
For PCR-DGGE analysis of the total bacteria, Nested PCR was
used to amplify the V2–V3 regions of the 16S rRNA gene. In the
first PCR amplification, the universal bacterial 27F and 1492R
primers were used to amplify the 16S rRNA gene in a S1000TM
thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, USA) using the following program:
initial denaturation for 5 min at 94◦C, 30 cycles of 94◦C for 30 s,
58◦C for 45 s, and 72◦C for 90 s and final elongation for 7 min at
72◦C. The PCR reaction solution (50 µl total) contained 2 µl of
DNA template (50 ng/µl), 2 µl of each primer (10 µM), 19 µl of
ddH2O and 25 µ lof 2 × Taq PCR MasterMix (contained 500 µM
dNTP, 0.1U Taq polymerase/µL, 20 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl
and 3 mM MgCl2) (TIANGEN, China). Then 16S rDNA was
purified using the Gel Extraction Kit (OMEGA, USA) according
to the standard protocol. In the second PCR amplification, the
universal bacterial HDA1-GC and HDA-2 primers were used to
amplify the V2–V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene in a S1000TM
thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, USA) using the following program:
initial denaturation for 5 min at 94◦C, 30 cycles of 94◦C for 30 s,
53◦C for 30 s, and 68◦C for 30 s; final elongation for 7 min at
68◦C. The PCR reaction solution (50 µL total) contained 2 µL of
DNA template (50 ng/µL), 2 µL of each primer (10 µM), 19 µL of
ddH2O and 25 µL of 2 × Taq PCR MasterMix (contained 500 µM
dNTP, 0.1U Taq polymerase/µL, 20 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl
and 3 mM MgCl2) (TIANGEN, China). The sequence of the GC
clamp was 5′-CGCCCGGGGCGCGCCCCGGGCGGGGCGGG
GGCACGGGGGG-3′.
The PCR products were subjected to DGGE analysis using
a 35–65% gradient in 8% acrylamide gel running at 120 V,
60◦C for 6 h with the DCodeTM Universal Mutation Detection
System (Bio-Rad, USA). After electrophoresis, the gel was
stained with SYBRTM Green I (1:10,000 dilution in TAE buffer,
Sigma, USA) in dark for 45 min (three times, 15 min each),
viewed with a Gel Imaging System (Universal Hood II, Bio-
Rad, USA), and photographed. The similarities and differences
in the microbial structure were determined by comparing the
clusters of the whole DGGE profiles using the Quantity One
software package (Version 4.6.9, Bio-Rad, USA). The similarity
matrices were produced using the Dice similarity coefficient,
which allowed for the construction of dendrograms using the un-
weighted pairwise grouping method with mathematical averages
(UPGMA) clustering algorithm. PCA was performed (on mean-
centered data) to visualize the general structure of species-level
composition of gut microbiome using the Canoco for Windows
4.5 Software.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
TABLE 3 | Primers used for RT-qPCR analysis.
Mouse gene
Forward 5′ → 3′
Reverse 5′ → 3′
TNF-α
TGGGACAGTGACCTGGACTGT
TTCGGAAAGCCCATTTGAGT
PAI-1
ACAGCCTTTGTCATCTCAGCC
CCGAACCACAAAGAGAAAGGA
MMP-13
CTTCTGGTCTTCTGGCACACG
GGTAATGGCATCAAGGGATAGGG
RPL-19
GAAGGTCAAAGGGAATGTGTTCA
CCTTGTCTGCCTTCAGCTTGT
PEPCK
ACACACACACATGCTCACAC
ATCACCGCATAGTCTCTGAA
Occluding
ATGTCCGGCCGATGCTCTC
TTTGGCTGCTCTTGGGTCTGTAT
ZO-1
ACCCGAAACTGATGCTGTGGATAG
AAATGGCCGGGCAGAACTTGTGTA
Claudin-2
CCTTCGGGACTTCTACTCGC
TCACACATACCCAGTCAGGC
DEFA5
GCTCCTGCTCAACAATTCTCC
CAGCTGCAGCAGAATACGAA
DEFA2
GGCTCCTGCTCACCAATTCT
GCCTCAGAGCTGATGGTTGT
DEFB1
ACACCCCATCTGCAACCTTA
TGTCCAAGTCCCAACACAGA
CAMP
AGTCTGTGAGGTTCCGAGTGAA
CACCAATCTTCTCCCCACCTTT
MCP1
GCAGTTAACGCCCCACTCA
CCCAGCCTACTCATTGGGATCA
MUC2
GCTCGGAACTCCAGAAAGAAG
GCCAGGGAATCGGTAGACAT
MUC1
CCTTTCTTCCTGCTGCTACTTCT
GGCTGGGTCTGAGTTGCTG
MMP7
GCAGAAGTTCTTTGGCCTGC
TATCCGCAGTCCCCCAACTA
Gut Microbiota Analysis by 16S rRNA
Sequencing
Metagenomic DNA was extracted from frozen ileal lumen
contents using a QIAamp-DNA stool mini kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The V3–V4
hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene (positions 338 to
806, based on Escherichia coli numbering) were amplified. The
forward PCR oligonucleotide contained a 5′ Illumina sequencing
adapter, a 10-nt pad sequence, followed by the 338 16S specific
linker-primer sequence (5′-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCA-3′).
The reverse primer contained the 3′ reverse complement of
an Illumina sequencing adapter, the 12-nt Golay barcode,
a 10-nt pad sequence followed by the 16S specific 806R
reverse linker-primer (5′-CCGGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-
3′). PCR reactions were quantified with QuantiFluor
TM-ST
system (Promega Company). Negative controls (no sample
added) were included in 16S PCR amplification to test
for contaminations. Amplicon pools were sequenced on an
Illumina
MiSeq sequencer
to obtain paired-end 250 bp
sequences at the Logic Informatics Company (Shanghai, China).
Relative abundance of Proteobacteria obtained by analyzing the
distribution of OTU sequences (97% level) was expressing as
Mean, constructed by Origin 8.5.1 (OriginLab Corporation).
Short sequences from 16S rRNA gene were aligned and clustered
into 475 OTUs. The resulting OTUs were then matched back to
bacteria species. These OTUs were normalized with proportion
and squared root arcsine transformation. One-way ANOVA and
Student’s t-test were used to detect differential OTUs in relative
abundance under different experimental conditions. Fifty-four
OTUs with P values less than 0.05 were selected to construct
the heat map (Figure 5). Clustergram function in bioinformatics
toolbox of MATLAB was used for heatmap creation and bi-
clustering. OTUs with similar patterns were clustered together.
Different colors on the heatmap indicate OTUS with different
relative abundances. As shown on the color bar, where red
TABLE 4 | Primers of 16S rDNA qPCR analysis.
Forward 5′ → 3′
Reverse 5′ → 3′
All bacteria
ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG
ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGG
A. muciniphila
CAGCACGTGAAGGTGGGGAC
CCTTGCGGTTGGCTTCAGAT
H. helicobacter
GCATTTGAAACTGTTACTCTG
CTGTTTTCAAGCTCCCC
represents high (normalized) relative abundance, and green
shows low relative abundance.
16S rDNA PCR Analysis
The ileal contents and feces were collected and stored at −80◦C
before analysis. For microbe analyzing, metagenomic DNA was
extracted from frozen ileal content or feces using a QIAamp-
DNA stool mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Q-PCR reactions were carried out with 1 µl of DNA,
200 nM primers, and 5 µl of FastStart Essential DNA Green
Master (06924204001, Roche) in a final volume of 10 µl by Bio-
Rad cfx96 machine. Relative abundance was normalized to the all
bacteria expression. Primer sequences of the microbe are listed in
Table 4.
In vitro Inhibition of Helicobacter hepaticus
by DEFA5
Original strain of H. hepaticus (ATCC 51449) was tested
for microbicidal and cytotoxic activities by DEFA5 (Peptides
International, INC., USA, PDF-4415) in vitro. After activation,
the strain was cultured in microaerophilic condition with brain-
heart infusion broth at 37◦C in an anaerobic jar (Mitsubishi Gas
Chemical Company, Inc., Japan) for 5d. Then DEFA5 was added
sterilely to the H. hepaticus culture at final concentrations of 1, 2,
4, 8, and 16 µmol/L, respectively. After culturing for additional
24 h, the numbers of the bacteria were counted. As the positive
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
control, amoxicillin with clavulanic acid at 2:1 ratio was applied
at final concentrations of 10, 20, and 40 µg/mL, respectively. The
inhibition ratio of each group was calculated statistical analyzed
(n = 3), respectively (Table 5).
Stability of DEFA5 in Gastrointestinal
Conditions
Secreted by Paneth cells in the small intestine as antibacterial
peptides in the lumen of intestinal track, alpha-defensins
are reported to be persisting throughout the intestinal tract,
suggesting that the peptides may mediate enteric innate
immunity in the colonic lumen (Darmoul and Ouellette, 1996;
Mastroianni and Ouellette, 2009). To calibrate the efficiency of
oral gavage of synthetic alpha-defenins 5 we measured its stability
through incubation of 1–2 µg peptide with fluid of gastric and
small intestine at 37◦C for 1 h, followed by Western blot analysis.
In such conditions DEFA5 was able to retain over 75% of its intact
form.
Statistical Analysis
Microsoft Excel 2003 (Microsoft Corp.) and GraphPad Prism
5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc.) were used for data recording,
collection, processing, and calculation. Results were expressed
as Mean ± SEM. Differences were assessed using unpaired
two-tailed Student’s t-tests and one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison testing.
Statistical significance is displayed as ∗P < 0.05, or ∗∗P < 0.01.
RESULTS
Dietary Depletion of Vitamin D Exacerbates
the HFD-Initiated Hepatic Steatosis and
Metabolic Disorders
BALB/c mice were fed by four types of diet, C for control
chow with sufficient VD3 supplement (1000 IU/kg), VDD for
vitamin D deficient control chow, HFD for high fat diet with
VD3 supplement, and HFD+VDD for vitamin D deficient high
fat diet, (n = 10 for each group, and repeating twice), as
described in the section of Methods and Materials. After 18
weeks of feeding, the mice fed with HFD or VDD developed
moderate hepatic steatosis (Figure 1A, and the NAFLD activity
score, NAS). In contrast, the HFD+VDD mice developed severe
hepatic steatosis, as indicated by oily ballooned hepatocytes
and macrovesicular fat droplets. Pathological significance of
TABLE 5 | DEFA5 inhibits Helicobacter hepaticus in vitro.
DEFA5, mmol/L
X107, CFU
X107, CFU
P-value
(mg/ml)
before treatment
after treatment
0
5.92 ± 0.88
5.20 ± 0.63
0.172
1 (0.0053)
4.56 ± 1.28
3.92 ± 0.77
0.367
2 (0.010)
8.08 ± 1.15
7.20 ± 0.63
0.171
4 (0.021)
5.60 ± 0.75
4.16 ± 0.83
0.020
8 (0.042)
6.08 ± 0.59
3.28 ± 0.52
<0.001
16 (0.084)
3.68 ± 0.52
0.96 ± 0.46
<0.001
NAFLD is its transition from simple steatosis to NASH, featured
by inflammation and fibrosis. Liver lesion as indicated by
fibrotic septa formation was induced by VDD as we reported
recently (Zhu et al., 2015), and here we showed that additional
HFD exacerbated the extent (Figure 1B, Masson’s Trichrome
staining). Likewise, hepatic inflammation was demonstrated
by infiltration of CD3+ lymphocytes (Figure 2H), and plasma
alanine transaminase (ALT) levels (Figure 2G) were evident in
the mice subjected to the double hits (HFD+VDD). Importantly,
the degree of steatosis was associated with deficiency of plasma
25-OH VD3, as described in our previous work (Kong et al.,
2014).
Hepatic steatosis more often is a consequence of insulin
resistance (IR) and glucose intolerance. In agreement with our
expectation, the mice under HFD+VDD feeding generated
significant amount of glucose intolerance and insulin resistance,
as determined by intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT)
(Figure 1C) and intraperitoneal insulin tolerance test (IPITT)
(data not shown). VDD in low fat diet did not significantly
affect glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, but aggravated
the HFD-induced glucose intolerance. HOMA-IR analysis
showed stepwise escalation of insulin resistance by the mice
under VDD, HDF, and HFD+VDD feedings, respectively
(Figure 1D). Moreover, plasma lipase and insulin levels were
significantly increased on HFD+VDD feeding (Figure 1E),
indicating potential pancreatic impairment. Further, HFD+VDD
fed mice had elevation of plasma levels of total cholesterol
(CHOL) and low-density lipoprotein associated cholesterol
(LDL-C), as commonly seen in patients with MetS (Figure 1E).
Taken together, our results demonstrate that HFD feeding
initiates fatty liver and insulin resistance in mice, but additional
VDD worsens the impact and results overt MetS and even NASH,
demonstrating the “two hits theory” in a new context.
Dietary Vitamin D Deficiency Exacerbates
the HFD-Elicited Systemic Inflammation,
Which Is Critical for Insulin Resistance and
NASH
Systemic and local inflammation, such as that in visceral fat tissue
has been causally linked to insulin resistance and MetS (Shoelson
et al., 2006; Cefalu, 2009). Indeed, mice fed with HFD+VDD had
significantly elevation of plasma TNF-α levels, as compared to
the moderate increases in the mice fed with HFD or VDD alone,
indicating systemic inflammation by the mice under the double
hits (Figure 2A). Expression of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α,
PAI-1 and MCP-1) in the visceral fat tissue was also initiated by
HFD feeding (Figures 2B–D). Likewise in the pancreatic tissue,
VDD feeding augmented the HFD-initiated up-regulation of
TNF-α and MMP13 mRNAs (Figures 2E,F), in agreement with
the increased plasma levels of lipase (Figure 1E), suggesting that
inflammatory injury might occur in the pancreas by the mice
under HFD+VDD feeding. Thus, these findings indicated that
lacking dietary vitamin D might exacerbate the HFD-exerted
systemic inflammation, which consequently could cause insulin
resistance, and NASH formation. Conversely, dietary vitamin D
supplement partially but significantly suppressed the efforts of
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
VDD, 
NAS=1
Control, NAS=0 
VDD, NAS=1
HFD, NAS=1.5   
HFD+VDD, NAS=4
Plasma Insulin
C
VDD
HFD
HFD+VDD
0
1
2
3
Blood insulin conc. (ug/L)
Plasma LDL-C
Plasma lipase
Plasma insulin
**
Plasma CHOL
**
*
*
**
C
VDD
HFD
HFD+VDD
0
10
20
30
40
plasma lipase U/L
IPGTT
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
5
10
15
C
VDD
HFD
HFVDD
Time(min)
Blood Glucose(mmol/L)
IPGTT
C
VDD
HFD
HFD+VDD
0
2
4
6
8
10
*
*
*
HOMA-IR
**
#
#
C
VDD
HFD
HFD+VDD
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
plasma LDLC mmol/L
plasma CHOL
C
VDD
HFD
HFD+VDD
0
2
4
6
8
plasma CHOL mmol/L
Arbitrary units
Control                                       VDD
HFD                                   HFD+VDD
A
C
D
E
B
FIGURE 1 | High fat feeding is not sufficient to induce robust hepatic steatosis and metabolic disorders, but additional vitamin D deficiency is needed.
Balb/C mice were fed for 18 weeks in the following 4 conditions (n = 10 per group): (1) control chow, AIN93 with standard VD3 supplement at 1000 IU/kg, (2) vitamin
D deficient AIN93 chow, VDD, (3) high fat diet (60% calorie from fat) with standard VD3 supplement, HFD, (4) vitamin D deficient high fat diet, HFD + VDD. (A)
Representative images of liver tissues, H&E staining. NAS scores are indicated. (B) Representative images of liver tissues, Masson’s Trichrome staining. (C)
Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT). (D) Homeostatic model assessment (HOMA-IR). (E) Plasma total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), plasma
lipase, and plasma insulin levels in fast. Data represent two independent experiments (n = 6–10 mice/group for each measurement). Error bars represent the SEM of
samples within a group. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01 (Student’s t-test). The arrows indicate the impact of vitamin D supplement to ameliorate the metabolic disorders.
#indicates the impact of vitamin D.
HFD in the induction of metabolic disorders, hepatic steatosis
and NASH.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Intestinal
Integrity
Previous work has shown that HFD feeding moderately increased
plasma endotoxin and induced insulin resistance (Pendyala et al.,
2012), and the latter could be recapitulated by administration
of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to the mice (Cani et al., 2007).
Therefore, we asked whether VDD could promote endotoxemia,
which consequently exerts systemic inflammation, leading to
insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis. In such regard, we
found that plasma LPS levels were significantly increased in
the mice fed with HFD or VDD, but synergistically elevated
in the HFD+VDD mice (Figure 3A). Conversely, dietary VD3
supplement significantly attenuated the plasma endotoxin levels,
being exerted by HFD feeding. Moreover, the elevation of plasma
endotoxin correlated well with the increased gut permeability in
these mice (Figure 3B), showing a potential causal relationship.
Since tight junctions (TJ) maintain enteral epithelial barrier, and
their defects may result in gut impairment, we analyzed the
impact of HFD or/and VDD on the key components of the TJ
expressed in the ileum. As shown, expression of occludin, ZO-1,
and claudin 2 in the ileum regions was moderately suppressed
in the mice under VDD or HFD feedings, but synergistically
decreased in the mice under VDD+HFD feeding (Figure 3C).
Periodic acid/Schiff (PAS) staining of ileum showed that mucosal
lattices were apparently detached from the epithelial lining in the
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
FIGURE 2 | Systemic and local inflammation is aggravated by dietary vitamin D deficiency. Balb/C mice were fed with four conditions for 18 weeks as
described in Figure 1. (A) Plasma TNF-α levels were measured by an ELISA kit. (B–D) In the visceral fat tissue, the mRNA levels of TNF-α, PAI-1, and MCP-1 were
measured by RT-qPCR analysis. (E,F) In the pancreas, the mRNA levels of MMP13 and TNF-α were determined by RT-qPCR analysis. (G) Plasma, alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels. (H) Lymphocyte infiltration in the liver was determined by CD3 staining. Data represent two independent experiments (n = 6–10
mice/group for each measurement). Error bars represent the SEM of samples within a group. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01 in comparison with the control.
mice fed by VDD or HFD, but most markedly in the HFD+VDD
mice (Figure 3D). The number of goblet cells indicated by the
secretory mucin granules was reduced in the VDD and HFD
mice. To determine whether vitamin D signaling plays a role
in the maintenance of TJ integrity, we assessed the vitamin D
receptor (VDR) expression in the ileum. As shown in Figure 3E,
the VDR mRNA is expressed most robustly in the ileum, showing
1300-fold greater than that expressed in the liver, indicating that
the ileum, rather than liver, is a major VD targeting tissue in the
mice. Likewise, intraperitoneal injection of calcitriol was able to
induce 400,000-folds of increase for the ileal Cyp24A1, a bona fide
target downstream of vitamin D-VDR signaling (Supplemental
Figure 1). These results suggest a critical role of vitamin D
signaling in maintaining the integrity of ileal mucosal lining, in
part through maintaining the steady state of the TJ components
and mucous proteoglycan (next section).
Vitamin D Deficiency Leads to Loss of
Paneth Cell Defensins
The robust expression of VDR in the ileum and remarkable
activation of VD signaling pathway as indicated by Cyp24A1
expression upon calcitriol challenge prompted us to examine the
roles of VD signaling in the Paneth cell specific α-defensins,
which are secreted into the lumen of gut to balance the
gut microbiome population. α-defensin 5 (Defa5) was highly
expressed in the ileum of the control mice, as determined by
RT-qPCR analysis (Figure 4A). The mRNA levels of the peptide
were moderately decreased in the HFD fed mice, but markedly
reduced in the VDD and HFD+VDD groups, indicating a
critical role of VD signaling in maintaining the expression
of the Paneth cell defensins in the ileum. Likewise, the ileal
expression of α-defensin 1 (Defa1), as measured by its mRNA
and protein in the crypts as well as β-defensin 1 (Defb1) were
all decreased in the VDD and HFD+VDD fed mice, again
showing vitamin D signaling is critical to regulate the ileal
defensins. Furthermore, MMP7, a metalloproteinase that can
proteolytically convert pro-α-defensins to their mature and active
forms (Wilson et al., 1999) and also serves as a lineage marker
for Paneth cells, was fully depleted in the ileal crypts of the
VDD and HFD+VDD fed mice as compared to that in the
control and HFD groups (Figure 4B). MMP7 protein, as stained
in the crypts of Lieberkühn in the control mice, was totally
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
FIGURE 3 | Vitamin D maintains intestinal homeostasis. The animal feeding conditions are described as in Figure 1. (A) Plasma LPS levels were measured by a
Limulus Amebocyte Lysate kit. (B) Gut permeability was determined by fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran presented in plasma after oral gavage administration.
(C) Expression of ZO-1, occluding, and claudin 2 in ileum region was determined by RT-qPCR analysis. (D) Periodic Acid/Schiff (PAS) staining. Green box highlights
the mucosa and goblet cells in the control. (E) Expression of VDR in the ileum, skin, pancreas, and liver by the mice was determined by RT-qPCR analysis. Data
represent two independent experiments (n = 6–10 mice/group for each measurement). Error bars represent the SEM of samples within a group. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01
(Student’s t-test). The arrows indicate the impact of dietary vitamin D on intestinal integrity and plasma endotoxin. #indicates the impact of vitamin D.
diminished by the VDD and HFD+VDD mice (Figure 4B).
These lines of result demonstrated a critical role of vitamin
D signaling in maintaining the steady state expression of α-
defensins and MMP7 in physiological conditions. In support
of this notion, administration of 1,25-dihydroxylvitmain D3
to the mice up-regulated defensin mRNA levels in the ileum
(Supplemental Figure 1). Lastly, through bioinformatics analysis
we recognized putative VDR responsive sites (VDRE, VDR
responsive elements) presented within the 5′-promoters of
these α-defensin genes (data not shown) suggesting a potential
mechanism of direct transcriptional activation in maintaining
physiological expression of gut defensins in the condition
of sufficient dietary vitamin D supplement. Taken together,
these results show the functionality of vitamin D-VDR axis
in up regulating and activation/process of ileal α-defensins.
Conversely, dietary vitamin D deficiency results in loss of
Paneth cell specific α-defensins, which may consequently lead to
intestinal dysbiosis and endotoxemia.
The Initial Dysbiosis Exerted by High Fat
Diet Was Exacerbated by Vitamin D
Deficiency, Showing Overgrowth of
Helicobacter hepaticus and
Down-Regulation of Akkermansia
muciniphila
Given the evidence of the ileum as a major VD-VDR targeting
tissue and VDR signaling in controlling Paneth cell defensins,
we sought to determine the role of vitamin D signaling in
maintaining the gut microbiome. We performed 16S rRNA gene
high throughput sequencing analysis of the ileal microbiota
for the mice under the 4 feeding conditions. More than 90%
of the bacteria from ileal contents belong to three phyla,
Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Proteobacteria (Supplemental
Figure 2). At phylum levels, the relative abundance of Firmicutes
was moderately increased, while Bacteroidetes was reduced by
HFD feeding. Conversely, the phylum of Proteobacteria was
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
DEFA5
C
VDD 
HFD
HFD+VDD
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Relative gene expression(DEFA55/RPL)fold
DEFA2
C
VDD 
HFD
HFD+VDD
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Relative gene expression(DEFA2/RPL)fold
Ileum DEFA5, mRNA
Ileum DEFA1, mRNA
C                                         VDD                                       HFD                                    HFD+VDD
**
**
*
HFD
#
Defensin b1
C
VDD 
HFD
HFD+VDD
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Relative gene expression(Defensinb1/RPL)fold
Ileum DEFB1, mRNA
*
*
#
DEFA1
MMP7
DAPI 
*
**
A
B
FIGURE 4 | Vitamin D signaling maintains the steady expression of Paneth cell defensins and their converting enzyme, MMP7. (A) Expression of
defensins in the ileum by the mice under the four feeding conditions was determined by RT-qPCR analysis. (B) Immunohistochemical staining of the ileal region for
DEFA1, and immunofluorescent staining for MMP7 in the crypts of Lieberkühn. Data (n = 4–10 mice/group for each measurement) are presented as mean ± standard
error. Comparison was conducted by t-test between the experimental groups with the control, and *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. #indicates the impact of vitamin D.
moderately increased by VDD or HFD feeding. The heat-map
with bacterial taxonomy shows the significantly changed ones
among the four feeding conditions (Figure 5A). A principal
component analysis (PCA) (Figure 5B) shows the enterotypes
of ileal bacteria were relatively clustered closely in three
distinct patterns: (1) the control, (2) HFD mice, (3) VDD and
HFD+VDD mice. Clearly, the phylogenetic clusters of the gut
bacteria were progressively changed from the control to HFD,
VDD, and HFD+VDD, respectively. We further examined a
phylogenetic branch in Proteobacteria, showing that the class
of epsilon-Proteobacteria, the order of Campylobacterales, the
family of Helicobacteraceae, and the genus of Helicobacter
in the taxonomy tree were all increased by VDD or HFD
feeding (Supplemental Figures 2B,C, highlighted in red). More
importantly, the relative abundance of H. hepaticus, which causes
hepatitis and liver tumors in certain immune deficient strains of
mice (Fox et al., 1994), was found here a big increase in the ileal
lumen by the mice under VDD or HFD feeding (Supplemental
Figure 2D). On the other hand, the Akkermansia muciniphila,
a symbiotic in the phylum of Verrucomicrobia was decreased
significantly in the ileum of mice fed with VDD or HFD
conditions. It was reported that the abundance of A. muciniphila
is inversely correlated to diabetes and MetS in rodents and
humans (Derrien et al., 2004), and probiotic administration of
A. muciniphila improves MetS in animal models (Everard et al.,
2013).
To validate the above findings, we resolved the nested PCR
products of the bacterial 16S rRNA genes by denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE). More than 40 bands distinctively
resolved on DGGE were subjected to sequencing analysis
(Supplemental Figure 3). Helicobacter species were identified in
multiple hits in the samples of VDD or/and HFD fed mice. We
then used qPCR amplification followed by sequencing analysis to
confirm the PCR product as H. hepaticus, showing a 99% match
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
FIGURE 5 | Initial dysbiosis in the ileum induced by high fat feeding is exacerbated by additional vitamin D deficiency. (A) The microbiota in the ileal lumen
of the mice by the four feeding conditions were determined by 16S ribosomal (rRNA) gene sequencing analysis (n = 6), and presented as hierarchical heat-map with
bacterial taxa (n = 3). (B) Principle component analysis (PCA). (C) The relative abundances of Helicobacter hepaticus and Akkermansia muciniphila were determined
by qPCR analysis by species-specific primers. Data represent two independent experiments (n = 6 for each measurement). Error bars represent the SEM of samples
within a group. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01 (Student’s t-test). The arrows indicate the impact of vitamin D supplement to ameliorate the dysbiosis. #indicates the impact of
vitamin D.
to the standard ATCC 51449 strain (Supplemental Figure 4). We
also quantitated the relative abundances of H. hepaticus among
the total bacteria presented in the ileal lumen. Results showed
that H. hepaticus was barely detectable in the ileum of the control
mice (5.59 × 10−5%), but substantially increased in the VDD,
HFD, and HFD+VDD mice, with the relative abundances of
0.081, 0.094, and 0.53%, respectively (Figure 5C). These changes
in the abundance of H. hepaticus reflected 1000, 1200, and 7000-
folds of increases over that in the control mice for the VDD,
HFD, and HFD+VDD fed mice, respectively. Conversely, A.
muciniphila was present in the ileum of control mice at 3.2%
relative abundance, but its abundance sharply declined by 8, 82,
626-folds in the VDD, HFD, and HFD+VDD mice, respectively,
in comparison with that in the control mice. Importantly, in
the ileal lumen of the control mice, the ratio of A. muciniphila
over H. hepaticus was about 100:1, showing predominance of
A. muciniphila in the control mice. Lacking vitamin D promoted
dysbiosis, showing switch the ratio of H. hepaticus over the
symbiotic A. muciniphila. To such regard, we addressed how
vitamin D signaling might control the gut eubiosis, and lacking
of vitamin D signaling in promoting dysbiosis.
Oral Administration of DEFA5 Suppresses
Gut H. hepaticus, Restores A. muciniphila,
and Resolves Hepatic Steatosis
We next investigated whether the overgrowth of H. hepaticus
was due to suppressed production of ileal α-defensins in the
condition of VDD feeding. We first cultured the standard
strain of H. hepaticus in microaerophilic conditions, followed
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
FIGURE 6 | Oral administration of human alpha-defensin 5 rebalances gut microbiota and resolves hepatic steatosis. (A) Experimental design. Balb/C
mice were fed with HFD+VDD for 18 w, followed by administrated synthetic human DEFA5 (10 µg /dose or mock with saline) by oral gavage for 4 times within 25 d,
and the mice were terminated in additional 10 days (n = 6 for each group). (B) Relative abundance of A. muciniphila presented in the feces during the treatments was
quantitated by 16S rDNA qPCR analysis. Changing folds over the mock were plotted. (C) Relative abundance of H. hepaticus in the lumen of ileum after the treatment
was quantitated by 16S rDNA qPCR analysis. (D) Relative abundance of A. muciniphila in the lumen of ileum after the treatment was quantitated by 16S rDNA qPCR
analysis. (E) The plasma levels of endotoxin after the treatment were determined by Limulus Amebocyte Lysate test. (F) The plasma levels of TNF-α was determined
by ELISA analysis. (G) Fasting plasma glucose during the treatments. (H) Representative images of the liver sections, H&E staining. (I) The mRNA levels of IL-1β in the
liver after the treatment were determined by RT-qPCR analysis. The data (n = 6 for each measurement) are presented as mean ± standard error. Comparison was
conducted by t-test between the experimental groups with the control, and *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
by incubation with synthetic DEFA5 at different concentrations
for 24 h. As shown in Table 5, DEFA5 halted the growth of
H. hepaticus in a dose-dependent manner, with an MIC of
4 µmol/L (21 µg/ml) and IC50 of 8 µmol/L (43 µg/ml), which
are within the estimated concentrations of the defensin peptide
(HD5) in human intestinal lumen (Ayabe et al., 2000; Wehkamp
et al., 2005). Others found MICs for mouse intestinal cryptdins
to be ∼10 µg/ml for various microbes (Ouellette et al., 1994).
Thus, the evidence of direct suppression of the Gram-negative
Proteobacteria H. hepaticus by DEFA5 supports the concept
of a causal link between the impaired expression of DEFA5
and H. hepaticus overgrowth (dysbiosis) in the HFD+VDD
mice.
We next examined whether oral administration of synthetic
DEFA5 would suppress H. hepaticus growth in vivo. The
metabolic disordered mice, generated by HFD+VDD feeding for
18 weeks, were given synthetic human DEFA5 by oral gavage
at 10 µg for four times in a period of 25 days (Figure 6A).
Two control conditions were applied: the HFD+VDD fed mice
received either equal volume of water or the same amount
of synthetic mutant DEFD5, by which the conserved Cys and
Lys residues were replaced with alanine and serine residues,
respectively. During the treatment, the mice were monitored for
plasma glucose levels, change of body mass, and fecal microbes.
Finally, the mice were euthanized in 10 days after the last gavage
treatment. Fecal analysis showed that the relative abundance of
A. muciniphila was remarkably increased following each of the
treatments, reaching 1000-fold greater numbers than that in the
control and mock treated conditions (Figure 6B). In the ileum,
the abundance of A. muciniphila was elevated 5-fold at the end
of treatment, while the H. hepaticus abundance decreased by 60%
(Figures 6C,D).
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
Remarkably,
the
suppression
of
ileal
Gram-negative
H. hepaticus through DEFA5 treatment led to reduction of
plasma endotoxin (Figure 6E) and TNF-α levels (Figure 6F),
suggesting a linkage. Indeed, insulin resistance was resolved,
showing
that
the
elevated
fasting
plasma
glucose
levels
(Figure 6G) and the body mass (Supplemental Figure 5A) by the
HFD+VDD mice were improved through DEFA5 treatment.
The hepatic steatosis elevated by the HFD+VDD feeding was
also improved by DEFA5 (Figure 6H) along with the reduction
of plasma glucose. Hepatic inflammation, determined by the
expression of IL-1β mRNA and infiltration of CD3+ cells, was
attenuated by DEFA5 (Figure 6I and data not shown). Moreover,
plasma triglycerides (TG) and LDL-cholesterol levels were also
decreased by the DEFA5 treatment, while total cholesterol,
HDL-cholesterol, and free fatty acid levels were unchanged
(Supplemental Figure 5 and data not shown). The DEFA5
treatment ameliorated steatosis as measured by H&E staining
and scoring (Figure 6H). Total plasma bile acid concentration,
which is decreased by HFD+VDD feeding and associated with
the development of NASH (Kong et al., 2014), was significantly
restored by DEFA5 treatment (data not shown) suggesting
improved enterohepatic circulation through balancing gut
microbiota. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
the metabolic disorders induced by VDD+HFD feeding are
mediated by the impaired production of intestinal α-defensins,
which consequently leads to dysbiosis, endotoxemia, systemic
and local inflammation, insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis.
VDR KO Mice Exhibit Ileal Dysbiosis,
Impairment of Mucosa, and Hepatic
Steatosis
Finally,
using
VDR
KO
mice
we
measured
vitamin
D
signaling in maintaining homeostasis of intestinal interface
and gut microbiota. VDR KO mice are viable, with moderate
developmental defects, such as alopecia (Amling et al., 1999) and
mild colonic inflammation (Froicu et al., 2006) when maintained
on calcium rich diet. As measured by immunohistochemical
staining, VDR was highly expressed in the ileum of WT, but
diminished in homozygous KO mice (Supplemental Figure 6A).
As shown, VDR in the nuclei was richly expressed in the ileal
epithelial cells, with the highest levels in the crypts of Lieberkühn
of the WT and VDR KO−/+ mice. At age of 4–6 months, VDR
KO mice developed spontaneous hepatic steatosis (Figure 7A),
while body mass was progressively decreased. Liver fibrosis in
the VDR KO was previously reported (Ding et al., 2013) and
here using Masson’s Trichrome staining, we confirmed the issue.
Remarkably, expression of DEFA5 and its converting enzyme
MMP7, as measured by their mRNA levels in the ileum, were
down regulated in the heterozygous and homozygous VDR
KO mice with a stepwise manner (Figure 7B), which is in
agreement with the results from dietary depletion of vitamin D.
Expression of occludin in the ileum was also down regulated in
the VDR KO mice. The VDR KO mice had decreased expression
of mucin 2 (MUC2), a prominent gut mucosa secreted by
epithelial goblet cells. On the other hand, MUC1, which is widely
expressed by the apical surface of epithelial cells in lung, stomach,
intestines, and the eye, was not significantly altered with VDR
KO (data not shown). As expected, the relative abundance of
H. hepaticus was significantly increased, while the abundance of
A. muciniphila was drastically decreased in the ileum of VDR KO
mice (Figure 7C). PAS staining showed distortion and collapse
of mucous membrane in ileum of VDR KO mice (Supplemental
Figure 6B), which is related to the aforementioned findings
of impaired ileal defensins and dysbiosis of gut microbiota.
Finally, using immunohistochemical staining we showed that the
expression of α-defensin 1 and MMP7 in the crypts of Paneth
cells was all down regulated (Figure 7D).
DISCUSSION
Epidemiological
evidence
shows
co-prevalence
and
tight
association between vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency and
metabolic disorders and NASH (Botella-Carretero et al., 2007;
Holick, 2011; Looker et al., 2011; Nelson et al., 2016). Conversely,
in animal experiments, artificial sunlight exposure improves
NAFLD (Nakano et al., 2011). However, the evidence for the
causal role of VDD in the biogenesis of hepatic steatosis and
MetS is elusive. In the first part of this work, we show that
HFD feeding is necessary, but insufficient to induce robust
MetS and hepatic steatosis, and additional VDD as a second
hit is needed. Our findings were reproduced in two commonly
used mouse strains, BALB/c and C57BL/6 (data not shown).
Conversely, dietary vitamin D supplementation in HFD partially
but significantly hampered the biogenesis of steatosis and
MetS. This finding is consistent with a previous report showing
improvement of diabetic outcomes in NOD background mice
with a high dose of VD3 supplementation (Takiishi et al., 2014).
In the second part of this work, we demonstrated a mechanism
of vitamin D signaling in controlling the interface of small
intestine, defined here as the interplay of the intestinal epithelia
and the adjacent gut microbiota. In particular, we showed the key
role of vitamin D signaling in maintaining the eubiosis through
induction of Paneth cell specific α-defensins (Figure 8A). A
previous work showed that vitamin D protects mice from
dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis through regulating the
gut microbiome; and conversely dysbiosis as indicated by
outgrowth of Proteobacteria was evident in the feces of the
VDR KO mice under the toxin treatment (Ooi et al., 2013).
Using two independent loss-of-function approaches, namely
dietary depletion of vitamin D3 (VDD) and genetic ablation of
vitamin D receptor (VDR-KO), we revealed here a critical role
of vitamin D signaling in controlling gut microbiota through
optimal expression of Paneth cell specific alpha-defensins and
their converting enzyme (MMP7) in the ileum. This notion is
further strengthened by the finding that vitamin D signaling in up
regulation of tight junction components and MUC2, a prominent
mucous proteoglycan made by goblet cells within the ileum.
Collectively, these results prompted us to outline a potential
pathway for biogenesis of MetS and steatosis under the two hits
(Figure 8B). In particular, we showed that high-fat diet with
sufficient vitamin D supplement could prevent the biogenesis
of MetS and steatosis, in part through maintaining integrity
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
FIGURE 7 | VDR KO mice exhibit ileal dysbiosis, impaired mucosa, and hepatic steatosis. VDR KO and WT littermates in the genetic background (B6.129S4)
fed with fortified phosphate and calcium chow for 20w were examined. (A) Representative images of liver tissues, H&E and Masson’s trichrome staining. (B) The
mRNA levels of DEFA5, MMP7, occludin, and mucin 2 (MUC2) in the ileum of WT, heterozygote, and homozygous VDR KO were determined by RT-qPCR analysis.
(C) H. hepaticus and A. muciniphila in the ileum lumen were determined by 16S rDNA qPCR analysis and presented as relative fold of changes. (D)
Immunohistochemical staining of MMP7 and DEFA1 in the ileum by WT and VDR KO mice. The data (n = 4–6 for each measurement) are presented as mean ±
standard error. Comparison was conducted by t-test between the experimental groups with the control, and *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
of intestinal interface through up regulation of tight junction
components and antimicrobial peptides, which consequently
maintain the gut microbiota in a state of eubiosis. Moreover,
based on the results we attempted to provide a new working
model, in the sense of integrative biology, to explain the
biogenesis of avert metabolic disorders and NASH. Importantly,
our data showed that typical HFD (with sufficient vitamin D
supplement) only generated moderately simple steatosis, in line
with mild systemic and local inflammation. And such sense,
insulin responsiveness is functional. Also, in such case, the
enterotype of gut microbiota showing 1st phase dysbiosis, which
is mostly checked through the sufficient levels of alpha-defensins
and relatively functional gut tight junction components. Such a
notion is demonstrated by the condition of double hits. Under
the two hits, the enterotype of gut microbiota is thoroughly
altered in a format of deep dysbiosis, called 2nd phase dysbiosis,
showing massively increased abundance of H. hepaticus in
the small intestine and concomitantly decreased population of
A. muciniphila. In line with a 2nd phase dysbiosis and impaired
expression of intestinal components including alpha-defensins
as well as increased gut permeability, the plasma endotoxin is
significantly elevated to the levels resulting in systemic and local
inflammation. The inflammation in the gut, pancreas, and liver is
presumably a major driving force for insulin resistance leading to
glucose intolerance. As a protective measure, the plasma glucose,
which is persistently elevated in the mice under HFD+VDD,
is ultimately converted to triglycerides to relieve hyperglycemia.
But the persistently elevated hepatic triglycerides in the form of
LDL may be further exported to other organs to create metabolic
dysorders, on the other hand, the elevated hepatic triglycerides
may be stored in the liver as steatosis. It is well known that
activation of inflammatory signaling pathways, such as JNK
and JAK can block the insulin signaling and GLU4 transport,
the basis of insulin resistance in peripheral organs including
muscle and adipose tissues (Hirosumi et al., 2002; Nakatani et al.,
2004). In the liver, the major function of insulin signaling is to
suppress gluconeogenesis and to lower the plasma glucose, while
the liver is able to take glucose steadily from the blood supply
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
FIGURE 8 | A working model showing how vitamin D and its signaling in maintain the homeostasis of gut microbiota, and how lacking of vitamin D
may exacerbate the high-fat-diet initiated fatty liver and metabolic syndromes. (A) Sufficient VD and its signaling in maintaining the integrity of small intestine.
Gut VDR/Paneth-cells/defensins axis may configure the enterotype of microbiota in eubiosis. Moreover, VD signal up regulates the key components of tight junctions
and mucin. (B) The primary dysbiosis initiated by HFD is worsened by hypovitaminosis D into second-phase dysbiosis that promotes systemic and hepatic
inflammation, leading to insulin resistance, fatty liver and metabolic syndromes, and even transition of simple steatosis and into NASH.
through steady-state transport by GLU2. Thus, insulin resistance
in the liver is featured by loss of insulin-mediated suppression of
gluconeogenesis. Whether and how vitamin D signaling engages
in gluconeogenesis is largely unknown and is currently under our
investigation.
How intestinal dysbiosis is a subject under intensive
investigation. Studies showed that while Bacteroidetes are
decreased in obese individuals as compared to lean ones,
Firmicutes are increased, and such inverse regulation is served
as a key signature for intestinal dysbiosis in MetS patients (Ley
et al., 2005). To address the possible mechanism for the intestinal
dysbiosis, a previous work demonstrated that transgenic
mice expressing human DEFA5 might reduce Firmicutes and
concomitantly promoted the growth of Bacteroidetes, while
MMP7 KO mice had opposite consequences, which collectively
demonstrated the critical roles of the Paneth cell specific
alpha-defensins in maintaining eubiosis (Salzman et al., 2010).
Importantly, the impaired expression of the Paneth-cell specific
defensins was found in obese human subjects (Hodin et al., 2011).
In agreement with these findings, our work demonstrated an
axis of vitamin D-dependent expression of DEFA5 and MMP7
in determining gut enterotype of microbiota. This notion is
further strengthened by the fact that oral gavage administration
of DEFA5 was able to resolve gut dysbiosis. In an in vitro analysis,
we found that DEFA5 can efficiently suppress the growth of
H. hepaticus. In line with our work, a recent study showed
that θ-defensin RTD-1 improves insulin action and normalizes
plasma glucose and FFA levels in diet-induced obese rats (Oh
et al., 2015).
Through three complementary measurements, including 16S
rDNA deep sequencing, DGGE, and qPCR/sequencing analysis,
we found outgrowth of H. hepaticus under the conditions
of HFD and lacking of vitamin D signaling. Specifically, the
outgrowth of H. hepaticus was associated with the down-
regulation of defa5 gene, along with impaired expression of
other α-defensins. Conversely, oral administration of DEFA5
suppressed ileal H. hepaticus and prevented endotoxemia,
systemic inflammation and hepatic steatosis in the HFD+VDD
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
15
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
mice, revealing a causal role of alpha-defensins in attenuating
biogenesis of systemic inflammation, insulin resistance, and
hepatic steatosis. Importantly, these results also demonstrated a
therapeutic potential of DEFA5 for hepatic steatosis and MetS.
Outgrowth of H. hepaticus is related to chronic inflammation
and neoplasia in susceptible animals (Fox et al., 1994; Avenaud
et al., 2003). In murine models, H. hepaticus causes chronic
hepatitis, IBD, colitis, and colorectal cancer (Ichikawa et al.,
2011). H. hepaticus was also detected in human bile samples
of patients with biliary diseases (Hamada et al., 2009) and is
implicated in HCC (Huang et al., 2004; Shimoyama et al., 2010).
H. hepaticus was initially identified in certain immune deficient
mice including IL-10 KO, Scid, and Rag mice, suggesting that
impairment of host immune surveillance is a prerequisite for the
growth and pathogenesis of H. hepaticus (Kullberg et al., 1998).
This notion was further supported by findings that H. hepaticus
infection and induction of colitis relied on host IL-23 and Th17
(Kullberg et al., 2006; Morrison et al., 2013). On the other hand,
vitamin D signaling could suppress Th17 cytokine production
(Chang et al., 2010), and induce CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory
T cells (Takeda et al., 2010; Hamzaoui et al., 2014). Enterohepatic
Helicobacter species including H. hepaticus are prevalent in mice
from commercial and academic institutions worldwide (Shames
et al., 1995; Taylor et al., 2007). Thus, the outgrowth of H.
hepaticus in the VDD or VDR KO mice is likely related to the
impaired immunity, such as lacking regulatory T cells and over
activation of Th17 response, which are under our investigation.
Whether H. hepaticus or other species of Helicobacter directly
contributes to NAFLD, T2D, obesity, and MetS in humans should
be a subject of investigation.
The symbiotic A. muciniphila presents as a highly abundant
bacterial species in the feces, inversely correlating with body
weight in rodents and humans. Also, oral administration of
A. muciniphila resolved T2D in a murine model (Shames et al.,
1995; Everard et al., 2013). Given our evidence that VDD causes
down-regulation of intestinal α-defensins, it is understandable
that there would be an outgrowth of opportunistic pathogenic
microbes including H. hepaticus, but it is unknown as to
how VDD causes suppression of the beneficial symbiotic
A. muciniphila. It is also unknown how DEFA5 administration
increases the abundance of A. muciniphila. Therefore, there is a
possibility that the two species, namely Akkermansia muciniphila
and H. hepaticus may mutually antagonize each other, either
directly or indirectly, resulting in two drastically different
microbiomes.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
DS, YN, AZ, ZC, PW, LZ, ML, LC, and YL conducted the
experiments and acquired data. QS, ZD, SZ, GW, ZX, RH, ZL,
and AL analyzed data and critically discussed the manuscript.
HT, SP, and YH conceived the work and wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful for the kind help of Drs. Andre J. Ouellette
and Yoshihiro Eriguchi (University of Southern California) for
their constructive discussions and suggestions regarding the
manuscript, and a key reagent. The study was supported by grants
from National Natural Science Foundation of China (31571165),
and Science and Technology Department of Sichuan Province
(2014SZ0194) to YH, NIH R01 AA019954 P01 CA163200 (AL,
SP). Department of Veterans Affairs grants: 5IO BX001991-02F
(HT), and I01BX001484 (SP).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fphys.
2016.00498/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Adams, J. S., and Hewison, M. (2010). Update in vitamin D. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 95, 471–478. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-1773
Amling, M., Priemel, M., Holzmann, T., Chapin, K., Rueger, J. M., Baron,
R., et al. (1999). Rescue of the skeletal phenotype of vitamin D receptor-
ablated mice in the setting of normal mineral ion homeostasis: formal
histomorphometric
and
biomechanical
analyses.
Endocrinology
140,
4982–4987. doi: 10.1210/en.140.11.4982
Avenaud, P., Le Bail, B., Mayo, K., Marais, A., Fawaz, R., Bioulac-Sage, P., et al.
(2003). Natural history of Helicobacter hepaticus infection in conventional A/J
mice, with special reference to liver involvement. Infect. Immun. 71, 3667–3672.
doi: 10.1128/IAI.71.6.3667-3672.2003
Ayabe, T., Satchell, D. P., Wilson, C. L., Parks, W. C., Selsted, M. E., and Ouellette,
A. J. (2000). Secretion of microbicidal α-defensins by intestinal Paneth cells in
response to bacteria. Nat. Immunol. 1, 113–118. doi: 10.1038/77783
Bäckhed, F., Ding, H., Wang, T., Hooper, L. V., Koh, G. Y., Nagy, A., et al.
(2004). The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat
storage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 15718–15723. doi: 10.1073/pnas.04070
76101
Barchetta, I., Angelico, F., Del Ben, M., Baroni, M. G., Pozzilli, P., Morini, S., et al.
(2011). Strong association between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
and low 25(OH) vitamin D levels in an adult population with normal serum
liver enzymes. BMC Med. 9:85. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-9-85
Bea, J. W., Jurutka, P. W., Hibler, E. A., Lance, P., Martínez, M. E., Roe, D. J.,
et al. (2015). Concentrations of the vitamin D metabolite 1,25(OH)2D and
odds of metabolic syndrome and its components. Metabolism 64, 447–459. doi:
10.1016/j.metabol.2014.11.010
Biddinger, S. B., and Kahn, C. R. (2006). From mice to men: insights into
the insulin resistance syndromes. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 68, 123–158. doi:
10.1146/annurev.physiol.68.040104.124723
Botella-Carretero, J. I., Alvarez-Blasco, F., Villafruela, J. J., Balsa, J. A., Vazquez,
C., and Escobar-Morreale, H. F. (2007). Vitamin D deficiency is associated
with the metabolic syndrome in morbid obesity. Clin. Nutr. 26, 573–580. doi:
10.1016/j.clnu.2007.05.009
Brown, K., DeCoffe, D., Molcan, E., and Gibson, D. L. (2012). Diet-
induced
dysbiosis
of
the
intestinal
microbiota
and
the
effects
on
immunity
and
disease.
Nutrients
4,
1095–1119.
doi:
10.3390/nu40
81095
Cani, P. D., Amar, J., Iglesias, M. A., Poggi, M., Knauf, C., Bastelica, D., et al.
(2007). Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes
56, 1761–1772. doi: 10.2337/db06-1491
Cefalu, W. T. (2009). Inflammation, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes: back to
the future? Diabetes 58, 307–308. doi: 10.2337/db08-1656
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
16
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
Chang, S. H., Chung, Y., and Dong, C. (2010). Vitamin D suppresses Th17 cytokine
production by inducing C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) expression.
J. Biol. Chem. 285, 38751–38755. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C110.185777
Creely, S. J., McTernan, P. G., Kusminski, C. M., Fisher ff, M., Da Silva, N. F.,
Khanolkar, M., et al. (2007). Lipopolysaccharide activates an innate immune
system response in human adipose tissue in obesity and type 2 diabetes. Am. J.
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 292, E740–E747. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00302.2006
Darmoul, D., and Ouellette, A. J. (1996). Positional specificity of defensin gene
expression reveals Paneth cell heterogeneity in mouse small intestine. Am. J.
Physiol. 271, G68–G74.
Day, C. P., and James, O. F. (1998). Steatohepatitis: a tale of two “hits”?
Gastroenterology 114, 842–845.
Derrien, M., Vaughan, E. E., Plugge, C. M., and de Vos, W. M. (2004). Akkermansia
muciniphila gen. nov., sp. nov., a human intestinal mucin-degrading bacterium.
Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 54, 1469–1476. doi: 10.1099/ijs.0.02873-0
Ding, N., Yu, R. T., Subramaniam, N., Sherman, M. H., Wilson, C., Rao, R., et al.
(2013). A vitamin D receptor/SMAD genomic circuit gates hepatic fibrotic
response. Cell 153, 601–613. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.028
Everard, A., Belzer, C., Geurts, L., Ouwerkerk, J. P., Druart, C., Bindels, L. B., et al.
(2013). Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium
controls diet-induced obesity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 9066–9071. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219451110
Ford, E. S. (2005). Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome defined by the
International Diabetes Federation among adults in the U.S. Diab. Care 28,
2745–2749. doi: 10.2337/diacare.28.11.2745
Fox, J. G., Dewhirst, F. E., Tully, J. G., Paster, B. J., Yan, L., Taylor, N. S., et al. (1994).
Helicobacter hepaticus sp. nov., a microaerophilic bacterium isolated from livers
and intestinal mucosal scrapings from mice. J. Clin. Microbiol. 32, 1238–1245.
Froicu, M., Zhu, Y., and Cantorna, M. T. (2006). Vitamin D receptor is required
to control gastrointestinal immunity in IL-10 knockout mice. Immunology 117,
310–318. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2005.02290.x
Hamada, T., Yokota, K., Ayada, K., Hirai, K., Kamada, T., Haruma, K.,
et al. (2009). Detection of Helicobacter hepaticus in human bile samples of
patients with biliary disease. Helicobacter 14, 545–551. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-
5378.2009.00729.x
Hamzaoui, A., Berraïes, A., Hamdi, B., Kaabachi, W., Ammar, J., and Hamzaoui,
K. (2014). Vitamin D reduces the differentiation and expansion of Th17
cells in young asthmatic children. Immunobiology 219, 873–879. doi:
10.1016/j.imbio.2014.07.009
Hirosumi, J., Tuncman, G., Chang, L., Gorgun, C. Z., Uysal, K. T., Maeda, K., et al.
(2002). A central role for JNK in obesity and insulin resistance. Nature 420,
333–336. doi: 10.1038/nature01137
Hodin, C. M., Verdam, F. J., Grootjans, J., Rensen, S. S., Verheyen, F. K., Dejong,
C. H., et al. (2011). Reduced Paneth cell antimicrobial protein levels correlate
with activation of the unfolded protein response in the gut of obese individuals.
J. Pathol. 225, 276–284. doi: 10.1002/path.2917
Holick, M. F. (2011). Vitamin D: a d-lightful solution for health. J. Investig. Med.
59, 872–880. doi: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e318214ea2d
Holick, M. F., Binkley, N. C., Bischoff-Ferrari, H. A., Gordon, C. M., Hanley, D. A.,
Heaney, R. P., et al. (2011). Evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin D
deficiency: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 96, 1911–1930. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0385
Hotamisligil, G. S., Shargill, N. S., and Spiegelman, B. M. (1993). Adipose
expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: direct role in obesity-linked insulin
resistance. Science 259, 87–91. doi: 10.1126/science.7678183
Huang, Y., Fan, X. G., Wang, Z. M., Zhou, J. H., Tian, X. F., and Li, N. (2004).
Identification of helicobacter species in human liver samples from patients
with primary hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Clin. Pathol. 57, 1273–1277. doi:
10.1136/jcp.2004.018556
Ichikawa, S., Mucida, D., Tyznik, A. J., Kronenberg, M., and Cheroutre, H.
(2011). Hepatic stellate cells function as regulatory bystanders. J. Immunol. 186,
5549–5555. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003917
Kong, M., Zhu, L., Bai, L., Zhang, X., Chen, Y., Liu, S., et al. (2014).
Vitamin D deficiency promotes non-alcoholic steatohepatitis through impaired
enterohepatic circulation in animal model. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest Liver
Physiol. 307, G883–G893. doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00427.2013
Kullberg, M. C., Jankovic, D., Feng, C. G., Hue, S., Gorelick, P. L., McKenzie,
B. S., et al. (2006). IL-23 plays a key role in Helicobacter hepaticus-induced
T cell-dependent colitis. J. Exp. Med. 203, 2485–2494. doi: 10.1084/jem.200
61082
Kullberg, M. C., Ward, J. M., Gorelick, P. L., Caspar, P., Hieny, S., Cheever, A.,
et al. (1998). Helicobacter hepaticus triggers colitis in specific-pathogen-free
interleukin-10 (IL-10)-deficient mice through an IL-12- and gamma interferon-
dependent mechanism. Infect. Immun. 66, 5157–5166.
Larsen, N., Vogensen, F. K., van den Berg, F. W., Nielsen, D. S., Andreasen,
A. S., Pedersen, B. K., et al. (2010). Gut microbiota in human adults with
type 2 diabetes differs from non-diabetic adults. PLoS ONE 5:e9085. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0009085
Ley, R. E., Bäckhed, F., Turnbaugh, P., Lozupone, C. A., Knight, R. D., and Gordon,
J. I. (2005). Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
102, 11070–11075. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504978102
Looker, A. C., Johnson, C. L., Lacher, D. A., Pfeiffer, C. M., Schleicher, R. L., and
Sempos, C. T. (2011). Vitamin D status: United States, 2001–2006. NCHS Data
Brief. 1–8.
Lu, L., Yu, Z., Pan, A., Hu, F. B., Franco, O. H., Li, H., et al. (2009). Plasma
25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration and metabolic syndrome among middle-
aged and elderly Chinese individuals. Diabetes Care 32, 1278–1283. doi:
10.2337/dc09-0209
Mastroianni, J. R., and Ouellette, A. J. (2009). α-defensins in enteric innate
immunity: functional Paneth cell α-defensins in mouse colonic lumen. J. Biol.
Chem. 284, 27848–27856. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.050773
Morrison, P. J., Bending, D., Fouser, L. A., Wright, J. F., Stockinger, B., Cooke, A.,
et al. (2013). Th17-cell plasticity in Helicobacter hepaticus-induced intestinal
inflammation. Mucosal Immunol. 6, 1143–1156. doi: 10.1038/mi.2013.11
Nakano, T., Cheng, Y. F., Lai, C. Y., Hsu, L. W., Chang, Y. C., Deng, J. Y., et al.
(2011). Impact of artificial sunlight therapy on the progress of non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease in rats. J Hepatol. 55, 415–425. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.11.028
Nakatani,
Y.,
Kaneto,
H.,
Kawamori,
D.,
Hatazaki,
M.,
Miyatsuka,
T.,
Matsuoka, T. A., et al. (2004). Modulation of the JNK pathway in liver
affects insulin resistance status. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 45803–45809. doi:
10.1074/jbc.M406963200
Nelson, J. E., Roth, C. L., Wilson, L. A., Yates, K. P., Aouizerat, B., Morgan-
Stevenson, V., et al. (2016). Vitamin D deficiency is associated with increased
risk of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in adults with non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease: possible role for MAPK and NF-κB? Am. J. Gastroenterol. 111, 852–863.
doi: 10.1038/ajg.2016.51
Nicholson, J. K., Holmes, E., Kinross, J., Burcelin, R., Gibson, G., Jia, W., et al.
(2012). Host-gut microbiota metabolic interactions. Science. 336, 1262–1267.
doi: 10.1126/science.1223813
Oh, Y. T., Tran, D., Buchanan, T. A., Selsted, M. E., and Youn, J. H. (2015). θ-
Defensin RTD-1 improves insulin action and normalizes plasma glucose and
FFA levels in diet-induced obese rats. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 309,
E154–E160. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00131.2015
Ooi, J. H., Li, Y., Rogers, C. J., and Cantorna, M. T. (2013). Vitamin D regulates
the gut microbiome and protects mice from dextran sodium sulfate-induced
colitis. J. Nutr. 143, 1679–1686. doi: 10.3945/jn.113.180794
Ouellette, A. J., Hsieh, M. M., Nosek, M. T., Cano-Gauci, D. F., Huttner, K. M.,
Buick, R. N., et al. (1994). Mouse Paneth cell defensins: primary structures
and antibacterial activities of numerous cryptdin isoforms. Infect. Immun. 62,
5040–5047.
Pendyala, S., Walker, J. M., and Holt, P. R. (2012). A high-fat diet is
associated with endotoxemia that originates from the gut. Gastroenterology 142,
1100–1101.e1102. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.01.034
Rawls, J. F., Mahowald, M. A., Ley, R. E., and Gordon, J. I. (2006). Reciprocal
gut microbiota transplants from zebrafish and mice to germ-free recipients
reveal host habitat selection. Cell. 127, 423–433. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.
08.043
Roth, C. L., Elfers, C. T., Figlewicz, D. P., Melhorn, S. J., Morton, G. J.,
Hoofnagle, A., et al. (2012). Vitamin D deficiency in obese rats exacerbates non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease and increases hepatic resistin and Toll-like receptor
activation. Hepatology 55, 1103–1111. doi: 10.1002/hep.24737
Salzman, N. H., Hung, K., Haribhai, D., Chu, H., Karlsson-Sjöberg, J., Amir, E.,
et al. (2010). Enteric defensins are essential regulators of intestinal microbial
ecology. Nat. Immunol. 11, 76–83. doi: 10.1038/ni.1825
Shames, B., Fox, J. G., Dewhirst, F., Yan, L., Shen, Z., and Taylor, N. S.
(1995). Identification of widespread Helicobacter hepaticus infection in feces
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
17
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
 Su et al.
Vitamin D Signaling Maintains Gut Microbiota
in commercial mouse colonies by culture and PCR assay. J. Clin. Microbiol. 33,
2968–2972.
Shimoyama, T., Takahashi, R., Abe, D., Mizuki, I., Endo, T., and Fukuda, S. (2010).
Serological analysis of Helicobacter hepaticus infection in patients with biliary
and pancreatic diseases. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 25(Suppl. 1), S86–S89. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2010.06224.x
Shoelson, S. E., Lee, J., and Goldfine, A. B. (2006). Inflammation and
insulin
resistance.
J.
Clin.
Invest.
116,
1793–1801.
doi:
10.1172/JCI
29069
Takeda, M., Yamashita, T., Sasaki, N., Nakajima, K., Kita, T., Shinohara, M.,
et al. (2010). Oral administration of an active form of vitamin D3 (calcitriol)
decreases atherosclerosis in mice by inducing regulatory T cells and immature
dendritic cells with tolerogenic functions. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 30,
2495–2503. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.215459
Takiishi, T., Ding, L., Baeke, F., Spagnuolo, I., Sebastiani, G., Laureys, J., et al.
(2014). Dietary supplementation with high doses of regular vitamin D3 safely
reduces diabetes incidence in NOD mice when given early and long term.
Diabetes 63, 2026–2036. doi: 10.2337/db13-1559
Taylor, N. S., Xu, S., Nambiar, P., Dewhirst, F. E., and Fox, J. G. (2007).
Enterohepatic Helicobacter species are prevalent in mice from commercial and
academic institutions in Asia, Europe, and North America. J. Clin. Microbiol.
45, 2166–2172. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00137-07
Wehkamp, J., Fellermann, K., Herrlinger, K. R., Bevins, C. L., and Stange, E. F.
(2005). Mechanisms of disease: defensins in gastrointestinal diseases. Nat. Clin.
Pract. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2, 406–415. doi: 10.1038/ncpgasthep0265
Wilson, C. L., Ouellette, A. J., Satchell, D. P., Ayabe, T., Lopez-Boado, Y. S.,
Stratman, J. L., et al. (1999). Regulation of intestinal α-defensin activation
by the metalloproteinase matrilysin in innate host defense. Science 286,
113–117.
Zhu, L., Kong, M., Han, Y. P., Bai, L., Zhang, X., Chen, Y., et al.
(2015). Spontaneous liver fibrosis induced by long term dietary vitamin D
deficiency in adult mice is related to chronic inflammation and enhanced
apoptosis. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 93, 385–394. doi: 10.1139/cjpp-20
b14-0275
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The reviewer YK and handling Editor declared their shared affiliation, and
the handling Editor states that the process nevertheless met the standards of a fair
and objective review.
Copyright © 2016 Su, Nie, Zhu, Chen, Wu, Zhang, Luo, Sun, Cai, Lai, Xiao, Duan,
Zheng, Wu, Hu, Tsukamoto, Lugea, Liu, Pandol and Han. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
18
November 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 498
