 Single-cell analysis resolves the cell state transition
and signaling dynamics associated with melanoma
drug-induced resistance
Yapeng Sua,b,1, Wei Weia,c,d,1,2, Lidia Roberte,1, Min Xuea,b, Jennifer Tsoic, Angel Garcia-Diaze, Blanca Homet Morenoe,f,
Jungwoo Kima,b, Rachel H. Nga,b, Jihoon W. Leea,b, Richard C. Koyag, Begonya Comin-Anduixd,g, Thomas G. Graeberc,d,h,
Antoni Ribasc,d,e,g,2, and James R. Heatha,b,d,2
aNanoSystems Biology Cancer Center, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; bDivision of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; cDepartment of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095;
dJonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095; eDepartment of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095; fDivision of Translational Oncology, Carlos III Health Institute, 28029 Madrid, Spain; gDepartment of Surgery, Division of Surgical-Oncology,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095; and hCrump Institute for Molecular Imaging, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
Edited by Herbert Levine, Rice University, Houston, TX, and approved November 14, 2017 (received for review July 6, 2017)
Continuous BRAF inhibition of BRAF mutant melanomas triggers a se-
ries of cell state changes that lead to therapy resistance and escape
from immune control before establishing acquired resistance geneti-
cally. We used genome-wide transcriptomics and single-cell phenotyp-
ing to explore the response kinetics to BRAF inhibition for a panel of
patient-derived BRAFV600-mutant melanoma cell lines. A subset of plas-
tic cell lines, which followed a trajectory covering multiple known cell
state transitions, provided models for more detailed biophysical in-
vestigations. Markov modeling revealed that the cell state transitions
were reversible and mediated by both Lamarckian induction and
nongenetic Darwinian selection of drug-tolerant states. Single-cell
functional proteomics revealed activation of certain signaling net-
works shortly after BRAF inhibition, and before the appearance of
drug-resistant phenotypes. Drug targeting those networks, in com-
bination with BRAF inhibition, halted the adaptive transition and led
to prolonged growth inhibition in multiple patient-derived cell lines.
single-cell analysis | cell state transition | adaptive resistance | Markov chain
model | melanoma
T
he high rate of both response and resistance to BRAF in-
hibitors (BRAFi) has made BRAF mutant melanomas and
derived cell lines into paradigmatic models for exploring the chal-
lenges of targeted inhibitors. Epigenetic alterations and associated
cell state transitions along the melanocytic lineage toward drug-
tolerant states appear to precede the emergence of clones that
are genetically resistant to BRAF inhibition (1–5). Specifically, brief
BRAFi exposure (1–3 d) can trigger melanocytic differentiation in
certain cell lines. This is accompanied by increased MITF (a mel-
anocytic transcription factor) and up-regulation of downstream
melanosomal antigens MART-1 and gp100 (1, 2). Slightly longer
exposure (2–9 d) can induce de-differentiation toward a slow-cycling
neural crest-like phenotype, with a characteristic increase of Nerve
Growth Factor Receptor (NGFR) and loss of MART-1 (5). Ex-
tended exposure (>2 wk) can yield an invasive mesenchymal-like
state with both MART-1 and NGFR loss (3). The kinetics and
molecular details of these cell state changes depend on the drug
treatment duration and dose, as well as the plasticity of the cancer
cells (3–5). For some patient-derived cell lines, these drug-induced
cell state transitions are reversed on drug release (5, 6). Observa-
tions on patient-derived cells have been shown to correlate with
what is seen in patient tumors (3–5).
Several studies have explored the biology of nongenetic BRAFi
resistance in BRAF mutant melanomas (1–5), but the biophysical
picture of this process is less resolved. Biophysical studies can yield
predictive insights, but may lack the mechanistic detail of
a biological investigation. Of particular interest here is the na-
ture of the cell-state changes observed over the course of drug
resistance development. We consider two scenarios. The first
involves the enrichment of drug-resistant cancer cell genotypes,
or epigenotypes, with growth advantage on drug exposure, akin
to the Darwinian-type selection (7). The second, Lamarckian
induction (8), is when the drug treatment itself induces cell state
changes toward a more drug-tolerant state that can persist across
cell generations through transcriptional reprogramming and
signaling network rewiring. The second scenario is often loosely
(and imprecisely) termed an adaptive response to drugging.
In principle, experimental measures of the trajectories of
many single melanoma cells would discriminate between the
different scenarios for drug resistance development. However,
such trajectories are not feasible for the full, few-month, re-
versible melanocyte-to-mesenchymal transition, although subre-
gions of this cell state space may be so mapped (5). Here, we use
whole-transcriptome analysis and single-cell phenotype profiling
to investigate the responses of a series of patient-derived BRAF
mutant melanoma cell lines to BRAFi. Certain cell lines exhibit
the full range of adaptive responses, and data from those cells are
computationally modeled to investigate the transition kinetics
Significance
This work provides biophysical insights into how BRAF mutant
melanoma cells adapt to the stress of MAPK inhibition via a
series of reversible phenotypic transitions toward drug-tolerant
or drug-resistant cell states enriched for neural-crest factors and
mesenchymal signatures. This adaptation is influenced by cell
phenotype-specific drug selection and cell state interconversion,
but not selection of genetically resistant clones. A panel of
functional proteins, analyzed at the single-cell level, pointed to
signaling network hubs that drive the initiation of the mela-
noma cell adaptive transition. Targeting those hubs halted the
transition and arrested resistance development.
Author contributions: W.W., A.R., and J.R.H. designed research; Y.S., W.W., L.R., M.X., J.T.,
A.G.-D., B.H.M., J.K., R.H.N., J.W.L., R.C.K., and B.C.-A. performed research; Y.S. and W.W.
developed the computational model; Y.S., W.W., L.R., M.X., J.T., A.G.-D., B.H.M., T.G.G.,
A.R., and J.R.H. analyzed data; W.W., A.R., and J.R.H. supervised the study; and Y.S., W.W.,
L.R., M.X., A.R., and J.R.H. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: J.R.H. and A.R. are affiliated with Isoplexis, which is seeking
to commercialize the single-cell barcode chip technology.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: The RNA-seq data reported in this paper have been deposited in the
ArrayExpress database (accession no. E-MTAB-5493).
1Y.S., W.W., and L.R. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: weiwei@mednet.ucla.edu,
aribas@mednet.ucla.edu, or heath@caltech.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1712064115/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712064115
PNAS
|
December 26, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 52
|
13679–13684
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
ENGINEERING
 and the nature of the BRAFi-triggered cell state changes. We
further explore the signaling pathways associated with the induc-
tion of various subphenotypes via a kinetic single-cell functional
proteomic study (9). These single-cell assays uncover the emer-
gence of drug-activated signaling before the appearance of drug-
tolerant phenotypes, and identify strategies for arresting the cell
state transitions and prolonging cell growth inhibition. We dem-
onstrate that our findings extend to less-plastic cell lines.
Results
The Cellular Transition Trajectories of Phenotypically Plastic Melanoma
Cells in Adaptation to BRAFi. We interrogated 18 patient-derived
BRAFV600E mutant melanoma cell lines by exposing them to
BRAFi (vemurafenib) for periods of 3 d and 3 wk at a concen-
tration of 2 × IC50 for each cell line (SI Appendix, Table S1).
Phenotypic changes were characterized by flow cytometry, using
well-established markers for melanocytic (MART-1) and neural
crest-like cells (NGFR), respectively (5, 6, 10) (SI Appendix, Figs.
S1 and S2 and Table S2). Clustering of flow cytometry data
classified the 18 cell lines into four clusters according to their
phenotypic plasticity to BRAFi. Cluster C cells exhibited the
highest plasticity on drug treatment (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A).
We further characterized these phenotypic changes at the whole-
transcriptome level. We randomly selected nine cell lines from the
four clusters for RNA-seq analysis at baseline, plus after 3 d and
3 wk of drug exposure (Fig. 1 and SI Appendix, Fig. S1B). Consistent
with previous findings, the most drug-resistant cell lines (defined by
IC50 > 1 μM) showed a relatively low melanocytic signature, ele-
vated expression of neural crest and mesenchymal-related genes,
and activated signaling in JNK and NFκB pathways (3, 5). AXL and
c-JUN strongly correlate with the IC50 values, whereas LEF1 and
MITF are anticorrelated (Fig. 1A) (3, 11, 12). A clustering analysis
of genome-wide expression of the nine cell lines yielded partitions
identical to those generated from two-marker flow cytometry data
(SI Appendix, Fig. S1B). This confirmed NGFR and MART-1 as
robust markers for characterizing the BRAFi-induced phenotype
transitions. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) on BRAFi
treatment, as analyzed using Gene Expression Dynamic Inspector
(13), pointed to cluster C again, which exhibited the largest tran-
scriptional alterations on drugging (Fig. 1C). A common group
of proliferation-related genes showed varying degrees of down-
regulation in all clusters (SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
We selected the highly plastic cluster C cell lines (M397, M229,
and M263) for a time-course analysis for either a brief (3 d) or a
prolonged (71–90 d) BRAF inhibition. The three lines followed
similar trajectories on the flow cytometry plots (Fig. 1B), starting
with transient melanocytic differentiation (increased MITF/
MART-1 expression) for 3 d treatment (Fig. 1B and SI Appendix,
Table S2), followed by the appearance of the slow-cycling neural
crest-like (NGFRhigh/MART-1neg) state after 1–3 wk of drug
treatment. Prolonged BRAF inhibition yielded a double-negative
(NGFRlow/MART-1neg) state characterized by a sharp increase in
cell proliferation (5). The interpretation of these trajectories
(Fig. 1B) was validated at the transcriptional level by scoring
MITF activity (14) and neural crest signatures (15) of each cell
line, using curated gene sets (Fig. 1D and SI Appendix, Fig.
S4 and Table S3). The trajectories also correlated with the de-
velopment of adaptive resistance (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). Simi-
larly, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis of the averaged gene
expression of the three cell lines revealed significant enrichment
in neural crest stem cell and epithelial–mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-related genes with elevated invasiveness and migration
signatures on continuous BRAFi exposure (Fig. 1E). Meanwhile,
TNF/NF-κB-, JNK-, and p38 MAPK signaling-related genes were
significantly enriched, with down-regulation of MITF signature
(Fig. 1E and SI Appendix, Fig. S6). These findings were con-
firmed by inspecting the expression levels (SI Appendix, Fig. S7A)
and mining the gene ontology terms of these DEGs (SI Appendix,
Fig. S7B). The enrichment of neural crest-related genes was in-
significant after prolonged drug exposure, whereas the enrichment
of EMT-associated genes held steady (Fig. 1E). Thus, the double-
negative state carried mesenchymal signatures and exhibited the
loss of neural crest state signatures. Analysis of other clusters
showed similar enrichment in neural crest and mesenchymal sig-
natures except for cluster A, which contained innately resistant
cells with MART-1neg/NGFRneg baseline expression (SI Appendix,
Fig. S8). Similar enrichment patterns of the transcriptional pro-
grams were also found in published transcriptomic datasets in-
volving 39 patient samples from pretreatment, on-treatment, and/
or emergence of acquired resistance to RAF/MEK inhibitors (16).
This suggests similar adaptive resistance in these BRAFi-treated
patient tumors (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Moreover, when cells were
treated with BRAFi for 3 wk or longer, we identified significant
enrichment in most innate anti-PD-1 resistance signatures (17) (SI
Appendix, Table S4), pointing to a potential rise of resistance to
PD-1 blockade for cells adapted to the run-in BRAFi therapy. The
BRAFi-induced cell state changes in cluster C cells reflected a
summation of the various types of adaptive transitions reported
for melanomas in response to BRAFi (1–6). Thus, cluster C cell
lines were carried forward for a detailed biophysical investigation
of BRAFi-induced cell state transitions.
Adaptive Transition Proceeds Through Drug-Mediated Cell State
Interconversion and Phenotypic Selection. Three factors can ac-
count for the drug-induced cell state transition kinetics. The first
is a deterministic factor that arises from cell state changes de-
termined by the underlying causative gene regulatory networks.
The second factor arises from the stochastic nature of gene ex-
pression. Stochastic cell state changes may be considered as a
random walk diffusion process across the epigenetic landscape
(18). The third factor accounts for phenotype-specific cell pro-
liferation and survival on drug exposure. To account for all three
factors, we modified a published Markov kinetic framework (19)
to model the BRAFi-induced cell state transitions (Fig. 2). Our
model assumed that the cell population is composed of four
discrete cell states (Fig. 2A) and contains a nonsymmetric cell
state interconversion matrix to account for both deterministic
(Lamarckian induction) and stochastic cell state transitions. For
drug-treated cells, a drug susceptibility matrix is introduced to
quantify the third factor (SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods).
Experimental inputs into the model are short-time measures of
the cell state composition dynamics. Computational outputs are
state-to-state transition probabilities (Fig. 2B) and, for drug-
treated samples, state-dependent drug susceptibility (Fig. 2C).
We sorted NGFRpos and NGFRneg subpopulations of two
cluster C cell lines (M397 and M229) at baseline, and seeded
them separately in Petri dishes for in vitro expansion (Fig. 2A
and SI Appendix, Figs. S10–S12), with and without BRAFi, thus
providing four initial conditions for each cell line. For untreated
samples, flow cytometry analysis of the phenotype compositions
during the first three cycles of expansion provided input into the
Markov model. The fitted Markov model parameters (Fig. 2B)
were then used to predict longer-term phenotypic evolution.
Without BRAFi, the NGFRpos and NGFRneg subpopulations of
both cell lines were predicted and experimentally shown to
return to their original unsorted phenotypic composition after
several cell cycles (5, 18–20) (SI Appendix, Fig. S10B).
BRAFi clearly altered the cell state interconversion proba-
bilities (Fig. 2B and SI Appendix, Fig. S13). The Markov model
fits from phenotype dynamics of sorted populations (Fig. 2B)
under BRAFi were used to predict the drug susceptibility of each
cell state. The neural crest-like and double-negative states were
predicted, and experimentally shown, to be more resistant to
drug treatment compared with melanocytic and double-positive
states (Fig. 2C). We further used the interconversion and drug
susceptibility matrices inferred from the cell state kinetics of
13680
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712064115
Su et al.
 segregated populations to predict the phenotypic evolution of
unsorted cells on prolonged BRAFi exposure. The model predic-
tions were in good agreement with the experiments (Fig. 2D and SI
Appendix, Fig. S13C and Tables S5 and S6). Furthermore, the
Markov model suggests that, on drug removal, the cells should
return to the original phenotypic compositions characteristic of
drug-naive cells. In fact, such a reversible transition was observed
in both the cluster C cells and the less plastic cluster B cells (SI
Appendix, Fig. S14A), and the reverted cells also exhibited a similar
IC50 to BRAFi as the untreated cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S14B).
The Markov model predictions provide evidence for La-
marckian induction, as they show that BRAFi influences the
specific rates of cell state interconversion. The predictions also
provide evidence of phenotype-dependent Darwinian selection,
as cell states with the lowest drug susceptibility eventually win
out. If only the drug susceptibility matrix is included in the
Fig. 1.
Phenotypic and transcriptomic characterization of a panel of patient-derived melanoma cell lines while adapting to BRAF inhibition. (A) Heat map of
baseline expression levels for critical genes involved in the adaptive BRAFi resistance across a panel of melanoma cell lines, ordered by averaged IC50 to BRAFi.
An IC50 of 1 μM was set to be the threshold for resistant lines. Correlation coefficients between each gene’s expression and IC50 across cell lines were evaluated
with statistically significant correlations listed in bold font (*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.005). (B) Phenotypic kinetics screened by flow cytometry shows how the
three plastic cell lines from cluster C experienced a phenotypic transition with a counterclockwise trajectory over a 73-d BRAF inhibition. (C) Visualization of
DEGs for all of the cell line clusters relative to control by Gene Expression Dynamic Inspector. Each mosaic map represents averaged genome-wide expression
profile for a specific cluster of cell lines at a time as labeled. Each pixel in the same location within the mosaic maps represents the same minicluster of genes
(red, up-regulation; blue, down-regulation; green, no change). (D) Plot of signature scores of MITF and neural crest for the three plastic cell lines across
different times upon BRAFi treatment. Counterclockwise trajectories appear for all three lines (VC, DMSO control). (E) Gene Set Enrichment Analysis nor-
malized enrichment scores (NES) show significant enrichment of curated gene sets in the relevant categories associated with melanoma-adaptive cell state
transition for 21 d and 73–90 d (nominal P values: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005, NS: not significant).
Su et al.
PNAS
|
December 26, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 52
|
13681
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
ENGINEERING
 Markov model, the resultant prediction is in poor agreement
with the experiments (SI Appendix, Fig. S13D). Therefore, the
combined actions of both cell state interconversion and drug
selection contribute to the observed phenotypic kinetics.
Single-Cell Functional Proteomics Reveals the Emergence of Drug-
Activated Signaling at the Initiation of the Adaptive Transition. We
used the microfluidics-based single-cell barcode chip (SCBC)
technology to carry out single-cell analysis of the M397 cells so as to
interrogate those signaling pathways directly targeted by BRAFi (9).
Guided by the transcriptional analysis, we designed a protein panel
that covers critical phenotypic markers, transcription factors, and
signaling effectors involved in the adaptive transition (SI Appendix,
Tables S7 and S8). Each SCBC has 320 microchambers (1.5-
nanoliter volume) engineered for cell lysis, and each is equipped
with an antibody array for protein capture. After cell lysis, specific
proteins are captured, and each array element is developed as a
sandwich immunofluorescent assay (SI Appendix, Fig. S15).
Scatter plots of single-cell data are shown in Fig. 3A, with av-
eraged protein abundance indicated by the black horizontal lines.
The time-series data are projected onto a 2D plane, using the
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) algorithm
(21) (Fig. 3B). SCBC assays from different times cluster into dif-
ferent groups. The dispersion within a group and the distance
between groups provides functional measures of how different the
single cells are. Such dispersion can be quantified by the functional
heterogeneity index defined in our previous study (9). Notably,
BRAFi treatment increases the cellular heterogeneity in days
3 and 6, indicating an elevated plasticity (Fig. 3C). This is reflected
in the sharply increased dispersion of day 6 cells in the t-SNE
plane. This increase in heterogeneity between days 3 and 6 is
reminiscent of the attractor destabilization and bifurcation before
a cell state transition in other systems (22, 23).
We used the SCBC data to assess protein–protein correlations
at each point (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). The emergence of strong
negative correlations between NGFR and MITF/MART-1 at day
3 points to the initiation of the cell state transition toward the
neural crest-like phenotype with elevated NGFR and loss of
MITF/MART-1. The overall activity of the network may be
quantified by the signaling network activity index (SNAI) that
accounts for both the numbers and the strengths of statistically
significant correlations (SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods).
The SNAI is highest at day 6 (Fig. 3D), with particularly strong
signaling participation of p-ERK and p-NFκB p65 (SI Appendix,
Fig. S16), suggesting a potential gain of function through MEK/
ERK and NFκB p65 signaling that might lead to BRAFi drug
tolerance by promoting the adaptive transition. The SNAI drops
sharply between day 6 and day 10, but then recovers to an activity
similar to that seen for untreated cells (Fig. 3D), albeit with al-
tered active network components (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). This
general behavior is reminiscent of cell state transitions seen in
other model systems (23) and indicates a possible cell state
switch between days 6 and 10.
To quantify the influence of the functional proteins on the overall
signaling coordination at the initiation of the transition, we per-
formed Principal Component Analysis, using an analytical approach
previously reported (9). We calculated the correlations between the
assayed proteins and first principal component (PC1) for untreated
and 6 d BRAFi treated samples. PC1 captures the most essential
feature of the signaling network, and thus identifies those proteins
that participate most strongly in the signaling coordination. For
the untreated sample, PC1 is populated by p-ERK, p-NFκB p65,
p-JNK, and p-P38α (Fig. 3E). At day 6, these four proteins bifurcate
into two groups, with the influence of p-JNK and p-P38α (blue
group) signaling repressed, and MEK/ERK and NFκB p65 signaling
(red group) elevated (Fig. 3E). This behavior suggests that com-
bining BRAFi with MEK and NFκB p65 inhibition might arrest the
adaptive cell state transition toward drug-resistant phenotypes.
Combined MEK/ERK and NFκB p65 Inhibition with BRAFi Arrests the
Adaptive Transition and Induced a Sustained Growth Inhibition. The
single-cell analysis suggests that inhibiting the NFκB p65 and
MEK/ERK signaling axes might keep the cells in the BRAFi
sensitive state. To test this hypothesis, we used trametinib (T,
MEK inhibitor) and JSH-23 (J, NFκB p65 translocation in-
hibitor) (24) in combination with vemurafenib (V) to treat the
M397 cells in vitro and compared the results against mono-
therapies (V, T, and J) or dual combinations (V+T and V+J)
Fig. 2.
Markov model of cell state transition predicts phenotypic evolution of melanoma cells on BRAF inhibition. (A) Schematic illustration of phenotypic
segregation and treatment conditions in the Markov model. The cells were sorted to NGFR+ and NGFR− subpopulations and treated with or without
vemurafenib. (B) Cell state transition probabilities of M397 at untreated and vemurafenib-treated conditions. (C) Relative viability of different phenotypes for
M397 inferred by the model (Left), and measured IC50 values (normalized to control) at different times (Right) across the transition at which one phenotype is
enriched, as indicated by its respective color code (error bars: ±SD). (D) Model prediction of the phenotypic kinetics (solid lines) versus experimental data (dots
connected with dashed lines) for M397 with continuous exposure to vemurafenib.
13682
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712064115
Su et al.
 over the course of 23 d. Consistent with our prediction, all com-
bination therapies induced considerable cell growth inhibition (Fig.
4A). The monotherapies T and J were much less potent compared
with V, but both dual combinations and the triple combination
significantly outperformed the monotherapies. Consistent with
previous finding (5), although V+T yielded enhanced therapeutic
effect relative to V, it did not halt the phenotypic transition toward
the neural crest-like drug-tolerant state (Fig. 4B and SI Appendix,
Fig. S17), and therapy resistance emerged after prolonged treat-
ment (Fig. 4C and SI Appendix, Fig. S19A). However, both V+J
and V+T+J successfully arrested the transition and kept the cells
in the drug-sensitive state (MART-1pos; Fig. 4B), indicating NFκB
p65 nuclear translocation is necessary for the adaptive transition
toward the drug-tolerant phenotypes. Drug dose–response assay
under the Bliss independence assumption further confirmed that
the sustained growth inhibition of the triple combination was not
simply a result of drug synergy, but a result of the arrest of cell
state transition (SI Appendix, Fig. S18). We further performed
clonogenic assays to assess whether the combination can induce
sustained growth inhibition on four other BRAFV600E mutated
melanoma cell lines. The results indicated that the V+T+J com-
bination outperforms V+T over prolonged periods for all cell lines
tested, whereas treatment with J alone showed no significant cy-
totoxicity (Fig. 4C and SI Appendix, Fig. S19).
Discussion
Adaptive resistance resulting from transcriptomic reprogram-
ming permits BRAF mutant melanoma cells to survive BRAF
inhibition. BRAFi exposure triggers a transient melanocytic
differentiation program, followed by multiple de-differentiation
programs that terminate in a drug-resistant mesenchymal-like
state. Cells with distinct innate drug sensitivities may follow all or
part of this transition trajectory on BRAFi exposure (SI Ap-
pendix, Fig. S2). The full transition trajectory was observed
within a highly plastic set of patient-derived cells (SI Appendix,
Fig. S1A, cluster C), accompanied by an elevated innate anti-PD-
1 resistance gene signature associated with anti-PD-1 therapy-
resistant melanomas (17). These results challenge the notion of
Fig. 3.
Single-cell proteomic profiling of the M397 cell line during the course of adaptive cell state transition. (A) Background subtracted SCBC data
represented as 1D scatter plot (mean ± SEM was overlaid for each protein by the black horizontal bar). Statistical uniqueness is evaluated by Kruskal-Wallis
test comparison among multiple points. All 13 markers are statistically significant with P < 0.0005. (B) Application of t-SNE algorithm to the single-cell data
separates the cells into spatially distinct clusters based on their proteomic profiles. Each point in the t-SNE plane represents a single-cell measurement, and
its color is coded by time. (C) Quantification of the functional heterogeneity (FHI) of M397 cells across different times, along with the transition. (D) The
SNAI across different times, along with the transition, extracted from single-cell proteomic measurements of M397 cells. (E) Change in signaling co-
ordination quantified as correlations between key functional proteins and the PC1 for control and day 6, in which a bifurcation of signaling proteins
is identified.
Fig. 4.
In vitro validation of the monotherapy and combination therapies predicted by SCBC analysis. (A) In vitro cell proliferation assay of M397 for the
monotherapy and combination therapies based on the predictions from the SCBC data analysis. At each time, cell number of each test condition is normalized
to the number of vemurafenib monotherapy and plotted as log 10 fold change (error bars: ±SD). (B) Flow cytometry analysis of MART-1 and NGFR levels at
single-cell resolution for monotherapy and combination therapies on both M397 (23 d treatment) and M229 (28 d treatment). (C) Clonogenic assays of long-
term drug treated samples confirm V+T+J induced a sustained growth inhibition (see also Fig. S19A).
Su et al.
PNAS
|
December 26, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 52
|
13683
BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
ENGINEERING
 protocols with a run-in period of targeted BRAFi therapy fol-
lowed by immune checkpoint therapy, as the adaptive response
to BRAFi may also create a less friendly environment to im-
munotherapies in certain BRAFi-sensitive tumors (25).
The kinetics of the cell state transitions that occur from the
drug-naive, melanocytic state to the drug-resistant mesenchymal
state was well-captured by a Markov model. This analysis
revealed the critical role of drug induction, relative to the se-
lection of drug-tolerant phenotypes, in the adaptive response to
BRAFi. Drug induction can enable the de novo generation of
new cell states, whereas selection accelerates the enrichment of
the drug-tolerant states. The cell state interconversion proba-
bilities over long periods of drug treatment were inferred from
snapshots of flow cytometry data. However, the Markov model
does have limitations. For example, the phenotype-dependent
drug susceptibility determined from the Markov model is in-
complete, as it groups the net effect of cell proliferation and cell
death of each phenotype into a single diagonal term in the ma-
trix. The relative contribution of each factor is not distinguished
(20, 26). Similarly, on drug removal, the relative contribution of
the cell state reversion versus regrowth of specific cellular phe-
notypes is also not resolved. In addition, the Markov model
oversimplifies the continuous cell state transitions by categoriz-
ing cells into discrete phenotypes on the basis of their marker
expression levels. Continuous kinetic models (18), coupled with
experimental measures of single-cell trajectories (26), may prove
attractive for investigating these transitions at finer resolution.
Transcriptional analysis revealed several critical signaling
pathways associated with cellular adaptation to BRAFi. This, in
turn, informed the design of a second kinetic investigation of the
transition via single-cell functional proteomics. That study un-
veiled the BRAFi-induced activation of MEK/ERK and NFκB
p65 signaling before the emergence of the drug-resistant phe-
notype. NFκB can synergize with c-Jun in the transcriptional
response to TNF-α (12). Further, the c-Jun/JNK signaling axis
has been reported to play a critical role in melanoma-adaptive
resistance to BRAFi (3, 4), and was also found here to be as-
sociated with the emergence of adaptive resistance when the
cells were transitioning to the neural crest or mesenchymal-like
states (SI Appendix, Fig. S20). However, TNF/NFκB signaling
was activated at the beginning of the adaptive transition (before
the c-Jun/JNK activation), implying that TNF/NFκB signaling
might enable the neural crest transition program. This is further
supported by the report that neural crest de-differentiation can
be triggered by proinflammatory cytokine TNF-α secreted from
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (10). It echoes the observation
that the MITFlow/NFκBhigh transcriptional state of melanomas is
resistant to inhibition of BRAF and MEK, singly or in combi-
nation (11). NFκB inhibitors are normally used as adjuvant to
chemotherapy or targeted therapies in clinical trials (27). How-
ever, because of the host toxicity, identifying more clinically ac-
tionable targets downstream of the NFκB pathway may be an
appealing option (28) for arresting BRAFi adaptive resistance.
As similar enrichment patterns were recurrent in more than half
the on-treatment patient biopsies (SI Appendix, Fig. S9), we
anticipate that combination therapy with inhibitors of this
pathway may improve the durability of BRAFi therapy.
Materials and Methods
Human melanoma cell lines (M series) were established from patient’s biopsies
under University of California, Los Angeles, institutional review board ap-
proval #11–003254. Please refer to SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods for
cell lines and reagents used, experimental protocols, and statistical analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We acknowledge the following agencies and foun-
dations for support: NIH Grants U54 CA199090 (to J.R.H., W.W., and A.R.),
P01 CA168585 (to T.G.G. and A.R.), and R35 CA197633 (to A.R.); the
Dr. Robert Vigen Memorial Fund, the Garcia-Corsini Family Fund, the Ressler
Family Fund, and the Grimaldi Family Fund (A.R.); the Jean Perkins
Foundation (J.R.H.); University of California, Los Angeles, Broad Stem Cell
Research Center Seed Fund for Small Cell Cancer Pilot Studies, and the Phelps
Family Foundation (W.W.); and ACS Research Scholar Award (RSG-12-257-01-
TBE), MRA Established Investigator Award (20120279), and University of
California, Los Angeles, Clinical and Translational Science Institute Grant
UL1TR000124 (to T.G.G.). We acknowledge University of California, Los
Angeles, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC) membership (NIH/
NCI P30CA016042) for using the JCCC Flow Cytometry Core and Genomics
Shared Resource. L.R. was supported by the V Foundation-Gil Nickel Family
Endowed Fellowship and a scholarship from SEOM. J.T. was supported by
NIH T32-CA009120.
1. Boni A, et al. (2010) Selective BRAFV600E inhibition enhances T-cell recognition of
melanoma without affecting lymphocyte function. Cancer Res 70:5213–5219.
2. Frederick DT, et al. (2013) BRAF inhibition is associated with enhanced melanoma
antigen expression and a more favorable tumor microenvironment in patients with
metastatic melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 19:1225–1231.
3. Ramsdale R, et al. (2015) The transcription cofactor c-JUN mediates phenotype
switching and BRAF inhibitor resistance in melanoma. Sci Signal 8:ra82.
4. Titz B, et al. (2016) JUN dependency in distinct early and late BRAF inhibition adap-
tation states of melanoma. Cell Discov 2:16028.
5. Fallahi-Sichani M, et al. (2017) Adaptive resistance of melanoma cells to RAF in-
hibition via reversible induction of a slowly dividing de-differentiated state. Mol Syst
Biol 13:905.
6. Sun C, et al. (2014) Reversible and adaptive resistance to BRAF(V600E) inhibition in
melanoma. Nature 508:118–122.
7. Huang S (2012) Tumor progression: Chance and necessity in Darwinian and La-
marckian somatic (mutationless) evolution. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 110:69–86.
8. Pisco AO, Huang S (2015) Non-genetic cancer cell plasticity and therapy-induced
stemness in tumour relapse: ‘What does not kill me strengthens me’. Br J Cancer 112:
1725–1732.
9. Wei W, et al. (2016) Single-cell phosphoproteomics resolves adaptive signaling dy-
namics and informs targeted combination therapy in glioblastoma. Cancer Cell 29:
563–573.
10. Landsberg J, et al. (2012) Melanomas resist T-cell therapy through inflammation-
induced reversible dedifferentiation. Nature 490:412–416.
11. Konieczkowski DJ, et al. (2014) A melanoma cell state distinction influences sensitivity
to MAPK pathway inhibitors. Cancer Discov 4:816–827.
12. Riesenberg S, et al. (2015) MITF and c-Jun antagonism interconnects melanoma de-
differentiation with pro-inflammatory cytokine responsiveness and myeloid cell re-
cruitment. Nat Commun 6:8755.
13. Eichler GS, Huang S, Ingber DE (2003) Gene expression dynamics inspector (GEDI): For
integrative analysis of expression profiles. Bioinformatics 19:2321–2322.
14. Hoek KS, et al. (2008) In vivo switching of human melanoma cells between pro-
liferative and invasive states. Cancer Res 68:650–656.
15. Bell GW, Yatskievych TA, Antin PB (2004) GEISHA, a whole-mount in situ hybridiza-
tion gene expression screen in chicken embryos. Dev Dyn 229:677–687.
16. Kwong LN, et al. (2015) Co-clinical assessment identifies patterns of BRAF inhibitor
resistance in melanoma. J Clin Invest 125:1459–1470.
17. Hugo W, et al. (2016) Genomic and transcriptomic features of response to anti-PD-
1 therapy in metastatic melanoma. Cell 165:35–44.
18. Sisan DR, Halter M, Hubbard JB, Plant AL (2012) Predicting rates of cell state change
caused by stochastic fluctuations using a data-driven landscape model. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 109:19262–19267.
19. Gupta PB, et al. (2011) Stochastic state transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium
in populations of cancer cells. Cell 146:633–644.
20. Zhou JX, Pisco AO, Qian H, Huang S (2014) Nonequilibrium population dynamics of
phenotype conversion of cancer cells. PLoS One 9:e110714.
21. Amir el-AD, et al. (2013) viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional single-cell
data and reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of leukemia. Nat Biotechnol 31:545–552.
22. Mojtahedi M, et al. (2016) Cell fate decision as high-dimensional critical state tran-
sition. PLoS Biol 14:e2000640.
23. Bargaje R, et al. (2017) Cell population structure prior to bifurcation predicts effi-
ciency of directed differentiation in human induced pluripotent cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 114:2271–2276.
24. Shin HM, et al. (2004) Inhibitory action of novel aromatic diamine compound on
lipopolysaccharide-induced nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB without affecting
IkappaB degradation. FEBS Lett 571:50–54.
25. Cooper ZA, Frederick DT, Ahmed Z, Wargo JA (2013) Combining checkpoint inhibitors
and BRAF-targeted agents against metastatic melanoma. Oncoimmunology 2:
e24320.
26. Pisco AO, et al. (2013) Non-Darwinian dynamics in therapy-induced cancer drug re-
sistance. Nat Commun 4:2467.
27. Lin Y, Bai L, Chen W, Xu S (2010) The NF-kappaB activation pathways, emerging
molecular targets for cancer prevention and therapy. Expert Opin Ther Targets 14:
45–55.
28. Tornatore L, et al. (2014) Cancer-selective targeting of the NF-κB survival pathway
with GADD45β/MKK7 inhibitors. Cancer Cell 26:495–508.
13684
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712064115
Su et al.
