 CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e15
ABSTRACT: Adverse experiences in childhood and adolescence, defined 
as subjectively perceived threats to the safety or security of the child’s 
bodily integrity, family, or social structures, are known to be associated 
with cardiometabolic outcomes over the life course into adulthood. This 
American Heart Association scientific statement reviews the scientific 
literature on the influence of childhood adversity on cardiometabolic 
outcomes that constitute the greatest public health burden in the 
United States, including obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
and cardiovascular disease. This statement also conceptually outlines 
pathways linking adversity to cardiometabolic health, identifies evidence 
gaps, and provides suggestions for future research to inform practice 
and policy. We note that, despite a lack of objective agreement on what 
subjectively qualifies as exposure to childhood adversity and a dearth 
of prospective studies, substantial evidence documents an association 
between childhood adversity and cardiometabolic outcomes across the 
life course. Future studies that focus on mechanisms, resiliency, and 
vulnerability factors would further strengthen the evidence and provide 
much-needed information on targets for effective interventions. Given 
that childhood adversities affect cardiometabolic health and multiple 
health domains across the life course, interventions that ameliorate 
these initial upstream exposures may be more appropriate than 
interventions remediating downstream cardiovascular disease risk factor 
effects later in life.
Shakira F. Suglia, ScD, Chair
Karestan C. Koenen, PhD, 
Vice Chair
Renée Boynton-Jarrett, MD, 
ScD
Paul S. Chan, MD, MSc
Cari J. Clark, ScD
Andrea Danese, MD, PhD
Myles S. Faith, PhD, FAHA
Benjamin I. Goldstein, MD, 
PhD, FRCP(C)
Laura L. Hayman, PhD, RN, 
FAHA
Carmen R. Isasi, MD, PhD, 
FAHA
Charlotte A. Pratt, PhD, MSc, 
RD, FAHA
Natalie Slopen, ScD
Jennifer A. Sumner, PhD
Aslan Turer, MD, MHS
Christy B. Turer, MD
Justin P
. Zachariah, MD, 
MPH, FAHA
On behalf of the American 
Heart Association Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention; 
Council on Cardiovascular 
Disease in the Young; Council 
on Functional Genomics and 
Translational Biology; Council 
on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing; and Council on 
Quality of Care and Outcomes 
Research
Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and 
Cardiometabolic Outcomes
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ adolescent  
◼ cardiovascular diseases ◼ child  
◼ diabetes mellitus ◼ hypertension 
◼ obesity ◼ stress ◼ trauma
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e16
I
t is now well established that experiences in childhood 
and adolescence are associated with health over the 
life course.1 Adverse childhood experiences, which we 
define as experiences that threaten the child’s bodily, 
familial, or social safety or security, range from broad 
categories of maltreatment and household dysfunction2 
to more targeted experiences of bullying,3 exposure 
to crime, victimization, and economic disadvantage3–5 
(Table). Adverse experiences are highly prevalent; recent 
data from the BRFSS (Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance 
System) demonstrate that 59% of the US adult popula-
tion has experienced at least 1 adverse childhood event.6 
Much of the existing literature on childhood adversities 
and health has focused on childhood maltreatment, in-
cluding experiences of physical, sexual, and emotional 
abuse and neglect, and has shown that such adversities 
disrupt normative developmental processes and magni-
fy risk for health consequences later in life.7 Cumulative 
measures have also been common ways of capturing 
exposure to childhood adversity, with many studies ag-
gregating across the 10 items defined by the ACE study 
(Adverse Childhood Experiences)2: witnessing a parent 
being abused, living with a mentally ill person, living 
with a substance abuser, imprisonment of a house-
hold member, emotional abuse, physical abuse, sexual 
abuse, emotional neglect, physical neglect, or parental 
separation or divorce. Additional research has expanded 
on the original set of ACE items to include adversities 
common in diverse, nonwhite, lower-socioeconomic-
level communities, as well as adversities perpetrated by 
peers (eg, bullying).8–10 Given the interindividual varia-
tion in threat perception, there is a lack of consensus 
on precisely what constitutes childhood and adolescent 
adversity. Nevertheless, there is general agreement that 
the accumulation of these experiences, across either 
time or multiple domains, during childhood and ado-
lescence detrimentally affects health. Moreover, cardio-
metabolic health outcomes and adverse experiences are 
strongly patterned by sex, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic 
status (SES), and nativity (place of birth, eg, whether 
born in the United States or elsewhere). For example, 
children living in lower-SES households and from racial/
ethnic minorities are more likely to experience multiple 
adversities in childhood in addition to having a higher 
prevalence of cardiometabolic health outcomes.6,8,11 The 
relation between sex and immigration status and child-
hood adversity and cardiometabolic outcomes is more 
complex and is discussed in detail later.
The goal of this American Heart Association scientific 
statement is to review the scientific literature on the in-
fluence of childhood and adolescent adversity (hereafter 
referred to as childhood adversity) on cardiometabolic 
health outcomes, including obesity, hypertension, type 
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and cardiovascular disease 
(CVD). Cardiometabolic diseases constitute the leading 
causes of morbidity and mortality for men and women 
in the United States12,13 and an escalating economic bur-
den.14,15 Our assessment draws from several recent sys-
tematic reviews focused on various forms of childhood 
adversity, including childhood maltreatment,16 violence,5 
and cardiometabolic outcomes, to identify evidence gaps 
and to provide suggestions for future research needed to 
inform policy and practice. Our broad goal is to summa-
rize evidence necessary to guide and inform multilevel in-
terventions designed to prevent and mitigate childhood 
adversity and associated risk for cardiometabolic disease.
Our review of the literature and proposed next 
steps are guided by a conceptual model (Figure) that 
recognizes 3 potential mechanisms of how childhood 
adversity could affect cardiometabolic health: behav-
ioral, mental health, and biological mechanisms. As de-
tailed later, behaviors such as smoking, sleep, activity, 
and caloric consumption all worsen as a result of stress-
ful events and household dysfunction. Mental health 
problems may be induced or exacerbated by childhood 
adversity, predisposing children and youth to early 
manifestations of cardiometabolic disease risk. Lastly, 
because childhood adversity disrupts many of the regu-
latory processes of the body, biological processes can 
be directly affected. All of these mechanisms (behav-
ioral, biological, and mental) interact, affect other car-
diometabolic factors (eg, blood pressure, adiposity, glu-
cose), and, in turn, affect cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality. We also recognize several immutable factors, 
including sex, race/ethnicity, nativity status, and genetic 
predisposition, that exacerbate or buffer the effect of 
Table. Childhood Adversity Items Commonly Assessed 
for Association With Cardiometabolic Outcomes 
Individually or in Composite Scales
Construct
Individual Item
Household dysfunction
Parental substance abuse
Violence at home
Parental psychopathology
Parental incarceration
Parental death
Parental separation or divorce
Violence (not childhood 
maltreatment or domestic violence 
at home)
Witnessing violence or violence 
victimization
Dating violence
Neighborhood safety
Childhood maltreatment
Emotional abuse
Physical abuse
Sexual abuse
Physical neglect
Other
Homelessness
Peer victimization (bullying)
Discrimination
Economic hardship
Other traumatic event
Death of close family friend or 
loved one
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e17
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
childhood adversity on cardiometabolic risk factors and 
ultimately cardiometabolic morbidity and mortality.
CHILDHOOD ADVERSITY AND 
CARDIOMETABOLIC OUTCOMES
Influence of Childhood Adversity on 
Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Several review articles suggest that childhood adver-
sity is associated with increased risk of cardiometabolic 
disease, including CVD mortality and numerous CVD 
outcomes such as myocardial infarction, stroke, isch-
emic heart disease, and coronary heart disease.5,16,17 A 
recent systematic review found that childhood maltreat-
ment was associated with CVD (myocardial infarction, 
stroke, ischemic heart disease, coronary heart disease) in 
91.7% (22 of 24) of published studies.16 Research has 
also examined the relation between childhood adversity 
and risk factors for cardiometabolic disease. For exam-
ple, several studies suggest that childhood adversity is 
associated with increased risk of hypertension and high 
blood pressure levels, although findings are mixed.5,16,18 
Other studies also suggest that there may be an associa-
tion between childhood adversity and obesity.3,19,20 A re-
cent meta-analysis noted a positive association between 
childhood adversity and childhood-overweight measures 
in a pooled estimate of reviewed longitudinal studies.21 
In addition, childhood adversity has been associated with 
increased risk of T2DM in adulthood.16,22,23
Severity, Timing, and Chronicity of 
Childhood Adversity on Cardiometabolic 
Outcomes
Childhood maltreatment (physical, sexual, or emotional 
abuse and neglect) is by far the most frequent opera-
tionalization of adversity, and this broad measure has 
been robustly associated with cardiometabolic risk.2,16 
Studies have documented a more consistent associa-
tion between physical and sexual abuse and cardio-
metabolic disease risk compared with other specific 
forms of adversity.23–29 Although some work has ex-
amined individual adverse experiences, other work has 
focused on the accumulation of these experiences and 
frequently demonstrates a dose-response relation with 
cardiometabolic risk. Several studies examining mal-
treatment as part of a composite measure of adversity 
have reported a dose-response relationship between 
number of childhood adversities and heightened risk 
for cardiometabolic diseases.2,27,30–34 This type of dose-
response relationship suggests that reducing the num-
ber of co-occurring adversities could help to prevent 
the downstream cardiometabolic consequences of mal-
treatment. The ACE study, for example, noted a con-
tinuous dose-response relation between the number 
of childhood adverse experiences and the odds of isch-
emic heart disease.2 However, some research suggests 
more of a threshold effect.22 Data from the BRFSS note 
a relation between exposure to ≥4 childhood adversi-
ties and CVD.31 More recent research has expanded the 
potential domains of adverse experiences and incorpo-
rated severity and intensity into an adversity score,35 
signaling a potential future direction in the assessment 
and modeling of adverse experiences and their relation 
with cardiometabolic risk.
In a recent review, all but 1 study considered adver-
sities experienced before 18 years of age as 1 period 
without consideration for different developmental pe-
riods that may exist within childhood.5 For example, 
results from the Bucharest Early Intervention Project, 
which randomized children from extremely deprived 
institutional environments to therapeutic foster care, 
found that, for cortisol and parasympathetic nervous 
Figure. Conceptual model of 
the relation between childhood 
adversities and cardiometabolic 
health.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e18
system reactivity, intervention effects were evident 
only among children placed in foster care before 24 
months of age, suggesting that there may be sensitive 
periods in childhood during which the environment is 
particularly likely to alter stress response system de-
velopment.36 Whether there are sensitive periods of 
exposure to adversity for the development of cardio-
metabolic outcomes remains unknown. Within the 
Nurses’ Health Study, Riley and colleagues37 noted 
that experiencing sexual abuse jointly in childhood and 
adolescence was associated with increased risk of hy-
pertension in adulthood compared with not experienc-
ing abuse at either time. A similar association was not 
noted among women who experienced abuse at only 
1 time point, suggesting that chronicity of exposure, 
not timing, was relevant for the development of hy-
pertension.37 However, childhood and adolescence, as 
defined by this study, are still quite broad periods in 
terms of development. More precise work on whether 
exposure during specific periods has differential effects 
on cardiometabolic risk is warranted.
Modifying Factors
Sex 
There are sex differences in exposure to childhood mal-
treatment and in cardiometabolic outcomes. However, 
investigation into whether sex modifies the relation 
between childhood maltreatment and cardiometabolic 
outcomes has been limited. With regard to exposure to 
adversity, data from the National Comorbidity Survey 
Adolescent Supplement indicate that girls are more like-
ly to experience sexual abuse and rape, for example, and 
boys are more likely to report experiences such as expo-
sure to accidents or disasters.38 Maltreatment-specific 
data suggest that girls are more likely to experience sex-
ual abuse and boys are more likely to experience physi-
cal abuse.39 With regard to cardiometabolic outcomes, 
many recent reviews have discussed sex differences, 
including an earlier age of onset of many cardiometa-
bolic diseases in men, yet in adulthood, CVD mortality 
is higher in women.40,41 Recent studies have postulated 
that psychosocial stress may be a more important risk 
factor for cardiometabolic disease in women than in 
men, either because women are exposed to more psy-
chosocial stress or because they are more vulnerable 
to its effects.42 For example, sex differences in  T2DM 
in relation to depression and anxiety have been noted, 
with stronger associations observed in women.43,44 Fur-
thermore, among young children, sex differences have 
also been noted in the relation between adversity and 
obesity, with girls being at increased risk of obesity in 
relation to adversity in early childhood.45 However, re-
cent reviews have demonstrated that few studies have 
formally examined sex-related differences in the associa-
tion between adversity and cardiometabolic outcomes. 
Among those that have, there was no consistent pat-
tern of sex-related variations.16 Similarly, a review by Slo-
pen et al46 of stress and cardiometabolic biomarkers in 
youth found that only 4 studies reported sex-stratified 
analyses with no consistent direction of effect. A recent 
meta-analysis also noted insufficient data to draw con-
clusions about sex-related differences based on adverse 
childhood events exposure and T2DM.47 Taken together, 
these data suggest large gaps in our knowledge and 
that a more rigorous examination of sex differences in 
the relation between childhood adversity and cardio-
metabolic outcomes is warranted.
SES, Race, Ethnicity, and Immigration Status 
Racial and ethnic minority children and children living in 
lower-SES households have a higher prevalence of child-
hood adversities; in addition, they experience a higher 
prevalence of cardiometabolic health outcomes across 
the life course.6,11 SES may be an upstream determinant 
of adversities because socioeconomic constraints may 
put children at higher risk for experiencing adversities 
(ie, exposure to violence, household dysfunction).17 
Children living in lower-SES households may be more 
vulnerable to adverse experiences because potential 
economic, social, and emotional resources necessary 
to cope with and manage these adverse experiences 
may not be available to them as a result of their disad-
vantaged position. However, existing studies have rarely 
examined the potential modifying effect of race/ethnic-
ity or lower SES on childhood adversities and cardio-
metabolic health relation. Immigration history has also 
been largely ignored as a potential modifying factor. A 
recent study of the National Survey of Children’s Health 
noted that regardless of SES, children of immigrant par-
ents had, counterintuitively, lower levels of adversities 
compared with children of US-born parents.11 Similar 
associations were noted within participants of the His-
panic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos.48 Pre-
vious work has documented that despite higher pov-
erty rates, children of immigrant parents have health 
outcomes that are similar to or better than those of 
children of US-born parents. Whether immigrant status 
modifies the association between childhood adversity 
and cardiometabolic health is unknown and warrants 
further research.
Mechanisms
As depicted in the Figure, at least 3 pathways are com-
monly identified to explain how childhood adversity 
may increase the risk of cardiometabolic (and other) 
diseases: behavioral, mental health, and biological.
Behavioral Factors
Evidence suggests that childhood adversity is associated 
with adverse health behaviors that increase the risk of 
cardiometabolic disease, including smoking, overeat-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e19
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ing, consumption of energy-dense foods, and inactiv-
ity.2,49,50 The association of childhood adversity with 
these behaviors was first tested by Felitti et al.2 In their 
retrospective ACE study, Felitti et al hypothesized that 
greater childhood adversity occurs in a setting of pa-
rental dysfunction in which children experience greater 
levels of distress and lack adequate support and “psy-
chological nourishment.”51 Thus, in response to high 
levels of distress, children experiencing adversity are 
at higher risk of adopting adverse coping mechanisms 
(eg, smoking, overeating). For example, Anda and col-
leagues52 published data showing that exposure to ≥5 
ACEs versus no exposure was associated with a 5-fold 
higher rate of early smoking initiation. Furthermore, 
the home environment is central to children’s daily ex-
periences, particularly with regard to meal and activity 
patterns. The home environment may affect practices 
such as meal preparation, use of television (and other 
digital media), consumption of food outside the home, 
and participation in physical activity.8,27,33,34 Parental 
psychological distress is associated with lower con-
sumption of fruits, vegetables, and high-calcium foods 
among children,33 plus fewer physical and more sed-
entary activities,25,35 each of which increases children’s 
risk of obesity.34,36,37 Childhood adversity has been as-
sociated with obesity in children as young as 5 years of 
age,45 and prospective research shows that childhood 
obesity and adolescent obesity have been associated 
with increased risk of cardiovascular risk factors and 
CVD among adults.53–55 Data also suggest that whereas 
an unhealthy diet and sedentary lifestyle adversely af-
fect physical and mental health,56,57 a healthy diet and 
plentiful activity reduce inflammation, depression, and 
anxiety.58,59 Thus, evidence increasingly suggests that 
behavioral risk factors, in part, mediate the childhood 
adversity–cardiometabolic disease relationship. Howev-
er, despite a strong retrospective association of trauma, 
stress, and adult obesity,60 little is known about the pro-
spective impact of childhood adversity on behavioral 
mediators that predict cardiometabolic disease across 
the life course. In addition to behavioral factors, other 
unmeasured behaviors or biological processes likely are 
involved in the pathway from childhood adversity to ad-
verse cardiometabolic outcomes.
Mental Health Factors
The association between early adversity and subse-
quent mental health problems in youth and adulthood 
is well known.61 It is thought to be moderated by ge-
netic factors and mediated in part by neurobiological 
effects of trauma.62–67 A recent systematic review noted 
that mental disorders were a partial mediator of the 
association between childhood maltreatment and car-
diometabolic disease16 but concluded that the findings 
should be interpreted with some caution because stud-
ies varied greatly in terms of how they modeled effects 
of mental disorders (eg, statistical models varied in their 
treatment of time, in combination with other disorders, 
or with health behaviors).24,27,28,30,68,69 Many childhood 
adversities, including childhood maltreatment and ex-
posure to violence, are traumatic events that may re-
sult in posttraumatic stress disorder in some individuals. 
Although investigators have examined posttraumatic 
stress disorder in relation to a range of health outcomes 
(including rheumatoid arthritis, stroke, heart disease, 
and cancer), some of the strongest empirical research, 
in terms of methodology and findings, has been with 
cardiometabolic diseases.70,71 Numerous methodologi-
cally rigorous prospective population-based obser-
vational studies have found that posttraumatic stress 
disorder is associated with increased risk of incident 
CVD72–84 and T2DM.85–87 However, whether and how 
much of the relation between childhood adversity and 
cardiometabolic disease may be explained by post-
traumatic stress disorder is unclear, especially because 
these studies have included traumatic events over the 
life course, with a substantial proportion of studies fo-
cused on veterans and military service–related trauma, 
not just adversity during childhood.
Childhood adversity increases the risk of mood and 
anxiety disorders,62,88 which are widely recognized as 
increasing the risk for cardiometabolic morbidity and 
mortality. A recent American Heart Association state-
ment positioned major depressive disorder and bipolar 
disorder as conditions that predispose youth to accel-
erated atherosclerosis and early CVD.89 Although an 
extensive amount of research has focused on depres-
sion, a recent review called for equal attention to anxi-
ety disorders as risk factors for CVD given the state of 
the current evidence.90 Childhood adversity converges 
with mental health problems in a number of ways that 
are relevant to cardiometabolic outcomes. For exam-
ple, childhood adversity is an important indicator of a 
more persistent and treatment-refractory course of ill-
ness and affects response to both pharmacological and 
psychosocial treatment for youth and adults with men-
tal health conditions.91–95 Among people with mental 
health conditions, childhood adversity, compared with 
no childhood adversity, results in greater cumulative ex-
posure to mental health symptoms, associated stress, 
and biological perturbations.96–98
Beyond the direct effects of mental health problems 
on cardiometabolic outcomes, there are also indirect 
effects that further exacerbate cardiometabolic risk fac-
tors. For example, youth with mood disorders are less 
likely to achieve recommended levels of physical activity 
and sleep and more likely to have suboptimal dietary 
habits, all of which impart cardiometabolic disease 
risk.89 In addition, several pharmacological treatments 
used to treat mental health problems could contribute 
to cardiometabolic risk factor accumulation. Several 
second-generation antipsychotics and mood-stabilizing 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e20
medications confer risk of weight gain and other car-
diometabolic disturbances.99,100 It is unlikely, however, 
that the link between mental health and cardiometa-
bolic outcomes is fully explained by psychotropic medi-
cations.77,101 In addition, contemporary medications 
used for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder, anxiety, and depression in youth are not 
commonly associated with cardiometabolic risk fac-
tors.102–105
Biological Factors
Childhood adversities may disrupt many of the regula-
tory systems of the body, altering the immune, meta-
bolic, neuroendocrine, and autonomic nervous sys-
tems.36,46,106 In the short term, altered stress responses 
likely help children function while living in high-risk 
households, for example, by increasing alertness. How-
ever, in the long term, these responses could trigger 
health problems, including chronic hypertension.107 
Long-term hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activa-
tion, in response to prolonged experiences of stress, 
affects glucocorticoid metabolism and likely alters im-
mune function. Studies document that childhood ad-
versities predispose individuals to chronic inflamma-
tion,108–110 with elevation of interleukin-6, C-reactive 
protein, fibrinogen, and other biomarkers associated 
with cardiometabolic disease. Childhood adversities are 
also related to adverse trajectories in traditional cardio-
metabolic factors; the Georgia Stress and Heart Study, 
for example, showed that individuals who experience 
childhood adversity have faster increases in blood pres-
sure from childhood to young adulthood.111 Similarly, 
a British cohort showed that childhood maltreatment 
led to accelerated increases in body mass index from 
childhood to adulthood.112 Several studies also dem-
onstrated that childhood adversities increase markers 
of subclinical CVD, including markers of endothelial 
dysfunction (E-selectin, intercellular adhesion mole-
cule-1),108 arterial stiffness, and carotid intima-media 
thickness progression.113,114 Preliminary data suggest 
that epigenetic changes may form part of the biological 
linkage between subjective experience of adversity and 
objective cardiometabolic derangement.115–118 Methyla-
tion of genes regulating pathways to obesity and meta-
bolic disorders in adults exposed to child abuse also has 
been identified.119 However, research on DNA methyla-
tion is still an emerging field of study. Population-based 
studies are needed to clarify the role of epigenetics in 
the link between childhood adversities and CVD risk.
Finally, although beyond the scope of this review, 
behavioral factors such as diet and physical activity as 
outlined earlier can reflect stress-induced physiological 
changes. For example, ghrelin is a neurohormone that 
is upregulated under stress conditions and has mild 
anxiolytic and antidepressant properties120; however, 
ghrelin also increases appetite, food-seeking behavior, 
and food-associated reward.121,122 In addition, maltreat-
ed children have been found to be deficient in leptin, a 
hormone that regulates energy balance.123 On the other 
hand, physical activity increases endorphins, postpran-
dial satiety-hormone levels (peptide YY3-36124), and af-
fective mood.125,126
LIMITATIONS
Although an increasing body of work has documented 
a relationship between childhood adversity and cardio-
metabolic outcomes and suggests potential underlying 
pathways, certain limitations of the literature should be 
considered.
Lack of Agreement on Definitions
As noted, existing literature in this area is based on a 
collection of heterogeneous measures and definitions 
of childhood adversity. Although the accumulation of 
these heterogeneous adverse experiences consistently 
predicts worse outcomes, little work has considered 
the differential effects that some of these experiences 
may have. In addition, limited research has carefully 
evaluated differential effects on the basis of the tim-
ing of when these experiences occur, with some stud-
ies suggesting that exposures in early childhood appear 
to have a more enduring impact. Furthermore, other 
prevalent adverse experiences not originally considered 
in the ACE study need to be evaluated for their poten-
tial influence on cardiometabolic risk. For example, al-
though child victimization at the hands of adults has re-
ceived more attention, recent studies have highlighted 
the important role of bullying or victimization by peers 
in predicting obesity and inflammation in later life.9,10 
Other studies have highlighted the importance of ex-
periences of racial discrimination in relation to health 
outcomes, which are more prevalent among racial/eth-
nic minorities.8 Given the high prevalence of individuals 
experiencing these and other stressors, it is important 
to consider the sociodemographic characteristics of the 
population being considered because its experiences of 
adversity will vary. Finally, adverse environmental condi-
tions are nonrandomly distributed, are experienced to a 
disproportionate degree by subgroups, and are associ-
ated with risk for  long-term familial and interpersonal 
adversities.
Few Truly Prospective Studies
Although longitudinal studies based on prospective 
measures have appeared more frequently in recent 
years, most of the research in the area is based on 
cross-sectional studies using retrospective reports by 
adults. Most research on childhood adversity and CVD, 
T2DM, hypertension, and obesity has been cross-sec-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e21
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tional and has relied on retrospective reporting of child-
hood adversity.5,16 This is problematic because research 
shows that there is only moderate agreement between 
prospective and retrospective measures of childhood 
adversity, such that groups of individuals identified 
with these 2 different methods of assessment may 
show only limited overlap and different disease risk.127 
Longitudinal designs are increasing in frequency, and 
a few longitudinal studies have assessed adversity in 
childhood and/or adolescence.4,9,10,29,68,109,111,128–131 As 
an example, the British National Child Development 
Study, a 50-year longitudinal study, assessed experi-
ences of bullying when children were between 7 and 
11 years of age. Bullying was associated with higher 
levels of C-reactive protein in midlife and, among 
women, with obesity in midlife.9 Nevertheless, retro-
spective reporting of adversity remains the predomi-
nant approach to measurement, even in longitudinal 
research. Longitudinal studies would enable the iden-
tification and tracking of behavioral, mental health, 
and biological mechanisms over time that then lead to 
cardiometabolic disease. In addition to strengthening 
the causal links, research that examines associations 
between childhood adversity and cardiometabolic risk 
over the life course is critical for elucidating when the 
deleterious effects of childhood adversity may begin 
to appear and thus could be targeted for prevention. 
To date, most investigations have focused on under-
standing how childhood adversity is associated with 
cardiometabolic risk in adulthood, although a grow-
ing number of studies have found detectable diver-
gence resulting from adversity in trajectories of health 
risk in adolescence.106,128,131,132 However, other studies 
have not found clear evidence of divergence before 
adulthood111,112 or have found evidence to be stron-
ger in adult samples compared with child/adolescent 
samples.20 Research explicitly investigating trajectories 
is limited, precluding firm conclusions on when excess 
risk resulting from adversity is reliably detectable. Pro-
spective studies that begin during the prenatal period 
or preconception or follow cohorts from childhood 
through childbirth would also capture intergeneration-
al adversity and perinatal programming.
Limited Identification of Mechanisms
As discussed, childhood adversity may provoke un-
healthy behaviors and poor mental health or produce 
neurobiological alterations that initiate relevant patho-
physiological processes. Few studies have explicitly 
tested the mechanisms linking childhood adversity and 
cardiometabolic disease with comprehensive mediation 
models.133 Moreover, no study of which we are aware 
has tested a range of mechanisms and attempted to 
quantify which mechanism may be most important. 
Such research is critical both to inform whether child-
hood adversity is causal in cardiometabolic disease and 
to identify targets for intervention.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Determinants of Resilience
Not all individuals with a history of childhood and ado-
lescent adversity develop cardiometabolic health out-
comes, which raises the question of the determinants of 
resilience and cardiometabolic health. Rather than be-
ing inherent to the child, resilience, that is, good mental 
and physical health despite the assails of early adversity, 
results from a complex interplay among the child’s ge-
netics, natural temperament, knowledge and skills, past 
experiences, social supports, and cultural and societal 
resources.134 Better integration of our understanding of 
modifiable resilience factors into interventions and rou-
tine care settings could improve outcomes for children 
who may face adversity in the future or have had past 
adversities. Information on determinants of resilience 
may also offer important insights into the mechanisms 
underlying the relationships between childhood adver-
sity and cardiometabolic health outcomes. Finally, infor-
mation on determinants of resilience may improve the 
tailoring of interventions to those who can most benefit 
from them. Because no intervention is universally effec-
tive, understanding why certain interventions benefit 
some children and not others will enable the matching 
of interventions. Moreover, identification of modifiable 
factors that buffer the effects of adversity or improve 
resilience could provide targets for interventions.135 Few 
studies have focused on resilience factors such as posi-
tive coping, social support, and family dynamics that 
could modify the impact of childhood adversity on car-
diometabolic health.136
Modifiers of Vulnerability
There has been limited examination of individual char-
acteristics such as sex, race/ethnicity, and genetic fac-
tors in modifying the risks posed by childhood adversity. 
Among women, experiences of stress are most often 
associated with a higher prevalence and incidence of 
cardiometabolic outcomes compared with men, which 
may be attributed to differential behavioral or biologi-
cal responses to stress. For example, some research sug-
gests that the impact of childhood adversity on obe-
sity3,20,137 is stronger or more consistent among women 
than men. However, consistent patterns of sex-related 
differences in the associations between childhood ad-
versity and cardiometabolic diseases have not been 
observed.16 Similarly, there are important environmen-
tal factors, including individual, family, neighborhood, 
and community characteristics, that could modify the 
effects of childhood adversity on cardiometabolic out-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e22
comes and should be further characterized. For exam-
ple, residential segregation, crime, and discrimination 
could be barriers to the adoption of healthy lifestyles 
(eg, physical activity and healthy dietary patterns), 
thereby contributing to poor cardiovascular health. Fi-
nally, several studies suggest that genes may influence 
how children interact with their environment, biasing 
their biological responses and affecting risk of clinical 
outcomes.138 Studies of gene-environment interplay, 
which includes genotype-environment and epigenetics, 
have, to date, focused largely on mental health out-
comes. Future research should explore how childhood 
adversity may interact with genetic vulnerability in pro-
ducing cardiometabolic health outcomes. Epigenetic 
approaches might examine how childhood adversity 
alters gene expression and whether such alterations in-
fluence cardiometabolic outcomes.
Mechanisms
To reverse or remediate biological risk for health out-
comes among those exposed to childhood adversity 
(secondary prevention), it is important to better under-
stand the mechanisms through which childhood ad-
versity leads to cardiometabolic outcomes. On the one 
hand, childhood adversity begets psychosocial adversity 
and worse mental health in later life. Future research 
should test whether adult psychosocial adversity and 
mental health explain why individuals with a history 
of childhood adversity develop cardiometabolic health 
outcomes. These studies might highlight targets for 
interventions. On the other hand, we are only begin-
ning to understand the biological mechanisms through 
which childhood adversity brings about cardiometa-
bolic outcomes (biological embedding),139 including 
inflammation, abnormal neuroendocrine function, and 
others.139 Future research should test comprehensive 
biological mediation models to uncover intervention 
targets. Research clearly demonstrating that childhood 
adversity alters known mechanisms of cardiometabolic 
risk would provide compelling evidence that childhood 
adversity is indeed involved in the pathogenesis of car-
diometabolic disease. However, rigorous evidence dem-
onstrating these causal associations is limited.
Application of Modern Epidemiological 
Methods
Confounding bias, that the relation between childhood 
adversity and cardiometabolic disease is explained by a 
third variable, has not been fully accounted for in many 
studies beyond consideration of childhood SES, thus 
limiting our ability to make causal inferences on the 
adversity and cardiometabolic health relation. State-
of-the-art epidemiological methods such as marginal 
structural models have transformed the epidemiologi-
cal approach to time-varying confounding of time-vary-
ing exposures over the past 25 years, but to the best 
of our knowledge, these methods have not been ap-
plied to childhood adversity research. The possibility of 
time-varying confounding, that the behaviors and risk 
factors that are subsequently affected by exposure to 
childhood adversity may also increase the risk of adver-
sity, is a major threat to causal inference. For example, 
findings in a genetically informative British cohort in-
dicated that child characteristics such as intelligence 
quotient and adjustment problems predicted exposure 
to maltreatment by adults140 and chronic peer victim-
ization (bullying).141 Others have shown the adverse ef-
fects of maltreatment and peer victimization on child 
adjustment. Childhood intelligence quotient and ad-
justment have been linked to cardiometabolic disease 
in adulthood.142,143 Marginal structural models can be 
used to account for the potential for dynamic feedback 
processes by which certain factors can act as either con-
founders or mediators of the effects of the childhood 
adversity–cardiometabolic disease relationship.144
Interventions
Another outstanding question is whether an effective 
reduction in childhood adversity or interventions aimed 
at buffering the effects of exposure to adversity can 
prevent or mitigate the likelihood of developing car-
diometabolic disease.145 Only a few studies have exam-
ined the role of early intervention on the reduction of 
childhood adversities and cardiometabolic health.146,147 
The Carolina Abecedarian Project noted lower levels 
of blood pressure among adults in their mid-30s who 
received early childhood intervention compared with 
a randomly allocated control group.146 Future research 
should also examine the potential benefit of preventive 
interventions targeting mental health, behavioral, and 
biological sequelae of childhood adversity that could 
buffer the effects on cardiometabolic health. The same 
questions can be raised about screening for childhood 
adversity. The National Council for Behavioral Health, in 
partnership with and sponsored by Kaiser Permanente 
National Community Benefit Fund, selected 14 organi-
zations through a competitive process to pilot the Trau-
ma Informed Primary Care Project with the goal of inte-
grating the assessment of trauma into primary care to 
tailor patient care while addressing the consequences 
of past trauma.148 However, at this time, the benefits of 
such screening have not been quantified. As previously 
noted, SES is a potential antecedent to the experience 
of childhood adversities; thus, addressing social factors 
could reduce both childhood adverse experiences and 
the risk of cardiometabolic disease.147 Moreover, the 
benefit of screening for childhood adversities relies on 
an appropriate response to address the effects of any 
adversities identified. Addressing the effects of child-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e23
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
hood adversity is complex and can pose challenges for 
providers.149,150 For adults, a retrospective assessment of 
childhood adversities and current trauma could be cou-
pled with mental health assessments and screenings 
for substance use, although the validity of retrospective 
recall of childhood adversity remains debated.127 Newly 
identified mental health problems should lead to refer-
rals and treatment for those conditions, in addition to 
already provided clinical care for physical health condi-
tions. For minors, in addition to screening for adversity 
and behavioral and mental health issues, the safety and 
security of the child must be considered because the 
adversity identified may be ongoing. There are thus 
implications to screening, requiring proper training of 
providers not only on the assessment of the adversities 
but also on the necessary responses.
CONCLUSIONS
Childhood adversity is highly prevalent, with 59% of 
the US population reporting at least 1 adverse event ex-
perience.6 Substantial evidence links childhood adver-
sity to cardiometabolic disease later in the life course, 
including heart disease, T2DM, and stroke, which are 3 
of the top 10 causes of mortality in the United States. 
Given the high variability of cardiometabolic aber-
ration and the multiplicity of pathways activated by 
childhood adversity, modification of the downstream 
cardiometabolic consequences is less desirable com-
pared with addressing upstream adversity exposures. 
However, there are no national guidelines or recom-
mendations on systematic surveillance for childhood 
adversity in the healthcare system, in part because of 
a limited understanding of how to prevent or mitigate 
adversity and to build resilience. Toward this goal, ad-
ditional research, including longitudinal prospective 
studies, designed to guide and inform effective and 
timely individual/clinical and population–level preven-
tive interventions is required. Areas for such research, 
as highlighted in this review, include defining exposure 
intensity, duration, and vulnerable periods during the 
life course and across generations; characterizing resil-
iency against progression toward cardiometabolic con-
sequences; identifying biological factors that modify 
response to adversity and elucidating pathobiological 
pathways linking adversity to cardiometabolic out-
comes; and demonstrating which interventions on up-
stream childhood adversity exposure prevent progres-
sion to cardiometabolic disease.
FOOTNOTES
The content of this paper is solely the responsibility of the au-
thors and does not necessarily represent the official views of 
the National Institutes of Health or the National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute.
The American Heart Association makes every effort to 
avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may 
arise as a result of an outside relationship or a personal, pro-
fessional, or business interest of a member of the writing pan-
el. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required 
to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing 
all such relationships that might be perceived as real or poten-
tial conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on 
July 28, 2017, and the American Heart Association Execu-
tive Committee on December 11, 2017. A copy of the docu-
ment is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements 
by using either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the 
“Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 
843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Suglia SF, Koenen KC, Boynton-Jar-
rett R, Chan PS, Clark CJ, Danese A, Faith MS, Goldstein BI, 
Hayman LL, Isasi CR, Pratt CA, Slopen N, Sumner JA, Turer A, 
Turer CB, Zachariah JP; on behalf of the American Heart Asso-
ciation Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Functional 
Genomics and Translational Biology; Council on Cardiovascu-
lar and Stroke Nursing; and Council on Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research. Childhood and adolescent adversity and 
cardiometabolic outcomes: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e15–
e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conduct-
ed by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA 
statements and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en-
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permit-
ted without the express permission of the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://
www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-
Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright 
Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e24
DISCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Shakira F. Suglia
Emory University Rollins School of 
Public Health
NHLBI†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Karestan C. Koenen
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Renée Boynton-Jarrett
Boston University School of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Paul S. Chan
Mid America Heart Institute and the 
University of Missouri-Kansas City
NHLBI†
None
None
None
None
Optum Rx†
None
Cari J. Clark
Emory University Global Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Andrea Danese
Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College 
London
UK MRC*; 
UK NSPCC/
ESRC*
None
None
None
None
UK National Society 
for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Children 
(NSPCC) Research 
Advisory Group*
None
Myles S. Faith
University at Buffalo School of 
Education and Psychology
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Benjamin I. Goldstein
University of Toronto
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Laura L. Hayman
University of Massachusetts Boston 
College of Nursing & Health Sciences
NIH*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Carmen R. Isasi
Albert Einstein College of Medicine 
Epidemiology & Population Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Charlotte A. Pratt
National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute NIH/NHLBI
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Natalie Slopen
University of Maryland College Park
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jennifer A. Sumner
Center for Behavioral Cardiovascular 
Health, Columbia University Medical 
Center
NIH/
NHLBI†
None
None
None
None
None
Columbia 
University 
Medical 
Center*
Aslan Turer
University of Texas–Southwestern
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Christy B. Turer
University of Texas–Southwestern 
Medical Center
NIH†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Justin P
. Zachariah
Baylor College of Medicine
NHLBI†
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 
000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, 
or owns $10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
DISCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Eric B. Loucks
Brown University
NIH 1R01AG048825-01 (This grant is focused 
on elucidating biological and behavioral 
mechanisms of how early life social adversity 
could influence later life obesity risk)†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Katie McLaughlin
University of 
Washington
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Kathryn M. 
Rexrode
Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 
000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
†Significant.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e25
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Shonkoff JP
, Garner AS; Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child 
and Family Health; Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption, and De-
pendent Care; Section on Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics. The 
lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic stress. Pediatrics. 
2012;129:e232–e246. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-2663.
 2. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, Williamson DF, Spitz AM, Edwards 
V, Koss MP, Marks JS. Relationship of childhood abuse and house-
hold dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults: 
the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Am J Prev Med. 
1998;14:245–258.
 3. Midei AJ, Matthews KA. Interpersonal violence in childhood as a risk 
factor for obesity: a systematic review of the literature and proposed 
pathways. Obes Rev. 2011;12:e159–e172. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X. 
2010.00823.x.
 4. Slopen N, Koenen KC, Kubzansky LD. Cumulative adversity in childhood 
and emergent risk factors for long-term health. J Pediatr. 2014;164:631–
638.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.11.003.
 5. Suglia SF, Sapra KJ, Koenen KC. Violence and cardiovascular health: a 
systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2015;48:205–212. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2014.09.013.
 6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Adverse childhood ex-
periences reported by adults: five states, 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2010;59:1609–1613.
 7. Shonkoff JP
, Boyce WT, McEwen BS. Neuroscience, molecular biology, and 
the childhood roots of health disparities: building a new framework for 
health promotion and disease prevention. JAMA. 2009;301:2252–2259. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.754.
 8. Cronholm PF, Forke CM, Wade R, Bair-Merritt MH, Davis M, Harkins-
Schwarz M, Pachter LM, Fein JA. Adverse childhood experiences: expand-
ing the concept of adversity. Am J Prev Med. 2015;49:354–361. doi: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2015.02.001.
 9. Takizawa R, Danese A, Maughan B, Arseneault L. Bullying victimization 
in childhood predicts inflammation and obesity at mid-life: a five-decade 
birth cohort study. Psychol Med. 2015;45:2705–2715. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291715000653.
 10. Baldwin JR, Arseneault L, Odgers C, Belsky DW, Matthews T, Ambler 
A, Caspi A, Moffitt TE, Danese A. Childhood bullying victimization 
and overweight in young adulthood: a cohort study. Psychosom Med. 
2016;78:1094–1103. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000388.
 11. Slopen N, Shonkoff JP
, Albert MA, Yoshikawa H, Jacobs A, Stoltz R, Wil-
liams DR. Racial disparities in child adversity in the U.S.: interactions with 
family immigration history and income. Am J Prev Med. 2016;50:47–56. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2015.06.013.
 12. Danaei G, Ding EL, Mozaffarian D, Taylor B, Rehm J, Murray CJ, Ezzati 
M. The preventable causes of death in the United States: comparative 
risk assessment of dietary, lifestyle, and metabolic risk factors. PLoS Med. 
2009;6:e1000058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000058.
 13. Havranek EP
, Mujahid MS, Barr DA, Blair IV, Cohen MS, Cruz-Flores S, 
Davey-Smith G, Dennison-Himmelfarb CR, Lauer MS, Lockwood DW, Ro-
sal M, Yancy CW; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council 
on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research, Council on Epidemiology and 
Prevention, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on 
Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health, and Stroke Council. Social determi-
nants of risk and outcomes for cardiovascular disease: a scientific state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:873–
898. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000228.
 14. Fox KM, Wang L, Gandra SR, Quek RG, Li L, Baser O. Clinical and eco-
nomic burden associated with cardiovascular events among patients with 
hyperlipidemia: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 
2016;16:13. doi: 10.1186/s12872-016-0190-x.
 15. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel LJ, Van Horn 
L, Greenlund K, Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Arnett DK, Fonarow 
GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi FA, Robertson RM, Roger V, Schwamm 
LH, Sorlie P
, Yancy CW, Rosamond WD; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Strategic Planning Task Force and Statistics Committee. Defin-
ing and setting national goals for cardiovascular health promotion and 
disease reduction: the American Heart Association’s strategic Impact 
Goal through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192703.
 16. Basu A, McLaughlin KA, Misra S, Koenen K. Childhood maltreatment and health 
impact: the examples of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus in 
adults. Clin Psychol (New York). 2017;24:125–139. doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12191.
 17. Su S, Jimenez MP
, Roberts CT, Loucks EB. The role of adverse childhood 
experiences in cardiovascular disease risk: a review with emphasis on plau-
sible mechanisms. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2015;17:88. doi: 10.1007/s11886-
015-0645-1.
 18. Norman RE, Byambaa M, De R, Butchart A, Scott J, Vos T. The long-term 
health consequences of child physical abuse, emotional abuse, and neglect: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2012;9:e1001349. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pmed.1001349.
 19. Gustafson TB, Sarwer DB. Childhood sexual abuse and obesity. Obes Rev. 
2004;5:129–135. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2004.00145.x.
 20. Danese A, Tan M. Childhood maltreatment and obesity: systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Mol Psychiatry. 2014;19:544–554. doi: 10.1038/
mp.2013.54.
 21. Elsenburg L, van Wijk K, Liefbroer A, Smidt N. Accumulation of adverse 
childhood events and overweight in children: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2017;25:820–832. doi: 10.1002/
oby.2179.
 22. Huffhines L, Noser A, Patton SR. The link between adverse childhood 
experiences and diabetes. Curr Diab Rep. 2016;16:54. doi: 10.1007/
s11892-016-0740-8.
 23. Rich-Edwards JW, Spiegelman D, Lividoti Hibert EN, Jun HJ, Todd TJ, 
Kawachi I, Wright RJ. Abuse in childhood and adolescence as a predictor 
of type 2 diabetes in adult women. Am J Prev Med. 2010;39:529–536. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2010.09.007.
 24. Afifi TO, Mota N, MacMillan HL, Sareen J. Harsh physical punishment in 
childhood and adult physical health. Pediatrics. 2013;132:e333–e340. 
doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-4021.
 25. Duncan AE, Auslander WF, Bucholz KK, Hudson DL, Stein RI, White 
NH. Relationship between abuse and neglect in childhood and diabe-
tes in adulthood: differential effects by sex, National Longitudinal Study 
of Adolescent Health. Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12:E70. doi: 10.5888/
pcd12.140434.
 26. Rich-Edwards JW, Mason S, Rexrode K, Spiegelman D, Hibert E, Kawachi I, 
Jun HJ, Wright RJ. Physical and sexual abuse in childhood as predictors of 
early-onset cardiovascular events in women. Circulation. 2012;126:920–
927. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.076877.
 27. Scott KM, Von Korff M, Angermeyer MC, Benjet C, Bruffaerts R, de 
 
Girolamo G, Haro JM, Lépine JP, Ormel J, Posada-Villa J, Tachimori H, 
Kessler RC. Association of childhood adversities and early-onset mental 
disorders with adult-onset chronic physical conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2011;68:838–844. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.77.
 28. Suglia SF, Clark CJ, Boynton-Jarrett R, Kressin NR, Koenen KC. Child mal-
treatment and hypertension in young adulthood. BMC Public Health. 
2014;14:1149. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-1149.
 29. Thomas C, Hyppönen E, Power C. Obesity and type 2 diabetes risk in 
midadult life: the role of childhood adversity. Pediatrics. 2008;121:e1240–
e1249. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-2403.
 30. Stein DJ, Scott K, Haro Abad JM, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Alonso J, Angermeyer 
M, Demytteneare K, de Girolamo G, Iwata N, Posada-Villa J, Kovess V, 
Lara C, Ormel J, Kessler RC, Von Korff M. Early childhood adversity and 
later hypertension: data from the World Mental Health Survey. Ann Clin 
Psychiatry. 2010;22:19–28.
 31. Gilbert LK, Breiding MJ, Merrick MT, Thompson WW, Ford DC, Dhingra 
SS, Parks SE. Childhood adversity and adult chronic disease: an update 
from ten states and the District of Columbia, 2010. Am J Prev Med. 
2015;48:345–349. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2014.09.006.
 32. Campbell JA, Walker RJ, Egede LE. Associations between adverse 
childhood experiences, high-risk behaviors, and morbidity in adult-
hood. Am J Prev Med. 2016;50:344–352. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2015. 
07.022.
 33. Friedman EM, Montez JK, Sheehan CM, Guenewald TL, Seeman TE. Child-
hood adversities and adult cardiometabolic health: does the quantity, tim-
ing, and type of adversity matter? J Aging Health. 2015;27:1311–1338. 
doi: 10.1177/0898264315580122.
 34. Wilson RS, Boyle PA, Levine SR, Yu L, Anagnos SE, Buchman AS, 
Schneider JA, Bennett DA. Emotional neglect in childhood and cerebral 
infarction in older age. Neurology. 2012;79:1534–1539. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e31826e25bd.
 35. Davis CR, Dearing E, Usher N, Trifiletti S, Zaichenko L, Ollen E, Brinkoet-
ter MT, Crowell-Doom C, Joung K, Park KH, Mantzoros CS, Crowell JA. 
Detailed assessments of childhood adversity enhance prediction of cen-
tral obesity independent of gender, race, adult psychosocial risk and 
health behaviors. Metabolism. 2014;63:199–206. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol. 
2013.08.013.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e26
 36. McLaughlin KA, Sheridan MA, Tibu F, Fox NA, Zeanah CH, Nelson CA 
3rd. Causal effects of the early caregiving environment on develop-
ment of stress response systems in children. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S 
A. 
2015;112:5637–5642. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1423363112.
 37. Riley EH, Wright RJ, Jun HJ, Hibert EN, Rich-Edwards JW. Hypertension 
in adult survivors of child abuse: observations from the Nurses’ Health 
Study II. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2010;64:413–418. doi: 10.1136/
jech.2009.095109.
 38. McLaughlin KA, Koenen KC, Hill ED, Petukhova M, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky 
AM, Kessler RC. Trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder in 
a national sample of adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2013;52:815–830.e14.
 39. Child Maltreatment: Facts at a Glance. 2013. https://www.cdc.gov/
violenceprevention/pdf/childmaltreatment-facts-at-a-glance.pdf.
 40. Mehta LS, Beckie TM, DeVon HA, Grines CL, Krumholz HM, Johnson 
MN, Lindley KJ, Vaccarino V, Wang TY, Watson KE, Wenger NK; on be-
half of the American Heart Association Cardiovascular Disease in Women 
and Special Populations Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiol-
ogy, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Cardiovascu-
lar and Stroke Nursing, and Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes 
Research. Acute myocardial infarction in women: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;133:916–947. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000351.
 41. Crea F, Battipaglia I, Andreotti F. Sex differences in mechanisms, pre-
sentation and management of ischaemic heart disease. Atherosclerosis. 
2015;241:157–168. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.04.802.
 42. Pedersen LR, Frestad D, Michelsen MM, Mygind ND, Rasmusen H, Suhrs 
HE, Prescott E. Risk factors for myocardial infarction in women and men: 
a review of the current literature. Curr Pharm Des. 2016;22:3835–3852.
 43. Suglia SF, Demmer RT, Wahi R, Keyes KM, Koenen KC. Depressive symp-
toms during adolescence and young adulthood and the development 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Epidemiol. 2016;183:269–276. doi: 
10.1093/aje/kwv149.
 44. Demmer RT, Gelb S, Suglia SF, Keyes KM, Aiello AE, Colombo PC, Galea 
S, Uddin M, Koenen KC, Kubzansky LD. Sex differences in the association 
between depression, anxiety, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Psychosom 
Med. 2015;77:467–477. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000169.
 45. Suglia SF, Duarte CS, Chambers EC, Boynton-Jarrett R. Cumulative social 
risk and obesity in early childhood. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e1173–e1179. 
doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-2456.
 46. Slopen N, Goodman E, Koenen KC, Kubzansky LD. Socioeconomic and 
other social stressors and biomarkers of cardiometabolic risk in youth: a 
systematic review of less studied risk factors. PLoS One. 2013;8:e64418. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064418.
 47. Huang H, Yan P, Shan Z, Chen S, Li M, Luo C, Gao H, Hao L, Liu L. 
Adverse childhood experiences and risk of type 2 diabetes: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Metabolism. 2015;64:1408–1418. doi: 
10.1016/j.metabol.2015.08.019.
 48. Llabre MM, Schneiderman N, Gallo LC, Arguelles W, Daviglus ML, Gonza-
lez F 2nd, Isasi CR, Perreira KM, Penedo FJ. Childhood trauma and adult 
risk factors and disease in Hispanics/Latinos in the US: results from the 
Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL) Sociocul-
tural Ancillary Study. Psychosom Med. 2017;79:172–180. doi: 10.1097/
PSY.0000000000000394.
 49. Sherwood NE, Jeffery RW. The behavioral determinants of exercise: impli-
cations for physical activity interventions. Annu Rev Nutr. 2000;20:21–44. 
doi: 10.1146/annurev.nutr.20.1.21.
 50. Hemmingsson E, Johansson K, Reynisdottir S. Effects of childhood abuse 
on adult obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev. 
2014;15:882–893. doi: 10.1111/obr.12216.
 51. Miller GE, Lachman ME, Chen E, Gruenewald TL, Karlamangla AS, See-
man TE. Pathways to resilience: maternal nurturance as a buffer against 
the effects of childhood poverty on metabolic syndrome at midlife. Psy-
chol Sci. 2011;22:1591–1599. doi: 10.1177/0956797611419170.
 52. Anda RF, Croft JB, Felitti VJ, Nordenberg D, Giles WH, Williamson DF, Gio-
vino GA. Adverse childhood experiences and smoking during adolescence 
and adulthood. JAMA. 1999;282:1652–1658.
 53. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Berenson GS, Venn A, Burns TL, Sabin MA, Sriniva-
san SR, Daniels SR, Davis PH, Chen W, Sun C, Cheung M, Viikari JS, Dwyer T, 
Raitakari OT. Childhood adiposity, adult adiposity, and cardiovascular risk fac-
tors. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1876–1885. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1010112.
 54. Suglia SF, Clark CJ, Gary-Webb TL. Adolescent obesity, change in 
weight status, and hypertension: racial/ethnic variations. Hypertension. 
2013;61:290–295. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00214.
 55. Baker JL, Olsen LW, Sørensen TI. Childhood body-mass index and the risk 
of coronary heart disease in adulthood. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2329–
2337. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa072515.
 56. Giugliano D, Ceriello A, Esposito K. The effects of diet on inflammation: 
emphasis on the metabolic syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:677–
685. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.03.052.
 57. Handschin C, Spiegelman BM. The role of exercise and PGC1alpha in 
inflammation and chronic disease. Nature. 2008;454:463–469. doi: 
10.1038/nature07206.
 58. Chrysohoou C, Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Das UN, Stefanadis C. Ad-
herence to the Mediterranean diet attenuates inflammation and coag-
ulation process in healthy adults: the ATTICA study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2004;44:152–158. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.03.039.
 59. Lavie CJ, Church TS, Milani RV, Earnest CP
. Impact of physical activity, 
cardiorespiratory fitness, and exercise training on markers of inflamma-
tion. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2011;31:137–145. doi: 10.1097/
HCR.0b013e3182122827.
 60. Kubzansky LD, Bordelois P
, Jun HJ, Roberts AL, Cerda M, Bluestone N, 
Koenen KC. The weight of traumatic stress: a prospective study of post-
traumatic stress disorder symptoms and weight status in women. JAMA 
Psychiatry. 2014;71:44–51. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.2798.
 61. McLaughlin KA. Future directions in childhood adversity and youth psy-
chopathology. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2016;45:361–382. doi: 
10.1080/15374416.2015.1110823.
 62. McLaughlin KA, Greif Green J, Gruber MJ, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky AM, 
Kessler RC. Childhood adversities and first onset of psychiatric disorders in 
a national sample of US adolescents. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69:1151–
1160. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.2277.
 63. Bradley RG, Binder EB, Epstein MP
, Tang Y, Nair HP
, Liu W, Gillespie CF, Berg 
T, Evces M, Newport DJ, Stowe ZN, Heim CM, Nemeroff CB, Schwartz A, 
Cubells JF, Ressler KJ. Influence of child abuse on adult depression: mod-
eration by the corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor gene. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2008;65:190–200. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2007.26.
 64. Vythilingam M, Heim C, Newport J, Miller AH, Anderson E, Bronen R, 
Brummer M, Staib L, Vermetten E, Charney DS, Nemeroff CB, Bremner 
JD. Childhood trauma associated with smaller hippocampal volume in 
women with major depression. Am J Psychiatry. 2002;159:2072–2080. 
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.159.12.2072.
 65. Heim C, Nemeroff CB. The role of childhood trauma in the neurobiology 
of mood and anxiety disorders: preclinical and clinical studies. Biol Psychia-
try. 2001;49:1023–1039.
 66. Kim-Cohen J, Caspi A, Taylor A, Williams B, Newcombe R, Craig IW, Mof-
fitt TE. MAOA, maltreatment, and gene-environment interaction predict-
ing children’s mental health: new evidence and a meta-analysis. Mol Psy-
chiatry. 2006;11:903–913. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001851.
 67. Kessler RC, Davis CG, Kendler KS. Childhood adversity and adult psy-
chiatric disorder in the US National Comorbidity Survey. Psychol Med. 
1997;27:1101–1119.
 68. Widom CS, Czaja SJ, Bentley T, Johnson MS. A prospective investigation 
of physical health outcomes in abused and neglected children: new find-
ings from a 30-year follow-up. Am J Public Health. 2012;102:1135–1144. 
doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2011.300636.
 69. Goodwin RD, Stein MB. Association between childhood trauma and 
physical disorders among adults in the United States. Psychol Med. 
2004;34:509–520.
 70. Lohr JB, Palmer BW, Eidt CA, Aailaboyina S, Mausbach BT, Wolkowitz 
OM, Thorp SR, Jeste DV. Is post-traumatic stress disorder associated with 
premature senescence? A review of the literature. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2015;23:709–725. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2015.04.001.
 71. Koenen KC, Sumner JA, Gilsanz P
, Glymour MM, Ratanatharathorn 
A, Rimm EB, Roberts AL, Winning A, Kubzansky LD. Post-traumatic 
stress disorder and cardiometabolic disease: improving causal infer-
ence to inform practice. Psychol Med. 2017;47:209–225. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291716002294.
 72. Boscarino JA, Chang J. Electrocardiogram abnormalities among men with 
stress-related psychiatric disorders: implications for coronary heart disease 
and clinical research. Ann Behav Med. 1999;21:227–234.
 73. Jordan HT, Miller-Archie SA, Cone JE, Morabia A, Stellman SD. Heart 
disease among adults exposed to the September 11, 2001 World Trade 
Center disaster: results from the World Trade Center Health Registry. Prev 
Med. 2011;53:370–376. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2011.10.014.
 74. Scherrer JF, Chrusciel T, Zeringue A, Garfield LD, Hauptman PJ, Lustman PJ, 
Freedland KE, Carney RM, Bucholz KK, Owen R, True WR. Anxiety disor-
ders increase risk for incident myocardial infarction in depressed and non-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Childhood and Adolescent Adversity and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536 
January 30, 2018
e27
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
depressed Veterans Administration patients. Am Heart J. 2010;159:772–
779. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2010.02.033.
 75. Vaccarino V, Goldberg J, Rooks C, Shah AJ, Veledar E, Faber TL, Votaw JR, 
Forsberg CW, Bremner JD. Post-traumatic stress disorder and incidence of 
coronary heart disease: a twin study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:970–978. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.04.085.
 76. Gradus JL, Farkas DK, Svensson E, Ehrenstein V, Lash TL, Milstein A, Adler 
N, Sørensen HT. Associations between stress disorders and cardiovascular 
disease events in the Danish population. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e009334. 
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009334.
 77. Sumner JA, Kubzansky LD, Elkind MS, Roberts AL, Agnew-Blais J, Chen 
Q, Cerdá M, Rexrode KM, Rich-Edwards JW, Spiegelman D, Suglia SF, 
Rimm EB, Koenen KC. Trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder 
symptoms predict onset of cardiovascular events in women. Circulation. 
2015;132:251–259. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.014492.
 78. Beristianos MH, Yaffe K, Cohen B, Byers AL. PTSD and risk of inci-
dent cardiovascular disease in aging veterans. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2016;24:192–200. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2014.12.003.
 79. Roy SS, Foraker RE, Girton RA, Mansfield AJ. Posttraumatic stress dis-
order and incident heart failure among a community-based sample 
of US veterans. Am J Public Health. 2015;105:757–763. doi: 10.2105/
AJPH.2014.302342.
 80. Chen MH, Pan TL, Li CT, Lin WC, Chen YS, Lee YC, Tsai SJ, Hsu JW, Huang 
KL, Tsai CF, Chang WH, Chen TJ, Su TP
, Bai YM. Risk of stroke among pa-
tients with post-traumatic stress disorder: nationwide longitudinal study. 
Br J Psychiatry. 2015;206:302–307. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.143610.
 81. Boscarino JA. A prospective study of PTSD and early-age heart disease mortal-
ity among Vietnam veterans: implications for surveillance and prevention. 
Psychosom Med. 2008;70:668–676. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e31817bccaf.
 82. Boscarino JA. Posttraumatic stress disorder and mortality among U.S. Army 
veterans 30 years after military service. Ann Epidemiol. 2006;16:248–256. 
doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2005.03.009
 83. Kubzansky LD, Koenen KC, Jones C, Eaton WW. A prospective study 
of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms and coronary heart disease 
in women. Health Psychol. 2009;28:125–130. doi: 10.1037/0278-
6133.28.1.125.
 84. Kubzansky LD, Koenen KC, Spiro A 3rd, Vokonas PS, Sparrow D. Prospec-
tive study of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms and coronary heart 
disease in the Normative Aging Study. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:109–
116. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.1.109.
 85. Boyko EJ, Jacobson IG, Smith B, Ryan MA, Hooper TI, Amoroso PJ, Gack-
stetter GD, Barrett-Connor E, Smith TC; Millennium Cohort Study Team. 
Risk of diabetes in U.S. military service members in relation to combat 
deployment and mental health. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:1771–1777. doi: 
10.2337/dc10-0296.
 86. Vaccarino V, Goldberg J, Magruder KM, Forsberg CW, Friedman MJ, Litz BT, 
Heagerty PJ, Huang GD, Gleason TC, Smith NL. Posttraumatic stress disor-
der and incidence of type-2 diabetes: a prospective twin study. J Psychiatr 
Res. 2014;56:158–164. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.05.019.
 87. Roberts AL, Agnew-Blais JC, Spiegelman D, Kubzansky LD, Mason SM, 
Galea S, Hu FB, Rich-Edwards JW, Koenen KC. Posttraumatic stress dis-
order and incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in a sample of women: 
a 22-year longitudinal study. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015;72:203–210. doi: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2632.
 88. Green JG, McLaughlin KA, Berglund PA, Gruber MJ, Sampson NA, 
Zaslavsky AM, Kessler RC. Childhood adversities and adult psychiatric dis-
orders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication I: associations with 
first onset of DSM-IV disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:113–123. 
doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.186.
 89. Goldstein BI, Carnethon MR, Matthews KA, McIntyre RS, Miller GE, Ra-
ghuveer G, Stoney CM, Wasiak H, McCrindle BW; on behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension and Obesity in Youth 
Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Major 
depressive disorder and bipolar disorder predispose youth to accelerated 
atherosclerosis and early cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:965–986. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000229.
 90. Tully PJ, Harrison NJ, Cheung P
, Cosh S. Anxiety and cardiovascular disease 
risk: a review. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2016;18:120. doi: 10.1007/s11886-016-
0800-3.
 91. Sala R, Goldstein BI, Wang S, Blanco C. Childhood maltreatment and 
the course of bipolar disorders among adults: epidemiologic evidence of 
dose-response effects. J Affect Disord. 2014;165:74–80. doi: 10.1016/j.
jad.2014.04.035.
 92. Shamseddeen W, Asarnow JR, Clarke G, Vitiello B, Wagner KD, Birmaher 
B, Keller MB, Emslie G, Iyengar S, Ryan ND, McCracken JT, Porta G, 
Mayes T, Brent DA. Impact of physical and sexual abuse on treatment 
response in the Treatment of Resistant Depression in Adolescent Study 
(TORDIA). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;50:293–301. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaac.2010.11.019.
 93. Nemeroff CB, Heim CM, Thase ME, Klein DN, Rush AJ, Schatzberg AF, 
Ninan PT, McCullough JP
, Weiss PM, Dunner DL, Rothbaum BO, Kornstein 
S, Keitner G, Keller MB. Differential responses to psychotherapy versus 
pharmacotherapy in patients with chronic forms of major depression and 
childhood trauma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S 
A. 2003;100:14293–14296.
 94. Nanni V, Uher R, Danese A. Childhood maltreatment predicts unfavor-
able course of illness and treatment outcome in depression: a meta-
analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169:141–151. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp. 
2011.11020335.
 95. Agnew-Blais J, Danese A. Childhood maltreatment and unfavourable clinical 
outcomes in bipolar disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 
Psychiatry. 2016;3:342–349. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00544-1.
 96. Pace TW, Mletzko TC, Alagbe O, Musselman DL, Nemeroff CB, Miller 
AH, Heim CM. Increased stress-induced inflammatory responses in male 
patients with major depression and increased early life stress. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2006;163:1630–1633. doi: 10.1176/ajp.2006.163.9.1630.
 97. Nusslock R, Miller GE. Early-life adversity and physical and emotional 
health across the lifespan: a neuroimmune network hypothesis. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2016;80:23–32. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.017.
 98. Danese A, Moffitt TE, Pariante CM, Ambler A, Poulton R, Caspi A. 
Elevated inflammation levels in depressed adults with a history of 
childhood maltreatment. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65:409–415. doi: 
10.1001/archpsyc.65.4.409.
 99. Correll CU, Manu P
, Olshanskiy V, Napolitano B, Kane JM, Malhotra AK. 
Cardiometabolic risk of second-generation antipsychotic medications 
during first-time use in children and adolescents. JAMA. 2009;302:1765–
1773. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1549.
 100. Correll CU. Weight gain and metabolic effects of mood stabilizers and 
antipsychotics in pediatric bipolar disorder: a systematic review and 
pooled analysis of short-term trials. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2007;46:687–700. doi: 10.1097/chi.0b013e318040b25f.
 101. Sumner JA, Kubzansky LD, Roberts AL, Gilsanz P
, Chen Q, Winning A, 
Forman JP
, Rimm EB, Koenen KC. Post-traumatic stress disorder symp-
toms and risk of hypertension over 22 years in a large cohort of younger 
and middle-aged women. Psychol Med. 2016;46:3105–3116. doi: 
10.1017/S0033291716001914.
 102. Reekie J, Hosking SP
, Prakash C, Kao KT, Juonala M, Sabin MA. The ef-
fect of antidepressants and antipsychotics on weight gain in children and 
adolescents. Obes Rev. 2015;16:566–580. doi: 10.1111/obr.12284.
 103. Olfson M, Huang C, Gerhard T, Winterstein AG, Crystal S, Allison PD, 
Marcus SC. Stimulants and cardiovascular events in youth with atten-
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2012;51:147–156. doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2011.11.008.
 104. Cooper WO, Habel LA, Sox CM, Chan KA, Arbogast PG, Cheetham 
TC, Murray KT, Quinn VP
, Stein CM, Callahan ST, Fireman BH, Fish FA, 
Kirshner HS, O’Duffy A, Connell FA, Ray WA. ADHD drugs and seri-
ous cardiovascular events in children and young adults. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365:1896–1904. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1110212.
 105. Faraone SV, Biederman J, Morley CP
, Spencer TJ. Effect of stimulants on 
height and weight: a review of the literature. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry. 2008;47:994–1009. doi: 10.1097/CHI.ObO13e31817eOea7.
 106. Slopen N, Koenen KC, Kubzansky LD. Childhood adversity and immune 
and inflammatory biomarkers associated with cardiovascular risk in 
youth: a systematic review. Brain Behav Immun. 2012;26:239–250. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbi.2011.11.003.
 107. McEwen BS. Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. N Engl 
J Med. 1998;338:171–179. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199801153380307.
 108. Hostinar CE, Lachman ME, Mroczek DK, Seeman TE, Miller GE. Additive 
contributions of childhood adversity and recent stressors to inflammation 
at midlife: findings from the MIDUS study. Dev Psychol. 2015;51:1630–
1644. doi: 10.1037/dev0000049.
 109. Danese A, Pariante CM, Caspi A, Taylor A, Poulton R. Childhood mal-
treatment predicts adult inflammation in a life-course study. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U 
S 
A. 2007;104:1319–1324. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0610362104.
 110. Slopen N, Lewis TT, Gruenewald TL, Mujahid MS, Ryff CD, Albert MA, 
Williams DR. Early life adversity and inflammation in African Americans 
and whites in the midlife in the United States survey. Psychosom Med. 
2010;72:694–701. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181e9c16f.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Suglia et al
January 30, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e15–e28. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000536
e28
 111. Su S, Wang X, Pollock JS, Treiber FA, Xu X, Snieder H, McCall WV, 
Stefanek M, Harshfield GA. Adverse childhood experiences and blood 
pressure trajectories from childhood to young adulthood: the Georgia 
Stress and Heart Study. Circulation. 2015;131:1674–1681. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013104.
 112. Power C, Pinto Pereira SM, Li L. Childhood maltreatment and BMI tra-
jectories to mid-adult life: follow-up to age 50 y in a British birth cohort. 
PLoS One. 2015;10:e0119985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119985.
 113. Klassen SA, Chirico D, O’Leary DD, Cairney J, Wade TJ. Linking systemic 
arterial stiffness among adolescents to adverse childhood experiences. 
Child Abuse Negl. 2016;56:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.chiabu.2016.04.002.
 114. Hakulinen C, Pulkki-Råback L, Elovainio M, Kubzansky LD, Jokela M, 
Hintsanen M, Juonala M, Kivimäki M, Josefsson K, Hutri-Kähönen N, 
Kähönen M, Viikari J, Keltikangas-Järvinen L, Raitakari OT. Childhood 
psychosocial cumulative risks and carotid intima-media thickness in 
adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Psychosom 
Med. 2016;78:171–181. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000246.
 115. Bick J, Naumova O, Hunter S, Barbot B, Lee M, Luthar SS, Raefski A, 
Grigorenko EL. Childhood adversity and DNA methylation of genes in-
volved in the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis and immune system: 
whole-genome and candidate-gene associations. Dev Psychopathol. 
2012;24:1417–1425. doi: 10.1017/S0954579412000806.
 116. Demetriou CA, van Veldhoven K, Relton C, Stringhini S, Kyriacou K, 
Vineis P
. Biological embedding of early-life exposures and disease risk in 
humans: a role for DNA methylation. Eur J Clin Invest. 2015;45:303–332. 
doi: 10.1111/eci.12406.
 117. Tyrka AR, Price LH, Marsit C, Walters OC, Carpenter LL. Childhood adver-
sity and epigenetic modulation of the leukocyte glucocorticoid receptor: 
preliminary findings in healthy adults. PLoS One. 2012;7:e30148. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0030148.
 118. Houtepen LC, Vinkers CH, Carrillo-Roa T, Hiemstra M, van Lier PA, Meeus 
W, Branje S, Heim CM, Nemeroff CB, Mill J, Schalkwyk LC, Creyghton MP
, 
Kahn RS, Joëls M, Binder EB, Boks MP
. Genome-wide DNA methylation 
levels and altered cortisol stress reactivity following childhood trauma in 
humans. Nat Commun. 2016;7:10967. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10967.
 119. Suderman M, Borghol N, Pappas JJ, Pinto Pereira SM, Pembrey M, 
Hertzman C, Power C, Szyf M. Childhood abuse is associated with meth-
ylation of multiple loci in adult DNA. BMC Med Genomics. 2014;7:13. 
doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-13.
 120. Lutter M, Sakata I, Osborne-Lawrence S, Rovinsky SA, Anderson JG, Jung 
S, Birnbaum S, Yanagisawa M, Elmquist JK, Nestler EJ, Zigman JM. The 
orexigenic hormone ghrelin defends against depressive symptoms of 
chronic stress. Nat Neurosci. 2008;11:752–753. doi: 10.1038/nn.2139.
 121. Perello M, Sakata I, Birnbaum S, Chuang JC, Osborne-Lawrence S, Rovinsky 
SA, Woloszyn J, Yanagisawa M, Lutter M, Zigman JM. Ghrelin increases 
the rewarding value of high-fat diet in an orexin-dependent manner. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2010;67:880–886. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.10.030.
 122. Perelló M, Zigman JM. The role of ghrelin in reward-based eating. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2012;72:347–353. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.02.016.
 123. Danese A, Dove R, Belsky DW, Henchy J, Williams B, Ambler A, 
Arseneault L. Leptin deficiency in maltreated children. Transl Psychiatry. 
2014;4:e446. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.79.
 124. Batterham RL, Cohen MA, Ellis SM, Le Roux CW, Withers DJ, Frost 
GS, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR. Inhibition of food intake in obese subjects 
by peptide YY3-36. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:941–948. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa030204.
 125. McMurray RG, Forsythe WA, Mar MH, Hardy CJ. Exercise intensity-re-
lated responses of beta-endorphin and catecholamines. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 1987;19:570–574.
 126. Byrne A, Byrne DG. The effect of exercise on depression, anxiety and 
other mood states: a review. J Psychosom Res. 1993;37:565–574.
 127. Reuben A, Moffitt TE, Caspi A, Belsky DW, Harrington H, Schroeder F, 
Hogan S, Ramrakha S, Poulton R, Danese A. Lest we forget: compar-
ing retrospective and prospective assessments of adverse childhood ex-
periences in the prediction of adult health. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 
2016;57:1103–1112. doi: 10.1111/jcpp.12621.
 128. Noll JG, Zeller MH, Trickett PK, Putnam FW. Obesity risk for female 
victims of childhood sexual abuse: a prospective study. Pediatrics. 
2007;120:e61–e67. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-3058.
 129. Danese A, Moffitt TE, Harrington H, Milne BJ, Polanczyk G, Pariante CM, 
Poulton R, Caspi A. Adverse childhood experiences and adult risk factors 
for age-related disease: depression, inflammation, and clustering of met-
abolic risk markers. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009;163:1135–1143. 
doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2009.214.
 130. Doom JR, Mason SM, Suglia SF, Clark CJ. Pathways between child-
hood/adolescent adversity, adolescent socioeconomic status, and long-
term cardiovascular disease risk in young adulthood. Soc Sci Med. 
2017;188:166–175. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.06.044.
 131. Wells NM, Evans GW, Beavis A, Ong AD. Early childhood poverty, cu-
mulative risk exposure, and body mass index trajectories through young 
adulthood. Am J Public Health. 2010;100:2507–2512. doi: 10.2105/
AJPH.2009.184291.
 132. Shin SH, Miller DP
. A longitudinal examination of childhood maltreatment 
and adolescent obesity: results from the National Longitudinal Study of 
Adolescent Health (AddHealth) Study. Child Abuse Negl. 2012;36:84–94. 
doi: 10.1016/j.chiabu.2011.08.007.
 133. Loucks EB, Almeida ND, Taylor SE, Matthews KA. Childhood family psy-
chosocial environment and coronary heart disease risk. Psychosom Med. 
2011;73:563–571. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e318228c820.
 134. Traub F, Boynton-Jarrett R. Modifiable resilience factors to childhood ad-
versity for clinical pediatric practice. Pediatrics 2017;139:e20162569.
 135. Gunnar MR, Fisher PA; Early Experience, Stress, and Prevention Network. 
Bringing basic research on early experience and stress neurobiology to 
bear on preventive interventions for neglected and maltreated children. 
Dev Psychopathol. 2006;18:651–677.
 136. Appleton AA, Buka SL, Loucks EB, Rimm EB, Martin LT, Kubzansky LD. A 
prospective study of positive early-life psychosocial factors and favorable 
cardiovascular risk in adulthood. Circulation. 2013;127:905–912. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.115782.
 137. Francis MM, Nikulina V, Widom CS. A prospective examination of the mech-
anisms linking childhood physical abuse to body mass index in adulthood. 
Child Maltreat. 2015;20:203–213. doi: 10.1177/1077559514568892.
 138. Caspi A, Hariri AR, Holmes A, Uher R, Moffitt TE. Genetic sensitivity 
to the environment: the case of the serotonin transporter gene and its 
implications for studying complex diseases and traits. Am J Psychiatry. 
2010;167:509–527. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09101452.
 139. Danese A, McEwen BS. Adverse childhood experiences, allostasis, allo-
static load, and age-related disease. Physiol Behav. 2012;106:29–39. doi: 
10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.08.019.
 140. Danese A, Moffitt TE, Arseneault L, Bleiberg BA, Dinardo PB, Gandelman SB, 
Houts R, Ambler A, Fisher HL, Poulton R, Caspi A. The origins of cognitive def-
icits in victimized children: implications for neuroscientists and clinicians. Am 
J Psychiatry. 2017;174:349–361. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16030333.
 141. Bowes L, Maughan B, Ball H, Shakoor S, Ouellet-Morin I, Caspi A, Moffitt 
TE, Arseneault L. Chronic bullying victimization across school transitions: 
the role of genetic and environmental influences. Dev Psychopathol. 
2013;25:333–346. doi: 10.1017/S0954579412001095.
 142. Dobson KG, Chow CH, Morrison KM, Van Lieshout RJ. Associations be-
tween childhood cognition and cardiovascular events in adulthood: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Cardiol. 2017;33:232–242. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2016.08.014.
 143. Winning A, Glymour MM, McCormick MC, Gilsanz P
, Kubzansky 
LD. Childhood psychological distress as a mediator in the relation-
ship between early-life social disadvantage and adult cardiometabolic 
risk: evidence from the 1958 British Birth Cohort. Psychosom Med. 
2016;78:1019–1030. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000409.
 144. VanderWeele TJ, Hawkley LC, Thisted RA, Cacioppo JT. A marginal 
structural model analysis for loneliness: implications for intervention tri-
als and clinical practice. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2011;79:225–235. doi: 
10.1037/a0022610.
 145. Dubowitz H, Thompson R, Proctor L, Metzger R, Black MM, English D, 
Poole G, Magder L. Adversity, maltreatment, and resilience in young chil-
dren. Acad Pediatr. 2016;16:233–239. doi: 10.1016/j.acap.2015.12.005.
 146. Campbell F, Conti G, Heckman JJ, Moon SH, Pinto R, Pungello E, Pan 
Y. Early childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science. 
2014;343:1478–1485. doi: 10.1126/science.1248429.
 147. Miller GE, Brody GH, Yu T, Chen E. A family-oriented psychosocial interven-
tion reduces inflammation in low-SES African American youth. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U 
S 
A. 2014;111:11287–11292. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1406578111.
 148. Trauma Informed Primary Care Initiative. 2016. https://www.thenational-
council.org/trauma-informed-primary-care-initiative-learning-community/.
 149. Flynn AB, Fothergill KE, Wilcox HC, Coleclough E, Horwitz R, Ruble 
A, Burkey MD, Wissow LS. Primary care interventions to prevent 
or treat traumatic stress in childhood: a systematic review. Acad Pediatr. 
2015;15:480–492. doi: 10.1016/j.acap.2015.06.012.
 150. Cohen JA, Kelleher KJ, Mannarino AP
. Identifying, treating, and refer-
ring traumatized children: the role of pediatric providers. Arch Pediatr 
Adolesc Med. 2008;162:447–452. doi: 10.1001/archpedi.162.5.447.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
