 Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine
Allogeneic Mesenchymal Stem Cell Therapy
Promotes Osteoblastogenesis and Prevents
Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis
BINGDONG SUI,a,b,c,d,* CHENGHU HU,a,b,* XINYI ZHANG,a,b PAN ZHAO,a,b TAO HE,a,b CUIHONG ZHOU,a,b
XINYU QIU,a,b NAN CHEN,a,b XINYI ZHAO,c,d YAN JINa,b
Key Words. Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis x Mesenchymal stem cell therapy x Cell homing x
Bone remodeling x Osteoblastogenesis
ABSTRACT
Gene-modified mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-like cells with enhanced bone marrow homing and
osteogenesis have been used in treating glucocorticoid-induced murine osteoporosis (GIOP). Recent
preclinical studies have further demonstrated the immunomodulatory and anticatabolic potential of
allogeneic MSCs in treating osteoporosis under inflammatory and autoimmune conditions. In this
study, we investigated whether systemic infusion of allogeneic MSCs without genetic manipulation
could prevent GIOP, whether anabolic and anticatabolic effects existed, and whether homing or
immunomodulation underlay the putative therapeutic effects. Allogeneic bone marrow-derived
MSCs (BMMSCs) were isolated, identified, and systemically infused into mice treated with excessive
dexamethasone. We revealed that allogeneic MSC transplantation prevented the reduction of bone
mass and strength in GIOP. Bone histomorphometric analyses of bone remodeling demonstrated the
maintenance of bone formation and osteoblast survival after MSC therapy. Using green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-labeled BMMSCs, we showed that donor BMMSCsGFP homed and inhabited recipient
bone marrow for at least 4 weeks and prevented recipient bone marrow cell apoptosis, as shown
by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling. Furthermore, donor
BMMSCsGFP committed to Osterix (Osx)+ osteoblast progenitors and induced recipient osteoblasto-
genesis, as exhibited by GFP-Osx double-labeling immunofluorescence analysis. No anticatabolic ef-
fects or systemic immunomodulatory effects of infused BMMSCs were detected. These findings
demonstrated that allogeneic MSC therapy prevented GIOP by inhabiting and functioning in recipient
bone marrow, which promoted osteoblastogenesis, which in turn maintained bone formation. Our find-
ings provide important information regarding cell-based anabolic therapy for GIOP and uncover MSC be-
haviors following the homing event. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1238–1246
SIGNIFICANCE
This study revealed the therapeutic potential of systemically infused, genetically unmodified alloge-
neic MSCs in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. The donor MSCs inhabited recipient bone marrow
and promoted osteoblastogenesis. The therapeutic effects were based on maintenance of bone for-
mation. These results provide important information regarding cell-based anabolic therapy for
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis and uncover previously unrecognized mesenchymal stem cell
behaviors following a homing event. The current study also indicates that minimizing the time of cell
culture confers an advantage for increasing transplanted mesenchymal stem cells to the targeted
organ to promote therapeutic effects.
INTRODUCTION
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GIOP) is
the most prevalent form of secondary osteoporo-
sis, the key feature of which is the rapid reduction
of bone formation [1–4]. Mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs, also known as mesenchymal stromal
cells), recognized as osteoblastic precursors, have
shown therapeutic prospects in the prevention
and management of osteoporotic bone loss in
preclinical studies [5–10]. In murine GIOP, Lien
et al. restored bone mass and strength by sys-
temic infusion of C3H10T1/2 MSC-like cells [5],
which were transduced to ectopically express
CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), the receptor
for stroma-derived factor 1 (SDF-1) [11], to facil-
itatebonemarrowhomingandretentionefficacy,
and core binding factor a1 (Cbfa-1), an osteo-
blast master transcription factor [12], to pro-
mote osteogenic differentiation postengraftment.
aState Key Laboratory of
Military Stomatology, Center
for Tissue Engineering,
bResearch and Development
CenterforTissueEngineering,
cState Key Laboratory of
Military Stomatology,
Department of Dental
Materials, and dDepartment
of Dental Materials, School of
Stomatology, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi’an,
Shaanxi, People’s Republic of
China
*Contributed equally.
Correspondence: Yan Jin, M.D.,
Ph.D., Research and
Development Center for Tissue
Engineering, Fourth Military
Medical University, No. 145 West
Changle Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi
710032, People’s Republic of
China. Telephone: 86-029-
84776472; E-Mail: yanjin@
fmmu.edu.cn; or Xinyi Zhao,
M.D., Ph.D., Department of
Dental Materials, School of
Stomatology, Fourth Military
Medical University, No. 145 West
Changle Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi
710032, People’s Republic of
China. Telephone: 86-029-
84776177; E-Mail: zhaoxinyi@
fmmu.edu.cn
Received November 30, 2015;
accepted for publication April 7,
2016; published Online First on
June 30, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0347
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1238–1246 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 Recently, preclinical studies have further revealed that based on
immunomodulation, allogeneic MSCs without genetic manipula-
tion exhibited profound potential to inhibit bone resorption and
ameliorate osteoporosis under inflammatory and autoimmune
conditions [8–10]. Whether allogeneic MSCs hold therapeutic
effects in GIOP is unknown.
According to reported data, transplanted MSCs rescue bone
lossthrough either systemic immunomodulatoryandanticatabolic
effects [8–10] or local anabolic effects exerted via direct intrabone
marrow injection or cell homing postinfusion [5–7]. Given that glu-
cocorticoid therapy is widely used in autoimmune diseases to con-
trol inflammation [1], immunomodulation might not contribute to
the putative effects of allogeneic MSCs in treating GIOP. Alterna-
tively,Lienandothersdemonstratedthatintravenously(i.v.)trans-
planted MSCs could migrate and nonspecifically distribute in
various organs including lung and liver, or preferentially home, with
limited efficiency, to bone marrow [5, 13, 14]. Without transduc-
tion to enforce homing, it remains to be elucidated whether sys-
temically infused allogeneic MSCs could inhabit and function in
recipient bone marrow to maintain therapeutic effects in GIOP.
In this study, we aimed to (a) examine whether allogeneic
MSC therapy via systemic infusion can prevent the development
of GIOP, (b) investigate whether anabolic and anticatabolic ef-
fects exist, and (c) elucidate whether homing or immunomodula-
tion underlie the putative therapeutic effects. We hypothesized
that allogeneic MSC therapy could prevent the reduction of bone
mass and strength in GIOP through maintaining bone formation
by inhabiting and functioning in recipient bone marrow.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and Experimental Design
The Guidelines of Intramural Animal Use and Care Committee of
the Fourth Military Medical University were followed. Female
wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice (age, 12 weeks; weight, 20–22 g)
(Laboratory Animal Center, the Fourth Military Medical Uni-
versity, China) and female green fluorescent protein (GFP)+/+
transgenic mice (age, 12 weeks; weight, 20–22 g) (C57BL/6
background, the Fourth Military Medical University, China) were
used. The mice were allowed to eat and drink ad libitum before
being sacrificed.
Experiment 1: Effects of Systemically Infused MSCs in
the Prevention of GIOP
WT mice were randomized by weight into four groups (n = 4 each)
according to treatment. In the GIOP group, mice received 20 mg/
kg/day intraperitoneal (i.p.) dexamethasone (DEX) (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, http://www.sigmaaldrich.com) for 35 con-
secutive days, as previously reported [5]. DEX was dissolved in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sci-
ences,Waltham,MA,http://www.thermofisher.com)inafinalcon-
centration of 2 mg/ml, and one DEX injection was given daily at
10ml/g.Inthecontrolgroup,micereceived10ml/gPBSfor5weeks
i.p. Necessary precautions were taken to prevent the injected fluid
from being accidentally placed in intestine. In the GIOP+BMMSC
group, 1 3 106 donor bone marrow MSCs (BMMSCs) derived from
WT mice were suspended in 200 ml PBS and intravenously (i.v.) in-
fused into each recipient GIOP mouse on day 7 of GIOP injection
[5, 9]. In the GIOP+PBS group, equivalent PBS was infused. Nothing
(vehicle) was infused into mice of the control group and the
GIOP group. Mice were sacrificed on day 35 of GIOP injection.
Femora were sampled for the micro-computed tomography
(micro-CT) analysis for bone mass evaluation, and tibiae were col-
lected for three-point bending test for bone quality determination.
Experiment 2: Effects of MSC Therapy on Bone
Remodeling in GIOP
WT mice were randomized by weight into three groups (n = 4
each): control, GIOP+PBS, and GIOP+BMMSC. Control and GIOP
modeling, as well as the systemic infusion of PBS and BMMSCs,
was according to methods stated above. Mice were sacrificed
on day 35 of GIOP injection. Sixteen and 2 days before sacrifice,
mice received double i.p. injection of 20 mg/kg calcein (Sigma-
Aldrich) [15]. Just before sacrifice, whole peripheral blood was
sampled for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). At sac-
rifice, femora were sampled for calcein labeling and immunoflu-
orescent examination, and tibiae were collected for tartrate
resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and toluidine blue staining.
Experiment 3: Fates of Infused MSCs in GIOP Mice
GFP+/+ mice were used as BMMSC donors. WT recipient mice
were randomized by weight into three groups (n = 8 each): con-
trol, GIOP+PBS, and GIOP+BMMSC. Control and GIOP modeling,
as well as the systemic infusion of PBS and BMMSCsGFP, was
according to methods stated above. At 4, 24, and 72 hours after
BMMSCGFP infusion (n = 4 each), mice of the GIOP+BMMSC group
were randomly chosen and 50 ml peripheral blood was sampled
from the tail for flow cytometric analysis to determine of the sur-
vival of GFP+ cells in the peripheral blood. Mice of the GIOP+PBS
groupalsounderwentbloodsampling24hoursafterPBSinfusion.
Mice were kept alive after blood sampling. At 24 hours (n = 4) and
4 weeks (n = 4) after PBS or BMMSCGFP infusion, mice of all three
groups were randomly chosen and sacrificed to collect femora for
immunofluorescent tests and whole peripheral blood for ELISA.
BMMSC or BMMSCGFP Culture, Identification, and
Systemic Infusion
For Experiments 1 and 2, BMMSCs werederived from C57BL/6 mice.
ForExperiment3,BMMSCsGFPweresourcedfromGFP+/+transgenic
mice. Isolation and culture of murine BMMSCs and BMMSCsGFP
were as previously described [16, 17]. Briefly, murine bone marrow
cells were seeded, incubated overnight, and rinsed with PBS to
remove nonadherent cells. Adherent cells were cultured with
a-minimumessentialmediumsupplementedwith20%fetalbovine
serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 g/ml
streptomycin (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences) at 37°C
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. BMMSCs were identified by
colonyformation,morphology,osteogenicandadipogenicdifferen-
tiation, and surface marker analysis, as stated below. Primary
BMMSC or BMMSCGFP colonies were applied for infusion after di-
gestion with 0.25% trypsin (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA,
http://www.mpbio.com) to yield appropriate numbers (2–3 3
106 BMMSCs or BMMSCsGFP could be harvested from one mouse).
For systemic infusion, BMMSCs were suspended in PBS at 5 3
106/ml and put on ice. BMMSCs or BMMSCsGFP (1 3 106 in 200 ml
or equivalent PBS) were administered via caudal vein into each
recipient mouse on day 7 of DEX treatment, which was finished
within 30 minutes after digestion [8, 9]. For colony formation
analysis, primary BMMSCs at confluence were digested and
plated in 5-cm culture dishes at a density of 1 3 104 cells/dish.
Sui, Hu, Zhang et al.
1239
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 After 14 days of culture, the colonies were fixed with 4% parafor-
maldehyde for 30 minutes and stained with crystal violet (Sigma-
Aldrich) for 5 minutes [18]. For cell morphologic evaluation,
primary BMMSCs at confluence were digested and plated in six-
well plates at a density of 5 3 105 cells/well. After 1 day of culture,
cell morphology was evaluated and photographs were taken.
For osteogenic differentiation, seeded BMMSCs were further
induced in osteogenesis-inducing media containing 100 mg/ml
ascorbic acid (MP Biomedicals), 2 mM b-glycerophosphate
(Sigma-Aldrich), and 10 nM DEX. After induction for 14 days,
alizarin red (Sigma-Aldrich) staining was performed to deter-
mine mineralization [16]. For adipogenic differentiation, seeded
BMMSCs were further induced in adipogenesis-inducing media
containing 0.5 mM isobutylmethylxanthine (MP Biomedicals),
0.5 mM DEX, and 60 mM indomethacin (MP Biomedicals). After in-
duction for 14 days, oil red O (Sigma-Aldrich) staining was per-
formed to determine lipid droplet formation. Photographs were
all taken using an inverted optical microscope (CKX41; Olympus,
Tokyo, Japan, http://www.olympusamerica.com) [16].
For flow cytometric analysis of surface makers, primary
BMMSC colonies were digested and suspended in PBS supple-
mented with 3% FBS at 1 3 106 cells/ml. Added to this were
2 3 105 cells/tube with 1 ml fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-
conjugated anti-mouse CD11b antibody, 1 ml phycoerythrin
(PE)-conjugated anti-mouse CD29 antibody, 1 ml PE-conjugated
anti-mouse CD34 antibody, 1 ml PE-conjugated anti-mouse
CD45antibody,1mlPE-conjugated anti-mousevascularcelladhe-
sionmolecule1(VCAM1,alsoknownasCD106)antibody,and1ml
FITC-conjugated anti-mouse stem cell antigen 1 (Sca-1) antibody
(all from Abcam, Cambridge, MA, http://www.abcam.com). Non-
immune immunoglobulin of the same isotype was used as the
negative control. BMMSCs were incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes
in the dark and washed twice with PBS supplemented with 3% FBS.
The percentage of positively stained cells was determined with a
flow cytometer (FACSAria; BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, http://www.
bd.com) equipped with FACSDiva version 6.1.3 software [19].
Micro-CT Analysis for Bone Mass Evaluation
For trabecular and cortical bone mass evaluation, a desktop
micro-CTsystem(eXploreLocusSP,GEHealthcare,LittleChalfont,
U.K., http://www3.gehealthcare.com) was used, as previously
documented [20]. In Experiment 1, at sacrifice, the left femora
were removed, fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde, and pre-
pared into 1-mm blocks with the distal femoral metaphysis in-
cluded. The specimens were scanned at a resolution of 8 mm, a
voltage of 80 kV, and a current of 80 mA. Trabecular bone data
were obtained at a region of interest (ROI) in the distal metaphy-
sis,0.3–0.8mmawayfromtheepiphysis.CorticalROIwasdefined
in the midshaft, 3.3–3.8 mm away from the epiphysis. Data were
analyzed with the Micview V2.1.2 software, and quantification
was performed using parameters of bone volume per tissue vol-
ume, bone mineral density, trabecular bone thickness, trabecular
bone number, trabecular separation, cortical bone thickness,
total cross-sectional area inside the periosteal envelope, cortical
bone area, and cortical bone area fraction [9, 21].
Three-Point Bending Test for Bone
Quality Determination
Tibiae were used for mechanical testing for bone quality determi-
nation in Experiment 1. At sacrifice, the left tibiae were isolated,
and the length was measured using a caliper to determine mid-
point. The tibiae were then placed in a universal testing machine
(AGS-10KN; Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan, http://www.shimadzu.com)
with two lower supports at a distance of 15 mm. The load was ap-
plied tothemidpointatadisplacementrateof0.05mm/suntil fail-
ure. The displacement, load, and load-deformation curve were
recorded.Ultimate force wasdefinedasthe maximal load. Young’s
modulus was calculated according to Turner and Burr [22].
Bone Histomorphometric Analyses for Bone
Remodeling Evaluation
For bone formation examination, double calcein labeling was
performed according to previous studies, with minor modifica-
tions [15, 20] (supplemental online Fig. 3A). In Experiment 2, at
16 and 2 days before sacrifice, mice received double injection
i.p. of 20 mg/kg calcein. Calcein was dissolved at a concentration
of 2 mg/ml in PBS supplemented with 1 mg/ml NaHCO3 (Sigma-
Aldrich) and was injected at 10 ml/g each time away from light.
Necessary precautions were taken to ensure that the injected
fluid was never accidentally placed in intestine, and that success-
ful administration of double calcein labeling was accomplished in
all mice. At sacrifice, left femora were isolated, fixed in 80% eth-
anol,andembeddedinmethylmethacrylate.Thespecimenswere
sagittally sectioned into 30-mm sections using a hard tissue slicing
machine (SP1600; Leica, Munich, Germany, http://www.leica.
com) away from light. Both double-labeled and single-labeled
cortical endosteum surfaces were evaluated by a fluorescence
microscope (STP6000; Leica) with an excitation wavelength of
488 nm. Quantification was performed based on at least five pho-
tographs using the parameters of mineral apposition rate (MAR)
andmineralizedsurfaceperbonesurface(MS/BS).Boneformation
rate (BFR) was calculated as MAR 3 MS/BS, according to previous
studies [15].
For osteoblast and osteoclast/bone resorption examination, to-
luidine blue and TRAP staining was performed, as stated previously
[23]. In Experiment 2, at sacrifice, tibiae were isolated, fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde, decalcified with 10%ethylenediamine tetraace-
ticacid(EDTA)(pH7.2–7.4),andembeddedinparaffin.Sagittalserial
sections (5 mm) of proximal metaphyses were prepared (RM2125;
Leica). The sections were stained by 1% toluidine blue (Sigma-
Aldrich)dissolvedinPBSfor30minutesorbyTRAPusingacommercial
kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (387-1A; Sigma-
Aldrich). Osteoblast quantification was performed using the pa-
rameters of number of osteoblasts per bone surface and osteoblast
surface per bone surface [15]. Similarly, osteoclast/bone resorp-
tion quantification was determined using the parameters of num-
ber of osteoclasts per bone surface and osteoclast surface per
bone surface [15]. Quantification was performed using ImageJ
1.47 software from at least five consecutive microscopic fields.
ELISA for the Detection of Serological Markers
In Experiments 2 and 3, at 24 hours and 4 weeks after PBS or
BMMSC infusion, before necropsy, 500-ml samples of whole pe-
ripheral blood were collected from the retro-orbital venous
plexus.Serawereisolatedbycentrifugingat3,000rpmfor10min-
utes followed by 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C [9]. Markers for
bone formation (procollagen 1 N-terminal peptide [P1NP]), bone
resorption (cross-linked C-telopeptide of type1 collagen [CTX-1]),
and inflammation (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-a and interferon
[IFN]-g) were detected using murine ELISA kits according to the
1240
MSC Therapy in Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 manufacturer’s instructions (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN,
http://www.rndsystems.com).
Immunofluorescent Staining and Terminal
Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase-Mediated dUTP
Nick-End Labeling
In Experiments 2 and 3, at sacrifice, femora were isolated, fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde, cryoprotected with 30% sucrose, decalci-
fied with 10% EDTA (pH 7.2–7.4), and embedded in optimal cut-
ting temperature compound. The specimens were snap-frozen
and sectioned into 15-mm sagittal sections (CM1950; Leica). All
of the below antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology
(Danvers, MA, http://www.cellsignal.com). Nonimmune immu-
noglobulin of the same isotype was used as the negative control.
Sections were observed under a fluorescence microscope (DP70;
Olympus). The images were further analyzed using ImageJ 1.47
software from at least five consecutive microscopic fields.
IntheExperiment 2, rightfemorawereevaluated for in situde-
tection of osteoblast progenitors in bone marrow. Osteoblast pro-
genitors were identified with Osterix (Osx) [24]. Sections were
blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved
in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature. Sections were then stained
with a goat anti-Osx primary antibody for 2 hours at room temper-
ature at a concentration of 1:100, followed by donkey anti-goat-
FITC secondary antibody for 30 minutes at room temperature at
a concentration of 1:200. Sections were counterstained with
Hoechst (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3 minutes at room temperature.
In Experiment 3, left femora were evaluated for in situ detec-
tionof donor BMMSCsGFP inrecipient bone marrow [17]. Sections
were blocked as stated. Sections were then stained with rabbit
anti-GFP primary antibody for 2 hours at room temperature at
a concentration of 1:100, followed by goat anti-rabbit-FITC sec-
ondaryantibodyfor30minutesatroomtemperatureataconcen-
tration of 1:200, and counterstained with Hoechst as stated.
For in situ detection of apoptosis of both donor BMMSCsGFP
and recipient bone marrow cells, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) and GFP-
immunofluorescence double-labeling assays were performed,
as previously reported [25]. Briefly, sections from the right fem-
ora underwent TUNEL assay using DeadEnd Colorimetric TUNEL
System according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega,
Madison, WI, http://www.promega.com). Sections were blocked,
stained for anti-GFP primary antibody and the secondary antibody,
and counterstained with Hoechst, as stated above.
For in situ detection of osteogenic differentiation of both
donor BMMSCGFP and recipient BMMSCs, an Osx- and GFP-
immunofluorescence double-labeling assay was performed. Sec-
tions were blocked as stated. Sections were then costained with
goat anti-Osx primary antibody and rabbit anti-GFP primary anti-
body for 2 hours at room temperature at a concentration of 1:100,
Figure 1.
Study design of Experiment 1 and trabecular bone mass.
(A): Study design of the Experiment 1 for bone mass evaluation. Fem-
ora and the tibiae were sampled at sacrifice. (B–E): Representative
micro-CT images illustrating trabecular bone mass of the distal meta-
physes of femora. ROI was defined 0.3–0.8 mm away from epiphyses.
Scale bars: 500 mm (top) and 100 mm (bottom). (F–J): Corresponding
parameters showing prevention of GIOP by MSC therapy. Data repre-
sent mean 6 SEM; n = 4 per group. pp, p , .01; ppp, p , .001. Abbre-
viations: BMD, bone mineral density; BMMSC, bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cell; BV/TV, bonevolume per tissuevolume; Cont,
control; DEX, dexamethasone; GIOP, glucocorticoid-induced osteopo-
rosis; i.p., intraperitoneally; i.v., intravenously; micro-CT, micro-
computed tomography; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; NS, not sig-
nificant; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; ROI, region of interest;
Tb.N, trabecular bone number; Tb.Th, trabecular bone thickness;
Tb.Sp, trabecular separation; w, weeks.
Sui, Hu, Zhang et al.
1241
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 followed by donkey anti-goat-cyanine 3 secondary antibody
together with a goat anti-rabbit-FITC secondary antibody for
30 minutes at room temperature at a concentration of 1:200,
and counterstained with Hoechst as stated.
Flow Cytometric Analysis for Detection of Donor
BMMSCsGFP in Recipient Peripheral Blood
In Experiment 3, 50-ml blood samples were collected by cutting off
the tips of the tails at indicated times. Samples were treated with
ACKlysis buffer (Lonza,Basel,Switzerland,http://www.lonza.com)
to remove red blood cells and washed with PBS. Percentages
of GFP+ cells in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNCs)
were determined with a flow cytometer (Cytomics FC 500;
Beckman-Coulter, Danvers, MA, https://www.beckmancoulter.com)
equipped with CXP 2.1 software.
Statistical Analysis
All results are presented as mean 6 SEM. The data were analyzed
using one-way analysis of variance followed by post hoc tests of
Newman-Keuls multiple comparison inGraphPadPrism software.
Values of p , .05 were considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Systemic Infusion of Allogeneic BMMSCs Maintained
Bone Mass and Strength in Glucocorticoid-Treated Mice
Murine BMMSCs used in the present study were demonstrated to
have the potential toform colonies and differentiate into multiline-
age osteoblasts and adipocytes (supplemental online Fig. 1A–1D),
as reported in our previous research [16, 26]. Analyzed by flow
cytometry, these BMMSCs uniformly expressed surface makers
considered to represent mesenchymal stem cells, including CD29,
VCAM1, and Sca-1, but were negative for hematopoietic markers
CD11b, CD34, and CD45 (supplemental online Fig. 1E) [19, 26].
To explore the therapeutic potential of allogeneic MSCs in GIOP,
we infused BMMSCs systemically into glucocorticoid-treated mice
according to the study design of Experiment 1 (Fig. 1A). Micro-CT
analysis demonstrated that BMMSC infusion maintained trabecular
bone mass in glucocorticoid-treated mice (Fig. 1B–1E) with corre-
sponding improvements in trabecular bone volume (Fig. 1F), min-
eral density (Fig. 1G), thickness (Fig. 1H), number (Fig. 1I), and
separation (Fig. 1J). Additional analysis showed partial prevention
against cortical bone loss by MSC therapy (supplemental online
Fig. 2A–2D), as indicated by the improvements of cortical bone
thickness (supplemental online Fig. 2E) and cortical area fraction
(supplemental online Fig. 2F–2H).Mechanical tests further demon-
strated partial maintenance of bone strength by systemic infusion
of BMMSCs, as shown in supplemental online Fig. 2I and 2J.
Allogeneic BMMSC Infusion Prevented GIOP Through
Maintenance of Bone Formation
To explore the underlying mechanisms of the therapeutic effects
of BMMSC infusion in GIOP, we analyzed bone-remodeling pa-
rameters in Experiment 2 (supplemental online Fig. 3A). Calcein
labeling showed rescue of the impaired bone formation by
BMMSC infusion (Fig. 2A–2C) with almost complete maintenance
of MAR (Fig. 2D), MS/BS (Fig. 2E), and BFR (Fig. 2F). However, no
significant changes were found in bone resorption, as shown by
TRAP staining on osteoclasts (Fig. 2G–2K). Detection of serological
Figure2.
Bone formation and bone resorption parameters. (A–C):
Representative calcein-labeling images exhibiting bone formation
rates. Mice received double injection of 20 mg/kg calcein at 16 and
2 d before sacrifice. Scale bars: 100 mm. (D–F): Corresponding pa-
rameters showing maintenance of bone formation by MSC ther-
apy. (G–I): Representative TRAP-staining images exhibiting bone
resorption rates. Red-stained areas with black arrows indicate
osteoclasts. The unstained area in the bone marrow represents
empty spaces occupied by adipocytes. Scale bars: 50 mm. (J, K):
Corresponding parameters showing paralleled bone resorption.
Data represent mean 6 SEM; n = 4 per group. p, p , .05; pp, p , .01;
and ppp, p , .001. Abbreviations: BFR, bone formation rate;
BMMSC, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell; Cont, con-
trol; GIOP, glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis; MAR, mineral ap-
position rate; MS/BS, mineralized surface per bone surface; MSC,
mesenchymal stem cell; N.Oc/BS, number of osteoclasts per bone
surface; NS, not significant; Oc.S/BS, osteoclast surface over bone
surface; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; TRAP, tartrate resistant
acid phosphatase.
1242
MSC Therapy in Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 markers of bone formation (P1NP) and bone resorption (CTX-1)
exhibited consistent results that MSC therapy primarily rescued
thereductionof bone formationbut failedtoprevent thetransient
elevationof boneresorption (supplemental online Fig. 3B–3E). Ad-
ditional analyses on concentrations of serological TNF-a and IFN-g
revealed no systemic modulatory effects of infused BMMSCs on
inflammation (supplemental online Fig. 3F, 3G).
MSC Therapy Promoted Osteoblast and Osteoblast
Progenitor Survival of Glucocorticoid-Treated Mice
To investigate whether the effects of infused BMMSCs on bone
formation were attributed to the changes of osteoblasts, tolui-
dine blue staining was performed. As shown in Figure 3A–3C
and the corresponding parameters (Fig. 3D, 3E), glucocorticoid
treatment induced loss of osteoblasts and increase of adipocytes
in bone marrow, which could be prevented by MSC therapy.
We next examined whether the promotion of osteoblast sur-
vivalbyMSCtherapywasattributedtoanincrease inosteoblasto-
genesis. Immunofluorescence labeling analysis was performed to
detect Osx+ osteoblast progenitors in recipient bone marrow. As
shown in Figure 3F and 3G, glucocorticoid treatment reduced the
numberofosteoblastprogenitors.BMMSCinfusionpromotedos-
teoblastprogenitorsurvivalinbonemarrow(Fig.3H),asindicated
by maintenance of Osx+ area (Fig. 3I).
Donor BMMSCsGFP Inhabited Recipient Bone Marrow
We next examined whether donor BMMSCs engrafted and
inhabited bone marrow by using GFP-labeled BMMSCs derived
from GFP+/+ transgenic mice in Experiment 3 (Fig. 4A). As depicted
inFigure4B–4D,donorBMMSCsGFPmigratedandhomedtorecip-
ient bone marrow within 24 hours postinfusion and engrafted for
atleast4weekspostinfusion. Thepercentage ofGFP+areaintotal
bone marrow area was .2% at 24 hours postinfusion and slightly
decreased to approximately 1.5% at 4 weeks postinfusion. No
GFP+ cells were noted in the GIOP+PBS group (Fig. 4E). Addition-
ally, BMMSCsGFP rapidly diminished in peripheral blood within
24 hours postinfusion, and virtually no GFP+ cells in PBMNCs could
be detected at 72 hours postinfusion (Fig. 4F). These findings indi-
cated local functional effects of donor BMMSCsGFP to promote
bone formation and osteoblastogenesis in recipient bone marrow.
Donor BMMSCsGFP Prevented Recipient Bone Marrow
Cell Apoptosis
To further uncover the cell fate of donor BMMSCs in recipient
bone marrow, TUNEL-GFP double-labeling analysis was per-
formedat24hourspostinfusion.AsshowninFigure5,BMMSCGFP
infusion prevented recipient bone marrow cell apoptosis at
the sacrifice of partial apoptosis themselves. The apoptotic per-
centage of donor BMMSCsGFP was less than 30%, suggesting sur-
vival of most infused BMMSCsGFP to further function. No GFP+ cells
were detected in the control group or GIOP+PBS group (Fig. 5E).
Donor BMMSCsGFP Committed to Osteoblasts With
Induction of Recipient Osteoblastogenesis
We next investigated whether the inhabited BMMSCsGFP partici-
pated in bone formation by performing a GFP-Osx double-labeling
analysis at 4 weeks postinfusion. As shown in Figure 6, approximately
40% of donor BMMSCsGFP underwent osteogenic differentiation
into Osx+ osteoblast progenitors (Fig. 6A–6D). Furthermore, the
Figure 3.
Survival of osteoblasts and osteoblast progenitors in re-
cipientbonemarrow. (A–C):Representativetoluidineblue-staining
images exhibiting osteoblasts (black arrows). Unstained empty
spaces represent occupied area by adipocytes in the bone marrow.
Scale bars: 50 mm. (D, E): Corresponding parameters showing main-
tenance of osteoblast survival by MSC therapy. (F–H): Representa-
tive images demonstrating Hoechst staining for total cells (blue),
Osterix immunofluorescence for osteoblast progenitors (green),
and merged labeling. Scale bars: 200 mm. (I): Corresponding param-
eter showing maintenance of osteoblast progenitor survival by
MSC therapy. Data represent mean 6 SEM; n = 4 per group. pp,
p , .01; ppp, p , .001. Abbreviations: Ar, area; BMMSC, bone mar-
row-derived mesenchymal stem cell; Cont, control; GIOP, glucocor-
ticoid-induced osteoporosis; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; NS, not
significant; N.Ob/BS, number of osteoblasts per bone surface; Ob.
S/BS, osteoblast surface over bone surface; PBS, phosphate-buffered
saline; Tt.Ar, total area.
Sui, Hu, Zhang et al.
1243
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 number of GFP-Osx+ osteoblast progenitors increased, suggesting in-
duction of recipient osteoblastogenesis by infused BMMSCs (Fig. 6E).
DISCUSSION
Excessive clinical use of glucocorticoids is a common cause of sec-
ondary osteoporosis [1–3]. In this preclinical study, we revealed that
allogeneic MSC therapy could serve as a promising anabolic option
in the management of GIOP, in that systemic infusion of BMMSCs
Figure 5.
Donor BMMSCGFP survival and apoptosis in recipient bone
marrow. (A–C): Representative images demonstrating Hoechst stain-
ing for total cells (blue), GFP immunofluorescence for donor
BMMSCsGFP (green), TUNEL fluorescence for apoptosis (red), and
merged double-labeling for apoptotic donor BMMSCsGFP (yellow).
Mice were sacrificed at 24 hours after PBS or BMMSC infusion. Scale
bars: 200 mm. (D, E): Corresponding parameters showing partial ap-
optosis of donor BMMSCsGFP with prevention of recipient bone mar-
row cell apoptosis. Data represent mean 6 SEM; n = 4 per group. ppp,
p , .001. Abbreviations: Ar, area; BMMSC, bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cell; Cont, control; GIOP, glucocorticoid-induced
osteoporosis; GFP, green fluorescent protein; MSC, mesenchymal
stem cell; ND, not detected; NS, not significant; PBS, phosphate-
buffered saline; TUNEL, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP nick-end labeling.
Figure 4.
Study design of Experiment 3 and inhabitation of donor
BMMSCsGFP in recipient bone marrow. (A): Study design of Experi-
ment 3 for cell fate investigation. Blood and bone were sampled at
indicated time points. (B–D): Representative images demonstrating
Hoechst staining for total cells (blue), GFP immunofluorescence for
donor BMMSCsGFP (green), and merged labeling. Scale bars: 500 mm.
(E): Corresponding parameter showing inhabitation of donor
BMMSCsGFP in recipient bone marrow for at least 4 weeks. (F):
Flow cytometric analysis of PBMNCs showing clearance of donor
BMMSCsGFP after 24 hours. Data represent mean 6 SEM; n = 4 per
group. p, p , .05; pp, p , .01. Abbreviations: Ar, area; BMMSC, bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell; Cont, control; d, day; DEX,
dexamethasone; GIOP, glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis; GFP,
green fluorescent protein; h, hours; i.p., intraperitoneally; i.v., intra-
venously; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; ND, not detected; NS, not
significant; PBMNCs, peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PBS,
phosphate-buffered saline; Tt.Ar, total area; w, weeks.
1244
MSC Therapy in Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 prevented the reduction of both bone mass and bone strength
in glucocorticoid-treated mice by maintaining bone formation. The
MSCs we used were genetically unmodified, different from the
CXCR4 and Cbfa-1 coexpressed C3H10T1/2 MSC-like cells adopted
to treat GIOP in Lien et al. [5]. However, the allogeneic BMMSCs in
our study exhibited potent cell homing efficacy with functionalized
participation in recipient bone remodeling. As previously reported,
being GFP+ could have few effects on the performance of MSCs in
implantation and retention [17], although we did not characterize
GFP+ BMMSCs ex vivo. It has been documented that freshly iso-
lated MSCs display higher homing capability compared with their
culture-expanded counterparts [27]. Our findings further suggested
the feasibility of maintaining homing efficacy using allogeneic MSCs
in clinical therapy of osteoporosis, without genetic manipulation.
The therapeutic potential of genetically unmodified allogeneic
MSCshasbeenpreviouslyrevealedintreatingosteoporosisunderin-
flammatoryandautoimmuneconditionsinpreclinicalstudies[8–10].
In murine models for postmenopausal osteoporosis and systemic
lupus erythematosus-induced secondary osteoporosis, systemically
infused allogeneic MSCs suppressed activated T cells via Fas ligand-
mediated Fas pathway,which hasbeen demonstrated as key to their
therapeutic potential in preventing bone loss [8, 9]. However, one of
themaindifferencesbetweenGIOPandpostmenopausalosteoporo-
sisisthedistinctsystemicenvironment,inthatglucocorticoidtherapy
is widely used in autoimmune diseases to control inflammation [1].
Therefore, immunomodulation might not be included in the under-
lying mechanism of MSCs preventing GIOP, as shown in our study. In
addition, the increase of bone resorption is also one of the common
effects of excessive glucocorticoids that may be alleviated by MSC
infusion[5,9].Inthisstudy,theboneresorptionrateincreasedwithin
1 week of exposure to excessive glucocorticoids before dropping to
thebaselinelevelat4weeks,consistentwithareportinhumans[28].
Interestingly, BMMSC infusion did not prevent the transient in-
crease of bone resorption, suggesting that the therapeutic ef-
fects were based on the maintenance of osteoblastogenesis.
ThereisgrowingevidencethatinfusedMSCshavehigherhoming
efficacies toward the bone marrow compartment or sites of inflam-
mation and injury [13, 29], although a large percentage of trans-
planted MSCs could get sequestered in other tissues such as lung
[5]. Previous preclinical research in osteoporosis revealed that
through either enforced homing by CXCR4 or direct injection into
bone marrow, transplanted MSCs could engraft and exert local ana-
bolic effects [5–7]. However, the exact localization and functional
characterization of inhabited MSCs remain exclusive. In our study,
we first took advantage of GFP-labeled MSCs to investigate cell fates
after homing. We found that most engrafted MSCs were retained,
withlessthanone-thirdofthemsufferingapoptosis.Wealsorevealed
that of the surviving MSCs, approximately one-half participated as a
functionalparttoreplenishrecipientosteoblast-lineagecells.Further-
more,MSCretentioninbonemarrowprofoundlypromotedrecipient
osteoblastogenesis and osteoblast survival. Further tests should be
done to detect BMMSCGFP retention in other tissue sites. According
tothepresentdata,thehomedallogeneicMSCsfunctionedprimarily
through local trophic effects on recipient osteoblast lineage cells in
GIOP. Thus, the interesting question that remains is how these cells
supported the recipient osteoblast-lineage cells. Additional experi-
ments are suggested to elucidate other types of cells that inhabited
BMMSCsGFP could differentiate into and to characterize the types of
cellsundergoingapoptosis,whichmightprovidevaluableinformation
in the selection of cells for future use. Studies are also needed to un-
cover the molecular basis of donor-recipient interactions.
CONCLUSION
The therapeutic potential of genetically unmodified allogeneic
MSCs in GIOP was revealed via systemic infusion. The therapeutic
effects were based on maintenance of bone formation by donor
MSCs inhabiting and functioning in recipient bone marrow, which
in turn promoted osteoblastogenesis. These results provide im-
portant information regarding cell-based anabolic therapy for
GIOP and uncover previously unrecognized MSC behaviors fol-
lowing a homing event.
Figure 6.
Osteogenic differentiation of donor BMMSCsGFP and osteo-
blastprogenitorsinrecipientbonemarrow.(A–C):Representativeimages
demonstrating Hoechst staining for total cells (blue), GFP immunofluo-
rescence for donor BMMSCsGFP (green), Osx immunofluorescence for
osteoblast progenitors (red), and merged double-labeling for donor
BMMSCGFP-differentiated osteoblast progenitors (yellow). Scale bars:
200 mm. (D, E): Corresponding parameters showing osteogenic differen-
tiation of donor BMMSCsGFP with induction of recipient osteoblastogen-
esis. Data represent mean 6 SEM; n = 4 per group. p, p , .05; ppp, p ,
.001. Abbreviations: Ar, area; BMMSC, bone marrow-derived mesenchy-
mal stem cell; Cont, control; GIOP, glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis;
GFP,greenfluorescentprotein;MSC, mesenchymalstemcell;ND,notde-
tected; Osx, Osterix; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; w, weeks.
Sui, Hu, Zhang et al.
1245
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31301062, 81570937, and 81470710)
and the National Basic Research Program (973 Program) of China
(2011CB964700).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
B.S. and C.H.: conception and design, collection and assembly of
data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final
approval of manuscript; X. Zhang, P.Z., T.H., C.Z., X.Q., and N.C.:
collection and assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation,
final approval of manuscript; X. Zhao, and Y.J.: conception and de-
sign, financial support, administrative support, provision of study
materials, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing,
final approval of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Rizzoli R, Biver E. Glucocorticoid-induced
osteoporosis: Who to treat with what agent?
Nat Rev Rheumatol 2015;11:98–109.
2
Henneicke H, Gasparini SJ, Brennan-Speranza
TC et al. Glucocorticoids and bone: Local effects
and systemic implications. Trends Endocrinol
Metab 2014;25:197–211.
3
Mazziotti G, Angeli A, Bilezikian JP et al.
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: An update.
Trends Endocrinol Metab 2006;17:144–149.
4
Weinstein RS, Jilka RL, Parfitt AM et al. In-
hibition of osteoblastogenesis and promotion
of apoptosis of osteoblasts and osteocytes by
glucocorticoids. Potential mechanisms of their
deleterious effects on bone. J Clin Invest
1998;102:274–282.
5
Lien CY, Chih-Yuan Ho K, Lee OK et al. Resto-
rationofbonemassandstrengthinglucocorticoid-
treated mice by systemic transplantation of
CXCR4 and cbfa-1 co-expressing mesenchymal
stem cells. J Bone Miner Res 2009;24:837–848.
6
Cho SW, Sun HJ, Yang JY et al. Transplan-
tation of mesenchymal stem cells overexpress-
ing RANK-Fc or CXCR4 prevents bone loss in
ovariectomized mice. Mol Ther 2009;17:
1979–1987.
7
Zhang XS, Linkhart TA, Chen ST et al. Local
exvivogenetherapy withbonemarrowstromal
cells expressing human BMP4 promotes endos-
teal bone formation in mice. J Gene Med 2004;
6:4–15.
8
Liu S, Liu D, Chen C et al. MSC transplanta-
tion improves osteopenia via epigenetic regula-
tion of notch signaling in lupus. Cell Metab
2015;22:606–618.
9
Liu Y, Wang L, Liu S et al. Transplantation
of SHED prevents bone loss in the early phase
of ovariectomy-induced osteoporosis. J Dent
Res 2014;93:1124–1132.
10
Ma L, Aijima R, Hoshino Y et al. Trans-
plantation of mesenchymal stem cells ame-
liorates secondary osteoporosis through
interleukin-17-impaired functions of recipient
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in
MRL/lpr mice. Stem Cell Res Ther 2015;6:104.
11
Lapidot T, Kollet O. The essential roles of
the chemokine SDF-1 and its receptor CXCR4 in
human stem cell homing and repopulation of
transplanted immune-deficient NOD/SCID and
NOD/SCID/B2m(null) mice. Leukemia 2002;16:
1992–2003.
12
Komori T. Runx2, a multifunctional tran-
scription factor in skeletal development. J Cell
Biochem 2002;87:1–8.
13
Devine SM, Bartholomew AM, Mahmud
N et al. Mesenchymal stem cells are capable
of homing to the bone marrow of non-human
primates following systemic infusion. Exp He-
matol 2001;29:244–255.
14
Devine SM, Cobbs C, Jennings M et al. Mes-
enchymalstemcellsdistributetoawiderangeoftis-
sues following systemic infusion into nonhuman
primates. Blood 2003;101:2999–3001.
15
DempsterDW,CompstonJE, DreznerMK
et al. Standardized nomenclature, symbols, and
units for bone histomorphometry: A 2012 up-
date of the report of the ASBMR Histomorph-
ometry Nomenclature Committee. J Bone
Miner Res 2013;28:2–17.
16
Liao L, Yang X, Su X et al. Redundant miR-
3077-5p and miR-705 mediate the shift of mes-
enchymal stem cell lineage commitment to
adipocyte in osteoporosis bone marrow. Cell
Death Dis 2013;4:e600.
17
Ezquer F, Ezquer M, Contador D et al. The
antidiabetic effect of mesenchymal stem cells is
unrelated to their transdifferentiation potential
but to their capability to restore Th1/Th2 bal-
ance and to modify the pancreatic microen-
vironment. STEM CELLS 2012;30:1664–1674.
18
Stolzing A, Sellers D, Llewelyn O et al.
Diabetes induced changes in rat mesenchy-
mal stem cells. Cells Tissues Organs 2010;
191:453–465.
19
Mei SH, McCarter SD, Deng Y et al. Pre-
vention of LPS-induced acute lung injury in
mice by mesenchymal stem cells overexpressing
angiopoietin 1. PLoS Med 2007;4:e269.
20
Yang N, Wang G, Hu C et al. Tumor necro-
sis factor a suppresses the mesenchymal stem
cell osteogenesis promoter miR-21 in estrogen
deficiency-induced osteoporosis. J Bone Miner
Res 2013;28:559–573.
21
Bouxsein ML, Boyd SK, Christiansen BA
et al. Guidelines for assessment of bone mi-
crostructure in rodents using micro-computed
tomography. J Bone Miner Res 2010;25:
1468–1486.
22
Turner CH, Burr DB. Basic biomechanical
measurements of bone: A tutorial. Bone 1993;
14:595–608.
23
Wei J, Shi Y, Zheng L et al. miR-34s inhibit
osteoblast proliferation and differentiation in
the mouse by targeting SATB2. J Cell Biol
2012;197:509–521.
24
Zhang C, Tang W, Li Y et al. Osteoblast-
specific transcription factor Osterix increases
vitamin D receptor gene expression in osteo-
blasts. PLoS One 2011;6:e26504.
25
Oberhaus SM. TUNEL and immunofluo-
rescence double-labeling assay for apoptotic
cells with specific antigen(s). Methods Mol Biol
2003;218:85–96.
26
Gao LN, An Y, Lei M et al. The effect of
the coumarin-like derivative osthole on the
osteogenic properties of human periodontal
ligament and jaw bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cell sheets. Biomaterials 2013;34:
9937–9951.
27
Rombouts WJ, Ploemacher RE. Pri-
mary murine MSC show highly efficient hom-
ing to the bone marrow but lose homing
ability following culture. Leukemia 2003;
17:160–170.
28
Dovio A, Perazzolo L, Osella G et al. Im-
mediate fall of bone formation and transient
increase of bone resorption in the course of
high-dose, short-term glucocorticoid therapy in
young patients with multiple sclerosis. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:4923–4928.
29
Karp JM, Leng Teo GS. Mesenchymal
stem cell homing: The devil is in the details. Cell
Stem Cell 2009;4:206–216.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
1246
MSC Therapy in Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
