 Article
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Exp. Med. 2018 Vol. 215 No. 1 115–140
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170681
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
115
IntroductIon
For decades, cancer therapy has focused on killing cancer cells, 
from broad cytotoxic therapy to the inhibition of specific mo-
lecular pathways, in order to reduce tumor burden. However, 
cancer therapy may inherently be a double-edged sword as 
radiation-induced apoptotic tumor cells can promote tumor 
growth (the Révész phenomenon; Révész, 1956; Huang et 
al., 2011; Chaurio et al., 2013; Ford et al., 2015; Gunjal et 
al., 2015; da Silva-Jr et al., 2017). Moreover, irradiation and 
chemotherapy trigger a cytokine storm in the tumor stroma, 
including the release of tumor-promoting cytokines IL-6 and 
TNFα (Poth et al., 2010; Reers et al., 2013; 
Vyas et al., 2014) 
as well as activation of macrophage production of proinflam-
matory mediators by apoptotic tumor cells (Ley et al., 2013). 
Conversely, cell debris can also stimulate antitumor immu-
nity (Casares et al., 2005). Thus, dead and dying tumor cells 
contribute to an underappreciated component of the tumor 
microenvironment that may promote tumor progression 
(Connell and Weichselbaum, 2011; Lauber and Herrmann, 
2015; Gregory et al., 2016; Ichim and Tait, 2016). However, 
the tumor-promoting activity of this treatment byproduct, 
i.e., tumor cell debris, has not been systematically examined.
In this study, we show that tumor cells killed by che-
motherapy or targeted therapy drastically stimulate tumor 
growth in animal models when coinjected with a subthresh-
old inoculum of tumor cells that would otherwise not result 
in macroscopic tumors. Thus, conventional chemotherapy 
and targeted therapy directly contribute to tumor progres-
sion and relapse as tumor cell debris stimulates the survival 
and growth of living tumor cells. 
We further demonstrate that 
chemotherapy-generated tumor cell debris promotes tum-
origenesis by stimulating the release of proinflammatory cy-
tokines by macrophages. Overcoming the dilemma between 
killing tumor cells and debris-induced tumor progression is 
paramount to preventing tumor recurrence after therapy. In 
cancer therapy reduces tumor burden by killing tumor cells, yet it simultaneously creates tumor cell debris that may stimulate 
inflammation and tumor growth. thus, conventional cancer therapy is inherently a double-edged sword. In this study, we show 
that tumor cells killed by chemotherapy or targeted therapy (“tumor cell debris”) stimulate primary tumor growth when coin-
jected with a subthreshold (nontumorigenic) inoculum of tumor cells by triggering macrophage proinflammatory cytokine 
release after phosphatidylserine exposure. debris-stimulated tumors were inhibited by antiinflammatory and proresolving lipid 
autacoids, namely resolvin d1 (rvd1), rvd2, or rvE1. these mediators specifically inhibit debris-stimulated cancer progression 
by enhancing clearance of debris via macrophage phagocytosis in multiple tumor types. resolvins counterregulate the release 
of cytokines/chemokines, including tnFα, IL-6, IL-8, ccL4, and ccL5, by human macrophages stimulated with cell debris. 
these results demonstrate that enhancing endogenous clearance of tumor cell debris is a new therapeutic target that may 
complement cytotoxic cancer therapies.
Resolvins suppress tumor growth and enhance  
cancer therapy
Megan L. Sulciner,1,2,3* Charles N. Serhan,4* Molly M. Gilligan,1,2,3* Dayna K. Mudge,1,2,3* 
Jaimie Chang,1,2,3 Allison Gartung,1,2,3 Kristen A. Lehner,1,2,3 Diane R. Bielenberg,5 Birgitta Schmidt,6 
Jesmond Dalli,4 Emily R. Greene,1,2,3 
Yael Gus-Brautbar,1,2,3 Julia Piwowarski,1,2,3 Tadanori Mammoto,5 
David Zurakowski,7,8 Mauro Perretti,12 
Vikas P
. Sukhatme,3,9 Arja Kaipainen,13 Mark W
. Kieran,10,11* 
Sui Huang,14* and Dipak Panigrahy1,2,3*
1Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 3Cancer Center, Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 4Center for Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 5Vascular Biology Program, Boston Children's Hospital, 6Department of Pathology, Boston Children’s Hospital, 7Department of 
Anesthesia, Boston Children’s Hospital, 8Department of Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital, 9Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
10Division of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and 11Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA
12The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, England, UK
13Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
14Institute of Systems Biology, Seattle, WA
© 2018 Sulciner et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
*M.L. Sulciner, C.N. Serhan, M.M. Gilligan, D.K. Mudge, M.W. Kieran, S. Huang, and D. 
Panigrahy contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Charles N. Serhan: cserhan@bwh.harvard.edu; Mark W. Kieran: 
mark_kieran@dfci.harvard.edu; Sui Huang: sui.huang@systemsbiology.org; Dipak 
Panigrahy: dpanigra@bidmc.harvard.edu
on June 4, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170681
Published Online: 30 November, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
116
this study, we address this with resolvin D1 (RvD1), RvD2, or 
RvE1, proresolving lipid autacoids that stimulate the natural 
debris-clearing process and promote the termination of in-
flammatory processes (Serhan, 2014). RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1 
stimulated the resolution of tumor-promoting inflammation 
by activating macrophage clearance of cellular debris in tumors.
rEsuLts
chemotherapy-generated or targeted therapy–generated 
tumor cell debris stimulates primary tumor growth
To interrogate the tumor growth–stimulating activity of tumor 
cell debris, we first developed a mouse debris-stimulated 
tumor model applicable to many cancer types in which debris 
generated in vitro can stimulate the growth of grafted tumors 
from a subthreshold inoculum of tumor cells, which would 
otherwise not generate a growing tumor. We prepared tumor 
cell debris in vitro by treating tumor cells with chemother-
apy (cisplatin, vincristine, gemcitabine, or docetaxel), targeted 
therapy (erlotinib or cetuximab), or cycloheximide plus 
TNFα 
(a canonical inducer of apoptosis; Niwa et al., 1997; Spite 
et al., 2009; Chiang et al., 2012). These treatments produced 
dead cells (apoptotic cells, necrotic cells, and cell fragments; 
see the Generation of debris by chemotherapy or targeted 
therapy: General note section of Materials and methods), 
hereafter referred to as “drug-generated debris” or “debris,” 
which were collected for coinjection with living tumor cells. 
In Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC), a widely used mouse tumor 
model (O’Reilly et al., 1994; Panigrahy et al., 2012), cispla-
tin-generated LLC debris stimulated LLC tumor growth in a 
dose-dependent manner up to 100-fold (Fig. 1 A). Increasing 
the amount of cisplatin-generated LLC debris (105, 3 × 105, 
or 9 × 105 dead cells) coinjected with a subthreshold inoc-
ulum of LLC (104 living cells) resulted in accelerated tumor 
growth (Figs. 1 A and S1 A). Implantation of a low number of 
LLC (103 or 104 living cells) mimicked dormancy or minimal 
growth as these tumor cells survived in the tissue for ≥110 
d (Panigrahy et al., 2012). Tumor cell debris alone without 
living cells did not produce any visible tumors at 400 d after 
injection. We assessed cell death of drug-generated debris via 
flow cytometry analysis of annexin V/propidium iodide (PI) 
and counted the number of dead cell bodies as a surrogate 
quantity for titrating its tumor-stimulatory potency (Fig. S1, 
A–K). Using GFP-labeled LLC cells, we verified that de-
bris-stimulated tumors arose from the subthreshold inoculum 
of living tumor cells (Fig. S1 L). Next, we titrated the number 
of living tumor cells for a fixed quantity of drug-generated 
debris (9 × 105 dead cells). LLC debris (9 × 105 dead cells) 
promoted rapid LLC tumor growth, even from a living tumor 
cell inoculum as low as 102 cells (Fig. S2 A). LLC alone (102 
or 103 living cells) did not result in growing tumors, even at 
300 d after injection (Fig. S2 A).
To exclude that stimulation of primary tumor growth 
by chemotherapy-generated tumor cell debris was an id-
iosyncrasy of the cisplatin and LLC combination, we 
examined several chemotherapeutics and tumor types. Vin-
cristine-generated lymphoma (EL4) debris (105, 3 × 105, 9 × 
105, or 1.8 × 106 dead cells) coinjected with a subthreshold 
inoculum of EL4 (104 living cells) resulted in progressive ac-
celeration of tumor growth (Fig. 1 B). Debris alone without 
living cells did not produce visible tumors at 400 d after in-
jection. Gemcitabine-generated debris also shortened survival 
in an orthotopic pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PancOH7) 
model (Fig. 1 C). However, debris-stimulated tumor growth 
was not altered in immunocompromised mouse strains (Fig. 
S2 B). Human tumor cell debris generated by chemother-
apy (e.g., docetaxel, gemcitabine, or cisplatin) also stimulated 
the growth of a subthreshold inoculum of living tumor cells, 
including human oral squamous cell carcinoma (HSC-3), 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (BxPC3), and prostate carcinoma 
(PC3M-LN4) xenografts (Fig. S2, C–E).
T
o determine whether debris-stimulated tumor growth 
required that both debris and living cells are of the same 
tumor type, we used LLC or EL4 debris to stimulate the 
growth of other tumor types. Cisplatin-generated LLC debris 
(9 × 105 dead cells) stimulated tumor growth from a sub-
threshold inoculum of 104 LLC, 
T241 (fibrosarcoma), B16F10 
(melanoma), or PancOH7 living cells (Fig. 1 D). Vincris-
tine-generated EL4 debris (9 × 105 dead cells) also stimulated 
tumor growth from 104 EL4, LLC, B16F10, or PancOH7 liv-
ing cells (Fig. 1 E). T
o exclude that debris-stimulated tumor 
growth was caused by nonspecific cytotoxicity caused by re-
sidual chemotherapy in the debris inoculum, we evaluated 
whether debris generated by the targeted drugs erlotinib 
or cetuximab (epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors) 
could stimulate tumor growth. Erlotinib-generated debris 
from both therapy-sensitive lung adenocarcinoma (HCC827) 
or LLC stimulated tumor growth (Fig. S2, F and G). Sim-
ilarly, cetuximab-generated PancOH7 debris stimulated 
tumor growth (Fig. S2 H).
We next determined whether cell debris generated by 
chemotherapies that induce immunogenic cell death (e.g., 
oxaliplatin or idarubicin; T
esniere et al., 2010; Pol et al., 2015) 
could stimulate tumor growth when coinjected with a sub-
threshold inoculum of tumor cells. T
o compare nonimmuno-
genic cell debris to immunogenic cell debris, we generated 
tumor cell debris not only with cisplatin but also with ox-
aliplatin or idarubicin in MC38 or CT26 colon carcinoma 
cells (Fig. S1, I and J). Both cisplatin-generated and oxal-
iplatin-generated MC38 colon cancer cell debris stimulated 
tumor growth in immunocompetent and immunocompro-
mised mice, including C57BL/6J and RAG1KO (Fig. S2, I 
and J). In addition, idarubicin-generated CT26 colon cancer 
cell debris also stimulated tumor growth in immunocompe-
tent BALB/c mice (Fig. S2 K).
We next asked whether systemic chemotherapy could 
also stimulate tumor growth by generating cell debris in vivo. 
Systemically administered cisplatin or vincristine inhibited 
the growth of LLC or EL4 tumors produced by a conven-
tional high inoculum of 106 living cells; in contrast, the same 
treatment stimulated tumor outgrowth from a subthreshold 
 117
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Figure 1. chemotherapy-generated tumor cell debris stimulates primary tumor growth. (A and B) Debris-stimulated LLC (A) and EL4 (B) tumor 
growth from chemotherapy-generated dead cells coinjected with a subthreshold inoculum of 104 living cells. n = 5–15 mice/group. Two-way repeat-
ed-measure mixed-effects ANO 
VAs for tumor growth rates and two-tailed Student’s t test for final tumor measurements were used throughout unless 
specified; *, P < 0.05 versus 104 living tumor cells alone (“No dead cells;” blue). (c) Percent survival of mice coinjected orthotopically into the pancreas 
with gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 dead cells and a subthreshold inoculum of PancOH7 living cells. n = 5 mice/group. *, P = 0.004 (Fisher’s exact test). 
Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated a significantly shortened survival of mice injected with a combination of dead and living cells as depicted by the area 
under the Kaplan-Meier survival curves (log-rank test = 9.14; *, P < 0.05). (d and E) Debris-stimulated tumor growth from cisplatin-generated LLC dead 
cells (D) coinjected with 104 LLC, B16F10, T241, or PancOH7 living cells as well as vincristine-generated EL4 dead cells (E) coinjected with 104 EL4, B16F10, 
LLC, or PancOH7 living cells. n = 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus corresponding living tumor cells alone. (F) Tumor growth from 106 versus 104 LLC 
living cells with systemic cisplatin. Chemotherapy was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection (dashed lines). n = 5–14 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus 
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
118
inoculum of 104 LLC or EL4 living cells (Fig. 1, F and G). Al-
though fast-growing tumors can contain a substantial number 
of spontaneously dying cells (Kornbluth, 1994; de Jong et al., 
2000; Alcaide et al., 2013; Gregory et al., 2016; Ichim and 
Tait, 
2016), analysis of dissociated tumor cells by flow cytometry 
for annexin V/PI confirmed that systemic chemotherapy in-
deed increased cell death in tumors derived from a subthresh-
old inoculum (104 cells) and whose growth was stimulated 
by the treatment. Tumors of comparable volume, which were 
established using the inoculum (106 cells) without drug treat-
ment, were used as controls (Fig. 1, H and I).
debris-stimulated primary tumor growth is 
phosphatidylserine (Ps) dependent
To determine the extent to which either apoptotic or ne-
crotic cells contributed to debris-stimulated tumor growth, 
we used flow cytometry to cell sort debris into apoptotic 
(annexin V+ PI−), necrotic (annexin V− PI+), and living (an-
nexin V− PI−) cell populations. Apoptotic cells from cispla-
tin-generated LLC or gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 
debris potently stimulated tumor growth, whereas living cells 
isolated from debris exhibited minimal tumor-stimulatory 
activity (Fig. 2, A and B). Necrotic cells alone exhibited no 
apparent tumor-stimulatory activity (Fig. 2, A and B).
Because apoptotic debris stimulated tumor growth, we 
asked whether PS, which is presented on the surface of apop-
totic cells and is detected by annexin 
V
, could be a molecular 
mediator of tumor stimulation by the debris. Coinjection of 
PS liposomes (Hosseini et al., 2015) in lieu of debris with a 
subthreshold inoculum of 104 living tumor cells, i.e., LLC, EL4, 
or PancOH7, stimulated tumor growth in a dose-dependent 
manner in comparison with phosphatidylcholine (PC) lipo-
somes (Fig. 2, C–E). Additionally, blocking PS in the debris 
with an annexin V–recombinant protein or an anti-PS neu-
tralizing antibody drastically, albeit not completely, suppressed 
debris-stimulated tumor growth in a dose-dependent man-
ner (Fig. 2, F–H). Intriguingly, chemotherapy alone did not 
exhibit therapeutic activity in debris-stimulated EL4 tumors 
(Fig. 2 G). In contrast, debris-stimulated tumors in which 
debris was treated with annexin V or anti-PS neutralizing 
antibody before injection were responsive to chemotherapy 
(cisplatin or vincristine; Fig. 2, G and H).
chemotherapy-generated debris stimulates primary tumor 
growth via proinflammatory cytokines
To further evaluate the potential mechanism or mecha-
nisms by which drug-generated debris stimulates tumor 
growth, we next measured the extent to which debris pro-
motes an inflammatory infiltrate, which is known to propa-
gate tumor growth and progression (Mantovani et al., 2008). 
Debris-stimulated tumors exhibited an increased proportion 
of infiltrating leukocytes (CD45+), specifically macrophages 
(CD45+ F4/80+), compared with nondebris tumors as as-
sessed by flow cytometry analysis of cells from dissociated 
tumors (Fig. S3 A). In contrast, the number of infiltrating my-
eloid-derived suppressor cells (CD11b+Gr1+) and neutrophils 
(CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+) was not altered compared with tumors 
derived from living cells alone (Fig. S3, B and C). We also 
found that conditioned media from RAW264.7 mouse mac-
rophages cocultured with tumor cell debris stimulated the 
proliferation of tumor and endothelial cells while not altering 
tumor cell viability or apoptosis (Fig. S3, D–F).
Proinflammatory cytokines released by activated im-
mune cells in the tumor stroma mediate the tumor-promoting 
activity of inflammatory infiltrates (Mantovani et al., 2008). 
Cytokine array screening of conditioned media from human 
monocyte–derived macrophages revealed an increase in 
proinflammatory cytokine release by macrophages cocultured 
with tumor cell debris (HSC-3 or PC3M-LN4), including 
IL-6, IL-8, TNFα, CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, and GROα, 
compared with macrophages alone (Fig. S3 G). This was in-
dependent of tumor type and the treatment used to gener-
ate debris. PS liposomes but not PC liposomes stimulated 
macrophages to release the same series of proinflammatory 
cytokines as drug-generated debris, including IL-6, CCL4, 
and CCL5 (Fig. S3 H). Intriguingly, treatment with annexin 
V 
recombinant protein inhibited the production of proinflam-
matory cytokines, such as CCL4, by debris-stimulated mouse 
macrophages (RAW264.7), consistent with the PS-dependent 
activity of debris (Fig. S3 I). Further, liquid chromatography–
tandem mass spectrometry (MS; LC-MS-MS)–based profiling 
of plasma from debris-stimulated tumor-bearing mice revealed 
elevated inflammatory and tumor-promoting mediators, in-
cluding prostaglandin E2 (PGE2; 
Wang and DuBois, 2010) and 
leukotriene B4 (LTB4; Fig. S3, J and K). Immunohistochem-
istry studies showed that debris-stimulated (PC3M-LN4) tu-
mors exhibited increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines 
IL-6, IL-8, and TNFα compared with nondebris tumors gen-
erated from only living tumor cells (Fig. S3 L).
T
o determine whether these proinflammatory cytokines 
were critical for the tumor-promoting activity of debris and/or 
PS liposomes, we depleted these cytokines in debris-stimulated 
and PS liposome–stimulated tumor models using neutralizing 
antibodies. 
The cytokines CCL4, CCL5, IL-6, and 
TNFα were 
chosen for in vivo depletion as these cytokines were consis-
tently released by macrophages when exposed to tumor cell 
 
control (living tumor cells alone; solid lines). (G) Tumor growth from 106 versus 104 EL4 living cells with systemic vincristine. Chemotherapy was initiated 
on the day of tumor cell injection (dashed lines); n = 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control (living tumor cells alone; solid lines). (H and I) Flow 
cytometry analysis for total cell death (sum of percent annexin V+ PI−, annexin V− PI+, and annexin V+ PI+) of comparable sized tumors from 104 LLC (H) or 
EL4 (I) living cells treated with systemic cisplatin or vincristine versus control (106 LLC or EL4 living cells). n = 4–6 mice/group; *, P < 0.05 versus control. 
Error bars represent SEM.
 119
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Figure 2. debris-stimulated primary tumor growth is Ps-dependent. (A and B) Growth of apoptotic (annexin V+ PI−), late apoptotic/necrotic 
(annexin V+ PI+), necrotic (annexin V− PI+), and living (annexin V− PI−; unstained; A) cisplatin-generated LLC and gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 
(B) debris-stimulated tumors. n = 4–10 mice/group. One-factor ANO 
VA for tumor growth rates and two-tailed Student’s t test for final tumor 
measurements were used throughout unless specified; *, P < 0.05 versus 104 living tumor cells alone. (c–E) PS or PC liposomes coinjected with a 
subthreshold inoculum of 104 LLC (C), EL4 (D), or PancOH7 (E) living cells. n = 5–15 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus PC liposomes. (F) Debris-stimulated 
EL4 tumor growth from annexin V–treated vincristine-generated EL4 debris coinjected with a subthreshold inoculum of 104 EL4 living cells. Debris 
was pretreated with annexin V recombinant protein (10 µM) or vehicle. n = 5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (G) Debris-stimulated EL4 
tumors with systemic chemotherapy (vincristine or cisplatin). Chemotherapy was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection. Debris was pretreated 
with annexin V recombinant protein (10 µM) or vehicle. n = 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control (green). (H) Debris-stimulated EL4 tumor 
growth with systemic vincristine. Chemotherapy was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection. Debris was pretreated with anti-PS antibody (2 µg) 
or control IgG. n = 5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. Error bars represent SEM.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
120
debris and/or PS liposomes (Fig. S3, G–I). Although depletion 
of a single cytokine (CCL4, CCL5, IL-6, or 
TNFα) only delayed 
debris- and PS liposome–stimulated tumor growth, the simul-
taneous depletion of all four cytokines (IL-6/CCL4/CCL5/
TNFα) not only prevented debris- and PS liposome–stimu-
lated growth of LLC tumors but also potently suppressed the 
growth of EL4 tumors stimulated by PS compared with mice 
administered isotype control antibodies (Fig. 3, A–C). Systemic 
cytokine depletion also sensitized PS liposome–stimulated tu-
mors to chemotherapy (cisplatin or vincristine; Fig. 3 D).
resolvins, chemotherapy, and anti-inflammatories exhibit 
differential tumor-inhibitory activity on debris-stimulated 
versus nondebris tumor models
We reasoned that if drug-generated debris promotes tumor 
growth, clearance of debris may mitigate this growth. Re-
solvins are endogenous proresolving and antiinflammatory 
mediators that stimulate the resolution of inflammation by 
increasing macrophage phagocytosis of debris and counter-
ing proinflammatory molecules (Serhan et al., 2002; Serhan, 
2014). Therefore, we examined whether resolvins (RvD1, 
RvD2, or RvE1; Spite et al., 2009; Chiang et al., 2012) could 
accelerate removal of drug-generated debris. Indeed, RvD1, 
RvD2, and RvE1 each delayed the onset of debris-stimulated 
tumor growth of a variety of tumors (LLC, BxPC3, PancOH7, 
 
or PC3M-LN4), achieving sustained suppression after 12–70 
d of treatment (Fig. 4, A and B; and Fig. S4, A–C). In con-
trast, chemotherapy exhibited less therapeutic activity than 
resolvins in debris-stimulated tumors (Fig. 4, A and B; and 
Fig. S4 C). In the corresponding nondebris tumor models 
(106 LLC, BxPC3, PancOH7, or PC3M-LN4 living cells), 
resolvins exhibited antitumor activity equivalent to chemo-
therapy (docetaxel, cisplatin, gemcitabine, or 5-fluorouracil 
[5-FU]; Fig. 4, C and D; and Fig. S4, D and E).
Resolvins differ from classic anti-inflammatories in that 
they stimulate, as agonists, the resolution of inflammation, act 
Figure 3. chemotherapy-generated debris stimulates primary tumor growth via proinflammatory cytokines. (A–c) Debris-stimulated LLC tumor 
growth (A) and PS liposome-stimulated LLC and EL4 tumor growth (B and C) in mice systemically depleted of CCL4, CCL5, IL-6, TNFα, or IL-6/CCL4/CCL5/
TNFα versus isotype control. Cytokine depletion was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection. n = 5–10 mice/group. (d) PS liposome-stimulated EL4 tumor 
growth in mice with or without multiple cytokine depletion (IL-6/CCL4/CCL5/TNFα) versus isotype control. Systemic chemotherapy (vincristine or cisplatin) 
and/or cytokine depletion were initiated on the day of tumor cell injection. n = 5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control or IL-6/CCL4/CCL5/TNFα depletion 
alone. Two-way repeated-measures mixed-effects ANO 
VAs for tumor growth rates and two-tailed Student’s t test for final tumor measurements were used 
throughout. *, P < 0.05 versus isotype control. Error bars represent SEM.
 121
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Figure 4. resolvins, chemotherapy, and antiinflammatories exhibit differential tumor inhibitory activity on debris-stimulated versus nondebris 
tumor models. (A–F) Debris-stimulated or nondebris LLC or BxPC3 tumors treated with systemic resolvins (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1), docetaxel, cisplatin, 
gemcitabine, 5-FU, dexamethasone, or indomethacin. Treatment was initiated once tumors reached 100–200 mm3 throughout unless otherwise specified. 
n = 4–10 mice/group. Two-way repeated-measures mixed-effects ANO 
VAs assessed by the F test for tumor growth rates and post hoc Tukey comparisons 
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
122
at significantly lower doses, and are not immunosuppressive 
(Serhan, 2014; Fullerton and Gilroy, 2016). T
o assess the con-
tribution of resolution in the observed tumor suppression 
by resolvins, we compared their tumor-inhibitory activity to 
anti-inflammatories (dexamethasone and indomethacin). Re-
solvins, and to a lesser extent dexamethasone, inhibited de-
bris-stimulated growth of BxPC3, LLC, and PancOH7 tumors 
(Fig. 4, B and E; and Fig. S4 B). Dexamethasone, indometh-
acin, and resolvins (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1) also inhibited 
nondebris tumor growth (BxPC3, LLC, or PancOH7 living 
cells), albeit not completely (Fig. 4, D and F; and Fig. S4 F). 
This is consistent with the known activity of dexamethasone 
to stimulate the resolution of inflammation, including macro-
phage phagocytosis of apoptotic cells (Maderna et al., 2005). 
However, dexamethasone (2 mg/kg/d) required a 1,000-fold 
higher dose compared with resolvins (6 µg/kg/d) to inhibit 
debris-stimulated tumor growth. Importantly, resolvins do 
not exhibit the immunosuppressive actions associated with 
dexamethasone (Serhan, 2014). Resolvins (RvD1, RvD2, or 
RvE1) also inhibited PS liposome–stimulated tumor growth 
(EL4 and LLC; Fig. 4, G and H). Furthermore, resolvins inhib-
ited the growth of orthotopic (PC3M-LN4) and spontaneous 
tumors (genetically engineered mouse models, transgenic ad-
enocarcinoma of the mouse prostate [TRA 
MP], and mouse 
mammary tumor virus [MMTV]-PyMT; Fig. S4, G–I).
Using a well-established model in which resection of a 
primary tumor reproducibly stimulates development of dis-
tant metastasis 14–17 d after resection (O’Reilly et al., 1994; 
Panigrahy et al., 2012), we investigated whether resolvins 
could inhibit spontaneous metastatic growth. Resolvins sup-
pressed metastasis in the lung, as measured by lung weight 
and number of surface lung metastases, compared with con-
trol mice (Fig. S4 J). T
o determine whether the inhibitory 
activity of resolvins was limited to the LLC model, we in-
jected B16F10 melanoma cells into the tail vein, a common 
(nonspontaneous) hematogenic metastasis model in which 
B16F10 cells exclusively colonize the lung and produce pul-
monary metastases (Parhar and Lala, 1987). Administration of 
RvD1 or RvD2 inhibited B16F10 lung metastasis (Fig. S4 K).
Given the unique ability of resolvins to stimulate 
clearance of debris (Serhan, 2014), we next treated de-
bris-stimulated tumors with resolvins in combination with 
the debris-generating chemotherapy or targeted therapy. 
Chemotherapy (gemcitabine or cisplatin) or targeted ther-
apy (cetuximab or erlotinib) in combination with resolvins 
resulted in pancreatic tumor regression in debris-stimulated 
tumors (PancOH7) and had additive antitumor activity in 
debris-stimulated LLC and spontaneous (MMTV-PyMT and 
TRA 
MP) tumor models over a treatment period of 17–84 
d (Fig. 5, A–E). The combination of resolvins and cisplatin 
treatment delayed MMTV-PyMT cancer onset and growth 
(Fig. 5 D). Furthermore, the antitumor activity of immuno-
genic chemotherapy (e.g., oxaliplatin) was improved when 
combined with resolvins in debris-stimulated tumors (Fig. 
S4 L). Finally, treatment with a combination of annexin V 
recombinant protein, cytokine depletion, and resolvins had 
the most potent activity in suppressing both debris-stimulated 
and chemotherapy-stimulated EL4 tumor growth (Fig. 5, F 
and G). Whereas systemic vincristine stimulated the out-
growth of a subthreshold inoculum of EL4 (104 living cells), 
the combination of vincristine with annexin V
, cytokine de-
pletion, and/or resolvins inhibited tumor growth (Fig. 5 G).
Antitumor activity of resolvins is receptor dependent
T
o confirm the specificity of resolvin action, we generated 
debris-stimulated and nondebris tumors in mice with a 
genetic deletion (KO) of the resolvin D1 receptor (ALX/
FPR2; Dufton et al., 2010), resolvin E1 receptor (ChemR23/
ER
V; Arita et al., 2007), or resolvin D2 receptor (GPR18/
DR
V2; Chiang et al., 2015). Debris-stimulated LLC, EL4, 
and PancOH7 tumors exhibited accelerated growth in ALX/
FPR2 KO, ChemR23/ER
V KO, and GPR18/DR
V2 KO 
mice in comparison with WT mice (Fig. 6, A, D, G, and 
H). Nondebris LLC and PancOH7 tumors (106 living cells) 
also displayed accelerated growth in ALX/FPR2 KO and 
ChemR23/ER
V KO mice (Fig. 6, B and C). In ChemR23/
ER
V–overexpressing transgenic mice (high expression of the 
RvE1 receptor in BALB/c background; Gao et al., 2013), 
mammary tumor growth (4T1) was inhibited compared with 
WT mice (Fig. 6 E). Lung, liver, and lymph node metastases 
after primary tumor resection (O’Reilly et al., 1994; Pani-
grahy et al., 2012) were enhanced in ALX/FPR2 KO mice 
compared with WT mice (Fig. 6 F). These findings suggest 
that endogenous resolvins may restrict growth of both de-
bris-stimulated and nondebris tumors. Indeed, measurement 
of resolvin production by macrophages revealed that de-
bris stimulates resolvin production (Fig. S5, A and B). The 
antitumor activity of administered RvD1, RvE1, or RvD2 
was lost in RvD1 receptor (ALX/FPR2), RvE1 receptor 
(ChemR23/ER
V), and RvD2 receptor (GPR18/DR
V2) KO 
mice, respectively (Fig. 6, G and H).
resolvins stimulate macrophage phagocytosis of tumor 
cell debris and counterregulate macrophage secretion of 
protumorigenic cytokines
A critical function of resolvins is to stimulate nonphlogistic 
macrophage phagocytosis of debris (Serhan, 2014). To es-
tablish whether the antitumor activity of resolvins is mac-
rophage dependent, we depleted macrophages in mice via 
clodronate liposomes (Zeisberger et al., 2006). As expected, 
for final tumor measurements were used throughout unless specified. *, P < 0.05 versus control in A–F; additionally, *, P < 0.05 RvD2 versus dexamethasone 
in E. (G and H) Growth of PS liposome–stimulated EL4 or LLC tumors treated systemically with resolvins (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1). Treatment was initiated on 
the day of tumor cell injection. n = 5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. Error bars represent SEM.
 123
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
clodronate liposomes inhibited tumor growth in animal 
tumor models, because of the known tumor-promoting ac-
tivity of macrophage infiltration (Qian and Pollard, 2010) 
compared with control mice administered empty (control) 
liposomes (Fig. 7 A). Macrophage depletion further abro-
gated the tumor-inhibitory actions of RvD2, resulting in 
faster growing tumors than RvD2-treated mice adminis-
tered empty liposomes (Fig. 7 A). Neither RvD1, RvD2, 
nor RvE1 inhibited tumor growth in mannose-binding lec-
tin (MBL)–deficient (MBL KO; Stuart et al., 2005; Stiens-
tra et al., 2014) or CCL2 KO (Lu et al., 1998) mice, two 
genetically engineered models with impaired macrophage 
phagocytosis and chemotaxis, respectively, consistent with 
defective clearance (Fig. 7, B–D). Thus, the presence of 
functional macrophages was necessary for maximal tumor 
inhibition by resolvins.
Figure 5. resolvins exhibit additive antitumor activity in combination with chemotherapy or targeted therapy in debris-stimulated and ge-
netically engineered mouse tumor models. (A) Debris-stimulated PancOH7 primary tumor growth with RvE1 and/or gemcitabine. n = 5 mice/group. 
Treatment initiated once tumors reached 100–200 mm3 throughout unless otherwise specified. Two-way repeated-measures mixed-effects ANO 
VAs for 
tumor growth rates and two-tailed Student’s t test for final tumor measurements used throughout unless specified. *, P < 0.05 versus control or RvE1 
alone. (B) Debris-stimulated PancOH7 primary tumor growth with RvE1 and/or cetuximab. n = 5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control or RvE1 alone. 
 
(c) Debris-stimulated LLC tumor growth with RvE1 and/or erlotinib. n = 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (d) MMTV-PyMT tumor growth with 
RvD2 and/or cisplatin. Treatment initiated when mice were 8 wk of age. Tumor volume represents the sum tumor volume of all visible tumors per mouse. n 
= 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05. (E) Tumor burden in TRA 
MP mice treated with RvD2 and/or cisplatin. Treatment initiated when mice were 8 wk of age for a 
duration of 84 d. n = 5–9 mice/group. *, P < 0.05. Images show representative tumors after 84 d of treatment. Bar, 1 cm. (F) Debris-stimulated EL4 tumor 
growth from in vitro annexin V recombinant protein–treated vincristine-generated EL4 debris coinjected with a subthreshold inoculum of 104 EL4 living 
cells. Debris was pretreated with annexin V recombinant protein (10 µM) or vehicle. RvD2 treatment and cytokine depletion (IL-6/CCL4/CCL5/TNFα) was 
initiated on the day of tumor cell injection versus isotype control. n = 5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (G) Tumor growth from 104 EL4 living cells 
treated with systemic vincristine. Chemotherapy was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection; systemic treatment was initiated on the day of tumor cell 
injection with annexin V recombinant protein, RvD2, or cytokine depletion (IL-6/CCL4/CCL5/TNFα) versus isotype control. n = 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 
versus vincristine and isotype control. Error bars represent SEM.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
124
 125
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
T
o demonstrate clearance of tumor debris by phagocy-
tosis in vivo, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of 
GFP-labeled tumors in animals treated with resolvins. Sec-
tions showed macrophages (identified by Giemsa or F4/80 
stain) containing GFP signals, indicative of phagocytosed 
tumor cells (Fig. 7, E and F). Moreover, electron microscopy 
of B16F10 melanoma tumors revealed melanosomes (a dis-
tinct electron-dense tumor cell marker; Drochmans, 1960) 
in the cytoplasm of macrophages in RvD2-treated tumors 
(Fig. 7 G). To confirm the localization of tumor cell debris 
in macrophages was caused by resolvin-stimulated phago-
cytosis, we used flow cytometry to detect macrophages in 
GFP-labeled tumors that (a) were positive for TIM-4, a 
PS-mediated macrophage efferocytosis marker (Kobayashi 
et al., 2007; Miyanishi et al., 2007; Wong et al., 2010), or 
CD11b, which distinguishes between phagocytic (CD11bhigh) 
and “satiated” (CD11blow) macrophage subtypes (Schif-Zuck 
et al., 2011); and (b) contained tumor cell material (GFP+), 
indicative of phagocytosis. Systemic treatment with re-
solvins (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1) increased the proportion 
of efferocytic double-positive (TIM-4+ F4/80+) macrophages 
compared with vehicle-treated tumors. Resolvins further in-
creased the fraction of macrophages that were triple-positive 
(GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+), indicating ingestion of tumor cells 
(LLC-GFP or B16F10-GFP) by efferocytosis, by fourfold 
compared with vehicle-treated tumors (Fig. 7, H–K). Simi-
larly, resolvin-treated tumors exhibited more than double the 
proportion of double-positive (CD11b+F4/80+) phagocytic 
macrophages compared with vehicle-treated tumors and al-
most fourfold more macrophages were triple-positive (GFP+ 
CD11b+F4/80+), indicative of phagocytosis of GFP-labeled 
tumor cells (Fig. 7, L and M). In contrast, chemotherapy 
(e.g., cisplatin) did not stimulate macrophage phagocytosis 
or efferocytosis of GFP-labeled tumor cells (Fig. 7, N and 
O). The RvD1 receptor antagonist (WR
W4) inhibited resol-
vin-stimulated macrophage tumor cell phagocytosis and effe-
rocytosis, albeit not completely (Fig. 7, P and Q).
Consistent with the observed resolvin-stimulated 
phagocytosis of tumor debris in vivo (Fig. 7, E–Q), treatment 
of human monocyte–derived and mouse macrophages in 
vitro with RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1 at 1 pM to 100 nM stim-
ulated phagocytosis of debris from several human and mouse 
tumor cell lines (PC3M-LN4, BxPC3, COV362, A375-SM, 
HEY
, OVC 
AR5, HSC-3, and ID8) generated by cisplatin, 
gemcitabine, or cycloheximide plus TNFα (Fig. 8, A–H). A 
biphasic dose-response curve with diminishing activity at 
doses >1 nM has also been observed for resolvin-stimulated 
phagocytosis of neutrophils (Spite et al., 2009; Chiang et al., 
2012). Moreover, the biological activity of resolvins is me-
diated by G protein–coupled receptors, known to display 
characteristic bell-shaped dose responses when activated by 
their cognate ligands (Perretti et al., 2002; Krishnamoorthy 
et al., 2010). The bell-shaped dose response is consistent with 
many other studies in which resolvins stimulate macrophage 
phagocytosis of cell debris in noncancer settings, including 
sepsis (Spite et al., 2009), infection (Chiang et al., 2012), clot 
remodeling (Elajami et al., 2016), and obesity (Titos et al., 
2011). Stimulation of phagocytosis by resolvins was receptor 
specific, as the selective RvD1 receptor (ALX/FPR2) antag-
onist, BOC-1, neutralized RvD1-stimulated phagocytosis of 
debris by peritoneal macrophages (Fig. 8 C). In contrast, the 
antiinflammatory drugs dexamethasone and indomethacin 
did not significantly stimulate macrophage phagocytosis of 
debris (Fig. 8, G and H).
Stimulation of the resolution of inflammation by re-
solvins not only enhances macrophage phagocytosis of debris, 
but it also counterregulates proinflammatory cytokine pro-
duction and halts leukocyte infiltration (Serhan, 2014). RvD1 
or RvD2 (1 nM) inhibited the release of proinflammatory 
tumor-promoting cytokines by tumor debris–activated mac-
rophages including IL-6, IL-8, TNFα, CCL4, and CCL5 by 
up to 10–40% compared with vehicle-treated macrophages 
(Fig. 8 I). As only traces of cytokines were found in tumor cell 
debris alone, these mediators were products of macrophages 
and not of debris (Fig. 8 I). T
o quantify leukocyte infiltration 
in vivo after resolvin treatment, we mimicked the tumor mi-
croenvironment using a Matrigel plug assay (Benton et al., 
2009). Systemic administration of RvD1 or RvD2 inhibited 
the proportion of infiltrating leukocytes (CD45+) found in 
the dissociated implant, whereas RvD2 also decreased the 
proportion of infiltrating macrophages (CD45+F4/80+; Fig. 
S5, C and D). RvD2 also inhibited the proportion of infiltrat-
ing macrophages in LLC-GFP tumors (Fig. S5 E). Systemic 
resolvins also decreased blood vessel formation (as quanti-
fied by the number of CD31+ cells coinciding with vessel 
structures; Fig. S5 F).
Figure 6. Primary tumor growth and metastasis are stimulated in genetically engineered resolvin receptor Ko mice. (A and B) Debris-stimulated 
(A) and nondebris (B) LLC tumor growth in resolvin D1 receptor (ALX/FPR2) KO and resolvin E1 receptor (ChemR23/ERV) KO mice compared with WT mice. 
n = 4–10 mice/group. Two-way repeated-measures mixed-effects ANO 
VAs for tumor growth rates and two-tailed Student’s t test for final tumor mea-
surements were used throughout unless specified. (c) Nondebris PancOH7 tumor growth in ALX/FPR2 KO and ChemR23/ERV KO mice compared with WT 
mice. n = 3–10 mice/group. (d) Debris-stimulated EL4 tumor growth in resolvin D2 receptor (GPR18/DRV2) KO mice compared with WT mice. n = 4–5 mice/
group. (E) Nondebris 4T1 tumor growth in ChemR23/ERV transgenic (overexpressed) mice compared with WT mice. n = 3–5 mice/group. (F) Spontaneous 
LLC lung, liver, and lymph node metastasis in ALX/FPR2 KO mice 10 d after removal of the primary tumor (LLC resection). n = 5–10 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 
versus WT. Images show representative lung, liver, and lymph node metastases 10 d after primary tumor resection. Bar, 1 cm. (G and H) Debris-stimulated 
PancOH7 tumor growth in ALX/FPR2 KO and ChemR23/ERV KO mice (G) as well as debris-stimulated LLC tumor growth in GPR18/DRV2 KO mice vs. WT 
mice (H). Systemic resolvin treatment was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection. n = 4–5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus WT control, and *, P < 0.05 of 
GPR18/DRV2 KO / RvD1 (treated with RvD1) versus GPR18/DRV2 KO control. Error bars represent SEM.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
126
Figure 7. Antitumor activity of resolvins is macrophage dependent and induces a prophagocytic macrophage phenotype. (A) B16F10 (106 living 
cells) tumor growth after macrophage depletion with clodronate liposomes and RvD2 or vehicle treatment. n = 5–10 mice/group. Systemic RvD2 treatment 
was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection. Clodronate was administered 3 d before tumor cell injection and every 3 d thereafter for 21 d. Two-way 
repeated-measures mixed-effects ANO 
VAs for tumor growth rates and two-tailed Student’s t test for final tumor measurements were used throughout 
 127
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
It is not likely that the antitumor activity of resolvins 
was mediated by direct antiproliferative or antimigratory ac-
tivity on tumor cells. Neither RvD1 nor RvD2 (≤1 µM) in-
hibited proliferation of B16F10, LLC, or PC3M-LN4 cells in 
vitro (Fig. S5 G). In addition, neither RvD1 nor RvD2 inhib-
ited tumor cell migration in vitro (Fig. S5 H). Also, Western 
blot analysis did not detect expression of the RvD1 receptor 
ALX/FPR2 in six different mouse tumor cell lines including 
LLC, B16F10, T241, pancreatic β cell tumor (BTC), sarcoma 
(MS-180), and hemangioendothelioma (EOMA; Fig. S5 I). 
Immunohistochemical analysis of clinical prostate carcinoma 
specimens showed that the human RvD1 receptor GPR32/
DR
V1 was expressed on tumor-infiltrating inflammatory 
cells but not on tumor cells (Fig. S5 J). Similarly, histological 
staining for ALX/FPR2 in sections of LLC tumors revealed 
expression only in stromal cells, including tumor-associated 
inflammatory cells and endothelial cells (Fig. S5 K). This 
was confirmed by double staining of LLC tumors for ALX/
FPR2 and the macrophage marker F4/80 or the endothe-
lial cell marker MECA-32 (Fig. S5, L and M). Collectively, 
these results indicate that the antitumor activity of resolvins 
may be mediated by cells in the tumor stroma and not by 
direct action on tumor cells.
dIscussIon
In this study, we demonstrate that tumor cell debris can stim-
ulate tumor growth, which has pivotal implications for the 
treatment of cancer patients. One central mechanism of de-
bris-stimulated tumor growth, in which debris is generated 
by chemotherapy or targeted therapy in vitro or in situ in 
grafted tumor models, is via stimulating macrophage release 
of proinflammatory cytokines. Resolvins promote nonphlo-
gistic clearance of debris by TIM4+ and CD11b+ phagocytic 
macrophages and suppress therapy-induced tumor growth. 
Current antiinflammatory cancer therapies have focused on 
suppressing proinflammatory mediators, (i.e., cytokines and 
prostaglandins; Wang and DuBois, 2010); however, they pos-
sess limited therapeutic efficacy. In this study, we demonstrate 
that endogenous clearance of inflammation (caused by tumor 
cell debris) mediated by resolvins contributes to the suppres-
sion of tumor growth (Fig. S5 N). Notably, resolvins (RvD1, 
RvD2, or RvE1) inhibited tumor growth at doses 10,000 
times lower than their substrates (eicosapentaenoic acid and 
docosahexaenoic acid; Grenon et al., 2013) or other anti-
inflammatory agents such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs (NSA 
IDs; Rothwell et al., 2012; Ful-
lerton and Gilroy, 2016).
Debris-stimulated tumor growth is likely relevant to 
many types of current cancer therapy, including chemother-
apy, radiation, and targeted therapy. During cytotoxic tumor 
treatment, some tumor cells inevitably survive (Pisco and 
Huang, 2015). Thus, in the process of reducing tumor burden 
via cytotoxic mechanisms, continuous production of chemo-
therapy-generated apoptotic cell debris in tumors perpetuates 
tumor growth via tumor-promoting cytokines released by 
macrophages (Fig. S5 N). The failure to clear apoptotic cells 
in a timely manner and the accumulation of apoptotic cells 
within tissue can stimulate an inflammatory response (Birge 
unless specified. *, P < 0.05. (B and c) Debris-stimulated LLC tumor growth in MBL KO (B) and CCL2 KO (C) mice with systemic RvD2 treatment. n = 5–7 
mice/group. Resolvin treatment was initiated once tumors reached 100–200 mm3 throughout unless otherwise specified. *, P < 0.05 versus WT control 
(black dashed lines). (d) Debris-stimulated LLC tumor growth in resolvin or vehicle-treated CCL2 KO mice. n = 5–10 mice/group. (E) Giemsa staining of 
RvD2-treated LLC-GFP tumor (top); macrophage ingesting tumor cell (dashed circle). Immunofluorescent double-staining (bottom) for tumor cell marker 
GFP (green) and macrophage marker F4/80 (red) or colocalization of macrophages and tumor cells (yellow, indicated by arrows). (F) Immunofluorescent 
double staining for tumor cell marker GFP (green, left) and macrophage marker F4/80 (red, center) or colocalization of macrophages and tumor cells (mac-
rophage phagocytosis indicated by arrows, right) in RvD2- or vehicle-treated LLC-GFP tumors on day 14 of treatment. Macrophage phagocytosis quantified 
by GFP+F4/80+ cells/field. Bars, 10 µm. *, P < 0.05 versus control. Images represent five sections each of four different samples. (G) Top: electron microscopy 
of RvD2-treated B16F10 tumors showing melanosomes (yellow arrows). Bottom: macrophage ingesting melanoma tumor cells (dashed circle). Bars: (top) 
500 nm; (bottom) 1 µm. (H and I) Flow cytometry analysis of resolvin (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1) versus vehicle-treated B16F10-GFP tumors for efferocytic 
macrophages (percent TIM-4+F4/80+) and macrophage efferocytosis of tumor debris (percent GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+). GFP+ cells were gated on TIM-4+F4/80+ 
cell populations. Macrophage efferocytosis of tumor debris quantified as the proportion of GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+ cells in each tumor sample. n = 4 mice/group. 
 
*, P < 0.05 versus control. (J and K) Flow cytometry analysis of efferocytic macrophages (TIM-4+F4/80+) in RvD2 versus vehicle-treated LLC-GFP tumors. 
GFP+ cells were gated on TIM-4+F4/80+ cell populations. Macrophage phagocytosis of tumor debris quantified as the proportion of GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+ 
cells in each tumor sample. n = 4 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (L) Flow cytometry analysis of phagocytic macrophages (CD11bhighF4/80+) in 
RvD2- versus vehicle-treated LLC-GFP tumors. n = 6 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (M) Macrophage phagocytosis of tumor debris quantified as 
the proportion of GFP+CD11b+F4/80+ cells in each tumor sample. GFP+ cells were gated on CD11b+F4/80+ cell populations. n = 3–6 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 
versus control. (n) Flow cytometry analysis of LLC-GFP tumors treated systemically with RvD1 or cisplatin. GFP+ cells were gated on TIM-4+F4/80+ cell 
populations. Macrophage efferocytosis of tumor debris quantified as the proportion of GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+ cells in each tumor sample. n = 4–5 mice/group. 
 
*, P < 0.05 versus control. (o) Flow cytometry analysis of LLC-GFP tumors treated systemically with RvD1 or cisplatin. Macrophage phagocytosis of tumor 
debris quantified as the proportion of GFP+CD11b+F4/80+ cells in each tumor sample. n = 4–5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (P) Flow cytometry 
analysis of efferocytic macrophages (TIM-4+F4/80+; left) in LLC-GFP tumors treated systemically with RvD1 and/or WRW4. GFP+ cells were gated on TIM-
4+F4/80+ cell populations. Macrophage efferocytosis of tumor debris quantified as the proportion of GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+ cells in each tumor sample (right). 
n = 4–5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control. (Q) Flow cytometry analysis of phagocytic macrophages (GFP+CD11b+F4/80+) in LLC-GFP tumors treated 
systemically with RvD1 and/or WRW4. Macrophage phagocytosis of tumor debris quantified as the proportion of GFP+CD11b+F4/80+ cells in each tumor 
sample. n = 4–5 mice/group. *, P < 0.05 versus control or RvD1. Data are representative of two biological repeats. Error bars represent SEM.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
128
Figure 8. resolvins stimulate macrophage phagocytosis of tumor cell debris and counterregulate the secretion of protumorigenic cytokines by 
macrophages exposed to tumor cell debris. (A–H) Macrophage phagocytosis of CFDA-labeled tumor cell debris measured as RFUs after resolvin treat-
ment. RFUs are displayed as percent increase above vehicle throughout. Data are representative of four biological repeats. (A) Human macrophage phago-
cytosis of cycloheximide plus TNFα– or cisplatin-generated dead cells (PC3M-LN4) after RvD1 (gray bars) or RvD2 (purple bars) treatment. n = 6/group. 
 
*, P < 0.05 versus vehicle. (B and c) Human macrophage phagocytosis of cisplatin-generated dead cells (A375-SM) or cycloheximide plus TNFα–generated 
dead cells (HEY and OVC 
AR5) after RvD1 treatment (B) and mouse peritoneal macrophage phagocytosis of cisplatin-generated dead cells (mouse ovarian 
cancer; ID8) treated with the RvD1 receptor (ALX/FPR2) antagonist BOC-1 and/or RvD1 (C). n = 6/group. (d) Human macrophage phagocytosis of cyclo-
heximide plus TNFα–generated dead cells (HEY) or cisplatin-generated dead cells (A375-SM) after RvD2. n = 6/group *, P < 0.05 versus vehicle. (E) Mouse 
 129
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
et al., 2016). Given the large debris to living cell ratio used for 
tumor implantation in the debris-stimulated tumor models 
(30–90:1 debris cells/living cells), the mass accumulation of 
debris and defective clearance may promote an inflammatory 
response that in turn contributes to debris-stimulated tumor 
progression. We show that chemotherapy-generated tumor 
cell debris stimulates living tumor cells, acting as a “feeder,” 
consistent with previous research on radiation-generated 
apoptotic tumor cells (Huang et al., 2011). Thus, cytotoxic 
cancer treatment designed to kill tumor cells may be a dou-
ble-edged sword. Our preclinical studies in a large variety of 
tumor models demonstrate that the growth-stimulating ac-
tivity of therapy-generated cell debris may contribute to the 
inherent limitation of cancer treatment in general. Indeed, we 
confirmed that established living cell tumors in mice contain 
cell debris that can be stimulated in situ by systemic admin-
istration of chemotherapy, supporting the pathophysiologi-
cal relevance of the debris-stimulated tumor models. Thus, 
debris-stimulated tumor growth may have clinical relevance. 
Our studies on chemotherapy-generated debris are consistent 
with previous observations on radiation-generated tumor 
cell debris by Révész (1956), in which the stimulation of 
tumor growth had been attributed to the production of dif-
fusible factors that conditioned the tumor microenvironment 
(Révész phenomenon; Révész, 1956; Seelig and Revesz, 1960; 
van den Brenk et al., 1977). The Révész phenomenon has 
been confirmed in followup studies of radiation-induced cell 
death (Huang et al., 2011; Chaurio et al., 2013; Donato et al., 
2014; Ford et al., 2015; 
Yu et al., 2016; da Silva-Jr et al., 2017).
Our studies also have implications for tumor immuno-
therapy. Specifically, we demonstrate that debris-stimulated 
tumor growth is in part mediated by PS, which accumulates 
in the tumor microenvironment and may antagonize adaptive 
tumor immunity (Birge et al., 2016). In support of our data, 
an apoptotic response to therapy has been shown to generate 
a PS-mediated immunosuppressive environment (Mochizuki 
et al., 2003; Birge et al., 2016), a response in which prostaglan-
din release has recently been implicated (Hangai et al., 2016). 
Our data are also consistent with an alternative mechanism 
in which annexin V
, a naturally occurring specific PS ligand, 
suppresses the tumorigenicity of dead tumor cells by pro-
moting antitumor immunity (Frey et al., 2009). In addition, 
annexin V–coupled irradiated cells induced the regression of 
growing tumors (Bondanza et al., 2004), and administration of 
radiation and anti-PS antibody induced tumor immunity in a 
glioblastoma model (He et al., 2009). Moreover, PS-targeting 
antibodies augment the antitumor activity of immunotherapy 
by enhancing immune activation (Gray et al., 2016).
The concept of immunogenic cell death postulates that 
debris generated by certain (but not all) chemotherapeutic 
agents (e.g., doxorubicin, anthracyclines, oxaliplatin, or bleo-
mycin) would stimulate the uptake of cell debris by dendritic 
cells for antigen presentation or contribute to adaptive immu-
nity by acting as an adjuvant (Casares et al., 2005; Obeid et al., 
2007). However, debris stimulated tumor growth in the sub-
threshold inoculum model presented in this study. This may 
be a result of the response to tumor cell debris by the innate 
immune system and inflammation, which may overwhelm 
and counteract a potential immunizing effect of immunogenic 
cell death. However, other studies demonstrate that tumor 
cell debris generated by radiation, the Herpes simplex virus 
thymidine kinase/ganciclovir (HSVtk/GCV) system, photo-
dynamic therapy, or radiofrequency ablation (e.g., ultrasound) 
can inhibit tumor growth, an effect that had been attributed 
to induction of antitumor immunity (Melcher et al., 1998; 
T
odryk et al., 1999; Gough et al., 2001; Akazawa et al., 2004; 
Bondanza et al., 2004; Casares et al., 2005; Apetoh et al., 2007; 
Korbelik et al., 2007; Obeid et al., 2007; Dromi et al., 2009; 
Deng et al., 2010; Garg et al., 2010, 2012; Unga and Hashida, 
2014; Shan et al., 2015; Kindy et al., 2016). Our studies sug-
gest that the generation of therapy-generated tumor cell death 
may be a doubled-edged sword. Future studies are required to 
establish the specific conditions in which therapy-generated 
cell debris suppresses or activates antitumor immunity.
We also demonstrate in this study that chemotherapy- 
generated tumor cell debris triggers a “cytokine storm” that 
stimulates tumor growth that is resistant to chemotherapy. Im-
munotherapy, including chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)– 
T cell therapy, may lead to the release of toxic levels of cyto-
kines (DeFrancesco, 2014). 
This therapy-induced cytokine re-
lease may be particularly relevant in patients with dormant or 
small residual tumors as modeled by the subthreshold inocu-
lum tumor models, and it may provide a potential mechanism 
whereby chemotherapy paradoxically harbors the potential to 
stimulate or induce tumor initiation, growth, and/or metas-
tasis (de Ruiter et al., 1979; Ormerod et al., 1986; Orr et al., 
1986; Poth et al., 2010; Abubaker et al., 2013; 
Volk-Draper et 
al., 2014; Vyas et al., 2014; Gunjal et al., 2015; Chang et al., 
2017; Karagiannis et al., 2017). We show in the subthresh-
old inoculum model that systemic chemotherapy stimulated 
bone marrow–derived macrophage and peritoneal macrophage phagocytosis of cisplatin-generated ID8 dead cells after RvD2 treatment. n = 6/group. 
 
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.0001 versus vehicle. (F) Human macrophage phagocytosis of cisplatin-generated dead cells (HSC-3 and COV362) after RvE1 treatment. 
n = 6/group (left) or n = 12/group (right). *, P < 0.05 versus vehicle. (G and H) Human macrophage phagocytosis of tumor cell debris (cisplatin-generated 
PC3M-LN4 or gemcitabine-generated BxPC3) after RvD1 (gray bars), RvD2 or RvE1 (black bars), dexamethasone (pink bars), or indomethacin (red bars) 
treatment. n = 6/group. *, P < 0.05 versus vehicle. Nondetectable RFUs are labeled n.d. (I) ELI 
SA quantification of IL-6, IL-8, TNFα, CCL4, and CCL5 produc-
tion by resolvin-treated human monocyte–derived macrophages coincubated with (black bars) or without (gray bars) tumor cell debris (cisplatin-generated 
PC3M-LN4) or by tumor cell debris alone (cisplatin-generated dead cells alone). n = 5–6/group. Data are representative of three biological repeats (three 
human peripheral blood monocyte donors). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.0001 versus control. Error bars represent SEM.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
130
small or dormant tumors to grow, instead of suppressing the 
tumor. However, the therapeutic activity of chemotherapy 
was restored in the debris-stimulated tumor models if the 
source of this inflammatory cascade, namely the PS presented 
by apoptotic cells, was neutralized with annexin 
V or anti-PS 
antibodies (Fig. 2, G and H). Collectively, these findings sug-
gest a critical role for PS in debris-stimulated tumors.
Therapy-generated tumor cell debris activates mac-
rophages to secrete proinflammatory and protumorigenic 
cytokines, thus sustaining an inflammatory tumor microen-
vironment, which in turn promotes tumor growth (Fig. S5 
N). This protumorigenic activity could fuel a positive feed-
back loop that is difficult to overcome with more aggres-
sive cytotoxic therapy. Sterile inflammation is sustained by 
the presence of cell debris, as apoptotic cells release inflam-
mation-initiating “danger signals” (Kornbluth, 1994; Chan 
et al., 2012). However, resolvins can polarize these protum-
origenic and proinflammatory macrophages to a prophago-
cytic state, inhibiting further proinflammatory cytokine 
secretion. Consistently, clearance of tumor cell debris dis-
rupts debris-dependent tumor growth. Thus, resolvins (i.e., 
RvE1, RvD1, and RvD2) represent a novel mechanism to 
suppress tumor progression, growth, and recurrence. Unlike 
the majority of antiinflammatory agents, including NSA 
IDs, 
resolvins are endogenous, nonimmunosuppressive, and non-
toxic inhibitors of inflammation (Serhan et al., 2002). We 
show that the specific resolvins RvD1, RvD2, and RvE1 pro-
mote the clearance of tumor debris and subsequent inhibition 
of tumor growth by stimulating macrophage phagocytosis of 
tumor cell debris and by counterregulating the release of crit-
ical proinflammatory protumorigenic cytokines/chemokines.
We showed that adding resolvins to existing chemother-
apy or targeted therapy regimens induced sustained regres-
sion of primary tumors by blocking the tumor-stimulatory 
activity of therapy-generated tumor cell debris produced by 
cytotoxic therapy. Although both aspirin and omega-3 fatty 
acids reduce cancer risk (Greene et al., 2011; Rothwell et al., 
2012), they only weakly trigger the production of resolvins 
by the human body (Sun et al., 2007). Resolvins have en-
tered clinical development as novel therapeutic approaches 
for inflammatory diseases including keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
periodontal disease, eczema, and various neurodegenerative 
diseases. Current antiinflammatory agents, including NSA 
IDs, 
have potentially severe side effects, such as stomach and brain 
bleeding, as well as cardiovascular and kidney toxicity. In con-
trast, targeting the resolvin pathways provides an entirely new, 
nontoxic, and nonimmunosuppressive approach to cancer 
therapy by increasing the body’s natural production of en-
dogenous proresolving and antiinflammatory mediators.
Rapid tumor growth is invariably linked to apoptotic 
cell death because of unfavorable conditions such as hypoxia 
(Holmgren et al., 1995; de Jong et al., 2000; 
Alcaide et al., 2013; 
Gregory et al., 2016; Ichim and Tait, 2016), and continuous 
production of apoptotic cell debris sustains inflammation that 
can stimulate tumor growth (Kornbluth, 1994). Thus, natural 
apoptotic cell death can also contribute to tumor progres-
sion (Reiter et al., 1999), and this underappreciated source of 
tumor stimulation is further enhanced by treatment-induced 
apoptosis. High levels of spontaneous apoptotic cell death in 
tumors of patients with cancer have also been shown to cor-
relate with poor prognosis in several cancer types and may be 
causatively involved in tumor growth (Wyllie, 1985; Korn-
bluth, 1994; de Jong et al., 2000; Naresh et al., 2001; Jalali-
nadoushan et al., 2004; Sun et al., 2006; Gregory and Pound, 
2011; Alcaide et al., 2013; Gregory et al., 2016; Ichim and 
Tait, 2016). This may explain the moderate antitumor activ-
ity of resolvins in the nondebris tumor models. Moreover, 
cytotoxic treatment in cancer patients without evidence of 
progressive cancer could be a double-edged sword as ther-
apy-generated debris could inadvertently stimulate prolif-
eration of dormant tumor cells or small tumors. Although 
generation of tumor cell debris throughout treatment may 
explain an inherent therapeutic limit to chemotherapy, tar-
geted therapy, and any cytocidal therapy, stimulating the clear-
ance of such tumor cell debris via specialized proresolving 
mediators such as resolvins represents a novel approach to 
prevent tumor growth and recurrence.
MAtErIALs And MEtHods
tumor debris, xenograft, and metastasis studies
Reporting of the following animal experiments abided by the 
Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARR 
IVE) guidelines (Kilkenny et al., 2010). All animal studies 
were reviewed and approved by the Animal Care and Use 
Committees of Boston Children’s Hospital and Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center. Animals at each institution were 
housed up to five mice/cage in a pathogen-free facility. Mice 
had unlimited access to sterile water and chow. Throughout 
each animal experiment, daily welfare evaluations were per-
formed, and animal sacrifice guidelines were followed per in-
stitutional committee guidelines.
Experiments involving human blood cells (deidenti-
fied) at Brigham and Women’s Hospital are under protocol 
1999P001297, and discarded human materials are under pro-
tocol 1999P001279. Both protocols are approved by the Part-
ners Human Research Committee.
Generation of debris by chemotherapy or targeted therapy: 
General note. 
 Cell debris for the debris-stimulated tumor 
models was generated in vitro by incubating cells in fresh 
media containing the drug at the indicated dose for the in-
dicated time (detailed for each tumor type below). For an-
nexin V/PI flow cytometry characterization of debris, only 
the media containing floating cells (debris) from drug-treated 
cell cultures was assessed. This was compared with vehi-
cle-treated (control) cell cultures in which media was col-
lected and combined with trypsinized cells (Fig. S1, A–J). 
The representative FACS analyses for control groups in-
cluded all cells taken from a single culture, and both adhered 
and floating cells were collected. For mouse tumor injec-
 131
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
tions, living cells were collected by trypsinization of adher-
ent cells only from untreated cell cultures, whereas debris 
was collected for injection by aspirating floating cells from 
drug-treated cell cultures. Surrogate measurement for quan-
tification of debris involved counting whole-cell bodies in 
the floating cell population after the specified treatment 
(except for the suspension cultures, i.e., EL4 cells, see the 
Vincristine-generated EL4 debris tumors section), indicated 
as number of dead cells (Fig. S1 K). This quantitation pro-
vides a tool for standardization and comparison of various 
tumor cell lines. Protocols for debris generation (drug dose 
and length of treatment) were adjusted such that at 900,000 
dead cells in all tumor cell lines used, robust debris-stimulated 
tumor growth was observed when coinjected with a sub-
threshold inoculum of living tumor cells. This subthreshold 
inoculum was separately determined by injection of living 
cells at a (typical) series of 106, 105, 104, and 103 cells, and 
assessment of tumor take was observed for 200–400 d. Once 
the quantitative parameters for each drug and cell line com-
bination used were established, routine generation of debris 
for tumor studies followed a strict protocol regarding treat-
ment, cell collection, washing, and handling before injec-
tion. Dead cells (apoptotic and necrotic) and living cells 
were counted by hemocytometer. Pelleted dead and living 
cells were resuspended at desired concentrations. Experi-
mental groups were then prepared by mixing equal volumes 
of dead cell bodies with living cells. The specifics are 
 
listed below.
cisplatin-generated LLc debris tumors. 
 Cisplatin-generated 
LLC debris was prepared by treating 75–80% confluent T150 
flasks with complete media with 10% FBS plus 50 µM cispla-
tin (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubating for 24 h. Dead cell bodies 
(apoptotic and necrotic cells) were counted by hemocytome-
ter. Pelleted cells were resuspended at 1.8 × 107 dead cells/ml 
in PBS. Untreated LLC cells were trypsinized, pelleted, and 
resuspended at 2 × 105 living cells/ml in PBS. Experimental 
groups were prepared by mixing equal volumes of dead cell 
bodies with living cells. Cisplatin-generated LLC debris (9 × 
105, 3 × 105, or 105 dead cells) and/or LLC (102, 103, or 104 
living cells) were coinjected into C57BL/6J, RAG1 KO mice 
(The Jackson Laboratory), and SCID mice (Charles River). 
All tumor debris and/or living tumor cells were injected sub-
cutaneously into the mid-dorsum of 6–8-wk-old male mice 
at 100 µl/mouse with a 30-G needle unless specifically noted. 
Cisplatin-generated LLC debris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or 
T241, B16F10, LLC, or PancOH7 (104 living cells) were co-
injected into C57BL/6J mice. LLC (104 or 106 living cells) 
were injected into C57BL/6J mice, and systemic cisplatin was 
initiated on the day of tumor injection (see the Tumor inhi-
bition studies section).
Gemcitabine-generated PancoH7 debris tumors. 
 Gemcit-
abine-generated PancOH7 debris was prepared by treating 
75–80% confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 
10% FBS plus 40 µM gemcitabine (Sigma-Aldrich) and incu-
bating for 72 h. Dead cell bodies were counted and prepared 
as described in the previous section. Gemcitabine-generated 
PancOH7 debris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or PancOH7 (104 
living cells) were coinjected into C57BL/6J, RAG1 KO, and 
SCID mice. For orthotopic tumors, gemcitabine-generated 
PancOH7 debris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or PancOH7 (104 
living cells) were coinjected directly into the pancreas of 
C57BL/6J mice with a 30-G needle.
Vincristine-generated EL4 debris tumors. 
 Vincristine- 
generated EL4 debris was prepared by treating confluent 
T150 flasks (7 × 106 cells) with complete media with 10% 
horse serum plus 40 nM vincristine (Sigma-Aldrich) and in-
cubating for 72 h. Dead cell bodies were isolated via Ficoll 
gradient (Enzo Life Sciences) and resuspended in PBS at 1.8 
× 107 cells/ml. Untreated EL4 cells were pelleted and resus-
pended in PBS at 2 × 105 cells/ml. Experimental groups were 
prepared as described in the General note and injected into 
C57BL/6J mice. Vincristine-generated EL4 debris (9 × 105 
dead cells) and/or EL4, LLC, B16F10, or PancOH7 (104 liv-
ing cells) were prepared as described in the General note and 
coinjected into C57BL/6J mice. EL4 (104 or 106 living cells) 
were injected into C57BL/6J mice, and systemic vincristine 
(Sigma-Aldrich) was initiated on the day of tumor injection 
(see the Tumor inhibition studies section).
docetaxel-generated Hsc-3 debris tumors. 
 Docetaxel- 
generated HSC-3 debris was prepared by treating 75–80% 
confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 10% FBS 
plus 10 nM docetaxel (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubating for 
48 h. Dead cell bodies were counted and prepared as de-
scribed in the General note. Untreated HSC-3 cells were 
trypsinized, pelleted, and resuspended at 106 living cells/ml in 
PBS. Subsequent groups were made by serial dilutions and 
combining equal volumes of dead cell bodies and living cells. 
Docetaxel-generated HSC-3 debris (9 × 105, 3 × 105, or 105 
dead cells) and/or HSC-3 (5 × 104 living cells) were co-
injected into SCID mice.
Erlotinib-generated human and mouse lung debris tumor. 
 
Erlotinib-generated HCC827 or LLC debris was prepared by 
treating 75–80% confluent T150 flasks with complete media 
with 10% FBS plus 10 µM erlotinib (SelleckChem) and incu-
bated for 72 h. Dead cell bodies were counted and prepared 
as described in the General note and resuspended in PBS at 
3.6 × 107 dead cells/ml. Untreated HCC827 and untreated 
LLC were trypsinized, pelleted, and resuspended in PBS at 
106 living cells/ml and 2 × 105 living cells/ml, respectively. 
Subsequent groups were made by serial dilutions and com-
bining equal volumes of dead cell bodies and living cells. Er-
lotinib-generated HCC827/LLC debris (9 × 105 or 1.8 × 
106 dead cells) and/or HCC827/LLC (5 × 104 or 104 living 
cells, respectively) were coinjected into SCID mice or 
C57BL/6J mice, respectively.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
132
cetuximab-generated PancoH7 debris tumors. 
 Cetuximab- 
generated PancOH7 debris was prepared by treating 75–80% 
confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 10% FBS 
plus 343 nM cetuximab and incubating for 72 h. Dead cell 
bodies were counted and prepared as described in the Gen-
eral note and resuspended in PBS at 3.6 × 107 dead cells/ml. 
Untreated PancOH7 cells were trypsinized, pelleted, and re-
suspended in PBS at 2 × 105 living cells/ml. Experimental 
groups were prepared by mixing equal volumes of dead cell 
bodies with living cells as described in the General note and 
coinjected into C57BL/6J mice.
Gemcitabine-generated BxPc3 debris tumors. 
 Gemcitabine- 
generated BxPC3 debris was prepared by treating 75–80% 
confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 10% FBS 
plus 40 µM gemcitabine and incubating for 72 h. Dead cell 
bodies were counted and prepared as described in the Gen-
eral note and then resuspended in PBS at 1.8 × 106 dead 
cells/ml. Untreated BxPC3 cells were trypsinized, pelleted, 
and resuspended in PBS at 106 or 107 living cells/ml. Experi-
mental groups were prepared by mixing equal volumes of 
dead cell bodies with living cells as described in the General 
note. Gemcitabine-generated BxPC3 debris (9 × 105 dead 
cells) and/or BxPC3 (5 × 104 living cells) were co-
injected into SCID mice.
cisplatin-generated Pc3M-Ln4 debris tumors. 
 Cisplatin- 
generated PC3M-LN4 debris was prepared by treating 
75–80% confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 
10% FBS plus 50 µM cisplatin and incubating for 24 h. 
Dead cell bodies were counted and prepared as described 
in the General note and resuspended in PBS at 1.8 × 106 
dead cells/ml. Untreated PC3M-LN4 tumor cells (pro-
vided by I.J. Fidler, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX) were trypsinized, pelleted, 
and resuspended in PBS at 107 living cells/ml. Experimen-
tal groups were prepared by mixing equal volumes of dead 
cell bodies with living cells as previously described. 
PC3M-LN4 debris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or PC3M-LN4 
(5 × 104 living cells) were coinjected into SCID mice. 
Treatment of debris-stimulated (9 × 105 dead cells with 5 
× 104 living cells/mouse) or nondebris (106 living cells/
mouse) PC3M-LN4 tumors with cisplatin or resolvins was 
initiated on the day of tumor injection.
oxaliplatin-generated Mc38 debris tumors. 
 Oxaliplatin- 
generated MC38 debris was prepared by treating 75–80% 
confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 10% FBS 
plus 50 µM oxaliplatin (MedChem Express) and incubating 
for 48 h. Dead cell bodies were counted and prepared as de-
scribed in the General note. Oxaliplatin-generated MC38 
debris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or MC38 (104 living cells) 
were coinjected into C57BL/6J mice, and systemic oxalipla-
tin was initiated on the day of tumor injection (see the 
Tumor 
inhibition studies section).
cisplatin-generated Mc38 debris tumors. 
 Cisplatin-generated 
MC38 debris was prepared by treating 75–80% confluent 
T150 flasks with complete media with 10% FBS plus 50 µM 
cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubating for 48 h. Dead cell 
bodies were counted and prepared as described in the Gen-
eral note. Cisplatin-generated MC38 debris (9 × 105 dead 
cells) and/or MC38 (104 living cells) were coinjected 
 
into C57BL/6J mice.
Idarubicin-generated ct26 debris tumors. 
 Idarubicin- 
generated CT26 debris was prepared by treating 75–80% 
confluent T150 flasks with complete media with 10% FBS 
plus 1 µM idarubicin (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubating for 
24 h. Dead cell bodies were counted and prepared as de-
scribed in the General note. Idarubicin-generated CT26 de-
bris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or CT26 (104 living cells) were 
coinjected into BALB/c mice.
nondebris tumors (living cells only). 
 For nondebris tumors, 
untreated tumor cells (LLC, LLC-GFP
, EL4, PancOH7, 
B16F10, B16F10-GFP
, BxPC3, and PC3M-LN4) were col-
lected and resuspended in PBS at 107 living cells/ml. LLC or 
EL4 (104, 105 or 106 living cells) and LLC-GFP
, PancOH7, 
B16F10, or B16F10-GFP (106 living cells) were injected sub-
cutaneously into C57BL/6J mice, and BxPC3 and 
PC3M-LN4 (106 living cells) were injected into SCID mice. 
For orthotopic human prostate tumors, PC3M-LN4 (2 × 105 
living cells) were injected directly into the prostate of SCID 
mice. RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1 (15 ng/d; Cayman Chemical) 
or vehicle miniosmotic pumps (Alzet Inc.) were implanted 
intraperitoneally on the day of injection and changed once at 
14 d after injection. For the genetically engineered TRA 
MP 
or MMTV-PyMT mice (The Jackson Laboratory), RvD2 (15 
ng/d) or vehicle was administered via miniosmotic pump 
and/or cisplatin (5 mg/kg q 5 d) initiated when mice were 
 
8 wk of age (the miniosmotic pumps were changed every 
 
28 d for 2 or 3 mo).
Metastasis studies. 
 For LLC metastasis studies, 106 LLC liv-
ing cells were injected subcutaneously into 6-wk-old male 
C57BL/6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory). Tumors were re-
sected once they had reached a size of 2 cm3, and mini-
osmotic pumps were implanted on the day of resection. 
B16F10 (2.5 × 105 living cells) were injected into 6-wk-old 
male C57BL/6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory) intrave-
nously via the tail vein.
Macrophage depletion studies. 
 Macrophages were depleted 
by clodronate liposomes (a gift from R. Schwendener, Uni-
versity of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland) in tumor-bearing 
mice (106 B16F10 living cells), and depletion was confirmed 
by flow cytometry. Initial clodronate dose was administered 
intraperitoneally at 2 mg/20 g mouse body weight followed 
by 1 mg/20 g mouse body weight every 3 d. RvD2 (15 ng/d) 
or vehicle was administered via miniosmotic pump beginning 
 133
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
on the day of tumor injection. Cisplatin-generated LLC de-
bris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or LLC (104 or 106 living cells) 
were injected into male MBL-deficient (MBL KO) and/or 
CCL2 KO mice (The Jackson Laboratory). Treatment with 
RvD1, RvD2, RvE1 (15 ng/d; Cayman Chemical), or vehi-
cle via miniosmotic pump was initiated when tumors 
 
reached 100–200 mm3.
resolvin receptor Ko mice and transgenic studies. 
 Cispla-
tin-generated LLC or gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 de-
bris (9 × 105 dead cells) and/or LLC or PancOH7 living 
tumor cells (104 or 106 cells) were injected into ALX/FPR2 
KO and ChemR23/ER
V KO mice (ChemR23/ER
V KO 
mice were provided by B. Zabel [Stanford University, Stan-
ford, CA] and E. Butcher [Stanford School of Medicine, Stan-
ford, CA]). Vincristine-generated EL4 or cisplatin-generated 
LLC debris (9 × 105 dead cells) and EL4 or LLC living cells 
(104) were coinjected into GPR18/DR
V2 KO mice, and 
mice were treated systemically with resolvins (see the Tumor 
inhibition studies section). For metastasis studies, LLC tumors 
were resected 14 d after injection. 4T1 (106 living cells) were 
collected and prepared as described in the General note and 
injected into ChemR23-overexpressing transgenic and 
 
WT mice.
FAcs cell sorting of debris. 
 Cisplatin-generated LLC or 
gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 debris was prepared as 
described in the Cisplatin-generated LLC debris tumors 
and Gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 debris tumors sec-
tions and resuspended in annexin 
V binding buffer at a con-
centration of 106 cells/ml according to FITC Annexin V/
Dead Cell Apoptosis kit protocol (Thermo Fisher Scien-
tific). Cells were sorted using Sorter BD FAC 
SAria Ilu 
SORP UV (DFCI; Jimmy Fund Flow Cytometry Core) as 
follows: annexin 
V single stain, PI single stain, annexin 
V/PI 
double stain, and unstained. Dead cell bodies were counted 
by hemocytometer, pelleted, and resuspended in PBS at 4 × 
105 cells/ml. Untreated LLC or PancOH7 cells were tryp-
sinized, pelleted, and resuspended at 2 × 105 cells/ml in PBS. 
Experimental groups were prepared by mixing equal vol-
umes of dead cell bodies with living LLC or PancOH7 cells, 
and combinations were injected subcutaneously into 
 
C57BL/6J mice.
Ps liposome–stimulated tumors. 
 PS and PC liposomes 
(Avanti Polar Lipids) were filtered through a 20-µm filter and 
resuspended in PBS at the concentrations of 104, 101, and 10−2 
μM. LLC, EL4, or PancOH7 cells were pelleted and resus-
pended in PBS for a final concentration of 2 × 105 cells/ml. 
 
Cells were resuspended in PS or PC liposomes for a final 
concentration of 105 cells/ml liposomes. Combination of li-
posomes and tumor cells were injected into C57BL/6J mice. 
Systemic treatment with resolvins (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1) 
was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection and adminis-
tered via miniosmotic pumps (Alzet).
tumor inhibition studies. 
 Treatment with chemotherapy, 
targeted therapy, antiinflammatory drugs, and/or resolvins 
was initiated once tumors reached 100–200 mm3 unless 
otherwise noted. Resolvins (RvD1, RvD2, or RvE1; 15 
ng/d; Cayman Chemical) or vehicle were administered in-
traperitoneally via miniosmotic pumps (Alzet); docetaxel 
(25 mg/kg q 10 d; Sigma-Aldrich), cisplatin (5 mg/kg q 5 d; 
Sigma-Aldrich), gemcitabine (50 mg/kg q 4 d; Sigma- 
Aldrich), 5-FU (10 mg/kg q 5 d; Sigma-Aldrich), dexa-
methasone (2 mg/kg/d; Sigma-Aldrich), cetuximab (40 
mg/kg/d), oxaliplatin (6 mg/kg q 4 d; MedChem Express), 
or WR
W4 (1 mg/kg/d; Sigma-Aldrich) were administered 
intraperitoneally; and erlotinib (40 mg/kg/d) or indometh-
acin (3 mg/kg/d; Sigma-Aldrich) were administered by ga-
vage. Tumor size was measured by caliper (width2 × length 
× 0.52 = mm3). Tumor experiments were terminated per 
protocol when tumor sizes reached a mean of 2,000–2,500 
mm3. Number of mice per group was determined by mini-
mum number required to achieve statistical significance (in 
collaboration with a statistician). Experiments were per-
formed at least three times with similar results unless other-
wise specified. For annexin V recombinant protein studies, 
vincristine-generated EL4 tumor cell debris (9 × 105 dead 
cells) was prepared as previously described and treated in 
vitro with recombinant annexin V protein (1 nM, 100 nM, 
or 10 µM; eBioscience) for 1 h before coinjection with EL4 
(104 living cells) into C57BL/6J mice. Annexin V recombi-
nant protein (4 µg/kg/d) was administered in vivo to mice 
injected with 104 living EL4 tumors via miniosmotic pumps. 
For cytokine depletion studies, C57BL/6J mice were treated 
intraperitoneally with combinations of anti–IL-6, anti- 
CCL4, anti-CCL5, and/or anti-TNFα neutralizing anti-
bodies beginning on the day of tumor cell injection (20 µg 
each q 4 d; R&D Systems). Systemic chemotherapy, cyto-
kine depletion, annexin V
, and/or resolvin treatment initi-
ated on the day of tumor cell injection.
Alternative debris generation for in vitro assays. 
 Cyclohexi-
mide plus TNFα–generated debris was prepared by treating 
75–80% confluent T150 flasks of PC3M-LN4, HEY
, HSC-3, 
or OVC 
AR5 with complete media with 10% FBS plus 4 ng/ml 
TNFα and 5 µM cycloheximide and incubating for 18 h. 
Dead cell bodies were counted by hemocytometer, pelleted, 
and then resuspended in PBS to give a final desired concen-
tration. See the Flow cytometry, Human macrophage phago-
cytosis assays, and Mouse phagocytosis assays sections.
Cisplatin-generated COV362, ID8 (provided by J. Law-
ler, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA), or 
A375-SM debris was prepared by treating 75–80% conflu-
ent T150 flasks of respective cells with complete media with 
10% FBS plus 50 µM cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubat-
ing for 24 h. Dead cell bodies were counted by hemocytom-
eter. Pelleted cells were resuspended in PBS at the desired 
concentration. See the Flow cytometry, Human macrophage 
phagocytosis assays, and Assays sections.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
134
Immunohistochemistry
Tumor samples were processed, and immunohistochem-
ical staining was performed according to standard proto-
col. Giemsa and 3-3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining 
were performed according to standard protocol. Sections 
were deparaffinized with xylene and rehydrated in graded 
ethanol. Sections were microwaved in 10 mM sodium ci-
trate and then incubated with IL-6 (1:100; Abcam), IL-8 
(1:100; Abcam), TNFα (1:100; Abcam), F4/80 (1:100; 
Bio-Rad Laboratories), GPR32 (1:200; GeneTex), ALX/
FPR2 (1:100; GeneTex), or CD31 antibodies (1:250; BD). 
MECA-32 and CD31 stains were amplified using Tyramide 
signal amplification direct and indirect kits (NEN Life Sci-
ence Products Inc.). Human prostate sections were obtained 
from M. Loda (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA). 
Histological sections of tumors were analyzed for vessel 
density as previously described (Panigrahy et al., 2012). 
Immunohistochemistry and localization of fluorescently la-
beled cells were analyzed using a confocal SP2 microscope 
 
(Leica Microsystems).
Western blotting
Protein was extracted from cell lysates, and immunoblotting 
was performed based on standard protocols to measure ALX/
FPR2 (GeneT
ex) in LLC, B16F10 (melanoma), T241 (fibro-
sarcoma), BTC, MS-180 (sarcoma), and EOMA. Protein from 
mouse spleen was used as a positive control.
Flow cytometry
For flow cytometry of in vitro debris cultures, vincris-
tine-generated EL4 debris was isolated via Ficoll gradient 
(GE Healthcare). For all other chemotherapy- and targeted 
therapy–generated debris, cells were treated and collected as 
described in the General note. Cells were pelleted and re-
suspended in annexin V binding buffer at 106 cells/ml and 
double stained with Annexin V and PI according to FITC 
Annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis kit protocol. Staining was 
assessed using a FAC 
SCanto II (BD) or LSR Fortessa (BD) 
and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).
For flow cytometry analysis of dissociated cells from 
whole tumors, tumors were removed when they reached 
≥1,500–2,000 mm3, and single-cell suspensions were pre-
pared by enzymatic digestion with Liberase (40 min at 
37°C; Roche). Digested tissue was filtered through a 40-µm 
cell strainer and resuspended in PBS. For nondebris LLC 
or EL4 tumors treated with and without systemic cisplatin 
or vincristine, respectively, cell death was assessed via an-
nexin V/PI staining as described in the FACS cell sorting 
of debris. For LLC-GFP– and LLC debris–stimulated tu-
mors, GFP levels were assessed using FAC 
SCanto II or LSR 
Fortessa and analyzed using FlowJo software. For flow cy-
tometry analysis of resolvin-treated LLC-GFP or B16F10-
GFP tumors, CD11b-PE and F4/80-APC (Roche) were 
assessed using FACS Calibur and CellQuest software (BD) 
and analyzed with WinMDI 2.8 software. For flow cytom-
etry analysis of tumor cell phagocytosis and efferocytosis in 
the resolvin-, cisplatin-, and/or WR
W4-treated LLC-GFP 
tumors, TIM-4–Alexa Fluor 647 (BioLegend), CD11b–
Alexa Fluor 405 (R&D Systems), and F4/80-PE (Miltenyi 
Biotec) were assessed using LSR Fortessa and analyzed 
with FlowJo software. TIM-4+F4/80+ cells were gated on 
whole-tumor populations, whereas GFP+ cells were gated 
on TIM-4+F4/80+ cells to reflect macrophage efferocytosis 
(GFP+TIM-4+F4/80+). Likewise, CD11b+F4/80+ cells were 
gated on whole-tumor populations, and GFP+ cells were 
gated on CD11b+F4/80+ cells to reflect macrophage phago-
cytosis (GFP+CD11b+F4/80+).
In tumors generated from 106 LLC living cells and cis-
platin-generated LLC debris–stimulated tumors, CD45-PE 
and F4/80-APC (Bio-Rad Laboratories) were assessed using 
LSR Fortessa and analyzed with FlowJo software. For exam-
ining immune cell types in tumors generated from 106 LLC 
or EL4 living cells and cisplatin-generated LLC debris or vin-
cristine-generated EL4 debris-stimulated tumors, F4/80-PE 
(Miltenyi Biotec), CD11b–Alexa Fluor 405 (R&D Systems), 
Gr1-APC (BioLegend), and Ly6G–Alexa Fluor 488 (Novus 
Biologicals) were assessed using LSR Fortessa and analyzed 
with FlowJo software. 
The percentage of CD45+ cells referred 
to the proportion of leukocytes (CD45+) within the whole 
tumor lysate included the double-stained CD45+F4/80+ 
population (macrophages) as well as CD45+F4/80− (leuko-
cytes excluding macrophages).
For flow cytometry of Matrigel plugs (100 mg/
ml; BD), plugs were injected into both flanks, resected 
after 7 d, and digested as described above with Liber-
ase. CD45-PE (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and F4/80-APC 
(Roche) were assessed using FAC 
SCanto II and analyzed 
 
with FlowJo software.
Electron microscopy and light microscopy
Electron microscopic thin sections were examined on a FEI/
Phillips EM 208S (FEI Electron Optics BV) equipped with a 
digital camera (Advanced Microscopy T
echniques). Light mi-
croscopic images were taken on an Eclipse E600 microscope 
(Nikon) with a 100× 0.30 NA oil immersion lens and an RT 
Slider SPOT 2.3.1 camera (Diagnostic Instruments) using 
SPOT Advanced software (3.5.9; SPOT Imaging). Tumor 
cell debris was prepared as described in the General note. 
Debris was collected and resuspended in PBS. Cells were 
placed on glass slides. Light microscopic images were taken 
on an Axiophot (ZEI 
SS) with a 20× dry objective lens using 
SPOT Advanced software.
Human monocyte–derived macrophages
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy 
human volunteers from the Children’s Hospital Boston blood 
bank were isolated by density-gradient Histopaque-1077 
(Sigma-Aldrich). Macrophages were differentiated using 
RPMI media plus 10 ng/ml GM-CSF (R&D Systems) 
for 7 d (37°C at 5% CO2).
 135
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Macrophage-secreted cytokines
For human tumor cell debris, human monocyte–derived 
macrophages were plated in six-well plates at 2 × 106 cells 
per well. Cells were incubated in complete RPMI medium 
with 10% FBS and 10 ng/ml GM-CSF for 7 d. Cispla-
tin-generated PC3M-LN4, cisplatin-generated HSC-3, and 
cycloheximide plus TNFα–generated PC3M-LN4 debris 
were prepared as described in the General note. Macrophage 
plates were rinsed with PBS and then were treated with ve-
hicle, RvD1 (1 nM), or RvD2 (1 nM) for 30 min at 37°C. 
Collected tumor cell debris was added to six-well plates at 
4 × 106 cells per well. PC3M-LN4 or HSC-3 debris was 
added to empty six-well plates as a control. Plates were in-
cubated for 1 h at 37°C. Plates were rinsed with PBS and 
then refed with 5 ml complete RPMI medium with 10% 
FBS. Plates were incubated for 24 h at 37°C. Conditioned 
media from plates was collected and used according to the 
protocol of R&D Systems Proteome Profiler: Human Cy-
tokine Array Panel A. Array control allows for comparison 
between membranes. For ELI 
SA analysis, human monocyte–
derived macrophage-conditioned media was prepared as de-
scribed above. Media was used according to the protocols of 
each ELI 
SA kit (R&D Systems). Human monocyte–derived 
macrophage-conditioned media collection was repeated 
using three individual patient donations of peripheral blood 
monocytes, and debris collection was repeated for a total of 
three separate experiments.
For mouse tumor cell debris, mouse RAW264.7 mac-
rophages were plated in six-well plates at 5 × 105 cells per 
well and incubated for 2 h in Dulbecco’s PBS at 37°C. Cis-
platin-generated LLC debris was prepared as described in 
the Cisplatin-generated LLC debris tumors section and pre-
treated with annexin V recombinant protein (10 µM; eBio-
science) for 1 h. Collected tumor cell debris was added to 
six-well plates at 2 × 106 cells per well. Plates were incubated 
for 1 h at 37°C. Plates were rinsed with PBS, refed with 3 ml/
well serum-free DMEM media, and incubated for 24 h at 
37°C. Conditioned media from plates was collected and used 
according to the protocol of R&D Systems Proteome Pro-
filer: Mouse Cytokine Array kit, Panel A. Array control allows 
for comparison between membranes.
For PS and PC liposome studies, RAW264.7 macro-
phages were plated in six-well plates at 106 cells per well. PS 
or PC liposomes (Avanti Polar Lipids) were resuspended in 
PBS for a final concentration of 100 µM. Macrophages were 
incubated with PS/PC liposomes for 2 h at 37°C, refed with 
serum-free DMEM media, and incubated for 24 h at 37°C. 
Conditioned media was collected and used according to the 
protocols for each ELI 
SA kit (R&D Systems).
Human monocyte–derived macrophage phagocytosis assays
Human primary monocyte–derived macrophages were 
plated in 96-well plates at 5 × 104 cells per well in complete 
RPMI medium with 10% FBS for 18–24 h. Dead cell bod-
ies were collected and prepared as described in the General 
note and then were fluorescently stained with carboxyflu-
orescein diacetate (CFDA). Macrophages were treated with 
vehicle, RvD1 RvD2, or RvE1 (0.001–100 nM), dexameth-
asone (1 nM or 10 nM), or indomethacin (1 nM or 10 nM) 
for 30 min at 37°C. Collected tumor cells were added to 
96-well plates at a 1:2 (PC3M-LN4, A375-SM, and BxPC3) 
or 1:4 (COV362, HEY, OVC 
AR5, and HSC-3) mono-
cyte-derived macrophage/dead cell body ratio, and plates 
were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Plates were quenched with 
trypan blue, and fluorescence was measured using a Spec-
tra Max M5 plate reader (Molecular Devices). Relative flu-
orescence units (RFUs) were used to measure phagocytosis 
compared with control monocyte-derived macrophages. Ex-
periments were performed three times with similar results. 
We performed macrophage phagocytosis assays using non-
tumorigenic macrophages (e.g., human monocyte–derived 
macrophages, mouse peritoneal macrophages, and mouse 
bone marrow–derived macrophages).
Mouse phagocytosis assays
Mouse resident peritoneal and bone marrow–derived macro-
phages. 
 Mouse resident peritoneal macrophages were col-
lected by peritoneal lavage of C57BL/6J male mice using 
sterile PBS. Macrophages were plated in 96-well plates at 5 × 
104 cells per well and incubated in PBS for 1–2 h at 37°C. 
Mouse bone marrow–derived macrophages were extracted 
from C57BL/6J male mice and differentiated by incubation 
in RPMI containing mouse CSF for 7 d (37°C at 5% CO2). 
Bone marrow–derived macrophages were plated in 96-well 
plates at 5 × 104 cells per well and incubated in DMEM sup-
plemented with 10% FBS and 30% l-929 medium overnight. 
ID8 cells were treated with cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich) and col-
lected as described in the General note. After 24 h, dead cell 
bodies were fluorescently stained with CFDA. Macrophage 
wells were treated with vehicle, RvD1, or RvD2 (0.001–100 
nM), and/or BOC-1 (10 µM; MP Biomedicals) for 30 min at 
37°C. CFDA-stained dead tumor cell bodies were added to 
96-well plates at a 1:4 macrophage/dead cell body ratio, and 
plates were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Plates were quenched 
with trypan blue, and fluorescence was measured using a 
Spectra Max M5 plate reader. RFUs were used to measure 
phagocytosis compared with control macrophages.
rvd1 and rvd2 levels in vitro (ELI 
sA). 
 For analysis of RvD1 
and RvD2 in tissue culture samples, mouse RAW264.7 mac-
rophages were plated in six-well plates at 2 × 106 macro-
phages per well in PBS and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. 
Cisplatin-generated LLC debris was counted and prepared as 
described in the General note. Debris was added to applicable 
plates at a 1:2 macrophage/dead cell body ratio. Plates were 
incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Conditioned media from each well 
was collected according to RvD1 or RvD2 ELI 
SA kit in-
structions (Cayman Chemical). Samples were run in tripli-
cates (RvD1) and duplicates (RvD2) per kit instructions. 
 
n = 4 per group.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
136
Proliferation assays
For tumor cell (B16F10, LLC, and PC3M-LN4) prolifera-
tions assays, B16F10 cells were plated at an initial 5 × 103 
cells/well in 24-well plates. LLC cells were plated at an initial 
7.5 × 103 cells/well in 24-well plates. PC3M-LN4 cells were 
plated at an initial 104 cells/well in 24-well plates. B16F10 
and LLC cells were treated with RvD1 (10 nM and 1 µM), 
RvD2 (10 nM and 1 µM), or vehicle for 48 h. PC3M-LN4 
cells were treated with RvD1 (10 nM and 1 µM), RvD2 (10 
nM and 1 µM), or vehicle for 24 h. After 1 or 2 d, B16F10, 
LLC, and PC3M-LN4 cells were counted with a Coulter 
Counter. n = 4–8/group, three biological repeats.
Additional proliferation assays used Cell Proliferation 
kit 1 (MTT; Roche), according to recommended protocol 
to quantify proliferation. PancOH7 or MS1 cells were plated 
at an initial 5 × 103 cells/well in 96-well plates with com-
plete media with 10% FBS and incubated overnight. Cells 
were refed with conditioned media from RAW264.7 mouse 
macrophages or RAW264.7 macrophages exposed to gem-
citabine-generated PancOH7 debris, prepared as described in 
the Gemcitabine-generated PancOH7 debris tumors. After a 
24-h incubation at 37°C with the macrophage-conditioned 
media, 10 µl of MTT reagent (Roche) was added to each 
well and incubated for 4 h at 37°C. Next, 100 µl of solubiliz-
ing solution (Roche) was added to each well and incubated 
overnight at 37°C. VersaMax microplate reader (Molecular 
Devices) was used to quantify the results of the assay.
tumor cell viability
Conditioned media from RAW264.7 mouse macrophages or 
RAW264.7 macrophages exposed to gemcitabine-generated 
PancOH7 debris was collected as described in the Macro-
phage secreted cytokines section. PancOH7 cells were plated 
at 5 × 105 and incubated overnight in complete media plus 
10% FBS. The next day, PancOH7 cells were refed with con-
ditioned media from macrophages and incubated overnight. 
Cells were stained according to the FITC Annexin V/Dead 
Cell Apoptosis kit protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 
cell viability was assessed via flow cytometry analysis.
Migration studies
RvD1, RvD2, or control was added to serum-free media at 
a final concentration of 10 nM. In transwell permeable sup-
ports with an 8.0-µm polycarbonate membrane (Costar), 10 
nM RvD1, 10 nM RvD2, or vehicle was added to the bot-
tom chamber, and 5 × 105 LLC in serum-free media was 
added to the top chamber. Cells were incubated at 37°C at 
5% CO2 for 5 h. After the incubation, remaining cells were 
removed from the top chamber with a cotton-tipped applica-
tor. Cells were fixed with methanol and stained using Giemsa 
stain (Sigma-Aldrich) for 40 min at room temperature. Excess 
Giemsa stain was removed with water. Migration was quan-
tified using an EVOS microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
and counting the number of cells per field (four fields/trans-
well) at 10× magnification.
Lc-Ms-Ms
Plasma from nontumor-bearing and tumor-bearing mice 
was analyzed by LC-MS-MS by LC-20AD HPLC and a 
SIL-20AC autoinjector (Shimadzu Corp.) paired with a 
QTrap 6500 (ABSciex). Mouse tumors were placed in 1 ml 
of methanol, gently homogenized using a glass dounce, and 
kept at −20°C to allow for protein precipitation. Lipid me-
diators were extracted using solid-phase extraction (Colas 
et al., 2014). In brief, before sample extraction, a deuterated 
internal standard (d5-LXA4) representing the region of in-
terest in the chromatographic analysis (500 pg) was added 
to facilitate quantification. Extracted samples were analyzed 
by a LC-MS-MS system, QTrap 6500 (AB Sciex) equipped 
with a SIL-20AC autoinjector and LC-20AD binary pump 
(Shimadzu Corp.). An Eclipse Plus C18 column (100 × 4.6 
mm × 1.8 µm; Agilent T
echnologies) was used with a gra-
dient of methanol/water/acetic acid of 55:45:0.01 (vol/vol/
vol) that was ramped to 85:15:0.01 (vol/vol/vol) over 10 min 
and then to 98:2:0.01 (vol/vol/vol) for the next 8 min. This 
was subsequently maintained at 98:2:0.01 (vol/vol/vol) for 2 
min. 
The flow rate was maintained at 0.4 ml/min. 
T
o monitor 
and quantify the levels of lipid mediators, a multiple reaction 
monitoring method was developed with signature ion frag-
ments (m/z) for each molecule monitoring the parent ion 
(Q1) and a characteristic daughter ion (Q3). Identification 
was conducted using published criteria where a minimum of 
six diagnostic ions were used (Colas et al., 2014). Calibration 
curves were determined using a mixture of lipid mediators 
obtained via total organic synthesis. Linear calibration curves 
for each compound were obtained with r2 values ranging 
from 0.98–0.99. Detection limit was ∼0.1 pg. Quantification 
was performed as described by Colas et al. (2014).
statistics
For in vivo experiments, Student’s t test and ANO 
VA were 
used. Student’s t test was used to evaluate significance of in 
vitro experiments. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-
fit statistic was used to test the assumption of normality of the 
tumor volume measurements and other continuous variables, 
and no significant departures from a Gaussian-shaped distri-
bution were detected. Therefore, summary data are reported 
as mean values and SEM. Longitudinal tumor growth data 
were analyzed using two-factor repeated-measures mixed ef-
fects ANO 
VA with the Greenhouse–Geisser F test to assess 
overall group differences followed by Tukey post hoc com-
parisons, where treatment was considered the between sub-
jects factor, and serial tumor measurements were considered 
the within subjects or repeated factor (Liu et al., 2010). In 
addition, one-factor ANO 
VA was used to compare treatment 
and control groups with respect to cytokines and biomarker 
variables, and the Student’s t test was used to compare the 
percentage of total cell death between cisplatin and control. 
Survival after orthotopic injection was analyzed using the 
Kaplan-Meier product-limit model with the log-rank test to 
evaluate survival differences over time after tumor injection 
 137
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
between treatment groups for chemotherapy-generated dead 
cells and PancOH7 living cells versus living cells alone. P-val-
ues <0.05 were considered statistically significant.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 characterizes the chemotherapy- and targeted 
therapy–generated debris used in our debris tumor mod-
els, describes how the debris was quantified, and confirms 
that debris-stimulated tumors indeed arose from the living 
tumor cells. Fig. S2 provides additional titrations of sub-
threshold inoculums of various tumor types with debris 
generated by different therapies in immunocompromised 
versus immunocompetent mouse models. Fig. S3 highlights 
and characterizes the role of macrophages and inflamma-
tion within the tumor microenvironment in debris-stimu-
lated tumors. Fig. S4 demonstrates the role of resolvins in 
human xenograft mouse models, genetically engineered 
mouse models, spontaneous tumor models, and metas-
tasis models. Fig. S5 further elucidates that the antitumor 
activity of resolvins is stromal and provides a schematic 
that summarizes our model.
AcKnoWLEdGMEnts
We gratefully acknowledge and thank Steve Moskowitz (Advanced Medical Graphics) 
for photography and preparation of the figures; we thank Dr. Sesquile Ramon, Dr. 
William Aird, Thad Vickery, John Daley, Catherine Butterfield, Dr. Howard Mulhern, Dr. 
Ofra Benny, Dr. Jo-Anne Vergilio, Donna Vatnick, and Chantal Barksdale for excellent 
technical assistance; Dr. Isaiah J. Fidler for PC3M-LN4 cells; Dr. Jack Lawler for ID8 
cells; Dr. Reto Schwendener for clodronate liposomes; and Dr. Massimo Loda for 
human prostate sections. The resolvin E1 receptor (ChemR23) KO mice were provided 
by Dr. Brian Zabel (supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01 AI079320) 
and Professor Eugene Butcher (supported by National Institutes of Health 
grant CA169354). 
This work was supported by the National Cancer Institute grants RO1 
01CA170549-02 (to D. Panigrahy and C.N. Serhan), ROCA148633-01A4 (to D. Panig-
rahy), and GM095467 (to C.N. Serhan); the Stop and Shop Pediatric Brain Tumor Fund 
(to M.W. Kieran); the CJ Buckley Pediatric Brain Tumor Fund (to M.W. Kieran); Alex 
Lemonade Stand (to M.W. Kieran); Molly’s Magic Wand for Pediatric Brain Tumors (to 
M.W. Kieran); the Markoff Foundation Art-In-Giving Foundation (to M.W. Kieran); the 
Kamen Foundation (to M.W. Kieran); Jared Branfman Sunflowers for Life (to M.W.K.); 
and The Wellcome Trust program 086867/Z/08 (to M. Perretti).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: conceptualization, M.L. Sulciner, C.N. Serhan, M.W. Kieran, 
S. Huang, and D. Panigrahy; data curation, M.L. Sulciner and D. Panigrahy; formal 
analysis, M.L. Sulciner, M.M. Gilligan, D. Zurakowski, C.N. Serhan, J. Dalli, S. Huang, and 
D. Panigrahy; funding acquisition, C.N. Serhan, M.W. Kieran, V.P. Sukhatme, and D. 
Panigrahy; investigation, M.L. Sulciner, C.N. Serhan, M.M. Gilligan, D.K. Mudge, J. Chang, 
A. Gartung, K.A. Lehner, D.R. Bielenberg, B. Schmidt, E.R. Greene, J. Dalli, Y. Gus-Brautbar, 
J. Piwowarski, M Perretti, T. Mammoto, V.P. Sukhatme, and D. Panigrahy; methodology, 
M.L. Sulciner, C.N. Serhan, M.M. Gilligan, J. Dalli, M. Perretti, A. Kaipainen, M.W. Kieran, 
S. Huang, and D. Panigrahy; project administration, C.N. Serhan, M.W. Kieran, S. Huang, 
and D. Panigrahy; resources, C.N. Serhan. M.W. Kieran, and D. Panigrahy; supervision, 
C.N. Serhan, M.W. Kieran, S. Huang, and D. Panigrahy; visualization, M.L. Sulciner, C.N. 
Serhan, M.M. Gilligan, D.M. Mudge, and D. Panigrahy; writing (original draft), M.L. 
Sulciner, C.N. Serhan, A. Kaipainen, M.W. Kieran, S. Huang, and D. Panigrahy; writing 
(review and editing), M.L. Sulciner, C.N. Serhan, M.M. Gilligan, D.M. Mudge, J. Dalli, V.P. 
Sukhatme, A. Kaipainen, M.W. Kieran, S. Huang, and D. Panigrahy.
Submitted: 12 April 2017
Revised: 15 September 2017
Accepted: 11 October 2017
rEFErEncEs
Abubaker, K., A. Latifi, R. Luwor, S. Nazaretian, H. Zhu, M.A. Quinn, 
E.W
. Thompson, J.K. Findlay, and N. Ahmed. 2013. Short-term single 
treatment of chemotherapy results in the enrichment of ovarian cancer 
stem cell-like cells leading to an increased tumor burden. Mol. Cancer. 
12:24. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1476 
-4598 
-12 
-24
Akazawa, T., H. Masuda, Y
. Saeki, M. Matsumoto, K. Takeda, K. Tsujimura, 
K. Kuzushima, T. Takahashi, I. Azuma, S. Akira, et al. 2004. Adjuvant-
mediated tumor regression and tumor-specific cytotoxic response are 
impaired in MyD88-deficient mice. Cancer Res. 64:757–764. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-03 
-1518
Alcaide, J., R. Funez, A. Rueda, E. Perez-Ruiz, T. Pereda, I. Rodrigo, R. 
Coveñas, M. Muñoz, and M. Redondo. 2013. The role and prognostic 
value of apoptosis in colorectal carcinoma. BMC Clin. Pathol. 13:24. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1472 
-6890 
-13 
-24
Apetoh, L., F
. Ghiringhelli, A. Tesniere, M. Obeid, C. Ortiz, A. Criollo, G. 
Mignot, M.C. Maiuri, E. Ullrich, P
. Saulnier, et al. 2007. T
oll-like 
receptor 4-dependent contribution of the immune system to anticancer 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Nat. Med. 13:1050–1059. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1622
Arita, M., T. Ohira, 
Y
.P
. Sun, S. Elangovan, N. Chiang, and C.N. Serhan. 2007. 
Resolvin E1 selectively interacts with leukotriene B4 receptor BLT1 
and ChemR23 to regulate inflammation. J. Immunol. 178:3912–3917. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.178 
.6 
.3912
Benton, G., J. George, H.K. Kleinman, and I.P
. Arnaoutova. 2009. Advancing 
science and technology via 3D culture on basement membrane matrix. J. 
Cell. Physiol. 221:18–25. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/jcp 
.21832
Birge, R.B., S. Boeltz, S. Kumar, J. Carlson, J. Wanderley, D. Calianese, 
M. Barcinski, R.A. Brekken, X. Huang, J.T. Hutchins, et al. 2016. 
Phosphatidylserine is a global immunosuppressive signal in efferocytosis, 
infectious disease, and cancer. Cell Death Differ. 23:962–978. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/cdd 
.2016 
.11
Bondanza, A., V
.S. Zimmermann, P
. Rovere-Querini, J. Turnay, I.E. 
Dumitriu, C.M. Stach, R.E. Voll, U.S. Gaipl, W
. Bertling, E. Pöschl, et 
al. 2004. Inhibition of phosphatidylserine recognition heightens the 
immunogenicity of irradiated lymphoma cells in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 
200:1157–1165. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20040327
Casares, N., M.O. Pequignot, A. Tesniere, F
. Ghiringhelli, S. Roux, N. Chaput, 
E. Schmitt, A. Hamai, S. Hervas-Stubbs, M. Obeid, et al. 2005. Caspase-
dependent immunogenicity of doxorubicin-induced tumor cell death. J. 
Exp. Med. 202:1691–1701. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20050915
Chan, J.K., J. Roth, J.J. Oppenheim, K.J. Tracey, T. Vogl, M. Feldmann, N. 
Horwood, and J. Nanchahal. 2012. Alarmins: awaiting a clinical response. 
J. Clin. Invest. 122:2711–2719. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI62423
Chang, 
Y
.S., S.P
. Jalgaonkar, J.D. Middleton, and T. Hai. 2017. Stress-inducible 
gene Atf3 in the noncancer host cells contributes to chemotherapy-
exacerbated breast cancer metastasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
114:E7159–E7168. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1700455114
Chaurio, R., C. Janko, C. Schorn, C. Maueröder, R. Bilyy, U. Gaipl, G. Schett, 
C. Berens, B. Frey, and L.E. Munoz. 2013. UVB-irradiated apoptotic 
cells induce accelerated growth of co-implanted viable tumor cells in 
immune competent mice. Autoimmunity. 46:317–322. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/08916934 
.2012 
.754433
Chiang, N., G. Fredman, F
. Bäckhed, S.F
. Oh, T. Vickery, B.A. Schmidt, and 
C.N. Serhan. 2012. Infection regulates pro-resolving mediators that 
lower antibiotic requirements. Nature. 484:524–528. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature11042
Chiang, N., J. Dalli, R.A. Colas, and C.N. Serhan. 2015. Identification of 
resolvin D2 receptor mediating resolution of infections and organ 
protection. J. Exp. Med. 212:1203–1217. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20150225
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
138
Colas, R.A., M. Shinohara, J. Dalli, N. Chiang, and C.N. Serhan. 2014. 
Identification and signature profiles for pro-resolving and inflammatory 
lipid mediators in human tissue. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 307:C39–
C54. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1152 
/ajpcell 
.00024 
.2014
Connell, P
.P
., and R.R. Weichselbaum. 2011. A downside to apoptosis in 
cancer therapy? Nat. Med. 17:780–782. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nm0711 
-780
da Silva-Jr, I.A. Jr., R. Chammas, A.P
. Lepique, and S. Jancar. 2017. Platelet-
activating factor (PAF) receptor as a promising target for cancer cell 
repopulation after radiotherapy. Oncogenesis. 6:e296. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/oncsis 
.2016 
.90
DeFrancesco, L. 2014. CAR-T cell therapy seeks strategies to harness 
cytokine storm. Nat. Biotechnol. 32:604. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nbt0714 
-604
de Jong, J.S., P
.J. van Diest, and J.P
. Baak. 2000. Number of apoptotic cells as 
a prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer. Br. J. Cancer. 82:368–373.
Deng, J., Y
. Zhang, J. Feng, and F
. Wu. 2010. Dendritic cells loaded with 
ultrasound-ablated tumour induce in vivo specific antitumour immune 
responses. Ultrasound Med. Biol. 36:441–448. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ultrasmedbio 
.2009 
.12 
.004
de Ruiter, J., S.J. Cramer, 
T. Smink, and L.M. van Putten. 1979. 
The facilitation 
of tumour growth in the lung by cyclophosphamide in artificial and 
spontaneous metastases models. Eur. J. Cancer. 15:1139–1149. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0014 
-2964(79)90130 
-0
Donato, A.L., Q. Huang, X. Liu, F
. Li, M.A. Zimmerman, and C.Y
. Li. 2014. 
Caspase 3 promotes surviving melanoma tumor cell growth after 
cytotoxic therapy. J. Invest. Dermatol. 134:1686–1692. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/jid 
.2014 
.18
Drochmans, P
. 1960. Electron microscope studies of epidermal melanocytes, 
and the fine structure of melanin granules. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol. 
8:165–180. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.8 
.1 
.165
Dromi, S.A., M.P
. Walsh, S. Herby, B. Traughber, J. Xie, K.V
. Sharma, K.P
. 
Sekhar, A. Luk, D.J. Liewehr, M.R. Dreher, et al. 2009. Radiofrequency 
ablation induces antigen-presenting cell infiltration and amplification of 
weak tumor-induced immunity. Radiology. 251:58–66. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1148 
/radiol 
.2511072175
Dufton, N., R. Hannon, V
. Brancaleone, J. Dalli, H.B. Patel, M. Gray, F
. 
D’Acquisto, J.C. Buckingham, M. Perretti, and R.J. Flower. 2010. Anti-
inflammatory role of the murine formyl-peptide receptor 2: ligand-
specific effects on leukocyte responses and experimental inflammation. J. 
Immunol. 184:2611–2619. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.0903526
Elajami, T.K., R.A. Colas, J. Dalli, N. Chiang, C.N. Serhan, and F
.K. Welty. 
2016. Specialized proresolving lipid mediators in patients with coronary 
artery disease and their potential for clot remodeling. FAS 
EB J. 30:2792–
2801. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1096 
/fj 
.201500155R
Ford, C.A., S. Petrova, J.D. Pound, J.J. Voss, L. Melville, M. Paterson, S.L. 
Farnworth, A.M. Gallimore, S. Cuff, H. 
Wheadon, et al. 2015. Oncogenic 
properties of apoptotic tumor cells in aggressive B cell lymphoma. Curr. 
Biol. 25:577–588. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2014 
.12 
.059
Frey, B., P
. Schildkopf, F
. Rödel, E.M. Weiss, L.E. Munoz, M. Herrmann, 
R. Fietkau, and U.S. Gaipl. 2009. AnnexinA5 renders dead 
tumor cells immunogenic--implications for multimodal cancer 
therapies. 
J. 
Immunotoxicol. 
6:209–216. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/15476910903204058
Fullerton, J.N., and D.W
. Gilroy. 2016. Resolution of inflammation: a new 
therapeutic frontier. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 15:551–567. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrd 
.2016 
.39
Gao, L., D. Faibish, G. Fredman, B.S. Herrera, N. Chiang, C.N. Serhan, T.E. 
Van Dyke, and R. Gyurko. 2013. Resolvin E1 and chemokine-like 
receptor 1 mediate bone preservation. J. Immunol. 190:689–694. https 
://
doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1103688
Garg, A.D., D. Nowis, J. Golab, P
. 
Vandenabeele, D.V
. Krysko, and P
. Agostinis. 
2010. Immunogenic cell death, DAMPs and anticancer therapeutics: an 
emerging amalgamation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1805:53–71. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.bbcan 
.2009 
.08 
.003
Garg, A.D., D.V
. Krysko, T. 
Verfaillie, A. Kaczmarek, G.B. Ferreira, T. Marysael, 
N. Rubio, M. Firczuk, C. Mathieu, A.J. Roebroek, et al. 2012. A 
novel pathway combining calreticulin exposure and ATP secretion in 
immunogenic cancer cell death. EMBO J. 31:1062–1079. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/emboj 
.2011 
.497
Gough, M.J., A.A. Melcher, A. Ahmed, M.R. Crittenden, D.S. Riddle, 
E. Linardakis, A.N. Ruchatz, L.M. Emiliusen, and R.G. Vile. 2001. 
Macrophages orchestrate the immune response to tumor cell death. 
Cancer Res. 61:7240–7247.
Gray, M.J., J. Gong, M.M. Hatch, 
V
. Nguyen, C.C. Hughes, J.T. Hutchins, and 
B.D. Freimark. 2016. Phosphatidylserine-targeting antibodies augment 
the anti-tumorigenic activity of anti-PD-1 therapy by enhancing 
immune activation and downregulating pro-oncogenic factors induced 
by T
-cell checkpoint inhibition in murine triple-negative breast cancers. 
Breast Cancer Res. 18:50. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s13058 
-016 
-0708 
-2
Greene, E.R., S. Huang, C.N. Serhan, and D. Panigrahy. 2011. Regulation of 
inflammation in cancer by eicosanoids. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 
96:27–36. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.prostaglandins 
.2011 
.08 
.004
Gregory, C.D., and J.D. Pound. 2011. Cell death in the neighbourhood: direct 
microenvironmental effects of apoptosis in normal and neoplastic tissues. 
J. Pathol. 223:177–194. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/path 
.2792
Gregory, C.D., C.A. Ford, and J.J. Voss. 2016. Microenvironmental Effects of 
Cell Death in Malignant Disease. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 930:51–88. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/978 
-3 
-319 
-39406 
-0 
_3
Grenon, S.M., C.D. Owens, H. Alley, K. Chong, P
.K. Y
en, W
. Harris, M. 
Hughes-Fulford, and M.S. Conte. 2013. n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids 
supplementation in peripheral artery disease: the OME 
GA-PAD trial. 
Vasc. Med. 18:263–274. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1177 
/1358863X13503695
Gunjal, P
.M., G. Schneider, A.A. Ismail, S.S. Kakar, M. Kucia, and M.Z. 
Ratajczak. 2015. Evidence for induction of a tumor metastasis-receptive 
microenvironment for ovarian cancer cells in bone marrow and other 
organs as an unwanted and underestimated side effect of chemotherapy/
radiotherapy. J. Ovarian Res. 8:20. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s13048 
-015 
-0141 
-7
Hangai, S., 
T. Ao, 
Y
. Kimura, K. Matsuki, 
T. Kawamura, H. Negishi, J. Nishio, 
T. 
Kodama, T. Taniguchi, and H. 
Yanai. 2016. PGE2 induced in and released 
by dying cells functions as an inhibitory DAMP
. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 113:3844–3849. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1602023113
He, J., Y
. Yin, T.A. Luster, L. Watkins, and P
.E. Thorpe. 2009. 
Antiphosphatidylserine antibody combined with irradiation damages 
tumor blood vessels and induces tumor immunity in a rat model of 
glioblastoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 15:6871–6880. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1078 
-0432 
.CCR 
-09 
-1499
Holmgren, L., M.S. O’Reilly, and J. Folkman. 1995. Dormancy of 
micrometastases: balanced proliferation and apoptosis in the presence of 
angiogenesis suppression. Nat. Med. 1:149–153. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm0295 
-149
Hosseini, H., 
Y
. Li, P
. Kanellakis, C. Tay, A. Cao, P
. Tipping, A. Bobik, B.H. T
oh, 
and T. Kyaw. 2015. Phosphatidylserine liposomes mimic apoptotic cells 
to attenuate atherosclerosis by expanding polyreactive IgM producing 
B1a lymphocytes. Cardiovasc. Res. 106:443–452. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/cvr 
/cvv037
Huang, Q., F
. Li, X. Liu, W
. Li, W
. Shi, F
.F
. Liu, B. O’Sullivan, Z. He, Y
. Peng, 
A.C. Tan, et al. 2011. Caspase 3-mediated stimulation of tumor cell 
repopulation during cancer radiotherapy. Nat. Med. 17:860–866. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.2385
Ichim, G., and S.W
. Tait. 2016. A fate worse than death: apoptosis as an 
oncogenic process. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 16:539–548. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrc 
.2016 
.58
 139
JEM Vol. 215, No. 1
Jalalinadoushan, M., H. Peivareh, and A. Azizzadeh Delshad. 2004. 
Correlation between Apoptosis and Histological Grade of Transitional 
Cell Carcinoma of Urinary Bladder. Urol. J. 1:177–179.
Karagiannis, G.S., J.M. Pastoriza, Y
. Wang, A.S. Harney, D. Entenberg, J. 
Pignatelli, V
.P
. Sharma, E.A. Xue, E. Cheng, T.M. D’Alfonso, et al. 2017. 
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy induces breast cancer metastasis through a 
TMEM-mediated mechanism. Sci. Transl. Med. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/scitranslmed 
.aan0026
Kilkenny, C., W
.J. Browne, I.C. Cuthill, M. Emerson, and D.G. Altman. 2010. 
Improving bioscience research reporting: the ARR 
IVE guidelines for 
reporting animal research. PLoS Biol. 8:e1000412.
Kindy, M.S., J. Yu, H. Zhu, M.T. Smith, and S. Gattoni-Celli. 2016. A 
therapeutic cancer vaccine against GL261 murine glioma. J. Transl. Med. 
14:1. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s12967 
-015 
-0757 
-9
Kobayashi, N., P
. Karisola, V
. Peña-Cruz, D.M. Dorfman, M. Jinushi, S.E. 
Umetsu, M.J. Butte, H. Nagumo, I. Chernova, B. Zhu, et al. 2007. 
TIM-1 
and TIM-4 glycoproteins bind phosphatidylserine and mediate uptake 
of apoptotic cells. Immunity. 27:927–940. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2007 
.11 
.011
Korbelik, M., B. Stott, and J. Sun. 2007. Photodynamic therapy-generated 
vaccines: relevance of tumour cell death expression. Br. J. Cancer. 
97:1381–1387. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/sj 
.bjc 
.6604059
Kornbluth, R.S. 1994. The immunological potential of apoptotic debris 
produced by tumor cells and during HIV infection. Immunol. Lett. 
43:125–132. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0165 
-2478(94)00149 
-9
Krishnamoorthy, S., A. Recchiuti, N. Chiang, S. Yacoubian, C.H. Lee, R. 
Yang, N.A. Petasis, and C.N. Serhan. 2010. Resolvin D1 binds human 
phagocytes with evidence for proresolving receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 107:1660–1665. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0907342107
Lauber, K., and M. Herrmann. 2015. Tumor biology: with a little help from 
my dying friends. Curr. Biol. 25:R198–R201. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2015 
.01 
.040
Ley, S., A. Weigert, B. Weichand, N. Henke, B. Mille-Baker, R.A. Janssen, and 
B. Brune. 2013. The role of TRKA signaling in IL-10 production by 
apoptotic tumor cell- activated macrophages. Oncogene. 32:631–640. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/onc 
.2012 
.77
Liu, C., T.P
. Cripe, and M.O. Kim. 2010. Statistical issues in longitudinal data 
analysis for treatment efficacy studies in the biomedical sciences. Mol. 
Ther. 18:1724–1730. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/mt 
.2010 
.127
Lu, B., B.J. Rutledge, L. Gu, J. Fiorillo, N.W
. Lukacs, S.L. Kunkel, R. North, C. 
Gerard, and B.J. Rollins. 1998. Abnormalities in monocyte recruitment 
and cytokine expression in monocyte chemoattractant protein 
1-deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. 187:601–608. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/
jem 
.187 
.4 
.601
Maderna, P
., S. Y
ona, M. Perretti, and C. Godson. 2005. Modulation 
of phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils by supernatant from 
dexamethasone-treated macrophages and annexin-derived peptide 
Ac(2-26). J. Immunol. 174:3727–3733. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/
jimmunol 
.174 
.6 
.3727
Mantovani, A., P
. Allavena, A. Sica, and F
. Balkwill. 2008. Cancer-related 
inflammation. 
Nature. 
454:436–444. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nature07205
Melcher, A., S. Todryk, N. Hardwick, M. Ford, M. Jacobson, and R.G. Vile. 
1998. Tumor immunogenicity is determined by the mechanism of cell 
death via induction of heat shock protein expression. Nat. Med. 4:581–
587. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm0598 
-581
Miyanishi, M., K. Tada, M. Koike, Y
. Uchiyama, T. Kitamura, and S. Nagata. 
2007. Identification of Tim4 as a phosphatidylserine receptor. Nature. 
450:435–439. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature06307
Mochizuki, T., Y
. Kuge, S. Zhao, E. Tsukamoto, M. Hosokawa, H.W
. Strauss, 
F
.G. Blankenberg, J.F
. Tait, and N. Tamaki. 2003. Detection of apop-
totic tumor response in vivo after a single dose of chemotherapy with 
99mTc-annexin 
V
. J. Nucl. Med. 44:92–97.
Naresh, K.N., K. Lakshminarayanan, S.A. Pai, and A.M. Borges. 2001. 
Apoptosis index is a predictor of metastatic phenotype in patients 
with early stage squamous carcinoma of the tongue. Cancer. 
91:578–584. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/1097 
-0142(20010201)91 
:3<578::AID-CNCR1037>3.0.CO;2-W
Niwa, M., A. Hara, Y
. Kanamori, K. Kohno, N. Y
oshimi, H. Mori, and T. 
Uematsu. 1997. Comparison of susceptibility to apoptosis induced 
by rhTNF-alpha and cycloheximide between human circulating and 
exudated neutrophils. Life Sci. 61:205–215. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/
S0024 
-3205(97)00375 
-5
O’Reilly, M.S., L. Holmgren, Y
. Shing, C. Chen, R.A. Rosenthal, M. Moses, 
W
.S. Lane, Y
. Cao, E.H. Sage, and J. Folkman. 1994. Angiostatin: a novel 
angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates the suppression of metastases by a 
Lewis lung carcinoma. Cell. 79:315–328. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0092 
-8674(94)90200 
-3
Obeid, M., A. T
esniere, F
. Ghiringhelli, G.M. Fimia, L. Apetoh, J.L. Perfettini, 
M. Castedo, G. Mignot, 
T. Panaretakis, N. Casares, et al. 2007. Calreticulin 
exposure dictates the immunogenicity of cancer cell death. Nat. Med. 
13:54–61. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1523
Ormerod, E.J., C.A. Everett, and I.R. Hart. 1986. Enhanced experimental 
metastatic capacity of a human tumor line following treatment with 
5-azacytidine. Cancer Res. 46:884–890.
Orr, F
.W
., I.Y
. Adamson, and L. Y
oung. 1986. Promotion of pulmonary me-
tastasis in mice by bleomycin-induced endothelial injury. Cancer Res. 
46:891–897.
Panigrahy, D., M.L. Edin, C.R. Lee, S. Huang, D.R. Bielenberg, C.E. 
Butterfield, C.M. Barnés, A. Mammoto, T. Mammoto, A. Luria, et al. 
2012. Epoxyeicosanoids stimulate multiorgan metastasis and tumor 
dormancy escape in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 122:178–191. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI58128
Parhar, R.S., and P
.K. Lala. 1987. Amelioration of B16F10 melanoma lung 
metastasis in mice by a combination therapy with indomethacin and 
interleukin 2. J. Exp. Med. 165:14–28. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.165 
.1 
.14
Perretti, M., N. Chiang, M. La, I.M. Fierro, S. Marullo, S.J. Getting, E. Solito, 
and C.N. Serhan. 2002. Endogenous lipid- and peptide-derived anti-
inflammatory pathways generated with glucocorticoid and aspirin 
treatment activate the lipoxin A4 receptor. Nat. Med. 8:1296–1302. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm786
Pisco, A.O., and S. Huang. 2015. Non-genetic cancer cell plasticity and 
therapy-induced stemness in tumour relapse: ‘What does not kill me 
strengthens me’. Br. J. Cancer. 112:1725–1732. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/bjc 
.2015 
.146
Pol, J., E. Vacchelli, F
. Aranda, F
. Castoldi, A. Eggermont, I. Cremer, C. 
Sautès-Fridman, J. Fucikova, J. Galon, R. Spisek, et al. 2015. Trial 
Watch: Immunogenic cell death inducers for anticancer chemotherapy. 
OncoImmunology. 4:e1008866. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1080 
/2162402X 
.2015 
.1008866
Poth, K.J., A.D. Guminski, G.P
. Thomas, P
.J. Leo, I.A. Jabbar, and N.A. 
Saunders. 2010. Cisplatin treatment induces a transient increase in 
tumorigenic potential associated with high interleukin-6 expression in 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Mol. Cancer 
Ther. 9:2430–2439. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1535 
-7163 
.MCT 
-10 
-0258
Qian, B.Z., and J.W
. Pollard. 2010. Macrophage diversity enhances tumor 
progression and metastasis. Cell. 141:39–51. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2010 
.03 
.014
Reers, S., A.C. Pfannerstill, D. Rades, R. Maushagen, M. Andratschke, R. 
Pries, and B. Wollenberg. 2013. Cytokine changes in response to radio-/
chemotherapeutic treatment in head and neck cancer. Anticancer Res. 
33:2481–2489.
 Resolvins mediate clearance of tumor cell debris | Sulciner et al.
140
Reiter, I., B. Krammer, and G. Schwamberger. 1999. Cutting edge: differential 
effect of apoptotic versus necrotic tumor cells on macrophage antitumor 
activities. J. Immunol. 163:1730–1732.
Révész, L. 1956. Effect of tumour cells killed by x-rays upon the growth of 
admixed viable cells. Nature. 178:1391–1392. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/1781391a0
Rothwell, P
.M., M. Wilson, J.F
. Price, J.F
. Belch, T.W
. Meade, and Z. Mehta. 
2012. Effect of daily aspirin on risk of cancer metastasis: a study of 
incident cancers during randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 379:1591–
1601. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(12)60209 
-8
Schif-Zuck, S., N. Gross, S. Assi, R. Rostoker, C.N. Serhan, and A. Ariel. 
2011. Saturated-efferocytosis generates pro-resolving CD11b low 
macrophages: modulation by resolvins and glucocorticoids. Eur. J. 
Immunol. 41:366–379. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.201040801
Seelig, K.J., and L. Revesz. 1960. Effect of lethally damaged tumour cells 
upon the growth of admixed viable cells in diffusion chambers. Br. J. 
Cancer. 14:126–138. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/bjc 
.1960 
.15
Serhan, C.N. 2014. Pro-resolving lipid mediators are leads for resolution 
physiology. Nature. 510:92–101. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature13479
Serhan, C.N., S. Hong, K. Gronert, S.P
. Colgan, P
.R. Devchand, G. Mirick, 
and R.L. Moussignac. 2002. Resolvins. J. Exp. Med. 196:1025–1037. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20020760
Shan, C.C., L.R. Shi, M.Q. Ding, Y
.B. Zhu, X.D. Li, B. Xu, J.T. Jiang, and 
C.P
. Wu. 2015. Cytokine-induced killer cells co-cultured with dendritic 
cells loaded with the protein lysate produced by radiofrequency ablation 
induce a specific antitumor response. Oncol. Lett. 9:1549–1556. https 
://
doi 
.org 
/10 
.3892 
/ol 
.2015 
.2977
Spite, M., L.V
. Norling, L. Summers, R. Yang, D. Cooper, N.A. Petasis, R.J. 
Flower, M. Perretti, and C.N. Serhan. 2009. Resolvin D2 is a potent 
regulator of leukocytes and controls microbial sepsis. Nature. 461:1287–
1291. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature08541
Stienstra, R., W
. Dijk, L. van Beek, H. Jansen, M. Heemskerk, R.H. 
Houtkooper, S. Denis, V
. van Harmelen, K. Willems van Dijk, C.J. Tack, 
and S. Kersten. 2014. Mannose-binding lectin is required for the effective 
clearance of apoptotic cells by adipose tissue macrophages during obesity. 
Diabetes. 63:4143–4153. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/db14 
-0256
Stuart, L.M., K. Takahashi, L. Shi, J. Savill, and R.A. Ezekowitz. 2005. 
Mannose-binding lectin-deficient mice display defective apoptotic cell 
clearance but no autoimmune phenotype. J. Immunol. 174:3220–3226. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.174 
.6 
.3220
Sun, B., Y
. Sun, J. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Wang, and X. Hao. 2006. Extent, 
relationship and prognostic significance of apoptosis and cell proliferation 
in synovial sarcoma. Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 15:258–265. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1097 
/01 
.cej 
.0000198896 
.02185 
.68
Sun, Y
.P
., S.F
. Oh, J. Uddin, R. Yang, K. Gotlinger, E. Campbell, S.P
. Colgan, 
N.A. Petasis, and C.N. Serhan. 2007. Resolvin D1 and its aspirin-
triggered 17R epimer. Stereochemical assignments, anti-inflammatory 
properties, and enzymatic inactivation. J. Biol. Chem. 282:9323–9334. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M609212200
Tesniere, A., F
. Schlemmer, V
. Boige, O. Kepp, I. Martins, F
. Ghiringhelli, L. 
Aymeric, M. Michaud, L. Apetoh, L. Barault, et al. 2010. Immunogenic 
death of colon cancer cells treated with oxaliplatin. Oncogene. 29:482–
491. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/onc 
.2009 
.356
Titos, E., B. Rius, A. González-Périz, C. López-Vicario, E. Morán-Salvador, 
M. Martínez-Clemente, V
. Arroyo, and J. Clària. 2011. Resolvin D1 and 
its precursor docosahexaenoic acid promote resolution of adipose tissue 
inflammation by eliciting macrophage polarization toward an M2-
like phenotype. J. Immunol. 187:5408–5418. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/
jimmunol 
.1100225
Todryk, S., A.A. Melcher, N. Hardwick, E. Linardakis, A. Bateman, M.P
. 
Colombo, A. Stoppacciaro, and R.G. Vile. 1999. Heat shock protein 70 
induced during tumor cell killing induces 
Th1 cytokines and targets im-
mature dendritic cell precursors to enhance antigen uptake. J. Immunol. 
163:1398–1408.
Unga, J., and M. Hashida. 2014. Ultrasound induced cancer immunotherapy. 
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 72:144–153. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.addr 
.2014 
.03 
.004
van den Brenk, H.A., M.C. Crowe, and M.G. Stone. 1977. Reactions of the 
tumour bed to lethally irradiated tumour cells, and the Révész effect. Br. 
J. Cancer. 36:94–104. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/bjc 
.1977 
.159
Volk-Draper, L., K. Hall, C. Griggs, S. Rajput, P
. Kohio, D. DeNardo, and 
S. Ran. 2014. Paclitaxel therapy promotes breast cancer metastasis in a 
TLR4-dependent manner. Cancer Res. 74:5421–5434. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-14 
-0067
Vyas, D., G. Laput, and A.K. Vyas. 2014. Chemotherapy-enhanced 
inflammation may lead to the failure of therapy and metastasis. Onco 
Targets Ther. 7:1015–1023. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.2147 
/OTT 
.S60114
Wang, D., and R.N. DuBois. 2010. Eicosanoids and cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 
10:181–193. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrc2809
Wong, K., P
.A. Valdez, C. Tan, S. Y
eh, J.A. Hongo, and W
. Ouyang. 2010. 
Phosphatidylserine receptor Tim-4 is essential for the maintenance of 
the homeostatic state of resident peritoneal macrophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA. 107:8712–8717. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0910929107
Wyllie, A.H. 1985. The biology of cell death in tumours. Anticancer Res. 
5:131–136.
Yu, Y
., L. Tian, X. Feng, J. Cheng, Y
. Gong, X. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Yang, S. 
He, C.Y
. Li, and Q. Huang. 2016. eIF4E-phosphorylation-mediated 
Sox2 upregulation promotes pancreatic tumor cell repopulation after 
irradiation. Cancer Lett. 375:31–38. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.canlet 
.2016 
.02 
.052
Zeisberger, S.M., B. Odermatt, C. Marty, A.H. Zehnder-Fjällman, K. Ballmer-
Hofer, and R.A. Schwendener. 2006. Clodronate-liposome-mediated 
depletion of tumour-associated macrophages: a new and highly effective 
antiangiogenic therapy approach. Br. J. Cancer. 95:272–281. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/sj 
.bjc 
.6603240
