 2-Hydroxyglutarate produced by neomorphic IDH mutations 
suppresses homologous recombination and induces PARP 
inhibitor sensitivity
Parker L. Sulkowski1,2,†, Christopher D. Corso1,†, Nathaniel D. Robinson1, Susan E. 
Scanlon1,3, Karin R. Purshouse1, Hanwen Bai2, Yanfeng Liu1, Ranjini K. Sundaram1, Denise 
C. Hegan1, Nathan R. Fons1,3, Gregory A. Breuer1,3, Yuanbin Song4, Ketu Mishra-Gorur5, 
Henk De Feyter6, Robin A. de Graaf6, Yulia V. Surovtseva7, Maureen Kachman8, Stephanie 
Halene4, Murat Günel2,5, Peter M. Glazer1,2,*, and Ranjit S. Bindra1,3,*
1Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520
2Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520
3Department of Experimental Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520
4Section of Hematology/Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT 06520
5Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520
6Department Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT 06520
7Yale Center for Molecular Discovery, West Haven, Connecticut 06516
8Michigan Regional Comprehensive Metabolomics Resource Core (RCMRC) NIEHS Children’s 
Health Exposure Analysis Resource (CHEAR) for Metabolomics University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109
Abstract
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Ranjit S. Bindra (ranjit.bindra@yale.edu) and Peter M. Glazer 
(peter.glazer@yale.edu), Department of Therapeutic Radiology, 333 Cedar St., New Haven, CT 06520.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author contributions.
P.L.S., and C.D.C., contributed experiments, scientific hypotheses, data analysis, and compiling of the manuscript. N.D.R., S.E.S., 
K.R.P., Y.F., R.K.S, D.C.H., N.R.F., Y.S., K.M., H.dF., R.dG., Y.V.S., and M.K. contributed to experiments. M.G., H.B. and G.A.B. 
contributed data analysis. S.H., P.M.G., and R.S.B. designed experiments. P.L.S., C.D.C., P.M.G., and R.S.B. wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests.
Ranjit Bindra and Peter Glazer are inventors on US patent application No. 62/344,678 submitted by Yale University, which covers 
compositions and methods for targeting and treating homologous recombination-deficient tumors.
Materials and data availability.
The in-house software written in MATLAB (Mathworks) is available for download by directly contacting Dr. Robin de Graaf (http://
mrrc.yale.edu/faculty/robin_degraaf.profile). For all other reagents and data requests, please contact Dr. Ranjit Bindra 
(ranjit.bindra@yale.edu).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Transl Med. 2017 February 01; 9(375): . doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aal2463.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2-Hydroxyglutarate (2HG) exists as two enantiomers, (R)-2HG and (S)-2HG, and both are 
implicated in tumor progression via their inhibitory effects on α-ketoglutarate (αKG)-dependent 
dioxygenases. The former is an oncometabolite that is induced by the neomorphic activity 
conferred by isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 and -2 (IDH1/2) mutations, whereas the latter is produced 
under pathologic processes such as hypoxia. Here, we report that IDH1/2 mutations induce a 
homologous recombination (HR) defect that renders tumor cells exquisitely sensitive to poly 
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. This “BRCAness” phenotype of IDH mutant cells 
can be completely reversed by treatment with small molecule inhibitors of the mutant IDH1 
enzyme, and, conversely, it can be entirely recapitulated by treatment with either 2HG enantiomer 
alone in cells with intact IDH1/2 proteins. We demonstrate IDH1-dependent PARP inhibitor 
sensitivity in a range of clinically relevant models, including primary patient-derived glioma cells 
in culture and genetically matched tumor xenografts in vivo. These findings provide the basis for a 
possible therapeutic strategy exploiting the biological consequences of mutant IDH, rather than 
attempting to block 2HG production, by targeting the 2HG-dependent HR-deficiency with PARP 
inhibition. Furthermore, our results uncover an unexpected link between oncometabolites, altered 
DNA repair, and genetic instability.
Introduction
The normal function of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) enzymes is to catalyze the 
conversion of isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate (αKG) in the citric acid cycle. Recurring IDH1 
mutations were identified in two independent cancer genome sequencing projects focused on 
gliomas and acute myeloid leukemia (AML; (1, 2)). Subsequent studies revealed that IDH1 
mutations occur in more than 70% of low grade gliomas and up to 20% of higher grade 
tumors (secondary glioblastoma multiforme; GBM), and approximately 10% of AML cases 
(3), 10% of cholangiocarcinoma (4), as well as in melanomas (5) and chondrosarcomas (6). 
Additionally, mutations were also identified in IDH2, the mitochondrial homolog of IDH1, 
in about 4% of gliomas and 10% of AMLs (3, 7). Nearly all known IDH1/2 alterations are 
heterozygous missense mutations that confer a neomorphic activity on the encoded enzymes, 
such that they convert α-KG to (R)-2HG (8). Emerging research indicates that (R)-2HG is 
an oncometabolite, with pleiotropic effects on cell biology including chromatin methylation 
and cellular differentiation, although many questions remain about its impact on 
tumorigenesis and therapy response (9). In addition, the (S)-enantiomer of 2HG was recently 
found to be produced at high concentrations in renal cell cancer (10) and in response to 
hypoxia (11, 12). Both (R)- and (S)-2HG appear to exert their regulatory effects via the 
inhibition of αKG-dependent dioxygenases (13). Emerging data also indicate subsets of 
breast cancers produce 2HG at high concentrations in the absence of IDH1/2-mutations, thus 
expanding the clinical relevance of these molecules to other solid tumors (14, 15).
IDH1 and IDH2 small molecule inhibitors, which block the production of (R)-2HG by the 
mutant enzyme, are being developed and tested in clinical trials for both glioma and AML, 
with the underlying assumption that blocking IDH neomorphic activity alone will abrogate 
tumor growth (16). Yet several recent clinical studies suggest that patients with IDH1/2-
mutant gliomas and cholangiocarcinomas have longer median survival times than their WT 
counterparts, which in many cases correlates with a favorable response to conventional 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 2
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 radiotherapy and chemotherapy (1, 3, 17–21). These findings have prompted us to 
hypothesize that exploiting, rather than reverting, the IDH1/2-mutant phenotype might be a 
more effective therapeutic strategy. We thus sought to further characterize the impact of 
IDH1/2 mutations to identify alternative therapeutic strategies that could exploit the 
profound molecular changes associated with 2HG production.
Results
IDH1/2-mutant cells are deficient in DNA double-strand break repair by homologous 
recombination
Clinical studies suggest a link between IDH1/2 mutations and enhanced chemo- and radio-
sensitivity, although the underlying mechanistic basis for this observation is poorly 
understood (20, 21). We sought to determine whether these sensitivities could arise from 
intrinsic DSB repair defects, which enhance cells’ susceptibility to DNA-damaging agents 
(22). We tested two different cell lines engineered to contain a heterozygous arginine (R) to 
histidine (H) mutation at codon 132 (R132H) in our study: (1) an IDH1-mutant HCT116 cell 
line generated using recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) targeting, and (2) a HeLa 
cell line in which we introduced the same mutation by CRISPR/Cas9-based gene targeting. 
Our IDH1 gene editing strategy is presented in fig. S1A–E. We confirmed that the single cell 
IDH1-mutant HeLa clone was identical in origin to the parental HeLa cell line that we 
modified using CRISPR/Cas-based targeting by STR analysis, rather than a contaminant 
from another IDH1-mutant cell line in culture (tables S1 and 2). In parallel, we created 
human erythroleukemia (HEL) cell lines with stably integrated, doxycycline (dox)-inducible 
IDH1/2-WT and -mutant open reading frames (ORFs). We reasoned that the use of multiple 
matched cell line pairs, each isogenic and differing only by mutant IDH1/2 protein 
expression, would allow us to precisely test whether these proteins induced a DSB repair 
defect.
We first confirmed mutant IDH1 protein expression in HCT116 and HeLa cells by western 
blot analysis (Fig. 1A). We detected an approximately 100-fold increase in (R)-2HG 
production by LC/MS comparing IDH1 mutant HeLa and HCT116 cells to WT controls 
(Fig. 1B). We detected 2HG in these cell lines by two other methods for additional 
validation, including a previously published enzyme-based detection assay and 1H NMR 
(figs. S1F and S1G, respectively; (23)). We also observed lower concentrations of 
intracellular NAD+ in IDH1-mutant cells, in keeping with previous reports (24), and we 
confirmed that the induced (R)-2HG could be suppressed by a known IDH1 inhibitor (figs. 
S1H and S1I, respectively; (16)). We then confirmed dox-inducible expression of the IDH1 
and IDH2 proteins in HEL cells by western blot analysis (Figs. 1C and 1D, respectively), 
which correlated with increased (R)-2HG production specifically after mutant IDH1/2 
protein expression (fig. S1J). Contrary to previous reports suggesting a growth advantage in 
IDH1/2-mutant cells (16), we observed slightly delayed growth kinetics in IDH1/2-mutant 
versus WT cells for all four pairs in vitro (figs. S1K–N). No major changes were observed in 
cell cycle phase distribution, and no differences were observed in the necrotic or apoptotic 
fractions between IDH1-WT and -mutant cells (figs. S1O and S1P, respectively).
Sulkowski et al.
Page 3
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Next, we sought to assess the intrinsic DSB repair capacities of our functionally validated 
collection of engineered IDH1-WT and -mutant cell lines. We used the neutral comet assay 
to measure persistence of DSBs after IR, which is a classic approach to assess functional 
DSB repair activity (25). We detected a markedly reduced capacity to repair DSBs after IR 
exposure in IDH1-mutant HCT116 cells, which was in the same range as that observed in a 
genetically matched HCT116 cell line with a homozygous knockout of DNA-PKcs, a key 
DSB repair gene involved in non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) (Fig. 1E; (26)). Similar 
results were observed in the HeLa cell line pair (Fig. 1F), and in both cases these differences 
were correlated with enhanced radiosensitivity in the IDH1-mutant cells, as detected by 
clonogenic survival assays (figs. S2A and S2B). Mutant IDH1-dependent radiosensitivity 
was also observed in the HEL cell line in a short-term viability assay; these are suspension 
cell lines, and thus clonogenic survival assays are not readily feasible (fig. S2C).
We also observed increased persistence of unrepaired DSBs at baseline (in the absence of 
irradiation) specifically in the IDH1-mutant HCT116 and HeLa cells (Fig. 1G). This 
phenotype of constitutively increased DSBs could also be induced by transient expression of 
mutant, but not WT, IDH1 and IDH2 proteins in HEL cells (Figs. 1H and 1I, respectively). 
Given the marked increase in comet tail moments (~4-fold) after induction of mutant IDH1 
protein over-expression in log phase cells, we sought to test whether we could observe the 
same phenotype in another genetic background. Indeed, we confirmed markedly increased 
comet tail moments (~4-fold) in the human monocytic cell line, THP1, specifically after 
expression of mutant IDH1 protein in log phase cells (fig. S2D).
We then performed DNA damage foci studies in log-phase IDH1-WT and -mutant cells to 
assess whether the increased comet tail moments in the latter cells correlated with larger 
amounts of DNA damage that could be directly visualized. As shown in Fig. 1J, we detected 
substantially increased γH2AX and phospho-53BP1 foci, indicative of DNA DSBs, in both 
HCT116 and HeLa IDH1-mutant cells (representative microscopy images are shown in fig. 
S2E and S2F). Cells harboring DSB repair defects, including HR gene aberrations, are 
known to develop increased DSBs in the absence of DNA damaging agent exposure (27). 
For comparison, we examined DNA damage foci patterns in HR-proficient and -deficient 
cell lines using the exact protocols and conditions that were used to assay the IDH mutant 
cells, as above. We found basally elevated DNA damage foci (fig. S2G) and concomitant 
persistent DNA DSBs measured by neutral comet assay (fig. S2H) in the HR-deficient cell 
lines (lacking functional BRCA2), which were similar in magnitude to those observed in the 
IDH1-mutant cell lines.
The results above suggest that IDH1/2-mutant cells harbor an intrinsic DSB repair defect, 
which prompted us to directly interrogate the integrity of HR and NHEJ in these cells. To 
this end, we used plasmid reporter assays recently developed by our group, which compare 
relative DSB repair activity between cell lines or conditions (schematic shown in Fig. 2A;
(28)). We observed a marked deficiency in HR in HCT116 and HeLa IDH1-mutant cells 
compared to their WT counterparts, whereas no differences were observed in the other major 
DSB repair pathway, NHEJ (Figs. 2B and 2C, respectively). The ability of these assays to 
report on pathway-specific DSB repair defects have been demonstrated previously(28), and 
representative data validating the ability to measure NHEJ repair are shown in fig. S2I 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 4
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (validation data for HR are presented below). Once again, we confirmed that this HR defect 
could be recapitulated by the expression of mutant, but not WT, IDH1 or IDH2 proteins in 
the HEL cells (Fig. 2D), with no observed effects on NHEJ repair (fig. S2J). As above, we 
observed normal cell cycle phase distributions, which ruled out the possibility of a 
confounding effect arising from altered cell cycle phase distribution (fig. S1O) Collectively, 
these data establish a mutant IDH1/2-dependent HR defect.
IDH1 R132H mutant cells are selectively killed by PARP inhibitors
It is well established that HR defects confer sensitivity to small molecule inhibitors of 
specific DNA repair pathways via synthetic lethal interactions (29). We thus performed a 
focused screen for DNA repair inhibitors that might selectively target IDH1-mutant cells, 
using a high-throughput, short-term cell growth inhibition assay (schematic shown in fig. 
S3A, and representative data from the primary screen shown in fig. S3B). These studies 
revealed a marked synthetic lethal interaction between the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 
(PARP) inhibitor, BMN-673, and the IDH1 R132H mutation (Fig. 2E). We also detected a 
substantial synthetic lethal interaction with the ATR inhibitor, VE-822 (30). Further, we 
observed synthetic lethal interactions with several other PARP inhibitors, including olaparib, 
MK-4827, and rucaparib (fig. S3C) in IDH1 R132H-mutant HeLa cells. Synthetic lethality 
with BMN-673 was also observed in the HCT116 IDH1-mutant cells using the same short-
term viability assay (fig. S3D). In both HCT116 and HeLa cell lines, we observed a 10-fold 
increase in cell killing with BMN-673 in IDH-mutant vs. -WT cells in the viability assays. 
The magnitude of synthetic lethality was similar to that observed in BRCA2-deficient 
ovarian cancer cells treated with these PARP inhibitors, as measured under similar short-
term assay conditions (fig. S3E). Mutant IDH1-dependent PARP inhibitor synthetic lethality 
was further confirmed in longer-term clonogenic survival assays based on colony formation 
in both the HCT116 and HeLa cell line pairs (Fig. 2F). We observed substantial sensitivity 
of the respective IDH1-mutant cells to BMN-673 in both cases, with an approximately 10-
fold decrease in cell survival compared to WT cells at a dose of 10 nM. We observed a 3-
fold decrease in survival when IDH1 R132H/+ Hela cells were treated with MK-4827 and 
rucaparib (figs. S4A and S4B). In the case of another PARP inhibitor, olaparib, both 
HCT116 and HeLa IDH1-mutant cell lines demonstrated exquisite sensitivity, with relative 
killing compared WT cells exceeding 45-fold (Fig. 2G). Similarly, olaparib demonstrated a 
substantial increase (nearly 8-fold) in relative HEL cell kill after expression of the mutant, 
but not WT, IDH1 protein (fig. S4C). To further extend these findings, we also found that 
mutant IDH1 protein overexpression was sufficient to confer PARP inhibitor sensitivity in 
the THP1 cell line, for both olaparib and BMN-673 (figs. S4D and S4E respectively). In 
parallel, we found that the BMN-673 and olaparib concentrations associated with enhanced 
killing in IDH1-mutant versus -WT cells also induced an IDH1 R132H mutant-specific 
increase in DSBs at these same doses (Figs. 2H and 2I, respectively). This particular finding 
has been observed in BRCA2-deficient tumor cells previously, which further highlights the 
similarities in the extent of the DSB repair defect observed in IDH1/2-mutant and BRCA-
deficient cells (31).
PARP inhibitors are synergistic with platinum-based chemotherapeutics (32), particularly in 
HR-deficient cells (33). This interaction has formed the basis for a number of clinical trials 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 5
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 testing these agents together in BRCA1 and BRCA2-deficient tumors (34, 35). We thus 
sought to test whether we could detect a similar interaction in IDH1-mutant cells. To this 
end, we tested a range of doses of cisplatin and BMN-673, either alone or in combination, in 
HeLa IDH1-WT and –mutant cells, and we measured viabilities using the short-term growth 
assays presented above. We analyzed the data using a validated, open-access software tool to 
assess and quantify possible drug combination effects in terms of synergy versus antagonism 
(36). Using a classical Lowe synergy model, we detected a substantial synergistic interaction 
between cisplatin and BMN-673 in HeLa cells, which was notably higher in IDH1-mutant 
vs. -WT cells (36). The synergy scores are presented in both a matrix format and as surface 
plots in Fig. 2J, and relative cell kill data are presented in figs. S4F and S4G. An example is 
highlighted by the red squares in the matrix plots in Fig. 2J, specifically at doses of cisplatin 
which do not affect viability in either cell line when given alone (see fig. S4G). Synergy 
scores were increased on average by approximately 2-fold under these conditions in IDH1-
mutant versus -WT cells (which correlated with an approximately 50% increase in cell kill). 
Combined together with the functional DSB repair assay presented earlier, these data 
support the presence of an HR defect in IDH1/2-mutant cells, which renders them sensitive 
to PARP inhibitors, alone or in combination with cisplatin.
2HG is sufficient to induce mutant IDH1-dependent HR deficiency and PARP inhibitor 
sensitivity
Next, we investigated the mechanism by which IDH1 mutations confer an HR defect. As 
discussed earlier, nearly all mutant IDH1/2 proteins acquire neomorphic activity resulting in 
the production of 2HG, and this oncometabolite is thought to be a major driver of 
tumorigenesis (9). We thus tested whether 2HG itself could induce the HR defect that is seen 
in IDH1-mutant cells. We found that treatment of IDH1-WT HeLa cells with (2R)-octyl-α-
hydroxyglutarate ((2R)-octyl-2-HG), a modified form of 2HG with high cellular uptake, 
resulted in a dose-dependent increase in DSBs in log-phase cells, and similar effects were 
observed with the (S) enantiomer of 2HG (Fig. 3A). We found that 900 μM of exogenously 
added 2HG, a dose that yields an intracellular concentration of 2HG similar to the actual 
concentration found in HeLa cells with a heterozygous IDH1-mutation as measured in the 
same assay (fig. S5A), induced the highest amount of DSBs in these experiments (Fig 3A). 
The increased comet tail moments after 2HG addition were similar to those observed in 
IDH1-mutant cells and to those observed in WT cells after 5 Gy of IR (fig. S5B). Of note, 
treatment of IDH1-mutant HeLa cells with 2HG did not further increase the already greater 
persistence of DSBs, although IR treatment did increase the amounts of DSBs in these cells. 
Treatment of plasmid DNA with 2HG in vitro for 8 hours did not induce any DNA cleavage, 
which ruled out any possible direct effect of this molecule on DNA (fig. S5C). The 
appearance of unrepaired DSBs after 2HG addition was rapid in HCT116 and HeLa IDH1-
WT cells, occurring within 2 hours of exposure of cells to the molecule (fig. S5D and S5E), 
which is suggestive of a post-translational mechanism of action rather than an effect 
mediated through changes in transcription. Further, we found that 2HG exposure induced 
increased rates of DSBs in a range of cell lines with diverse genetic backgrounds, including 
immortalized astrocytes, primary melanoma cultures, breast cancer cell lines, and U2OS 
osteosarcoma cells (Figs. 3B, 3C, fig. S5F, and fig. S5G, respectively), suggesting that this is 
a fundamental effect of this metabolite.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 6
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We then tested the effect of 2HG directly on HR using the well-established, chromosomally 
integrated HR reporter assay, DR-GFP, in IDH1-WT U2OS cells. These cells were chosen 
because they are widely used as a tool to measure factors that impact HR (37). HR 
suppression by 2HG was dose-dependent and was observed with both R- and S- 
enantiomers, whereas no effects were seen with α-KG (Fig. 3D) (schematic and an example 
of the flow cytometry read-out are shown in Fig. 3E). Suppression of HR by 2HG in the 
U2OS cells was dramatic, and it approached the extent of suppression seen with siRNAs 
targeting two key HR genes, RAD51 and BRCA2 (Fig. 3F). In IDH1-WT HCT116 and 
HeLa cells, exposure to 2HG recapitulated the HR defect that is otherwise seen in the IDH1-
mutant versions of these cells (Fig. 3G; compare to Fig. 2B and 2C, respectively).
Returning to the plasmid-based assay, we further determined that treatment with 2HG was 
able to phenocopy the magnitude of the BRCA-deficient HR phenotype seen in two 
independent matched cell line pairs with or without inactivating BRCA2 mutations (Fig. 3G; 
BRCA2 WT and deficient DLD1 pair, and BRCA2 WT and deficient PEO1 C4-2 and PEO1 
pair; the expected reduction in HR measured in the BRCA2-deficient cells provides 
validation for the assay). In keeping with the effect of 2HG itself, on HR capacity, we found 
that treatment of WT HCT116 cells with 2HG conferred increased PARP inhibitor 
sensitivity (Figs. 3H and 3I).
We also sought to test the effects of manipulating endogenously produced 2HG on baseline 
DSBs and HR repair activity. To this end, we treated IDH1-WT and –mutant cells with 
siRNAs targeting mRNAs for either IDH1 or L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase 
(L2HGDH). Knockdown of L2HGDH, which metabolizes (S)-2HG, was recently shown to 
increase (S)-2HG in log-phase, normoxic cells (38). As shown in fig. S6A and S6B, IDH1 
siRNA knockdown reduced the high amounts of DSBs in IDH1-mutant HeLa cells, with no 
effects on the IDH-WT cell line, which is consistent with the findings presented above that 
mutant IDH1-generated (R)-2HG induces baseline high amounts of DSBs. In contrast, 
siRNAs targeting L2HGDH increased baseline DSBs in both the IDH1-WT and -mutant 
HeLa cells, in keeping with the effects of (S)-2HG on HR as shown above. Further, 
treatment of U2OS DR-GFP cells with L2HGDH siRNAs suppressed HR (fig. S6B and 
S6C). Collectively, these data establish (R)-2HG as the mediator of HR suppression and 
consequent PARP inhibitor sensitivity in IDH1/2-mutant cells and further demonstrate that 
the enantiomer, (S)-2HG, which is produced by other pathways (and increases upon 
knockdown of its respective dehydrogenase), can have similar effects.
The 2HG-induced BRCAness occurs via inhibition of specific αKG-dependent 
dioxygenases
Both the (R) and (S) forms of 2HG are thought exert their effects primarily via direct 
inhibition of αKG-dependent dioxygenases, which prompted us to test whether we could 
induce a similar HR defect via treatment with a known inhibitor of these proteins, 
dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG; (39)). DMOG is a structural analog of αKG in which the -
CH2-moiety has been replaced by an -NH-, and it acts as a competitive inhibitor of αKG-
dependent dioxygenases (13, 39). As shown in Fig. 3J, treatment of IDH1-WT U2OS DR-
GFP cells with DMOG resulted in a dose-dependent increase in baseline DSBs, which 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 7
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 correlated with dose-dependent HR suppression (Fig 3K). No major changes in cell cycle 
phase distribution were observed after treatment with DMOG (or with the octyl ester forms 
of 2HG or αKG), and thus these effects cannot be explained by a confounding G1/G0-arrest 
phenotype (Figure S6D). Next, we tested if exogenous αKG could rescue the IDH1-R132H 
dependent DNA repair defect. Exogenous αKG was able to suppress the persistence of DNA 
DSBs in IDH1 R132H/+ HeLa cells down to amounts observed in WT cells (Figure 3L). 
Additionally, exogenous αKG was able to rescue the HR suppression of 2HG in the DR-
GFP assay (fig. S7A).
Next, we performed a focused siRNA screen targeting all major αKG-dependent 
dioxygenases, to identify the protein(s) involved in the 2HG-induced HR suppression 
phenotype. We used a U2OS DR-GFP cell line optimized for use in 96- and 384-well 
microplate screening campaigns that was recently published by our group (40). The genes 
that we targeted with pooled siRNAs (4 siRNAs per gene) are shown in table S3. This screen 
pointed to a handful of αKG-dependent dioxygenase genes, the knockdown of which 
yielded Z-scores (for the HR suppression phenotype) that clustered with the effects of 
exposure to (R)-2HG, (S)-2HG, and DMOG (Fig. 3M). Deconvolution of the corresponding 
siRNA pools narrowed the candidate list to two key αKG-dependent dioxygenase genes, 
KDM4A and KDM4B, based on the criteria that three or more siRNAs targeting these two 
genes substantially reduced HR activity compared to scrambled control siRNAs (Figs. 3N). 
Each of the active siRNAs (fig. S7B) also substantially amplified the baseline increased 
DSBs in IDH1-WT U2OS cells and HeLa cells, which served as an orthogonal validation of 
specificity (Fig. 3O and 3P). Notably, each of the 3 siRNAs targeting KDM4A and KDM4B 
were unable to further increase the DNA DSB persistence in IDH1 R132H cells, suggesting 
an epistatic relationship (Fig 3P). Expression of the KDM4A ORFs from two independent 
constructs, as well as expression of the ORF encoding KDM4B, were able to rescue the 
DNA DSB repair defect in IDH1 R132H cells, but had no effect on IDH1-WT cells (Fig. 3Q 
and fig. S7C and S7D), as measured by the neutral comet assay. Conversely, ORFs for the 
αKG-dependent dioxygenases KDM4C, KDM6A, KDM6B, EGLN3, and ALKBH7 were 
unable to rescue the DNA DSB repair defect in IDH mutant cells (Fig. 3Q and fig. S7D). We 
then tested whether we could induce a similar phenotype in the same IDH1-WT cells with a 
small molecule inhibitor of KDM4A/KDM4B, NSC-636819. As shown in fig. S7E, 
treatment of HCT116 IDH-WT cells with this compound induced a dose-dependent increase 
in DSBs, which approached the amount seen in untreated HCT116 IDH-mutant cells. We 
observed this phenotype at doses ranging from 12.5–50 μM, which is within the reported 
range for the activity of this agent in cell culture studies (41, 42). NSC-636819 treatment in 
HCT116 IDH-mutant cells did not further increase comet tail moments, suggesting an 
epistatic interaction with the mutant IDH1 gene. Additionally, we observed a decrease in HR 
measured by the U2OS DR-GFP assay after treatment with NSC-636819 (fig. S7F). Both 
KDM4A and KDM4B are histone lysine demethylases that play roles in the orchestration of 
DSB repair and recruitment of repair factors to sites of DNA damage (43, 44), providing the 
mechanistic basis to link 2HG inhibition of these dioxygenases to attenuation of DNA repair.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 8
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The DSB repair defect and the PARP inhibitor vulnerability in IDH1-mutant cells are 
reversed by treatment with inhibitors of mutant IDH
Next, we sought to test whether small molecule inhibitors of the mutant IDH1 enzyme, 
which potently block the production of 2HG, could block the DSB repair deficiency 
phenotype. Treatment with a selective IDH1 R132H inhibitor, AGI-5198, reduced the 
amounts of baseline DSBs in IDH1-mutant HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner and did 
so nearly to the extent seen in IDH-WT cells (Fig. 4A). AGI-5198 also reduced baseline 
DSBs in HCT116 IDH1-mutant cells (Fig. 4B). Representative images from the 
corresponding comet assays for both IDH1-mutant lines with and without AGI-5198 
treatment are shown in Fig. 4C. We next sought to rule out the possibility that off-target 
effects of AGI-5198 might be mediating the reversal of the baseline increased DSBs in 
IDH1-mutant cells. To this end, we confirmed a similar phenotype with two other 
structurally distinct inhibitors of mutant IDH1, AG-120 and IDH1-C227, in both IDH1-
mutant HCT116 and HeLa cells (Figs. 4D and 4E, respectively). We also demonstrated that 
the increased DSBs produced by induction of mutant IDH1 protein expression in HEL cells 
could be fully reversed by AGI-5198. This reversal could be overcome with simultaneous 
treatment of cells with (R)-2HG (Fig. 4F), to thereby provide increased 2HG independently 
of the inhibited mutant enzyme. Similarly, the greater persistence of PARP inhibitor-induced 
DSBs in IDH1-mutant HeLa cells was reversed by AGI-5198 (Fig. 4G). In contrast, 
AGI-5198 was unable to prevent increases in DSBs that were induced by exogenously added 
2HG (in both IDH1-WT and -mutant HeLa cells), demonstrating that the rescue effect of 
AGI-5198 in this experiment is specific for inhibition of the IDH1-mutant enzyme (Fig. 4G).
We also confirmed these findings in a cell line that harbors an endogenous IDH1 mutation 
by showing that baseline increased DSBs could be reversed by treatment with a small 
molecule inhibitor of the mutant protein. For this, we used HT1080 cells, a human sarcoma 
cell line which harbors a naturally occurring heterozygous R132C IDH1 mutation. We 
confirmed that this cell line produces high concentrations of (R)-2HG that are suppressed by 
AGI-5198 (fig. S7G), in keeping with prior work (45). As shown in Fig. 4H, we found that 
treatment of H1080 cells with AGI-5198 resulted in a reduction in mean comet tail 
moments.
In addition, we found that AGI-5198 treatment reverts the PARP inhibitor sensitivity seen in 
IDH1-mutant HeLa cells (Fig. 4I). Similarly, we found that the PARP inhibitor sensitivity 
conferred by induced mutant IDH1 protein expression in HEL cells could be reversed by 
AGI-5198 (Fig. 4J). We also tested the HT1080 cells (with an endogenous R132C IDH1 
mutation), and we found that AGI-5198 also substantially reduced the sensitivity of this cell 
line to both olaparib and BMN-673 (figs. S7H and S7I, respectively). Collectively, these data 
indicate that the DSB repair defect and the PARP inhibitor sensitivity caused by IDH1 
mutations are effectively reversed by treatment with a selective inhibitor of the mutant IDH1 
protein.
NAD+ levels do not play a role in mutant IDH1/2-induced PARP inhibitor sensitivity
Because it has been reported that IDH1-mutant cells can harbor low NAD+ concentrations 
(24), and because PARP enzymes use NAD+ as a substrate (46), we examined NAD status 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 9
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 under the conditions of our experiments. As shown in fig. S7J, BMN-673 did not suppress 
NAD+ in either WT or mutant HeLa cells. Also, treatment of wild-type HeLa with 2HG (at 
concentrations that mediate suppression of HR and confer PARP inhibitor sensitivity, as 
shown earlier) did not alter NAD concentrations. In contrast, treatment with FK866, an 
inhibitor of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) that depletes NAD+ (47), 
substantially reduced NAD+ concentrations in both cell lines, and served as a positive 
control for the ability to detect reduced NAD+ content in this assay. Collectively, these data 
rule out a role for altered NAD in the observed effects of 2HG on DSB repair function.
Patient-derived gliomas show IDH1 mutation-associated and 2HG-mediated HR 
suppression and PARP inhibitor sensitivity
Next, we sought to further establish the clinical relevance of our findings using a collection 
of early-passage, patient-derived IDH1-WT and -mutant glioma cell lines available at our 
institution (clinical characteristics are shown Fig. 5A). IDH1 mutations were confirmed by 
sequencing as reported previously (48), and we also confirmed that we could detect 2HG 
production in samples harboring an IDH1 R132H or R132C mutation (Fig. 5B). We detected 
increased baseline persistence of DSBs by comet assay in the primary glioma cell lines 
harboring IDH1 mutations, and we demonstrated that we could induce this phenotype in the 
WT glioma cell lines by the addition of 2HG. Representative images from the corresponding 
comet assays are shown in Fig. 5C, and quantitative data for each cell line are presented in 
Fig. 5D. The higher amounts of DSBs in the IDH1-mutant primary glioma cell lines (and 
also IDH1-WT cells treated with 2HG) correlated with increased γH2AX and 53BP1 foci 
(Figs. 5E and S8A, respectively). We transfected two IDH1-WT and two IDH1-mutant cell 
lines with our HR reporters, and in both cases we detected reduced HR capacities in the 
latter samples (Fig. 5F). Finally, although these are early-passage primary cells obtained 
directly from fresh glioma resection tissue, we nonetheless were able to perform clonogenic 
survival assays on a subset of them. We were able to detect PARP inhibitor sensitivity in two 
IDH1-mutant primary glioma cultures compared to two IDH1-WT cultures by clonogenic 
survival, and once again we found that 2HG exposure could recapitulate PARP inhibitor 
sensitivity in WT cultures (Fig. 5G).
The PARP inhibitor, olaparib, selectively inhibits the growth of IDH1-R132H mutant tumor 
xenografts
We next tested the extent to which IDH1 mutant-dependent PARP inhibitor sensitivity could 
be recapitulated in vivo using 3 independent subcutaneous xenograft tumor models. We 
chose to conduct in vivo efficacy studies with olaparib, because it showed close to a 50-fold 
difference in IDH1-mutant sensitivity in vitro. Moreover, olaparib is currently in clinical 
trials and is FDA-approved for numerous cancers, and thus the pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of this agent are well established. The purpose of our study was to 
determine whether we could detect a statistically significant, mutant IDH1-dependent 
difference in PARP inhibitor response in vivo.
To this end, we first implanted HT1080 cells harboring an endogenous IDH1 R132C 
mutation into the flanks of nude mice, and we observed a significant tumor growth delay in 
mice receiving olaparib treatment (beginning four days after tumor cell implantation) 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 10
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compared to vehicle control (ANOVA p=0.026; Figure 5H). Next, we sought to further 
confirm that this is an IDH mutant specific effect. To this end, we implanted HCT116 IDH1-
WT and R132H-mutant tumor cells into the flanks of nude mice, and, after confirmation of 
tumor formation by bioluminescence imaging (BLI), treated the mice with olaparib at 50 
mg/kg daily (versus vehicle control in both cases). We observed a striking (8-fold) and 
significant (ANOVA p=0.001; Fig. 5I) difference in tumor growth delay specific to the 
olaparib-treated IDH1-mutant xenograft as compared to the vehicle control. In contrast, 
exposure of HCT116 IDH1-WT xenografts to olaparib did not result in a statistically 
significant growth delay compared to vehicle (ANOVA p=0.30; Fig. 5J). Bioluminescence 
imaging demonstrated a marked reduction in the BLI signal in the IDH1-mutant xenografts 
after treatment of mice with olaparib as compared to vehicle control (Fig. 5K), whereas no 
differences in the BLI signal were observed in the IDH1-WT xenografts whether the mice 
were treated with olaparib or not (fig. S8B). We next sought to test a second genetically 
matched pair of xenograft models, the CRISPR-engineered IDH1-mutant HeLa cells and 
parental wild-type line. Treatment with olaparib induced a mutant-specific effect in this 
model as well, significantly inhibiting the growth of the IDH1-mutant HeLa tumor by 3-fold 
(ANOVA p=0.007; fig. S8C), without affecting the WT isogenic control tumor (ANOVA 
p=0.90; fig. S8D). In addition, we harvested untreated HCT116 IDH1-mutant tumor 
xenografts and untreated IDH WT xenografts and assayed for 2HG by 1H NMR, confirming 
that the IDH1-mutant tumors produced higher amounts of 2HG in vivo, as expected (fig. 
S8E).
Patient-derived AML cells show IDH1 mutation-associated and 2HG-mediated HR 
suppression and PARP inhibitor sensitivity
As an additional test of clinical relevance, we sought to determine whether we could detect a 
mutant IDH1/2-dependent DSB repair defect in primary bone marrow cultures derived from 
AML patients with tumors harboring IDH1 and IDH2 gene mutations. The clinical 
characteristics of four specimens from our institution are shown in Fig. 6A. We were able to 
successfully maintain and expand these cultures for several passages, and we confirmed log-
phase proliferation (representative cell cycle plots are shown in Fig. 6B for two samples). 
Similar to the results obtained with the primary glioma cell lines, we detected IDH-mutation 
associated increases in DSBs in a matched IDH1-WT and –mutant pair of primary samples, 
and similar results were obtained with a matched IDH2-WT and –mutant pair (Fig. 6C; 
representative comet images shown in Fig. 6D). We also detected increased radiosensitivity 
in both the IDH1- and IDH2-mutant AML cells compared to their WT counterparts (Fig. 
6E), which correlated with prolonged DSBs 24 h after IR (Fig. 6F).
Discussion
In summary, we report here that IDH1/2 mutations induce an HR defect that renders tumor 
cells sensitive to PARP inhibition. We validated this phenotype across five genetically 
diverse cell line pairs that were engineered to express either the WT or the mutant IDH1/2 
proteins, and we confirmed the observed DSB repair defect using multiple orthogonal 
functional assays. The IDH1-dependent PARP inhibitor sensitivities were profound, and 
approached a 50-fold difference compared to IDH1-WT cells, with the FDA-approved PARP 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 11
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inhibitor, olaparib. In addition, we demonstrated multiple aspects of the IDH1/2-induced 
BRCAness phenotype in a range of clinically relevant models, including patient-derived 
glioma cell lines, primary AML bone marrow cultures, a human sarcoma cell line carrying a 
naturally occurring IDH1 R132C mutation in cell culture and as a xenograft in mice, and 
two genetically matched pairs of tumor xenografts in mice. Mechanistically, this phenotype 
can be entirely recapitulated by exposure to either 2HG enantiomer, and it cannot be 
explained by the alterations in NAD+ that have been seen in IDH1/2-mutant cancers (24). 
Our data suggest that 2HG-induced HR suppression is mediated by direct inhibition of 
αKG-dependent dioxygenases, in particular KDM4A and KDM4B. We found that treatment 
with a mutant IDH1-specific small molecule inhibitor that potently suppresses 2HG 
production (similar to drugs in clinical trials) reversed the observed HR defect and 
eliminated the associated PARP inhibitor sensitivity. We demonstrated this reversal in both 
our mutant IDH1/2 cell lines and in a cell line harboring an endogenous IDH1 mutation. 
Reversal of the mutant IDH1-associated DSB repair defect was confirmed using three 
different small molecule inhibitors of the mutant protein, and also with siRNAs targeting the 
IDH1 gene, thus ruling out potential off-target effects of the inhibitors. A proposed 
mechanism of action is summarized in Fig. 6G.
Both IDH1 mutant-induced (R)-2HG and hypoxia-induced (S)-2HG suppress α-KG-
dependent dioxygenases, resulting in profound epigenetic reprogramming in cells (9, 11). 
We have previously shown that hypoxia suppresses HR, driving genetic instability and 
conferring a BRCAness phenotype in hypoxic tumor cells (49–51). It is tempting to 
speculate that the findings reported here may provide a shared mechanism by which hypoxia 
and IDH1/2 mutations promote genetic instability and tumor progression: through induction 
of 2HG and consequent suppression of HR, thereby also bestowing a vulnerability to PARP 
inhibition that can be therapeutically exploited. Clinical trials such as NCT01116648 are 
now testing synthetic lethal targeting of hypoxia-induced HR suppression by combining 
cediranib, an angiogenesis inhibitor that induces transient hypoxia, with PARP inhibitors as 
a therapeutic strategy, further highlighting the clinical relevance of the results presented 
here.
IDH1-mutant gliomas are chemo- and radiosensitive, although the mechanism underlying 
this enhanced sensitivity has been elusive (20). The findings presented here that IDH1/2 
mutations induce “BRCAness” provide a basis for this sensitivity. Because multiple PARP 
inhibitors are currently in clinical trials and one is FDA-approved for HR-deficient cancers 
(olaparib), our data suggest an urgent need to test these agents in IDH1-mutant gliomas and 
in other cancers with IDH1/2 mutations. Emerging evidence reveals that IDH1/2 mutations 
that generate (R)-2HG are also found in numerous other tumor types, including 
cholangiocarcinoma, chondrosarcoma, AML, melanoma, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer, 
liver cancer, and others (52). Furthermore, substantial 2HG production has been reported in 
a subset of breast cancers in the absence of IDH1/2 mutations (14, 15), and the (S) 
enantiomer is produced in some renal cell cancers (10). The (S) enantiomer is also generated 
in hypoxic cancer cells as noted above (11, 12). Because our data establish 2HG as 
necessary and sufficient for the induced BRCAness phenotype, it is likely that these other 
classes of tumors will be also susceptible to PARP inhibition. 2HG can be detected non-
invasively by a number of approaches, including LC/MS analyses of blood and urine 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 12
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specimens (53), as well as MR spectroscopy (54), and thus we suggest that 2HG could serve 
as a biomarker to identify HR-deficient tumors (independent of BRCA1/2 mutations) that 
will respond to PARP inhibitors.
Although the findings reported here have therapeutic implications, there are nonetheless 
some limitations to our work that warrant further study. For example, we did not study 
PARP inhibitor activity against IDH1/2-mutant glioma xenografts in vivo. We did 
demonstrate mutant IDH1-dependent PARP inhibitor sensitivity in primary, patient-derived 
glioma cells ex vivo, but these lines do not form tumors in mice, and so we were unable to 
test their response in vivo. A demonstration of the in vivo sensitivity of IDH1 mutant 
gliomas to PARP inhibition would be valuable to further support the direct translation of our 
findings into the clinic specifically for IDH1/2-mutant gliomas. Nonetheless, we have 
presented consistent data using a panel of IDH1-WT and -mutant tumor cell lines in a series 
of in vitro and in vivo assays, which taken together point to a tissue-agnostic suppression of 
HR repair and induction of PARP inhibitor sensitivity by 2HG and/or IDH mutation. 
Furthermore, we confirmed that 2HG exposure in immortalized human astrocytes induces a 
marked DSB repair defect. In addition, several PARP inhibitors penetrate the blood-brain 
barrier, including olaparib (55) and veliparib (56, 57), which further supports the eventual 
testing of PARP inhibitors against IDH1/2-mutant gliomas.
Small molecule inhibition of oncogenic kinases is a pillar of precision medicine in modern 
oncology (58), and this approach has been extrapolated to treat IDH1/2-mutant cancers with 
small molecule inhibitors of the neomorphic activity of the mutant protein (59). In the work 
reported here, we demonstrate that IDH1/2-mutations induce an unexpected HR defect and 
consequent vulnerability to PARP inhibition, and we propose that this vulnerability should 
be exploited rather than inhibited.
Materials and methods
Study design
The objective of the present study was to characterize IDH1/2 mutant cells and identify a 
mechanistic basis for synthetic lethal drug interactions. The sample sizes of the experiments 
were selected on the basis of previous experience. Data collection was stopped at a priori 
defined time points for all experiments. Animal experiments were performed in a 
confirmatory fashion with an a priori hypothesis and a priori endpoints for tumor growth 
delay. All in vitro experiments were carried out in biological triplicate and data are presented 
as +/− SEM. In vivo experiments were carried out in a blinded fashion with animals 
randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, and in vitro experiments were not 
blinded.
Clonogenic survival assay
Cells in culture were irradiated at varying doses of ionizing radiation. Four to six hours after 
irradiation, they were trypsinized, washed, counted, and seeded in 6-well plates in triplicate 
at 3-fold dilutions ranging from 9000 to 37 cells per well. Depending on colony size, these 
plates were kept in the incubator for 10 to 14 days. After incubation, colonies were washed 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 13
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in PBS, stained with crystal violet, and counted and quantified. For drug treatments, cells 
were counted and diluted in media containing various concentrations of drug. They were 
then immediately seeded in 6-well plates in triplicate at 3-fold dilutions, ranging from 9000 
to 37 cells per well. These plates were kept in the incubator for 10 to 14 days, after which 
they were washed in PBS, stained with crystal violet, and quantified. Data are presented as 
the mean +/− SD. A list of SF50 values for all clonogenic survival assays testing PARP 
inhibitors is shown in table S4.
Neutral comet assays
Neutral comet assays were performed per manufacturer’s protocol (Trevigen). Briefly, cells 
were trypsinized, washed with PBS, and replicates were suspended in LM Agarose 
(Trevigen). Neutral electrophoresis was conducted at 21 V for 1 h in the CometAssay 
Electrophoresis System (Trevigen). Data were collected with an EVOS FL microscope 
(Advanced Microscopy Group) and analyzed using Open Comet software(60). Data are 
presented as the mean +/− SEM for 3 biological replicates with more than 100 cells 
analyzed per replicate. Statistical analysis was by t-test.
Luciferase-based host-cell reactivation reporter assays for HDR and NHEJ
The HR luciferase reporter has been previously reported(28, 61) and was generated by 
cloning an inactivating I-SceI recognition site into the BstBI site 56 amino acids into the 
firefly luciferase gene in the gWIZ.Luciferase vector (Gelantis), and cloning a promoterless 
copy of the firefly luciferase open reading frame 700 base pairs downstream in reverse 
orientation as a donor template for HR. A DSB in the firefly luciferase gene was induced by 
I-SceI digestion and confirmed by electrophoresis. Linearized plasmid was transfected into 
cells to measure HR as a function of luciferase activity (firefly luciferase activity can only be 
restored by HR, which removes the inactivating I-SceI site). The NHEJ assay has been 
previously reported(50, 62) To assay NHEJ, a HindIII-mediated DSB was generated 
between the promoter and the coding region of the firefly luciferase gene in the pGL3-
Control Vector (Promega) and confirmed by electrophoresis. After transfection of linearized 
plasmid, repair of the DSB by NHEJ restores firefly luciferase activity. All reporter assays 
were performed in 12-well format by seeding 7 × 104 cells per well 24 h before transfection 
and transfecting 1 μg of reporter or positive control vector and 50 ng Renilla luciferase 
vector per well. For HR, cells were analyzed 48 h after reporter transfection, and for NHEJ, 
cells were analyzed 24 h after reporter transfection. Luciferase activity was measured using 
the Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) for all samples and normalized to 
Renilla luciferase signal to control for transfection efficiency, to a positive control luciferase 
expression vector gWIZ.luciferase for HR, and to pGl3-Control for NHEJ. Data are 
presented as the mean of 3 biological replicates +/− SEM. Statistical analysis was by t-test.
U2OS DR-GFP reporter assays
These reporter assays were carried out as previously described (37, 63). To test the effect of 
2HG, cells in culture were treated for the indicated times with (2R)-octyl-2-HG, and then 
106 cells were transfected in triplicate with 4 μg pI-SceI using the Amaxa Nucleofector II 
and Nucleofection Kit V (Lonza) per manufacturer’s protocol. 72 h after transfection, cells 
were analyzed for GFP expression by flow cytometry, and the data were analyzed using 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 14
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FlowJo software to calculate %GFP-positive cells. Data are presented as the mean of 3 
biological replicates +/− SEM. Statistical analysis was by t-test.
For the siRNA screen of the alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, ligand inducible 
DR-GFP with siRNA reverse transfection was performed as previously described (64). ON-
Target plus smart pool siRNAs (GE Dharmacon) were selected, targeting 64 of the known 
alpha-ketoglutarate dependent dioxygenases (along with, for comparison, siRNAs targeting 
selected DNA repair factors and siRNAs targeting IDH1 and L2HGDH). The siRNAs were 
reverse transfected into cells to a final concentration of 20 nM. Cell cycle analysis for all 
samples was performed in parallel with the DR-GFP assay to rule out false positive DR-GFP 
results because of cell cycle arrest. Potential hits were deconvoluted by performing the 
inducible DR-GFP assay with the four individual RNA oligonucleotides comprising the 
smart pool, and cell cycle analysis was performed again in parallel for each siRNA 
oligonucleotide. Robust Z-Scores were calculated for each sample.
Short-term, high-throughput growth delay assays
Cells were plated in 96-well black-walled plates (Costar) at a concentration of 2500 cells per 
well and allowed to adhere at room temperature for 60 min before return to the incubator. 
For growth delay assays containing (2R)-octyl-2HG, cells were cultured with the indicated 
concentration for 10 days before plating. After 24 h, the media were changed, and indicated 
drugs dissolved in either DMSO or DMF (cisplatin only) were added in quadruplicate at 
varying concentrations. For synergy experiments, cells were replica-plated and drugs added 
in single wells at the indicated concentrations. At 96 h after the addition of drugs, cells were 
washed in PBS, fixed in 70% ethanol, and stained with Hoechst at 1 μg/mL. The plates were 
then imaged on a Cytation 3 automated imager (BioTek), and cells were counted using 
CellProfiler (http://cellprofiler.org/). For synergy experiments, experiments were analyzed 
for synergistic interactions by the Loewe synergy and antagonism method using Combenefit 
(http://www.cruk.cam.ac.uk/research-groups/jodrell-group/combenefit).
Cell viability assays
Adherent cells were seeded at a density of 2500 cells per well, and suspension cells at a 
density of 5000 cells per well in solid white 96 well plates (Costar) and incubated under 
indicated conditions in sextuplicate. Cell viability was assayed using the Cell Titer Glo Kit 
(Promega) per manufacturer’s protocol, and data are presented as mean +/− SEM.
In vivo olaparib efficacy studies
Female athymic nu/nu mice (Envigo/Harlan) were used for all in vivo xenograft studies. All 
studies were approved by the Yale University IACUC. Mice were quarantined for at least 1 
week before experimental manipulation. Human luciferase-expressing HCT116 cells (with 
and without IDH1 mutation), HeLa cells (with and without IDH1 mutation), and HT1080 
cells (with native IDH1 R132C mutation) were implanted subcutaneously (2 × 106 cells in 
0.1 cc PBS) in the right flank. Mice were visually observed daily, and tumors were measured 
three times per week by calipers to determine tumor volume using the formula: 
. Olaparib (Selleckchem) was solubilized in 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 15
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DMSO and diluted with 10% (w/v) 2-hydroxy-propyl-beta-cyclodextrin (Sigma) to obtain 
the desired concentration. Olaparib was delivered via intraperitoneal injection (50 mg/kg) 
once daily, five days per week, starting four days after tumor implantation. Growth curves 
were compared statistically using ANOVA for repeated measures.
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI)
BLI was carried out using the IVIS Spectrum In Vivo imaging system (Perkin Elmer) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Imaging was performed once weekly during the 
tumor growth delay experiments, starting before the first treatment. Mice were anesthetized, 
and D-luciferin was injected intraperitoneally. Imaging was carried out 15 minutes after 
luciferin injection. After image acquisition, a region of interest (ROI) was circumscribed for 
each tumor, and a corresponding tumor-free ROI was circumscribed to generate a 
background-corrected bioluminescence flux value. Bioluminescence values from 
representative animals in each treatment group were compared, and luminescence images 
were prepared using a standard scale for all mice.
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± SEM and compared using Student’s t test, or ANOVA with 
repeated measures when appropriate. All tests were two-sided. Statistical analyses were 
carried out using GraphPad Prism and STATA software. A p value of less than 0.05 was 
considered statistically significant.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Andreas von Deimling for generously providing us with the HGDH enzyme, T. Taniguchi for providing 
us with the PEO1, PEO4, and dPEO1 C4-2 cells, R. Majeti for the THP1 cells, and T. Chan for providing us with 
immortalized astrocytes. We apologize to those whose work we cannot list due to the reference limitations for a 
publication in this journal.
Funding.
This work was supported by the NIH (R01ES005775, R01CA168733, and R01 CA177719 to PMG), by the 
American Cancer Society (Research Scholar Grant to RSB), and by the Connecticut Department of Public Health 
(RFP 2014-0135 to SH). Nathaniel Robinson is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Medical Research Fellow. 
Susan Scanlon was supported by NIH Medical Scientist Program Training Grant T32GM007205 and NIH NIGMS 
training grant T32GM007223. The work on this paper used Metabolomics Core Services supported by grant U24 
DK097153 of NIH Common Funds Project to the University of Michigan.
References and notes
1. Parsons DW, et al. An integrated genomic analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme. Science. 
2008; 321:1807–1812. [PubMed: 18772396] 
2. Mardis ER, et al. Recurring mutations found by sequencing an acute myeloid leukemia genome. N 
Engl J Med. 2009; 361:1058–1066. [PubMed: 19657110] 
3. Yan H, et al. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in gliomas. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:765–773. [PubMed: 
19228619] 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 16
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Jiao Y, et al. Exome sequencing identifies frequent inactivating mutations in BAP1, ARID1A and 
PBRM1 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Nature genetics. 2013; 45:1470–1473. [PubMed: 
24185509] 
5. Krauthammer M, et al. Exome sequencing identifies recurrent somatic RAC1 mutations in 
melanoma. Nature genetics. 2012; 44:1006–1014. [PubMed: 22842228] 
6. Amary MF, et al. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are frequent events in central chondrosarcoma and 
central and periosteal chondromas but not in other mesenchymal tumours. The Journal of pathology. 
2011; 224:334–343. [PubMed: 21598255] 
7. Clark O, Yen K, Mellinghoff IK. Molecular Pathways: Isocitrate Dehydrogenase Mutations in 
Cancer. Clinical Cancer Research. 2016; 22:1837–1842. [PubMed: 26819452] 
8. Dang L, et al. Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature. 2010; 
465:966. [PubMed: 20559394] 
9. Losman JA, Kaelin WG Jr. What a difference a hydroxyl makes: mutant IDH, (R)-2-
hydroxyglutarate, and cancer. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:836–852. [PubMed: 23630074] 
10. Shim EH, et al. L-2-Hydroxyglutarate: an epigenetic modifier and putative oncometabolite in renal 
cancer. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:1290–1298. [PubMed: 25182153] 
11. Intlekofer AM, et al. Hypoxia Induces Production of L-2-Hydroxyglutarate. Cell Metab. 2015; 
22:304–311. [PubMed: 26212717] 
12. Oldham WM, Clish CB, Yang Y, Loscalzo J. Hypoxia-Mediated Increases in L-2-hydroxyglutarate 
Coordinate the Metabolic Response to Reductive Stress. Cell metabolism. 2015; 22:291–303. 
[PubMed: 26212716] 
13. Xu W, et al. Oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate is a competitive inhibitor of alpha-ketoglutarate-
dependent dioxygenases. Cancer cell. 2011; 19:17–30. [PubMed: 21251613] 
14. Terunuma A, et al. MYC-driven accumulation of 2-hydroxyglutarate is associated with breast 
cancer prognosis. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:398–412. [PubMed: 24316975] 
15. Smolkova K, Dvorak A, Zelenka J, Vitek L, Jezek P. Reductive carboxylation and 2-
hydroxyglutarate formation by wild-type IDH2 in breast carcinoma cells. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 
2015; 65:125–133. [PubMed: 26007236] 
16. Rohle D, et al. An inhibitor of mutant IDH1 delays growth and promotes differentiation of glioma 
cells. Science. 2013; 340:626–630. [PubMed: 23558169] 
17. Bleeker FE, et al. The prognostic IDH1(R132) mutation is associated with reduced NADP+-
dependent IDH activity in glioblastoma. Acta Neuropathol. 2010; 119:487–494. [PubMed: 
20127344] 
18. Molenaar RJ, et al. The combination of IDH1 mutations and MGMT methylation status predicts 
survival in glioblastoma better than either IDH1 or MGMT alone. Neuro Oncol. 2014; 16:1263–
1273. [PubMed: 24510240] 
19. Wang P, et al. Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 occur frequently in intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas and share hypermethylation targets with glioblastomas. Oncogene. 2013; 
32:3091–3100. [PubMed: 22824796] 
20. Tran AN, et al. Increased sensitivity to radiochemotherapy in IDH1 mutant glioblastoma as 
demonstrated by serial quantitative MR volumetry. Neuro Oncol. 2014; 16:414–420. [PubMed: 
24305712] 
21. Cairncross JG, et al. Benefit from procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine in oligodendroglial 
tumors is associated with mutation of IDH. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:783–790. [PubMed: 24516018] 
22. Jackson SP, Helleday T. DNA REPAIR. Drugging DNA repair. Science. 2016; 352:1178–1179. 
[PubMed: 27257245] 
23. Balss J, et al. Enzymatic assay for quantitative analysis of (D)-2-hydroxyglutarate. Acta 
neuropathologica. 2012; 124:883–891. [PubMed: 23117877] 
24. Tateishi K, et al. Extreme Vulnerability of IDH1 Mutant Cancers to NAD+ Depletion. Cancer Cell. 
2015; 28:773–784. [PubMed: 26678339] 
25. Olive PL, Banath JP. The comet assay: a method to measure DNA damage in individual cells. Nat 
Protoc. 2006; 1:23–29. [PubMed: 17406208] 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 17
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. Ruis BL, Fattah KR, Hendrickson EA. The catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase 
regulates proliferation, telomere length, and genomic stability in human somatic cells. Mol Cell 
Biol. 2008; 28:6182–6195. [PubMed: 18710952] 
27. Murfuni I, et al. Survival of the replication checkpoint deficient cells requires MUS81-RAD52 
function. PLoS Genet. 2013; 9:e1003910. [PubMed: 24204313] 
28. Czochor JR, Sulkowski P, Glazer PM. miR-155 Overexpression Promotes Genomic Instability by 
Reducing High-fidelity Polymerase Delta Expression and Activating Error-Prone DSB Repair. 
Molecular Cancer Research. 2016; 14:363–373. [PubMed: 26850462] 
29. Fece de la Cruz F, Gapp BV, Nijman SM. Synthetic lethal vulnerabilities of cancer. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2015; 55:513–531. [PubMed: 25340932] 
30. Foote KM, Lau A, Nissink JW. Drugging ATR: progress in the development of specific inhibitors 
for the treatment of cancer. Future Med Chem. 2015; 7:873–891. [PubMed: 26061106] 
31. Patel AG, Sarkaria JN, Kaufmann SH. Nonhomologous end joining drives poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor lethality in homologous recombination-deficient cells. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:3406–3411. [PubMed: 21300883] 
32. Donawho CK, et al. ABT-888, an orally active poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor that 
potentiates DNA-damaging agents in preclinical tumor models. Clinical cancer research : an 
official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2007; 13:2728–2737. [PubMed: 
17473206] 
33. Kortmann U, et al. Tumor growth inhibition by olaparib in BRCA2 germline-mutated patient-
derived ovarian cancer tissue xenografts. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the 
American Association for Cancer Research. 2011; 17:783–791. [PubMed: 21097693] 
34. Lee JM, et al. Phase I/Ib study of olaparib and carboplatin in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation-
associated breast or ovarian cancer with biomarker analyses. Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute. 2014; 106:dju089. [PubMed: 24842883] 
35. Oza AM, et al. Olaparib combined with chemotherapy for recurrent platinum-sensitive ovarian 
cancer: a randomised phase 2 trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2015; 16:87–97. [PubMed: 25481791] 
36. Di Veroli GY, et al. Combenefit: an interactive platform for the analysis and visualization of drug 
combinations. Bioinformatics. 2016; 32:2866–2868. [PubMed: 27153664] 
37. Pierce AJ, Johnson RD, Thompson LH, Jasin M. XRCC3 promotes homology-directed repair of 
DNA damage in mammalian cells. Genes Dev. 1999; 13:2633–2638. [PubMed: 10541549] 
38. Oldham WM, Clish CB, Yang Y, Loscalzo J. Hypoxia-mediated increases in l-2-hydroxyglutarate 
coordinate the metabolic response to reductive stress. Cell metabolism. 2015; 22:291–303. 
[PubMed: 26212716] 
39. Baader E, Tschank G, Baringhaus KH, Burghard H, Gunzler V. Inhibition of prolyl 4-hydroxylase 
by oxalyl amino acid derivatives in vitro, in isolated microsomes and in embryonic chicken tissues. 
The Biochemical journal. 1994; 300(Pt 2):525–530. [PubMed: 8002959] 
40. Goglia AG, et al. Identification of novel radiosensitizers in a high-throughput, cell-based screen for 
DSB repair inhibitors. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015; 14:326–342. [PubMed: 25512618] 
41. Wang LY, et al. KDM4A Coactivates E2F1 to Regulate the PDK-Dependent Metabolic Switch 
between Mitochondrial Oxidation and Glycolysis. Cell Rep. 2016; 16:3016–3027. [PubMed: 
27626669] 
42. Chu CH, et al. KDM4B as a target for prostate cancer: structural analysis and selective inhibition 
by a novel inhibitor. J Med Chem. 2014; 57:5975–5985. [PubMed: 24971742] 
43. Mallette FA, et al. RNF8- and RNF168-dependent degradation of KDM4A/JMJD2A triggers 
53BP1 recruitment to DNA damage sites. EMBO J. 2012; 31:1865–1878. [PubMed: 22373579] 
44. Young LC, McDonald DW, Hendzel MJ. Kdm4b histone demethylase is a DNA damage response 
protein and confers a survival advantage following gamma-irradiation. J Biol Chem. 2013; 
288:21376–21388. [PubMed: 23744078] 
45. Li L, et al. Treatment with a Small Molecule Mutant IDH1 Inhibitor Suppresses Tumorigenic 
Activity and Decreases Production of the Oncometabolite 2-Hydroxyglutarate in Human 
Chondrosarcoma Cells. PloS one. 2015; 10:e0133813. [PubMed: 26368816] 
46. Alano CC, et al. NAD+ depletion is necessary and sufficient for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1-
mediated neuronal death. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:2967–2978. [PubMed: 20181594] 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 18
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 47. Ju HQ, et al. Regulation of the Nampt-mediated NAD salvage pathway and its therapeutic 
implications in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Lett. 2016; 379:1–11. [PubMed: 27233476] 
48. Bai H, et al. Integrated genomic characterization of IDH1-mutant glioma malignant progression. 
Nat Genet. 2016; 48:59–66. [PubMed: 26618343] 
49. Lu Y, Chu A, Turker MS, Glazer PM. Hypoxia-induced epigenetic regulation and silencing of the 
BRCA1 promoter. Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 31:3339–3350. [PubMed: 21670155] 
50. Bindra RS, Glazer PM. Basal repression of BRCA1 by multiple E2Fs and pocket proteins at 
adjacent E2F sites. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006; 5:1400–1407. [PubMed: 17106239] 
51. Scanlon SE, Glazer PM. Hypoxic stress facilitates acute activation and chronic downregulation of 
fanconi anemia proteins. Mol Cancer Res. 2014; 12:1016–1028. [PubMed: 24688021] 
52. Mondesir J, Willekens C, Touat M, de Botton S. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations as novel therapeutic 
targets: current perspectives. Journal of blood medicine. 2016; 7:171–180. [PubMed: 27621679] 
53. Babakoohi S, Lapidus RG, Faramand R, Sausville EA, Emadi A. Comparative Analysis of 
Methods for Detecting Isocitrate Dehydrogenase 1 and 2 Mutations and Their Metabolic 
Consequence, 2-Hydroxyglutarate, in Different Neoplasms. Applied immunohistochemistry & 
molecular morphology : AIMM. 2016
54. Emir UE, et al. Noninvasive Quantification of 2-Hydroxyglutarate in Human Gliomas with IDH1 
and IDH2 Mutations. Cancer research. 2016; 76:43–49. [PubMed: 26669865] 
55. Anthony AJ, Chalmers J, Swaisland Helen, Stewart William, Halford Sarah ER, Molife L Rhoda, 
Hargrave Darren R, McCormick Alex. Results of stage 1 of the oparatic trial: A phase I study of 
olaparib in combination with temozolomide in patients with relapsed glioblastoma. JCO. 2014; 
32:abstr 2025.
56. Su JM, et al. A phase I trial of veliparib (ABT-888) and temozolomide in children with recurrent 
CNS tumors: a pediatric brain tumor consortium report. Neuro-oncology. 2014; 16:1661–1668. 
[PubMed: 24908656] 
57. Muscal JA, et al. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of ABT-888 after oral 
administration in non-human primates. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2010; 65:419–425. 
[PubMed: 19526240] 
58. Gross S, Rahal R, Stransky N, Lengauer C, Hoeflich KP. Targeting cancer with kinase inhibitors. J 
Clin Invest. 2015; 125:1780–1789. [PubMed: 25932675] 
59. Dang L, Yen K, Attar EC. IDH mutations in cancer and progress toward development of targeted 
therapeutics. Ann Oncol. 2016; 27:599–608. [PubMed: 27005468] 
60. Gyori BM, Venkatachalam G, Thiagarajan P, Hsu D, Clement MV. OpenComet: an automated tool 
for comet assay image analysis. Redox biology. 2014; 2:457–465. [PubMed: 24624335] 
61. Chatterjee G, Jimenez-Sainz J, Presti T, Nguyen T, Jensen RB. Distinct binding of BRCA2 BRC 
repeats to RAD51 generates differential DNA damage sensitivity. Nucleic acids research, gkw242. 
2016
62. Zhuang J, et al. Checkpoint Kinase 2–Mediated Phosphorylation of BRCA1 Regulates the Fidelity 
of Nonhomologous End-Joining. Cancer research. 2006; 66:1401–1408. [PubMed: 16452195] 
63. Stachelek GC, et al. YU238259 Is a Novel Inhibitor of Homology-Dependent DNA Repair That 
Exhibits Synthetic Lethality and Radiosensitization in Repair-Deficient Tumors. Mol Cancer Res. 
2015; 13:1389–1397. [PubMed: 26116172] 
64. Bindra RS, Goglia AG, Jasin M, Powell SN. Development of an assay to measure mutagenic non-
homologous end-joining repair activity in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:e115. 
[PubMed: 23585275] 
65. Nakanishi K, et al. Human Fanconi anemia monoubiquitination pathway promotes homologous 
DNA repair. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2005; 102:1110–1115. [PubMed: 15650050] 
66. Sakai W, et al. Functional restoration of BRCA2 protein by secondary BRCA2 mutations in 
BRCA2-mutated ovarian carcinoma. Cancer research. 2009; 69:6381–6386. [PubMed: 19654294] 
67. Singleton B, et al. Molecular and biochemical characterization of xrs mutants defective in Ku80. 
Molecular and cellular biology. 1997; 17:1264–1273. [PubMed: 9032253] 
68. Chan SM, et al. Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 mutations induce BCL-2 dependence in acute 
myeloid leukemia. Nature medicine. 2015; 21:178–184.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 19
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 69. Turcan S, et al. IDH1 mutation is sufficient to establish the glioma hypermethylator phenotype. 
Nature. 2012; 483:479–483. [PubMed: 22343889] 
70. Lewis CA, et al. Tracing compartmentalized NADPH metabolism in the cytosol and mitochondria 
of mammalian cells. Molecular cell. 2014; 55:253–263. [PubMed: 24882210] 
71. Balss J, et al. Enzymatic assay for quantitative analysis of (D)-2-hydroxyglutarate. Acta 
neuropathologica. 2012; 124:883–891. [PubMed: 23117877] 
72. Surovtseva YV, et al. Characterization of Cardiac Glycoside Natural Products as Potent Inhibitors 
of DNA Double-Strand Break Repair by a Whole-Cell Double Immunofluorescence Assay. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society. 2016; 138:3844–3855. [PubMed: 26927829] 
73. Chowdhury GM, Jiang L, Rothman DL, Behar KL. The contribution of ketone bodies to basal and 
activity-dependent neuronal oxidation in vivo. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism. 
2014; 34:1233–1242. [PubMed: 24780902] 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 20
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 One-sentence summary
The oncometabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate, renders IDH1/2 mutant cancer cells deficient in 
homologous recombination and confers vulnerability to synthetic lethal targeting with 
PARP inhibitors.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 21
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Mutant IDH cells are deficient in DNA DSB break repair
(A) Western blot analysis of IDH1-R132H expression in IDH1-mutant HCT116 and HeLa 
cells. SMC1 is used as loading control. (B) Quantification of (R)-2HG by LC-MS in WT 
and R132/+ HeLa and HCT116 cells (n=3, mean +/− SD). (C–D) Western blot analysis of 
doxycycline-inducible, FLAG-tagged (C) WT or mutant IDH1 and (D) WT or mutant IDH2 
expression in HEL cells. (E) Representative images and quantification of neutral comet 
assays performed 24 h after 5 Gy IR in wild type, IDH1 R123H/+ (Mut), and DNA-PK 
(PRKDC) knockout HCT116 cells (PK). Scale bar = 400 μm. Statistical analysis by t-test 
(n=3). (F) Representative images and quantification of neutral comet assay performed 24 h 
after 5 Gy IR in wild type and IDH1 R123H/+ HeLa cells. Scale bar = 400 μm. Statistical 
analysis by t-test (n=3). (G) Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in log-phase, 
wild-type or IDH1 R132H/+ HCT116 and HeLa cells. (H and I) Representative images and 
quantification of neutral comet assay in HEL cells infected with (H) pSLIK IDH1-WT or 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 22
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pSLIK IDH1 R132H and (I) pSLIK IDH2 WT or pSLIK IDH2-R172K with or without 
doxycycline induction of the target protein, 7 days after addition of doxycycline or vehicle 
control. Scale bar = 400 μm (n=3). (J) Quantification of γH2AX and phospho-53BP1foci 
per nucleus in log-phase, untreated IDH1-WT and IDH1 R132H matched-pair HeLa and 
HCT116 cells (n=3). For E, F, G, H, I, and J, bars represent mean +/− SEM.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 23
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The IDH1 R132H-dependent homologous recombination deficiency confers synthetic 
lethality with PARP inhibition
(A) Schematic representation of the luciferase-based reporter assays for HR and NHEJ. Note 
the inactivating I-SceI gene in the luciferase open reading frame of the HR reporter, allowing 
restoration of functional luciferase only by homologous recombination at the I-SceI induced 
double strand break. Pathway-specific, luciferase-based HR and NHEJ reporter assays in the 
(B) WT and R132H heterozygous HCT116 cells, (C) WT or IDH1 R132H HeLa cells, and 
(D) doxycycline inducible HEL + WT IDH1, IDH1 R132H, WT IDH2, or IDH2 R172K. 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 24
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Statistical analysis by t-test (n=3). (E) Targeted small molecule screen in the WT and 
R132H heterozygous HeLa cells identifies a synthetic lethal interaction between IDH1 
R132H and the PARP inhibitor BMN-673. (F) Clonogenic survival assays in the IDH1-WT 
and R132H HCT116 cells or HeLa cells treated with indicated doses of BMN-673 (n=6). 
(G) Clonogenic survival assays in the IDH1-WT or R132H HCT116 cells or HeLa cells 
treated with indicated doses of olaparib. Dashed lines indicate surviving fraction at 10 nM 
BMN-673 in F and 12.5 μM olaparib in G (n=6). (H and I) Quantification of neutral comet 
assay performed in WT or R132H/+ HeLa cells treated with indicated doses of (H) 
BMN-673 or (I) olaparib. (J) Synergy surface plots in WT or IDH1 R132H/+ HeLa cells 
show a mutant specific increase in synergy between BMN-673 and cisplatin (n=3). For B, C, 
D, H and I, bars represent mean +/− SEM.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 25
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 2-Hydroxyglutarate is sufficient to induce homologous recombination deficiency and 
PARP inhibitor synthetic lethality
(A) Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in WT HeLa cells after 24 h exposure 
to indicated amounts of (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate and (S)-2-hydroxyglutarate (n=3). (B) 
Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in immortalized astrocytes after 24 h 
exposure to indicated amounts of (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate (n=3). (C) Quantification of 
neutral comet assay performed in primary melanoma cultures treated with 300 μM (R)-2-
hydroxyglutarate for 24 h (n=3). (D) U2OS DR-GFP show a dose response of HR 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 26
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suppression after 24 h exposure to both (2R)-octyl-2-HG and(2S)-octyl-2-HG but not the 
octyl- α-ketoglutarate control (n=3). (E) Schematic and representative dot plot of the DR-
GFP assay results that are quantified in F. (F) Quantification of U2OS DR-GFP assay 
performed after 7 day culture in 2HG or DMSO control or after siRNA knockdown of the 
indicated targets, with western blot analysis of siRNA target knockdown. Statistical analysis 
by t-test (n=3). (G) Relative HR capacity determined by quantification of luciferase-based 
plasmid HR reporter assay normalized to DMSO-treated WT for each respective cell type in 
HeLa, HCT116, DLD1, and PEO1 C4-2 cells (WT BRCA2) treated with 900 μM and 300 
μM (2R)-octyl-2-HG, assayed in parallel with DMSO-treated WT and DMSO-treated 
BRCA2 homozygous knockout DLD1 cells and BRCA2 functional-null PEO1 cells (n=3). 
(H) Short-term growth delay assays in HCT116 WT cells after 4-day culture in 900 μM 
(2R)-octyl-2-HG or DMSO treated with indicated concentrations of BMN-673 (n=3). (I) 
Short-term growth delay assay in wild-type HCT116 cells after 4-day culture in 300 nM 
BMN-673 or DMSO control, treated with increasing concentrations of (2R)-octyl-2-HG, as 
indicated (n=3). Fractional survival is normalized to survival in either DMSO or 300 nM 
BMN-673 without (2R)-octyl-2-HG. (J) Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in 
WT U2OS cells after 24 h exposure to indicated amounts of the α-ketoglutarate-dependent 
dioxygenase inhibitor, DMOG. (n=3). (K) Quantification of U2OS DR-GFP assay 
performed after 24 h pretreatment with indicated concentrations of DMOG or α-
ketoglutarate (n=3). (L) Quantification and representative images of neutral comet assay 
performed in IDH1-mutant HeLa cells treated with exogenous octyl-α-ketoglutarate and WT 
HeLa cells. Scale bar = 400 μm (n=3). (M) Robust Z-Score of normalized HR from the 
ligand-inducible DR-GFP of 64 smart pool siRNAS targeting α-ketoglutarate dependent 
dioxygenases compared to the effects of 1 mM (R)-2HG, (S)-2HG, and DMOG, as well as 
control siRNAs targeting known core DNA repair proteins (n=3). (N-O) Quantitation of (N) 
ligand-inducible DR-GFP and (O) neutral comet assay (n=3) with deconvoluted siRNAs 
against KDM4A and KDM4B, each performed 96 h after siRNA transfection in U2OS 
inducible DR-GFP cells. (P and Q) Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in WT 
and R132H/+ HeLa cells (n=3) (P) 72 h after transfection with indicated deconvoluted 
siRNAs and (Q) 24 h after transfection with expression vectors for indicated ORFs. (n=3) 
Note two independent KDM4A expression constructs KDM4A #1 (pCMV-HA-KDM4A) 
and KDM4A #2 (pCMV-FLAG-KDM4A). For A, B, C, D, F, G, J, K, O, P, and Q, bars 
represent mean +/− SEM.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 27
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Inhibition of mutant IDH1 reverses the DSB repair defect and PARP inhibitor 
vulnerability
(A) Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in R132H/+ HeLa cells treated with 
indicated doses of AG1-5198 or WT HeLa cells treated with indicated doses of (R)-2HG 
(n=3). (B) Quantification of neutral comet assay performed in R132H/+ HCT116 cells 
treated with indicated doses of AG1-5198 (n=3). (C) Representative images from 
quantification shown in (A–B). Scale bar = 400 μm. (D–E) Quantification of neutral comet 
assays performed in (D) HCT116 IDH1 R132H/+ cells (n=3) and (E) HeLa IDH1 R132H/+ 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 28
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells (n=3) treated with indicated amounts of the mutant IDH1 inhibitors AG120 and IDH1-
C227. (F) Quantification of neutral comet assay in HEL cells, performed after the indicated 
conditions of induction of IDH1 R132H and treatment with 1.2 μM AGI-5198 and 1 mM 
(R)-2HG (n=3). (G) Quantification of neutral comet assay. WT or R132H/+ Hela cells were 
cultured in 1.2 μM AGI-5198 or DMSO control for 96 h, then supplemented with 300 μM 
(2R)-octyl-2-HG or DMSO control for 24 h before being split and treated with 10 nM 
BMN-673 for 48 h with continued exposure to 1.2 μM AGI-5198, 300 μM (2R)-octyl-2-HG, 
or DMSO control, then collected for analysis (n=3). (H) Quantification of neutral comet 
assay in HT1080 cells harboring an endogenous IDH1 R132C mutation treated with 1 μM 
AGI-5198 or DMSO control. Statistical analysis by t-test (n=3). (I) Quantification and 
representative images of clonogenic survival assays of WT and R132H/+ (Mut) HeLa Cells 
treated with the indicated concentrations of BMN-673 in the presence or absence of 
AGI-5198. HeLa cells were cultured in 1.2 μM AGI-5198 or DMSO control for 96 h before 
seeding for clonogenic survival, and exposure to AGI-5198 was maintained throughout the 
clonogenic survival assay. Representative images are HeLa seeded at 2400 cells per well and 
treated with 10 nM BMN and 1.2 μM AGI-5198 or DMSO control (n=6). (J) Short term 
viability assay in HEL cells with dox inducible IDH1 R132H treated with either 1 μM 
AGI-5198 or DMSO control and indicated doses of BMN-673 (n=4). For A, B, D, E, F, G, 
and H, bars represent mean +/− SEM.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 29
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. IDH1 mutations confer repair deficiency and PARP inhibitor sensitivity in human 
glioma cells and mouse tumor models
(A) Patient information and clinical characteristics for the primary, patient-derived glioma 
culture collection. (B) Quantification of (R)-2HG production in IDH mutant primary glioma 
cultures (n=3). (C) Representative images and (D) quantification of neutral comet assays 
performed on primary, patient-derived glioma cultures (n=3). Scale bar = 400 μm. For 
comparison, primary cultures 80 and 97 were grown in media supplemented or not with 300 
μM (2R)-octyl-2-HG for 7 days as indicated. (E) Quantification of γH2AX foci in primary 
Sulkowski et al.
Page 30
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glioma cultures treated the same way as in (C–D) (n=3). (F) Host cell reactivation assay for 
HR in primary glioma cultures. (G) Quantification and representative images of clonogenic 
survival assays in response to BMN-673 performed in primary glioma cultures. Gliomas 80 
and 97 in black are IDH1 WT. Gliomas 129 and 2 in brown are IDH1 mutant. WT gliomas 
80 and 97 were also cultured in 300 μM (2R)-octyl-2-HG for 7 days before seeding for the 
clonogenic survival assay and were maintained in 2HG throughout the assay; these are in 
blue (n=4). (H) Tumor volume growth curves for IDH1 R132C/+ HT1080 xenografts treated 
daily with either 50 mg/kg olaparib or vehicle control (ANOVA p=0.026) starting 4 days 
after implantation (n=9 per group). (I and J) Murine tumor volume growth curves for (I) 
IDH1 R132H heterozygous (ANOVA P = 0.001) (n=9 per group) and (J) IDH1 WT 
HCT116 xenografts (ANOVA P = 0.30) (n=9 per group) after treatment with 50 mg/kg 
olaparib once daily five days per week versus vehicle control. Treatment was initiated on 
day 4 after tumor implantation. (K) Representative images of in vivo luciferase activity in 
HCT116 IDH1 R132H heterozygous xenografts before and after olaparib treatment. For B, 
D, E, and F, bars represent mean +/− SEM.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 31
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Patient-derived primary acute myeloid leukemia samples show a 2HG-dependent DSB 
repair defect
(A) Patient information and clinical characteristics for the matched pairs of primary AML 
samples. (B) Cell cycle analysis of the IDH1 WT and R132H primary AML samples. (C) 
Quantification and (D) representative images of neutral comet assays performed on primary 
AML patient cells (n=3). Scale bar = 400 μm. (E) Radiation survival of primary AML 
cultures assayed by a short term viability assay 48 h after 5 Gy IR (n=3). (F) Representative 
images of neutral comet assay performed 24 h after 5 Gy IR on the primary AML cells 
WT-1 and Mut-1 (IDH1 R132H), indicating differential persistence of DNA DSBs after IR. 
Scale bar = 400 μm. (G) Proposed mechanism by which the (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate 
produced by IDH1 R132H (or (S)-2HG produced by hypoxia) induces an HR-deficient 
“BRCAness” phenotype and subsequent vulnerability to PARP inhibition. For C and E, bars 
represent mean +/− SEM.
Sulkowski et al.
Page 32
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
