 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2016 Vol. 213 No. 9 1851–1864
www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20150514
1851
INT 
ROD 
UCT 
ION
During recent influenza pandemics and epidemics, post-in-
fluenza methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) 
infection has emerged as a leading contributor to death 
(Metzger and Sun, 2013). It is well recognized that influenza 
infection inhibits antibacterial immunity, thereby increasing 
susceptibility to secondary bacterial infection (Small et al., 
2010; Kudva et al., 2011; Robinson et al., 2013). However, 
even with appropriate antibiotic treatment, the mortality rate 
of patients with post-influenza MRSA pneumonia remains 
>50% (Vardakas et al., 2009). The inefficacy of antibiotic 
therapy has led to the assumption that defective bacterial con-
trol is not the only determinant of disease severity. However, 
the incomplete understanding of pathogenic mechanisms has 
hindered the development of effective treatments against in-
fluenza and MRSA coinfection (Vardakas et al., 2009; Meter-
sky et al., 2012; Blyth et al., 2013).
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAD 
PH) oxidase 2 (Nox2), also known as gp91phox, is the cata-
lytic subunit of NAD 
PH oxidase in phagocytes. In humans, 
defects in X chromosome–linked Nox2 can lead to chronic 
granulomatous disease (CGD). Activation of Nox2, a process 
called oxidative burst, is critical for immune defense against 
S. aureus infection (Sun and Metzger, 2014). In contrast, as 
a result of the nonspecific action of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), Nox2 is known to be involved in inflammatory tissue 
damage (Imai et al., 2008; von Dessauer et al., 2011), includ-
ing acute lung injury during influenza infection (Akaike et 
al., 1996; Snelgrove et al., 2006; Imai et al., 2008; 
Vlahos et al., 
2011). We have recently demonstrated that intracellular ROS 
levels in phagocytes decrease after influenza infection. This 
decrease leads to defective bacterial killing and susceptibility 
to secondary S. aureus infection (Sun and Metzger, 2014). 
Furthermore, we hypothesize that during influenza and S. au-
reus coinfection, in addition to defective antibacterial immu-
nity, a concomitant but contrasting contribution of oxidative 
burst to acute lung injury leads to immune dysregulation and, 
consequently, poor disease outcomes.
Over half of the cases of patients with S. aureus nec-
rotizing pneumonia are fatal even after administration of 
appropriate antibiotics (Vardakas et al., 2009). Death from 
influenza and/or bacterial pneumonia is generally associated 
with the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), a condition characterized by extensive inflamma-
tory injury to the alveolar capillary barrier (Matute-Bello et 
al., 2008; Short et al., 2014; Han and Mallampalli, 2015). De-
Clinical post-influenza Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia is characterized by extensive lung inflammation associated with 
severe morbidity and mortality even after appropriate antibiotic treatment. In this study, we show that antibiotics rescue nic-
otinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAD 
PH) oxidase 2 (Nox2)–deficient mice but fail to fully protect WT animals from 
influenza and S. aureus coinfection. Further experiments indicate that the inefficacy of antibiotics against coinfection is at-
tributable to oxidative stress–associated inflammatory lung injury. However, Nox2-induced lung damage during coinfection 
was not associated with aggravated inflammatory cytokine response or cell infiltration but rather caused by reduced survival 
of myeloid cells. Specifically, oxidative stress increased necrotic death of inflammatory cells, thereby resulting in lethal damage 
to surrounding tissue. Collectively, our results demonstrate that influenza infection disrupts the delicate balance between 
Nox2-dependent antibacterial immunity and inflammation. This disruption leads to not only increased susceptibility to S. 
aureus infection, but also extensive lung damage. Importantly, we show that combination treatment of antibiotic and NAD 
PH 
oxidase inhibitor significantly improved animal survival from coinfection. These findings suggest that treatment strategies that 
target both bacteria and oxidative stress will significantly benefit patients with influenza-complicated S. aureus pneumonia.
Nox2-derived oxidative stress results in inefficacy of 
antibiotics against post-influenza S. aureus pneumonia
Keer Sun,1,2 
Vijaya Kumar Yajjala,1 Christopher Bauer,1 Geoffrey A. Talmon,1 Karl J. Fischer,1 
Tammy Kielian,1 and Dennis W
. Metzger2
1Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198
2Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY 12208
© 2016 Sun et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Keer Sun: Keer.sun@unmc.edu
Abbreviations used: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; BAL, bronchoalveolar 
lavage; BALF, BAL fluid; CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; dpi, days postinfection; 
FVD, fixable viability dye; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MPO, myeloperoxidase; MRSA, 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NAD 
PH, nicotinamide adenine dinucle-
otide phosphate; Nox2, NAD 
PH oxidase 2; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
on June 3, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20150514
Published Online: 15 August, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1852
spite improved supportive care, there is currently no specific 
treatment for inflammatory lung damage that is based on a 
known molecular pathway.
In the present study, we examined whether the ineffi-
cacy of antibiotics against post-influenza S. aureus infection is 
caused by Nox2-derived, ROS-mediated inflammatory lung 
damage. Indeed, we found that antibiotic inhibition of bac-
terial outgrowth provided complete protection against influ-
enza and MRSA coinfection only in the absence of oxidative 
burst. However, we found that the adverse role of Nox2 was 
not caused by aggravated inflammatory cytokine production 
or cell accumulation, but rather, it was caused by reduced sur-
vival of myeloid cells. Furthermore, in contrast to the cell-in-
trinsic contribution of ROS to phagocytic bacterial killing 
(Sun and Metzger, 2014), our studies in Nox2+/− mosaic mice 
(i.e., female carriers of X-linked Nox2 deficiency) revealed 
that Nox2-driven oxidative stress accelerated necrotic cell 
death and caused direct lung damage.
RES 
ULTS
Detrimental role of Nox2 during 
influenza and MRSA coinfection
To mimic clinical events in which influenza infection predis-
poses individuals to S. aureus infection, we challenged NAD 
PH oxidase–deficient and WT mice with a sublethal dose 
of PR8 influenza virus followed by i.n. superinfection with 
MRSA 7 d later (Sun and Metzger, 2014). In agreement with 
previous studies (Köhler et al., 2011; Sun and Metzger, 2014), 
Nox2-deficient mice were more susceptible to S. aureus in-
fection alone; however, in the absence of influenza infection, 
daily treatment with the bacteriostatic antibiotic linezolid was 
sufficient to protect both WT and Nox2−/y males (Fig. 1 A). 
Conversely, without antibiotic treatment, nearly all influen-
za-infected WT and Nox2−/y mice succumbed to subsequent 
MRSA infection (Fig. 1 B). WT mice treated daily with the 
antibiotic linezolid exhibited extended survival times com-
pared with PBS-treated controls, but >50% of them even-
tually succumbed to post-influenza MRSA infection. In 
contrast, all linezolid-treated Nox2−/y (Fig. 1 B) mice sur-
vived influenza and MRSA coinfection.
P47phox is the cytosolic subunit of NAD 
PH oxidase 
and is required for enzyme activation and subsequent super-
oxide production (Abo et al., 1992). Similar to Nox2-defi-
cient mice, linezolid treatment protected all p47phox−/− mice 
from an otherwise lethal coinfection (Fig. 1 C). Furthermore, 
daily treatment of the antibiotic gentamicin (Fig. 1 D) or 
vancomycin (Fig. 1 E) rescued Nox2-deficient mice but 
failed to protect WT animals from lethal coinfection (Fig. 1, 
D and E). Of note, at equivalent inoculating doses, neither in-
fluenza (not depicted) nor MRSA infection alone (Fig. 1 A) 
caused death in linezolid-treated 
WT or Nox2-deficient con-
trols. These striking differences in the efficacy of antibiotic 
Figure 1. NAD 
PH oxidase activity and antibiotic inefficacy against coinfection. (A) Survival of C57BL/6 WT and Nox2−/y mice infected with MRSA 
only. Infected mice were treated daily with the linezolid or PBS. (B–E) Survival of C57BL/6 WT (7–10 mice/group), Nox2−/y (7–10 mice/group), p47phox−/− mice 
(8–10 mice/group), and Nox2−/− mice superchallenged with MRSA on day 7 after PR8 virus infection. Coinfected mice were treated daily with the antibiotics 
linezolid (B and C), gentamicin (D), or vancomycin (E). In B and C, control mice were treated daily with PBS. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, log-rank 
test. Data shown in A were combined from two independent experiments. Data shown in B–E are representative of at least two independent experiments.
 1853
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
treatment between Nox2-deficient and WT mice implicate 
a detrimental role of oxidase burst during post-influenza S. 
aureus infection, which is usually masked by its protective 
antibacterial function.
Nox2 exacerbates lung damage during 
influenza and MRSA coinfection
We next investigated the therapeutic effect of antibiotics 
during influenza and/or MRSA infection. As expected, an-
tibiotic treatment reduced bacterial burdens during MRSA 
infection but did not appear to have a significant effect on 
viral titers after influenza infection alone (Fig. 2, A and B). 
Conversely, antibiotic treatment was essential for prolonged 
animal survival after coinfection. Interestingly, compared 
with PR8-infected and PBS-treated controls, coinfected and 
antibiotic-treated WT mice exhibited temporary decreases 
in detectable viral titers, probably because of the combined 
stimulatory effects of MRSA superinfection and linezolid 
treatment (Fig. 2 B). Albumin efflux as well as protein and 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels in airway fluids were next 
assessed as indications of lung vascular and tissue damage. 
In agreement with the bacterial control, linezolid treatment 
greatly attenuated lung tissue damage during MRSA infec-
tion alone. Nonetheless, compared with either influenza or 
MRSA infection alone, acute lung injury was significantly 
aggravated after influenza and MRSA coinfection, even after 
antibiotic treatment (Fig. 2, C–E).
T
o determine how Nox2 activity renders antibiotic 
therapy ineffective against influenza and MRSA coinfection, 
we next investigated the possible negative impact of oxidative 
burst on the bactericidal activity of the antibiotic linezolid 
(Kohanski et al., 2010; Liu and Imlay, 2013). Conversely, we 
found that during the course of infection, bacterial burdens 
were persistently higher in coinfected Nox2-deficient mice 
compared with WT animals (Fig. 3 A). We have previously 
reported that influenza infection suppresses NAD 
PH ox-
idase–dependent phagocytic bacterial clearance (Sun and 
Metzger, 2014). Indeed, in contrast to WT mice, Nox2-de-
ficient mice showed similar increased bacterial burdens at 1 
d postinfection (dpi) after either MRSA infection alone or 
coinfection (Fig. 3 A). Notably, Nox2 has been reported to 
delay viral clearance during influenza infection alone (Vlahos 
et al., 2011). However, viral burdens were similar in influen-
za-infected WT and Nox2-deficient mice after inoculation 
of MRSA or PBS control (Fig. 3 B), suggesting that nei-
ther Nox2 activity nor MRSA superinfection significantly 
suppresses viral clearance. Moreover, both viral and bacterial 
burdens in the lungs declined when coinfected 
WT mice suc-
Figure 2. Antibiotic treatment controls lung bacterial burdens. (A–E) WT mice were infected with PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with MRSA. At 
1 dpi, lungs were analyzed for bacterial burdens (A), viral titers (B), protein (C), LDH (D), and albumin levels (E) in BALF. All PR8-infected (Flu), MRSA-in-
fected (MRSA), and coinfected (Flu + MRSA) mice were treated with linezolid or PBS control. #, four out of five coinfected mice died within 24 h in the 
absence of linezolid treatment; AU, arbitrary units; n.s., not significant. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, Mann Whitney test. Data shown are representative of two 
independent experiments.
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1854
cumbed to disease (Figs. 1 and 3). Of note, in this particu-
lar study, all animals received antibiotic treatment, including 
mice infected with influenza virus or MRSA alone (Fig. 3). 
Together, these results establish that the lethal contribution 
of Nox2 to the outcome of coinfection is not caused by its 
influence on viral clearance or the bactericidal effect of an-
tibiotics, but instead, it is likely caused by the undue damage 
inflicted by the inflammatory responses of the host.
Extreme inflammatory lung damage is indeed a char-
acteristic feature of S. aureus pneumonia, as consistently 
demonstrated in both humans and animal models (Louria et 
al., 1959; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
2007; Small et al., 2010; Iverson et al., 2011; Kudva et al., 
2011). Additionally, multiple studies establish that ROS pro-
duced by phagocytes can cause inflammatory diseases (Imai 
et al., 2008; Vlahos et al., 2011). Considering that Nox2 is 
responsible for inducible ROS production in phagocytes, we 
sought to determine whether lethal coinfection in WT an-
imals is associated with Nox2-induced inflammatory lung 
damage. At early time points of infections, we did not ob-
serve attenuation of lung damage in Nox2-deficient mice as 
compared with corresponding WT controls (Fig. 4, A and B). 
However, coinfected WT mice did exhibit a significant delay 
in resolution of inflammation, as revealed by elevated levels 
of albumin and LDH in airways at 6 dpi (Fig. 4 C). Notably, 
at this later time point, there were no detectable viral titers 
in either WT or Nox2-deficient mice infected with PR8 
only (Fig. 3 B). Conversely, despite their residual bacterial 
burdens at 6 dpi (Fig. 3 A), inflammatory lung damage was 
not evident in WT and Nox2-deficient mice inoculated with 
MRSA only (Fig. 4 C). Such observations suggest that after 
appropriate antibiotic treatment for coinfection, Nox2-in-
duced lung injury, rather than viral or bacterial outgrowth, is 
the fundamental determinant of disease outcome.
T
o characterize Nox2-induced inflammatory lung 
damage, we evaluated the lung histopathology of antibiot-
ic-treated Nox2-deficient and WT mice at 6 dpi (Fig. 4 D). 
The majority of WT mice exhibited extensive lung damage 
accompanied by prominent intraalveolar protein and/or fi-
brin extravasation, a characteristic feature of ARDS. Further, 
the degree of parenchymal damage significantly increased in 
the lungs of 
WT mice compared with Nox2-deficient animals 
(Fig. 4 E). Conversely, although proinflammatory cytokine 
production was significantly enhanced after MRSA superin-
fection, their levels were comparable in coinfected WT and 
Nox2-deficient mice (Fig. 5, A–E). In fact, Nox2-deficient 
mice demonstrated significantly increased IL-17 production 
early (1 dpi) after MRSA infection (Fig. 5 D). Nonetheless, 
airway inflammatory cytokine production was essentially di-
minished in both WT and Nox2-deficient mice at the later 
stage of coinfection (Fig. 5). Collectively, these results indicate 
that during influenza and MRSA coinfection, as distinct from 
influenza infection alone (Akaike et al., 1996; Snelgrove et 
al., 2006; Imai et al., 2008; 
Vlahos et al., 2011), Nox2-induced 
lung injury does not correlate with an aggravated cytokine 
response at the site of infection.
Nox2 activity during coinfection 
reduces myeloid cell survival
We next determined whether Nox2-induced lung injury 
correlates with extensive inflammatory cell infiltration. As ex-
pected, neutrophil influx was greatly enhanced after MRSA 
superinfection (Fig. 6 A). Interestingly, compared with WT 
mice, coinfected Nox2-deficient mice demonstrated further 
increases in accumulation of neutrophils at 1 dpi (Fig. 6 A). 
Even so, this effect is transient, considering that neutrophil 
numbers dramatically declined in both WT and Nox2-defi-
cient mice at 6 dpi (Fig. 6, B and C). In addition, the relative 
numbers of CD11c+ resident alveolar macrophages and in-
flammatory monocytes were also comparable in coinfected 
WT and Nox2-deficient mice at 6 dpi (Fig. 6, D and E).
Notably, inflammatory cells are short lived, and their 
numbers at a given time point are the result of simultaneous 
recruitment and removal (Bratton and Henson, 2011; Geer-
Figure 3. Nox2 activity enhances lung 
bacterial clearance. (A and B) WT and 
Nox2-deficient (KO) mice were infected with 
PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with MRSA. 
Lungs were analyzed for bacterial burdens 
(A) and viral titers (B). All PR8-infected (Flu), 
MRSA-infected (MRSA), or coinfected (Flu + 
MRSA) mice were treated daily with linezolid 
until 24 h before harvesting the samples. *, 
P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, Tukey's 
multiple comparisons test. n.s., not signifi-
cant. Data shown are representative of two 
independent experiments.
 1855
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
ing and Simon, 2011; Janssen et al., 2011). Interestingly, we 
found that CD11b+ myeloid cells from WT mice at 1 dpi 
exhibited a significant reduction in survival time, as indicated 
by increases in both early apoptotic (annexin+fixable viability 
dye [FVD]low) and late apoptotic/necrotic (annexin+FVDhi) 
cells (Fig. 7, A and B). By 3 dpi, over half of the WT in-
flammatory cells in the airways became apoptotic or necrotic 
(Fig. 7 C). The proportions of dying CD11b+ inflammatory 
cells significantly increased in WT airways at 6 dpi, which 
was followed by overt cell necrosis (Fig. 7 D). T
ogether, these 
results indicate that rather than regulating inflammatory in-
filtration, Nox2 activity accelerates inflammatory cell death 
during post-influenza MRSA infection.
Nox2-derived extracellular ROS 
accelerate necrotic cell death
Considering 100-fold decreases in neutrophil numbers within 
3 d in both coinfected WT and Nox2-deficient mice (Fig. 6, 
B and C), the detectable levels of dying cells in vivo were 
relatively infrequent (Fig. 7 D). This is likely because of mac-
rophage-mediated efferocytosis of apoptotic cells or disinte-
gration of necrotic cells. Conversely, the proportions of late 
apoptotic/necrotic WT inflammatory cells were significantly 
increased after 24 h in culture (Fig. 7, E–G), despite treatment 
with the necrosis inhibitor IM-54 (Sodeoka and Dodo, 2010) 
or necroptosis inhibitor necrostatin 1 (Su et al., 2015). These 
observations imply that Nox2 activity may promote not only 
inflammatory cell apoptosis, but also their progress to auto-
lytic secondary necrosis after coinfection.
Of note, the Nox2 subunit is an X chromosome–linked 
gene. Female Nox2+/− (mosaic) mice contain both WT 
(Nox2+) and Nox2-deficient (Nox2−) neutrophils because 
of random inactivation of the X chromosome in individual 
cells (Sun and Metzger, 2014). Therefore, to investigate the 
contribution of oxidative burst to neutrophil survival in vivo, 
we examine the frequency of Nox2-postive and Nox2-defi-
cient neutrophils in mosaic mice before and after infections. If 
the oxidative burst process in activated neutrophils compro-
mises their own survival, we expected decreased proportions 
of Nox2+ neutrophils in mosaic mice at the site of infection 
(Sun and Metzger, 2014). On the contrary, we found that 
during the course of infection, the ratio of Nox2+ and Nox2− 
neutrophils remained essentially the same in the blood (Fig. 8, 
A and B) and airways (Fig. 8, A and C). These observations 
indicate that despite their cell-intrinsic defect in oxidative 
burst, Nox2-deficient neutrophils have a similar lifespan as 
WT neutrophils in the same environment. Furthermore, this 
suggests that the regulatory effect of Nox2-derived ROS 
on neutrophil survival is not cell intrinsic during influenza 
and/or MRSA infections.
The findings in the previous paragraph imply that ex-
tracellular ROS levels are responsible for neutrophil turnover 
Figure 4. Nox2 activity during coinfec-
tion exacerbates tissue damage. (A–C) WT 
and Nox2-deficient (KO) mice were infected 
with PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with 
MRSA. BALFs were analyzed for albumin and 
LDH levels at days 1 (A), 3 (B), and 6 (C) after 
infection. Data represent albumin and LDH 
levels relative to these in naive WT mice. *, 
P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, Tukey's 
multiple comparisons test. (D and E) At 6 dpi, 
lungs were analyzed for histopathology (H&E; 
D) and histopathologic scores (each symbol 
represents one mouse; E). (E) Whole mount 
H&E-stained sections of lung tissue from each 
mouse were semiquantitatively assessed at 
low power (100×) for the proportion of pa-
renchyma with alveoli-containing intraluminal 
material (proteinaceous exudate and/or fibrin) 
in the background of interstitial expansion and 
inflammation. Each lung was scored by the 
relative amount of abnormal tissue as follows: 
normal = 0; 1–25% = 1; 26–50% = 2; 51–75% 
= 3; >76% = 4. ***, P < 0.001, Student’s t test. 
Bars, 100 µm. All PR8-infected (Flu), MR-
SA-infected (MRSA), or coinfected mice (Flu 
+ MRSA) were treated daily with linezolid 
until 24 h before harvesting the samples. Data 
shown in (A–D) are representative of two in-
dependent experiments. Data shown in E were 
combined from two independent experiments.
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1856
rates in mice. We next investigated whether, similar to WT 
females, this Nox2-dependent, accelerated inflammatory cell 
death also occurred in coinfected Nox2+/− mosaic mice. In-
terestingly, mosaic mice showed similar proportions of apop-
totic neutrophils compared with Nox2−/− females (Fig. 8, D 
and E); however, similar to WT controls, the percentage of 
necrotic cells significantly increased in the airways of mosaic 
mice (Fig. 8, D and E). 
These results indicate that extracellular 
ROS levels are indeed responsible for increased necrotic cell 
death during influenza and MRSA coinfection.
Systemic oxidative stress induces lethal 
inflammation during coinfection
Excessive release of toxic products from necrotic cells has long 
been known to cause tissue damage and subsequent organ fail-
ure. 
T
o determine whether extracellular ROS accumulation is 
responsible for lethal lung inflammation during coinfection, 
we evaluated the efficacy of antibiotics in Nox2+/− mosaic 
mice. Indeed, although all groups of coinfected mice dis-
played comparable declines in viral and bacterial burdens at 
6 dpi (Fig. 9, A and B), attenuation of acute lung damage 
was detected only in Nox2−/− but not mosaic females (Fig. 9, 
C–E). Likewise, the extracellular release of phagocyte my-
eloperoxidase (MPO) into airways significantly increased in 
WT and mosaic mice, although their overall lung MPO levels 
were comparable to those in Nox2−/− animals (Fig. 9 F). Sim-
ilar to WT controls but in sharp contrast to Nox2−/− animals, 
mosaic mice succumbed to influenza and MRSA coinfection 
despite antibiotic treatments (Fig. 9, G and H). 
T
ogether, these 
results suggest that Nox2-induced systemic oxidative stress is 
responsible for lethal lung damage during coinfection.
Nox2 inhibitor in conjunction with antibiotic treatment 
protects against lethal influenza and MRSA coinfection
T
o investigate the practical application of findings from 
Nox2-deficient mice, we evaluated the effect of the NAD 
PH 
oxidase–specific inhibitor apocynin (Wang et al., 1994; Ste-
fanska et al., 2012) in conjunction with antibiotics for treat-
ment of influenza-complicated MRSA infection. Although 
statistically insignificant, initiating apocynin administration 
24 h before MRSA superinfection, i.e., 6 d post-influenza 
infection, tended to improve animal survival (P = 0.15), par-
ticularly at the later stage of coinfection (Fig. 10 A). Consis-
tent with this finding, we observed significantly attenuated 
lung damage in apocynin-treated mice at 7 dpi (Fig. 10 B). 
Furthermore, we evaluated the therapeutic effect of apocynin 
by initiating the administration 24 h after MRSA superinfec-
tion. The proportion of necrotic cells tended (P = 0.059) to 
decline in airway inflammatory cells from apocynin-treated 
mice (Fig. 10 C), even though there were comparable lung 
viral and bacterial burdens in apocynin- or PBS-treated mice 
at 3 dpi (unpublished data). However, likely because of the 
differential animal survival in these two groups by 6 dpi (un-
published data), we were unable to quantitatively demonstrate 
an attenuation of lung damage in apocynin-treated mice 
(Fig. 10 D). Nonetheless, at this later time point, all surviving 
mice exhibited effective control of virus and bacteria but not 
inflammatory lung damage (Fig. 10, D–G). Importantly, even 
though treatment with the inhibitor apocynin alone was not 
sufficient to improve protection (Fig. 10H-I), in conjunction 
with antibiotic treatment, apocynin significantly reduced the 
mortality rate of coinfected mice (Fig. 10 J). 
T
ogether, our re-
sults demonstrate that therapeutic administration of NAD 
PH 
oxidase inhibitor and appropriate antibiotic can rescue mice 
from influenza and MRSA coinfection.
DIS 
CUS 
SION
Our study establishes that oxidative burst is critically involved 
in the pathogenesis of influenza and MRSA coinfection. 
Compared with WT controls, Nox2-deficient mice exhib-
Figure 5. Nox2 activity during coinfection does not enhance inflam-
matory cytokine response. (A–E) WT and Nox2-deficient (KO) mice were 
infected with PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with MRSA. BALFs were 
analyzed for TNF-α (A), IL-1β (B), IL-6 (C), IL-17 (D), and keratinocyte-de-
rived chemokine and MIP-2 (E) levels at days 1, 3, and 6 after infection. All 
PR8-infected (Flu), MRSA-infected (MRSA), or coinfected (Flu + MRSA) mice 
(n ≥ 4) were treated daily with linezolid until 24 h before harvesting the 
samples. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, Student’s t test. Data shown 
are representative of two independent experiments and are means ± SD.
 1857
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
ited attenuated lung damage yet increased bacterial burdens 
after coinfection. In contrast, antibiotic treatment rescued 
Nox2-deficient mice but failed to protect fully WT animals, 
indicating Nox2 as a primary source of lethal lung injury. 
Thus, the reported high mortality rate from influenza and S. 
aureus coinfection, even with appropriate antibiotic treatment, 
appears attributable to Nox2-induced inflammatory tissue 
damage. Importantly, we found that antibiotic treatment in 
conjunction with an NAD 
PH oxidase inhibitor significantly 
improved survival from post-influenza MRSA infection.
Secondary bacterial infection after influenza is known 
to cause severe pneumonia (Metersky et al., 2012). Compro-
mised immune defense against either influenza virus or bacte-
ria is suggested to contribute to disease pathogenesis (Sun and 
Metzger, 2008; Small et al., 2010; Iverson et al., 2011; Kudva et 
al., 2011). In particular, multiple mechanisms are reported to be 
involved in influenza-induced susceptibility to subsequent S. 
aureus infection (Small et al., 2010; Kudva et al., 2011; Robin-
son et al., 2013; Sun and Metzger, 2014). 
These previous studies 
described an association between suppression of innate immu-
nity and consequent defects in bacterial control after influenza 
infection. However, how these innate immune responses lead 
to the disparate outcomes of suppressed antibacterial immunity 
but exaggerated lung inflammation remains unclear. Indeed, to 
our knowledge, no previous studies directly address the con-
tribution of inflammatory damage to the pathogenesis of S. 
aureus pneumonia apart from defective antibacterial immunity.
In our influenza–MRSA coinfection model, bacterial 
infection was controlled through daily administration of anti-
biotics commonly used in MRSA patients, including linezolid, 
gentamicin, and vancomycin. The majority of antibiot-
ic-treated WT mice still died from coinfection, even though 
the MRSA strain used in the study was sensitive to these anti-
biotics, as indicated in the Mouse model of viral and bacterial 
infection section of Materials and methods. As such, our lethal 
coinfection model replicates the poor outcome of patients 
with post-influenza S. aureus infection despite appropriate 
antibiotic treatment (Metersky et al., 2012). Importantly, this 
unique approach allowed us to investigate coinfection patho-
genesis independent of defective bacterial killing.
Excessive lung inflammation is a key feature of clin-
ical influenza and/or bacterial pneumonia. For example, a 
coinfection model of influenza and Legionella by Jamieson 
et al. (2013) showed that the lethal disease outcome resulted 
from impaired ability to tolerate tissue damage, rather than 
defective bacterial control. In agreement with Jamieson, Liu 
et al. (2013) showed that antibiotic therapy alone did not 
prevent the maximal weight loss of influenza and S. aureus–
coinfected mice. Conversely, Ghoneim and McCullers (2014) 
found that the antiinflammatory agent corticosteroid rescued 
ampicillin-treated mice from severe secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia. However, adjuvant corticosteroid did not pre-
vent the development of severe influenza-complicated pneu-
monia, such as in adults during the 2009 H1N1 influenza 
Figure 6. Influenza and MRSA coinfection induces 
both inflammatory monocytes and neutrophils into 
airways. (A–C) Mice were infected with PR8 and 7 d later 
superchallenged with MRSA. BALF cells from WT and 
Nox2-deficient (KO) mice were analyzed for numbers of 
CD11b+ myeloid cells or neutrophils at days 1 (A), 3 (B), and 
6 (C) post-infection. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001, Student’s t 
test. (D) Flow cytometry analysis of airway inflammatory 
monocytes (Mo) and neutrophils (PMN) in coinfected CX-
3CR1EGFP mice (n = 4) at 6 dpi. (E) BALF cells from WT and 
Nox2-deficient (KO) mice were analyzed for the composi-
tions of CD11b+ myeloid cells (mean of five mice/group) at 
6 dpi. All infected mice were treated daily with linezolid 
until 24 h before harvesting the samples. Data shown are 
representative of at least two independent experiments.
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1858
pandemic (Kim et al., 2011; Viasus et al., 2011). Notably, de-
spite improved supportive care, there is currently no specific 
treatment for inflammatory lung damage that is based on a 
known molecular pathway.
Nox2 activation in phagocytes is required for immune 
defense against numerous microbial pathogens, including S. au-
reus (Sun and Metzger, 2014). Even in circumstances in which 
oxidative burst is dispensable for microbial killing, Nox2 can 
attenuate or aggravate inflammation through fundamentally 
different mechanisms. In humans, defects in X chromosome–
linked Nox2 can lead to CGD, and CGD patients suffer from 
a variety of inflammatory conditions, presumably because of 
defective neutrophil apoptosis (Deresinski, 2014). In mouse 
models, during pulmonary infection of fungal Coccidioides, 
Nox2 limits neutrophil infiltration to attenuate lung inflam-
mation (Gonzalez et al., 2011). Moreover, after intratracheal 
challenge with zymosan or lipopolysaccharide, Nox2 reduces 
inflammatory cytokine production and thus facilitates reso-
lution of lung inflammation (Segal et al., 2010). Interestingly, 
during pneumococcal pneumonia, although Nox2 deficiency 
facilitates neutrophil infiltration, it is not associated with lung 
injury. Instead, in this case, Nox2 deficiency facilitates bacterial 
clearance and thereby improves disease outcome.
During infection with H3N2 subtype influenza virus 
X31, Nox2 not only inhibits early viral clearance (3 dpi), but 
also promotes lung pathology (Snelgrove et al., 2006; Vlahos 
et al., 2011). Despite this, compared with X31-infected WT 
controls, Nox2-deficient females (Nox2−/−) were found to 
have increased airway accumulation of inflammatory cells 
and greater weight loss (Snelgrove et al., 2006); in contrast, 
X31-infected Nox2-deficient males (Nox2−/y) were reported 
to have decreased airway accumulation of macrophages but no 
difference in weight loss (Vlahos et al., 2011). Daily apocynin 
treatment, starting 3 d before X31 infection, enhanced early 
viral clearance (Vlahos et al., 2011). Nonetheless, none of 
these previous studies using Nox2-deficient mice or oxidase 
inhibitors has demonstrated a significant Nox2 effect on viral 
clearance, lung pathology, or animal mortality during infec-
tion with the highly virulent influenza virus PR8 (H1N1), 
which was used in the current study.
We have previously established that influenza infection 
suppresses Nox2-dependent bacterial clearance and enhances 
susceptibility to secondary MRSA infection (Sun and Metzger, 
2014). In the current study, bacterial outgrowth is inhibited 
by antibiotic therapy, and conversely, we found that Nox2 
activity exacerbates inflammatory lung damage. Collectively, 
these studies reveal a double-edged sword action of Nox2 
activation during influenza–MRSA coinfection. However, 
rather than broadly decreased inflammatory responses, early 
IL-17 production and neutrophil recruitment in Nox2-defi-
Figure 7. Nox2 activity during coinfection reduces inflammatory cell survival. (A–G) WT and Nox2-deficient (KO) mice were infected with PR8 and 7 
d later superchallenged with MRSA. (A–D) CD11b+ BALF cells (n = 4–5) were analyzed by flow cytometry after staining with annexin V and FVD at the time of 
isolation (0 h), as well as 24 h after in vitro culture. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, Student’s t test. (A) Numbers indicate the mean percentages of four mice/group. 
(E) Diff-Quick–stained BALF cells from day 3 coinfected WT and Nox2-deficient (KO) mice and after 24 h in culture. Bars, 50 µm. (F and G) At 3 dpi, CD11b+ 
BALF cells were stained with annexin V and FVD after 24 h in culture with IM-54, necrostatin 1 (Nec-1), or solvent control (DMSO). (F) BALF cells pooled 
from at least three mice per group are shown (mean ± SD of triplicate wells). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, paired Student’s t test. All coinfected mice were treated 
daily with linezolid (A–D) or gentamicin (E–G) until 24 h before harvesting the samples. Data shown in (A–F) are representative of at least two independent 
experiments. Data shown in G were combined from four independent experiments. Error bars represent SD.
 1859
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Figure 9. Antibiotic therapy is insufficient to rescue Nox2+/− mosaic mice from coinfection. (A–F) WT, Nox2−/− (KO), and Nox2+/− (Mosaic) females 
were infected with PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with MRSA. At 6 dpi, lungs were analyzed for bacterial burdens (A), viral titers (B), albumin (C), protein 
(D), LDH activities (E), and MPO (F) in BALF. Coinfected mice were treated daily with gentamicin until 24 h before harvesting the samples. *, P < 0.05; **, P 
< 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, Mann Whitney test (C) or Tukey's multiple comparisons test (D–F). AU, arbitrary units. (G and H) Survival of WT, Nox2−/− (KO), and 
Nox2+/− (Mosaic) mice after superchallenge of day 7 PR8-infected mice with MRSA. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, log-rank test. Coinfected mice were treated 
daily with gentamicin (G), linezolid, or PBS (H). Data shown in A–G were combined from two independent experiments. Data shown in H are representative 
of two independent experiments.
Figure 8. Nox2 activity accelerates ne-
crotic cell death. (A–E) Mice were inoculated 
with PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with 
MRSA. (A–C) The percentages of Nox2-positive 
neutrophils in blood and airways at 6 dpi after 
coinfection (A), in blood (B), and in airways (C) 
at various days after MRSA or PBS inoculation 
of Nox2+/− mosaic mice (n = 5) with (+Flu) or 
without (−Flu) before PR8 infection. Mice were 
treated daily with linezolid until 24 h before 
harvesting the samples. (A) The gray histogram 
represents neutrophils in Nox2−/− airways. 
***, P < 0.001, Pearson correlation. (D and E) 
Annexin V and FVD staining of inflammatory 
monocytes and neutrophils in WT (n = 8), 
Nox2−/− (KO; n = 5), and Nox2+/− (mosaic; n 
= 6) mice at 6 dpi. (D) Numbers indicate the 
mean percentages. Coinfected mice were 
treated daily with gentamicin until 24 h before 
harvesting the samples. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; 
***P < 0.001, Mann Whitney test. Data shown 
in B and C were combined from three indepen-
dent experiments. Data shown in A, D, and E 
are representative of at least two independent 
experiments. Error bars represent SD.
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1860
cient mice instead increase during coinfection. Even so, this 
effect is transient, considering that neutrophil numbers dra-
matically decline in both 
WT and Nox2-deficient mice at the 
later stage of coinfection. Compared with the magnitude of 
inflammatory cell influx, inappropriate cell death is a more 
important source of acute lung injury (Bratton and Henson, 
2011). In agreement, after influenza and S. aureus coinfection, 
we found that CD11b+ inflammatory cells in WT airways 
exhibited a significant reduction in survival time.
The half-life of circulating and tissue-infiltrating neutro-
phils is generally regulated by apoptosis (Hofman, 2004). This 
programmed form of cell death and subsequent removal of 
apoptotic cells by macrophages is known to be critical for re-
solving inflammation (Bratton and Henson, 2011). However, 
it is also known that during inflammation, monocytes/mac-
rophages are ineffective in apoptotic cell uptake (Jennings et 
al., 2005). In the absence of efferocytosis, excessive apoptotic 
cells will undergo autolytic secondary necrosis (do 
Vale et al., 
2007; Silva, 2010). Therefore, we speculate that the impact of 
Nox2-derived ROS on inflammatory lung damage is context 
dependent, i.e., when apoptotic cells can be promptly cleared, 
Nox2-induced cell death is antiinflammatory; in contrast, 
when apoptotic cells cannot be effectively cleared by effero-
cytosis, e.g., after influenza infection, Nox2 activity prompts 
secondary necrosis and subsequent inflammatory damage.
We show in this in vivo model that coinfected mice ex-
hibit substantial proinflammatory cytokine responses (Fig. 5) 
and thereby extensive airway neutrophil recruitment at 1 dpi 
(Fig. 6 A). Although neutrophil numbers remain elevated at 3 
dpi, over half of the inflammatory cells were dying (Fig. 7 C), 
which in turn lead to 100-fold decreases in neutrophil num-
bers at 6 dpi (Fig. 6, B and C), coinciding with pronounced 
decreases in inflammatory cytokine production at these later 
stages of coinfection. 
T
ogether, this indicates that during coin-
fection, the host immune response proceeds from an initial 
hyperinflammatory phase into a more extended immuno-
Figure 10. Antibiotic treatment in conjunction with NAD 
PH oxidase inhibitor improves protection against coinfection. (A–J) Mice were inocu-
lated with PR8 and 7 d later superchallenged with MRSA. (A and B) Survival (A) and day 7 lung histopathology (H&E; B) of coinfected mice treated daily 
with apocynin (Gentamicin + Apocynin) or PBS (Gentamicin + PBS) beginning at 24 h before MRSA infection (−24 h). Bars, 100 µm. *, P < 0.05, Student’s t 
test. (C) The percentages of annexin+FVD+ inflammatory cells (CD11b+) from day 3 coinfected mice after 24 h in culture. (D–F) BALF albumin levels, bacterial 
burdens, and viral titers on day 6, and lung histopathology (G) on day 7 after coinfection. (C–G) Coinfected mice were treated daily with apocynin or PBS 
beginning at 24 h after MRSA infection. All mice were treated daily with the antibiotics gentamicin (A–C and G) or linezolid (D–F) until 24 h before harvest-
ing the samples. (H and I) Survival of PR8 and 0.25-mg (H) or 0.5-mg (I) MRSA coinfected mice in the absence of antibiotic treatment. (J) Survival of PR8 
and 0.5-mg MRSA coinfected mice after treatments with PBS control (PBS + PBS), linezolid alone (Linezolid + PBS), or linezolid plus apocynin (Linezolid 
+ Apocynin) beginning at 24 h after MRSA infection (+24 h). *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001, log-rank test. Data shown are representative of two independent 
experiments (G) or were combined from two (H–J) or three (A–F) independent experiments.
 1861
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
suppressive phase, similar to that observed in septic patients 
(Hotchkiss et al., 2013).
Considering the simultaneous recruitment, death, and 
removal of inflammatory cells at different phases of coin-
fection, we recognized the limitations of our in vivo model 
for detailed cellular and molecular analysis of Nox2-driven 
inflammatory cell death. Instead, we examined the possible 
effect of pharmacological inhibitors on inflammatory cell 
death ex vivo. IM-54 is a selective inhibitor of necrosis but 
not apoptosis (Sodeoka and Dodo, 2010), whereas necrosta-
tin 1 is an inhibitor of necroptosis, i.e., an apoptosis-inde-
pendent mode of programmed cell death (Su et al., 2015). 
However, neither IM-54 nor necrostatin 1 inhibited necrotic 
death of inflammatory cells isolated from coinfected mice. 
Therefore, we propose that rather than oxidative stress–in-
duced direct necrosis or necroptosis, secondary necrosis after 
apoptosis is the prevailing form of inflammatory cell death. 
Nonetheless, these pharmacological inhibitors are generally 
used for examining death pathways of tissue cells, so their 
regulatory effects on oxidative stress–induced necrotic cell 
death are probably cell type and context dependent. As such, 
in our ex vivo model, IM-54 actually accelerates inflamma-
tory cell death (Fig. 7 G).
We have previously shown that Nox2+/− mosaic mice, 
similar to Nox2−/− females, are susceptible to post-influenza 
MRSA infection in the absence of antibiotic treatment (Sun 
and Metzger, 2014). However, in contrast to Nox2−/− females, 
antibiotic treatment failed to attenuate lung damage and re-
duce mortality in mosaic mice. Furthermore, mosaic mice 
showed significant increases in the percentage of necrotic in-
flammatory cells. T
ogether, these data suggest that Nox2-in-
duced systemic oxidative stress is responsible for accelerated 
necrotic cell death and lethal lung damage during coinfec-
tion. Conversely, the proportion of apoptotic neutrophils is 
reduced in mosaic mice. We speculate that this reduction is a 
combined result of increased survival of Nox2-deficient neu-
trophils and oxidative stress–accelerated secondary necrosis. 
Interestingly, the ratio of WT and Nox2-deficient neutro-
phils remains generally the same in mosaic mice before or 
after coinfection. These observations suggest that the overall 
impact of Nox2-derived ROS on the lifespan of circulating 
neutrophils is not cell intrinsic, even in the absence of influ-
enza and/or MRSA infection.
Interestingly, our recent studies show that intracellular 
ROS in alveolar macrophages and neutrophils are in fact de-
creased at the recovery stage of influenza infection (Sun and 
Metzger, 2014). 
This negative regulation of oxidative burst has 
likely evolved to minimize lung damage during viral infection. 
Although intracellular ROS are reduced on a per cell basis 
during coinfection, there are excessive numbers of inflamma-
tory cells, including both influenza-induced monocytes and S. 
aureus–induced neutrophils (Sun and Metzger, 2014). These 
inflammatory cells, in turn, release oxidants and other toxic 
molecules to airways. This event eventually culminates in le-
thal damage to surrounding lung tissue during coinfection.
Given that Nox2 is the catalytic subunit of NAD 
PH 
oxidase in phagocytes, we focused the investigation on the 
regulatory effects of oxidative burst on myeloid cell death. 
We show that compared with influenza infection alone, 
MRSA superinfection induces extensive neutrophil infiltra-
tion (Fig. 6 A), and presumably, Nox2 activity in this phago-
cyte population is an important source of oxidative stress. In 
contrast, compared with MRSA infection alone, influenza 
infection specifically induces CCR2-dependent influx of in-
flammatory monocytes (Lin et al., 2011; Sun and Metzger, 
2014). Moreover, despite their increased susceptibility to in-
fluenza infection alone (Aldridge et al., 2009), our ongoing 
studies revealed that CCR2-deficent mice are more resistant 
to influenza–MRSA coinfection, suggesting a detrimental 
role of airway monocytes during coinfection (unpublished 
data); however, future experimental evidence is needed to 
establish whether this adverse contribution of inflammatory 
monocytes to coinfection outcome is relevant to their Nox2 
activity. Clinically, epithelial and endothelial injury is likely 
the ultimate cause of end-stage organ failure during ARDS 
or sepsis. Even though we cannot exclude the possibility that 
uncontrolled production of ROS can cause direct injury 
to lung epithelium at the later stage of infections, the find-
ings in our studies suggest that Nox2 activity is the primary 
source of systemic oxidative stress during influenza-com-
plicated MRSA coinfection.
In summary, our results demonstrate that influenza 
infection disrupts the delicate balance between Nox2-de-
pendent antibacterial immunity and inflammation. This 
disruption leads to not only increased susceptibility to S. au-
reus infection, but also extensive lung damage. Importantly, 
we show that a combination treatment with antibiotics and 
a NAD 
PH oxidase inhibitor significantly improved animal 
survival from coinfection. These findings suggest that treat-
ment strategies that target both bacteria and oxidative stress 
will significantly benefit patients with influenza-compli-
cated S. aureus pneumonia.
MAT 
ERI 
ALS AND MET 
HODS
Mouse model of viral and bacterial infection
Specific pathogen–free, C57BL/6 WT, p47phox−/− Nox2−/y, 
Nox2−/−, and CX3CR1EGFP mice were purchased from the 
Jackson Laboratory and bred at Albany Medical College and 
University of Nebraska Medical Center following Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines. C57BL/6 
Nox2+/y (WT) males were mated with Nox2−/− females to 
produce Nox2+/− mosaic mice for the experiments. All ani-
mal experiments were approved by Albany Medical College 
Animal Care and Use Committee and University of Ne-
braska Medical Center, and all experiments were performed 
in accordance with Albany Medical College and University 
of Nebraska Medical Center Assurance of Compliance with 
Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals, which is on file with the Office of Pro-
tection from Research Risks, National Institutes of Health.
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1862
Viral challenge was performed with a sublethal (0.25 
LD50), i.e., 25 PFU/female and 50 PFU/male, dose of PR8 
administered i.n. to anesthetized, sex- and age-matched adult 
mice in 50 µl of sterile PBS. Titers of virus stocks and viral 
levels in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluids (BALFs) and 
lungs of infected mice were determined by plaque assays on 
Madin-Darby canine kidney cell monolayers. Bacterial coin-
fection was performed 7 d later (Sun and Metzger, 2014). T
o 
induce bacterial pneumonia, anesthetized mice were inocu-
lated i.n. with 50 µl PBS containing 0.25 mg (in Fig. 10 F) or 
0.5 mg (∼2–6 × 108 CFU/mouse) of ATCC MRSA strain 
BAA-1695 (a pvl-isolate from patient sputum). Minimum in-
hibitory concentration values of antibiotics for MRSA BAA-
1695 were ≤12.5 µg/ml for gentamicin, ≤1.17 µg/ml for 
vancomycin, and ≤2.5 µg/ml for linezolid in vitro. Bacterial 
burden in the lungs was measured by sacrificing infected mice 
at the indicated time points and plating serial 10-fold dilu-
tions of each sample onto blood agar plates.
BAL cell analysis
BALF samples were collected by making an incision in the 
trachea and lavaging the lung twice with 0.8 ml PBS, pH 7.4. 
Total leukocyte counts were determined using a Bright-Line 
hemacytometer (Hausser Scientific).
For in vitro culture, BALF cells were washed and re-
suspended in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. 1 × 106 
BALF cells were added to the wells of a 96-well low-attach-
ment plate (Costar) in presence of 10 µg/ml IM-54 or 50 µM 
necrostatin 1 for 24 h at 37°C. After overnight incubation, 
BALF cells were evaluated using Diff-Quick–stained cytospin 
preparations or flow cytometric analysis.
For flow cytometric analysis, BALF cells were in-
cubated with 2.4G2 mAb against FcγRII/III and stained 
with APC-conjugated anti-CD11c (BD), FITC-conjugated 
anti-CD11b (BD), PE-conjugated anti-Ly6G mAb (clone 
1A8; BD), and APC-Cy7–conjugated anti-F4/80 (eBio-
science) for myeloid cell analysis. Furthermore, APC-con-
jugated anti-CD11c (BD), PE-conjugated anti-CD11b 
(BD), PE-Cy7–conjugated anti-Ly6G mAb (BD), and 
APC-Cy7–conjugated anti-F4/80 (eBioscience) were used 
for myeloid cell analysis in CX3CR1EGFP mice. To differ-
entiate early-stage apoptotic cells from the late-stage apop-
totic and necrotic cells, BALF cells were stained with FVD 
eFluor 780 and annexin V PerCP–eFluor 710 (eBiosci-
ence), using FITC-conjugated anti-CD11b (BD), PE-con-
jugated anti-ly6G (BD), BV421-conjugated anti-F4/80 
(BioLegend), and APC-conjugated anti-CD11c (BD) for 
cell surface markers. The stained cells were analyzed on a 
FAC 
SCanto cell analyzer (BD) or LSR 
II-green flow cy-
tometer (BD) using FAC 
SDiva (BD) and FlowJo (Tree 
Star) software analysis.
Detection of WT and Nox2-deficient neutrophils. 
 Nox2 ex-
pression in neutrophils was assessed with an anti–mouse gp-
91phox mAb (BD; Sun and Metzger, 2014). In brief, after 
staining for neutrophils with FITC-conjugated anti–mouse 
Ly6G mAb and PE-Cy7–conjugated anti–mouse CD11b 
mAb, cells were fixed and permeabilized before incubation 
with purified mouse anti-gp91phox mAb. Cells were then 
washed and incubated with PE-conjugated rat anti–mouse 
IgG1 Ab (BD) before analysis by flow cytometry.
Determination of cytokine/chemokine production by ELI 
SA. 
 
BALF and lung homogenates were harvested and assayed for 
TNF
, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17, keratinocyte-derived chemokine, 
and MIP-2 by ELI 
SA using commercially available kits 
from BD and R&D Systems.
Lung histology analysis. 
 Mice were sacrificed 6 d after MRSA 
superinfection, and the lungs were removed for histological 
analyses. Paraffin-embedded tissues were sectioned to a thick-
ness of 5 µm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E) by standard methods.
Evaluation of airway damage. 
 BALFs were harvested and as-
sayed for albumin by ELI 
SA using a commercially available 
kit from Bethyl Laboratories, Inc. MPO levels in BALF and 
lung homogenates were determined by ELI 
SA (R&D Sys-
tems). T
otal protein levels and LDH activities in BALF were 
analyzed by a micro–bicinchoninic acid assay protein assay kit 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an LDH cytotoxicity assay kit 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively.
Treatment with antibiotics
Mice were i.p. injected with a therapeutic dose (100 mg/
kg) of gentamicin at 3 h after MRSA infection and then 
followed by 50 mg/kg/d (Espersen et al., 1994). In some ex-
periments, mice were treated s.c. with 50 mg/kg/d linezolid 
(Pfizer Inc.) or 150 mg/kg/d vancomycin beginning 2 h 
after MRSA infection (Reyes et al., 2011; Niska et al., 2013; 
Schuch et al., 2014). Control mice received PBS. All antibi-
otic treatment and sham injections continued through day 
10 after MRSA infection.
Treatment with apocynin
Mice were treated i.p. daily with 0.15 mg of apocynin (Sig-
ma-Aldrich; 
Vlahos et al., 2011; Ferreira et al., 2013) in 100 µl 
PBS initiated 24 h before or after and continued through day 
10 after MRSA infection.
Statistics
Results are expressed as means ± SD. Significant differences 
between experimental groups were determined using a two-
tailed Student t test (to compare two samples), an ANO 
VA 
analysis followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test (to 
compare multiple samples), or a Mann Whitney test (non-
parametric test) in Prism 6 (GraphPad Software). Survival 
analyses were performed using the log-rank test. For all anal-
yses, a p-value <0.05 was considered to be significant.
 1863
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
ACK 
NOW 
LED 
GME 
NTS
The authors thank Melody Montgomery at the University of Nebraska Medical Center 
(UNMC) Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research Research Editorial Office for the 
professional editing of this manuscript. The authors also thank Dr. Philip Hexley and 
the UNMC Flow Cytometry Core Facility for assistance with FACS analysis, the UNMC 
Tissue Sciences Facility for staining and imaging tissue sections, and Dr. Kaihong Su 
for critical review of the manuscript.
 This work was supported by a Pfizer Young Investigator award, a National Insti-
tutes of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute grant (R01 HL118408) to K. 
Sun, and National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases grants (RO1 AI75312) to D.W. Metzger.
 The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Submitted: 19 March 2015
Accepted: 30 June 2016
REFERENCES
Abo, 
A., 
A. Boyhan, I. 
West, 
A.J. 
Thrasher, and 
A.W
. Segal. 1992. Reconstitution 
of neutrophil NAD 
PH oxidase activity in the cell-free system by four 
components: p67-phox, p47-phox, p21rac1, and cytochrome b-245. J. 
Biol. Chem. 267:16767–16770.
Akaike, T., Y
. Noguchi, S. Ijiri, K. Setoguchi, M. Suga, Y
.M. Zheng, B. 
Dietzschold, and H. Maeda. 1996. Pathogenesis of influenza virus-
induced pneumonia: involvement of both nitric oxide and oxygen 
radicals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 93:2448–2453. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.93 
.6 
.2448
Aldridge, J.R. Jr., C.E. Moseley, D.A. Boltz, N.J. Negovetich, C. Reynolds, J. 
Franks, S.A. Brown, P
.C. Doherty, R.G. Webster, and P
.G. Thomas. 2009. 
TNF/iNOS-producing dendritic cells are the necessary evil of lethal 
influenza virus infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:5306–5311. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0900655106
Blyth, C.C., S.A. Webb, J. Kok, D.E. Dwyer, S.J. van Hal, H. Foo, A.N. Ginn, 
A.M. Kesson, I. Seppelt, J.R. Iredell, ANZ 
IC Influenza Investigators. 
COSI Microbiological Investigators. 2013. The impact of bacterial and 
viral co-infection in severe influenza. Influenza Other Respi. Viruses. 
7:168–176. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1750 
-2659 
.2012 
.00360 
.x
Bratton, D.L., and P
.M. Henson. 2011. Neutrophil clearance: when the party 
is over, clean-up begins. Trends Immunol. 32:350–357. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.it 
.2011 
.04 
.009
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2007. Severe meth-
icillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus community-acquired pneu-
monia associated with influenza--Louisiana and Georgia, December 
2006-January 2007. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 56:325–329.
Deresinski, S. 2014. Chronic granulomatous disease: a potentially lethal com-
bination of immunodeficiency and excess inflammation. Clin. Infect. Dis. 
59:iii–iv.
do 
Vale, A., C. Costa-Ramos, A. Silva, D.S. Silva, F
. Gärtner, N.M. dos Santos, 
and M.T. Silva. 2007. Systemic macrophage and neutrophil destruction 
by secondary necrosis induced by a bacterial exotoxin in a Gram-
negative septicaemia. Cell. Microbiol. 9:988–1003. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1462 
-5822 
.2006 
.00846 
.x
Espersen, F
., N. Frimodt-Møller, L. Corneliussen, U. Riber, 
V
.T. Rosdahl, and 
P
. Skinhøj. 1994. Effect of treatment with methicillin and gentamicin in 
a new experimental mouse model of foreign body infection. Antimicrob. 
Agents Chemother. 38:2047–2053. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/AAC 
.38 
.9 
.2047
Ferreira, A.P
., F
.S. Rodrigues, I.D. Della-Pace, B.C. Mota, S.M. Oliveira, C.C. 
Velho Gewehr, F
. Bobinski, C.V
. de Oliveira, J.S. Brum, M.S. Oliveira, et 
al. 2013. The effect of NAD 
PH-oxidase inhibitor apocynin on cognitive 
impairment induced by moderate lateral fluid percussion injury: role of 
inflammatory and oxidative brain damage. Neurochem. Int. 63:583–593. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuint 
.2013 
.09 
.012
Geering, B., and H.U. Simon. 2011. Peculiarities of cell death mechanisms in 
neutrophils. Cell Death Differ. 18:1457–1469. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/cdd 
.2011 
.75
Ghoneim, H.E., and J.A. McCullers. 2014. Adjunctive corticosteroid therapy 
improves lung immunopathology and survival during severe secondary 
pneumococcal pneumonia in mice. J. Infect. Dis. 209:1459–1468. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/infdis 
/jit653
Gonzalez, A., C.Y
. Hung, and G.T. Cole. 2011. Absence of phagocyte NAD 
PH oxidase 2 leads to severe inflammatory response in lungs of mice 
infected with Coccidioides. Microb. Pathog. 51:432–441. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.micpath 
.2011 
.08 
.003
Han, S., and R.K. Mallampalli. 2015. The acute respiratory distress syndrome: 
from mechanism to translation. J. Immunol. 194:855–860. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1402513
Hofman, P
. 2004. Molecular regulation of neutrophil apoptosis and potential 
targets for therapeutic strategy against the inflammatory process. 
Curr. Drug Targets Inflamm. Allergy. 3:1–9. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2174 
/1568010043483935
Hotchkiss, R.S., G. Monneret, and D. Payen. 2013. Sepsis-induced 
immunosuppression: from cellular dysfunctions to immunotherapy. Nat. 
Rev. Immunol. 13:862–874. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3552
Imai, Y
., K. Kuba, G.G. Neely, R. Yaghubian-Malhami, T. Perkmann, G. van 
Loo, M. Ermolaeva, R. Veldhuizen, Y
.H. Leung, H. Wang, et al. 2008. 
Identification of oxidative stress and T
oll-like receptor 4 signaling as a 
key pathway of acute lung injury. Cell. 133:235–249. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2008 
.02 
.043
Iverson, A.R., K.L. Boyd, J.L. McAuley, L.R. Plano, M.E. Hart, and J.A. 
McCullers. 2011. Influenza virus primes mice for pneumonia from 
Staphylococcus aureus. J. Infect. Dis. 203:880–888. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/infdis 
/jiq113
Jamieson, A.M., L. Pasman, S. Yu, P
. Gamradt, R.J. Homer, T. Decker, and R. 
Medzhitov. 2013. Role of tissue protection in lethal respiratory viral-
bacterial coinfection. Science. 340:1230–1234. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1233632
Janssen, W
.J., L. Barthel, A. Muldrow, R.E. Oberley-Deegan, M.T. Kearns, 
C. Jakubzick, and P
.M. Henson. 2011. Fas determines differential fates 
of resident and recruited macrophages during resolution of acute lung 
injury. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 184:547–560. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201011 
-1891OC
Jennings, J.H., D.J. Linderman, B. Hu, J. Sonstein, and J.L. Curtis. 2005. 
Monocytes recruited to the lungs of mice during immune inflammation 
ingest apoptotic cells poorly. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 32:108–117. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1165 
/rcmb 
.2004 
-0108OC
Kim, S.H., S.B. Hong, S.C. Yun, W
.I. Choi, J.J. Ahn, Y
.J. Lee, H.B. Lee, C.M. 
Lim, and Y
. Koh. Korean Society of Critical Care Medicine H1N1 
Collaborative. 2011. Corticosteroid treatment in critically ill patients 
with pandemic influenza A/H1N1 2009 infection: analytic strategy 
using propensity scores. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 183:1207–1214. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201101 
-0110OC
Kohanski, M.A., M.A. DePristo, and J.J. Collins. 2010. Sublethal antibiotic 
treatment leads to multidrug resistance via radical-induced mutagenesis. 
Mol. Cell. 37:311–320. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2010 
.01 
.003
Köhler, J., K. Breitbach, C. Renner, A.K. Heitsch, A. Bast, N. van Rooijen, S. 
Vogelgesang, and I. Steinmetz. 2011. NAD 
PH-oxidase but not inducible 
nitric oxide synthase contributes to resistance in a murine Staphylococcus 
aureus Newman pneumonia model. Microbes Infect. 13:914–922. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.micinf 
.2011 
.05 
.004
Kudva, A., E.V
. Scheller, K.M. Robinson, C.R. Crowe, S.M. Choi, S.R. 
Slight, S.A. Khader, P
.J. Dubin, R.I. Enelow, J.K. Kolls, and J.F
. Alcorn. 
2011. Influenza A inhibits Th17-mediated host defense against bacterial 
pneumonia in mice. J. Immunol. 186:1666–1674. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1002194
 Nox2 induces lethal lung damage | Sun et al.
1864
Lin, K.L., S. Sweeney, B.D. Kang, E. Ramsburg, and M.D. Gunn. 2011. 
CCR2-antagonist prophylaxis reduces pulmonary immune pathology 
and markedly improves survival during influenza infection. J. Immunol. 
186:508–515. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1001002
Liu, Y
., and J.A. Imlay. 2013. Cell death from antibiotics without the 
involvement of reactive oxygen species. Science. 339:1210–1213. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1232751
Liu, X., 
Y
. He, K. Xiao, J.R. White, D.N. Fusco, and G.A. Papanicolaou. 2013. 
Effect of linezolid on clinical severity and pulmonary cytokines in a 
murine model of influenza A and Staphylococcus aureus coinfection. 
PLoS One. 8:e57483. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0057483
Louria, D.B., H.L. Blumenfeld, J.T. Ellis, E.D. Kilbourne, and D.E. Rogers. 
1959. Studies on influenza in the pandemic of 1957-1958. II. Pulmonary 
complications of influenza. J. Clin. Invest. 38:213–265. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI103791
Matute-Bello, G., C.W
. Frevert, and T.R. Martin. 2008. Animal models of 
acute lung injury. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 295:L379–L399. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1152 
/ajplung 
.00010 
.2008
Metersky, M.L., R.G. Masterton, H. Lode, T.M. File Jr., and T. Babinchak. 
2012. Epidemiology, microbiology, and treatment considerations for 
bacterial pneumonia complicating influenza. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 16:e321–
e331. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ijid 
.2012 
.01 
.003
Metzger, D.W
., and K. Sun. 2013. Immune dysfunction and bacterial 
coinfections following influenza. J. Immunol. 191:2047–2052. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1301152
Niska, J.A., J.H. Shahbazian, R.I. Ramos, K.P
. Francis, N.M. Bernthal, and L.S. 
Miller. 2013. Vancomycin-rifampin combination therapy has enhanced 
efficacy against an experimental Staphylococcus aureus prosthetic joint 
infection. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57:5080–5086. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/AAC 
.00702 
-13
Reyes, N., J.B. Aggen, and C.F
. Kostrub. 2011. In vivo efficacy of the novel 
aminoglycoside ACHN-490 in murine infection models. Antimicrob. 
Agents Chemother. 55:1728–1733. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/AAC 
.00862 
-10
Robinson, K.M., S.M. Choi, K.J. McHugh, S. Mandalapu, R.I. Enelow, J.K. 
Kolls, and J.F
. Alcorn. 2013. Influenza A exacerbates Staphylococcus 
aureus pneumonia by attenuating IL-1β production in mice. J. Immunol. 
191:5153–5159. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1301237
Schuch, R., H.M. Lee, B.C. Schneider, K.L. Sauve, C. Law, B.K. Khan, J.A. 
Rotolo, Y
. Horiuchi, D.E. Couto, A. Raz, et al. 2014. Combination 
therapy with lysin CF-301 and antibiotic is superior to antibiotic alone 
for treating methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus-induced murine 
bacteremia. J. Infect. Dis. 209:1469–1478. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/
infdis 
/jit637
Segal, B.H., W
. Han, J.J. Bushey, M. Joo, Z. Bhatti, J. Feminella, C.G. Dennis, 
R.R. 
Vethanayagam, F
.E. 
Yull, M. Capitano, et al. 2010. NAD 
PH oxidase 
limits innate immune responses in the lungs in mice. PLoS One. 5:e9631. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0009631
Short, K.R., E.J. Kroeze, R.A. Fouchier, and 
T. Kuiken. 2014. Pathogenesis of 
influenza-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet Infect. Dis. 
14:57–69. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S1473 
-3099(13)70286 
-X
Silva, M.T. 2010. Bacteria-induced phagocyte secondary necrosis as a 
pathogenicity mechanism. J. Leukoc. Biol. 88:885–896. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1189 
/jlb 
.0410205
Small, C.L., C.R. Shaler, S. McCormick, M. Jeyanathan, D. Damjanovic, 
E.G. Brown, P
. Arck, M. Jordana, C. Kaushic, A.A. Ashkar, and Z. Xing. 
2010. Influenza infection leads to increased susceptibility to subsequent 
bacterial superinfection by impairing NK cell responses in the lung. 
J. Immunol. 184:2048–2056. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.0902772
Snelgrove, R.J., L. Edwards, A.J. Rae, and T. Hussell. 2006. An absence of 
reactive oxygen species improves the resolution of lung influenza 
infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 36:1364–1373. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.200635977
Sodeoka, M., and K. Dodo. 2010. Development of selective inhibitors of 
necrosis. Chem. Rec. 10:308–314. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/tcr 
.201000031
Stefanska, J., A. Sarniak, A. Wlodarczyk, M. Sokolowska, E. Pniewska, 
Z. Doniec, D. Nowak, and R. Pawliczak. 2012. Apocynin reduces 
reactive oxygen species concentrations in exhaled breath condensate 
in asthmatics. Exp. Lung Res. 38:90–99. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/01902148 
.2011 
.649823
Su, X., H. Wang, D. Kang, J. Zhu, Q. Sun, T. Li, and K. Ding. 2015. 
Necrostatin-1 ameliorates intracerebral hemorrhage-induced brain 
injury in mice through inhibiting RIP1/RIP3 pathway. Neurochem. Res. 
40:643–650. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s11064 
-014 
-1510 
-0
Sun, K., and D.W
. Metzger. 2008. Inhibition of pulmonary antibacterial 
defense by interferon-γ during recovery from influenza infection. Nat. 
Med. 14:558–564. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1765
Sun, K., and D.W
. Metzger. 2014. Influenza infection suppresses NAD 
PH oxidase-dependent phagocytic bacterial clearance and enhances 
susceptibility to secondary methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
infection. J. Immunol. 192:3301–3307. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/
jimmunol 
.1303049
Vardakas, K.Z., D.K. Matthaiou, and M.E. Falagas. 2009. Incidence, 
characteristics and outcomes of patients with severe community 
acquired-MRSA pneumonia. Eur. Respir. J. 34:1148–1158. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1183 
/09031936 
.00041009
Viasus, D., J.R. Paño-Pardo, E. Cordero, A. Campins, F
. López-Medrano, A. 
Villoslada, M.C. Fariñas, A. Moreno, J. Rodríguez-Baño, J.A. Oteo, et al. 
Novel Influenza A (H1N1) Study Group, Spanish Network for Research 
in Infectious Diseases. 2011. Effect of immunomodulatory therapies 
in patients with pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 complicated by 
pneumonia. J. Infect. 62:193–199. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jinf 
.2011 
.01 
.014
Vlahos, R., J. Stambas, S. Bozinovski, B.R. Broughton, G.R. Drummond, 
and S. Selemidis. 2011. Inhibition of Nox2 oxidase activity ameliorates 
influenza A virus-induced lung inflammation. PLoS Pathog. 7:e1001271. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1001271
von Dessauer, B., J. Bongain, V
. Molina, J. Quilodran, R. Castillo, and R. 
Rodrigo. 2011. Oxidative stress as a novel target in pediatric sepsis man-
agement. J Crit. Care. 26:103e1–103e7.
Wang, W
., Y
. Suzuki, T. Tanigaki, D.R. Rank, and T.A. Raffin. 1994. Effect of 
the NAD 
PH oxidase inhibitor apocynin on septic lung injury in guinea 
pigs. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 150:1449–1452. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/ajrccm 
.150 
.5 
.7952574
