 Leaky gate model: intensity-dependent coding of pain and itch 
in the spinal cord
Shuohao Sun1,#, Qian Xu1,#, Changxiong Guo4, Yun Guan2, Qin Liu4, and Xinzhong 
Dong1,3,*
1The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Center for Sensory Biology, Baltimore, 
MD 21205, USA
2Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA
4Department of Anesthesiology and the Center for the Study of Itch, Department of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, 
63110, USA
SUMMARY
Coding of itch versus pain has been heatedly debated for decades. However, the current coding 
theories (labeled line, intensity and selectivity theory) cannot accommodate all experimental 
observations. Here we identified a subset of spinal interneurons, labeled by gastrin releasing 
peptide (Grp), that receive direct synaptic input from both pain and itch primary sensory neurons. 
When activated, these Grp+ neurons generated rarely-seen simultaneous robust pain and itch 
responses that were intensity-dependent. Accordingly, we propose a “leaky gate” model, in which 
Grp+ neurons transmit both itch and weak pain signals, however upon strong painful stimuli the 
recruitment of endogenous opioids works to close this gate, reducing overwhelming pain 
generated by parallel pathways. Consistent with our model, loss of these Grp+ neurons increased 
pain responses while itch was decreased. Our new model serves as an example of non-monotonic 
coding in the spinal cord and better explains observations in human psychophysical studies.
*Correspondence and Lead Contact: xdong2@jhmi.edu.
#Contributed equally to this work
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.S. and X.D. initiated the project. S.S. carried out the genetic manipulations, immunostainings and most of the behavioral 
experiments. C.G. and Q.L. contributed to optogenetics experiments. Q.X. and Y.G. performed electrophysiological recordings. Q.X. 
and S.S. performed virus-tracing experiments. S.S. and X.D. wrote the manuscript.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2017 February 22; 93(4): 840–853.e5. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.01.012.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
Pain and itch are two distinct yet related sensations. Both pain and itch are detected by 
small-diameter dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons and transmitted to the spinal cord dorsal 
horn, yet trigger distinct behavioral responses. Pain generates a withdrawal response to avoid 
tissue damage, while itch elicits scratching to remove irritants. Pain can suppress itch, which 
is demonstrated when the mechanical pain generated by scratching relieves the itchy 
sensation (Davidson et al., 2009). Itch, however, can rarely suppress pain. On the cellular 
level, neurons responsive to itchy stimuli in both DRG and the spinal cord can also be 
activated by pain (Akiyama et al., 2009a; Davidson et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2009; Schmelz et 
al., 2003), begging the question how these two sensations are distinguished.
Debates about pain and itch coding have been on-going for decades. One major theory, the 
intensity theory, claims that poly-modal sensory neurons respond to both painful and itchy 
stimuli. The same group of neurons can be stimulated strongly or weakly to generate pain or 
itch sensations respectively (Lewis et al., 1927; Von frey, 1922). However, weaker painful 
stimuli or stronger itchy stimuli fail to turn into a different sensation, thus raising questions 
about the intensity theory (Handwerker et al., 1991; Ochoa and Torebjörk, 1989; Tuckett, 
1982). Another major theory is the labeled line theory, which argues that different senses are 
coded by mutually exclusive populations (Norrsell et al., 1999; Schmelz et al., 1997). 
However, the fact that itch-responsive neurons are also activated by painful stimuli argues 
against the labeled line theory. A modified labeled line theory, termed the selectivity theory, 
incorporates the existence of poly-modal sensory neurons (Handwerker, 1992; McMahon 
and Koltzenburg, 1992). The selectivity theory suggests that itchy stimuli specifically 
activate itch-selective neurons to generate itch sensation, while painful stimuli activate both 
itch-selective neurons and a larger nociceptive population whose activation inhibits itch to 
produce only pain sensation.
Recent studies largely support this modified labeled line theory. In DRG, Han et al. 
confirmed the existence of “itch-selective” neurons by showing that the activation of the 
MrgprA3+ primary sensory neurons generated itch but not pain responses, while its ablation 
impaired itch and spared pain (Han et al., 2013). Further along this same labeled line, the 
“itch-selective” neurons in the spinal cord are proposed to be the gastrin releasing peptide 
receptor (GRPR) positive population. The loss of the GRPR+ neurons abolished most itch 
responses but spared pain responses (Sun et al., 2009). In addition, brain natriuretic peptide 
(BNP) is suggested to be the itch-specific neurotransmitter, signaling between itch-selective 
cells in DRG and itch-selective cells in the spinal cord (Mishra and Hoon, 2013). However, 
in human psychophysical studies, most chemical-induced itch sensations are accompanied 
by weaker nociceptive sensations (burning, pricking, stinging, etc.) (LaMotte et al., 2014; 
Liu, 2012; Sikand et al., 2011a, 2009). These mixed sensations raise questions about the 
“selectivity” of itch pathways.
Although we cannot deny the beauty of simplicity, the anatomical structure of the spinal 
cord dorsal horn seems to suggest a more complicated and integrative organization of 
sensory circuits than labeled lines. Unlike pseudo-unipolar DRG neurons, which all serve 
output functions, only a small subset of superficial dorsal horn neurons transmit signals 
Sun et al.
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 further to the brain (Spike et al., 2003). The remaining majority are interneurons forming 
interlacing local circuitries whose functions remain largely elusive. Here we attempted to 
reveal the functions of dorsal horn circuits as they related to pain and itch. Second order 
neurons are the first step in the spinal circuitry, receiving direct synaptic input from DRG 
neurons. We identified a subset of second order neurons, positive for Grp, that receive direct 
synaptic inputs from both pain and itch primary sensory neurons. Surprisingly, the activation 
of the Grp+ neurons generated both pain and itch responses with the pain coding being 
intensity dependent. These data led us to this “leaky gate” model, which provides a refined 
theory for pain and itch coding in the spinal cord and better explains results from human 
psychophysics experiments.
RESULTS
Genetic labeling of itch second order neurons in the spinal cord
Previously, we discovered that axons of MrgprA3+ itch primary sensory neurons selectively 
terminate in lamina II of spinal cord (Han et al., 2013). To identify genetic markers of 
second order neurons which form synapses directly with MrgprA3+ neurons, we utilized 
transgenic mouse lines with Cre recombinase expression under specific neuronal gene 
promoters, generated using bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-based transgenic 
technology by the Gene Expression Nervous System Atlas (GENSAT) project (Gong et al., 
2003). Upon screening all GENSAT Cre lines with expression in the spinal cord dorsal horn, 
we focused on a promising target, Grp. Grp has previously been implicated in itch 
transmission. Grp was reported to express in DRG but not in spinal cord and proposed to 
provide input to GRPR+ neurons (Sun and Chen, 2007). However, recent studies suggest that 
Grp instead expresses in spinal cord dorsal horn, not the DRG (Fleming et al., 2012; 
Solorzano et al., 2015).
Consistent with the recent studies, we found that GrpCre expression was restricted to the 
superficial lamina of the spinal cord and we could not detect GrpCre expression in DRG 
(Figure 1A and 1B), when visualized with ROSA26LSL-tdTomato reporter line. Instead of 
attempting to reconcile the controversies regarding GRP expression, we focused more on 
utilizing the genetically labeled mouse lines to study the function of this subset of spinal 
cord neurons in pain and itch sensation. To further determine the laminar distribution of the 
Grp+ neurons in the dorsal horn, we performed immunostaining on GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-tdTomato spinal sections. Grp+ neurons were located deeper than the CGRP-
labeled terminals in lamina II outer layer (Figure 1E), co-localized with IB4 positive fibers 
in lamina II dorsal inner layer (Figure 1F) and partially overlapped with PKCγ neurons 
(9.03%) in ventral inner layer(Braz et al., 2014; Solorzano et al., 2015) (Figure 1G and 
Figure S1E). Since there are no projection neurons (i.e. dorsal horn neurons sending their 
axons to the brain) in lamina II (Todd, 2010), GrpCre line thus labels a subset of interneurons 
(i.e. neurons whose axons remain and arborize in the spinal cord) in the lamina II inner 
layer. Regarding neurotransmitter types, more than 90% of Grp+ neurons expressed the 
glutamatergic excitatory marker (Figure 1H and 1K), vesicular glutamate transporter 
(vGlut2); while less than 10% of Grp+ neurons overlapped with the GABAergic inhibitory 
Sun et al.
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 marker, GAD1 (Figure 1I). Therefore, Grp labels a subset of excitatory interneurons in 
lamina II inner layer.
To check the prevalence of Grp+ neurons in the spinal cord, we stained for pan-neuronal 
marker, NeuN. Grp labeled only 4.24% of neurons in lamina II (Figure S1). Moreover, Grp+ 
neurons were all characterized as vertical neurons according to morphology (n=16) (Grudt 
and Perl, 2002) (Figure 1J and 1J′). Such a small group of genetically labeled neurons with 
uniform morphologies likely have uniform functions. Thus the GrpCre line from GENSAT 
serves as a great tool to investigate this small subset of spinal interneurons.
GENSAT has another Grp line with EGFP expression under the same promoter. 93% of 
neurons from GrpEGFP line were reported to express Grp mRNA (Solorzano et al., 2015). 
We crossed the EGFP line with GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-tdTomato. 90.3% of GrpCre positive 
neurons also expressed GrpEGFP (Figure 1C, Figure S1), while 64.1% of GrpEGFP neurons 
co-localized with GrpCre, showing that GrpEGFP line labeled most GrpCre positive neurons. 
We found that the distribution of GrpEGFP labeled neurons overlapped with MrgprA3 central 
terminals in the spinal cord (Figure 1D). Moreover, GrpEGFP co-localized with both 
MrgprA3 and post-synaptic marker PSD95 (Figure S1), suggesting that Grp+ neurons could 
form synaptic contacts with MrgprA3-labeled (diagramed in Figure 1L), itch-selective 
neurons in DRG (Han et al., 2013).
Grp+ neurons receive direct synaptic inputs from itch-selective primary neurons
Next, to directly examine the synaptic inputs to Grp+ neurons, we recorded from Grp+ 
neurons in spinal slices while electrically stimulating the dorsal root. All Grp+ neurons had 
monosynaptic input from C fibers (Figure S2), demonstrating that Grp exclusively labels 
second order neurons with direct synaptic input from DRG. We then tried to further 
determine the source of C fiber inputs onto Grp+ neurons. To determine whether Grp+ 
neurons receive direct synaptic input from MrgprA3+ neurons, we crossed MrgprA3Cre with 
Cre dependent Channelrhodopsin reporter line ROSA26LSL-ChR2 to selectively activate 
MrgprA3 fibers with blue light (as diagramed in Figure 2A).
To test the behavioral effect of light-mediated activation of the MrgprA3+ neurons, we shone 
blue light on the shaved nape regions of MrgprA3Cre; ROSA26LSL-ChR2 mice (as diagramed 
in Figure 2A). 1Hz 100ms light stimulation generated significant scratching compared with 
controls (Figure 2B, Supplemental video 1). Similar to chemical activation (Han et al., 
2013), optogenetic activation generated only scratching but not wiping behavior, which 
confirmed the role of MrgprA3+ neurons as itch-selective neurons. 5Hz light stimulation, 
however, failed to elicit scratching above baseline (Figure 2B, see also Figure S3C). 
Consistently, 1Hz light stimulation reliably evoked action potentials in MrgprA3+ neurons, 
while 5Hz light stimulation failed to do so (Figure S3), suggesting that these neurons might 
not be able to fire at this higher frequency. Yet failure of 5Hz light to induce scratching 
could also be caused by failure in synaptic transmission in the central synapses or central 
terminals to follow at this frequency.
When we recorded from the Grp+ neurons while stimulating the MrgprA3 central terminals 
with light, 100% of the Grp+ neurons (16/16) received monosynaptic input from MrgprA3+ 
Sun et al.
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurons (Figure 2C, see also Figure S3, monosynaptic connections inferred from no failure 
of EPSCs to 20 stimuli at 1Hz), showing that all sampled Grp+ neurons labeled a 
functionally unified population of second order neurons that appeared to receive direct itchy 
input from the periphery. When we recorded from surrounding Grp negative neurons, 25% 
of them (7/28) also received monosynaptic input, an additional 18% (5/28) received 
polysynaptic input and the remaining 57% (16/28) had no connection with MrgprA3+ 
neurons (Figure 2D), suggesting that Grp labels a subset of itch second order neurons in the 
spinal cord.
Grp+ neurons receive monosynaptic input from both itch and pain primary sensory 
neurons
We then checked whether Grp+ neurons receive input from nociceptors other than 
pruriceptors in DRG. However, it is hard to selectively activate nociceptors without also 
targeting the itch-selective neurons, given that they share many genetic markers. Therefore, 
we decided to use mono-synaptic rabies tracing (Wickersham et al., 2007) to systemically 
quantify the inputs to the Grp+ population. AAV helper virus (AAV8-LSL-TVA-EGFP-
B19G) was injected into the spinal cord to enable expression of TVA receptor and rabies 
glycoprotein in Cre expressing neurons. Deficient rabies virus (ΔG-RV-GFP) then 
specifically infected TVA expressing Grp+ neurons, which also contained the rabies 
glycoprotein that allowed trans-synaptic labeling (as diagramed in Figure 3A).
Deficient rabies virus successfully infected Grp+ neurons in spinal cord lamina II, but not in 
Cre negative mice or when injected without the helper virus (Figure 3B and Figure S4), 
confirming the specificity of viral tracing. In DRG, rabies virus trans-synaptically labeled 
mostly small to medium diameter neurons. 64.1% of rabies-labeled DRG neurons expressed 
peptidergic marker calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), 39.3% of rabies-labeled DRG 
neurons expressed non-peptidergic marker IB4, while very few (3.85%) expressed 
myelinated neuronal marker NF200 (Figure 3C and 3D). In addition, 50.0% of rabies-
labeled neurons were positive for nociceptive marker, TrpV1; while an available MrgprC11 
antibody, which marks most MrgprA3+ itch neurons (Han et al., 2013), labeled 22.3% of 
rabies-infected neurons, confirming that Grp+ neurons received monosynaptic input from 
itch-selective neurons (Figure 3D). Since the nociceptive neuron markers CGRP, IB4 and 
TrpV1 (which could also be expressed in some pruriceptors) labeled a larger percentage of 
rabies-infected DRG neurons than marker for itch neurons, we conclude that Grp+ neurons 
received monosynaptic input from nociceptive populations in addition to itch-selective 
neurons.
Painful stimuli strongly activate while itchy stimuli weakly activate Grp+ neurons
Since our results suggest that Grp neurons receive direct synaptic inputs from both itch and 
pain primary sensory neurons, we next tried to determine whether Grp+ neurons can 
distinguish between painful and itchy inputs. We performed DRG-attached spinal slice 
recordings and applied drugs on DRG cell bodies to mimic natural painful and itchy stimuli 
coming from the periphery (Figure 4A). Both pain- and itch-producing drugs applied 
directly on DRG triggered action potentials in Grp+ neurons (Figure 4C-F). Capsaicin 
evoked high frequency firing in Grp+ neurons; while the pruritogen SLIGRL produced only 
Sun et al.
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 weak firing on the same recorded neurons even at very high doses. To ensure that limited 
penetration of peptide SLIGRL did not affect the responses of Grp+ neurons, we applied 
small molecule pruritogens, histamine and chloroquine. Similarly, histamine and 
chloroquine generated weaker firing in Grp+ neurons, comparing with capsaicin (p<0.001 
and p<0.001 respectively, two-way ANOVA), which indicates that these neurons fire 
strongly in response to painful stimuli but weakly in response to itchy stimuli (diagramed in 
Figure 4B). Similar to our results, several previous studies showed spinal interneurons and 
projection neurons fired at higher frequencies in response to painful stimuli versus itchy 
stimuli (Akiyama et al., 2009b; Davidson et al., 2012, 2007).
Coding of both pain and itch by Grp+ neurons
Although the itch neurons in DRG are responsive to both painful and itchy stimuli, 
activation of these neurons generates itch, not pain responses (Han et al., 2013). Similarly, 
Grp+ neurons appear to receive direct synaptic input from both pain and itch primary 
neurons. Using behavioral assays, we next determined what sensations are generated by the 
activation of Grp+ neurons. To specifically activate Grp+ neurons, we crossed GrpCre line to 
cre-dependent reporter line ROSA26LSL-TrpV1 in a global TrpV1 knockout background 
(GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/−). In GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− mice, Grp+ 
neurons were the only cells with TrpV1 expression (as diagramed in Figure 5A), therefore 
TrpV1 agonist capsaicin can selectively activate Grp+ neurons. To test the functional 
expression of TrpV1, we injected AAV1-LSL-tdTomato virus into the spinal cord and 
recorded from tdTomato labeled Grp+ neurons. Labeled neurons from GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− but not from GrpCre; TrpV1−/− mice responded to capsaicin 
(Figure S5). Grp+ neurons with ectopic TrpV1 expression showed lower sensitivity to 
capsaicin compared with TrpV1+ DRG neurons. These neurons exhibited monotonically 
increased responses to a wide range of capsaicin doses (Figure S5), confirming the 
functional expression of TrpV1 in Grp+ neurons.
Drugs known to produce pain (capsaicin) and itch (gastrin releasing peptide, GRP and brain 
natriuretic peptide, BNP) were first tested intrathecally in wild-type mice. Previous studies 
reported mixed licking, biting and scratching responses to capsaicin (Hunskaar et al., 1985; 
Yaksh et al., 1979). Counting licking/biting and scratching separately, revealed that 
responses in mice were predominantly licking/biting with very few bouts of scratching 
(Hunskaar et al., 1986). To further distinguish licking, indicating pain and biting, indicating 
itch, behaviors were recorded with a high-definition camera and four side mirrors to enable 
views from all angles (Figure S5) (LaMotte et al., 2011). When played back at 1/4 normal 
speed, licking but not biting responses was detected following injections of capsaicin. Short-
lasting licking responses (<5 minutes) directed to the lower back regions were 
predominantly observed, at a characteristic frequency of 5Hz, accompanied by minor 
scratching responses as previously reported (Figure 5B). Such responses were not seen in 
TrpV1−/− mice, ensuring specificity. GRP and BNP, nonetheless, produced scratching that 
lasted about 30 minutes after injection with minor licking responses (Figure 5C and Figure 
S5B).
Sun et al.
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surprisingly, specific activation of Grp+ neurons in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− 
mice by intrathecal injection of capsaicin generated both pain-related licking and itch-related 
scratching (Supplemental video 2); whereas injection of capsaicin generated no response in 
Cre negative control mice (ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/−) and only pain-related licking in 
wild-type mice (Figure 5B and 5C), which confirms the specificity of the activation 
responses. The licking responses lasted only about 4 minutes after injection (similar to the 
licking responses in wild-type mice) and were not affected by intrathecal injection of a 
GRPR antagonist (Figure 5F); the scratching responses lasted more than 30 minutes and 
were effectively blocked by GRPR antagonist (Figure 5G), consistent with the critical role of 
GRPR neurons in itch transmission (Sun et al., 2009; Sun and Chen, 2007). Thus, the 
activation of Grp+ neurons can trigger both robust pain and itch responses, a phenomenon 
rarely observed. Grp+ neurons appear to receive monosynaptic inputs from both itch and 
pain neurons and code for both itch and pain, showing unexpected convergence of two 
related sensations in the spinal cord.
Intensity dependent coding of pain by Grp+ neurons
Next, we examined the relationship between neuronal activation and behavior by 
determining the behavioral effects of various doses of capsaicin. Itch responses 
monotonically increased until a plateau was reached and were fitted to the Hill equation 
(R2=0.97, Figure 5E and 5I). Pain responses, surprisingly, showed an inverted U relationship 
(Figure 5D). Increased amounts of capsaicin resulted in increased licking time that peaked 
and then decreased with higher capsaicin doses, so that weak and strong activation produced 
little pain behavior while medium range activation generated greatest pain responses. Not 
surprisingly, pain dose responses were fitted well with a polynomial equation (R2=0.99, 
Figure 5H). Given that high doses of capsaicin still caused robust itch responses, the inverted 
U pain responses were unlikely caused by desensitization. Thus, Grp+ neurons demonstrate 
intensity-dependent coding. Rather than generating itch sensation with weak activation and 
pain sensation with strong activation, as suggested by the original intensity theory, Grp+ 
neurons monotonically code for itch while pain is coded only by inputs of medium 
intensities.
We reasoned that the inverted U coding of pain could be generated by a combination of 
direct coding effects and another pain inhibition circuit. To uncover this pain inhibition 
mechanism, we attempted to “rescue” pain responses during strong activation of the Grp+ 
neurons. An opioid antagonist, naloxone, at a dose not eliciting pain itself, “rescued” the 
pain responses from almost zero to about half of the maximal level. Both bicuculline, a 
GABA A antagonist, and cyclo-somatostatin, the antagonist of anti-nociceptive somatostatin 
highly expressed in the surrounding region, failed to “rescue” the pain responses (Figure 
5F). Successfully rescuing pain responses again confirmed that Grp+ neurons were not 
desensitized by high doses of capsaicin. To demonstrate that naloxone was not simply 
blocking the basal activity of the endogenous opioid system, independent of Grp activation, 
we co-injected naloxone with a low dose of capsaicin which can produce both medium pain- 
and itch-responses. No effect was observed on pain responses (Figure 5F), indicating that the 
endogenous opioid system was only recruited to inhibit pain during strong activation of the 
Grp+ neurons. Thus, the endogenous opioid system is at least partially responsible for the 
Sun et al.
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pain inhibition associated with strong activation of the Grp+ neurons and therefore, together 
with direct pain coding by the Grp+ neurons, generates this inverted U response curve.
We then determined which endogenous opioid peptide was employed to block pain by 
utilizing mu opioid antagonist CTAP and CTOP and delta opioid antagonist naltrindole. 
Naltrindole but not CTAP or CTOP induced a similar rescue effect as naloxone (Figure 5F), 
while none of the drugs affected itch responses (Figure 5G). These results suggest that 
Enkephalin, the endogenous ligand for delta opioid receptors, was recruited by Grp+ neurons 
to inhibit pain but not itch, consistent with previously reported enkephalin effects (Lee and 
Ko, 2015); on the contrary, another endogenous opioid, dynorphin was reported to inhibit 
itch but not pain (Kardon et al., 2014). Co-localization of Grp, enkephalin and synaptic 
marker PSD95 also suggests that enkephalin-expressing interneurons may be synaptically 
connected to Grp+ neurons (Figure S5). To directly test this, we utilized PenkCre line to label 
enkephalin-expressing neurons in the spinal cord and verified the expression of enkephalin 
in these inhibitory interneurons (Figure 6D and 6E), as previously reported (Fukushima et 
al., 2011; Todd et al., 1992). Patch-clamped recordings of GrpEGFP neurons were made in 
spinal cord slices from GrpEGFP; PenkCre; ROSA26LSL-GCaMP6 mice. Depolarization of a 
single GrpEGFP neuron triggered activation of enkephalin-expressing neurons, as monitored 
by GCaMP6 calcium imaging, in 50% of cases (5 out of 10 neurons, Figure 6C), confirming 
the synaptic connections between Grp+ neurons and enkephalin-expressing neurons. This 
percentage may be an underestimate, since some connections might be lost during 
sectioning. In addition, enkephalin release was detected by ELISA when GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− spinal cords were treated with high dose capsaicin but not with 
low dose or no capsaicin (Figure 6B). Furthermore, spinal cords from Cre negative control 
mice (ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/−) treated with high dose capsaicin released a minimal 
amount of enkephalin, which confirms that the release of enkephalin is dependent on strong 
activation of the Grp+ neurons. Moreover, enkephalin requires strong depolarization for 
release (Cesselin et al., 1984; Neuman et al., 1984), consistent with the observation that only 
strong activation of the Grp+ neurons triggers pain inhibition.
Grp+ neurons form “leaky gate” to negatively regulate pain transmission
Activation of the Grp+ neuron population codes for pain but also inhibits pain through the 
release of enkephalin, which forms a type I incoherent feed forward loop (FFL) 
(summarized in Figure 7B), featuring non-monotonic output (Alon, 2007; Milo et al., 2002). 
Example of pain related type I incoherent FFL can be found in the gate control theory (Braz 
et al., 2014; Duan et al., 2014; Melzack and Wall, 1965; Wall, 1978). The gate control theory 
of pain proposes that nociceptive transmission neurons (T) receive both noxious input from 
C fibers and non-noxious input from Aβ fibers. Aβ input also indirectly inhibits nociceptive 
transmission neurons through inhibitory interneurons (IN), thus forming a type I incoherent 
feed forward loop, which can close the “gate” (T) and suppress painful input (Figure 7A). 
The somatostatin- and the dynorphin-expressing interneurons are recently implicated as 
transmission neurons and inhibitory interneurons in the gate control theory, respectively 
(Duan et al., 2014).
Sun et al.
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here, we present a model to explain our experimental observations and then provide more 
data to support the model. Similar to Aβ fibers in the gate control theory, we propose that 
Grp+ neurons utilize the type I incoherent feed forward loop as a “gate” to regulate pain 
transmission. When strongly activated, Grp+ neurons can trigger enkephalin release to close 
the “gate” to painful signals from both Grp+ neurons and potentially other pain- sensing 
neurons in the spinal cord, resulting in reduced pain sensation (summarized in Figure 7B). 
However, the Aβ and Grp gates have some fundamental differences. The Aβ FFL does not 
let any signals through the “gate”, at least under physiological conditions, so that non-
noxious input does not elicit pain sensations; the Grp FFL allows weak pain signals to pass 
through the “gate” but suppresses strong pain signals. Therefore, we named it a “leaky” gate. 
We think the advantage of this “leaky gate” is that passing on weak signals ensures 
sensitivity to weak painful stimuli while inhibiting strong signals prevents overwhelming 
pain sensations.
Increased pain and decreased itch after ablation of Grp+ neurons
According to our “leaky gate” model, the Grp FFL functions as a “brake” to prevent strong 
pain signals from overwhelming the system. Therefore, we predicted that the loss of the 
Grp+ neurons should lead to an increase of pain responses. To directly test this prediction, 
we ablated Grp+ neurons with diphtheria toxin. Diphtheria toxin receptors (DTRs) were 
specifically expressed in Grp+ neurons with Cre dependent ROSA26LSL-DTR line together 
with ROSA26LSL-tdTomato allele to monitor ablation efficacy (Figure 8A). Diptheria toxin 
treatments successfully ablated more than 95% of the Grp+ neurons (Figure 8B and 8C). Cre 
negative mice (ROSA26LSL-DTR/LSL-tdTomato) treated with same doses of diphtheria toxin 
were used as controls. Ablated mice were healthy and had normal motor coordination in the 
rotarod test (Figure S6). In addition, CGRP and IB4 labeled lamina II regions showed no 
change after ablation, indicating that the loss of such a small population did not obviously 
affect the general organization of the local circuitries. The number of PKCγ positive 
neurons was reduced, consistent with the partial overlap between PKCγ and Grp+ neurons 
while the number of Pax2+ interneurons were comparable between ablated and control mice, 
confirming that diphtheria toxin treatment did not produce non-specific neurotoxicity 
(Figure S6).
First, we tested acute pain responses. Pain behavioral responses induced by injection of 
capsaicin into both the cheek and intraplantar surface of the hindpaw greatly increased after 
ablation (Figure 8E, yellow shaded). GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR/LSL-tdTomato mice also had 
significantly shorter response latencies in all thermal pain assays including hot plate, 
Hargreave and tail immersion when compared with control mice (Figure 8E,F). Mechanical 
sensitivity tested by Von Frey filaments remained the same in both genotypes (Figure 8G). 
Thus, the loss of Grp+ neurons enhanced chemical and thermal pain, as predicted by the 
“leaky gate” model. We next examined itch responses. Scratching responses to multiple 
pruritogens including histamine (100mM or 5μmol/site), chloroquine (CQ, 4mM or 
200nmol/site), SLIGRL (1mM or 50nmol/site) and serotonin (5-HT, 1mM or 50nmol/site) 
were all significantly reduced in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR/LSL-tdTomato mice, confirming the 
critical role of Grp+ neurons in itch coding (Figure 8D). Interestingly, GRPR antagonist 
significantly blocked histamine and chloroquine induced itch in control mice but did not 
Sun et al.
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 further reduce scratching responses in Grp neuron ablated mice. This suggests that the 
residual itch responses after Grp neuron ablation is mediated by GRPR-independent 
pathway (Figure 8E).
Strong pain responses are more affected by the loss of Grp+ neurons
Unlike the gate control theory, only strong activation of the Grp+ neurons closes the “leaky 
gate” to inhibit pain. Therefore, the “leaky gate” model predicts that weak painful stimuli 
might trigger less or no inhibition. Accordingly, we compared chemical pain responses 
(capsaicin-induced cheek wiping) with two different doses. High dose capsaicin (1mg/ml) 
produced significantly more cheek wiping in ablated mice (Figure 8E, yellow shaded), while 
low dose capsaicin (0.5mg/ml) generated similar amounts of wiping in both ablated and 
control mice (Figure 8F), matching our prediction that weak pain triggers no inhibition from 
the Grp FFL. Similarly, intraplantar injection of high dose capsaicin (0.1mg/ml) induced 
significantly more licking/flinching responses, indicating pain, in ablated animals, while low 
dose (0.05mg/ml) triggered comparable responses. We also tested thermal pain using both 
hot plate and tail immersion, with two temperatures. Ablated mice showed reduced response 
latencies at both temperatures (Figure 8G,H). Therefore, we compared the ratios of ablated 
responses to control responses at the two temperatures, with a lower ratio meaning a larger 
increase in pain response after ablation. The ratios at high temperature were significantly 
lower than the ratios at low temperature in both tests, suggesting that thermal stimuli at 
higher temperatures resulted in larger increase in pain response after the loss of Grp+ 
neurons, consistent with the “leaky gate” model.
We also compared dose effect on itch responses, which are normally coded by the Grp+ 
neurons, between control and ablated mice. Ablated mice showed reduced itch responses to 
low doses of SLIGRL and CQ (Figure 8D), while high doses generated similar responses in 
both ablated and control mice (Figure S6). Thus, in contrast to pain, stronger itch responses 
are less affected by the loss of Grp+ neurons, potentially due to saturation or compensation 
from other itch second order neurons. These results confirm that the Grp FFL has distinct 
roles in pain and itch coding.
DISCUSSION
The selectivity theory depicts pain and itch coding in the spinal cord as the continuation of 
separate labeled lines from periphery with pain inhibiting itch through B5-I interneurons 
(Kardon et al., 2014) and NPY interneurons (Bourane et al., 2015). Here, we present 
experimental observations and a new leaky gate model to expand the current coding theory 
of pain and itch. In combination with selectivity theory, leaky gate model can provide better 
descriptions of pain and itch related phenomena. The data show that a subset of second order 
neurons with uniform morphologies, the Grp+ population, participates in the coding of both 
pain and itch sensations, which potentially represents the currently underappreciated 
crosstalk of different sensations in the spinal cord. Another feature of the Grp+ population is 
the intensity dependent coding of pain. The Grp+ neurons directly code for pain sensation 
and upon strong activation, indirectly inhibit pain via the recruitment of the endogenous 
opioid system. The classic intensity theory suggests that pain and itch sensations are 
Sun et al.
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 differentially coded by strong and weak activation intensities. Here, we propose that the 
intensity-dependent pain coding by Grp+ neurons is a form of negative regulation of pain in 
the spinal cord. This novel intensity-dependent coding serves as a good example of the 
currently overlooked non-monotonic signal processing in spinal circuits.
Consistent with the intensity dependent coding of Grp+ neurons, we observed dose 
dependent behavioral changes after the loss of Grp+ neurons (Figure 8 and Figure S6), 
suggesting that testing of multiple doses in behavioral assays could help to identify currently 
overlooked non-linearity in pain and itch coding. Notably, the drug doses utilized in pain and 
itch behavioral tests in our study and in the pain/itch field were high compared with cellular 
studies. The specificities of these responses were largely established by previous work with 
respective pruritogen receptor knockouts (Han et al., 2006; Liu, 2011; Liu et al., 2009). 
However, receptor knockouts usually reduce but not abolish scratching responses, suggesting 
potential non-specific effects associated with high doses in behavioral tests. The number of 
activated neurons or ligand-bound receptors needed to trigger behavior responses remains an 
open question in the field. Yet the higher doses used in behavioral tests compared with 
cellular assays could be at least partially explained by dilution, tissue penetration and the 
differential receptor densities between nerve terminals and cell bodies. In addition, human 
psychophysical studies, in which subjects can orally report sensations, usually require lower 
doses (LaMotte et al., 2011; Sikand et al., 2011b)) compared to animal behavioral assays, 
indicating the relative low sensitivity of animal behavioral tests.
Grp+ neurons appear to receive monosynaptic input from both pain and itch sensing primary 
populations, yet painful stimuli strongly activates Grp+ neurons while itchy stimuli weakly 
activates them. The weaker pruritogen-mediated activation of Grp+ neurons could be due to 
factors including the weak activation of DRG neurons by itchy stimuli, weak synaptic 
connections, or a small percentage of itch responsive primary neurons. This weak activation 
by itchy stimuli is consistent with the failure to detect chloroquine induced c-fos activity in 
Grp+ neurons (Bell et al., 2016). Yet unlike enkephalin-expressing inhibitory interneurons, 
which require strong depolarization to release neuropeptides, the weak activation of Grp+ 
neurons by pruritogens seems sufficient to trigger GRP release from these excitatory 
interneurons. In addition to Grp+ neurons, some lamina II interneurons may receive 
monosynaptic itchy input. In lamina I, projection neurons and GRPR+ interneurons might 
also receive direct itchy input, warranting future research to further dissect related spinal 
cord circuits.
Pain detection systems need to be sensitive enough to protect the body from potential harm, 
but when exposed to strong painful stimuli, high sensitivity may generate too much pain and 
interfere with proper behavioral responses. Thus brakes are necessary. Brakes triggered by 
signals from Aβ mechanosensitive fibers makes gentle rubbing an effective way to relieve 
pain. The Grp FFL also functions as a brake for pain generated by Grp+ population and 
parallel pain pathways. It positively codes for pain while triggers enkephalin release only in 
response to strong activation, which is consistent with dependence of enkephalin release on 
strong depolarization. This prominent enkephalin mediated pain inhibition can completely 
block pain responses from the Grp+ population and further reduce pain coded by parallel 
pain pathways in the spinal cord, thus its high triggering threshold ensures sensitivity to 
Sun et al.
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 weak painful input. Meanwhile, the pain inhibition mediated by Grp FFL cannot be 
triggered by itch, since itch stimuli only weakly activate Grp+ neurons, consistent with the 
fact that itch can rarely inhibit pain.
The ablation experiments showed that stronger pain responses had larger increases after the 
ablation of the Grp+ neurons, suggesting that the Grp FFL provides stronger inhibition on 
stronger painful input in physiological conditions, as predicted by the “leaky gate” model. 
Theoretically, weak enough painful stimuli would be positively coded by Grp+ neurons 
without triggering pain inhibition. Thus these pain responses might be weaker after the 
ablation of Grp+ neurons. However, given that the Grp+ neurons only represent a subset of 
pain responsive neurons in the spinal cord, the loss of these neurons may generate a more 
subtle change in behavior when compared with the loss of the strong pain inhibition effect 
mediated by the Grp FFL and thus be much harder to detect with animal behavioral tests. In 
a previous study, Mishra et al. ablated 70% of NPR1+ neurons, which were reported to be a 
subset of Grp+ neurons, with BNP conjugated saporin and found a significant change in 
histamine responses(Mishra and Hoon, 2013). We believe the partial loss of Grp+ neurons 
might not be sufficient to generate significant changes in pain responses; however, a trend of 
increase in pain responses from hot plate test was observed after the ablation of NPR1+ 
neurons.
The Grp+ neurons represent a subset of second order neurons that mediate pain and itch 
sensations in the spinal cord. Painful stimuli from the periphery can elicit both pain and itch 
responses via the Grp+ neurons. The itch responses are likely blocked by feed forward 
inhibition from parallel pain pathways, as noted by the selectivity theory. Similarly, itchy 
stimuli from the periphery can also trigger both itch and pain responses via the Grp+ 
neurons. We think this pain responses might be weak, as Grp+ neurons were only weakly 
activated by itchy stimuli. Indeed, in human psychophysical studies, most itchy substances 
induce itch sensation accompanied by weaker pain sensations, such as pricking and burning; 
while painful substances induce nociceptive but not itch sensations (LaMotte et al., 2014; 
Liu et al., 2012; Sikand et al., 2011a, 2009). Even if we cannot rule out the possibility that 
mechanical or other forms of itch can bypass or block the weak pain responses and result in 
pure itch sensation, the “leaky gate” model can explain the nociceptive sensations generated 
by itchy chemicals in human psychophysics studies.
In summary, Grp+ neurons positively code for itch while negatively regulating pain 
transmission with a “leaky gate.” This study, to our knowledge, experimentally demonstrates 
intensity-dependent coding of pain in the spinal cord for the first time. Our leaky gate model 
builds on current theories of pain and itch coding, and further refines them. It better explains 
observations in human psychophysical studies and serves as an example of non-monotonic 
coding and crosstalk of sensory information in the spinal cord. Further studies of the Grp+ 
related circuits in chronic pain and itch conditions might uncover relevant changes 
contributing to these pathological conditions.
Sun et al.
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STAR Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by the Lead Contact Xinzhong Dong (xdong2@jhmi.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Mouse lines
GrpCre and GrpEGFP mouse lines were acquired from MMRRC. MrgprA3Cre mouse line was 
previously generated by our group. ROSA26LSL-tdTomato, ROSA26LSL-ChR2, 
ROSA26LSL-DTR, ROSA26LSL-TrpV1, vGlut2Cre, GAD1EGFP and TrpV1−/− mouse lines 
were acquired from the Jackson laboratory. We used GrpCre, GrpEGFP, and MrgprA3Cre as 
hemizygotes or heterozygotes for all the experiments. All experiments were performed using 
protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine.
All behavioral tests were performed with an experimenter blind to genotype. The mice were 
2–4-month-old males that had been backcrossed to C57Bl/6 mice for at least six generations. 
The day before the behavioral tests, all mice were acclimated for at least 30 min to their 
testing environment. We housed 4–5 mice in each cage in the vivarium with 12h light/dark 
cycle and all the behavioral tests were performed in the morning.
METHOD DETAILS
Immunofluorescence—2–4 month old mice were anesthetized with pentobarbital and 
perfused with 20 ml 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4, 4 °C) followed with 25 ml of fixative (4% 
formaldehyde (vol/vol) and 14% sat. picric acid (vol/vol) in PBS, 4 °C). Spinal cord and 
DRG were dissected from the perfused mice. DRG was post-fixed in fixative at 4 °C for 30 
min, and spinal cord were fixed for 1 h. Tissues were cryoprotected in 30% sucrose (wt/vol) 
for more than 12 h and were sectioned with a cryostat. The sections on slides were dried at 
37 °C for 40 min, and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min. The 
slides were pre-incubated in blocking solution (10% normal goat serum (vol/vol), 0.2% 
Triton X-100 (vol/vol) in PBS, pH 7.4) for 1 or 2 h at room temperature, then incubated 
overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies. Secondary antibody incubation was performed at 
room temperature for 2 h.
For primary antibodies, we used rabbit α-CGRP (T-4239, Peninsula, 1:1,000), rabbit α-
NF200 (AB1982, Chemicon, 1:1,000), rabbit α-PKCγ (sc-211, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 
1:1,000), rabbit α-GFP (A-11122, Molecular Probes, 1:1,000), mouse α-Neuronal nuclei 
(MAB377, Chemicon, 1:200), mouse α-PSD95 (K28/43, NeuroMab, 1:500), rabbit α-
PSD95 (EP1183Y, Millipore, 1:500), guinea pig α-TrpV1 (AB5566, Millipore, 1:200), 
rabbit α-MrgprC11 (made by our lab, 1:200), mouse α-GAD1 (MAB 5406, Millipore, 
1:2000) and mouse α-Enkephalin (NOC1, Millipore, 1:100). For secondary antibodies, we 
used goat α-rabbit (A11008, Alexa 488 conjugated; A11011, Alexa 568 conjugated; 
A21245, Alexa 647 conjugated, Thermo Fisher), goat α-mouse (A11001. Alexa 488 
conjugated; A11004, Alexa 568 conjugated; A21236, Alexa 647 conjugated, Thermo Fisher) 
and goat α-guinea pig (A11075, Alexa 568 conjugated). All secondary antibodies were 
Sun et al.
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diluted 1:500 in blocking solution. To detect IB4 binding, sections were incubated with 
Griffonia simplicifolia isolectin GS-IB4 (1:500; I21411, Alexa 488 conjugated; I21412, 
Alexa 568 conjugated, Thermo Fisher).
Electrophysiological recordings—To prepare spinal cord slices, 4 to 6 week-old mice 
were deeply anesthetized with 2% isoflurane (Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL, 
USA). Spinal cord with dorsal root or DRG was rapidly removed and placed in ice-cold, 
low-sodium Krebs solution which contained: 95mM NaCl, 2.5mM KCl, 26mM NaHCO3, 
1.25mM NaH2PO4-H2O, 6mM MgCl2, 1.5mM CaCl2, 25mM glucose, 50mM sucrose, 1mM 
kynurenic acid bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2. Sagittal spinal cord slices (400μm) with 
dorsal roots or DRG attached were cut by a Vibratome (VT1200, Leica Biosystems, Buffalo 
Grove, IL, USA) and transferred to low-sodium Krebs solution without kynurenic acid for 
recovery at 34°C for 45 minutes and then at room temperature for an additional 1 hour 
before being used for recordings.
For electrophysiology recording, slices were stabilized with a nylon harp and submerged in a 
low-volume recording chamber (SD Instruments, San Diego, CA, USA), which was 
perfused with Krebs solution (125mM NaCl, 2.5mM KCl, 26mM NaHCO3, 1.25mM 
NaH2PO4-H2O, 1mM MgCl2, 2mM CaCl2, 25mM glucose) at a rate of 5ml/min bubbled 
with 95% O2/5% CO2. Whole-cell patch-clamp recording of Grp+ neuron was carried out 
under oblique illumination with an Olympus fixed-stage microscope system (BX51, 
Melville, NY, USA). Using a puller (P1000, Sutter, Novato, CA, USA), we fabricated thin-
walled glass pipettes (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL, USA) that had a resistance 
of 3–6 MΩ and were filled with internal solution (120mM K-gluconate, 20mM KCl, 2mM 
MgCl2, 0.5mM EGTA, 2mM Na2-ATP, 0.5mM Na2-GTP, and 20mM HEPES). The cells 
were voltage clamped at –70 mV. Membrane current signals were sampled at 10kHz and 
low-pass filtered at 2 kHz. We monitored R series and R input and discarded cells if either of 
these values changed by more than 20%.
DRGs were collected from mice, which were deeply anesthetized with 2% isoflurane 
(Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL, USA) and put in cold DH10 medium (DMEM/
F-12 with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, Gibco) and treated with 
enzyme solution (5mg/ml dispase and 1mg/ml collagenase Type I in HBSS without Ca2+ 
and Mg2+, Gibco) at 37°C. After trituration and centrifugation, cells were resuspended in 
DH10 with nerve growth factor (50ng/ml, Upstate) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic 
factor (25ng/ml, R&D Systems), plated on glass coverslips coated with poly-D-lysine (100 
μg/ml, Biomedical Technologies) and laminin (10μg/ml, Invitrogen), cultured at 37°C, and 
used after 20–40 hours. Whole-cell recording of MrgprA3 positive DRG neurons were 
performed with Axon 700B amplifier and pClamp 10 software (Molecular Devices, 
Sunnyvale, CA). The thin-walled glass pipettes were pulled by a puller (P1000, Sutter, 
Novato, CA, USA) with the resistance of 2–4 MΩ.
Dorsal roots stimulation was applied by a suction electrode at 500μA, sufficient to activate 
C-fibers, using a Master-9 Pulse Stimulator and Iso-Flex Stimulus Isolator (AMPI, 
Jerusalem, Israel). For light stimulation mediated by channelrhodopsin, the LED blue light 
(465 nm, 300 mW/cm2) was elicited by a high power LED illumination system(LEX2-B, 
Sun et al.
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Brainvision) through the Olympus fixed-stage microscope system (BX51, Melville, NY, 
USA). The LED illumination system was connected to an A/D converter (Digidata 1440, 
Axon CNS, Molecular Devices), and controlled by the pClamp10 software (Axon CNS). For 
DRG attached spinal cord slice Grp neurons recording, drugs were directly puffed on the 
DRG tissue using the DVD-8VC superfusion application system (ALA Scientific 
Instruments, Farmingdale, NY, USA). To differentiate monosynaptic and polysynaptic 
connections, 20 C-fiber-strength electrical stimulation or light stimulation at 1Hz were 
delivered, neurons with no failure in EPSCs were monosynaptically connected according to 
established criteria(Nakatsuka et al., 2000).
Calcium imaging of enkephalin-expression neurons was performed with a 700 Zeiss 
confocal microscope. PenkCre; Rosa26LSL-GCaMP6; GrpEGFP spinal slices were cut as 
described above. The GrpEGFP neurons were patched and depolarized by 1Hz 50pA current 
injection. Green fluorescence of patch neurons was monitored to exclude recording of active 
Penk+ neurons. Patched GrpEGFP neurons were labeled by Red fluorescent dye (Alex Fluor 
568, life technologies). Images were acquired at 2.6Hz in frame-scan mode with a 256 × 256 
pixel region of interest.
Biocytin Labeling—After 20 min in the whole-cell patch-clamp configuration, the 
biocytin-filled (0.5%) electrodes were withdrawn from the targeted neuron, and the slices 
were immersed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Spinal slices were then washed with 
PBS (3 X 20 min) and incubated with Alexa-488 conjugated streptavidin (1:200, Life 
technologies) at 4°C overnight. After washing with PBS (3 X 20 min), the fluorescent 
signals of the spinal cord sections were collected as z-series images using a confocal 
microscope.
Rabies viral tracing—Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane and a laminectomy was 
performed at the T13-L1 level. A fine glass capillary was inserted into dorsal spinal cord. 
AAV helper virus, AAV8-LSL-TVA-EGFP-B19G (UNC vector core), was first injected 
(500nl, 50nl/min). AAV1-LSL-tdTomato virus (Upenn vector core) was similarly injected to 
visualize Grp+ neurons. EnvA pseudotyped rabies glycoprotein deficient GFP rabies virus 
(Courtesy of Dr. Fan Wang’s group, Duke University) was injected in the same spot three 
weeks later. Animals were perfused 7 days after rabies virus injection and processed for 
immunostaining.
ELISA—GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− mice and ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− 
littermate controls were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane, decapitated and the lumbar 
spinal cord was quickly removed to ice-cold, low-sodium Krebs solution which contain: 
95mM NaCl, 2.5mM KCl, 26mM NaHCO3, 1.25mM NaH2PO4-H2O, 6mM MgCl2, 1.5mM 
CaCl2, 25mM glucose, 50mM sucrose, 1mM kynurenic acid bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2.
Spinal cords were cut into three sagittal sections and then recovered in oxygenated ACSF for 
about 1h at 37°C. Three sections were subsequently incubated with 200μl oxygenated Krebs 
solution (125mM NaCl, 2.5mM KCl, 26mM NaHCO3, 1.25mM NaH2PO4-H2O, 1mM 
MgCl2, 2mM CaCl2, 25mM glucose) with capsaicin (2mg/ml, 5μg/ml and 0μg/ml, 
respectively) and proteinase inhibitor mix (1μM phosphoramidon, 1μM captopril and 0.1% 
Sun et al.
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BSA) for 15 minutes at 37°C. 100μl of ACSF from each sample was then used for the 
detection of Enkephalin release. ELISA detections of enkephalin were performed following 
manufacturer’s protocol (FEK02421, Phoenix Pharmaceuticals). Results were normalized to 
the weight of the tissue. At least six mice were used for each condition.
Behavioral testing—For ablation experiments, we injected 8-week-old GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-DTR;LSL-tdTomato mice and ROSA26LSL-DTR;LSL-tdTomato littermates with 
diphtheria toxin (intra-peritoneal, 35 μg per kg of body weight, Sigma) twice, separated by 
72 h. Behavioral experiments were performed 4 weeks after the first toxin injection.
For back injections, pruritic compounds dissolved in saline were subcutaneously injected 
into the nape of the neck (50μl) with insulin syringes (26 Gauge). GRPR antagonist 
(Deamino-Phe19,D-Ala24,D-Pro26-psi(CH2NH)Phe27)-GRP (19–27), 200μM or 2nmol/site) 
or saline (50μl) were injected 10 minutes before pruritogen injection when indicated. 
Behavioral responses were video recorded for 30 min. The video recording was 
subsequently played back in slow motion and the number of bouts of scratching with the 
hindpaw and directed toward the injection site, were counted.
For the hot plate test, a clear plexiglass cylinder was placed on the plate and the mice were 
placed inside the cylinder. The onset of brisk hindpaw lifts and/or flicking/licking of the 
hindpaw was assessed at different temperatures.
For the tail immersion test, mice were gently restrained in a 50ml conical tube into which 
the mice voluntarily entered. The protruding one-third of the tail was then dipped into a 
water bath of varying temperatures. The latency to respond to the heat stimulus with 
vigorous flexion of the tail was measured.
For the Hargreaves test, mice were placed under a transparent plastic box (4.5 × 5 × 10 cm) 
on a glass floor. The infrared source was placed under the glass floor and the infrared light 
was delivered to the hindpaw. The latency for the animal to withdraw its hindpaw was 
measured.
For the Von Frey filament test, mice were placed under a transparent plastic box (4.5 × 5 × 
10 cm) on a metal mesh. Von Frey filaments, each delivering a different bending force, were 
applied to the hind paw using the up-down method and the threshold force corresponding to 
50% withdrawal was determined.
For the chemically induced pain test, 10μl of capsaicin and 7μl of capsaicin were injected in 
cheek and paw respectively and the numbers of front paw wipes or the time of licking/
flinching responses were counted in 10 minutes.
For the rotarod test, each mouse was trained for 5 min at a constant speed of 4 rpm on the 
rotarod (Rotamex, Columbus Instruments). The first trial started at least 1h after training. 
Every day, each mouse received three trials, separated by 30 min, at speeds accelerating 
from 4 to 40 rpm (with a 4 rpm increase every 30 s). Each mouse was tested for three 
consecutive days. The trial was finished when the mouse fell off the rotarod. The latency to 
falling off the rotarod was recorded and used in subsequent analyses.
Sun et al.
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For specifc activation of Grp+ neurons, GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− mice were 
intrathecally injected with different amounts of capsaicin or capsaicin with naloxone (0.1mg/
ml), naltrindole (0.2mg/ml), CTAP (0.5mg/ml), CTOP (1mg/ml), cycloSOM (0.1mM) and 
bicuculline (10μM). Lumber puncture were made with 30 gauge needles and drugs at 10μl of 
volume were delivered. Lower back regions of mice were shaved a day before injections. 
High definition videos were recorded from the top for 30 minutes with four mirrors to 
enable views of all angles. Video recordings were subsequently played back at 1/5 normal 
speed. The durations of licking directed to lower back region with a characteristic frequency 
of 5Hz were quantified in the first four minutes and bouts of scratching were counted in 30 
minutes. ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− littermates were used as controls. Wild type and 
TrpV1−/− mice were also intrathecally injected with GRP, BNP and capsaicin. Licking and 
scratching behaviors quantified as reference.
For light mediated activation of MrgprA3+ neurons, MrgprA3Cre; ROSA26LSL-ChR2 mice 
with shaved nape regions were given 100 ms blue light at 1Hz or 5Hz and litter mate 
ROSA26LSL-ChR2 mice were used as controls. Scratching bouts were counted in 5minute 
time period. Sham operations without blue light were used to determine baseline scratch 
numbers.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. n represents the number of mice analyzed. The 
distribution of the variables in each experimental group was assumed normal. Most 
statistical comparisons were conducted by two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t test. Two-way 
ANOVA followed by post hoc Student-Newmann-Keuls tests were used for comparison 
between capsaicin and pruritogen-induced responses. Extended Welch’s t test was used for 
the comparison of ratios of ablated responses and control responses, where student t tests 
and ANOVA tests could not apply. Power analysis was used to justify the sample size. No 
data was excluded. Differences were considered to be statistically significant for P < 0.05. 
Representative data are from experiments that were replicated biologically at least three 
times with similar results. Statistical analysis done with R.
Extension of Welch’s t test: μ1h: mean of log value of ablated responses, high dose; μ1l 
mean of log value of ablated responses, low dose; μ2h: mean of log value of control 
responses, high dose; μ2l: mean of log value of control responses, low dose. Null hypothesis 
H0: (μ1h - μ2h) - (μ1l - μ2l) = 0. Alternative H1: (μ1h - μ2h) - (μ1l - μ2l) > 0. Test statistics: 
, where μ̄ detonates the sample means of the subgroup. 
, where s2 denotes the sample variance and n is the sample size. 
Under H0, the test statistics follows t-distribution and the degrees of freedom,
Sun et al.
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dose response curve fitting for capsaicin mediated activation:
Itch dose responses were fit with Hill equation: 
Pain dose responses were fit with polynomial equation: y=0.469 − 3.882x + 11.38x2 
− 1.904x3 + 0.08229x4
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Fan Wang at Duke University for deficient rabies virus. We thank C. Hawkins and the staff of 
Transgenic Mouse Core at Johns Hopkins University for assistance with transgenic mouse lines. We thank Dr. 
Hongzhen Hu at Washington University for allowing us to use their optogenetics apparatus. We also thank Dr. 
Pamela Colleen Lavinka and Dr. Dustin Green at Johns Hopkins University for manuscript editing and Dr. Zhixiang 
Lin at Stanford University for help with statistics. The work was supported by grants from the US National 
Institutes of Health to X.D. (R01DE022750 and R01NS054791). X.D. is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute.
References
Akiyama T, Carstens MI, Carstens E. Excitation of mouse superficial dorsal horn neurons by histamine 
and/or PAR-2 agonist: potential role in itch. J Neurophysiol. 2009a; 102:2176–83. DOI: 10.1152/jn.
00463.2009 [PubMed: 19625538] 
Akiyama T, Merrill AW, Carstens MI, Carstens E. Activation of superficial dorsal horn neurons in the 
mouse by a PAR-2 agonist and 5-HT: potential role in itch. J Neurosci. 2009b; 29:6691–9. DOI: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6103-08.2009 [PubMed: 19458238] 
Alon U. Network motifs: theory and experimental approaches. Nat Rev Genet. 2007; 8:450–61. DOI: 
10.1038/nrg2102 [PubMed: 17510665] 
Bell AM, Gutierrez-Mecinas M, Polgár E, Todd AJ. Spinal neurons that contain gastrin-releasing 
peptide seldom express Fos or phosphorylate extracellular signal-regulated kinases in response to 
intradermal chloroquine. Mol Pain. 2016; :12.doi: 10.1177/1744806916649602
Bourane S, Duan B, Koch SC, Dalet A, Britz O, Garcia-Campmany L, Kim E, Cheng L, Ghosh A, Ma 
Q, Goulding M. Gate control of mechanical itch by a subpopulation of spinal cord interneurons. 
Science (80-). 2015; 350:550–554. DOI: 10.1126/science.aac8653
Braz J, Solorzano C, Wang X, Basbaum AI. Transmitting pain and itch messages: a contemporary view 
of the spinal cord circuits that generate gate control. Neuron. 2014; 82:522–36. DOI: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2014.01.018 [PubMed: 24811377] 
Cesselin F, Bourgoin S, Artaud F, Hamon M. Basic and Regulatory Mechanisms of In Vitro Release of 
Met-Enkephalin from the Dorsal Zone of the Rat Spinal Cord. J Neurochem. 1984; 43:763–774. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.1984.tb12798.x [PubMed: 6747633] 
Davidson S, Zhang X, Khasabov SG, Moser HR, Honda CN, Simone DA, Giesler GJ. Pruriceptive 
spinothalamic tract neurons: physiological properties and projection targets in the primate. J 
Neurophysiol. 2012; 108:1711–23. DOI: 10.1152/jn.00206.2012 [PubMed: 22723676] 
Davidson S, Zhang X, Khasabov SG, Simone DA, Giesler GJ. Relief of itch by scratching: state-
dependent inhibition of primate spinothalamic tract neurons. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:544–6. DOI: 
10.1038/nn.2292 [PubMed: 19349977] 
Davidson S, Zhang X, Yoon CH, Khasabov SG, Simone DA, Giesler GJ. The itch-producing agents 
histamine and cowhage activate separate populations of primate spinothalamic tract neurons. J 
Neurosci. 2007; 27:10007–14. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2862-07.2007 [PubMed: 17855615] 
Duan B, Cheng L, Bourane S, Britz O, Padilla C, Garcia-Campmany L, Krashes M, Knowlton W, 
Velasquez T, Ren X, Ross SE, Lowell BB, Wang Y, Goulding M, Ma Q. Identification of spinal 
Sun et al.
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 circuits transmitting and gating mechanical pain. Cell. 2014; 159:1417–32. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.
2014.11.003 [PubMed: 25467445] 
Fleming MS, Ramos D, Han SB, Zhao J, Son YJ, Luo W. The majority of dorsal spinal cord gastrin 
releasing peptide is synthesized locally whereas neuromedin B is highly expressed in pain- and 
itch-sensing somatosensory neurons. Mol Pain. 2012; 8:52.doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-8-52 
[PubMed: 22776446] 
Fukushima T, Tsuda M, Kofuji T, Hori Y. Physiological properties of enkephalin-containing neurons in 
the spinal dorsal horn visualized by expression of green fluorescent protein in BAC transgenic 
mice. BMC Neurosci. 2011; 12:36.doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-12-36 [PubMed: 21548966] 
Gong S, Zheng C, Doughty ML, Losos K, Didkovsky N, Schambra UB, Nowak NJ, Joyner A, Leblanc 
G, Hatten ME, Heintz N. A gene expression atlas of the central nervous system based on bacterial 
artificial chromosomes. Nature. 2003; 425:917–925. DOI: 10.1038/nature02033 [PubMed: 
14586460] 
Grudt TJ, Perl ER. Correlations between neuronal morphology and electrophysiological features in the 
rodent superficial dorsal horn. J Physiol. 2002; 540:189–207. [PubMed: 11927679] 
Han L, Ma C, Liu Q, Weng HJ, Cui Y, Tang Z, Kim Y, Nie H, Qu L, Patel KN, Li Z, McNeil B, He S, 
Guan Y, Xiao B, Lamotte RH, Dong X. A subpopulation of nociceptors specifically linked to itch. 
Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:174–82. DOI: 10.1038/nn.3289 [PubMed: 23263443] 
Han SK, Mancino V, Simon MI. Phospholipase Cbeta 3 mediates the scratching response activated by 
the histamine H1 receptor on C-fiber nociceptive neurons. Neuron. 2006; 52:691–703. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.036 [PubMed: 17114052] 
Handwerker HO. Pain and allodynia, itch and alloknesis: An alternative hypothesis. APS J. 1992; 
1:135–138. DOI: 10.1016/1058-9139(92)90043-C
Handwerker HO, Forster C, Kirchhoff C. Discharge patterns of human C-fibers induced by itching and 
burning stimuli. J Neurophysiol. 1991; 66:307–15. [PubMed: 1919673] 
Hunskaar S, Fasmer OB, Hole K. Acetylsalicylic acid, paracetamol and morphine inhibit behavioral 
responses to intrathecally administered substance P or capsaicin. Life Sci. 1985; 37:1835–1841. 
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(85)90227-9 [PubMed: 2414631] 
Hunskaar S, Post C, Fasmer OB, Arwestrom E. Intrathecal injection of capsaicin can be used as a 
behavioural nociceptive test in mice. Neuropharmacology. 1986; 25:1149–53. [PubMed: 2431343] 
Kaplan S, Bren A, Dekel E, Alon U. The incoherent feed-forward loop can generate non-monotonic 
input functions for genes. Mol Syst Biol. 2008; 4:203.doi: 10.1038/msb.2008.43 [PubMed: 
18628744] 
Kardon AP, Polgár E, Hachisuka J, Snyder LM, Cameron D, Savage S, Cai X, Karnup S, Fan CR, 
Hemenway GM, Bernard CS, Schwartz ES, Nagase H, Schwarzer C, Watanabe M, Furuta T, 
Kaneko T, Koerber HR, Todd AJ, Ross SE. Dynorphin acts as a neuromodulator to inhibit itch in 
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Neuron. 2014; 82:573–86. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.02.046 
[PubMed: 24726382] 
LaMotte RH, Dong X, Ringkamp M. Sensory neurons and circuits mediating itch. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2014; 15:19–31. DOI: 10.1038/nrn3641 [PubMed: 24356071] 
LaMotte RH, Shimada SG, Sikand P. Mouse models of acute, chemical itch and pain in humans. Exp 
Dermatol. 2011; 20:778–82. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01367.x [PubMed: 21929688] 
Lee H, Ko MC. Distinct functions of opioid-related peptides and gastrin-releasing peptide in regulating 
itch and pain in the spinal cord of primates. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:11676.doi: 10.1038/srep11676 
[PubMed: 26119696] 
Lewis, T., Grant, RT., Marvin, HM. [accessed 7.31.15] Vascular reactions of the skin to injury. Part X 
The intervention of a chemical stimulus illustrated especially by the flare. The response to 
faradism - Google Search [WWW Document]. Heart. 1927. URL https://www.google.com/search?
q=Vascular+reactions+of+the+skin+to+injury+X.+The+intervention+of+a+chemical+stimulus
+illustrated+especially+by+the+flare.+The+response+to+faradism&oq=Vascular+reactions+of
+the+skin+to+injury+X.+The+intervention+of+a+chemical
Liu Q. Mechanisms of itch evoked by beta-alanine. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:14532–14537. [PubMed: 
23077038] 
Sun et al.
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liu Q. The distinct roles of two GPCRs, MrgprC11 and PAR2, in itch and hyperalgesia. Sci Signal. 
2011; 4:ra45. [PubMed: 21775281] 
Liu Q, Sikand P, Ma C, Tang Z, Han L, Li Z, Sun S, LaMotte RH, Dong X. Mechanisms of itch evoked 
by β-alanine. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:14532–7. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3509-12.2012 [PubMed: 
23077038] 
Liu Q, Tang Z, Surdenikova L, Kim S, Patel KN, Kim A, Ru F, Guan Y, Weng HJ, Geng Y, Undem BJ, 
Kollarik M, Chen ZF, Anderson DJ, Dong X. Sensory neuron-specific GPCR Mrgprs are itch 
receptors mediating chloroquine-induced pruritus. Cell. 2009; 139:1353–65. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.
2009.11.034 [PubMed: 20004959] 
McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M. Itching for an explanation. Trends Neurosci. 1992; 15:497–501. DOI: 
10.1016/0166-2236(92)90102-E [PubMed: 1282750] 
Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new theory. Science. 1965; 150:971–9. [PubMed: 5320816] 
Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, Alon U. Network motifs: simple building 
blocks of complex networks. Science. 2002; 298:824–7. DOI: 10.1126/science.298.5594.824 
[PubMed: 12399590] 
Mishra SK, Hoon MA. The Cells and Circuitry for Itch Responses in Mice. Science (80-). 2013; 
340:968–971. DOI: 10.1126/science.1233765
Nakatsuka T, Ataka T, Kumamoto E, Tamaki T, Yoshimura M. Alteration in synaptic inputs through C-
afferent fibers to substantia gelatinosa neurons of the rat spinal dorsal horn during postnatal 
development. Neuroscience. 2000; 99:549–56. [PubMed: 11029546] 
Neuman B, Wiedermann CJ, Fischer-Colbrie R, Schober M, Sperk G, Winkler H. Biochemical and 
functional properties of large and small dense-core vesicles in sympathetic nerves of rat and ox vas 
deferens. Neuroscience. 1984; 13:921–31. [PubMed: 6527783] 
Norrsell U, Finger S, Lajonchere C. Cutaneous sensory spots and the “law of specific nerve energies”: 
history and development of ideas. Brain Res Bull. 1999; 48:457–465. DOI: 10.1016/
S0361-9230(98)00067-7 [PubMed: 10372506] 
Ochoa J, Torebjörk E. Sensations evoked by intraneural microstimulation of C nociceptor fibres in 
human skin nerves. J Physiol. 1989; 415:583–99. [PubMed: 2640470] 
Schmelz M, Schmidt R, Bickel A, Handwerker HO, Torebjork HE. Specific C-Receptors for Itch in 
Human Skin. J Neurosci. 1997; 17:8003–8008. [PubMed: 9315918] 
Schmelz M, Schmidt R, Weidner C, Hilliges M, Torebjork HE, Handwerker HO. Chemical response 
pattern of different classes of C-nociceptors to pruritogens and algogens. J Neurophysiol. 2003; 
89:2441–8. DOI: 10.1152/jn.01139.2002 [PubMed: 12611975] 
Sikand P, Dong X, LaMotte RH. BAM8-22 peptide produces itch and nociceptive sensations in 
humans independent of histamine release. J Neurosci. 2011a; 31:7563–7. DOI: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1192-11.2011 [PubMed: 21593341] 
Sikand P, Shimada SG, Green BG, LaMotte RH. Sensory responses to injection and punctate 
application of capsaicin and histamine to the skin. Pain. 2011b; 152:2485–2494. DOI: 10.1016/
j.pain.2011.06.001 [PubMed: 21802851] 
Sikand P, Shimada SG, Green BG, LaMotte RH. Similar itch and nociceptive sensations evoked by 
punctate cutaneous application of capsaicin, histamine and cowhage. Pain. 2009; 144:66–75. DOI: 
10.1016/j.pain.2009.03.001 [PubMed: 19423224] 
Solorzano C, Villafuerte D, Meda K, Cevikbas F, Bráz J, Sharif-Naeini R, Juarez-Salinas D, 
Llewellyn-Smith IJ, Guan Z, Basbaum AI. Primary afferent and spinal cord expression of gastrin-
releasing peptide: message, protein, and antibody concerns. J Neurosci. 2015; 35:648–57. DOI: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2955-14.2015 [PubMed: 25589759] 
Spike RC, Puskár Z, Andrew D, Todd AJ. A quantitative and morphological study of projection 
neurons in lamina I of the rat lumbar spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci. 2003; 18:2433–48. [PubMed: 
14622144] 
Sun YG, Chen ZF. A gastrin-releasing peptide receptor mediates the itch sensation in the spinal cord. 
Nature. 2007; 448:700–3. DOI: 10.1038/nature06029 [PubMed: 17653196] 
Sun YG, Zhao ZQ, Meng XL, Yin J, Liu XY, Chen ZF. Cellular basis of itch sensation. Science. 2009; 
325:1531–4. DOI: 10.1126/science.1174868 [PubMed: 19661382] 
Sun et al.
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Todd AJ. Neuronal circuitry for pain processing in the dorsal horn. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010; 11:823–
36. DOI: 10.1038/nrn2947 [PubMed: 21068766] 
Todd AJ, Spike RC, Russell G, Johnston HM. Immunohistochemical evidence that Met-enkephalin and 
GABA coexist in some neurones in rat dorsal horn. Brain Res. 1992; 584:149–156. DOI: 
10.1016/0006-8993(92)90888-G [PubMed: 1515935] 
Tuckett RP. Itch evoked by electrical stimulation of the skin. J Invest Dermatol. 1982; 79:368–73. 
[PubMed: 7142737] 
Von frey, M. [accessed 7.31.15] Zur Physiologie der Juckempfindung [WWW Document]. Arch Neerl 
Physiol. 1922. URL https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-
instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=von+Frey+M.+Arch.+Neerl.+Physiol.+Vol.+7.+1922.+Zur
+Physiologie+der+Juckempfindung%3B+pp.+142%E2%80%93145
Wall PD. The gate control theory of pain mechanisms. A re-examination and re-statement. Brain. 
1978; 101:1–18. [PubMed: 205314] 
Wickersham IR, Lyon DC, Barnard RJO, Mori T, Finke S, Conzelmann KK, Young JAT, Callaway 
EM. Monosynaptic restriction of transsynaptic tracing from single, genetically targeted neurons. 
Neuron. 2007; 53:639–47. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.033 [PubMed: 17329205] 
Yaksh TL, Farb DH, Leeman SE, Jessell TM. Intrathecal capsaicin depletes substance P in the rat 
spinal cord and produces prolonged thermal analgesia. Science. 1979; 206:481–3. [PubMed: 
228392] 
Sun et al.
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Genetic labeling of itch second order neurons in the spinal cord
(A and B) Spinal cord and DRG sections from GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-tdTomato mice, tdTomato 
fluorescence were visualized directly without staining. (C and D) GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-tdTomato;GrpEGFP and MrgprA3Cre; ROSA26LSL-tdTomato; GrpEGFP spinal 
sections stained with GFP antibody. (E–G) GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-tdTomato spinal sections 
stained with antibodies to CGRP, IB4 and PKCγ respectively. (H and I) GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-tdTomato; Gad1EGFP and vGlut2Cre; ROSA26LSL-tdTomato; GrpEGFP spinal 
sections stained with GFP antibody. White arrowheads in C, G, I indicate overlap. (J, J′) 
Biocytin labeled individual Grp+ neurons, categorized as vertical neurons. All scale bars 
represent 20 μm. (K) Percentage of Grp+ neurons expressing vGlut2 and Gad1. n= 15 
hemisections from three mice per group. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. (L) Diagram 
summarizing the potential synaptic connections between MrgprA3+ DRG neurons and Grp+ 
neurons in the spinal cord. MrgprA3 also overlapped with Grp and post-synaptic marker, 
PSD95.
Sun et al.
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Grp+ neurons receive monosynaptic itchy input
(A) Left: diagram showing light activation of MrgprA3 peripheral fibers in behavioral tests; 
right: diagram showing light activation of MrgprA3 central terminals and recording of Grp+ 
neurons in the spinal cord. (B) 1Hz and 5Hz 100ms light stimulation triggered scratching 
bouts in five minutes. MrgprA3Cre; ROSA26LSL-ChR2 and ROSA26LSL-ChR2 control mice 
with light delivered to shaved nape regions (n=6). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. (C) 
From left to right: image of Grp+ neurons in spinal slice with electrode (black lines), 
representative traces of light-induced EPSCs in Grp+ neurons with monosynaptic input from 
MrgprA3+ neurons and percentage of Grp+ neurons with monosynaptic input from 
MrgprA3+ neurons. (D) Left: representative traces of light-induced EPSCs in lamina II Grp 
negative neurons with monosynaptic input, polysynaptic input and no synaptic input from 
MrgprA3+ neurons. Right: percentage of lamina II Grp negative neurons with monosynaptic 
input, polysynaptic input and no synaptic input from MrgprA3+ neurons.
Sun et al.
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Monosynaptic retrograde tracing from Grp+ neurons
(A) Diagram showing monosynaptic retrograde tracing strategy from Grp+ neurons. (B) 
Rabies-labeled neurons overlap with IB4 in spinal cord. (C) Top panels: L4–6 DRG sections 
labeled with different markers (CGRP, IB4, NF200, MrgprC11 and TrpV1). Middle panels: 
rabies virus trans-synaptically labeled DRG neurons. Bottom panels: merge images. 
Arrowhead indicates overlap of markers and rabies-labeled DRG neurons. All scale bars 
represent 20 μm. (D) Percentage of rabies trans-synaptically labeled DRG neurons co-
localize with different markers. Pooled results from more than 30 DRG sections of at least 
five mice for each marker.
Sun et al.
Page 24
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Painful stimuli strongly activate while itchy stimuli weakly activate Grp+ neurons
(A) Image of DRG attached spinal cord slice. Recording electrode on right and drug 
application electrode on left. (B) Diagram summarizing painful stimuli from DRG can 
strongly activate Grp+ neurons while itchy stimuli can only weakly activate Grp+ neurons. 
(C–F) Top panels: representative traces of action potentials from Grp+ neurons in responses 
to drugs. Bottom panels: Grp+ neurons in response to capsaicin (n=5, 0.5μM; n=5, 2μM; 
n=6, 5μM), SLIGRL (n=7, 100μM; n=6, 500μM), chloroquine (CQ, n=9, 3mM; n=10, 
10mM) and histamine (n=5, 10mM; n=9, 50mM) application on DRG. Black bar indicates 
duration of drug application (n=6). Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
Sun et al.
Page 25
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Intensity dependent coding of pain and itch by Grp+ neurons
(A) Diagram showing the strategy of capsaicin-mediated specific activation of Grp+ neurons 
in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− mice. (B and C) Pain-related licking time and itch-
related scratching bouts in wild type (green bars) and TrpV1−/− mice (red bars) triggered by 
intrathecal delivery of 10μl capsaicin (1μg or 3.3nmol, n=6 for both genotypes), BNP 
(2.5mg/ml or 7.1nmol/site, n=8) and GRP peptides (200μM or 2nmol/site, n=8). (D and E) 
10μl intrathecal capsaicin-triggered pain and itch responses in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; 
TrpV1−/− mice (black bars, from left to right: 10ng or 0.03nmol, n=9; 50ng or 0.16nmol, 
n=6; 0.2μg or 0.67nmol, n=5; 1μg or 3.33nmol, n=6; 5μg or 16.7nmol, n=10; 20μg or 
66.7nmol, n=6) together with responses in wild-type (green bars, 1μg or 3.33nmol, n=6) and 
TrpV1−/− mice (red bars, 5μg or 16.7nmol, n=6) from (B and C). (F and G) 10μl intrathecal 
capsaicin-triggered pain and itch responses in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− mice 
with drugs. From left to right 1μg or 3.33nmol capsaicin without and with GRPR antagonist 
Sun et al.
Page 26
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Deamino-Phe19,D-Ala24,D-Pro26-psi(CH2NH)Phe27)-GRP (19–27), 200μM or 2nmol/site, 
n=6 and 5); 10μg or 33.3nmol capsaicin, n=8; 10μg or 33.3nmol capsaicin with naloxone 
(1μg or 3.33nmol, n=7), naltrindole (10μg or 24.1nmol, n=7), CTAP (5μg or 13.7nmol, n=6), 
CTOP (10μg or 9.43nmol, n=6), bicuculline (10μM or 0.1nmol, n=7), cycloSomatostatin 
(0.1mM or 1nmol, n=8) and for (F) 5μg/ml or 0.16nmol capsaicin without (n=6) and with 
naloxone (1μg or 3.33nmol, n=9). (H and I) Pain and itch dose-response curve fitting of (D 
and E). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *: P < 0.05, **: P<0.01, ***: P<0.001, two-
tailed unpaired Student’s t test. Abbreviations: WT short for wild type. KO short for 
TrpV1−/−. Grp-V1;V1KO short for GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/−.
Sun et al.
Page 27
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Activation of enkephalin-expressing neurons triggered by stimulation of Grp+ neurons
(A) Diagram showing calcium imaging of enkephalin-expressing neurons labeled by 
PenkCre while depolarizing GrpEGFP neurons in spinal slices. (B) Enkephalin release with 
different doses of capsaicin from GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− mice (black bars) 
and ROSA26LSL-TrpV1; TrpV1−/− control mice (blue bars) normalized to per g tissue used in 
ELISA. (C) Representative calcium imaging results showing enkephalin-expressing neurons 
before, during and after activation of GrpEGFP neurons (1Hz 50pA current injection). White 
lines (in pipet shape) indicated patch-clamped GrpEGFP neurons. Arrowheads indicated 
activated enkephalin-expressing neurons during Grp activation. Enkephalin-expressing 
neurons (PenkCre; Rosa26LSL-GCaMP6) were activated when 5 out of 10 Grp+ neurons were 
depolarized. (D) PenkCre labeled neurons co-localized with enkephalin and GAD1. 
Representative neurons magnified in upper right corner (Arrowheads indicated magnified 
cells). Scale bars represent 20μm.
Sun et al.
Page 28
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. “Leaky gate” model in pain and itch transmission
(A) Comparison of “leaky gate” model (left) and the gate control theory (right). Grp+ 
neurons directly code for pain and itch while inhibiting pain through enkephalin-expressing 
interneurons. Aβ fibers activate pain transmission neurons and also indirectly inhibit pain 
transmission neurons via inhibitory interneurons. Yellow rectangles indicate type I 
incoherent feed forward loop formed by Grp+ neurons and Aβ fibers respectively. (B) 
Diagram summarizing the role of Grp+ neurons in pain and itch coding. Grp+ neurons 
receive weak input from itchy stimuli and strong input from painful stimuli, and positively 
code for itch while negatively regulate pain transmission. Enke (Enkephalin), T (pain 
transmission neurons), IN (inhibitory interneurons).
Sun et al.
Page 29
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Increased pain and decreased itch responses after the ablation of Grp+ neurons
(A) Diagram showing ablation of Grp+ neurons in the spinal cord. (B) Representative 
images of GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato spinal slices with and without diphtheria 
toxin treatments. All scale bars represent 20 μm. (C) Quantification of Grp+ neurons per five 
20μm hemisections in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato (red) and 
ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato control mice (blue) after diphtheria toxin treatments (n=5 
mice). (D) Scratching bouts induced by histamine (100mM or 5μmol, n=6 vs. 8), serotonin 
(1mM or 50nmol, n=7 vs. 8), SLIGRL (1mM or 50nmol, n=7) and chloroquine (4mM or 
200nmol, n=11 vs. 9) injection in the nape region (50μl) in GrpCre; 
ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato (red) and ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato control mice (blue). 
(E) Scratching bouts induced by injections of histamine (100mM or 5μmol, n=6) and 
chloroquine (4mM or 200nmol, n=6) in the nape region (50μl), with saline (50μl) or GRPR 
antagonist (50μl, Deamino-Phe19,D-Ala24,D-Pro26-psi(CH2NH)Phe27)-GRP (19–27), 
200μM or 2nmol/site) pretreatments 10 minutes before injection and saline (50μl) induced 
scratching bouts (n=6) in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato (red) and 
Sun et al.
Page 30
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato control mice (blue). (F) Pain responses from capsaicin cheek 
injections (1mg/ml or 33nmol, n=8; 0.5mg/ml or 16.7nmol, n=7 vs. 6), capsaicin intraplantar 
injections (0.1mg/ml or 3.3nmol, n=6; 0.05mg/ml or 1.67nmol, n=6) and immersion assay 
(50°C, n=7 vs. 6; 52°C, n=7 vs. 6) in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato (red) and 
ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato control mice (blue). (G and H) Pain responses from hot plate 
test (52°C, n=10; 55°C, n=7 vs. 6), Hargreaves test (n=8 vs. 7) and Von Frey test responses 
(n=11) in GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato (red) and ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato 
control mice (blue). Yellow shaded regions represent responses with strong stimuli. Data are 
represented as mean ± SEM. *: P < 0.05, **: P<0.01, ***: P<0.001, extended Welch’s t test 
for response ratio comparison between different temperatures in hot plate and tail immersion 
test and two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test for the rest. Abbreviations: Grp/DTR/tdt short 
for GrpCre; ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato and DTR/tdt short for 
ROSA26LSL-DTR; LSL-tdTomato, CQ short for chloroquine, 5-HT short for serotonin.
Sun et al.
Page 31
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
