 Adaptive deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease using 
motor cortex sensing
Nicole C. Swann, Ph.D.*,1,2, Coralie de Hemptinne, Ph.D.1, Margaret C. Thompson, M.A.3, 
Svjetlana Miocinovic, M.D. Ph.D.4, Andrew M. Miller, B.S.1, Ro’ee Gilron, Ph.D.1, Jill L. 
Ostrem, M.D.5, Howard J. Chizeck, Ph.D.3,6, and Philip A. Starr, M.D. Ph.D.1
1Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Franciso
2Department of Human Physiology, University of Oregon
3Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington
4Department of Neurology, Emory University
5Department of Neurology, University of California, San Franciso
6Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington
Abstract
Objective—Contemporary deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease is delivered 
continuously, and adjustments based on patient’s changing symptoms must be made manually by a 
trained clinician. Patients may be subjected to energy intensive settings at times when they are not 
needed, possibly resulting in stimulation-induced adverse effects, such as dyskinesia. One solution 
is “adaptive” DBS, in which stimulation is modified in real time based on neural signals that co-
vary with the severity of motor signs or of stimulation-induced adverse effects.
Here we show the feasibility of adaptive DBS using a fully implanted neural prosthesis.
Approach—We demonstrate adaptive deep brain stimulation in two patients with Parkinson’s 
disease using a fully implanted neural prosthesis that is enabled to utilize brain sensing to control 
stimulation amplitude (Activa PC+S). We used a cortical narrowband gamma (60-90 Hz) 
oscillation related to dyskinesia to decrease stimulation voltage when gamma oscillatory activity is 
high (indicating dyskinesia) and increase stimulation voltage when it is low.
Main Results—We demonstrate the feasibility of “adaptive deep brain stimulation” in two 
patients with Parkinson’s disease. In short term in-clinic testing, energy savings were substantial 
(38-45%), and therapeutic efficacy was maintained.
Significance—This is the first demonstration of adaptive DBS in Parkinson’s disease using a 
fully implanted device and neural sensing. Our approach is distinct from other strategies utilizing 
basal ganglia signals for feedback control.
*Corresponding author: Nicole C. Swann, PhD, Department of Human Physiology, University of Oregon, 122 Esslinger Hall, 1240 
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, 458-205-5293. 
Disclosures
UCSF has filed a preliminary patent related to this work and Drs. NCS, CD, JLO, and PAS are co-inventors on this patent.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Neural Eng. 2018 August ; 15(4): 046006. doi:10.1088/1741-2552/aabc9b.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) can be an effective treatment for Parkinson’s disease (PD), 
but has limitations that reduce efficacy for individual patients and create barriers to more 
widespread application of the technique. Programming requires a trained clinician, can be 
time consuming and, for some patients, satisfactory settings are never achieved. Adverse 
effects related to therapy, such as dyskinesia, can occur in response to DBS. Since its 
introduction 25 years ago, DBS for PD has been delivered in a constant or “open-loop” 
manner without real-time adjustments based on patient’s changing signs and symptoms. 
DBS could be improved by automated adjustment of stimulation in response to neural 
signatures of motor impairment or of stimulation-induced adverse effects. One approach, 
demonstrated using temporarily externalized DBS leads, utilized the amplitude of beta 
frequency oscillations in the subthalamic nucleus (STN) local field potential (LFP) to 
control the amplitude of STN stimulation1,2. This “adaptive DBS” approach is promising but 
may be challenging to implement in fully implantable systems due to the small amplitude of 
the STN LFP coupled with the large stimulation artifact generated when sensing a signal in 
close proximity to the stimulating contact. Additionally, the challenges of stimulating and 
recording from the same lead array can limit choices for therapy or recording. Further, beta 
band phenomena are strongly affected by normal voluntary movement3, which may 
complicate their use as signatures of motor impairment.
From invasive brain recordings, several neural signatures have been identified that may 
index the severity of parkinsonian motor signs or the presence of stimulation-induced 
adverse effects. Neural signatures may be detected in the motor cortex as well as the basal 
ganglia. Recently we characterized a distinctive narrowband gamma oscillation (60-90 Hz) 
detectable in human motor cortex, which occurs during dyskinesia4 (Figure 1A). This 
signature is associated with dyskinesia that occurs following medication alone and also 
dyskinesia which occur during DBS4. It is not strongly modulated by voluntary movement 
and is distinct from the canonical broadband gamma changes that occur in motor cortex 
during voluntary movement.5,6 Moreover, during DBS at typical frequencies (i.e.130-160 
Hz), if dyskinesia is present, the narrowband gamma oscillation occurs reliably at half the 
stimulation frequency4, possibly because of neuronal entrainment (Figure 1A and 1C). Since 
this signature of dyskinesia is not disrupted by voluntary movement and occurs in a 
predictable frequency range, it is a promising control signal for adaptive DBS.
Here we demonstrate unilateral adaptive DBS in two PD patients, in which the stimulation 
lead is in STN while the control signal is sensed from a permanent subdural paddle lead 
implanted over ipsilateral motor cortex. Both leads are attached to Activa PC+S (Medtronic), 
an investigational implantable pulse generator (IPG) that allows chronic recording as well as 
stimulation. Since STN stimulation can exacerbate dyskinesia, we utilized the dyskinesia-
related cortical narrowband gamma signal to reduce the amplitude of STN stimulation when 
the gamma oscillation exceeded a preset threshold. The algorithm was initially implemented 
on an external computer that received the brain data streamed in real-time and updated the 
patient’s DBS settings noninvasively via radio telemetry. We subsequently uploaded the 
algorithm to the patient’s internal pulse generator (IPG) to demonstrate totally embedded 
closed loop control (illustrated in relation to current “open loop control” in Figure 2).
Swann et al.
Page 2
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods
Patients and device implantation
We tested adaptive stimulation in two male patients (65 and 61 years old) who were 
previously implanted with Activa PC+S as part of a chronic brain recording study4,7,8, but 
continue to experience mild to moderate dyskinesia in spite of optimization of stimulation 
parameters by a movement disorders neurologist. The patients were diagnosed with PD 8 
and 7 years ago (respectively) and were implanted with DBS 3 years (Patient 1) and 1 year 
11 months (Patient 2) prior to participation in this study. At surgery, their baseline Unified 
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) scores on and off medications were: 14 and 30 
(Patient 1) and 14 and 29 (Patient 2). Patient 2 was implanted with only unilateral DBS. 
Patient’s clinical stimulation settings are listed in Table 1. This protocol was approved by the 
UCSF institutional review board (protocol # 13-10878) under a physician sponsored 
investigational device exemption (IDE # G120283). The study was registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01934296). Informed consent was obtained under the Declaration of 
the Principles of Helsinki. Patient 1 and 2 in this study correspond to Patient 3 and 2 
respectively in our previous publication4.
Surgical procedures for implantation of stimulation and sensing leads have been described 
previously4,7. In brief, in addition to the quadripolar cylindrical STN lead (Medtronic model 
3389) that delivers DBS therapy, we implanted a permanent quadripolar paddle-type lead 
(Medtronic model 3587A) in the subdural space over motor cortex. The cortical lead has 1 
cm spacing between contacts and was only utilized for sensing, not stimulation. Both leads 
were attached to Activa PC+S (Medtronic), an IPG enabled to sense and store field 
potentials. Because Activa PC+S was only implanted unilaterally, adaptive DBS was 
delivered only on one side. On the contralateral hemisphere Patient 1 was implanted with a 
standard clinical IPG without sensing capability (Activa SC) attached to an STN lead. The 
stimulation delivered by the Activa SC was not altered during adaptive DBS.
Control algorithms for adaptive DBS
Activa PC+S, in conjunction with appropriate firmware and external devices, has two 
interfaces for prototyping and implementing closed loop DBS. The “Nexus D3” interface 
implements adaptive DBS using an external computer. Neural data are streamed to the 
external computer which implements the control algorithm and then updates stimulation.9 
This approach is helpful for rapid algorithm prototyping and visualization of signals in real-
time before implementing fully embedded adaptive DBS, for which algorithm 
troubleshooting is more challenging. The “Nexus E” interface allows for simple control 
algorithms, based on spectral power in pre-specified frequency bands, to be implemented 
within Activa PC+S10. In this mode, patients are not tethered to external systems. While 
there are some power requirements associated with running the detection algorithm on the 
IPG (Nexus E), the translational potential is very high since this is currently the only way 
that adaptive DBS can be feasibly delivered long-term. An open-loop DBS control session 
was also completed as a comparison to the adaptive DBS sessions. DBS setting used for 
adaptive stimulation are shown in Table 2 and details for each of the adaptive algorithms and 
open-loop session are provided below. In brief, both adaptive methods used the cortical 
Swann et al.
Page 3
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electrocorticographic (ECoG) signal over motor cortex in the gamma (60-90 Hz) range to 
detect whether dyskinesia was likely. If the signal was high (suggesting dyskinesia was 
likely) stimulation in the ipsilateral STN was reduced, and if it was low, stimulation was 
increased (Figure 1B and Figure 2B).
Behavioral assessments
Video recordings of all testing sessions were reviewed post hoc by a blinded movement 
disorders neurologist (SM). Patients were on medications during each session. Patients were 
also blinded to stimulation type (adaptive versus open-loop). For Patient 1, clinical rating 
scales were performed every 20 minutes using the upper body portions of the Unified 
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS, items 20a-c, 21a-b, and 23a-25b) and the 
Unified Dyskinesia Rating scale (UDYS11). To summarize these scores we summed the 
values for each scale (UPDRS and UDYS) and averaged them over time. We also asked the 
patient how he felt at each clinical rating session (i.e. every 20 minutes), specifically if there 
was any change to his subjective state. The timing of medication relative to testing is 
provided in Table 3. Patient 2 performed a short testing session (10 minutes) without 
administering formal rating scales. Video during the session was reviewed by the neurologist 
for overt clinical changes during continuous versus adaptive testing.
Energy calculation
All analyses were conducted in Matlab with custom scripts or eeglab12. Total energy use was 
calculated based on the method proposed by Koss and collegues13. Here total energy 
delivered is expressed as:
TEED1sec = ((voltage2 × frequency × pulse width)/impedance) × 1sec)
Here our voltage measure takes the average voltage over time which encompasses the 
integration of the stimulation current on a per pulse basis and derives the average energy 
delivered over the closed loop period. Total energy used for the adaptive DBS session was 
compared to total energy for an open-loop session of the same length of time where the 
voltage was maintained at the higher level used for adaptive DBS throughout the session. 
Spectral power near the primary frequency of the DBS artifact was recorded during all 
sessions, to verify appropriate changes in DBS amplitude.
Prototyping algorithms using Nexus D3
The Nexus D3 interface for closed loop control from an external computer was tested in one 
subject (Patient 1). A bipolar cortical signal sampled at 422 Hz was streamed from the 
implanted Activa PC+S device to an external computer. To measure the neural signature of 
interest, power was extracted in the frequency domain from a window centered at 80 Hz 
(half the DBS stimulation frequency) with a 2.5 Hz bandwidth. Power in this window was 
averaged over 30 seconds. When the average crossed a specified threshold, stimulation 
voltage was adjusted (increased when the power was below the threshold, decreased when it 
was above, see Figure 1B). The threshold for triggering stimulation updates was set at 2.5 
standard deviations above the calibration mean, which was calculated from power in the 
Swann et al.
Page 4
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 same 80 Hz-centered window from a separate data set collected prior to the start of the 
adaptive DBS algorithm, during a time period when the patient was not dyskinetic. DBS 
parameters were selected to be as close to the patient’s clinical settings as possible, while 
minimizing artifacts related to stimulation and Activa PC+S recordings. (For instance, 
constant current was not used for algorithm prototyping due to artifacts associated with this 
mode4.) Details are provided in Table 2. The stimulation frequency for the contralateral, 
non-sensing IPG (Activa SC), was changed to 160 Hz to match the Activa PC+S side, to 
avoid artifacts at additional frequencies in the brain recording, however it was not 
dynamically changed during adaptive DBS. The DBS voltage was adjusted on the Activa PC
+S side between a therapeutic high value (3V) and a lower value (1V or 1.5V) value. 
Initially a low value of 1 V was used but was subsequently raised to 1.5 V for better 
entrainment of gamma band activity to the desired frequency of 80 Hz.
Embedded closed loop DBS using Nexus E
Fully internalized adaptive DBS using the Nexus E interface was tested in two patients. In 
this prototype, the signals to drive adaptive DBS were derived from electrocorticography 
(ECoG) power channels that record power directly from the Activa PC+S device (recordings 
were filtered using an analog filter prior to digitization). The narrowband gamma signal 
related to dyskinesia occurs at half the stimulation frequency, when dyskinesia is present 
(Figure 1A and 1C)4. Thus, for Patient 1 the power channel was centered at 80 Hz (+/− 2.5 
Hz) (since his stimulation was delivered at 160 Hz) and for Patient 2 the power channel was 
centered at 65 Hz (+/− 2.5 Hz) (since his stimulation was delivered at 130 Hz). We also 
recorded a second power channel from the same recording electrodes, to record stimulation 
artifact and detect algorithm-triggered changes. This, in conduction with verification from 
the log file, was used to derive voltage for the total energy used calculation. The power 
channel recording was set at a center frequency slightly off the actual stimulation frequency 
to avoid saturation of the power channels (140 Hz for Patient 1 and 150 Hz for Patient 2). 
Power values were acquired at a sampling rate of 5 Hz. We also recorded full time domain 
signals from motor cortex for visualization. These were sampled at 422 Hz for Patient 1 and 
at 800 Hz for Patient 2. Different sampling rates were used to accommodate different desired 
lengths of recording sessions and to minimize artifact caused by interactions between the 
sampling rates, stimulation frequency, and center frequencies of power channels4.
Stimulation voltage was decreased when the gamma signal rose above a threshold and was 
maintained at that level for at least 600 ms, and was increased when it fell below the same 
threshold for the same amount of time. This 600 ms parameter was selected to allow quick 
responses to changes in the feedback signal, while balancing the need to minimize false 
detections. The threshold was determined based on previously collected data both in and 
outside of clinic that occurred with and without dyskinesia. This data was used to select the 
frequency of interest and to properly train the support vector machine which was used to 
implement the algorithm. Voltage was changed between a therapeutic high value (3 V for 
Patient 1 and 5 V for Patient 2) and a low value (1 V for both patients), on the side 
implanted with Activa PC+S. The higher values were chosen to be similar to those used for 
therapeutic stimulation and the lower value was chosen to be as low as possible but still 
entrain the gamma signal4. Stimulation parameters used for adaptive DBS are shown in 
Swann et al.
Page 5
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Table 2. Voltage ramp times were 4 seconds for increasing DBS voltages and either 1 second 
(Patient 1) or 4 seconds (for Patient 2) for decreasing DBS voltages. We used slower ramp 
times for increases in voltage to avoid the sensation of stimulation-induced paresthesia. A 
quick ramp-down time was used to quickly reduce, or prevent the worsening of, dyskinesia.
Open-Loop Control
As a comparison to the adaptive DBS testing with Nexus E, we also performed an open-loop 
control test on a different day, where DBS voltage was held constant, for both patients (3 V 
for Patient 1 and 5 V for Patient 2). For each patient, the open-loop session was designed to 
be as similar to the adaptive DBS session as possible. Compared to the adaptive DBS 
testing, the open-loop testing lasted approximately the same amount of time, was at 
approximately the same time of day, and occurred after about the same amount of time 
relative to the last medication dose.
Results
We developed a novel adaptive DBS algorithm first by prototyping an externalized control 
system in one patient before testing a totally embedded control system in two patients. The 
algorithm used a cortical physiological signature sensitive to dyskinesia to update DBS 
voltage values – reducing voltages when gamma power was above a threshold (indicating 
dyskinesia was likely) and increasing voltages when gamma power was below a threshold 
(suggesting dyskinesia was less likely)4. These adaptive stimulation sessions were compared 
to an open-loop session where DBS was on at the same voltage continuously. Since the 
patient’s clinical state was variable (presence or absence of dyskinesia, time since last 
medication dose) several sessions were performed with breaks in between to capture epochs 
where dyskinesia was present. Results for clinical efficacy and total energy used were 
calculated from the longest session containing dyskinesia for both Nexus D3 and Nexus E. 
The open-loop session analyzed was the session that best matched the Nexus sessions for 
time since last medication dose. This match was closer for the Nexus E session than for 
Nexus D3.
Clinical Efficacy
Clinical efficacy as determined by examination of video-recorded clinical ratings by a 
blinded neurologist are presented in Table 3 for Patient 1. This is based on a 62 minute 
session of closed loop DBS using Nexus D3 and a 30 minute session of Nexus E. The 
patient had similar bradykinesia and dyskinesia scores for all three sessions (Nexus D3, 
Nexus E, and open-loop), and this is true whether bilateral or unilateral scores are 
considered (Table 3). He never had tremor, so these scores were not included in the analysis.
Patient 2 did not have formal clinical ratings, but was included in the study to demonstrate 
technical capability of Activa PC+S for fully embedded adaptive stimulation in a second 
subject. The blinded neurologist reviewed video during both sessions and reported no overt 
clinical difference between adaptive DBS (Nexus E) and open-loop DBS. Both subjects 
denied any awareness of changes in stimulation settings during testing sessions.
Swann et al.
Page 6
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Total energy savings
Adaptive DBS resulted in less total energy use compared to open-loop DBS. For sessions 
using adaptive DBS during dyskinesia the total energy saved was 38% for Patient 1 using 
Nexus D3, and 45% and 39% for Patients 1 and 2 respectively using Nexus E. An important 
consideration is that there is an additional 10% battery cost associated with sensing the 
electrophysiology data and running the Nexus E algorithm. Nevertheless, the energy saved 
surpassed the energy used. Use of Nexus D3 is associated with a more significant energy 
cost associated with streaming the data, which we did not consider for this study since the 
purpose of Nexus D3 was for prototyping our algorithms, not clinical application.
Algorithm performance
During the adaptive DBS session using the external adaptive DBS system (Nexus D3), 72 
transitions (instances where the threshold was crossed) were triggered (over 64 minutes) for 
Patient 1 (Figure 3). For the same patient, 490 transitions were triggered (over 30.5 minutes) 
using the totally embedded system (Nexus E, Figure 4). For Patient 2, 158 transitions were 
triggered (over 10 minutes) using the embedded system (Nexus E). The zoomed in views of 
state changes in Figures 3c and 4b indicate that changes in classifier state were appropriately 
triggered by changes in gamma power.
Discussion
We have demonstrated the feasibility of adaptive DBS in PD using a fully implantable 
device, with feedback control provided by a cortical gamma band oscillation related to the 
emergence of dyskinesia, a common adverse effect of levodopa therapy and of STN DBS. 
While the total energy delivered by adaptive stimulation was substantially less than that of 
open-loop stimulation, blinded clinical ratings confirmed similar efficacy for both 
approaches. The classifier algorithm performed as expected, appropriately detecting changes 
in gamma band power and triggering reduction in DBS amplitude when the gamma 
threshold was exceeded. Adaptive DBS was tested in two modes of action: during data 
streaming from the implantable device to an external computer hosting the control 
algorithm, and with the control algorithm totally embedded within the pulse generator. Our 
goal was not to demonstrate clinical superiority of adaptive stimulation, but to perform 
short-term testing of a simple control algorithm as a foundation for a trial of adaptive DBS 
in a chronic, ambulatory setting.
Cortical versus basal ganglia control strategies
Prior published work on the use of neural control signals for adaptive DBS in PD has 
utilized STN LFPs recorded from the same DBS lead used for therapeutic stimulation. 
Although this approach has shown promise1,2, the STN LFP is a low amplitude signal that is 
strongly affected by stimulation artifact when stimulation is delivered on adjacent contacts. 
Thus far, this approach has been tested largely with temporarily externalized STN leads, and 
may be difficult to translate into a fully implanted system given the less favorable signal to 
noise ratio characteristics, the larger stimulation artifact present in fully implanted systems 
compared to external recording systems7 and challenges of recording and stimulating form 
the same array. Indeed, for our particular control strategy (using a narrowband gamma 
Swann et al.
Page 7
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 feedback signal), the signal was more reliably detected in cortex compared to STN both on 
and off DBS (Figure 5). Furthermore, as we showed in our previous paper, the cortical signal 
was associated with an area under the curve value of 0.912 from a receiver operator curve 
analysis, compared to a value of 0.797 for STN4. In contrast, our approach utilizes an ECoG 
signal for feedback control, provides a higher amplitude signal that is much further from the 
source of stimulation artifact and does not limit the choice of DBS contacts available for 
stimulation (given the inability to record and stimulate from the same contact). This last 
point bears particular consideration since often the contacts in STN which best detect 
signatures related to symptoms are also the contacts which correspond to the regions of STN 
most likely to be targeted for clinical use14. We have demonstrated the technical feasibility 
of this approach within a totally implanted device. While this cortical detection strategy does 
require insertion of a subdural lead for motor cortex recording, insertion of this “extra” lead 
is technically simple and can be done at the same time as insertion of the DBS leads, using 
the same skull opening and surgical exposure as used for the DBS leads7. Additionally, the 
insertion of this lead has not been associated with negative outcomes when used acutely15 or 
chronically (in a small sample)7.
Neural control utilizing STN signals has focused on beta band oscillations, a possible 
marker of the severity of parkinsonism whose amplitude is reduced by therapeutic DBS and 
dopaminergic medication16,17. A challenge to using a beta-derived control signal is that it is 
strongly modulated by normal behaviors including voluntary movement3. For adaptive DBS 
in the chronic ambulatory setting, the control algorithm would have to distinguish between 
beta changes related to bradykinesia and those related to voluntary movement. This is less of 
a concern for the cortical control strategy demonstrated here, since feedback control utilized 
a narrowband gamma oscillation which is not strongly modulated by voluntary movement4. 
Of note, this narrowband gamma oscillation is larger than, and distinct from, the low 
amplitude, broadband gamma signal detectable in ECoG recordings that is modulated by 
normal movement and probably reflects asynchronous (non-oscillatory) processes5,6.
Is adaptive DBS necessary?
Standard, open-loop continuous DBS has been shown to be highly effective for PD in 
randomized clinical trials18. However, there are several reasons why adaptive DBS could 
improve this therapy. Reduction in stimulation current without loss of therapeutic benefit has 
the potential to reduce stimulation-induced adverse effects19, as well as prolong battery life 
or allow greater miniaturization of the relatively large pulse generators now in use20. 
Further, some of the PD patients most in need of DBS are also among the most difficult to 
successfully program: those who alternate between extreme states of dyskinesia and 
bradykinesia with little in-between time (“brittle fluctuators”)21,22. Previous research has 
estimated the percentage of patients who exhibit this “brittle” pattern is between 2-6%21,22. 
Although the percentage is relatively low, there is a high need for a solution for these 
patients as their dyskinesia tends to be more severe and more painful and they can be 
extremely sensitive to stimulation-induced dyskinesia21. Furthermore the lessons learned 
from this approach may have broader implications. For instance, as a therapeutic strategy for 
other disorders associated with hyperkinetic movements following DBS23.
Swann et al.
Page 8
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While for some patients simply manually adjusting their own DBS settings might be 
sufficient to avoid frequent dyskinesia, for others, especially patients with very frequent 
motor fluctuations, such an approach would be cumbersome and imprecise. Additionally, 
many patients have co-morbid cognitive impairment, which would preclude active 
monitoring of their clinical state and devices. Thus an adaptive algorithm that automatically 
titrated stimulation to avoid dyskinesia could be useful. Motor fluctuations in patients in this 
pilot study were less extreme, which may explain why adaptive DBS in this short-term study 
did not show therapeutic superiority over open-loop continuous DBS. Indeed, it is possible 
there could have been a floor effect for dyskinesia in this study since dyskinesia was mild 
for all conditions (see Table 3). Another possibility is that bilateral adaptive stimulation may 
be necessary for clinical benefit and that this is why we did not see a clinical improvement 
(since we tested only unilateral adaptive DBS). Of note, adaptive DBS using neural control 
embedded within a totally implantable device has shown promise in other movement 
disorders, including Tourette’s syndrome24 and essential tremor25.
Another consideration is that our results apply specifically to STN DBS, which is currently 
the most commonly used target for DBS in PD. An alternative surgical target for DBS is the 
globus pallidus interna (GPi). GPi DBS is less associated with dyskinesia postoperatively 
and, therefore, a dyskinesia-based control strategy may not be as useful for these patients. 
However, there are disadvantages to GPi DBS including a shorter battery life and diminished 
ability to lower medication dosages postoperatively26.
Limitations
Here, we utilized a simple single threshold control strategy with a sensitive detector that 
allowed us to demonstrate technical success of adaptive stimulation during brief, in-clinic 
testing. Using this approach transitions in the classifier state occurred much more frequently 
than would be expected if transitions were only triggered by changes in the clinical state of 
the patient. Rather, multiple transitions were triggered by relatively small fluctuations in the 
neural signal, fluctuations which were likely too small to correlate with overt behavioral 
changes. A sensitive algorithm was desired for this brief in-clinic test to ensure that the 
system was accurately detecting changes in the neural signals and adjusting stimulation 
accordingly. Further, the amplitude of the neural signal used for control (gamma band 
power) also fluctuated rather than stabilized, possibly in part due to frequent voltage 
transitions.
One way to dampen rapid changes in stimulation, in the setting of a sensitive classifier, is to 
utilize a slow ramp for stimulation voltage changes when the classifier detects change. The 
ramp times utilized here were between 1-4 seconds. Because of this, while many transitions 
were triggered, DBS voltages did not change as often since the voltage was set to ramp 
slowly (Figure 3b). Even longer ramp times could be used to achieve even more stable 
voltages. Other alternatives, especially for longer-term testing, is to increase the threshold 
for triggering a change in DBS, or to use a two-threshold control strategy. These 
modifications might result in fewer transitions, greater stability in the neural signature of 
dyskinesia, and closer tracking of the clinical state of the patient. With two thresholds, the 
classifier would change to the “reduced gamma” state after the control signal declined below 
Swann et al.
Page 9
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the lower threshold, but would not change back to the “elevated gamma” state until the 
control signal rose above the higher threshold. Of note, at this time using the fully embedded 
(Nexus E) Activa PC+S strategy, only single level control is possible.
It should be noted that rapid transitions in classifier state are not necessarily detrimental. 
Adaptive control algorithms utilizing STN beta band oscillations also showed rapid 
transitions in the classifier with frequent fluctuations in DBS amplitude1, but these 
fluctuations nevertheless served to “shape” the neural signal in a therapeutically useful way, 
by shortening the duration of “bursts” of beta activity27.
Finally, we did not specifically compare adaptive stimulation based on neural feedback to 
intermittent open-loop stimulation since the goal of the study was to show technical 
feasibility of adaptive DBS in a short-term trial.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated the feasibility of adaptive DBS using a cortical detector sensitive to 
dyskinesia in two patients. In both patients there were energy savings without worsening of 
clinical symptoms. This strategy requires further testing in a chronic ambulatory setting, and 
may be useful in PD patients who are motor fluctuators and experience severe dyskinesia 
alternating with marked bradykinesia21,22. This work illustrates a systematic approach to 
algorithm development in a neural interface, beginning with the use of sensing for biomarker 
discovery, then in-clinic testing using an external computer for flexibility in algorithm 
development, and finally use of control algorithm that is totally embedded within the device.
Acknowledgments
This project was supported by NIH grants (NS090913-01 and NS100544-02) and the UC President’s Postdoctoral 
Fellowship. We thank Maryam Shanechi and Simon Little for their critical review of the manuscript and Witney 
Chen, Preeya Khanna, and Shelia Rajagopalan for their help with data collection. Engineers at Medtronic, Inc. 
reviewed the manuscript for technical accuracy.
References
1. Little S, Pogosyan A, Neal S, et al. Adaptive deep brain stimulation in advanced Parkinson disease. 
Annals of neurology. 2013; 74(3):449–457. [PubMed: 23852650] 
2. Rosa M, Arlotti M, Ardolino G, et al. Adaptive deep brain stimulation in a freely moving 
Parkinsonian patient. Mov Disord. 2015; 30(7):1003–1005. [PubMed: 25999288] 
3. Kuhn AA, Williams D, Kupsch A, et al. Event-related beta desynchronization in human subthalamic 
nucleus correlates with motor performance. Brain. 2004; 127(Pt 4):735–746. [PubMed: 14960502] 
4. Swann NC, de Hemptinne C, Miocinovic S, et al. Gamma Oscillations in the Hyperkinetic State 
Detected with Chronic Human Brain Recordings in Parkinson’s Disease. J Neurosci. 2016; 36(24):
6445–6458. [PubMed: 27307233] 
5. Crone NE, Miglioretti DL, Gordon B, Lesser RP. Functional mapping of human sensorimotor cortex 
with electrocorticographic spectral analysis. II. Event-related synchronization in the gamma band. 
Brain. 1998; 121(Pt 12):2301–2315. [PubMed: 9874481] 
6. Miller KJ, Leuthardt EC, Schalk G, et al. Spectral Changes in Cortical Surface Potentials during 
Motor Movement. Journal of Neuroscience. 2007; 27(9):2424–2432. [PubMed: 17329441] 
7. Swann NC, de Hemptinne C, Miocinovic S, et al. Chronic multisite brain recording from a totally 
implantable bidirectional neural interface: experience in five patients with Parkinson’s disease. 
Journal of neurosurgery. 2017 in press. 
Swann et al.
Page 10
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Khanna P, Swann N, De Hemptinne C, et al. Neurofeedback Control in Parkinsonian Patients Using 
Electrocortigraphy Signals Accessed Wirelessly With a Chronic, Fully Implanted Device. IEEE 
Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2016
9. Herron J, Chizeck HJ. Prototype closed-loop deep brain stimulation systems inspired by Norbert 
Weiner. IEEE Conference on Norbert Wiener in the 21st Century. 2014
10. Afshar P, Khambhati A, Stanslaski S, et al. A translational platform for prototyping closed-loop 
neuromodulation systems. Front Neural Circuits. 2012; 6:117. [PubMed: 23346048] 
11. Goetz CG, Nutt JG, Stebbins GT. The Unified Dyskinesia Rating Scale: presentation and 
clinimetric profile. Mov Disord. 2008; 23(16):2398–2403. [PubMed: 19025759] 
12. Delorme A, Makeig S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG 
dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of neuroscience methods. 2004; 
134(1):9–21. [PubMed: 15102499] 
13. Koss AM, Alterman RL, Tagliati M, Shils JL. Calculating total electrical energy delivered by deep 
brain stimulation systems. Annals of neurology. 2005; 58(1):168. author reply 168-169. [PubMed: 
15984018] 
14. Trottenberg T, Kupsch A, Schneider GH, Brown P, Kuhn AA. Frequency-dependent distribution of 
local field potential activity within the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Experimental 
neurology. 2007; 205(1):287–291. [PubMed: 17336961] 
15. Panov F, Levin E, de Hemptinne C, et al. Intraoperative electrocorticography for physiological 
research in movement disorders: principals and experience in 200 cases. Journal of neurosurgery. 
2016 in press. 
16. Kühn AA, Kempf F, Brücke C, et al. High-frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus 
suppresses oscillatory beta activity in patients with Parkinson’s disease in parallel with 
improvement in motor performance. J Neurosci. 2008; 28(24):6165–6173. [PubMed: 18550758] 
17. Kühn AA, Kupsch A, Schneider G-H, Brown P. Reduction in subthalamic 8-35 Hz oscillatory 
activity correlates with clinical improvement in Parkinson’s disease. Eur J Neurosci. 2006; 23(7):
1956–1960. [PubMed: 16623853] 
18. Deuschl G, Schade-Brittinger C, Krack P, et al. A randomized trial of deep-brain stimulation for 
Parkinson’s disease. The New England journal of medicine. 2006; 355(9):896–908. [PubMed: 
16943402] 
19. Little S, Tripoliti E, Beudel M, et al. Adaptive deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease 
demonstrates reduced speech side effects compared to conventional stimulation in the acute 
setting. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry. 2016; 87(12):1388–1389.
20. Meidahl AC, Tinkhauser G, Herz DM, Cagnan H, Debarros J, Brown P. Adaptive Deep Brain 
Stimulation for Movement Disorders: The Long Road to Clinical Therapy. Mov Disord. 2017; 
32(6):810–819. [PubMed: 28597557] 
21. Martinez-Ramirez D, Giugni J, Vedam-Mai V, et al. The “brittle response” to Parkinson’s disease 
medications: characterization and response to deep brain stimulation. PLoS One. 2014; 
9(4):e94856. [PubMed: 24733172] 
22. Sriram A, Foote KD, Oyama G, Kwak J, Zeilman PR, Okun MS. Brittle Dyskinesia Following 
STN but not GPi Deep Brain Stimulation. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2014; 4:242. 
[PubMed: 24932426] 
23. Ostrem JL, Racine CA, Glass GA, et al. Subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in primary 
cervical dystonia. Neurology. 2011; 76(10):870–878. [PubMed: 21383323] 
24. Shute JB, Okun MS, Opri E, et al. Thalamocortical network activity enables chronic tic detection 
in humans with Tourette syndrome. NeuroImage Clinical. 2016; 12:165–172. [PubMed: 
27419067] 
25. Herron J, Thompson M, Brown T, Chizeck H, Ojemann J, Ko A. Cortical brain computer interface 
for closed-loop deep brain stimulation. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2017
26. Williams NR, Foote KD, Okun MS. STN vs. GPi Deep Brain Stimulation: Translating the Rematch 
into Clinical Practice. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2014; 1(1):24–35. [PubMed: 24779023] 
27. Tinkhauser G, Pogosyan A, Little S, et al. The modulatory effect of adaptive deep brain stimulation 
on beta bursts in Parkinson’s disease. Brain. 2017; 140(4):1053–1067. [PubMed: 28334851] 
Swann et al.
Page 11
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
A. Example of power spectral densities from motor cortex recorded with and without 
dyskinesia, both during DBS. Inset shows raw motor cortex signal when DBS was off. Black 
arrow indicates narrowband gamma signal used for feedback (adapted from Swann et al. 
2016). B. Schematic of closed loop algorithm. DBS voltage is decreased if narrowband 
gamma exceeds a threshold and increased when below the threshold. C. Example of the 
change in the peak frequency of the narrowband gamma with DBS. DBS caused the 
frequency to shift to half the stimulation frequency (adapted from Swann et. al 2016).
Swann et al.
Page 12
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Schematics of current Open Loop (A) and Feedback Controlled (B) DBS. Note that in the 
Feedback Controlled version (B) the portion labeled “Nexus D/E” is external in the case of 
Nexus D and internal for Nexus E.
Swann et al.
Page 13
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Adaptive DBS utilizing Activa PC+S under control of an external computer (Nexus D3), 
from patient 1. A. Schematic illustration of external control. B. 3-D reconstruction of 
patient’s brain and ECoG contacts used for sensing, derived from postoperative CT images 
computationally fused to a preoperative brain MRI. C. Neural data, classifier state, and 
stimulation state during adaptive DBS. Top panel: Spectrogram of time domain signal 
recorded from motor cortex for longest adaptive DBS session during which dyskinesia 
occurred. Second panel: classifier state (gold), DBS voltage (blue), and gamma power used 
Swann et al.
Page 14
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 as the control signal (red). The y-axis is in arbitrary units. Lower panels show a zoomed in 
view to demonstrate that classifier state transitions correspond appropriately to fluctuations 
in gamma band power.
Swann et al.
Page 15
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Adaptive DBS utilizing Activa PC+S with fully embedded control (Nexus E), from Patient 
1. A. Schematic of fully embedded control. B. Neural data, classifier state, and stimulation 
state during adaptive DBS. Panel format same as Figure 2. Note the more frequent 
transitions in the classifier compared to Nexus D3. This is likely because the Nexus E 
algorithm did not incorporate any smoothing of the signal, whereas Nexus D3 averaged the 
gamma signal over time before triggering a change in stimulation. This type of smoothing 
was not supported by Nexus E.
Swann et al.
Page 16
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Examples of time series of the STN LFP and M1 ECoG potential, and their power spectra, 
both on and off DBS. The The gamma peak in the power spectrum is larger for cortical 
recordings. There is prominent stimulation artifact for both recording sites with DBS on. 
While the gamma peak in the power spectrum of the STN LFP is totally obscured during 
DBS on, the M1 gamma peak remains detectable, underscoring the utility of the M1 signal 
for feedback control. Note the differing scales of the y-axis for STN versus M1.
Swann et al.
Page 17
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Swann et al.
Page 18
Table 1
Stimulation parameters used for standard clinical DBS, prior to starting this study. Patient 2 has unilateral DBS.
Patient #
Activa PC+S (stimulation and sensing)
Activa SC (stimulation, no sensing)
Brain Side
Active Contactsa
Amplitude
Pulse Width
(μsec)
Frequency
(Hz)
Brain side
Active Contacts
Amplitude
Pulse Width
(μsec)
Frequency
(Hz)
1
R
C+1−
3V
60
150
L
C+3-
5.2 mA
60
130
2
L
C+2−
5.4 mA
90
130
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
aAC-PC coordinates of the active contacts, expressed as lateral (x), anterior (y), and superior (x) distances from to the midcommissural point, were −10.59, −2.61, −2.06 (x,y,z, patient 1) and −13.78, 4.74, 
−2.10 (x,y,z, patient 2).
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Swann et al.
Page 19
Table 2
Stimulation parameters of the Activa PC+S device during adaptive DBS.
Patient #
Brain Side
Active stimulation Contacts
AC-PC coordinates of ECoG recording contact 
pairsa
Amplitude range 
for adaptive
(V)
Pulse Width
(μsec)
Amplitude for continuous
(V)
Frequency
(Hz)
x
y
z
1
R
C+1−
29.23
30.40
−17.86
−7.63
66.22
65.36
1b-3
60
3
160
2
L
C+2−
28.43
28.43
−14.90
5.02
67.61
63.59
1-5
90
5
130
aCoordinates are expressed as the lateral (x), anterior (y), and superior (x) distances from the midcommissural point. Note that two sets of coordinates are provided because each ECoG signal was recorded 
from a pair of electrodes that were bipolar referenced.
bNote, part-way through the Nexus D3 run the lower limit was adjusted to 1.5 V. The lower limit was still 1 V for Nexus E.
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Swann et al.
Page 20
Table 3
Clinical Ratings from Patient 1. Bradykinesia score is derived from items 23a-25b of the UPDRS and 
Dyskinesia score is derived from the UDYS rating scale. In both cases, scores were summed and then averaged 
across time. We have reported rating scales which are both bilateral and unilateral (reflecting the side of the 
body contralateral to the side modulated by adaptive DBS.) Note that for the dyskinesia rating scale the 
highest theoretical score is 28, so patient’s overall dyskinesia was relatively low, suggesting that a floor effect 
could be occurring.
Stimulation mode
Bradykinesia Score 
Total/Contralateral only
Dyskinesia Score Total/
Contralateral only
Total Energy Saved 
Relative to Open-loop
Minutes Since Last 
Medication Dose (session 
start-session end)
Adaptive, Nexus D3
14/7
1.5/1.25
38%
110-175
Adaptive, Nexus E
11.83/4.67
1.33/1.33
45%
65-110
Open-loop
12.33/5.67
1.667/1.33
0%
70-110
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 01.
