 Blood–brain barrier breakdown in Alzheimer’s disease and other 
neurodegenerative disorders
Melanie D. Sweeney1, Abhay P. Sagare1, and Berislav V. Zlokovic1
1Department of Physiology and Neuroscience and the Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School 
of Medicine of the University of Southern California, 1501 San Pablo Street, Los Angeles, 
California 90089, USA
Abstract
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is a continuous endothelial membrane within brain microvessels 
that has sealed cell-to-cell contacts, and is sheathed by mural vascular cells and perivascular 
astrocyte end-feet. The BBB protects neurons from factors present in the systemic circulation, and 
maintains the highly regulated CNS internal milieu, which is required for proper synaptic and 
neuronal functioning. BBB disruption allows influx into the brain of neurotoxic blood-derived 
debris, cells, and microbial pathogens, and is associated with inflammatory and immune 
responses, which can initiate multiple pathways of neurodegeneration. This Review discusses 
neuroimaging studies in the living human brain, post-mortem tissue and biomarker studies 
demonstrating BBB breakdown in Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, HIV-1-associated dementia and chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy. The pathogenic mechanisms by which BBB breakdown leads to neuronal injury, 
synaptic dysfunction, loss of neuronal connectivity and neurodegeneration are described. The 
importance of a healthy BBB for therapeutic drug delivery, and the adverse effects of disease-
initiated, pathological BBB breakdown in relation to brain delivery of neuropharmaceuticals are 
briefly discussed. Finally, future directions, gaps in the field and opportunities to control the 
course of neurological diseases by targeting BBB are presented.
Introduction
The human brain contains ~644 km of blood vessels that supply brain cells with oxygen, 
energy metabolites and nutrients, and remove carbon dioxide and other metabolic waste 
products from the brain to the systemic circulation1,2. Although representing only 2% of 
total body mass, the brain consumes ~20% of the body’s glucose and oxygen, and can 
rapidly increase blood flow and oxygen delivery to its activated regions, a process known as 
Correspondence to B.V.Z., zlokovic@usc.edu. 
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the literature search and writing the review. BVZ worked closely with MDS and APS to write the review 
and design figures and tables.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Neurol. 2018 March ; 14(3): 133–150. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2017.188.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurovascular coupling2,3. Capillaries are the smallest cerebral blood vessels (FIG. 1); they 
account for approximately 85% of cerebral vessel length and are a major site of the blood–
brain barrier (BBB) (FIG. 1)1. In the human brain, capillaries provide approximately 12 
m2 of endothelial cell surface area, which is available for transport of solutes from the blood 
to the brain, and vice versa. The mean intercapillary distance in the human brain is ~40 μm4; 
solute equilibration is, therefore, almost instantaneous throughout the brain interstitial space 
once molecules cross the BBB.
The endothelial BBB has tightly sealed cell-to-cell contacts that result in high 
transendothelial electrical resistance and low paracellular and transcellular permeability5 
(FIG. 2). The endothelial monolayer is sheathed by mural cells (pericytes in capillaries and 
vascular smooth muscle cells in arterioles and arteries) and by astrocyte end-feet6,7. In 
contrast to the highly permeable systemic capillaries8, brain capillaries exhibit a low rate of 
transendothelial bulk flow by transcytosis, which together with the tightly sealed 
endothelium restricts the entry of most blood-derived molecules into the brain, unless they 
have specialized carriers and/or receptors in the brain endothelium that facilitate their 
transport across the BBB (FIG. 2).
Maintaining BBB integrity is crucial for tight control of the chemical composition of brain 
interstitial fluid (ISF), which is critical for proper synaptic functioning, information 
processing and neuronal connectivity. Loss of BBB integrity results in increased vascular 
permeability and is associated with reduced cerebral blood flow and impaired 
haemodynamic responses2,3,5,7,9. Breakdown of the BBB enables toxic blood-derived 
molecules, cells and microbial agents to enter the brain, and is associated with inflammatory 
and immune responses, which can initiate multiple pathways of neurodegeneration.
In this Review, we first briefly describe the molecular architecture and transport physiology 
of the BBB, and then examine vascular pathology, and neuroimaging, post-mortem and 
biomarker studies demonstrating BBB breakdown in several neurodegenerative diseases: 
namely, Alzheimer disease (AD), Parkinson disease (PD), Huntington disease (HD), 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and multiple sclerosis (MS), which is considered to be 
an autoimmune and neurodegenerative disorder10, as well as in HIV-1-associated dementia 
and chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). We focus on the pathogenetic mechanisms by 
which BBB breakdown leads to neurodegeneration, and briefly note the implications of 
BBB dysfunction for therapeutic drug delivery. Finally, we discuss future directions, gaps in 
the field, and opportunities to control neurological disease by targeting the BBB. This 
Review does not examine the role of reduced cerebral blood flow and altered haemodynamic 
responses in AD and neurodegenerative disorders, nor does it cover BBB disruption in 
experimental models of AD and neurodegeneration, which have been extensively reviewed 
elsewhere2,3,9,11.
The BBB molecular architecture
Brain endothelial cells are connected by tight junctions and adherens junctions. Tight 
junctions involve occludin and claudin-1, claudin-3, claudin-5 and claudin-12, and the 
membrane-associated guanylate kinases tight junction proteins ZO1, ZO2 and ZO3, whereas 
Sweeney et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adherens junctions involve cadherins, platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule 
(PECAM-1), and the junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) JAMA, JAMB and JAMC6. A 
paucity of pinocytosis and bulk flow fluid transcytosis contributes to the limited exchange of 
solutes across the brain endothelium (FIG. 2), although oxygen and carbon dioxide rapidly 
diffuse across it. Small arterioles12 and capillaries13 are major sources of the brain’s oxygen 
supply. Additionally, small lipid-soluble molecules and compounds with a molecular weight 
<400 Da or containing <8 hydrogen bonds (such as ethanol), can cross the BBB by simple 
transmembrane diffusion4.
Solute carrier-mediated transport (CMT) facilitates the transport of carbohydrates, amino 
acids, fatty acids, monocarboxylic acids, nucleotides, hormones, vitamins, organic anions 
and cations across the BBB. Receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT) enables 
transendothelial transport of proteins and peptides in both directions: from blood to brain 
(transferrin and insulin)4 and from brain to blood (apolipoproteins)6. Sodium-dependent 
lysophosphatidylcholine symporter 1 (NLS1, also known as major facilitator superfamily 
domain-containing protein 2a), an important transporter, transports essential ω3 fatty acids 
into the brain14, which is also critical for BBB formation15 (FIG. 2).
The sodium pump (Na+, K+-ATPase) on the abluminal membrane of the BBB regulates 
sodium influx into the brain ISF, in exchange for potassium16. Other ion transporters 
regulate the transport of sodium, potassium, chloride and calcium ions, and facilitate the 
exchange of sodium for hydrogen ions and chloride for bicarbonate ions at the BBB. ATP-
binding cassette (ABC) transporters expressed at the luminal side of the BBB prevent brain 
accumulation of drugs, xenobiotic agents and drug conjugates, via active efflux from 
endothelium into blood6,17. CMT facilitates CNS-to-blood clearance of excitatory amino 
acids (such as glutamate and aspartate)18, whereas RMT clearance of amyloid-β (Aβ, some 
forms of which are associated with AD)6,19–25 across the BBB keeps brain levels of these 
potentially toxic substances low (FIG. 2). Much more could be said about the molecular 
architecture of the BBB and its transport physiology, but only a brief overview is given here 
as these topics have been reviewed in detail elsewhere6,7.
Molecules generated by the brain diffuse across brain extracellular spaces, and are cleared 
from the brain by two mechanisms: trans-vascular transport across the BBB, via the 
mechanisms illustrated in FIG. 2 (b–d, f–h)5,6,26; and perivascular transport of ISF, which 
travels in the reverse direction to the flow of blood within the basement membranes of 
arterial vessel walls (FIG. 1)26–28. Studies conducted in the 1980s and 1990s showed that 
solutes carried by the perivascular ISF flow reach the subarachnoid space, which is filled 
with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and drains into deep cervical lymph29,30. In the past 3 years, 
further studies have confirmed a role of the dural lymphatic vascular system in clearance of 
ISF and macromolecules by the meningeal lymphatic vessels31, which drain into cervical 
lymph nodes32–34 (FIG. 1). Under physiological conditions, the perivascular ISF pathway is 
responsible for 15–20% of the clearance of AD-related forms of Aβ from the mouse 
brain19,35, whereas 80–85% is removed by transvascular BBB transport. In 1985, solutes 
were shown to rapidly distribute throughout the brain by paravascular transport from the 
subarachnoid space through Virchow–Robin spaces, in the same direction to the flow of 
blood36. Subsequent studies introduced the term ‘glymphatic’ system to describe this 
Sweeney et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 paravascular circulation, and suggested that solute transport in the CNS occurs via CSF 
convective flow through the brain extracellular spaces, in a para-arterial to para-venous 
direction, regulated by aquaporin-4 (AQP4) water channels on astrocytes37,38. The proposed 
glymphatic mechanism, however, has not been supported by the latest studies39–42, and the 
convective, pressure-driven fluid flow of CSF from para-arterial to para-venous extracellular 
spaces throughout the parenchyma remains unproven43–45,39,40. Furthermore, deletion of 
Aqp4 in mice and rats does not impair the transport of fluorescent solutes from the 
subarachnoid space into the brain, which implies that water production by astrocyte end-feet 
does not have a role in the regulation of solute transport within parenchymal extracellular 
spaces39. Further experimental work is needed to resolve these controversies.
Vascular pathology in neurodegeneration
Cerebrovascular dysfunction and vascular pathology contribute to cognitive decline and 
neuronal loss in AD, in addition to AD-related Aβ and tau pathology5,6,46–53. Many lines of 
evidence indicate that cerebrovascular dysfunction in AD cannot be simply attributed to 
comorbid vascular dementia. For instance, in one study of the association between 
cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative disease, the US National Alzheimer’s Coordinating 
Centre database was used to identify 5,715 patients with an autopsy-based diagnosis of a 
single neurodegenerative disease (AD, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, α-
synucleinopathy, hippocampal sclerosis, prion disease, and cerebrovascular disease)52. 
Within the subgroup of 4,629 patients diagnosed as having AD who had no evidence of 
mixed dementia, 80% had vascular pathology including cerebrovascular disease, lacunae and 
multiple microinfarcts indicative of small vessel disease, haemorrhage, atherosclerosis, 
arteriolosclerosis and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)52. The two subgroups of 
patients with an autopsy-based diagnosis of either AD or cerebrovascular disease exhibited a 
remarkably similar prevalence of vascular risk factors, such as coronary disease, 
hypercholesterolemia and diabetes52.
Cerebral vessel pathology is a major risk factor for AD dementia, and is associated with low 
scores in most cognitive domains51. CAA, which is an important cause of BBB disruption 
and one of the three pathological hallmarks of AD54, induces various vascular pathologies 
that contribute to cognitive decline26. Moreover, in preclinical AD, changes in vascular 
biomarkers occur before the development of cognitive impairment and before detectable 
increases in standard AD biomarkers, including amyloid deposition, decreased CSF levels of 
Aβ42, and increased CSF levels of tau and phosphorylated tau48. Small vessel disease of the 
brain is prominent in patients with AD, as discussed below, and contributes to ~50% of all 
dementias worldwide3,55–58.
According to the two-hit vascular hypothesis of AD, damage to blood vessels is the initial 
insult, causing BBB dysfunction and diminished brain perfusion that, in turn, lead to 
neuronal injury and Aβ accumulation in the brain5,6,47,50. Cerebrovascular disruption is 
influenced by lifestyle and might act independently and/or synergistically with Aβ to 
promote AD pathology, which is accelerated by genetic risk factors, such as carriage of the 
ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE*ε4), vascular risk factors (such as hypertension, 
diabetes and dyslipidemia) and environmental risk factors (such as pollution)47,50.
Sweeney et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Vascular pathology also contributes to other neurodegenerative disorders52. For example, 
cerebrovascular disease plays a part in the pathogenesis of PD52, the second most common 
neurodegenerative disorder, which is characterized by accumulation of α-synuclein and 
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Vascular disease and vascular 
risk factors aggravate motor dysfunction and cognitive impairment in PD59. Cerebrovascular 
disease, BBB impairments and neurovascular abnormalities are also found in HD60,61, an 
autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative disease with motor, cognitive, psychiatric, and 
metabolic abnormalities caused by the aggregation of mutant huntingtin protein. BBB 
disruption and trafficking of T cells, B cells and peripheral macrophages across 
dysfunctional BBB is a pathological hallmark of MS33. BBB disruption has been described 
in ALS62, is a feature of CTE64 and, in HIV-1-associated dementia, enables HIV-1-infected 
monocytes and macrophages to enter the brain63.
Neuroimaging evidence of BBB disruption
In this section, we examine recent PET and MRI studies of BBB integrity and function in 
AD and other neurodegenerative disorders (TABLE 1).
Increased BBB permeability to gadolinium
BBB breakdown in the hippocampus, a centre of memory and learning, has been observed in 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) using dynamic contrast-enhanced 
(DCE) MRI. In this technique, leakage of gadolinium contrast agent into the brain enables 
the regional CNS BBB permeability constant, Ktrans, to be quantified using the Patlak 
analysis method49,65,66. A study that compared BBB breakdown in the hippocampus in 
individuals with MCI compared to age-matched controls found that the extent of BBB 
breakdown was not affected by vascular risk factors49, but correlated with increased CSF 
levels of soluble platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β (PDGFRβ), a marker of pericyte 
injury49,67. BBB breakdown in the hippocampus occurred prior to hippocampal atrophy49, 
which is typically seen early in AD68,69, raising the possibility that BBB breakdown might 
precede neurodegeneration. This concept is supported by data from experimental models of 
BBB breakdown, which causes neurodegenerative changes over time70–73. Follow-up DCE-
MRI studies in patients with early AD confirmed BBB breakdown in several grey matter and 
white matter regions46,74–76 (TABLE 1). Consistent with these findings, early contrast-
enhanced MRI studies in humans showed increased BBB permeability in the hippocampus 
in individuals with MCI compared to healthy controls77, and suggested that contrast agent 
accumulates in the brains of individuals with probable AD via a blood-to-brain-to-CSF 
pathway78.
DCE-MRI studies have detected increased BBB leakage of gadolinium (using the Patlak 
quantification method49,65,66) in the basal ganglia in patients with PD compared to healthy 
controls79. In patients with HD, DCE-MRI analysis reveals a positive correlation between 
increased BBB permeability in the caudate nucleus and increased disease burden score, as 
well as increased grey matter arterial cerebral blood volume60. DCE-MRI studies have 
similarly established the presence of increased BBB permeability in white matter in 
MS49,80–82, particularly in active MS lesions83,84 (TABLE 1). Increased matrix 
Sweeney et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) activity in the CSF has been suggested to contribute to BBB 
breakdown in MS82,85. To understand the pathogenetic role of BBB breakdown in the living 
human brain, future longitudinal DCE-MRI studies are required to investigate the 
relationships between vascular changes, progression of neurological deficits in AD, PD, HD 
and MS, and changes in brain structural and functional connectivity. Extending DCE-MRI 
studies to patients with ALS, HIV-1-associated dementia and CTE will help us to identify 
whether regional BBB breakdown has a pathogenetic role in neurodegenerative disorders.
Microbleeds
Damage to blood vessels can lead to pronounced BBB breakdown manifested as cerebral 
microbleeds (microhaemorrhages), which is frequently seen in AD86–93, MCI94, and in 
APOE*ε4 individuals who have increased genetic risk of AD94. CAA is one of the main 
causes of vascular degeneration and lobar microbleeds in AD, and contributes to BBB 
breakdown, infarcts, white matter changes and cognitive impairment26. The microbleed 
location relates to its aetiology: CAA causes lobar microbleeds and hypertensive 
vasculopathy causes microbleeds in the basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum and brainstem 
(reviewed elsewhere95). Microbleeds in AD are predominantly lobar88,92,96–99 (similar to 
CAA-associated microbleeds) and are mainly found in the occipital lobe92,98,99. Amyloid 
deposition in the brain, as detected by 18F-florbetapir PET, is positively associated with the 
number of microbleeds in individuals with MCI and AD99. Several studies that reported a 
high prevalence of microbleeds in patients with AD86–93 or MCI94 did not perform amyloid-
PET imaging86–93, however, precluding a direct comparison of microbleeds and CAA 
severity.
Cortical superficial siderosis (that is, detection of subpial deposits of hemosiderin) has been 
suggested as an alternative imaging biomarker for CAA100,89,101,102. The extent of cortical 
superficial siderosis, lobar microbleeds, and amyloid plaque burden is higher in patients with 
AD than in cognitively normal controls (as shown by MRI and amyloid-PET studies94), and 
MRI evidence of superficial siderosis was also observed in three individuals with 
pathologically confirmed CAA. To definitely relate the topography and prevalence of 
microbleeds and superficial siderosis to CAA in AD, more amyloid-PET and high field 
strength MRI studies are needed, as discussed below.
Microbleeds are often used as a criterion to define small vessel disease in the brain103. Small 
hypointense regions on T2*-weighted and susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) MRI 
are thought to representing blood-derived hemosiderin deposits, probably phagocytosed by 
macrophages in the perivascular spaces, after microbleeding events96. The strength of the 
MRI magnetic field determines the ability to detect brain microhemorrhages104. For 
example, 3 T MRI studies indicate that approximately 45% of patients with AD88,90,91,94 
and 25% of individuals with MCI94 develop microhemorrhages, whereas a 7 T MRI study 
found that 78% of patients with AD have microhemorrhages87. Since most current studies 
involve 1.5T and 3T MRI, the incidence of microhemorrhages in MCI and AD is likely to be 
underestimated. High-resolution confocal microscopy of brain tissue can detect capillary 
hemorrhages as small as 20–30 μm in diameter, which are easily missed on 1.5T or 3T 
MRI62.
Sweeney et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cerebral microbleeds have been detected throughout deep grey matter regions (including the 
caudate, thalamus, putamen and globus pallidus), cortical regions and white matter in 
patients with PD by T2*-weighted and SWI-MRI. The incidence of microbleeds is higher in 
patients with PD dementia than in PD patients without dementia and controls, and is 
associated with the extent of white matter lesions105,106.
Hypointense areas in the cortex on T2-weighted MRI, suggestive of microbleeds, have also 
been shown in patients with ALS62. Studies using high-resolution T2-weighted 7T MRI 
have also reported microbleeds in the brains and spinal cords of patients with ALS107.
Impaired glucose transport
Glucose is a key energy substrate for the brain. Brain uptake of glucose is measured using 
the radiolabeled glucose analogue, 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG), as a PET tracer46. 
FDG enters the brain via solute carrier family 2, facilitated glucose transporter member 1 
(also known as glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1)), which is expressed only in the endothelium 
of the BBB, not in neurons6,108. Besides GLUT1, brain uptake of FDG depends on cerebral 
blood flow2,5, which is reduced in MCI and early AD, prior to brain atrophic changes2.
Although both glucose and FDG are rapidly transported into the brain via GLUT-1, avidly 
taken up by brain cells and then phosphorylated by intracellular hexokinase127,128, their 
subsequent metabolic fate in the brain is completely different129. Glucose-6-phosphate is 
metabolized rapidly in the glycolytic pathway, whereas FDG-6-phosphate is not a substrate 
for glucose-6-phosphate isomerase and thus cannot be converted into fructose-6-phosphate, 
which precludes its further metabolism130,127,131,128. Therefore, approximately 45–90 min 
after systemic administration of FDG, 90–97% of this compound persists in the mouse128 or 
rat131,132 brain in the form of FDG-6-phosphate or its epimers; the remainder is FDG. 
Because brain cells have very low activity of glucose-6-phosphatase, and poor transport of 
FDG-6-phosphate across cell membranes133,134, FDG-6-phosphate remains trapped within 
brain cells132,135 and is eliminated only slowly from the brain. Since brain uptake of FDG 
across the BBB depends on GLUT1not direct neuronal uptake, the diminished uptake of 
FDG in the AD brain points to a vascular deficit (that is, impaired BBB function). 
Importantly, GLUT1 levels are substantially reduced in brain microvessels in AD109–112. 
Diminished BBB transport and brain uptake of FDG precedes neurodegeneration and brain 
atrophy in patients with MCI who later convert to a diagnosis of AD, as well as in patients 
with early AD. This vascular deficit should be considered in staging preclinical AD136.
FDG-PET studies also indicate that individuals with MCI have diminished glucose uptake in 
several brain regions (including the precuneus, posterior cingulate, right angular gyrus and 
bilateral temporal cortices) prior to any detectable neurodegenerative changes, brain atrophy 
and/or conversion to AD113. The reductions in FDG uptake in the posterior cingulate gyri 
and parietotemporal lobes of patients with AD are observed with and without corrections for 
partial volume effects, confirming that these decreases are not due to brain atrophy 114. 
Longitudinal FDG-PET findings have additionally suggested that reductions in hippocampal 
glucose uptake during normal ageing can predict cognitive decline years in advance of a 
clinical AD diagnosis115. Similarly, asymptomatic carriers of presenilin-1 (PSEN1) 
mutations associated with early-onset autosomal dominant AD show AD-like reductions in 
Sweeney et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FDG uptake in the absence of brain atrophy116. Diminished glucose uptake in the 
hippocampus, parieto-temporal cortex and/or posterior cingulate cortex has been repeatedly 
shown by FDG-PET in early AD117,118, in individuals at genetic risk of AD119,120, with a 
positive family history of AD121 and/or MCI, as well as in individuals with no cognitive 
impairment who went on to develop AD122,123. The patterns of FDG brain uptake can also 
discriminate individuals with normal cognition from those with MCI and AD117. FDG-PET 
changes preceding neurodegeneration are not only found in humans113–116, but also in 
transgenic mouse models of AD124, reflecting reductions in glucose transport across the 
BBB125,126.
Moreover, experimental studies in Slc2a1+/− mice (which express 50% of GLUT1 levels in 
cerebral blood vessels compared with their wild-type littermates) have shown rapid BBB 
breakdown followed by secondary neurodegeneration, which is accelerated by Aβ108. No 
attempts have been made so far to explore whether GLUT1 at the BBB is a therapeutic target 
in human AD, or whether pharmacological upregulation of this transporter in humans can 
prevent BBB breakdown, neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits, as it can in animal 
models. Additionally, the role of glucose transport in other neurodegenerative disorders has 
not been examined, and should be pursued by future studies.
Impaired P-glycoprotein function
P-glycoprotein (encoded by the ABCB1 gene) mediates the active efflux of drugs and 
xenobiotic compounds from the endothelium to blood, thereby preventing their 
accumulation in the brain6,17. P-glycoprotein clears Aβ across the BBB, which requires 
LDL receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1)137–139. P-glycoprotein function is clinically 
assessed by 11C-verapamil-PET. Verapamil-PET studies in AD have demonstrated 
increased uptake of verapamil in frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital cortices, and in 
posterior and anterior cingulate gyri140. Similarly, verapamil-PET studies in patients with 
mild AD found substantially reduced P-glycoprotein activity in the parietotemporal, frontal, 
and posterior cingulate cortices and hippocampus141. Furthermore, verapamil-PET studies 
indicated diminished P-glycoprotein activity, indicating BBB dysfunction, in the mid-brain 
of patients with PD142. Collectively, these studies suggest that decreased P-glycoprotein 
function is involved in the pathogenesis of AD — either by enabling xenobiotic compounds 
to accumulate in the brain (high levels of which can injure neurons and promote 
inflammation) and/or by reducing Aβ clearance across the BBB. Thus, P-glycoprotein and 
LRP1 could be important therapeutic targets in AD, and perhaps also in PD.
CNS leukocyte infiltration
Studies using a radiolabelled MMP as a PET tracer showed increased MMP activity in early 
MS lesions, which is associated with leukocyte infiltration143. Additionally, MS patients 
show impaired cerebral venous drainage144 and decreased cerebrovascular reactivity of grey 
matter, which correlates with grey matter atrophy145. As leukocyte infiltration of the CNS 
also occurs in other neurodegenerative diseases, notably AD146–149, HIV-1-associated 
dementia150 and CTE151, similar MMP-PET neuroimaging studies would be helpful to 
identify when in the course of these diseases this cellular infiltration of the CNS takes place. 
However, as yet, such studies are lacking.
Sweeney et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Postmortem evidence of BBB disruption
In this section, we examine the evidence of BBB disruption derived from analyses of post-
mortem tissues from patients with AD and other neurodegenerative disorders. In these 
studies, BBB disruption is demonstrated by brain capillary leakages, degeneration of BBB-
associated cells (including pericytes and endothelial cells), brain infiltration of circulating 
leukocytes and red blood cells, aberrant angiogenesis and molecular changes (TABLE 2).
Capillary leakages
Several studies of post-mortem brain tissue from patients with AD have found (using various 
analysis methods: immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting and Prussian blue staining) 
capillary leakages of blood-derived proteins in the prefrontal and entorhinal cortex and 
hippocampus, including accumulations of fibrinogen, thrombin, albumin, IgG, and iron-
containing proteins such as haemosiderin146,147,152–157. These blood-derived proteins are 
often found co-localized with deposits of AD-associated Aβ147,153,155. Evidence of BBB 
breakdown is most pronounced in individuals carrying the APOE*ε4 allele, the major 
genetic risk factor for AD. By contrast, individuals homozygous for the most common allele, 
APOE*ε3, have a reduced risk of AD and show a decreased degree of BBB 
breakdown147,152,156,158. As reviewed elsewhere11, multiple experimental studies have 
confirmed that BBB breakdown causes capillary leakage in AD models of β-
amyloidosis159–162 and in APOE*ε4 transgenic mice71,163,164.
Post-mortem analysis of brain tissue from patients with PD revealed perivascular deposits of 
fibrinogen or fibrin165, IgG166 and haemosiderin165,167 in the striatum, which is indicative of 
BBB breakdown. Fibrin(ogen) deposits around capillaries were also found in brain tissue 
from patients with HD60. Fibrinogen, thrombin, IgG and haemosiderin deposits have been 
found in brain and spinal cord tissue from patients with sporadic or familial forms of 
ALS62,107,168 as well as in a transgenic mouse model of ALS, prior to the onset of motor 
neuron degeneration11,169.
Finally, patients with MS develop capillary leakages of fibrinogen within active and inactive 
lesions, particularly along vessels with abnormal tight junctions170. The first post-mortem 
study of a patient with CTE found cerebral oedema and haemosiderin-laden perivascular 
macrophages in the Virchow–Robin spaces171.
Pericyte degeneration
Electron microscopy studies of brain tissue from patients with AD revealed pericyte 
degeneration in the cortex associated with large accumulations of osmiophilic material. 
These changes are suggestive of increased phagocytosis of blood-derived proteins, 
mitochondrial alterations, and an increased number of pinocytotic vesicles172,173. 
Immunostaining for the pericyte marker PDGFRβ revealed reduced pericyte coverage and 
numbers on brain capillaries in brain samples from patients with AD155, which showed 
evidence of a gene-dose effect linked to the number of APOE*ε4 alleles (compared with 
homozygosity for APOE*ε3)156. Immunoassay of AD cortical tissue confirmed loss of the 
pericyte marker PDGFRβ in the precuneus157, a region affected early in the course of AD. 
Sweeney et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pericytes maintain BBB integrity7,176, and their degeneration leads to BBB 
breakdown70,174,175. Additionally, pericytes clear Aβ from the brain, and their loss 
accelerates the onset and progression of Aβ and tau pathology in mouse models of AD159.
Immunohistological analysis of spinal cord or brain tissue from patients with ALS also 
reveals notable pericyte degeneration62,168. Post-mortem studies of brain tissue from 
patients with HIV-1-associated dementia or HIV encephalitis have found evidence of 
microvascular degeneration and BBB breakdown, including reduced pericyte coverage177. 
Vascular insults, including enlarged perivascular spaces64,151,178 and mineralization of mural 
cells of deep penetrating blood vessels171, have also been found in brain tissue from patients 
with CTE64,151,171,178.
Endothelial degeneration
Reductions in capillary length (suggestive of endothelial degeneration), reduced expression 
of tight junction proteins, and capillary basement membrane changes have been reported in 
brain tissue from patients with AD5,155,156,158,173,179,180. These changes might reflect 
aberrant brain angiogenesis, caused by the low brain endothelial cell expression of MEOX2, 
encoding homeobox protein MEOX2, a regulator of vascular differentiation in AD180. A 
wide range of proangiogenic factors are also expressed in microvessels isolated from the 
brains of patients with AD181, which (in the presence of reduced MEOX2 expression) leads 
to reduced brain capillary density and cell death via increased expression of the AFX1 
transcription factor, which regulates apoptosis180. Pericyte-derived soluble factors that 
maintain a healthy endothelium might also be lacking in the AD brain owing to pericyte 
degeneration, which could potentially contribute to endothelial degeneration, as shown in 
animal models70.
Endothelial degeneration with microvascular changes (reductions in endothelial cell 
thickness, length and density), loss of and abnormalities in tight junction proteins, and 
basement membrane changes have also been reported in brain tissue from patients with 
PD166. Immunohistological analysis of spinal cord or brain tissue from patients with ALS 
revealed endothelial degeneration with reduced tight junctions, capillary basement 
membrane changes, and enlarged perivascular spaces168,182,183, as well as dissociation of 
astrocyte end-feet from capillaries107. Reduced expression of endothelial tight junction 
proteins claudin-5 and occludin has been shown in HD60. Endothelial degeneration with 
reduced and discontinuous expression of tight junction protein ZO1 has been shown in 
active and inactive MS lesions, compared with normal-appearing white matter170. Post-
mortem studies of brain tissue from patients with HIV-1-associated dementia or HIV 
encephalitis have found evidence of microvascular degeneration and BBB breakdown, 
including reduced pericyte coverage177, reduced and disrupted tight junctions150,184, and 
capillary basement membrane changes150.
Cellular infiltration
Extravasation of red blood cells has been found in AD146, PD165 and ALS62. Infiltration by 
peripheral macrophages has also been shown in AD149,172 and in HIV encephalitis150. 
Additionally, neutrophils can cross the BBB in AD148. These findings collectively suggest 
Sweeney et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that BBB breakdown in AD and other neurodegenerative disorders not only enables 
extravasation of red blood cells, which causes microbleeds and deposition of haemosiderin 
(derived from the haemoglobin carried by red blood cells), but also activates the innate 
immune response in the brain. Whether these immune system responses in non-AD 
neurodegenerative diseases are directed at identifying and eliminating pathogens that would 
otherwise enter the brain across the disrupted BBB, (and which in models of AD has been 
shown to accelerate amyloid deposition in exchange for circumscribing the infection 
process185,186), remains to be determined in future studies.
Aberrant angiogenesis
Increased levels of pro-angiogenic factors have been reported in AD brains181. However, 
successful renewal of lost capillary networks is compromised in AD brains, which is 
probably due to ongoing pericyte degeneration7 and low endothelial expression of 
MEOX2180, as discussed above. Aberrant angiogenesis, as indicated by changes in markers 
of angiogenesis, has also been found in the substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, and putamen in 
PD187,188. The effectiveness of deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus to alleviate 
motor symptoms in PD might even be attributable to improvements in the microvascular 
architecture189,166, such as increased capillary length and density, increased endothelial cell 
thickness, and increased expression of the tight and adherens junction proteins occludin, 
claudin-5, ZO1 and vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin, along with reduced perivascular IgG 
leakage in post-mortem brain samples from deep brain stimulation-treated compared with 
untreated PD patients166.
Increased density of capillaries (vessels 5–10 μm in diameter) and reduced numbers of larger 
microvessels (10–20 μm in diameter), suggestive of aberrant angiogenesis, was found in 
HD60. Abnormal vascularization in HD was also found in the cortex and substantia 
nigra60,61.
Molecular changes
Several studies have shown that AD brain endothelium expresses low levels of GLUT1, a 
BBB-specific glucose transporter109–112, which leads to diminished glucose transport across 
the BBB108. AD brain microvessels also show diminished expression of LRP1, a major Aβ 
clearance receptor at the BBB19,20,156,190,191 (which change is also present in patients with 
hereditary cerebral haemorrhage with amyloidosis, Dutch type (HCHWA-D)20). Diminished 
LRP1 expression leads to reduced Aβ clearance from the brain, promoting its accumulation 
in the brain20,22,24. Thus, LRP1 is a key target for enhancing transvascular Aβ clearance192. 
This mechanism could be important for the efficacy of current Aβ clearance therapies based 
on anti-Aβ antibodies, particularly for therapies with a peripheral Aβ sink mechanism of 
action, which requires Aβ clearance from brain-to-blood across the BBB193,194,195 (FIG. 2).
Patients with AD develop increased levels of receptor for advanced glycation end 
products (RAGE) in brain microvessels, both in brain endothelium and mural 
cells190,191,196. RAGE transports Aβ in the opposite direction to LRP1, mediating the re-
entry of circulating Aβ into the brain, which promotes inflammation. Experimental studies 
Sweeney et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 have also identified RAGE as a major therapeutic target in AD196–199, which led to initiation 
of an ongoing phase III trial of a RAGE blocker in patients with AD200.
Compared to controls, patients with AD have increased levels of both cyclophilin A (a 
proinflammatory cytokine) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) in the brain 
endothelium and pericytes. These increases are particularly pronounced in APOE*ε4 
carriers156, findings comparable to those in transgenic APOE*ε4 mice71, which suggests 
that these increases represent activation of a BBB-degrading pathway involving cyclophilin 
A and MMP9. Activation of this cyclophilin A–MMP9 pathway has been confirmed by CSF 
analysis in non-symptomatic APOE*ε4 carriers, in whom it is associated with BBB 
breakdown201, and by analysis of cyclophilin A mRNA levels in brain tissue202. As the 
cyclophilin A inhibitor alisporivir has shown promise in a phase III clinical trial as an add-
on treatment for hepatitis C203, these studies raise a possibility that these agents might also 
be useful in stabilizing the BBB in APOE*ε4 AD carriers. Whether inhibition of the BBB 
cyclophilin A–MMP9 pathway can influence the neurodegenerative process in human 
APOE*ε4 carriers with AD (as it does in humanized APOE*ε4 transgenic mice71), is an 
interesting topic for future studies.
Post-mortem studies of patients with HIV-1-associated dementia or HIV encephalitis also 
report reduced brain endothelial expression of P-glycoprotein204. Additionally, in patients 
with HD, mutant huntingtin aggregates accumulate in brain endothelial cells, perivascular 
macrophages, vascular smooth muscle cells, and vascular basal lamina60, and in genetically 
unrelated fetal neural allografts in the brains of patients with advanced HD205. These data 
suggest that the cerebral vasculature and immune system contribute to the spread of mutant 
huntingtin as well as the ability of non-neuronal cells including vascular cells to contribute 
to spreading of HTT mutant.
CSF evidence of BBB disruption
Here we examine CSF biomarkers of BBB breakdown in AD and other neurodegenerative 
disorders (TABLE 3). Other CSF biomarkers of aberrant angiogenesis, endothelial 
dysfunction, mural cell injury, inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in AD and other 
neurodegenerative disorders have been reviewed in detail elsewhere50,206,207, and are not 
examined here.
Since albumin is a blood-derived protein, an increase in the ratio of CSF albumin to serum 
albumin levels, which is known as the albumin quotient (Qalb), is frequently used as a 
measure of BBB breakdown50. Several studies report that Qalb is elevated in individuals 
with preclinical AD201, MCI49, and AD208–210. However, other studies did not find any 
increase in Qalb in patients with AD211 unless vascular risk factors211–214 including mild 
arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease211,213 or dyslipidemia214 
were also present. However, the majority of patients with AD have vascular risk factors: 
65% of patients aged 65 years and 80% of patients aged 85 years3,56,57. Although some 
studies have not specifically examined the relationship between vascular risk factors and 
Qalb201,208, vascular risk factors did not worsen the extent of BBB breakdown, as measured 
by gadolinium efflux from blood into the brain extravascular-extracellular space on DCE-
Sweeney et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MRI Ktrans permeability analysis49. These observations support the view that BBB 
breakdown is associated with AD independently from vascular risk factors. Future studies 
should examine carefully whether ischemic vascular damage from comorbidities and 
vascular risk factors3,47,215 can augment BBB breakdown in AD.
However, CSF albumin levels could be influenced by proteolytic cleavage, as well as 
albumin uptake by brain macrophages, microglia, astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes 
(cells that express chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 (also known as NG2))216–218. 
Therefore, Qalb might underestimate the degree of BBB breakdown. On the other hand, 
decreased CSF reabsorption and/or production could elevate Qalb, leading to false-positive 
results that might not reflect BBB breakdown206. In support of this notion, one study in 
seven patients with AD found that these individuals had a considerably reduced rate of CSF 
production219. To determine definitively whether diminished CSF turnover underlies 
increased Qalb in some patients with AD, detailed human studies of CSF dynamics are 
needed. Sensitive tests of BBB integrity, including DCE-MRI49, microbleed T2*-weighted 
MRI87, and/or measurement of alternative CSF blood-derived biomarkers (such as 
fibrinogen220 and plasminogen221, which have previously been used to detect BBB 
breakdown in patients with MCI and early AD, respectively) should additionally be 
considered.
Several important CSF biomarker studies have reported increased Qalb106,209,222,223 as well 
as an increased CSF:serum IgG ratio222 in non-demented patients with early stage PD 
compared to controls. Four independent studies reported increased Qalb in 55 of 138 (~40%) 
of patients with ALS, reviewed elsewhere62. Increased CSF levels of albumin, IgG and other 
blood-derived proteins have also been reported in patients with ALS62,224. Qalb is also 
elevated in patients with MS218, and this change correlates with increased white matter BBB 
permeability detected by DCE-MRI80. In patients with HIV-1-associated dementia, 
increased Qalb was associated with axonal injury as measured by CSF levels of 
neurofilament light chain225. Finally, increased MMP9 activity in CSF in patients with 
MS82,85 and APOE*ε4 carriers prior to cognitive decline201 is associated with BBB 
breakdown.
BBB breakdown and neurodegeneration
The neurodegenerative disorders discussed above share pathological alterations of the vessel 
wall resulting in BBB disruption. Endothelial degeneration leads to loss of tight junction 
proteins and/or increased transendothelial bulk flow via transcytosis5,6. The associated 
pericyte degeneration causes BBB breakdown7,70,174–176 and initiates multiple pathways of 
neurodegeneration (FIG. 3) owing to the entry of several neurotoxic blood-derived proteins, 
including plasminogen, thrombin and fibrinogen, which enter different areas of the CNS in 
different neurodegenerative disorders (TABLES 1–3).
Plasmin, which is generated from circulating plasminogen, degrades the neuronal matrix 
protein laminin, thereby promoting neuronal injury226. High concentrations of thrombin 
mediate neurotoxicity and memory impairment227 and accelerate BBB disruption228. 
Fibrinogen leads to axonal retraction229 and BBB damage that promotes 
Sweeney et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuroinflammation230. Additionally, fibrin depletion delays the onset of neuroinflammation 
and demyelination in transgenic mouse models of MS231, and treatment with fibrin induced 
M1-type activation and induction of antigen-presenting genes in both primary microglia and 
bone marrow-derived macrophages232. The role of coagulation and fibrinolysis proteins on 
development of brain pathology in MS has been reviewed elsewhere233.
Influx of albumin leads to perivascular oedema that obstructs the brain microcirculation and 
blood flow. In turn, these hypoxic conditions lead to neuronal injury and impaired 
haemodynamic responses that contribute to neurodegeneration2,13. Extravasation of red 
blood cells (microbleeds) are seen in almost all neurodegenerative disorders92,104, and lead 
to the perivascular accumulation of toxic, iron-containing proteins (such as haemoglobin) 
that release of free iron (Fe2+) as they are broken down107,62,73, generating reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) and subjecting neurons to oxidative stress234.
In neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, PD, and HIV-1-associated dementia140–142,204, 
dysfunction of P-glycoprotein-mediated active efflux transport at the BBB leads to the 
accumulation of toxic xenobiotic agents (such as environmental pollutants, food additives, 
pesticides and drugs) in brain. Reduced levels of P-glycoprotein and LRP1 at the 
BBB20,25,137, and increased levels of RAGE in brain microvessels6,190,191,196,199, lead to 
faulty clearance of toxic Aβ species linked to AD and their accumulation the in brain. 
Reduced blood flow and increased Aβ levels can both promote tau pathology, another key 
pathological hallmark of AD2. Whether faulty clearance of other proteins — tau in AD and 
CTE, α-synuclein in PD and/or huntingtin in HD — can also contribute to their respective 
accumulations in CNS is not clear at present.
Interestingly, experimental studies suggest that α-synuclein is transported into and out of the 
brain across the BBB as a free peptide235. Moreover, systemically administered α-synuclein 
oligomers, ribbons and fibrils cause distinct synucleinopathies, implying that they can all 
cross the BBB236. In humans, extracellular vesicles containing α-synuclein have been found 
in the CSF and blood, suggesting bidirectional transport of this protein between the blood 
and CSF237,238. As red blood cells are a source of α-synuclein-containing extracellular 
vesicles237, and extravasation of red blood cells into the striatum has been detected in 
patients with PD165,166, extravasated red blood cells might contribute to the development of 
α-synucleinopathy in humans. Since levels of α-synuclein are two orders of magnitude 
higher in the circulation than in the CNS238, α-synuclein transport across the BBB might be 
implicated in the pathogenesis of PD, and could be a novel therapeutic target.
Accumulates of neurotoxic material and reduced blood flow can activate microglia and 
astrocytes, leading to an inflammatory response with secretion of neurotoxic cytokines and 
chemokines47. Additionally, in some diseases (such as AD) brain infiltration of peripheral 
macrophages147,149 and neutrophils148 suggests activation of an innate immune response. 
Besides peripheral macrophage infiltration, influx of T and B lymphocytes across the BBB 
was found in patients with MS, indicating an adaptive immune response33. Altogether, these 
studies suggest that breakdown of the BBB enables the entry of circulating leukocytes into 
the brain.
Sweeney et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BBB breakdown leads to the generation of several anti-CNS autoantibodies in humans239, 
but their roles in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders have not been fully 
explored. Additionally, BBB breakdown can enable circulating pathogens to enter the brain 
and injure neurons, and/or provoke an amyloid response that aggravates β-amyloidosis, as 
shown in animal models of AD185,186.
How BBB breakdown affects drug delivery
Successful delivery of therapeutic agents across the BBB requires functionally and 
structurally healthy blood vessels, normal vascularization, adequate blood flow, and 
recruitment of solute carrier-mediated transport (CMT) or receptor-mediated transcytosis 
(RMT) systems to facilitate drug delivery to the CNS (FIG. 4). Strategies that use existing 
CMT and RMT BBB systems have been explored to increase brain penetration and potency 
of neurotherapeutic agents (FIG. 2). For example, the large neutral amino acid CMT 
transporter delivers L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) to the brain in PD240, and the 
transferrin RMT can deliver therapeutic antibodies to the brain in various neurological 
conditions4,241–243. Other approaches, such as using nanoparticles244 and/or opening the 
BBB by focused ultrasound245,246 to improve the delivery of therapeutic agents to CNS, 
have been attempted.
Neurologists commonly assume that disease-initiated BBB breakdown might present an 
opportunity to deliver therapeutic antibodies, proteins, peptides, small molecules, and/or 
genetic medicines to affected neurons, without further need to manipulate the BBB. 
However, brain regions affected by neurodegeneration develop a pathological BBB 
breakdown characterized by functional and structural changes in the blood vessels, which 
often develop before neurodegeneration and persist as the disease progresses. These vascular 
changes include endothelial degeneration, reduced expression of tight junctions and 
adherens junctions at the BBB, increased endothelial bulk flow transcytosis, disrupted BBB 
transporter expression, pericyte degeneration, perivascular accumulation of toxic products, 
inflammation, and immune responses (FIG. 3), which all hinder the delivery of therapeutic 
agents to the brain. Under pathological conditions, blood-derived products, water and 
electrolytes accumulate in the enlarged perivascular spaces, which interferes with the normal 
diffusion of solutes across brain extracellular spaces, ISF formation and ISF flow, resulting 
in impaired distribution of solutes throughout the CNS (FIG. 4). As a consequence of 
disease-driven BBB disruption, impaired solute transport across parenchymal extracellular 
spaces and diminished ISF regional flow, therapeutic agents (including antibodies, proteins, 
peptides and small molecules) are likely to get trapped in pathologically altered brain tissue 
within the enlarged perivascular spaces, along with other blood-derived debris, preventing 
them from reaching their neuronal targets. Decreased function of CMT and RMT systems in 
neurodegenerative diseases additionally complicates their use for therapeutic drug delivery. 
Therefore, brain regions with healthy blood vessels and/or stabilization of the damaged 
vasculature in disease-affected brain regions are needed to improve cerebrovascular integrity 
and re-establish diffusion across extracellular spaces and ISF circulation, factors that are 
important for the successful delivery of neurotherapeutic agents to disease-affected brain.
Sweeney et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Insight from genetic studies
In this Review, we position BBB breakdown as a key pathogenic feature of 
neurodegenerative diseases (TABLES 1–3). Importantly, BBB breakdown is also found in 
(rare), inherited monogenic neurological disorders involving a primary genetic deficit in 
brain endothelial cells and/or mural cells of the vascular wall6. The known genetic aetiology 
of these diseases offers valuable insights into the shared causal mechanisms underpinning 
BBB genetic defects and neurodegeneration. For example, mutations in the SLC2A1 gene 
(encoding solute carrier family 2, facilitated glucose transporter member 1 (GLUT1)) lead to 
GLUT1 deficiency syndrome, which is characterized by onset of seizures in infancy, 
microcephaly, mild movement disorder, and developmental delay247 associated with early 
onset of BBB breakdown108. Mutations in the MFSD2A gene (encoding sodium-dependent 
lysophosphatidylcholine symporter 1 (NLS1), the brain endothelial transporter of essential 
ω3 fatty acids), leads to lethal or nonlethal microcephaly, cognitive disorder, spasticity and 
absent speech248,249 and early BBB breakdown15. Genetic defects in endothelial 
monocarboxylate transporter-8 (MCT8; encoded by SLC16A2), which transports thyroid 
hormones into the CNS, leads to Allan–Herndon–Dudley syndrome with severe 
psychomotor retardation250. Mutations in OCLN (encoding the tight junction BBB protein 
occludin) lead to early-onset seizures, microcephaly, and grey matter calcification, whereas 
mutations in the JAM3 gene (encoding another tight junction BBB protein, JAMC) lead to 
brain haemorrhages and subependymal calcifications due to leakage from the BBB251,252. 
Mutations in the PDGFRβ gene in pericytes lead to BBB breakdown and cause a primary 
familial brain calcification characterized by early-onset microvascular calcification in basal 
ganglia, which induces seizures and motor and cognitive problems253,254.
Conclusions
By contrast, we have limited knowledge about the molecular mechanisms underlying BBB 
breakdown in non-monogenic human neurodegenerative disorders (TABLES 1–3). Most 
mechanistic insights have been gained from animal models of these disorders6,11. However, 
the development of advanced neuroimaging techniques that are capable of interrogating 
changes in BBB integrity in humans in regions as small as hippocampal subfields46,49,65,66, 
and improved imaging techniques for determining regional cerebral blood flow and 
haemodynamic responses2, enlarged perivascular spaces55, and incidence and distribution of 
microbleeds, using high strength 7T magnets to increase the detectability of these vascular 
changes87,104, hold considerable promise for future neurovascular research in humans. The 
development of new molecular ligands (in addition to the presently used amyloid and tau 
PET ligands for AD255 and FDG-PET113–123 and verapamil-PET140–142) for use in other 
neurodegenerative disorders — for example, ligands to visualize MMP activity at the BBB 
in vivo143 and/or the activity of other BBB transporters, receptors and/or junctional proteins 
affected by disease processes), is expected to provide important mechanistic insights into the 
role of the brain vascular system in neurodegeneration. Development of new biomarkers of 
vascular injury and/or repair in CSF and blood, and studies to determine how they relate to 
other systemic and cell-specific biomarkers of the neurovascular unit (including astrocytes, 
neuronal, oligodendrocytes, microglia and inflammatory biomarkers, and/or standard disease 
Sweeney et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 biomarkers, such as Aβ and tau in AD50), would also advance our understanding of vascular 
contributions to neurodegeneration and cognitive decline.
Besides the key question — what exactly is the role of the vascular system in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, dementia and motor CNS changes — emerging 
questions relate to the prognostic and diagnostic value of neurovascular imaging and 
molecular biomarkers in predicting neurodegenerative processes and cognitive decline. If 
CNS vascular changes drive the initial pathogenic events that contribute to onset and 
progression of neurodegeneration, loss of brain connectivity, and neuronal injury and loss in 
complex neurodegenerative disorders, as they do in human monogenic neurological BBB 
diseases6, the question persists will therapeutic targeting of BBB arrest and reverse the 
course of neurological disorder in humans in a way as shown in some animal 
models71,73,192,196,199? How genetics, vascular risk factors, environment and lifestyle 
influence the BBB functions during normal aging and disease, and how this relates to 
neurological disorder, is another important focus for future studies.
Findings from this review suggest that healthy brain needs healthy vascular system for its 
normal functioning. As studies in animal models have begun developing advanced RNA-seq 
molecular atlas of the BBB and its associated cells6,256, similar studies in humans should be 
pursued to understand at the molecular level functions of human BBB. Using stem cell 
technology to develop in vitro human BBB models derived from induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs) from patients with different neurodegenerative disorders carrying genetic risk 
and from those with sporadic form of disease will advance drug discovery to stabilize 
vascular function in neurodegenerative disorders and/or develop new drug delivery 
approaches targeting BBB. Going forward, the BBB should be regarded as an important 
therapeutic opportunity, in combination with other approaches, to prevent, arrest and 
ultimately reverse neurodegenerative process and clinical deficits.
Acknowledgments
The work of B.V.Z. is supported by the National Institutes of Health grants R01AG023084, R01NS090904, 
R01NS034467, R01AG039452, R01NS100459, and 5P01AG052350, in addition to the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund, 
Alzheimer’s Association and the Foundation Leducq Transatlantic Network of Excellence for the Study of 
Perivascular Spaces in Small Vessel Disease reference no. 16 CVD 05.
Glossary items
Blood-brain barrier (BBB)
a continuous endothelial membrane of the brain vasculature with sealed cell-to-cell contacts 
that is sheathed by vascular mural cells and perivascular astrocyte end-feet; functions to 
separate the circulating blood and brain compartments and strictly regulates blood-to-brain 
and brain-to-blood transport of solutes
Pericytes
mural cells that wrap brain capillary endothelium and are important for the formation and 
maintenance of the blood-brain barrier
Neurodegeneration
Sweeney et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 progressive neuronal dysfunction causing neuronal degenerative changes and loss of neurons 
in various regions of the central nervous system in different neurodegenerative diseases
Tight junctions (TJ)
endothelial proteins that tightly connect brain endothelial cells forming the anatomical 
blood-brain barrier with low paracellular permeability and high transendothelial electrical 
resistance
Transmembrane diffusion
a type of passive transport across a cellular membrane where the net movement of molecules 
occurs down their respective concentration gradients
Carrier-mediated transport (CMT)
transport of molecules across the blood-brain barrier down the concentration gradient via 
specific membrane carrier proteins
Receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT)
transport of molecules across the blood-brain barrier in a highly specific fashion via 
membrane receptors that become internalized with the ligand during trans-endothelial 
transcytosis
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
a fluid continually produced in the choroid plexus that flows throughout the brain’s 
ventricular system; functions as a clearance pathway, maintains intraventricular intracranial 
pressure in the brain and is often used to measure brain-derived biomarkers of disease
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)
amyloid deposition in the vascular wall of small brain arteries and capillaries causing 
vascular degeneration and lobar microbleeds in Alzheimer’s disease, which contributes to 
blood-brain barrier breakdown, infarcts, white matter changes and cognitive impairment
Two-hit vascular hypothesis of AD
blood vessel damage is an initial insult through which BBB dysfunction and/or diminished 
brain perfusion lead directly to secondary neuronal injury in an Alzheimer’s amyloid-β (Aβ) 
independent manner, from one hand (hit 1), and Aβ accumulation in the brain due to faulty 
Aβ clearance and increased Ab production, from the other hand (hit 2)
Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 (APOE*ε4)
the major genetic risk factor for sporadic late-onset Alzheimer’s disease
Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI)
dynamic MRI sequence used to quantify regional BBB permeability to a gadolinium contrast 
agent
T2*-weighted susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) MRI
a MRI sequence where haemosiderin deposits yield hypointense signal; allows for the 
regional in vivo measurement of cerebral microbleeds in the living human brain
Sweeney et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG)
a 18F (F) radiolabeled analog of glucose, 2-deoxyglucose (2DG) is not metabolized in brain 
in contrast to glucose; FDG is used in clinic as a surrogate PET ligand for glucose to provide 
an estimate of glucose uptake by the brain across the blood-brain barrier via GLUT1 glucose 
transporter
Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1)
major efflux transporter for Alzheimer’s amyloid-β at the blood-brain barrier responsible for 
clearance of Aβ from brain-to-blood
Verapamil-positron emission tomography (PET)
a radioactive 14C-labeled PET ligand allows for the in vivo detection of P-glycoprotein 
function at the blood-brain barrier in the living human brain
Receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE)
major influx transporter of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β (Aβ) at the blood-brain barrier 
contributing to Aβ accumulation in brain, inflammatory response, suppression of blood flow 
and blood-brain barrier breakdown
RNA-sequencing
transcriptomic approach to reveal the presence and quantity of RNA transcripts in a 
biological sample
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
an adult cell reprogrammed back into an embryonic-like pluripotent state for the purposes of 
differentiating to a cell type of interest for research studies and/or potential therapeutic 
efforts
References
1. Zlokovic BV. The blood-brain barrier in health and chronic neurodegenerative disorders. Neuron. 
2008; 57:178–201. [PubMed: 18215617] 
2. Kisler K, Nelson AR, Montagne A, Zlokovic BV. Cerebral blood flow regulation and neurovascular 
dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2017; 18:419–434. [PubMed: 28515434] 
3. Iadecola C. The pathobiology of vascular dementia. Neuron. 2013; 80:844–866. [PubMed: 
24267647] 
4. Pardridge WM. Targeted delivery of protein and gene medicines through the blood-brain barrier. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015; 97:347–361. [PubMed: 25669455] 
5. Zlokovic BV. Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other 
disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011; 12:723–738. [PubMed: 22048062] 
6. Zhao Z, Nelson AR, Betsholtz C, Zlokovic BV. Establishment and Dysfunction of the Blood-Brain 
Barrier. Cell. 2015; 163:1064–1078. [PubMed: 26590417] 
7. Sweeney MD, Ayyadurai S, Zlokovic BV. Pericytes of the neurovascular unit: key functions and 
signaling pathways. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:771–783. [PubMed: 27227366] 
8. Mann GE, Zlokovic BV, Yudilevich DL. Evidence for a lactate transport system in the sarcolemmal 
membrane of the perfused rabbit heart: kinetics of unidirectional influx, carrier specificity and 
effects of glucagon. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1985; 819:241–248. [PubMed: 4041458] 
9. Iadecola C. Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2004; 5:347–360. [PubMed: 15100718] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Friese MA, Schattling B, Fugger L. Mechanisms of neurodegeneration and axonal dysfunction in 
multiple sclerosis. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014; 10:225–238. [PubMed: 24638138] 
11. Montagne A, Zhao Z, Zlokovic B. Alzheimer’s disease: a matter of blood-brain barrier 
dysfunction? J Exp Med. (In Press). 
12. Sakadžić S, et al. Large arteriolar component of oxygen delivery implies a safe margin of oxygen 
supply to cerebral tissue. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:5734. [PubMed: 25483924] 
13. Kisler K, et al. Pericyte degeneration leads to neurovascular uncoupling and limits oxygen supply 
to brain. Nat Neurosci. 2017; 20:406–416. [PubMed: 28135240] 
14. Nguyen LN, et al. Mfsd2a is a transporter for the essential omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic 
acid. Nature. 2014; 509:503–506. [PubMed: 24828044] 
15. Ben-Zvi A, et al. Mfsd2a is critical for the formation and function of the blood-brain barrier. 
Nature. 2014; 509:507–511. [PubMed: 24828040] 
16. Mokgokong R, Wang S, Taylor CJ, Barrand MA, Hladky SB. Ion transporters in brain endothelial 
cells that contribute to formation of brain interstitial fluid. Pflugers Arch. 2014; 466:887–901. 
[PubMed: 24022703] 
17. Abbott NJ, Patabendige AAK, Dolman DEM, Yusof SR, Begley DJ. Structure and function of the 
blood-brain barrier. Neurobiol Dis. 2010; 37:13–25. [PubMed: 19664713] 
18. Vazana U, et al. Glutamate-Mediated Blood-Brain Barrier Opening: Implications for 
Neuroprotection and Drug Delivery. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2016; 36:7727–7739.
19. Shibata M, et al. Clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid-ss(1-40) peptide from brain by LDL receptor-
related protein-1 at the blood-brain barrier. J Clin Invest. 2000; 106:1489–1499. [PubMed: 
11120756] 
20. Deane R, et al. LRP/amyloid beta-peptide interaction mediates differential brain efflux of Abeta 
isoforms. Neuron. 2004; 43:333–344. [PubMed: 15294142] 
21. Bell RD, et al. Transport pathways for clearance of human Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide and 
apolipoproteins E and J in the mouse central nervous system. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int 
Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007; 27:909–918.
22. Deane R, et al. apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid beta peptide clearance from mouse 
brain. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:4002–4013. [PubMed: 19033669] 
23. Zlokovic BV. Neurodegeneration and the neurovascular unit. Nat Med. 2010; 16:1370–1371. 
[PubMed: 21135839] 
24. Storck SE, et al. Endothelial LRP1 transports amyloid-β1-42 across the blood-brain barrier. J Clin 
Invest. 2015; doi: 10.1172/JCI81108
25. Zhao Z, et al. Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood-brain barrier transcytosis and 
clearance. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:978–987. [PubMed: 26005850] 
26. Saito S, Ihara M. Interaction between cerebrovascular disease and Alzheimer pathology. Curr Opin 
Psychiatry. 2016; 29:168–173. [PubMed: 26779861] 
27. Tarasoff-Conway JM, et al. Clearance systems in the brain--implications for Alzheimer diseaser. 
Nat Rev Neurol. 2016; 12:248. [PubMed: 27020556] 
28. Bakker ENTP, et al. Lymphatic Clearance of the Brain: Perivascular, Paravascular and Significance 
for Neurodegenerative Diseases. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2016; 36:181–194. [PubMed: 26993512] 
29. Bradbury MW, Cserr HF, Westrop RJ. Drainage of cerebral interstitial fluid into deep cervical 
lymph of the rabbit. Am J Physiol. 1981; 240:F329–336. [PubMed: 7223890] 
30. Ichimura T, Fraser PA, Cserr HF. Distribution of extracellular tracers in perivascular spaces of the 
rat brain. Brain Res. 1991; 545:103–113. [PubMed: 1713524] 
31. Aspelund A, et al. A dural lymphatic vascular system that drains brain interstitial fluid and 
macromolecules. J Exp Med. 2015; 212:991–999. [PubMed: 26077718] 
32. Louveau A, et al. Structural and functional features of central nervous system lymphatic vessels. 
Nature. 2015; 523:337–341. [PubMed: 26030524] 
33. Engelhardt B, et al. Vascular, glial, and lymphatic immune gateways of the central nervous system. 
Acta Neuropathol (Berl). 2016; 132:317–338. [PubMed: 27522506] 
34. Engelhardt B, Vajkoczy P, Weller RO. The movers and shapers in immune privilege of the CNS. 
Nat Immunol. 2017; 18:123–131. [PubMed: 28092374] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Xie L, et al. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science. 2013; 342:373–377. 
[PubMed: 24136970] 
36. Rennels ML, Gregory TF, Blaumanis OR, Fujimoto K, Grady PA. Evidence for a ‘paravascular’ 
fluid circulation in the mammalian central nervous system, provided by the rapid distribution of 
tracer protein throughout the brain from the subarachnoid space. Brain Res. 1985; 326:47–63. 
[PubMed: 3971148] 
37. Iliff JJ, et al. A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and the 
clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid β. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:147ra111.
38. Jessen NA, Munk ASF, Lundgaard I, Nedergaard M. The Glymphatic System: A Beginner’s 
Guide. Neurochem Res. 2015; 40:2583–2599. [PubMed: 25947369] 
39. Smith AJ, Yao X, Dix JA, Jin B-J, Verkman AS. Test of the ‘glymphatic’ hypothesis demonstrates 
diffusive and aquaporin-4-independent solute transport in rodent brain parenchyma. eLife. 2017; 6
40. Holter KE, et al. Interstitial solute transport in 3D reconstructed neuropil occurs by diffusion rather 
than bulk flow. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017; 114:9894–9899. [PubMed: 28847942] 
41. Hladky SB, Barrand MA. Mechanisms of fluid movement into, through and out of the brain: 
evaluation of the evidence. Fluids Barriers CNS. 2014; 11:26. [PubMed: 25678956] 
42. Spector R, Robert Snodgrass S, Johanson CE. A balanced view of the cerebrospinal fluid 
composition and functions: Focus on adult humans. Exp Neurol. 2015; 273:57–68. [PubMed: 
26247808] 
43. Asgari N, Berg CT, Mørch MT, Khorooshi R, Owens T. Cerebrospinal fluid aquaporin-4-
immunoglobulin G disrupts blood brain barrier. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2015; 2:857–863. 
[PubMed: 26339679] 
44. Asgari M, de Zélicourt D, Kurtcuoglu V. Glymphatic solute transport does not require bulk flow. 
Sci Rep. 2016; 6:38635. [PubMed: 27929105] 
45. Jin BJ, Smith AJ, Verkman AS. Spatial model of convective solute transport in brain extracellular 
space does not support a ‘glymphatic’ mechanism. J Gen Physiol. 2016; 148:489–501. [PubMed: 
27836940] 
46. Montagne A, et al. Brain imaging of neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta 
Neuropathol (Berl). 2016; 131:687–707. [PubMed: 27038189] 
47. Nelson AR, Sweeney MD, Sagare AP, Zlokovic BV. Neurovascular dysfunction and 
neurodegeneration in dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016; 1862:887–
900. [PubMed: 26705676] 
48. Iturria-Medina Y, et al. Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease 
based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:11934. [PubMed: 27327500] 
49. Montagne A, et al. Blood-brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippocampus. Neuron. 
2015; 85:296–302. [PubMed: 25611508] 
50. Sweeney MD, Sagare AP, Zlokovic BV. Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of neurovascular 
dysfunction in mild dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015; doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.76
51. Arvanitakis Z, Capuano AW, Leurgans SE, Bennett DA, Schneider JA. Relation of cerebral vessel 
disease to Alzheimer’s disease dementia and cognitive function in elderly people: a cross-sectional 
study. Lancet Neurol. 2016; 15:934–943. [PubMed: 27312738] 
52. Toledo JB, et al. Contribution of cerebrovascular disease in autopsy confirmed neurodegenerative 
disease cases in the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Centre. Brain J Neurol. 2013; 136:2697–
2706.
53. Rosenberg GA. Blood-Brain Barrier Permeability in Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease. J Prev 
Alzheimers Dis. 2014; 1:138–139. [PubMed: 26301207] 
54. Hardy J, Allsop D. Amyloid deposition as the central event in the aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Trends Pharmacol Sci. 1991; 12:383–388. [PubMed: 1763432] 
55. Wardlaw JM, et al. Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel disease and its 
contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 2013; 12:822–838. [PubMed: 
23867200] 
56. Montine TJ, et al. Recommendations of the Alzheimer’s Disease-Related Dementias Conference. 
Neurology. 2014; 83:851–860. [PubMed: 25080517] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 57. Snyder HM, et al. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia including 
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2014; doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.
2014.10.008
58. Hachinski V. World Stroke Organization. Stroke and Potentially Preventable Dementias 
Proclamation: Updated World Stroke Day Proclamation. Stroke. 2015; 46:3039–3040. [PubMed: 
26504189] 
59. Malek N, et al. Vascular disease and vascular risk factors in relation to motor features and 
cognition in early Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord Off J Mov Disord Soc. 2016; 31:1518–1526.
60. Drouin-Ouellet J, et al. Cerebrovascular and blood-brain barrier impairments in Huntington’s 
disease: Potential implications for its pathophysiology. Ann Neurol. 2015; 78:160–177. [PubMed: 
25866151] 
61. Lin CY, et al. Neurovascular abnormalities in humans and mice with Huntington’s disease. Exp 
Neurol. 2013; 250:20–30. [PubMed: 24036415] 
62. Winkler EA, et al. Blood-spinal cord barrier breakdown and pericyte reductions in amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol (Berl). 2013; 125:111–120. [PubMed: 22941226] 
63. Strazza M, Pirrone V, Wigdahl B, Nonnemacher MR. Breaking down the barrier: the effects of 
HIV-1 on the blood-brain barrier. Brain Res. 2011; 1399:96–115. [PubMed: 21641584] 
64. Doherty CP, et al. Blood-Brain Barrier Dysfunction as a Hallmark Pathology in Chronic Traumatic 
Encephalopathy. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2016; 75:656–662. [PubMed: 27245243] 
65. Barnes SR, et al. ROCKETSHIP: a flexible and modular software tool for the planning, processing 
and analysis of dynamic MRI studies. BMC Med Imaging. 2015; 15:19. [PubMed: 26076957] 
66. Barnes SR, et al. Optimal acquisition and modeling parameters for accurate assessment of low 
Ktrans blood-brain barrier permeability using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI. Magn Reson Med. 
2016; 75:1967–1977. [PubMed: 26077645] 
67. Sagare AP, Sweeney MD, Makshanoff J, Zlokovic BV. Shedding of soluble platelet-derived growth 
factor receptor-β from human brain pericytes. Neurosci Lett. 2015; 607:97–101. [PubMed: 
26407747] 
68. Whitwell JL, et al. Neuroimaging correlates of pathologically defined subtypes of Alzheimer’s 
disease: a case-control study. Lancet Neurol. 2012; 11:868–877. [PubMed: 22951070] 
69. Apostolova LG, et al. Subregional hippocampal atrophy predicts Alzheimer’s dementia in the 
cognitively normal. Neurobiol Aging. 2010; 31:1077–1088. [PubMed: 18814937] 
70. Bell RD, et al. Pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal phenotype in the adult 
brain and during brain aging. Neuron. 2010; 68:409–427. [PubMed: 21040844] 
71. Bell RD, et al. Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature. 2012; 
485:512–516. [PubMed: 22622580] 
72. Winkler EA, Sengillo JD, Bell RD, Wang J, Zlokovic BV. Blood-spinal cord barrier pericyte 
reductions contribute to increased capillary permeability. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012; 32:1841–1852.
73. Winkler EA, et al. Blood-spinal cord barrier disruption contributes to early motor-neuron 
degeneration in ALS-model mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:E1035–1042. [PubMed: 
24591593] 
74. van de Haar HJ, et al. Blood-Brain Barrier Leakage in Patients with Early Alzheimer Disease. 
Radiology. 2016; 281:527–535. [PubMed: 27243267] 
75. van de Haar HJ, et al. Neurovascular unit impairment in early Alzheimer’s disease measured with 
magnetic resonance imaging. Neurobiol Aging. 2016; 45:190–196. [PubMed: 27459939] 
76. van de Haar HJ, et al. Subtle blood-brain barrier leakage rate and spatial extent: considerations for 
dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI. Med Phys. 2017; doi: 10.1002/mp.12328
77. Wang H, Golob EJ, Su MY. Vascular volume and blood-brain barrier permeability measured by 
dynamic contrast enhanced MRI in hippocampus and cerebellum of patients with MCI and normal 
controls. J Magn Reson Imaging JMRI. 2006; 24:695–700. [PubMed: 16878309] 
78. Starr JM, Farrall AJ, Armitage P, McGurn B, Wardlaw J. Blood-brain barrier permeability in 
Alzheimer’s disease: a case-control MRI study. Psychiatry Res. 2009; 171:232–241. [PubMed: 
19211227] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 79. Al-Bachari, S. PhD Thesis. University of Manchester; 2016. MRI assessment of neurovascular 
changes in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease; p. 201
80. Taheri S, Gasparovic C, Shah NJ, Rosenberg GA. Quantitative measurement of blood-brain barrier 
permeability in human using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI with fast T1 mapping. Magn Reson 
Med Off J Soc Magn Reson Med Soc Magn Reson Med. 2011; 65:1036–1042.
81. Cramer SP, Simonsen H, Frederiksen JL, Rostrup E, Larsson HBW. Abnormal blood-brain barrier 
permeability in normal appearing white matter in multiple sclerosis investigated by MRI. 
NeuroImage Clin. 2014; 4:182–189. [PubMed: 24371801] 
82. Cramer SP, Modvig S, Simonsen HJ, Frederiksen JL, Larsson HBW. Permeability of the blood-
brain barrier predicts conversion from optic neuritis to multiple sclerosis. Brain J Neurol. 2015; 
138:2571–2583.
83. Gaitán MI, et al. Evolution of the blood-brain barrier in newly forming multiple sclerosis lesions. 
Ann Neurol. 2011; 70:22–29. [PubMed: 21710622] 
84. Ingrisch M, et al. Quantification of perfusion and permeability in multiple sclerosis: dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI in 3D at 3T. Invest Radiol. 2012; 47:252–258. [PubMed: 22373532] 
85. Fainardi E, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid and serum levels and intrathecal production of active matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) as markers of disease activity in patients with multiple sclerosis. 
Mult Scler Houndmills Basingstoke Engl. 2006; 12:294–301.
86. Goos JDC, et al. Patients with Alzheimer disease with multiple microbleeds: relation with 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and cognition. Stroke J Cereb Circ. 2009; 40:3455–3460.
87. Brundel M, et al. High prevalence of cerebral microbleeds at 7Tesla MRI in patients with early 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2012; 31:259–263. [PubMed: 22531417] 
88. Uetani H, et al. Prevalence and topography of small hypointense foci suggesting microbleeds on 3T 
susceptibility-weighted imaging in various types of dementia. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2013; 
34:984–989. [PubMed: 23124636] 
89. Zonneveld HI, et al. Prevalence of cortical superficial siderosis in a memory clinic population. 
Neurology. 2014; 82:698–704. [PubMed: 24477113] 
90. Olazarán J, et al. Pattern of and risk factors for brain microbleeds in neurodegenerative dementia. 
Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2014; 29:263–269. [PubMed: 24408753] 
91. Heringa SM, et al. Multiple microbleeds are related to cerebral network disruptions in patients with 
early Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2014; 38:211–221. [PubMed: 23948936] 
92. Shams S, et al. Cerebral microbleeds: different prevalence, topography, and risk factors depending 
on dementia diagnosis—the Karolinska Imaging Dementia Study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2015; 
36:661–666. [PubMed: 25523590] 
93. Poliakova T, Levin O, Arablinskiy A, Vasenina E, Zerr I. Cerebral microbleeds in early 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol. 2016; 263:1961–1968. [PubMed: 27389080] 
94. Yates PA, et al. Incidence of cerebral microbleeds in preclinical Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 
2014; 82:1266–1273. [PubMed: 24623839] 
95. Greenberg SM, et al. Cerebral microbleeds: a guide to detection and interpretation. Lancet Neurol. 
2009; 8:165–174. [PubMed: 19161908] 
96. Viswanathan A, Greenberg SM. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy in the elderly. Ann Neurol. 2011; 
70:871–880. [PubMed: 22190361] 
97. Hanyu H, Tanaka Y, Shimizu S, Takasaki M, Abe K. Cerebral microbleeds in Alzheimer’s disease. 
J Neurol. 2003; 250:1496–1497. [PubMed: 14673587] 
98. Pettersen JA, et al. Microbleed topography, leukoaraiosis, and cognition in probable Alzheimer 
disease from the Sunnybrook dementia study. Arch Neurol. 2008; 65:790–795. [PubMed: 
18541799] 
99. Kantarci K, et al. Focal hemosiderin deposits and β-amyloid load in the ADNI cohort. Alzheimers 
Dement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2013; 9:S116–123.
100. Feldman HH, et al. Superficial siderosis: a potential diagnostic marker of cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy in Alzheimer disease. Stroke. 2008; 39:2894–2897. [PubMed: 18635858] 
101. Charidimou A, et al. Cortical Superficial Siderosis in Memory Clinic Patients: Further Evidence 
for Underlying Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy. Cerebrovasc Dis Basel Switz. 2016; 41:156–162.
Sweeney et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 102. Shams S, et al. Cortical superficial siderosis: Prevalence and biomarker profile in a memory clinic 
population. Neurology. 2016; 87:1110–1117. [PubMed: 27534713] 
103. Blair GW, Hernandez MV, Thrippleton MJ, Doubal FN, Wardlaw JM. Advanced Neuroimaging 
of Cerebral Small Vessel Disease. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2017; 19:56. [PubMed: 
28620783] 
104. Shams S, Wahlund LO. Cerebral microbleeds as a biomarker in Alzheimer’s disease? A review in 
the field. Biomark Med. 2016; 10:9–18. [PubMed: 26641942] 
105. Ham JH, et al. Cerebral microbleeds in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol. 2014; 
261:1628–1635. [PubMed: 24920492] 
106. Janelidze S, et al. Increased CSF biomarkers of angiogenesis in Parkinson disease. Neurology. 
2015; 85:1834–1842. [PubMed: 26511451] 
107. Kwan JY, et al. Iron accumulation in deep cortical layers accounts for MRI signal abnormalities in 
ALS: correlating 7 tesla MRI and pathology. PloS One. 2012; 7:e35241. [PubMed: 22529995] 
108. Winkler EA, et al. GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease vasculo-neuronal 
dysfunction and degeneration. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:521–530. [PubMed: 25730668] 
109. Simpson IA, Chundu KR, Davies-Hill T, Honer WG, Davies P. Decreased concentrations of 
GLUT1 and GLUT3 glucose transporters in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Ann 
Neurol. 1994; 35:546–551. [PubMed: 8179300] 
110. Mooradian AD, Chung HC, Shah GN. GLUT-1 expression in the cerebra of patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 1997; 18:469–474. [PubMed: 9390772] 
111. Kalaria RN, Harik SI. Reduced glucose transporter at the blood-brain barrier and in cerebral 
cortex in Alzheimer disease. J Neurochem. 1989; 53:1083–1088. [PubMed: 2769254] 
112. Horwood N, Davies DC. Immunolabelling of hippocampal microvessel glucose transporter 
protein is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease. Virchows Arch Int J Pathol. 1994; 425:69–72.
113. Hunt A, et al. Reduced cerebral glucose metabolism in patients at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. 
Psychiatry Res. 2007; 155:147–154. [PubMed: 17524628] 
114. Samuraki M, et al. Partial volume effect-corrected FDG PET and grey matter volume loss in 
patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2007; 34:1658–1669. 
[PubMed: 17520250] 
115. Mosconi L, et al. Multicenter standardized 18F-FDG PET diagnosis of mild cognitive 
impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, and other dementias. J Nucl Med Off Publ Soc Nucl Med. 
2008; 49:390–398.
116. Mosconi L, et al. Hypometabolism exceeds atrophy in presymptomatic early-onset familial 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Nucl Med Off Publ Soc Nucl Med. 2006; 47:1778–1786.
117. Landau SM, et al. Associations between cognitive, functional, and FDG-PET measures of decline 
in AD and MCI. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32:1207–1218. [PubMed: 19660834] 
118. Bailly M, et al. Precuneus and Cingulate Cortex Atrophy and Hypometabolism in Patients with 
Alzheimer’s Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment: MRI and (18)F-FDG PET Quantitative 
Analysis Using FreeSurfer. BioMed Res Int. 2015; 2015:583931. [PubMed: 26346648] 
119. Ossenkoppele R, et al. Differential effect of APOE genotype on amyloid load and glucose 
metabolism in AD dementia. Neurology. 2013; 80:359–365. [PubMed: 23255822] 
120. Protas HD, et al. Posterior cingulate glucose metabolism, hippocampal glucose metabolism, and 
hippocampal volume in cognitively normal, late-middle-aged persons at 3 levels of genetic risk 
for Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 2013; 70:320–325. [PubMed: 23599929] 
121. Mosconi L, et al. Amyloid and metabolic positron emission tomography imaging of cognitively 
normal adults with Alzheimer’s parents. Neurobiol Aging. 2013; 34:22–34. [PubMed: 22503001] 
122. Landau SM, et al. Comparing predictors of conversion and decline in mild cognitive impairment. 
Neurology. 2010; 75:230–238. [PubMed: 20592257] 
123. Mosconi L, et al. FDG-PET changes in brain glucose metabolism from normal cognition to 
pathologically verified Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2009; 36:811–822. 
[PubMed: 19142633] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 124. Niwa K, Kazama K, Younkin SG, Carlson GA, Iadecola C. Alterations in cerebral blood flow and 
glucose utilization in mice overexpressing the amyloid precursor protein. Neurobiol Dis. 2002; 
9:61–68. [PubMed: 11848685] 
125. Jagust WJ, et al. Diminished glucose transport in Alzheimer’s disease: dynamic PET studies. J 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1991; 11:323–330.
126. Piert M, Koeppe RA, Giordani B, Berent S, Kuhl DE. Diminished glucose transport and 
phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease determined by dynamic FDG-PET. J Nucl Med Off Publ 
Soc Nucl Med. 1996; 37:201–208.
127. Sokoloff L, et al. The [14C]deoxyglucose method for the measurement of local cerebral glucose 
utilization: theory, procedure, and normal values in the conscious and anesthetized albino rat. J 
Neurochem. 1977; 28:897–916. [PubMed: 864466] 
128. McDougal DB, et al. Use of nonradioactive 2-deoxyglucose to study compartmentation of brain 
glucose metabolism and rapid regional changes in rate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990; 
87:1357–1361. [PubMed: 2304903] 
129. Cunnane S, et al. Brain fuel metabolism, aging, and Alzheimer’s disease. Nutr Burbank Los 
Angel Cty Calif. 2011; 27:3–20.
130. Crane RK, Sols A. The non-competitive inhibition of brain hexokinase by glucose-6-phosphate 
and related compounds. J Biol Chem. 1954; 210:597–606. [PubMed: 13211596] 
131. Rokka J, Grönroos TJ, Viljanen T, Solin O, Haaparanta-Solin M. HPLC and TLC methods for 
analysis of [(18)F]FDG and its metabolites from biological samples. J Chromatogr B Analyt 
Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2017; 1048:140–149.
132. Southworth R, Parry CR, Parkes HG, Medina RA, Garlick PB. Tissue-specific differences in 2-
fluoro-2-deoxyglucose metabolism beyond FDG-6-P: a 19F NMR spectroscopy study in the rat. 
NMR Biomed. 2003; 16:494–502. [PubMed: 14696007] 
133. Hers HG, De Duve C. The hexosephosphatase system; partition of activity of glucose-6-
phosphatase in the tissues. Bull Soc Chim Biol (Paris). 1950; 32:20–29. [PubMed: 15420572] 
134. Sokoloff L. Measurement of local cerebral glucose utilization and its relation to local functional 
activity in the brain. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1991; 291:21–42. [PubMed: 1927683] 
135. Huang MT, Veech RL. Metabolic fluxes between [14C]2-deoxy-D-glucose and [14C]2-deoxy-D-
glucose-6-phosphate in brain in vivo. J Neurochem. 1985; 44:567–573. [PubMed: 3965622] 
136. Sperling RA, et al. Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: 
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on 
diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2011; 
7:280–292.
137. Cirrito JR, et al. P-glycoprotein deficiency at the blood-brain barrier increases amyloid-beta 
deposition in an Alzheimer disease mouse model. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:3285–3290. [PubMed: 
16239972] 
138. Wang W, Bodles-Brakhop AM, Barger SW. A Role for P-Glycoprotein in Clearance of Alzheimer 
Amyloid β-Peptide from the Brain. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2016; 13:615–620. [PubMed: 
26971931] 
139. McInerney MP, Short JL, Nicolazzo JA. Neurovascular Alterations in Alzheimer’s Disease: 
Transporter Expression Profiles and CNS Drug Access. AAPS J. 2017; 19:940–956. [PubMed: 
28462473] 
140. van Assema DME, et al. Blood-brain barrier P-glycoprotein function in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Brain J Neurol. 2012; 135:181–189.
141. Deo AK, et al. Activity of P-Glycoprotein, a β-Amyloid Transporter at the Blood-Brain Barrier, Is 
Compromised in Patients with Mild Alzheimer Disease. J Nucl Med Off Publ Soc Nucl Med. 
2014; 55:1106–1111.
142. Kortekaas R, et al. Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in parkinsonian midbrain in vivo. Ann Neurol. 
2005; 57:176–179. [PubMed: 15668963] 
143. Gerwien H, et al. Imaging matrix metalloproteinase activity in multiple sclerosis as a specific 
marker of leukocyte penetration of the blood-brain barrier. Sci Transl Med. 2016; 8:364ra152.
144. Zamboni P, et al. The value of cerebral Doppler venous haemodynamics in the assessment of 
multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 2009; 282:21–27. [PubMed: 19144359] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 145. Marshall O, et al. Impaired cerebrovascular reactivity in multiple sclerosis. JAMA Neurol. 2014; 
71:1275–1281. [PubMed: 25133874] 
146. Cullen KM, Kócsi Z, Stone J. Pericapillary haem-rich deposits: evidence for microhaemorrhages 
in aging human cerebral cortex. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2005; 25:1656–1667.
147. Hultman K, Strickland S, Norris EH. The APOE ε4/ε4 genotype potentiates vascular fibrin(ogen) 
deposition in amyloid-laden vessels in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013; 33:1251–1258.
148. Zenaro E, et al. Neutrophils promote Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and cognitive decline via 
LFA-1 integrin. Nat Med. 2015; 21:880–886. [PubMed: 26214837] 
149. Fiala M, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2-positive macrophages infiltrate the Alzheimer’s disease brain 
and damage the blood-brain barrier. Eur J Clin Invest. 2002; 32:360–371. [PubMed: 12027877] 
150. Persidsky Y, et al. Rho-mediated regulation of tight junctions during monocyte migration across 
the blood-brain barrier in HIV-1 encephalitis (HIVE). Blood. 2006; 107:4770–4780. [PubMed: 
16478881] 
151. Omalu BI, Fitzsimmons RP, Hammers J, Bailes J. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a 
professional American wrestler. J Forensic Nurs. 2010; 6:130–136. [PubMed: 21175533] 
152. Zipser BD, et al. Microvascular injury and blood-brain barrier leakage in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurobiol Aging. 2007; 28:977–986. [PubMed: 16782234] 
153. Ryu JK, McLarnon JG. A leaky blood-brain barrier, fibrinogen infiltration and microglial 
reactivity in inflamed Alzheimer’s disease brain. J Cell Mol Med. 2009; 13:2911–2925. 
[PubMed: 18657226] 
154. Cortes-Canteli M, et al. Fibrinogen and beta-amyloid association alters thrombosis and 
fibrinolysis: a possible contributing factor to Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 2010; 66:695–709. 
[PubMed: 20547128] 
155. Sengillo JD, et al. Deficiency in mural vascular cells coincides with blood-brain barrier disruption 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol Zurich Switz. 2013; 23:303–310.
156. Halliday MR, et al. Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain barrier breakdown in 
apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016; 36:216–227.
157. Miners JS, Schulz I, Love S. Differing associations between Aβ accumulation, hypoperfusion, 
blood-brain barrier dysfunction and loss of PDGFRB pericyte marker in the precuneus and 
parietal white matter in Alzheimer’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab. 2017; 271678X17690761. doi: 10.1177/0271678X17690761
158. Salloway S, et al. Effect of APOE genotype on microvascular basement membrane in Alzheimer’s 
disease. J Neurol Sci. 2002; 203–204:183–187.
159. Sagare AP, et al. Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat 
Commun. 2013; 4:2932. [PubMed: 24336108] 
160. Park L, et al. Innate immunity receptor CD36 promotes cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:3089–3094. [PubMed: 23382216] 
161. Kelly P, et al. Restoration of cerebral and systemic microvascular architecture in APP/PS1 
transgenic mice following treatment with LiraglutideTM. Microcirc N Y N 1994. 2015; 22:133–
145.
162. Park JC, et al. Annexin A1 restores Aβ1-42-induced blood-brain barrier disruption through the 
inhibition of RhoA-ROCK signaling pathway. Aging Cell. 2017; 16:149–161. [PubMed: 
27633771] 
163. Alata W, Ye Y, St-Amour I, Vandal M, Calon F. Human apolipoprotein E ε4 expression impairs 
cerebral vascularization and blood-brain barrier function in mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off 
J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015; 35:86–94.
164. Nishitsuji K, Hosono T, Nakamura T, Bu G, Michikawa M. Apolipoprotein E regulates the 
integrity of tight junctions in an isoform-dependent manner in an in vitro blood-brain barrier 
model. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:17536–17542. [PubMed: 21471207] 
165. Gray MT, Woulfe JM. Striatal blood-brain barrier permeability in Parkinson’s disease. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015; 35:747–750.
Sweeney et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 166. Pienaar IS, et al. Deep-brain stimulation associates with improved microvascular integrity in the 
subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2015; 74:392–405. [PubMed: 
25533682] 
167. Loeffler DA, et al. Transferrin and iron in normal, Alzheimer’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease 
brain regions. J Neurochem. 1995; 65:710–724. [PubMed: 7616227] 
168. Garbuzova-Davis S, et al. Impaired blood-brain/spinal cord barrier in ALS patients. Brain Res. 
2012; 1469:114–128. [PubMed: 22750125] 
169. Zhong Z, et al. ALS-causing SOD1 mutants generate vascular changes prior to motor neuron 
degeneration. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:420–422. [PubMed: 18344992] 
170. Kirk J, Plumb J, Mirakhur M, McQuaid S. Tight junctional abnormality in multiple sclerosis 
white matter affects all calibres of vessel and is associated with blood-brain barrier leakage and 
active demyelination. J Pathol. 2003; 201:319–327. [PubMed: 14517850] 
171. Omalu BI, et al. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a National Football League player. 
Neurosurgery. 2005; 57:128–134. discussion 128–134. 
172. Farkas E, Luiten PG. Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Prog 
Neurobiol. 2001; 64:575–611. [PubMed: 11311463] 
173. Baloyannis SJ, Baloyannis IS. The vascular factor in Alzheimer’s disease: a study in Golgi 
technique and electron microscopy. J Neurol Sci. 2012; 322:117–121. [PubMed: 22857991] 
174. Armulik A, et al. Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature. 2010; 468:557–561. 
[PubMed: 20944627] 
175. Daneman R, Zhou L, Kebede AA, Barres BA. Pericytes are required for blood-brain barrier 
integrity during embryogenesis. Nature. 2010; 468:562–566. [PubMed: 20944625] 
176. Winkler EA, Bell RD, Zlokovic BV. Central nervous system pericytes in health and disease. Nat 
Neurosci. 2011; 14:1398–1405. [PubMed: 22030551] 
177. Niu F, Yao H, Zhang W, Sutliff RL, Buch S. Tat 101-mediated enhancement of brain pericyte 
migration involves platelet-derived growth factor subunit B homodimer: implications for human 
immunodeficiency virus-associated neurocognitive disorders. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 
2014; 34:11812–11825.
178. Kokjohn TA, et al. Neurochemical profile of dementia pugilistica. J Neurotrauma. 2013; 30:981–
997. [PubMed: 23268705] 
179. Bailey TL, Rivara CB, Rocher AB, Hof PR. The nature and effects of cortical microvascular 
pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol Res. 2004; 26:573–578. [PubMed: 
15265277] 
180. Wu Z, et al. Role of the MEOX2 homeobox gene in neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer 
disease. Nat Med. 2005; 11:959–965. [PubMed: 16116430] 
181. Grammas P, Tripathy D, Sanchez A, Yin X, Luo J. Brain microvasculature and hypoxia-related 
proteins in Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011; 4:616–627. [PubMed: 21904637] 
182. Henkel JS, Beers DR, Wen S, Bowser R, Appel SH. Decreased mRNA expression of tight 
junction proteins in lumbar spinal cords of patients with ALS. Neurology. 2009; 72:1614–1616. 
[PubMed: 19414730] 
183. Miyazaki K, et al. Disruption of neurovascular unit prior to motor neuron degeneration in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurosci Res. 2011; 89:718–728. [PubMed: 21337372] 
184. Yamamoto M, et al. Phosphorylation of claudin-5 and occludin by rho kinase in brain endothelial 
cells. Am J Pathol. 2008; 172:521–533. [PubMed: 18187566] 
185. Kumar DKV, et al. Amyloid-β peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse and worm 
models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med. 2016; 8:340ra72.
186. Soscia SJ, et al. The Alzheimer’s disease-associated amyloid beta-protein is an antimicrobial 
peptide. PloS One. 2010; 5:e9505. [PubMed: 20209079] 
187. Wada K, et al. Expression levels of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors in 
Parkinson’s disease. Neuroreport. 2006; 17:705–709. [PubMed: 16641673] 
188. Desai Bradaric B, Patel A, Schneider JA, Carvey PM, Hendey B. Evidence for angiogenesis in 
Parkinson’s disease, incidental Lewy body disease, and progressive supranuclear palsy. J Neural 
Transm Vienna Austria 1996. 2012; 119:59–71.
Sweeney et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 189. Hill KK, et al. Cerebral blood flow responses to dorsal and ventral STN DBS correlate with gait 
and balance responses in Parkinson’s disease. Exp Neurol. 2013; 241:105–112. [PubMed: 
23262122] 
190. Donahue JE, et al. RAGE, LRP-1, and amyloid-beta protein in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta 
Neuropathol (Berl). 2006; 112:405–415. [PubMed: 16865397] 
191. Miller MC, et al. Hippocampal RAGE immunoreactivity in early and advanced Alzheimer’s 
disease. Brain Res. 2008; 1230:273–280. [PubMed: 18657529] 
192. Sagare AP, Deane R, Zlokovic BV. Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1: a 
physiological Aβ homeostatic mechanism with multiple therapeutic opportunities. Pharmacol 
Ther. 2012; 136:94–105. [PubMed: 22820095] 
193. DeMattos RB, Bales KR, Cummins DJ, Paul SM, Holtzman DM. Brain to plasma amyloid-beta 
efflux: a measure of brain amyloid burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Science. 
2002; 295:2264–2267. [PubMed: 11910111] 
194. DeMattos RB, et al. Peripheral anti-A beta antibody alters CNS and plasma A beta clearance and 
decreases brain A beta burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2001; 98:8850–8855. [PubMed: 11438712] 
195. US National Library of Medicine. clinicaltrials.gov. 2017. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02008357
196. Deane R, et al. RAGE mediates amyloid-beta peptide transport across the blood-brain barrier and 
accumulation in brain. Nat Med. 2003; 9:907–913. [PubMed: 12808450] 
197. Yan SD, et al. RAGE and amyloid-beta peptide neurotoxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature. 
1996; 382:685–691. [PubMed: 8751438] 
198. Mackic JB, et al. Human blood-brain barrier receptors for Alzheimer’s amyloid-beta 1-40. 
Asymmetrical binding, endocytosis, and transcytosis at the apical side of brain microvascular 
endothelial cell monolayer. J Clin Invest. 1998; 102:734–743. [PubMed: 9710442] 
199. Deane R, et al. A multimodal RAGE-specific inhibitor reduces amyloid β-mediated brain disorder 
in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:1377–1392. [PubMed: 
22406537] 
200. US National Library of Medicine. clinicaltrials.gov. 2017. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02916056
201. Halliday MR, et al. Relationship between cyclophilin a levels and matrix metalloproteinase 9 
activity in cerebrospinal fluid of cognitively normal apolipoprotein e4 carriers and blood-brain 
barrier breakdown. JAMA Neurol. 2013; 70:1198–1200. [PubMed: 24030206] 
202. Conejero-Goldberg C, et al. APOE2 enhances neuroprotection against Alzheimer’s disease 
through multiple molecular mechanisms. Mol Psychiatry. 2014; 19:1243–1250. [PubMed: 
24492349] 
203. Zeuzem S, et al. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015; 42:829–844. DOI: 10.1111/apt.13342 [PubMed: 
26238707] 
204. Langford D, et al. Altered P-glycoprotein expression in AIDS patients with HIV encephalitis. J 
Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2004; 63:1038–1047. [PubMed: 15535131] 
205. Cicchetti F, et al. Mutant huntingtin is present in neuronal grafts in Huntington disease patients. 
Ann Neurol. 2014; 76:31–42. [PubMed: 24798518] 
206. Erickson MA, Banks WA. Blood-brain barrier dysfunction as a cause and consequence of 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013; 
33:1500–1513.
207. Nuzzo D, et al. Inflammatory mediators as biomarkers in brain disorders. Inflammation. 2014; 
37:639–648. [PubMed: 24292800] 
208. Skoog I, et al. A population study on blood-brain barrier function in 85-year-olds: relation to 
Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. Neurology. 1998; 50:966–971. [PubMed: 9566380] 
209. Janelidze S, et al. Increased blood-brain barrier permeability is associated with dementia and 
diabetes but not amyloid pathology or APOE genotype. Neurobiol Aging. 2017; 51:104–112. 
[PubMed: 28061383] 
210. Skillback T, et al. CSF/serum albumin ratio in dementias: a cross-sectional study on 1861 
patients. Neurobiol Aging. (Accepted). 
Sweeney et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 211. Blennow K, et al. Blood-brain barrier disturbance in patients with Alzheimer’s disease is related 
to vascular factors. Acta Neurol Scand. 1990; 81:323–326. [PubMed: 2360400] 
212. Wallin A, Blennow K, Rosengren L. Cerebrospinal fluid markers of pathogenetic processes in 
vascular dementia, with special reference to the subcortical subtype. Alzheimer Dis Assoc 
Disord. 1999; 13(Suppl 3):S102–105. [PubMed: 10609688] 
213. Blennow K, Wallin A, Uhlemann C, Gottfries CG. White-matter lesions on CT in Alzheimer 
patients: relation to clinical symptomatology and vascular factors. Acta Neurol Scand. 1991; 
83:187–193. [PubMed: 2031453] 
214. Bowman GL, Kaye JA, Quinn JF. Dyslipidemia and blood-brain barrier integrity in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Curr Gerontol Geriatr Res. 2012; 2012:184042. [PubMed: 22654903] 
215. Faraco G, Iadecola C. Hypertension: a harbinger of stroke and dementia. Hypertens Dallas Tex 
1979. 2013; 62:810–817.
216. Ivens S, et al. TGF-beta receptor-mediated albumin uptake into astrocytes is involved in 
neocortical epileptogenesis. Brain J Neurol. 2007; 130:535–547.
217. Braganza O, et al. Albumin is taken up by hippocampal NG2 cells and astrocytes and decreases 
gap junction coupling. Epilepsia. 2012; 53:1898–1906. [PubMed: 22967085] 
218. LeVine SM. Albumin and multiple sclerosis. BMC Neurol. 2016; 16:47. [PubMed: 27067000] 
219. Silverberg GD, et al. The cerebrospinal fluid production rate is reduced in dementia of the 
Alzheimer’s type. Neurology. 2001; 57:1763–1766. [PubMed: 11723260] 
220. Craig-Schapiro R, et al. Multiplexed immunoassay panel identifies novel CSF biomarkers for 
Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis and prognosis. PloS One. 2011; 6:e18850. [PubMed: 21526197] 
221. Hanzel CE, et al. Analysis of matrix metallo-proteases and the plasminogen system in mild 
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid. J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2014; 
40:667–678. [PubMed: 24531161] 
222. Pisani V, et al. Increased blood-cerebrospinal fluid transfer of albumin in advanced Parkinson’s 
disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2012; 9:188. [PubMed: 22870899] 
223. Liguori C, et al. Cerebrospinal-fluid Alzheimer’s Disease Biomarkers and Blood-Brain Barrier 
Integrity in a natural population of cognitive intact Parkinson’s Disease patients. CNS Neurol 
Disord Drug Targets. 2016
224. Brettschneider J, Petzold A, Süssmuth SD, Ludolph AC, Tumani H. Axonal damage markers in 
cerebrospinal fluid are increased in ALS. Neurology. 2006; 66:852–856. [PubMed: 16567701] 
225. Jessen Krut J, et al. Biomarker evidence of axonal injury in neuroasymptomatic HIV-1 patients. 
PloS One. 2014; 9:e88591. [PubMed: 24523921] 
226. Chen ZL, Strickland S. Neuronal death in the hippocampus is promoted by plasmin-catalyzed 
degradation of laminin. Cell. 1997; 91:917–925. [PubMed: 9428515] 
227. Mhatre M, et al. Thrombin, a mediator of neurotoxicity and memory impairment. Neurobiol 
Aging. 2004; 25:783–793. [PubMed: 15165703] 
228. Chen B, Cheng Q, Yang K, Lyden PD. Thrombin mediates severe neurovascular injury during 
ischemia. Stroke. 2010; 41:2348–2352. [PubMed: 20705928] 
229. Schachtrup C, et al. Fibrinogen inhibits neurite outgrowth via beta 3 integrin-mediated 
phosphorylation of the EGF receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:11814–11819. 
[PubMed: 17606926] 
230. Paul J, Strickland S, Melchor JP. Fibrin deposition accelerates neurovascular damage and 
neuroinflammation in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J Exp Med. 2007; 204:1999–2008. 
[PubMed: 17664291] 
231. Akassoglou K, et al. Fibrin depletion decreases inflammation and delays the onset of 
demyelination in a tumor necrosis factor transgenic mouse model for multiple sclerosis. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:6698–6703. [PubMed: 15096619] 
232. Ryu JK, et al. Blood coagulation protein fibrinogen promotes autoimmunity and demyelination 
via chemokine release and antigen presentation. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8164. [PubMed: 
26353940] 
233. Bardehle S, Rafalski VA, Akassoglou K. Breaking boundaries-coagulation and fibrinolysis at the 
neurovascular interface. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015; 9:354. [PubMed: 26441525] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 234. Zhong Z, et al. Activated protein C therapy slows ALS-like disease in mice by transcriptionally 
inhibiting SOD1 in motor neurons and microglia cells. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:3437–3449. 
[PubMed: 19841542] 
235. Sui YT, Bullock KM, Erickson MA, Zhang J, Banks WA. Alpha synuclein is transported into and 
out of the brain by the blood-brain barrier. Peptides. 2014; 62:197–202. [PubMed: 25278492] 
236. Peelaerts W, et al. α-Synuclein strains cause distinct synucleinopathies after local and systemic 
administration. Nature. 2015; 522:340–344. [PubMed: 26061766] 
237. Matsumoto J, et al. Transmission of α-synuclein-containing erythrocyte-derived extracellular 
vesicles across the blood-brain barrier via adsorptive mediated transcytosis: another mechanism 
for initiation and progression of Parkinson’s disease? Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2017; 5:71. 
[PubMed: 28903781] 
238. Shi M, et al. Plasma exosomal α-synuclein is likely CNS-derived and increased in Parkinson’s 
disease. Acta Neuropathol (Berl). 2014; 128:639–650. [PubMed: 24997849] 
239. Calderón-Garcidueñas L, et al. Air pollution and children: neural and tight junction antibodies 
and combustion metals, the role of barrier breakdown and brain immunity in neurodegeneration. 
J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2015; 43:1039–1058. [PubMed: 25147109] 
240. Pardridge WM. Drug transport across the blood-brain barrier. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int 
Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012; 32:1959–1972.
241. Bray N. Biologics: Transferrin’ bispecific antibodies across the blood-brain barrier. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov. 2015; 14:14–15.
242. Niewoehner J, et al. Increased brain penetration and potency of a therapeutic antibody using a 
monovalent molecular shuttle. Neuron. 2014; 81:49–60. [PubMed: 24411731] 
243. Yu YJ, et al. Therapeutic bispecific antibodies cross the blood-brain barrier in nonhuman 
primates. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6:261ra154.
244. Yemisci M, et al. Systemically administered brain-targeted nanoparticles transport peptides across 
the blood-brain barrier and provide neuroprotection. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015; 35:469–475.
245. Burgess A, Hynynen K. Microbubble-Assisted Ultrasound for Drug Delivery in the Brain and 
Central Nervous System. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016; 880:293–308. [PubMed: 26486344] 
246. Poon C, McMahon D, Hynynen K. Noninvasive and targeted delivery of therapeutics to the brain 
using focused ultrasound. Neuropharmacology. 2017; 120:20–37. [PubMed: 26907805] 
247. Wang D, Kranz-Eble P, De Vivo DC. Mutational analysis of GLUT1 (SLC2A1) in Glut-1 
deficiency syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2000; 16:224–231. [PubMed: 10980529] 
248. Alakbarzade V, et al. A partially inactivating mutation in the sodium-dependent 
lysophosphatidylcholine transporter MFSD2A causes a non-lethal microcephaly syndrome. Nat 
Genet. 2015; 47:814–817. [PubMed: 26005865] 
249. Guemez-Gamboa A, et al. Inactivating mutations in MFSD2A, required for omega-3 fatty acid 
transport in brain, cause a lethal microcephaly syndrome. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:809–813. 
[PubMed: 26005868] 
250. Novara F, et al. Clinical and Molecular Characteristics of SLC16A2 (MCT8) Mutations in Three 
Families with the Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2017; 38:260–264. [PubMed: 
27805744] 
251. Abdel-Hamid MS, Abdel-Salam GMH, Issa MY, Emam BA, Zaki MS. Band-like calcification 
with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria: report of 10 new families and identification of five 
novel OCLN mutations. J Hum Genet. 2017; 62:553–559. [PubMed: 28179633] 
252. Akawi NA, et al. Delineation of the clinical, molecular and cellular aspects of novel JAM3 
mutations underlying the autosomal recessive hemorrhagic destruction of the brain, 
subependymal calcification, and congenital cataracts. Hum Mutat. 2013; 34:498–505. [PubMed: 
23255084] 
253. Keller A, et al. Mutations in the gene encoding PDGF-B cause brain calcifications in humans and 
mice. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1077–1082. [PubMed: 23913003] 
254. Nicolas G, et al. Mutation of the PDGFRB gene as a cause of idiopathic basal ganglia 
calcification. Neurology. 2013; 80:181–187. [PubMed: 23255827] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 255. Vemuri P, Schöll M. Linking Amyloid-β and Tau Deposition in Alzheimer Disease. JAMA 
Neurol. 2017; 74:766–768. [PubMed: 28558092] 
256. He L, et al. Analysis of the brain mural cell transcriptome. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:35108. [PubMed: 
27725773] 
Sweeney et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key points
•
The blood-brain barrier protects neurons from factors present in the systemic 
circulation, and maintains the highly regulated brain internal milieu, which is 
required for proper synaptic and neuronal functioning.
•
Blood-brain barrier breakdown allows entry into the brain of neurotoxic 
blood-derived products, cells, and pathogens, and is associated with 
inflammatory and immune responses, which can initiate multiple pathways of 
neurodegeneration.
•
Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated early blood-brain barrier 
dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, 
also supported by the biomarkers biofluid data, and consistently observed by 
post-mortem tissue analysis.
•
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in neurodegenerative disorders includes 
increased blood-brain barrier permeability, microbleeds, impaired glucose 
transport, impaired P-glycoprotein function, perivascular deposits of blood-
derived products, cellular infiltration, pericyte and endothelial cell 
degeneration.
Sweeney et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. The blood-brain barrier
Brain capillaries are a key site of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). The capillary cross-section 
(large inset) shows a tightly sealed endothelium, which shares a common basement 
membrane with pericytes, and astrocyte end-feet wrapping around the capillary wall. The 
arterial cross section (small inset) shows perivascular flow of interstitial fluid (ISF) through 
the arterial wall in the opposite direction to blood flow; paravascular flow might also occur 
in the same direction as blood flow. CSF is produced by the choroid plexus and flows from 
brain ventricles into subarachnoid spaces, draining into the meningeal lymphatic system 
and/or venous blood through the arachnoid villi. ISF can exchange with CSF in the 
ventricles (not shown) and subarachnoid spaces. ECS, extracellular space.
Sweeney et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Key transport properties of the capillary endothelium
a | Tight junctions (TJ), adherens junctions (AJ), and junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) 
prevent free paracellular exchanges of solutes. Lack of pinocytosis and bulk flow 
transcytosis contributes to the endothelial barrier function. b | O2 and CO2 cross the blood–
brain barrier (BBB) by simple diffusion, as do small lipophilic molecules (such as ethanol). 
c | Solute carrier-mediated transport (CMT) of metabolites, nutrients, vitamins, nucleotides 
and other substrates, according to substrate specificity and concentration gradient. d | 
Receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT) of peptides and proteins. e | NLS1 (sodium-
dependent lysophosphatidylcholine symporter 1) transports ω3 essential fatty acids into the 
brain. f | Ion concentrations are regulated by the abluminal sodium pump (Na+,K+ATPase), 
the luminal sodium-hydrogen exchanger, chloride-bicarbonate exchanger, luminal sodium-
potassium-chloride cotransporter, and sodium-calcium exchanger. Water is transported via 
aquaporin (AQP) receptors: AQP1 on endothelial cells and AQP4 on astrocytic end-feet. g | 
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) active efflux transporters limit entry of drugs, xenobiotics, and 
drug conjugates. h | Neurotoxic substances are cleared by phosphatidylinositol binding 
clathrin assembly protein (PICALM)-mediated transcytosis and LDL receptor-related 
protein-1 (LRP1), which removes toxic amyloid-β (Aβ) species linked to Alzheimer disease 
(AD). Excitatory acidic amino acid CMT transporters EAAT1 and EAAT2 clear neurotoxic 
glutamate and aspartate. However, receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) is 
upregulated in AD and mediates re-entry of circulating Aβ, which increases brain Aβ levels. 
i | Solutes diffusing across brain extracellular spaces (ECS) (dotted arrows) are cleared via 
transvascular transport (c–e, g–i) and by perivascular ISF flow within the arterial wall (solid 
arrow), in the reverse direction of the blood flow, eventually reaching the CSF-filled 
Sweeney et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subarachnoid space and draining into meningeal lymphatic vessels and cervical lymph 
nodes.
Sweeney et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown promotes neurodegeneration
BBB breakdown is characterized by pericyte and endothelial degeneration, with loss of tight 
and adherens junctions and increased bulk flow transcytosis. BBB breakdown leads to the 
entry of microbial pathogens, accumulation of neurotoxic material faulty BBB transport, red 
blood cell extravasation and the release of neurotoxic free iron (Fe2+), which generates 
reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress. Inflammatory and immune responses lead to 
the generation of autoantibodies. CMT, solute carrier-mediated transport; ECS, extracellular 
spaces, L-DOPA, L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine; RMT, receptor-mediated transcytosis.
Sweeney et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction – implications for drug delivery
In a healthy BBB (left), strategies to breach the barrier and deliver neuropharmaceuticals to 
brain rely on carrier-mediated transporters (CMT), receptor-mediated transporters (RMT), 
nanoparticles, and/or transient opening of BBB as for example by focused ultrasound. Under 
pathological conditions (right), the disrupted BBB leads to accumulation of blood-derived 
debris and cells into enlarged perivascular spaces. This blocks normal distribution of 
molecules throughout the CNS by concentration gradient-driven diffusion across brain 
extracellular spaces (ECS) and interrupts regionally formation of interstitial fluid (ISF) and 
ISF flow preventing the therapeutic antibodies, proteins, peptides, gene medicine and other 
drugs to efficiently reach their neuronal targets. See main text for details.
Sweeney et al.
Page 37
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sweeney et al.
Page 38
Table 1
Blood–brain barrier disruption on neuroimaging in neurodegenerative disorders.
Disease
Region and details
Refs
Increased leakage of gadolinium ( DCE 
MRI; Ktrans*)
MCI
Hippocampus
46, 49, 74–75, 77
Early AD
Several grey and white matter regions
46, 74–76
PD
Basal ganglia
79
HD
Caudate nucleus
60
MS
Perivascular growth of lesions in white matter regions
49, 80–84
Microbleeds (T2* and SWI-MRI)
MCI
25% of patients
94, 104
AD
45–78% of patients
86–94, 104
PD
Several deep and cortical grey matter regions and white matter
105, 106
ALS
Deep cortical layers
107
Diminished glucose transport ( FDG-
PET)
Normal cognition with AD genetic or 
parental risk
Entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, posterior cingulate cortex, whole 
brain
116, 120–121
MCI
Precuneus, cingulate cortex and temporal cortex (prior to 
conversion to AD)
115, 117, 118, 122, 123
Early AD
Hippocampus, parietal, temporal and cingulate cortex (prior to 
development of atrophy and neurodegeneration)
113–115, 117–119, 122, 123
Diminished P-glycoprotein function 
( verapamil PET)
Mild AD
Parietotemporal, frontal, and posterior cingulate cortices, and 
hippocampus
140, 141
AD
Frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital cortices, and posterior and 
anterior cingulate
140
PD
Mid-brain
142
CNS leukocyte infiltration ( MMP 
inhibitor-PET)
MS
Leukocyte infiltration (MMP activation) in lesions
143
*The regional CNS blood–brain barrier permeability constant. AD, Alzheimer disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; DCE, dynamic contrast-
enhanced; FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; HD, Huntington disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; 
MMP; matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor MS, multiple sclerosis; PD, Parkinson disease; SW, susceptibility-weighted imaging.
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sweeney et al.
Page 39
Table 2
Blood–brain barrier disruption on post-mortem tissue analysis in neurodegenerative disorders.
Disease
Details
Refs
Brain capillary leakages*§
AD
Accumulation of blood-derived fibrinogen, thrombin, albumin, IgG, and 
haemosiderin in the cortex and hippocampus
146, 147, 152–157
PD
Accumulation of blood-derived proteins in striatum: fibrinogen, IgG, 
haemosiderin in globus pallidus
165, 166
HD
Leakage of blood-derived proteins: fibrin in the putamen
60
ALS
Leakage of blood-derived proteins: fibrinogen, thrombin, IgG, collagen type 
IV, iron-containing proteins
62, 107, 168
MS
Leakage of blood-derived proteins: fibrinogen
170
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy
Perivascular haemosiderin-laden macrophages and histiocytes
151, 171
Pericyte degeneration
AD*‡§
Ultrastructural changes in the cortex: accumulation of osmiophilic material, 
mitochondrial changes, pinocytosis, loss of pericyte capillary coverage and 
numbers in the cortex and hippocampus
155–157, 172, 173
ALS*‡§
Pericyte loss in the medulla, reduced pericyte capillary coverage and number 
in the cervical spinal cord
62, 168
HIV-associated dementia*
Loss of pericyte coverage in the frontal cortex
177
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy*
Mural cell mineralization in deep penetrating vessels
171
Endothelial degeneration
AD*‡
Microvascular reductions, reduced tight junction proteins, capillary basement 
membrane changes in the cortex and hippocampus
118, 155, 156, 158, 
173, 180
PD‡
Microvascular degeneration, reduced and disrupted tight junctions, capillary 
basement membrane changes in the subthalamic nucleus
166
HD§
Decreased and disrupted tight junction protein expression in the putamen
60
ALS*||
Microvascular degeneration, intracellular vacuolization; reduced or disrupted 
tight junctions, capillary basement membrane changes, enlarged perivascular 
spaces in the medulla, cervical spinal cord and lumbar spinal cord
168, 182, 183
MS*
Decreased and disrupted tight junctions
170
HIV-associated dementia*
Reduced or disrupted tight junctions
150, 184
Cellular Infiltration*
AD
Extravasation of red blood cells, peripheral macrophage infiltration, 
neutrophils infiltration
146–149
PD
Red blood cell extravasation in striatum
165
ALS
Red blood cell extravasation
62
MS
Leukocyte infiltration
143
HIV-associated dementia
Peripheral macrophage infiltration
150
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy
Lymphocyte infiltration in Virchow–Robin spaces
151
Aberrant angiogenesis*
PD
increased endothelial cell number in substantia nigra pars compacta; 
increased angiogenic endothelial integrin-αvβ3 expression in substantia nigra 
pars compacta, locus coeruleus, putamen
187–188
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sweeney et al.
Page 40
Disease
Details
Refs
HD
Increased vessel density, particularly of capillaries in the cortex, caudate or 
putamen and substantia nigra
60, 61
Molecular changes
AD*§
Reduced GLUT1 levels (diminished brain glucose uptake); reduced LRP1 
levels (diminished Aβ clearance); upregulation of RAGE (increased Aβ re-
entry, neurovascular inflammation); activation of proinflammatory 
cyclophilin A–MMP9 pathway in APOE4 carriers (blood–brain barrier 
breakdown owing to degradation of tight junctions and basement membrane 
proteins); increased levels of angiogenic proteins
19, 20, 109–112, 156, 
181, 190, 191, 196
HIV-associated dementia
Reduced P-glycoprotein expression
204
HD*‡
Huntingtin protein aggregation in endothelial cells, perivascular 
macrophages, vascular smooth muscle cells, and vascular basal lamina in the 
cortex and putamen
60, 205
*Detected by immunohistochemistry.
‡Detected by electron microscopy.
§Detected by immunoblotting.
||Detected by reverse transcription PCR.
AD, Alzheimer disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; GLUT1, glucose transporter 1; HD, Huntington disease; LRP1, LDL receptor-related 
protein 1; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; MS, multiple sclerosis; PD, Parkinson disease; RAGE, receptor for advanced glycation end products.
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sweeney et al.
Page 41
Table 3
Blood–brain barrier disruption on CSF ELISA in neurodegenerative disorders.
CSF ELISA analysis 
method
Disease
Details
Refs
Albumin
Preclinical AD or MCI
Increased Qalb
49, 50, 201
Albumin
AD
Increased or no change in Qalb
208–210, 212
Albumin
AD with vascular risk factors:
Increased Qalb
211, 213, 214
Albumin
PD
Increased Qalb
106, 209, 222, 223
Albumin
ALS
Increased Qalb in 40% of patients
62, 224
Albumin
MS
Increased Qalb
80, 218
Albumin
HIV-associated dementia
Increased Qalb
225
Plasminogen
Preclinical AD or MCI
Increased CSF levels of blood-derived proteins 
(plasminogen)
221
Fibrinogen
Preclinical AD or MCI
Increased CSF levels of blood-derived proteins 
(fibrinogen)
220
IgG
PD
Increased CSF:serum IgG ratio
222
IgG
ALS
Increased CSF levels of blood-derived proteins (IgG)
62
AD, Alzheimer disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HD, 
Huntington disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; MS, multiple sclerosis; PD, Parkinson disease; Qalb, 
CSF:serum albumin ratio.
Nat Rev Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 01.
