 Review Series
THE UPDATED WHO CLASSIFICATION OF HEMATOLOGICAL MALIGNANCIES
The 2016 revision of the World Health Organization classification of
lymphoid neoplasms
Steven H. Swerdlow,1 Elias Campo,2 Stefano A. Pileri,3 Nancy Lee Harris,4 Harald Stein,5 Reiner Siebert,6 Ranjana Advani,7
Michele Ghielmini,8 Gilles A. Salles,9 Andrew D. Zelenetz,10 and Elaine S. Jaffe11
1Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA; 2Department of Pathology, Hospital
Clinic, University of Barcelona, August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain; 3Haematopathology Unit, European Institute of
Oncology, Milan, and Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Bologna University Medical School, Bologna, Italy; 4Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; 5Pathodiagnostik, Berlin, Germany; 6Institute of Human Genetics,
Christian Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany; 7Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; 8Department of
Medical Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland; 9Department of Hematology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, and
Universit´
e Claude Bernard Lyon-1, Lyon, France; 10Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, NY; and 11Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD
A revision of the nearly 8-year-old World
Health Organization classification of the
lymphoid neoplasms and the accompa-
nying monograph is being published. It
reflects a consensus among hematopa-
thologists, geneticists, and clinicians re-
garding both updates to current entities
as well as the addition of a limited number
of new provisional entities. The revision
clarifies the diagnosis and management
of lesions at the very early stages of
lymphomagenesis, refines the diagnostic
criteria for some entities, details the
expanding genetic/molecular landscape
of numerous lymphoid neoplasms and
their clinical correlates, and refers to
investigations leading to more targeted
therapeutic strategies. The majorchanges
are reviewed with an emphasis on the
most important advances in our under-
standing that impact our diagnostic
approach, clinical expectations, and thera-
peutic strategies for the lymphoid neo-
plasms. (Blood. 2016;127(20):2375-2390)
Introduction
The 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of
hematopoietic and lymphoid tumors and the associated monograph
represent the established guidelines for the diagnosis of malignant
lymphomas; however, subsequently there have been major advances
withsignificant clinical and biologicimplications.1 A major revision is
therefore being published that will be an update of the current fourth
edition and not a truly new fifth edition as there are still other volumes
pending in the fourth edition of the WHO tumor monograph series.
Because it is considered a part of the fourth edition, while some
provisional entities will be promoted to definite entities and a small
numberof newprovisional entitiesadded, there willbe nonewdefinite
entities.
Aswiththe 2001 and 2008 classifications,an all-important Clinical
Advisory Committee meeting was held in 2014 to obtain the advice
and consent of clinical hematologists/oncologists and other physicians
critical tothe revision (supplemental Appendix, available on the Blood
Web site). Additional editorial meetings and consultations followed
leading to the updated classification (Table 1).2 Although there are
only limited alterations in the classification compared with 2008,
the revised monograph will incorporate a large body of information
published over the last 8 years relating to existing entities with
some important diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic implica-
tions. The classification maintains the goals of helping to identify
homogeneous groups of well-defined entities and facilitating the
recognition of uncommon diseases that require further clarification.3
This manuscript will review the major areas in lymphoid, histiocytic,
and dendritic neoplasms where changes from the prior edition are
foreseen as well as emphasize conceptual themes (Table 2).
Mature B-cell lymphoid neoplasms
An important element that pervades many parts of the new monograph
derives from an explosion of new clinical, pathological, and genetic/
molecular data concerning the “small B-cell” lymphomas. The concept
that there are lymphoid proliferations that we used to diagnose as overt
lymphoid neoplasms but which are not considered as such in 2016 will
be further emphasized. Among the aggressive B-cell lymphomas,there
are major changes that impact how these cases should be evaluated and
diagnosed that have important therapeutic implications as well as being
of biologic interest.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
and monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
The 2008 monograph recognized monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
(MBL) as the presence of monoclonal B-cell populations in the
peripheral blood (PB) of up to 5 3 109/L either with the phenotype of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), atypical CLL, or non-CLL
(CD52) B cells in the absence of other lymphomatous features. Found
in up to 12% of healthy individuals, in some it may be an extremely
Submitted December 31, 2015; accepted February 9, 2016. Prepublished
online as Blood First Edition paper, March 15, 2016; DOI 10.1182/blood-2016-
01-643569.
The online version of this article contains a data supplement.
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2375
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 small population, but in others associated with a lymphocytosis.4
Whereas in 2008 it was unknown whether MBL was a precursor of
CLL, we now know that MBL precedes virtually all cases of CLL/
small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL).5 The updated WHO will retain
the current criteria for MBL, but will emphasize that “low-count”
MBL, defined as a PB CLL count of ,0.5 3 109/L, must be
distinguished from “high-count” MBL because low count MBL has
significant differences from CLL, an extremely limited, if any, chance
of progression, and, until new evidence is provided, does not require
routinefollow-upoutsideofstandardmedicalcare.6,7Incontrast,high-
count MBL requires routine/yearly follow-up, and has very similar
phenotypic and genetic/molecular features as Rai stage 0 CLL,
although immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV)-
mutated cases are more frequent in MBL.8 Also impacting our
diagnostic criteria, the revision will eliminate the option to diagnose
CLLwith ,5 3109/L PB CLLcells inthe absence of extramedullary
Table 1. 2016 WHO classification of mature lymphoid, histiocytic,
and dendritic neoplasms
Mature B-cell neoplasms
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis*
B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
Splenic marginal zone lymphoma
Hairy cell leukemia
Splenic B-cell lymphoma/leukemia, unclassifiable
Splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma
Hairy cell leukemia-variant
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
Waldenstr¨
om macroglobulinemia
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), IgM*
m heavy-chain disease
g heavy-chain disease
a heavy-chain disease
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), IgG/A*
Plasma cell myeloma
Solitary plasmacytoma of bone
Extraosseous plasmacytoma
Monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition diseases*
Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT lymphoma)
Nodal marginal zone lymphoma
Pediatric nodal marginal zone lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma
In situ follicular neoplasia*
Duodenal-type follicular lymphoma*
Pediatric-type follicular lymphoma*
Large B-cell lymphoma with IRF4 rearrangement*
Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma
Mantle cell lymphoma
In situ mantle cell neoplasia*
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), NOS
Germinal center B-cell type*
Activated B-cell type*
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
Primary DLBCL of the central nervous system (CNS)
Primary cutaneous DLBCL, leg type
EBV1 DLBCL, NOS*
EBV1 mucocutaneous ulcer*
DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma
Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma
ALK1 large B-cell lymphoma
Plasmablastic lymphoma
Primary effusion lymphoma
HHV81 DLBCL, NOS*
Burkitt lymphoma
Burkitt-like lymphoma with 11q aberration*
High-grade B-cell lymphoma, with MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6 rearrangements*
High-grade B-cell lymphoma, NOS*
B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between DLBCL and
classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Mature T and NK neoplasms
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
Chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of NK cells
Aggressive NK-cell leukemia
Systemic EBV1 T-cell lymphoma of childhood*
Hydroa vacciniforme–like lymphoproliferative disorder*
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
Extranodal NK-/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
Table 1. (continued)
Monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma*
Indolent T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder of the GI tract*
Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma
Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma
Mycosis fungoides
S´
ezary syndrome
Primary cutaneous CD301 T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders
Lymphomatoid papulosis
Primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma
Primary cutaneous gd T-cell lymphoma
Primary cutaneous CD81 aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma
Primary cutaneous acral CD81 T-cell lymphoma*
Primary cutaneous CD41 small/medium T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder*
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
Follicular T-cell lymphoma*
Nodal peripheral T-cell lymphoma with TFH phenotype*
Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, ALK1
Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, ALK2*
Breast implant–associated anaplastic large-cell lymphoma*
Hodgkin lymphoma
Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma
Classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Mixed cellularity classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Lymphocyte-depleted classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD)
Plasmacytic hyperplasia PTLD
Infectious mononucleosis PTLD
Florid follicular hyperplasia PTLD*
Polymorphic PTLD
Monomorphic PTLD (B- and T-/NK-cell types)
Classical Hodgkin lymphoma PTLD
Histiocytic and dendritic cell neoplasms
Histiocytic sarcoma
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Langerhans cell sarcoma
Indeterminate dendritic cell tumor
Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma
Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma
Fibroblastic reticular cell tumor
Disseminated juvenile xanthogranuloma
Erdheim-Chester disease*
Provisional entities are listed in italics.
*Changes from the 2008 classification.
2376
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 disease even if there are cytopenias or disease-related symptoms.
Non-CLL type MBL, at least some of which may be closely related to
splenic marginal zone lymphoma, is also recognized.9,10
In addition, although other confirmatory studies are necessary, the
concept of tissue-based MBL of CLL type will be discussed as there are
a subset of cases with lymph node involvement by “SLL” that also do
not seem to have a significant rate of progression. In 1 retrospective
study, lymph nodes with CLL/SLL in which proliferation centers were
not observed and patients in whom adenopathy was ,1.5 cm based
on computed tomography scans were the best candidates for tissue-
based MBL.11
Alsorelated toCLL/SLL, there isincreasing interest in proliferation
centers (PCs) in overt CLL/SLL. We have learned that: PCs can have
cyclin D1 expression in up to about 30% of CLL/SLL, they express
MYC protein, and, based on 3 of 4 studies, PCs which are large/
confluent and/or have a high proliferative fraction are a significant
and independent adverse prognostic indicator.12-16
Follicular lymphoma, in situ follicular neoplasia, pediatric-type
follicular lymphoma, and other related lymphomas
Consistentwiththegrowingconservatisminlymphomadiagnosis,insitu
follicular lymphoma (FL) will be renamed in situ follicular neoplasia
(ISFN) with the criteria remaining those described previously. Much
has been learned about these neoplasms, which have a low rate of
progression, but are more often associated with prior or synchronous
overt lymphomas, thus requiring additional clinical assessment.17,18
They must be distinguished from partial involvement by FL that is more
likely to progress.17 Unfortunately, the extent of the in situ lesions, such
as the number or proportion of abnormal follicles or the degree of
involvement within the abnormal follicles, cannot be used to predict
whichpatientshaveisolatedISFNorwhoareleastlikelytoprogresstoan
overt lymphoma.17,18 ISFN does have fewer chromosomal copy-number
abnormalities than focal and especially overt FL, although secondary
genetic abnormalities are present even in the earliestlesions in addition to
BCL2 rearrangements.19,20 At the very lowest end of this spectrum, cells
similar to those with t(14;18)(q32;q21) IGH/BCL2 translocation that
circulate in many healthy individuals may reside in the germinal centers
as nonproliferative centrocytes even in the absence of recognizable
ISFN.21 However, higher levels of circulating t(14;18)1 lymphocytes
(.1024 of total cells) indicate a higher risk for FL.22 It is also important
to recognize that flow cytometric studies demonstrate populations of
B cells with a FL-type phenotype in about half of all lymph nodes with
ISFN.18 This is of particular importance in the evaluation of fine-needle
aspirations in which architectural features cannot be evaluated.
Pediatric FL will become a definite entity in the 2016 classification
but are now known as pediatric-type FL because similar lymphomas
may occur in adults.23,24 It is a nodal disease characterized by large
expansile highly proliferative follicles that often have prominent
blastoid follicular center cells rather than classic centroblasts (or
centrocytes).23 Some have reported a moderate number of cases as
grade1-2of3.BCL2rearrangementsmustnotbe present,buttheremay
be some BCL2 protein expression. They also lack BCL6 and MYC
rearrangements with ongoing investigations of their genetic/molecular
landscape.25 Nearly all cases are localized and may not require
treatment other than excision. The criteria for pediatric-type FL,
however, must be strictly applied to avoid underdiagnosing conven-
tional grade 3 FL, with particular caution required before making this
diagnosis in an adult. This category also excludes cases with diffuse
areas (ie, foci of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma [DLBCL]). Some
studies have raised the possibility that pediatric-type FL might be a
“benign clonal proliferation with low malignant potential.”23,24
LargeB-celllymphoma(LBCL)withIRF4rearrangement,which
also occurs most commonly in children and young adults, will be
considered a distinct new provisional entity (Figure 1A-D).23,26 These
lymphomas most typically occur in Waldeyer ring and/or cervical
lymph nodes and are low stage. They may have a follicular, follicular
and diffuse, or pure diffuse growth pattern resembling FL grade 3B or a
DLBCL. Strong IRF4/MUM1 expression is seen usually with BCL6
and a high proliferative fraction. BCL2 and CD10 are also expressed in
more than half of the cases with a minority CD51. They are most often
of germinal center type, particularly based on gene expression profiling
(GEP) studies.26 Most cases have IG/IRF4 rearrangements sometimes
together with BCL6 rearrangements but they uniformly lack BCL2
rearrangements. Some cases that also seem to belong in this category
lack a demonstrable IRF4 rearrangement but have strong IRF4/MUM1
expression.23 This lymphoma is considered to be more aggressive than
other pediatric-type FL but patients, at least when treated, have done
very well.26 These cases must be distinguished from the CD102, IRF4/
MUM11 FL which are often associated with DLBCL and occur in
older individuals.27
The current monograph recognizes gastrointestinal (GI) tract FL as a
variant. The revision will emphasize the distinctive nature specifically of
duodenal-type FL, which although having features of a localized overt
low-grade FL, is distinct from other GI tract FL, and has many features
that overlap with ISFN as well as some features resembling an
extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue.19,28,29 These patients appear to have an excellent outcome,
including some cases managed with a watch-and-wait strategy.28
The new monograph will also recognize that although some
diffuse-appearing FL may simply reflect a sampling issue, there is a
group of distinctive largely diffuse low-grade FL that typically present
aslargelocalizedinguinalmasses,lackBCL2rearrangements,andhave
1p36 deletions.30 It should be noted that the latter is not a specific
findingandcanbeseeninotherlymphomasincludingconventionalFL.
Mantle cell lymphoma, leukemic nonnodal mantle cell
lymphoma, and in situ mantle cell neoplasia
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) classically has been recognized as an
aggressive but incurable small B-cell lymphoma that developed in a
linear fashion from na¨
ıve B cells. Two types of clinically indolent
variants are now recognized and reflect, in part, that MCL develops
along 2 very different pathways (Figure 2).31 Classical MCL is usually
composed of IGHV-unmutated or minimally mutated B cells that
usually express SOX11 and typically involves lymph nodes and other
extranodal sites. Acquisition of additional molecular/cytogenetic
abnormalitiescanleadtoevenmoreaggressiveblastoidorpleomorphic
MCL. Other MCL develop from IGHV-mutated SOX112 B cells
which leads to leukemic nonnodal MCL, usually involving the PB,
bone marrow, and often spleen. These cases are frequently clinically
indolent; however, secondary abnormalities, often involving TP53,
may occurand lead to very aggressive disease. In situ MCL is nowto be
called in situ mantle cell neoplasia (ISMCN), again emphasizing a
more conservative approach for lymphoid neoplasms with a low rate of
progression. It is characterized by the presence of cyclin D11 cells,
mosttypically in the inner mantle zones of follicles, in lymphoid tissues
that do not otherwise suggest the diagnosis of a MCL, and is often
found incidentally, sometimes in association with other lymphomas.32
They are much less common than ISFN and although they may be
disseminated, appear to have a low rate of progression.32 ISMCN should
be distinguished from overt MCL with a mantle zone growth pattern.
Nevertheless, these latter cases as well as other classical MCL with a low
proliferative fraction may also be relatively indolent.
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2377
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 Table 2. Highlights of changes in 2016 WHO classification of lymphoid, histiocytic, and dendritic neoplasms
Entity/category
Change
CLL/SLL
• Cytopenias or disease-related symptoms are now insufficient to make a diagnosis of CLL with
,5 3 109/L PB CLL cells.
• Large/confluent and/or highly proliferative proliferation centers are adverse prognostic indicators.
• Mutations of potential clinical relevance, such as TP53, NOTCH1, SF3B1, ATM, and BIRC3, have
been recognized.
Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
• Must distinguish low-count from high-count MBL.
• A lymph node equivalent of MBL exists.
Hairy cell leukemia
• BRAF V600E mutations in vast majority of cases with MAP2K1 mutations in most cases that use
IGHV4-34 and lack BRAF mutation.
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL)
• MYD88 L265P mutation in vast majority of cases impacting diagnostic criteria even though finding is
not specific for LPL.
• IgM MGUS is more closely related to LPL and other B-cell lymphomas than to myeloma.
Follicular lymphoma (FL)
• Mutational landscape better understood but clinical impact remains to be determined.
In situ follicular neoplasia
• New name for in situ follicular lymphoma reflects low risk of progression to lymphoma.
Pediatric-type FL
• A localized clonal proliferation with excellent prognosis; conservative therapeutic approach may be
sufficient.
• Occurs in children and young adults, rarely in older individuals.
Large B-cell lymphoma with IRF4 rearrangement
• New provisional entity to distinguish from pediatric-type FL and other DLBCL.
• Localized disease, often involves cervical lymph nodes or Waldeyer ring.
Duodenal-type FL
• Localized process with low risk for dissemination.
Predominantly diffuse FL with 1p36 deletion
• Accounts for some cases of diffuse FL, lacks BCL2 rearrangement; presents as localized mass, often
inguinal.
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL)
• Two MCL subtypes recognized with different clinicopathological manifestations and molecular
pathogenetic pathways: one largely with unmutated/minimally mutated IGHV and mostly SOX111 and
the other largely with mutated IGHV and mostly SOX112 (indolent leukemic nonnodal MCL with PB,
bone marrow (BM), 6splenic involvement, may become more aggressive).
• Mutations of potential clinical importance, such as TP53, NOTCH 1/2, recognized in small proportion
of cases.
• CCND2 rearrangements in approximately half of cyclin D12 MCL.
In situ mantle cell neoplasia
• New name for in situ MCL, reflecting low clinical risk.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, NOS
• Distinction of GCB vs ABC/non-GC type required with use of immunohistochemical algorithm
acceptable, may affect therapy.
• Coexpression of MYC and BCL2 considered new prognostic marker (double-expressor lymphoma).
• Mutational landscape better understood but clinical impact remains to be determined.
EBV1 DLBCL, NOS
• This term replaces EBV1 DLBCL of the elderly because it may occur in younger patients.
• Does not include EBV1 B-cell lymphomas that can be given a more specific diagnosis.
EBV1 mucocutaneous ulcer
• Newly recognized entity associated with iatrogenic immunosuppression or age-related
immunosenescence.
Burkitt lymphoma
• TCF3 or ID3 mutations in up to ;70% of cases.
Burkitt-like lymphoma with 11q aberration
• New provisional entity that closely resembles Burkitt lymphoma but lacks MYC rearrangement and has
some other distinctive features.
High-grade B-cell lymphoma, with MYC and BCL2
and/or BCL6 translocations
• New category for all “double-/triple-hit” lymphomas other than FL or lymphoblastic lymphomas.
High-grade B-cell lymphoma, NOS
• Together with the new category for the “double-/triple-hit” lymphomas, replaces the 2008 category of
B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between DLBCL and Burkitt lymphoma
(BCLU).
• Includes blastoid-appearing large B-cell lymphomas and cases lacking MYC and BCL2 or BCL6
translocations that would formerly have been called BCLU.
T-cell large granular lymphocyte leukemia
• New subtypes recognized with clinicopathologic associations.
• STAT3 and STAT5B mutations in a subset, latter associated with more clinically aggressive disease.
Systemic EBV1 T-cell lymphoma of childhood
• Name changed from lymphoproliferative disorder to lymphoma due to its fulminant clinical course
and desire to clearly distinguish it from chronic active EBV infection.
Hydroa vacciniforme–like lymphoproliferative
disorder
• Name changed from lymphoma to lymphoproliferative disorder due to its relationship with chronic active
EBV infection and a spectrum in terms of its clinical course.
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL)
• Diagnosis only to be used for cases formerly known as type I EATL, typically associated with celiac
disease.
Monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell
lymphoma
• Formerly type II EATL; segregated from type I EATL and given a new name due to its distinctive nature
and lack of association with celiac disease.
Indolent T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder of the
GI tract
• New indolent provisional entity with superficial monoclonal intestinal T-cell infiltrate, some cases show
progression.
Lymphomatoid papulosis
• New subtypes described with similar clinical behavior but atypical histologic/immunophenotypic features.
Primary cutaneous g d T-cell lymphoma
• Important to exclude other cutaneous T-cell lymphomas/lymphoproliferative disorders that may also be
derived from g d T cells such as mycosis fungoides or lymphomatoid papulosis.
Primary cutaneous acral CD81 T-cell lymphoma
• New indolent provisional entity, originally described as originating in the ear.
2378
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 Impact of newer molecular/cytogenetic studies related to the
small B-cell lymphoid neoplasms
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies have led not only to major
advancesinbetterunderstandingthesmallB-celllymphoidneoplasms,but
alsotodiscoveriesofdiagnosticimportance.Whereasthe2008monograph
reported that “No cytogenetic abnormality is specific for [hairy cell
leukemia]”, we now know that BRAF V600E mutations are found in
almost all cases of hairy cell leukemia (HCL) but not in HCL-variant
(HCL-v) or other small B-cell lymphoid neoplasms.33 More recently,
mutations inMAP2K1which encodes MEK1 (which isdownstream of
BRAF)have been reported inalmosthalf of HCL-v andinthe majority
ofHCLthat useIGHV4-34 and which,likeHCL-v,lackBRAFV600E
mutations.34
Similarly, the 2008 monograph noted that “no specific chromosomal
or oncogene abnormalities are recognized” in lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma (LPL); however, we now know that about 90% of LPL
or Waldenstr¨
om macroglobulinemia (LPL plus an immunoglobulin
M [IgM] paraprotein) have MYD88 L265P mutations.35 This mutation
also is found in a significant proportion of IgM but not IgG or IgA
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS)
cases, a small proportion of other small B-cell lymphomas even after
careful review, in ;30% of non–germinal center-type DLBCL, more
than half of primary cutaneous DLBCL, leg type, and many DLBCL
at immune-privileged sites but not in plasma cell myeloma, even
of IgM type.36 Review of cases with and without the mutation have
led to revised criteria for LPL, emphasizing the monotony of the
lymphoplasmacyticproliferation incasesotherthan thoseundergoing
transformation, total architectural effacement in some cases, and al-
lowing for significant follicular colonization.37 Although seeming to
be more inclusive, these studies also suggest that cases previously
described as polymorphic LPL and some LPL-like cases of g heavy
chain disease be excluded from the LPL category.37,38 These studies
alsohave ledtoIgM MGUSbeingthoughtofasmorecloselyrelated to
LPL or other B-cell lymphomas and segregated from the uniformly
wild-type MYD88 IgG and IgA MGUS cases that are more closely
relatedtoplasmacellmyeloma.Consistentwiththisapproach,CXCR4
mutations are found in about 30% of LPL and 20% of IgM MGUS but
are not found in IgG or IgA MGUS cases.39-41
The situation with CLL/SLL is quite different and more complex
because although there are no recognized disease-defining mutations,
there are a large number of mutations that occur with a relatively low
frequency.42-51 In addition to their biological implications, at least
some, such as TP53, NOTCH1, SF3B1, and BIRC3, are of clinical
interest because of their adverse prognostic implications and with some
being potential direct or indirect therapeutic targets (Figure 3). It has
been suggested that some of these could be integrated into an updated
cytogenetic risk profile that also includes the well-known recurrent
chromosomal abnormalities typically identified with fluorescence in
situ hybridization studies50,52; however, although interest remains
in this concept, the literature is inconsistent regarding the clinical im-
plications of some of the mutations and combined risk profile, and it
will not be recommended in the revised monograph.49,51
In addition to having many nonrandom secondary chromosomal
gains and losses as well as recurrent copy-neutral lossof heterozygosity
that often involves the same regions where the losses occur such as
TP53, MCL also are characterized by having mutations affecting many
different genes with ATM (40%-75%) and CCND1 (35%) the most
frequent.53 Other mutations are present in ,15% of cases, including
some such as NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 that are of prognostic and po-
tential therapeutic importance.53,54 It has also been learned that about
half of MCL that lack cyclin D1 expression/CCND1 rearrangements
have CCND2 translocations, often with IGK or IGL as a partner locus,
a finding that can be of diagnostic utility.55
Much has also been learned about the mutational landscape in terms
of the development and progression in FL. Mutations in chromatin
regulator/modifier genes, such as CREBBP and KMT2D (MLL2), are
extremely common early events and may be potential therapeutic
targets.56-59 EZH2 mutations, present in about 20% to 25% of FL, are
another early event and potential therapeutic target.57,58,60 Mutations
are present in a large number of other genes, including some seen pre-
dominantly with transformation, but in significantly lower proportions
Table 2. (continued)
Entity/category
Change
Primary cutaneous CD41 small/medium T-cell
lymphoproliferative disorder
• No longer to be diagnosed as an overt lymphoma due to limited clinical risk, localized disease, and
similarity to clonal drug reactions.
• Remains a provisional entity.
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL), NOS
• Subsets based on phenotype and molecular abnormalities being recognized that may have clinical
implications but are mostly not a part of routine practice at this time.
Nodal T-cell lymphomas with T-follicular helper
(TFH) phenotype
• An umbrella category created to highlight the spectrum of nodal lymphomas with a TFH phenotype
including angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, follicular T-cell lymphoma, and other nodal PTCL with a
TFH phenotype (specific diagnoses to be used due to clinicopathologic differences).
• Overlapping recurrent molecular/cytogenetic abnormalities recognized that potentially could impact
therapy.
ALK2 anaplastic large-cell lymphoma
• Now a definite entity that includes cytogenetic subsets that appear to have prognostic implications
(eg, 6p25 rearrangments at IRF4/DUSP22 locus).
Breast implant–associated anaplastic large cell
lymphoma
• New provisional entity distinguished from other ALK2 ALCL; noninvasive disease associated with
excellent outcome.
Nodular lymphocyte–predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma
• Variant growth patterns, if present, should be noted in diagnostic report, due to their clinicopathologic
associations.
• Cases associated with synchronous or subsequent sites that are indistinguishable from T-cell histiocyte-
rich large B-cell lymphoma (THRLBCL) without a nodular component should be designated THRLBCL-
like transformation.
Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma
• Features recognized that are intermediate between NLPHL and other types of classical Hodgkin
lymphoma.
Erdheim-Chester disease
• Should be distinguished from other members of the juvenile xanthogranuloma family; often associated
with BRAF mutations.
Other histiocytic/dendritic neoplasms
• Clonal relationship to lymphoid neoplasms recognized in some cases.
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2379
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 of patients. A new prognostic model integrating gene mutations with
clinical parameters has been proposed, but, although conceptually
interesting, requires validation.58 Whether mutational analysis should
be performed routinely for diagnostic, prognostic, or therapeutic
purposes and whether it should be integrated with other pathological
and clinical prognostic factors remains to be determined.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Cell-of-origin classification.
The 2008 classification recognized
germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) and activated B-cell-like (ABC)
molecular “subgroups” of DLBCL based on GEP as well as a group of
cases that could not be put into either category (unclassifiable). The
GCB and ABC subgroups differed in their chromosomal alterations,
activation of signaling pathways, and clinical outcome.61 It separately
recognized GCB and non-GCB immunohistochemical subgroups
based on the Hans algorithm which used antibodies to CD10, BCL6,
and IRF4/MUM1 but noted that these groups did not “exactly
correlate” with the molecular categories and that these subgroups did
not determine therapy. However, because GEP was not available as a
routine clinical test, and because there were issues of reproducibility
andreliability of immunohistochemical algorithms, subclassification
of DLBCL, not otherwise specified (NOS) was considered optional in
the 2008 classification. The better understanding of the molecular
pathogenesis of these 2 subgroups since 2008, however, has led to the
investigation of more specific therapeutic strategies to mitigate the
worse outcome among those with ABC/non-GCB type DLBCL
reported in most studies; prospective trials are ongoing to determine
whether these therapies should be incorporated into clinical practice.62
For this reason, the revised classification will require the identifica-
tion of these 2 subtypes. With GEP still not a routine clinical test, the
use of immunohistochemistry (IHC) algorithms will be considered
Figure 1. New provisional B-cell lymphoma entities.
(A-D) LBCL with IRF4 rearrangement. (A) Note the very
large abnormal-appearing follicles in the central portion
of this tonsil. (B) The neoplastic follicles have numerous
transformed cells that are (C) IRF4/MUM-11 and (D)
BCL61. (E-H) Burkitt-like lymphoma with 11q aberration.
(E) The touch imprint demonstrates a monotonous pop-
ulation of transformed cells with basophilic cytoplasm
that are (F) CD201, (G) have a very high MIB1/Ki-67
proliferation fraction, and are (H) BCL61. (A-B) Hema-
toxylin and eosin stain; (C,D-H) immunoperoxidase
stains as specified; (E) Romanowsky-type stain.
2380
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 acceptable. Although the Hans algorithm remains the most popular and
has a reasonable correlation with the GEP, other algorithms also may
be used. It is acknowledged that the IHC algorithms donotrecognize
the 10% to 15% of tumors unclassified by GEP, have reproducibility
issues,andarenotuniformlyreportedtohaveprognosticutility.Newer
methods based on quantification of RNA transcripts extracted from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues provide concordant results
with conventional microarray GEP, are reproducible between
laboratories, and capture the prognostic impact of the cell-of-origin
classification.63-66 These methods are still not accessible to most
laboratories but may represent a promising alternative to the current
IHC-based algorithms.
Other phenotypic and molecular/cytogenetic features of
clinical importance.
A significant advance in recent years has been
the better understanding of MYC alterations in LBCLs.67 MYC is
rearranged in 5% to 15% of DLBCL, NOS, and is frequently associated
with BCL2 or, to a lesser extent, BCL6 translocation, in the so-called
“double-hit” or “triple-hit” lymphomas that are included in the updated
WHOclassificationinthenewcategoryofhigh-gradeB-celllymphoma
(HGBL), with rearrangements of MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6 (see
detailed discussion under “High-grade B-cell lymphomas, with and
without MYC and BCL2 or BCL6 translocations”).68
MYC protein expression is detected in a much higher proportion of
DLBCL (30%-50%) and is associated with concomitant expression of
BCL2in20%to35%ofcases.67MostofthesetumorsdonotcarryMYC/
BCL2chromosomalalterations andhavebeennamed“double-expressor
lymphoma.” Most studies use a cutoff of 40% MYC-expressing cells
to define these cases; the cutoff for BCL2 expression has varied
considerably in the literature, but a figure of .50% is recommended.
In several but not all studies, the double-expressor lymphomas have a
worse outcome than other DLBCL, NOS but they are not as aggressive
as the HGBL, with rearrangements of MYC and BCL2 and/or
BCL6.69,70 These observations have suggested that double expression
of MYC and BCL2 proteins without gene aberrations should be
considered a prognostic indicator in DLBCL, NOS but not a separate
category. CD30 expression in DLBCL, NOS is also of potential
interest as itmay be a potential target for new antibody-based therapies.
Recent NGS studies have identified common somatic mutations in
all subgroups of DLBCL but also a profile of alterations differentially
represented in both GCB and ABC subtypes.71 Somatic mutations
common in both DLBCL subtypes are inactivating mutations of TP53
and genes involved in immunosurveillance (B2M, CD58), alterations in
epigenetic regulators (CREBBP/EP300, KMT2D/C [MLL2/3], MEF2B),
and oncogenic activation of BCL6. GCB-DLBCL carry frequent
alteration in the histone methyl transferase EZH2, BCL2 translo-
cations, and mutations in the cell motility regulator GNA13, whereas
ABC-DLBCL have mutations in genes (MYD88, CD79A, CARD11,
TNFAIP3) activating the B-cell receptor/Toll-like receptor and
NF-kB pathways. Although the clinical implications of these muta-
tions are not fully understood, there are increasing expectations that
they will become important in guiding future targeted therapies.62,72
EBV1 large B-cell lymphomas and EBV1 mucocutaneous ulcer
The 2008 monograph included “EBV-positive DLBCL of the elderly”
as a provisional entity. These tumors occur in apparently immuno-
competent patients usually .50 years old and have a worse prognosis
than Epstein-Barr virus–negative (EBV2) tumors. Epstein-Barr virus–
positive(EBV1)DLBCL,however,havebeenincreasinglyrecognized
in younger patients, with a broader morphological spectrum and better
survival than initially thought.73-75 This new information has led to
substitution of the modifier “elderly” with “not otherwise specified”
(EBV1 DLBCL, NOS) in the updated classification. The NOS is to
highlight that there are other more specific entities with neoplastic
EBV1largeBcells,suchaslymphomatoidgranulomatosis.Inaddition,
Unmutated/minimally
mutated IG
SOX11 + B cell
In situ MC
neoplasia
Pre-
B cell
Cyclin
D1 neg
Hypermutated IG
SOX11– B cell
Mantle
zone
Germinal
center
Lymph
node,
extranodal
PB, BM,
spleen
NaÏve
B cell
CCND1-R
Classical MCL
Leukaemic
non-nodal MCL
Pleomorphic
MCL
Blastoid MCL
Progression
(TP53 and other
   oncogenic
abnormalities)
Figure 2. Proposed model of molecular pathogene-
sis in the development and progression of major
subtypes of MCL. Precursor B cells usually with but
sometimes without a CCND1 rearrangement mature to
abnormal na¨
ıve B cells which may initially colonize, often
the inner portion of the mantle zones, representing
ISMCN. These cells already have additional molecular
genetic abnormalities, such as inactivating ATM muta-
tions. They may progress to classical MCL which most
frequently is SOX111, has no evidence of transit
through the germinal center, and is genetically unstable
acquiring additional abnormalities related to cell cycle
dysregulation, the DNA damage response pathway, cell
survival, and other pathways. Ultimately, progression
to blastoid or pleomorphic MCL may occur. A smaller
proportion of neoplastic mantle cells may undergo
somatic hypermutation, presumably in germinal centers,
leading to SOX112 MCL that are more genetically stable
for long periods of time and which preferentially involve
the PB, bone marrow (BM), and sometimes the spleen.
Even these MCL, however, may undergo additional
molecular/cytogenetic abnormalities, particularly TP53
abnormalities, leading to clinical and sometime morpho-
logical progression. Adapted from Jares et al31 and
Swerdlow et al.2 Professional illustration by Patrick
Lane, ScEYEnce Studios.
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2381
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 the new category EBV1 mucocutaneous ulcer has been segre-
gated from EBV1 DLBCL as a provisional entity due to its self-
limited growth potential and response to conservative management.
These lesions may present in advanced age or with iatrogenic
immunosuppression.76,77
Burkitt lymphoma
Recent NGS studies of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) have improved our
understanding of the pathogenesis of these tumors. Mutations in the
transcription factor TCF3 or its negative regulator ID3 occur in about
70% of sporadic and immunodeficiency-related BL and 40% of
endemic cases. TCF3 promotes survival and proliferation in lymphoid
cells by activating the B-cell receptor/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
signaling pathways and modulating the expression of cyclin D3, which
is also mutated in 30% of BL.78-81
One controversial issue not fully resolved is whether true BL
without MYC translocations really exist. Some recent studies have
identified a subset of lymphomas that resemble BL morphologically,
to a large extent phenotypically and by GEP, but which lack MYC
rearrangements. Instead, they have a chromosome 11q alteration
characterized by proximal gains and telomeric losses.82,83 Compared
with BL, these lymphomas have more complex karyotypes, lower
levels of MYC expression, a certain degree of cytological pleomor-
phism, occasionally a follicular pattern, and frequently a nodal
presentation. The clinical course seems to be similar to BL, but the
number of cases reported is still limited. Although more studies are
needed, the consensus for the revised WHO classification was to
consider these a new provisional entity designated Burkitt-like
lymphoma with 11q aberration (Figure 1E-H).
High-grade B-cell lymphomas, with and without MYC and BCL2
or BCL6 translocations
The 2008 WHO classification introduced the category of “B-cell
lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between DLBCL
A
A
G
G
G
G
C
A
C
C
T
E
P
S
A
A
G
G
G
G
C
A
C
C
T
E
P
S
NOTCH1 p.P2514fs*4
mutated case
NOTCH1
unmutated case
139,390,650 bp
139,390,650 bp
Coverage
Reads
700
0
1500
0
A
B
Coverage
Reads
Figure 3. NOTCH1 mutation detected by NGS and Sanger sequencing. (A) NOTCH1 p.P2514fs*4 (NP_060087.3) (c.7541-7542delCT, NM_017617.3) mutation detected
by NGS (MiSeq, Illumina) as visualized in the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV, www.broadinstitute.org/igv, human reference genome GRCh37/hg19) (left, mutated case)
and the same region of a NOTCH1 unmutated sample (right, unmutated case). In each case, the nucleotide coverage as well as a few representative NGS reads are shown.
A deletion of AG (CT if considering the reverse strand) is observed in the mutated case. By NGS, each read is represented by a gray horizontal bar and the deletion is
represented as a black line within those reads carrying the mutation. A decrease in 50% of the coverage can be observed for the 2 nucleotides affected showing that the
mutation is present in half of the reads. (B) Sanger sequencing results are shown under the reference nucleotide and amino acid sequences.
2382
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 and BL” (BCLU) to recognize a subset of very aggressive tumors in
which the distinction between DLBCL and BL was very difficult.
Lymphomas with a GEP intermediate between that of molecular BL
and molecular non-BL (mostly DLBCL), also lends support to the
existence of these intermediate-type cases, which were not, however,
considered a specific entity.84,85 Segregation of these cases was also
necessary to better define these clinically problematic tumors.3
Additional studies followed that demonstrated that BCLU and other
LBCL, with rearrangements of MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6, had
mutational features intermediate between DLBCL and BL. They also
better characterized the double-/triple-hit lymphomas, including iden-
tifying features that might mitigate the adverse clinical impact of MYC
translocations.68,86-88 The criteria for BCLU, however, are vague and
the diagnosis has not been used uniformly, limiting its utility as a
diagnostic category.68,86,87
All LBCL with MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6 rearrangements will
beincludedinasinglecategorytobedesignatedHGBL,withMYCand
BCL2 and/or BCL6 rearrangements, except for cases that fulfill the
criteria for a follicular or lymphoblastic lymphoma (Figures 4 and 5).89
The morphologic appearance should be noted in a comment. The
Figure 5. Cytologic spectrum of HGBL, with MYC
and BCL2 and/or BCL6 rearrangements. (A-B) This
HGBL with MYC and BCL6 rearrangements closely
resembles a BL including a starry sky with tingible body
macrophages and many intermediate-sized transformed
cells although there are some subtle cytologic differences
from a classic BL. (C) This HGBL with MYC, BCL2, and
BCL6 rearrangements appears more blastoid but was
TdT2. (D) This HGBL with MYC and BCL2 rearrange-
ments would otherwise have been considered a DLBCL
that included many immunoblastic-type cells with single
prominent central nucleoli. (A-D) Hematoxylin and eosin
stain.
Morphology
Phenotype &
cytogenetics
Diagnosis
Blastoid
BL
DLBCL/BL
DLBCL
B-LBL
HGBL, NOS
DLBCL, NOS
HGBL, with MYC and
BCL2 and/or BCL6R
BL
TdT+
TdT–, cyclin D1–
Figure 4. Diagnostic approach to HBCLs. Lymphomas that potentially fall into the HGBL categories can morphologically resemble B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
(B-LBL), BL, and DLBCL as well as lymphomas that are intermediate between DLBCL and BL (DLBCL/BL). These distinctions can be very subjective. The orange arrows
indicate cases with a BL phenotype and a MYC rearrangement without BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangements (“single hit”). The red arrows indicate cases with MYC and BCL2 and/or
BCL6 rearrangements (“double or triple hit”). Neither MCLs, subtypes of LBCLs, nor Burkitt-like lymphoma with 11q aberration are indicated in this diagram. Adapted from
Kluin et al89 with permission. Professional illustration by Patrick Lane, ScEYEnce Studios.
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2383
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 category of BCLU will be eliminated. Cases that appear blastoid or
casesintermediatebetweenDLBCLandBL,butwhichlackaMYCand
BCL2 and/or BCL6 rearrangement, will be placed in the category of
HGBL, NOS. A consensus has not yet been reached to provide
specific guidelines as to which LBCL should have fluorescence in
situ hybridization studies. Some believe that all DLBCL should
have genetic studies for the detection of MYC, BCL2, and BCL6
rearrangements, whereas others would limit them, for example, to
cases with a GCB phenotype and/or high-grade morphology or to
cases with .40% MYC1 cells.
Mature T- and NK-cell neoplasms
Nodal T-cell lymphomas: angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma,
follicular T-cell lymphoma, and peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not
otherwise specified
Significant advances have occurred in the classification of both nodal
and extranodal T-cell and natural killer (NK)-cell neoplasms, which
have led to revisions in the classification and introduction of new
provisional entities. Many of these changes are the result of genomic
studies using approaches to examine GEP and the genetic landscape of
T-cell and NK-cell neoplasms.
There have been new insights into the complexity of nodal
peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL). Genetic studies have shown
recurrent mutations that affect a significant proportion of cases
of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL). Importantly,
many of the same genetic changes are observed in cases of PTCL,
NOS that manifest a T follicular helper (TFH) phenotype.90-92 For
this designation, the neoplastic cells should express at least 2 or
3 TFH-related antigens, including CD279/PD1, CD10, BCL6,
CXCL13, ICOS, SAP, and CCR5. This common phenotype has led
to follicular T-cell lymphoma (FTCL) and AITL being unified under a
common heading. Cases of nodal PTCL with TFH phenotype will be
included here as well. Recurrent genetic abnormalities include TET2,
IDH2, DNMT3A, RHOA, and CD28 mutations, as well as gene
fusions such as ITK-SYK or CTLA4-CD28. All these lesions can take
part in the process of lymphomagenesis and may represent the target
of tailored therapies (eg, epigenetic modifiers). These cases also
share many features by GEP.
Both AITL and FTCL may contain B-cell blasts, often EBV1, in
addition to the neoplastic TFH cells. In some cases, the atypical B-cell
blasts simulate Hodgkin–Reed-Sternberg cells, leading to a mistaken
diagnosis of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL).93,94 Progression to
EBV1, and more rarely EBV2, B-cell neoplasms may occur ina subset
of cases.95 Nevertheless, although the neoplastic cells share a TFH
phenotype and share many genetic changes, clinical and pathological
differences remain, so that both diagnoses are retained in the classifica-
tion. FTCL more often presents with localized disease, with fewer
systemic symptoms.
ThecasesremaininginthePTCL,NOScategorystillshowextreme
cytological and phenotypic heterogeneity. GEP studies display a global
signature close to the one of activated T-lymphocytes. GEP analysis of
372 cryopreserved PTCLs identified at least 3 subtypes characterized
by overexpression of GATA3, TBX21, and cytotoxic genes, as well
as expression of the corresponding molecules using IHC.96 These
subtypes are associated with a different clinical behavior and response
to therapy. The GATA3 subtype has an inferior prognosis, shows high
levels of Th2 cytokines, and can be identified by IHC.97 Studies using
NGS are at an early stage in PTCL, NOS, but have provided new
insights, which may lead to further refinement in the classification
or new targets for therapy. These studies have identified mutations
of epigenetic mediators (KMT2D [MLL2], TET2, KDM6A, ARID1B,
DNMT3A, CREBBP, MLL, and ARID2), genes involved in signaling
pathways(TNFAIP3,APC,CHD8,ZAP70,NF1,TNFRSF14,TRAF3),
and tumor suppressors (TP53, FOXO1, BCORL1, ATM).98
Anaplastic large-cell lymphomas: ALK1, ALK2, and
breast implant–associated
GEP studies also have provided insights into the distinction of CD30-
expressing T-cell lymphomas (TCLs), and have facilitated the
distinction of PTCL with high CD30 expression from ALK2
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL), the latter having a superior
prognosis.99,100 ALK1 and ALK2 ALCL were both recognized in
the 2008 classification, although ALK2 ALCL was considered a
provisional entity, as criteria for distinguishing ALK2 ALCL from
CD301 PTCL were imperfect. Improved criteria now exist for the
recognition of ALK2 ALCL in daily practice, and it is no longer
considered provisional.101
GEP studies have shown that ALK2 ALCL has a signature quite
close to that of ALK1 ALCL and distinct from other NK/TCLs. More
recent studies illuminating the genetic landscape of ALK2 ALCL have
shown convergent mutations and kinase fusions that lead to
constitutive activation of the JAK/STAT3 pathway.102 These
studies provide a genetic rationale for the morphologic and phenotypic
similarities between ALK1 and ALK2 ALCL. However, not all cases
of ALK2 ALCLs are created equal. A subset with rearrangements at
the locus containing DUSP22 and IRF4 in chromosome 6p25 tends to
be relatively monomorphic, usually lack cytotoxic granules, and have
been reported to have a superior prognosis, whereas a small subset
with TP63 rearrangements are very aggressive (Figure 6A).103-105
Interestingly, the same locus in 6p25 has also been implicated
in lymphomatoid papulosis (LYP) and primary cutaneous
ALCL.106,107 LYP is a clinically diverse disorder, and in recent
years a number of new pathological and clinical variants have
been described. The WHO classification recognizes the original
variants, types A, B, and C; as well as the more recently described
types D (mimics primary cutaneous aggressive epidermotropic
CD81 cytotoxic TCL),108 E (angioinvasive),109 and LyP with
chromosome 6p25 rearrangement,107 as well as some even more rare
variants. Appreciation of these variants is important, as histologically
they can mimic very aggressive TCLs, but they are clinically similar to
other forms of LYP.
A number of studies in recent years have identified a unique form
of ALK2 ALCL arising in association with breast implants designated
as breast implant–associated ALCL (Figure 6B).110 First described in
1997, it usually presents as an accumulation of seroma fluid between the
implant itself and the surrounding fibrous capsule.111 Both saline- and
silicone-filled implants have been implicated, with a median interval
from the time of the implant to the lymphoma of about 10 years.112 In
most cases, the neoplastic cells are confined to the seroma fluid, without
invasion of the capsule. In such cases, conservative management is
recommended, with removal of the implant and capsule.113 If there is
invasion through the capsule, there is risk of lymph node involvement
and systemic spread, warranting systemic chemotherapy.114 The factors
leading to progression have not been delineated.
Cytotoxic T-cell lymphomas and leukemias
Mature T-cell and NK-cell lymphomas and leukemias expressing
cytotoxic molecules constitute a heterogeneous group of diseases with
variations in clinical behavior and prognosis.115 Other than ALCL,
2384
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 most of these neoplasms present with extranodal disease, or are
systemic with involvement of liver, spleen, and bone marrow. Since
the publication of the 2008 monograph, several entities have
received greater recognition, and the revised classification reflects
the new data. Besides breast implant–associated ALCL, we have the
addition of indolent T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder (LPD) of
the GI tract and primary cutaneous acral CD81 TCL as provisional
entities.116,117 Both are clonal disorders, usually composed of CD81
T cells, with an indolent clinical course. The cutaneous acral lesions,
first recognized affecting the ear, are nearly always localized to a
single site and can be managed conservatively (Figure 6C-D).
Indolent T-cell LPD of the GI tract can be derived from either CD8 or
lessoftenCD41Tcells,affectsmanysitesintheGItract,buthasanindolent
clinical course. Their optimal management is not yet determined.
The desire to categorize lymphomas according to the precise cellular
origin is attractive,but among the mature TCLs,promiscuity is observed.
Some years ago, it was recognized that although hepatosplenic TCL is
usually of gd T-cellderivation,somecases havean ab phenotype,118yet
are otherwise clinically and genetically similar. Furthermore, among
cutaneous TCLs, although gd TCL are generally aggressive,119,120 gd
variants of mycosis fungoides or other TCLs with an indolent clinical
course have been described.121,122
Recent studies have identified recurrent mutations affecting
the JAK/STAT pathway in many T-cell and NK-cell malignancies,
Figure 6. TCLs. (A) ALK2 ALCL with DUSP22 rearrange-
ment. There is a relatively monotonous proliferation of
large transformed cells and classic “Hallmark” cells. (B)
Breast implant–associated ALCL. The seroma cavity
demonstrates numerous very large anaplastic-appearing
lymphoid cells. (C-D) Primary cutaneous acral CD81
TCL. (C) Nodule on the ear. (D) There is a diffuse
monotonous infiltrate of CD81 T cells. (E) EATL. The
somewhat pleomorphic intestinal infiltrate extends into the
epithelium and would be associated with enteropathic
changes elsewhere in the intestine. (F) MEITL. The
monotonous intestinal infiltrate is very epitheliotropic. (G-H)
Primary cutaneous CD41 small/medium T-cell LPD.
(G) Small nodule on scalp. (H) Although the infiltrate is
dense and lymphoma-like, this is now to be considered a
lymphoproliferative disorder rather than a “lymphoma.”
(A,E,F,H) Hematoxylin and eosin stain; (B) Romanowsky-
type stain; (D) CD8 immunoperoxidase stain.
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2385
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 further emphasizing the overlapping biology in many of these
malignancies.123-126 STAT3 mutations are common in large granular
lymphocyte leukemias of both T-cell and NK-cell types.123,124 STAT5B
mutations are more uncommon and are associated with more clinically
aggressive disease.127 Recurrent mutations of STAT5B and less often
STAT3 are seen in hepatosplenic TCL of gd origin128 and a similar
pattern was observed in primary cutaneous TCL.129 Additionally,
STAT5B mutations were reported in 36% of cases of what has been
knownasenteropathy-associatedTCL(EATL),typeII,allofwhichwere
of gd T-cell origin.129
These data and others have led to changes in the categorization of
intestinalTCLs.Ithasbecomeapparentthatthe2subtypesofEATLare
distinct, and will be more clearly distinguished in the revised WHO
classification.130EATL,typeI,nowsimplydesignatedasenteropathy-
associated TCL, is closely linked to celiac disease, and is primarily
a disease of individuals of northern European origin. EATL, type II,
now formally designated as monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal
TCL (MEITL), shows no association with celiac disease, and appears
increasedinincidenceinAsians,andHispanicpopulations(Figure6E-F).
Although EATL generally has a polymorphic cellular composition
and wide range in cytology, MEITL is monomorphic, and usually
positive for CD8, CD56, and MATK.131 Gains in chromosome 8q24
involvingMYCareseeninahighproportionofcases.132Manycasesof
MEITL are derived from gd T cells, but exceptions exist; some cases
are T-cell receptor (TCR) silent and some cases express TCR ab.133
Likewise, most cases of EATL express TCR ab, but gd variants exist.
As noted in the previous paragraph, mutations in STAT5B were only
associated with gd MEITL, but investigation of classical EATL or ab
cases was limited.
Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas
Primary cutaneous acral CD81 TCL and primary cutaneous gd TCL are
discussed in the previous section. Primary cutaneous CD41 small/
medium TCL was included as a provisional entity in the 2008
classification (Figure 6G-H). Since then, several clinical series have
been reported, further elucidating its cellular origin and clinical behavior.
The cells have a TFH phenotype,134 but recurrent mutations as seen in
nodal TFH lymphoma have not been reported. The clinical behavior is
almost always indolent, with most patients presenting with localized
disease. Systemic disease is rare, and conservative local management
is sufficient in most patients.135-137 It has been suggested that this may
represent a limited clonal response to an unknown stimulus, not fulfilling
criteria for malignancy. The terminology in the revised classification has
been modified to reflect this uncertain malignant potential, designating
these cases as primary cutaneous CD41 small/medium T-cell LPD.
EBV1 T-cell and NK-cell lymphomas
The most common EBV1 NK-cell lymphoma or TCL is extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, which usually presents in the upper
aerodigestive tract. However, there are less common EBV1 TCLs and
leukemias with different clinical presentations and biology. These are
delineated in the upcoming revision of the WHO classification, and
somewhat modified from the 2008 monograph. EBV-associated T- and
NK-cell lymphoproliferative disorders in the pediatric age group
include 2 major groups: chronic active EBV infection and systemic
EBV1 TCL of childhood.138,139 Both occur with increased frequency
in Asians, and in indigenous populations from Central and South
America and Mexico. Chronic active EBV infection of T/NK type
shows a broad range of clinical manifestations from indolent, local-
ized forms like hydroa vacciniforme–like LPD and severe mosquito
bite allergy to a more systemic form characterized by fever,
hepatosplenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy with or without cuta-
neous manifestations.140,141 Systemic EBV1 TCL of childhood, no
longer referred to as a “lymphoproliferative disorder,” has a fulminant
clinical course usually associated with a hemophagocytic syn-
drome. The differential diagnosis includes acute EBV-associated
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), which can present acutely,
but in some patients responds well to the HLH 94 protocol, and is not
considered neoplastic. Node-based EBV1 PTCL, defined as demon-
strating EBV in the majority of the neoplastic cells, are uncommon and
included under the broad heading of PTCL, NOS. They are generally
monomorphic and lack the angioinvasion and necrosis of extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma. They most often present in older adults, and also
can be seen in the posttransplant setting and other immunodeficiency
states.101,142,143
Hodgkin lymphomas
Although the classification of Hodgkin lymphomas (HLs) has not
changed, the revision will include updates concerning nodular
lymphocyte–predominant HL (NLPHL). It has long been recog-
nized that NLPHL can have varied growth patterns, including some
with diffuse areas and/or numerous T cells.144 Additionally,
cases manifesting one of the variant patterns have been reported to be
associated with advanced disease and a higher relapse rate, although
they still have good survival.144-146 Thus, it is useful to note these
features in the diagnostic report.
NLPHL may evolve to a completely diffuse T-cell–rich pro-
liferation lacking any follicular dendritic cells which would be
consistent with a T-cell histiocyte-rich LBCL (THRLBCL) or can be
associated with such a proliferation at a separate site. Whereas the 2008
monograph said, “It is probably good practice to label cases of NLPHL
that progress to a diffuse T-cell–rich pattern as NLPHL, THRLBCL-
like…,” the revision will recommend the designation of THRLBCL-
like transformation of NLPHL, with inclusion of the word “like” due
to some remaining uncertainties. This consensus was based on the
conclusion from the Clinical Advisory Committee that transformation
of NLPHL to DLBCL should be based on WHO criteria (with
THRLBCL being a type of LBCL). Recent data indicate that
progression to a process with features of THRLBCL is associated with
a more aggressive clinical course, and requires different management,
such that the term NLPHL in this setting may not be sufficient.147,148
However, cases with only focal diffuse areas are not considered
transformation. It is also of interest that aside from their immunomor-
phologic appearance, GEP and array comparative genomic hybridiza-
tion studies have shown similarities between NLPHL and THRLBCL,
suggesting a relationship to each other, in spite of other major dif-
ferences.147,149 The revision will also acknowledge that lymphocyte-
rich CHL has some features that are intermediate between other CHL
and NLPHL.150
Histiocytic and dendritic cell neoplasms
The classification of the histiocytic and dendritic cell neoplasm is
similar to that from 2008 except that the order of the entities is
minimally altered and Erdheim-Chester disease has been added, as
it should be distinguished from other members of the juvenile
xanthogranuloma family.1,151 Histiocytic and dendritic cell neo-
plasms are grouped together based on the functional properties of their
2386
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 normal counterpart (ie, phagocytosis and/or processing and pre-
sentation of antigens) rather than their cell of origin. Although most
arise from a common myeloid precursor, a few are of mesenchymal
origin(ie,folliculardendriticcellsarcomaandfibroblasticreticularcell
tumor).
During the last few years, several publications highlighted that,
irrespective of their myeloid or mesenchymal origin, some of these
neoplasms are associated with or preceded by FL, CLL, B- or
T-lymphoblastic neoplasms, or PTCL.152-157 These cases carry the
same TCR or IGHV rearrangements and chromosomal aberrations
as the associated lymphoid neoplasms, suggesting a process of
transdifferentiation.152-157 Moreover, the BRAF V600E mutation has
been reported in the setting of Langerhans cell histiocytosis, histiocytic
sarcoma, disseminated juvenile xanthogranuloma, Erdheim-Chester
disease, and even follicular dendritic cell sarcoma.158
Summary
There have been major advances in our knowledge of the lymphoid
neoplasms and howthey shouldbestbetreated over the last 8 years.We
have seen new insights into the biology and management of both clonal
proliferations with limited malignant potential, as well as the aggress-
ive lymphoid neoplasms where more targeted and effective therapies
are being investigated. The 2016 WHO classification and associated
monograph aim to provide updated diagnostic categories and criteria,
together with biological and clinical correlates, and facilitate state-of-
the-art patient care, future therapeutic advances, and basic research in
this field.
Acknowledgments
The Clinical Advisory Committee meeting would not have been
possible without the major support from James W. Vardiman, lead
organizer, and the staff at the University of Chicago.
S.A.P. was supported in part through the Italian Association
for Cancer Research (AIRC, Milan) grant 5x1000 number 10007.
A.D.Z. was supported in part through the National Institutes of
Health (NIH)/National Cancer Institute (NCI) Cancer Center
Support Grant P30 CA008748. The authors acknowledge the
unrestricted financial support of the Clinical Advisory Committee
meeting held in Chicago, IL, March 31-April 1, 2014 from the
following organizations: American Society of Hematology, Josep
Carreras Foundation, Fondazione Italiana Linfomi (FIL), Leuke-
mia Clinical Research Foundation, University of Chicago Com-
prehensive Cancer Center, Beckman Coulter Corporation, Celgene
Corporation, Dako, Genentech Corporation, Incyte Corporation,
Leica Corporation, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Pharmacyclics,
Seattle Genetics Corporation, Sysmex Corporation, and Ventana
Medical Systems, Inc, a member of the Roche Group.
Authorship
Contribution: All authors contributed to the contents of this
manuscript which was written by S.H.S., E.C., S.A.P., and E.S.J.
and reviewed and edited by all authors.
Conflict-of-interest disclosure: S.A.P. is member of the Scientific
Advisory Board of Takeda/Millennium. M.G. has received hono-
raria from Roche, Celgene, Janssen, Gilead, Millenium, and
Mundipharma. The remaining authors declare no competing financial
interests.
The current affiliation for R.S. is Institute of Human Genetics,
Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.
Correspondence: Steven H. Swerdlow, Division of Hematopathol-
ogy, Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine,200 Lothrop St,Pittsburgh, PA15213; e-mail: swerdlowsh@
upmc.edu; Elias Campo, Department of Pathology, Hospital Clinic,
University of Barcelona, Villarroel 170, 08036 Barcelona, Spain;
e-mail: ecampo@clinic.cat; and Elaine S. Jaffe, Hematopathology
Section, Laboratory of Pathology, CCR, NCI, Building 10, Room
3s235, Bethesda, MD 20892-1500; e-mail: elainejaffe@nih.gov.
References
1. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al, eds.
WHO classification of tumours of haematopoietic
and lymphoid tissues. In: Bosman FT, Jaffe ES,
Lakhani SR, Ohgaki H, eds. World Health
Organization Classification of Tumours. Lyon,
France: IARC; 2008.
2. Swerdlow SH, et al. WHO classification of tumours of
haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. In: World
Health Organization Classification of Tumours. Lyon,
France: IARC. In press.
3. Campo E, Swerdlow SH, Harris NL, Pileri S,
Stein H, Jaffe ES. The 2008 WHO classification
of lymphoid neoplasms and beyond: evolving
concepts and practical applications. Blood. 2011;
117(19):5019-5032.
4. Nieto WG, Almeida J, Romero A, et al; Primary
Health Care Group of Salamanca for the Study of
MBL. Increased frequency (12%) of circulating
chronic lymphocytic leukemia-like B-cell clones
in healthy subjects using a highly sensitive
multicolor flow cytometry approach. Blood. 2009;
114(1):33-37.
5. Landgren O, Albitar M, Ma W, et al. B-cell
clones as early markers for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2009;
360(7):659-667.
6. Rawstron AC, Shanafelt T, Lanasa MC, et al.
Different biology and clinical outcome according
to the absolute numbers of clonal B-cells in
monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL).
Cytometry B Clin Cytom. 2010;78(suppl 1):
S19-S23.
7. Vardi A, Dagklis A, Scarf`
o L, et al.
Immunogenetics shows that not all MBL are
equal: the larger the clone, the more similar to
CLL. Blood. 2013;121(22):4521-4528.
8. Morabito F, Mosca L, Cutrona G, et al. Clinical
monoclonal B lymphocytosis versus Rai
0 chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a comparison
of cellular, cytogenetic, molecular, and clinical
features. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19(21):
5890-5900.
9. Xochelli A, Kalpadakis C, Gardiner A, et al.
Clonal B-cell lymphocytosis exhibiting
immunophenotypic features consistent with a
marginal-zone origin: is this a distinct entity?
Blood. 2014;123(8):1199-1206.
10. Bruscaggin A, Monti S, Arcaini L, et al. Molecular
lesions of signalling pathway genes in clonal
B-cell lymphocytosis with marginal zone
features. Br J Haematol. 2014;167(5):
718-720.
11. Gibson SE, Swerdlow SH, Ferry JA, et al.
Reassessment of small lymphocytic lymphoma
in the era of monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis.
Haematologica. 2011;96(8):1144-1152.
12. Gradowski JF, Sargent RL, Craig FE, et al.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic
lymphoma with cyclin D1 positive proliferation
centers do not have CCND1 translocations or
gains and lack SOX11 expression. Am J Clin
Pathol. 2012;138(1):132-139.
13. Gibson SE, Leeman-Neill RJ, Jain S,
Piao W, Cieply KM, Swerdlow SH.
Proliferation centres of chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma have
enhanced expression of MYC protein, which
does not result from rearrangement or gain
of the MYC gene [published online ahead of
print November 16, 2015]. Br J Haematol.
14. Gin´
e E, Martinez A, Villamor N, et al. Expanded
and highly active proliferation centers identify a
histological subtype of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (“accelerated” chronic lymphocytic
leukemia) with aggressive clinical behavior.
Haematologica. 2010;95(9):1526-1533.
15. Ciccone M, Agostinelli C, Rigolin GM, et al.
Proliferation centers in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia: correlation with cytogenetic and
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2387
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 clinicobiological features in consecutive patients
analyzed on tissue microarrays. Leukemia.
2012;26(3):499-508.
16. Falchi L, Keating MJ, Marom EM, et al.
Correlation between FDG/PET, histology, clinical
characteristics, and survival in 332 patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2014;
123(18):2783-2790.
17. Jegalian AG, Eberle FC, Pack SD, et al.
Follicular lymphoma in situ: clinical implications
and comparisons with partial involvement by
follicular lymphoma. Blood. 2011;118(11):
2976-2984.
18. Pillai RK, Surti U, Swerdlow SH. Follicular
lymphoma-like B cells of uncertain significance
(in situ follicular lymphoma) may infrequently
progress, but precedes follicular lymphoma, is
associated with other overt lymphomas and
mimics follicular lymphoma in flow cytometric
studies. Haematologica. 2013;98(10):
1571-1580.
19. Mamessier E, Song JY, Eberle FC, et al.
Early lesions of follicular lymphoma: a genetic
perspective. Haematologica. 2014;99(3):
481-488.
20. Schmidt J, Salaverria I, Haake A, et al.
Increasing genomic and epigenomic complexity
in the clonal evolution from in situ to manifest
t(14;18)-positive follicular lymphoma. Leukemia.
2014;28(5):1103-1112.
21. Tellier J, Menard C, Roulland S, et al. Human
t(14;18)positive germinal center B cells: a new
step in follicular lymphoma pathogenesis? Blood.
2014;123(22):3462-3465.
22. Roulland S, Kelly RS, Morgado E, et al. t(14;18)
translocation: a predictive blood biomarker for
follicular lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(13):
1347-1355.
23. Liu Q, Salaverria I, Pittaluga S, et al. Follicular
lymphomas in children and young adults: a
comparison of the pediatric variant with usual
follicular lymphoma. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013;
37(3):333-343.
24. Louissaint A Jr, Ackerman AM, Dias-Santagata
D, et al. Pediatric-type nodal follicular lymphoma:
an indolent clonal proliferation in children and
adults with high proliferation index and no BCL2
rearrangement. Blood. 2012;120(12):2395-2404.
25. Martin-Guerrero I, Salaverria I, Burkhardt B,
et al. Recurrent loss of heterozygosity in 1p36
associated with TNFRSF14 mutations in IRF4
translocation negative pediatric follicular
lymphomas. Haematologica. 2013;98(8):
1237-1241.
26. Salaverria I, Philipp C, Oschlies I, et al;
Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphomas
Network Project of the Deutsche Krebshilfe;
German High-Grade Lymphoma Study Group;
Berlin-Frankfurt-M¨
unster-NHL Trial Group.
Translocations activating IRF4 identify a subtype
of germinal center-derived B-cell lymphoma
affecting predominantly children and young
adults. Blood. 2011;118(1):139-147.
27. Karube K, Guo Y, Suzumiya J, et al. CD10-
MUM11 follicular lymphoma lacks BCL2 gene
translocation and shows characteristic biologic
and clinical features. Blood. 2007;109(7):
3076-3079.
28. Schmatz AI, Streubel B, Kretschmer-Chott E,
et al. Primary follicular lymphoma of the
duodenum is a distinct mucosal/submucosal
variant of follicular lymphoma: a retrospective
study of 63 cases. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(11):
1445-1451.
29. Takata K, Sato Y, Nakamura N, et al. Duodenal
follicular lymphoma lacks AID but expresses
BACH2 and has memory B-cell characteristics
[published correction appears in Mod Pathol.
2013;26(8):1152]. Mod Pathol. 2013;26(1):
22-31.
30. Katzenberger T, Kalla J, Leich E, et al.
A distinctive subtype of t(14;18)-negative nodal
follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma characterized
by a predominantly diffuse growth pattern and
deletions in the chromosomal region 1p36.
Blood. 2009;113(5):1053-1061.
31. Jares P, Colomer D, Campo E. Molecular
pathogenesis of mantle cell lymphoma. J Clin
Invest. 2012;122(10):3416-3423.
32. Carvajal-Cuenca A, Sua LF, Silva NM, et al. In
situ mantle cell lymphoma: clinical implications
of an incidental finding with indolent clinical
behavior. Haematologica. 2012;97(2):270-278.
33. Tiacci E, Trifonov V, Schiavoni G, et al. BRAF
mutations in hairy-cell leukemia. N Engl J Med.
2011;364(24):2305-2315.
34. Waterfall JJ, Arons E, Walker RL, et al. High
prevalence of MAP2K1 mutations in variant and
IGHV4-34-expressing hairy-cell leukemias. Nat
Genet. 2014;46(1):8-10.
35. Treon SP, Xu L, Yang G, et al. MYD88 L265P
somatic mutation in Waldenstr¨
om’s
macroglobulinemia. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(9):
826-833.
36. Swerdlow SH, Kuzu I, Dogan A, et al. The
many faces of small B cell lymphomas with
plasmacytic differentiation and the contribution of
MYD88 testing. Virchows Arch. 2016;468(3):
259-275.
37. Hamadeh F, MacNamara SP, Aguilera NS,
Swerdlow SH, Cook JR. MYD88 L265P mutation
analysis helps define nodal lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma. Mod Pathol. 2015;28(4):564-574.
38. Hamadeh F, MacNamara S, Bacon CM, Sohani
AR, Swerdlow SH, Cook JR. Gamma heavy
chain disease lacks the MYD88 L265p mutation
associated with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
Haematologica. 2014;99(9):e154-e155.
39. Treon SP, Cao Y, Xu L, Yang G, Liu X, Hunter
ZR. Somatic mutations in MYD88 and CXCR4
are determinants of clinical presentation and
overall survival in Waldenstrom
macroglobulinemia. Blood. 2014;123(18):
2791-2796.
40. Roccaro AM, Sacco A, Jimenez C, et al.
C1013G/CXCR4 acts as a driver mutation of
tumor progression and modulator of drug
resistance in lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
Blood. 2014;123(26):4120-4131.
41. Schmidt J, Federmann B, Schindler N, et al.
MYD88 L265P and CXCR4 mutations in
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma identify cases
with high disease activity. Br J Haematol. 2015;
169(6):795-803.
42. Wang L, Lawrence MS, Wan Y, et al. SF3B1 and
other novel cancer genes in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(26):
2497-2506.
43. Puente XS, Pinyol M, Quesada V, et al.
Whole-genome sequencing identifies recurrent
mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.
Nature. 2011;475(7354):101-105.
44. Quesada V, Conde L, Villamor N, et al. Exome
sequencing identifies recurrent mutations of
the splicing factor SF3B1 gene in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Nat Genet. 2011;44(1):
47-52.
45. Villamor N, Conde L, Martinez-Trillos A, et al.
NOTCH1 mutations identify a genetic subgroup
of chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients with
high risk of transformation and poor outcome.
Leukemia. 2013;27(5):1100-1106.
46. Puente XS, Be`
a S, Vald´
es-Mas R, et al.
Non-coding recurrent mutations in chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia. Nature. 2015;526(7574):
519-524.
47. Queir´
os AC, Villamor N, Clot G, et al. A B-cell
epigenetic signature defines three biologic
subgroups of chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
clinical impact. Leukemia. 2015;29(3):598-605.
48. Fabbri G, Rasi S, Rossi D, et al. Analysis of the
chronic lymphocytic leukemia coding genome:
role of NOTCH1 mutational activation. J Exp
Med. 2011;208(7):1389-1401.
49. Jeromin S, Weissmann S, Haferlach C, et al.
SF3B1 mutations correlated to cytogenetics and
mutations in NOTCH1, FBXW7, MYD88, XPO1
and TP53 in 1160 untreated CLL patients.
Leukemia. 2014;28(1):108-117.
50. Rossi D, Rasi S, Spina V, et al. Integrated
mutational and cytogenetic analysis identifies new
prognostic subgroups in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Blood. 2013;121(8):1403-1412.
51. Baliakas P, Hadzidimitriou A, Sutton LA, et al;
European Research Initiative on CLL (ERIC).
Recurrent mutations refine prognosis in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia. 2015;29(2):
329-336.
52. Fo`
a R, Guarini A. A mechanism-driven treatment
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia? N Engl J Med.
2013;369(1):85-87.
53. Be`
a S, Vald´
es-Mas R, Navarro A, et al.
Landscape of somatic mutations and clonal
evolution in mantle cell lymphoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2013;110(45):18250-18255.
54. Kridel R, Meissner B, Rogic S, et al. Whole
transcriptome sequencing reveals recurrent
NOTCH1 mutations in mantle cell lymphoma.
Blood. 2012;119(9):1963-1971.
55. Salaverria I, Royo C, Carvajal-Cuenca A, et al.
CCND2 rearrangements are the most frequent
genetic events in cyclin D1(-) mantle cell
lymphoma. Blood. 2013;121(8):1394-1402.
56. Green MR, Kihira S, Liu CL, et al. Mutations
in early follicular lymphoma progenitors
are associated with suppressed antigen
presentation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;
112(10):E1116-E1125.
57. Okosun J, B¨
od¨
or C, Wang J, et al. Integrated
genomic analysis identifies recurrent mutations
and evolution patterns driving the initiation and
progression of follicular lymphoma. Nat Genet.
2014;46(2):176-181.
58. Pastore A, Jurinovic V, Kridel R, et al.
Integration of gene mutations in risk
prognostication for patients receiving first-line
immunochemotherapy for follicular lymphoma: a
retrospective analysis of a prospective clinical
trial and validation in a population-based registry.
Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(9):1111-1122.
59. Loeffler M, Kreuz M, Haake A, et al;
HaematoSys-Project. Genomic and epigenomic
co-evolution in follicular lymphomas. Leukemia.
2015;29(2):456-463.
60. B¨
od¨
or C, Grossmann V, Popov N, et al. EZH2
mutations are frequent and represent an early
event in follicular lymphoma. Blood. 2013;
122(18):3165-3168.
61. Young RM, Shaffer AL 3rd, Phelan JD, Staudt
LM. B-cell receptor signaling in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma. Semin Hematol. 2015;52(2):
77-85.
62. Roschewski M, Staudt LM, Wilson WH. Diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma-treatment approaches in
the molecular era. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014;
11(1):12-23.
63. Scott DW, Wright GW, Williams PM, et al.
Determining cell-of-origin subtypes of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma using gene expression in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. Blood.
2014;123(8):1214-1217.
64. Scott DW, Mottok A, Ennishi D, et al. Prognostic
significance of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell
of origin determined by digital gene expression in
2388
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
biopsies. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(26):2848-2856.
65. Masqu´
e-Soler N, Szczepanowski M, Kohler CW,
Spang R, Klapper W. Molecular classification of
mature aggressive B-cell lymphoma using digital
multiplexed gene expression on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded biopsy specimens. Blood.
2013;122(11):1985-1986.
66. Mareschal S, Ruminy P, Bagacean C, et al.
Accurate classification of germinal center B-cell-
like/activated B-cell-like diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma using a simple and rapid reverse
transcriptase-multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification assay: a CALYM Study. J Mol
Diagn. 2015;17(3):273-283.
67. Karube K, Campo E. MYC alterations in diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas. Semin Hematol. 2015;
52(2):97-106.
68. Swerdlow SH. Diagnosis of ‘double hit’ diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma and B-cell lymphoma,
unclassifiable, with features intermediate
between DLBCL and Burkitt lymphoma: when
and how, FISH versus IHC. Hematology Am Soc
Hematol Educ Program. 2014;2014(1):90-99.
69. Johnson NA, Slack GW, Savage KJ, et al.
Concurrent expression of MYC and BCL2 in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with
rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone. J Clin Oncol. 2012;
30(28):3452-3459.
70. Molina TJ, Canioni D, Copie-Bergman C, et al.
Young patients with non-germinal center B-cell-
like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma benefit from
intensified chemotherapy with ACVBP plus
rituximab compared with CHOP plus rituximab:
analysis of data from the Groupe d’Etudes des
Lymphomes de l’Adulte/Lymphoma Study
Association phase III trial LNH 03-2B. J Clin
Oncol. 2014;32(35):3996-4003.
71. Pasqualucci L, Dalla-Favera R. The genetic
landscape of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Semin Hematol. 2015;52(2):67-76.
72. Intlekofer AM, Younes A. Precision therapy for
lymphoma–current state and future directions.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014;11(10):585-596.
73. Dojcinov SD, Venkataraman G, Pittaluga S, et al.
Age-related EBV-associated lymphoproliferative
disorders in the Western population: a spectrum
of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia and lymphoma.
Blood. 2011;117(18):4726-4735.
74. Nicolae A, Pittaluga S, Abdullah S, et al.
EBV-positive large B-cell lymphomas in young
patients: a nodal lymphoma with evidence for a
tolerogenic immune environment. Blood. 2015;
126(7):863-872.
75. Said J. The expanding spectrum of EBV1
lymphomas. Blood. 2015;126(7):827-828.
76. Dojcinov SD, Venkataraman G, Raffeld M,
Pittaluga S, Jaffe ES. EBV positive
mucocutaneous ulcer–a study of 26 cases
associated with various sources of
immunosuppression. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010;
34(3):405-417.
77. Hart M, Thakral B, Yohe S, et al. EBV-positive
mucocutaneous ulcer in organ transplant
recipients: a localized indolent posttransplant
lymphoproliferative disorder. Am J Surg Pathol.
2014;38(11):1522-1529.
78. Love C, Sun Z, Jima D, et al. The genetic
landscape of mutations in Burkitt lymphoma. Nat
Genet. 2012;44(12):1321-1325.
79. Richter J, Schlesner M, Hoffmann S, et al; ICGC
MMML-Seq Project. Recurrent mutation of the
ID3 gene in Burkitt lymphoma identified by
integrated genome, exome and transcriptome
sequencing. Nat Genet. 2012;44(12):1316-1320.
80. Schmitz R, Young RM, Ceribelli M, et al. Burkitt
lymphoma pathogenesis and therapeutic targets
from structural and functional genomics. Nature.
2012;490(7418):116-120.
81. Sander S, Calado DP, Srinivasan L, et al.
Synergy between PI3K signaling and MYC in
Burkitt lymphomagenesis. Cancer Cell. 2012;
22(2):167-179.
82. Salaverria I, Martin-Guerrero I, Wagener R, et al;
Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphoma
Network Project; Berlin-Frankfurt-M¨
unster Non-
Hodgkin Lymphoma Group. A recurrent 11q
aberration pattern characterizes a subset of
MYC-negative high-grade B-cell lymphomas
resembling Burkitt lymphoma. Blood. 2014;
123(8):1187-1198.
83. Ferreiro JF, Morscio J, Dierickx D, et al.
Post-transplant molecularly defined Burkitt
lymphomas are frequently MYC-negative and
characterized by the 11q-gain/loss pattern.
Haematologica. 2015;100(7):e275-e279.
84. Dave SS, Fu K, Wright GW, et al; Lymphoma/
Leukemia Molecular Profiling Project. Molecular
diagnosis of Burkitt’s lymphoma. N Engl J Med.
2006;354(23):2431-2442.
85. Hummel M, Bentink S, Berger H, et al;
Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphomas
Network Project of the Deutsche Krebshilfe. A
biologic definition of Burkitt’s lymphoma from
transcriptional and genomic profiling. N Engl J
Med. 2006;354(23):2419-2430.
86. Campo E. MYC in DLBCL: partners matter.
Blood. 2015;126(22):2439-2440.
87. Momose S, Weißbach S, Pischimarov J, et al.
The diagnostic gray zone between Burkitt
lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is
also a gray zone of the mutational spectrum.
Leukemia. 2015;29(8):1789-1791.
88. Gebauer N, Bernard V, Feller AC, Merz H. ID3
mutations are recurrent events in double-hit
B-cell lymphomas. Anticancer Res. 2013;33(11):
4771-4778.
89. Kluin P, et al. High grade B-cell lymphoma. In:
Swerdlow SH, et al. WHO Classification of Tumors
of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. World
Health Organization Classification of Tumours. Lyon,
France: IARC. In press.
90. Lemonnier F, Couronn´
e L, Parrens M, et al.
Recurrent TET2 mutations in peripheral T-cell
lymphomas correlate with TFH-like features and
adverse clinical parameters. Blood. 2012;120(7):
1466-1469.
91. Sakata-Yanagimoto M, Enami T, Yoshida K,
et al. Somatic RHOA mutation in
angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma. Nat
Genet. 2014;46(2):171-175.
92. Cairns RA, Iqbal J, Lemonnier F, et al. IDH2
mutations are frequent in angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma. Blood. 2012;119(8):
1901-1903.
93. Nicolae A, Pittaluga S, Venkataraman G,
et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas of follicular
T-helper cell derivation with Hodgkin/Reed-
Sternberg cells of B-cell lineage: both EBV-
positive and EBV-negative variants exist. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2013;37(6):816-826.
94. Moroch J, Copie-Bergman C, de Leval L, et al.
Follicular peripheral T-cell lymphoma expands
the spectrum of classical Hodgkin lymphoma
mimics. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012;36(11):
1636-1646.
95. Balagu´
e O, Mart´
ınez A, Colomo L, et al.
Epstein-Barr virus negative clonal plasma cell
proliferations and lymphomas in peripheral T-cell
lymphomas: a phenomenon with distinctive
clinicopathologic features. Am J Surg Pathol.
2007;31(9):1310-1322.
96. Iqbal J, Wright G, Wang C, et al; Lymphoma
Leukemia Molecular Profiling Project and the
International Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma Project.
Gene expression signatures delineate biological
and prognostic subgroups in peripheral T-cell
lymphoma. Blood. 2014;123(19):2915-2923.
97. Wang T, Feldman AL, Wada DA, et al. GATA-3
expression identifies a high-risk subset of PTCL,
NOS with distinct molecular and clinical features.
Blood. 2014;123(19):3007-3015.
98. Palomero T, Couronn´
e L, Khiabanian H, et al.
Recurrent mutations in epigenetic regulators,
RHOA and FYN kinase in peripheral T cell
lymphomas. Nat Genet. 2014;46(2):166-170.
99. Agnelli L, Mereu E, Pellegrino E, et al; European
T-Cell Lymphoma Study Group. Identification of
a 3-gene model as a powerful diagnostic tool for
the recognition of ALK-negative anaplastic large-
cell lymphoma. Blood. 2012;120(6):1274-1281.
100. Piccaluga PP, Fuligni F, De Leo A, et al.
Molecular profiling improves classification and
prognostication of nodal peripheral T-cell
lymphomas: results of a phase III diagnostic
accuracy study. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(24):
3019-3025.
101. Attygalle AD, Cabec
¸adas J, Gaulard P, et al.
Peripheral T-cell and NK-cell lymphomas and
their mimics; taking a step forward - report on the
Lymphoma Workshop of the XVIth meeting of
the European Association for Haematopathology
and the Society for Hematopathology.
Histopathology. 2014;64(2):171-199.
102. Crescenzo R, Abate F, Lasorsa E, et al;
European T-Cell Lymphoma Study Group, T-Cell
Project: Prospective Collection of Data in
Patients with Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma and
the AIRC 5xMille Consortium “Genetics-Driven
Targeted Management of Lymphoid
Malignancies”. Convergent mutations and
kinase fusions lead to oncogenic STAT3
activation in anaplastic large cell lymphoma
[published correction appears in Cancer Cell.
2015;27(5):744]. Cancer Cell. 2015;27(4):
516-532.
103. Parilla Castellar ER, Jaffe ES, Said JW, et al.
ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma is
a genetically heterogeneous disease with widely
disparate clinical outcomes. Blood. 2014;124(9):
1473-1480.
104. King RL, Dao LN, McPhail ED, et al. Morphologic
features of ALK-negative anaplastic large cell
lymphomas with DUSP22 rearrangements. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2016;40(1):36-43.
105. Parrilla Castellar ER, Jaffe ES, Said JW, et al.
ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma is
a genetically heterogeneous disease with widely
disparate clinical outcomes. Blood. 2014;124(9):
1473-1480.
106. Feldman AL, Dogan A, Smith DI, et al. Discovery
of recurrent t(6;7)(p25.3;q32.3) translocations in
ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphomas
by massively parallel genomic sequencing.
Blood. 2011;117(3):915-919.
107. Karai LJ, Kadin ME, Hsi ED, et al. Chromosomal
rearrangements of 6p25.3 define a new subtype
of lymphomatoid papulosis. Am J Surg Pathol.
2013;37(8):1173-1181.
108. Saggini A, Gulia A, Argenyi Z, et al. A variant
of lymphomatoid papulosis simulating primary
cutaneous aggressive epidermotropic CD81
cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma. Description of 9 cases.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2010;34(8):1168-1175.
109. Kempf W, Kazakov DV, Sch¨
arer L, et al.
Angioinvasive lymphomatoid papulosis: a new
variant simulating aggressive lymphomas. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2013;37(1):1-13.
110. Thompson PA, Lade S, Webster H, Ryan G,
Prince HM. Effusion-associated anaplastic large
cell lymphoma of the breast: time for it to be
defined as a distinct clinico-pathological entity.
Haematologica. 2010;95(11):1977-1979.
111. Keech JA Jr, Creech BJ. Anaplastic T-cell
lymphoma in proximity to a saline-filled breast
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
2016 WHO CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
2389
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 implant. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1997;100(2):
554-555.
112. Miranda RN, Aladily TN, Prince HM, et al. Breast
implant-associated anaplastic large-cell
lymphoma: long-term follow-up of 60 patients.
J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(2):114-120.
113. Clemens MW, Medeiros LJ, Butler CE, et al.
Complete surgical excision is essential for the
management of patients with breast implant-
associated anaplastic large-cell lymphoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(2):160-168.
114. Laurent C, Delas A, Gaulard P, et al. Breast
implant associated anaplastic large cell
lymphoma: two distinct clinicopathological
variants with different outcomes. Ann Oncol.
2016;27(2):306-314.
115. Swerdlow SH, Jaffe ES, Brousset P, et al;
International Lymphoma Study Group. Cytotoxic
T-cell and NK-cell lymphomas: current questions
and controversies. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014;
38(10):e60-e71.
116. Perry AM, Warnke RA, Hu Q, et al. Indolent
T-cell lymphoproliferative disease of the
gastrointestinal tract. Blood. 2013;122(22):
3599-3606.
117. Petrella T, Maubec E, Cornillet-Lefebvre P, et al.
Indolent CD8-positive lymphoid proliferation of
the ear: a distinct primary cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma? Am J Surg Pathol. 2007;31(12):
1887-1892.
118. Macon WR, Levy NB, Kurtin PJ, et al.
Hepatosplenic alphabeta T-cell lymphomas:
a report of 14 cases and comparison with
hepatosplenic gammadelta T-cell lymphomas.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2001;25(3):285-296.
119. Toro JR, Liewehr DJ, Pabby N, et al. Gamma-
delta T-cell phenotype is associated with
significantly decreased survival in cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma. Blood. 2003;101(9):
3407-3412.
120. Guitart J, Weisenburger DD, Subtil A, et al.
Cutaneous gd T-cell lymphomas: a spectrum of
presentations with overlap with other cytotoxic
lymphomas. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012;36(11):
1656-1665.
121. Rodr´
ıguez-Pinilla SM, Ortiz-Romero PL,
Monsalvez V, et al. TCR-g expression in primary
cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Am J Surg Pathol.
2013;37(3):375-384.
122. Endly DC, Weenig RH, Peters MS, Viswanatha
DS, Comfere NI. Indolent course of cutaneous
gamma-delta T-cell lymphoma. J Cutan Pathol.
2013;40(10):896-902.
123. Koskela HL, Eldfors S, Ellonen P, et al. Somatic
STAT3 mutations in large granular lymphocytic
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(20):
1905-1913.
124. Jerez A, Clemente MJ, Makishima H, et al.
STAT3 mutations unify the pathogenesis of
chronic lymphoproliferative disorders of NK cells
and T-cell large granular lymphocyte leukemia.
Blood. 2012;120(15):3048-3057.
125. Bergmann AK, Schneppenheim S, Seifert M,
et al. Recurrent mutation of JAK3 in T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer. 2014;53(4):309-316.
126. Kiel MJ, Velusamy T, Rolland D, et al. Integrated
genomic sequencing reveals mutational
landscape of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia.
Blood. 2014;124(9):1460-1472.
127. Rajala HL, Eldfors S, Kuusanm¨
aki H, et al.
Discovery of somatic STAT5b mutations in large
granular lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2013;
121(22):4541-4550.
128. Nicolae A, Xi L, Pittaluga S, et al. Frequent
STAT5B mutations in gd hepatosplenic T-cell
lymphomas. Leukemia. 2014;28(11):2244-2248.
129. K¨
uc
¸ ¨
uk C, Jiang B, Hu X, et al. Activating
mutations of STAT5B and STAT3 in lymphomas
derived from gd-T or NK cells. Nat Commun.
2015;6:6025.
130. Deleeuw RJ, Zettl A, Klinker E, et al. Whole-
genome analysis and HLA genotyping of
enteropathy-type T-cell lymphoma reveals 2
distinct lymphoma subtypes. Gastroenterology.
2007;132(5):1902-1911.
131. Tan SY, Ooi AS, Ang MK, et al. Nuclear
expression of MATK is a novel marker of type II
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma.
Leukemia. 2011;25(3):555-557.
132. Tomita S, Kikuti YY, Carreras J, et al. Genomic
and immunohistochemical profiles of
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma in
Japan. Mod Pathol. 2015;28(10):1286-1296.
133. Chan JK, Chan AC, Cheuk W, et al. Type II
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma: a
distinct aggressive lymphoma with frequent gd
T-cell receptor expression. Am J Surg Pathol.
2011;35(10):1557-1569.
134. Rodr´
ıguez Pinilla SM, Roncador G, Rodr´
ıguez-
Peralto JL, et al. Primary cutaneous CD41
small/medium-sized pleomorphic T-cell
lymphoma expresses follicular T-cell markers.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2009;33(1):81-90.
135. Garcia-Herrera A, Colomo L, Cam´
os M, et al.
Primary cutaneous small/medium CD41 T-cell
lymphomas: a heterogeneous group of tumors
with different clinicopathologic features and
outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(20):3364-3371.
136. Grogg KL, Jung S, Erickson LA, McClure RF,
Dogan A. Primary cutaneous CD4-positive
small/medium-sized pleomorphic T-cell
lymphoma: a clonal T-cell lymphoproliferative
disorder with indolent behavior. Mod Pathol.
2008;21(6):708-715.
137. Beltraminelli H, Leinweber B, Kerl H, Cerroni L.
Primary cutaneous CD41 small-/medium-sized
pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma: a cutaneous
nodular proliferation of pleomorphic T lymphocytes
of undetermined significance? A study of 136
cases. Am J Dermatopathol. 2009;31(4):317-322.
138. Cohen JI, Kimura H, Nakamura S, Ko YH,
Jaffe ES. Epstein-Barr virus-associated
lymphoproliferative disease in non-
immunocompromised hosts: a status report and
summary of an international meeting, 8-9 September
2008. Ann Oncol. 2009;20(9):1472-1482.
139. Kimura H, Ito Y, Kawabe S, et al. EBV-
associated T/NK-cell lymphoproliferative
diseases in nonimmunocompromised hosts:
prospective analysis of 108 cases. Blood. 2012;
119(3):673-686.
140. Ohshima K, Kimura H, Yoshino T, et al; CAEBV
Study Group. Proposed categorization of
pathological states of EBV-associated T/natural
killer-cell lymphoproliferative disorder (LPD) in
children and young adults: overlap with chronic
active EBV infection and infantile fulminant EBV
T-LPD. Pathol Int. 2008;58(4):209-217.
141. Quintanilla-Martinez L, Ridaura C, Nagl F, et al.
Hydroa vacciniforme-like lymphoma: a chronic
EBV1 lymphoproliferative disorder with risk to
develop a systemic lymphoma. Blood. 2013;
122(18):3101-3110.
142. Swerdlow SH. T-cell and NK-cell
posttransplantation lymphoproliferative
disorders. Am J Clin Pathol. 2007;127(6):
887-895.
143. Kato S, Asano N, Miyata-Takata T, et al. T-cell
receptor (TCR) phenotype of nodal Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)-positive cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma
(CTL): a clinicopathologic study of 39 cases. Am
J Surg Pathol. 2015;39(4):462-471.
144. Fan Z, Natkunam Y, Bair E, Tibshirani R,
Warnke RA. Characterization of variant patterns
of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma with immunohistologic and clinical
correlation. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003;27(10):
1346-1356.
145. Hartmann S, Eichenauer DA, Pl¨
utschow A, et al.
The prognostic impact of variant histology in
nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma: a report from the German Hodgkin
Study Group (GHSG). Blood. 2013;122(26):
4246-4252.
146. Boudov´
a L, Torlakovic E, Delabie J, et al.
Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma with nodules resembling T-cell/
histiocyte-rich B-cell lymphoma: differential
diagnosis between nodular lymphocyte-
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and T-cell/
histiocyte-rich B-cell lymphoma. Blood. 2003;
102(10):3753-3758.
147. Hartmann S, D¨
oring C, Jakobus C, et al.
Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma and T cell/histiocyte rich large B cell
lymphoma–endpoints of a spectrum of one
disease? PLoS One. 2013;8(11):e78812.
148. Xing KH, Connors JM, Lai A, et al. Advanced-
stage nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma compared with classical Hodgkin
lymphoma: a matched pair outcome analysis.
Blood. 2014;123(23):3567-3573.
149. Hartmann S, D¨
oring C, Vucic E, et al. Array
comparative genomic hybridization reveals
similarities between nodular lymphocyte
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and T cell/
histiocyte rich large B cell lymphoma. Br J
Haematol. 2015;169(3):415-422.
150. Nam-Cha SH, Montes-Moreno S, Salcedo MT,
Sanjuan J, Garcia JF, Piris MA. Lymphocyte-rich
classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma: distinctive tumor
and microenvironment markers. Mod Pathol.
2009;22(8):1006-1015.
151. Haroche J, Abla O. Uncommon histiocytic
disorders: Rosai-Dorfman, juvenile
xanthogranuloma, and Erdheim-Chester
disease. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
Program. 2015;2015(1):571-578.
152. Feldman AL, Arber DA, Pittaluga S, et al.
Clonally related follicular lymphomas and
histiocytic/dendritic cell sarcomas: evidence for
transdifferentiation of the follicular lymphoma
clone. Blood. 2008;111(12):5433-5439.
153. Shao H, Xi L, Raffeld M, et al. Clonally related
histiocytic/dendritic cell sarcoma and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic
lymphoma: a study of seven cases. Mod
Pathol. 2011;24(11):1421-1432.
154. Chen W, Jaffe R, Zhang L, et al. Langerhans
cell sarcoma arising from chronic lymphocytic
lymphoma/small lymphocytic leukemia: lineage
analysis and BRAF V600E Mutation Study.
N Am J Med Sci. 2013;5(6):386-391.
155. Ratei R, Hummel M, Anagnostopoulos I,
et al. Common clonal origin of an acute
B-lymphoblastic leukemia and a Langerhans’
cell sarcoma: evidence for hematopoietic
plasticity. Haematologica. 2010;95(9):
1461-1466.
156. Dalia S, Jaglal M, Chervenick P, Cualing H,
Sokol L. Clinicopathologic characteristics and
outcomes of histiocytic and dendritic cell
neoplasms: the Moffitt Cancer Center
experience over the last twenty five years.
Cancers (Basel). 2014;6(4):2275-2295.
157. Dalia S, Shao H, Sagatys E, Cualing H, Sokol L.
Dendritic cell and histiocytic neoplasms: biology,
diagnosis, and treatment. Cancer Control. 2014;
21(4):290-300.
158. Go H, Jeon YK, Huh J, et al. Frequent detection
of BRAF(V600E) mutations in histiocytic and
dendritic cell neoplasms. Histopathology. 2014;
65(2):261-272.
2390
SWERDLOW et al
BLOOD, 19 MAY 2016 x VOLUME 127, NUMBER 20
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 online March 15, 2016
 originally published
doi:10.1182/blood-2016-01-643569
2016 127: 2375-2390
 
 
Ranjana Advani, Michele Ghielmini, Gilles A. Salles, Andrew D. Zelenetz and Elaine S. Jaffe
Steven H. Swerdlow, Elias Campo, Stefano A. Pileri, Nancy Lee Harris, Harald Stein, Reiner Siebert,
 
lymphoid neoplasms
The 2016 revision of the World Health Organization classification of
 
http://www.bloodjournal.org/content/127/20/2375.full.html
Updated information and services can be found at:
 (244 articles)
Review Series
    
 (839 articles)
Review Articles
    
 (3063 articles)
Lymphoid Neoplasia
    
 (5409 articles)
Free Research Articles
    
 (4961 articles)
Clinical Trials and Observations
    
Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#repub_requests
Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#reprints
Information about ordering reprints may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml
Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at:
  
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology; all rights reserved.
of Hematology, 2021 L St, NW, Suite 900, Washington DC 20036.
Blood (print ISSN 0006-4971, online ISSN 1528-0020), is published weekly by the American Society
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
