 © 2017 Joule Inc. or its licensors 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
E139
C
hest pain is a common presentation to the emergency 
department, with more than 8 million visits annually, and 
accounts for about 5%–7% of all visits to emergency 
departments in the United States.1,2 Ultimately, only 12%–15% of 
patients with chest pain who have a diagnosis of acute coronary 
syndrome, which includes ST-elevation myocardial infarction, 
non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction or unstable angina.3 Most 
patients with chest pain are placed on a cardiac monitor in the 
emergency department for fear of a potentially life-threatening 
arrhythmia. Studies consistently show that arrhythmia is an 
uncommon event; among patients with chest pain who undergo 
continuous cardiac monitoring, 99.4% of monitor alarms were 
erroneous, with no arrhythmias detected.4–6
Cardiac monitors in the emergency department are a scarce 
resource, and patients with chest pain occupy a substantial pro-
portion of monitored beds for a prolonged period of time. This 
effectively blocks access to these beds, with increased morbidity 
and mortality for other cardiac and noncardiac patients in 
crowded emergency departments.7–10 In current practice, most 
patients with chest pain are triaged to an area with cardiac moni-
toring.6 The decision to remove them from cardiac monitoring is 
based on individual physician gestalt, and emergency physicians 
have overwhelmingly acknowledged that research to identify 
low-risk patients for monitoring has the potential to substan-
tially influence clinical practice and optimize resource use.11,12 
More than 90% of physicians stated that they would forgo car-
diac monitoring among chest pain patients if an appropriate low-
risk subset could be identified.12 However, little work has been 
done to identify patients who are at risk for arrhythmia and the 
need for cardiac monitoring among these patients.
RESEARCH
Prospective validation of a clinical decision rule 
to identify patients presenting to the emergency 
department with chest pain who can safely be 
removed from cardiac monitoring
Shahbaz Syed BSc MD, Mathieu Gatien MD, Jeffrey J. Perry MD MSc, Hina Chaudry MBBS, Soo-Min Kim BScH, 
Kenneth Kwong BSc, Muhammad Mukarram MBBS, Venkatesh Thiruganasambandamoorthy MBBS MSc
n Cite as: CMAJ 2017 January 30;189:E139-45. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.160742
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND: Most patients with chest 
pain in the emergency department are 
assigned to cardiac monitoring for sev-
eral hours, blocking access for patients 
in greater need. We sought to validate a 
previously derived decision rule for safe 
removal of patients from cardiac moni-
toring after initial evaluation in the 
emergency department.
METHODS: We prospectively enrolled 
adults (age ≥ 18 yr) who presented with 
chest pain and were assigned to cardiac 
monitoring at 2 academic emergency 
departments over 18 months. We col-
lected standardized baseline character-
istics, findings from clinical evaluations 
and predictors for the Ottawa Chest 
Pain Cardiac Monitoring Rule: whether 
the patient is currently free of chest 
pain, and whether the electrocardio-
gram is normal or shows only nonspe-
cific changes. The outcome was an 
arrhythmia requiring intervention in the 
emergency department or within 8 
hours of presentation to the emergency 
department. We calculated diagnostic 
characteristics for the clinical predic-
tion rule.
RESULTS: We included 796 patients 
(mean age 63.8 yr, 55.8% male, 8.9% 
admitted to hospital). Fifteen patients 
(1.9%) had an arrhythmia, and the rule 
performed with the following character-
istics: sensitivity 100% (95% confidence 
interval [CI] 78.2%–100%) and specificity 
36.4% (95% CI 33.0%–39.6%). Applica-
tion of the Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac 
Monitoring Rule would have allowed 284 
out of 796 patients (35.7%) to be safely 
removed from cardiac monitoring.
INTERPRETATION: We successfully vali-
dated the decision rule for safe removal 
of a large subset of patients with chest 
pain from cardiac monitoring after ini-
tial evaluation in the emergency depart-
ment. Implementation of this simple yet 
highly sensitive rule will allow for 
improved use of health care resources.
 RESEARCH
E140 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
Our group previously prospectively derived a highly sensitive 
decision tool that identifies patients who can be safely removed 
from cardiac monitoring and reported that 1.7% of patients with 
chest pain in the emergency department had arrhythmias.13 In 
this study, we sought to prospectively validate this decision rule 
to determine its safety and potential clinical impact.
Methods
Study design and setting
We conducted a prospective cohort study at 2 tertiary care emer-
gency departments of The Ottawa Hospital (Civic and General 
campuses), each with about 75 000 patient visits per year. Both 
emergency departments have 2 main nursing stations for moni-
tored beds (20 at the General campus, 23 at the Civic campus). All 
monitored beds are connected to a central control panel at the 
nursing station, with alarms and arrhythmia monitoring. Each 
nursing station is maintained by 3–4 nurses, and it is the nurses’ 
responsibility to note alarms and changes in a patient’s condi-
tion or vital signs.
Enrolment
From November 2013 to April 2015, we attempted to prospec-
tively enroll consecutive patients who presented to the emer-
gency department with chest pain (or with neck, back, shoulder 
or abdominal pain that was suspicious for a cardiac cause) and 
who were placed on cardiac monitor. Patients were excluded 
from the study if they had a cardiac arrest before arrival at the 
hospital or showed an ST-elevated myocardial infarction on an 
initial electrocardiogram (ECG).
The decision to place a patient on cardiac monitor was made 
at the triage nurse’s discretion by taking the patient’s Canadian 
Triage and Acuity Scale score into account.14 This score is used to 
determine the urgency with which patients presenting to the 
emergency department require care and the frequency of re-
assessments while the patient is waiting. The scoring system 
does not make any explicit recommendations regarding placing 
patients in a monitored bed for physician assessment. 
Patients gave verbal consent to participate in the study.
Data collection
This validation phase was conducted and data were collected as 
per the previously conducted derivation phase.13 We collected the 
presenting symptom, the time of onset and whether the patient 
was free of chest pain. Similar to the derivation study, during the 
validation phase, ECGs were analyzed and classified by the inves-
tigators after the investigators were blinded to outcome data. The 
study was conducted in the context of a larger study that aimed 
to develop troponin cut-off values for ruling-in and ruling-out 
non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction among patients present-
ing to the emergency department with chest pain.
We created data collection forms before the beginning of the 
study with the required information. Data collection forms were 
appended to the charts of all potentially eligible patients by 
emergency department nurses, clerks or physicians. We col-
lected baseline characteristics (age, sex), medical history (hyper-
tension, diabetes, coronary artery disease or congestive heart 
failure), the presence of any pre-existing arrhythmia on arrival at 
the emergency department and the decision tool predictors. The 
Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac Monitoring Rule (Box 1) comprises 2 
clinical predictors: “Is the patient currently chest pain free?” and 
“Is the ECG normal or showing only nonspecific changes?” In 
addition, we collected the patient’s disposition (discharged to 
place of residence or admitted to hospital).13
ECG analysis
All ECGs performed during the study patients’ visits to the emer-
gency departments were analyzed by the investigators (S.S., M.G.) 
after the visit. We classified the ECGs based on an internationally 
accepted classification for abnormalities as follows: 1 = normal; 
2 = nonspecific ST–T wave changes, accepted deviation from the 
norm with a low likelihood of ischemia; 3 = abnormal, but not 
diagnostic of ischemia (i.e., prolonged QTc, QRS or PR intervals, 
atrial fibrillation or flutter, old rate-controlled arrhythmia, bundle 
branch block, left ventricular hypertrophy with strain or heart 
block); 4 = ischemia or infarction known to be old; 5 = ischemia or 
infarction not known to be old; 6 = consistent with acute myocar-
dial infarction; and 7 = uninterpretable (paced rhythm).15
It is possible for ischemia to be detected in patients with 
paced rhythm using the Sgarbossa criteria.16 However, because 
those criteria are not as well studied in this subgroup as in 
patients with left bundle branch block, we elected to code these 
ECGs as uninterpretable for ischemia.
The primary investigator (S.S.) was  blinded to the patient 
outcomes and classified all of the ECGs. To determine interrater 
reliability, a second reviewer (M.G.), who was blinded to the first 
reviewer’s classification and  to the patient outcomes, reviewed 
all ECGs from a random sample of 100 study patients. For the 
purposes of the clinical prediction rule, the ECG classifications 
were dichotomized as normal or abnormal; ECGs in categories 1 
and 2 were considered normal, whereas the remainder (catego-
ries 3–7) were considered abnormal.
Outcomes
We defined the outcome as an arrhythmia (defined as abnormal 
cardiac electrical activity) that occurred within 8 hours of presen-
tation to the emergency department and which required treat-
ment during the patient’s stay in the emergency department. Isch-
emic or nonspecific ST wave changes were not considered 
arrhythmias. During the derivation phase, arrhythmias that 
occurred during the patient’s stay in the emergency department 
Box 1: The Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac Monitoring Rule13
A patient with chest pain can be removed from cardiac monitoring 
on initial physician assessment if:
• the patient is currently chest pain free
• and the patient’s electrocardiogram is normal or has nonspecific 
changes (no signs of acute ischemia; infarction; bundle branch 
block; prolonged QRS, QT or PR interval; left ventricular hypertrophy 
with strain; arrhythmia; or paced rhythm).
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
E141
were defined as an outcome, with patients remaining in the emer-
gency department for about 8 hours. However, with the use of 
newer troponin assays, to ensure that patients were not being dis-
charged early only to have an arrhythmia outside the hospital, and 
to be consistent with the derivation phase, we included any 
arrhythmia within 8 hours of the initial presentation that required 
treatment as an outcome. Untreated arrhythmias and arrhythmias 
present on arrival during the initial emergency department visit 
were not considered an outcome.
We assessed the outcome occurrence by reviewing all emer-
gency department records for the index visit. We reviewed physi-
cian record of treatment, nursing notes, medication administra-
tion records, procedural intervention notes and monitor strips. In 
addition, we reviewed all return visits within 24 hours of leaving 
the emergency department and conducted a standardized 30-day 
telephone follow-up by a trained research assistant to identify 
any arrhythmias that might have occurred after the visit. We col-
lected information on the time of occurrence of these arrhyth-
mias and the treatments received. We also collected 30-day out-
come data (myocardial infarction, unstable angina or death) 
based on a review of medical records from the hospital and tele-
phone follow-up.
Our study also included evaluation of outcomes among patients 
with chest pain who were not placed on cardiac monitoring. Safety 
data were collected for all patients who were not placed on a car-
diac monitor to determine any potential adverse outcomes, arrhyth-
mias or upgrade to monitor. We did this by reviewing records for the 
initial emergency department visit and any return visits within 
30 days, a hospital chart review and a 30-day telephone follow-up to 
determine the occurrence of the study outcomes.
Sample size
During the derivation phase, the Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac Mon-
itoring Rule performed with 100% sensitivity for predicting 
arrhythmias.13 With a conservative estimation of 96% sensitivity 
during the validation phase, a 3% bound on the error and 1.5%–
2% prevalence in the occurrence of arrhythmias, we calculated 
that 683 patients would be required to validate the tool.17
Primary data analysis
We used descriptive statistics to report patient characteristics 
using mean and standard deviations for continuous variables, and 
proportion with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for categorical vari-
ables. We calculated interobserver agreement using the κ coeffi-
cient, the proportion of agreement beyond chance for classifica-
tion of ECG abnormalities. We used χ2 with continuity correction or 
the Fischer exact test as appropriate and reported relative risks 
with 95% CIs to determine the association between the rule pre-
Total visits to the 
emergency department
n = 146 403
Patients connected to cardiac monitor 
in the emergency department and 
included in analysis
n = 796
Excluded  n = 1231
• Patient does not meet inclusion 
criteria n = 1069
• Coded as ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction  n = 147
• Patient lef without being seen  n = 12
• Language barrier  n = 3
Excluded  n= 204
• Double enrollment n = 26
• Patient refused to participate  n = 57
• Patient not enrolled  n = 121
Patients included
n = 1125
Visits screened
n = 2560
Potentially eligible visits
n = 1329
Figure 1: Flow of participants through the study.
Table 1: Baseline patient characteristics
Characteristic
Total, no. (%)*
n = 796
Age, yr, mean ± SD
63.8 ± 14.8
Male sex
444 (55.8)
Coronary artery disease
286 (36.0)
Congestive heart failure†
48 (6.0)
Hypertension†
411 (52.0)
Diabetes†
157 (20.0)
Arrhythmia on arrival
Atrial fibrillation/flutter
103 (12.9)
Paced
31 (3.9)
ECG
Normal
315 (39.6)
Nonspecific ST–T wave changes
207 (26.0)
Abnormal, but not diagnostic of ischemia
209 (26.3)
Infarction or ischemia known to be old
34 (4.3)
Infarction or ischemia not known to be old
12 (1.5)
Uninterpretable
13 (1.6)
Missing ECG interpretation
4 (0.5)
Disposition and 30-day outcomes
Admitted to hospital
71 (8.9)
Non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction
28 (3.5)
Unstable angina
32 (4.0)
Death
6 (0.8)
Note: ECG = electrocardiogram, SD = standard deviation.
*Unless otherwise specified.
†Diagnosis requires the patient to be on medication for these conditions.
 RESEARCH
E142 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
dictors and study outcomes. We calculated sensitivity, specificity, 
predictive values and likelihood ratios with 95% CIs to report the 
performance of the clinical decision tool. We used SAS (version 9.4, 
SAS Institute Inc.) software for analysis.
Ethics approval
The Ottawa Health Science Network Research Ethics Board 
approved the protocol.
Results
A total of 1125 patients with chest pain were enrolled in the 
study, 796 of whom (70.8%) were monitored during their stay in 
the emergency department and included in our analysis (Fig-
ure 1). In our study, 8.9% of all patients were admitted to hospi-
tal (Table 1). Thirty-day clinical outcomes among study patients 
included 6 deaths (0.8%) within 30 days of presentation, none of 
which were due to arrhythmias and all of which had a non-
arrhythmogenic cause.
Within our cohort of patients who were monitored, 15 (1.9%, 
95% CI 1.1%–3.1%) had arrhythmia requiring intervention (Table 
2). All arrhythmias were detected during the initial visit to the 
emergency department; no patients had the study outcome dur-
ing a return visit within 8 hours. All 15 of these patients had an 
abnormal ECG as per the decision tool. On review of the 329 
patients who were not triaged to cardiac monitoring, we found 
that none of them subsequently had an arrhythmia within 
8 hours. Overall, 15 of the 1125 (1.3%, 95% CI 0.8%–2.2%) 
patients enrolled in the study (including the patients who were 
not triaged to cardiac monitoring) had clinically important 
arrhythmias.
The decision rule detected all 15 outcomes, with no patients 
missed. The decision rule therefore performed with a sensitivity 
of 100% (95% CI 78.2%–100%), specificity of 36.4% (95% CI 
33.0%–39.6%) and a negative predictive value of 100% (95% CI 
98.7%–100%) (Table 3). If the rule were applied, 36% (286 out of 
796) of patients who were on cardiac monitoring would have 
been able to be safely removed from monitoring during the ini-
tial physician assessment.
The relative risks for the 2 rule predictors were as follows: ECG 
normal or nonspecific changes, 0.02 (95% CI 0.00–0.28), and 
patient is free of chest pain, 0.43 (95% CI 0.15–1.25) (Table 4). The 
interrater reliability between the 2 physicians for the abnormal 
ECG predictor was 0.84 (95% CI 0.73–0.95).
Discussion
We previously derived13 a simple and highly sensitive decision rule 
to remove patients from cardiac monitoring in the emergency 
department, and have subsequently validated the rule with the 
current study. Our study results show that clinically important 
arrhythmias are uncommon among patients presenting to the 
emergency department with chest pain. A substantial number of 
patients are unnecessarily being placed on cardiac monitoring, 
Table 2: Description of patients who had arrhythmias and their subsequent treatments
Patient
Age, sex
Ongoing pain
ECG
Event
Intervention
1
33, M
Yes
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Diltiazem intravenously
2
68, F
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Magnesium sulfate 
intravenously,  atenolol orally
3
67, F
Yes
Ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Electrical cardioversion
4
68, M
Yes
Paced
Ventricular tachycardia
Amiodarone intravenously
5
51, M
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Procainamide intravenously, 
electrical cardioversion
6
71, F
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial flutter
Metoprolol intravenously
7
56, M
Yes
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial flutter
Diltiazem intravenously
8
58, F
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Supraventricular tachycardia
Diltiazem intravenously
9
73, F
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Procainamide intravenously
10
79, M
Yes
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Digoxin, electrical 
cardioversion
11
67, F
Yes
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Magnesium sulfate and
diltiazem intravenously
12
85, M
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Metoprolol intravenously
13
80, F
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Diltiazem intravenously, 
electrical cardioversion
14
67, M
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Supraventricular tachycardia
Adenosine and
metoprolol intravenously
15
79, F
No
Abnormal, not ischemic
Atrial fibrillation
Metoprolol intravenously
Note: F = female, M = male.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
E143
while this resource is needed for patients in the waiting room who 
are more ill. This validated rule will help identify a large subset of 
very low-risk patients with chest pain who could safely be 
removed from cardiac monitoring at the onset of their evaluation 
in the emergency department.
During the validation phase, less than 2% of patients had 
arrhythmias, and these results are similar to those from the deri-
vation phase. However, all patients who had arrhythmias would 
have been identified by our decision rule. The American Heart 
Association suggests that all patients presenting to the emer-
gency department with chest discomfort or other symptoms sug-
gestive of acute coronary syndrome be placed on cardiac moni-
toring during work-up, although there is very limited evidence to 
support this recommendation.18 Given the escalating degree of 
emergency department crowding in North America, we believe it 
is impractical to place all patients on cardiac monitoring during 
their entire stay for work-up of acute coronary syndrome.
In our study, the most common arrhythmia that required 
intervention within 8 hours was atrial fibrillation, or flutter. It is 
possible the fast ventricular rates associated with this arrhyth-
mia could have caused the patients’ chest pain and their presen-
tation to the emergency department.
The Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac Monitoring Rule was derived to 
achieve a very high sensitivity (100%) and performed at this level of 
sensitivity during the validation phase. As with most decision rules 
that involve a potential serious outcome, we feel that the high sen-
sitivity is the most important characteristic of the rule, because we 
are attempting to ensure that patients do not have increased mor-
bidity and mortality as a result of missed arrhythmias.
Our study identified a large subset of low-risk patients with 
chest pain who can be safely removed from cardiac monitoring 
during their stay in the emergency department. We feel that this 
is a clinically important finding, because the ability to remove 
about one-third of patients with chest pain from cardiac moni-
toring at the beginning of their evaluation potentially unbur-
dens enough monitored beds to positively affect flow and allevi-
ate crowding in the emergency department. In addition, the 
interrater agreement for ECG interpretation in our study was 
very good, 0.84, and was similar to the 0.80 calculated during 
the derivation phase.19
This study does not aim to dictate which patients require car-
diac monitoring, but identifies a subset of patients who may be 
removed from cardiac monitoring at the time of the initial phys-
ician evaluation. In our study, the predictors were assessed by 
phys 
icians validating the rule. The predictor “Is the patient chest 
pain free?” can potentially be evaluated by the triage nurse on ini-
tial patient contact in the emergency department. If the patient is 
free of chest pain, and the physician confirms that the ECG is nor-
mal or shows only nonspecific changes, we recommend that the 
patient be triaged to a nonmonitored area in the absence of any 
distress or unstable vital signs. However, further studies are needed 
to assess the success of implementation at triage.
Decision rules are developed to aid management decisions 
when uncertainties exist. Any patient who looks unwell or has 
unstable vital signs should be placed on a monitor regardless of 
the rule, because no decision rules are required in the manage-
ment of care for such unstable patients. 
In our study, the outcome was defined as an arrhythmia 
requiring intervention within 8 hours of arrival at the emergency 
department. Because arrhythmias beyond 8 hours during a stay 
in hospital or in the short term were not used in the analysis, we 
are unable to provide recommendations for inpatient telemetry 
among patients admitted to hospital with potential acute coro-
nary syndrome. Further research involving patients admitted to 
hospital should be completed to answer this question.
We gave consideration to the incorporation of troponin 
results in the decision-making process for removing patients 
from cardiac monitoring. One previous study that incorporated 
the results of the first troponin in their algorithm found no 
decrease in the duration of cardiac monitoring.20 Given the 100% 
sensitivity with the 2 simple predictors in our rule, the ease of its 
application and the results of the previous study, we believe that 
incorporating troponin results will lead to lesser impact on 
health resource use.
Strengths and limitations
The strengths of our study include its prospective design, rigor-
ous data collection, analysis and follow up, and strong interrater 
reliability for the abnormal ECG predictor. In addition, we feel 
Table 3: Performance of the Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac 
Monitoring Rule among participants with arrhythmia
Performance
Arrhythmia
No arrhythmia
Total
Rule positive
15
497
512
Rule negative
0
284
284
Total
15
781
796
Note: Sensitivity = 100% (95 % confidence interval [CI] 78.2%–100%), positive 
likelihood ratio = 1.57 (95% CI 1.49–1.66), positive predictive value = 2.9% (95% CI 
1.7%–4.8%), specificity = 36.4% (95% CI 33.0%–39.6%), negative likelihood ratio = 0.0, 
negative predictive value = 100% (98.7%–100%).
Table 4: Performance of the Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac Monitoring Rule predictors
Predictor
Outcome occurred, %
n = 15
Outcome did not occur, %
n = 781
RR (95% CI)
Patient is free of chest pain
5 (33)
423 (54)
0.43 (0.15–1.25)
ECG normal or nonspecific
0 (0)
523 (67)
0.02 (0.00–0.28)
Note: CI = confidence interval, RR = relative risk.
 RESEARCH
E144 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
that this clinical problem has a broad geographic scope of appli-
cability because patients with chest pain are typically placed on 
cardiac monitoring in North America, Australia and Europe. 
Our study does have several limitations. Given that arrhythmia 
is an uncommon event in patients presenting with chest pain, a 
very large sample size will be required to achieve more precise 
estimates of sensitivity. However, because the patients not on a 
cardiac monitor will still be in the emergency department, we 
believe the consequent morbidity and mortality will be low.
A small proportion of eligible patients (121 of 1246 patients; 
9.7%) were not enrolled because the emergency physicians were 
busy and did not complete the study form. However, with more 
than 90% of eligible patients enrolled, we believe that these 
missing patients will not bias the study results.
To keep the study forms short and improve physician compli-
ance, we did not ask attending physicians to interpret the ECGs, 
and therefore potentially lost some pragmatic value.
The initial derivation study classified the ECGs as “normal or 
nonspecific ECG” or “abnormal” if signs of acute ischemia, infarc-
tion, old infarction, left bundle branch block or paced rhythm were 
present. Since the publication of the derivation study, standard-
ized definitions for research into acute coronary syndrome have 
been developed.15 Hence, we elected to use these standardized 
definitions. These standardized definitions included QRS and QT 
prolongation, old arrhythmia, right bundle branch block and left 
ventricular hypertrophy with strain pattern as “abnormal.” Despite 
the standardized definition being more conservative and more 
inclusive, our study maintained an improved specificity compared 
with the initial derivation study. We believe that these standard-
ized definitions will make widespread implementation easier.
We acknowledge the lag time between derivation and valida-
tion studies, but we do not feel that this interval affects the 
results in a meaningful way. Both the derivation and validation 
studies were done at the same institution, which is considered 
temporal validation of the prediction model.21 Hence, future 
studies completed in a different population may be useful in fur-
ther affirming the external validity of the decision rule. 
We did not specifically collect information on patients whose 
chest pain resolved after treatment or those in whom chest pain 
developed later while fulfilling criteria on initial physician assess-
ment. We believe that it is unlikely to affect the results of our 
study because all 15 patients who had arrhythmia showed an 
abnormal ECG as per the rule. In these scenarios, we believe the 
rule should be applied at the discretion of the physician.
Our study results show that a 36% reduction in monitoring 
can be achieved by implementing the Ottawa Chest Pain Cardiac 
Monitoring Rule. However, depending on differences in ECG 
interpretation and provider nonadherence, the actual reduction 
might be lower than reported here.
Conclusion
We found that arrhythmia among patients presenting to the emer-
gency department with chest pain is an uncommon event, which is 
consistent with previously published studies. We successfully vali-
dated a simple and highly sensitive clinical decision rule to safely 
remove patients from cardiac monitoring. Based on our results, we 
recommend that patients who present to the emergency depart-
ment with chest pain be removed from cardiac monitoring if they 
are free of chest pain at the time of assessment and if the ECG is 
either normal or shows only nonspecific changes. Following this 
rule will allow for at least one-third of patients to be safely removed 
from cardiac monitoring immediately after their initial evaluation, 
freeing up valuable resources that may be allocated to patients 
who are more ill.
References
 1. Niska R, Bhuiya F, Xu J. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 
2007 emergency department summary. Natl Health Stat Report 2010;6:1-31.
 2. Amsterdam EA, Kirk JD, Bluemke DA, et al.; American Heart Association Exercise, 
Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention Committee of the Council on Clinical Car-
diology, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, and Interdisciplinary Council on 
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Testing of low-risk patients presenting 
to the emergency department with chest pain: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 2010;122:1756-76.
 3. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. ACC/AHA Task Force Members; 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions and the Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients 
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: executive summary: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines [published erratum Circulation 2014;130:e431-2]. 
Circulation 2014;130:2354-94.
 4. Atzema C, Schull MJ, Borgundvaag B, et al. ALARMED: adverse events in low-
risk patients with chest pain receiving continuous electrocardiographic moni-
toring in the emergency department. A pilot study. Am J Emerg Med 2006; 
24:62-7.
 5. Singer AJ, Visram F, Shembekar A, et al. Telemetry monitoring during transport 
of low-risk chest pain patients from the emergency department: is it necessary? 
Acad Emerg Med 2005; 
12:965-9.
 6. Hollander JE, Sites FD, Pollack CV Jr, et al. Lack of utility of telemetry monitor-
ing for identification of cardiac death and life-threatening ventricular dys-
rhythmias in low-risk patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg Med 2004;43:71-6.
 7. Pines JM, Pollack CV Jr, Diercks DB, et al. The association between emergency 
department crowding and adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with 
chest pain. Acad Emerg Med 2009;16:617-25.
 8. Singer AJ, Thode HC Jr, Viccellio P, et al. The association between length of 
emergency department boarding and mortality. Acad Emerg Med 2011; 
18:1324-9.
 9. Diercks DB, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al. Prolonged emergency department stays of 
non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction patients are associated with 
worse adherence to the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-
ciation guidelines for management and increased adverse events. Ann Emerg 
Med 2007;50:489-96.
10. Bernstein SL, Aronsky D, Duseja R, et al.; Society for Academic Emergency Medi-
cine, Emergency Department Crowding Task Force. The effect of emergency 
department crowding on clinically oriented outcomes. Acad Emerg Med 
2009;16:1-10.
11. Gagnon MP, Émond M, Chauny J-M, et al. 2010 CAEP/ACMU Scientific Abstracts 
May 29–Jun. 2, 2010 Montréal, Que. Emergency physician intention to use clini-
cal decision rule to safely cease monitoring of patients with suspected acute 
coronary syndrome: a study of psychosocial determinant. CJEM 2010;12:269.
12. Atzema CL, Schull MJ. ALaRMED: adverse events in low-risk chest pain patients 
receiving continuous ECG monitoring in the emergency department: a survey 
of Canadian emergency physicians. CJEM 2008;10:413-9.
13. Gatien M, Perry JJ, Stiell IG, et al. A clinical decision rule to identify which chest 
pain patients can safely be removed from cardiac monitoring in the emer-
gency department. Ann Emerg Med 2007;50:136-43.
14. Bullard MJ, Chan T, Brayman C, et al.; Members of the CTAS National Working 
Group. Revisions to the Canadian Emergency Department Triage and Acuity 
Scale (CTAS) guidelines. CJEM 2014;16:485-9.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  JANUARY 30, 2017  |  VOLUME 189  |  ISSUE 4 
E145
15. Cullen L, Than M, Brown AF, et al. Comprehensive standardized data defini-
tions for acute coronary syndrome research in emergency departments in Aus-
tralasia. Emerg Med Australas 2010;22:35-55.
16. Sgarbossa EB, Pinski SL, Gates KB, et al. Early electrocardiographic diagnosis 
of acute myocardial infarction in the presence of ventricular paced rhythm. 
GUSTO-I Investigators. Am J Cardiol 1996;77:423-4.
17. Scheaffer RL, Mendenhall W III, Ott RL, et al. Elementary survey sampling. 
Pacific Grove (CA): Duxbury Press; 1979.
18. Anderson JL, Adams CD, Antman EM, et al. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for the 
management of patients with unstable angina/non–ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction — Executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Commit-
tee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Unstable 
Angina/Non–ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction) developed in collaboration 
with the American College of Emergency Physicians, the Society for Cardiovas-
cular Angiography and Interventions, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Reha-
bilitation and the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2007;50:652-726.
19. 
McGinn T, Wyer PC, Newman TB, et al.; Evidence-Based Medicine Teaching Tips Work-
ing Group. Tips for learners of evidence-based medicine: 3. Measures of observer vari-
ability (kappa statistic) [published erratum in CMAJ 2005;173:18]. CMAJ 
2004;171:1369-73.
20. King G, Nicholls GM, Jones P. Impact of a decision rule on duration of continu-
ous cardiac monitoring of patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome in 
an emergency department. Intern Med J 2013;43:1088-95.
21. Altman DG, Royston P. What do we mean by validating a prognostic model? 
Stat Med 2000;19:453-73.
Competing interests: None declared.
This article has been peer reviewed.
Accepted: Oct. 12, 2016
Affiliations: Departments of Emergency Medi-
cine (Syed, Gatien, Perry, Thiruganasamban-
damoorthy) and Epidemiology and Community 
Medicine (Perry, Thiruganasambandamoorthy), 
University of Ottawa; Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute (Perry, Chaudry, Kim, Kwong, Mukar-
ram, Thiruganasambandamoorthy), The 
Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ont.
Contributors: Shahbaz Syed, Mathieu Gatien, 
Jeffrey Perry and Venkatesh Thiruganasam-
bandamoorthy conceived the idea for this 
study. All of the authors contributed to the 
study design and development of the study 
protocol. All of the authors were involved in 
the conduct of the trial, including patient re-
cruitment, data collection and data manage-
ment, including quality control. Kenneth 
Kwong and Venkatesh Thiruganasambanda-
moorthy were involved in the statistical as-
pects of the study and analyzed the data. 
Shahbaz Syed, Mathieu Gatien and Venkatesh 
Thiruganasambandamoorthy drafted the 
manuscript. All of the authors reviewed the 
manuscript and contributed substantially to 
its revision, approved the final version to be 
published and agreed to act as guarantors of 
the results.
Funding: Ontario Innovation Fund.
Acknowledgements: The authors thank all of 
the emergency physicians at The Ottawa Hospi-
tal — Civic and General campuses, who re-
cruited the patients, as well as the emergency 
medicine residents who helped in this process. 
In addition, they thank the following members 
of their research team: Sarah Gaudet, My-Linh 
Tran, Sheryl Domingo, Kirtana Arcot, Brittany 
Mutsaers, Aline Ishimwe, Catherine Clement 
and Angela Marcantonio.
Correspondence to: Venkatesh 
Thiruganasambandamoorthy, vthirug@ohri.ca
