 SPECIAL ARTICLE
Jerzy P. Szaflarski, MD,
PhD
David Gloss, MD,
MPH&TM
Jeffrey R. Binder, MD
William D. Gaillard, MD
Alexandra J. Golby, MD
Scott K. Holland, PhD
Jeffrey Ojemann, MD
David C. Spencer, MD
Sara J. Swanson, PhD
Jacqueline A. French, MD
William H. Theodore,
MD
Correspondence to
American Academy of Neurology:
guidelines@aan.com
Supplemental data
at Neurology.org
Practice guideline summary: Use of fMRI in the
presurgical evaluation of patients with epilepsy
Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and
Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
ABSTRACT
Objective: To assess the diagnostic accuracy and prognostic value of functional MRI (fMRI) in
determining lateralization and predicting postsurgical language and memory outcomes.
Methods: An 11-member panel evaluated and rated available evidence according to the 2004
American Academy of Neurology process. At least 2 panelists reviewed the full text of 172
articles and selected 37 for data extraction. Case reports, reports with ,15 cases, meta-
analyses, and editorials were excluded.
Results and recommendations: The use of fMRI may be considered an option for lateralizing
language functions in place of intracarotid amobarbital procedure (IAP) in patients with medial
temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE; Level C), temporal epilepsy in general (Level C), or extratemporal
epilepsy (Level C). For patients with temporal neocortical epilepsy or temporal tumors, the evi-
dence is insufficient (Level U). fMRI may be considered to predict postsurgical language deficits
after anterior temporal lobe resection (Level C). The use of fMRI may be considered for lateralizing
memory functions in place of IAP in patients with MTLE (Level C) but is of unclear utility in other
epilepsy types (Level U). fMRI of verbal memory or language encoding should be considered for
predicting verbal memory outcome (Level B). fMRI using nonverbal memory encoding may be con-
sidered for predicting visuospatial memory outcomes (Level C). Presurgical fMRI could be an ade-
quate alternative to IAP memory testing for predicting verbal memory outcome (Level C).
Clinicians should carefully advise patients of the risks and benefits of fMRI vs IAP during discus-
sions concerning choice of specific modality in each case. Neurology® 2017;88:395–402
GLOSSARY
AAN 5 American Academy of Neurology; ATL 5 anterior temporal lobe; fMRI 5 functional MRI; IAP 5 intracarotid amobar-
bital procedure; LI 5 laterality index; MTL 5 medial temporal lobe; MTLE 5 medial temporal lobe epilepsy; ROI 5 region of
interest; TLE 5 temporal lobe epilepsy.
This article summarizes an American Academy of
Neurology (AAN) guideline on use of functional
MRI (fMRI) for presurgical mapping in epilepsy. Addi-
tional information is provided in the complete guide-
line, available as a data supplement at Neurology.org.
Appendices e-1 through e-5, available in the complete
guideline, tables e-1 and e-2, and references e1–e16,
cited here, are available at Neurology.org.
The choice of performing intracarotid amobarbital
procedure (IAP) or fMRI for presurgical language and
memory assessment depends on multiple factors that
need to be taken into account when selecting the
study. fMRI is properly described as an image acquisi-
tion technique that has come to mean imaging brain
activity. fMRI results may depend on, for example,
scanner strength, analysis methods, type of task con-
trast used, patient compliance and cooperation with
the tasks, or medications administered at the time of
the procedure; neither selection of fMRI tasks nor data
processing methods have been universally standard-
ized.1–4 Nonetheless, standard practices are beginning
to emerge.5 The IAP language or memory testing is
also not standardized; the reviewed studies vary with
regard to the procedure used for comparison. IAP may
From the Department of Neurology (J.P.S.), University of Alabama at Birmingham; Department of Neurology (D.G.), Charleston Area Medical
Center, WV; Department of Neurology (J.R.B., S.J.S.), Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee; Children’s National Medical Center (W.D.G.),
George Washington University, Washington, DC; Departments of Neurosurgery and Radiology (A.J.G.), Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
MA; Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation (S.K.H.), OH; Department of Neurosurgery (J.O.), Seattle Children’s Hospital, WA;
Department of Neurology (D.C.S.), Oregon Health & Science University, Portland; Department of Neurology (J.A.F.), New York University, New
York; and Clinical Epilepsy Section (W.H.T.), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD.
Approved by the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee on February 29, 2016; by the Practice Committee
on March 10, 2016; and by the AAN Institute Board of Directors on October 18, 2016.
This guideline was endorsed by the American College of Radiology on September 14, 2016, and by the American Epilepsy Society on December 14, 2016.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
© 2017 American Academy of Neurology
395
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 be inconclusive in a substantial proportion of patients.
Data on healthy volunteers are not available. The goal
of this practice guideline is to review available evidence
and provide practitioners with evidence-based recom-
mendations for the role of fMRI in epilepsy surgery
evaluation and postsurgical outcome prediction. The
guideline authors used the AAN diagnostic and prog-
nostic schemes for rating evidence.
This practice guideline seeks to answer the follow-
ing clinical questions:
1. Is fMRI comparable with the current standard
(IAP) for measuring language lateralization?
2. Can fMRI predict postsurgical language outcomes
in patients with epilepsy undergoing brain surgery?
3. Is fMRI comparable with the current standard
(IAP) for measuring memory lateralization?
4. Can fMRI predict postsurgical verbal memory
outcomes in patients with epilepsy undergoing
temporal lobectomy?
5. Can fMRI predict postsurgical nonverbal (visuo-
spatial) memory outcomes in patients with epi-
lepsy undergoing temporal lobectomy?
6. Is there sufficient evidence in terms of diagnostic
accuracy and outcome prediction for fMRI to
replace the IAP (Wada test) in presurgical evalua-
tion for epilepsy surgery?
DESCRIPTION OF THE ANALYTIC PROCESS The
Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Imple-
mentation Subcommittee appointed an 11-member
panel with special expertise in neuroimaging or epi-
lepsy, or both, and with experience in AAN guideline
development.
The
panel
followed
the
methods
described in the 2004 AAN process manual6 to develop
this guideline. The guideline authors included only
peer-reviewed studies in humans (see appendix e-3 for
complete search strategy).
Two panelists working independently of each other
selected 37/172 possibly relevant articles for full data
extraction. Studies with n , 15 cases, case reports,
meta-analyses, and editorials were excluded. Two pan-
elists rated each article according to the AAN diagnos-
tic and prognostic classification of evidence schemes
(appendix e-4). One panelist (J.P.S.) arbitrated differ-
ences in ratings until reviewer consensus was achieved.
The study methodologist (D.G.) reviewed all articles
again to confirm adherence to the classification
scheme. The guideline panel linked recommendation
strength to evidence strength on the basis of the num-
ber of Class I, II, and III studies (appendix e-5).
ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE Is fMRI comparable with
the current standard (IAP) for measuring language
lateralization? Because Class I and II studies are avail-
able, Class III studies are not discussed. The guideline
authors performed an individual patient data meta-
analysis on the Class I and II studies in order to
address
this
question
in
patients
with
medial
temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE).7–10 Additional data
were identified (6 Class II studies and 12 Class III
studies) that did not specify medial vs lateral temporal
localization.11–28
Temporal lobe epilepsy. One Class I study included
229 patients with epilepsy, 188 of whom had tempo-
ral lobe epilepsy (TLE).9 There was concordance with
IAP in 81/91 (89%) for the right and 82/97 (85%)
for the left medial temporal foci. Medial and lateral
temporal foci were not explicitly separated in the re-
sults, but the presence of medial temporal sclerosis
did not affect concordance rate. One Class II study
showed a concordance of 12/14 (86%) in patients
with MTLE and in 3/3 (100%) in patients with
medial temporal tumors.8 In the second Class II study
(40 patients), when only the data on the reading task
were evaluated, the concordance between fMRI and
IAP was 26/31 for all patients and 9/13 when only
patients with medial temporal seizure onset were ana-
lyzed.7 The last Class II study that compared concor-
dance between fMRI and IAP showed excellent
agreement in patients with MTLEs (17/17) and
seizures related to medial temporal tumors (4/4).10
Extratemporal epilepsy. The Class I study previously
mentioned showed concordance between fMRI and
IAP in 34/41 (83%) of the extratemporal cases.9 Of
the Class II studies, 1 performed in 40 patients with
epilepsy showed that in patients with extratemporal
epilepsies the concordance was 8/11 for all IAP results
and 8/10 if the patient with IAP bilateral language
distribution was excluded.7 Another Class II study of
26 patients with epilepsy reported 100% concordance
between fMRI and IAP in 5/5 patients with extra-
temporal lobe epilepsies.18
Of the studies conducted in patients with mixed
or unspecified location of seizure onset foci, 1 Class
II study showed overall 86% correlation with IAP
in 20 patients with epilepsy or brain tumors, or both,
for the sentence task and 89% for the synonym task;
individual patient data were not provided.19 A Class II
study in 51 patients with epilepsy or brain tumors, or
both, indicated moderate correlation (r 5 0.68; p ,
0.0001) between IAP and fMRI, but again, individ-
ual data were not provided to aid the combined anal-
ysis,20 which is similar to the other 2 Class II
studies.23,24 Finally, the last Class II study performed
in 38 patients with epilepsy showed concordance in
1/2 extratemporal cases.10
Meta-analysis of the previously discussed studies
found the following concordance rates (considering
only definitely right or left IAP results): 201/232
(87%) for medial temporal foci, 7/7 (100%) for
medial temporal lesions, and 48/59 (81%) for
396
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 extratemporal foci. Data from studies that included
patients with mixed or unspecified foci are harder
to interpret because some studies did not clearly spec-
ify the focus of localization. We classified these meta-
analysis data as Class II because they are composed of
2 Class I and 8 Class II studies.
Conclusions. fMRI possibly provides language lateral-
ization information concordant with that of IAP in
87% of medial temporal cases (Class II meta-analysis
of individual patient data) and in 81% of extratempo-
ral cases (Class II meta-analysis of individual patient
data). There are insufficient data for temporal tumors
or lateral temporal cases.
Recommendations. fMRI may be considered as an
option in lateralizing language functions in place of
IAP in patients with MTLE (Level C), temporal epi-
lepsy in general (Level C), or extratemporal epilepsy
(Level C), although patients should be carefully advised
of the risks and benefits of fMRI vs IAP during discus-
sions of modality choice in each individual case. The
evidence is unclear for patients with temporal neocor-
tical epilepsy or temporal tumors (Level U).
Can fMRI predict postsurgical language outcomes in
patients with epilepsy undergoing brain surgery? The
panel identified 1 Class II study of 44 patients with
left or right TLE associated with hippocampal sclero-
sis29 and 1 Class III study of 56 patients with left or
right MTLE (information regarding hippocampal
sclerosis was not provided).27 In the Class II study,
in patients with left TLE, strong left frontal activation
predicted greater postresection decline (sensitivity
100%, specificity 33%, positive predictive value
60%), and that the postresection performance de-
pended on greater right frontal language activation
shift.29 The Class III study showed that stronger left-
ward lateralization in a temporal lobe region of interest
(ROI) during a semantic decision task predicted
greater postoperative naming decline (sensitivity of
100%, specificity of 73%, positive predictive value
81%; temporal lobe laterality index [LI] correlation
to postoperative Boston Naming Test score: r 5
20.64; p , 0.001).27 This study also assessed the
ability of IAP language lateralization to predict naming
outcome in the same patients. Accuracy of the IAP
prediction (sensitivity 92%, specificity 45%, positive
predictive value 67%) was lower than that of fMRI.
Conclusions. fMRI is possibly effective in aiding
the prediction of postsurgical language deficits in
patients undergoing presurgical evaluation for pos-
sible temporal lobectomy (1 Class II study and 1
Class III study).
Recommendation. fMRI may be considered for pre-
dicting postsurgical language outcomes after anterior
temporal lobe (ATL) resection for the control of TLE
(Level C).
Is fMRI comparable with the current standard (IAP) for
measuring memory lateralization? Of 2 Class II studies,
1 study of 67 patients with TLE employed an fMRI
contrast between novel visual scenes and meaningless
visual patterns to show a significant correlation (r 5
0.31; p 5 0.007) between a hippocampal fMRI LI
and IAP memory LI.14 The second study found no
significant correlation (r 5 0.152; p 5 0.47) between
an IAP memory asymmetry measure and medial tem-
poral fMRI LI in 25 patients with TLE.30
Of 2 Class III studies, one conducted in 18 pa-
tients with TLE used an fMRI paradigm contrasting
novel pictures with previously studied pictures to
show that LI computed for the medial temporal lobe
(MTL) region correlated (r 5 0.49; p 5 0.049) with
the IAP memory LI.31 The second Class III study in
30 patients with TLE showed that the number of
activated left MTL voxels in patients with left TLE
was positively correlated with left IAP memory score
(Spearman r 5 0.60; p , 0.01).32
Conclusions. In patients with MTLE, there is Class
II evidence that fMRI is comparable with IAP in its
ability to lateralize memory functions and may be used
for this purpose. The conflicting data from one study
may be related to a relatively high dose of sodium amo-
barbital used to perform the IAP.
Recommendation. fMRI may be considered as an
option to lateralize memory functions in place of IAP
in patients with MTLE (Level C).
Can fMRI predict postsurgical verbal memory outcomes
in patients undergoing temporal lobectomy? Nine Class
II and 3 Class III studies provided data addressing this
question.14,22,30,33–40,e1 Class III data are not discussed
further.22,38,40 In one Class II study of 122 patients
with TLE (60 left), 50% of the variance in postsur-
gical verbal memory outcome in patients with left
TLE was explained by preoperative neuropsycholog-
ical testing, whereas fMRI explained an additional
10% of the variance (p # 0.003).33 A previously
mentioned Class II study found that, in contrast to
lateralization of language network activation, lateral-
ization of hippocampal activation during the picture
encoding task was not predictive of postresection verbal
memory outcomes.14 Another Class II study examined
asymmetry of hippocampal activation and postsurgical
memory outcomes in 54 patients with TLE (29 left),
using a word-encoding fMRI paradigm and stepwise
linear regression to test associations between fMRI
activation and postoperative memory changes after
ATL.34 The degree of fMRI asymmetry toward the
left was correlated with postsurgical verbal memory
decline (p 5 0.028). A model including left fMRI
activation during delayed recognition, side of seizure
onset, and preoperative verbal memory score correctly
predicted worsening of postoperative verbal memory in
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
397
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 90% of patients.30 A recent Class II study conducted in
50 patients with TLE (23 left) showed that increasing
left lateralization in the frontotemporal verbal memory
network preresection was associated with postresection
verbal memory decline in patients with left TLE (r 5
0.44; p 5 0.037); this effect was not observed in
patients with right TLE.39 In additional Class II
studies, postsurgical memory outcome was related to
presurgical fMRI memory lateralization.36,37 Finally,
one Class II study showed in 21 patients with left or
right TLE that greater functional connectivity between
the hippocampus and Brodmann area 22 (superior
temporal
gyrus)
before
surgical
resection
was
associated with decreased verbal memory function
after surgery.e1
Conclusion. fMRI leftward activation asymmetry
during encoding of verbal material, regardless of
whether measured in the MTL or in the language net-
work, probably predicts verbal memory decline after
left MTL surgery (9 Class II studies that used differ-
ent methods).
Recommendation. Presurgical fMRI of verbal mem-
ory or of language encoding should be considered as
an option to predict verbal memory outcome in pa-
tients with epilepsy who are undergoing evaluation
for left MTL surgery (Level B).
Can fMRI predict postsurgical nonverbal (visuospatial)
memory outcomes in patients with epilepsy undergoing
medial temporal lobectomy? One Class II study (72 pa-
tients, 68 with unilateral hippocampal sclerosis)
found that asymmetry of face recognition–related
activation was the best predictor of visual-spatial
decline after surgery (greater right anterior MTLE
activation for encoding faces correlates with greater
visual memory decline after right ATL resection: r 5
0.47; p 5 0.02).34
Conclusion. fMRI activation asymmetry during
nonverbal (scene and face recognition) memory tasks
is possibly predictive of nonverbal memory decline
after MTL surgery (1 Class II study).
Recommendation. Presurgical fMRI using nonverbal
memory encoding may be considered as a means to
predict visuospatial memory outcomes in patients
with epilepsy who are undergoing evaluation for tem-
poral lobe surgery (Level C).
Is there sufficient evidence in terms of diagnostic
accuracy and outcome prediction for fMRI to replace
the IAP (Wada test) in presurgical evaluation for epilepsy
surgery? The IAP is used to assess risk to language and
memory functions before brain surgery. fMRI has
some inherent advantages over the IAP, including
lower risk, greater potential for localization of function,
and lower cost. Whether fMRI is a suitable replace-
ment for the IAP, however, depends on whether it pro-
duces results that are concordant with those from the
IAP and whether it can predict cognitive outcomes
as accurately as the IAP.
Language. Several studies address the issue of con-
cordance between fMRI and IAP language lateraliza-
tion. Concordance is generally high, but not 100%
(table 1). The evidence for the ability of fMRI to
predict language outcome (i.e., risk to language func-
tion from surgery) is limited to 1 Class II study and 1
Class III study.27,29 Data on the ability of IAP to
predict language outcome also are limited.
Conclusions. Based on data from 1 Class II study and
1 Class III study, fMRI is possibly an effective
method of lateralizing language functions in patients
undergoing presurgical evaluation and may be a suit-
able replacement for the IAP for this purpose. Data
on the ability of fMRI to predict language outcomes
are limited.
Recommendation. Presurgical fMRI may be used
instead of the IAP for language lateralization in patients
with epilepsy who are undergoing evaluation for brain
surgery (Level C). However, when fMRI is used for
this purpose, task design, data analysis methods, and
epilepsy type (temporal vs extratemporal, lesional vs
nonlesional) need to be considered. Of particular
importance for patients with lesional epilepsy is the fact
that only small numbers of participants with variable
lesion size/location were included in previous studies.
Memory. The objectives of the memory portion of
the IAP are to assess risk of global amnesia after ATL
resection, even though IAP reliability for this purpose
has been questioned,e2–e5 and to predict material-
specific verbal memory deficits.e6–e9
Concordance is modest between IAP memory
asymmetry and fMRI MTL activation asymmetry.
Because of this low concordance rate and the limited
ability of the IAP to predict postoperative verbal mem-
ory outcome, a crucial clinical question is whether
fMRI can predict memory outcome better than the
IAP. In a previously discussed Class II study of 60 pa-
tients who had undergone left ATL surgery, an fMRI
language LI was more strongly correlated with verbal
memory change on a standardized list-learning mea-
sure (r 5 0.44; p , 0.001) than was the IAP memory
asymmetry (r 5 0.30; p , 0.05). Moreover, a multi-
variate prediction model that included preoperative
memory score, age at seizure onset, and fMRI LI was
not improved by adding IAP asymmetry scores.33
Conclusion. The correlations between fMRI and IAP
memory asymmetry measures are modest, and the abil-
ity of the memory IAP to predict material-specific ver-
bal memory change is relatively weak. Based on 9 Class
II studies, including one study that showed that fMRI
of language LI is possibly more accurate in predicting
material-specific verbal memory change than was the
memory IAP in patients undergoing left ATL resec-
tion, fMRI may be an alternative to IAP memory
398
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 testing. The ability of fMRI to predict global amnesia
has not been assessed.
Recommendation. fMRI of language and verbal mem-
ory lateralization may be an alternative to IAP mem-
ory testing for prediction of verbal memory outcome
in MTLE (Level C). fMRI is not yet established as an
alternative to the IAP for prediction of global amnesia
in patients who have undergone ATL surgery.
CLINICAL CONTEXT Several Class I–III studies pro-
vide support for fMRI use for language mapping,
although several reservations are warranted. Much of
the evidence was derived from relatively small patient
samples with heterogeneous characteristics. Some stud-
ies were underpowered or susceptible to random vari-
ation. Few studies have examined the ability of fMRI
to predict language outcomes. Multicenter studies are
missing, and there are no data about generalizability
across centers.
The available evidence leaves many critical matters
unresolved. The imperfect concordance between fMRI
and IAP language lateralization leaves open the question
of which test is more accurate in discordant cases.
Although the IAP has been considered a reference stan-
dard, it is susceptible to a number of limitations resulting
from individual variation in arterial anatomy (i.e., circle
of Willis), variable effects of anesthesia, rate of amobar-
bital or methohexital injection, variation in patient coop-
eration, and variation in testing methods. Evidence
concerning the relative accuracy of IAP and fMRI in pre-
dicting language outcomes is limited to a single study.e10
Another important clinical question is the extent to
which the published results apply to children and ado-
lescents, patients with varying seizure focus location or
lesion types, and patients with different levels of cogni-
tive performance or ability to cooperate with the pro-
cedure. The vast majority of the available data are from
adults with TLE and minimal structural lesions. A few
Table
Class I and II fMRI–intracarotid amobarbital procedure language lateralization comparison studies
First author, y
Class
No.
Language task
Baseline
Brain region examined
Concordance, %
Adcock et al., 200311
II
19
Silent word generation
Fixation
Language
100
Arora et al., 20097
II
37
Sentence judgment (auditory)
Tone comparison
Hemisphere
0
38
Sentence judgment (visual)
Line comparison
68
31
Silent word generation
Line comparison
65
28
All tasks combined
71
Benke et al., 200612
I
68
Semantic decision (auditory)
Tone decision
Frontal lobe
78
Temporal
69
Binder et al., 199613
I
22
Semantic decision (auditory)
Tone decision
Hemisphere
100
Chlebus et al., 200715
I
15
Silent word generation
Rest
Frontal lobe
100
Deblaere et al., 200416
I
17
Silent word generation
Silent counting
Frontal lobe
100
Hemisphere
94
Temporal
82
Ellmore et al., 201017
II
23
Silent naming and word generation
Fixation
Frontal lobe
91
Gutbrod et al., 201219
II
20
Rhyme decision
Letter decision
Frontala
84–88
Synonym decision
Temporala
82–84
Sentence decision
Combineda
90
Gaillard et al., 20048
I
25
Silent word generation
Rest
Language
84
1 Reading comprehension
Passive visual patterns
1 Auditory comprehension
Rest or reversed speech
Janecek et al., 20139
II
229
Semantic decision (auditory)
Tone decision
Language
86
Rutten et al., 200225
II
18
Silent verb generation only
Shape decision
Language
72
Silent verb generation
1 Silent object naming
1 Silent sentence reading
Language
83
Sabbah et al., 200326
II
20
Silent word generation
Rest
Hemisphere
95
Szaflarski et al., 200810
II
28
Silent verb generation
Finger tapping
Language
82
27
Semantic decision (auditory)
Tone decision
78
a Combined for all tasks.
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
399
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 studies suggest less reliable results in patients with extra-
temporal foci and larger lesions. Several studies included
adolescents and children as young as 6 years. Although
results appear similar to those in adults, there are no
Class I or II studies that solely address fMRI in compar-
ison with IAP or outcomes in the younger age ranges.
The reviewed studies varied across a number of meth-
odologic features, including the strength of the magnetic
field used, expertise in the techniques used for analysis of
the raw data, thresholding method (if any), ROI exam-
ined, and lateralization method. The extent to which
these variables affect data quality and validity is currently
unknown.
The present recommendations assume that pub-
lished standards are followed for conducting clinical
fMRI studies. As with the IAP, cognitive fMRI is
a complex diagnostic procedure that requires both
advanced technical expertise in imaging and expert
interaction with patients to elicit adequate levels of
task performance, select a set of activation tasks
appropriate to the patient’s ability and the clinical
aims of the study, instruct the patient on the tasks,
administer the tasks during scanning, and evaluate
and provide corrective feedback on task performance
during the scanning session.e11 Compliance with the
activation tasks is a prerequisite for eliciting the mod-
ulation of brain activity on which fMRI depends.
Clinicians need to have a thorough understanding
of the cognitive processes (language and nonlanguage)
elicited by the tasks and be mindful of the advantages
and disadvantages of particular language and baseline
or contrast tasks.
Ten years ago, practitioners were not ready to
address the matter of replacing the memory portion
of the IAP with fMRI, and the evidence with regard
to memory localization and lateralization with fMRI
is still not as clear or straightforward as with the lan-
guage tasks. Two Class II studies with relatively large
participant samples have now shown that fMRI can
predict verbal memory outcome in left ATL sur-
gery33,34 and may be more accurate than IAP for this
purpose.33 Some practitioners, however, depend on
the IAP to assess risk for global amnesia, which has
been reported after bilateral MTL damage.e12–e14
Global amnesia is rare after unilateral temporal lobe
surgery, however, and occurs mainly when there is
preexisting contralateral MTL dysfunction.e2,e5,e15,e16
One possible approach, therefore, is to reserve use
of the IAP memory test for those patients at greatest
risk for global amnesia, that is, patients undergoing
unilateral ATL resection who have structural or func-
tional evidence of damage to the contralateral MTL.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
There is a great need for further research in a number
of areas, including the following:
• Studies comparing fMRI and IAP with regard to
their ability to predict language and memory
outcomes
• Studies comparing the ability of fMRI to predict
language and memory outcomes in patients
receiving various surgical treatments
• Studies comparing various fMRI language and
memory tasks in regard to their ability to later-
alize functions, their level of agreement with IAP,
and their ability to predict postsurgical outcomes
• Studies comparing various fMRI analysis meth-
ods, using level of agreement with IAP and abil-
ity to predict postsurgical outcomes as standards
• Multicenter studies assessing the replicability of
particular fMRI methods across centers
• Studies specifically targeting patients with extra-
temporal epilepsy and lesional epilepsy
• Studies specifically targeting pediatric epilepsy
populations
CONFLICT OF INTEREST The American Academy
of Neurology is committed to producing independent,
critical,
and
truthful
clinical
practice
guidelines
(CPGs). Significant efforts are made to minimize the
potential for conflicts of interest to influence the
recommendations of this CPG. To the extent possible,
the AAN keeps separate those who have a financial
stake in the success or failure of the products appraised
in the CPGs and the developers of the guidelines.
Conflict of interest forms were obtained from all
authors and reviewed by an oversight committee prior
to project initiation. AAN limits the participation of
authors with substantial conflicts of interest. The AAN
forbids commercial participation in, or funding of,
guideline projects. Drafts of the guideline have been
reviewed by at least 3 AAN committees, a network
of neurologists, Neurology peer reviewers, and
representatives from related fields. The AAN Guideline
Author Conflict of Interest Policy can be viewed at aan.
com. For complete information on this process, access
the 2004 AAN process manual.6
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Dr. Szaflarski: study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or
interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of
the manuscript for important intellectual content, study supervision.
Dr. Gloss: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/
revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Binder: acquisition of data, anal-
ysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revi-
sion of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study supervision.
Dr. Gaillard: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/
revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Golby: acquisition of data, anal-
ysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revi-
sion of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study supervision.
Dr. Holland: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/
revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Ojemann: acquisition of data,
400
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study supervi-
sion. Dr. Spencer: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for
important intellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Swanson: acquisition
of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study
supervision. Dr. French: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of
data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript
for important intellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Theodore: acqui-
sition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the man-
uscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content,
study supervision.
STUDY FUNDING
This guideline was developed with financial support from the American
Academy of Neurology (AAN). Authors who serve as AAN subcommittee
members or methodologists (D.G., J.A.F.) were reimbursed by the AAN
for expenses related to travel to subcommittee meetings where drafts of
manuscripts were reviewed.
DISCLOSURE
J. Szaflarski has served, in the past 2 years, as a consultant for GW Phar-
maceuticals, Inc., Upsher-Smith Laboratories, Inc., Sage Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., and Biomedical Systems, Inc.; has served or serves on the editorial
boards of Epilepsy & Behavior, Epilepsy Currents (contributing editor),
Journal of Epileptology (associate editor), Journal of Medical Science, Folia
Medica Copernicana, Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience (associate edi-
tor), and Conference Papers in Medicine; has received funding for research
from the US Department of Defense (DOD), US Food and Drug
Administration, American Epilepsy Society, SAGE Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., Eisai, Inc., UCB Pharmaceuticals, the National Institute of Neuro-
logical Disorders and Stroke of the NIH, the State of Alabama (“Carly’s
Law”), and the University of Alabama at Birmingham; and has served as
an expert witness in legal proceedings. D. Gloss is an evidence-based
methodologist of the American Academy of Neurology. J. Binder serves
on the editorial boards of Brain and Language, Brain Imaging and Behav-
ior, the Journal of Neuroimaging, Frontiers in Auditory Cognitive Neuro-
science, the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, and Neuropsychology and
receives funding for research from the NIH and the Medical College
of Wisconsin. W. Gaillard reports support from Research Triangle Inter-
national and grant support from the NIH, the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention, the DOD, the National Science Foundation (NSF),
Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy, Pediatric Epilepsy Research
Foundation, and BAND and serves on the editorial boards for Epilepsia
and Epilepsy Research. A. Golby serves on the editorial boards of Brain
Imaging and Behavior, the Journal of Neuroimaging, the Journal of Cancer
Translational Medicine, and NeuroImage: Clinical; serves as an associate
editor of Neurosurgery; and has received research funding from the NIH,
Harvard Catalyst, and Koh-Young Technology, Inc. S. Holland reports
grant support from 4 entities within the NIH (the National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the National Institute of Mental
Health, the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, and the National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders) and from the Schiff Family Founda-
tion, the Schroth Family Foundation, the Fischer Family Foundation,
and PNC Bank Foundation. J. Ojemann is a board member of Therma
Neuroscience, Inc.; receives funding from the NIH and the NSF; is
a member of the Epilepsy Foundation Northwest professional advisory
board; and serves on the editorial boards of Neurosurgery and the Journal
of Neurosurgery. D. Spencer has served as an editor for Neurology® and the
Neurology patient page; has received research support from NeuroPace,
Inc.; and has given a deposition in a legal proceeding. S. Swanson has
received support from the Epilepsy Foundation of America and the NIH
and has served as an expert witness in civil and criminal legal proceedings.
J. French receives New York University (NYU) salary support for con-
sulting work on behalf of the Epilepsy Study Consortium for Acorda,
Adamas, Alexza, Anavex, BioPharm Solutions, Cerecor, Concert Pharma-
ceuticals, Eisai, Georgia Regents University, GW Pharmaceuticals,
Marinus, Monteris Medical, Nestlé Health Science, Neurelis, Novartis,
Pfizer, Pfizer Neusentis Research and Development, Pronutria, Roivant
Sciences, Sage Therapeutics, SciFluor Life Sciences, SK Life Science,
Sunovion, Takeda, UCB, Inc., Upsher-Smith, Xenon Pharmaceuticals,
Zogenix, and Zynerba; has received personal compensation for serving as
associate editor of Epilepsia; received research grants from the commercial
entities Acorda, Alexza, Eisai Medical Research, Lewis County General
Hospital, Lundbeck, Pfizer, SK Life Science, Sunovion, UCB, Upsher-
Smith, and Vertex; has received grants from the noncommercial entities
Epilepsy Research Foundation, Epilepsy Study Consortium, Epilepsy
Therapy Project, and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke of the NIH; serves on the editorial boards of Lancet Neurology,
Neurology Today, and Epileptic Disorders; is scientific officer for the Epilepsy
Foundation of America, for which NYU receives salary support; and has
received travel reimbursement related to research, advisory meetings, or
presentation of results at scientific meetings from the Epilepsy Study Con-
sortium, the Epilepsy Foundation of America, Eisai, GW Pharmaceuticals,
Marinus, Nestlé Life Sciences, Pfizer, Sage, SK Life Science, Takeda, UCB,
Upsher-Smith, Zogenix, and Zynerba. W. Theodore is an employee of the
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke of the NIH, which
provides salary, travel, and research support; has served as co-editor-in-chief
for Epilepsy Research, and on editorial boards for Lancet Neurology,
Neurology, Epilepsia, Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, and Neurotherapeutics;
and has received support from the International League Against Epilepsy for
teaching in Zambia. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
DISCLAIMER
Clinical practice guidelines, practice advisories, systematic reviews, and
other guidance published by the American Academy of Neurology and
its affiliates are assessments of current scientific and clinical information
provided as an educational service. The information (1) should not be
considered inclusive of all proper treatments, methods of care, or as
a statement of the standard of care; (2) is not continually updated and
may not reflect the most recent evidence (new evidence may emerge
between the time information is developed and when it is published or
read); (3) addresses only the question(s) specifically identified; (4) does
not mandate any particular course of medical care; and (5) is not in-
tended to substitute for the independent professional judgment of the
treating provider, as the information does not account for individual varia-
tion among patients. In all cases, the selected course of action should be
considered by the treating provider in the context of treating the individual
patient. Use of the information is voluntary. AAN provides this information
on an “as is” basis, and makes no warranty, expressed or implied, regarding
the information. AAN specifically disclaims any warranties of merchantabil-
ity or fitness for a particular use or purpose. AAN assumes no responsibility
for any injury or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to
any use of this information or for any errors or omissions.
Received April 26, 2016. Accepted in final form September 9, 2016.
REFERENCES
1.
Loring DW, Meador KJ, Allison JD, et al. Now you see
it, now you don’t: statistical and methodological
considerations
in
fMRI.
Epilepsy
Behav
2002;3:
539–547.
2.
Szaflarski JP, Allendorfer JB. Topiramate and its effect on
fMRI of language in patients with right or left temporal
lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 2012;24:74–80.
3.
Vannest JJ, Karunanayaka PR, Altaye M, et al. Compari-
son of fMRI data from passive listening and active-
response story processing tasks in children. J Magn Reson
Imaging 2009;29:971–976.
4.
Yasuda CL, Centeno M, Vollmar C, et al. The effect of
topiramate on cognitive fMRI. Epilepsy Res 2013;105:
250–255.
5.
Best Practices in Data Analysis and Sharing in Neuroimag-
ing Using MRI. Minneapolis: The Organization for
Human Brain Mapping (OHBM) Web site. Available at:
humanbrainmapping.org/files/2016/COBIDAS-Final%20For
%20Vote.pdf. Accessed June 15, 2016.
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
401
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 6.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guide-
lines Process Manual, 2004 ed. St. Paul: The American Acad-
emy of Neurology; 2004. Available at: aan.com/Guidelines/
Home/UnderDevelopment. Accessed November 12, 2009.
7.
Arora J, Pugh K, Westerveld M, Spencer S, Spencer DD,
Todd Constable R. Language lateralization in epilepsy pa-
tients: fMRI validated with the Wada procedure. Epilepsia
2009;50:2225–2241.
8.
Gaillard WD, Balsamo L, Xu B, et al. fMRI language task
panel improves determination of language dominance.
Neurology 2004;63:1403–1408.
9.
Janecek JK, Swanson SJ, Sabsevitz DS, et al. Language
lateralization by fMRI and Wada testing in 229 patients
with epilepsy: rates and predictors of discordance. Epilepsia
2013;54:314–322.
10.
Szaflarski JP, Holland SK, Jacola LM, Lindsell C, Privitera
MD, Szaflarski M. Comprehensive presurgical functional
MRI language evaluation in adult patients with epilepsy.
Epilepsy Behav 2008;12:74–83.
11.
Adcock JE, Wise RG, Oxbury JM, Oxbury SM, Matthews
PM. Quantitative fMRI assessment of the differences in
lateralization of language-related brain activation in pa-
tients with temporal lobe epilepsy. Neuroimage 2003;18:
423–438.
12.
Benke T, Koylu B, Visani P, et al. Language lateralization
in temporal lobe epilepsy: a comparison between fMRI
and the Wada Test. Epilepsia 2006;47:1308–1319.
13.
Binder JR, Swanson SJ, Hammeke TA, et al. Determina-
tion of language dominance using functional MRI: a com-
parison with the Wada test. Neurology 1996;46:978–984.
14.
Binder JR, Swanson SJ, Sabsevitz DS, Hammeke TA,
Raghavan M, Mueller WM. A comparison of two fMRI
methods for predicting verbal memory decline after left
temporal lobectomy: language lateralization versus hippo-
campal activation asymmetry. Epilepsia 2010;51:618–626.
15.
Chlebus P, Mikl M, Brazdil M, Pazourkova M, Krupa P,
Rektor I. fMRI evaluation of hemispheric language dom-
inance using various methods of laterality index calcula-
tion. Exp Brain Res 2007;179:365–374.
16.
Deblaere K, Boon PA, Vandemaele P, et al. MRI language
dominance assessment in epilepsy patients at 1.0 T: region
of interest analysis and comparison with intracarotid amy-
tal testing. Neuroradiology 2004;46:413–420.
17.
Ellmore TM, Beauchamp MS, Breier JI, et al. Temporal
lobe white matter asymmetry and language laterality in
epilepsy patients. Neuroimage 2010;49:2033–2044.
18.
Gaillard WD, Balsamo L, Xu B, et al. Language domi-
nance in partial epilepsy patients identified with an fMRI
reading task. Neurology 2002;59:256–265.
19.
Gutbrod K, Spring D, Degonda N, et al. Determination of
language dominance: Wada test and fMRI compared using
a novel sentence task. J Neuroimaging 2012;22:266–274.
20.
Jones SE, Mahmoud SY, Phillips MD. A practical clinical
method to quantify language lateralization in fMRI using
whole-brain analysis. Neuroimage 2011;54:2937–2949.
21.
Kamada K, Sawamura Y, Takeuchi F, et al. Expressive and
receptive language areas determined by a non-invasive reli-
able method using functional magnetic resonance imaging
and magnetoencephalography. Neurosurgery 2007;60:
296–305; discussion 305–306.
22.
Koylu B, Walser G, Ischebeck A, Ortler M, Benke T.
Functional imaging of semantic memory predicts postop-
erative episodic memory functions in chronic temporal
lobe epilepsy. Brain Res 2008;1223:73–81.
23.
Ota T, Kamada K, Kawai K, Yumoto M, Aoki S, Saito N.
Refined analysis of complex language representations by
non-invasive neuroimaging techniques. Br J Neurosurg
2011;25:197–202.
24.
Rodin D, Bar-Yosef O, Smith ML, Kerr E, Morris D,
Donner EJ. Language dominance in children with epilepsy:
concordance of fMRI with intracarotid amytal testing and
cortical stimulation. Epilepsy Behav 2013;29:7–12.
25.
Rutten GJ, Ramsey NF, van Rijen PC, Alpherts WC, van
Veelen CW. fMRI-determined language lateralization in
patients with unilateral or mixed language dominance ac-
cording to the Wada test. Neuroimage 2002;17:447–460.
26.
Sabbah P, Chassoux F, Leveque C, et al. Functional MR
imaging in assessment of language dominance in epileptic
patients. Neuroimage 2003;18:460–467.
27.
Sabsevitz DS, Swanson SJ, Hammeke TA, et al. Use of pre-
operative functional neuroimaging to predict language defi-
cits from epilepsy surgery. Neurology 2003;60:1788–1792.
28.
Woermann FG, Jokeit H, Luerding R, et al. Language
lateralization by Wada test and fMRI in 100 patients with
epilepsy. Neurology 2003;61:699–701.
29.
Bonelli SB, Thompson PJ, Yogarajah M, et al. Imaging
language networks before and after anterior temporal lobe
resection: results of a longitudinal fMRI study. Epilepsia
2012;53:639–650.
30.
Dupont S, Duron E, Samson S, et al. Functional MR
imaging or Wada test: which is the better predictor of
individual postoperative memory outcome? Radiology
2010;255:128–134.
31.
Deblaere K, Backes WH, Tieleman A, et al. Lateralized ante-
rior mesiotemporal lobe activation: semirandom functional
MR imaging encoding paradigm in patients with temporal lobe
epilepsy: initial experience. Radiology 2005;236:996–1003.
32.
Jokeit H, Okujava M, Woermann FG. Memory fMRI later-
alizes temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurology 2001;57:1786–1793.
33.
Binder JR, Sabsevitz DS, Swanson SJ, Hammeke TA,
Raghavan M, Mueller WM. Use of preoperative functional
MRI to predict verbal memory decline after temporal lobe
epilepsy surgery. Epilepsia 2008;49:1377–1394.
34.
Bonelli SB, Powell RH, Yogarajah M, et al. Imaging mem-
ory in temporal lobe epilepsy: predicting the effects of
temporal lobe resection. Brain 2010;133:1186–1199.
35.
Bonelli SB, Thompson PJ, Yogarajah M, et al. Memory reor-
ganization following anterior temporal lobe resection: a longi-
tudinal functional MRI study. Brain 2013;136:1889–1900.
36.
Cheung MC, Chan AS, Lam JM, Chan YL. Pre- and
postoperative fMRI and clinical memory performance in
temporal lobe epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
2009;80:1099–1106.
37.
Frings L, Wagner K, Halsband U, Schwarzwald R, Zentner J,
Schulze-Bonhage A. Lateralization of hippocampal activation
differs between left and right temporal lobe epilepsy patients
and correlates with postsurgical verbal learning decrement.
Epilepsy Res 2008;78:161–170.
38.
Mechanic-Hamilton D, Korczykowski M, Yushkevich PA,
et al. Hippocampal volumetry and functional MRI of memory
in temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 2009;16:128–138.
39.
Sidhu MK, Stretton J, Winston GP, et al. Memory fMRI
predicts verbal memory decline after anterior temporal
lobe resection. Neurology 2015;84:1512–1519.
40.
Vannest J, Szaflarski JP, Privitera MD, Schefft BK,
Holland SK. Medial temporal fMRI activation reflects
memory lateralization and memory performance in pa-
tients with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 2008;12:410–418.
402
Neurology 88
January 24, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003532
2017;88;395-402 Published Online before print January 11, 2017
Neurology 
Jerzy P. Szaflarski, David Gloss, Jeffrey R. Binder, et al. 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
epilepsy: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation 
Practice guideline summary: Use of fMRI in the presurgical evaluation of patients with
This information is current as of January 11, 2017
Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/4/395.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Supplementary Material
 
532.DC1
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2017/01/11/WNL.0000000000003
Supplementary material can be found at: 
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/4/395.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 38 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at: 
Citations
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/4/395.full##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/functional_neuroimaging
Functional neuroimaging
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/fmri
fMRI
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_epilepsy_seizures
All Epilepsy/Seizures
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
