 The American Journal of  
Cosmetic Surgery
2016, Vol. 33(3) 116 
–120
© The Author(s) 2016 
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0748806816663915
acs.sagepub.com
Original Article, Clinical Science
Lateral brow ptosis is a common aging phenomenon, con-
tributing to the lateral upper eyelid hooding, in addition to 
dermatochalasis. Lateral brow lift complements upper 
blepharoplasty in achieving a youthful periorbital appear-
ance. Various brow lifting techniques have been described 
for ptotic brows, including coronal brow lift, endoscopic 
brow lift, direct brow lift, pretrichial brow lift, and mid-
forehead brow lift.1-9 There are also multiple indications and 
clinical findings that influence the surgical technique, in 
addition to surgeon’s preference, including brow contour 
and position, degree of brow ptosis, skin type, presence of 
forehead rhytids, brow symmetry, and position of the hair-
line. Cost, recovery times, and patient preference are other 
factors involved.
In this study, the author reports his experience in utiliz-
ing a temporal (pretrichial) subcutaneous lateral brow lift 
technique under local anesthesia and discusses the ideal 
candidate.
Methods
This was a retrospective analysis of all patients undergoing 
the proposed technique by one surgeon (M.R.T.) from 
2009 to 2016. Informed consent was obtained for each pro-
cedure, and the review adhered to the standards of the 
Declaration of Helsinki and was compliant with the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. All patients 
were from the private practice of the senior author (M.R.T.), 
and all surgeries were performed at the office under local 
anesthesia.
663915 ACSXXX10.1177/0748806816663915The American Journal of Cosmetic SurgeryTaban
research-article2016
1Private Practice, Beverly Hills, CA, USA
2University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Corresponding Author:
Mehryar Ray Taban, 9735 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 319, Beverly Hills, CA 
90212, USA. 
Email: doctor@TabanMD.com
Lateral Browlift Using Temporal 
(Pretrichial) Subcutaneous Approach 
Under Local Anesthesia
Mehryar Ray Taban, MD, FACS1,2
Abstract
Lateral brow ptosis is a common aging phenomenon, contributing to the lateral upper eyelid hooding, in addition to 
dermatochalasis. Lateral brow lift complements upper blepharoplasty in achieving a youthful periorbital appearance. In this 
study, the author reports his experience in utilizing a temporal (pretrichial) subcutaneous lateral brow lift technique under 
local anesthesia. A retrospective analysis of all patients undergoing the proposed technique by one surgeon from 2009 to 
2016 was conducted. Additional procedures were recorded. Preoperative and postoperative photographs at the longest 
follow-up visit were used for analysis. Operation was performed under local anesthesia. The surgical technique included 
a temporal (pretrichial) incision with subcutaneous dissection toward the lateral brow, with superolateral lift and closure. 
Total of 45 patients (44 females, 1 male; mean age: 58 years) underwent the temporal (pretrichial) subcutaneous lateral 
brow lift technique under local anesthesia in office setting. The procedure was unilateral in 4 cases. Additional procedures 
included upper blepharoplasty (38), ptosis surgery (16), and lower blepharoplasty (24). Average follow-up time was 1 year 
(range, 6 months to 5 years). All patients were satisfied with the eyebrow contour and scar appearance. One patient required 
additional brow lift on one side for asymmetry. There were no cases of frontal nerve paralysis. In conclusion, the temporal 
(pretrichial) subcutaneous approach is an effective, safe technique for lateral brow lift/contouring, which can be performed 
under local anesthesia. It is ideal for women. Additional advantages include ease of operation, cost, and shortening the 
hairline (if necessary).
Keywords
temporal brow lift, pretrichial forehead lift, aesthetic, cosmetic, technique
 Taban 
117
Surgical candidate included any person with lateral brow 
ptosis without significant medial brow descent. Smokers 
were excluded. Concomitant surgical procedures were 
recorded. Preoperative and postoperative photographs at 
the longest follow-up visit were analyzed for cosmetic out-
come. All photographs were obtained using a standardized 
technique in the frontal and oblique positions with the eye-
lids open and facial muscles relaxed. Complications were 
recorded.
Surgical Technique
Operation was performed under local anesthesia (with light 
oral sedation using 5-10 mg Valium) in the office setting. 
Markings were made preoperatively, with the patient in a sit-
ting position. The lateral brow was manually lifted in supero-
lateral direction to achieve aesthetic youthful brow with the 
lateral half higher than the medial half of the brow. This was 
done with the patient’s input with a mirror on hand. The 
markings were made along the temple hairline (Figure 1).
The area of the dissection was infiltrated with lidocaine 
1% or 2% with epinephrine, with a total of 3 to 6 CC injected 
on each side. After sterile preparation, a beveled incision was 
made to allow for potential hair growth through the scar. The 
subcutaneous plane was elevated from the incision line to a 
level midway to the lateral brow using a blunt vertical 
spreading technique.
The skin flap was lifted in an ideal vector for the individ-
ual patient in superolateral direction. Appropriate amount of 
excess skin was excised. The flap was closed under minimal 
(less lift) to moderate (more lift) tension by using deep sub-
cutaneous 4-0 Vicryl sutures in an interrupted fashion fol-
lowed by superficial closure using 5-0 Prolene sutures in a 
running fashion. Dog ear at the most superior end of the 
wound were trimmed. Both sides were closed in a similar 
fashion under same tension unless there was preoperative 
asymmetry, in which case the more ptotic side was lifted in 
greater amount, resulting in more tension on the wound clo-
sure (moderate instead of minimal tension). The sutures were 
then covered by antibiotic ointment without any dressing. 
First postoperative follow-up was at 1 week at which time 
the Prolene sutures were removed.
Results
Total of 45 patients (44 females, 1 male; mean age, 58 years; 
range, 38-78 years) underwent the temporal (pretrichial) sub-
cutaneous lateral brow lift technique under local anesthesia 
Figure 1. Intraoperative photo series demonstrating temporal brow lift in a 63-year-old female: A, Marking along the hairline in the 
temple; B, beveled incision and vertical spreading technique in the subcutaneous plane; C, excess skin to be excised; D, after excision; E, 
superolateral lift closure with subcutaneous 4-0 Vicryl suture; F, superficial closure using 5-0 Prolene suture; G, after completion of the 
right side, before start of the left side; H, immediate postoperative bilateral lift.
 118 
The American Journal of Cosmetic Surgery 33(3)
in the office setting. The procedure was unilateral in 4 cases 
due to preoperative asymmetry. Concomitant surgical proce-
dures performed included upper blepharoplasty (38), ptosis 
surgery (16), and lower blepharoplasty (24). Average follow-
up time was 1 year (range, 6 months to 5 years).
All patients were satisfied with the eyebrow contour and 
scar appearance at the 4-month postoperative visit, as 
assessed by a short questionnaire at the 3- to 4-month post-
operative period. No patient needed scar revision. One 
patient required additional brow lift on one side for asym-
metry. There were no incidences of hematoma, infection, 
prolonged numbness, or frontal nerve paralysis.
Representative clinical photographs from 5 patients in 
this series can be seen in Figures 2 to 6.
Discussion
The temporal/lateral brow lift using pretrichial incision with 
subcutaneous dissection can be done under local anesthesia 
with effective and safe results, with high patient satisfaction. 
The lateral brow is normally the main segment of the eye-
brow that descends with time, and this technique effectively 
addressed this segment and addresses the lateral brow “hood-
ing,” which cannot be addressed by upper blepharoplasty 
Figure 2. Preoperative (left) and 8-month postoperative (right) photographs of a 73-year-old female who underwent bilateral lateral 
brow lift and upper blepharoplasty.
Note. Her eyebrow tattoo is elevated laterally, which depicts clear elevation of the lateral eyebrow (with no possible manipulation of any eyebrow hair).
Figure 3. Preoperative (top, left) and 1-year postoperative (bottom, left) photographs of a 57-year-old female who underwent bilateral 
lateral brow lift, quad-blepharoplasty, ptosis surgery, and canthoplasty, and right photo depicts faint scar along the temple hairline.
 Taban 
119
alone. It can be combined with other periorbital rejuvenation 
procedures to achieve optimal results.
This proposed variation of the lateral brow lift technique 
has multiple advantages over other brow lift techniques. The 
incision and dissection is much closer to the lateral brow 
than the standard pretrichial incision in the superior fore-
head area, which results in less dissection, more comfort, 
less sensory nerve loss, and more effective results due to 
simple physics.1,10-12 The incision is easily hidden along the 
lateral hairline in females, during the initial 3 months of 
healing, after which the incision is not clearly visible in 
almost all the patients. This technique can either elevate (by 
removing hair-barring portion) or lower the hairline, as 
desired, or the hairline position can be left undisturbed. The 
extent of dissection and tissue removed along with the vec-
tor (and effective lift) can be titrated to each side to correct 
for asymmetries. Most importantly, this minimally invasive 
technique can be done comfortably and safely in the office 
setting under local anesthesia without extensive equipment, 
unlike endoscopic or coronal lift. This reduces the cost and 
stress for the patient, with desired quicker recovery and less 
anesthesia (with less subsequent short-term and long-term 
side effects). This technique has distinct advantages over 2 
other brow lift techniques that can be performed under local 
anesthesia. Internal brow lift/fixation usually only gives 
support to the brows, with only modest lift at best. Direct 
brow lift technique leaves a visible permanent scar, which is 
not preferred by almost all female patients.
There are 3 main limitations of this technique. First, it 
only addresses the lateral brow and hence it is not appropri-
ate for those patients in whom the entire forehead needs to 
be lifted. Second, the incision is visible (red) for about 3 
months after the procedure, which limits its use in patients 
with short hair (ie, males). Third, the feasibility of this tech-
nique in patients with poor healing or smokers is yet to be 
determined.
In summary, the temporal/lateral brow lift technique using 
pretrichial incision with subcutaneous dissection is ideal for 
nonsmoking patients with long hair and lateral brow descent 
with limited central forehead rhytids. It can be combined 
Figure 4. Preoperative (left) and 9-month postoperative (right) photographs of a 67-year-old female who underwent bilateral lateral 
brow lift, quad-blepharoplasty, and ptosis surgery.
Figure 5. Preoperative (left) and 2 years postoperative (right) photographs of a 71-year-old female who underwent bilateral lateral 
brow lift, quad-blepharoplasty, ptosis surgery, and canthoplasty.
 120 
The American Journal of Cosmetic Surgery 33(3)
with other periorbital procedures in the office under local 
anesthesia. In addition, it can address eyebrow asymmetry, 
along with addressing high or short hairline. It is effective, 
safe, and inexpensive with high patient satisfaction.
Author’s Note
This study was presented at American Academy of Facial Plastic 
and Reconstructive Surgery (AAFPRS) 11th International 
Symposium in New York (May 29, 2014) and at the Vegas Cosmetic 
Conference in Las Vegas (June 26, 2014).
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article.
References
 1. Bidros RS, Salazar-Reyes H, Friedman JD. Subcutaneous tem-
poral browlift under local anesthesia: a useful technique for 
periorbital rejuvenation. Aesthet Surg J. 2010;30(6):783-788.
 2. Lee NG, Callahan AB, Migliori ME, Freitag SK. Minimally 
invasive approaches to eyebrow lifting. Int Ophthalmol Clin. 
2013;53:47-57.
 3. Passot RL. Chirurgie esthetique pure: techniques et resultats. 
Paris, France: Gaston Dorn et Cie; 1930.
 4. Gonzalez-Ulloa M. Facial wrinkles: integral elimination. Plast 
Reconstr Surg Transplant Bull. 1962;29:658-673.
 5. Marten FW, et al. Aging defects in the male: a regional approach 
to treatment. In: Marten FW, Lewis JR, eds. Symposium on 
Aesthetic Surgery of the Face, Eyelid, and Breast. St. Louis, 
MO: Mosby; 1972.
 6. Gleason MC. Brow-lift through a temporal scalp approach. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 1973;52:141.
 7. Knize DM. Limited-incision forehead lift for eyebrow eleva-
tion to enhance upper blepharoplasty. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1996;97:1334-1342.
 8. Core GB, Vasconez LO, Askren C. Coronal face lift with endo-
scopic techniques. Plast Surg Forum. 1992;15:227-228.
 9. Fogli AL. Temporal lift by galeapexy: a review of 270 cases. 
Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2003;27:159-165.
 
10. Guyuron B, Davies B. Subcutaneous anterior hairline forehead 
rhytidectomy. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1988;12:77.
 
11. Miller TA, Rudkin G, Honig M, Elahi M, Adams J. Lateral 
subcutaneous brow lift and interbrow muscle resection: clini-
cal experience and anatomic studies. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:1120-1127.
 
12. Tonnard P, Verpaele A. Short-Scar Face Lift: Operative 
Strategies and Techniques. St. Louis, MO: Quality Medical 
Publishing; 2007.
Author Biography
Mehryar Ray Taban is an oculoplastic surgeon in private practice 
in Beverly Hills. He is an assistant clinical professor at Jules Stein 
Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). He 
focuses on cosmetic and reconstructive eye plastic surgery.
Figure 6. Same patient as the one in the surgical series in Figure 1, undergoing bilateral lateral brow lift, quad-blepharoplasty, and 
canthoplasty.
Note. Top Left, preoperative; Top Right, 1-week postoperative; Bottom, 4-month postoperative photographs. Note faint scar along the temple hairline.
