 Report
Increased Global Functional Connectivity Correlates
with LSD-Induced Ego Dissolution
Highlights
d High-level cortical regions and the thalamus show increased
connectivity under LSD
d The brain’s modular and rich-club organization is altered
under LSD
d Increased global connectivity under LSD correlates with ego
dissolution scores
Authors
Enzo Tagliazucchi, Leor Roseman,
Mendel Kaelen, ..., Amanda Feilding,
David J. Nutt, Robin Carhart-Harris
Correspondence
tagliazucchi.enzo@googlemail.com
(E.T.),
r.carhart-harris@imperial.ac.uk (R.C.-H.)
In Brief
Tagliazucchi et al. find that increased
global communication mediated by the
brain’s key integration centers underlies
LSD-induced ‘‘ego dissolution.’’ This
globally enhanced integration impairs the
functional identity of brain systems,
leading to feelings of ego dissolution and
disturbed ego boundaries.
Tagliazucchi et al., 2016, Current Biology 26, 1043–1050
April 25, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.010
 Current Biology
Report
Increased Global Functional Connectivity
Correlates with LSD-Induced Ego Dissolution
Enzo Tagliazucchi,1,2,14,* Leor Roseman,3,4,14 Mendel Kaelen,3 Csaba Orban,3 Suresh D. Muthukumaraswamy,5,6
Kevin Murphy,5 Helmut Laufs,7 Robert Leech,4 John McGonigle,3 Nicolas Crossley,8 Edward Bullmore,9,10,11
Tim Williams,12 Mark Bolstridge,3 Amanda Feilding,13 David J. Nutt,3 and Robin Carhart-Harris3,*
1Department of Sleep and Cognition, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience (NIN), an institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences, Amsterdam 1105 BA, the Netherlands
2Institute for Medical Psychology, University of Kiel, Kiel 24113, Germany
3Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK
4Computational, Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience Laboratory (C3NL), Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London
W12 0NN, UK
5Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), Department of Psychology, Cardiff CF10 3AT, UK
6Schools of Pharmacy and Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland 1010, New Zealand
7Neurology Department, Schleswig-Holstein University Hospital, University of Kiel, Kiel 24113, Germany
8Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neurosciences, King’s College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK
9Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK
10Cambridgeshire & Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB21 5EF, UK
11Alternative Discovery & Development, GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford TW8 9GS, UK
12AWP Mental Health NHS Trust, Blackberry Centre, Manor Road, Bristol BS16 2EW, UK
13The Beckley Foundation, Oxford OX3 9SY, UK
14Co-first author
*Correspondence: tagliazucchi.enzo@googlemail.com (E.T.), r.carhart-harris@imperial.ac.uk (R.C.-H.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.010
SUMMARY
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is a non-selective
serotonin-receptor agonist that was first synthesized
in 1938 and identified as (potently) psychoactive in
1943. Psychedelics have been used by indigenous
cultures for millennia [1]; however, because of
LSD’s unique potency and the timing of its discovery
(coinciding with a period of major discovery in psy-
chopharmacology), it is generally regarded as the
quintessential contemporary psychedelic [2]. LSD
has profound modulatory effects on consciousness
and was used extensively in psychological research
and psychiatric practice in the 1950s and 1960s [3].
In spite of this, however, there have been no modern
human imaging studies of its acute effects on the
brain. Here we studied the effects of LSD on intrinsic
functional connectivity within the human brain using
fMRI. High-level association cortices (partially over-
lapping with the default-mode, salience, and fron-
toparietal attention networks) and the thalamus
showed increased global connectivity under the
drug. The cortical areas showing increased global
connectivity overlapped significantly with a map of
serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) receptor densities (the key
site of action of psychedelic drugs [4]). LSD also
increased global integration by inflating the level of
communication between normally distinct brain net-
works. The increase in global connectivity observed
under LSD correlated with subjective reports of
‘‘ego dissolution.’’ The present results provide the
first evidence that LSD selectively expands global
connectivity in the brain, compromising the brain’s
modular and ‘‘rich-club’’ organization and, simulta-
neously, the perceptual boundaries between the
self and the environment.
RESULTS
We used fMRI to investigate global and local changes in func-
tional connectivity following intravenous injection of lysergic
acid diethylamide (LSD) versus placebo to 15 healthy volunteers.
The experiment followed a randomized and balanced within-
subject design, and both whole-brain exploratory and more
selective hypothesis-driven data-analysis approaches were
employed. Based on the predominantly cortical distribution of
serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) receptors [5, 6] (the principal receptor
mediating psychedelic effects [4]), as well as previous findings
with other psychedelics [5, 7, 8], we hypothesized that connec-
tivity changes would implicate high-level cortical networks
such as the default-mode network (DMN) [9] and salience
network [10]. The association between these networks and
self-consciousness [7, 11, 12] led us to expect a parametric cor-
relation with the intensity of subjective reports of ‘‘ego dissolu-
tion’’ under LSD, i.e., a compromised sense of possessing an
integrated and distinct personality or identity.
We first studied changes in the overall connectivity of 401
even-sized regions of interest (ROIs) completely covering cortical
and sub-cortical gray matter and obtained using a method intro-
duced by Zalesky and colleagues [13]. We computed the func-
tional connectivity density (FCD) [14] as the average correlation
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
1043
 between the spontaneously fluctuating blood oxygen level-
dependent (BOLD) signal at each region of interest and the time
series from all remaining ROIs. Thus, high FCD values corre-
spond to regions whose activity is strongly correlated to that
of the rest of the brain, whereas activity in regions with low
FCD values is weakly correlated to that of the rest of the
brain. The average FCDs measured under LSD and placebo are
shown in Figure 1A as a 3D rendering on top of a gray-matter
surface. Histograms depicting the distribution of FCD values
across all ROIs were obtained for both conditions. In the LSD
condition there was a tail of highly coupled regions that was
less prominent in the placebo condition (Figure 1B). FCD values
were globally increased under LSD compared with placebo (Fig-
ure 1B inset).
The increases in global connectivity under LSD were observed
in predominantly in frontal, parietal, and inferior temporal
cortices, as well as in the bilateral thalamus. In Figure 1C we
present a rendering of these effects together with the outline of
three resting state networks (RSNs) obtained by applying inde-
pendent component analysis [16] to resting-state data from 35
Figure 1. LSD Selectively Increases Global
Functional Connectivity of Higher-Level Inte-
grative Cortical and Sub-cortical Regions
(A) Average FCD under the placebo and LSD
conditions.
(B) Normalized histogram (P) of all FCD values for
both conditions (mean ± SEM). The inset shows
the whole-brain FCD averages (*p < 0.05, two-
tailed t test).
(C) Rendering of significant FCD increases under
LSD versus placebo (thresholded at p < 0.05, two-
tailed t test, false discovery rate [FDR]-controlled
for multiple comparisons). Outlines of the bilateral
frontoparietal, salience, and default-mode RSN
are overlaid on top of the map of FCD significant
increases.
(D) Quantitative analysis of the overlap between
significant FCD increases and eight RSNs (FP,
frontoparietal; Sal, salience; DMN, default-mode
network; DAN, dorsal attention network; Vis L,
lateral visual; Aud, auditory; Vis M, medial visual;
SM, sensorimotor) obtained from 35 subjects
scanned in the Human Connectome Project, as
well as 5-HT2A receptor concentration and FCD
increases under psilocybin. Only FP, Sal, DMN,
and the maps of 5-HT2A receptor concentration
and FCD increases under psilocybin had an over-
lap significantly greater than that observed when
spatially randomizing the networks (mean ± SD,
*p < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected for multiple com-
parisons). For a description of the randomization
procedure, see [15] and the Supplemental Exper-
imental Procedures. See also Figure S1.
healthy subjects in the Human Connec-
tome Project (HCP) dataset (http://www.
humanconnectomeproject.org/).
These
three
RSNs
(bilateral
frontoparietal,
default-mode, and salience networks)
showed a significant overlap with FCD
increases under LSD (Figure 1D) and
have been implicated in the action of other psychedelics [5, 8].
Additionally, we found a significant overlap between FCD in-
creases under LSD and the distribution of 5-HT2A receptors
(the key site of action of psychedelic drugs [4]), obtained using
positron emission tomography (PET) [6], as well as with FCD
increases observed under psilocybin (same data and prepro-
cessing as reported in [15]) (Figure 1D, right). We did not observe
significant overlap between FCD increases and the distribution
of other serotonin receptors (i.e., the 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B
receptors).
Subsequently, we correlated the magnitude of regional FCD
increases observed under LSD with the intensity of ego disso-
lution reported by the participants (LSD minus placebo) across
all ROIs. Regions surviving correction for multiple comparisons
included the bilateral temporo-parietal junction (angular gyrus)
and the bilateral insular cortex (red rendering in Figure 2A).
The specificity of this finding was assessed by also correlating
all other VAS (visual analog scale) scores with FCD increases
under LSD. Importantly, ego dissolution was the only subjective
rating that survived this multiple-comparisons correction (see
1044
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
 Figure S2 for more information on VAS and ASC [altered state
of consciousness questionnaire] scores). In the green rendering
in Figure 2A, we identify those regions presenting correlations
with ego dissolution scores (corrected for multiple compari-
sons) and uncorrelated to all other VAS scores (at a level
of p < 0.05, uncorrected). Scatterplots of FCD versus ego
dissolution are shown in Figure 2B for four example regions
located in the left/right angular gyrus and insula. These regions
were selected based on their overlap with the corresponding
Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) atlas regions and their
association with self-awareness [11, 12, 17, 18]. Scatterplots
of FCD versus the other five VAS scores are provided in Fig-
ure S4, and plots for four additional regions are provided in
Figure S3.
The FCD increases indicated that the overall global connectiv-
ity of the regions in Figure 1C increased under LSD relative to
placebo. Next, we asked which areas of the brain became
especially more engaged with these highly globally connected
brain areas under LSD. To do this, we divided the FCD differ-
ence map (Figure 1C) into four components: a frontal seed
(comprising parts of inferior, middle, and superior frontal gyri),
Figure 2. FCD Increases Correlate with Sub-
jective Reports of Ego Dissolution
(A) Brain regions where a significant (p < 0.05, two-
tailed, FDR-controlled for multiple comparisons)
correlation between FCD and subjective reports of
ego dissolution (LSD minus placebo) was found
are colored in red. Brain regions where none of the
other VAS scores correlated with FCD at p < 0.05,
two-tailed, uncorrected (i.e., regions presenting
the most selective correlations between FCD in-
creases and ego dissolution scores) are colored in
green.
(B)
Association
between
FCD
increases
and
reports of ego dissolution in four example ROIs
(bilateral angular gyrus and insular cortex). See
also Figures S2 and S3.
a parietal seed (bilateral temporo-parietal
junction/angular gyrus), the precuneus,
and the bilateral thalamus. Seed-based
regression analyses were subsequently
conducted based on each of these four
seeds (as the independent variables)
with all 401 ROIs as dependent variables.
Figure 3 displays difference maps with
the regions becoming more coupled with
four FCD-determined seeds (left panel)
under LSD relative to placebo. In all
four cases, sensory cortices were impli-
cated (right panel). This result was further
confirmed by repeating the permutation
analysis [15] conducted for the FCD
map (Figure 1D)—yielding a significant
overlap between the difference maps
and four HCP-derived RSNs: a sensori-
motor RSN spanning the pre- and post-
central gyri, two visual RSNs (medial and
lateral), and an auditory RSN encompassing the superior tempo-
ral cortex (including the primary auditory cortex in the Heschl’s
gyrus). For comparison, the contour of these RSNs is overlaid
with the maps of statistically significant regions in Figure 3 (right
panel).
Next, we evaluated whether LSD only scaled the magnitude of
the coupling or also rearranged connectivity patterns in the brain,
independently of the coupling strength. To do this, we studied
the modularity of whole-brain functional connectivity networks
having the ROIs as nodes. In the present context, modularity
measures how well the brain can be parcellated into modules
having dense within-module and sparse between-module con-
nectivity [19]. Based on the observation of increased between-
network connectivity under LSD (Figure 3), as well as previous
findings with other psychedelics [20], we predicted that there
would be a decrease in brain modularity under the drug,
indicating a reduction in the separation of intrinsic brain net-
works. As shown in Figure 4A, this prediction was supported
over an extended range of functional network link densities
(ratio of the number of binary connections present in the
network to the maximum possible number of connections; see
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
1045
 Supplemental Experimental Procedures). In Figure 4B, we show
the modules identified by the modularity optimization algo-
rithm. We also computed the participation coefficient of each
node
(measuring
how
much
each
node
communicates
across modules relative to how much they communicate within
their own module [19]) and observed increased participation
coefficients in frontal and midline regions (Figure 4C) overlap-
ping with those in Figure 1C, suggesting that these areas serve
as conduits for increased between-module communication
under LSD.
Finally, we investigated changes in the level of integration be-
tween highly coupled regions by means of the so-called ‘‘rich-
club’’ coefficient F(k). This metric calculates the ratio of links
between nodes of degree (i.e., the number of attached links)
higher than a certain number (k) over the maximum possible
number of links between them, and it is normalized by the
same metric computed after degree-preserving randomization
of the network [21]. In Figure 4D we show that the rich-club co-
efficient is higher under placebo than LSD, indicating that LSD
decreases the level of (preferential) communication between
the brain’s dominant hub regions. These hub regions are found
within a single module (corresponding to primary sensory
areas; green module in Figure 4B) as revealed by the k-core
of the LSD and placebo networks (with k = 100), defined as
the smallest subset of nodes with degree at least equal to
k (see Figure 4E). Thus, LSD enhances between-module inte-
gration at the expense of impairing within-module communica-
tion of highly coupled nodes.
Figure 3. LSD Increases Between-System
Functional Connectivity
Results of seed correlation analyses based on four
ROIs (leftmost column) defined from the map of
significant FCD increases (Figure 1C). In the three
columns at right, regions in red indicate signifi-
cantly higher connectivity (p < 0.05, two-tailed
t test, FDR-controlled for multiple comparisons)
with the seed (leftmost column, in blue) under LSD
relative to the placebo. A permutation test revealed
that only four RSNs present a significant (p < 0.05,
Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons)
overlap with the functional connectivity increases
under LSD: the sensorimotor (SM), auditory (Aud),
visual medial (Vis M), and visual lateral (Vis L)
RSNs. The contour of these RSNs is jointly
rendered with the maps of functional connectivity
changes. See also Figures S1 and S3.
DISCUSSION
Taken together, the present results indi-
cate
that
LSD
enhances
global
and
between-module communication while
diminishing
the
integrity
of
individual
modules, and that this effect is mediated
by the brain’s key integration centers
such as those that are rich in 5-HT2A re-
ceptors. These results invite comparisons
with those of our previous functional im-
aging studies with psilocybin, a related
compound and another serotonergic psychedelic. For example,
in [5] we reported decreases in functional connectivity between
anterior and posterior nodes of the DMN under psilocybin, and
in [22] and [23] we suggested that decreased within-network
integrity was a general property of psychedelics. Furthermore,
two subsequent reports detailed increased between-RSN con-
nectivity under psilocybin [20, 24], matching the directionality
of the effects found here with LSD. Indeed, re-analysis of our pre-
viously acquired psilocybin fMRI data revealed FCD increases in
regions similar to those observed here with LSD (Figures 1D and
S1). Importantly, despite overlap with the default-mode, fronto-
parietal, and salience networks, the results of the current FCD
analysis were not constrained a priori to these or any other spe-
cific RSN.
Intriguingly, a formal analysis revealed significant overlap be-
tween the regions of increased global connectivity under LSD
and those that express the 5-HT2A receptors in especially
high concentrations. 5-HT2A receptor agonism is known to in-
crease cell excitability (in particular that of layer V pyramidal
neurons) [25], which may result in higher metabolic demands.
Increased glucose metabolism in frontal, temporal, and subcor-
tical regions has been reported for serotonergic psychedelics,
and these increases correlate with subjective reports of ego
dissolution [26]. Glucose metabolism is also known to covary
with the density of functional connections [27], thus establish-
ing a possible connection between the FCD increases ob-
served here and 5-HT2A receptor-mediated changes in neural
excitability.
1046
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
 Electroencephalography (EEG) studies performed during the
1950s and 1960s reported broadband decreases in oscillatory
power under LSD [28], and magnetoencephalography recently
revealed diminished power in a broad range of frequency bands
after psilocybin infusion [23]. 5-HT2A receptor-mediated oscilla-
tory desynchronization can be traced to an uncoupling of layer 5
pyramidal cell firing from local field potential oscillations [29],
suggesting that dysregulating the firing of these neurons is
critical. In the human cortex, decreases in alpha power after
psilocybin infusion are particularly marked, and decreased alpha
in the posterior DMN (precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex)
correlates with the intensity of ego dissolution [22]. A number
of multimodal EEG-fMRI studies have now revealed an inverse
correlation between global functional connectivity and power
in the alpha band [30–32], which reconciles these electrophysio-
logical observations with our findings of increased global con-
nectivity in high-level association areas under both LSD and
psilocybin. Alpha oscillations have been hypothesized to inhibit
or regulate task-irrelevant (i.e., ‘‘spontaneous’’ or ‘‘ongoing’’)
neural processes [33]; thus, findings of reduced alpha under psy-
chedelics suggest that these drugs could reduce this inhibition
(i.e., be disinhibitory). It must be noted, however, that alpha
oscillations are linked to a number of cognitive processes (e.g.,
attention, memory, executive control, and conscious access)
[34], and the hypothesized disinhibition cannot be directly in-
ferred from the present results.
The areas of the brain that displayed increased global connec-
tivity under LSD have different functional roles. The frontoparietal
cortex is implicated in conscious information access [35], and its
activity is suppressed in some states of diminished conscious
awareness (such as seizures or deep sleep) [36], even though
an unequivocal link between frontoparietal activity and the
conscious state is lacking. Different DMN components perform
functions related to self-consciousness: activity in the precuneus
correlates with self-reflection processes and autobiographical
memory retrieval [37], while the activation of temporo-parietal
junctions is typical of out-of-body experiences [17]. The bilateral
insular cortex is related to self-awareness [18], as well as to the
processing of emotional information [38], that could also play an
important role in the psychedelic experience. One intriguing pos-
sibility is that increased cross-talk between these networks and
other brain systems underlies the experience of ego dissolution
under LSD. This scenario is supported by our observation of pos-
itive correlations between increased FCD in the bilateral tem-
poro-parietal junction and insular cortex and subjective reports
of ego dissolution. Furthermore, we observed that the increases
in global connectivity in these high-level regions particularly
involved sensory areas. This increased communication between
Figure 4. LSD Increases Global Integration
(A) Modularity versus link density for the LSD and placebo conditions (mean ± SEM, *p < 0.05, two-tailed t test, FDR-controlled for multiple comparisons). The
inset shows the same for networks after degree-preserving randomization (no significant differences were found).
(B) Rendering of the modules identified at a reference link density of 0.3, for the placebo (top) and LSD (bottom) conditions.
(C) Regions presenting increased participation coefficient in LSD versus placebo (link density = 0.3, p < 0.05 two-tailed t test, FDR-controlled for multiple
comparisons).
(D) Normalized rich-club coefficient f(k) for LSD and placebo. The inset shows the difference between both conditions (mean ± SEM, link density = 0.3, *p < 0.05,
two-tailed t test, FDR-controlled for multiple comparisons).
(E) k-cores (k = 100) for placebo (top) and LSD (bottom) conditions. See also Figure S4.
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
1047
 high-level (association) and lower-level (sensory) cortices might
represent a collapse in the normal hierarchical organization of
the brain [22] such that the boundaries between lower-level
systems anchored to the external world and higher-level
systems operating more autonomously from sensory information
become blurred. It is intriguing to speculate whether this blurring
of boundaries and putative expansion of the ‘‘global work-
space’’ [35] are related to the blurring of ego boundaries and
the experiences of ego dissolution and ‘‘expanded awareness’’
reported in relation to psychedelics.
It is deserving of mention that our exploratory imaging analysis
revealed significant (corrected) correlations with only one (out of
six) VAS items, i.e., the one that enquired about feelings of ego
dissolution. That the results of these exploratory whole-brain an-
alyses correlated selectively with ego dissolution may be signif-
icant, as it suggests that this phenomenon is important [7] and
dependent on changes that implicate the whole of the brain
rather than just specific functional modules. It remains possible,
however, that other aspects of the psychedelic experience (e.g.,
visual hallucinations) may depend on changes in the functioning
of a particular module (e.g., the visual cortex), and this is some-
thing that we intend to investigate in the future.
As mentioned above, the quality of consciousness under
psychedelics is frequently referred to as ‘‘expanded’’ [22]. It is
reasonable to infer, therefore, that the neurophysiology of the
psychedelic state will contrast with that of states of ‘‘diminished
consciousness,’’ such as deep sleep or general anesthesia. Our
results support this inference on many levels. As discussed
above, increased frontoparietal FCD under LSD suggests higher
metabolism in these regions, whereas unconscious states are
generally characterized by diminished frontoparietal meta-
bolism and connectivity [36]. Deep sleep, for instance, presents
decreased density and efficiency of frontoparietal functional
connections [39]. Both sleep and anesthesia are characterized
by a breakdown of global functional integration, resulting in
increased modularity values [40, 41], whereas we observed
decreased modularity values under LSD, reflecting enhanced
between-module cross-talk. Broadly speaking, this study’s re-
sults are consistent with the previous hypothesis that the psy-
chedelic and unconscious states occupy polar-opposite ends
of a spectrum of conscious states, defined by their level of en-
tropy or randomness [22]. This hypothesis can now be updated
to state that the brain’s level of modularity (low modularity being
characteristic of random and disordered networks [19]), during a
particular period of time (e.g., the duration of resting-state scan),
is predictive of the subjective quality of consciousness that is
experienced during that period. Further work is required to
develop our characterization and subsequent quantification of
the subjective nature of conscious states [42]; however, the pre-
sent measure of ego dissolution can be viewed as a start in this
direction.
Some limitations of our study must be acknowledged. First,
while we attempted by all available means to reduce the impact
of head motion in our results and to show that our results cannot
be attributed to motion confounds (see section ‘‘Motion’’ in
the Supplemental Experimental Procedures), significant differ-
ences in head motion persisted between conditions. Second,
the particularly strict criteria used to combat motion artifacts
reduced our original sample of 20 subjects to a smaller sample
of 15 ‘‘clean’’ datasets. Third, our analysis of ego dissolution
was based on a single numerical report by experienced psyche-
delic drug users; future studies should attempt a more thorough
characterization of the subjective dimension of this experience.
Finally, since the participants were experienced psychedelic
drug users, it is more likely that they could differentiate the
LSD from the placebo, potentially leading to demand character-
istics. It would be interesting to repeat these analyses in psyche-
delic-naive participants to test whether past use of psychedelics
can be predictive of the reported effects, although we failed to
observe any correlations between past use and the above-
reported effects of LSD in the present study.
In conclusion, the present study aimed to explore one of the
most remarkable and least understood domains of the psyche-
delic experience, known both colloquially and academically as
‘‘ego dissolution.’’ It revealed an increase in global integration
within the brain (but a decrease in within-module integrity),
seemingly mediated by high-level cortical association regions
that are rich in 5-HT2A receptors, as well as the thalamus.
Importantly, the increases in global integration in cortical asso-
ciation regions selectively correlated with subjective ratings of
ego dissolution. These results help to inform not only on the
neurobiology of the psychedelic experience but on a funda-
mental aspect of human consciousness, namely the sense of
possessing a coherent ‘‘self’’ or ‘‘ego’’ that is distinct from
others and separate from the external environment. Further
work is required to develop these insights and explore other
interesting aspects of the phenomenology of the psychedelic
experience. Finally, the present study reinforces the view that,
conducted with appropriate care, human research with psyche-
delic drugs is safe and can provide valuable insights in human
neuroscience.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
This study was approved by the National Research Ethics Service Committee
London – West London and was conducted in accordance with the revised
Declaration of Helsinki (2000), the International Committee on Harmonisation
Good Clinical Practices guidelines, and the National Health Service Research
Governance Framework. Imperial College London sponsored the research,
which was conducted under a Home Office license for research with Schedule
1 drugs. Detailed experimental procedures (including information on subject
recruitment, experimental design, data acquisition, and data analysis) can
be found in the Supplemental Information.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes four figures and Supplemental Experi-
mental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.010.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.T. analyzed the data, produced all figures, and wrote the manuscript. L.R.
contributed to study design, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript.
M.K. contributed to study design, recruitment of volunteers, and data analysis.
C.O. contributed to data analysis. S.D.M. contributed to study design and co-
ordination. K.M. contributed to data analysis. H.L. contributed to data analysis
and edited the manuscript. R.L. contributed to study design and edited the
manuscript. J.M. contributed to data analysis. N.C. and E.B. contributed to
data analysis and edited the manuscript. T.W. and M.B. helped perform the
research, cared for participants, administered the LSD, and served as
1048
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
 medical/psychiatric cover for the study. A.F. was instrumental in initiating the
research and edited the manuscript. D.J.N. advised on the study design and
implementation and edited the manuscript. R.C.-H. designed and led the
study, oversaw recruitment, contributed to data analysis, and edited the
manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research received financial support from the Safra Foundation (who fund
D.J.N. as the Edmond J. Safra Professor of Neuropsychopharmacology) and
the Beckley Foundation (it was conducted as part of the Beckley/Imperial
Research Programme). E.T. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship of the
AXA Research Fund. R.C.-H. is supported by an MRC clinical development
scheme grant. S.D.M. is supported by a Royal Society of New Zealand Ruth-
erford Discovery Fellowship. K.M. is supported by a Wellcome Trust fellowship
(WT090199). The researchers would like to thank supporters of the Walacea
crowdfunding campaign (https://walacea.com/) for helping to secure the
funds required to complete the study. This report presents independent
research carried out at the NIHR/Wellcome Trust Imperial Clinical Research
Facility.
E.B. is employed half-time by University of Cambridge and half-time by
GlaxoSmithKline; he holds stock in GlaxoSmithKline.
Received: September 18, 2015
Revised: January 6, 2016
Accepted: February 2, 2016
Published: April 13, 2016
REFERENCES
1. Metzner, R. (1998). Hallucinogenic drugs and plants in psychotherapy and
shamanism. J. Psychoactive Drugs 30, 333–341.
2. Hofmann, A. (1980). LSD: My Problem Child (McGraw-Hill).
3. Grob, C. (1996). Psychiatric Research with Hallucinogens: What Have We
Learned? (VWB - Verlag fu
¨ r Wissenschaft und Bildung).
4. Glennon, R.A., Titeler, M., and McKenney, J.D. (1984). Evidence for 5-HT2
involvement in the mechanism of action of hallucinogenic agents. Life Sci.
35, 2505–2511.
5. Carhart-Harris, R.L., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., Stone, J.M., Reed, L.J.,
Colasanti, A., Tyacke, R.J., Leech, R., Malizia, A.L., Murphy, K., et al.
(2012). Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI
studies with psilocybin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 2138–2143.
6. Saulin, A., Savli, M., and Lanzenberger, R. (2012). Serotonin and molecular
neuroimaging in humans using PET. Amino Acids 42, 2039–2057.
7. Lebedev, A.V., Lo
¨ vde
´ n, M., Rosenthal, G., Feilding, A., Nutt, D.J., and
Carhart-Harris, R.L. (2015). Finding the self by losing the self: Neural cor-
relates of ego-dissolution under psilocybin. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 3137–
3153.
8. Palhano-Fontes, F., Andrade, K.C., Tofoli, L.F., Santos, A.C., Crippa,
J.A.S., Hallak, J.E., Ribeiro, S., and de Araujo, D.B. (2015). The psyche-
delic state induced by ayahuasca modulates the activity and connectivity
of the default mode network. PLoS ONE 10, e0118143.
9. Raichle, M.E., MacLeod, A.M., Snyder, A.Z., Powers, W.J., Gusnard, D.A.,
and Shulman, G.L. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 676–682.
10. Seeley, W.W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A.F., Keller, J., Glover, G.H., Kenna,
H., Reiss, A.L., and Greicius, M.D. (2007). Dissociable intrinsic connectiv-
ity networks for salience processing and executive control. J. Neurosci.
27, 2349–2356.
11. Vogeley, K., May, M., Ritzl, A., Falkai, P., Zilles, K., and Fink, G.R. (2004).
Neural correlates of first-person perspective as one constituent of human
self-consciousness. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16, 817–827.
12. Carhart-Harris, R.L., and Friston, K.J. (2010). The default-mode, ego-func-
tions and free-energy: a neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain
133, 1265–1283.
13. Zalesky, A., Fornito, A., Harding, I.H., Cocchi, L., Yu
¨ cel, M., Pantelis, C.,
and Bullmore, E.T. (2010). Whole-brain anatomical networks: does the
choice of nodes matter? Neuroimage 50, 970–983.
14. Tomasi, D., and Volkow, N.D. (2010). Functional connectivity density map-
ping. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 9885–9890.
15. Tagliazucchi, E., Carhart-Harris, R., Leech, R., Nutt, D., and Chialvo, D.R.
(2014). Enhanced repertoire of brain dynamical states during the psyche-
delic experience. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 5442–5456.
16. Beckmann, C.F., DeLuca, M., Devlin, J.T., and Smith, S.M. (2005).
Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent compo-
nent analysis. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360, 1001–1013.
17. Blanke, O., Ortigue, S., Landis, T., and Seeck, M. (2002). Stimulating
illusory own-body perceptions. Nature 419, 269–270.
18. Craig, A.D. (2011). Significance of the insula for the evolution of human
awareness of feelings from the body. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1225, 72–82.
19. Bullmore, E., and Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: graph theo-
retical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
10, 186–198.
20. Roseman, L., Leech, R., Feilding, A., Nutt, D.J., and Carhart-Harris, R.L.
(2014). The effects of psilocybin and MDMA on between-network resting
state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8, 204.
21. van den Heuvel, M.P., and Sporns, O. (2011). Rich-club organization of the
human connectome. J. Neurosci. 31, 15775–15786.
22. Carhart-Harris, R.L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P.J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A.,
Tagliazucchi, E., Chialvo, D.R., and Nutt, D. (2014). The entropic brain: a
theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with psy-
chedelic drugs. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 20.
23. Muthukumaraswamy, S.D., Carhart-Harris, R.L., Moran, R.J., Brookes,
M.J.,
Williams,
T.M.,
Errtizoe,
D.,
Sessa,
B.,
Papadopoulos,
A.,
Bolstridge, M.,Singh,K.D., etal.(2013).Broadbandcortical desynchroniza-
tion underlies the human psychedelic state. J. Neurosci. 33, 15171–15183.
24. Carhart-Harris, R.L., Leech, R., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T.M., Stone, J.M.,
Evans, J., Sharp, D.J., Feilding, A., Wise, R.G., and Nutt, D.J. (2013).
Functional connectivity measures after psilocybin inform a novel hypothe-
sis of early psychosis. Schizophr. Bull. 39, 1343–1351.
25. Andrade, R. (2011). Serotonergic regulation of neuronal excitability in the
prefrontal cortex. Neuropharmacology 61, 382–386.
26. Vollenweider,
F.X.,
Leenders,
K.L.,
Scharfetter,
C.,
Maguire,
P.,
Stadelmann, O., and Angst, J. (1997). Positron emission tomography and
fluorodeoxyglucose studies of metabolic hyperfrontality and psychopathol-
ogy in the psilocybin model of psychosis. Neuropsychopharmacology 16,
357–372.
27. Tomasi, D., Wang, G.J., and Volkow, N.D. (2013). Energetic cost of brain
functional connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 13642–13647.
28. Fink, M. (1969). EEG and human psychopharmacology. Annu. Rev.
Pharmacol. 9, 241–258.
29. Celada, P., Puig, M.V., Dı
´az-Mataix, L., and Artigas, F. (2008). The halluci-
nogen DOI reduces low-frequency oscillations in rat prefrontal cortex:
reversal by antipsychotic drugs. Biol. Psychiatry 64, 392–400.
30. Scheeringa, R., Petersson, K.M., Kleinschmidt, A., Jensen, O., and
Bastiaansen, M.C. (2012). EEG a power modulation of fMRI resting-state
connectivity. Brain Connect. 2, 254–264.
31. Tagliazucchi, E., von Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., and
Laufs, H. (2012). Dynamic BOLD functional connectivity in humans and
its electrophysiological correlates. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6, 339.
32. Chang, C., Liu, Z., Chen, M.C., Liu, X., and Duyn, J.H. (2013). EEG corre-
lates of time-varying BOLD functional connectivity. Neuroimage 72,
227–236.
33. Klimesch, W., Sauseng, P., and Hanslmayr, S. (2007). EEG alpha oscilla-
tions: the inhibition-timing hypothesis. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 53,
63–88.
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
1049
 34. Bazanova, O.M., and Vernon, D. (2014). Interpreting EEG alpha activity.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 44, 94–110.
35. Dehaene, S., and Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience
of consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition
79, 1–37.
36. Boly, M., Phillips, C., Tshibanda, L., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Schabus, M.,
Dang-Vu, T.T., Moonen, G., Hustinx, R., Maquet, P., and Laureys, S.
(2008). Intrinsic brain activity in altered states of consciousness: how
conscious is the default mode of brain function? Ann. N Y Acad. Sci.
1129, 119–129.
37. Johnson, S.C., Baxter, L.C., Wilder, L.S., Pipe, J.G., Heiserman, J.E., and
Prigatano, G.P. (2002). Neural correlates of self-reflection. Brain 125,
1808–1814.
38. Phan, K.L., Wager, T., Taylor, S.F., and Liberzon, I. (2002). Functional
neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies
in PET and fMRI. Neuroimage 16, 331–348.
39. Uehara, T., Yamasaki, T., Okamoto, T., Koike, T., Kan, S., Miyauchi, S.,
Kira, J., and Tobimatsu, S. (2014). Efficiency of a ‘‘small-world’’ brain
network depends on consciousness level: a resting-state FMRI study.
Cereb. Cortex 24, 1529–1539.
40. Tagliazucchi, E., von Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., Borisov,
S., Jahnke, K., and Laufs, H. (2013). Large-scale brain functional modu-
larity is reflected in slow electroencephalographic rhythms across the
human non-rapid eye movement sleep cycle. Neuroimage 70, 327–339.
41. Schrouff, J., Perlbarg, V., Boly, M., Marrelec, G., Boveroux, P.,
Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Bruno, M.A., Laureys, S., Phillips, C., Pe
´ le
´ grini-
Issac, M., et al. (2011). Brain functional integration decreases during pro-
pofol-induced loss of consciousness. Neuroimage 57, 198–205.
42. Studerus, E., Gamma, A., and Vollenweider, F.X. (2010). Psychometric
evaluation of the altered states of consciousness rating scale (OAV).
PLoS ONE 5, e12412.
1050
Current Biology 26, 1043–1050, April 25, 2016
