 Article
Identifying people with
dementia on T
witter
Catherine Talbot
University of Exeter Medical School, UK; Centre for Research in Ageing
and Cognitive Health (REACH), University of Exeter, UK
Siobhan O’Dwyer
University of Exeter Medical School, UK; Centre for Research in Ageing
and Cognitive Health (REACH), University of Exeter, UK; Menzies
Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Australia;
PenCLAHRC, Institute of Health Research, University of Exeter
Medical School, UK
Linda Clare
Centre for Research in Ageing and Cognitive Health (REACH),
University of Exeter, UK; PenCLAHRC, Institute of Health Research,
University of Exeter Medical School, UK; Alzheimer’s Society Centre of
Excellence, University of Exeter, UK
Janet Heaton
Department of Rural Health and Wellbeing, School of Health,
University of the Highlands and Islands, Scotland
Joel Anderson
University of Tennessee College of Nursing, USA
Abstract
There is a growing body of research on the use of Twitter by people with health conditions, but it
does not include people with dementia. In this brief report, we aim to: (1) determine whether
people with dementia are using Twitter; (2) provide an estimate of the number of Twitter account
holders who identify as having a diagnosis of dementia; and (3) examine the demographic char-
acteristics of these account holders. Tweetcatcher was used to identify tweets containing the
Corresponding author:
Catherine Talbot, South Cloisters 1.27, University of Exeter Medical School, St Luke’s Campus, Heavitree Road, Exeter,
EX1 2LU, UK.
Email: Ct500@exeter.ac.uk
Dementia
0(0) 1–10
! The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1471301218792122
journals.sagepub.com/home/dem
 search terms ‘dementia’ or ‘Alzheimer’. These data were systematically searched to locate
account holders who identified themselves as having a diagnosis of dementia, and a content
analysis was conducted of these account holders’ profiles. Thirty account holders self-
identified as having a diagnosis of dementia. The average age of account holders was 59 years
and the majority were located in North America or the UK. Although the majority of account
holders reported having Alzheimer’s disease or did not specify a type of dementia, some rare
forms of dementia were also evident. The sample consisted of relatively young account holders
and contained more men, which might suggest that other groups are under-represented on
Twitter. The majority of account holders considered themselves a dementia activist or were
affiliated with a dementia organisation. The findings suggest that people with dementia, with
varying demographic characteristics and a range of diagnoses, are active on Twitter. These
account holders are more frequently male, relatively young, and dementia activists.
Keywords
activism, advocacy, Alzheimer’s, identity, internet, social media
Introduction
In recent years, dementia research has moved beyond stereotypical assumptions and bio-
medical models to embrace approaches that consider the whole person (Kitwood, 1997).
Previously, people with dementia were considered to be ‘victims’ (Fontana & Smith, 1989)
who experienced a ‘loss of self’ (Cohen & Eisdorfer, 1986) and a ‘living death’, but the
personhood approach has championed the value of the lived experience and framed people
with dementia as service users, consumers, and people with rights who can ‘live well’ with
dementia (Clare et al., 2014; Innes, Archibald, & Murphy, 2004; Kirkman, 2006; Rahman,
2014; Wiersma et al., 2016). Encouraged by this shift in attitudes, people with dementia have
begun to acknowledge their rights and seek opportunities to advocate for themselves
(Bartlett, 2012, 2014). Research suggests that people with dementia are using the internet
to access social media platforms such as Facebook, blogs, and forums to facilitate their
activism, seek support, share information, and connect with others (Clare, Rowlands, &
Quin, 2008; Craig & Strivens, 2016; Lorenz, Freddolino, Comas-Herrera, Knapp, &
Damant, 2017; Rodriquez, 2013). To our knowledge, however, there has been no research
on how people with dementia use the social networking site Twitter.
In other health conditions, people have used Twitter for information-sharing, social
support, raising awareness, and advocacy (Berry et al., 2017; Gabarron, Makhlysheva, &
Marco, 2015; Hemsley, Dann, Palmer, Allan, & Balandin, 2015; Himelboim & Han, 2014;
Tsuya, Sugawara, Tanaka, & Narimatsu, 2014). Similarly, Twitter hashtags, such as #black-
livesmatter and #freethenipple, have also been used to further the social movements of
oppressed or under-represented groups (Bassett, 2015; Highfield, 2016; Rosado &
Marques, 2016). Twitter might, therefore, provide a platform for people with dementia,
who have traditionally been marginalised within society (Gilmour & Brannelly, 2010), to
communicate their experiences and perspectives.
The demographic and diagnostic information of Twitter users with health conditions can
provide important information about the voices that are represented on this platform.
2
Dementia 0(0)
 The prevalence of dementia in the general population is greater for women (Alzheimer’s
Research UK, 2015) and yet the voices of women affected by dementia are often missing
from research (Bartlett, Gjernes, Lotherington, & Obstefelder, 2016). Previous research on
Twitter users with a diagnosis of cancer has found that men and women are equally repre-
sented on Twitter and use the platform to tweet about a range of cancer types (Sugawara
et al., 2012). To our knowledge, there has been no research on the demographics of Twitter
users with dementia. It is unclear whether certain groups of people with dementia, such as
women and people with rare types of dementia, are also underrepresented on Twitter or if
the platform provides a more equitable space for the voices of all people with dementia to
be heard.
The aims of this brief report were to: (1) determine whether people with dementia are
using Twitter; (2) estimate the number of Twitter account holders who publicly identify as
having a diagnosis of dementia; and (3) examine the demographic characteristics of these
account holders. The study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the
University of Exeter Medical School.
Method
Data collection
On 12 June 2017 16:42 (GMT), the data extraction software program Tweetcatcher, which
uses Twitter’s Search Application Programming Interface (API) to identify past tweets using
predefined keywords (Brooker, Barnett, & Cribbin, 2016), was used to identify tweets posted
in the previous 24 hours that contained the search terms ‘dementia’ or ‘Alzheimer’. It is not
currently possible to search for Twitter account holders by their profile description, only by
their tweets, so this is the only viable method of collecting Twitter data (Kumar, Morstatter,
& Liu, 2014). Once the tweets are located, it is then possible to examine the profiles of the
account holders who posted them.
The search was repeated every 24 hours for 30 consecutive days. For each tweet, the
contents of the tweet and the date and time of posting were collected. The following infor-
mation was collected from the Twitter profile of the account holder who posted the tweet:
username, real name, location, ‘bio’ (Twitter, 2017a), number of tweets, number of fol-
lowers, and number being followed.
Sample
Tweetcatcher identified 416,826 tweets containing the terms ‘dementia’ or ‘Alzheimer’
during the 30-day period. This included 226,602 retweets. The sample was screened for
multiple tweets by the same account holder, reducing the final sample to 217,623 tweets
(including 132,628 retweets).
Tweets and account holder data were imported into Microsoft Excel for analysis. The
profile descriptions of the account holders were searched for any evidence of a dementia
diagnosis. A systematic search strategy was developed by the first author and included the
following: statements of having a diagnosis (e.g. ‘I have dementia’, ‘diagnosis’ AND ‘demen-
tia’); different types of dementia (e.g. ‘frontotemporal’); and campaigns or groups led by
people diagnosed with dementia (e.g. ‘Scottish Dementia Working Group’, ‘SDWG’).
Account holders were excluded from the sample if they belonged to organisations, were
Talbot et al.
3
 researchers or carers, or were individuals who did not identify as having dementia. For
practical reasons, only accounts written in English were included.
Data analysis
A content analysis was conducted to identify characteristics of the sample. In a content
analysis, large quantities of text are organised into fewer content categories. These catego-
ries refer to patterns or themes that are directly expressed in the text or derived through the
analysis (Marks & Yardley, 2004). Codes for content were gender, current age, age at
diagnosis, type of dementia, description of dementia, advocacy activities, affiliations
with dementia organisations, and social identities beyond the dementia diagnosis.
‘Description of dementia’ referred to how the account holders described their condition,
such as ‘living with dementia’ or being a ‘dementia patient’. ‘Social identities beyond the
dementia diagnosis’ referred to other social roles account holders occupied beyond their
identities as people with dementia. Descriptive analyses were conducted to identify the
relative frequency of each content category.
Results
Of the 217,623 account holders tweeting about dementia, 30 publicly identified themselves as
having a diagnosis of dementia. The average age was 59 years (range: 37–88), they had been
on Twitter for an average of five years, and the majority were men. The full list of demo-
graphic characteristics is reported in Table 1.
The majority of account holders (n ¼ 20) specified the type of dementia with which they
had been diagnosed, with Alzheimer’s disease being the most common (see Table 2).
Eight Twitter account holders described themselves as having young-onset dementia (i.e.
onset of symptoms before the age of 65). Two account holders gave their ages at the time of
diagnosis, which were 50 and 52.5, respectively.
Table 1. Participant demographics.
Characteristic
Mean (SD)
Range
n
Time since first joined Twitter (years)
4.57 (2.61)
0–9
Number of tweets
13,900 (286,000)
82–130,932
Number of followers
1930 (2330)
44–8337
Number following
1406 (1715)
50–7462
Age (years)
58.6 (15.8)
37–88
7
Age at diagnosis
51.3 (1.77)
50–52.5
2
Gender
Male
17
Female
12
Unknown
1
Location
UK and Ireland
15
North America
12
Australia
1
Unknown
2
4
Dementia 0(0)
 Although descriptions of dementia varied considerably, the majority of account holders
(n ¼ 16) described themselves as ‘living with’ or ‘living well with’ dementia. Other descrip-
tions included ‘having a diagnosis’ of dementia (n ¼ 4), ‘having’ dementia (n ¼ 3), ‘person
with’ dementia (n ¼ 1), and being a ‘dementia survivor’ (n ¼ 1). One female account holder
described herself as a ‘patient’.
Seven account holders identified themselves as dementia activists/advocates, and 10 were
affiliated with an organisation such as the SDWG, the Three Nations Dementia Working
Group, or the European Dementia Working Group.
Fourteen account holders reported social identities beyond their dementia diagnosis.
These included father, football fan, and animal lover.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the use of Twitter by people with
dementia, and the results clearly show that people with dementia are active on Twitter.
Eight account holders reported having young-onset dementia, the average age of account
holders was 59 years, the average age at diagnosis was 51 years, and the majority were
located in North America or the UK. Although Alzheimer’s disease was most commonly
reported, a range of diagnoses was evident, including rare forms of dementia such as pos-
terior cortical atrophy. The majority of account holders reported ‘living with’ dementia and
considered themselves a dementia activist or were affiliated with a dementia organisation.
Only 40 percent of the account holders identified in this study were female.
Although the population identified in this study is relatively small when compared with
the organisations, health professionals, and general public who contribute to dementia-
related content on Twitter (Oscar et al., 2017; Robillard, Johnson, Hennessey, Beattie, &
Illes, 2013), it is likely to increase as digital natives and immigrants age (Prensky, 2001).
Social media platforms such as Twitter are expected to become an integral aspect of living
with dementia as ‘tech-savvy’ generations approach later life, and this is already evident in
the relatively young age of the sample in this study. Twitter and other social media plat-
forms may be changing the lived experience of dementia by facilitating greater social con-
nection, engagement, and self-expression than has been possible for pre-Web 2.0 cohorts.
Previous research on the use of social media by people with dementia has either not
specified the type of dementia (Lorenz et al., 2017; Rodriquez, 2013) or has focused on
people diagnosed before the age of 65 (Craig & Strivens, 2016). The current study provides
Table 2. Twitter account holders’ self-reported type of dementia.
Type of dementia
n
Not specified
12
Alzheimer’s disease
8
Lewy body dementia
3
Posterior cortical atrophy
2
Frontotemporal dementia
2
Mixed dementia
1
Atypical Alzheimer’s disease
1
Vascular dementia
1
Talbot et al.
5
 evidence that people with a range of different dementia diagnoses are active on Twitter.
Although the majority of account holders reported having Alzheimer’s disease or did not
specify their diagnosis, other types of dementia (including rare forms of dementia) were
evident. This could be because people under the age of 65 are more likely to be diagnosed
with a rare type of dementia (Dickerson et al., 2017), such as posterior cortical atrophy, and
are also more likely to use Twitter (Greenwood, Perrin, & Duggan, 2016).
The range of dementia types identified in this study echoes the findings of Sugawara et al.
(2012) which showed that people with a range of cancer types, such as breast, stomach,
prostate, and liver cancer are active on Twitter. People with different types of dementia
could use Twitter for different reasons and gain different benefits from it. People with rare
forms of dementia, for example, might use Twitter to share their experiences with a wider
audience and to raise awareness of non-Alzheimer’s conditions, while those with more
common forms of dementia might use it for social support or information seeking.
Although it is beyond the scope of this study, research that examines the tweets of people
with different types of dementia could be used to identify differences in the Twitter behav-
iour of those with rare and common conditions and those with young and later onset.
The majority of account holders in this study were men and were relatively young, yet the
prevalence of dementia in the general population is greater for women and people over the
age of 65 (Alzheimer’s Research UK, 2015; Prince et al., 2014). This finding contrasts with
the findings of prior research regarding the use of Twitter by people with cancer, where men
and women were equally represented on the platform (Sugawara et al., 2012). It is possible
that, despite its potential for giving voice to the marginalised and oppressed, Twitter might
not be providing a platform for all people with dementia. Instead, the dominance of younger
and male dementia voices on Twitter might be perpetuating the marginalisation and stigma
experienced in ‘real life’, especially by older women with dementia. This could also be
reflective of the demographics of Twitter users, where those over the age of 65 make up
the smallest proportion of account holders (Greenwood et al., 2016).
In this study, the diagnosis of dementia was self-reported in Twitter ‘bios’, so it was not
possible to identify the stage of dementia or the type of impairments account holders are
living with. Although it is likely that it is mainly people with less severe dementia who are
using Twitter, this can only be confirmed through research that moves beyond data collected
solely from Twitter and engages with account holders directly. Similarly, dementia is a
progressive condition, and although this study provides an important snapshot of the demo-
graphic characteristics of current Twitter account holders who identify themselves as having
a diagnosis of dementia, it does not describe how the use of Twitter by people with dementia
changes as their condition progresses. The use of longitudinal methods in future research
could make it possible to examine this.
It is interesting to note that although descriptions of the experience of dementia varied,
none of the account holders described themselves as ‘suffering from’ dementia, and only one
used the term ‘patient’. This may reflect the growing emphasis on personhood in dementia
research and practice, which frames people with dementia as individuals who are more than
their diagnosis and can live well with the condition (Kitwood, 1997). Although it was
beyond the scope of this study, future research could examine whether people with dementia
are using Twitter to challenge stereotypical beliefs and further their social movement.
The majority of account holders described themselves as dementia activists and/or were
affiliated with a dementia organisation. This suggests that these account holders could be
using Twitter to facilitate their activism and further their social movement, just like account
6
Dementia 0(0)
 holders who use hashtags relating to other issues (Bassett, 2015; Rosado & Marques, 2016).
This finding is also consistent with research on the use of other social media platforms (e.g.
blogs and forums) by people with dementia, which has also identified advocacy activities as
important (Clare et al., 2008; Craig & Strivens, 2016; Lorenz et al., 2017).
Finally, more than half of the account holders did not present identities other than their
dementia diagnosis, suggesting that these account holders could be using Twitter specifically
for dementia activism, rather than general social contact. Despite this, it is still important to
consider all aspects of identity that people choose to present. There has been a tendency for
Twitter researchers who have examined health conditions to focus only on the diagnosis and
not the other identities of account holders that co-exist with the diagnosis (e.g. parent,
spouse, etc.; Page, 2012). Future research on the use of social media by people with
health conditions, including dementia, must recognise the complexity of online identities
and resist the temptation to reduce account holders purely to their diagnosis.
Limitations
Although this study has demonstrated that people with dementia are active on Twitter, it
does have some limitations. Firstly, Tweetcatcher uses Twitter’s Search API, which only has
access to a limited index of tweets and focuses on relevance, rather than completeness
(Twitter, 2017b). Consequently, it is possible that not all account holders with dementia
were identified and so the findings might not be representative of the total population of
Twitter account holders who identify themselves as having a diagnosis of dementia. The
Search API is, however, commonly used in Twitter research (e.g. Berry et al., 2017; Harris,
Mueller, Snider, & Haire-Joshu, 2013; Hemsley et al., 2015; Hemsley, Palmer, Goonan, &
Dann, 2017). Tweetcatcher is also one of the most appropriate freely available data extrac-
tion tools (Brooker, Barnett, Cribbin, & Sharma, 2016) and has been estimated to capture
74% of tweets (Ahmed & Bath, 2015). Although costly to use, future research could over-
come this limitation by using Twitter’s ‘Firehose’ Stream API to access 100% of tweets over
a given period of time.
Secondly, this study only included Twitter accounts written in English and account
holders who mentioned their dementia diagnosis in their ‘bios’, so the findings may not
be representative of people with dementia who tweet in a language other than English or
those with dementia who do not disclose their diagnosis in their profiles.
Finally, this study focused only on the profile information of account holders and did not
examine the content of their tweets. As noted earlier, research examining the tweets of
people with dementia could provide insight into how people with dementia use Twitter.
Conclusion
This study clearly shows that people with dementia, with varying demographic character-
istics and a range of dementia diagnoses, are active on Twitter. The majority of account
holders reported ‘living with’ dementia, considered themselves dementia activists, or were
affiliated with dementia organisations, suggesting they could be using Twitter to facilitate an
advocacy role. This finding is also supported by the absence of identity information beyond
a diagnosis in more than half of account holders ‘bios’. Future research could examine the
profiles of people with dementia who tweet in languages other than English and those who
Talbot et al.
7
 do not disclose their diagnosis in their profiles. An analysis of the tweets of people with
dementia would provide insight into how and why people with dementia use Twitter.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article: Siobhan O’Dwyer and Linda Clare are supported by the National Institute
for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
South West Peninsula (PenCLAHRC). The views expressed are those of the authors and not neces-
sarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health.
ORCID iD
Catherine Talbot
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9353-8990
Joel Anderson
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6216-4014
References
Ahmed, W., & Bath, P. A. (2015, July). Comparison of Twitter APIs and tools for analysing tweets
related to the Ebola virus disease. Paper presented at IFutures, University of Sheffield, Sheffield.
Retrieved from http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/87868/11/Comparison%20of%20twitter.pdf
Alzheimer’s Research UK. (2015). Women and dementia: All but forgotten? A literature review. York,
England: Social Policy Research Unit, University of York.
Bartlett, R. (2012). The emergent modes of dementia activism. Ageing & Society, 34(4), 623–644.
Bartlett, R. (2014). Citizenship in action: The lived experiences of citizens with dementia who cam-
paign for social change. Disability & Society, 29(8), 1291–1304.
Bartlett, R., Gjernes, T., Lotherington, A. T., & Obstefelder, A. (2016). Gender, citizenship and
dementia care: A scoping review of studies to inform policy and future research. Health & Social
Care in the Community, 26(1), 14–26.
Bassett, M. T. (2015). #BlackLivesMatter – A challenge to the medical and public health communities.
The New England Journal of Medicine, 372(12), 1085–1087.
Berry,
N.,
Lobban,
M.,
Belousov,
M.,
Emsley,
R.,
Nenadic,
G.,
&
Bucci,
S.
(2017).
#WhyWeTweetMH: Understanding why people use Twitter to discuss mental health problems.
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 19(4), e107.
Brooker, P., Barnett, J., & Cribbin, T. (2016). Doing social media analytics. Big Data & Society,
3(2), 1–12.
Brooker, P., Barnett, J., Cribbin, T., & Sharma, S. (2016). Have we even solved the first ‘big data
challenge?’ Practical issues concerning data collection and visual representation for social media
analytics. In Snee H., Hine, C., Morey, Y., Roberts, S., & Watson, H. (Eds.), Digital methods for
social science (pp. 34–50). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Clare, L., Nelis, S. M., Quinn, C., Martyr, A., Henderson, C., Hindle, J. V., & Victor, C. R. (2014).
Improving the experience of dementia and enhancing active life – Living well with dementia: Study
protocol for the IDEAL study. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 12(1), 164.
Clare, L., Rowlands, J. M., & Quin, R. (2008). Collective strength: The impact of developing. A shared
social identity in early-stage dementia. Dementia, 7(1), 9–30.
Cohen, D., & Eisdorfer, C. (1986). Alzheimer’s disease: The loss of self. New York, NY: W.W. Norton
and Co.
8
Dementia 0(0)
 Craig, D., & Strivens, E. (2016). Facing the times: A young onset dementia support group:
FacebookTM style. Australasian Journal on Ageing, 35(1), 48–53.
Dickerson, B. C., McGinnis, S. M., Xia, C., Price, B. H., Atri, A., Murray, M. E., & Wolk, D. A.
(2017). Approach to atypical Alzheimer’s disease and case studies of the major subtypes. CNS
Spectrums, 22(6), 439–449.
Fontana, A., & Smith, R. W. (1989). Alzheimer’s disease victims: The ‘unbecoming’ of self and the
normalization of competence. Sociological Perspectives, 32(1), 35–46.
Gabarron, A., Makhlysheva, A., & Marco, L. (2015). Type 1 diabetes in Twitter: Who all listen to?
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 216(4), 216.
Gilmour, J. A., & Brannelly, T. (2010). Representation of people with dementia – subaltern, person,
citizen. Nursing Inquiry, 17(3), 240–247.
Greenwood, S., Perrin, A., & Duggan, M. (2016). Social Media Update 2016. Retrieved from http://
www.pewinternet.org/2016/11/11/social-media-update-2016/
Harris, J., Mueller, N., Snider, D., & Haire-Joshu, D. (2013). Local health department use of Twitter
to disseminate diabetes information. Preventing Chronice Disease, 10, E70.
Hemsley, B., Dann, S., Palmer, S., Allan, M., & Balandin, S. (2015). “We definitely need an audience”:
Experiences of Twitter, Twitter networks and tweet content in adults with severe communication
disabilities who use augmentative and alternative communication
(AAC). Disability
and
Rehabilitation, 37(17), 1531–1542.
Hemsley, B., Palmer, S., Goonan, W., & Dann, S. (2017, January). Motor neurone disease (MND) and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): Social media communication on selected# MND and# ALS
tagged tweets. Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Hilton
Waikoloa Village, Hawaii.
Highfield, T. (2016). Social media and everyday politics. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
Himelboim, I., & Han, H. Y. (2014). Cancer talk on Twitter: Community structure and information
sources in breast and prostate cancer social networks. Journal of Health Communications, 19(2),
210–225. 37–41.
Innes, A., Archibald, C., & Murphy, C. (2004). Dementia and social inclusion: Marginalised groups and
marginalised
areas
of
dementia
research,
care,
and
practice.
London,
England:
Jessica
Kingsley Publishers.
Kirkman, A. M. (2006). Dementia in the news: The media coverage of Alzheimer’s disease.
Australasian Journal on Ageing, 25(2), 74–79.
Kitwood, T. (1997). Dementia reconsidered: The person comes first. Milton, England: Open
University Press.
Kumar, S., Morstatter, F., & Liu, H. (2014). Twitter data analytics. New York, NY: Springer.
Lorenz, K., Freddolino, P. P., Comas-Herrera, A., Knapp, M., & Damant, J. (2017). Technology-
based tools and services for people with dementia and carers: Mapping technology onto the demen-
tia care pathway. Dementia, doi: 10.1177/1471301217691617
Marks, D., & Yardley, L. (2004). Content and thematic analysis: Research methods for clinical and
health psychology. London, England: Sage.
Oscar, N., Fox, P. A., Croucher, R., Wenick, R., Keune, J., & Hooker, K. (2017). Machine
learning, sentiment analysis and tweets: An examination of Alzheimer’s disease stigma on
Twitter.
Journals
of
Gerontology
Series
B:
Psychological
Sciences
and
Social
Sciences,
72(5), 742–751.
Page, R. E. (2012). Stories and social media : Identities and interaction. New York, NY: Routledge.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants, Part 1. On the Horizon, 9(5), 12–13.
Prince, M., Knapp, M., Guerchet, M., McCrone, P., Prina, M., Comas-Herrera, A., & Rehill, A.
(2014). Dementia UK second edition – Overview view. London: Alzheimer’s Society. Retrieved from
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/sites/default/files/migrate/downloads/dementia_uk_update.pdf
Rahman, S. (2014). Living well with dementia. London, England: Radcliffe Publishing Limited.
Talbot et al.
9
 Robillard, J. M., Johnson, T. W., Hennessey, C., Beattie, B. L., & Illes, J. (2013). Aging 2.0: Health
Information about dementia on Twitter. PLoS One, 8(7), 1–5.
Rodriquez, J. (2013). Narrating dementia: Self and community in an online forum. Qualitative Health
Research, 23(9), 1215–1227.
Rosado, F. F., & Marques, M. E. (2016). Performing the breastfeeding body: Lactiv-ism and art
interventions. Studies in the Maternal, 8(2), 1–15.
Sugawara, Y., Narimatsu, H., Hozawa, A., Shao, L., Otani, K., & Fukao, A. (2012). Cancer patients
on Twitter: A novel patient community on social media. BMC Research Notes, 5(1), 699.
Tsuya, A., Sugawara, Y., Tanaka, A., & Narimatsu, H. (2014). Do cancer patients tweet? Examining
the Twitter use of cancer patients in Japan. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 16(5), 1–8.
Twitter. (2017a). Customising your profile. Retrieved from https://support.twitter.com/
Twitter. (2017b). Search Tweets: The Search API. Retrieved from https://developer.twitter.com/en/
docs//tweets/search/overview/basic-search.html
Wiersma, E. C., O’Connor, D. L., Loiselle, L., Hickman, K., Heibein, B., Hounam, B., & Mann, J.
(2016). Creating space for citizenship: The impact of group structure on validating the voices of
people with dementia. Dementia, 15(3), 414–433.
Woods, R. T. (1989). Alzheimer’s disease: Coping with a living death. London, England: Souvenir Press.
Catherine Talbot is a PhD student in the Centre for Research in Ageing and Cognitive
Health (REACH) at the University of Exeter. She is a cyberpsychologist interested in
dementia, social media, online communities, and internet-mediated research ethics.
Siobhan O’Dwyer is a senior lecturer in Ageing and Family Care at the University of Exeter
Medical School. She is a member of the Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health
Research and Care South West Peninsula (PenCLAHRC) and the Centre for Research in
Ageing and Cognitive Health, and is also an Adjunct Senior Research Fellow at Griffith
University (Australia). Her primary areas of research are: suicide, homicide, and self-harm
in family carers; psychosocial approaches to wellbeing in dementia; the intersection of social
media and health; and professional development in academia.
Linda Clare directs the Centre for Research in Ageing and Cognitive Health (REACH) at
the University of Exeter, and leads the IDEAL programme. Linda’s research aims to
improve the experience of older people and people living with dementia by promoting
well-being, reducing disability, and improving rehabilitation and care.
Janet Heaton is a research fellow at the University of the Highlands and Islands, United
Kingdom. She is a sociologist who has undertaken a number of applied health and social
care research projects with a wide range of groups. She has a special interest in people’s
experiences of illness and health care and in working with service users and providers to
improve them. She is currently pursuing this interest in relation to people who live and work
in rural and remote locations.
Joel G Anderson, PhD, CHTP, FGSA is an associate professor in the College of Nursing at
the University of Tennessee-Knoxville. His research focuses on non-pharmacological strat-
egies for symptom management and caregiver support in Alzheimer’s disease and related
dementias. This includes exploring the caregiving experience and understanding the ways in
which social media are used by family caregivers and persons with dementia.
10
Dementia 0(0)
