 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
Pictorial Essay
Introduction
Shoulder pathologies in the anterolateral region of the rotator cuff 
of the shoulder are common in clinical practice. Frequently encoun-
tered pathologies in this region are listed in ▶Table 1. Detailed 
knowledge of the anatomy of this region and its ultrasound appear-
ance is essential to recognize possible pathologies that correlate 
with the clinical presentation [1]. The focus of this pictorial essay 
is to review and discuss the anatomical details of the rotator inter-
val of the shoulder, correlate the anatomy with normal ultrasound 
images and present selected pathologies.
Diagnostic musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSUS) is an excellent 
tool in the detection of rotator cuff (RC) pathologies [2, 3] with an 
accuracy compared to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ar-
throscopy in the hands of experienced sonographers [4–8]. RC le-
sions are even more frequent in inflammatory patients (e. g., in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), crystal deposition diseases or polymy-
algia rheumatica) with the result that a painful shoulder is not al-
ways related to active synovitis [9].
The rotator cuff interval (RI) is a roughly triangular region cre-
ated by the interposition of the coracoid process, the base of the 
triangle, between the subscapularis muscle/tendon (SSC) medial-
ly and the supraspinatus muscle/tendon (SSP) anteriorly forming 
the two sides. The RI is a complex anatomic region that plays a rel-
evant role in the stability and function of the shoulder joint. The 
structure of the RI supports the tendon of the long head of the bi-
ceps muscle to prevent dislocation antero-medially and antero-in-
feriorly (e. g., in external rotation and abduction). In addition, RI 
structures contribute to inferior glenohumeral joint stability by lim-
iting glenohumeral motility [10, 11]. The added value of the ultra-
The Rotator Interval – A Link Between Anatomy and Ultrasound
  
Authors
Giorgio Tamborrini1, 7, Ingrid Möller2, 7, David Bong3, 7, Maribel Miguel4, Christian Marx1, Andreas Marc Müller5,  
Magdalena Müller-Gerbl6
Affiliations
1 Ultrasound Center, Rheumatology, Basel, Switzerland
2 Instituto Poal de Reumatologia, BCN Sonoanatomy 
group, Barcelona, Spain
3 BCN Sonoanatomy group, Rheumatology, Barcelona, 
Spain
4 Departamento de Patología y  
Terapéutica Experimental, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
5 Orthopädie und Traumatologie, Universitatsspital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland
6 Institute of Anatomy, Universitat Basel, Basel, Switzerland
7 EULAR Study Group on Anatomy for the Image
Key words
shoulder, rotator cuff, interval
received   11.08.2016 
revised      24.02.2017 
accepted  23.04.2017
Bibliography
DOI https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-110473
Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York 
ISSN 2199-7152
Correspondence
Dr. med. Giorgio Tamborrini
Ultrasound Center Rheumatology
Aeschenvorstadt 68
4051 Basel
Switzerland 
Tel.:  + 41/612/251 010 
shoulder@irheuma.ch
ABsTrACT
Shoulder pathologies of the rotator cuff of the shoulder are 
common in clinical practice. The focus of this pictorial essay is 
to discuss the anatomical details of the rotator interval of the 
shoulder, correlate the anatomy with normal ultrasound ima-
ges and present selected pathologies. We focus on the imaging 
of the rotator interval that is actually the anterosuperior aspect 
of the glenohumeral joint capsule that is reinforced externally 
by the coracohumeral ligament, internally by the superior 
glenohumeral ligament and capsular fibers which blend to-
gether and insert medially and laterally to the bicipital groove. 
In this article we demonstrate the capability of high-resolution 
musculoskeletal ultrasound to visualize the detailed anatomy 
of the rotator interval. MSUS has a higher spatial resolution 
than other imaging techniques and the ability to examine the-
se structures dynamically and to utilize the probe for precise 
anatomic localization of the patient’s pain by sono-palpation.
E107
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
Pictorial Essay
sound assessment is to provide a dynamic complementary tool to 
help in the clinical approach of a patient with RI injuries [12, 13].
Anatomy
The RC is composed of the tendons of the supraspinatus (SSP), in-
fraspinatus (ISP), subscapularis (SSC) and teres minor (Tm) mus-
cles. The RC is an important dynamic stabilizer of the glenohumer-
al joint; it compresses the humeral head into the glenoid and thus 
prevents superior migration of the humeral head triggered by del-
toid muscle contraction during abduction and elevation [14]. It 
may also prevent excessive anterior translation of the humeral head 
in abduction and external rotation [15]. The triangular shaped RI 
forms a unique gap in the anterior part of the RC and may vary in 
size [16].The RI is actually the anterosuperior aspect of the gleno-
humeral joint capsule that is reinforced externally (laterally) by the 
coracohumeral ligament (CHL), internally (medially) by the supe-
rior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL) and capsular fibers which blend 
together and insert medially and laterally to the bicipital groove 
(▶Fig. 1– 4).
CHL (Coracohumeral Ligament)
The CHL originates at the proximal third of the dorsolateral aspect 
of the base of the coracoid [17]. The CHL consists of a lateral and 
medial bundle arranged like two pillars of a bridge. The smaller me-
dial bundle (MCHL) crosses the intraarticular part and surrounds the 
medial and inferior part of the intraarticular portion of the LBT to 
insert at the lesser tubercle together with the superior fibers of the 
SSC tendon and the SGHL [18–21]. This part communicates with 
the glenohumeral ligament and the superior part with the SSC ten-
don and forms the medial-pulley-complex (MPC) [21]. This anatom-
ical relationship explains why the LBT tends to become dislocated 
antero-medially with a subscapularis tendon tear. The larger lateral 
bundle (LCHL) surrounds the superior and lateral part of the intraar-
ticular LBT. The LCHL inserts at the greater tubercle of the humerus 
and on the anterior border of the SSP and forms the lateral-pul-
▶Table 1  adapted from [42–1], frequently encountered pathologies 
related to anatomical regions.
Anatomical region
Pathologies
Long biceps tendon 
(LBT)
Tendinosis, tears, effusion in the LBT 
recess, calcifications, (sub-) luxation
Supraspinatus and 
subscapularis tendon
Tendinosis, tears, enthesopathy, 
calcifications, etc.
Ligaments, labrum and 
joint capsule
Tears, thickening, contraction (e. g., in 
capsulitis), anteromedial or anterosuperior 
impingement, secondary instability, etc.
Bursa
Bursitis (subdeltoid, subcoracoid, 
subscapularis communicating with the 
anterior gleno-humeral recess)
▶Fig. 1 Drawings of the rotator interval. Superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL), middle glenohumeral ligament (MGHL), anterior inferior gleno-
humeral ligament (IGHL), coracohumeral ligament (CHL), medial coracohumeral ligament (MCHL), Lateral coracohumeral ligament (LCHL), subscap-
ularis tendon (SSC), long biceps tendon (LBT) and supraspinatus tendon (SSP).
E108
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
ley-complex (LPC) [22, 23]. This lateral part has been called the ro-
tator cable, a thin fibrous band continuous with the coracohumeral 
ligament (and some fibers of the SGHL) that arcs along the under-
surface of the SSP and ISP fibers and superficial to the joint capsule. 
The CHL may be hypoplastic or absent in up to 6 % of shoulder dis-
sections [24]. The tension of the CHL has an important effect on the 
stability and range of motion of the glenohumeral joint, particular-
ly in external rotation [10, 22]. The CHL consists of loose connective 
tissue and is therefore relatively flexible. Histological studies demon-
strate that the CHL contains irregular and sparse fibers with a high-
er proportion of type III collagen compared to the LBT or the intra-
muscular SSC tendon [25, 26]. Selected histological studies even 
suggest that the superior glenohumeral ligament may be a defined 
part of the CHL, adherent to the tendinous slip of the SSC [27].
SGHL (Superior Glenohumeral Ligament)
The SGHL is a reinforcement of the anterosuperior glenohumeral 
joint capsule. Some anatomical details and variations of the SGHL 
need to be explained in more detail due to their relevance in imag-
ing studies. The SGHL may be absent in up to 3 % of patients based 
on arthroscopy findings [28]. The proximal attachment of the SGHL 
can be quite variable: originating from the LBT only; from the LBT 
and the superior part of the labrum; or from the middle glenohumer-
al ligament, the LBT, the superior part of the labrum and partially 
from the superior glenoid tubercle of the scapula [29, 30]. It inserts 
near the lesser tubercle at the fovea capitis of the humerus [10]. The 
SGHL crosses the floor of the RI and may fuse with the MCHL [23].
LBT (Long Biceps Tendon) and Borders of 
the RI (Rotator Interval)
The RI contains the intraarticular portion of the tendon of the long 
head of the biceps muscle (LBT) as it passes through the joint cap-
sule [17–20]. The LBT may originate from the postero-superior la-
brum, the superior glenoid tubercle, or from both [31–21]. At this 
level, the LBT functions as a humeral head depressor and stabilizer 
of the glenohumeral joint. In 207 examined shoulders, the mean 
width of the long head of the biceps tendon was 6.0 mm (range: 
3–10 mm) [32].The distal anterior roof of the RI expands anterior-
ly to form the transverse humeral ligament, which covers the LBT 
in the bicipital groove. Some authors propose that the transverse 
ligament is only a minor contributor to stabilization of the LBT in 
the bicipital groove [33, 20, 34], while others describe no distinct 
transverse ligament, characterizing it as a combination of fibers 
from the SSC tendon and the posterior lamina of the tendon of the 
pectoralis major muscle [35]. Furthermore, the supraspinatus ten-
don has an aponeurotic tendon-like expansion which courses an-
teriorly and laterally to the LBT tendon reaching the cranial inser-
tion of the pectoralis major. It may be identified with MRI or ultra-
sound in about one-half of shoulders [36]. Fibers from the 
coracohumeral ligament, SSP and SSC contribute to the anterior 
roof proximal to the transverse ligament, forming a sling around 
the biceps tendon at the level of the proximal bicipital groove while 
forming the distal end or the apex of the RI [37]. Thus the RI con-
tains parts of the CHL (posterior roof and lateral wall together with 
▶Fig. 2 Anatomical section through the rotator interval showing 
the superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL), the medial (MCHL) and 
lateral (LCHL) coracohumeral ligament (CHL), the long biceps tendon 
(LBT), the supraspinatus tendon (SSP) and the subscapularis tendon 
(SSC).
▶Fig. 3 Arthroscopic image showing the long biceps tendon (LBT), 
the superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL) and the lateral bundle of 
the coracohumeral ligament (LCHL).
▶Fig. 4 Histological image (toluidine blue) of the rotator interval 
showing the long biceps tendon (LBT), the superior glenohumeral 
ligament (SGHL) and the lateral (LCHL) and medial (MCHL) coraco-
humeral ligament (CHL).
E109
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
Pictorial Essay
the SSP tendon) and the SGHL (medial wall together with fibers of 
the SSC tendon) (▶Fig. 2). They form the sling-like capsulo-liga-
mentous biceps pulley (CHL, SGHL, capsule) [38] (▶Fig. 3). All of 
these structures together are also referred to as the superior-com-
plex layer (SCL) [39]. Superiorly and posteriorly, the RI border is 
formed by fibers of the SSP, inferiorly by fibers of the SSC. Between 
the rotator cable and the insertional region of the distal portion of 
the SSP at the greater tubercle, there is a zone known as the rotator 
crescent which is a poorly vascularized but clinically highly stressed 
section of the rotator cuff. The crescent of the rotator cuff becomes 
thinner with age. Tears involving the rotator crescent with an intact 
rotator cuff cable may have minimal biomechanical consequences 
[12] [40]. The rotator cable has been described as the suspension 
bridge of the shoulder joint providing stress dispersal to the rotator 
cuff tendons and is a stabilizer of the glenohumeral joint [12]. Morag 
et al. measured the different rotator cuff structures around the cable 
on cadaveric specimens by ultrasound [41, 42]. Ultrasound demon-
strates the rotator cable on essentially all normal shoulders consist-
ent with the articular-sided fibrillary structure perpendicular to the 
rotator (SSP, ISP) noted in histologic studies [42].
Ultrasound Technique and Ultrasound 
Findings
Before focusing on the RI, the full extent of the biceps tendon 
(LHBT) and its associated structures are initially examined in trans-
verse and longitudinal axes from the RI distal to the superior aspect 
of the tendon of the pectoralis major [43].
▶Fig. 6 Transverse oblique ultrasound image of the rotator interval in a modified Crass position demonstrating an anisotropy effect (box) of the 
long biceps tendon (LBT), of the superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL) and of the medial (MCHL) and lateral (LCHL) coracohumeral ligament (CHL), 
subscapularis tendon (SSC), supraspinatus tendon (SSP).
▶Fig. 5 Patient in supine position, arm in neutral position: a; arm in retroversion: b; arm in retroversion and slightly external rotation: c; patient in a 
sitting position. Arm in neutral position: d; in external rotation and abduction: e; in the modified Crass position: f.
a
d
e
f
b
c
E110
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
For the examination of the rotator interval, one preferred posi-
tion to examine the patient is supine on the examination table with 
the upper extremity to be examined hanging off the side of the 
table (allowing for posterior flexion which opens the interval, 
stretches the LHBT and tightens the CHL) and in neutral rotation 
▶Fig. 5a–c. Alternatively, the patient sits on a revolving chair with 
the examiner sitting or standing behind or in front of the patient 
according to personal preference (▶Fig. 5d–f).
We begin by placing the probe in short axis over the superior as-
pect of the bicipital groove. The probe is then moved upward to a 
position just above the most proximal aspect of the groove (and 
the trans-humeral ligament). It is now in the most distal aspect of 
the RI where the CHL and SGHL coalesce into an annular sling 
around the LHBT as it enters the glenohumeral joint. The sling is 
hypoechoic when compared to the hyperechoic LHBT and the 
probe must be angulated from side-to-side to eliminate this aniso-
tropy ▶Fig. 6. Remember that the LHBT is much more sensitive to 
the angulation of the probe than the CHL. The LHBT/CHL are fol-
lowed superiorly as they enter the joint and with the LHBT turning 
sharply and disappearing into the joint towards its origin on the su-
praglenoid tubercle ▶Fig. 7. It is possible to visualize the LHBT/CHL 
over the most distal cartilaginous surface of the humeral head. It 
is important to toggle the probe slightly to utilize the different an-
isotropies of the LHBT and CHL to distinguish them as distinct struc-
tures separated by the joint capsule ▶Fig. 8.
▶Fig. 7 Longitudinal oblique ultrasound image of the origin of the 
long biceps tendon (asterisks) in a modified Crass position with 
forced internal rotation.
▶Fig. 8 Transverse oblique ultrasound image of the rotator interval 
in a relaxed neutral position with flexed elbow and supinated forearm 
demonstrating an anisotropy effect (box at the bottom) of the long 
biceps tendon (LBT) and of the superior glenohumeral ligament 
(SGHL), subscapularis tendon (SSC), supraspinatus tendon (SSP) and 
of the medial (MCHL) and lateral (LCHL) coracohumeral ligament 
(CHL).
▶Fig. 9 Anatomical section anterior oblique showing the coracoac-
romial ligament (asterisks) and the coracohumeral ligament (plus 
signs) in an external rotation and retroversion position, coracoid 
process (c), acromion (a).
▶Fig. 10 Ultrasound images of the rotator interval in a transverse 
view (at the top) and longitudinal oblique view (at the bottom) in a 
modified Crass position. Superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL), 
lateral coracohumeral ligament (LCHL), long biceps tendon (LBT), 
supraspinatus tendon (SSP).
E111
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
Pictorial Essay
Returning to the starting point for transverse imaging of the RI, 
the dependent arm is slightly rotated internally and externally and 
the proximal pole of the probe is rotated approximately 30o in the 
direction of the deep aspect of the lateral coracoid process and the 
CHL origin. The oblique probe is now longitudinal to the CHL and 
essentially transverse to the distal SSP tendon close to its insertion 
into the medial aspect of the greater tuberosity. One should visu-
alize the trajectory of the fibers of the CHL originating at the base 
of the lateral coracoid process as they pass over the LHBT into the 
inferior portion of the SSP ▶Fig. 9 [44].
▶Fig. 11 Arthroscopy of the rotator cable and ultrasound image of 
the supraspinatus tendon longitudinal in a modified Crass position: 
peribursal structures (b), layer I = superficial layer, measuring 1 mm in 
thickness and composed of fibers from the coracohumeral ligament 
(LCHL) which extends posteriorly and obliquely, infraspinatus and 
supraspinatus tendon layer (ISP and SSP, respectively) composed of 3 
layers: layer II = densely packed fibers of the tendon, 3–5 mm in thick-
ness, layer III = 3 mm thick and composed of smaller bundles of colla-
gen which are loosely organized at an approximately 45 degree angle 
to the long axis of the tendon, layer IV = loose connective tissue and 
thick collagen bands and merges with fibers from the coracohumeral 
ligament), layer V (LCHL/capsule) = capsule and glenohumeral liga-
ment, 2 mm in thickness, cartilage (c). Note the anisotropy effect at 
the insertion due to the different trajectories of the different layers. 
Anisotropy artifacts typically affect the insertional area at the level of 
the footprint of the humeral head. To avoid these artifacts, try to tilt 
the probe laterally to have the ultrasound beam as perpendicular as 
possible to the tendon or the ligament fibers.
▶Fig. 12 Adhesive capsulitis phase 1. Transverse a and longitudinal 
oblique b power Doppler images in a modified Crass position ob-
tained over the rotator cuff interval. Images show the normal long 
head of the biceps tendon (asterisks) that appears thin and hypere-
choic. The tendon is surrounded by a hypervascular area related to 
inflammation of the rotator cuff interval.
▶Fig. 13 Adhesive capsulitis phase 2. Transverse a and longitudinal oblique b images obtained over the anterior aspect of the shoulder in a relaxed 
neutral position with flexed elbow and supinated forearm. Images show the coracohumeral ligament (black arrowheads) that is thickened and hypo-
echoic. The normal coracoacromial ligament is thin and hyperechoic (white arrowheads).
E112
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
In the modified crass position ▶Fig. 5, we have an excellent view 
to evaluate the supraspinatus (SSP) enthesis (footprint at the great-
er tubercle), the ligaments and the humeral cartilage. All struc-
tures, especially the supraspinatus, should be visualized in the lon-
gitudinal and transverse view from anterior (subscapularis tendon, 
long biceps tendon) to posterior (infraspinatus tendon, teres minor 
tendon). The hyperechoic fibrillar rotator cable is a thin fibrous 
band continuous with the coracohumeral ligament that courses 
along the undersurface of the rotator cuff fibers and superficial to 
the joint capsule and can be visualized 1.5 cm medial to the great-
er tubercle [41] ▶Fig. 10. Different layers of the supraspinatus ten-
don are shown in ▶Fig. 11 according to different cadaveric studies 
[45, 46]. The rotator cable can be visualized in up to 99 % of cases 
[41, 47]. On long axis scans, the rotator cable is visualized in its 
short axis as a hyperechoic transversely oriented bundle of fibers 
running perpendicular and deep to the SSP and ISP tendons, locat-
ed approximately 1 cm medial to the rotator cuff footprint [40]. 
Medial to the bicipital groove, we identify the subscapularis ten-
▶Fig. 14 Tear of the supraspinatus and posterior bundle of the coracohumeral ligament (CHL). Transverse a and longitudinal oblique c images in a 
modified Crass position and corresponding MR images obtained over the anterior aspect of the shoulder. Images show medial subluxation of the 
long head of the biceps tendon (black arrowheads) due to tear on the anterior CHL bundle and supraspinatus (black arrows). The anterior bundle of 
the CHL and the glenohumeral ligament (white arrows) are continuous and retain the tendon to dislocate completely.
▶Fig. 15 Tear of the subscapularis tendon associated with a partial tear of the anterior sling. Longitudinal a and transverse b oblique images ob-
tained respectively over the rotator cuff interval and anterior aspect of the shoulder. In a, note the irregularly thickened anterior sling (black arrow-
heads) suggesting a partial tear. The long head of the biceps tendon (asterisk) and the supraspinatus tendon (white arrows) are normal. Note the 
absence of instability of the long head of the biceps tendon. An anechoic fluid collection (Eff) is located close to the subscapularis tendon (small 
black arrow) which appears thin and hypoechoic. In b, a complete tear of the subscapularis tendon is evident (calipers). Note the larger retracted 
tendon stump (large arrow) and the smaller distal stump (small arrow).
E113
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
Pictorial Essay
don (SSC) and the superior glenohumeral ligament in external ro-
tation.
The RI may reflect the condition of the glenohumeral joint 
 
and may be distended due to intra-articular effusion, capsulitis 
 
or synovitis [43]. Pathologic changes at the RI are common. A 
 
selection of changes is listed in ▶Table 1. In adhesive capsulitis 
(▶Fig. 12, 13), for example, arthroscopy and histological studies 
revealed thickening of the ligaments of the RI, a shortened antero-
superior portion of the capsule with concomitant synovitis [48] or 
a contraction of the rotator interval [49] with replacement of the 
normal RI fat by fibrous tissue [50]. Another representative exam-
ple is the combined pulley and rotator cuff lesion (▶Fig. 14– 16). 
Arthroscopic studies could demonstrate that for instance of all di-
agnosed subscapularis tears, 47 % involved the medial pulley 
(SGHL/MCHL complex) and of all rotator cuff tears involving the su-
praspinatus tendon, 10 % involved the lateral pulley (LCHL) [32, 49].
Summary
This article demonstrates the capability of MSUS to visualize the 
detailed anatomy of the rotator interval. MSUS has a higher spatial 
resolution than other imaging techniques, the ability to examine 
these structures dynamically and to utilize the probe for precise 
anatomic localization of the patient’s pain by sono-palpation. Ob-
viously, MSUS is limited with respect to visualizing the more prox-
imal intra-articular aspect of the components of the RI and when 
the structures are obscured by overlying bone such as the acromi-
on. Since pathologic changes are common in this region, it is im-
▶Fig. 16 Tear of the subscapularis tendon associated with a complete tear of the anterior sling. Transverse a and longitudinal oblique c images 
obtained at the anterior face of the shoulder. Longitudinal oblique e image obtained over the supraspinatus tendon. Corresponding MR images 
b,d,f). In a, b, note the complete tear of the subscapularis tendon (black arrow) associated with the intraarticular dislocation of the long head of the 
biceps (white arrows). The white arrowheads point to the empty biceps groove. In c, d, longitudinal US and MRI images show the tear of the anterior 
sling (black arrowheads). In e, f, the supraspinatus tendon is normal.
E114
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
portant to acquire the necessary technical ability. Routine MSUS 
imaging of the rotator interval will amplify our diagnostic ability in 
rheumatology patients with shoulder pain and improve our diag-
nostic accuracy. So, we not only need to consider bursitis, synovi-
tis and tendonitis, but we also need to become proficient in detect-
ing capsulitis and the wide array of rotator cuff tears with or with-
out additional lesions of the ligaments and joint capsule in this 
critical region.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Stefano Bianchi for providing selected 
pathological images.
References
[1] Micheroli R, Kyburz D, Ciurea A, Dubs B, Bisig SP, Tamborrini G. 
Correlation of findings in clinical and high resolution ultrasonography 
examinations of the painful shoulder. J Ultrason 2015; 15: 29–44
[2] Hashefi M. Ultrasound in the diagnosis of noninflammatory 
musculoskeletal conditions. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009; 1154: 171–203
[3] Nofsinger C, Konin JG. Diagnostic ultrasound in sports medicine: 
Current concepts and advances. Sports Med Arthrosc 2009; 17: 
25–30
[4] Yablon CM, Bedi A, Morag Y, Jacobson JA. Ultrasonography of the 
shoulder with arthroscopic correlation. Clin Sports Med 2013; 32: 
391–408
[5] Teefey SA, Rubin DA, Middleton WD, Hildebolt CF, Leibold RA, 
Yamaguchi K. Detection and quantification of rotator cuff tears. 
Comparison of ultrasonographic, magnetic resonance imaging, and 
arthroscopic findings in seventy-one consecutive cases. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am 2004; 86-A: 708–16
[6] Iannotti JP, Ciccone J, Buss DD, Visotsky JL, Mascha E, Cotman K, 
Rawool NM. Accuracy of office-based ultrasonography of the shoulder 
for the diagnosis of rotator cuff tears. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2005; 87: 
1305–11
[7] Al-Shawi A, Badge R, Bunker T. The detection of full thickness rotator 
cuff tears using ultrasound. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2008; 90: 889–92
[8] van Holsbeeck MT, Kolowich PA, Eyler WR, Craig JG, Shirazi KK, Habra 
GK, Vanderschueren GM, Bouffard JA. US depiction of partial-thick-
ness tear of the rotator cuff. Radiology 1995; 197: 443–6
[9] Stegbauer J, Rump LC, Weiner SM. Sites of inflammation in painful 
rheumatoid shoulder assessed by musculoskeletal ultrasound and 
power Doppler sonography. Rheumatol Int 2008; 28: 459–65
[10] Harryman DT, Sidles JA, Harris SL, Matsen FA. The role of the rotator 
interval capsule in passive motion and stability of the shoulder. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am 1992; 74: 53–66
[11] Gaskill TR, Braun S, Millett PJ. Multimedia article. The rotator interval: 
pathology and management. Arthroscopy 2011; 27: 556–67
[12] Burkhart SS, Esch JC, Jolson RS. The rotator crescent and rotator 
cable: an anatomic description of the shoulder’s ‘suspension bridge’. 
Arthroscopy 1993; 9: 611–6
[13] Scofienza LM, Orlandi D, Fabbro E, Pucci S, Silvestri E. High-resolution 
ultrasound (HRUS) evaluation of the rotator cable (RCa) in young and 
elderly asymptomatic volunteers.  ECR Meet 2010;
[14] Thompson WO, Debski RE, Boardman ND, Taskiran E, Warner JJ, Fu 
FH, Woo SL. A biomechanical analysis of rotator cuff deficiency in a 
cadaveric model. Am J Sports Med 24: 286–92
[15] Malicky DM, Soslowsky LJ, Blasier RB, Shyr Y. Anterior glenohumeral 
stabilization factors: Progressive effects in a biomechanical model.  
J Orthop Res 1996; 14: 282–8
[16] Seibold CJ, Mallisee TA, Erickson SJ, Boynton MD, Raasch WG, Timins 
ME. Rotator cuff: Evaluation with US and MR imaging. Radiographics 
19: 685–705
[17] Jost B, Koch PP, Gerber C. Anatomy and functional aspects of the 
rotator interval. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 9: 336–41
[18] Ho CP. MR imaging of rotator interval, long biceps, and associated 
injuries in the overhead-throwing athlete. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N 
Am 1999; 7: 23–37
[19] Lee JC, Guy S, Connell D, Saifuddin A, Lambert S. MRI of the rotator 
interval of the shoulder. Clin Radiol 2007; 62: 416–23
[20] Sethi N, Wright R, Yamaguchi K. Disorders of the long head of the 
biceps tendon. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 8: 644–54
[21] Habermeyer P, Magosch P, Pritsch M, Scheibel MT, Lichtenberg S. 
Anterosuperior impingement of the shoulder as a result of pulley 
lesions: A prospective arthroscopic study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 13: 
5–12
[22] Cole BJ, Rodeo SA, O’Brien SJ, Altchek D, Lee D, DiCarlo EF, Potter H. 
The anatomy and histology of the rotator interval capsule of the 
shoulder. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2001; 129–37
[23] Yang H, Tang K, Chen W, Dong S, Jin T, Gong J, Li J, Wang H, Wang J, 
Xu J. An anatomic and histologic study of the coracohumeral 
ligament. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 18: 305–10
[24] Neer CS, Satterlee CC, Dalsey RM, Flatow EL. The anatomy and 
potential effects of contracture of the coracohumeral ligament. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res 1992; 182–5
[25] Keene DR, Sakai LY, Burgeson RE. Human bone contains type III 
collagen, type VI collagen, and fibrillin: Type III collagen is present on 
specific fibers that may mediate attachment of tendons, ligaments, 
and periosteum to calcified bone cortex. J Histochem Cytochem 
1991; 39: 59–69
[26] Franchi M, Trirè A, Quaranta M, Orsini E, Ottani V. Collagen structure 
of tendon relates to function. ScientificWorldJournal 2007; 7: 404–20
[27] Arai R, Nimura A, Yamaguchi K, Yoshimura H, Sugaya H, Saji T, 
Matsuda S, Akita K. The anatomy of the coracohumeral ligament and 
its relation to the subscapularis muscle. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2014; 
23: 1575–81
[28] Shankman S, Bencardino J, Beltran J. Glenohumeral instability: 
evaluation using MR arthrography of the shoulder. Skeletal Radiol 
1999; 28: 365–82
[29] D. AF. Surgery of the Shoulder: 9780397504923: Medicine & Health 
Science Books
[30] Krzyżanowski W. The use of ultrasound in the assessment of the 
glenoid labrum of the glenohumeral joint. Part I: Ultrasound anatomy 
and examination technique. J Ultrason 2012; 12: 164–77
[31] Yamaguchi WG, Bindra K. R. Disorders of the biceps tendon. In: 
Iannotti JP. Complex and Revision Problems in Shoulder Surgery: 
9780781746588.  Medicine & Health Science Books
[32] Braun S, Horan MP, Elser F, Millett PJ. Lesions of the biceps pulley. Am 
J Sports Med 2011; 39: 790–5
[33] Bennett WF. Subscapularis, medial, and lateral head coracohumeral 
ligament insertion anatomy. Arthroscopic appearance and incidence 
of ‘hidden’ rotator interval lesions. Arthroscopy 2001; 17: 173–80
E115
 Tamborrini G et al. The Rotator Interval – A Link … Ultrasound Int Open 2017; 3: E107–E116
Pictorial Essay
[34] Curtis AS, Snyder SJ. Evaluation and treatment of biceps tendon 
pathology. Orthop Clin North Am 1993; 24: 33–43
[35] MacDonald K, Bridger J, Cash C, Parkin I. Transverse humeral ligament: 
Does it exist? Clin Anat 2007; 20: 663–7
[36] Moser TP, Cardinal É, Bureau NJ, Guillin R, Lanneville P, Grabs D. The 
aponeurotic expansion of the supraspinatus tendon: Anatomy and 
prevalence in a series of 150 shoulder MRIs. Skeletal Radiol 2015; 44: 
223–31
[37] Gleason PD, Beall DP, Sanders TG, Bond JL, Ly JQ, Holland LL, Pasque 
CB. The transverse humeral ligament: A separate anatomical structure 
or a continuation of the osseous attachment of the rotator cuff? Am J 
Sports Med 2006; 34: 72–7
[38] Nakata W, Katou S, Fujita A, Nakata M, Lefor AT, Sugimoto H. Biceps 
pulley: Normal anatomy and associated lesions at MR arthrography. 
Radiographics 31: 791–810
[39] Kolts I, Busch LC, Tomusk H, Arend A, Eller A, Merila M, Russlies M. 
Anatomy of the coracohumeral and coracoglenoidal ligaments. Ann 
Anat 2000; 182: 563–6
[40] Denard PJ, Koo SS, Murena L, Burkhart SS. Pseudoparalysis: The 
importance of rotator cable integrity. Orthopedics 2012; 35: e1353–7
[41] Morag Y, Jacobson JA, Lucas D, Miller B, Brigido MK, Jamadar DA. US 
appearance of the rotator cable with histologic correlation: prelimi-
nary results. Radiology 2006; 241: 485–91
[42] Morag Y, Jamadar DA, Boon TA, Bedi A, Caoili EM, Jacobson JA. 
Ultrasound of the rotator cable: prevalence and morphology in 
asymptomatic shoulders. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2012; 198: W27–30
[43] Tamborrini G, Marx C, Müller AM, Szöllösy G, Draghi FSt Bianchi  et al.  
Ultrasound, Anatomy and Arthroscopy of the Shoulder: high resolution 
sonoanatomy, sonohistology and sonopathology atlas – anatomy and 
arthroscopy of the shoulder, 3nd ed. 2017;
[44] Rozin AP, Toledano K, Dagan A, Balbir-Gurman A. Ultrasound 
investigation of the glenohumeral joint by anterior access in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis and healthy controls. Med Sci Monit 2015; 
21: 533–41
[45] Dugas JR, Campbell DA, Warren RF, Robie BH, Millett PJ. Anatomy and 
dimensions of rotator cuff insertions. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 11: 
498–503
[46] Clark JM, Harryman DT. Tendons, ligaments, and capsule of the rotator 
cuff. Gross and microscopic anatomy. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1992; 74: 
713–25
[47] Kask K, Kolts I, Lubienski A, Russlies M, Leibecke T, Busch LC. Magnetic 
resonance imaging and correlative gross anatomy of the ligamentum 
semicirculare humeri (rotator cable). Clin Anat 2008; 21: 420–6
[48] Warner JJ, Allen A, Marks PH, Wong P. Arthroscopic release for chronic, 
refractory adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
1996; 78: 1808–16
[49] Vinson EN, Major NM, Higgins LD. Magnetic resonance imaging 
findings associated with surgically proven rotator interval lesions. 
Skeletal Radiol 2007; 36: 405–10
[50] Rodeo SA, Hannafin JA, Tom J, Warren RF, Wickiewicz TL. Immunolo-
calization of cytokines and their receptors in adhesive capsulitis of the 
shoulder. J Orthop Res 1997; 15: 427–36
E116
