 A Wnt-producing niche drives proliferative potential and 
progression in lung adenocarcinoma
Tuomas Tammela1, Francisco J. Sanchez-Rivera1, Naniye Malli Cetinbas1, Katherine Wu1, 
Nikhil S. Joshi1, Katja Helenius1, Yoona Park1, Roxana Azimi1, Natanya R. Kerper1, R. 
Alexander Wesselhoeft1, Xin Gu1, Leah Schmidt1, Milton Cornwall-Brady1, Ömer H. 
Yilmaz1, Wen Xue1,5, Pekka Katajisto3,4, Arjun Bhutkar1, and Tyler Jacks1,2
1David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 3Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014 
Helsinki, Finland 4Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, 14183, 
Stockholm, Sweden 5RNA Therapeutics Institute, Program in Molecular Medicine, and 
Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA
Abstract
The heterogeneity of cellular states in cancer has been linked to drug resistance, cancer 
progression and presence of cancer cells with properties of normal tissue stem cells1,2. Secreted 
Wnt signals maintain stem cells in various epithelial tissues, including in lung development and 
regeneration3–5. Here we report that murine and human lung adenocarcinomas display hierarchical 
features with two distinct subpopulations, one with high Wnt signaling activity and another 
forming a niche that provides the Wnt ligand. The Wnt responder cells showed increased tumour 
propagation ability, suggesting that they have features of normal tissue stem cells. Genetic 
perturbation of Wnt production or signaling suppressed tumour progression. Small molecule 
inhibitors targeting essential post-translational modification of Wnt reduced tumour growth and 
dramatically decreased proliferative potential of the lung cancer cells, leading to improved survival 
of tumour-bearing mice. These results indicate that strategies for disrupting pathways that 
maintain stem-like and niche cell phenotypes can translate into effective anti-cancer therapies.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed to: Dr Tyler Jacks, David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Phone: +1-617-253-0263; Fax: +1-617-253-9863; 
tjacks@mit.edu. 
Author contributions
T.T. and T.J. designed and directed the study; T.T., K.W., Y.P. and R.A.W. performed all types of experiments reported in the study; 
F.J.S.R. performed CRISPR-a experiments and analysed CRISPR-mutated loci; N.M.C. and K.H. performed gene expression analysis, 
and N.M.C. performed ISH; N.S.J., L.S. and P.K. performed FACS; R.A. and N.R.K. performed molecular cloning, and R.A. 
quantified Ki67+ nuclei; X.G. performed cell culture experiments; M.C.B. developed and used μCT analysis methodology; W.X. 
generated shRNA reagents; A.B. conducted bioinformatic analyses; F.J.S.R., N.S.J., Ö.H.Y., P.K., and A.B. provided conceptual 
advice; T.T. and T.J. wrote the manuscript with comments from all authors.
Author Information
The authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 May 18; 545(7654): 355–359. doi:10.1038/nature22334.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stem cells are defined by their capacity to self-renew while also producing differentiated 
cells. The decision to divide or differentiate is primarily controlled by extrinsic signaling 
factors, which, together with the cells that produce them, form a niche with a local range of 
action capable of supporting a limited number of stem cells. Among the niche signals that 
promote stem cell phenotypes, secreted Wnt proteins are notable due to their function in 
multiple epithelial stem cell compartments3. Wnt growth factors are palmitoylated in cells 
that produce them by the membrane-bound O-acyltransferase Porcupine (encoded by Porcn 
in mice)3. This postranslational modification is critical for Wnt secretion and binding to 
Frizzled family receptors3. Wnt binds Frizzled, promoting the stabilization, nuclear 
translocation and transcriptional activity of β-catenin through its interaction with T-cell 
factor (TCF) family transcription factors. Recently, R-spondin (Rspo) growth factors were 
found to amplify Wnt signaling by engaging Leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein 
coupled receptor (Lgr)4, Lgr5 and Lgr66. Lgr5 marks stem cells in multiple epithelial tissues 
and in intestinal adenomas3,6–8. Stem-like cells have recently been described in 
autochthonous mouse tumour models7,9,10 and in tumour transplants11–13, but evidence for 
the existence of stem-like cells and particularly their niche in advanced cancers in situ has 
been lacking14.
Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a leading cause of death globally. Tumours driven by 
oncogenic KRAS account for approximately 30% of LUAD, which lacks effective 
chemotherapies15. Wnt signaling is essential for the initiation and maintenance of Braf-
driven lung adenomas in mice16, and forced activation of the pathway promotes progression 
of Kras or Braf mutant lung tumours16,17. Human LUAD, in particular metastasis, is 
frequently associated with increased expression of Wnt pathway-activating genes and down-
regulation of negative regulators of the pathway18,19.
We isolated tdTomato+ primary cancer cells from autochthonous KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; 
Rosa26tdTomato/+ (KPT) mouse LUAD, and established low-density 3-dimensional (3D) 
organotypic tumour spheroid cultures. 2.7% (±0.5%) of the cells gave rise to persistently 
proliferating spheroids (Figure 1a, b), suggesting that cells capable of self-renewal comprise 
a small minority. Recombinant Wnt3a, R-spondin-1, or their combination (RW) increased 
the absolute number and ratio of primary murine KP LUAD spheroids that contained 
proliferating cells, and promoted overall cell proliferation (Figure 1a, b; Extended Data 
Figure 1a, b). Conversely, inhibition of ligand-driven Wnt signaling with either the 
Porcupine inhibitor LGK974 (ref. 20), short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting Porcn or 
recombinant DKK-1 (a Wnt antagonist3) suppressed proliferative capacity of primary LUAD 
cells in 3D spheroids (Figure 1a, b; Extended Data Figure 1a-f). Tumour formation by 
primary LUAD cells was markedly decreased upon orthotopic transplantation (genetically 
engineered mouse model –derived allograft, GEMM-DA) into recipient mice that were 
treated with LGK974 compared to control (Figure 1c; Extended Data Figure 1g). 
Collectively, these data indicate that KP LUAD cells display heterogeneity in their 
proliferative potential, which is maintained by Wnt signals produced by the cancer cells.
Rspo1 alone was most potent in stimulating proliferation and expansion of KP LUAD 
spheroids (Figure 1a, b; Extended Data Figure 1a), even though, as expected, the 
Tammela et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 combination of recombinant Rspo1 and Wnt3a (RW) was most potent in activating the Wnt 
pathway (Extended Data Figure 1e, h; Supplementary Information Text). We next employed 
the CRISPR/Cas9-based Synergistic Activation Mediator (SAM) system21 to robustly drive 
expression of Rspo2, Rspo3 or Lgr5 in KP LUAD cells (Extended Data Figure 1i-l); this 
increased their proliferation and induced Wnt target genes in 3D spheroid culture, both of 
which were suppressed by LGK974 (Figure 1d, Extended Data Figure 1m, n). Knockdown 
of both Lgr4 and Lgr5 was required to fully suppress R-spondin-driven Wnt pathway 
activation (Extended Data Figure 2a-g, Figure 1e), indicating that both Lgr4 and Lgr5 are R-
spondin receptors in the KP LUAD model.
We next assessed whether the Wnt pathway is activated in autochthonous KP LUAD 
tumours in vivo. Using a luciferase or GFP reporter gene driven by a synthetic β-catenin-
sensitive 7TCF promoter, we observed Wnt pathway activation in a subpopulation of cancer 
cells particularly in large autochthonous KP tumours (Figure 2a, b). In subcutaneous 
transplants of KP tumour lines 7TCF promoter activity was suppressed by treatment with 
LGK974 (Extended Data Figure 3a-c). Interestingly, we observed nuclear localization of β-
catenin, a hallmark for activation of Wnt signaling, in a subpopulation of cancer cells only in 
tumours that had progressed from adenoma to adenocarcinoma (Figure 2c, d; Extended Data 
Figure 3d).
We next performed Porcupine immunostaining in tumour sections to identify cells 
competent for producing Wnt in the LUAD tumours. Interestingly, Porcupine localized to 
cancer cells in close proximity to cells with nuclear β-catenin or expression of the Wnt 
target gene Axin2 in autochthonous KP LUAD, although rare Porcupine+ macrophages were 
also detected, predominantly in peritumoural areas (Figure 2c, Extended Data Figure 3e-i). 
Furthermore, Porcn gene expression was considerably higher in adenocarcinomas compared 
to adenomas (Figure 2e). Importantly, we detected similar Porcupine- or nuclear β-catenin-
positive subpopulations and induction of PORCN expression in human LUAD (Figure 2f, 
Extended Data Figure 3j, k). These findings indicate that the Wnt pathway is activated in a 
subpopulation of lung adenocarcinoma cells in close proximity to Porcupine+ cells that are 
competent for providing the Wnt signal. Porcupine localized to bronchiolar epithelium in the 
normal lung and was restricted to sites of high Wnt signaling and stem cell activity in the 
intestine and liver (Extended Data Figure 4a-e)3, suggesting that Porcupine is specifically 
expressed in Wnt-producing cells in normal stem cell niches.
To test the functional requirement for Porcupine expression in LUAD cells in vivo, we used 
CRISPR/Cas9 to inactivate Porcn specifically in the cancer cells of the KP LUAD model. 
Interestingly, targeting Porcn did not affect tumour grade or burden at 12 weeks after tumour 
initiation, when most tumours are still in the adenoma stage (Figure 2g, Extended Data 
Figure 5a). However, targeting Porcn reduced tumour burden and resulted in a shift to lower 
grade tumours at 20 weeks compared to control (Figure 2g, h). Of note, of 12 tumours 
graded as adenocarcinomas, 10 harbored predomidantly wild-type Porcn alleles or small 
non-frameshift mutations (Extended Data Figure 5b, c). In 2/12 of these tumours, where 
significant allelic fractions of frameshift mutations were detected, tumours still maintained 
residual Porcupine immunopositivity (data not shown). These data suggest that only tumours 
Tammela et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with at least a fraction of cells retaining functional Porcn were capable of progressing 
beyond adenomas.
Lgr5 is a Wnt target gene functionally involved in amplification of Wnt signaling and stem 
cell maintenance in multiple tissues3,6. When compared to adenomas, KP adenocarcinomas 
had an increased level of Lgr5 transcripts, which localized to a subpopulation of 
adenocarcinoma cells (Extended Data Figure 6a, b). Lgr4 expression in KP LUAD tumours 
was more widespread compared to Lgr5, much like in normal intestinal crypts6, but was 
enriched in the Lgr5+ cells (Extended Data Figure 6b-d). Furthermore, in GEMM-DAs 
established from KP LUAD tumours harboring a Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ reporter allele, the Lgr5+ 
cells were localized in close proximity to Porcupine+ cancer cells (Figure 3a). Sorted 
primary Lgr5+ KP LUAD cells were more efficient in forming persistently proliferating 
spheroids in vitro and orthotopic KP LUAD GEMM-DAs in vivo than the Lgr5- cells 
(Figure 3b; Extended Data Figure 6f, g), suggesting that these cells have high proliferative 
potential.
To investigate whether the Lgr5+ cells also display stem-like properties in situ in established 
tumours, we established subcutaneous KP LUAD GEMM-DAs harboring Lgr5CreER and 
Rosa26mTmG alleles, which allowed for inducible labeling of the Lgr5+ lineage in 
established tumours with membrane-associated GFP (mG) using tamoxifen. Single mG+ 
cells were found labeled 2 days after the tamoxifen pulse in Porcupine+ niches, whereas 
significant expansion of the Lgr5+ clones was observed at 14 days post-tamoxifen 
administration (Figure 3c). The absolute number of clones did not change significantly over 
time (Extended Data Figure 6h). Importantly, the Lgr5+ cells gave rise to Porcupine+ cells 
during the 14-day chase (Figure 3c), indicating that the Lgr5+ stem-like cells can give rise to 
their own niche in KP LUAD. Notably, single-cell clones derived from KP; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ 
mouse LUAD formed heterogenous tumours comprised of Lgr5+, Porcupine+ and Lgr5−/
Porcupine- subpopulations (Extended Data Figure 7a, b), indicating that considerable 
plasticity and heterogeneity in cellular states exists in the KP lung tumours11. Based on our 
lineage-tracing data, this heterogeneity is in part driven by cooperation between the 
Porcupine+ and Lgr5+ subpopulations.
Interestingly, a subpopulation of Wnt pathway-positive cells harboring stem-like properties 
was recently described in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell lines12. In keeping 
with these findings, we detected Porcupine+ cells in close proximity to a subpopulation of 
Lgr5+ cells, which had increased proliferative potential in a PDAC GEMM (Extended Data 
Figure 7c-f). Furthermore, Lgr5+ stem-like cells have been described in intestinal 
adenomas7. We detected Porcupine+ cells in close proximity to the Lgr5+ cells in ApcΔ/
Δ;Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ murine intestinal adenomas and Porcupine expression in human 
colorectal carcinomas (Extended Data Figure 7g, h). These results suggest that paracrine 
Wnt signals may maintain subpopulations of cancer cells in a stem-like state in other 
epithelial cancers.
To explore the relevance of elevated Wnt signaling in human non-small cell lung cancer, we 
examined gene expression patterns in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset. A ligand-
stimulated Wnt gene expression signature22 correlated with poor survival and higher tumour 
Tammela et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 grade, and was independently prognostic in human LUAD, but not in squamous cell lung 
cancer (Extended Data Figure 8a-c; Supplementary Data Table 1). We then extended this 
analysis to 34 additional human cancers within the TCGA dataset, and found similar 
correlations in PDAC and in mesothelioma (Extended Data Figure 8d, e).
Given that KP LUAD cells respond to R-spondins via Lgr4 and Lgr5, we investigated the 
requirement for these genes in the KP model. CRISPR/Cas9-based combined inactivation of 
Lgr4 and Lgr5 in the KP model led to reduced lung tumour burden and a block in 
progression of adenomas to adenocarcinomas (Figure 3d), similar to what was observed 
when targeting Porcn (Figure 2g). Tumours that progressed into adenocarcinomas harbored 
predomidantly wild-type alleles or small non-frameshift mutations in Lgr4 and Lgr5 
(Extended Data Figure 8f-h). These data are consistent with a key role for Lgr4 and Lgr5 in 
the progression into adenocarcinomas. We detected expression of the Lgr4/Lgr5 ligands 
Rspo1 and Rspo3 in KP LUAD, which localized predominantly to endothelial cells in the 
tumours (Extended Data Figure 9a, b). Analogously, endothelial cells expressing R-spondin 
form a part of the niche for liver stem cells23.
To identify the Wnt ligands and their Frizzled receptors involved in LUAD, we performed 
qPCR on 84 Wnt pathway-related genes in sorted KPT lung adenocarcinoma cells (T) and 
their stroma (S). This analysis revealed very little expression of Porcn or Wnt ligands in the 
stroma, consistent with the cancer cells being the predominant source of Wnt ligands in 
LUAD (Extended Data Figure 9c, d; Supplementary Data Table 2). Out of the 19 Wnt genes, 
Wnt7a, Wnt5a and Wnt7b were robustly expressed in LUAD (Extended Data Figure 9c-e). 
In situ hybridization placed expression of these three Wnt ligands in KP LUAD into regions 
with Wnt pathway activation (Figure 3e). Increased levels of WNT5A, WNT3, WNT5B, and 
WNT10A in subpopulations of patients and, in particular, WNT7B were observed in human 
LUAD when compared to normal lung in the TCGA dataset (Extended Data Figure 9f, 
Supplementary Data Table 3). We detected robust expression of 8 of the 10 Fzd receptors 
and their Lrp5 and Lrp6 co-receptors in sorted KP LUAD cells (Extended Data Figure 9g). 
Expression of Fzd1, Fzd4 and Fzd6 was increased in KP lung adenocarcinomas when 
compared to adenomas (Extended Data Figure 9h). Of note, each of these receptors can be 
engaged by at least one of the three Wnt ligands identified in the study24.
We next explored inhibition of ligand-dependent Wnt signaling as a potential therapeutic 
strategy in LUAD. Treatment with LGK974 suppressed Wnt target genes, inhibited tumour 
growth, proliferation and prolonged survival of mice with advanced autochthonous KP 
LUAD tumours (Figure 4a-d; Extended Data Figure 10a, b). Furthermore, treatment of 
tumour donor mice with LGK974 dramatically suppressed tumour-forming ability of 
transplanted cells and reduced numbers of proliferative tumours in recipient mice (Figure 4e; 
Extended Data Figure 10c-e), suggesting that inhibiting Wnt can disrupt stem-like cells in 
LUAD (Figure 4f).
Our results indicate that a subset of Kras and p53 mutant LUAD cells acts as a Wnt-
producing niche for another cancer cell subpopulation that responds to the Wnt signal and 
has robust proliferative potential (Figure 4g). Inhibiting Porcupine disrupts Wnt secretion 
and activity in the niche, suppressing stem cell function in tumours, which ultimately 
Tammela et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 translates into therapeutic benefit (Figure 4f). Inhibitors of Wnt signaling or the Rspo-Lgr5 
axis have shown efficacy also in patient-derived xenograft models of LUAD25,26. We 
identified specific components of the Wnt–Frizzled and R-spondin–Lgr5 signaling pathways 
that may serve as entry points for therapeutic approaches aimed at disrupting the interactions 
between niche cells and stem-like cells in LUAD (Figure 4g).
In this study, we observed the emergence of Porcupine+ niche cells and Lgr5+ stem-like 
cells as KP lung adenomas progress to adenocarcinomas. This transition is also associated 
with amplification of the mutant KrasG12D locus and consequent increase in mitogen-
activated protein kinase activity as well as upregulation of tissue repair pathways27. 
Therefore increased proliferation and activation of regenerative pathways may contribute to 
activation of Wnt signaling in adenocarcinoma. Interestingly, heterogeneous Wnt pathway 
activation and Lgr5+ expression in progenitor-like cells is also observed during repair of 
normal epithelial tissues8, suggesting that lung adenocarcinomas may be co-opting a latent 
tissue regenerative program upon progression. Our results indicate that Wnt pathway activity 
in a subset of cancer cells is essential for the maintenance of proliferative potential in 
LUAD, which presents a novel therapeutic opportunity for the treatment of lung 
adenocarcinoma and other epithelial cancers.
Methods
Mice
Previously published KrasLSL-G12D (ref. 28), Trp53flox/flox (ref. 29), KrasFSF-G12D (ref. 30), 
Trp53frt/frt (ref. 31), Rosa26LSL-tdTomato (ref. 32), Apcflox/flox (ref. 33), Rosa26LSL-Luciferase 
(ref. 34), Rosa26mTmG (ref. 35), Lgr5GFP-IRES-CreER/+ (ref. 36), and Lgr5CreER/+ (ref. 8) 
gene-targeted mice were used in the study. All mice were maintained in a mixed Sv129/C57 
black 6 genetic background. Tumours were induced in KP mice with 2.5×107 plaque-
forming units (pfu) of AdCMV-Cre (Iowa), 2×108 pfu of AdSPC-Cre23,37, 1×108 pfu of 
AdCMV-FlpO (Iowa) or 15-50,000 transforming units of lentiviral Cre, as previously 
described38,39, in mice that were between 8-12 weeks of age. Approximately equal numbers 
of male and female mice were included in all experimental groups in all mouse experiments. 
Mice bearing lung tumours were treated with 10 mg/kg/d of LGK974 (ref. 20) resuspended 
in 0.5% carboxymethylcellulose (Sigma) and 0.5% Tween 80 (Sigma) or vehicle. Weights of 
mice were followed weekly. The growth of autochthonous KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; 
Rosa26Luciferase/+ lung tumors was followed longitudinally by bioluminescence imaging, as 
before34. Briefly, mice were anesthesized by isoflurane inhalation, administered 100 mg/kg 
D-Luciferin (Perkin Elmer) by intraperitoneal injection and imaged 10 min after using the 
IVIS imaging system (Perkin Elmer). Such longitudinal imaging experiments were repeated 
three times and representative data from one such experiment is shown in Figure 4a. 
Survival experiments were repeated three times and representative data from one such 
experiment is shown in Figure 4b. For survival experiments, mice were randomized based on 
their tumour burden as assessed by μCT. Mice were assigned a tumor burden score ranging 
from 0 (no tumors) to 10 (lungs completely full of tumors), and experimental groups were 
formed such that each group had approximately equal tumor average tumor burdens. Mice 
with tumor burden scores under 3 were excluded from the study. The health of the mice in 
Tammela et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 all experiments was monitored daily by the investigators and/or veterinary staff at the 
Department of Comparative Medicine at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mice with a 
body condition score under 2 were humanely euthanised. Animal studies were approved by 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Committee for Animal Care (institutional 
animal welfare assurance no. A-3125-01). The maximal tumour dimensions permitted by the 
MIT Committee for Animal Care were 2 cm across the largest tumour diameter and this 
limit was not reached in any experiments.
Isolation of primary mouse lung adenocarcinoma cells
Mice bearing KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Rosa26tdTomato/+ (KPT) or KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; 
Rosa26tdTomato/+; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+(KPT; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+) LUAD tumours or were 
euthanized 12-26 weeks following tumour induction and perfused with S-MEM (Gibco) 
through the right ventricle of the heart. Dissected lungs with tumours were dissociated in 
protease and DNAse solution of the Lung Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech) followed by 
mechanical dissociation using MACS “C” columns (Miltenyi Biotech) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. The dissociate was filtered using a 100 μm strainer and red 
blood cells were lysed using ACK (Thermo), followed by staining with APC-conjugated 
CD31 (Biolegend, cat. # 102510), CD45 (BD, cat. # 559864), CD11b (eBioscience, cat. # 
17-0112-82), and TER119 (BD, cat. # 557909) antibodies and dead cells with DAPI 
(Sigma). The same approach using the Tumour Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech) was used 
to isolate KPT; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+; Pdx1::Cre PDAC tumours cells when mice were 7 weeks of 
age.
Fluorescence-assisted cell sorting (FACS) of stained primary cells was performed using a 
FACSAria sorter (BD) by gating for tdTomato+/DAPI−/APC− cells (total cancer cell 
fraction) in the case of KPT tumours. In the case of KPT; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ tumours, both 
tdTomato+/DAPI−/APC−/GFP+ (Lgr5+ cancer cell fraction) and tdTomato+/DAPI−/APC
− /GFP− (Lgr5- cancer cell fraction) populations were sorted. Sorted cells were placed in 3-
dimensional organotypic culture, transplanted intratracheally into NOD-SCID-gamma 
(NSG) recipient mice, or subcutaneously into athymic nu/nu mice immediately after sorting 
(see below).
Transplantation of cancer cells into recipient mice
For intratracheal transplantation, 8-10 weeks old immunodeficient NSG mice were 
anesthesized, intubated as previously described38, and allowed to inhale 15-50,000 primary 
sorted KP LUAD cancer cells resuspended in 30 μl of S-MEM (Gibco). For subcutaneous 
transplantation, 50-500,000 primary sorted KP LUAD cells, KP LUAD cell lines or single-
cell clones derived from a KP; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ LUAD cell line were resuspended in 50% 
Matrigel/50% S-MEM and injected subcutaneously into both flanks of athymic nu/nu mice 
in a volume of 100 μl. Mice harboring transplant tumours were injected intraperitoneally 
with 1 mg of 5-ethynyl-2-deoxyuridine (EdU, Setareh Biotech) 4 hours prior to euthanasia to 
label proliferating cells. EdU was detected in cryosections using the Click-iT EdU Alexa 
Fluor 488 Imaging Kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Lgr5+ cells in 
close proximity to Porcupine were detected by GFP and Porcupine immunofluorescence: All 
GFP+ cells were analysed as being immediately adjacent to at least one Porcupine+ cell, as 
Tammela et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 double-positive for both GFP and Porcupine, or as neither of the above (Figure 3a). All 
transplantation experiments were reproduced three times.
Low-density 3-dimensional organotypic cell culture
150-1000 KP primary mouse LUAD cells, cells from established KP LUAD cell lines, or 
primary mouse PDAC cells were mixed in 50% Matrigel (BD) and 50% Advanced 
DMEM/F12 (Gibco) and plated on 10 μl of Matrigel. The gel was allowed to solidify in 37° 
C, followed by addition of Advanced DMEM/F12 (Thermo) supplemented with gentamicin 
(Thermo), penicillin-streptomycin (VWR), 10 mM HEPES (Thermo), and 2% heat-
inactivated fetal bovine serum. For Wnt pathway manipulation, cultures were incubated with 
1 μg/ml recombinant mouse (rm)R-spondin1 (Sino Biological), 100 ng/ml rmWnt3a (R&D 
Sytstems), 500 ng/ml or 1 μg/ml rmDKK-1 (R&D Systems), or 100 nM LGK974 (Medchem 
Express) for 6-14 days. Media was changed every 2 days. At the end of the experiment, 
proliferating cells were labeled with 10 μM EdU for 4h, followed by paraformaldehyde 
fixation and fluorescent labeling of proliferating cells using the Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 
488 Imaging Kit (Thermo), according to the manufacturer’s protocol, in whole mount 
preparations of tumour spheroids. Proliferating spheroids were quantified using a Nikon 
Eclipse 80i microscope: a spheroid was classified as a cluster of at least 10 cells, and a 
proliferating spheroid contained at least one EdU positive nucleus (proliferating cells were 
not observed in clusters of cells smaller than 10 cells). At least four replicate wells per 
condition were quantified in each experiment. Images were acquired using a Nikon A1R 
confocal microscope. Stimulation and inhibitor experiments were reproduced at least 10 
times for each experimental condition.
Cell lines
Multiple cell lines were established from the mouse LUAD and PDAC KP GEMMs over the 
course of the study. The cell lines have not been authenticated. The cell lines were routinely 
tested for Mycoplasma and found to be negative. At the time of conducting the experiments, 
no cell lines used were found to be listed in the ICLAC database of misidentified cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry
Tissues or tumour organoids were fixed in 10% formalin overnight and embedded in 
paraffin. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on a Thermo Autostainer 360 with or 
without hematoxylin counterstaining using antibodies to β-catenin (BD, cat. # 610153), 
Ki67 (Vector Labs, cat. # VP-RM04), glutamine synthetase (BD, cat. # 610517), or 
Porcupine (AbCam, cat. # ab105543). Lungs from at least three tumor-bearing mice were 
analysed by each antibody. Livers and small intestines harvested from three normal, healthy 
mice were subjected to β-catenin, glutamine synthetase, and Porcupine IHC. 65 human 
LUAD tumors samples in two separate tissue microarrays were analysed by β-catenin and 
Porcupine IHC. 5 human colorectal adenocarcinoma samples were stained with Porcupine 
antibodies. All human tissue material was obtained commercially from Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals.
Tammela et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tissue immunofluorescence
Mice were anesthetized and perfused through the right cardiac ventricle with 1% 
paraformaldehyde. Lungs with tumours were dissected, immersed in 4% PFA overnight and 
frozen in OCT medium (Sakura Finetek). 7 μm sections were stained with antibodies to 
EpCAM (eBioscience, cat. # 17-5791-82), β-catenin (BD, cat. # 610153), GFP (Cell 
Signaling Technologies, cat. # 2956S; or Aves Labs, cat. # GFP-1020), CD11b (eBioscience, 
cat. # 17-0112-82), or Porcupine (AbCam, cat. # ab105543). Lungs from at least three 
tumor-bearing mice were analysed by each antibody.
Quantification of cell proliferation in tumors
Digitally scanned images of Ki67-stained slides were created with the Aperio ScanScope 
AT2 at 20X magnification. Aperio’s WebScope software was used to assess for Ki67+ 
density per tumor area. A built-in IHC Nuclear Image Analysis algorithm was used to 
classify cells based on the intensity of the nuclear Ki67 stain. Nuclei were classified from 0 
to 3+; only nuclei of moderate nuclear staining (2+) or intense nuclear staining (3+) were 
considered Ki67 positive. Tumor regions were outlined on WebScope before running the 
IHC Nuclear Image Analysis algorithm such that the number of 2+ and 3+ cells was 
normalized to tumor area.
Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Total RNA was isolated from tumours or cells using the RNeasy plus kit (Qiagen) according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of RNA using the 
SuperScript VILO cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo). qPCR was performed in triplicates with 2 
μl of diluted cDNA (1:10) using PerfeCTa SYBR Green FastMix (Thermo) on a Bio-Rad 
iCycler RT–PCR detection system. Expression was normalized to Actb or Gapdh. All 
oligonucleotides used in this study are listed in Supplementary Data Table 4. All qPCR 
experiments were reproduced using at least three biological replicates.
Alternatively, a Mouse WNT Signaling Pathway RT2 Profiler PCR Array (Qiagen) was used 
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Raw expression values were thresholded to drop 
non-detected and lowly expressed genes (maximum Ct value set to 33; 0 values set to 33). 
Array position to gene-name mapping details were retrieved from the manufacturer’s 
website (www.pcrdataanalysis.sabiosciences.com). Expression values for all genes per array 
were normalized to the expression of the housekeeping gene Gusb. Three replicates of 
stroma samples and three replicates of tumour samples were compared to calculate log2 
fold-change and differential expression significance values (2-sided t-test).
Lentiviral shRNA-mediated gene silencing
Short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) were cloned into lentiviral pLKO.1 vectors (Addgene 
#10878) or into pTRIPZ (Dharmacon) vectors and lentivirus were produced as previously 
described40. KP mouse LUAD cell lines were infected with the lentiviral vectors, followed 
by puromycin selection and, in the case cells infected with the TRIPZ virus, incubation in 1 
μg/ml doxycycline for 4 days and RNA extraction for testing target knockdown (Extended 
Data Figure 2a and not shown). For combination Lgr4 and Lgr5 silencing experiments, cell 
Tammela et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lines expressing pLKO.1 driving Lgr4 or Lgr5 shRNAs were generated by puromycin 
selection, followed by infection with TRIPZ vectors driving miR30-based Lgr4 or Lgr5 
shRNAs and turboRFP under the control of a TET-responsive promoter. Cells were 
incubated in 1 μg/ml doxycycline for 2 days and red fluorescent cells were sorted to generate 
pure cell lines expressing combinations of Lgr4 and Lgr5 shRNAs. All shRNA experiments 
were reproduced using at least three independent cell lines.
Topflash assay
10,000 of KP LUAD cells were plated in 100 μl of media containing 10% FBS per well of a 
white-walled 96-well plate (Perkin Elmer). After 24 h, KP mouse LUAD cells were 
transfected using Attractene transfection reagent (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s 
instructions with 150 ng of TOPFLASH Firefly (M50) reporter41 (Addgene #12456) and 20 
ng of pRL-SV40P Renilla (Addgene #27163) constructs. In initial experiments, the Wnt-
insensitive FOPFLASH Firefly (M51) reporter41 (Addgene #12457) was used to rule out 
signal background (not shown). Cells were stimulated for 16h with recombinant Rspo1 (1 
μg/ml, Sino Biological), recombinant Wnt3a (100 ng/ml, R&D Systems) or their 
combination (RW) in Advanced DMEM/F12 (Gibco), with supplements listed above. After 
stimulation, Firefly and Renilla signals were detected using Dual-Glo luciferase detection 
reagents (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions. A Tecan Infiniti 200 Pro plate 
reader and automated injector system was used to detect luminescence. To control for 
transfection efficiency, Firefly luciferase levels were normalized to Renilla luciferase levels 
to generate the measure of relative luciferase units. Experimental data are presented as mean 
± s.d. from three independent wells. All TOPFLASH experiments were reproduced using at 
least three independent cell lines.
Application of the Synergistic Activation Mediator system to overexpress components of 
the Rspo-Lgr5 axis
Catalytically-dead Cas9 (dCas9)-based systems have recently emerged as powerful tools for 
transcriptionally activating endogenous genes42. Notably, these systems allow for 
overexpression of genes in their endogenous genomic context. To overexpress Rspo2, Rspo3 
or Lgr5 in KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ LUAD cell lines, we employed the Synergistic Activation 
Mediator (SAM) system, which is a 3-component system based on (1) a dCas9 fusion to the 
transcriptional activator VP64 (a tandem repeat of four DALDDFDLDML sequences from 
Herpes simplex viral protein 16, VP16), (2) a modified gRNA scaffold containing two MS2 
RNA aptamers, and (3) the MS2-P65-HSF1 tripartite synthetic transcriptional activator21. In 
this scenario, sgRNA-dependent recruitment of dCas9-VP64 and MS2-P65-HSF1 to the 
endogenous Rspo2, Rspo3 or Lgr5 loci results in potent transcriptional activation (Extended 
Data Figure 1i-l).
Non-clonal KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Rosa26tdTomato/+ or KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; 
Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ LUAD cells stably expressing dCas9-VP64-Blast (Addgene #61425) and 
MS2-P65-HSF1-Hygro (Addgene #61426) were generated via sequential lentiviral 
transduction and selection with blasticidin and hygromycin, respectively. To overexpress 
Rspo2 or Rspo3 we designed four independent sgRNA sequences targeting the Rspo2 or 
Rspo3 transcription start site; sgRNAs targeting the upstream region of the Lgr5 gene were 
Tammela et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 provided by L. Gilbert, M. Horlbeck and J. Weissman43. The sgRNAs were cloned into a 
lentiviral vector (Lenti-sgRNA-MS2-Zeocin; Addgene #61427) and subsequently 
transduced and zeocin-selected the aforementioned cell lines to generate KrasG12D/+; 
Trp53Δ/Δ; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ LUAD cell lines stably expressing all three components. These 
experiments were reproduced using three independent cell lines.
Cloning of lentiviral vectors
The 7TCF::Luciferase-PGK::Cre, 7TCF::GFP-PGK-Cre and U6::sgRNA-EFS::Cre 
(pUSEC) lentivirus vectors were generated by Gibson assembly44,45. Briefly, a 1.8 kb part 
corresponding to 7TCF::Luciferase or a 1.2 kb part corresponding to 7TCF::GFP were 
amplified from 7TFP (Addgene #24308, ref. 46) or 7TGP (Addgene #24305, ref. 46) 
respectively, and fused with a 0.5 kb PGK promoter part, a 1.0kb Cre cDNA part and the 
PmeI + BsrGI linearized LV1-5 (Addgene #68411) part44. U6::sgRNA-EFS::Cre was 
generated by amplifying a 2.2 kb part corresponding to U6-filler-chimeric gRNA backbone 
from pSECC (Addgene #60820), and fused with a 0.25 kb EFS promoter part, a 1.0kb Cre 
cDNA part and the PmeI + BsrGI -linearized LV1-5 (Addgene #68411) part44. Lentivirus 
was produced in 293FS* cells, as previously described38. Experiments utilizing 
7TCF::Luciferase-PGK::Cre (Figure 2a) were reproduced twice (n = 15 mice in total) and 
experiments utilizing 7TCF::GFP-PGK-Cre (Figure 2b) three times (n = 19 mice in total).
For generation of lentiviruses harboring sgRNAs, three sgRNAs per gene targeting Porcn, 
Lgr4 or Lgr5 were designed using CRISPR Design47, cloned into pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP 
(pX458, Addgene #48138) as previously described48, transfected into GG cells49, and 
screened for efficiency by Western blotting for Porcn protein or by massively parallel 
sequencing of the regions in Lgr4 or Lgr5 targeted by the respective sgRNAs (data not 
shown). The most efficient Porcn sgRNA was cloned into pSECC as previously described49. 
The most efficient Lgr4 and Lgr5 sgRNAs were cloned into the pUSEC vector together with 
a synthetic mouse/human U6 promoter (sU6), as previously described50, to generate 
U6::sgLgr4-sU6::Lgr5-EFS::Cre (pU2SEC).
Measurement of Wnt signaling pathway activity in tumours in vivo
A KPT LUAD cell line was transduced with 7TCF::Luciferase-PGK::Puro (7TFP) 
lentiviruses46, selected for puromycin resistance, and transplanted subcutaneously into 
flanks of immunodeficient athymic nu/nu mice. Three weeks following transplantation 
tumour burden was measured by registering tdTomato fluorescence using an IVIS imaging 
system (Perkin Elmer), followed by administration of 100 mg/kg D-Luciferin (Perkin Elmer) 
and registration of luciferase signal (7TCF promoter activity). The luciferase signal was 
normalized to the tdTomato signal (Wnt pathway activity/total tumour burden). 
Quantification of Wnt pathway activity was performed every 24h for a week in mice treated 
with 10 mg/kg/d of LGK974 or vehicle. The maximal tumour dimensions permitted by the 
MIT IACUC were 2 cm across the largest tumour diameter and this limit was not reached in 
these experiments. This experiment was reproduced twice.
Tammela et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Single-molecule mRNA in situ hybridization
Single-molecule in situ hybridization was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin embedded 
tissues using the Advanced Cell Diagnostics RNAscope 2.5 HD Detection Kit (cat. # 
322360). Catalog numbers of the probes are 400331 (Axin2), 312171 (Lgr5), and 404971 
(Porcn). Lungs from three tumor-bearing mice were analyzed.
Lineage-tracing of Lgr5+ cells in KP tumours
We generated KrasFSF-G12D/+; Trp53frt/frt; Lgr5CreER/+; Rosa26mTmG/+ mice and induced 
lung tumours by intratracheal administration of AdCMV-FlpO. Lung tumours were 
harvested, enzymatically dissociated and passaged in vitro for 8-10 passages to eradicate 
stromal cells from the cultures. Such early-passage cell lines were transplanted 
subcutaneously into flanks of NSG mice. When mice developed palpable tumours, they were 
administered a single tamoxifen pulse (20 mg/kg), or corn oil vehicle control. Tumours were 
harvested at 2 days or 14 days post-tamoxifen administration and prepared for 
cryosectioning. Three sections 500 μm apart were prepared from each tumour and imaged 
under a fluorescence microscope. The number of GFP+ cells per section was quantified in 9 
tumors per time point.
μCT data acquisition and analysis
An eXplore CT 120 microcomputed tomography (μCT) system (Northridge Tri-Modality 
Imaging Inc.) was used for in vivo imaging. Mice were imaged under anesthesia (induced at 
3% isoflurane in oxygen, maintained at between 2-2.5% during imaging) in groups of 4 in a 
custom mouse holder. Scanner settings were are follows: 720 views, 360 degree rotation, 70 
kVp, 50 mA, 32 ms integration time with 2x2 detector pixel binning (isotropic nominal 
resolution of 50 microns). Data were reconstructed using the Parallax Innovations GPU 
accelerated reconstruction engine for the eXplore CT120.
Tissue density values (in Hounsfield Units, HU) for normal, air-filled lung parenchyma were 
determined by eye using MicroView software (Parallax Innovations). For the scanning 
conditions in this study a range of −550 to −300 HU was determined to represent the range 
of normal lung parenchyma values. A custom analysis script was created using Matlab (The 
Mathworks) to identify a region of interest (ROI) including the soft tissue of the mouse 
thorax. Within this region the volume of tissue within the “healthy” density range was 
measured. Within this same volume Minimum Intensity Projections (MinP) were created, 
both to confirm the accuracy of the ROI and to qualitatively assess lung pathology. For data 
visualization, the change in healthy lung volume was inverted to represent change in tumour 
volume (Extended Data Figure 10b). One experiment involving 9 mice treated with LGK974 
and 11 mice treated with Vehicle control was carried out to track changes in tumor volume 
(Extended Data Figure 10b).
Human clinical data analyses
RNA-seq gene expression profiles of primary tumours and relevant clinical data of 488 lung 
adenocarcinoma patients were obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA LUAD; 
http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). The Willert et al.22 Wnt signaling geneset (24 genes up-
regulated after stimulation with recombinant human WNT3A) was obtained from the 
Tammela et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB)51 and used to score individual patient expression 
profiles using ssGSEA52,53. Patients were stratified according to their correlation score, into 
top (n=115) and bottom (n=114) 20th percentile sets. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was 
conducted between these sets of patients and the log-rank test was used to assess 
significance. Subsequently, the Kaplan-Meier survival analysis methodology was extended 
to assess significant survival differences across 35 TCGA cancer types using a similar 
strategy.
Additionally, the Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to analyse the 
prognostic value of the Willert geneset across all patients within the TCGA LUAD cohort, in 
the context of additional clinical covariates. All univariate and multivariable analyses were 
conducted within a 5-year survival timeframe. The following patient and tumour-stage 
clinical characteristics were used: Signature (Willert et al. signature strong vs. weak 
correlation); Gender (male vs. female); Age (years, continuous); Smoking History (reformed 
> 15yrs vs. non-smoker, reformed < 15yrs vs. non-smoker, current smoker vs. non-smoker); 
Mutational Load (derived as the number of non-silent mutations per 30Mb of coding 
sequence, continuous); Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM Stage 
specification (Stage III/IV vs. I/II); UICC T score specification (T2 vs. T1, T3/T4 vs. T1); 
UICC N score specification (N1/N2 vs. N0). Hazard ratio proportionality assumptions for 
the Cox regression model were validated by testing for all interactions simultaneously (p = 
0.703). Interaction between the Willert-signature and TNM stage, T score, and N score 
(significant covariates in the model) were tested using a likelihood ratio test (LRT) to 
contrast a model consisting of both covariates with another model consisting of both 
covariates plus an interaction term. No statistically significant difference was found between 
the two models (TNM: p=0.8751, T score: p=0.8204, N score: p=0.8625; likelihood ratio 
test). To test for statistically significant differences between Willert signature correlation 
scores across TCGA LUAD grade levels (T-scores), the Kurskal-Wallis test was used to 
assess overall significance and the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test was used to assess pairwise 
differences. All statistical analyses were conducted in R (www.R-project.org) and all 
survival analyses and were conducted using the survival package in R.
Finally, we analysed the expression of Wnt pathway genes present in the Mouse WNT 
Signaling Pathway RT2 Profiler PCR Array (Qiagen) in human TCGA LUAD data 
(Supplementary Data Table 3). Expression levels between 57 LUAD tumour samples and 
corresponding matched normal samples were analysed using empirical cumulative 
distribution function (ECDF) plots. Significance of different expression levels was assessed 
using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test. For a more comprehensive analysis covering 
human orthologs of all WNT pathway genes tested on the mouse qPCR array, pairwise 
differential expression analysis (tumour versus normal, n=57 each) was performed using 
EBSeq v1.4.0 (ref. 54)
Massively parallel sequencing
Genomic regions containing the sgPorcn, sgLgr4 or sgLgr5 target sequences were amplified 
using Herculase II Fusion DNA polymerase and gel purified (primer sequences are shown in 
Supplementary Data Table 4). Sequencing libraries were prepared from 50 ng of PCR 
Tammela et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 product using the Nextera DNA Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina) according to 
manufacturer’s instructions and sequenced on Illumina MiSeq sequencers to generate 150 bp 
paired-end reads.
Bioinformatic analysis of target loci
Illumina MiSeq reads (150bp paired-end) were trimmed to 120bp after reviewing base 
quality profiles, in order to drop lower quality 3’ ends. Traces of Nextera adapters were 
clipped using the FASTX toolkit (Hannon Lab, CSHL) and pairs with each read greater than 
15bp in length were retained. Additionally, read pairs where either read had 50% or more 
bases below a base quality threshold of Q30 (Sanger) were dropped from subsequent 
analyses. The reference sequence of the target locus was supplemented with 10 bp genomic 
flanks and was indexed using an enhanced suffix array55. Read ends were anchored in the 
reference sequence using 10 bp terminal segments for a suffix array index lookup to search 
for exact matches. A sliding window of unit step size and a maximal soft-clip limit of 10 bp 
was used to search for possible anchors at either end of each read. For each read, optimal 
Smith-Waterman dynamic programming alignment56 was performed between the reduced 
state space of the read sequence and the corresponding reference sequence spanning the 
maximally distanced anchor locations. Scoring parameters were selected to allow for 
sensitive detection of short and long insertions and deletions while allowing for up to four 
mismatches, and the highest scoring alignment was selected. Read pairs with both reads 
aligned in the proper orientation were processed to summarize the number of wild-type 
reads and the location and size of each insertion and deletion event. Overlapping reads 
within pairs were both required to support the event if they overlapped across the event 
location. Additionally, mutation events and wild-type reads were summarized within the 
extents of the sgRNA sequence and PAM site by considering read alignments that had a 
minimum of 20 bp overlap with this region. Mutation calls were translated to genomic 
coordinates and subsequently annotated using Annovar57. The alignment and post-
processing code was implemented in C++ along with library functions from SeqAn58 and 
SSW59 and utility functions in Perl and R (www.R-project.org). Mutation calls were 
subjected to manual review using the Integrated Genomics Viewer (IGV)60.
Statistics and reproducibility
Statistical analysis was carried out as indicated in the Figure Legends, Extended Data Figure 
Legends and in the Methods for each experiment. The data were found to meet the 
assumptions of the statistical tests. Variation was estimated for each group of data the 
variance was found to be similar between groups that were compared. No animals were 
excluded from any of the studies. The investigator was blinded with respect to group 
assignment for the quantification of 3D spheroids, proliferating (Ki67+) cells and for the 
analysis of healthy lung volume by μCT. Power calculations were performed to estimate the 
sample size for experiments involving LGK974 treatment. Briefly, to detect a difference of 
30% in average survival between the two groups (effect size = 1.2 standard deviation of 
survival based on Cohen’s d61 using untreated sample baseline survival from Jackson et al.
39) with 90% power a minimum of 5 mice/group needed to be used.
Tammela et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data availability statement
Massively parallel sequencing data are available in the NCBI/SRA data repository under 
accession PRJNA379539. Source code and all other data are available from the authors on 
reasonable request.
Extended Data
Tammela et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 1. Inhibiting Wnt synthesis with the Porcupine inhibitor LGK974 
suppresses Wnt pathway activation by the R-spondin/Lgr5 axis in primary lung adenocarcinoma 
cultures
a, Percent of EdU+ (proliferating) cells in 3-dimensional (3D) cultures of KrasG12D/+; 
Trp53Δ/Δ; Rosa26tdTomato/+ (KPT) lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells followed by Wnt 
pathway stimulation with Rspo1 (1 μg/ml), Wnt3a (100 ng/ml), or RW (1 μg/ml Rspo1 
+ 100 ng/ml Wnt3a), or Wnt pathway inhibition with LGK974 (100 nM) or DKK1 (500 
ng/ml) for 7 days (starting at 7 days after plating). EdU labeling was performed 16h before 
analysis of proliferating cells by flow cytometry. N = 6 wells/condition. b, Percent of 
spheroids proliferating in low-density 3D cultures of primary mouse KPT LUAD cells 14 
days after plating. N = 8 wells/condition. Representative data from 8 replicate experiments; 
TT5678 and TT5861 identify donor mice. c, Quantitative PCR of Porcn transcripts in 
sublines of a KP LUAD cell line expressing shRNAs targeting Porcn (shPorcn) or control 
shRNA (shLuc). Quantification of 3D tumour spheroids containing EdU+ cells of KP LUAD 
cells expressing the indicated shRNAs in response to 100 ng/ml Wnt3a or control at 6 days 
after plating. Representative data of n = 3 technical replicates, the experiment was performed 
with three independent cell lines. e, Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of 
Axin2 and Lgr5 transcripts in 3D cultures of primary KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ (KP) LUAD 
cells following Wnt pathway stimulation with Rspo1 (1 μg/ml), Wnt3a (100 ng/ml), or RW 
(1 μg/ml Rspo1 + 100 ng/ml Wnt3a), or Wnt pathway inhibition with LGK974 (100 nM) or 
DKK1 (1 μg/ml) for 6 days (starting at 10 days after plating). Representative data of n = 3 
technical replicates, the experiment was carried out three times, each time with cells isolated 
from different tumor-bearing mouse. f, Quantification of tumour spheroids containing EdU+ 
cells per 100 primary KPT LUAD cells 14 days after plating. RW (1 μg/ml Rspo1 + 100 
ng/ml Wnt3a); LGK974 (100 nM). N = 8 wells/condition. g, Recipient mouse lungs 8 weeks 
following orthotopic transplantation of 30,000 primary tdTomato+ (red) primary mouse KP 
LUAD cells. Arrowheads indicate tdTomato+ tumours. Recipient mice were treated with 10 
mg/kg/d LGK974 or vehicle for 8 weeks, starting from the day of transplantation. Scale bar: 
2 mm. The experiments was performed three times, each time with cells isolated from 
different (donor) tumor-bearing mouse. h, Wnt pathway activity measured by detection of 
firefly luciferase driven by a Wnt-sensitive 7TCF promoter (TOPFLASH assay) in murine 
KP LUAD cells stimulated for 24h with the indicated growth factors. N = 3 technical 
replicates/condition. Representative data from experiments that were performed with four 
different cell lines. i, j, k, Quantitative PCR analysis of Rspo2 (i), Rspo3 (j) or Lgr5 (k) 
transcripts in two independent murine KP LUAD cell lines (TT5734 and TT5764) 
expressing Synergistic Activation Mediator (SAM) components21 driving expression of the 
indicated genes. l, Flow cytometry analysis of GFP fluorescence in a KP LUAD cell line 
harboring the Lgr5GFP-CreER reporter36 expressing vector control (top panel) or an sgRNA 
targeting the transcription start site of Lgr5 (bottom panel). m, n, qRT-PCR analysis of the 
Wnt target genes Axin2 (m) and Lgr5 (n) in 3D cultures of sublines of a KP LUAD cell line 
(TT5764) expressing the CRISPR-activator system driving expression of Rspo2 (Rspo2-a), 
Rspo3 (Rspo3-a) or Lgr5 (Lgr5-a). * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001. 
Two-way ANOVA: (a), (b), (d), (h), (m), (n); Student’s two-sided t-test: (c), (e), (f), (i), (j), 
(k); error bars: +SD.
Tammela et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Lgr4 and Lgr5 are R-spondin receptors in lung adenocarcinoma
a, Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of Lgr4, Lgr5, and Lgr6 transcripts in 
sublines of a KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ (KP) LUAD cell line stably expressing shLgr4, shLgr5, 
shLgr6, or shLuciferase (shLuc) control. Note minimal effects of the indicated shRNAs on 
other Lgr5 family members. N = 3 technical replicates/condition; representative data from 3 
experiments carried out in different cell lines. b, c, Formation of 3D tumour spheroids of 
sublines of a KP LUAD cell line expressing the indicated shRNAs in response to 1 μg/ml 
Rspo1 (b, c) or 100 ng/ml Wnt3a (d, e) 6 days after plating. Scale bars: 500 μm. N = 8 
Tammela et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 wells/condition, representative data from 3 experiments carried out in different cell lines. f, 
g, No difference in cell morphology (f) or growth rate (g) in sublines of a KP LUAD cell 
line expressing shLgr4, shLgr5, shLgr6, or control shLuciferase (shLuc) over 6 days in 2-
dimensional cell culture. Scale bar: 200 μm. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001. 
Student’s two-sided t-test: (a); two-way ANOVA: (c), (e), (g); error bars: +SD. All 
experiments in this figure were performed three times, each time with a different KP LUAD 
cell line.
Tammela et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Wnt ligands produced predominantly by cancer cells drive activation of 
the Wnt signaling pathway in lung adenocarcinoma
a, Schematic representation of the lentivirus vector46 used to transduce a KrasG12D/+; 
Trp53Δ/Δ; Rosa26tdTomato/+ (KPT) LUAD cell line, followed by puromycin selection. b, 
tdTomato and 7TCF::Luciferase signals at baseline (0h) and 48h following treatment with 10 
mg/kg/d LGK974 or vehicle. Red arrows indicate two subcutaneous tumours with reduced 
7TCF-dependent bioluminescence in response to 48h of LGK974 treatment. c, Suppression 
of 7TCF-driven bioluminescence by LGK974 relative to tdTomato signal in mice harboring 
subcutaneous transplants of the KPT LUAD cell line stably expressing the 
7TCF::Luciferase-PGK-Puro lentivirus. N = 6 tumours, 3 mice per group. Representative 
data from two independent experiments. Student’s two-sided t-test; error bars: ±SD. d, 
Haematoxylin-eosin (HE) or β-catenin staining in KP adenomas or in adenocarcinomas. 
Scale bars: 100 μm. e, Immunofluorescence for β-catenin (red) and Porcupine (green) in a 
KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ (KP) lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Scale bar: 100 μm. f, In situ 
hybridization (ISH) for Axin2 mRNA (purple, arrowheads) in KP lung adenomas or 
adenocarcinomas. Scale bar: 50 μm. g, Immunofluorescence for Porcupine (green, white 
arrowheads) and ISH for Axin2 (red, yellow arrowheads) in KP LUAD. Scale bar: 10 μm. h, 
Immunofluorescence for Porcupine (green) in an autochthonous grade 3 KPT 
adenocarcinoma. Arrowheads indicate peritumoural Porcupine+ cells, which are tdTomato 
negative (i.e. not cancer cells). Scale bar: 100 μm. i, CD11b (green) and Porcupine (red) 
immunofluorescence in a peritumoural region. White line delineates tumour (T). Scale bar: 
100 μm. j, Immunohistochemistry for β-catenin or Porcupine in human LUAD. Arrowheads 
indicate cells with nuclear β-catenin. Scale bar. 100 μm. 65 human LUAD tumors in two 
tissue microarrays were analysed. k, Comparison of PORCN gene expression in tumours 
versus normal tissue in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung adenocarcinoma cohort: 
Empirical cumulative density function (CDF) plots of standardized gene expression values 
are shown. A right-shift indicates relatively higher expression, with P-values indicated to 
assess statistical significance (KS-test).
Tammela et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Expression of Porcupine in lung adenocarcinoma, the normal lung and 
in stem cell niches of the intestine and liver
a, In situ hybridization (ISH) for Porcn in a grade 3 KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ (KP) lung 
adenocarcinoma. b, c, Immunohistochemistry for Porcupine (brown) (b), or Porcn in situ 
hybridization (ISH) in the normal lung (c). Arrowheads indicate Porcupine expression in 
bronchioles. d, Immunohistochemistry for β-catenin (brown) and Porcupine (purple) in the 
small intestine. Note Porcupine expression in intestinal crypts (black arrowheads), the 
location of Lgr5+ intestinal stem cells36, as well as in transit-amplifying cells (blue 
arrowheads) and stromal cells (dark green). e, Immunostaining for Porcupine (brown) and 
Tammela et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glutamine synthetase (GS, purple) expression localizes to areas around the central vein of 
the liver (e), coinciding with the location of Lgr5+/Axin2+ liver stem cells8,62. Scale bars: 
100 μm.
Extended Data Figure 5. Analysis of the Porcn locus following CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome 
editing in vivo
a, Haematoxylin-eosin staining of KP LUAD-bearing lungs generated with pSECC-sgTom 
or pSECC-sgPorcn and quantification of the proportion of adenomas vs. adenocarcinomas at 
12 weeks following tumour initiation. Scale bar: 2 mm. Student’s two-sided t-test; error 
Tammela et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 bars: +SD. N = 5 mice per group. b, Massively parallel sequencing analysis of allelic 
fractions of the Porcn locus in lung lobes containing microscopic tumours (“sgPorcn.2 L”) 
or microdissected macroscopic tumours (“sgPorcn.2 T”) induced in KrasLSL-G12D/+; 
Trp53flox/flox (KP) mice using pSECC-sgPorcn.2, or in lung lobes or macroscopic tumours 
induced in KP mice using pSECC-sgTom.2 (“sgTom.2 T/L”). WT: wild-type read; FS: 
frameshift mutation; NFS: non-frameshift mutation; Low freq: low-frequency mutation 
event. Note predominantly wild-type or non-frameshifting reads in microdissected tumours, 
whereas mutations in tumours containing microscopic tumours have introduced frameshifts. 
The large contribution of wild-type reads in “sgPorcn.2 L” samples is due to domination of 
the normal stroma in whole-lobe samples, whereas wild-type reads in sgPorcn.2 T indicate 
cancer cells where genome editing did not function, as in whole tumour samples tumour 
cells are expected to contribute at least 50% (ref. 49). c, Qualitative analysis of mutations 
introduced by sgPorcn.2 in vivo. INS: insertion; DEL: deletion; bp: base pair (indicates size 
of insertion/deletion). Ratio indicates frequency of event across 15 samples analysed.
Tammela et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Lgr5 and Lgr4 are expressed in lung adenocarcinoma, and Lgr5 marks 
cells with increased tumour-forming ability
a, Quantitative PCR analysis of Lgr5 gene expression in KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ (KP) LUAD 
tumours microdissected at 9 weeks (adenomas) or 20 weeks (adenocarcinomas) post-
initiation with adenoviral Cre. N = 6 tumors/group. b, In situ hybridization (ISH) for Lgr5 or 
Lgr4 mRNA (purple) in grade 3 KP LUAD adenocarcinomas 12 weeks following tumour 
induction with AdCre. Scale bars: 100 μm. c, d, FACS sorting (d) of Lgr5+ (GFP+) cells in 
cultured KP LUAD cell line containing the Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ reporter allele (KP; 
Tammela et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lgr5GFP-CreER/+), followed by quantitative real-time PCR analysis (c) of Lgr4 expression in 
Lgr5+ cells in two independent cell lines (TT1937 and TT6280). This experiment was 
performed once. e, Fluorescence-assisted cell sorting (FACS) of GFP+ and GFP- cells 
isolated from KPT; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ primary LUAD 14 weeks following tumour initiation 
with intratracheally administered AdCre. The FACS plot is gated on tdTomato+/CD11b−/
CD31−/CD45−/TER119− cells. Note bleeding of the tdTomato signal to the GFP channel in 
the panel on the right. Gates were drawn as shown to increase cell yield at the cost of purity 
to enrich for Lgr5+ cells. Such FACS sorting was performed on 21 KPT; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ 
mice. f, Recipient mouse lungs 12 weeks following orthotopic transplantation of 15,000 
primary Lgr5+/tdTomato+ or Lgr5−/tdTomato+ primary mouse LUAD cells. Arrowheads 
indicate tdTomato+ tumours (red). Scale bar: 2 mm. Representative data from three replicate 
experiments. g, Quantification of tumours per 1000 cells in recipient mouse lungs 12 weeks 
following orthotopic transplantation of 15,000 primary Lgr5+/tdTomato+ or Lgr5−/
tdTomato+ primary mouse LUAD cells. N = 3 recipient mice per group; representative data 
from three replicate experiments. *P < 0.05. h, Number of membrane-associated GFP+ (mG
+) clones following lineage-tracing in established subcutaneous KP; Lgr5CreER/+; 
Rosa26LSL-mTmG/+ LUAD primary transplants (see Figure 3c). N = 9 tumors/time point. 
Student’s two-sided t-test: (a), (c), (g), (h). *P < 0.05, n.s. = not significant: error bars: +SD.
Tammela et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Phenotypical plasticity of Lgr5+ cells that reside in Porcupine+ niches 
in lung, pancreatic and colon tumours
a, Immunofluorescence for GFP (green) and EpCAM (red) in a subcutaneous transplant 
established from a single-cell clone of KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Lgr5CreER/+ cell line. Scale 
bar: 1 mm. b, Immunofluorescence for GFP (green) and Porcupine (red) in a subcutaneous 
transplant established from a single-cell clone of KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Lgr5CreER/+ cell 
line. (a, b) are representative data from four replicate experiments, each with a different 
KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Lgr5CreER/+ cell line. c, ISH for Lgr5 mRNA (purple) in KP; 
Tammela et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pdx1::Cre pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Scale bars: 100 μm (top) and 10 μm 
(bottom). Representative data from 3 PDAC tumors analysed. d, Immunofluorescence 
staining for GFP (green) in a tdTomato+ (red) autochthonous KP; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+; 
Rosa26tdTomato/+; Pdx1::Cre PDAC. Scale bars: 100 μm (top) and 10 μm (bottom). e, 
Quantification of primary spheroids containing EdU+ cells per 100 Lgr5+/tdTomato+ or 
Lgr5−/tdTomato+ primary mouse PDAC cells plated. N = 4 wells/group. *P < 0.05, 
Student’s two-sided t-test; error bars: +SD. f, Immunofluorescence staining for GFP (green) 
and Porcupine (red) in autochthonous KP; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+; Pdx1::Cre PDAC. Note 
juxtaposition of Lgr5+ and Porcupine+ cells in the tumours. Scale bars: 100 μm (top) and 10 
μm (bottom). (d, f) Representative data from 6 KP; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+; Pdx1::Cre PDAC 
tumors analysed. g, Immunofluorescence staining for GFP (green) and Porcupine in an 
autochthonous ApcΔ/Δ; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+intestinal adenoma. Again, note juxtaposition of 
Lgr5+ and Porcupine+ cells in the tumours. Scale bar: 100 μm. N = 3 tumor samples. h, 
Immunohistochemistry for Porcupine (brown) in human colorectal adenocarcinoma. Scale 
bars: 100 μm (top) and 10 μm (bottom). 5 human colorectal adenocarcinoma samples were 
analysed.
Tammela et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Wnt pathway activation correlates with poor survival in human lung 
adenocarcinoma, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and mesothelioma, but not in human 
squamous cell lung cancer; analysis of the Lgr4 and Lgr5 loci following CRISPR/Cas9-mediated 
genome editing in vivo
a, Kaplan-Meier survival curve comparing the 20% strongest (red, n = 91) and weakest 
(blue, n = 92) Willert Wnt signature correlated patients from the TCGA Lung 
Adenocarcinoma cohort. b, Empirical cumulative density function (CDF) plots of 
standardized gene expression values showing a correlation between the Wnt pathway 
activation gene expression signature correlation score and histological grade of primary 
Tammela et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tumours. A right-shift indicates relatively higher expression, with P-values indicated to 
assess statistical significance (KS-test). c-e, Kaplan-Meier survival curvex comparing the 
20% strongest (red) and weakest (blue) Willert Wnt signature correlated patients from the 
TCGA Squamous Cell Lung Cancer (most-correlated/red n = 100, least-correlated/blue n = 
100) (c), Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (most-correlated/red n=34, least-correlated/
blue n=34) (d), and Mesothelioma (most-correlated/red n=17, least-correlated/blue n=18) (e) 
cohorts. f, Massively parallel sequencing analysis of allelic fractions of the Lgr4 and Lgr5 
loci in lung lobes containing microscopic tumours (“Lobe”) or microdissected macroscopic 
tumours (“Tumour”) induced in KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53flox/flox; Rosa26LSL-Cas9+2a+eGFP/+ 
mice using hU6::sgLgr4-sU6::sgLgr5-EFS::Cre (pU2SEC) or hU6::sgTom-EFS::Cre 
(pUSEC) lentiviral vectors. WT: wild-type read; FS: frameshift mutation; NFS: non-
frameshift mutation. Note predominantly wild-type or non-frameshifting reads in 
microdissected tumours, whereas mutations in tumours containing microscopic tumours 
have introduced frameshifts. The large contribution of wild-type reads in “Lobe” samples is 
due to domination of the normal stroma in whole-lobe samples, whereas wild-type reads in 
Lgr4/Lgr5 co-targeted tumours indicate cancer cells where genome editing did not function, 
as in whole tumour samples tumour cells are expected to contribute at least 50% (ref. 49). g, 
h, Qualitative analysis of mutations introduced by sgLgr4 or sgLgr5 in vivo. INS: insertion; 
DEL: deletion; bp: base pair (indicates size of insertion/deletion). Ratio indicates frequency 
of event across all samples analysed. P-values are indicated in the figure (log-rank test).
Tammela et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Characterization of the niche for stem-like cells in lung 
adenocarcinoma
a, Quantitative PCR analysis of Rspo gene expression in 16 KP LUAD tumours, normalized 
to Actb expression. Tumours were harvested at 16 weeks post-initiation with adenoviral Cre. 
In situ hybridization (ISH) for Rspo1 mRNA (purple, arrowheads) in a KP LUAD tumour. 
Note Rspo1 transcripts in endothelial cells. b, qPCR for Rspo1 and Rspo3 in tdTomato+ 
tumour cells (Tumour), CD31+ endothelial cells and the rest of the cells (Stroma) in 
microdissected KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Rosa26tdTomato/+ (KPT) LUAD tumours following 
Tammela et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sorting. The expression of Pecam1 (that encodes CD31) was found to be >400-fold enriched 
in the CD31+ fraction compared to the stroma (not shown). N = 3 mice, representative from 
two replicate experiments. c, Heatmap showing relative expression levels of Porcn and the 
19 murine Wnt genes based on quantitative PCR analysis in sorted tdTomato+ KP LUAD 
cells (T) vs. tdTomato- stromal cells (S) in microdissected tumours harvested at 20 weeks 
post tumour initiation (a time point when most tumours are adenocarcinomas). d, Volcano 
plot of qPCR array gene expression analysis showing statistically significant differentially 
expressed genes (in red, Fzd receptors are circled). X-axis is the log2 fold-change (Tumour/
Stroma) and Y-axis is the –log10 P-value of the differential enrichment (2-sided t-test). e, 
Quantitative PCR analysis of Wnt5a, Wnt7a and Wnt7b gene expression in KP tumours 
microdissected at 9 weeks (adenomas) or 20 weeks (adenocarcinomas) post-initiation with 
adenoviral Cre. N = 6 mice, representative from two replicate experiments. f, Comparison of 
WNT gene expression in tumours versus normal tissue in The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) lung adenocarcinoma cohort: Empirical cumulative density function (CDF) plots of 
standardized gene expression values for WNT5A, and WNT7B are shown. A right-shift 
indicates relatively higher expression, with P-values indicated to assess statistical 
significance (KS-test). g, Heatmap showing relative expression levels of Lrp5, Lrp6 and 9 
murine Fzd genes based on quantitative PCR analysis in sorted tdTomato+ KP LUAD cells 
(T) vs. tdTomato- stromal cells (S) in microdissected tumours harvested at 20 weeks post 
tumour initiation (a time point when most tumours are adenocarcinomas). h, Quantitative 
PCR analysis of 8 Fzd receptors in KP tumours microdissected at 9 weeks (adenomas) or 20 
weeks (adenocarcinomas) post-initiation with adenoviral Cre. N = 3 mice. Student’s two-
sided t-test: (b), (e), (h); *P < 0.05; error bars: +SD.
Tammela et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. Porcupine inhibition suppresses Wnt pathway activity, progression 
and proliferative potential in autochthonous murine KP lung adenocarcinomas
a, Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis of Axin2 and Lgr5 transcripts in KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ 
(KP) LUAD tumours 2 weeks following treatment with 10 mg/kg/d LGK974 or vehicle. 
Treatment was started at 11 weeks post-tumour initiation. N = 6 tumors/group. b, 
Quantification of μCT data showing change in tumour volume compared to baseline 
(obtained at 76 days post tumor initiation, dashed line) after 4 weeks of 10 mg/kg/d LGK974 
or vehicle control. c, Recipient mouse lungs 4 weeks following orthotopic GEMM-DA of 
Tammela et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 50,000 primary tdTomato+ (red) primary mouse LUAD cells. Arrowheads indicate tdTomato
+ tumours. Donor mice bearing autochthonous KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; Rosa26tdTomato/+ 
(KPT) LUAD tumours were treated for 2 weeks with LGK974 or vehicle (black box, starting 
at 84 days post-tumour induction). The recipient mice were treated with LGK974 or vehicle 
(white box) for 4 weeks. Scale bar: 2 mm. d, tdTomato+ tumours in sections from lungs in 
(c) containing EdU+ cells (white arrowheads) or not containing EdU+ cells (yellow 
arrowheads). Scale bars: 500 μm (top) and 100 μm (bottom). e, Quantification of EdU+ 
(black) or EdU- (gray) tumours per section through the lungs depicted in (c, d). N = 5 
(Vehicle-Vehicle), epresentative data from three replicate experiments. *P < 0.05; Student’s 
two-sided t-test: (a, b); two-way ANOVA (e); error bars: ±SD.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank D. McFadden and P. Sharp for critical reading of the manuscript and T. Papagiannakopoulos for helpful 
discussions; H. Clevers for Lgr5CreER/+ mice; Janssen Pharmaceuticals for human tissue; J. Roper for mouse 
colon adenoma tissue; R. T. Bronson for expertise in animal pathology; Y. Soto-Feliciano and S. Levine for 
massively parallel sequencing expertise; L. Gilbert, M. Horlbeck and J. Weissman for Lgr5 CRISPRa sgRNA 
sequences; A. Li for help with generation of TCGA data catalogues; M. Griffin, M. Jennings and G. Paradis for 
FACS support; E. Vasile for microscopy support; K. Cormier and the Hope Babette Tang (1983) Histology Facility 
for histology support; S. Bajpay, D. Canner, D. Garcia-Gali, R. Kohn, N. Marjanovich, K. Mercer, J. Replogle, and 
R. Romero for help with experiments; K. Anderson, I. Baptista, A. Deconinck, J. Teixeira, and K. Yee for 
administrative support; and the Swanson Biotechnology Center for excellent core facilities. This work was 
financially supported by the Transcend Program and Janssen Pharmaceuticals, the Lung Cancer Research 
Foundation, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and, in part, by the Cancer Center Support (core) grant P30-
CA14051 from the National Cancer Institute. T.T. is supported by the National Cancer Institute (K99 CA187317), 
the Sigrid Juselius Foundation, the Hope Funds for Cancer Research, and the Maud Kuistila Foundation. T.J. is a 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigator, a David H. Koch Professor of Biology, and a Daniel K. Ludwig 
Scholar.
References
1. Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature. 2012; 481:306–313. DOI: 10.1038/
nature10762 [PubMed: 22258609] 
2. Kreso A, Dick JE. Evolution of the cancer stem cell model. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 14:275–291. DOI: 
10.1016/j.stem.2014.02.006 [PubMed: 24607403] 
3. Clevers H, Loh KM, Nusse R. Stem cell signaling. An integral program for tissue renewal and 
regeneration: Wnt signaling and stem cell control. Science. 2014; 346:1248012. [PubMed: 
25278615] 
4. Hogan BL, et al. Repair and regeneration of the respiratory system: complexity, plasticity, and 
mechanisms of lung stem cell function. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 15:123–138. DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.
2014.07.012 [PubMed: 25105578] 
5. Herriges M, Morrisey EE. Lung development: orchestrating the generation and regeneration of a 
complex organ. Development. 2014; 141:502–513. DOI: 10.1242/dev.098186 [PubMed: 24449833] 
6. de Lau W, Peng WC, Gros P, Clevers H. The R-spondin/Lgr5/Rnf43 module: regulator of Wnt 
signal strength. Genes Dev. 2014; 28:305–316. DOI: 10.1101/gad.235473.113 [PubMed: 24532711] 
7. Schepers AG, et al. Lineage tracing reveals Lgr5+ stem cell activity in mouse intestinal adenomas. 
Science. 2012; 337:730–735. DOI: 10.1126/science.1224676 [PubMed: 22855427] 
8. Huch M, et al. Unlimited in vitro expansion of adult bi-potent pancreas progenitors through the 
Lgr5/R-spondin axis. The EMBO journal. 2013
Tammela et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Boumahdi S, et al. SOX2 controls tumour initiation and cancer stem-cell functions in squamous-cell 
carcinoma. Nature. 2014; 511:246–250. DOI: 10.1038/nature13305 [PubMed: 24909994] 
10. Driessens G, Beck B, Caauwe A, Simons BD, Blanpain C. Defining the mode of tumour growth by 
clonal analysis. Nature. 2012; 488:527–530. DOI: 10.1038/nature11344 [PubMed: 22854777] 
11. Meacham CE, Morrison SJ. Tumour heterogeneity and cancer cell plasticity. Nature. 2013; 
501:328–337. DOI: 10.1038/nature12624 [PubMed: 24048065] 
12. Ilmer M, et al. RSPO2 Enhances Canonical Wnt Signaling to Confer Stemness-Associated Traits to 
Susceptible Pancreatic Cancer Cells. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1883–1896. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1327 [PubMed: 25769727] 
13. Zheng Y, et al. A rare population of CD24(+)ITGB4(+)Notch(hi) cells drives tumor propagation in 
NSCLC and requires Notch3 for self-renewal. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:59–74. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.
2013.05.021 [PubMed: 23845442] 
14. Plaks V, Kong N, Werb Z. The cancer stem cell niche: how essential is the niche in regulating 
stemness of tumor cells? Cell Stem Cell. 2015; 16:225–238. DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.015 
[PubMed: 25748930] 
15. Johnson DH, Schiller JH, Bunn PA Jr. Recent clinical advances in lung cancer management. J Clin 
Oncol. 2014; 32:973–982. DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2013.53.1228 [PubMed: 24567433] 
16. Juan J, Muraguchi T, Iezza G, Sears RC, McMahon M. Diminished WNT -> beta-catenin -> c-
MYC signaling is a barrier for malignant progression of BRAFV600E-induced lung tumors. Genes 
Dev. 2014; 28:561–575. DOI: 10.1101/gad.233627.113 [PubMed: 24589553] 
17. Pacheco-Pinedo EC, et al. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling accelerates mouse lung tumorigenesis by 
imposing an embryonic distal progenitor phenotype on lung epithelium. The Journal of clinical 
investigation. 2011; 121:1935–1945. DOI: 10.1172/JCI44871 [PubMed: 21490395] 
18. Stewart DJ. Wnt signaling pathway in non-small cell lung cancer. Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute. 2014; 106:djt356. [PubMed: 24309006] 
19. Nguyen DX, et al. WNT/TCF signaling through LEF1 and HOXB9 mediates lung adenocarcinoma 
metastasis. Cell. 138:51–62. doi:S0092-8674(09)00455-3[pii]. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.030
20. Liu J, et al. Targeting Wnt-driven cancer through the inhibition of Porcupine by LGK974. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 
110:20224–20229. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1314239110 [PubMed: 24277854] 
21. Konermann S, et al. Genome-scale transcriptional activation by an engineered CRISPR-Cas9 
complex. Nature. 2014; 517:583–588. DOI: 10.1038/nature14136 [PubMed: 25494202] 
22. Willert J, Epping M, Pollack JR, Brown PO, Nusse R. A transcriptional response to Wnt protein in 
human embryonic carcinoma cells. BMC Dev Biol. 2002; 2:8. [PubMed: 12095419] 
23. Rocha AS, et al. The Angiocrine Factor Rspondin3 Is a Key Determinant of Liver Zonation. Cell 
Rep. 2015; 13:1757–1764. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.10.049 [PubMed: 26655896] 
24. Yu H, Ye X, Guo N, Nathans J. Frizzled 2 and frizzled 7 function redundantly in convergent 
extension and closure of the ventricular septum and palate: evidence for a network of interacting 
genes. Development. 2012; 139:4383–4394. DOI: 10.1242/dev.083352 [PubMed: 23095888] 
25. Gurney A, et al. Wnt pathway inhibition via the targeting of Frizzled receptors results in decreased 
growth and tumorigenicity of human tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:11717–11722. 
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1120068109 [PubMed: 22753465] 
26. Chartier C, et al. Therapeutic Targeting of Tumor-Derived R-Spondin Attenuates beta-Catenin 
Signaling and Tumorigenesis in Multiple Cancer Types. Cancer Res. 2016; 76:713–723. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0561 [PubMed: 26719531] 
27. Feldser DM, et al. Stage-specific sensitivity to p53 restoration during lung cancer progression. 
Nature. 2010; 468:572–575. doi:nature09535 [pii]. DOI: 10.1038/nature09535 [PubMed: 
21107428] 
28. Jackson EL, et al. Analysis of lung tumor initiation and progression using conditional expression of 
oncogenic K-ras. Genes & development. 2001; 15:3243–3248. DOI: 10.1101/gad.943001 
[PubMed: 11751630] 
29. Marino S, Vooijs M, van Der Gulden H, Jonkers J, Berns A. Induction of medulloblastomas in p53-
null mutant mice by somatic inactivation of Rb in the external granular layer cells of the 
cerebellum. Genes Dev. 2000; 14:994–1004. [PubMed: 10783170] 
Tammela et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 30. Young NP, Crowley D, Jacks T. Uncoupling cancer mutations reveals critical timing of p53 loss in 
sarcomagenesis. Cancer research. 2011; 71:4040–4047. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4563 
[PubMed: 21512139] 
31. Lee CL, et al. Generation of primary tumors with Flp recombinase in FRT-flanked p53 mice. 
Disease models & mechanisms. 2012; 5:397–402. DOI: 10.1242/dmm.009084 [PubMed: 
22228755] 
32. Madisen L, et al. A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the 
whole mouse brain. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:133–140. DOI: 10.1038/nn.2467 [PubMed: 20023653] 
33. Kuraguchi M, et al. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is required for normal development of skin 
and thymus. PLoS Genet. 2006; 2:e146. [PubMed: 17002498] 
34. Yeddula N, Xia Y, Ke E, Beumer J, Verma IM. Screening for tumor suppressors: Loss of ephrin 
receptor A2 cooperates with oncogenic KRas in promoting lung adenocarcinoma. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2015
35. Muzumdar MD, Tasic B, Miyamichi K, Li L, Luo L. A global double-fluorescent Cre reporter 
mouse. Genesis. 2007; 45:593–605. DOI: 10.1002/dvg.20335 [PubMed: 17868096] 
36. Barker N, et al. Identification of stem cells in small intestine and colon by marker gene Lgr5. 
Nature. 2007; 449:1003–1007. DOI: 10.1038/nature06196 [PubMed: 17934449] 
37. Sutherland KD, et al. Cell of origin of small cell lung cancer: inactivation of Trp53 and Rb1 in 
distinct cell types of adult mouse lung. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:754–764. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.
2011.04.019 [PubMed: 21665149] 
38. DuPage M, Dooley AL, Jacks T. Conditional mouse lung cancer models using adenoviral or 
lentiviral delivery of Cre recombinase. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:1064–1072. doi:nprot.2009.95 [pii]. 
DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2009.95 [PubMed: 19561589] 
39. Jackson EL, et al. The differential effects of mutant p53 alleles on advanced murine lung cancer. 
Cancer research. 2005; 65:10280–10288. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-2193 [PubMed: 
16288016] 
40. Zuber J, et al. Toolkit for evaluating genes required for proliferation and survival using 
tetracycline-regulated RNAi. Nat Biotechnol. 2011; 29:79–83. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1720 [PubMed: 
21131983] 
41. Korinek V, et al. Constitutive transcriptional activation by a beta-catenin-Tcf complex in APC−/− 
colon carcinoma. Science. 1997; 275:1784–1787. [PubMed: 9065401] 
42. Hsu PD, Lander ES, Zhang F. Development and applications of CRISPR-Cas9 for genome 
engineering. Cell. 2014; 157:1262–1278. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.010 [PubMed: 24906146] 
43. Horlbeck MA, et al. Compact and highly active next-generation libraries for CRISPR-mediated 
gene repression and activation. Elife. 2016; 5
44. Akama-Garren EH, et al. A Modular Assembly Platform for Rapid Generation of DNA Constructs. 
Sci Rep. 2016; 6:16836. [PubMed: 26887506] 
45. Gibson DG, et al. Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases. Nat 
Methods. 2009; 6:343–345. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1318 [PubMed: 19363495] 
46. Fuerer C, Nusse R. Lentiviral vectors to probe and manipulate the Wnt signaling pathway. PLoS 
One. 2010; 5:e9370. [PubMed: 20186325] 
47. Hsu PD, et al. DNA targeting specificity of RNA-guided Cas9 nucleases. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 
31:827–832. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.2647 [PubMed: 23873081] 
48. Ran FA, et al. Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat Protoc. 2013; 8:2281–
2308. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2013.143 [PubMed: 24157548] 
49. Sanchez-Rivera FJ, et al. Rapid modelling of cooperating genetic events in cancer through somatic 
genome editing. Nature. 2014; 516:428–431. DOI: 10.1038/nature13906 [PubMed: 25337879] 
50. Vidigal JA, Ventura A. Rapid and efficient one-step generation of paired gRNA CRISPR-Cas9 
libraries. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8083. [PubMed: 26278926] 
51. Liberzon A, et al. The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collection. Cell 
Syst. 2015; 1:417–425. DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2015.12.004 [PubMed: 26771021] 
Tammela et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 52. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:15545–15550. DOI: 
10.1073/pnas.0506580102 [PubMed: 16199517] 
53. Mootha VK, et al. PGC-1alpha-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are 
coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nat Genet. 2003; 34:267–273. DOI: 10.1038/
ng1180 [PubMed: 12808457] 
54. Leng N, et al. EBSeq: an empirical Bayes hierarchical model for inference in RNA-seq 
experiments. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:1035–1043. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt087 [PubMed: 
23428641] 
55. Abouelhoda MI, Kurtz S, Ohlebusch E. Replacing suffix trees with enhanced suffix arrays. J 
Discrete Algorithms. 2004:53–86.
56. Smith TF, Waterman MS. Identification of common molecular subsequences. J Mol Biol. 1981; 
147:195–197. [PubMed: 7265238] 
57. Wang K, Li M, Hakonarson H. ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from high-
throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:e164. [PubMed: 20601685] 
58. Doring A, Weese D, Rausch T, Reinert K. SeqAn an efficient, generic C++ library for sequence 
analysis. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008; 9:11. [PubMed: 18184432] 
59. Zhao M, Lee WP, Garrison EP, Marth GT. SSW library: an SIMD Smith-Waterman C/C++ library 
for use in genomic applications. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e82138. [PubMed: 24324759] 
60. Thorvaldsdottir H, Robinson JT, Mesirov JP. Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV): high-
performance genomics data visualization and exploration. Brief Bioinform. 2013; 14:178–192. 
DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbs017 [PubMed: 22517427] 
61. Cumming, G. Understanding the New Statistics: Effect sizes, Confidence Intervals, and Meta-
Analysis. Routledge; 2012. 
62. Wang B, Zhao L, Fish M, Logan CY, Nusse R. Self-renewing diploid Axin2(+) cells fuel 
homeostatic renewal of the liver. Nature. 2015; 524:180–185. DOI: 10.1038/nature14863 
[PubMed: 26245375] 
Tammela et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Ligand-dependent Wnt signaling sustains proliferative potential in lung 
adenocarcinoma
a, 3D cultures of sorted tdTomato+ (red) primary mouse KrasG12D/+; Trp53Δ/Δ; 
Rosa26tdTomato/+ (KPT) LUAD cells 14 days after plating. Proliferating (EdU+) cells (green, 
arrowheads). Scale bar: 100 μm. b, Quantification of tumour spheroids containing EdU+ 
cells from two mice (TT5678 and TT5861). N = 8 wells/condition. c, Quantification of KPT 
LUAD primary transplant tumours in recipient mouse lungs treated with LGK974 or vehicle 
for 8 weeks. d, Quantification of tumour spheroids containing EdU+ cells 10 days after 
plating. Rspo2-a, Rspo3-a and Lgr5-a refer to sublines expressing CRISPR-activator (SAM) 
components driving expression of the indicated gene. N = 8 wells/condition. e, Wnt pathway 
activity measured by TOPFLASH assay in KP LUAD sublines stably expressing shRNAs 
targeting Lgr4, Lgr5, Lgr4+Lgr5 or a Vector control. N = 3 technical replicates/condition, 
experiment was repeated 4 times. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 compared to control, 
except in (d) where comparison in the LGK974 group is to the same CRISPR-activator line, 
and in (e) where comparison is to Rspo1 stimulation. Two-way ANOVA: (b), (d–e); 
Student’s t-test: (c); error bars: +SD.
Tammela et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Porcupine+ cancer cells form a niche that drives Wnt signaling in lung adenocarcinoma
a, Bioluminescence in lungs of KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53flox/flox (KP) or KrasLSL-G12D/+; 
Apcflox/flox mice 20 weeks following intratracheal infection with 7TCF::Luciferase-
PGK::Cre lentivirus (see schematic). Scale bar: 5 mm. b, GFP (green) and EpCAM (red) 
staining in KP LUAD tumours 20 weeks following infection with 7TCF::GFP-PGK::Cre 
lentivirus (see schematic). Arrowheads indicate GFP+ cells with 7TCF promoter activity. 
Scale bars: 100 μm (left) and 10 μm (right). c, Haematoxylin-eosin (HE), β-catenin or 
Porcupine staining in KP adenomas or in adenocarcinomas. Note nuclear localization of β-
catenin in adenocarcinomas (arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 μm. d, Percent of tumours 
containing subpopulations of cells with Porcupine expression or nuclear β-catenin per 
histological grade, or in metastases (M). N = 19 grade 1, 47 grade 2, 31 grade 3 and 11 grade 
4 tumours, and 6 lymph node or thoracic wall metastases. e, Quantitative PCR analysis of 
Porcn gene expression in KP tumours at 9 weeks (adenomas) or 20 weeks 
(adenocarcinomas) post-initiation. ***P < 0.001, n = 16. f, Percent of human lung 
Tammela et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adenocarcinomas with absent, heterogenous or uniform Porcupine expression or nuclear β-
catenin. N = 65. g, Quantification of tumour burden in KP mice 12 or 20 weeks following 
infection with 25,000 TU of pSECC-sgTom or pSECC-sgPorcn. h, Haematoxylin-eosin 
staining of KP LUAD-bearing lungs generated with pSECC-sgTom or pSECC-sgPorcn and 
quantification of the proportion of adenomas vs. adenocarcinomas at 20 weeks following 
tumour initiation. Scale bar: 2 mm. *P < 0.05. Student’s two-sided t-test: (e, g–h); error 
bars: +SD.
Tammela et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Lgr5+ lung adenocarcinoma cells display persistent proliferative potential
a, Immunostaining for GFP (green), Porcupine (red), and EpCAM (blue) in a subcutaneous 
transplant of primary KP; Lgr5GFP-CreER/+ LUAD cells 3 weeks following transplantation. 
Scale bars: 100 μm (left) and 10 μm (right). Quantification of the percent of Lgr5+ cells that 
are adjacent to Porcupine+ or Porcupine- cells, or that are positive for both Lgr5 and 
Porcupine in the transplants. N = 6 tumors. b, 3D culture of Lgr5+ and Lgr5- KP LUAD 
cells. Scale bar: 100 μm. Quantification of primary spheroids containing EdU+ cells 
(arrowheads). N = 8 wells/group. c, Lineage-tracing of of KP; Lgr5CreER/+; 
Rosa26LSL-mTmG/+ LUAD cells in established subcutaneous primary transplants. Note 
migration of individual mG positive cells (yellow arrowheads) away from clones derived 
from Lgr5+ cells, and Porcupine+ progeny arising from Lgr5+ cells (white arrowheads). N = 
9 tumours/group. Quantification of average clone size at 2 and 14 days post-tamoxifen 
administration. d, Quantification of tumour burden and proportion of adenomas/
adenocarcinomas, and haematoxylin-eosin staining in KP; Rosa26LSL-Cas9-2a-GFP/+ mice 
infected with the indicated lentiviral vectors. hU6: human U6 promoter; sU6: synthetic U6 
promoter; EFS: minimal E1α promoter. N = 6 (sgTom), 7 (sgLgr + sgLgr5). Scale bar: 2 
mm. e, mRNA ISH for the indicated transcripts (purple) in consecutive sections of a similar 
region of a KP lung adenocarcinoma. Scale bar: 100 μm. Student’s two-sided t-test: (a–d); 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; error bars: ±SD.
Tammela et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Porcupine inhibition improves survival by suppressing proliferative potential in mice 
harboring lung adenocarcinoma
a, Fold change in bioluminescence signal in autochthonous KP LUAD tumours harboring a 
Rosa26Luciferase/+ allele in mice treated with LGK974 or vehicle. N = 3. b, Survival of mice 
harboring autochthonous KP LUAD tumours treated with LGK974 or vehicle starting at 77 
days following tumour initiation. P = 0.0008; n = 5 (LGK974), 8 (Vehicle). c, Lung μCT 
images of mice treated with vehicle or LGK974 at 77 days after tumour initiation and after 
40 days on therapy (Day 117). H: heart, T: tumour. d, Quantification of proliferating 
(Ki67+) cells in autochthonous KP LUAD tumours 2 weeks following treatment with 
LGK974 or vehicle. ****P < 0.0001; n = 80 vehicle tumours, n = 59 LGK974 tumours. e, 
Quantification of the number of tdTomato+ surface tumours in recipient mice. Student’s 
two-sided t-test: (a), (b), (d); two-way ANOVA: (e); error bars: ±SD. f, The outcome of Wnt 
inhibition in LUAD: Porcupine+ niche cells provide Wnt to Lgr5+ cells with robust 
proliferative potential, which can be suppressed by Wnt inhibitors. g, The niche for Wnt 
responder cells in LUAD: Lgr5+ cells (green) reside next to Porcupine+ cells (red). Wnt5a, 
Wnt7a and Wnt7b, provided by Porcupine+ niche cells (red), bind Frizzled on Wnt 
responder cells. Rspo1 and Rspo3, which bind Lgr4 and Lgr5, reinforce Wnt signaling by 
inhibiting Rnf43 and Znrf3 ubiquitin ligases that degrade Frizzled6. Wnt is palmitoylated 
(serrated line) by Porcupine, critical for Wnt secretion and binding to Frizzled3.
Tammela et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
