 Ther Adv Chronic Dis
2016, Vol. 7(5) 229 
–245
DOI: 10.1177/ 
2040622316658463
© The Author(s), 2016.  
Reprints and permissions:  
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/
journalsPermissions.nav
Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease
http://taj.sagepub.com 
229
Introduction
Antipsychotic medications are often used to treat 
behavioral and psychological symptoms of 
dementia (BPSD) [Zuidema et al. 2015]. 
Evidence indicates that the prescription rates for 
antipsychotics among individuals with dementia 
vary between 20% and 50% [Feng et al. 2009; 
Wetzels et al. 2011]. In addition, individuals with 
dementia who live in skilled nursing facilities have 
significantly greater rates of prescription of antip-
sychotic medications when compared with those 
individuals living in the community [Maguire, 
2013]. Available data also indicate antipsychotics 
are often used in individuals with dementia for 
sustained periods (⩾6 months) with limited mon-
itoring of their effects [Wetzels et al. 2011; Barnes 
et al. 2012; Gustafsson et al. 2013; Chen et al. 
2010; Gellad et al. 2012].
Available evidence indicates that risperidone, 
olanzapine and aripiprazole exhibit modest bene-
fits in the management of aggression and psycho-
sis over a 6–12-week period in individuals with 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [Ballard et al. 2009]. 
Antipsychotic use in dementia: a systematic 
review of benefits and risks from meta-
analyses
Rajesh R. Tampi, Deena J. Tampi, Silpa Balachandran and Shilpa Srinivasan
Abstract
Background: The purpose of this review is to evaluate the data on the use of antipsychotics in 
individuals with dementia from meta-analyses.
Methods: We performed a literature search of PubMed, MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO and 
Cochrane collaboration databases through 30 November, 2015 using the following keywords: 
‘antipsychotics’, ‘dementia’ and ‘meta-analysis’. The search was not restricted by the age 
of the patients or the language of the study. However, in the final analysis we only included 
studies involving patients that were published in English language journals or had official 
English translations. In addition, we reviewed the bibliographic databases of published articles 
for additional studies.
Results: This systematic review of the literature identified a total of 16 meta-analyses that 
evaluated the use of antipsychotics in individuals with dementia. Overall, 12 meta-analyses 
evaluated the efficacy of antipsychotics among individuals with dementia. Of these, eight also 
assessed adverse effects. A further two studies evaluated the adverse effects of antipsychotics 
(i.e. death). A total of two meta-analyses evaluated the discontinuation of antipsychotics in 
individuals with dementia. Overall, three meta-analyses were conducted in individuals with 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) whereas one focused on individuals with Lewy Body Dementia (LBD). 
The rest of the 12 meta-analyses included individuals with dementia.
Conclusions: Antipsychotics have demonstrated modest efficacy in treating psychosis, 
aggression and agitation in individuals with dementia. Their use in individuals with dementia is 
often limited by their adverse effect profile. The use of antipsychotics should be reserved for 
severe symptoms that have failed to respond adequately to nonpharmacological management 
strategies.
Keywords: antipsychotics, benefits, dementia, meta-analysis, risks, therapy
Correspondence to: 
Rajesh R. Tampi, MD, MS, 
DFAPA  
Case Western Reserve 
University School of 
Medicine, Vice Chairman 
for Education and Faculty 
Development, Program 
Director, Psychiatry 
Residency, Department of 
Psychiatry, MetroHealth, 
2500 MetroHealth Drive, 
Cleveland, OH 44109, USA 
rajesh.tampi@gmail.com
Deena J. Tampi, MSN, 
MBA-HCA, RN  
Saint Francis Hospital and 
Medical Center, Hartford, 
CT, USA
Silpa Balachandran, MD 
Department of Psychiatry, 
MetroHealth, Cleveland, 
OH, USA
Shilpa Srinivasan, MD, 
DFAPA  
University of South 
Carolina School of 
Medicine, Charleston, 
SC, USA
658463 TAJ0010.1177/2040622316658463Therapeutic Advances in Chronic DiseaseRR Tampi, DJ Tampi
research-article2016
Original Research
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
230 
http://taj.sagepub.com
However, similar benefits have not been observed 
for quetiapine. In addition, there is limited evi-
dence for the use of these medications in individ-
uals with non-AD type dementia [Ballard et al. 
2008]. Furthermore, the benefit of using antipsy-
chotics as a longer-term treatment in individuals 
with dementia is unclear.
The use of antipsychotics in the management of 
psychotic symptoms and aggression in individuals 
with dementia must be balanced against their 
serious adverse effects profile [Ballard et al. 2009]. 
Antipsychotic use increases the risk for death, 
cerebrovascular 
adverse 
events 
(CVAEs), 
Parkinsonism, sedation, gait disturbance, cogni-
tive decline and pneumonia [Ballard et al. 2009; 
Chiu et al. 2015; Mittal et al. 2011]. Given the 
significant risk for mortality when antipsychotics 
are used in individuals with dementia, the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the 
European Medicines Agency and the UK 
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory 
Agency have issued warnings regarding their use 
in individuals with dementia [Mittal et al. 2011]. 
Data also indicate that the risk for mortality 
remains elevated for at least 2 years, and the 
actual number of deaths due to antipsychotics 
increases with their longer duration of use. The 
US FDA has not yet approved any medication for 
treating agitation associated with dementia and 
AD and in the European Union and Australia 
only risperidone is indicated for the short-term 
management of persisting and severe aggression 
in individuals with AD who have failed nonphar-
macological trials [Maher et al. 2011]. Despite 
these warnings, the off-label use of antipsychotics 
for treating individuals with dementia appears to 
have grown over the past two decades.
Numerous reviews have evaluated the use of 
antipsychotics in individuals with dementia 
[Gallagher 
and 
Herrmann, 
2015; 
Madhusoodanan 
and Ting, 2014; Gareri et al. 2014]. However, 
none of these reviews have systematically studied 
the data on the use of antipsychotics in individu-
als with dementia exclusively from meta-analyses. 
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of well-
designed and completed randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) can provide the highest levels of evi-
dence to support therapeutic interventions 
[McNamara and Scales, 2011; Sauerland and 
Seiler, 2005]. In order to fill this void in the litera-
ture, we decided to conduct a systematic review 
of meta-analyses that evaluated the use of antip-
sychotics in individuals with dementia. Our goal 
was to assess the highest level of evidence on the 
use of antipsychotics in individuals with dementia 
so that these data can be used to improve the care 
of these vulnerable individuals.
Search strategy
This systematic review was conducted in accord-
ance with the guidelines of the Preferred Reporting 
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
(PRISMA) statement [Shamseer et al. 2015]. 
The purpose of this review is to evaluate the data 
on the use of antipsychotics in individuals with 
dementia from meta-analyses. We performed a 
literature search of PubMed, MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, PsycINFO and Cochrane collabora-
tion databases through 30 November, 2015 using 
the following keywords: ‘antipsychotics’, ‘demen-
tia’ and ‘meta-analysis’. The search was not 
restricted by the age of the patients or the lan-
guage of the study. However, in the final analysis 
we only included studies involving patients that 
were published in English language journals or 
had official English translations. In addition, we 
reviewed the bibliographic databases of published 
articles for additional studies.
The review of all the abstracts and full-text articles 
from the citations obtained via the search of the 
databases was carried out by three of the authors 
(RRT, DJT and SC). The decision on which stud-
ies to be included or excluded from the final analy-
sis was done after a review of the full-text articles by 
all the authors. Disagreements between the authors 
were resolved by a consensus. See Figure 1.
Results
This systematic review of the literature identified 
a total of 16 meta-analyses that evaluated the use 
of antipsychotics in individuals with dementia 
[Schneider et al. 1990, 2005, 2006; Kirchner 
et al. 2001; Ballard and Waite, 2006; Yury and 
Fisher, 2007; Katz et al. 2007; Cheung and 
Stapelberg, 2011; Maher et al. 2011; Declercq 
et al. 2013; Ma et al. 2014; Pan et al. 2014; Wang 
et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2015; Stinton et al. 2015; 
Hulshof et al. 2015].
Among the 16 meta-analyses, 12 evaluated the 
efficacy of antipsychotics among individuals with 
dementia [Schneider et al. 1990; Kirchner et al. 
2001; Ballard and Waite, 2006; Schneider et al. 
2006; Yury and Fisher, 2007; Katz et al. 2007; 
Cheung and Stapelberg, 2011; Maher et al. 2011; 
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
231
Ma et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2015; 
Stinton et al. 2015]. A total of 8 of the 12 stud*ies 
also assessed adverse effects [Kirchner et al. 2001; 
Ballard and Waite, 2006; Schneider et al. 2006; 
Katz et al. 2007; Maher et al. 2011; Ma et al. 2014; 
Wang et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2015]. There were 
two studies that evaluated the adverse effects of 
antipsychotics (i.e. death) [Schneider et al. 2005; 
Hulshof et al. 2015]. A total of two studies focused 
on the discontinuation of antipsychotics among 
individuals with dementia [Declercq et al. 2013; 
Pan et al. 2014]. There were three meta-analyses 
that were conducted in individuals with AD 
[Ballard and Waite, 2006; Katz et al. 2007; Wang 
et al. 2015] whereas one focused on individuals 
with Lewy body dementia (LBD) [Stinton et al. 
2015]. LBD includes individuals with dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson’s disease 
dementia. The rest of the 12 meta-analyses 
included individuals with dementia [Schneider 
et al. 1990, 2005, 2006; Kirchner et al. 2001; Yury 
and Fisher, 2007; Cheung and Stapelberg, 2011; 
Maher et al. 2011; Declercq et al. 2013; Ma et al. 
2014; Pan et al. 2014; Tan et al. 2015; Hulshof 
et al. 2015]. A total of seven of the meta-analyses 
were completed prior to 2010 [Schneider et al. 
1990, 2005, 2006; Kirchner et al. 2001; Ballard 
and Waite, 2006; Yury and Fisher, 2007; Katz 
et al. 2007] when compared with nine studies after 
2010 [Cheung and Stapelberg, 2011; Maher et al. 
2011; Declercq et al. 2013; Ma et al. 2014; Pan 
et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2015; 
Stinton et al. 2015; Hulshof et al. 2015].
In the next section we describe the data on effi-
cacy, adverse effects and the evidence for discon-
tinuation of antipsychotics in individuals with 
dementia.
Data on efficacy
This section contains data from 12 meta-analyses 
that evaluated the efficacy of antipsychotics in 
individuals with dementia [Schneider et al. 1990, 
2006; Kirchner et al. 2001; Ballard and Waite, 
2006; Yury and Fisher, 2007; Katz et al. 2007; 
Cheung and Stapelberg, 2011; Ma et al. 2014; 
Wang et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2015; Stinton et al. 
2015]. The meta-analyses have been arranged in 
a chronological order with the oldest study first 
and the latest study at the end.
In the earliest meta-analysis that was identified in 
this review, Schneider and colleagues evaluated 
the use of typical antipsychotic medications in 
individuals with dementia [Schneider et al. 
1990]. The investigators found that these medi-
cations were more effective than placebo in treat-
ing agitation in dementia with a modest effect 
size (0.18). They found that when thioridazine 
and haloperidol were compared with the other 
typical antipsychotics there was no significant 
difference noted between these two drugs and 
the other medications.
In a meta-analysis that evaluated the use of 
thioridazine in individuals with dementia, the 
investigators found that, when compared with 
placebo, thioridazine reduced symptoms of 
anxiety in these individuals [Kirchner et al. 
2001]. However, there were no significant 
effects noted on clinical global change in thior-
idazine-treated individuals when compared 
with placebo. Thioridazine was found to be 
superior to diazepam for anxiety symptoms. 
Both medications did not improve global clini-
cal evaluation scales in individuals with demen-
tia. Thioridazine was found to be inferior to 
chlormethiazole in managing behavioral symp-
toms. Thioridazine was no better than etoperi-
done, loxapine or zuclopenthixol when used in 
individuals with dementia.
In the meta-analysis by Ballard and Waite, the 
investigators found that among individuals with 
dementia, the use of risperidone and olanzapine 
improved aggression when compared with pla-
cebo [Ballard and Waite, 2006]. In addition, they 
found that the use of risperidone also improved 
psychotic symptoms among these individuals. 
Schneider and colleagues, in their meta-analysis 
evaluating the use of atypical antipsychotics for 
dementia, found efficacy for aripiprazole and ris-
peridone but not for olanzapine when used in 
these individuals [Schneider et al. 2006]. They 
also noted smaller effects for less-severe demen-
tia, outpatients and individuals with psychotic 
symptoms. In the meta-analysis by Yuri and 
Fisher, the investigators included data from 13 
studies that compared risperidone, olanzapine, 
and quetiapine with either placebo or with each 
other [Yury and Fisher, 2007]. The investigators 
found the overall mean effect size from the seven 
placebo-controlled studies for primary measures 
to be 0.45 for atypical antipsychotics when com-
pared with 0.32 for placebo in individuals with 
dementia. For all measures of behavioral prob-
lems, the mean effect size was 0.43 for the atypi-
cal antipsychotic group when compared with 0.26 
for the placebo group.
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
232 
http://taj.sagepub.com
In a meta-analysis, Katz and colleagues compared 
data from four large placebo-controlled clinical 
trials of risperidone in individuals with psychosis 
of AD or dementia [Katz et al. 2007]. The inves-
tigators found that that risperidone when com-
pared with placebo improved scores on the 
Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease 
Rating Scale (BEHAVE-AD), psychosis subscale, 
(effect size 0.87 versus 0.57) with an estimated 
effect size between groups at endpoint of 0.15. 
On the Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale 
the estimated effect size at endpoint was 0.17 
between the risperidone and placebo-treated 
groups. Secondary analyses indicated that indi-
viduals with more severe symptoms showed bet-
ter response to treatment with risperidone when 
compared with placebo (effect size 1.14 versus 
0.61) with an estimated effect size difference at 
endpoint of 0.29. Cheung and Stapleberg con-
ducted a meta-analysis on the efficacy of quetia-
pine for BPSD [Cheung and Stapelberg, 2011]. 
Based on the data from five studies, the investiga-
tors found a mean difference of −3.05 and −0.31 
respectively on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
(NPI) total score and the CGI of Change scale 
(CGI-C) score when comparing quetiapine with 
placebo-treated individuals.
Maher and colleagues in their meta-analysis used 
data from 18 RCTs that evaluated the use of 
atypical antipsychotic medications in individuals 
with dementia [Maher et al. 2011]. They exam-
ined three types of outcomes: improvement in 
psychosis (delusions and hallucinations, princi-
pally), improvement in agitation (including phys-
ical aggression, verbal aggression, excitability, 
oppositional behaviors, and excessive motor 
activity) and a total global score that included 
cumulative psychiatric symptoms of delusions, 
hallucinations, suspiciousness, dysphoria, anxi-
ety, motor agitation, aggression, hostility, eupho-
ria, disinhibition, irritability, apathy and other 
behavioral disturbances. The investigators found 
that for aripiprazole, olanzapine and risperidone, 
the effect size for treating these symptoms was 
small (0.12–0.20), but statistically significant. 
The effect size for quetiapine was 0.11, which was 
not statistically significant. The mean change in 
the NPI total score in individuals treated with an 
antipsychotic medication was a 35% improve-
ment compared with baseline, while the differ-
ence in the pooled NPI total score between 
treatment and placebo was 3.41 points. The 
investigators also found that aripiprazole (10 mg 
a day) or risperidone (2 mg a day) may be more 
effective than lower doses in treating the behavio-
ral symptoms. For the treatment of psychosis, the 
effect sizes were 0.20 for risperidone, 0.20 for ari-
piprazole, 0.05 for olanzapine and −0.03 for que-
tiapine. Aripiprazole, olanzapine and risperidone 
were all associated with statistically significant 
improvements in agitation with effect sizes 
between 0.19 and 0.31 whereas the effect size for 
quetiapine was 0.05. The three trials that com-
pared risperidone with olanzapine or risperidone 
with quetiapine did not find any significant differ-
ence between these drugs for treating behavioral 
symptoms. A total of five trials that compared an 
atypical antipsychotic medication with haloperi-
dol for the total global outcome also did not con-
sistently identify any statistically significant 
difference between these drugs.
In a meta-analysis by Ma and colleagues the 
investigators studied the efficacy of atypical antip-
sychotic medications for BPSD from 16 RCTs 
[Ma et al. 2014]. They found that atypical antip-
sychotics showed efficacy on the Brief Psychiatric 
Rating Scale (BPRS), weighted mean difference 
(WMD, −1.58), the Cohen–Mansfield Agitation 
Inventory (CMAI, −1.84), NPI (−2.81), CGI-C 
(−0.32) and the Clinical Global Impression of 
Severity (CGI-S, −0.19) when compared with 
individuals receiving placebo.
In a meta-analysis that evaluated the efficacy of 
pharmacological treatments for neuropsychiatric 
symptoms (NPSs) among individuals with AD, 
Wang and colleagues found that available data 
from six studies indicate that atypical antipsy-
chotics improve NPI total score [standardized 
mean difference (SMD) −0.21] when compared 
with placebo [Wang et al. 2015]. In the subgroup 
analyses, the investigators found that olanzapine 
improved behavioral symptoms in individuals 
with AD (SMD −0.18) whereas aripiprazole pro-
duced improvements on the NPI scale (SMD 
−0.20) when compared with placebo. Tan and 
colleagues in their meta-analysis of 23 studies of 
atypical antipsychotics in individuals with demen-
tia found that the WMD in change scores for the 
NPI total score was only significant for aripipra-
zole (−4.4) when compared with placebo [Tan 
et al. 2015]. They also found that WMD in change 
scores for the BEHAVE-AD was only significant 
for risperidone (−1.48).
In a meta-analysis that evaluated all pharmaco-
logical treatment strategies for individuals with 
LBD the investigators could not conduct a 
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
233
meta-analysis of antipsychotic medications as 
there was an inadequate number of eligible stud-
ies [Stinton et al. 2015]. However, the investiga-
tors found a secondary analysis of a RCT that 
used olanzapine in individuals with AD who were 
retrospectively identified as meeting the LBD cri-
teria [Cummings et al. 2002]. Among individuals 
with LBD (N = 29), those individuals treated 
with 5 mg a day of olanzapine (N = 10) showed 
greater reductions in scores on the NPI subscales 
for delusions (−3.8 points) and hallucinations 
(−5.9 points) when compared with individuals 
receiving placebo (N = 10). The investigators did 
not find significant differences between the olan-
zapine 10 mg and the 15 mg groups and the pla-
cebo groups on psychiatric symptoms. The 
investigators also found a randomized placebo-
controlled trial of quetiapine among individuals 
with LBD dementia and AD with Parkinsonian 
features [Kurlan et al. 2007]. They found no dif-
ference on measures of psychiatric symptoms 
between the quetiapine and the placebo-treated 
groups in this study.
A summary of the 12 meta-analyses that evaluated 
the efficacy of antipsychotic medications in indi-
viduals with dementia indicates that 10 of these 
studies (83%) evaluated atypical antipsychotic 
medications and only 2 meta-analyses evaluated 
typical antipsychotics. The two meta-analyses that 
studied the use of typical antipsychotics found 
that these medications have modest efficacy when 
used in individuals with dementia. There was no 
superiority noted for any particular medication in 
this drug-class. Atypical antipsychotic medica-
tions (risperidone, olanzapine and aripiprazole) 
showed modest efficacy when used in individuals 
with dementia including AD. Quetiapine was 
found to have limited efficacy when used in indi-
viduals with dementia. Psychosis, aggression, agita-
tion and more severe symptoms appear to be 
particularly responsive to the atypical antipsychot-
ics. Smaller effects were noted for less severe demen-
tia and individuals receiving outpatient treatment. 
There was no meta-analysis identified on the use 
 
of antipsychotic medications among individuals 
with LBD. However, one RCT found that olan-
zapine at 5 mg a day improved delusions and hal-
lucinations in these individuals. See Table 1.
Data on adverse effects
Overall 10 of the 16 meta-analyses commented 
on adverse effects when antipsychotic medica-
tions were used in individuals with dementia 
[Kirchner et al. 2001; Schneider et al. 2005, 2006; 
Ballard and Waite, 2006; Katz et al. 2007; Maher 
et al. 2011; Ma et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2015; Tan 
et al. 2015; Hulshof et al. 2015]. This includes 
eight studies that also assessed efficacy of these 
medications in individuals with dementia includ-
ing AD [Kirchner et al. 2001; Ballard and Waite, 
2006; Schneider et al. 2006; Katz et al. 2007; 
Maher et al. 2011; Ma et al. 2014; Wang et al. 
2015; Tan et al. 2015]. There were two studies 
that exclusively commented on the adverse effects 
(i.e. death) when these medications are used in 
individuals with dementia [Schneider et al. 2005; 
Hulshof et al. 2015]. The meta-analyses have 
been arranged in a chronological order with the 
oldest study first and the latest study at the end.
In the meta-analysis by Kirchner and colleagues, 
the investigators noted that adverse events were 
not reported in a systematic manner in any of the 
trials [Kirchner et al. 2001]. However, no deaths 
were reported in any of the studies. The studies 
also provided limited or no information regarding 
EKG changes in the participants.
The meta-analysis by Schneider and colleagues 
evaluated the risk of death with atypical antipsy-
chotics when used in individuals with dementia. 
The investigators found that more deaths 
occurred among individuals who were rand-
omized to the drugs when compared with placebo 
(118 [3.5%] versus 40 [2.3%]) [Schneider et al. 
2005]. The odds ratio (OR) by meta-analysis was 
1.54 and the risk difference (RD) of 0.01. There 
was no evidence noted for differential risks based 
on individual drugs, severity of dementia, sample 
selection or by the diagnosis.
The meta-analysis by Ballard and Waite indicates 
that risperidone-treated individuals have greater 
odds of dropping out of the study due to adverse 
effects especially at the 2 mg a day dose when 
compared with placebo [Ballard and Waite, 
2006]. In addition, the odds of developing somno-
lence, urinary tract infection (UTI), falls, extrapy-
ramidal symptoms (EPSs), pain, peripheral 
edema, fever, gait abnormality, urinary inconti-
nence and asthenia were greater in the risperi-
done-treated individuals when compared with 
placebo. Adverse effects were greater in the risp-
eridone 2 mg dosing when compared with 1 mg 
dosing. Overall, five trials found that CVAEs were 
more common in the risperidone group (all doses 
pooled) when compared with placebo (OR 3.64). 
Among the olanzapine studies, dropouts due to 
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
234 
http://taj.sagepub.com
adverse effects were greater in the drug-treated 
group when compared with placebo. Abnormal 
gait, somnolence, fever and urinary incontinence 
were greater in the olanzapine-treated individuals 
when compared with placebo-treated individuals. 
Aripiprazole-treated individuals had greater risk of 
somnolence when compared with placebo-treated 
individuals. Quetiapine worsened cognition when 
compared with placebo.
In their second meta-analysis, Schneider and col-
leagues evaluated the risk of adverse events when 
atypical antipsychotic medications are used in 
individuals with dementia [Schneider et al. 2006]. 
The investigators found that somnolence was 
higher among drug-treated individuals (OR 2.84) 
when compared with placebo. The risk for som-
nolence was greater for olanzapine-treated indi-
viduals when compared with aripiprazole (RD 
0.16 versus 0.06). There was increased risk for 
EPSs (OR 1.51) for the drug-treated individuals 
when compared with placebo. The highest risk 
for EPSs was noted for risperidone (OR 1.8 and 
RD 0.06). Abnormal gait (OR 3.42) was noted in 
the active drug group (risperidone and olanzap-
ine) when compared with placebo. There was 
increased risk for edema (OR 1.99) among the 
drug-treated group (risperidone and olanzapine) 
when compared with placebo. UTIs and urinary 
incontinence were more common among the 
drug-treated group (OR 1.51) when compared 
with placebo. CVAEs were more common in the 
drug treated group (OR 2.13) when compared 
with placebo. This risk was significantly higher 
for risperidone (OR 3.43) when compared with 
placebo. The risk of death was evaluated in the 
previous meta-analysis [Schneider et al. 2005].
In the meta-analysis by Katz and colleagues, the 
investigators found that somnolence (18% versus 
8%) and EPSs (12% versus 6%) were more com-
mon in the risperidone group when compared 
with the placebo group [Katz et al. 2007]. They 
also noted that there were more CVAEs in the ris-
peridone group (1.6% versus 0.8%) when com-
pared with the placebo group although this 
difference was not statistically significant. The 
investigators found that there were 16 deaths 
(3.1%) in the risperidone group, including deaths 
occurring within 30 days of the last dose of study 
drug, compared with 7 deaths (1.8%) in the pla-
cebo group. This difference was deemed not to be 
statistically significant. There was no association 
noted between all-cause mortality and the severity 
of behavioral problems at baseline for both groups.
In the meta-analysis by Maher and colleagues the 
investigators found that the use of olanzapine and 
risperidone were associated with cardiovascular 
effects (OR 2.30 and 2.10 respectively) [Maher 
et al. 2011]. Cerebrovascular accident was more 
common among individuals treated with risperi-
done (OR 3.12). Increased appetite and weight 
gain were more common among individuals 
treated with olanzapine and risperidone (OR 4.70 
and 3.40 respectively) with a number needed to 
harm (NNH) of 25. Olanzapine showed signifi-
cantly greater central and peripheral anticholin-
ergic effects (OR 3.30) and NNH of 6 when 
compared with placebo. Olanzapine, quetiapine 
and risperidone were associated with sedation 
and fatigue (OR 4.60, 5.20 and 2.30 respec-
tively). Olanzapine and risperidone were associ-
ated with an increase in EPSs (OR 15.20 and 
3.00) and NNH of 10 and 20, respectively. 
Olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone, were 
associated with an increase in urinary tract symp-
toms (OR 9.5, 2.4 and 1.6, respectively) with 
NNH ranging from 16 to 36. The data from six 
head-to-head trials showed that individuals tak-
ing olanzapine had greater odds of having a neu-
rological symptom such as confusion, dizziness, 
and headaches when compared with those taking 
risperidone (OR 1.54).
The meta-analysis by Ma and colleagues indi-
cated that EPSs were greater among the drug-
treated individuals with dementia when compared 
with placebo-treated individuals (15.2% versus 
8.6%) with an OR 1.74 [Ma et al. 2014]. The risk 
for EPSs was higher for individuals receiving 
olanzapine and risperidone. A total of 17.0% of 
individuals in the drug-treated group experienced 
somnolence when compared with 7.2% of the 
placebo-treated individuals with an OR 2.95. 
Individuals receiving aripiprazole, olanzapine, 
quetiapine and risperidone were at higher risk for 
somnolence when compared with those individu-
als receiving placebo. The individuals in the drug-
treated group were more likely to experience 
CVAEs when compared with placebo-treated indi-
viduals (2.1% versus 0.9%) with an OR 2.50. A 
total of 6.9% of individuals in the drug-treated 
group experienced gait abnormality when com-
pared with 1.7% of the placebo-treated individuals 
with an OR 3.35. Individuals who were treated 
with olanzapine and risperidone were at higher risk 
for gait abnormalities when compared with pla-
cebo treated individuals. The investigators found 
that 3.6% of drug-treated individuals died during 
the trials or within 30 days of discontinuation of 
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
235
the drug when compared with 2.3% individuals 
in the placebo group for an OR 1.5. Common 
causes of death were pneumonia, stroke and car-
diac arrests. Subgroup meta-analyses did not 
identify greater risk of death for individuals receiv-
ing aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine or risperi-
done when compared with placebo. Individuals 
receiving active drugs were at higher risk of devel-
oping edema (9.3% versus 5.2%, OR 1.8) and 
UTI (14.9% versus 10.9%, OR 1.35). However, 
falls (15.2% versus 18.8%, OR 0.89) and insom-
nia (5.4% versus 5.4%, OR 0.94) were no differ-
ent between the two groups.
The meta-analysis by Wang and colleagues indi-
cated that in this study there was no significant 
difference in the number of dropouts caused by 
any reason between the groups treated with atypi-
cal antipsychotics and placebo, risk ratio (RR) of 
0.94 [Wang et al. 2015]. However, the number of 
individuals who dropped out of the study due to 
adverse events was greater in the atypical antipsy-
chotic group when compared with the placebo 
group (RR 2.24). In addition, individuals in the 
atypical antipsychotic group experienced greater 
number of adverse events than placebo-treated 
individuals (RR 1.17).
In the meta-analysis by Tan and colleagues, the 
investigators found that somnolence was greater 
in the group treated with atypical antipsychotics 
when compared with placebo-treated individuals 
(OR 3.7) [Tan et al. 2015]. Somnolence was 
greater among individuals treated with aripipra-
zole (OR 3.51), olanzapine (OR 3.61) and que-
tiapine (OR 5.88). However, injury/accidental 
injury and falls were no different between the 
drug-treated and placebo-treated groups (OR 
0.89). Abnormal gait was more frequent in the 
group treated with atypical antipsychotics when 
compared with placebo (OR 1.84). The highest 
risk was in the olanzapine-treated group (OR 
3.84). Edema was more common in the individu-
als treated with quetiapine (OR 1.51) when com-
pared with placebo-treated individuals. UTIs 
were more common in the atypical antipsychotic-
treated individuals when compared with placebo-
treated individuals (OR 
of 1.91). The risks were 
highest in the olanzapine (6.93) and risperidone-
treated (2.28) groups. Strokes were more com-
mon in the drug-treated group when compared 
with the placebo-treated group (OR 2.62). The 
risk was highest in the risperidone treated group 
(OR 4.53). The overall OR by meta-analysis for 
death in individuals treated with antipsychotics 
when compared with placebo was 1.06 with no 
increased risk of death noted with any individual 
drug.
In the meta-analysis by Hulshof and colleagues, 
the investigators included data from 17 trials that 
evaluated the use of conventional antipsychotics 
among individuals with dementia and delirium 
[Hulshof et al. 2015]. They found that the pooled 
RD for death among individuals treated with con-
ventional antipsychotics when compared with 
placebo was 0.1% with a RR of 1.07. When the 
data were analyzed from the 11 trials that evalu-
ated haloperidol the RD was 0.4% and the RR 
was 1.25. These findings were not statistically sig-
nificant. On sensitivity analyses the investigators 
found that the point estimate for risk was higher 
in the dementia trials (0.5%) and lower in delir-
ium-prevention trials (−0.4%). The risks were 
also lower in trials with low risk because of base-
line differences (0.0%), inadequate blinding 
(0.0%), and dropout (−0.6%). This pattern also 
occurred for the haloperidol trials.
A summary of these 10 meta-analyses indicate 
that antipsychotic use in individuals with demen-
tia results in a greater number of adverse effects 
when compared with individuals treated with pla-
cebo, including the risk of CVAEs and deaths. 
The risk of CVAEs was most prominent in the 
risperidone-treated group. The risk of death was 
not associated with any particular drug but was 
appreciated when the antipsychotic drugs were 
considered together as a group. The risk of death 
was not associated with the severity of dementia 
or behavioral symptoms, by the sample selection 
or by the diagnosis. Sedation, abnormal gait and 
EPSs appear to be most prominent with the use 
of risperidone and olanzapine. See Table 2.
Withdrawal of antipsychotics
There were two meta-analyses that evaluated the 
discontinuation of antipsychotics in individuals 
with dementia [Declercq et al. 2013; Pan et al. 
2014].
In the first meta-analysis by Declercq and col-
leagues, the investigators included data from nine 
trials. There were seven trials conducted in nursing 
homes while one trial was conducted in an outpa-
tient setting and one trial in both settings [Declercq 
et al. 2013]. The investigators used success of 
withdrawal (i.e. participants remaining in study off 
antipsychotics) and the NPSs as primary efficacy 
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
236 
http://taj.sagepub.com
measures from these studies. Overall, eight of nine 
studies found no overall difference between the 
groups on the primary outcomes. In one study of 
individuals with psychosis and agitation that 
responded to haloperidol, the time to relapse was 
shorter in the discontinuation group when com-
pared with the continuation group (p = 0.04). In 
one trial that included individuals with dementia 
and psychosis or agitation who had responded well 
to risperidone for 4–8 months, discontinuation of 
the medication led to an increase in the NPI-core 
score ⩾ 30% in the discontinuation group when 
compared with the continuation group Hazard 
Ratio (HR of 1.94). Pooled NPI-score (two stud-
ies) indicated that there was no significant differ-
ence between individuals who discontinued the 
drug versus those continuing on antipsychotics at 3 
months [mean difference (MD) −1.49]. In one 
study, those individuals with milder behavioral 
symptoms at baseline were significantly less agitated 
at 3 months in the discontinuation group when 
compared with the continuation group (p = 0.018). 
In both studies, there was evidence for significant 
worsening of behavioral symptoms in individuals 
with more severe baseline symptoms who were 
withdrawn from the antipsychotics when com-
pared with those who continued on the medica-
tions (p = 0.009).
In a meta-analysis of published randomized con-
trolled studies that compared the effects of antip-
sychotic discontinuation versus continuation in 
individuals with dementia, Pan and colleagues 
included data from a total of nine studies [Pan 
et al. 2014]. The investigators found that there 
was no statistically significant difference between 
the group that discontinued the antipsychotic 
medication when compared with the group that 
continued on the antipsychotic medication on 
behavioral severity score change from baseline 
Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram.
PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses.
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
237
Table 1. Efficacy of antipsychotics in individuals with dementia.
Study
Objectives
Details of the 
study
Comparators
Outcomes
[Schneider 
et al. 1990]
To study the efficacy of 
typical antipsychotics 
in individuals with 
dementia
7 RCTs
Typical antipsychotics 
versus placebo.
One typical antipsychotic 
versus another typical 
antipsychotic
Modest effect size (0.18) for treating 
agitation.
Thioridazine and haloperidol were no 
different from the other medications
[Kirchner 
et al. 2001]
To study efficacy 
of thioridazine in 
individuals with 
dementia
8 RCTs
Thioridazine versus 
placebo.
Thioridazine versus no 
treatment.
Thioridazine 
versus alternative 
pharmacological 
intervention.
Thioridazine versus 
behavioral intervention
Thioridazine superior to diazepam for 
anxiety symptoms.
Thioridazine had no efficacy on global 
clinical evaluation scales.
Thioridazine was inferior to 
chlormethiazole for behavioral 
symptoms.
Thioridazine was no better 
than etoperidone, loxapine or 
zuclopenthixol for behavioral 
symptoms
[Ballard 
et al. 2006]
To study efficacy of 
atypical antipsychotics 
for the treatment of 
aggression, agitation 
and psychosis in 
individuals with AD
10 RCTs
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo.
One atypical 
antipsychotic medication 
versus other atypical 
antipsychotic medication
Risperidone and olanzapine improved 
aggression when compared with 
placebo.
Risperidone improved psychotic 
symptoms in these individuals
[Schneider 
et al. 2006]
To study efficacy of 
atypical antipsychotics 
in individuals with 
dementia
15 RCTs
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo.
One atypical 
antipsychotic 
medication versus other 
atypical antipsychotic 
medication(s)
Efficacy noted for aripiprazole and 
risperidone but not for olanzapine.
Smaller effects noted for less severe 
dementia, outpatients and individuals 
with psychotic symptoms
[Yury and 
Fisher, 
2007]
To study effectiveness 
of atypical 
antipsychotics for 
behavioral problems 
in individuals with 
dementia
7 RCTs
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo
Overall mean effect size from the 
7 placebo-controlled studies for 
primary measures was 0.45 for 
atypical antipsychotics and 0.32 for 
placebo.
For all measures of behavioral 
problems, the mean effect size was 
0.43 for the atypical antipsychotic 
group when compared with 0.26 for 
the placebo group
[Katz et al. 
2007]
To study efficacy 
of risperidone for 
psychosis of AD and 
mixed dementia
4 RCTs
Risperidone versus 
placebo
Risperidone improved scores on the 
(BEHAVE-AD) Psychosis subscale 
compared with placebo (effect size 
0.87 versus 0.57) with an estimated 
effect size between groups at 
endpoint of 0.15.
On the CGI scale the estimated effect 
size at endpoint was 0.17 between the 
risperidone and placebo treated groups
Individuals with more severe 
symptoms showed better response 
to risperidone when compared with 
placebo (effect size 1.14 versus 
0.61) with an estimated effect size 
difference at endpoint of 0.29
(Continued)
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
238 
http://taj.sagepub.com
Study
Objectives
Details of the 
study
Comparators
Outcomes
[Cheug and 
Stapleberg, 
2011]
To study efficacy of 
quetiapine for BPSD
5 RCTs
Quetiapine versus 
placebo
Mean difference of −3.05 and −0.31 
respectively was noted on the NPI 
total score and the CGI-C score when 
quetiapine group was compared with 
placebo group
[Maher et al. 
2011]
To study the efficacy 
and safety of atypical 
antipsychotic 
medications for use 
in conditions lacking 
approval for labeling 
and marketing by the 
US Food and Drug 
Administration
18 RCTs in 
individuals with 
dementia
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo
For aripiprazole, olanzapine and 
risperidone the effect size for treating 
behavioral symptoms ranged from 
0.12–0.20 and for quetiapine it was 
0.11.
For the treatment of psychosis,  
the effect sizes were 0.20 for 
risperidone, 0.20 for aripiprazole, 
0.05 for olanzapine and −0.03 for 
quetiapine.
For the treatment of agitation, 
aripiprazole, olanzapine and 
risperidone had effect sizes between 
0.19 and 0.31 whereas the effect size 
for quetiapine was 0.05
[Ma et al. 
2014]
To study the efficacy of 
atypical antipsychotics 
for BPSD
16 RCTs
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo
Atypical antipsychotics showed 
efficacy on the BPRS (WMD), [−1.58], 
CMAI (−1.84), NPI (−2.81), CGI-C 
(−0.32) and the CGI-S (−0.19) when 
compared with placebo
[Wang et al. 
2015]
To study the efficacy 
of pharmacological 
treatments for 
neuropsychiatric 
symptoms of AD
6 RCTs
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo
Atypical antipsychotics improve 
NPI total score [(SMD) −0.21] when 
compared with placebo.
Olanzapine improved behavioral 
symptoms in AD patients (SMD −0.18) 
when compared with placebo.
Aripiprazole produced improvements 
on the NPI scale (SMD −0.20) when 
compared with placebo
[Tan et al. 
2015]
To study the efficacy of 
atypical antipsychotics 
in individuals with 
dementia
23 RCTs
Atypical antipsychotics 
versus placebo
The WMD in change scores for the 
NPI total score was only significant 
for aripiprazole (−4.4) when compared 
with placebo.
The WMD change scores for the 
BEHAVE-AD was only significant for 
risperidone (−1.48)
[Stinton 
et al. 2015]
To study the efficacy 
of pharmacological 
treatment strategies 
for individuals with 
LBD
No meta-analysis 
conducted for 
antipsychotics 
but 1 RCT for 
olanzapine 
and 1 RCT for 
quetiapine was 
included in the 
manuscript
Antipsychotics versus 
placebo
antipsychotics versus any 
treatment
Individuals treated with olanzapine 5 
mg a day showed greater reductions 
in scores on the NPI subscales 
for delusions (−3.8 points) and 
hallucinations (−5.9 points) compared 
with placebo.
Quetiapine was no better than placebo 
for psychiatric symptoms
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BPRS, Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale; BPSD, behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia; CGI-C, Clinical Global 
Impression of Change; CGI-S, Clinical Global Impression of Severity; CMAI, Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory; LBD, Lewy Body Dementia; NPI, 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory; RCT, randomized controlled trials; SMD, standardized mean difference; WMD, weighted mean difference.
Table 1. (Continued)
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
239
Table 2. Adverse effects from antipsychotics.
Study
Outcomes
[Kirchner 
et al. 2001]
No deaths were reported in any of the studies
[Schneider 
et al. 2005]
118 (3.5%) deaths in drug treated group versus 40 deaths (2.3%) in placebo groups, OR 1.54 and RD 0.01.
No differential risk for individual drugs, severity of dementia, sample selection or by the diagnosis
[Ballard et al. 
2006]
Somnolence, UTI, falls, EPSs, pain, peripheral edema, fever, gait abnormality, urinary incontinence and 
asthenia greater in the risperidone group versus placebo group
Adverse effects and dropouts greater in the risperidone 2 mg dosing versus 1 mg dosing
CVAEs more in the risperidone group versus placebo group, OR 3.64
Dropouts due to adverse effects greater in the olanzapine group versus placebo group.
Abnormal gait, somnolence, fever and urinary incontinence greater in the olanzapine group versus placebo 
group.
Somnolence greater in the aripiprazole group compared with placebo group.
Quetiapine worsened cognition compared with placebo
[Schneider 
et al. 2006]
Somnolence greater in the drug treated group versus placebo group, OR 2.84.
Somnolence greater for olanzapine group versus aripiprazole group when compared with placebo group, RD 
0.16 versus 0.06.
Risk for EPSs greater in the drug treated group versus placebo group, OR 1.51.
Highest risk for EPSs in the risperidone group versus placebo group, OR 1.8 and RD 0.06.
Abnormal gait more often in the risperidone and olanzapine groups versus placebo group, OR 3.42.
Edema greater in the risperidone and olanzapine groups versus placebo group, OR 1.99.
UTIs and urinary incontinence more common among the drug treated group versus placebo group, OR 1.51.
CVAEs more common in the drug treated group versus placebo group, OR 2.13.
CVAEs significantly higher in the risperidone group versus placebo group, OR 3.43.
[Katz et al. 
2007]
Somnolence (18% versus 8%) risperidone versus placebo group.
EPSs (12% versus 6%) risperidone versus placebo group.
CVAEs (1.6% versus 0.8%) risperidone versus placebo group.
Deaths within 30 days of last dose (3.1% versus 1.8%) risperidone versus placebo group, not statistically 
significant.
No association between all-cause mortality and the severity of behavioral problems at baseline.
[Maher et al. 
2011]
Cardiovascular effects were more common among users of olanzapine and risperidone, OR 2.30 and 2.10.
Cerebrovascular accident was more common among individuals treated with risperidone, pooled OR 3.12.
Increased appetite and weight gain were more common among individuals treated with olanzapine and 
risperidone, pooled OR 4.70 and 3.40 and NNH of 25.
Olanzapine showed significantly anticholinergic effects, OR 3.30 and NNH of 6.
Olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone were associated with sedation and fatigue with an OR 4.60, 5.20 and 2.30.
Olanzapine and risperidone were associated with an increase in extrapyramidal symptoms, OR 15.20 and 3.00, 
NNH of 10 and 20.
Olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone were associated with an increase in urinary tract symptoms, OR 9.5, 2.4 
and 1.6 respectively and NNH ranging from 16 to 36.
6 head-to-head trials showed that olanzapine use resulted in more neurological symptom such as confusion, 
dizziness, headaches etc. when compared with risperidone, OR 1.54
[Ma et al. 
2014]
EPSs (15.2% versus 8.6%) drug versus placebo group, OR 1.74 with risk for EPSs higher in olanzapine and 
risperidone groups.
Somnolence (17.0% versus 7.2%) drug versus placebo group, OR 2.95 with risk for somnolence greater in the 
aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone groups.
CVAEs (2.1% versus 0.9%) drug versus placebo group, OR 2.50.
Gait abnormality (6.9% versus 1.7%) drug versus placebo group, risk for gait abnormality greater in the 
olanzapine and risperidone groups.
Deaths within 30 days of drug discontinuation (3.6% versus 2.3%) drug versus placebo group, OR 1.5, subgroup 
meta-analyses did not identify greater risk of death in aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine or risperidone 
groups.
Edema (9.3% versus 5.2%, OR 1.8) drug versus placebo group
Urinary tract infection (14.9% versus 10.9%, OR 1.35), drug versus placebo group.
Falls (15.2% versus 18.8%, OR 0.89) drug versus placebo group
(Continued)
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
240 
http://taj.sagepub.com
Study
Outcomes
[Wang et al. 
2015]
Dropout due to adverse events greater in the atypical antipsychotic group compared with placebo group, RR 
2.24.
Adverse effects greater in the atypical antipsychotic group compared with placebo group, RR 1.17
[Tan et al. 
2015]
Somnolence greater in the atypical antipsychotic group compared with placebo group, OR 3.7.
Somnolence greater in aripiprazole (OR, 3.51), olanzapine (OR, 3.61) and quetiapine (OR, 5.88) groups when 
compared with placebo groups.
Abnormal gait more frequent in atypical antipsychotic group compared with placebo group, OR 1.84, highest in 
the olanzapine group, OR 3.84.
Edema more common in quetiapine group compared with placebo group, OR 1.51.
UTI more common in the atypical antipsychotic group compared with placebo group, OR of 1.91, risk highest in 
the olanzapine (6.93) and risperidone (2.28) groups.
Strokes more common in the drug-treated group compared with placebo group, OR 2.62, risk highest in 
risperidone group, OR 4.53.
Deaths more in the atypical antipsychotic group compared with placebo group, OR 1.06, no increased risk of 
death noted with any individual drug.
[Hulshof et al. 
2015]
Pooled risk difference for death (0.1%), conventional antipsychotic group versus placebo group, RR 1.07.
Pooled risk difference for death (0.4%), haloperidol group versus placebo group, RR 1.25, not statistically 
significant.
Point estimate higher in the dementia trials (0.5%) versus delirium-prevention trials (−0.4%)
CVAEs, cerebrovascular adverse events; EPS, extrapyramidal symptoms; NNH, number needed to harm; OR, odds ratio; RD, risk difference; RR, 
risk ratio; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Table 3. Withdrawal of antipsychotics.
Name of the study
Outcomes
[Declercq et al. 2013]
No overall difference between the groups on the primary outcomes.
In one trial, the time to relapse was shorter in the discontinuation group when compared with the 
continuation group, p = 0.04.
In one trial, discontinuation of the medication led to an increase in the NPI-core score ⩾ 30% in the 
discontinuation group, HR 1.94.
In one trial, individuals with milder behavioral symptoms at baseline were less agitated in the 
discontinuation group, p = 0.018.
In two trials, individuals with more severe baseline symptoms had a worsening of symptoms when they 
were withdrawn from the antipsychotics, p = 0.009
[Pan et al. 2014]
No statistically significant difference between the groups on the behavioral severity score change from 
baseline, SMD of 0.19.
There was a higher proportion of individuals whose behavioral symptoms worsened in the drug 
discontinuation group when compared with the drug continuation group, RR 1.78
The drug discontinuation group had higher rates of early study termination when compared with the 
drug continuation group, RR 1.11.
The drug discontinuation group had lower mortality during follow up when compared with the drug 
continuation group, RR 0.83
HR, Hazard Ratio; NPI, Neuropsychiatric Inventory; RR, risk ratio; SMD, standardized mean difference.
[standardized mean difference (SMD), 0.19]. 
However, the discontinuation group had a higher 
proportion of individuals whose behavioral symp-
toms worsened, (RR 1.78) and this outcome was 
statistically significant. In addition, the discon-
tinuation group had higher rates of early study 
termination (RR 1.11) when compared with the 
drug continuation group. The discontinuation 
group had lower mortality during follow up when 
compared with the continuation group (RR 0.83). 
The last two outcomes were not statistically 
significant.
A summary of these two meta-analyses indicate 
that discontinuation of antipsychotic medication 
may not necessarily worsen behavioral symptoms 
Table 2. (Continued)
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
241
in all individuals with dementia. However, indi-
viduals with greater baseline behavioral symptoms 
may have a worsening of symptoms when the anti- 
psychotic medication is discontinued. Mortality 
rates were noted to be lower in the discontinuation 
group from one meta-analysis. See Table 3.
Discussion
This systematic review indicates that there are a 
fair number of meta-analyses that have evaluated 
the use of antipsychotics in individuals with 
dementia. The majority (12 of 16, 75%) of the 
meta-analyses evaluated the efficacy of these med-
ications in individuals with dementia. Of these 12 
studies, 8 also assessed adverse effects of these 
medications. There were two additional meta-
analyses that assessed adverse effects (deaths) 
with the use of these medications in individuals 
with dementia. There were two meta-analyses that 
evaluated the discontinuation of the antipsychotic 
medications in these individuals.
Efficacy data indicate that 83% (10 of 12) of the 
meta-analyses evaluated atypical antipsychotic 
medications 
in 
individuals 
with 
dementia. 
Risperidone, olanzapine and aripiprazole show 
modest efficacy in treating psychosis, aggression 
and agitation when used in individuals with 
dementia including AD. Quetiapine was found to 
have limited efficacy in treating these types of 
symptoms in individuals with dementia. More 
severe symptoms appear to be particularly respon-
sive to the atypical antipsychotics. Smaller effects 
were noted for less severe dementia and individu-
als receiving outpatient treatment. The two meta-
analyses that assessed the use of typical 
antipsychotics found that these medications have 
modest efficacy when used in individuals with 
dementia with no superiority noted for any par-
ticular medication in this drug-class. We did not 
identify any meta-analysis that studied the use of 
antipsychotic medications among individuals 
with LBD or vascular dementia (VD).
Data from 10 meta-analyses indicate that the use 
of antipsychotics among individuals with demen-
tia results in greater number of adverse effects 
when compared with placebo-treated individuals 
including CVAEs and deaths. The risk of CVAEs 
was most prominent among the risperidone-
treated group. The risk of death was not associ-
ated with any particular drug but became 
significant when the data from the different stud-
ies were pooled together. The risk of death was 
not associated with the severity of dementia, the 
severity of behavioral symptoms, by the sample 
selection or by the diagnosis. Sedation, abnormal 
gait and EPSs appear to be most prominent with 
the use of risperidone and olanzapine.
Data from two meta-analyses indicate that discon-
tinuation of antipsychotic medication results in 
worsening of symptoms among individuals with 
greater baseline behavioral symptoms. Data from 
one meta-analysis indicate that mortality rates are 
lower in the drug-discontinuation group when com-
pared with the group that continued on the drug.
This review has several weaknesses. We only used 
data from meta-analyses published in the English 
language or with an official English language 
translation. Additionally, there was significant 
heterogeneity between the various meta-analyses 
based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, the 
medications and dosages used, the rating scales 
used and the duration of included studies. We did 
not use any statistical method to correct for this 
heterogeneity. Furthermore, there were no meta-
analyses that evaluated the use of antipsychotics 
in individuals with less common types of demen-
tia including LBD and VD.
The strengths of this review include a comprehen-
sive search of five large databases and adherence to 
the PRISMA guidelines for systematic reviews. In 
addition, this review is the first attempt to collate 
data from all the published meta-analyses on the 
use of antipsychotics in individuals with dementia.
This systematic review did not find any meta-
analysis that evaluated the difference in rates of 
mortality between first and second generation 
antipsychotics (FGAs and SGAs) when used in 
older adults. However, one systematic review and 
meta-synthesis that included data from 20 studies 
found that among older adults the use of FGAs 
increased the risk for stroke, ventricular arrhyth-
mia, myocardial infarction and hip fracture when 
compared with SGAs [Jackson et al. 2014]. 
Antipsychotic-induced stroke accounted for 6.7% 
of this difference, hip fracture for 6.5%, myocar-
dial infarction for 3.5%, and ventricular arrhyth-
mia for 0.9%. When combined, these medical 
events explained about one-sixth (17%) of the 
mortality differences between FGAs and SGAs 
but the investigators opine that this difference 
could be as large as 42%. These data are compa-
rable to the data obtained by Kales and colleagues 
and Maust and colleagues in their database review 
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
242 
http://taj.sagepub.com
of US Department of Veterans Affairs that 
included individuals with dementia [Kales et al. 
2012; Maust et al. 2015]. The investigators found 
that the use of haloperidol (NNH, 26) resulted in 
the highest mortality rates when compared with 
risperidone (NNH, 27), olanzapine (NNH, 40) 
and quetiapine (NNH, 50) when used in older 
individuals with dementia.
The data on worse outcomes including severe 
adverse effects among individuals with dementia 
who are prescribed antipsychotics should not be 
entirely attributed to medication effects. A recent 
study that evaluated the use of typical and atypical 
antipsychotics on the time to nursing home admis-
sion and the time to death in a group of individuals 
with mild-to-moderate probable AD found that 
after adjustment for psychiatric symptoms the 
association between time to admission to a nursing 
home or to death were no longer significant [Lopez 
et al. 2013]. Psychosis was strongly associated with 
nursing home admission and time to death.
Multiple high quality studies have indicated that 
nonpharmacological treatments show benefit when 
used in individuals with BPSD [Livingston et al. 
2005; Livingston et al. 2014; Cooper et al. 2012; 
Brodaty and Arasaratnam, 2012]. These interven-
tions are recommended as first-line management 
strategies for individuals with BPSD [Kales et al. 
2014; Kales, 2015]. Available data also indicate 
some efficacy for other classes of medications for 
the treatment of certain types of behavioral symp-
toms 
in 
dementia 
[Panza 
et 
al. 
2015]. 
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may be beneficial 
for treating depression, dysphoria, apathy and anx-
iety in individuals with dementia. Memantine has 
shown modest efficacy in improving behavioral 
symptoms among individuals with dementia when 
compared with placebo [Maidment et al. 2008]. 
Sertraline and citalopram have been shown to 
reduce agitation among individuals with dementia 
when compared with placebo [Seitz et al. 2011]. 
Other medications that have shown potential in 
the treatment of behavioral symptoms in dementia 
include dextromethorphan/quinidine, cannabi-
noids, scyllo-inositol, brexpiprazole and prazosin 
[Antonsdottir et al. 2015]. However, none of these 
agents appear to have sufficient evidence in treat-
ing agitation in individuals with dementia and to 
be recommended for routine clinical practice.
A recent American Psychiatric Association (APA) 
practice guideline on the use of antipsychotics to 
treat agitation or psychosis in individuals with 
dementia recommends that before nonemergency 
treatment with an antipsychotic is initiated in 
individuals with dementia, the potential risks and 
benefits from these medications must be assessed 
by the clinician and discussed with the patient, 
their family and or the surrogate decision maker 
[Reus et al. 2016]. The APA guideline recom-
mends that if the risks and benefits assessment 
favors the use of an antipsychotic for behavioral/
psychological symptoms in individuals with 
dementia, the treatment should be initiated at a 
low dose and to be titrated up to the minimum 
effective dose as tolerated. The guideline also rec-
ommends that if the individual with dementia 
experiences a clinically significant adverse effect 
due to the antipsychotic medication, the potential 
risks and benefits of the antipsychotic medication 
should be reviewed by the clinician to determine 
if tapering and discontinuing of the medication is 
indicated. In addition, the APA guideline recom-
mends that in individuals with dementia and agi-
tation or psychosis if there is no clinically 
significant response after a 4-week trial of an ade-
quate dose of an antipsychotic then the medica-
tion should be tapered and discontinued. It is also 
recommended that among individuals who show 
a positive response to treatment, the decision to 
possibly taper the antipsychotic medication 
should be discussed with the patient, the patient’s 
family and or the surrogate decision maker. 
Among the individuals who show an adequate 
response to treatment with an antipsychotic, an 
attempt to taper and withdraw the medication 
should be made within 4 months of initiation of 
treatment unless the individual experiences a recur-
rence of symptoms with previous attempts at taper-
ing the antipsychotic medication. Additionally, 
while the antipsychotic medication is being tapered, 
assessment of symptoms should occur at least every 
month during the taper and for at least 4 months 
after the medication is discontinued to identify 
signs of recurrence and if there is a recurrence of 
symptoms, the reevaluation of the benefits and 
risks of antipsychotic treatment. The APA also rec-
ommends that in the absence of delirium, if none-
mergency antipsychotic medication treatment is 
indicated then haloperidol should not be used as a 
first-line agent. Furthermore, the APA recom-
mended that in individuals with dementia and agi-
tation or psychosis a long-acting injectable 
antipsychotic medication should not be utilized 
unless it is otherwise indicated for a co-occurring 
chronic psychotic illness.
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
243
Based on the available data from this review it 
would be prudent to state that antipsychotics 
should be used with caution in individuals with 
dementia given their significant adverse effect 
profile and modest efficacy data. These medica-
tions should be reserved for treating psychosis, 
aggression and agitation that are severe and are 
unresponsive to nonpharmacological strategies. 
Among the atypical antipsychotics, risperidone, 
olanzapine and aripiprazole appear to have 
stronger data when compared with quetiapine for 
treating the above mentioned symptoms. The 
data on the dosages of these medications to be 
used and the duration of treatment are still 
unclear from these meta-analyses. However, the 
recent APA guideline identifies 4 months of effec-
tive treatment after which a possible taper of the 
medication should be evaluated. There are no 
meta-analyses of newer atypical antipsychotics 
such as ziprasidone, paliperidone, iloperidone, 
asenapine, lurasidone in individuals with demen-
tia. Among typical antipsychotic medications the 
data did not indicate superiority for any particular 
medication.
Conclusion
Available data indicate that antipsychotic medi-
cations have modest efficacy when used in indi-
viduals with dementia. These medications are 
associated with significant adverse effects includ-
ing CVAEs and death when used in this popula-
tion. Among the atypical drugs, risperidone, 
olanzapine and aripiprazole appear to have 
stronger data in treating psychosis, aggression 
and agitation when compared with quetiapine. 
There are no controlled data on the use of the 
newer atypical antipsychotic medications in indi-
viduals with dementia. Typical antipsychotics 
also have modest efficacy when used in individu-
als with dementia with no superiority noted for 
any particular drug. These medications should 
be used in individuals with dementia only when 
nonpharmacological management has failed to 
provide benefit. Antipsychotics appear to be par-
ticularly effective for more severe symptoms. 
Controlled data for the use of these medications 
in individuals with LBD and VD are currently 
unavailable.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-
for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.
References
Antonsdottir, I., Smith, J., Keltz, M. and 
Porsteinsson, A. (2015) Advancements in the 
treatment of agitation in Alzheimer’s disease. Expert 
Opin Pharmacother 16: 1649–1656.
Ballard, C., Gauthier, S., Cummings, J., Brodaty, H., 
Grossberg, G., Robert, P. et al. (2009) Management 
of agitation and aggression associated with 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Neurol 5: 245–255.
Ballard, C., Lana, M., Theodoulou, M., Douglas, S., 
McShane, R., Jacoby, R. et al. (2008) A randomized, 
blinded, placebo-controlled trial in dementia patients 
continuing or stopping neuroleptics (the DART-AD 
trial). PLoS Med 5: e76. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pmed.0050076.
Ballard, C. and Waite, J. (2006) The effectiveness of 
atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of aggression 
and psychosis in Alzheimer’s disease. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 1: CD003476.
Barnes, T., Banerjee, S., Collins, N., Treloar, A., 
McIntyre, S. and Paton, C. (2012) Antipsychotics 
in dementia: prevalence and quality of antipsychotic 
drug prescribing in UK mental health services. Br J 
Psychiatry 201: 221–226.
Brodaty, H. and Arasaratnam, C. (2012) Meta-
analysis of nonpharmacological interventions for 
neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia. Am J 
Psychiatry 169: 946–953.
Chen, Y., Briesacher, B., Field, T., Tkia, J., Lau, D. 
and Gurwitz, J. (2010) Unexplained variation across 
US nursing homes in antipsychotic prescribing rates. 
Arch Intern Med 170: 89–95.
Cheung, G. and Stapelberg, J. (2011) Quetiapine 
for the treatment of behavioral and psychological 
symptoms of dementia (BPSD): a meta-analysis of 
randomized placebo-controlled trials. NZ Med J 124: 
39–50.
Chiu, Y., Bero, L., Hessol, N., Lexchin, J. and 
Harrington, C. (2015) A literature review of clinical 
outcomes associated with antipsychotic medication 
use in North American nursing home residents. Health 
Policy 119: 802–813.
Cooper, C., Mukadam, N., Katona, C., Lyketsos, 
C., Ames, D., Rabins, P. et al. (2012) Systematic 
review of the effectiveness of nonpharmacological 
interventions to improve quality of life of people with 
dementia. Int Psychogeriatr 24: 856–870.
 Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease 7(5)
244 
http://taj.sagepub.com
Cummings, J., Street, J., Masterman, D. and Clark, 
W. (2002) Efficacy of olanzapine in the treatment 
of psychosis in dementia with Lewy bodies. Dement 
Geriatr Cogn Disord 13: 67–73.
Declercq, T., Petrovic, M., Azermai, M., Vander 
Stichele, R., De Sutter, A., Van Driel, M. et al. 
(2013) Withdrawal versus continuation of chronic 
antipsychotic drugs for behavioural and psychological 
symptoms in older people with dementia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 3: CD007726.
Feng, Z., Hirdes, J., Smith, T., Finne-Soveri, H., 
Chi, I., Du Pasquier, J. et al. (2009) Use of physical 
restraints and antipsychotic medications in nursing 
homes: a cross-national study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 
24: 1110–1118.
Gallagher, D. and Herrmann, N. (2015) Agitation 
and aggression in Alzheimer’s disease: an update on 
pharmacological and psychosocial approaches to care. 
Neurodegener Dis Manag 5: 75–83.
Gareri, P., De Fazio, P., Manfredi, V. and De 
Sarro, G. (2014) Use and safety of antipsychotics in 
behavioral disorders in elderly people with dementia. J 
Clin Psychopharmacol 34: 109–123.
Gellad, W., Aspinall, S., Handler, S., Stone, 
R., Castle, N., Semla, T. et al. (2012) Use of 
antipsychotics among older residents in VA nursing 
homes. Med Care 50: 954–960.
Gustafsson, M., Karlsson, S. and Lövheim, H. (2013) 
Inappropriate long-term use of antipsychotic drugs 
is common among people with dementia living in 
specialized care units. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol 14: 10.
Hulshof, T., Zuidema, S., Ostelo, R. and Luijendijk, 
H. (2015) The mortality risk of conventional 
antipsychotics in elderly patients: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled 
trials. J Am Med Dir Assoc 16: 817–824.
Jackson, J., Schneeweiss, S., van der Weele, T. and 
Blacker, D. (2014) Quantifying the role of adverse 
events in the mortality difference between first and 
second-generation antipsychotics in older adults: 
systematic review and meta-synthesis. PLoS One 9: 
e105376. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105376.
Kales, H. (2015) Common sense: addressed to 
geriatric psychiatrists on the subject of behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry 23: 1209–1213.
Kales, H., Gitlin, L. and Lyketsos, C. (2014) 
Management of neuropsychiatric symptoms of 
dementia in clinical settings: recommendations from 
a multidisciplinary expert panel. J Am Geriatr Soc 62: 
762–769.
Kales, H., Kim, H., Zivin, K., Valenstein, M., 
Seyfried, L., Chiang, C. et al. (2012) Risk of mortality 
among individual antipsychotics in patients with 
dementia. Am J Psychiatry 169: 71–79.
Katz, I., de Deyn, P., Mintzer, J., Greenspan, A., 
Zhu, Y. and Brodaty, H. (2007) The efficacy and 
safety of risperidone in the treatment of psychosis of 
Alzheimer’s disease and mixed dementia: a meta-
analysis of 4 placebo-controlled clinical trials. Int J 
Geriatr Psychiatry 22: 475–484.
Kirchner, V., Kelly, C. and Harvey, R. (2001) 
Thioridazine for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 3: CD000464.
Kurlan, R., Cummings, J., Raman, R. and Thal, 
L. (2007) Quetiapine for agitation or psychosis in 
patients with dementia and parkinsonism. Neurology 
68: 1356–1363.
Livingston, G., Johnston, K., Katona, C., Lyketsos, 
C. and Paton, J. (2005) Old age task force of 
the World Federation of Biological Psychiatry. 
Systematic review of psychological approaches to 
the management of neuropsychiatric symptoms of 
dementia. Am J Psychiatry 162: 1996–2021.
Livingston, G., Kelly, L., Lewis-Holmes, E., Baio, G., 
Morris, S., Patel, N. et al. (2014) Nonpharmacological 
interventions for agitation in dementia: systematic 
review of randomized controlled trials. Br J Psychiatry 
205: 436–442.
Lopez, O., Becker, J., Chang, Y., Sweet, R., 
Aizenstein, H., Snitz, B. et al. (2013) The long-term 
effects of conventional and atypical antipsychotics 
in patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease. Am J 
Psychiatry 170: 1051–1058.
Ma, H., Huang, Y., Cong, Z., Zhu, G., Wang, Y., 
Jiang, W. et al. (2014) The efficacy and safety of 
atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of dementia: 
a meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled 
trials. J Alzheimers Dis 42: 915–937.
Madhusoodanan, S. and Ting, M. (2014) 
Pharmacological management of behavioral symptoms 
associated with dementia. World J Psychiatry 4: 72–79.
Maher, A., Maglione, M., Bagley, S., Suttorp, 
M., Hu, J., Ewing, B. et al. (2011) Efficacy and 
comparative effectiveness of atypical antipsychotic 
medications for off-label uses in adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. JAMA 306: 1359–1369.
Maidment, I., Fox, C., Boustani, M., Rodriguez, 
J., Brown, R. and Katona, C. (2008) Efficacy of 
memantine on behavioral and psychological symptoms 
related to dementia: a systematic meta-analysis. Ann 
Pharmacother 42: 32–38.
Maguire, A., Hughes, C., Cardwell, C. and O’Reilly, 
D. (2013) Psychotropic medications and the 
transition into care: a national data linkage study. J 
Am Geriatr Soc 61: 215–221.
 RR Tampi, DJ Tampi et al.
http://taj.sagepub.com 
245
Maust, D., Kim, H., Seyfried, L., Chiang, 
C., Kavanagh, J., Schneider, L. et al. (2015) 
Antipsychotics, other psychotropics, and the risk of 
death in patients with dementia: number needed to 
harm. JAMA Psychiatry 72: 438–445.
McNamara, E. and Scales, C. (2011) Role of 
systematic reviews and meta-analysis in evidence-
based clinical practice. Indian J Urol 27: 520–524.
Mittal, V., Kurup, L., Williamson, D., Muralee, S. 
and Tampi, R. (2011) Risk of cerebrovascular adverse 
events and death in elderly patients with dementia 
when treated with antipsychotic medications: a 
literature review of evidence. Am J Alzheimers Dis 
Other Demen 26: 10–28.
Pan, Y., Wu, C., Gau, S., Chan, H. and Banerjee, 
S. (2014) Antipsychotic discontinuation in patients 
with dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of published randomized controlled studies. Dement 
Geriatr Cogn Disord 37: 125–140.
Panza, F., Solfrizzi, V., Seripa, D., Imbimbo, B., 
Santamato, A., Lozupone, M. et al. (2015) Progresses 
in treating agitation: a major clinical challenge in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Expert Opin Pharmacother 16: 
2581–2588.
Reus, V., Fochtmann, L., Eyler, A., Hilty, D., 
Horvitz-Lennon, M., Jibson, M. et al. (2016) The 
American Psychiatric Association practice guideline 
on the use of antipsychotics to treat agitation or 
psychosis in patients with dementia. Am J Psychiatry 
173: 543–546.
Sauerland, S. and Seiler, C. (2005) Role of systematic 
reviews and meta-analysis in evidence-based medicine. 
World J Surg 29: 582–587.
Schneider, L., Dagerman, K. and Insel, P. (2005) 
Risk of death with atypical antipsychotic drug 
treatment for dementia: meta-analysis of randomized 
placebo-controlled trials. JAMA 294: 1934–1943.
Schneider, L., Dagerman, K. and Insel, P. (2006) 
Efficacy and adverse effects of atypical antipsychotics 
for dementia: meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-
controlled trials. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 14: 191–210.
Schneider, L., Pollock, V. and Lyness, S. (1990) 
A meta-analysis of controlled trials of neuroleptic 
treatment in dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc 38: 553–563.
Seitz, D., Adunuri, N., Gill, S., Gruneir, A., 
Herrmann, N. and Rochon, P. (2011) Antidepressants 
for agitation and psychosis in dementia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2: CD008191.
Shamseer, L., Moher, D., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., 
Liberati, A., Petticrew, M. et al. (2015) Preferred 
reporting items for systematic review and meta-
analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: elaboration and 
explanation. BMJ 349: g7647.
Stinton, C., McKeith, I., Taylor, J., Lafortune, L., 
Mark, E., Mioshi, E. et al. (2015) Pharmacological 
management of lewy body dementia: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 172: 
731–742.
Tan, L., Tan, L., Wang, H., Wang, J., Tan, C., 
Tan, M. et al. (2015) Efficacy and safety of atypical 
antipsychotic drug treatment for dementia: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Alzheimers Res 
Ther 7: 20.
Wang, J., Yu, J., Wang, H., Meng, X., Wang, C., 
Tan, C. et al. (2015) Pharmacological treatment of 
neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 86: 101–109.
Wetzels, R., Zuidema, S., de Jonghe, J., Verhey, F. 
and Koopmans, R. (2011) Prescribing pattern of 
psychotropic drugs in nursing home residents with 
dementia. Int Psychogeriatr 23: 1249–1259.
Yury, C. and Fisher, J. (2007) Meta-analysis of 
the effectiveness of atypical antipsychotics for the 
treatment of behavioural problems in persons with 
dementia. Psychother Psychosom 76: 213–218.
Zuidema, S., Johansson, A., Selbaek, G., Murray, 
M., Burns, A., Ballard, C. et al. (2015) A consensus 
guideline for antipsychotic drug use for dementia 
in care homes. Bridging the gap between scientific 
evidence and clinical practice. Int Psychogeriatr 27: 
1849–1859.
Visit SAGE journals online 
http://taj.sagepub.com
SAGE journals
