 A transsynaptic nanocolumn aligns neurotransmitter release to 
receptors
Ai-Hui Tang1,2,*, Haiwen Chen1,2,3,*, Tuo P. Li1,2,3, Sarah R. Metzbower1,2, Harold D. 
MacGillavry4, and Thomas A. Blanpied1,2
1Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, 
USA 2Program in Neuroscience, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21201, USA 3Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA 4Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Abstract
Synaptic transmission is maintained by a delicate, subsynaptic molecular architecture, and even 
mild alterations in synapse structure drive functional changes during experience-dependent 
plasticity and pathological disorder1,2. Key to this architecture is how the distribution of 
presynaptic vesicle fusion sites corresponds to the position of receptors in the postsynaptic density. 
However, despite long recognition that this spatial relationship modulates synaptic strength3, it has 
not been precisely described, due in part to the limited resolution of light microscopy. Using 
localization microscopy, we report here that key proteins mediating vesicle priming and fusion are 
mutually co-enriched within nanometer-scaled subregions of the presynaptic active zone. Through 
development of a new method to map vesicle fusion positions within single synapses, we found 
that action potential evoked fusion was guided by this protein gradient and occurred preferentially 
in confined areas with higher local density of RIM within the active zones. These presynaptic RIM 
nanoclusters closely aligned with concentrated postsynaptic receptors and scaffolding proteins4–6, 
suggesting a transsynaptic molecular “nanocolumn.” Thus, we propose that the nanoarchitecture 
of the active zone directs action potential evoked vesicle fusion to occur preferentially at sites 
directly opposing postsynaptic receptor-scaffold ensembles. Remarkably, NMDA receptor 
activation triggered distinct phases of plasticity in which postsynaptic reorganization was followed 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.A.B. (tblanpied@som.umaryland.edu) or A.T 
(tangaihui@gmail.com).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author Contributions
A.T. and H.C. performed STORM experiments, A.T. designed 3D-STORM analysis, H.C. performed and analyzed pHuse and RIM 
PALM experiments, T.P.L. and A.T. performed simulations, S.R.M. performed GCaMP imaging and nanobody STORM experiments, 
H.D.M. performed PSD PALM experiments, and A.T., H.C., and T.A.B. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 August 11; 536(7615): 210–214. doi:10.1038/nature19058.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by transsynaptic nanoscale realignment. This architecture thus suggests a simple organizational 
principle of CNS synapses to maintain and modulate synaptic efficiency.
The location of vesicle fusion within an active zone (AZ) is likely dictated by a few key 
members of the presynaptic proteome, including RIM1/2, Munc13, and Bassoon7 (Fig. 1a). 
To explore the organization of these proteins, we studied their subsynaptic distribution 
relative to postsynaptic scaffolding protein PSD-95 in cultured hippocampal neurons using 
3D-STORM8 following immunolabeling using primary antibodies and Alexa647- or Cy3-
tagged secondary antibodies (Fig. 1b). Paired synaptic clusters of AZ protein and PSD-95 
with clear borders were selected. As a confirmation that these pairs constituted synapses, we 
measured the peak-to-peak distances between pre- and postsynaptic clusters and found them 
to be consistent with previous measurements9 (Extended Data Fig. 1).
The distribution of RIM1/2 within the AZ, measured as 3D local density, was distinctively 
nonuniform with notable high-density peaks, which we characterized as nanoclusters (NCs, 
Fig. 1c, e). We adapted an auto-correlation function (ACF) to test whether this distribution 
occurs more frequently than expected by chance. The measured ACF showed significant 
nonuniformity compared to random ensembles (Fig. 1d). Simulations showed that the 
distance for which the ACF was significantly elevated provided a means to estimate the NC 
diameter (Extended Data Fig. 2a–c). The average estimated diameter of ~80 nm for RIM1/2 
NCs was very close to the reported size of PSD-95 and AMPA receptor (AMPAR) NCs4–6. 
Similar distribution and NC properties were found using a different antibody targeted toward 
a separate epitope in RIM1 (Extended Data Fig. 2d). Isolated non-synaptic small groups of 
localizations showed a weaker ACF that was significant over a much smaller distance (Fig. 
1d). This and other experiments suggest that the measured nonuniformity was not likely due 
to over-counting molecules or to potential artifacts of primary-secondary antibody labeling 
(Extended Data Fig. 3).
To directly compare the nanoscale organization of key AZ proteins, we developed an 
algorithm that identified NCs based on local densities (Fig. 1e). NCs of each protein were 
more likely to be located near the center of synapses than near the edge (Fig. 1f, Extended 
Data Fig. 2i). Compared to PSD-95 as the common control in pairwise two-color 
experiments, there were similar numbers of RIM1/2, more Munc13, and fewer Bassoon NCs 
per synapse (Fig. 1h). Comparisons between these three proteins suggested that Munc13 had 
a wider distribution than RIM1/2 across the AZ and the distribution of Bassoon was closer to 
uniform throughout the synapse (Fig. 1g–i, Extended Data Fig. 2f–n). Together, these 
observations revealed a complex and heterogeneous molecular architecture within single 
synapses, typified by dense assemblies of fusion-associated proteins nearer the center.
To examine the potential functional impact of the AZ nanoclusters on vesicle fusion10,11, we 
sought to directly map the distribution of vesicle fusion sites over multiple release events 
within individual boutons. To do so, we adapted analysis for single-molecule localization to 
signals from single-vesicle fusion obtained with vGlut1-pHluorin-mCherry (vGpH). 
Neurons were cotransfected with synapsin1a-CFP (Syn1a), a vesicle-associated protein that 
marks boutons, and vGpH, which increases in green fluorescence intensity upon vesicle 
fusion12. Single electrical field stimuli evoked vesicle fusion (Fig. 2a–b, Extended Data Fig. 
Tang et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4a) with a release probability (Pr) of 0.11 ± 0.01 per bouton, comparable to previous 
measurements, which was also sensitive to extracellular Ca2+ (Extended Data Fig. 4b–d), as 
expected. The frequency of action potential (AP)-independent spontaneous release events 
observed in TTX detected with vGpH was similar to the frequency of NMDA receptor 
(NMDAR)-dependent postsynaptic Ca2+ transients measured separately using the Ca2+ 
sensor GCaMP6f (Extended Data Fig. 5a).
To determine whether these evoked fusion events represent single- or multi-vesicular fusion, 
we compared them with spontaneous release in TTX (Fig. 2a–c), which most likely arises 
from single vesicle fusion13. By fitting the photon number distributions of evoked and 
spontaneous events, we estimated that ~72–82% of evoked events arose from single-vesicle 
fusion (Fig. 2c). With the majority of evoked release stemming from single-vesicle fusion, 
the location of fusion may be deduced by mathematically fitting the fluorescence profile 
captured immediately after fusion (Fig. 2d), analogous to single-molecule localization 
techniques14. For our median count of 518 photons/localization, the effective localization 
precision was in practice limited by vesicle diameter. In individual boutons, multiple evoked 
or spontaneous single-vesicle fusion events were used to generate maps that defined the 
areas over which vesicle fusion occurred (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4e–l). We called this 
approach “pHluorin uncovering sites of exocytosis” or pHuse.
Fusion site areas for spontaneous and evoked vesicle fusion tightly correlated with bouton 
areas measured by Syn1a (Fig. 2f), as expected. However, the slopes of the correlations 
differed, even though the bouton sizes were similar between groups (Extended Data Fig. 5b). 
In fact, evoked fusion site areas were significantly smaller (median smaller by 48%) and 
occurred over a significantly smaller proportion of the bouton (median smaller by 39%) than 
spontaneous fusion (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c–d, h–j).
One interpretation is that the concentration of vesicle priming proteins in NCs favors evoked 
fusion in these subregions of the AZ. This predicts that pHuse events would be associated 
with higher local RIM1 density and conversely that high local density of RIM1 increases the 
probability of nearby fusion. To assess these predictions, we mapped vesicle fusion sites 
relative to Eos3-tagged RIM1 using sequential PALM-pHuse imaging on the same live 
boutons (Fig. 2h, Extended Data Fig. 6d–e). As a local density metric for RIM1, we applied 
Voronoï tessellation and measured the first-rank density (δ1) for each RIM1-mEos3 
localization (as described in Levet et al, 2015). The distribution of RIM1-mEos3 was 
nonuniform and contained NCs with an average diameter of 80.95 ± 5.34 nm and 78.93 
± 5.85 nm using either an adapted SR-Tesseler analysis15 or nearest neighbor distance 
analysis4, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 6f), consistent with our 3D-STORM results (Fig. 
1). We then compared δ1 as a function of distance from the nearest pHuse localization for 
the measured RIM1 distributions versus randomized RIM1 distributions generated from the 
same number of localizations over the same area. Indeed, near pHuse sites, the average 
RIM1 δ1 was significantly greater than chance (Fig. 2i). Furthermore, within individual 
boutons, RIM1 molecules within 40 nm of a pHuse location had significantly higher δ1 than 
those further away (Fig. 2j). Conversely, considering all individual RIM1 localizations, the 
distance from the nearest pHuse localization decreased as a function of RIM1 δ1 (Fig. 2k). 
Thus, nanodistribution of RIM predicts the local probability of evoked fusion.
Tang et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For the synapse as a whole, the impact of presynaptic nanoscale organization and confined 
vesicle sites (Fig. 1, 2) will depend strongly on whether these RIM NCs align with 
postsynaptic receptor NCs4. To assess this, we compared the distribution of PSD-95 over the 
face of individual synapses to the corresponding distributions of RIM1/2, as the PSD-95 
NCs concentrate higher density of receptors7. An example synapse, presented in Fig. 3a 
(suppl. Video 1), shows three RIM1/2 NCs and three PSD-95 NCs that appear well-aligned 
and one pair not aligned. We used two independent approaches to assess the relationship 
between AZ and postsynaptic density (PSD) protein distributions. First we adapted a pair 
cross-correlation function (PCF) to measure the spatial relationship between the two 
distributions (see Methods). The measured AZ-PSD distributions showed a significantly 
elevated PCF compared to simulated AZ-PSD distributions with either distribution fully 
randomized (Fig. 3b). We then tested the contribution of NC positions to this elevated PCF 
(Fig. 3c). Randomizing NC positions and out-of-NC molecules (keeping localizations within 
NC borders intact) abolished the PCF to chance level, while randomizing just the out-of-NC 
molecules only modestly reduced the PCF, indicating that the precise positioning of the NCs 
themselves dominate the overall correlation of protein distributions (Fig. 3c–d).
Second, we reasoned that if synapses were transsynaptically aligned on the nanoscale level, 
the protein distribution on one side of the synapse would predict protein density in the 
opposing neuron. To test this, we measured RIM1/2 localization densities as a function of 
radial distance from the centers of PSD-95 NCs as translated across the synaptic cleft (Fig. 
3e). RIM1/2 localization densities within a 60 nm radius were significantly higher than the 
synaptic cluster average, decaying e-fold per 43.2 ± 12.1 nm away from the peak. This 
enrichment was again principally dependent on the relative positioning of NCs within 
synaptic clusters (Fig. 3e). For each individual NC, we defined an enrichment index as the 
average molecular density of the opposed protein within a 60 nm radius from the NC center 
(Extended Data Fig. 7a). NCs with enrichment indices significantly greater than that of the 
fully randomized distribution were considered enriched (Fig. 3f). We found 44.4 ± 3.0 % of 
PSD-95 NCs to be enriched (Extended Data Fig. 7b), and these NCs were opposed to 
RIM1/2 molecule densities that were 2.0 ± 0.1 times the average RIM1/2 synaptic cluster 
density (Fig. 3f). A similar PSD-95 protein enrichment profile was found relative to the 
centers of RIM1/2 NCs (Fig. 3e). Thus, this detailed metric for assessing nanoscale 
alignment revealed strong co-enrichment of these key proteins along narrow, transcellular 
columns. In comparison to RIM1/2, the enrichment of Munc13 with respect to PSD-95 NCs 
was considerably weaker, and Bassoon intermediate (Fig. 3d, g, Extended Data Fig. 7c–e, 
Suppl. Table 2). Together, both the PCFs and protein enrichment analyses revealed 
significant trans-synaptic alignment between RIM1/2 and PSD-95 distributions, largely 
stemming from the correlated positions of their respective NCs. We likewise found 
quantitatively similar number, characteristics, and alignment of pre- and postsynaptic NCs in 
acute hippocampal slices from adult rats (Extended Data Fig. 7f–h).
To determine whether evoked release aligns with postsynaptic receptors, we compared 
distributions of GluA2-containing AMPARs with RIM1/2 (Fig. 3h). Similar to PSD-95, 
GluA2 was significantly enriched relative to RIM1/2 NCs, decaying e-fold per 66.9 ± 15.4 
nm. This was further confirmed with a different GluA2/3 antibody (Suppl. Table 2). 
Importantly, given that the probability of AMPAR activation declines with distance from 
Tang et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glutamate release sites has previously been deduced3,16, we can predict synaptic potency by 
using the observed RIM1/2 and receptor distributions. To estimate the physiological impact 
of this transsynaptic alignment, we calculated receptor activation in a measured synapse 
versus randomized distributions. Consistent with effect sizes posited by previous 
models4,5,17, the measured distribution with transsynaptic alignment gained 21.8 ± 0.5% in 
synaptic strength compared to a uniform distribution of AZ and PSD proteins (Extended 
Data Fig. 8), suggesting this synaptic architecture facilitates higher single vesicle response 
potency. For comparison, long-term depression induces a very similar magnitude decrease in 
synaptic strength18.
Notably, we found that transsynaptic molecular alignment may extend deeper into the 
postsynaptic cell, as postsynaptic scaffold molecules farther from the plasma membrane also 
colocalized with PSD-95 NCs (Extended Data Fig. 9a,c), and RIM1/2 was correspondingly 
enriched with respect to Shank NCs (Extended Data Fig. 9b). 3D-STORM imaging of 
RIM1/2, PSD-95, and GKAP1 at the same synapses further confirmed their mutual co-
enrichment (Extended Data Fig. 9d–f). Altogether, these results revealed an axially oriented 
molecular ensemble spanning the cleft within the bounds of the synapse, evoking the 
concept of a transsynaptic “nanocolumn” enriched with key proteins that regulate synaptic 
transmission (Extended Data Fig. 9g). The graded protein densities involved suggest this 
may not be a clearly delineated structural element. Nevertheless, sensitivity of PSD-95 NC 
size to latrunculin4 further suggests that the spine cytoskeleton is engaged at the “base” of 
the column. Because actin executes many aspects of synaptic plasticity, this provides a 
potential means by which synaptic strength may be dynamically tuned.
Consequently, we speculated that nanoscale alignment might be altered during synaptic 
plasticity. To test this, we induced long-term potentiation via APV withdrawal and glycine 
stimulation19 which resulted in an increase in PSD-95 localization density within NCs, the 
percentage of PSD-95 NCs enriched with RIM1/2, and the enrichment index of PSD-95 NCs 
(Fig. 4a–c, Extended Data Fig. 10m). These changes were prevented by co-application of the 
NMDAR antagonist APV (Fig 4a–c, Extended Data Fig. 10m). Notably, no changes in 
RIM1/2 were observed, consistent with LTP as a primarily postsynaptic phenomenon.
We next tested an acute 5-minute activation of NMDARs, known to induce a sustained 
depression of synaptic strength20,21. Following this stimulus, postsynaptic nanostructure was 
markedly disrupted in the generally opposite manner, with the synaptic cluster volume of 
PSD-95 and the number, volume, and protein density of PSD-95 NCs all reduced (Figs. 4d–
f, Suppl. Table 3). These effects were long-lasting, and during the subsequent 25 minutes, 
most parameters underwent only partial recovery. In contrast, presynaptic nanostructure 
underwent a strikingly different pattern of reorganization that was detectable only in relation 
to PSD-95 NCs. Unlike PSD-95, RIM1/2 distributions were not affected immediately 
following the stimulus (Fig. 4d–f). However, following the 25-minute recovery, the 
enrichment index of RIM1/2 with respect to PSD-95 NCs increased with a corresponding 
increase in the percentage of enriched PSD-95 NCs (Fig. 4g–h). Remarkably, while RIM1/2 
NCs altogether remained constant in number and enriched percentage, there was in fact an 
increase in the size of those RIM1/2 NCs that were enriched with PSD-95, whereas the other 
non-enriched RIM1/2 NCs remained constant (Fig. 4i). Similar results were found when we 
Tang et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 studied NMDA-induced changes on RIM1/2 and GluA2/3 alignment (Extended Data Fig. 
10a–h). Note that on a traditional microscopic level, these changes to presynaptic 
organization were essentially undetectable: RIM1/2 staining revealed no change in synaptic 
cluster size or intensity at any point. Because the delayed presynaptic modification was 
specific to aligned NCs, it may be that nanocolumns point to an alignment-specific, 
retrograde presynaptic compensation following postsynaptic depression (Fig. 4j), potentially 
relating to previous reports of presynaptic homeostatic plasticity22.
Overall, the gradients of protein density we observed suggest a nanocolumn model, in which 
AZ regions with the highest likelihood of release are aligned to the densest receptor areas, 
optimizing the potency of neurotransmission (Suppl. Video 2). This provides a simple 
organizational principle that may hold for many small, CNS synapses, and will have the 
largest influence at synapses that typically release only one vesicle following an AP. The 
compartmentalized AZ architecture is reminiscent of protein organization in Drosophila 
neuromuscular junction23 and vertebrate ribbon synapses, where vesicles and priming 
proteins are arrayed around tight clusters of Ca2+ channels. However, observations in small 
CNS synapses of both clustered24,25 and random distribution of Ca2+ channels26, and 
emerging evidence for channel mobility as an equalizer of Pr for vesicles independent of 
channel positioning27 suggest that their precise distribution may not be the sole determinant 
of the AZ release likelihood landscape.
The alignment of pre and postsynaptic nanoscale subdomains4–6 suggests that even small 
synapses may be composed of dynamic functional modules28,29. We hypothesize that the 
nanocolumn represents an especially sensitive point whereby disease-associated pathways, 
frequently known to alter synaptic plasticity1,2, may disrupt synapse function. It will be 
important to identify which, if any, of the numerous cleft-spanning adhesion systems30 or 
retrograde signaling mechanisms mediate release-receptor alignment and permit dynamic 
transsynaptic realignment.
Methods
All experimental protocols were approved by the University of Maryland, Baltimore School 
of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Dissociated hippocampal 
neurons from E18 SD rats of both sexes were prepared as described31. To increase the 
experiment efficiency, for three-color STORM experiments we used the ‘sandwich’ cultures 
with a supporting astroglial monolayer as described32 in which most neuronal structures 
were in the same focal plane. All experiments were performed on neurons 14–21DIV and 
repeated on 3 or more separate cultures unless otherwise specified.
Immunostaining
Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and 4% sucrose in PBS (pH 7.4) for 10 
minutes at room temperature (RT), followed by washing with 50mM Glycine in PBS. Cells 
were then permeabilized and blocked using 3% BSA or 5–10% donkey or goat serum in 
PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100, followed by incubation with primary antibody (3 hours RT or 
4°C overnight) and secondary antibodies (1 hour RT).
Tang et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For comparisons of Munc13 or RIM1/2 with Bassoon made using 3D-STORM, mouse anti-
Bassoon (1:500, Enzo) was used with either rabbit anti-RIM1/2 (1:500; Synaptic Systems 
No. 140203) or rabbit anti-Munc13 (1:500; Synaptic Systems No. 126103). Cy3 or 
Alexa-647 conjugated goat or donkey anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibodies (1:200 
in PBS; JacksonImmuno) were used33. For comparisons of Munc13 and RIM1/2, staining 
was performed sequentially separated by additional blocking steps of incubation with rabbit 
serum at RT for 30 minutes followed by incubation with excess unconjugated anti-rabbit Fab 
antibody for 1 hour at RT. For this set of experiments, all permutations of the order in which 
the primary antibody was applied and the fluorophore used to label each protein were 
included. For transsynaptic measurements, rabbit anti-Munc13, anti-RIM1/2, anti-RIM1 
(1:500; Synaptic Systems No.140003) or anti-Bassoon (1:500, Cell Signaling), were used 
with mouse anti-PSD-95 (1:200; Neuromab), mouse anti-GluA2 (1:100, Millipore), or rabbit 
anti-GluR2/3 (1:100, Millipore). Unless specified otherwise, presynaptic proteins were 
labeled with donkey anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with Alexa-647 and postsynaptic PSD-95 
were labeled with donkey anti-mouse IgG conjugated with Cy3. For comparison of directly 
labeled primary antibody with primary-secondary antibody labeling, we directly conjugated 
Alexa-647 dye to anti-PSD-95 antibody and purified antibody using illustra NAP Columns 
(GE Healthcare). For comparison of nanobody labeling of expressed GFP-tagged 
knockdown-rescue PSD-95 with primary-secondary antibody labeling, we used GFP-booster 
(1:200, Chromotek). More information on antibodies used can be found in the 
supplementary information.
Tissue slice staining was performed essentially as previously described9,34. Briefly, 1 mm 
thick blocks of hippocampal tissue from 5–7 wk old male SD rats were fixed with ice-cold 
4% PFA for 15 min and then dehydrated with 30% sucrose in PBS. Cryostat sections with 
40 μm thickness were made, permeabilized and blocked with 10% donkey serum and 0.3% 
Triton X-100 in PBS/Glycine for 1 hours. PSD-95 and RIM1/2 were labeled with the same 
antibody concentration as was used in cell culture.
3D STORM Imaging
Imaging was performed on an Olympus IX81 ZDC2 inverted microscope with a 100X/1.49 
TIRF oil immersion objective. Excitation light was reflected to the sample via a 
405/488/561/638 quad-band polychroic (Chroma). The typical incident power was ~30 mW 
for 647 nm and ~60 mW for 561 nm (measured through the objective). To reduce 
background fluorescence while maximizing the depth of view, we adjusted the incident 
angle of the excitation beam to near but less than the critical angle, to achieve oblique 
illumination of the sample. Emission was passed through a Photometrics DV2 which split 
the emission at 565 nm and directed the red and far-red bands through matched filters 
(595/50 and 655 long-pass) onto an iXon+ 897 EM-CCD camera (Andor). A cylindrical lens 
(focal length = 30 cm) was inserted in each path of the splitting cassette of the DV2 to create 
the astigmatism for 3D imaging. All hardware was controlled via iQ software (Andor). Z 
stability was maintained by the Olympus ZDC2 feedback positioning system. Lateral drift 
was corrected with a cross-correlation drift-correction approach35,36.
Tang et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Labeled cells and tissue slices were imaged in a STORM imaging buffer freshly made 
before experiments containing 50 mM Tris, 10 mM NaCl, 10% glucose, 0.5 mg/ml glucose 
oxidase (Sigma), 40 μg/ml catalase (Sigma), and 0.1 M cysteamine (Sigma). For tissue 
slices, the focal plane was set to within 1.5 μm from the glass coverslip to obtain the best 
signal-to-noise ratio. Imaging was performed as previously described4,33. TetraSpeck beads 
(100 nm; Invitrogen) deposited on a coverslip were localized to correct alignment between 
the two channels as described4. The average deviation of the bead localizations after 
correction was between 10 and 15 nm. To calibrate the 3D positions of localizations, a z-
stack with 30 nm steps was collected on the same coverslip with beads. The average 
deviation of localized z-positions of immobilized fluorophores was 40–50 nm.
Three-color 3D-STORM
Three-color STORM were performed with two sequential sets of two-color 3D-STORM on 
RIM1/2-PSD-95 as a pair and then GKAP1-PSD-95 as a pair. Cells were immunolabeled 
with mouse anti-PSD-95, rabbit anti-RIM1/2, and mouse anti-GKAP1 (1:200, Neuromab). 
PSD-95 and RIM1/2 were then immunolabeled with secondary antibodies conjugated to 
Alexa 647 and Cy3, respectively. After >20 minutes of continuous excitation by high-
powered lasers during the first round of imaging, the majority of Cy3 molecules (RIM1/2) 
become bleached. After acquisition of the first set of data, GKAP1 was then labeled with 
secondary antibody conjugated to Cy3 while the coverslip remained on the microscope. The 
two sets of data were aligned post-hoc based on Alexa 647 (PSD-95) localizations. Because 
RIM1/2 and GKAP1 are not overlapping proteins, in the second imaging set, those Cy3 
localizations within the RIM cluster borders potentially arising from the small, unbleached 
fraction of RIM-Cy3 were rejected from GKAP1 localizations.
PALM-STORM Imaging
PALM imaging of PSD-95 concurrent with STORM imaging of GKAP or Shank (1:200, 
Neuromab) was performed as previously described4.
Single molecule localization and analysis
All data analysis was performed offline using custom routines in MATLAB (Mathworks). 
Molecule locations were determined by fitting an elliptical 2D Gaussian function to an 
11×11 pixel array (pixel size 100 nm) surrounding the peak4. The lateral (x, y) and axial (z) 
coordinates of the fluorophore were determined from the centroid position and ellipiticity of 
the fitted peak, respectively8. Only molecules localized with an x-y precision <10 nm37, 
fitting R2 > 0.6, and comprising >200 photons were used for further analysis.
To remove the localizations from those fittings of multiple overlapping peaks, we developed 
a rejection criteria based on the shape of peaks. For peaks arising from single fluorophores, 
the fitted width in x and y (Wx and Wy, respectively) should correlate in a manner mainly 
determined by the cylindrical lens. All localizations away from this correlation would come 
from multiple overlapping or poorly fitted peaks and therefore were rejected (Extended Data 
Fig. 1a–f).
Tang et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Single molecule tracking was employed to remove the overcounted localizations from peaks 
lasting for more than one frame. Tracking was accomplished with available algorithms 
(http://physics.georgetown.edu/matlab/). Particles appearing in consecutive frames separated 
by no more than 200 nm were collapsed into one track and considered one molecule by 
taking only the location in the first frame for further analysis.
Analysis of synaptic clusters
A potential synapse could be identified by a juxtaposed pair of synaptic proteins in a 2D 
scatter plot of all accepted localizations from both channels. By rotating a 3D scatterplot of 
localizations of a selected potential synapse, we evaluated the data quality and selected only 
those with clear pre- and postsynaptic components (e.g. no nearby third cluster which may 
indicate two synapses in close proximity) for further analysis. To define the border of a 
synaptic cluster, the nearest neighbor distances (NND) between localizations were calculated 
and the mean + 2 × standard deviation of NND was used as a cutoff to divide the 
localizations into sub-clusters. All localizations outside of the primary sub-clusters were 
considered to be background and discarded.
Due to the irregularly curved shapes of some synapses, using the convex hull to define 
synaptic cluster shape would overestimate the synaptic cluster volume. We thus defined the 
synaptic cluster using the alpha shape of the set of 3D localizations with α = 150 nm. This 
value was determined based on series of tests on >100 synapses to obtain the best synaptic 
cluster shape while avoiding dramatic changes in volume when individual localizations near 
the border were added or removed. This alpha shape algorithm gave a synaptic cluster 
volume of 81 ± 3 % of the convex hull volume (n = 156 synapses). Subsequently, this alpha 
shape was used as the cluster border when localizations were randomized.
A synaptic cluster was only considered for analysis if the volume was between 2 × 10−3 μm3 
and 30 × 10−3 μm3 (Cit.38), and contained an average density of > 8 × 103 localizations/μm3. 
Local density was defined as the number of molecules within a radius of 2.5 times the 
standard median nearest neighbor distance (MdNND) for the synaptic cluster density. The 
standard MdNND was calculated from a standard correlation curve 
(unit per 100 nm voxel for d) where d is the averaged localization density. This equation is 
derived from fitting MdNND with d in a series of simulations of uniformly distributed 
synaptic clusters with different densities. The reason we used this standard MdNND instead 
of the median NND from the original synaptic cluster was to reduce the deviation caused by 
local assembles.
Nanocluster analysis
Localizations with local densities ≥ 14 were selected and divided into agglomerative sub-
clusters with a node height cutoff of 40 nm using Matlab functions linkage() and cluster(). 
For each sub-cluster, we then calculated the NND and discarded those localizations with 
NND > MdMND if any. Only those sub-clusters containing ≥ 4 localizations were counted 
as nanoclusters (NCs).
Tang et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 These criteria were chosen based on a conservative strategy such that no NCs were identified 
in simulations of randomly distributed synaptic clusters with different densities. 
Consequently, they may have prevented detection of small or weakly enriched NCs. In 
principal, we cannot completely exclude the possibility of overcounting, so a certain fraction 
of detected NCs are potentially artificial. However, we employed the same standard on all 
datasets. Since all the transsynaptic analyses were well controlled by randomizing 
simulations, this contamination is not able to produce false positives for transsynaptic 
alignment analyses. On the contrary, it may attenuate the significance of the differences in 
transsynaptic analyses based on NCs, including cross-correlation, protein enrichment and 
the fraction of enriched NCs.
Since the number of localizations in one NC was typically small, using convex hull or alpha 
shape would greatly under-estimate the NC volume due to the border effect. Therefore, we 
tessellated the synaptic cluster with polyhedrons using Matlab function voronoin(), with 
each Voroni cell containing one localization. The NC volume was calculated as a summation 
of volumes of all polyhedrons containing the NC localizations. To avoid unexpected 
unbounded voronoin cells and over-estimating the volume of cells near the cluster surface, 
we introduced ~10% background noise by adding randomly distributed localizations around 
the cluster15. Polyhedron volume for each localization was averaged across ten independent 
simulations.
Autocorrelation function (ACF) analysis
To quantify the self-clustering of synaptic proteins, we adapted an autocorrelation 
function4,39 for our 3D data. The autocorrelation function g(r) is a measure of density 
correlations, which reports increased probability of finding a second localized signal a 
distance r away from a given localized signal. It was tabulated in Matlab using Fast Fourier 
Transforms (FFTs), as in Eq. 1.
(1)
FFT−1 is an inverse Fast Fourier Transform, I is the reconstructed 3D density matrix of 
localized fluorophores (pixel size of 5 nm), ρ is the general localization density inside the 
synaptic cluster, and W is a shape function that has the value of 1 inside the synaptic cluster 
as defined above with an alpha shape and the value of 0 elsewhere. The matrix I was padded 
with zeros in all three directions out to a distance larger than the range of the desired 
correlation function (we used 200 nm) to avoid artifacts due to the periodic nature of FFT 
functions. W was also padded by an equal number of zeros. FFT−1(|FFT(W)|2) is a 
normalization factor accounting for the general shape of the synaptic cluster itself so that the 
output of the ga(r⃗) represented only the internal structure of the measured synaptic cluster. 
ga(r⃗) was symmetric to rotations around the center of matrix C(xc, yc, zc), and it could be 
averaged over angles to obtain ga(r) by converting to polar coordinates. ga(r) was then 
Tang et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 binned by radius (r). Correlation functions were plotted for r > 0, as ga(r = 0) was a trivial 
contribution.
For a uniform distribution, e.g. when all localizations were uniformly randomized within the 
alpha shape, ga(r) = 1 (Fig. 1d). Any heterogeneity will result in a ga(r) > 1. The extent of 
ga(r) over 1, i.e. r0 for ga(r0) =1, is related to the pattern size of the internal heterogeneity 
(Extended Data Figure 2b–c)39.
Isolated, non-synaptic small groups of localizations were taken from our experimental data. 
These localization groups likely represent an overestimate of a single-dye-molecule 
localization spread. Nevertheless, we find that they are still significantly smaller than the 
large majority of the nanoclusters we detected.
Imaging vesicle exocytosis
For imaging vesicle fusion, vGluT-pHluorin-mCherry (a gift from Timothy Ryan)40,41, was 
cotransfected with Synapsin1a-CFP (a gift from George Augustine) using Lipofectamine 
2000 (Invitrogen) for 4–6 days before imaging cells at 14–20DIV. Optical measurements 
were performed using a laminar-flow perfusion and stimulation chamber. Images were 
acquired at 10 Hz with an Andor iXon 887 EM-CCD camera on an Olympus IX81 ZDC2 
inverted microscope with a 100X/1.49 TIRF oil immersion objective. Temperature was 
controlled using an objective heater set at either room temperature (~25°C) or 32°C. Action 
potentials were evoked by passing 1 ms current pulses yielding fields of ≈10-V/cm via 
platinum-iridium electrodes. Terminals were selected for imaging by assessing their 
responsiveness, as indicated by a fluorescence increase, to a 10 AP train at 20 Hz. A 
widefield Syn1a image was then taken at the imaging plane. Single AP-evoked release was 
measured over 60 trials of (1) 1 s acquisition of baseline fluorescence, (2) stimulus, (3) 2.5 s 
acquisition of post-stimulus fluorescence, (4) 7 s recovery during which the laser is off. 
Spontaneous release was measured over 5 min of continuous acquisition. Cells were imaged 
in a saline solution containing 120 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 
mM glucose, and 10 mM HEPES, pH adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH, 10 μM 6,7-
dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (DNQX; Sigma), 50 μM D,L-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric 
acid (AP5; Sigma), and 500 nM Jasplikinolide (Jasp; Millipore) at room temperature 
(~25C). When higher [CaCl2] was used, [MgCl2] was reduced to keep the divalent ion 
concentration constant. For measurements of spontaneous events, 500 nM tetrodotoxin 
(TTX; Enzo) was added after identifying terminals using AP-evoked fluorescence increase.
For calculating normalized changes in fluorescence (dF/F), images were analyzed in ImageJ 
by custom-written plugins12. Average fluorescence intensities were measured over a circular 
region of interest (ROI) of radius 800 nm for each bouton. Change in fluorescence (dF) was 
calculated as the difference in intensity of the frame after the stimulus was delivered and the 
average ROI intensity of 5 baseline frames not including the first frame or the frame 
immediately before the stimulus (Fbaseline). dF/F was calculated by normalizing each dF to 
Fbaseline.
Tang et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pHuse localization and analysis
Data analysis was performed offline using custom routines in MATLAB (Mathworks). 
Boundaries for individual boutons were determined using widefield images of Syn1a-CFP 
centered at the focal plane of the pHuse experiments thresholded at 50% of the peak 
intensity (33% and 67% thresholds were also compared and showed no significant difference 
on the effect of mode of release, shown in Extended Data Fig. 5i). Binary images were 
created from the thresholded image, and Syn1a-CFP puncta area calculated as a measure of 
bouton area, which correlated with pHuse area, as expected42. Images for each fusion event 
were processed using frame-by-frame subtraction followed by background subtraction to 
isolate fluorescence increases (Fig. 2d)43. Similar detection thresholds were set for 
spontaneous (75 ± 15) and evoked (78 ± 14, t = 0.88, p = 0.40) release, at ~3–4 times above 
background noise, on an individual imaging field basis. Spatial localization of the fusion 
events were determined by fitting an elliptical 2-dimensional Gaussian function to a 9×9 
pixel array surrounding the peak. Only molecules localized with a precision <25 nm37,44, 
elliptical form <1.3, and comprising >100 photons were used for further analysis. An 
additional criterion to exclude evoked pHuse localizations with photon counts > mean + 2SD 
of spontaneous photon count distribution was used in Extended Data Fig. 5d and showed no 
significant difference compared to the distribution lacking this criterion. Localizations from 
multiple fusion events over time at individual boutons were mapped. A 2D convex hull 
algorithm was used to calculate the minimal convex polygon that incorporated all fusion site 
localization points. The area of the resulting polygon was used as the fusion site (pHuse) 
area.
Photon count distributions analysis
Data analysis was performed offline using custom routines in MATLAB (Mathworks). The 
distribution for spontaneous fusion events was fit with a normal distribution using normfit(), 
which uses maximal likelihood estimation for optimization. The distribution of evoked 
fusion events was fit with a custom univariate distribution for a mixture of two normal 
distributions with a probability density function (pdf) defined in Eq. 2. This fitting also used 
maximal likelihood estimation for optimization of five parameters, including the mixture 
probability (p), and the population means (μ1, μ1) and variance (σ1, σ2) for each component, 
over 300 iterations using normpdf() to compute the pdf for each of the two component 
normal distributions.
(2)
Here p was constrained between 0 and 1, and σ had a lower bound of 0. This mixture 
probability defined the lower estimate (72%) for the percentage of single stimulus evoked 
fusion arising from single vesicles. We calculated the higher estimate (82%) by calculating 
the percent of evoked fusion events with photon counts within two standard deviations of the 
mean spontaneous fusion event photon count. To assess the influence of multivesicular 
events on evoked pHuse area, we used this as a cutoff to exclude localizations above this 
Tang et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 photon count. We found no significant difference between evoked area with and without 
excluding these events (Extended Data Fig. 5d).
Ca2+ imaging and analysis
For Ca2+ imaging, the genetically encoded indicator GCaMP6f45 was transfected at 14 DIV 
and imaged 3 days after transfection. GCaMP6f was used to detect postsynaptic miniature 
spontaneous Ca2+ transients (mSCaTs) that arose in dendritic spines following NMDA 
receptor activation by spontaneous release46. Coverslips were placed in custom-made 
chambers in saline solution containing 1 μM TTX, 10 μM DNQX, 25 μM picrotoxin 
(Sigma), and 5 μM nifedipine (Sigma). Imaging was performed on a spinning disk confocal 
system (Andor Technology), consisting of a CSU-22 confocal (Yokagawa) with a Zyla 4.2 
CCD camera detector (Andor) mounted on the side port of an Olympus IX-81 inverted 
microscope, using a 60X/1.42 oil-immersion objective, yielding a final effective pixel size of 
108 nm. Continuous acquisition at 20 Hz was collected for 3 minutes, controlled by iQ 
software (Andor).
Data analysis was performed offline using custom routines in Metamorph (Molecular 
Devices), Clampex (Molecular Devices), and Matlab (Mathworks). First, using Metamorph, 
a baseline image was created by averaging the first three and last three image frames and a 
maximum intensity projection was made by averaging all image frames. Image subtraction 
of the baseline from the maximum intensity projection revealed spines that showed an 
increase in GCaMP intensity. Regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn around these “active” 
spines as well as a background region and then transferred to the original timelapse. For 
each ROI the averaged intensity was measured per frame. The average intensity of the 
background ROI was subtracted from the average intensity of “active” spine ROIs. From 
this, an average fluorescence intensity was calculated for every 10 frames, and within every 
minute interval of imaging the lowest positive value was used as the baseline fluorescence 
intensity for that minute (Fbaseline,1min). A normalized change in fluorescence (dF/F) was 
calculated for each frame as (Fframe − Fbaseline,1min) / Fbaseline,1min. The dF/F values were 
then fed into Clampex, and mSCaTs were detected using a template search that identified 
peaks based on a shape profile determined from mSCaT examples with near-average rise 
and decay time courses.
Confocal imaging of presynaptic proteins
Neurons 14–20DIV were cotransfected for 3 days with RIM1-mVenus (a gift from P. 
Kaeser) and Synapsin1a-CFP to assess colocalization. Neurons transfected with only RIM1-
mVenus were immunostained with chicken anti-GFP (1:200, Chemicon) labeled with 
secondary anti-chicken-Alexa-488, rabbit anti-RIM1/2 labeled with secondary anti-rabbit-
Cy-3, and mouse anti-Bassoon labeled with secondary anti-mouse-Alexa-647 to assess 
expression levels. Imaging was performed on a spinning disk confocal system as described 
above. ImageJ was used to analyze fluorescence intensity of RIM1/2 and Bassoon at 
transfected compared to neighboring untransfected boutons.
Tang et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PALM-pHuse
RIM1-mEos3.1 was constructed by subcloning mEos3.1 from mEos3.1-N1 (a gift from S. 
McKinney) into pCMV5-RIM1-mVenus (P. Kaeser) in place of mVenus at NotI-AscI. 
PALM was performed on RIM1, and nanoclusters identified using local density measured by 
nearest neighbor distance as previously described4, or using an adapted form of SR-Tesseler 
first rank neighbor density (δ1), using 2× mean δ1 of the whole synapse as the threshold for 
identifying nanoclusters, as described in Levet et al. (2015)15. Nanoclusters identified by 
both methods were similar in size (Extended Data Fig. 6). To map vesicle fusion to AZ 
nanostructure, RIM1-mEos3.1 was cotransfected with vGpH at 10–14DIV and imaged at 
14–18DIV. RIM1 PALM and pHuse of 1-AP-evoked release was performed as described 
above sequentially on the same boutons. Overlapping RIM1 and pHuse localizations were 
analyzed at boutons containing > 10 RIM1 localizations and > 3 pHuse localizations offline 
using custom routines in MATLAB (Mathworks). vGpH fluorescence increase following a 
10 AP-train stimulus was used to outline the border of individual boutons. Randomized 
distributions of RIM1 were simulated for each synapse by randomly placing the same 
number of RIM1 localizations within the same area of RIM1 as calculated by convex hull of 
the measured RIM1 distribution. RIM1 local density within these randomized distributions 
was similarly calculated. Normalized RIM1 δ1 was calculated with respect to overall 
synaptic localization density.
3D Pair cross-correlation function (PCF) analysis
The 3D PCF was adapted from a similar function previously used to quantify colocalization 
in 2D data39. It was computed using two matrices (I1 and I2) reconstructed from two image 
channels (Eq. 3).
(3)
Here, conj[] is a complex conjugate, ρ1 and ρ2 are the averaged localization densities in the 
pair of synaptic clusters, W1 and W2 are shape functions of the two synaptic clusters, and 
Re{} indicates the real part. Different from the ACF, the symmetric origin of gc(r⃗) here is no 
longer the matrix center C(xc, yc, zc), but a different point A(x, y, z), and the vector 
represents the direction and distance for the translation of PSD-95 synaptic clusters (I2) to 
get the best overlap with presynaptic clusters (I1). We computed the direct correlation 
between I1 and I2 with Eq. 4.
(4)
A is the point with the peak G value. Because the originally constructed matrix I1 and I2 
were not continuous, to reduce the noise of the correlation, we first convoluted the two 
matrixes with an 11×11×11 kernel (Extended Data Fig. 1g). To avoid having the correlation 
Tang et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 be dominated by local domains with high localization density, we cut the peaks of the 
convoluted matrixes to 1/4 of the mean localization density within synaptic clusters (ρ1/4 
and ρ2/4) (Extended Data Figure 1h) so that G only represented the relationship between the 
general 3D shapes of the two synaptic clusters (I1′, I2′) without internal heterogeneity 
(Extended Data Figure 1m–n). Around A, gc(r⃗) is symmetric and could be angularly 
averaged to get gc(r).
Since the information of synaptic cluster shape and overall density had been normalized, 
gc(r) was fully dependent on the internal organizations of the two synaptic clusters. If 
localization assemblies inside the two synaptic clusters organized in a similar pattern and 
opposed each other, gc(r) > 1. If either synaptic cluster had a uniform distribution of 
localizations (Fig. 3b) or the internal assemblies were not aligned (Fig. 3c), gc(r) = 1. 
Different from the ACF, overcounting has no effect on the PCF39.
Protein enrichment analysis
The protein enrichment profile of protein-A relative to a protein-B NC, EA→B (r), was 
calculated as the angularly averaged localization density of protein-A around the aligned 
center of a protein-B NC normalized to the average localization density in synaptic cluster 
A. The aligned NC center was found as shown in Extended Data Fig. 1. To avoid potential 
problems caused by boundary conditions, we calculated the enrichment profile as Eq. 5.
(5)
NA→B (r) is the binned distribution of protein-A localization number to the aligned protein-
B NC center, NAr(m)→B (r) is the distribution of localization number for a uniformly 
randomized synaptic cluster A with m times of original localization density, and m is a 
factor set to 15 to reduce the effect of fluctuations. A protein-B NC was considered to be 
significantly enriched with protein A if EA→B (r) > Mean[EAr→B (r)] + 1.96 × Standard 
Deviation[EAr→B (r)], where EA→B (r) represents the enrichment profile of 10 simulated 
uniformly randomized A synaptic clusters with the original density and the same alignment 
to the NC center of protein-B.
Chemical LTP and LTD
Chemical LTP was performed using a combination of APV withdrawal and application of 
glycine as described in Araki et al. (2015)19 Briefly, 3–4 weeks old cultures were treated 
with 200 μM DL-APV in culture medium for two days and then transferred to ACSF (150 
NaCl, 3 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES-Na, 10 D-Glucose, all in mM, pH 7.4) with 100 
μM picrotoxin, 1 μM strychnine, 0.5 μM TTX and 200 μM APV. After preincubation for 1–2 
hours, chemical LTP was induced with 15 min incubation in the similar solution with 200 
μM glycine but without Mg2+ and APV. Neurons were fixed directly following induction. 
Chemical LTD was performed using application of NMDA as described in Lee et al. 
(1998)20. Control solutions of regular saline solution or coapplication with APV were paired 
with experimental conditions. Cells were fixed either immediately after plasticity induction 
Tang et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or washed with saline and incubated for 25 min at 37°C to allow recovery prior to fixing. 
Cells were then immunostained and imaged as described above.
Synaptic modeling
We used an experimentally constrained deterministic approach to study the dependence of 
synaptic strength on the spatial distribution of release sites and AMPARs. Central to this 
approach is the relationship between channel opening probability and its distance from a 
release site, determined previously by stochastic modeling approaches3,16,47:
(6)
where r is the lateral distance between an AMPAR and a release site. In brief, the 
distribution of RIM1/2 proteins and GluA2/3-containing AMPA receptors measured by 
STORM were used to determine the spatial coordinates of release sites and AMPARs on a 
model synapse. Since the precise photophysics and blink distribution of dyes are 
complicated and the exact efficiency of antibody labeling is unknown, we calculated 
gradient maps of spatial coordinates to determine putative RIM1/2 protein and AMPAR 
locations from the single-molecule images. First, the 3D spatial coordinates were projected 
onto 2D planes orthogonal to the manually determined axodendritic axis. Each projected 
point was assigned a Gaussian function, the amplitude and width of which were determined 
by the normalized local density and the lateral STORM localization precision (20 nm). 
Overlapping Gaussian functions within the AZ or PSD convex hull were integrated to create 
the pre- and post-synaptic gradient maps. The sampling pixel size was 2.5 nm (the calculated 
synaptic response was independent of pixilation level for sampling size from 1 to 20 nm, 
data not shown). The pre- and post-synaptic gradient maps were separated by 20 nm, the 
cleft distance used to determine Equation 63.
The model synaptic response for a single synapse was computed as the expected fraction of 
receptors that would open given a single release, averaged over all possible release locations 
in the AZ. For any single release event, the expected open fraction of channels at the peak of 
the response was calculated as follows:
(7)
where rij is the lateral distance between the ith pixel in the presynaptic gradient map and the 
jth pixel in the postsynaptic gradient map; the expected fraction of open channels O(i) from 
the ith release site is sum of channel opening probabilities at all pixels in the postsynaptic 
gradient map, where each jth pixel is weighted by its normalized local density LDj (i.e. the 
channel fraction is assumed to be directly proportional to the channel local density). To 
constrain the location of release events in the AZ, we utilized the live-cell pHuse-PALM 
data, which showed that release events preferentially occurred in regions with normalized 
RIM local density greater than 1.5, and these events occurred over 20–60% of the AZ area 
Tang et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (spontaneous pHuse area / PALMed RIM area, and evoked pHuse area / spontaneous pHuse 
area). To account for these measured features, we modeled the spatial likelihood of release 
as a piecewise sigmoidal function dependent on the normalized local RIM density:
(8)
where s is the steepness of the sigmoid transition, LDi is the normalized local density of 
RIM at the ith pixel of the presynaptic gradient map, LDinflect is the point of inflection in the 
sigmoidal function, and LDmax is the maximum normalized local density of RIM in the 
STORM measured example shown in Extended Data Fig. 8b. LDinflect and s were fitted to be 
1.5 and 0.959 in order to yield a fractional release area of 40%. To calculate the average 
peak synaptic response per release, we calculated the expected open channel fraction 
averaged over all possible release sites weighted by the spatial probabilities of release:
(9)
Code availability
All codes used in the paper are available upon request.
Statistical analysis
Statistical tests were performed with Sigmastat, Matlab, Graphpad, or R. No statistical 
methods were used to predetermine sample size. The sample sizes were determined based on 
numbers reported in previous studies. For comparison of two or more distributions, all 
samples were assessed for normality using Shapiro-Wilk or Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests. If 
samples met criteria for normality, we used a student’s t-test to compare two groups, a 
paired t-test for comparison of the same group before and after a treatment, or ANOVA for 
more than two groups. If ANOVAs were significant, we used a post-hoc Tukey test to 
compare between groups. For groups with combinations of discrete and continuous 
variables, we used MANCOVAs. We only performed two-tailed tests. Homogeneity of 
variances was tested using an F-test and found to be similar between compared groups. If 
samples did not meet criteria for parametric tests, we used Kolmogorov-Smirnov or 
Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for comparison of two groups and Kruskal-Wallis or Friedman 
ANOVA for comparison of more than two groups, with post-hoc analysis using Dunn’s test. 
Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m unless otherwise specified. Also see supplemental tables.
Tang et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Filtering of localizations and automatic algorithm to detect the synaptic 
axis
a, Scatterplot of fitted peak width in y (Wy) against that in x (Wx). The color codes the 
position in z. All localizations away from this center dense region arise from multiple 
overlapping or poorly fitted peaks and should be rejected. b, The ellipticity (Wx/Wy) and the 
width difference (Wx − Wy) formed an approximate linear relationship when Wx > Wy 
(dotted box). c, We fitted the ratios between ellipticity and the width difference to the 
denominators with third degree polynomial functions (black line) and rejected all 
Tang et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 localizations out of 95% confidence intervals (gray lines) of the curve (> 1.96 × standard 
deviation). The same criteria was applied to the other fraction of localizations with Wx < 
Wy. d, The same scatterplot as in a after rejection of all of the diffuse localizations (about 
20–25%). e–f, The filtering protocol cleared up most of the localizations from multiple 
overlapping peaks or poorly fitted peaks, including most of the nonrelevant background 
localizations (e, scale 2 μm) and those localizations with poorly calibrated z positions (f, 
scale 200 nm). The synapse in f corresponds to the boxed synapse in e. g, A 2D section 
through the center of the convoluted constructed 3D distribution matrix of a synapse. h, Peak 
density of the matrix set to a quarter of the mean molecule density of the synaptic cluster. i, 
2D section at the same position of the 3D matrix of direct cross-correlation of the two 
channels (equation 3 in methods). C is the center of matrix, and A is the peak of the cross-
correlation. j–k, Best overlap of the two synaptic clusters after PSD-95 was moved in 3D 
space along the vector 
. l, 3D scatter plots of the synapse in two different view angles. 
The arrow denotes the vector and the extended line (dotted) represents the synaptic axis. m, 
3D plot of detected synaptic axis when the positions of high density peaks in RIM1/2 
(nanoclusters) were randomized within the synaptic cluster. This simulation was performed 
35 times, but only 10 representative results are presented here to avoid overlapping. The red 
denotes the synaptic axis of the original synaptic cluster. n, Averaged distance between the 
detected Cn positions from 35 simulated clusters to the C position of the original cluster. 
Data shown in mean ± s.d. This < 6 nm distance confirms that the high density peaks have 
negligible effect on the detection of the synaptic axis in this method. o, Distribution of all 
localizations along the synaptic axis with bin size of 10 nm. Peak-to-peak distance between 
the synaptic protein pair can be measured from this distribution. p–r, Distribution of peak-
to-peak distances for three pairs of synaptic proteins.
Tang et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Nanocluster organization of vesicle release machinery proteins in the 
active zone and postsynaptic AMPA receptors
a, En-face (top) and side (bottom) views of local density maps of a simulated synapse with 
artificial NCs with 40 nm diameters, scale 100 nm. b, Autocorrelation function of simulated 
clusters with different sized NCs. The points represent the radius where g(r) = 1. c, Pooled 
data from 15 sets of simulations showing that the radius where g(r) first crosses 1 reasonably 
estimates the average NC diameters. d, Comparison of NC number, fraction of localization 
in NC, and NC volume across different developmental stages shows no significant 
difference, though the young DIV9 culture shows a trend toward increased NC numbers 
Tang et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (one-way ANOVA on ranks for NC number and volume, one-way ANOVA for %localization 
in NC). Data were from 143 RIM NCs and 135 PSD NCs of 64 DIV9 synapses, 63 RIM 
NCs and 65 PSD NCs of 38 DIV14 synapses, and 44 RIM NCs and 41 PSD NCs from 28 
DIV21 synapses. e, Comparison of two RIM antibodies (from left to right) in whole synaptic 
cluster volume, number of NCs, autocorrelation function estimating average NC diameter, 
and protein density relative to PSD-95 NC centers. Anti-RIM1/2 (Synaptic Systems #140–
203) targets the Zn-finger domain and anti-RIM1 targets the PDZ domain of RIM1 
(Synaptic Systems #140–003). These tests suggest that there is no significant difference 
between these two antibodies. The numbers in bars denote the group sizes. f, Local density 
maps of en-face (top) and side (bottom) views of an example Munc13 cluster, scale 200 nm. 
g, Auto-correlation functions for Munc13 distributions compared to simulated randomized 
distributions. h–i, Local density maps and ACF of Bassoon cluster, scale 200 nm. j, Pooled 
cluster volumes, normalized to PSD-95 volumes within each synapse. Each bar pair 
represents data from a set of RIM1/2-PSD-95, Munc13-PSD-95 or Bassoon-PSD-95 
staining. The numbers in bars denote the group sizes. k, Distribution of en-face distances 
between NC center and synapse center. Data were normalized to the distribution of 
simulated clusters with the same number of NCs as the original synapse but randomized 
positions. l, An example synapse with RIM1/2 and Munc13 staining of the same synapse, 
shown in two different angles. The translucent surfaces represent the alpha shapes that 
define the synaptic cluster borders. m, Pooled RIM1/2 and Munc13 cluster volumes, 
normalized to RIM1/2 within each synapse. n, Pooled RIM1/2, Munc13 and Bassoon cluster 
volumes from staining of RIM1/2-Bassoon and Munc13-Bassoon, normalized to Bassoon 
within each synapse. *p<0.05, ***p<0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test. †p<0.05, one-way 
ANOVA on ranks with pairwise comparison procedures (Dunn’s method). o, Local density 
map of a GluA2 cluster. p, Auto-correlation functions for GluA2 distributions compared to 
simulated randomized distributions. q, Local density map of a GluR2/3 cluster. r, Auto-
correlation functions for GluR2/3 distributions compared to simulated randomized 
distributions.
Tang et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Detected nanoclusters unlikely due to labeling artifact or overcounting 
of molecules
a–i, Comparison of PSD-95 labeled with monoclonal primary antibodies directly conjugated 
to Alexa 647 dye (1°-A647, red) with the same molecules labeled with primary and 
secondary antibodies conjugated to Cy3 (1°-2°-Cy3, blue) as represented in c. a–b, 
Comparison between non-synaptic small groups of localizations arising from isolated 
primary antibodies and secondary antibodies. Schematic shown in (a). Standard deviation of 
localizations in both groups along different dimensions (n = 32 for A647; n = 36 for Cy3) in 
(b). The two types of localizations groups showed similar variation in all dimensions. d, 
Local density maps of the same PSD-95 cluster labeled with 1°-A647 (top) and 1°-2°-Cy3 
Tang et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (middle) and overlapped distribution of 1°-A647 and 2°-Cy3 with detected nanoclusters 
highlighted in darker colors (bottom), scale 200 nm. e, Autocorrelation of synaptic clusters 
labeled with 1°-A647 and 1°-2°-Cy3. f, Autocorrelation of isolated small groups of 
localizations of A647 and Cy3 dyes. g, Comparison of the radius at which the 
autocorrelation function crossed with the random level (g(r) = 1). There was no difference 
between PSD-95 clusters with different labeling methods, but the r(0) for isolated 
localization groups were significantly less than r(0) for PSD-95 clusters. . **p < 0.01, t-test 
between the filled and open bars of the same color. h, NCs detected in both channels 
displayed no difference in number, volume, or the fraction of NCs enriched with 
localizations from the other channel. i, Protein enrichment of localizations detected in each 
channels with those in the other channel (n = 32 synapses). These results demonstrate that 
the NCs we detected in our study were not due to aggregation of multiple secondary 
antibodies to the primary antibodies. j–r, Cells transfected with knockdown-rescue-PSD-95-
GFP were labeled with nanobodies against GFP conjugated at a 1:1 ratio with Atto647 (Nb-
At647, red) and primary/secondary antibodies against PSD-95 (1°-2°-Cy3, blue) as depicted 
in l. j–k, Comparison between non-synaptic small groups of localizations arising from 
isolated Nb-At647 and 1°-2°-Cy3 (as depicted in j, n = 26 and 28, respectively). k, The 
nanobodies showed a significant smaller size than antibodies. ***p < 0.001, two-way 
ANOVA, †p<0.05, ††p<0.01, pairwise comparison (Tukey Test) between nanobodies and 
antibodies. m–r, Similar comparison as in d–i between PSD-95 clusters labeled with Nb-
At647 and 1°-2°-Cy3 (n = 13 synapses). Scale 200 nm. Overall, these results demonstrated 
that the NCs we detected in our study were unlikely due to artifacts of antibody binding and 
labeling. The difference between the size of the isolated localizations groups and PSD-95 
clusters calculated by autocorrelation also argues against the possibility that the nanoclusters 
we detected were due to repetitive switching of one or a few fluorophores. **p < 0.01, t-test 
between the filled and open bars of the same color. s, An example synapse with nanoclusters 
highlighted before (upper) and after (lower) removal of localizations resulting from 
fluorophores lasting for multiple frames, scale 100 nm. t, Paired autocorrelation function of 
synaptic clusters with and without multiple-frame molecules. p = 0.77, n = 25 synapses for 
RIM1/2; p = 0.58, n = 25 synapses for PSD-95, two-way ANOVA with repeated measures. 
u, The tracking removed 13 ± 8% and 17 ± 9% of the localizations for RIM1/2 and PSD-95, 
respectively, but had no significant effects on autocorrelation function results, NC numbers, 
or NC volumes. ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, NS p > 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
Tang et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. 1AP evoked release is [Ca2+] dependent and mainly univesicular48
a, Example of fluorescence signals at a single bouton over repeated trials of 1 AP 
stimulation. b, Single event traces of vGpH fluorescence increase following 1 AP stimuli in 
standard (2 mM) or heightened extracellular [Ca2+] (4 mM). c, Comparison of distributions 
of fluorescence changes in 2 mM (n = 233/27) and 4 mM (n = 115/12) extracellular [Ca2+], 
relative to noise distributions obtained from the baseline frames prior to stimulation. d, 
Comparison of noise-subtracted distributions of fluorescence changes in different [Ca2+]. e, 
Processed images of vGpH fluorescence increase following 1 AP stimuli from 3 trials 10 
trials apart. f, Automatic detection using pHuse of events shown in e. g, Summed projection 
of framewise and background subtracted vGpH fluorescence increases over 60 trials. h, 
pHuse localizations on Syn1a (white). i–l. Same as e–h for spontaneous events in TTX over 
5 minutes. n given in synapses/experiments.
Tang et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. pHuse reveals differences between evoked and spontaneous fusion site 
areas
a. Comparison of spontaneous frequency measured presynaptically using vGpH (n = 77/22) 
and postsynaptically using GCaMP6f 45(n = 61/5), t = 1.02, n.s. b. Average bouton areas 
across groups, t = 0.87, n.s. c. Cumulative distributions of fusion areas for spontaneous and 
evoked release (K–S test, D = 0.23*) d. Cumulative distributions of normalized fusion areas 
for 1 AP evoked fusion excluding events with photon counts > mean + 2SD of spontaneous 
events (n = 91/27) compared to all evoked events (n = 104/28, K–S test, D = 0.05, n.s.) and 
spontaneous events (n = 77/22, K–S test, D = 0.25*) e–f. Interestingly, while evoked Pr was 
significantly positively correlated with Syn1a area, as reported previously50, spontaneous 
event frequency showed no relationship with Syn1a area (e, linear fit, evoked R = 0.30**, 
spontaneous R = 0.12, n.s.). On the other hand, both spontaneous event frequency and 
evoked Pr significantly positively correlated with pHuse area (f, linear fit, evoked R = 
Tang et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 0.64***, spontaneous R = 0.60***). This suggests that pHuse area may be a better 
approximate for AZ area and the functional parameters of a synapse than bouton area. g. 
Normalized pHuse area as a function of cell age shows no significant correlation (evoked R 
= 0.03, n.s., spont R = 0.004, n.s.). e–g: nevoked = 104/28, nspont = 77/22. h. Normalized 
pHuse area was not significantly different at RT (nevoked = 51/10, nspont = 32/7) vs 
physiological temperature (nevoked = 35/9, nspont = 34/4) within modes of release but still 
significantly different between modes of release. i. Normalized pHuse area was not 
significantly different at different thresholds for Syn1a within modes of release but still 
significantly different between modes of release (n = 51/10). j. Both numbers of events and 
mode of release are significant factors for pHuse area, but they do not have a significant 
interaction nevoked = 155/38, nspont = 109/29. (For i–j, see Supplementary Tables for 
statistics.) n given in synapses/experiments, n.s. = not significant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, 
***p < 0.001.
Extended Data Figure 6. RIM1-mEos3.1 PALM identifies NCs
a. Neurons coexpressing RIM1-mVenus (a generous gift from Pascal Kaesar) and Syn1a-
CFP colocalize to the same boutons. Right panels show enlargement of areas within the 
Tang et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 white boxes, scale 5 μm (left) and 1 μm (right). b. Neurons expressing RIM1-mVenus 
immunostained for RIM1/2 and Bassoon. Arrowheads point to some colocalized AZs, scale 
2 μm. c. Immunofluorescence intensity of transfected cells normalized to nearby 
untransfected cells show 3.74 ± 0.11-fold overexpression of RIM and 1.24 ± 0.03-fold 
increase in Bassoon (n = 262 synapses/7 cells). d. Photon count distribution of RIM1-
mEos3.1 (3997 localizations). e. Same boutons shown in Fig. 2 visualized using 5 × Nearest 
Neighbor Density (NND) as a measure of local density. f–h. Cumulative distributions of 
PALMed RIM1 NCs diameter, area, and number, respectfully, identified using adapted 
Tesseler analysis and 5 × NND analysis (n = 65/13). i. RIM1 localization density as a 
function of radial distance from pHuse localizations. (See Supplementary Tables for 
statistics.) j. Mean distance from pHuse localizations as a function of local density measured 
by 5 × NND (Raw data R = 0.23***, n = 26/13). k. Proportion of pHuse localizations within 
40 nm of a RIM1 localization as a function of RIM1 local density measured by 5 × NND (R 
= 0.35***). n given in synapses/experiments unless otherwise specified, ***p < 0.001.
Extended Data Figure 7. Protein enrichment within nanocolumns
a, Enrichment index between RIM1/2 and PSD-95. The left insets are replicas of Fig. 3e, 
and the enrichment index is defined as the average of the first three bins in the enrichment 
profile (boxed), i.e. normalized localization density within 60 nm from the projection center 
of a given NC. Filled points show RIM1/2 relative to PSD-95 NCs, open points show 
Tang et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PSD-95 relative to RIM1/2 NCs. Same randomizations as in Fig. 3e and depicted again in b. 
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001, one-way ANOVA on ranks with pairwise comparison procedures 
(Dunn’s method). b, The fraction of enriched NCs is significantly above chance level, and is 
also dependent on the relative position of the two sets of NCs. c–d, Side and en-face views 
of a synaptic Munc13 and PSD-95 pair and a synaptic Bassoon and PSD-95 pair with 
highlighted nanoclusters, scale 200 nm. e, Pooled enrichment index of three AZ proteins and 
PSD-95, scale 200 nm. Filled points show AZ proteins relative to PSD-95 NCs, open points 
show PSD-95 relative to AZ protein NCs. **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, one-way ANOVA on 
ranks with pairwise comparison procedures (Dunn’s method). f, Example of RIM1/2 and 
PSD-95 in adult hippocampal slices. g, Auto-correlation functions of RIM1/2 and PSD-95 (n 
= 192 and 43 synapses, respectively). There were, on average, 2.02 ± 0.08 and 1.32 ± 0.21 
NCs with a volume of (3.6 ± 0.2) and (4.2 ± 0.7) × 105 nm3 for RIM1/2 and PSD-95, 
respectively. Except PSD NC number which was significantly less than that in cultures (p = 
0.03), all other parameters were similar (Wilcoxon signed-rank test). h, Enrichment profile 
between RIM1/2 and PSD-95 in tissue slices (28 synapses from 7 sections, 4 animals). 
*p<0.05 between measured and randomized synapses, two way ANOVA with pairwise 
comparison procedures (Dunn’s method).
Tang et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Preferential release in nanocolumns can increase synaptic strength
a, Schematic of the experimentally constrained, deterministic approach used to study the 
dependence of synaptic strength on the spatial distribution of release sites and AMPARs. 
The simulated release site distribution at a synapse was drawn from its measured RIM 
positions and the average measured relationship between RIM density and pHuse locations 
(Fig 2). b, Distributions of measured RIM localizations within a single active zone (AZ) 
boundary (grey), and the same cluster with randomized positions of the indicated subsets of 
molecules. c, Maps of RIM local density normalized to the overall densities within the AZs. 
d, Probability density maps of possible release sites given that a release occurs. e, 
Distributions of GluA2/3 locations within the PSD boundary (grey) of the same measured 
synapse (ellipses refer to this distribution) and randomized. f, Maps of fraction of open 
channels at peak response per average release from the respective AZs directly above them 
in d. g, Calculated open channels at peak response, n = 20 randomly generated molecular 
distributions. See methods for more details.
Tang et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Enrichment of other scaffolding proteins within nanocolumns
a, Enrichment of Homer1 with PSD-95 NCs, n = 118 NCs from 48 synapses, scale 100 nm. 
b, Enrichment of RIM1/2 to Shank NCs, n = 80 NCs from 32 synapses, scale 200 nm. 
*p<0.05, ANOVA on ranks with pairwise comparison procedures (Dunn’s method) in a and 
b. c, GKAP2 and Shank3 densities (determined with STORM, n = 6 and 12, respectively) 
within PSD-95 NCs (determined with PALM of transfected knockdown-replacement-
PSD-95-mEos2) normalized to total PSD densities. Both proteins showed significant 
enrichment in PSD-95 NCs, *p<0.05, paired t-tests. d, Three-color STORM imaging of 
RIM1/2, GKAP1 and PSD-95 on the same synapses example (left) and protein enrichment 
profiles of RIM1/2 and GKAP1 with respect to PSD-95 NCs (right), n = 32 NCs from 17 
synapses, scale 200 nm. e, Enrichment indices of RIM1/2 and GKAP1 relative to PSD-95 
NCs. Color-coded bars represent the same set of randomizations as performed in Fig. 3c: 
orange denotes randomization of only out-of-NC localizations, cyan denotes randomization 
of NC positions within synaptic clusters and grey denotes randomization of all localizations. 
f, The percentage of PSD-95 NCs that were enriched with GKAP1, RIM1/2 or both with 
color-coded randomizations. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ANOVA on ranks with pairwise 
comparison procedures (Dunn’s method), n = 32 NCs from 17 synapses in 7 different 
cultures. g, Schematic summary of the distribution of synaptic proteins within nanocolumns. 
The distributions of color-coded proteins are based on our results and the proteins in grey are 
hypothetical, some, such as Ca2+ channels, have been suggested previously to be 
clustered49,50.
Tang et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. Plasticity within nanocolumns
a, Changes in the localization density within RIM1/2 (red) and PSD-95 (blue) NCs under 
control, 5 min NMDA treatment, 25 min washout, and NMDA + APV treatment conditions. 
b–h, Reorganization of RIM1/2 and GluR2/3 under control, 5 min NMDA treatment, 25 min 
washout conditions examples (b), comparison of whole synaptic cluster sizes (c), NC 
number per synapse (d), localization density within NCs (e), enrichment indices (f), 
percentage of NCs that were enriched (g), and NC volumes (h). Note that similar to the 
results from the RIM1/2-PSD-95 analyses, only those RIM1/2 NCs that were enriched with 
GluR2/3 (dark red) were increased in volume. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ANOVA on ranks with 
pairwise comparison to control group (Dunn’s method), and χ2 test for the proportion. Data 
from 62, 21 and 37 NCs from 34, 18 and 24 synapses for control, NMDA, and washout, 
respectively. i, Color coded local density map of an example live-PALMed PSD-95 cluster 
before and after NMDA treatment. Scale 100 nm. j–k, Changes in PSD-95 NC area induced 
by NMDA and blocked by APV (n = 28 and 21, respectively). **p<0.01, n.s. = not 
significant, paired t-test. l–n, LTP stimulation induced changes in NC volumes (l), 
localization density within NCs (m) and NC numbers (n). *p<0.05, ANOVA on ranks with 
pairwise comparison to control group (Dunn’s method).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Tang et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We thank Scott Thompson, Thomas Abrams, Sandra Jurado, and George Wittenberg for advice and comments, 
Pascal Kaeser for advice on RIM expression and RIM antibodies, Yoichi Araki and Richard Huganir for advice on 
chemLTP, and Sai Sachin Divakaruni for advice and initial tests of chemLTP. We thank Pascal Kaeser for the 
generous gift of RIM1-mVenus, Timothy Ryan for vGlut1-pHluorin-mCherry, George Augustine for Synapsin1a-
CFP, and M. Contreras for excellent technical assistance. This work was supported by F30-MH105111 to H.C., 
F30MH102891 to T.P.L., F31-MH105105 to S.R.M., T31GM008181 to H.C. and S.R.M., R01-MH080046 and 
NS090644 to T.A.B, and a gift from the Kahlert Foundation to T.A.B.
References
1. Fromer M, et al. De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks. Nature. 2014
2. Volk L, Chiu SL, Sharma K, Huganir RL. Glutamate Synapses in Human Cognitive Disorders. Annu 
Rev Neurosci. 2015; 38:127–149. [PubMed: 25897873] 
3. Franks KM, Stevens CF, Sejnowski TJ. Independent sources of quantal variability at single 
glutamatergic synapses. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2003; 23:3186–3195. [PubMed: 12716926] 
4. MacGillavry HD, Song Y, Raghavachari S, Blanpied TA. Nanoscale Scaffolding Domains within the 
Postsynaptic Density Concentrate Synaptic AMPA Receptors. Neuron. 2013; 78:615–622. 
[PubMed: 23719161] 
5. Nair D, et al. Super-resolution imaging reveals that AMPA receptors inside synapses are 
dynamically organized in nanodomains regulated by PSD95. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2013; 
33:13204–13224. [PubMed: 23926273] 
6. Fukata Y, et al. Local palmitoylation cycles define activity-regulated postsynaptic subdomains. The 
Journal of cell biology. 2013; 202:145–161. [PubMed: 23836932] 
7. Sudhof TC. The presynaptic active zone. Neuron. 2012; 75:11–25. [PubMed: 22794257] 
8. Huang B, Wang W, Bates M, Zhuang X. Three-dimensional super-resolution imaging by stochastic 
optical reconstruction microscopy. Science. 2008; 319:810–813. [PubMed: 18174397] 
9. Dani A, Huang B, Bergan J, Dulac C, Zhuang X. Superresolution imaging of chemical synapses in 
the brain. Neuron. 2010; 68:843–856. [PubMed: 21144999] 
10. Park H, Li Y, Tsien RW. Influence of synaptic vesicle position on release probability and 
exocytotic fusion mode. Science. 2012; 335:1362–1366. [PubMed: 22345401] 
11. Watanabe S, et al. Ultrafast endocytosis at mouse hippocampal synapses. Nature. 2013; 504:242–
247. [PubMed: 24305055] 
12. Balaji J, Ryan T. Single-vesicle imaging reveals that synaptic vesicle exocytosis and endocytosis 
are coupled by a single stochastic mode. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2007; 
104:20576–20581.
13. Leitz J, Kavalali ET. Fast retrieval and autonomous regulation of single spontaneously recycling 
synaptic vesicles. eLife. 2014; 3:e03658. [PubMed: 25415052] 
14. Betzig E. Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics (Nobel Lecture). Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition. 2015; 54:8034–8053.
15. Levet F, et al. SR-Tesseler: a method to segment and quantify localization-based super-resolution 
microscopy data. Nature methods. 2015; 12:1065–1071. [PubMed: 26344046] 
16. Raghavachari S, Lisman JE. Properties of quantal transmission at CA1 synapses. Journal of 
neurophysiology. 2004; 92:2456–2467. [PubMed: 15115789] 
17. Tarusawa E, et al. Input-specific intrasynaptic arrangements of ionotropic glutamate receptors and 
their impact on postsynaptic responses. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2009; 29:12896–12908. 
[PubMed: 19828804] 
18. Dudek SM, Bear MF. Homosynaptic long-term depression in area CA1 of hippocampus and effects 
of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor blockade. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
1992; 89:4363–4367.
19. Araki Y, Zeng M, Zhang M, Huganir RL. Rapid dispersion of SynGAP from synaptic spines 
triggers AMPA receptor insertion and spine enlargement during LTP. Neuron. 2015; 85:173–189. 
[PubMed: 25569349] 
Tang et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 20. Lee HK, Kameyama K, Huganir RL, Bear MF. NMDA induces long-term synaptic depression and 
dephosphorylation of the GluR1 subunit of AMPA receptors in hippocampus. Neuron. 1998; 
21:1151–1162. [PubMed: 9856470] 
21. Sanderson JL, et al. AKAP150-anchored calcineurin regulates synaptic plasticity by limiting 
synaptic incorporation of Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2012; 
32:15036–15052. [PubMed: 23100425] 
22. Davis GW, Müller M. Homeostatic control of presynaptic neurotransmitter release. Annual review 
of physiology. 2015; 77:251–270.
23. Liu KS, et al. RIM-binding protein, a central part of the active zone, is essential for 
neurotransmitter release. Science. 2011; 334:1565–1569. [PubMed: 22174254] 
24. Holderith N, et al. Release probability of hippocampal glutamatergic terminals scales with the size 
of the active zone. Nature Neuroscience. 2012
25. Nakamura Y, et al. Nanoscale distribution of presynaptic Ca 2+ channels and its impact on 
vesicular release during development. Neuron. 2015; 85:145–158. [PubMed: 25533484] 
26. Scimemi A, Diamond JS. The Number and Organization of Ca2+ Channels in the Active Zone 
Shapes Neurotransmitter Release from Schaffer Collateral Synapses. The Journal of Neuroscience. 
2012; 32:18157–18176. [PubMed: 23238730] 
27. Schneider R, et al. Mobility of Calcium Channels in the Presynaptic Membrane. Neuron. 2015; 
86:672–679. [PubMed: 25892305] 
28. Tarr TB, Dittrich M, Meriney SD. Are unreliable release mechanisms conserved from NMJ to 
CNS? Trends in neurosciences. 2013; 36:14–22. [PubMed: 23102681] 
29. Lisman J, Raghavachari S. A unified model of the presynaptic and postsynaptic changes during 
LTP at CA1 synapses. Sci STKE. 2006; 2006:re11–re11. [PubMed: 17033044] 
30. Missler M, Südhof TC, Biederer T. Synaptic cell adhesion. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in 
biology. 2012; 4:a005694. [PubMed: 22278667] 
31. Frost NA, Shroff H, Kong H, Betzig E, Blanpied TA. Single-molecule discrimination of discrete 
perisynaptic and distributed sites of actin filament assembly within dendritic spines. Neuron. 2010; 
67:86–99. [PubMed: 20624594] 
32. Kaech S, Banker G. Culturing hippocampal neurons. Nature protocols. 2006; 1:2406–2415. 
[PubMed: 17406484] 
33. van de Linde S, et al. Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy with standard fluorescent 
probes. Nature protocols. 2011; 6:991–1009. [PubMed: 21720313] 
34. Gasser EMS, et al. Immunofluorescence in brain sections: simultaneous detection of presynaptic 
and postsynaptic proteins in identified neurons. Nature protocols. 2006; 1:1887–1897. [PubMed: 
17487173] 
35. Geisler C, et al. Drift estimation for single marker switching based imaging schemes. Optics 
express. 2012; 20:7274–7289. [PubMed: 22453409] 
36. Mlodzianoski MJ, et al. Sample drift correction in 3D fluorescence photoactivation localization 
microscopy. Optics express. 2011; 19:15009–15019. [PubMed: 21934862] 
37. Thompson RE, Larson DR, Webb WW. Precise nanometer localization analysis for individual 
fluorescent probes. Biophysical journal. 2002; 82:2775–2783. [PubMed: 11964263] 
38. Schikorski T, Stevens CF. Quantitative ultrastructural analysis of hippocampal excitatory synapses. 
The Journal of Neuroscience. 1997; 17:5858–5867. [PubMed: 9221783] 
39. Veatch SL, et al. Correlation functions quantify super-resolution images and estimate apparent 
clustering due to over-counting. PloS one. 2012:7.
40. Kim SH, Ryan TA. CDK5 serves as a major control point in neurotransmitter release. Neuron. 
2010; 67:797–809. [PubMed: 20826311] 
41. Voglmaier SM, et al. Distinct endocytic pathways control the rate and extent of synaptic vesicle 
protein recycling. Neuron. 2006; 51:71–84. [PubMed: 16815333] 
42. Harris KM, Stevens JK. Dendritic spines of CA 1 pyramidal cells in the rat hippocampus: serial 
electron microscopy with reference to their biophysical characteristics. The Journal of 
Neuroscience. 1989; 9:2982–2997. [PubMed: 2769375] 
Tang et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 43. Simonson PD, Rothenberg E, Selvin PR. Single-molecule-based super-resolution images in the 
presence of multiple fluorophores. Nano letters. 2011; 11:5090–5096. [PubMed: 22003850] 
44. Thompson MA, Lew MD, Moerner W. Extending microscopic resolution with single-molecule 
imaging and active control. Annual review of biophysics. 2012; 41:321–342.
45. Chen TW, et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature. 2013; 
499:295–300. [PubMed: 23868258] 
46. Murthy VN, Sejnowski TJ, Stevens CF. Dynamics of dendritic calcium transients evoked by 
quantal release at excitatory hippocampal synapses. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2000; 97:901–906.
47. Xie X, Liaw JS, Baudry M, Berger TW. Novel expression mechanism for synaptic potentiation: 
alignment of presynaptic release site and postsynaptic receptor. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences. 1997; 94:6983–6988.
48. Kavalali ET, et al. Spontaneous neurotransmission: an independent pathway for neuronal 
signaling? Physiology. 2011; 26:45–53. [PubMed: 21357902] 
49. Ermolyuk Y, et al. Differential triggering of spontaneous glutamate release by P/Q-, N-and R-type 
Ca2+ channels. Nature Neuroscience. 2013
50. Frank T, et al. Bassoon and the synaptic ribbon organize Ca 2+ channels and vesicles to add release 
sites and promote refilling. Neuron. 2010; 68:724–738. [PubMed: 21092861] 
Tang et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Vesicle release proteins form subsynaptic nanoclusters
a, Color-coded schematic of studied synaptic proteins. b, Synapses labeled with RIM1/2 and 
PSD-95 imaged using 3D-STORM (10 nm pixels) compared to wide-field composite 
(bottom corner, 100 nm pixels), scale 2 μm. Boxed synapse enlarged in original (top) and 
rotated (bottom) angles, scale 200 nm. c, En-face (top) and side (bottom) views of a RIM1/2 
cluster showing all localizations and local density maps for a measured synaptic cluster 
compared to a simulated randomized cluster, scale 200 nm. d, Auto-correlation functions of 
measured RIM1/2 (n = 115), isolated non-synaptic small groups of localizations due to 
repetitive switching of fluorophores (n = 42), and simulated randomized (n = 115) 
distributions. e, RIM1/2 nanoclusters (NCs, red) within a synaptic cluster. f, Distribution of 
NC distances from the center of synapses normalized to randomized distribution. g, 
Molecule density inside NCs normalized to synaptic average. h, Average number of protein 
NCs per synapse. i, Cumulative distributions of NC volumes. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 
0.001, One-way ANOVA on ranks with pairwise comparison procedures (Dunn’s method) 
for g–h and K–S test for i. All experiments were repeated ≥3 times. Also see Extended Data 
Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 1.
Tang et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Release site mapping by pHuse in single synapses shows RIM predicts evoked fusion 
distribution
a, Neurons co-expressing Syn1a-CFP (top, scale 5 μm), identifying synaptic boutons, and 
vGpH (bottom, scale 500 nm), used to detect vesicle fusion with fluorescence increases from 
1 AP-evoked and spontaneous release. b, Example of fluorescence traces from evoked and 
spontaneous events over repeated trials at single boutons. c, Photon count distributions for 
detected spontaneous events fit with a normal distribution (μ = 512, σ = 167) and evoked 
events fit with a mixture of 2 normal distributions (μ1 = 542, σ1 = 143, μ2 = 912, σ2 = 319). 
Filled circles with error bars show μ ± σ of normal curves. d, Image processing steps in 
pHuse to determine fusion site locations. e, Fusion sites (green points) and area of fusion 
Tang et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (blue line) from boutons of different sizes defined with Syn1a (white), scale 500 nm. f, 
Correlation between fusion area and bouton size, linear fit. Correlations are significantly 
different, ANCOVA, F1, 171 = 5.01. g, Cumulative distributions of fusion areas normalized to 
bouton size (K–S test, D=0.26**). f–g, nspontaneous = 77/22, nevoked = 104/28. h. Tessellated 
RIM1-mEos and pHuse localizations over the same boutons, scale 200 nm. i. Tesseler first-
rank density (δ1) for RIM1 measured vs randomized distributions as a function of distance 
from pHuse localizations. j. Comparison within boutons of average δ1 for RIM1 
localizations within 40 nm to a pHuse localization vs not. k. Average nearest pHuse distance 
as a function of RIM1 δ1. j–i, n = 26/13 *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. n given in 
synapses/experiments. All experiments were repeated ≥3 times. Also see Extended Data 
Figs. 4–6.
Tang et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Transsynaptic nanoscale alignment of AZ and PSD proteins
a, Distributions of synaptic RIM1/2 and PSD-95 pair as the original localizations (left) and 
with NCs highlighted (right), scale 200 nm. Filled arrows indicate aligned NCs, open arrows 
non-aligned NCs. b, Paired correlation function (PCF) of measured RIM1/2 and PSD-95 
compared to PCF with either distribution randomized. c, PCF of simulated distributions with 
(cyan) and without (orange) shuffling NC positions. d, Cumulative distributions of cross-
correlation index (n = 143 synapses). e, RIM1/2 protein enrichment as a function of distance 
from translated PSD-95 NC centers (top, filled points) and PSD-95 enrichment relative to 
RIM1/2 NCs (bottom, open points). Simulations with same randomizations as in d–e were 
performed for each synapse. f, Protein density profile for enriched vs non-enriched NCs, n = 
119 PSD-95 NCs, 90 RIM1/2 NCs. g, Enrichment indices for RIM1/2, Munc13, and 
Bassoon relative to PSD-95 NCs (filled) and for the opposite direction (open), n >260 NCs, 
*p < 0.05, **p< 0.01, ANOVA on ranks with Dunn’s method. h, GluA2 enrichment with 
respect to RIM1/2 NCs, n = 36 synapses, scale 100 nm. All experiments were repeated ≥3 
times. Also see Extended Data Fig. 6 and Supplementary Table 2.
Tang et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Retrograde plasticity of synaptic nanoscale alignment
a, Distributions of synaptic RIM1/2 and PSD-95 for control and post-LTP induction 
conditions with NCs highlighted. b–c, Across-condition comparison of enrichment index 
and percentage of NCs enriched (n = 45, 87 and 42 synapses for control, LTP, and APV, 
respectively). d, Distributions of RIM1/2 and PSD-95 for conditions following NMDA 
stimulation. Scale 100 nm. e–i, Across-conditions comparison of RIM1/2 and PSD-95. Dark 
red in i represents RIM1/2 NCs enriched with PSD-95 and light red the unenriched NCs. n = 
61, 96, 77 and 74 synapses for control, NMDA, washout, and APV, respectively. j, 
Schematic summarizing the reorganization of NCs during NMDA-induced plasticity and 
Tang et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recovery. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ANOVA on ranks with pairwise comparison (Dunn’s 
method), and χ2 test for the proportion. All experiments were repeated ≥3 times.
Tang et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
