 nutrients
Review
Recent Perspectives Regarding the Role of Dietary
Protein for the Promotion of Muscle Hypertrophy
with Resistance Exercise Training
Tanner Stokes, Amy J. Hector, Robert W. Morton, Chris McGlory and Stuart M. Phillips * ID
Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada; stokest@mcmaster.ca (T.S.);
hectoraj@mcmaster.ca (A.J.H.); mortonrw@mcmaster.ca (R.W.M.); mcglorc@mcmaster.ca (C.M.)
* Correspondence: phillis@mcmaster.ca; Tel.: +1-905-525-9140 (ext. 24465)
Received: 1 January 2018; Accepted: 1 February 2018; Published: 7 February 2018
Abstract: Skeletal muscle supports locomotion and serves as the largest site of postprandial glucose
disposal; thus it is a critical organ for physical and metabolic health. Skeletal muscle mass is regulated
by the processes of muscle protein synthesis (MPS) and muscle protein breakdown (MPB), both of
which are sensitive to external loading and aminoacidemia. Hyperaminoacidemia results in a robust
but transient increase in rates of MPS and a mild suppression of MPB. Resistance exercise potentiates
the aminoacidemia-induced rise in MPS that, when repeated over time, results in gradual radial
growth of skeletal muscle (i.e., hypertrophy). Factors that affect MPS include both quantity and
composition of the amino acid source. Specifically, MPS is stimulated in a dose-responsive manner
and the primary amino acid agonist of this process is leucine. MPB also appears to be regulated in part
by protein intake, which can exert a suppressive effect on MPB. At high protein doses the suppression
of MPB may interfere with skeletal muscle adaptation following resistance exercise. In this review,
we examine recent advancements in our understanding of how protein ingestion impacts skeletal
muscle growth following resistance exercise in young adults during energy balance and energy
restriction. We also provide practical recommendations for exercisers who wish to maximize the
hypertrophic response of skeletal muscle during resistance exercise training.
Keywords: skeletal muscle; protein turnover; resistance exercise; muscle hypertrophy; energy
balance; energy restriction; amino acids
1. Introduction
Maintaining skeletal muscle mass throughout the lifespan is critical for the preservation of
metabolic health and independent locomotion. While central to the production of contractile force,
skeletal muscle also serves as the primary site of postprandial glucose disposal [1] and is the
largest contributor to resting energy expenditure [2]. In addition to the health-centric importance of
maintaining skeletal muscle there is also great interest, particularly within the athletic community, in
enhancing the adaptive response of skeletal muscle to exercise training (i.e., improved force production
and increasing muscle size: hypertrophy) with the aim of maximizing physical performance in
competitive events. Thus, strategies to augment skeletal muscle hypertrophy and promote optimal
remodeling and reconditioning of skeletal muscle following exercise training is an intense area of
scientific inquiry with ramifications in both the clinical and athletic settings.
There is now a wealth of studies that have characterized the response of skeletal muscle to
changes in nutritional and contractile stimuli. What these studies have shown is that the size of skeletal
muscle is dependent upon the kinetic processes of muscle protein synthesis (MPS) and muscle protein
breakdown (MPB), the algebraic difference (MPS minus MPB) between which dictates net protein
balance (NPB). When diurnal fluctuations in MPS equal those of MPB, muscle mass is maintained.
Nutrients 2018, 10, 180; doi:10.3390/nu10020180
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
2 of 18
Muscle protein accretion leading to the growth of muscle fiber size, is only achieved when net rates
of MPS exceed MPB and NPB is positive. Alternatively, net muscle catabolism (atrophy) leading to
the loss of muscle proteins, occurs when MPB exceeds MPS and NPB is negative [3,4]. Increased
loading of skeletal muscle and hyperaminoacidemia following dietary protein intake, independently
and synergistically exert a positive influence on NPB by modulating the relative balance between MPS
and MPB [3,4]. Indeed, in the postabsorptive state, an acute bout of resistance exercise stimulates MPS
by more than 100% above basal levels [5]; however, NPB remains negative due to the concomitant
activation of MPB. Only when protein is ingested following a resistance exercise bout is there a
synergistic impact on MPS resulting in a protracted state of positive NPB [6]. Repetitive bouts of
resistance exercise in combination with protein intake increase NPB and promote muscle protein
accretion over time.
In this brief review, we focus on how dietary protein is utilized in support of skeletal muscle
protein remodeling and how protein may facilitate increased post-exercise MPS and ultimately impact
hypertrophy. To gain a deeper understanding of this concept, we address the human capacity to digest
protein and contrast that with the ability of skeletal muscle to utilize the available amino acids for MPS.
In addition, we discuss the issue of the per meal quantity of protein that optimally stimulates daily
MPS and speculate as to why a strategy focused on persistent suppression of MPB may be ill-suited to
the goal of promoting muscle hypertrophy with resistance exercise training. Leveraging large sample
sizes from recent meta-analyses we attempt to provide an ‘optimal’ prescription for protein intake for
maximizing protein remodeling and hypertrophy following resistance exercise. Finally, we provide a
brief discussion of recent findings regarding strategies to maintain or even increase skeletal muscle
mass during periods of energy restriction.
2. Understanding the Limits to Muscle Protein Synthesis: How Much Protein Can Muscle Use?
The capacity to digest and absorb dietary protein and the subsequent aminoacidemia far exceeds
the capacity of skeletal muscle to utilize the constituent amino acids for the purpose of muscle
anabolism. Following oral ingestion, protein digestion is initiated in the stomach by pepsin in the
presence of hydrochloric acid and continues in the duodenum by the secretion of pancreatic proteases
and enterocyte proteases. The end products include peptide fragments and free amino acids that are
absorbed almost exclusively in the small intestine. The gut is a highly metabolically active organ [7,8],
and extracts ~40%–50% of the available amino acids from the ingested protein meal primarily for the
purposes of energy production and for local protein synthesis [9]. The remainder (~50%) of amino
acids is released into the hepatic portal vein prior to being taken up by the liver. Like the gut, the
liver utilizes amino acids for local metabolism but, rather than primarily oxidizing amino acids, a
significant proportion of amino acids are instead used for the synthesis of hepatic and liver-derived
blood proteins [10]. The amino acids that have been sequestered by the splanchnic tissues and the liver
are ‘first-pass cleared’ and thus are not available for peripheral metabolism. It is interesting to note
that the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), which are implicated in skeletal muscle anabolism [11],
are catabolized to a relatively minor extent by the liver due to a low content of the branched-chain
aminotransferase enzyme in human hepatocytes [12,13]. A disproportionate amount (relative to the
composition of ingested protein) of amino acids released from the splanchnic bed into the hepatic vein
are therefore BCAAs [14]. Overall, ~50% of the amino acids in a protein-containing meal are extracted
by the splanchnic tissues whereas the rest are released into the plasma circulation for extra-splanchnic
utilization [15]. Although skeletal muscle is a large depot for the retention of amino acids, not all
the amino acids released into plasma are destined to become incorporated into new skeletal muscle
tissue. In a recent study employing an intrinsically-labeled tracer approach, Groen and colleagues [15]
demonstrated that only ~2.2 g or 11% of the amino acids provided to young men in a 20 g bolus of
casein protein were used for de novo protein synthesis despite ~55% availability in the peripheral
circulation following splanchnic extraction. The remaining amino acids are catabolized and serve as
substrates for a range of metabolic processes from energy production and urea synthesis and, to a very
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
3 of 18
minor extent, neurotransmitter production (see Figure 1 for an overview). It is, however, important
to acknowledge that states of disease as well as age may alter the kinetics of amino acid metabolism
following protein ingestion [16,17]. Future research should focus on determining how factors such
as protein type [18], age [16], and potentially the gut microbiota [19] interact to influence amino acid
partitioning and specifically how these factors change in the context of resistance exercise.
Nutrients 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
3 of 18 
urea synthesis and, to a very minor extent, neurotransmitter production (see Figure 1 for an 
overview). It is, however, important to acknowledge that states of disease as well as age may alter 
the kinetics of amino acid metabolism following protein ingestion [16,17]. Future research should 
focus on determining how factors such as protein type [18], age [16], and potentially the gut 
microbiota [19] interact to influence amino acid partitioning and specifically how these factors change 
in the context of resistance exercise. 
 
Figure 1. Simplified overview of whole body oral protein utilization at rest. Of the protein ingested, 
approximately 50% is extracted by splanchnic tissues before entering peripheral circulation. 
Interestingly, only ~10% of the ingested protein is utilized for skeletal muscle protein synthesis while 
the rest is catabolized.  
Lower quality proteins, such as soy or wheat protein, that lack or are low in one or more essential 
amino acids, fail to stimulate MPS to the same degree as higher quality sources [20,21] and the 
constituent amino acids could presumably become less enriched in muscle tissue at the same relative 
dose. Regardless of the protein source, the feeding-induced rise in plasma amino acid concentrations 
drives uptake across the muscle membrane. Some evidence suggests that protein ingestion induces 
gene expression of several amino acid transport proteins [22,23] that may increase the influx of amino 
acids into skeletal muscle. Following substantial hyperaminoacidemia, there is a ~30 min delay in the 
stimulation of MPS before it peaks at 2 h [24,25]. Importantly, aminoacidemia-induced activation of 
MPS is transient and MPS reverts to basal levels after ~2–3 h despite continuing hyperaminoacidemia 
[25]. This phenomenon, which has been corroborated in studies employing both infusion of amino 
acids [26] and oral bolus protein ingestion [27], has been coined the ‘muscle-full’ effect and explains 
why simply consuming protein in the absence of contractile activity fails to induce protein retention 
and skeletal muscle hypertrophy. The stimulation of MPS in response to hyperaminoacidemia 
appears to be entirely driven by the essential amino acids contained within protein [28], and of these 
amino acids, leucine is the primary amino acid agonist [29–31]. While it is true that leucine is capable 
of stimulating MPS in the absence of other amino acids, it should be emphasized that protein 
synthesis will eventually become limited by the availability of other essential amino acids. However, 
enriching a lower quality protein with leucine, provided a full complement of essential amino acids 
is also present, may induce a comparable stimulation of MPS to that seen in higher quality sources 
[32]. Regardless, that fact that MPS plateaus despite sustained hyperaminoacidemia suggests that 
MPS is a saturable process and that amino acids above certain quantities provide no further 
stimulation. In this regard, Moore et al. [33] showed that 0.24 g/kg (±0.06 g/kg; 95% confidence 
Figure 1.
Simplified overview of whole body oral protein utilization at rest.
Of the protein
ingested, approximately 50% is extracted by splanchnic tissues before entering peripheral circulation.
Interestingly, only ~10% of the ingested protein is utilized for skeletal muscle protein synthesis while
the rest is catabolized.
Lower quality proteins, such as soy or wheat protein, that lack or are low in one or more essential
amino acids, fail to stimulate MPS to the same degree as higher quality sources [20,21] and the
constituent amino acids could presumably become less enriched in muscle tissue at the same relative
dose. Regardless of the protein source, the feeding-induced rise in plasma amino acid concentrations
drives uptake across the muscle membrane. Some evidence suggests that protein ingestion induces
gene expression of several amino acid transport proteins [22,23] that may increase the influx of
amino acids into skeletal muscle. Following substantial hyperaminoacidemia, there is a ~30 min
delay in the stimulation of MPS before it peaks at 2 h [24,25]. Importantly, aminoacidemia-induced
activation of MPS is transient and MPS reverts to basal levels after ~2–3 h despite continuing
hyperaminoacidemia [25]. This phenomenon, which has been corroborated in studies employing both
infusion of amino acids [26] and oral bolus protein ingestion [27], has been coined the ‘muscle-full’
effect and explains why simply consuming protein in the absence of contractile activity fails to
induce protein retention and skeletal muscle hypertrophy. The stimulation of MPS in response to
hyperaminoacidemia appears to be entirely driven by the essential amino acids contained within
protein [28], and of these amino acids, leucine is the primary amino acid agonist [29–31]. While
it is true that leucine is capable of stimulating MPS in the absence of other amino acids, it should
be emphasized that protein synthesis will eventually become limited by the availability of other
essential amino acids. However, enriching a lower quality protein with leucine, provided a full
complement of essential amino acids is also present, may induce a comparable stimulation of MPS
to that seen in higher quality sources [32]. Regardless, that fact that MPS plateaus despite sustained
hyperaminoacidemia suggests that MPS is a saturable process and that amino acids above certain
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
4 of 18
quantities provide no further stimulation. In this regard, Moore et al. [33] showed that 0.24 g/kg
(±0.06 g/kg; 95% confidence interval (CI)) body mass of protein maximally stimulated rates of MPS in
younger males, but ~0.40 g/kg (±0.19 g/kg; 95% CI) body mass of protein is required in older adults
to achieve a comparable stimulation of MPS: 0.056%/h vs. 0.058%/h in older and younger adults,
respectively. Thus, per meal doses would be recommended to be ~68% higher in older persons to
achieve similar levels of MPS [33].
We know that exercise sensitizes the muscle to hyperaminoacidemia [34], which suggests that
habitual exercise would shift the dose-response curve to the left and lower intakes of protein would
be needed to stimulate MPS; however, it may be that exercise also increases the capacity for use
of amino acids so the maximal gain in MPS may require higher intakes of protein. With respect to
recovery from exercise, Witard and colleagues [35] employed a unilateral exercise model to probe for
differences between rested and exercised-stimulated rates of MPS and made similar observations as
Moore et al. [36] when measuring myofibrillar-specific protein synthesis in young men administered
titratable doses of whey protein (see Figure 2 for the relative increase in MPS at each dose of protein).
Importantly, Moore [36] and Witard [35] both observed that protein doses beyond ~20 g (equivalent to
~0.24 g/kg body mass per meal) resulted in a negligible further stimulation of MPS, such that 40 g of
protein provided no statistically significant enhancement in rates of MPS either at rest or following
resistance exercise. Instead, as would be expected, leucine oxidation increased when protein dose
exceeded 20 g [36], or there was enhanced conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine [35], and an increase
in plasma urea production and concentration [35]. It is important to note that biopsy acquisition
time points in the aforementioned investigations [35,36] only permitted MPS measurements over
~4 h period following exercise; however, cumulative MPS over the course of a day also influences
the accretion of myofibrillar protein. Therefore, it may be more important to consider the protein
dosing strategy that maximizes MPS during waking hours rather than at a single meal. Areta and
colleagues [37] demonstrated that the intake of 20 g whey protein administered every ~3 h was more
effective at stimulating MPS over a 12 h period following bilateral leg exercise than protein-equated
doses administered as smaller, more frequent pulses (10 g every 1.5 h), or larger boluses consumed less
frequently (40 g every 6 h). Given that the studies mentioned above [35–37] measured MPS using stable
isotope infusions in a controlled laboratory setting, future research should replicate these studies under
free-living conditions using deuterium oxide to capture the influence of normal daily eating patterns
on MPS. Cumulatively, these findings suggest that ~20 g of high-quality protein (or ~0.3 g/kg/meal)
is sufficient to maximally stimulate MPS after a single meal and, when repeatedly administered 3 h
apart, optimize MPS throughout the day.
Nutrients 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
4 of 18 
interval (CI)) body mass of protein maximally stimulated rates of MPS in younger males, but ~0.40 
g/kg (±0.19 g/kg; 95% CI) body mass of protein is required in older adults to achieve a comparable 
stimulation of MPS: 0.056%/h vs. 0.058%/h in older and younger adults, respectively. Thus, per meal 
doses would be recommended to be ~68% higher in older persons to achieve similar levels of MPS 
[33]. 
We know that exercise sensitizes the muscle to hyperaminoacidemia [34], which suggests that 
habitual exercise would shift the dose-response curve to the left and lower intakes of protein would 
be needed to stimulate MPS; however, it may be that exercise also increases the capacity for use of 
amino acids so the maximal gain in MPS may require higher intakes of protein. With respect to 
recovery from exercise, Witard and colleagues [35] employed a unilateral exercise model to probe for 
differences between rested and exercised-stimulated rates of MPS and made similar observations as 
Moore et al. [36] when measuring myofibrillar-specific protein synthesis in young men administered 
titratable doses of whey protein (see Figure 2 for the relative increase in MPS at each dose of protein). 
Importantly, Moore [36] and Witard [35] both observed that protein doses beyond ~20 g (equivalent 
to ~0.24 g/kg body mass per meal) resulted in a negligible further stimulation of MPS, such that 40 g 
of protein provided no statistically significant enhancement in rates of MPS either at rest or following 
resistance exercise. Instead, as would be expected, leucine oxidation increased when protein dose 
exceeded 20 g [36], or there was enhanced conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine [35], and an 
increase in plasma urea production and concentration [35]. It is important to note that biopsy 
acquisition time points in the aforementioned investigations [35,36] only permitted MPS 
measurements over ~4 h period following exercise; however, cumulative MPS over the course of a 
day also influences the accretion of myofibrillar protein. Therefore, it may be more important to 
consider the protein dosing strategy that maximizes MPS during waking hours rather than at a single 
meal. Areta and colleagues [37] demonstrated that the intake of 20 g whey protein administered every 
~3 h was more effective at stimulating MPS over a 12 h period following bilateral leg exercise than 
protein-equated doses administered as smaller, more frequent pulses (10 g every 1.5 h), or larger 
boluses consumed less frequently (40 g every 6 h). Given that the studies mentioned above [35–37] 
measured MPS using stable isotope infusions in a controlled laboratory setting, future research 
should replicate these studies under free-living conditions using deuterium oxide to capture the 
influence of normal daily eating patterns on MPS. Cumulatively, these findings suggest that ~20 g of 
high-quality protein (or ~0.3 g/kg/meal) is sufficient to maximally stimulate MPS after a single meal 
and, when repeatedly administered 3 h apart, optimize MPS throughout the day. 
 
Figure 2. Whey protein ingestion-induced increase in MPS in young men, percent change from 0 g. 
(A) At rest, consumption of 10 g or 20 g of protein results in a rise of 19% and 52% respectively from 
0g. Consumption of 40 g of whey protein does not result in superior stimulation of MPS beyond 
consumption of 20 g; (B) Following resistance exercise, consumption of 20 g of protein increases MPS 
almost twice as much as consumption of 10 g, while consumption of 40 g of whey protein results in a 
small stimulation of MPS over and above that seen at 20 g indicating there are diminishing returns in 
terms of stimulation of MPS above 20 g. Data redrawn from Witard et al. [35], however, similar data 
are reported by MacNaughton et al. [38], and Moore et al. [36]. 
Figure 2. Whey protein ingestion-induced increase in MPS in young men, percent change from 0 g.
(A) At rest, consumption of 10 g or 20 g of protein results in a rise of 19% and 52% respectively from
0g. Consumption of 40 g of whey protein does not result in superior stimulation of MPS beyond
consumption of 20 g; (B) Following resistance exercise, consumption of 20 g of protein increases MPS
almost twice as much as consumption of 10 g, while consumption of 40 g of whey protein results in a
small stimulation of MPS over and above that seen at 20 g indicating there are diminishing returns in
terms of stimulation of MPS above 20 g. Data redrawn from Witard et al. [35], however, similar data
are reported by MacNaughton et al. [38], and Moore et al. [36].
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
5 of 18
A recent two dose study performed by MacNaughton and colleagues [38] detected a statistically
significant 19% greater stimulation of MPS following whole-body resistance exercise in young men
consuming 40 g of protein compared to those consuming 20 g. To place this finding into context,
the added stimulation observed with ingestion of 40 g compared to 20 g of protein by Moore and
Witard (who also measured responses at lower and zero protein) was 11% and 13%, respectively.
Given that the only salient difference between the experimental design employed by MacNaughton
and those utilized by Moore and Witard was the exercise protocol (whole-body vs. unilateral), these
data [35,36,38] suggest that young men performing whole-body resistance exercise may opt to ingest
greater amounts of protein than those performing lower body exercise to maximize muscle anabolism.
However, the incremental gain in muscle mass would appear to be marginal and likely of no great
relevance to recreationally exercising individuals. Finally, since MacNaughton et al. only tested two
protein intakes (20 g and 40 g) it is unknown whether an intake between these two levels (e.g., 30 g)
could have resulted in a similar stimulation of MPS. In addition, it was not possible in this study [38]
to determine a true dose response and thus determine the robustness of the small difference between
MPS at 20 g and 40 g of protein. Recommended daily protein intakes are body mass-specific and
heavier athletes will require quantitatively more protein than lighter athletes at each meal to fulfill
their daily requirements. However, even a 100 kg athlete can satisfy his/her daily protein requirements
by consuming ~30 g of protein at each meal, which aligns with the per meal recommendations of
0.24–0.30 g/kg (including upper 95th confidence interval) advocated by Moore et al. [33]. Thus, it is
important to consider contextual variables such as body mass and exercise modality when advocating
on optimal protein dosing strategies.
More recently, the ingestion of protein prior to sleep has garnered significant interest as it relates
to the recovery from successive bouts of resistance exercise. Adults aged 18–64 years sleep on average
for ~7 h each night, rendering the overnight period the longest postabsorptive period of the day if
one considers that the last meal may be consumed 3–4 h prior to sleep. Until recently, little attention
was given to the overnight sleeping period; however, in the context of stimulation of MPS, an optimal
prescription for protein ingestion would include something that could offset negative NPB after
overnight fasting. In a proof-of-principle study, Groen et al. [39] demonstrated that nasogastric
administration of 40 g casein protein effectively stimulated MPS and improved whole-body protein
balance over a 7 h overnight sleep. This finding is particularly relevant in athletes and recreationally
active adults who may exercise in the evening hours and therefore consume protein supplements soon
before they sleep. Limited evidence has shown that ingestion of ~20 g of protein, which maximizes
MPS at each meal during waking hours, may be unable to enhance overnight muscle protein anabolism
to a significant degree [40]. However, it is possible that the lack of effect of protein on overnight muscle
anabolism observed by Beelen and colleagues [40] was due to a washout from the long period of tracer
incorporation (9 h). The same group later demonstrated a significant 22% increase of overnight mixed
MPS in young men who ingested 40 g of casein protein immediately prior to sleep [41]. The same
dose consumed after exercise was also shown recently to stimulate overnight MPS 30% more than the
same dose of protein consumed without the prior performance of resistance exercise [42]. This finding
suggests that the exercise-induced sensitization of skeletal muscle to amino acid intake extends into
the overnight recovery period [42,43]. Examined over a chronic period, pre-sleep ingestion of 27.5 g
casein protein (as a hydrolysate-intact protein blend) augmented gains in quadriceps cross sectional
area, type II fiber cross sectional area, and the sum of a several 1-RM assessments compared to those
partaking in the same exercise protocol without pre-sleep protein ingestion [44]. It is important to note
that, although Snijders and colleagues [44] did conclude that protein supplementation prior to sleep
enhanced gains in quadriceps cross sectional area compared to placebo intake, there was no difference
in lean body mass accrual between groups with resistance training. Cumulatively, these data [39–44]
suggest that casein protein consumed prior to sleep represents an effective strategy to promote skeletal
muscle anabolism, but that pre-sleep doses of protein may need to be somewhat higher than those
recommended during the daytime, appearing to be in the range of ~30–40 g.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
6 of 18
A recent meta-analysis and meta-regression conducted by our laboratory demonstrated that
protein supplementation is sufficient to optimize resistance exercise training-induced gains in fat-free
mass [45]. Indeed, Morton et al. [45] demonstrated that protein supplementation during resistance
training for ≥6 weeks augmented lean mass accretion by 27% (~0.3 kg) on average, which is similar to a
previously conducted meta-analysis (e.g., ~0.7 kg; [46]). In a breakpoint analysis, we also demonstrated
that beyond a daily protein intake of 1.6 g/kg/day (1.0–2.2; 95% CI), protein supplementation failed to
augment resistance exercise-induced muscle hypertrophy [45]. Although timing [37], dose [33,35,36,38],
and source [20,21] may influence the efficacy of protein supplementation on MPS, our meta-analysis
showed that these variables do not necessarily translate into enhanced muscle accretion in a chronic
exercise setting [45]. Rather, a daily protein intake of ~1.6 g/kg/day or as high as 2.2 g/kg/day,
appears to be the most influential factor to consider when optimizing muscle mass accretion with
resistance exercise is the goal. This daily protein intake could be achieved via the incorporation of
high-quality protein sources at each meal throughout the day and, if necessary, supplementing the diet
with high-quality (i.e., whey or casein) protein supplements.
3. Protein-Induced Inhibition of Proteolysis: A Good Thing for Enhancing Muscle
Protein Accretion?
Resistance exercise results in skeletal muscle damage that compromises the architectural integrity
of the myofibril [47]. Damage may be induced mechanically, as evidenced by z-disk streaming [47,48],
or can be manifested as increased protein carbonylation [49], indicative of exercise-induced oxidative
stress. It is likely that the exercise-induced muscle damage stimulates an increase in MPB that is
observed following resistance exercise [5]. From a physiological perspective, an acute increase in
MPB is required to dismantle and repair damaged proteins and to help restore muscle function. In
the postabsorptive state muscle proteolysis results in release of amino acids into the intramuscular
free pool for subsequent use by the protein synthetic machinery (i.e., intracellular recycling), thereby
supporting MPS in the absence of exogenous protein intake [50]. Theoretically, this remodeling response
after successive bouts of resistance exercise serves as an effective mechanism to reduce subsequent
exercise-induced damage. A recent study by Damas and colleagues [48] showed that an unaccustomed
bout of resistance exercise in young men resulted in z-disk streaming and swelling-induced edema,
indicating the presence of muscle damage. Moreover, rates of MPS were shown to be highest following
the initial bout of an unaccustomed exercise bout than after completing the same bout of exercise
following 3- and 10-weeks of resistance exercise training. Importantly, when the acute MPS response
was normalized to the magnitude of z-disk streaming at each relative phase of the study, there were no
detectable differences in MPS. This finding suggests that during the early resistance-training period,
MPS is robustly stimulated to facilitate the repair and remodeling of exercise-induced protein damage.
As the transition of muscle tissue from exercise-naïve to ‘resistance-trained’ occurs, MPS was adaptively
reduced and directed more towards myofibrillar remodeling rather than a global remodeling all muscle
protein fractions. Consequently, training attenuates the MPS response to resistance exercise [51,52].
Our laboratory has also shown that young men who performed unilateral resistance training for 8
weeks had a more pronounced stimulation of MPS in their trained limb relative to their untrained
limb 4 h after exercise completion; however, MPS returned to basal levels 28 h after exercise only in the
trained limb [53]. We propose that MPB follows a similar adaptive decline with resistance training
characterized by a robust stimulation following the first bout of unaccustomed exercise to initiate
global remodeling, followed by an adaptive decrease with training. Analogously, antioxidant enzyme
content increases from an untrained state following resistance training [54], which in turn may buffer
exercise-induced oxidative damage. Taken together, increased protein turnover appears to be necessary,
especially during the early resistance-training period, to facilitate skeletal muscle remodeling and to
lay the foundation for subsequent muscle protein accretion with progressive training. The impact of
suppressing this normal rise in MPB is not known, however, it appears unlikely, in our estimation,
to translate into any physiological benefit. Two nutritional interventions capable of suppressing
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
7 of 18
MPB, thereby enhancing net protein balance, include increasing systemic insulin concentrations via
carbohydrate ingestion, and/or by supplementing with higher doses of protein (than are needed to
maximally stimulate MPS) [55,56].
In pre-clinical rodent models, insulin stimulates MPS [57], however, in humans insulin
concentrations above ~5 IU/mL do not appear to stimulate MPS [58]. In a recent meta-analysis [59],
it was concluded that insulin is merely permissive for the stimulation of MPS and predominantly
regulates muscle anabolism through its inhibitory influence on MPB. Even moderate elevations of
plasma insulin achievable by consuming a mixed-meal or protein beverage are sufficient to reduce MPB
by ~50% [58,60], with no further suppression at insulin concentrations above ~30 mU/L. It is, therefore,
not surprising that investigations pairing carbohydrate and protein intake post exercise have failed to
observe a superior anabolic response compared to protein ingestion alone [61–63]. The triviality of
carbohydrate in augmenting muscle anabolism was demonstrated by Staples et al. [62], who failed
to detect a greater stimulation of MPS or a greater suppression of MPB when 50 g of carbohydrates
were added to a dose of 25 g of whey protein when evaluated against 25 g of protein alone, despite
enhanced anabolic signaling and a substantially greater insulinemia. Thus, carbohydrate coingestion
with protein does not enhance the anabolic effect of protein and does not contribute to a greater
hypertrophic potential following resistance exercise. However, given that protein is habitually ingested
as a mixed-meal, it is prudent to mention that carbohydrates do not impair the anabolic response to
protein, despite increasing splanchnic retention of amino acids and slowing the rate at which they enter
the systemic circulation [64]. Moreover, ingesting carbohydrates restores muscle glycogen following
exhaustive exercise [65,66], and may therefore be important for performance recovery in an athletic
setting (for a recent review see Ref. [67]).
Amino acid intake at sufficiently high levels (~70 g) also appears to inhibit proteolysis in an
insulin-independent manner [68]. In theory, by continuing to ingest amino acids beyond the point at
which MPS is maximally stimulated (i.e., 20–30 g in healthy young adults), intracellular amino acid
concentrations rise and inhibit MPB rather than further stimulating MPS and, by extension, promotes a
greater NPB. Kim et al. [56] have suggested that solely focusing on MPS to generate recommendations
on the protein dose necessary to optimize the anabolic response to a meal neglects the contribution
that suppression of proteolysis would have on promoting a more positive NPB. They argue that,
while data generated from their laboratory [69] corroborates the finding that ~25 g of high quality
protein maximizes the MPS response at rest or following exercise, greater amounts of protein promote
an incrementally greater whole body NPB, primarily by suppressing whole-body (note: MPB has
not been measured) protein breakdown [68]. To provide experimental evidence to support their
thesis, Kim et al. [68] recently compared the anabolic response of 40 g vs. 70 g of protein, in the form
of beef patties, either at rest or following a bout of exhaustive resistance exercise on NPB. While
muscle-specific protein synthesis was increased to a similar extent in both groups, NPB was more
positive in the higher protein group due to a greater suppression of whole-body protein breakdown
and a smaller, albeit significant, increase in whole-body protein synthesis. Given that skeletal muscle
may constitute ~25% of whole-body proteolysis [70], it is possible that 70 g of protein suppressed MPB,
however, such speculation requires further investigation. In another study [71], by the same group,
it was demonstrated that a positive linear relationship existed between incrementally higher protein
intakes (from ~6 g to 92 g) and whole body NPB that led the authors to conclude that no practical
upper limit exists regarding the amount of protein that could maximize muscle anabolism; however,
once again the responses measured were not muscle-specific.
While consumption of greater quantities of protein per meal than what we are recommending
here (i.e., ~20–30 g/meal) may suppress proteolysis, we see little evidence to support strategies that
aim to specifically suppress MPB following resistance exercise due to the role MPB would play in
protein remodeling during recovery from exercise and because of our relative lack of understanding of
the potential consequences of doing so. Indeed, rodent data provides a useful lens through which to
view the potential physiological consequences of inhibiting proteolysis. The two predominant systems
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
8 of 18
responsible for protein-specific and macromolecular breakdown are the ubiquitin-proteasomal (UPS)
and autophagic-lysosomal systems, respectively. Knocking out Atg7 in rodents, a critical autophagy
gene, results in a 40% decrease in myofiber size compared to wild-type littermates [72]. Moreover, Atg7
null mice have grossly impaired muscle specific force, likely resulting from z-disk misalignment acting
in confluence with increased protein carbonylation [72]. Similar impairments have been observed in
mice who have had TSC1 knocked out, consequently leading to sustained mTORC1 activation and
a chronic inhibition of Ulk-1, an upstream activator of autophagy [73]. Lastly, rodents with the Rpt3
(an essential subunit in the 19S core of the 26S proteasome) gene conditionally knocked out, exhibited
a reduced lifespan as well as smaller myofiber CSA, and severely impaired grip strength [74]. Taken
together, animal work in combination with extant human data [5] strongly implicate an important role
for basal rates of autophagy- and UPS-mediated protein breakdown in the maintenance of skeletal
muscle viability. Admittedly, suppression of MPB by nutritional means is not synonymous with
the suppression of MPB from the knockout of key proteolytic factors, and it is improbable that the
consequences of suppressing MPB would be remotely characteristic of genetic ablation. However,
there is cross-sectional evidence [75] to suggest that even moderate differences in the regulation of
proteolysis are related to poor muscle quality and frailty. For example, a lower expression of genes
involved in autophagy, mitophagy, and the UPS was shown to be associated with sarcopenia and
impaired physical function, as indicated by lower lean mass and a reduced travel distance during a
6-min walk test in older women [75]. The thesis behind these data [75] is there is a decreased clearance
of misfolded and/or aggregated proteins in individuals with lower autophagy flux, leading to lower
quantity and quality of muscle.
In the context of resistance exercise, the role played by proteolytic factors is not as clear.
A study by Leger et al. [76] demonstrated a 10-fold and 2.5-fold increase in MuRF1 and atrogin1
mRNA, respectively, following an 8-week resistance-training study. Importantly, atrogin1 protein
content increased ~40%, despite the participants experiencing a 10% gain in quadriceps muscle size.
Presumably, increased atrogin1 protein content constitutes one of a number of adaptations that occur
to modulate skeletal muscle protein breakdown in the presence of increased contractile and structural
protein content, rather than being involved in muscle atrophy per se. It is not clear what effect
attempting to suppress, through dietary or other means, this exercise-induced increase in atrogin1
protein content, or an acute activation of MPB in general, would have on the integrity of skeletal muscle
but if work in rodents is any indication, basal protein degradation is necessary to ensure optimal
skeletal muscle function. Moreover, suppressing whole-body protein breakdown following exercise
may result in transient organ tissue accretion (a component of lean body mass) rather than muscle
hypertrophy per se, which cannot be easily discerned from DXA-derived lean body mass changes.
More research is now needed to characterize the impact of mildly suppressing protein breakdown,
both at the whole-body and skeletal muscle level, on the phenotypic adaptations to resistance exercise.
However, in our view athletes and recreationally active individuals should focus on practices to
maximize MPS rather than suppress MPB, which appears to be physiologically important for skeletal
muscle remodeling following damaging exercise.
4. Protein Intake during Energy Restriction
When energy intake is not sufficient to balance energy expenditure, a decrease in total body
mass occurs. These periods of energy restriction may be voluntarily invoked, as is the case for
athletes competing in body mass-restricted events and competitions focusing on muscle aesthetics (i.e.,
bodybuilding), or it can be involuntary in nature, such as during military operations. In general, an
energy deficit can be achieved via either, or a combination of, caloric restriction or a chronic elevation
in physical activity levels (with no compensatory increase in energy intake [77]). In overweight and
obese individuals, the ensuing body mass loss that follows a protracted energy deficit generally confers
physical as well as metabolic health benefits such as improved hepatic and skeletal muscle insulin
sensitivity, as well as improvements in beta-cell function [78]. However, a concerning consequence
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
9 of 18
of energy-restriction is that lost weight is comprised, in general, of a 25% loss of lean body mass
(LBM) [79], a significant proportion of which is skeletal muscle. This loss of skeletal muscle mass could
subsequently lead to reductions in performance and increased injury susceptibility. Thus, regardless
of the antecedent cause of the energy deficit, it may be important for athletes that efforts be made to
ensure maintenance of LBM.
Evidence is mounting to suggest that a reduction in postabsorptive and postprandial MPS is
contributing and may be the main adaptive mechanism driving the loss of LBM during energy
restriction. Following a ~20% energy deficit, postabsorptive rates of MPS were found to be reduced
by ~19% compared to measurements made during body mass maintenance [80]. This decrement in
MPS was likely precipitated by reduced intramuscular anabolic signaling, as evidenced by a ~35%
and 30% lower phosphorylation of AktSer473 and 4E-BP1Thr37/46, respectively [80]. Given that MPS
is an energy-demanding process, the declines observed during caloric restriction likely represent a
conservation-oriented mechanism to avoid the inefficient utilization of ATP for growth promoting
processes when food availability is low. In line with this thesis, reductions in MPS occur rapidly
following the onset of food deprivation. For example, Areta et al. [81] observed a ~27% reduction
in myofibrillar protein synthesis after only 5 days of energy restriction in young men and women.
As energy restriction is prolonged, the changes in MPS appear to plateau at a level suitable to the
prevailing nutrient abundance [82].
Exactly how rates of MPB change in response to energy-restriction is less well characterized,
particularly owing to the difficulty of applying methods currently available to quantify MPB. Carbone
and colleagues [83] investigated the changes in molecular markers of MPB to infer the dynamics
of muscle proteolysis in response to a ~40% energy-restricted diet. They failed to demonstrate any
changes in 26S proteosomal proteolytic activity, but observed a 1.2- and 1.3-fold increase in MuRF1
and atrogin1 mRNA, respectively. These observations led the authors to speculate that MPB is elevated
in response to energy restriction [83]. Later, the same group showed that fractional breakdown rate
was elevated ~60% above basal levels after 10 days of energy deficit, with a small concomitant rise in
caspase-3 [84] in a cohort of highly active cyclists. These findings are at odds with findings from our
laboratory in response to a comparable dietary intervention. Hector et al. [85] exposed 24 overweight
participants to a 10 d period of 40% caloric restriction (relative to energy requirements) and found no
significant changes in MPB or any static marker of muscle proteolysis. The disparate observations
of Carbone et al. [84] and Hector et al. [85] showing an elevated and an unchanged rate of MPB are
difficult to reconcile; however, they may be due to the different study populations (active adults
in Carbone et al. and overweight adults in Hector et al.). Nonetheless, we contend that there is a
compensatory decrease in energy-consuming processes during periods of caloric restriction. Muscle
proteolysis, which is accomplished primarily via UPS-mediated degradation, is heavily reliant on ATP
to fuel the conjugation and ligation of ubiquitin molecules onto a target substrate [86]. Furthermore,
the tight 19S cap of the 26S proteasomal complex prohibits folded proteins from entering the 20S
catalytic core [86]. Each subsequent step of protein breakdown is therefore reliant on sufficient energy.
Autophagy also plays a key role in macromolecular breakdown during energy-deprived conditions,
however the scope of the current review precludes a detailed discussion in this regard. Given the high
energy cost of MPB, we propose that it is unlikely that energy-restriction would increase MPB to the
extent observed by Carbone et al. [84]. Taken together, efforts to combat the loss of LBM during periods
of energy restriction would be most fruitful by employing strategies that minimize the decrements
in MPS.
Strategies that have proven effective at maintaining or even augmenting LBM during periods of
energy restriction include practicing loading exercise and, to a lesser extent, increasing daily protein
intake. During energy balance, as we have discussed above, daily protein intakes of 1.6 g/kg/day
maximize the hypertrophic potential of skeletal muscle following a resistance-training intervention [45].
Under energy-restricted conditions, however, a greater relative proportion of amino acids are
catabolized for energy production, resulting in fewer amino acids available for muscle anabolism.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
10 of 18
It could be contended that by increasing protein intake during calorically restricted periods, energy
production can be sustained while also preserving MPS. Indeed, Pasiakos et al. [87] measured MPS in
response to protein-rich meal before and after 21 days of a 40% energy deficit, achieved by 30% caloric
restriction in combination with a 10% increase in aerobic exercise. The authors demonstrated that only
participants consuming 1.6 g/kg/day (twice the recommended dietary allowance for protein-RDA)
and 2.4 g/kg/day (3 times the RDA) preserved their anabolic sensitivity to protein. In contrast, the
group consuming the RDA (0.8 g/kg/day) for protein had a suppressed MPS response to protein
ingestion after being in an energy deficit. The RDA-consuming group also lost substantially more total
mass as fat-free mass compared to those consuming 2- or 3-times the RDA for protein [87]. Despite
retaining anabolic sensitivity to a protein containing meal, even the participants consuming protein at
levels greater than the RDA for protein experienced significant losses of LBM [87]. Taken together these
data [87] suggest that protein intake alone is insufficient to maintain LBM during energy restriction.
Engaging in resistance exercise during an energy deficit has a sparing effect on LBM [81,85,88].
Indeed, LBM was retained following a 4-week energy-restricted diet in individuals who resistance
trained 6 days/week and consumed 1.2 g/kg/day of protein [88], a daily protein intake that was
hypothesized to be insufficient to prevent reductions in LBM in the absence of exercise [87]. Moreover,
participants who consumed 2.4 g/kg/day protein (3-times the RDA) in conjunction with the same
6 day/week exercise regimen increased their LBM over the 4-week period [88]. Areta et al. [81]
reported that resistance exercise restored the ~27% decrement observed in postabsorptive MPS
during energy restriction, and when paired with protein ingestion, significantly enhanced MPS
above values obtained in energy-balance. Using ingestion of deuterium oxide, we also demonstrated
a preservation of integrated myofibrillar protein synthesis, which was only observed in participants
consuming 2.4 g/kg/day protein [85]. It is important to note that we studied an overweight population
and therefore these findings may not be applicable to leaner subjects undergoing periods of energy
restriction who, despite higher intakes of protein, may be unable to retain LBM. A meta-analysis [89]
demonstrated that leaner subjects with resistance-training experience were more vulnerable to losses in
LBM than exercise-naive individuals with a higher body fat percentage. Thus, athletes who tend to be
leaner than the general population, and who have more training experience, have been recommended
to consume protein intakes upwards of ~3 g/kg/day in an attempt to prevent LBM losses during
energy restriction [89]. It is important to note, however, that the protein intake necessary to offset
reductions in LBM is likely more reliant upon the severity of energy restriction and the amount of
resistance exercise habitually performed [90]. Nevertheless, resistance exercise when performed in
conjunction with consumption of a higher protein intake is effective for mitigating losses and leading
to maintenance or allowing LBM accrual, during energy restriction.
In addition to protein requirements it is also important to consider the satiating effect of
protein. Many athletes who compete in aesthetically inclined sports (i.e., bodybuilding) begin dieting
aggressively anywhere from 8–16 weeks before competition. These periods are often characterized by
pronounced caloric deficits aimed at reducing body fat to very low levels, while retaining the greatest
proportion of muscle mass possible [91]. The success of an athlete during this period is predicated on
his/her ability to chronically adhere to a calorically restricted diet. Thus, maximizing the satiating
effect of each meal is paramount during these protracted periods of energy restriction. Protein is the
most satiating macronutrient [92,93] and should therefore be the cornerstone of any weight loss plan;
however, not all protein sources modulate hunger and satiety levels to the same degree. Under acute
settings, in which a breakfast composed primarily of whey protein was compared to casein protein,
hunger was suppressed to a greater extent in participants consuming whey protein [94]. This effect
may be partly due to the efficacy of whey protein to stimulate a more pronounced secretion of the
satiety-inducing hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) compared to casein [94]. Interestingly,
this effect may be driven by the inhibitory role that whey protein has on dipeptidyl peptidase IV,
the enzyme responsible for the degradation of active GLP-1 [95]. By preventing the degradation of
systemic GLP-1, more GLP-1 remains active in the circulation and has a more protracted effect on
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
11 of 18
satiety. Hall et al. [96] also demonstrated greater plasma elevations of cholecystokinin (CCK), another
satiety-inducing hormone secreted by the gut, after whey protein consumption. An elevated circulating
CCK with consumption of whey protein [96] may be due to the presence of glycomacropeptide (GMP)
promoting the secretion of CCK [97]. In support of the unique ability of GMP to stimulate systemic CCK
release, Veldhorst and colleagues [98] demonstrated an increased energy intake at lunch following
the consumption of a meal containing GMP-depleted whey protein compared to a ‘GMP-replete’
whey protein.
When measurement periods are prolonged and ad libitum food intake is assessed after
several hours, casein appears to be mildly better than whey protein for appetite suppression [99].
Indeed, casein supplementation was shown in one study to reduce energy intake relative to
whey supplementation over a seven day long supplementation trial [100]. Importantly, the effects
of individual protein sources on satiety may be equivalent if protein intakes are high enough.
Veldhorst et al. [94] found that a whey protein-containing breakfast delivering 10% protein, 55%
carbohydrate, and 30% fat more effectively suppressed energy intake at lunch when compared to
a casein protein-containing breakfast with the same macronutrient profile. When the percentage of
meal-derived protein was increased to 25% (with a corresponding reduction in fat), there were no
observable differences in lunch meal energy intake between casein and whey protein groups [94]. Given
that athletes and recreationally active adults require higher amounts of protein to maintain LBM during
energy restriction, the differences observed between whey and casein at smaller relative doses will
likely be diluted when protein intake is increased. Therefore, akin to athletes in energy balance, athletes
subjected to energy-restricted diets should focus primarily on fulfilling daily protein requirements
(1.6–2.4 g/kg/day) and only then focusing on other relevant variables of protein supplementation
(i.e., protein source and timing).
5. Practical Recommendations
We provide here some translatable messages that summarize some of the more salient points we
have made in this review.
5.1. Individuals in Energy Balance
1.
Consume ~0.4 g/kg body mass (i.e., 0.24 plus 0.06 with protein added to account for the influence
of other macronutrients in meals and protein quality), to maximally stimulate MPS following a
period of rest or exhaustive resistance exercise.
2.
Spacing protein-containing meals ~3–5 h throughout the day maximizes MPS rates over the
course of a 12 h (i.e., waking) period.
3.
Practice pre-sleep protein ingestion (1–3 h prior to sleep) to offset declines in MPS that would
occur during an overnight fasting period.
4.
To maximize muscle protein accretion with resistance exercise, daily protein intakes should be
~1.6 g/kg/day and up to 2.2 g/kg/day. This intake can be achieved by ingesting 3 meals, each
containing ~0.53 g/kg protein, or 4 meals containing ~0.4g/kg protein.
5.2. Individuals in Energy Restriction
1.
Daily protein requirements are greater than they are during period of energy balance to promote
the maintenance or increase in lean body mass.
2.
Resistance exercise should be performed during energy restriction to promote the retention of
lean body mass if desired.
3.
For athletes ‘cutting’ weight over an extended period, high quality protein sources such as
whey and casein, or a blend of each, should be chosen to optimize appetite control and ensure
dietary compliance.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
12 of 18
4.
To promote lean body mass retention during weight loss, protein intakes of ~2.3–3.1 g/kg/day
have been advocated. Exercise-naive adults who have a greater body fat percentage should
aim to achieve the lower end of this range, whereas leaner individuals with resistance-training
experience who are more vulnerable to losing lean body mass during energy restriction might
aim for the higher end of this range.
6. Summary and Conclusions
The human body is capable of digesting large quantities of dietary protein. However, not all
the constituent amino acids are utilized by the translational machinery to synthesize new proteins.
With consumption of an isolated protein source, beyond a protein intake of ~0.3 g/kg body mass
(i.e., 0.24 plus the upper-end of the 95% CI), MPS is saturated and the rate of amino acid catabolism
through oxidation and urea production increases and so less amino acids are available for protein
synthesis. Individuals performing whole-body resistance exercise may require larger protein doses
to maximize the anabolic effects of protein, yet these effects are only marginally greater than what is
observed at 20 g protein. Given that the muscle becomes refractory to the presence of amino acids,
such that MPS returns to basal levels after ~3 h despite sustained hyperaminoacidemia, protein meals
should be separated by ~3–5 h to maximize MPS over the waking period. While these strategies have
proven to be most effective in acute settings (i.e., over a 12 h capture period), the most salient variable
determining the effectiveness of protein supplementation on gains in muscle size during resistance
training is still total daily protein intake. In a large meta-analysis, protein intake was shown to promote
additional gains in lean body mass beyond those observed with resistance exercise alone; however,
beyond a daily intake of 1.6 g/kg body mass per day (up to as high as 2.2 g/kg/day), the additional
effects of protein are greatly diminished. Rather than further stimulating MPS, large intakes of protein
beyond what we are recommending may modulate anabolism by suppressing proteolysis; however, we
lack experimental evidence for this in muscle. We caution against strategies that focus on suppressing
MPB as we contend that efficient removal of damaged proteins would require a robust and fully
functional proteolytic response. We are unaware of any potential improvements with respect to
skeletal muscle hypertrophy by strategies that suppress MPB. Thus, athletes in energy-balance seeking
to optimize the adaptive potential of their resistance-training programs are advised to first ensure that
they are consuming ~1.6 g/kg body mass per day of protein, and tailor their dosing strategies to meet
this overarching goal.
Periods of energy restriction result in significant reductions of lean body mass. Lean individuals,
and those with more training experience, appear to be more susceptible to reductions in skeletal
muscle size relative to heavier, training-naïve individuals. Reductions in LBM are primarily driven by
reductions in postabsorptive rates of MPS and a reduced sensitivity to the presence of a protein bolus.
To effectively prevent these declines in MPS during both postabsorptive and postprandial periods,
daily protein intake have been recommended to be increased to ~2.3–3.1 g/kg/day, and leaner athletes
may wish to aim for intakes at the higher end of this range. Participation in resistance exercise is
sufficient to counteract the decrements observed in MPS following an acute period of energy restriction
and, when paired with sufficient protein intake, can result in gains in LBM. Thus, this combination of
sufficient protein intake and performing regular resistance exercise should form the cornerstone of any
weight-loss diet. Athletes who are attempting to cut body mass for a competition several weeks in
advance can enhance the satiating effects of each meal, and thus dietary compliance, by ensuring that
high quality protein is ingested. During acute periods, whey protein has greater appetite suppressive
effects than casein protein, however the situation is reversed when measurements are obtained several
hours after food intake. Thus, an athlete may wish to consume a blend of proteins in addition to other
whole-food sources to achieve better satiety. However, such a strategy may be unnecessary if protein
intakes approach those required to maintain skeletal muscle mass during periods of energy restriction.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
13 of 18
Acknowledgments: S.M.P. receives competitive grant funding support from the National Science and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, the Canada Research Chairs Program, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
the Canadian Diabetes Association, the United States Department of Agriculture (through the US National Dairy
Council). There was no specific source of funding for the present work.
Author Contributions: T.S., A.J.H., R.W.M., C.M. and S.M.P. were involved in the preparation and editing of the
manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: S.M.P. has received honoraria, travel expenses, and research support from the US National
Dairy Council. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Thiebaud, D.; Jacot, E.; DeFronzo, R.A.; Maeder, E.; Jequier, E.; Felber, J.P. The effect of graded doses of
insulin on total glucose uptake, glucose oxidation, and glucose storage in man. Diabetes 1982, 31, 957–963.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Wang, Z.; Ying, Z.; Bosy-Westphal, A.; Zhang, J.; Schautz, B.; Later, W.; Heymsfield, S.B.; Muller, M.J. Specific
metabolic rates of major organs and tissues across adulthood: Evaluation by mechanistic model of resting
energy expenditure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 92, 1369–1377. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Morton, R.W.; McGlory, C.; Phillips, S.M. Nutritional interventions to augment resistance training-induced
skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Front. Physiol. 2015, 6, 245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Phillips, S.M. A brief review of critical processes in exercise-induced muscular hypertrophy. Sports Med.
2014, 44, S71–S77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Phillips, S.M.; Tipton, K.D.; Aarsland, A.; Wolf, S.E.; Wolfe, R.R. Mixed muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown after resistance exercise in humans. Am. J. Physiol. 1997, 273, E99–E107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Biolo, G.; Tipton, K.D.; Klein, S.; Wolfe, R.R. An abundant supply of amino acids enhances the metabolic
effect of exercise on muscle protein. Am. J. Physiol. 1997, 273, E122–E129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
McNurlan, M.A.; Garlick, P.J. Contribution of rat liver and gastrointestinal tract to whole-body protein
synthesis in the rat. Biochem. J. 1980, 186, 381–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Nakshabendi, I.M.; McKee, R.; Downie, S.; Russell, R.I.; Rennie, M.J. Rates of small intestinal mucosal protein
synthesis in human jejunum and ileum. Am. J. Physiol. 1999, 277, E1028–E1031. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Stoll, B.; Henry, J.; Reeds, P.J.; Yu, H.; Jahoor, F.; Burrin, D.G. Catabolism dominates the first-pass intestinal
metabolism of dietary essential amino acids in milk protein-fed piglets. J. Nutr. 1998, 128, 606–614. [PubMed]
10.
Stoll, B.; Burrin, D.G.; Henry, J.; Yu, H.; Jahoor, F.; Reeds, P.J. Dietary amino acids are the preferential source
of hepatic protein synthesis in piglets. J. Nutr. 1998, 128, 1517–1524. [PubMed]
11.
Jackman, S.R.; Witard, O.C.; Philp, A.; Wallis, G.A.; Baar, K.; Tipton, K.D. Branched-chain amino
acid ingestion stimulates muscle myofibrillar protein synthesis following resistance exercise in humans.
Front. Physiol. 2017, 8, 390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Hutson, S.M. Subcellular distribution of branched-chain aminotransferase activity in rat tissues. J. Nutr.
1988, 118, 1475–1481. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Suryawan, A.; Hawes, J.W.; Harris, R.A.; Shimomura, Y.; Jenkins, A.E.; Hutson, S.M. A molecular model of
human branched-chain amino acid metabolism. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1998, 68, 72–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Wahren, J.; Felig, P.; Hagenfeldt, L. Effect of protein ingestion on splanchnic and leg metabolism in normal
man and in patients with diabetes mellitus. J. Clin. Investig. 1976, 57, 987–999. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Groen, B.B.; Horstman, A.M.; Hamer, H.M.; de Haan, M.; van Kranenburg, J.; Bierau, J.; Poeze, M.;
Wodzig, W.K.; Rasmussen, B.B.; van Loon, L.J. Post-prandial protein handling: You are what you just
ate. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0141582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Dangin, M.; Guillet, C.; Garcia-Rodenas, C.; Gachon, P.; Bouteloup-Demange, C.; Reiffers-Magnani, K.;
Fauquant, J.; Ballevre, O.; Beaufrere, B. The rate of protein digestion affects protein gain differently during
aging in humans. J. Physiol. 2003, 549, 635–644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Schadewaldt, P.; Wendel, U. Metabolism of branched-chain amino acids in maple syrup urine disease.
Eur. J. Pediatr. 1997, 156, S62–S66. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Fouillet, H.; Mariotti, F.; Gaudichon, C.; Bos, C.; Tome, D. Peripheral and splanchnic metabolism of dietary
nitrogen are differently affected by the protein source in humans as assessed by compartmental modeling.
J. Nutr. 2002, 132, 125–133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
14 of 18
19.
Devaraj, S.; Hemarajata, P.; Versalovic, J. The human gut microbiome and body metabolism: Implications for
obesity and diabetes. Clin. Chem. 2013, 59, 617–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Tang, J.E.; Moore, D.R.; Kujbida, G.W.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Phillips, S.M. Ingestion of whey hydrolysate,
casein, or soy protein isolate: Effects on mixed muscle protein synthesis at rest and following resistance
exercise in young men. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009, 107, 987–992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Gorissen, S.H.; Horstman, A.M.; Franssen, R.; Crombag, J.J.; Langer, H.; Bierau, J.; Respondek, F.;
van Loon, L.J. Ingestion of wheat protein increases in vivo muscle protein synthesis rates in healthy older
men in a randomized trial. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 1651–1659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Reidy, P.T.; Walker, D.K.; Dickinson, J.M.; Gundermann, D.M.; Drummond, M.J.; Timmerman, K.L.;
Cope, M.B.; Mukherjea, R.; Jennings, K.; Volpi, E.; et al. Soy-dairy protein blend and whey protein ingestion
after resistance exercise increases amino acid transport and transporter expression in human skeletal muscle.
J. Appl. Physiol. 2014, 116, 1353–1364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Drummond, M.J.; Fry, C.S.; Glynn, E.L.; Timmerman, K.L.; Dickinson, J.M.; Walker, D.K.; Gundermann, D.M.;
Volpi, E.; Rasmussen, B.B. Skeletal muscle amino acid transporter expression is increased in young and older
adults following resistance exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2011, 111, 135–142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Dreyer, H.C.; Drummond, M.J.; Pennings, B.; Fujita, S.; Glynn, E.L.; Chinkes, D.L.; Dhanani, S.; Volpi, E.;
Rasmussen, B.B. Leucine-enriched essential amino acid and carbohydrate ingestion following resistance
exercise enhances mtor signaling and protein synthesis in human muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
2008, 294, E392–E400. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Bohe, J.; Low, J.F.; Wolfe, R.R.; Rennie, M.J. Latency and duration of stimulation of human muscle protein
synthesis during continuous infusion of amino acids. J. Physiol. 2001, 532, 575–579. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Bohe, J.; Low, A.; Wolfe, R.R.; Rennie, M.J. Human muscle protein synthesis is modulated by extracellular,
not intramuscular amino acid availability: A dose-response study. J. Physiol. 2003, 552, 315–324. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
27.
Atherton, P.J.; Etheridge, T.; Watt, P.W.; Wilkinson, D.; Selby, A.; Rankin, D.; Smith, K.; Rennie, M.J. Muscle
full effect after oral protein: Time-dependent concordance and discordance between human muscle protein
synthesis and mtorc1 signaling. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 92, 1080–1088. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Volpi, E.; Kobayashi, H.; Sheffield-Moore, M.; Mittendorfer, B.; Wolfe, R.R. Essential amino acids are primarily
responsible for the amino acid stimulation of muscle protein anabolism in healthy elderly adults. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2003, 78, 250–258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Anthony, J.C.; Lang, C.H.; Crozier, S.J.; Anthony, T.G.; MacLean, D.A.; Kimball, S.R.; Jefferson, L.S.
Contribution of insulin to the translational control of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle by leucine. Am. J.
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2002, 282, E1092–E1101. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Crozier, S.J.; Kimball, S.R.; Emmert, S.W.; Anthony, J.C.; Jefferson, L.S. Oral leucine administration stimulates
protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle. J. Nutr. 2005, 135, 376–382. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Norton, L.E.; Layman, D.K.; Bunpo, P.; Anthony, T.G.; Brana, D.V.; Garlick, P.J. The leucine content of a
complete meal directs peak activation but not duration of skeletal muscle protein synthesis and mammalian
target of rapamycin signaling in rats. J. Nutr. 2009, 139, 1103–1109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Breen, L.; Di Donato, D.M.; Hector, A.J.; Mitchell, C.J.; Moore, D.R.; Stellingwerff, T.;
Breuille, D.; Offord, E.A.; Baker, S.K.; et al. Leucine supplementation of a low-protein mixed macronutrient
beverage enhances myofibrillar protein synthesis in young men: A double-blind, randomized trial. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 276–286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Moore, D.R.; Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Witard, O.; Breen, L.; Burd, N.A.; Tipton, K.D.; Phillips, S.M. Protein
ingestion to stimulate myofibrillar protein synthesis requires greater relative protein intakes in healthy older
versus younger men. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2015, 70, 57–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Burd, N.A.; Phillips, S.M. Nutritional regulation of muscle protein synthesis with
resistance exercise: Strategies to enhance anabolism. Nutr. Metab. 2012, 9, 40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Witard, O.C.; Jackman, S.R.; Breen, L.; Smith, K.; Selby, A.; Tipton, K.D. Myofibrillar muscle protein synthesis
rates subsequent to a meal in response to increasing doses of whey protein at rest and after resistance exercise.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 86–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Moore, D.R.; Robinson, M.J.; Fry, J.L.; Tang, J.E.; Glover, E.I.; Wilkinson, S.B.; Prior, T.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.;
Phillips, S.M. Ingested protein dose response of muscle and albumin protein synthesis after resistance
exercise in young men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 89, 161–168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
15 of 18
37.
Areta, J.L.; Burke, L.M.; Ross, M.L.; Camera, D.M.; West, D.W.; Broad, E.M.; Jeacocke, N.A.; Moore, D.R.;
Stellingwerff, T.; Phillips, S.M.; et al. Timing and distribution of protein ingestion during prolonged recovery
from resistance exercise alters myofibrillar protein synthesis. J. Physiol. 2013, 591, 2319–2331. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
38.
Macnaughton, L.S.; Wardle, S.L.; Witard, O.C.; McGlory, C.; Hamilton, D.L.; Jeromson, S.; Lawrence, C.E.;
Wallis, G.A.; Tipton, K.D. The response of muscle protein synthesis following whole-body resistance exercise
is greater following 40 g than 20 g of ingested whey protein. Physiol. Rep. 2016, 4, e128932. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
39.
Groen, B.B.;
Res, P.T.;
Pennings, B.;
Hertle, E.;
Senden, J.M.;
Saris, W.H.;
van Loon, L.J.
Intragastric protein administration stimulates overnight muscle protein synthesis in elderly men.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2012, 302, E52–E60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Beelen, M.; Tieland, M.; Gijsen, A.P.; Vandereyt, H.; Kies, A.K.; Kuipers, H.; Saris, W.H.; Koopman, R.; van
Loon, L.J. Coingestion of carbohydrate and protein hydrolysate stimulates muscle protein synthesis during
exercise in young men, with no further increase during subsequent overnight recovery. J. Nutr. 2008, 138,
2198–2204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Res, P.T.; Groen, B.; Pennings, B.; Beelen, M.; Wallis, G.A.; Gijsen, A.P.; Senden, J.M.G.; van Loon, L.J. Protein
ingestion before sleep improves postexercise overnight recovery. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2012, 44, 1560–1569.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Holwerda, A.M.; Kouw, I.W.; Trommelen, J.; Halson, S.L.; Wodzig, W.K.; Verdijk, L.B.; van Loon, L.J. Physical
activity performed in the evening increases the overnight muscle protein synthetic response to presleep
protein ingestion in older men. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 1307–1314. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Trommelen, J.; Holwerda, A.M.; Kouw, I.W.; Langer, H.; Halson, S.L.; Rollo, I.; Verdijk, L.B.; van Loon, L.J.
Resistance exercise augments postprandial overnight muscle protein synthesis rates. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
2016, 48, 2517–2525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Snijders, T.; Res, P.T.; Smeets, J.S.; van Vliet, S.; van Kranenburg, J.; Maase, K.; Kies, A.K.; Verdijk, L.B.;
van Loon, L.J. Protein ingestion before sleep increases muscle mass and strength gains during prolonged
resistance-type exercise training in healthy young men. J. Nutr. 2015, 145, 1178–1184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Morton, R.W.; Murphy, K.T.; McKellar, S.R.; Schoenfeld, B.J.; Henselmans, M.; Helms, E.; Aragon, A.A.;
Devries, M.C.; Banfield, L.; Krieger, J.W.; et al. A systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression of
the effect of protein supplementation on resistance training-induced gains in muscle mass and strength in
healthy adults. Br. J. Sports Med. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Cermak, N.M.; Res, P.T.; de Groot, L.C.; Saris, W.H.; van Loon, L.J. Protein supplementation augments the
adaptive response of skeletal muscle to resistance-type exercise training: A meta-analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2012, 96, 1454–1464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Gibala, M.J.; MacDougall, J.D.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Stauber, W.T.; Elorriaga, A. Changes in human skeletal
muscle ultrastructure and force production after acute resistance exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 1995, 78, 702–708.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Damas, F.; Phillips, S.M.; Libardi, C.A.; Vechin, F.C.; Lixandrao, M.E.; Jannig, P.R.; Costa, L.A.; Bacurau, A.V.;
Snijders, T.; Parise, G.; et al. Resistance training-induced changes in integrated myofibrillar protein synthesis
are related to hypertrophy only after attenuation of muscle damage. J. Physiol. 2016, 594, 5209–5222.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Hudson, M.B.; Hosick, P.A.; McCaulley, G.O.; Schrieber, L.; Wrieden, J.; McAnulty, S.R.; Triplett, N.T.;
McBride, J.M.; Quindry, J.C. The effect of resistance exercise on humoral markers of oxidative stress. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 2008, 40, 542–548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Wolfe, R.R. Tracers in metabolic research: Radioisotope and stable isotope/mass spectrometry methods.
Lab. Res. Methods Biol. Med. 1984, 9, 1–287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Hartman, J.W.; Moore, D.R.; Phillips, S.M. Resistance training reduces whole-body protein turnover and
improves net protein retention in untrained young males. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2006, 31, 557–564.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Moore, D.R.; Del Bel, N.C.; Nizi, K.I.; Hartman, J.W.; Tang, J.E.; Armstrong, D.; Phillips, S.M. Resistance
training reduces fasted- and fed-state leucine turnover and increases dietary nitrogen retention in previously
untrained young men. J. Nutr. 2007, 137, 985–991. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
16 of 18
53.
Tang, J.E.; Perco, J.G.; Moore, D.R.; Wilkinson, S.B.; Phillips, S.M. Resistance training alters the response of
fed state mixed muscle protein synthesis in young men. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2008,
294, R172–R178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Azizbeigi, K.; Azarbayjani, M.A.; Peeri, M.; Agha-alinejad, H.; Stannard, S. The effect of progressive resistance
training on oxidative stress and antioxidant enzyme activity in erythrocytes in untrained men. Int. J. Sport
Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2013, 23, 230–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Deutz, N.E.; Wolfe, R.R. Is there a maximal anabolic response to protein intake with a meal? Clin. Nutr. 2013,
32, 309–313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Kim, I.Y.; Deutz, N.E.P.; Wolfe, R.R. Update on maximal anabolic response to dietary protein. Clin. Nutr.
2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Kimball, S.R.; Jurasinski, C.V.; Lawrence, J.C., Jr.; Jefferson, L.S. Insulin stimulates protein synthesis in
skeletal muscle by enhancing the association of eIF-4E and eIF-4G. Am. J. Physiol. 1997, 272, C754–C759.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Greenhaff, P.L.; Karagounis, L.G.; Peirce, N.; Simpson, E.J.; Hazell, M.; Layfield, R.; Wackerhage, H.; Smith, K.;
Atherton, P.; Selby, A.; et al. Disassociation between the effects of amino acids and insulin on signaling,
ubiquitin ligases, and protein turnover in human muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2008, 295,
E595–E604. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Abdulla, H.; Smith, K.; Atherton, P.J.; Idris, I. Role of insulin in the regulation of human skeletal muscle
protein synthesis and breakdown: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2016, 59, 44–55.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Wilkes, E.A.; Selby, A.L.; Atherton, P.J.; Patel, R.; Rankin, D.; Smith, K.; Rennie, M.J. Blunting of insulin
inhibition of proteolysis in legs of older subjects may contribute to age-related sarcopenia. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2009, 90, 1343–1350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Koopman, R.; Beelen, M.; Stellingwerff, T.; Pennings, B.; Saris, W.H.; Kies, A.K.; Kuipers, H.; van Loon, L.J.
Coingestion of carbohydrate with protein does not further augment postexercise muscle protein synthesis.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2007, 293, E833–E842. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Staples, A.W.; Burd, N.A.; West, D.W.; Currie, K.D.; Atherton, P.J.; Moore, D.R.; Rennie, M.J.; Macdonald, M.J.;
Baker, S.K.; Phillips, S.M. Carbohydrate does not augment exercise-induced protein accretion versus protein
alone. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2011, 43, 1154–1161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Glynn, E.L.; Fry, C.S.; Timmerman, K.L.; Drummond, M.J.; Volpi, E.; Rasmussen, B.B. Addition of
carbohydrate or alanine to an essential amino acid mixture does not enhance human skeletal muscle
protein anabolism. J. Nutr. 2013, 143, 307–314. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Gorissen, S.H.; Burd, N.A.; Hamer, H.M.; Gijsen, A.P.; Groen, B.B.; van Loon, L.J. Carbohydrate coingestion
delays dietary protein digestion and absorption but does not modulate postprandial muscle protein accretion.
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014, 99, 2250–2258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Ivy, J.L.; Goforth, H.W., Jr.; Damon, B.M.; McCauley, T.R.; Parsons, E.C.; Price, T.B. Early postexercise muscle
glycogen recovery is enhanced with a carbohydrate-protein supplement. J. Appl. Physiol. 2002, 93, 1337–1344.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Berardi, J.M.; Price, T.B.; Noreen, E.E.; Lemon, P.W. Postexercise muscle glycogen recovery enhanced with a
carbohydrate-protein supplement. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2006, 38, 1106–1113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Burke, L.M.; van Loon, L.J.C.; Hawley, J.A. Postexercise muscle glycogen resynthesis in humans.
J. Appl. Physiol. 2017, 122, 1055–1067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Kim, I.Y.; Schutzler, S.; Schrader, A.; Spencer, H.J.; Azhar, G.; Ferrando, A.A.; Wolfe, R.R. The anabolic
response to a meal containing different amounts of protein is not limited by the maximal stimulation of
protein synthesis in healthy young adults. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2016, 310, E73–E80. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
69.
Symons, T.B.; Sheffield-Moore, M.; Wolfe, R.R.; Paddon-Jones, D. A moderate serving of high-quality protein
maximally stimulates skeletal muscle protein synthesis in young and elderly subjects. J. Am. Diet. Assoc.
2009, 109, 1582–1586. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Long, C.L.; Birkhahn, R.H.; Geiger, J.W.; Blakemore, W.S. Contribution of skeletal muscle protein in elevated
rates of whole body protein catabolism in trauma patients. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1981, 34, 1087–1093. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
17 of 18
71.
Kim, I.Y.; Schutzler, S.; Schrader, A.; Spencer, H.; Kortebein, P.; Deutz, N.E.; Wolfe, R.R.; Ferrando, A.A.
Quantity of dietary protein intake, but not pattern of intake, affects net protein balance primarily through
differences in protein synthesis in older adults. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2015, 308, E21–E28.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Masiero, E.; Agatea, L.; Mammucari, C.; Blaauw, B.; Loro, E.; Komatsu, M.; Metzger, D.; Reggiani, C.;
Schiaffino, S.; Sandri, M. Autophagy is required to maintain muscle mass. Cell Metab. 2009, 10, 507–515.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Castets, P.; Lin, S.; Rion, N.; Di Fulvio, S.; Romanino, K.; Guridi, M.; Frank, S.; Tintignac, L.A.; Sinnreich, M.;
Ruegg, M.A. Sustained activation of mTORC1 in skeletal muscle inhibits constitutive and starvation-induced
autophagy and causes a severe, late-onset myopathy. Cell Metab. 2013, 17, 731–744. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Kitajima, Y.; Tashiro, Y.; Suzuki, N.; Warita, H.; Kato, M.; Tateyama, M.; Ando, R.; Izumi, R.; Yamazaki, M.;
Abe, M.; et al. Proteasome dysfunction induces muscle growth defects and protein aggregation. J. Cell Sci.
2014, 127, 5204–5217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Drummond, M.J.; Addison, O.; Brunker, L.; Hopkins, P.N.; McClain, D.A.; LaStayo, P.C.; Marcus, R.L.
Downregulation of E3 ubiquitin ligases and mitophagy-related genes in skeletal muscle of physically
inactive, frail older women: A cross-sectional comparison. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2014, 69,
1040–1048. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Leger, B.; Cartoni, R.; Praz, M.; Lamon, S.; Deriaz, O.; Crettenand, A.; Gobelet, C.; Rohmer, P.;
Konzelmann, M.; Luthi, F.; et al. Akt signalling through GSK-3beta, mtor and foxo1 is involved in human
skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy. J. Physiol. 2006, 576, 923–933. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Dhurandhar, E.J.; Kaiser, K.A.; Dawson, J.A.; Alcorn, A.S.; Keating, K.D.; Allison, D.B. Predicting adult
weight change in the real world: A systematic review and meta-analysis accounting for compensatory
changes in energy intake or expenditure. Int. J. Obes. 2015, 39, 1181–1187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Magkos, F.; Fraterrigo, G.; Yoshino, J.; Luecking, C.; Kirbach, K.; Kelly, S.C.; de Las Fuentes, L.; He, S.;
Okunade, A.L.; Patterson, B.W.; et al. Effects of moderate and subsequent progressive weight loss on
metabolic function and adipose tissue biology in humans with obesity. Cell Metab. 2016, 23, 591–601.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Wolfe, R.R. The underappreciated role of muscle in health and disease. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2006, 84, 475–482.
[PubMed]
80.
Pasiakos, S.M.; Vislocky, L.M.; Carbone, J.W.; Altieri, N.; Konopelski, K.; Freake, H.C.; Anderson, J.M.;
Ferrando, A.A.; Wolfe, R.R.; Rodriguez, N.R. Acute energy deprivation affects skeletal muscle protein
synthesis and associated intracellular signaling proteins in physically active adults. J. Nutr. 2010, 140,
745–751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Areta, J.L.; Burke, L.M.; Camera, D.M.; West, D.W.; Crawshay, S.; Moore, D.R.; Stellingwerff, T.; Phillips, S.M.;
Hawley, J.A.; Coffey, V.G. Reduced resting skeletal muscle protein synthesis is rescued by resistance exercise
and protein ingestion following short-term energy deficit. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014, 306,
E989–E997. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Villareal, D.T.; Smith, G.I.; Shah, K.; Mittendorfer, B. Effect of weight loss on the rate of muscle protein
synthesis during fasted and fed conditions in obese older adults. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2012, 20, 1780–1786.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Carbone, J.W.; Margolis, L.M.; McClung, J.P.; Cao, J.J.; Murphy, N.E.; Sauter, E.R.; Combs, G.F., Jr.; Young, A.J.;
Pasiakos, S.M. Effects of energy deficit, dietary protein, and feeding on intracellular regulators of skeletal
muscle proteolysis. FASEB J. 2013, 27, 5104–5111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Carbone, J.W.; Pasiakos, S.M.; Vislocky, L.M.; Anderson, J.M.; Rodriguez, N.R. Effects of short-term
energy deficit on muscle protein breakdown and intramuscular proteolysis in normal-weight young adults.
Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2014, 39, 960–968. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Hector, A.J.; McGlory, C.; Damas, F.; Mazara, N.; Baker, S.K.; Phillips, S.M. Pronounced energy restriction
with elevated protein intake results in no change in proteolysis and reductions in skeletal muscle protein
synthesis that are mitigated by resistance exercise. FASEB J. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Peth, A.; Nathan, J.A.; Goldberg, A.L. The atp costs and time required to degrade ubiquitinated proteins by
the 26 s proteasome. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 29215–29222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 180
18 of 18
87.
Pasiakos, S.M.; Cao, J.J.; Margolis, L.M.; Sauter, E.R.; Whigham, L.D.; McClung, J.P.; Rood, J.C.; Carbone, J.W.;
Combs, G.F., Jr.; Young, A.J. Effects of high-protein diets on fat-free mass and muscle protein synthesis
following weight loss: A randomized controlled trial. FASEB J. 2013, 27, 3837–3847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Longland, T.M.; Oikawa, S.Y.; Mitchell, C.J.; Devries, M.C.; Phillips, S.M. Higher compared with lower
dietary protein during an energy deficit combined with intense exercise promotes greater lean mass gain
and fat mass loss: A randomized trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2016, 103, 738–746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Helms, E.R.; Zinn, C.; Rowlands, D.S.; Brown, S.R. A systematic review of dietary protein during caloric
restriction in resistance trained lean athletes: A case for higher intakes. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2014,
24, 127–138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Hector, A.; Phillips, S.M. Protein recommendations for weight loss in elite athletes: A focus on body
composition and performance. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Helms, E.R.; Aragon, A.A.; Fitschen, P.J. Evidence-based recommendations for natural bodybuilding contest
preparation: Nutrition and supplementation. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2014, 11, 20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Vandewater, K.; Vickers, Z. Higher-protein foods produce greater sensory-specific satiety. Physiol. Behav.
1996, 59, 579–583. [CrossRef]
93.
Astrup, A. The satiating power of protein—A key to obesity prevention? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 82, 1–2.
[PubMed]
94.
Veldhorst, M.A.; Nieuwenhuizen, A.G.; Hochstenbach-Waelen, A.; van Vught, A.J.; Westerterp, K.R.;
Engelen, M.P.; Brummer, R.J.; Deutz, N.E.; Westerterp-Plantenga, M.S. Dose-dependent satiating effect
of whey relative to casein or soy. Physiol. Behav. 2009, 96, 675–682. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Gunnarsson, P.T.; Winzell, M.S.; Deacon, C.F.; Larsen, M.O.; Jelic, K.; Carr, R.D.; Ahren, B. Glucose-induced
incretin hormone release and inactivation are differently modulated by oral fat and protein in mice.
Endocrinology 2006, 147, 3173–3180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Hall, W.L.; Millward, D.J.; Long, S.J.; Morgan, L.M. Casein and whey exert different effects on plasma amino
acid profiles, gastrointestinal hormone secretion and appetite. Br. J. Nutr. 2003, 89, 239–248. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
97.
Burton-Freeman, B.M. Glycomacropeptide (GMP) is not critical to whey-induced satiety, but may have a
unique role in energy intake regulation through cholecystokinin (CCK). Physiol. Behav. 2008, 93, 379–387.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Veldhorst, M.A.; Nieuwenhuizen, A.G.; Hochstenbach-Waelen, A.; Westerterp, K.R.; Engelen, M.P.;
Brummer, R.J.; Deutz, N.E.; Westerterp-Plantenga, M.S. Effects of complete whey-protein breakfasts versus
whey without GMP-breakfasts on energy intake and satiety. Appetite 2009, 52, 388–395. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Acheson,
K.J.;
Blondel-Lubrano,
A.;
Oguey-Araymon,
S.;
Beaumont,
M.;
Emady-Azar,
S.;
Ammon-Zufferey, C.; Monnard, I.; Pinaud, S.; Nielsen-Moennoz, C.; Bovetto, L. Protein choices
targeting thermogenesis and metabolism. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 93, 525–534. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Alfenas Rde, C.; Bressan, J.; Paiva, A.C. Effects of protein quality on appetite and energy metabolism in
normal weight subjects. Arq. Bras. Endocrinol. Metabol. 2010, 54, 45–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
