 Supplement / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
July 8, 2016 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
CDC’s Response to the 2014–2016  
Ebola Epidemic — 
West Africa and United States
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Supplement
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(Suppl-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Karen L. Foster, MA, Caran Wilbanks, Project Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
Editorial Committee
David M. Bell, MD (Guest co-editor)1
Inger Damon, MD, PhD (Guest co-editor)2
Sara R. Bedrosian3
Valerie R. Johnson, MPH4
Jennifer H. McQuiston, DVM2
John O’Connor, MS4
Joint Information Center Staff
Brian J. Panasuk, MPH5
Laura A. Smith, MA4
Maddison D. Bruer5
Kondra C. Williams, MSPH5
1Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
2Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Division of Public Affairs, Office of the Associate Director for Communication, CDC
4Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
5Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC 
CONTENTS
Foreword ..................................................................................................................1
Overview, Control Strategies, and Lessons Learned in the CDC 
Response to the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic............................................4
CDC’s Response to the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic — Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone............................................................................................... 12
Early Identification and Prevention of the Spread of Ebola in 
High-Risk African Countries ......................................................................... 21
Incident Management Systems and Building Emergency 
Management Capacity during the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic — 
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea 
............................................................... 28
Ebola Surveillance — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone ..................... 35
Laboratory Response to Ebola — West Africa and United States 
..... 44
Infection Prevention and Control for Ebola in Health Care Settings — 
West Africa and United States ..................................................................... 50
Travel and Border Health Measures to Prevent the International 
Spread of Ebola 
................................................................................................. 57
Lessons of Risk Communication and Health Promotion — West Africa 
and United States............................................................................................. 68
Early Identification and Prevention of the Spread of Ebola — 
United States ..................................................................................................... 75
Modeling in Real Time During the Ebola Response 
............................... 85
Safe and Effective Deployment of Personnel to Support the Ebola 
Response — West Africa 
................................................................................ 90
Implementing an Ebola Vaccine Study — Sierra Leone ....................... 98
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
At the peak of the response, CDC maintained approximately 
200 staff per day in West Africa and approximately 400 staff 
per day at its Atlanta headquarters dedicated to the response. 
Overall, approximately 1,897 CDC staff were deployed to 
international and U.S. locations, for approximately 110,000 
total work days, and more than 4,000 CDC staff worked as 
part of the response. In 2016, CDC staff remain on the ground 
in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone in newly established 
CDC country offices to improve surveillance, response, and 
prevention for Ebola and other health threats.
In addition to their work in West Africa, CDC staff played 
a critical role protecting the United States by aiding state and 
local health departments in their preparedness activities and 
their response to the country’s first imported Ebola cases. 
CDC helped international, federal, and state partners establish 
airport risk assessment of travelers departing and arriving from 
affected countries, monitored travelers and other potentially 
exposed persons for 21 days, and helped hospitals across the 
country prepare to manage a possible case of Ebola through 
intensive training and preparedness activities.
The response illustrated the need for speed and flexibility. The 
arrival in a Dallas, Texas, hospital of a traveler from Liberia with 
Ebola and its subsequent transmission to two nurses working 
there led to rapid changes in domestic preparedness and response 
recommendations and practices. The deployment of large 
numbers of CDC staff to West Africa emphasized the agency’s 
response capacity. Longer and more repeat deployments would 
have improved effectiveness but were difficult to achieve because 
of the unprecedented need for large numbers of highly skilled 
staff, including French speakers to work in Guinea. At times, 
responders faced health, safety, and security risks while overseas, 
and after returning to the United States responders and their 
families were sometimes irrationally stigmatized. 
Through CDC’s collaboration with national and international 
partners, surveillance, contact tracing, diagnostic testing, 
community engagement and ownership, infection prevention 
and control, border health, emergency management, and 
vaccine evaluation all improved steadily. The implications of 
sporadic cases during the epidemic tail are still being assessed. 
Above all, this epidemic underscored the need for the new 
Global Health Security Agenda, a program designed to build 
stronger national and global capacities to prevent, detect, and 
respond to health threats (4).
Foreword
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH
Director, CDC
Corresponding author: Thomas R. Frieden, Office of the Director, CDC; Telephone: 404-639-7000; E-mail: TFrieden@cdc.gov.
The 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in 
West Africa required a massive international response by 
many partners to assist the affected countries and tested the 
world’s readiness to respond to global health emergencies. 
The epidemic demonstrated the importance of improving 
readiness in at-risk countries and remaining prepared for Ebola 
and other health threats. The devastation caused by Ebola in 
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone is well recognized; what is 
less widely recognized is that in these countries more people 
probably died because of Ebola than from Ebola. The epidemic 
shut most health care systems and derailed programs to prevent 
and treat malaria, tuberculosis, vaccine-preventable diseases, 
and other conditions (1,2).
How close the world came to a global catastrophe is even 
less well recognized. If Ebola had not been rapidly contained 
in Lagos, Nigeria, a densely populated city with many 
international airline connections, the disease most likely 
would have spread to other parts of Nigeria, elsewhere in 
Africa, and possibly to other continents. Even more people 
would have died from Ebola, and the disruption of health care 
systems would have threatened a decade of progress in Africa 
in vaccine programs and prevention and control of human 
immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis, malaria, maternal 
mortality, and other health conditions; changed the way ill 
travelers from all affected countries would be assessed; and 
undermined already fragile systems for health, social, and 
economic development. This catastrophe was averted through 
effective response in Lagos, led by Nigerian public health 
leaders, particularly the CDC-supported polio eradication 
staff and their implementation of CDC technical guidance 
for Ebola outbreak investigation, contact tracing, infection 
control, risk communication, border protection measures, and 
Ebola subject-matter expertise (3).
When CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center on 
July 9, 2014, the situation was ominous: Ebola cases in West 
Africa were increasing exponentially. Without a massive, well-
organized global response, a devastating epidemic could have 
become a global catastrophe. No matter what steps CDC took, 
and no matter how quickly the world took action, the epidemic 
was not going to end quickly. At the end of July, CDC pledged 
to put an unprecedented 50 staff in the field within 30 days. 
The agency not only exceeded this goal, but as the epidemic 
intensified, launched the largest response in its history.
 Supplement
2 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
This MMWR supplement presents reports that chronicle 
major aspects of CDC’s unprecedented response to the Ebola 
epidemic. Written by CDC staff who played key roles, these 
reports summarize the agency’s work, primarily during the first 
year and a half of the epidemic. From the start, CDC focused 
on providing proven public health measures to assist affected 
countries to defeat Ebola. Some of these key activities included:
• Supporting the incident management systems of Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone to permit effective action to 
stop Ebola.
• Establishing CDC teams in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone, which have transitioned into permanent CDC 
country offices.
• Improving case detection and contact tracing to stop 
Ebola transmission.
• Strengthening surveillance and response capacities in 
surrounding countries to reduce the risk for further spread.
• Improving infection control in Ebola treatment units and 
general health care facilities to stop spread of Ebola. This 
effort included training tens of thousands of health care 
workers in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone to safely care 
for Ebola patients and working to ensure the provision 
and correct use of personal protective equipment.
• Promoting the use of safe and dignified burial services to 
stop spread of Ebola.
• Conducting detailed epidemiologic analyses of Ebola trends 
and transmission patterns in communities and health care 
facilities to target and optimize epidemic control.
• Supporting laboratory needs at CDC’s Viral Special 
Pathogens Branch (Division of High-Consequence 
Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases) in Atlanta and 
transferring CDC laboratory expertise to the field (e.g., 
establishing an Ebola laboratory in Bo, Sierra Leone).
• Reducing the likelihood of spread of Ebola through travel, 
including working with international partners and federal 
and state health officials to establish exit and entry risk 
assessment and management procedures, as well as helping 
establish protocols to track travelers arriving in the United 
States from affected countries until 21 days after their last 
potential exposure.
• Disseminating risk communication materials designed to 
help change behavior, decrease rates of transmission, and 
confront stigma, both in West Africa and the United States.
• Assisting state health departments in responding to 
domestic Ebola concerns, including the response in Dallas 
after the first U.S. case of Ebola imported in a traveler 
from Liberia.
• Establishing trained and ready hospitals in the United 
States capable of safely assessing, managing, and caring 
for possible Ebola patients.
• Modeling, in real time, predictions for the course of the 
epidemic, which helped galvanize international support and 
enabled CDC to act on and align global action to reach 
goals for control to quickly shift the course of the epidemic.
• Providing logistic support for the most ambitious CDC 
deployment in history.
• Fostering hope for a long-term solution for Ebola, 
including rollout of Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a 
Vaccine against Ebola (STRIVE).
Although this supplement tells the story of CDC’s 
contributions to the Ebola response, partnerships have been, 
and remain, indispensable to CDC’s activities (http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html). 
Throughout the response, CDC assisted the governments of 
affected countries and worked closely with key international 
partners, including the World Health Organization, Médecins 
Sans Frontières, the African Union, other nations, and 
many local and international nongovernment and nonprofit 
organizations, including the CDC Foundation. Partnerships 
with many U.S. government agencies, particularly the Office of 
Foreign Disaster Assistance of the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, the U.S. Department of Defense, the Customs 
and Border Protection service of the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security, and ambassadors from affected countries, 
as well as state and local health departments and hospitals and 
health care workers, were critical. Achieving zero new Ebola 
cases in West Africa can be understood only in light of these 
effective collaborations with international partners, as well 
as collaborations from throughout the U.S. government and 
substantial emergency funding from the U.S. Congress. 
At the time this supplement went to press, widespread 
transmission of Ebola had ended. On March 29, 2016, the 
World Health Organization declared that Ebola in West Africa 
was no longer a Public Health Emergency of International 
Concern, and the CDC Ebola Response was deactivated on 
March 31, 2016. This deactivation does not mean support 
from the international community will end. CDC and 
partners remain in the region and CDC staff continue to be 
deployed internationally to support ongoing efforts to improve 
detection, response, and prevention through the Global Health 
Security Agenda (4). Even though the 2014–2016 Ebola 
epidemic has been declared over in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone, much important work remains to be done, and CDC 
staff will continue to address a wide range of issues, including 
resuming and strengthening core public health and health 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
care services, particularly vaccination programs and malaria 
prevention, treatment, and control initiatives in the aftermath 
of the largest Ebola outbreak in history.
Future progress requires renewed international focus on 
global health security to ensure that another preventable 
epidemic—whether of Ebola or another health threat—does 
not again get out of control. Documenting CDC’s experiences 
in responding to the Ebola epidemic is intended to promote 
understanding and action on the valuable global experience 
gained to improve the prevention, detection, and response to 
the next health crisis.
References
1. Plucinski MM, Guilavogui T, Sidikiba S, et al. Effect of the Ebola-virus-
disease epidemic on malaria case management in Guinea, 2014: a cross-
sectional survey of health facilities. Lancet Infect Dis 2015;15:1017–23. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00061-4
2. Elston JW, Moosa AJ, Moses F, et al. Impact of the Ebola outbreak on 
health systems and population health in Sierra Leone. J Public Health 
(Oxf) 2015;Oct 27. pii: fdv158. Epub ahead of print. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/pubmed/fdv158
3. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949
4. CDC. Global Health Security Agenda. http://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/security
 Supplement
4 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
In response to the emergence, rapid spread, and sustained 
transmission of Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in West Africa 
during 2014–2016, CDC worked closely with other U.S. 
government agencies, ministries of health (MoHs), the World 
Health Organization (WHO), and other international partners 
as part of an intensive effort to end the epidemic (Figure 1). 
Multiple factors led to the unprecedented scale of this epidemic, 
including the wide geographic spread of cases, slow response 
by the international community, population intermixing and 
mobility, disease transmission in densely populated urban 
areas, poor public health and societal infrastructure, local 
unfamiliarity with the disease, and distrust of government 
authorities and health care workers (HCWs). As of March 31, 
2016, WHO had reported 28,652 suspected, probable, and 
confirmed Ebola cases, including 11,325 deaths, far exceeding 
the combined total number of cases reported in approximately 
20 previous outbreaks since the 1970s (Table). This report 
presents an overview of previous Ebola outbreaks and the 
2014–2016 epidemic and observations about the epidemic’s 
implications for future public health responses.
Background
Ebola Outbreaks and Control Strategies, 
1976–2014
Ebola is a rare and often fatal illness caused by viruses 
of the family Filoviridae, genus Ebolavirus, which has five 
viruses: Ebola virus (EBOV), Sudan virus, Bundibugyo virus, 
Overview, Control Strategies, and Lessons Learned in the CDC 
Response to the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic
Beth P
. Bell, MD1
Inger K. Damon, MD, PhD2
Daniel B. Jernigan, MD3
Thomas A. Kenyon, MD4
Stuart T. Nichol, PhD2
John P
. O’Connor, MS1
Jordan W. Tappero, MD5
1Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
2Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
4Office of the Director, Center for Global Health, CDC
5Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
Corresponding author: Beth P
. Bell, Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-3967; 
E-mail: BBell@cdc.gov.
Summary
During 2014–2016, CDC, working with U.S. and international partners, mounted a concerted response to end the unprecedented epidemic 
of Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in West Africa. CDC’s response, which was the largest in the agency’s history, was directed simultaneously at 
controlling the epidemic in West Africa and strengthening preparedness for Ebola in the United States. Although experience in responding to 
approximately 20 Ebola outbreaks since 1976 had provided CDC and other international responders an understanding of the disease and 
how to stop its spread, the epidemic in West Africa presented new and formidable challenges. The initial response was slow and complicated 
for several reasons, including wide geographic spread of cases, poor public health and societal infrastructure, sociodemographic factors, local 
unfamiliarity with Ebola, and distrust of government and health care workers. In the United States, widespread public alarm erupted 
after Ebola cases were diagnosed in Dallas, Texas, and New York City, New York. CDC, in collaboration with its U.S. and international 
counterparts, applied proven public health strategies as well as innovative new approaches to help control the Ebola epidemic in West Africa 
and strengthen public health readiness in the United States. Lessons learned include the recognition that West African and other countries 
need effective systems to detect and stop infectious disease threats, the need for stronger international surge capacity for times when countries 
are overwhelmed by an outbreak, and the importance of improving infection prevention and control in health care settings. 
 The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Taï Forest virus, and Reston virus. All viruses cause disease in 
humans except Reston virus, which has caused asymptomatic 
infections in humans but disease in nonhuman primates only. 
The natural wildlife host of EBOV has not been definitively 
identified; however, evidence suggests fruit bats of the family 
Pteropodidae might be a reservoir. Ebola was first recognized 
in 1976 during two near-simultaneous outbreaks: one caused 
by EBOV in Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo 
[DRC]) that comprised 318 cases and 280 deaths (case-fatality 
rate [CFR] = 88%), and the other caused by Sudan virus in 
Sudan that comprised 284 cases and 151 deaths (CFR = 53%). 
These and subsequent sporadic outbreaks of Ebola in Eastern 
and Central African nations (DRC, seven; Uganda, five; 
Gabon, four; and Republic of the Congo and Sudan [now 
South Sudan], three each) had CFRs of approximately 
25%–90%; occurred in resource-poor settings where health 
care, transportation, and other services are limited; and lasted 
from several weeks to approximately 3 months (1) (Table).
EBOV is thought to be introduced into humans when a 
person has direct contact with blood, body fluids, or organs 
of infected animals (e.g., fruit bats, chimpanzees, or gorillas) 
or prepares meat from infected animals. Infection in human 
communities is sustained through person-to-person contact, 
often from symptomatic persons to caregivers in homes and 
health care settings, where infection-control practices are 
inadequate and personal protective equipment is unavailable 
FIGURE 1. CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic, from the first reported cases through the first year after CDC’s EOC was activated, and 
approximate number of reported new cases of Ebola per week — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, March 2014–July 2015
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; EOC = Emergency Operations Center. 
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Mar
2014
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
2015
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Guinea
Sierra Leone
Liberia
Reported no. of new cases of Ebola per week
Pre-EOC activation
First quarter EOC
Second quarter EOC
Third quarter EOC
Fourth quarter EOC
 
Spread to Liberia and Sierra Leone
Spread to Nigeria and Senegal; 
CDC teams help stop the outbreak
Traveler with Ebola comes to United States (Dallas); two nurses infected
CDC expands 
Ebola testing 
among U.S. 
laboratories
CDC organizes health care worker safety course in Anniston, Alabama, for West Africa volunteers
Rapid Isolation and Treatment of Ebola (RITE) teams 
help rapidly control new outbreaks in Liberia
Spread to Mali; CDC teams help 
stop the outbreak
CDC deploys 1,000th 
staf member
Liberia outbreak declared 
over for the frst time
Early reports of Ebola 
from Guinea; CDC feld 
team deployed
CDC EOC 
activated; CDC 
deployments 
surge
CDC issues Level 3 
travel warnings for 
West Africa (i.e., avoid 
all nonessential travel 
to West Africa)
CDC laboratory 
established in 
Sierra Leone
CDC Director 
Dr. Thomas 
Frieden travels 
to Guinea, 
Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone
Microplanning 
workshops with 
county leaders 
held in Liberia
CDC implements enhanced 
screening at airports; new 
tracking program for people 
coming from countries with 
Ebola outbreaks
CDC works with 
states to improve 
hospital readiness
CDC recommends reduced 
screening for passengers 
from Liberia
New cases 
reported 
in Liberia
CDC marks frst year since 
EOC was activated 
 Supplement
6 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
or in short supply. In some previous outbreaks (e.g., Kikwit, 
Zaire, in 1995), the infection cycle was amplified by explosive 
spread of disease in overcrowded local hospitals, underscoring 
the role of nosocomial transmission. Because corpses have high 
viral loads, funerals and burials accompanied by ceremonial 
washing and touching of deceased persons often are responsible 
for multiple chains of transmission.
During the first reported Ebola outbreak in Zaire in 1976, an 
international response team developed an early strategy to stop 
the outbreak, focusing on the identification, isolation, and care 
of persons with Ebola symptoms; meticulous contact tracing; 
engagement with community leaders; culturally sensitive and 
safe burials; effective infection control; and reliable laboratory 
testing (2). This strategy, further refined with accumulated 
experience, has been used to successfully control approximately 
20 Ebola outbreaks, including DRC’s seventh outbreak in 
November 2014 (3).
Ebola Symptoms, Tests, Treatment,  
and Transmission
Ebola patients typically experience fever, fatigue, muscle 
pain, and headache, followed by variable signs and symptoms 
that include vomiting, diarrhea, rash, and hemorrhagic 
diathesis resulting in external bleeding, internal bleeding, or 
both. In severe cases, multiorgan dysfunction (e.g., hepatic 
damage, renal failure, and central nervous system involvement) 
can develop, leading to shock and death (4). The incubation 
period is 2–21 days; symptoms usually appear within 8–10 days 
after exposure to EBOV. In the initial clinical phase, Ebola 
can be difficult to distinguish from other infectious diseases, 
including malaria, typhoid fever, and Lassa fever.
EBOV infection most commonly is confirmed by testing 
blood by using a real-time reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. Genetic sequencing is 
increasingly useful for describing the molecular epidemiologic 
characteristics and other features of Ebola outbreaks. No 
proven vaccine or specific treatment for Ebola exists; however, 
human trials of potential vaccines and therapies are under 
way. Early supportive care with rehydration (e.g., providing 
intravenous fluids and balancing electrolytes) and treatment 
of specific symptoms improve chances for survival.
Human-to-human transmission of EBOV occurs through 
direct contact with the blood or body fluids (e.g., urine, saliva, 
sweat, feces, vomit, breast milk, or semen) of symptomatic or 
deceased persons or with objects (e.g., needles and syringes) 
contaminated with body fluids from an infected person. An 
infected person becomes contagious once symptoms appear, 
and the level of infectivity increases dramatically as the disease 
progresses and the infected person’s viral load increases. The 
TABLE. Number of cases and deaths during Ebola outbreaks, excluding the 2014–2016 epidemic — worldwide, 1976–2014
Country
Year
Town
No. of cases
No. of deaths
Species
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2014
Multiple
66
49
Zaire ebolavirus
Uganda
2012
Luwero District
6*
3*
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2012
Isiro Health Zone
36*
13*
Bundibugyo ebolavirus
Uganda
2012
Kibaale District
11*
4*
Sudan ebolavirus
Uganda
2011
Luwero District
1
1
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2008
Luebo
32
15
Zaire ebolavirus
Uganda
2007
Bundibugyo
149
37
Bundibugyo ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2007
Luebo
264
187
Zaire ebolavirus
South Sudan†
2004
Yambio
17
7
Zaire ebolavirus
Republic of the Congo
2003
Mbomo
35
29
Zaire ebolavirus
Republic of the Congo
2002
Mbomo
143
128
Zaire ebolavirus
Republic of the Congo
2001
Not specified
57
43
Zaire ebolavirus
Gabon
2001
Libreville
65
53
Zaire ebolavirus
Uganda
2000
Gulu
425
224
Sudan ebolavirus
South Africa
1996
Johannesburg
2
1
Zaire ebolavirus
Gabon
1996
Booue
60
45
Zaire ebolavirus
Gabon
1996
Mayibout
37
21
Zaire ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo§
1995
Kikwit
315
250
Zaire ebolavirus
Côte d’Ivoire
1994
Tai Forest
1
0
Taï Forest ebolavirus
Gabon
1994
Mekouka
52
31
Zaire ebolavirus
South Sudan†
1979
Nzara
34
22
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo§
1977
Tandala
1
1
Zaire ebolavirus
South Sudan†
1976
Nzara
284
151
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo§
1976
Yambuku
318
280
Zaire ebolavirus
Source: CDC. Outbreaks chronology: Ebola virus disease. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/history/chronology.html 
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* Numbers reflect laboratory-confirmed cases only.
† Formerly part of Sudan.
§ Formerly Zaire.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
fluids, skin, and other tissues of persons who die of Ebola are 
extremely infectious and pose a hazard to anyone who has 
unprotected contact with the body, including caregivers and 
people preparing the body for burial. EBOV can be found in 
the semen of some men who have recovered from the disease, 
and CDC has recommended that contact with semen from 
male survivors be avoided until more is known about infectivity 
of body fluids. If male survivors have sex, they are advised to 
use a condom correctly and consistently (5).
Emergence in West Africa: A Regional 
and Global Threat
The first Ebola cases in West Africa were reported by WHO 
on March 23, 2014, in the forested rural region of southeastern 
Guinea bordering Liberia and Sierra Leone, where multiple 
unrecognized chains of transmission had festered for months 
(6). The lack of surveillance systems and other public health 
infrastructure impeded the ability of affected countries to 
effectively detect and respond to the rapidly evolving outbreak. 
As the outbreak spread to urban areas and expanded into 
an epidemic, the number of cases quickly overwhelmed 
the limited isolation and treatment capacity in the three 
countries affected, exacerbated by strained laboratory testing 
capacity. Poor infection control resulted in transmission in 
health care facilities, including a large number of infections 
and deaths among HCWs, and collapse of the health care 
system. Inadequate disease surveillance and reporting further 
hampered control efforts, resulting in incomplete information 
about the extent of the outbreak, particularly in difficult-
to-reach areas. Sociodemographic factors that contributed 
to virus spread included high mobility and intermixing of 
populations (e.g., ease of travel across land and river borders) 
and general unfamiliarity with Ebola and how to respond to 
Ebola outbreaks. By late July, Ebola had reached the urban 
and densely populated capitals of all three countries, the 
first time the disease had caused widespread transmission in 
crowded metropolitan areas. On August 8, 2014, with case 
counts steadily increasing, WHO declared the escalating 
Ebola situation a Public Health Emergency of International 
Concern (7). By March 2016, WHO had reported cumulative 
cases throughout Liberia and Sierra Leone and most of the 
prefectures in Guinea (Figure 2).
CDC’s Role and Accomplishments
CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic was the largest 
emergency response in the agency’s history (8). During CDC’s 
activation of its Emergency Operations Center (EOC) during 
July 9, 2014–March 31, 2016, approximately 4,000 CDC 
staff members directly participated in the response, and of 
these, 1,897 deployed to Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and 
other African countries affected by the epidemic (e.g., Nigeria 
and Mali). CDC’s deployed teams included specialists in 
epidemiology, infection control, laboratory analysis, medical 
care, emergency management, information technology, health 
communication, behavioral science, anthropology, logistics, 
planning, and other disciplines.
Response in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone
Before the Ebola epidemic, CDC’s presence in Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone was limited to technical support for a 
small number of disease-specific disease control programs (e.g., 
malaria and polio) and vaccination campaigns (e.g., measles and 
yellow fever). In Liberia, CDC also supported the collection of 
reproductive health data to improve family planning, maternal 
health, and gender-based violence, as well as programs to help 
United Nations peacekeepers avoid human immunodeficiency 
virus infection. In Sierra Leone, CDC evaluated the impact of 
community case management of childhood diseases programs. 
Though these programs provided some support for public health 
systems, they did not include efforts to strengthen infectious 
disease surveillance with laboratory diagnostic testing. Therefore, 
CDC’s response in these three countries required that CDC 
experts mobilize from other international and U.S. CDC 
locations. CDC teams deploying to West Africa early in the 
response established working relationships with each country’s 
MoH, WHO, and other international partners. In addition to 
CDC country teams, CDC staff members in West Africa were 
part of the Disaster Assistance Response Teams (DARTs) of the 
U.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Foreign 
Disaster Assistance, with CDC leading the public health and 
medical care teams within the DARTs.
A priority was to make response activities faster and 
more effective. To strengthen coordination among various 
government and partner organizations in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone, CDC helped set up national EOCs by using an 
incident management system (IMS) (9). Teams specializing 
in areas such as surveillance, case management, infection 
control, and social mobilization* met daily to report the 
status of assigned tasks and provide updates on the epidemic 
to an incident manager, who in turn updated country leaders. 
Support for EOC buildings, staffing, and operations was 
provided in large part by the CDC Foundation and by the 
DARTs and WHO.
* Social mobilization is a process that uses dialogue to encourage communities 
and help them work together to overcome a disease or achieve a social objective.
 Supplement
8 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Drawing on experience from previous Ebola responses, 
CDC worked with governments and partners to detect and 
break chains of transmission and end the epidemic. Because 
lack of reliable epidemiologic data was a major challenge from 
the outset, the teams quickly began to improve surveillance, 
laboratory, and information management systems to collect, 
analyze, and report data needed to guide response actions (10). 
CDC field teams regularly traveled to districts and villages 
to work with community teams on patient identification 
and isolation, contact tracing, infection control, social 
mobilization, and safe burials. However, as the epidemic in 
West Africa evolved, the large numbers of new cases and 
contacts each day overwhelmed response efforts. Effective 
isolation of patients became increasingly difficult as hospitals, 
clinics, and temporary Ebola treatment units (ETUs) were 
filled beyond capacity; persons with new suspected cases, as 
FIGURE 2. Number of cumulative confirmed Ebola cases during the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic, by county (Liberia), district (Sierra Leone), and 
prefecture (Guinea) — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, as of March 27, 2016*
Source: World Health Organization. Ebola situation reports. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. http://apps.who.int/ebola/ebola-situation-reports
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* After March 27, 2016, an additional three confirmed cases were reported in Liberia, and three probable cases were reported in Guinea.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
well as symptomatic contacts, frequently were turned away 
from ETUs, thereby fostering new chains of transmission. 
Suspicion of ETUs as a possible source for infection was 
common, making some persons reluctant to seek care even 
when beds were available. In addition, many HCWs became 
infected and died, contributing to the collapse of an already 
limited and compromised health care system. The growing 
numbers of contacts inundated response teams’ capacity to 
identify and monitor contacts. Chains of Ebola transmission 
evolved rapidly, and responders often were unable to identify 
how cases were epidemiologically linked.
In September 2014, CDC published results of a modeling 
analysis that estimated that approximately 555,000 Ebola 
cases (1.4 million cases when corrected for underreporting) 
could occur in Liberia and Sierra Leone by January 20, 2015, 
if approximately 70% of all persons with new cases were not 
effectively isolated (11). The model also showed that the speed 
with which this 70% target was reached would profoundly affect 
the total number of cases attributable to the epidemic. As the 
situation worsened in the three countries that were most heavily 
affected, these estimates contributed to the decision to massively 
scale up U.S. resources, including deployment of approximately 
3,000 U.S. Department of Defense personnel to Liberia to build 
ETUs and support other response activities. Other countries and 
organizations increased their response efforts as well; for example, 
the African Union mobilized nearly 1,000 African health care 
staff members to support the response.
CDC teams were integral to each country’s EOC in several 
ways (12). First, they responded rapidly to reports of new 
cases, helped place symptomatic persons into ETUs, and 
identified and monitored contacts by creating teams dedicated 
to targeted and rapid response (e.g., as part of the Rapid 
Isolation and Treatment of Ebola [RITE] strategy developed 
in Liberia) (13) and assigning field staff to districts. Second, 
previous Ebola responses, as well as evidence of widespread 
transmission in health care settings in the three countries most 
affected, emphasized the importance of infection control in 
breaking the chains of EBOV transmission. CDC provided 
infection-control training to approximately 24,600 HCWs 
and others; helped establish a system of infection control 
points of contact in health care facilities in Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone; and conducted 3-day hands-on training in 
Anniston, Alabama, for approximately 650 U.S. HCWs and 
other staff scheduled for deployment to West Africa. Third, 
CDC laboratory experts worked closely with IMS and other 
response teams to expand and coordinate the availability of 
laboratory testing of clinical specimens and collaborated to 
develop faster diagnostic assays. Fourth, social mobilization 
was used to promote awareness of the epidemic and marshal 
community religious and political leaders, and CDC health 
communication experts worked with response teams to help 
educate local populations about Ebola. Finally, CDC helped 
each country’s MoH develop border and airport exit-screening 
programs. Teams at national airports screened all passengers 
before the passengers boarded commercial flights and retained 
and evaluated travelers with febrile illness to minimize the risk 
for exportation of Ebola to other countries.
Response in Other African Countries
In July 2014, a traveler with Ebola flew from Monrovia, 
Liberia, to Lagos, Nigeria, where multiple responders had 
unprotected contact with him and were infected, raising the 
specter of an Ebola epidemic in Africa’s most populous city 
(21 million). The Nigerian government promptly launched an 
emergency response supported by an existing EOC and IMS 
structure for polio eradication, Nigerian trainees and graduates 
of a CDC Field Epidemiology Training Program, and CDC 
response officials. The IMS response established an ETU within 
2 weeks, trained approximately 2,000 Ebola caregivers, identified 
approximately 890 contacts, and completed 19,000 contact 
tracing home visits (14). The rapid response helped contain the 
outbreak to just 19 cases in two cities and averted a public health 
catastrophe, not only for Nigeria (population approximately 
180 million) but also for the entire African continent. WHO 
declared Nigeria Ebola-free on October 20, 2014.
CDC provided support to Senegal and Mali after separate 
importations of Ebola into those countries by travelers. 
Vigorous responses, including meticulous contact tracing, were 
implemented rapidly, and only a small number of cases occurred 
(one confirmed in Senegal and eight reported [seven confirmed] 
in Mali). CDC also worked with WHO and national MoHs to 
improve Ebola preparedness for all at-risk West African countries 
by helping to plan for EOCs, isolation capacity for patients with 
suspected Ebola, disease surveillance, laboratory testing, public 
awareness, and other related activities.
Response in the United States
As its response in West Africa evolved during the summer of 
2014, CDC worked closely with U.S. federal, state, and local 
public health and clinical partners to prepare for the possible 
introduction of Ebola into the United States. CDC issued 
guidance (15) and alerted health care workers to consider a 
diagnosis of Ebola if patients had compatible symptoms and 
had visited an affected country within the previous 3 weeks. 
To facilitate rapid testing, CDC provided staff, training, and 
support to qualify 56 state and local public health laboratories 
to perform Ebola reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) testing for Ebola.
 Supplement
10 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The introduction of Ebola into the United States triggered 
intense national media attention and widespread public 
alarm. In September 2014, a man flew from Liberia to Dallas, 
Texas and became ill with Ebola after his arrival; he died in 
a Dallas hospital. Two nurses who cared for him became 
infected with Ebola, were hospitalized, and recovered. A 
fourth U.S. case was confirmed in an HCW who returned 
from West Africa to New York City in October 2014, was 
hospitalized there, and recovered; no secondary infections 
were reported. In addition to these four U.S. patients, seven 
persons with Ebola symptoms, including six HCWs, were 
transported by charter aircraft from West Africa to U.S. 
hospitals; six of these patients recovered.
After the laboratory confirmation of Ebola in the Dallas 
patient, CDC developed expert teams (i.e., CDC Ebola 
Response Teams) to deploy where needed anywhere in the 
United States to assist with the response. To strengthen the 
preparedness of hospitals nationwide, CDC defined three tiers 
of hospital readiness, consisting of frontline health care facilities,† 
Ebola assessment hospitals, and Ebola treatment centers (16). 
CDC teams with expertise in infection control, occupational 
health, and laboratory diagnosis visited 81 facilities in 21 states 
and the District of Columbia (DC) to evaluate their readiness to 
care for patients with Ebola. By July 2015, a total of 55 hospitals 
in 17 states and DC were designated by state health departments 
as Ebola treatment centers.
To improve protection against importation of Ebola 
into the United States, CDC worked closely with the U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security, and state and local public health 
departments to establish a system to screen and follow up 
all travelers returning from Ebola-affected countries in West 
Africa. Travelers arriving from these countries were routed 
to one of five U.S. airports, triaged by CBP agents, screened 
for febrile illness, provided with CARE (Check and Report 
Ebola) kits (consisting of a thermometer, prepaid cell phone, 
and educational materials), and given an opportunity to have 
any questions answered by CDC. These returning travelers 
were then tracked by state and local health departments 
for any symptoms consistent with Ebola during the 21-day 
incubation period. During October 2014–December 2015, 
approximately 29,000 persons were monitored. Health 
departments also implemented plans to facilitate safe 
transport of travelers to a hospital ready to assess them for 
Ebola if fever or other compatible symptoms developed.
Conclusion
The Ebola epidemic of 2014–2016 took a profound toll 
on the lives of men, women, and children of Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone who were affected by a disease that had never 
been seen in their part of the world. Although an earlier and 
more robust response most likely would have controlled the 
epidemic sooner, the affected West African nations and the 
international community that responded were not prepared 
for an epidemic of this magnitude. This epidemic in the 
three countries and its introduction to seven other countries 
illustrates how all countries are connected and that a threat in 
one country is a threat everywhere. Readiness to detect and 
respond to outbreaks of infectious disease such as Ebola is the 
goal of the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) (17), an 
initiative supported by countries, government agencies, and 
international organizations to assist countries with attaining 
compliance with the International Health Regulations (18) and 
accelerate progress toward detecting and mitigating infectious 
disease threats quickly and effectively (19,20). The U.S. 
government has committed to working in at least 30 countries 
to implement GHSA, including Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone, where CDC has established new country offices to 
provide direct technical assistance with implementation. One 
of the most important lessons of the epidemic is that building 
these foundational capacities beyond Ebola in the three 
countries that were most heavily affected and more broadly is 
pivotal to preventing a similar disaster in the future.
CDC’s technical expertise and in-country presence and close 
collaboration with MoHs and international partners were vital 
to controlling the epidemic. By using information gleaned from 
participation in approximately 20 previous Ebola outbreaks, 
CDC’s Ebola experts and laboratory scientists, emergency 
management and response specialists, epidemiologists, 
database developers and managers, health communicators, 
experts in infection prevention and control and border 
issues, and numerous dedicated field workers all contributed 
unique and essential skills. Through rigorous field work to 
identify and follow up with ill persons and their contacts and 
innovative and focused epidemiologic analyses, response teams 
helped demonstrate that the epidemic was more widespread 
than initially thought and that more extensive and targeted 
control measures were needed. CDC laboratory scientists 
staffed field laboratories and helped to boost testing capacity 
in the three countries that were most heavily affected. CDC 
worked to strengthen critical control strategies, including case 
management, meticulous contact tracing, early treatment with 
supportive care, and social mobilization, and helped to develop 
† Facilities able to identify and triage persons under investigation and isolate 
them, notify the appropriate authorities, and transfer patients to an assessment 
hospital or treatment center.  
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
creative new strategies relevant to this epidemic (e.g., the RITE 
strategy in Liberia, which enhanced the capacity of county 
health teams to investigate and lead coordinated responses 
to outbreaks in remote areas) (13). In-country scientists and 
public health experts were integral to these activities. CDC’s 
Public Health Ethics Unit staffed the Ethics Desk within the 
EOC and facilitated consultation on ethical issues.
The epidemic highlighted how much more still needs to 
be learned about Ebola and the importance of partnerships, 
including with in-country scientists, in addressing research 
questions. Some areas of research include less common modes 
of virus transmission, virus persistence, virus reservoirs, 
clinical sequelae and disease spectrum, development of faster 
reliable laboratory tests and genetic analysis methods for virus 
characterization, improved information technology systems 
for use in the field, and effectiveness and safety of Ebola 
therapeutic drugs and vaccines, such as the Sierra Leone Trial 
to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola (21).
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone will move beyond the 
epidemic and rebuild with resources they lacked before 
this epidemic, including EOCs, stronger laboratories and 
surveillance systems, improved infection control in hospitals 
and health care centers, and better public awareness of the 
threats posed by infectious diseases. CDC in-country offices 
have been established and will continue to work with MoHs 
and other partners to further strengthen public health systems 
through GHSA.
CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa was 
made possible by the tireless work, unbridled dedication, and 
extraordinary resilience of thousands of agency staff members 
overseas and in the United States. To sustain CDC’s readiness 
to respond to future epidemics, emphasis must continue to be 
on building capacity and having a strong in-country presence; 
meticulous field work, technical rigor, and expertise; partnerships 
with MoHs, WHO, and other international organizations; and 
a commitment to effective evidence-based strategies.
Acknowledgment
CDC Ebola response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
1. CDC. Ebola (Ebola virus disease). Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.
gov/vhf/ebola/index.html
2. Breman JG, Johnson KM. Ebola then and now. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:1663–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1410540
 3. World Health Organization. Democratic Republic of Congo: the country 
that knows how to beat Ebola. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2014. http://www.who.int/features/2014/drc-beats-ebola/en
 4. WHO Ebola Response Team. Ebola virus disease in West Africa—the 
first 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:1481–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1411100
 5. CDC. Ebola virus disease transmission. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/transmission
 6. Dixon MG, Schafer IJ; CDC. Ebola viral disease outbreak—West Africa, 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:548–51.
 7. World Health Organization. Statement of the 1st meeting of the IHR 
emergency committee on the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2014. http://www.
who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2014/ebola-20140808/en
 8. CDC. The road to zero: CDC’s response to the West African Ebola 
epidemic, 2014–2015. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/
about/ebola/index.html
 9. Brooks JC, Pinto M, Gill A. Incident management systems and building 
emergency management capacity during the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic—
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. In: CDC response to the 2014–2016 
Ebola epidemic-—West Africa and United States. MMWR Suppl 
2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
10. Arwady MA, Bawo L, Hunter JC, et al. Evolution of Ebola virus disease 
from exotic infection to global health priority, Liberia, mid-2014. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:578–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2104.141940
 
11. Meltzer MI, Atkins CY, Santibanez S, et al. Estimating the future number 
of cases in the Ebola epidemic—Liberia and Sierra Leone, 2014–2015. 
MMWR Suppl 2014;63(No. Suppl 3).
 
12. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949
 
13. Kateh F, Nagbe T, Kieta A, et al. Rapid response to Ebola outbreaks in 
remote areas—Liberia, July–November 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:188–92.
 
14. Shuaib F, Gunnala R, Musa EO, et al. Ebola virus disease outbreak—
Nigeria, July–September 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:867–72.
 
15. CDC. Guidelines for evaluation of U.S. patients suspected of having 
Ebola virus disease. CDC Health Advisory. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2014. 
http://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00364.asp
 
16. Van Beneden CA, Pietz H, Kirkcaldy RD, et al. Early identification and 
prevention of the spread of Ebola—United States. In: CDC response to 
the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United States. 
MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
17. CDC. The global health security agenda. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://
www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/oga
 
18. World Health Organization. International health regulations. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/topics/
international_health_regulations/en
 
19. Heymann DL, Chen L, Takemi K, et al. Global health security: the wider 
lessons from the West African Ebola virus disease epidemic. Lancet 
2015;385:1884–901. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60858-3
 
20. Frieden TR, Tappero JW, Dowell SF, Hien NT, Guillaume FD, Aceng 
JR. Safer countries through global health security. Lancet 2014;383:764–
6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60189-6
 
21. Widdowson MA, Schrag SJ, Carter RJ, et al. Implementing an Ebola vaccine 
study—Sierra Leone. In: CDC response to the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—
West Africa and United States. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3). 
 Supplement
12 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
health authorities realized in June that the outbreak was not 
contained. By mid-2014, the situation had evolved into an 
international public health crisis as the first documented 
multicountry Ebola epidemic. Ongoing transmission occurred 
in multiple districts in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, 
including in these countries’ densely populated urban areas (2).
Before this epidemic, CDC presence in all three countries 
was very limited, and most early support for the response was 
provided through short-term (4- to 6-week) assignments of staff 
from headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, and CDC’s international 
country offices. In response to the evolving crisis, on July 9, 
2014, CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center (EOC) 
and committed agency support to assist the governments of 
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Deployed staff comprised 
epidemiologists, data managers, public health advisors, laboratory 
Overview of Response
The Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa 
(Figure 1) began in late 2013 in Guinea (1) and quickly spread 
to neighboring countries during early 2014. The epidemic is 
believed to have originated as an epizootic case of Ebola in 
Guinea (1) that led to local person-to-person spread of disease, 
initially in remote semirural areas of West Africa. However, 
with subsequent introductions of Ebola into urban areas, new 
cases occurred rapidly, and contacts moved across borders, 
facilitating uncontrolled spread.
Early international aid provided by the World Health 
Organization (WHO), Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), and 
CDC initially appeared to help curtail the outbreak in March 
and April 2014. However, with movement of untracked 
contacts across borders facilitating uncontrolled spread, public 
CDC’s Response to the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic — Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone
Benjamin A. Dahl, PhD1
Michael H. Kinzer, MD2
Pratima L. Raghunathan, PhD3
Athalia Christie, MIA3
Kevin M. De Cock, MD4,5
Frank Mahoney, MD1
Sarah D. Bennett, MD2
Sara Hersey, MPH2,6
Oliver W. Morgan, PhD7
1Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, CDC
2Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
3Office of the Director, Center for Global Health, CDC
4Division of Global HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis, Center for Global Health, CDC
5Country Director, CDC Kenya
6Country Director, CDC Sierra Leone
7Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
Corresponding author: Benjamin A. Dahl, Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-0972; E-mail: BDahl@cdc.gov.
Summary
CDC’s response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa was the largest in the agency’s history and occurred 
in a geographic area where CDC had little operational presence. Approximately 1,450 CDC responders were deployed to Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone since the start of the response in July 2014 to the end of the response at the end of March 2016, including 455 persons 
with repeat deployments. The responses undertaken in each country shared some similarities but also required unique strategies specific to 
individual country needs. The size and duration of the response challenged CDC in several ways, particularly with regard to staffing. The 
lessons learned from this epidemic will strengthen CDC’s ability to respond to future public health emergencies. These lessons include the 
importance of ongoing partnerships with ministries of health in resource-limited countries and regions, a cadre of trained CDC staff who 
are ready to be deployed, and development of ongoing working relationships with U.S. government agencies and other multilateral and 
nongovernment organizations that deploy for international public health emergencies. CDC’s establishment of a Global Rapid Response 
Team in June 2015 is anticipated to meet some of these challenges. 
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
scientists, communication experts, logistic and administrative 
support staff, and diverse technical support staff (3).
CDC established in-country Ebola teams in collaboration 
with the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) 
Disaster Assistance Response Team. This team worked with 
host country governments and partners as a key advisor 
on overall response management, including support for 
establishing EOCs by using an incident management system 
(IMS) (4). External partners working with this IMS (and 
with each other) included CDC, WHO, MSF, USAID, and 
United Nations agencies. The concept of a unified command 
to manage the response was new in all three of the countries 
most heavily affected, and the governments of these countries 
had no previous experience managing a complex outbreak 
that evolved into a humanitarian crisis. CDC teams worked 
within this unique and evolving structure to tailor activities 
to individual country needs, collaborating closely with WHO 
and the lead epidemiologist in the ministries of health.
CDC staff were deployed to Guinea and Liberia in March 
2014 (Figure 2); in July, deployments were increased through 
the activation of CDC’s EOC. In each country, CDC staff 
provided technical support and guidance to the working 
groups involved with epidemiology and surveillance; case 
investigation; laboratory capacity; safe transport of patients 
suspected of having Ebola, dead bodies, and laboratory 
specimens; infection control; community engagement; and 
safe burials. As the response evolved and the number of CDC 
staff in each country increased (Figure 2), CDC-supported 
FIGURE 1. Number of Ebola cases per 100,000 population — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, December 2013–March 31, 2016
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
14 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
staff (3) were deployed to outbreak areas to support ministry 
of health teams conducting case investigations, outbreak 
investigations, and various field surveys in collaboration with 
WHO, UNICEF, and MSF; epidemiologists were deployed 
through the African Union. CDC played an important role in 
case finding in all three countries by training staff to conduct 
surveillance activities and by training lead surveillance persons 
at the county (Liberia), district (Sierra Leone), and prefecture 
(Guinea) level. CDC did not send staff to provide direct 
patient care but did organize a training course and center for 
clinicians who had been deployed to work in Ebola treatment 
units (ETUs) in the countries affected by Ebola (5).
To maintain the large number of personnel for a long period, 
CDC drew on staff from its headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, 
and from other CDC offices and institutes across the United 
States (e.g., the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health in Cincinnati, Ohio, and the National Center 
for Health Statistics in Hyattsville, Maryland) and from the 
many CDC offices in countries around the world. In addition, 
CDC recruited domestic public health professionals from 
state health departments, fellowship programs in the United 
States, and other agencies within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. For the response in Guinea, the 
number of French-speaking CDC experts was augmented 
substantially with the deployment of colleagues from the Public 
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and graduates of the Field 
Epidemiology Training Program (FETP), particularly from 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given CDC’s need 
to continue its ongoing work in many other areas of public 
health, many of the CDC experts were deployed on 4- to 
6-week rotations; 455 persons were deployed more than once.
In all three countries, the general response emphasized active 
surveillance, rapid case investigation, referral of patients with 
suspected Ebola for treatment in ETUs, contact ascertainment 
and follow-up, infection control, and safe burials. Although the 
responses in the three countries were often similar, important 
differences and approaches also existed in accordance with 
the stage of the epidemic in each country, the unique cultural 
influences and language barriers, and variable levels of 
international aid and partners available in each country.
Guinea
The Ebola epidemic is believed to have begun as a small 
outbreak in the Guéckédou prefecture of Guinea in late 2013, 
and cases spread to the capital city, Conakry, by March 2014 
(2). CDC teams arrived in March to work with WHO and the 
Guinean government. CDC staff stayed through April, when 
the outbreak seemed to be waning. However, cases occurred 
FIGURE 2. Number of staff deployments by CDC for the Ebola epidemic, by country and month — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, 
March 2014–March 2016 
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Guinea
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
No. of deployments
Activation of CDC 
Emergency 
Operations Center 
July 9, 2014
Month and year of deployment
Jun
May
Apr
Mar
Feb
Jan
Dec
Nov
Oct
Sep
Aug
Jul
Jun
May
Apr
Mar
Jul
2014
2015
Sep
Aug
Mar
Feb
Jan
Dec
Nov
Oct
2016
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
again, and CDC orchestrated a more robust response to assist 
the Guinean government and other partners. CDC Guinea 
team numbers fluctuated daily and ranged from two in May 
2014 to 38 in March 2015 (Figure 2). By March 31, 2016, 
CDC had made 568 deployments to Guinea (Table).
Several different ministries of the Guinean government 
managed the early response; CDC, WHO, and other 
partners offered primarily technical support. In September 
2014, the response was reorganized into an IMS structure in 
which CDC and WHO provided technical assistance. The 
response was organized into five activities known as pillars, 
each of which was co-led by a Guinean national alongside an 
experienced partner: surveillance (WHO), care and treatment 
(MSF), sanitation (International Federation of Red Cross), 
communication (UNICEF), and research (a Congolese 
professor). The pillar co-leads convened technical working 
groups to support the needs of the response. The former head of 
the Epidemiology and Disease Surveillance section of Guinea’s 
Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene led the National 
Ebola Coordination Cell. Although WHO was the main 
surveillance lead, CDC staff provided substantial technical 
leadership at both central and prefectural levels, focusing on 
support for case finding, contact tracing, case investigation, 
contact listing, investigation and documentation of chains of 
transmission, and support for improving rigor and oversight 
in investigating cross-prefecture and cross-border movements 
of contacts. Early in the epidemic, CDC staff assisted Guinean 
officials with exit screening at Conakry Airport; once that was 
effective, they shifted to monitoring terrestrial movements 
(especially between Forécariah prefecture and Kambia district 
in Sierra Leone and Boké prefecture and in Tombali region 
of Guinea-Bissau). CDC, challenged by a limited number of 
French-speaking staff in Atlanta, recruited French-speaking 
staff internally within the U.S. government from other CDC 
country offices, CDC locally employed staff, and the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services and externally 
through PHAC and Democratic Republic of the Congo 
FETP graduates and residents. The external partnerships 
with PHAC and Democratic Republic of the Congo FETP 
yielded particularly experienced and effective staff who were 
linguistically and culturally well adapted to the fluid field 
epidemiology environment.
In Guinea, as in Liberia and Sierra Leone, CDC staff did not 
play a direct role in Ebola treatment but did collaborate with 
health care workers and health care facilities on surveillance and 
community outreach. MSF, the French Red Cross, the African 
Union in collaboration with the Cuban Brigade, and Alliance 
for International Medical Action were the primary operators of 
the ETUs in Guinea. The French military also established and 
ran a 10-bed ETU designated for Ebola-infected care providers 
(e.g., medical staff, ambulance drivers, and traditional healers) 
(6). The U.S. Embassy and USAID’s Office of U.S. Foreign 
Disaster Assistance played key roles in negotiating locations 
and funding new ETU construction.
A marked reticence among Guinean residents to report 
suspected Ebola cases hampered an early effective response; 
when the initial outbreak seemed to be waning, cases 
probably were unreported (7,8). Community resistance at 
times challenged the response and accessibility to villages. 
Deep-seated distrust of the government and outsiders and 
misconceptions in the country about the disease and the 
responders drove lack of reporting and, in some cases, hostility 
toward responders. In September 2014, villagers killed eight 
response workers, comprising WHO staff, doctors, and 
journalists (9), an event that underscored the dangerous nature 
of working in an atmosphere driven by fear, disbelief in the 
existence of the disease, and distrust of authorities. To address 
the reticence, several approaches were undertaken by the 
response IMS, including working with village elders, engaging 
Conakry residents who had family in the villages, deploying 
social anthropologists as members of investigation teams, and 
using security forces to maintain the peace.
In Guinea, WHO, CDC, and MSF advocated community 
outreach, active case finding, contact tracing, and rapid 
transport of patients suspected of having Ebola to ETUs 
rather than the widespread construction of unstaffed ETUs. 
This strategy markedly differed from the strategy adopted in 
Liberia and Sierra Leone, where construction of ETUs was a 
primary international focus. In Guinea, the national strategy 
of enhanced surveillance was anchored by the hiring of teams 
of recently graduated Guinean doctors who were deployed in 
each prefecture under the leadership of a prefectural lead. CDC 
and WHO deployed staff to the prefectures heavily affected by 
Ebola to offer technical and supervisory assistance. In the early 
stages, case finding was conducted through prefecture-wide 
door-to-door sensitization visits to raise community awareness 
of the urgent need to report patients suspected of having Ebola. 
Later, Ebola case finding in Guinea was intensified to include 
door-to-door monitoring in high-incidence subprefectures. 
TABLE. Number of confirmed (with date), probable, and suspected 
Ebola cases; number of deaths; and number of CDC staff deployments 
during the Ebola epidemic — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, 
March 2014–March 20, 2016
Characteristic
Guinea
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Date of first confirmed case
March 2014
March 2014
May 2014
No. of confirmed, probable, 
and suspected cases
3,811
10,675
14,124
No. of deaths
2,543
4,809
3,956
No. of CDC staff  
deployments 
568
627
1,100
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
16 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
At this stage, contacts of Ebola patients were monitored with 
daily temperature checks but were not physically or socially 
restricted from traveling to other prefectures.
The continued seeding of new chains of transmission in 
prefectures that had previously been free of Ebola led the 
Guinean National Ebola Response to adopt an approach 
called cerclage to contain the outbreak (10). This approach 
was an attempt to limit the movement of contacts of recent 
Ebola patients and their associated communities through social 
pressure and encouragement to remain within a circumscribed 
area (home or their village). To ensure community participation 
with the restrictions on movement, the national Ebola 
response provided some essential medical services, as well as 
supplemental food and hygiene materials. Village leaders were 
engaged and asked whether they agreed to participate in the 
cerclage. Prefectural Ebola response teams continued to directly 
observe the contacts each day during the 21-day follow-up 
period to rapidly isolate newly symptomatic patients. This 
approach was partially adapted from the Rapid Isolation and 
Treatment of Ebola (RITE) strategy (11,12) in Liberia and the 
quarantine village approach from Sierra Leone.
WHO declared Guinea free of Ebola transmission on 
December 29, 2015, after the last Ebola patient in Guinea 
was discharged from an ETU on November 16, 2015. On 
March 17, 2016, a new case of Ebola was reported in Guinea, 
and related cases were subsequently identified in both Guinea 
and Liberia. CDC expected that sporadic cases of Ebola could 
occur, even after the epidemic had ended, and cases have 
indeed occurred in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone since 
the epidemic was declared over in each country.
Liberia
A team of seven CDC staff members arrived in Monrovia 
in mid-July 2014 after a request for assistance from Liberia’s 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. Events in late July 
that drew the world’s attention to the emergency in West 
Africa included travel by an infected person from Monrovia 
to Lagos, Nigeria, initiating a secondary outbreak there, 
and Ebola infection in U.S. and other expatriate health care 
workers and their subsequent international evacuation (13). 
Within weeks, considerable additional staff were deployed; 
by September 2014, the CDC team in Liberia comprised 
approximately 40 persons. Initial investigations in July 2014 
focused on determining the extent and magnitude of the 
outbreak, including among health care workers; clarifying 
and strengthening data systems and reporting; coordinating 
enhancement of laboratory capacity; and providing overall 
support for the Liberian response (14–16).
In early August 2014, the gravity of the situation was 
recognized. The U.S. ambassador declared a disaster, the 
president of Liberia declared a state of emergency (14–16), and 
WHO called the Ebola epidemic a public health emergency 
of international concern (14). An important contribution by 
the CDC team in late July 2014 was advising the Ministry of 
Health and Social Welfare on establishing a focused IMS to 
replace the previous Liberian Ebola Task Force, a task force 
that was large and included high-level officials within the 
government (17,18). After formation of the IMS, the following 
priorities were established: 1) early detection and isolation of 
persons with Ebola, 2) safe transport of patients with suspected 
Ebola, 3) support of infection control to prevent transmission 
within the health care system, and 4) safe burials. Isolation of 
patients with suspected Ebola was the most immediate and 
overriding objective. The strategy did not include treatment of 
patients within existing health facilities (but supported home-
based care instead) and did not use involuntary quarantine for 
contacts of patients. Involuntary quarantine by the authorities 
of a particularly impoverished community in Monrovia in 
mid-August 2014 resulted in violence, was not supported by 
technical partners, and was not repeated (19).
IMS proved critical to consolidate, communicate, and 
ensure broad support for technical and policy interventions. 
However, the system remained larger than ideal. Therefore, the 
incident manager set up an inner core of advisors comprising 
representatives from WHO, CDC, and the UN Mission for 
Ebola Emergency Response, who conferred daily to discuss 
priority activities and make key decisions. The Liberian EOC 
organized a series of microplanning (county-level response) 
workshops with key county health officials and partners to 
assist in planning and developing response capacity.
WHO co-chaired the case management working group, and 
CDC played an important role in supporting the evolving 
case management strategy. U.S. government efforts focused on 
building ETUs to manage the increasing caseload of patients, 
although those efforts were not managed by CDC staff. Several 
partners contributed to the building of ETUs; however, delays in 
construction and mobilization of resources to staff and supply the 
ETUs hampered efforts. In response to the increasing number 
of patients suspected of having Ebola and requiring urgent 
management and care, CDC and others supported establishment 
of community care centers in areas without ETUs. The increase 
in available isolation beds and expanded efforts to ensure rapid 
and safe burials markedly reduced Ebola incidence, and by late 
September 2014, national bed capacity exceeded demand (20).
During late October and early November 2014, numerous 
outbreaks occurred in remote areas of Liberia. The need for 
flexible, mobile, and rapid teams that could quickly reach new 
hot spots, conduct assessments, and implement early control 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
measures was recognized, leading to development of the RITE 
strategy (11,12). RITE teams were deployed at the first report 
of new suspected outbreaks, and team members focused on 
village-level isolation and management of patients until safe 
referral to ETUs could be established. The enhanced capacity 
of county health teams to investigate outbreaks in remote areas 
provided a faster, more tailored response to the local needs.
In addition to supporting the national surveillance office, CDC 
deployed staff and tried to maintain a presence in all counties 
within Liberia that had ongoing Ebola virus transmission. Much 
of the work at the county level focused on developing surveillance 
and data management capacity of the county health team and 
supporting contact tracing and outbreak investigations. Effort 
also went into health communication (17).
By November 2014, the epidemic was characterized by continued 
low-level transmission in Monrovia and surrounding Montserrado 
County, which resulted in sporadic cases in remote, rural locations. 
Cases had declined substantially, enabling focus on individual 
transmission chains. The last known chain, in a community near 
Saint Paul River Bridge, was investigated and contained in early 
2015 (21). Although Liberia appeared on the way to being declared 
Ebola-free, one case occurred unexpectedly in Monrovia in March 
2015. A detailed investigation found that the patient most likely 
acquired Ebola through sexual intercourse with an Ebola survivor 
who had been ill approximately 6 months previously (22,23).
Liberia was first declared free of Ebola transmission by 
WHO on May 9, 2015, and on two subsequent occasions 
(September 3, 2015, and January 14, 2016), only to have other 
clusters or cases subsequently detected and contained. CDC 
staff are now concentrating on strengthening epidemiology, 
laboratory capacity, infection prevention and control, and 
restoration of routine health services.
Sierra Leone
The first cases of Ebola in Sierra Leone were detected in May 
2014. Transmission increased from the eastern Kailahun and 
Kenema districts early in the outbreak to eventually affect all 
14 districts. CDC’s first deployment to Sierra Leone occurred 
in July 2014 (Figure 2); 1,100 deployments supported CDC 
activities in the country through March 20, 2016 (Table).
CDC provided technical assistance to the government of Sierra 
Leone and many partners to implement outbreak management 
activities. To support these activities, CDC staff were embedded 
into the local response teams at the District Ebola Response 
Centres and into the national-level National Ebola Response 
Centre and Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MoHS).
CDC supported establishment and management of 
the national and district databases and provided data 
management and technical assistance for Ebola surveillance, 
case investigation, contact tracing, and other outbreak control 
activities. CDC staff helped with training and supportive 
supervision of case investigators, contact tracers, and data 
managers and contributed subject-matter expertise to the 
investigations of nosocomial Ebola outbreaks and infections 
among health care workers and frontline responders. The 
MoHS used CDC’s concept of Ring Infection Prevention 
and Control (Ring IPC) (24), and CDC was integral to 
implementing the strategy; this strategy supported improved 
screening, isolation, referral for treatment, use of hand hygiene 
and personal protective equipment, waste management, 
and cleaning and decontamination practices for health care 
facilities and health care workers at highest risk for Ebola 
exposure and infection. CDC staff commonly coordinated 
Ring IPC activities in collaboration with WHO, the United 
Kingdom’s Department for International Development, and 
nongovernment organizational partners. Finally, CDC staff 
supported rapid behavioral assessments to inform ongoing 
response activities and improve community engagement.
The MoHS, the International Organization for Migration, 
and CDC worked to strengthen screening at the international 
airport and seaports and along land borders. CDC also 
supported development of guidelines, training of screeners 
and management staff, periodic assessments with support to 
address gaps identified, and exercises to maintain procedures 
throughout the epidemic.
Unlike in Guinea and Liberia, in Sierra Leone CDC 
established, managed, and staffed an Ebola testing laboratory. 
Initially the laboratory was in Kenema district but was later 
relocated to Bo district, with an MSF ETU. The CDC Bo 
Laboratory maintained capacity to test up to a peak of 180 
samples in a single day. The laboratory played a considerable 
role in Ebola virus diagnostic laboratory testing in Sierra Leone, 
processing more than one third of all specimens during the 
epidemic, and had tested approximately 26,000 specimens 
when it was closed in October 2015. In addition to diagnostic 
testing, the CDC Bo Laboratory also tested semen samples 
collected as part of the Virus Persistence Study among Ebola 
survivors (25). CDC supported laboratory coordination, 
assisted with the development of sample transport and data 
reporting systems, and provided support to MoHS to conduct 
proficiency testing of international Ebola laboratories in 
Sierra Leone. As of March 31, 2016, CDC continued to 
provide technical assistance to the government of Sierra Leone 
and other partners to sustain laboratory capacity for Ebola 
virus testing and to strengthen government of Sierra Leone 
laboratory systems at the Central Public Health Reference 
Laboratory in Freetown.
 Supplement
18 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Throughout the epidemic, CDC collaborated with MoHS 
and the Ebola Response Consortium, which comprised 
nongovernment organizations, to enhance screening, isolation, 
and referral capacity at non-Ebola health care facilities. 
Activities reached 1,188 government clinics and resulted in 
training of 4,264 health care workers on infection-control 
procedures (26) relevant to the outpatient setting, including 
screening, isolation and temporary management, referral 
for testing, hand washing, use of recommended personal 
protective equipment, waste management, and cleaning and 
decontamination. At government hospitals, CDC supported 
MoHS and WHO in the placement and training of IPC 
focal persons and committees (5). Within MoHS, CDC and 
WHO assisted with establishing the National IPC Unit, led 
by a national IPC coordinator. The National IPC Unit is 
responsible for expanding Ebola IPC activities to all public and 
private health care facilities and to include practices to reduce 
nosocomial transmission of pathogens other than Ebola virus.
With MoHS and other partners, CDC participated in several 
studies during the Ebola response, including the Sierra Leone 
Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola (27). In addition, 
with MoHS and WHO, CDC initiated the Virus Persistence 
Study to assess the length of Ebola virus shedding in the semen 
of survivors (25). A second phase of the study is enrolling 
survivors of both sexes to determine the persistence of Ebola 
virus in body fluids. A household transmission study was 
conducted in Freetown to better understand the dynamics of 
Ebola virus transmission (CDC, unpublished data, 2015). Four 
surveys of knowledge, attitudes, and practices were conducted 
with CDC support at different stages during the epidemic to 
improve understanding of how Sierra Leone residents perceived 
the Ebola epidemic and response and what activities might 
improve community engagement. CDC also collaborated with 
the National Institutes of Health to implement a randomized 
trial of the investigational therapeutic drug ZMapp (28).
Sierra Leone had two new cases beginning in January 2016, 
more than 2 months after WHO declared the end of the epidemic 
in Sierra Leone on November 7, 2015. Rapid and effective contact 
tracing, as well as implementation of control measures, quickly 
controlled the sporadic clusters that have occurred.
Challenges and Lessons Learned
Key challenges to the countries affected by Ebola as the 
epidemic accelerated included response coordination, initial 
clinical management and isolation of patients suspected of 
having Ebola, development of a reliable alert system to report 
suspected cases, development of a skilled workforce for field 
epidemiologic investigation, and the need for infrastructure to 
manage and isolate contacts. Early in the epidemic, all three 
countries found it challenging to reach a consensus among 
partners on specific strategies for the overall response. Other 
challenges included 1) developing treatment protocols and 
scaling up health systems’ capacity to manage the growing 
number of patients; 2) deciding whether to use existing 
facilities or build new facilities for clinical care, whether 
to support home-based care, and the role of quarantine in 
managing cases and contacts; 3) developing communication 
strategies; 4) determining how to engage communities and 
enlist their support; and 5) deciding how to respond to the 
increasing humanitarian crisis. Another challenge included 
producing reliable descriptive epidemiologic data, which 
underscored the need for standardization of data collection 
and management between the three countries.
A major issue for all three countries was the extensive and 
substantial effect of the epidemic on basic health care services. 
For example, nosocomial transmission led to Ebola virus 
infection among staff members, routine vaccination campaigns 
were canceled, samples from persons suspected of having polio 
were unable to be transported out of the countries, and 75% 
fewer caesarean sections reportedly were performed than before 
the Ebola epidemic (29,30). As the epidemic has waned, the 
need to rebuild the health care sector has become apparent.
Many unique staffing challenges and solutions were 
encountered during this historic response, the largest in CDC’s 
history. Approximately 1,400 CDC staff were placed in the three 
countries during the 21 months of the EOC activation, during 
July 2014–March 2016. This long-term need for international 
deployment of staff highlighted that CDC’s traditional approach 
to international work (deployments of approximately 30 days) 
might need to be reconsidered for future responses of this 
magnitude and length. Positive relationships with different 
partners must continue to be fostered, and clear objectives for 
CDC roles and responsibilities for outbreak responses should 
be determined before the next outbreak.
The 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa underscores 
the importance of ongoing partnerships with ministries of 
health in resource-limited countries and regions. The rapid 
response to the initial introduction of Ebola into Nigeria, where 
CDC had an established presence (3), contrasts considerably 
with that of the early CDC response in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone. Issues to consider while attempting to enhance 
CDC’s capacity in overseas public health emergency responses 
of this magnitude include providing effective, internationally 
focused emergency response training; maintaining a cadre of 
culturally and linguistically fluent, highly experienced staff who 
are ready to be deployed to other countries; and developing 
ongoing working relationships with U.S. government agencies 
and other multilateral and nongovernment organizations that 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
deploy during international public health emergencies. CDC’s 
establishment in June 2015 of the Global Rapid Response 
Team, which includes staff members who are on call and ready 
to deploy at any given time to Africa, the Middle East, and 
Asia, is anticipated to meet many of these challenges.
Conclusion
The response to the Ebola epidemic in Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone varied by country and involved many 
international partners working with government ministries. 
However, across the region, CDC staff were primarily engaged 
in offering subject-matter expertise on the core principles for 
control, including ensuring and enhancing surveillance efforts 
across the region, and ensuring prompt, efficient, and complete 
contact tracing practices. In addition, CDC provided technical 
support in other areas, offering guidance, training, and support 
for infection-control and health communication. Although the 
response varied among countries and changed as the epidemic 
shifted, a common goal, to reach zero new Ebola cases, drove 
the response within each country and among all partners, as 
did the belief that such a goal was attainable.
A CDC operational presence earlier in the epidemic might 
have led to a more effective response. Therefore, CDC has 
established country offices in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone to help the ministries of health better prepare for future 
disease outbreaks. These new in-country offices will focus on 
building surveillance capacity by strengthening the public health 
infrastructure, expanding the workforce, improving laboratories, 
and continuing to develop emergency response capability.
References
1. Baize S, Pannetier D, Oestereich L, et al. Emergence of Zaire Ebola virus 
disease in Guinea. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1418–25. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa1404505
2. Dixon MG, Schafer IJ; CDC. Ebola viral disease outbreak—West Africa, 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:548–51.
3. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949
4. Brooks JC, Pinto M, Gill A, et al. Incident management systems and 
building emergency management capacity during the 2014-2016 Ebola 
epidemic—Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. In: CDC response to the 
2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United States. MMWR 
Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
5. Hageman JC, Hazim C, Wilson K, et al. Infection prevention and control 
for Ebola in health care settings—West Africa and United States. In: CDC 
response to the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United 
States. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
6. Janvier F, Foissaud V, Delaune D, et al. Deployment of the French military 
field laboratory dedicated to Ebola virus infected patients in Guinea, 
January–July 2015. J Infect Dis 2016;213:1208–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/jiv554
7. Dixon MG, Taylor MM, Dee J, et al. Contact tracing activities during the 
Ebola virus disease epidemic in Kindia and Faranah, Guinea, 2014. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:2022–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201//eid2111.150684
 8. Victory KR, Coronado F, Ifono SO, Soropogui T, Dahl BA. Ebola 
transmission linked to a single traditional funeral ceremony—
Kissidougou, Guinea, December 2014–January 2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:386–8.
 9. Dixon R. Eight reported dead in attack on Ebola workers in Guinea. 
Los Angeles Times. September 18, 2014. http://www.latimes.com/world/
africa/la-fg-attack-ebola-guinea-outreach-20140918-story.html
 
10. Hersey S, Martel LD, Jambai A, et al. Ebola virus disease—Sierra Leone 
and Guinea, August 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2015;64:981–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6435a6
 
11. Kateh F, Nagbe T, Kieta A, et al. Rapid response to Ebola outbreaks in 
remote areas—Liberia, July–November 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:188–92.
 
12. Lindblade KA, Kateh F, Nagbe TK, et al. Decreased Ebola transmission 
after rapid response to outbreaks in remote areas, Liberia, 2014. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:1800–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2110.150912
 
13. Forrester JD, Hunter JC, Pillai SK, et al. Cluster of Ebola cases among 
Liberian and U.S. health care workers in an Ebola treatment unit and 
adjacent hospital—Liberia, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:925–9.
 
14. Arwady MA, Bawo L, Hunter JC, et al. Evolution of Ebola virus disease 
from exotic infection to global health priority, Liberia, mid-2014. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:578–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2104.141940
 
15. Forrester JD, Pillai SK, Beer KD, et al. Assessment of Ebola virus disease, 
health care infrastructure, and preparedness—four counties, Southeastern 
Liberia, August 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:891–3.
 
16. Matanock A, Arwady MA, Ayscue P
, et al. Ebola virus disease cases 
among health care workers not working in Ebola treatment units—
Liberia, June–August, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1077–81.
 
17. Nyenswah TG, Kateh F, Bawo L, et al. Ebola and its control in Liberia, 
2014–2015. Emerg Infect Dis 2016;22:169–77. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid2202.151456
 
18. Pillai SK, Nyenswah T, Rouse E, et al. Developing an incident 
management system to support Ebola response—Liberia, July–August 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:930–3.
 
19. Onishi N. Clashes erupt as Liberia sets an Ebola quarantine. New York 
Times. August 20, 2014. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/21/world/
africa/ebola-outbreak-liberia-quarantine.html
 
20. Nyenswah T, Fahnbulleh M, Massaquoi M, et al. Ebola epidemic—
Liberia, March–October 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1082–6.
 
21. Nyenswah T, Fallah M, Sieh S, et al. Controlling the last known cluster 
of Ebola virus disease—Liberia, January–February 2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:500–4. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:806; MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:1180.
 
22. Christie A, Davies-Wayne GJ, Cordier-Lasalle T, et al. Possible sexual 
transmission of Ebola virus—Liberia 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:479–81. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2015;64:1180.
 
23. Mate SE, Kugelman JR, Nyenswah TG, et al. Molecular evidence of 
sexual transmission of Ebola virus. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2448–54. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1509773
 
24. Nyenswah T, Massaquoi M, Gbanya MZ, et al. Initiation of a ring 
approach to infection prevention and control at non-Ebola health care 
facilities—Liberia, January–February 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:505–8.
 
25. Deen GF, Knust B, Broutet N, et al. Ebola RNA persistence in semen 
of Ebola virus disease survivors—preliminary report. N Engl J Med 
2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1511410
 Supplement
20 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
26. Levy B, Rao CY, Miller L, et al. Ebola infection control in Sierra Leonean 
health clinics: a large cross-agency cooperative project. Am J Infect 
Control 2015;43:752–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2015.03.011
 
27. Widdowson MA, Schrag SJ, Carter RJ, et al. Implementing an Ebola vaccine 
study—Sierra Leone. In: CDC response to the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic-—
West Africa and United States. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
28. National Institutes of Health. Putative investigational therapeutics in 
the treatment of patients with known Ebola infection. Washington, DC: 
National Institutes of Health; 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02363322?term=zmapp&rank=1
 
29. Elston JWT, Moosa AJ, Moses F, et al. Impact of the Ebola outbreak on 
health systems and population health in Sierra Leone. J Public Health 
(Oxf) 2015;fdv158. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdv158
 
30. Lori JR, Rominski SD, Perosky JE, et al. A case series study on the effect of 
Ebola on facility-based deliveries in rural Liberia. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 
2015;15:254. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12884-015-0694-x   
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
because each shared a land border with Guinea or Liberia. The 
World Health Organization (WHO) identified these four 
bordering countries and 10 others in the WHO Africa Region 
(Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, 
Ethiopia, The Gambia, Ghana, Mauritania, Niger, and Togo) 
as the highest priority countries for technical assistance for 
Ebola preparedness; two additional countries (Nigeria and 
Democratic Republic of the Congo) were identified as at high 
risk for Ebola introduction because of strong trade and travel 
links with the affected countries (1).
Background
In the late summer of 2014, it became apparent that 
improved preparedness was needed for Ebola virus disease 
(Ebola) in at-risk countries surrounding the three West 
African countries that were most highly affected (Guinea, 
Sierra Leone, and Liberia). The potential for Ebola to spread 
from these countries to other countries in Africa was of 
particular concern. Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, and 
Senegal were considered at greatest risk for Ebola importation 
Early Identification and Prevention of the Spread 
of Ebola in High-Risk African Countries
Lucy Breakwell, PhD1
A. Russell Gerber, MD2
Ashley L. Greiner, MD1
Deborah L. Hastings, MD1
Kelsey Mirkovic, PhD1
Magdalena M. Paczkowski, PhD1
Sekou Sidibe, MPH2
James Banaski, MS3
Chastity L. Walker, DrPH2
Jennifer C. Brooks, MPH3
Victor M. Caceres, MD2
Ray R. Arthur, PhD2
Frederick J. Angulo, DVM, PhD2
1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC
2Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
3Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
Corresponding author: Frederick J. Angulo, Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC. T
elephone: 404-639-5314; E-mail: FAngulo@cdc.gov.
Summary
In the late summer of 2014, it became apparent that improved preparedness was needed for Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in at-risk countries 
surrounding the three highly affected West African countries (Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia). The World Health Organization 
(WHO) identified 14 nearby African countries as high priority to receive technical assistance for Ebola preparedness; two additional 
African countries were identified at high risk for Ebola introduction because of travel and trade connections. To enhance the capacity of 
these countries to rapidly detect and contain Ebola, CDC established the High-Risk Countries Team (HRCT) to work with ministries of 
health, CDC country offices, WHO, and other international organizations. From August 2014 until the team was deactivated in May 
2015, a total of 128 team members supported 15 countries in Ebola response and preparedness. In four instances during 2014, Ebola 
was introduced from a heavily affected country to a previously unaffected country, and CDC rapidly deployed personnel to help contain 
Ebola. The first introduction, in Nigeria, resulted in 20 cases and was contained within three generations of transmission; the second 
and third introductions, in Senegal and Mali, respectively, resulted in no further transmission; the fourth, also in Mali, resulted in seven 
cases and was contained within two generations of transmission. Preparedness activities included training, developing guidelines, assessing 
Ebola preparedness, facilitating Emergency Operations Center establishment in seven countries, and developing a standardized protocol 
for contact tracing. CDC’s Field Epidemiology Training Program Branch also partnered with the HRCT to provide surveillance training 
to 188 field epidemiologists in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, and Senegal to support Ebola preparedness. Imported cases of Ebola 
were successfully contained, and all 15 priority countries now have a stronger capacity to rapidly detect and contain Ebola.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
22 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Recognizing the importance of rapid response to an Ebola 
importation, CDC established the High-Risk Countries Team 
(HRCT) in the International Task Force of the CDC Ebola 
response in August 2014. Its purpose was to enhance the 
capacity of identified high-priority African countries to rapidly 
detect and contain an imported case of Ebola. To facilitate the 
enhancement of the capacity for rapid Ebola detection and 
containment, the Atlanta, Georgia–based HRCT, in close 
collaboration with CDC country offices in Africa, focused on 
building epidemiologic and laboratory capacity, particularly 
Ebola surveillance and alert systems, Ebola specimen transport, 
contact tracing, border/points-of-entry screening, and 
implementation of rapid response teams.
When the HRCT was deactivated in May 2015, CDC 
had provided technical assistance for Ebola preparedness 
to 15 of the 16 at-risk countries (the exception was the 
Central African Republic) (Figure 1). CDC also assigned 
staff to the WHO Africa Regional Office in Brazzaville, 
Congo, and WHO headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. 
In-country members of the HRCT worked directly with 
ministry of health (MoH) officials or persons who worked 
for organizations designated responsible for the country’s 
Ebola preparedness activities. The team also collaborated 
with WHO and other international organizations, such as 
the International Organization for Migration, Médecins Sans 
Frontières (MSF), and the International Committee of the 
Red Cross. Key in-country partners included U.S. Embassy 
staff, particularly U.S. Agency for International Development 
and CDC country office staff.
CDC staff already had been working in nine of the 
15 countries and were intensely involved in Ebola 
preparedness and response; seven of these countries 
(Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, 
Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, and Nigeria) had CDC country 
offices, and the two other countries (Benin and Senegal) 
had in-country CDC malaria resident advisors involved in 
the President’s Malaria Initiative (Figure 1). Because CDC 
in-country staff already had built relationships with public 
health staff in their countries, they were able to more rapidly 
assist these countries with Ebola preparedness.
A total of 128 CDC staff provided in-country technical 
support to these countries and to WHO Africa Regional 
Office and WHO headquarters. An additional 30 CDC 
staff members in Atlanta supported personnel deployed in 
the field. Countries that received the highest levels of CDC 
in-country technical support were the three countries that 
had imported cases of Ebola: Nigeria, Senegal, and Mali. 
CDC Technical Assistance in Ebola 
Preparedness and Response
Nigeria
On July 20, 2014, an airline passenger with symptoms 
consistent with Ebola (index case-patient) traveled from 
Liberia to Lagos, Nigeria, and subsequently was confirmed 
to have Ebola (2). Thirteen direct contacts of the index 
case-patient, including nine health care workers, contracted 
Ebola; these cases represent first-generation spread of Ebola 
in Nigeria (2). Three of these case-patients transmitted Ebola 
to other persons (second-generation spread), including a 
physician in Port Harcourt, Nigeria, who was infected after 
treating a patient who had traveled to Port Harcourt from 
Lagos seeking private care (2). An additional three persons 
who had contact with the Port Harcourt physician contracted 
Ebola, representing third-generation spread of Ebola in 
Nigeria (Figure 2). Ultimately, the July Ebola importation 
into Nigeria resulted in 20 cases (19 confirmed and one 
probable) and eight deaths (2).
Given the population and the international airline 
connections in Lagos, as well as the economic and geographic 
importance of Nigeria, the introduction of Ebola into Nigeria 
represented a critical juncture in the response to Ebola. 
Immediately after being notified about the index case, the 
Lagos State MoH, with technical assistance from CDC Nigeria 
and the Nigerian Polio Eradication Program, activated an Ebola 
Incident Management (IM) center that eventually became the 
national Emergency Operations Center (EOC) (2). Within 
72 hours after being notified of the index case, CDC personnel 
and Nigerian Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP) 
staff previously assisting the MoH with polio elimination were 
deployed to provide technical assistance to Nigeria’s MoH and 
were incorporated into the EOC (2). The EOC in Lagos was 
built on an existing IM structure, developed as part of the 
Nigerian Polio Eradication Program (2,3). A major partner in 
the response in Nigeria was the FETP
, which facilitated field 
work, particularly contact tracing. After Ebola was confirmed 
in Port Harcourt, an EOC was established there.
Approximately 890 persons who had been exposed to Ebola 
(contacts) were identified and monitored, 19,000 home visits 
were conducted, and 150,000 airline passengers were screened in 
Nigeria (2,3). CDC team members were involved in planning, 
health communication, infection control, and surveillance, as 
well as in coordinating support from other sources (2). WHO 
declared Nigeria Ebola-free on October 20, 2014.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Senegal
Seven weeks into the Ebola outbreak in Nigeria, on August 29, 
2014, Senegal confirmed its first Ebola case in a student aged 21 years 
who had traveled from Guinea in mid-August to visit family in 
Dakar, Senegal (index case-patient) (4). At the request of Senegal’s 
MoH, CDC quickly deployed staff, who partnered with the CDC 
malaria resident advisor in-country to assist the MoH with rapid 
Ebola containment through robust contact tracing, including 21-day 
active monitoring. The HRCT
, which was developed shortly before 
cases in Senegal were recognized, facilitated the CDC response. A 
total of 74 contacts of the index case-patient were identified and 
followed through the 21-day monitoring period (4). No further 
Ebola transmission occurred in Senegal from this case (Figure 2) (4).
FIGURE 1. African countries where CDC provided technical assistance for Ebola preparedness — August 2014–May 2015*  
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* The High-Risk Countries Team was active from August 2014 through May 2015.
 Supplement
24 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The Dakar airport, a major West African hub, was a critical 
corridor for transporting aid into and out of the countries that were 
most heavily affected. Before the Ebola importation, Senegal no 
longer permitted air travel to or from Senegal and Guinea, Liberia, 
or Sierra Leone, which limited the transport of critical supplies 
into the countries that were heavily affected. CDC provided 
point-of-entry screening technical assistance at Dakar’s airport, 
and this assistance contributed to the creation of an “air corridor” 
for humanitarian assistance whereby vital supplies and personnel 
could be transported to Liberia via the Dakar International 
Airport. CDC also assessed Senegal’s Ebola surveillance system 
and provided recommendations to strengthen the system. WHO 
declared Senegal Ebola-free on October 17, 2014.
Mali
Mali confirmed its first imported Ebola case on October 20, 
2014 (5). The index case-patient was a girl aged 2 years who 
FIGURE 2. Number of Ebola cases for each generation of transmission following each importation of Ebola — Nigeria, Senegal, and Mali, July 
2014–January 2015*
Nigeria
(July–October) 
Senegal
(August–October) 
Mali Case 1
(October–January) 
Mali Case 2
(October–January) 
Index case 
First 
Second     
Generation of transmission
Third
One case
Transmission
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* The World Health Organization declared Nigeria free of Ebola on October 20, 2014; Senegal on October 17, 2014; and Mali on January 18, 2015.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
25
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
traveled from Guinea to Kayes, Mali, transiting through Bamako, 
Mali’s capital (5). Members of the HRCT, who were already 
in-country supporting a WHO Ebola preparedness mission, 
assisted Mali MoH staff with the response by drafting standard 
operating procedures and contact tracing guidelines. They also 
helped to institute an IM structure. No subsequent transmission 
occurred in Mali from this Ebola importation (Figure 2).
On November 10, 2014, Mali was notified of a second Ebola 
importation. This index case-patient was a man aged 70 years 
from Guinea who arrived at a Bamako clinic on October 25 
with symptoms consistent with Ebola (6). The case investigation, 
immediately initiated by Malia’s MoH, revealed that this man 
did not share an epidemiologic link with the index case-patient 
of the first Ebola importation (6). Concern about the potential 
spread of Ebola in Bamako led to immediate deployment of 
additional CDC staff, who provided technical assistance for 
contact tracing, active surveillance, and border/points-of-entry 
screening. The team collaborated with Mali’s MoH and WHO 
to identify 332 contacts of the index case-patient of the second 
importation; 93% of these persons completed 21-day active 
monitoring without missing a daily visit by the contact tracing 
team. The Ebola outbreak from the second Ebola importation 
was controlled within two generations of transmission. Five first-
generation cases and two second-generation cases occurred in 
Mali; all second-generation cases were identified through active 
monitoring (Figure 2) (6). WHO declared Mali Ebola-free on 
January 18, 2015.
Guidance on Contact Tracing
CDC has continuously emphasized the importance of 
contact tracing as the single most effective tool for containing 
imported Ebola cases (7). As part of response and preparedness 
training, CDC supported development of national and local 
contact tracing guidelines and provided contact tracing 
training, particularly for rapid response teams. The rapid 
identification and isolation of contacts with symptoms 
consistent with Ebola reduces the risk for exposure to other 
persons, effectively breaking chains of transmission and halting 
Ebola transmission (7). However, contact tracing is effective 
only if it is initiated immediately after a case is identified and 
it is performed consistently and comprehensively.
Implementing and managing contact tracing during the 
2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa posed serious 
challenges, including lack of a standardized approach. In 
response, CDC created a guidance document that detailed 
a systematic method for contact tracing implementation 
and management, “CDC Methods for Implementing and 
Managing Contact Tracing for Ebola Virus Disease in 
Less-Affected Countries” (8). The content derived from 
responders’ experiences supporting MoHs in Ebola preparation 
in the high-risk countries, as well as through the responders’ 
direct involvement in contact tracing in the affected countries.
Team members also partnered with WHO to create joint 
comprehensive contact tracing guidelines applicable to all 
countries. These guidelines expanded on the previously published 
CDC document and WHO Africa Region’s “Contact Tracing 
During an Outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease” guideline, detailing 
the contact tracing process, addressing common challenges, and 
describing contact tracing monitoring and evaluation methods 
(7,8). The joint guidelines are intended to support contact 
tracing during the current epidemic and to operate as guidelines 
to prepare for and address future Ebola outbreaks.
Additional Activities and Training for 
Ebola Preparedness
In addition to providing contact tracing technical support 
and training to 450 persons, CDC trained approximately 1,500 
persons on infection prevention and control, 300 on point-
of-entry screening, and 120 on the Epi Info database used 
for Ebola surveillance. CDC developed guidelines, standard 
operating procedures, forms, and protocols for point-of-entry 
screening, Ebola surveillance, alert planning, preparedness, and 
72-hour rapid response. CDC also facilitated introduction 
of the Emergency Management Development Team, which 
enabled initiation of public health emergency management 
capacity development, including development of EOCs, in 
seven high-risk countries: Cameroon, The Gambia, Ghana, 
Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Nigeria, and Senegal.
Beginning in January 2015, to further strengthen field 
epidemiology capacity at all levels of the public health systems 
in West Africa, CDC’s FETP Branch partnered with the CDC 
HRCT and the MoHs in Guinea-Bissau, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, 
and Senegal; WHO Training Programs in Epidemiology and 
Public Health Interventions Network; and the African Field 
Epidemiology Network to implement Surveillance Training for 
Ebola Preparedness (STEP) (9), a 5-week program designed 
to rapidly strengthen surveillance skills among surveillance 
officers in districts bordering Ebola-affected countries.
STEP combined the Integrated Disease Surveillance 
and Response framework, widely used in Africa, with the 
FETP model of mentorship and field work. The training 
has three phases: 1) 1 week of classroom instruction about 
basic surveillance data analysis, interpretation, and reporting, 
including an Ebola-focused day covering surveillance case 
definitions and contact tracing; 2) a 3-week mentored field 
experience; and 3) a 3-day workshop on field work. During 
 Supplement
26 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
the field work component, participants visit surveillance sites 
in their home districts to audit data quality. Participants from 
highest risk districts, such as border districts or potential 
point-of-entry districts, are equipped with cell phones to report 
through a daily short message service (text message) the number 
of new suspected Ebola cases from the previous day. Data are 
uploaded in real time by using a Web-based mobile platform.
A total of 188 participants have been trained in STEP: 
56 participants from 25 districts in Côte d’Ivoire (two 
sequential cohorts), 53 participants from 13 regions in Guinea-
Bissau (two cohorts), 52 participants from 21 districts in 
Senegal (two cohorts), and 27 participants from 10 districts 
in Mali (one cohort). In addition to surveillance officers, 
STEP participants included nurses, laboratory technicians, 
statisticians, and chief medical officers.
CDC’s partners have widely acknowledged that STEP 
provided critically needed field epidemiology training. STEP 
is evaluated 3–6 months after each training to assess changes 
in surveillance practice by using indicators collected at the start 
of each training. Experience gained during the Ebola response 
indicates that the STEP training model could be adapted to 
rapidly scale up surveillance capacity in future epidemics.
Conclusion
Members of the CDC HRCT, in partnership with MoHs and 
WHO, provided technical assistance for Ebola preparedness 
through in-country and headquarters support that assisted 
with the rapid containment of several imported Ebola cases. In 
collaboration with many partners, particularly CDC’s FETP 
Branch, CDC supported development of the public health 
workforce in high-risk countries by providing field epidemiology 
trainings and enhanced in-country future response capabilities 
by facilitating development of IM capacity.
In addition to building country-specific epidemiology and 
surveillance capacity, country and regional capacity in West 
Africa needs to be strengthened. National borders do not 
prevent the spread of disease, as evidenced by the importations 
of Ebola in this epidemic. Mechanisms for information sharing 
to effectively address future outbreaks also need enhancement. 
As described in the newly launched Global Health Security 
Agenda (10), such public health capacity building and 
information sharing are essential worldwide for all countries 
to meet the goal of the International Health Regulations 
(11) to rapidly detect and respond to public health events of 
international importance.
Acknowledgments
High-Risk Countries Team: Cleopatra Adedeji, Walter Alarcon, 
Kristina Angelo, Ronke Apata, Grace Appiah, Nicole Stehling 
Ariza, Rene Arrazola, Carmen Arriola, Angel Aviles, Daniel Baden, 
Kip Baggett, Ezra Barzilay, Oleg Bilukha, Denise Borntrager, Eric 
Brenner, Vance Brown, Lauren Brown Burness, Gary Burnette, Erica 
Bushong, Andrea Carcelen, Bryan Christensen, Angela Cleveland, 
Gary Cobb, Adam Cohen, Dana Cole, Deborah Conner, Emily 
Cramer, James Crockett, Cheryl Cunningham, Dave Daigle, 
Subrat Das, Kristin Delea, Panayotta Delinois, Andrew Demma, 
Yvette Diallo, Fabien Diomande, Timothy Doyle, Shahul Ebrahim, 
Lina Elbadawi, Lisa Esapa, T’Rhonda Flagg, Ted Forbes, Daniel 
Frank, Yolonda Freeman, Nicholas Gaffga, Ruth Cooke Gibbs, 
Sherry Gilbert, Adrienne Gill, Runa Gokhale, Cheri Grigg, Marta 
Guerra, Abdou Gueye, Rajni Gunnala, Rana Hajjeh, Jessica 
Hancock-Allen, Jeff Hanson, Jennifer Harris, Donald Haverkamp, 
Wendy Heaps, Katrina Hedberg, Morgan Hennessey, Katherine 
Hills, Christopher Hsu, David Hunter, Charlotte Kabore, Melissa 
Kadzik, Amelia Kasper, Julia Kibunja, Craig Kiebler, Cara Bicking 
Kinsey, Andrew Klevos, Nancy Knight, Judy Kruger, Pascale 
Krumm, Prathit Kulkarni, Jessie Legros, Jacquelyn Lickness, Xia 
Lin, Ulzii Orshikh Luvsansharav, Alexandre Macedo De Oliveira, 
Jennifer MacFarquhar, Frank Mahoney, Jean-Marie Maillard, Jessica 
Marcinkevage, Lise Martel, Chad Martin, Almea Matanock, Jay 
McAuliffe, Andrea McCollum, Amanda McGurn, Claire Midgley, 
Rajal Mody, Benjamin Monroe, Samantha Morgan, Leah Moriarty, 
Rupa Narra, Ryan Novak, Thai-An Ngyuen, Edith Nyangoma, 
Ikwo Oboho, Monique Tuyisenge Onyegbula, Chantelle Owens, 
Julia Painter, Benjamin Park, Prabasaj Paul, Leonard Peruski, Reine 
Phillips, Meredith Pinto, Raoult Ratard, Mary Reynolds, Andre 
Riggins, Tomas Rodriguez, Kyle Roesler, Keysha Ross, Joaquin 
Rueda, Michelle Russell, Peter Rzeszotarski, Stephanie Salyer, Erin 
Sauber-Schatz, Colin Schwensohn, Julie Sinclair, Lee Smith, Craig 
Steffens, Aimee Summers, Philana Swann, David Swerdlow, Pamela 
Talley, Jennifer Thomas, Brenna VanFrank, Marietijie Venter, John 
Vertefeuille, Antonio Vieira, Tyson Volkmann, Neil Vora, Allison 
Walker, Malaika Washington, Emily Weston, Racquel Williams, 
Nana Wilson, Jacklyn Wong, Hsiu Wu, Weigong Zhou.
CDC staff in-country offices: Benin: Peter Thomas; Cameroon: 
Omotayo Bolu, Els Mathieu, Gordon Okpu; Côte d’Ivoire: Abdou 
Gueye, Fazle Khan, Stefan Weir, Therese Wingate; Democratic 
Republic of the Congo: Yassa Ndjakani, Kassim Sidibe; Ethiopia: 
Berhanu Amare, Linda Boulanger, Clare Dykewicz, Jeff Hanson, 
Theresa Kanter, Joseph Malone, Brent Wolff; Ghana: Philips Ricks, 
Cecil Threat, Celia Woodfill; Mali: Varough Deyde, Jacques Mathieu, 
Jules Mihigo, Adama N’dir; Nigeria: Catherine Avery, Pauline Harvey, 
Pratima Raghunathan; Senegal: Julie Thwing.
Graphics technical assistance: Thomas Nagle.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
27
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
1. World Health Organization. Ebola virus disease preparedness: taking 
stock and moving forward. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2015. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/
ebola/preparedness-meeting-report/en/
2. Shuaib F, Gunnala R, Musa EO, et al. Ebola virus disease outbreak—
Nigeria, July–September 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:867–72.
3. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949
4. Mirkovic K, Thwing JD, Diack PA. Imported Ebola virus disease—
Senegal, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:873–4.
5. World Health Organization. Mali confirms its first case of Ebola. Ebola 
situation assessment: 24 October 2014. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization; 2014. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/
ebola/24-october-2014/en/
6. World Health Organization. Mali confirms its second fatal case of Ebola 
virus disease. Ebola situation assessment: 12 November 2014. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2014. http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/news/ebola/24-october-2014/en/
 7. World Health Organization. Contact tracing during an outbreak of 
Ebola virus disease. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 
2015. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/contact-
tracing/en/
 8. CDC. CDC methods for implementing and managing contact tracing 
for Ebola virus disease in less-affected countries. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/pdf/contact-tracing-guidelines.pdf
 9. CDC. CDC launches FETP-STEP in Cote d’Ivoire and other high-risk 
unaffected countries in West Africa. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/
globalhealth/stories/fetp_cote-d-ivoire.htm
 
10. Heymann DL, Keizo Takemi LC, Fidler DP
, et al. Global health security: 
the wider lessons from the west African Ebola virus disease epidemic. 
Lancet 2015;385:1884–901.
 
11. World Health Organization. International Health Regulations. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2016. http://www.who.int/
topics/international_health_regulations/en/  
 Supplement
28 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
A functional incident management system (IMS) provides 
a flexible and scalable approach to managing public health 
emergencies and includes principles such as modular 
organization, incident action planning, manageable span of 
control, resource management, integrated communication, 
and chain of command (1). Before the 2014–2016 Ebola 
virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, limited capacity 
existed in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone for public health 
emergency management, which the epidemic strained further. 
CDC applied its IMS experience to help these countries 
establish IMS systems to respond to the Ebola outbreak and 
to future public health emergencies (2,3).
CDC’s Role and Work with Partners
In September 2014, as part of its response to the Ebola 
epidemic in West Africa, CDC established the Emergency 
Management Development Team (EMDT) within its IMS 
structure. This team coordinated and provided technical 
assistance to build emergency management capacity in Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone, as well as in high-risk unaffected 
countries (Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, Togo, Benin, 
and Nigeria). EMDT was formed to address gaps in emergency 
management capacity in the affected and at-risk countries. For 
the most part, international partners who focused on emergency 
management had not arrived in country by this time, and a 
clear and pressing need was identified to begin organizing the 
response using established emergency management principles.
Incident Management Systems and Building Emergency 
Management Capacity during the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic — 
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea
Jennifer C. Brooks, MPH1
Meredith Pinto, MPH1
Adrienne Gill, MPH1
Katherine E. Hills, MPH1
Shivani Murthy, MPH1
Michelle N. Podgornik, MPH1
Luis F. Hernandez2
Dale A. Rose, PhD1
Frederick J. Angulo, DVM2
Peter Rzeszotarski, MA1
1Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
2Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
Corresponding author: Jennifer C. Brooks, Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-3186; 
E-mail: JCBrooks@cdc.gov.
Summary
Establishing a functional incident management system (IMS) is important in the management of public health emergencies. In response 
to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC established the Emergency Management Development 
Team (EMDT) to coordinate technical assistance for developing emergency management capacity in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. 
EMDT staff, deployed staff, and partners supported each country to develop response goals and objectives, identify gaps in response 
capabilities, and determine strategies for coordinating response activities. To monitor key programmatic milestones and assess changes in 
emergency management and response capacities over time, EMDT implemented three data collection methods in country: coordination 
calls, weekly written situation reports, and an emergency management dashboard tool. On the basis of the information collected, EMDT 
observed improvements in emergency management capacity over time in all three countries. The collaborations in each country yielded 
IMS structures that streamlined response and laid the foundation for long-term emergency management programs.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
EMDT was managed at CDC’s headquarters in Atlanta, 
Georgia, by the Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, 
Division of Emergency Operations, with leadership and subject-
matter expertise from the Center for Global Health, Division of 
Global Health Protection. CDC staff members deployed through 
EMDT were drawn from the ranks of emergency management 
specialists within the Division of Emergency Operations and 
technical experts from the Center for Global Health and other 
CDC programs and centers. Staff also were deployed from 
external partners, principally Public Health Agency of Canada 
(PHAC), which provided assistance and leadership to the 
team in Guinea. EMDT members, deployed staff, and others 
supporting the mission to build emergency management capacity 
also worked closely with Ebola response partners, including the 
World Health Organization (WHO), CDC Foundation, United 
Kingdom Department for International Development, Public 
Health England, eHealth Africa, International Organization for 
Migration, and Milken Institute School of Public Health at George 
Washington University.
EMDT members, deployed staff, and partners provided 
expertise in assisting country ministries of health and other 
government entities in building core IMS functions, such 
as emergency response planning, operations, and logistics. 
Deployed staff and partners enhanced emergency management 
capacity in three key domains:
1. Staff: Trained emergency management specialists and 
technical advisors able to work under a standardized 
organizational response structure, which promotes 
rapid integration of personnel and resources (2);
2. Systems: Standardized policies, processes, and 
procedures that are the codified basis for response 
activities and tasks; and
3. Infrastructure: A fully equipped emergency operations 
center (EOC) that facilitates, supports, and coordinates 
management and executive response decisions and 
activities for a public health emergency response. 
“Fully equipped” means, at a minimum, primary and 
redundant power supply, audio/visual functionality, 
computers, telephones, and Internet access.
Contributions and Impact
Sources of Information and  
Data Collection
To monitor progress toward key programmatic milestones 
and assess changes in emergency management and response 
capacities over time, EMDT collected information from three 
sources in each country: coordination calls, weekly written 
situation reports, and an emergency management dashboard 
tool. EMDT headquarters staff monitored activities and 
progress in emergency management capacity building primarily 
through coordination calls and weekly situation reports, which 
were generated and submitted by CDC staff deployed to West 
Africa. To supplement this information, EMDT obtained 
approval from incident management leadership to develop 
and use a new dashboard tool based on the three emergency 
management capacity domains (i.e., staff, systems, and 
infrastructure). Although a few assessment tools and checklists 
already existed, EMDT determined that a response-focused 
assessment tool, scaled to assess basic emergency management 
capacities, was needed. The initial intent of the dashboard 
tool was to facilitate a comprehensive evaluation of basic 
emergency management capacity–building activities and 
accomplishments. However, a scaled-down version of the tool 
was more appropriate, not for use as the main source of data 
for assessing capacity but rather as one of multiple sources to 
monitor progress in key areas simply and quickly.
The tool consists of the three domains of staff, systems, 
and infrastructure. Each domain comprises several elements 
developed by EMDT leadership to reflect the essential 
components necessary to execute basic emergency response 
operations. To reflect incremental increases in capacity, 
each element within each domain was rated on a 6-point 
qualitative ordinal scale, ranging from “domain element non-
existent” (lowest rating) to “basic requirement met” (highest 
rating). Because all three countries had little to no emergency 
management capacity before the Ebola epidemic, “basic 
requirement met” was the highest achievable rating for any 
given element (Table 1).
Data Collection and Analysis
Deployed staff participated in coordination calls and 
submitted situation reports and administered the dashboard 
tool. To administer the tool, deployed staff assigned one of six 
qualitative ratings to each domain element. Although situation 
reports were submitted weekly, the frequency of administration 
of the dashboard tool fluctuated between countries. In Liberia, 
the tool was administered an average of twice per month 
during September 2014–June 2015 and was used to assess the 
emergency management capacity of the Ministry of Health. In 
Sierra Leone, it was administered an average of twice per month 
during August 2014–June 2015 and assessed the progress of 
the National Ebola Response Centre (NERC). In Guinea, the 
tool was administered an average of nearly three times each 
month during September 2014–April 2015 and assessed the 
National Coordination Cell (known as Cellule), an entity 
reporting directly to the country’s president.
 Supplement
30 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Dashboard tool–derived information was stored in a 
central data repository and shared with CDC Ebola response 
leadership and other programs within CDC. Deployed EMDT 
staff and headquarters staff used the information to coordinate 
activities at the national level in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone; address gaps in IMS capabilities; and inform decisions 
on resource allocation within each country. These data also 
provided information to agency leadership and higher levels.
EMDT reviewed situation reports and analyzed key programmatic 
accomplishments and milestones. T
o analyze dashboard data, ratings 
were converted from the six-point qualitative ordinal scale to 
quantitative scores ranging from 0 to 5. For each country, a score 
was calculated for each domain equal to the median of its constituent 
element scores for each month during August 2014–June 2015. 
Data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel.
Changes in Capacity for  
Emergency Management
During August 2014–June 2015, basic emergency 
management capacity improved in all three countries. Weekly 
updates revealed improved capability in demonstrating IMS 
principles; key events and accomplishments are listed in 
Table 2. Dashboard scores generally reached and maintained 
their highest levels during October–December 2014 (Table 3), 
although additional gains and losses occurred after this period, 
some of which might be attributable to lower staffing levels 
over the December holiday season. Early in the response, some 
elements of capacity building were deemed high priority in all 
countries, such as appointing an incident manager, identifying 
and establishing an EOC facility, and ensuring response teams 
and logistic support were in place and used appropriately. 
Scores for other elements, such as administrative support and 
meeting management, did not improve as quickly; these were 
addressed later after more crucial elements were in place.
Liberia
EMDT began supporting the Liberian government’s Ebola 
response on August 3, 2014. As of March 31, 2016, a total of 17 
EMDT members had provided 914 person-days of in-country 
technical support. When EMDT first became involved, Liberia’s 
president already had appointed an incident manager, but the 
response was not following standard IMS principles, such as 
chain of command, incident action planning, and resource 
TABLE 1. Dashboard tool used for measuring emergency management capacity domains and elements and definitions of “basic requirement 
met” rating for each element during the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa
Domain
Domain element
“Basic requirement met” definition (highest rating)
Staff
Incident management
IM has authority to direct activities of all assigned response staff.
Response organization
Response staffing increases or decreases as required in a timely manner.
Operations
Operations chief has authority to run the response in the IM’s absence; additional staff are available for 
response operations.
Watch desk
Trained watch staff routinely produces situation reports or spot reports.
Logistics
Chief is trained in IM principles and best practices; additional staff are available for response operations.
Finance/Administration
Chief is trained in IM principles and best practices; additional staff are available for response operations.
Plans
Chief is trained in IM principles and best practices; additional staff are available for response operations.
Technical
At a minimum: epidemiology, laboratory, medical management, migration/population movement, and 
community engagement/health education teams or task forces staffed adequately to meet response need.
Public affairs
Officer has authority to serve as spokesperson in the IM’s absence (or dedicated spokesperson is appointed).
Liaison
Officers are routinely used to address requests for information and requests for assistance.
Response teams
Teams routinely report back to the EOC from the field according to established protocols.
Systems
Meeting management
IM enforces meeting discipline.
Incident action plans
Situation reporting system routinely used by planning staff to capture progress and report to national 
authorities and WHO.
Accountability
Task tracking system routinely used for task management by operations staff; reports are generated for IM.
Operational support
Situational awareness products are kept current and posted within the EOC.
Administrative support
Centralized stock of office supplies available as needed.
Financial support
Expenditures are tracked and categorized to enable subsequent reimbursement.
Logistics support
Response teams are supplied as needed to sustain field operations.
Staffing support
Procedures exist for occupational safety and health screening of staff postresponse.
Communication support
Media management system is in place to service media inquiries responsively.
Infrastructure
EOC facility
Breakout space is available for ≥1 teams; all space is assigned or scheduled by EOC staff.
Power
Facility has operational power redundancy in place.
Communications infrastructure
Communication infrastructure is routinely used to triage calls from, as well as communicate with, both 
subnational levels and WHO (note: video teleconferencing capability is not included).
Information infrastructure
Operations staff have training on and can use all available IM infrastructure elements.
Data processing and visualization 
infrastructure
Data display screen(s) and associated processors used within the EOC to maintain situational awareness.
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; EOC = emergency operations center; IM = incident manager; WHO = World Health Organization.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
management. In addition, the response was being managed 
from space that was too small and lacked key technologic 
infrastructure. Early challenges included an insufficient 
number of trained logistic staff and a span of control too large 
for response leadership to manage effectively. Other challenges 
included difficulty mobilizing resources and insufficient 
coordination among response partner organizations. Initially, 
deployed EMDT staff supported Liberia’s Ministry of Health in 
establishing an incident management structure and providing 
training on IMS principles (4).
TABLE 2. Timeline of events in Ebola epidemic response — Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, August 2014–June 2015
Date
Country
Activity
2014
August 3
Liberia
Emergency Management Development Team begins work in country.
August 10
Sierra Leone
Emergency Management Development Team begins work in country.
September 18
Liberia
Use of interim EOC begins.
September 22
Guinea
Emergency Management Development Team begins work in country.
October 7
Sierra Leone
National Ebola response coordinator approves plans for PH NEOC.
October 20
Sierra Leone
United Kingdom takes over command of the response.
October 23
Guinea
Renovations of the national public health EOC start.
October 27
Sierra Leone
Response operations move to operate under the National Ebola Response Centre.
November 1
Guinea
All partner meetings begin to be held at the PH NEOC.
November 12
Liberia
Ground breaking on permanent PH NEOC.
November 29
Guinea
Inaugural reception for the National Ebola Response Call Center.
December 13
Sierra Leone
Ground breaking on permanent PH NEOC.
2015
February 5
Liberia
IMS workshop for 30 medical and public health students from the Young Liberian Professionals group (potential surge 
staff for the response).
February 10
Liberia
First 3-day EOC operations and IMS workshop for 35 subnational and national EOC staff and county health officers.
February 13
Guinea
Incident manager approves Ebola staffing plan.
February 18
Liberia
Second 3-day EOC operations and IMS workshop for 31 subnational and national EOC staff and county health officers.
March 17
Sierra Leone
Half-day EOC management workshop for key MoHS staff on EOC management and organizational structure.
March 18
Sierra Leone
Signing and deed gifting ceremony for PH NEOC to the MoHS from CDC Foundation.
March 20
Guinea
Implements new strategy for response meeting coordination.
April 27
Guinea
PH NEOC establishes central e-mail address.
May 10
Liberia
Completion of preliminary construction of PH NEOC.
June 1
Guinea
Clearance and distribution protocols for recommendations from PH NEOC to subnational response staff are established.
June 16
Liberia
All response operations move into the PH NEOC.
June 22
Sierra Leone
All NERC and MoHS staff and partners begin operating out of the PH NEOC.
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; EOC = Emergency Operations Center; IMS = Incident Management System; MoHS = Ministry of Health and Sanitation; 
PH NEOC = Public Health National EOC.  
TABLE 3. Domain scores* on a dashboard tool for measuring emergency management capacity, by month — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, 
August 2014–June 2015  
Country/Domain
Domain scores
August  
2014
September 
2014
October 
2014
November 
2014
December 
2014
January 
2015
February 
2015
March  
2015
April  
2015
May  
2015
June  
2015
Guinea†
Staff
—§
1
2.5
4
4
4
4
3
3
—
—
Infrastructure
—
1
1
3
3
3
3
4
4
—
—
Systems
—
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
—
—
Liberia¶
Staff
—
2
3
3
—
3
3
3
3
3
3
Infrastructure
—
1
3
3
—
2.5
2
2
2
3
3
Systems
—
1
2
3
—
3
3
3
3
3
3
Sierra Leone
Staff
2
2
3
4
4
4
—
4
4
4
4
Infrastructure
1
1
2
3
3
3
—
3
3
3
3
Systems
0
1
3
3
4
4
—
4
4
4
4
* Domain scores are on a 0 to 5 ordinal scale, which reflect lowest to highest capacity.
† The dashboard tool was only used from September 2014 to the beginning of May 2015 because of implementation of other monitoring methods more suitable for 
Guinea’s incident management system.
§ No data were collected.
¶ The dashboard tool was not used until September 2014.
 Supplement
32 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Liberia’s Ministry of Health opened an interim EOC on 
September 18, 2014, with guidance and technical assistance 
from EMDT. During the first few months of the response, 
EMDT supported establishment of the national Ebola response 
call center, which was developed with sufficient technical 
infrastructure to be repurposed into a national dispatch center 
or EOC watch desk after the Ebola response. EMDT also 
supported the Ministry of Health in creating a task tracker for 
Liberian Ebola response leadership and a template to facilitate 
management during response updates. In addition, deployed 
EMDT staff conducted and coordinated four in-progress 
reviews (i.e., mid-response assessments) for Liberia’s Ebola 
response leadership in November and December 2014.
In September 2014, deployed EMDT staff began to 
coordinate the building of a permanent national public health 
EOC facility with CDC partners in Liberia. The facility opened 
on June 16, 2015; it was used for all response meetings and 
has helped response staff coordinate activities and streamline 
communication among staff working in various technical areas.
Most work in Liberia focused on building capacity to 
coordinate emergency response by establishing subnational 
EOCs in the country’s 15 counties. In February 2015, two 
3-day emergency management training sessions were held 
for 48 subnational personnel, 10 national personnel, and 
eight county health officers focusing on IMS principles 
and approaches to coordinating national and subnational 
emergency management. To reinforce this training, EMDT 
supported Liberian Ebola response staff in developing and 
collecting situation reports to streamline communication 
between county and national EOCs. In May 2015, this staff 
and infrastructure, including subnational EOCs, supported a 
large measles vaccination campaign in country.
Emergency management capacity improved quickly in 
Liberia. Dashboard scores for the staff and infrastructure 
domains peaked (median: 3) by October 2014, with the systems 
domain following close behind (Table 3). Scores for staff and 
systems remained at these levels while the infrastructure score 
dropped in January 2015, recovering a few months later.
Sierra Leone
Since August 10, 2014, deployed EMDT staff and partners 
have supported efforts by the Sierra Leone Ministry of 
Health and Sanitation (MoHS) to build response capacity for 
public health emergency management in Sierra Leone. As of 
March 31, 2016, at total of 17 CDC staff (deployed through 
EMDT) provided 905 person-days of in-country technical 
support. These staff provided technical assistance to the Ebola 
response in Sierra Leone and focused on building emergency 
management capacity through engagements with the NERC, 
the MoHS, and other international partners, including WHO, 
Public Health England, and the United Kingdom Department 
for International Development.
Early in the response, deployed EMDT staff supported 
establishment of an IMS in Sierra Leone by providing technical 
assistance to strengthen the ministry’s organizational response 
structure and recommending ways to expand response 
functions, such as setting up an Ebola response call center. 
Team members helped build system capacity by developing 
terms of reference for IMS staff (e.g., a document identifying 
mission, role-specific objectives, and responsibilities), an EOC 
operations guidebook, and standard operating procedures to 
streamline the submission of requests and proposals from field 
staff to the EOC. Throughout the response, deployed EMDT 
staff engaged the MoHS in building staff capacity by training 
ministry staff to enhance their knowledge of public health 
emergency management functions and EOC management 
and operations. These training sessions included three half-
day workshops, six training sessions for district health medical 
teams, and one training session for MoHS national-level staff, 
reaching a total of 120 persons.
Originally, all response-related activities operated out of the 
WHO country office. In September 2014, as the response 
expanded with additional partners, deployed EMDT staff 
guided and coordinated establishment of an interim EOC at 
a Sierra Leone Armed Forces facility. In October 2014, the 
government of Sierra Leone established NERC, and a former 
Sierra Leone Minister of Defence assumed command of 
Ebola response activities. The Sierra Leone Office of National 
Security, Ministry of Defence, and the United Kingdom 
Department for International Development provided 
substantial assistance in support of the response. Deployed 
EMDT staff supported transition of the interim EOC to the 
United Nations Special Court compound in Freetown, which 
temporarily housed NERC, enabling closer coordination with 
international partners. NERC subsequently established 10 
subnational level District Ebola Response Centres to support 
surge response to localized outbreaks. The national MoHS 
and subnational district health medical teams supported the 
response by providing technical scientific expertise to NERC 
and District Ebola Response Centres.
Throughout the response, deployed EMDT staff served 
as liaisons among CDC IMS leadership, NERC, and 
other MoHS officials while helping the MoHS develop its 
emergency management capacity. In addition to national-level 
response coordination, EMDT assisted NERC in completing 
assessments of IMS capabilities developed at a subnational level 
in the District Ebola Response Centres and helped the MoHS 
and other partners assess the long-term IMS and response 
capabilities of the district health medical teams.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Although response operations continued under NERC, 
EMDT personnel acted as technical advisors to such partners as 
WHO and the CDC Foundation. The CDC Foundation funded 
a public health national EOC (PH NEOC) and on March 18, 
2015, a deeding and gifting ceremony transferred ownership 
of the facility to the MoHS. In coordination with WHO, 
deployed EMDT staff helped the MoHS develop a strategy 
and a staffing model for the PH NEOC. In May 2015, CDC 
began assisting the NERC Transition Move Project, supported 
by the United Kingdom Joint Interagency Task Force, to develop 
plans to co-locate the Disease Prevention and Control Division 
of the MoHS and core Office of National Security functions 
with NERC in the PH NEOC. This colocation enabled the 
building of additional emergency management capacity for 
the MoHS by leveraging response skills from NERC for future 
operations; in June 2015, the MoHS and NERC officially 
began Ebola response operations from the PH NEOC. Full 
transition of emergency operations capability to the PH NEOC, 
led by the Office of National Security and the MoHS, occurred 
on January 1, 2016. Finally, deployed EMDT staff are now 
supporting the MoHS in developing a 1-year strategic plan to 
position MoHS to engage in long-term capacity building for 
public health emergency management.
Overall, the dashboard revealed marked gains across the 
three targeted domains of emergency management capacity 
building. The median score for the systems domain rose from 
0 in August 2014 to 4 in December 2014 with a steep increase 
from September to October (Table 3). Scores for the staff and 
infrastructure domains also rose quickly. The median staff score 
began at 2 in August 2014 and increased to 4 in November 
2014, and the infrastructure score rose from 1 to 3 during the 
same period. In addition, unlike the scores for Liberia and 
Guinea, scores for Sierra Leone either increased or remained 
steady; none ever declined.
Guinea
The first emergency management deployments to support 
Guinea’s Ebola response began in country September 22, 
2014. To help fulfill Guinea’s need for French-speaking 
emergency managers, CDC partnered with PHAC, which led 
in-country technical assistance. When possible, PHAC staff 
were supported by additional deployed staff from CDC and the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). As 
of March 31, 2016, the 29 persons deployed (9 from CDC, 2 
from HHS, and 18 from PHAC) provided 1,374 person-days 
of in-country technical support in Guinea. These staff provided 
guidance and technical assistance to Cellule.
Through funding by the CDC Foundation, a call center was 
established and a government-owned building was renovated to 
function as the national EOC facility. Deployed staff assisted 
the call center through the development of standard operating 
procedures, scripts, and training sessions for call center staff and 
assisted Cellule by developing basic emergency management 
administration and other office systems for a streamlined 
and coordinated response. The systems created for the EOC 
of Cellule include a task tracker system used in national 
coordination meetings for increased accountability, standard 
operating procedures for CDC staff to submit mission orders to 
Cellule before traveling outside Conakry, a standard template 
for Cellule incident management meetings, and a functional 
e-mail box for Cellule staff and priority prefecture EOCs.
Deployed staff and partners supported capacity development 
for Guinea response staff by conducting ad hoc training of 
Cellule employees on foundational workplace skills, such 
as using e-mail, Microsoft PowerPoint, and Excel, and by 
embedding deployed staff and partners into critical response 
technical areas such as logistics. This support also created an 
environment in which the daily coordination of meetings 
and management of functional e-mail boxes is performed by 
Guinean staff.
Since March 2015, through a collaboration between PHAC, 
CDC, the International Organization for Migration, and 
George Washington University, all of the five communal and 
18 prefectural EOC structures put in place by the International 
Organization for Migration have been assessed, an emergency 
management curriculum and a train-the-trainer program 
developed, and principles of emergency management formally 
introduced to key leadership within Cellule. The national 
coordinator approved the proposed rollout of the emergency 
management program, which started in January 2016.
The dashboard tool highlighted gains in emergency 
management capacity in Guinea. The median score for the 
staff domain quickly increased from 1 in September 2014 to 
its maximum of 4 just 2 months later (Table 3). Likewise, the 
score for infrastructure increased from 1 in September 2014 
to 4 in March 2015, but with two plateaus in the interim 
(from September 2014 to October 2014, when the median 
score was 1, and again from November 2014 to February 
2015, when the median score was 3). Unlike the infrastructure 
score, which either rose or remained constant, the staff score 
declined from 4 in February 2015 to 3 in March 2015. The 
systems score began at 2 in September 2014 and increased to 
3 in November 2014, where it remains.
Conclusion
CDC staff and partners deployed through EMDT provided 
emergency management technical assistance and guidance to 
 Supplement
34 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
the national Ebola responses in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone. This assistance included developing IMS goals and 
objectives, identifying gaps in response capabilities, and 
recommending strategies for coordinating response activities. 
EMDT staff, deployed personnel, and partners assisted all three 
countries in prioritizing foundational emergency management 
activities during the Ebola epidemic. As countries carried out 
activities, such as locating and equipping adequate work spaces, 
training response staff on IMS principles, and establishing basic 
plans and processes for public health emergency management, 
EMDT staff, deployed personnel, and partners provided 
support and technical expertise wherever needed.
The information provided in this report highlights the 
rapidity with which rudimentary emergency management 
capacities can be established with the application of focused 
technical assistance yet also reveals the challenge of progressing 
beyond basic staff, systems, and infrastructure. Integrating 
these capacities into a sustained and functional operation 
is difficult in any context, but all the more so in a resource-
limited setting containing a vulnerable public health and health 
care system and experiencing a widespread infectious disease 
outbreak. Likewise, balancing long-term capacity building with 
the need to execute actions quickly also proved challenging.
EMDT used the dashboard tool as one of multiple methods 
to capture progress in emergency management capacity-
building efforts. The response context presented many 
challenges for effective assessment, and key limitations and 
areas for improvement emerged while using the dashboard 
and reviewing collected data. The response priorities and 
IMS functional groups varied from country to country and 
were at times not consistent with the domains listed in the 
dashboard. This variation was especially marked in Guinea, 
where formal IMS principles were not introduced until later in 
the response, and the day-to-day work was not always captured 
by the dashboard items. In addition, the constant turnover of 
deployed staff and the lack of standardized definitions within 
and across domains led to inconsistent interpretation of the 
indicators. Finally, although the tool was intended to help 
prioritize key IMS principles, the collected information was not 
always analyzed quickly enough to inform technical assistance. 
Now that this tool has been used for the first time in real-world 
conditions, it can be revised and improved.
A lesson learned is to not assume that the benefits of 
emergency management and IMS are easily observed at the 
outset of a crisis or emergency. During the early stages of this 
response, neither the principles of emergency management nor 
the benefits of implementing the system in country were well 
understood in the West African countries affected by Ebola. 
However, once the benefits of IMS were noticeable, country 
leadership requested additional assistance in emergency 
management; the requests for additional assistance also 
indicated that real-world use of IMS is the most effective way 
to demonstrate its value. As CDC continues to support the 
Global Health Security Agenda (5) in countries around the 
world, highlighting precisely how IMS enables a country to 
respond efficiently and effectively to a public health event or 
emergency is becoming increasingly important. In Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, and Guinea, the IMS structures for this response 
could become the foundational framework for a long-term 
public health emergency management program that has the 
staff, infrastructure, and systems in place to successfully prepare 
for and respond to public health events and emergencies.
Acknowledgments
EMDT, Atlanta-based: Bianca Alba, Angel Aviles, James Banaski, 
Jim Crockett, Yvette Diallo, Emily Dodd, Scott Naelitz, Andrea 
Neiman, John Yembu; deployed staff: Roodly Archer, Mark Austin, 
John Bermingham, Daniel Brencic, Valeria Carlson, Jim Crockett, 
Yvette Diallo, Shahul Ebrahim, Mark Hall, Mark Hansey, Bryan 
Heartsfield, Bill Howard, Harvey Howard, Thomas Jones, David 
Kennedy, Sharanya Krishnan, Jose Laguana, Travis Mann, David 
Maples, Eric Marble, Lise Martel, Chuck Menchion, James Mullikin, 
Twite wa Numbi Mulunda, Peter Paye, Michael Phipps, Luis Poblano, 
Nathan Pyles, Ed Rouse, Rajeev Sharma, Christopher Smith, Paul 
Smith, Dan Tuten; HHS: David Starr, Greg Grass; PHAC: Daniella 
Cole, Danielle Demers, Jean-François Duperré, Lise Gauthier, 
Christopher Hewson, Steven Kempton, Marc Lafontaine, Marc 
Lauzier, Jennifer McCrea-Logie, Lynn Menard, Claude Ouellette, 
Violaine Pilote, Lara Rooke, Lisa Sherman, Danny Sokolowski, 
Anne-Marie Ugnat, Tricia Vockeroth, David Zito; CDC Ebola 
response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
1. US Department of Homeland Security. National Incident Management 
System. Washington, DC: US Department of Homeland Security, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency; 2008. http://www.fema.gov/pdf/
emergency/nims/NIMS_core.pdf
2. Papagiotas SS, Frank M, Bruce S, Posid JM. From SARS to 2009 H1N1 
influenza: the evolution of a public health incident management system 
at CDC. Public Health Rep 2012;127:267–74.
3. Leidel L, Groseclose S, Burney B, Navin P
, Wooster M. CDC. CDC’s 
Emergency Management Program activities—worldwide, 2003-2012. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2013;62:709–13.
4. Pillai SK, Nyenswah T, Rouse E, et al. Developing an incident management 
system to support Ebola response—Liberia, July–August 2014. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:930–3.
5. CDC. Global health security: vision and overarching target. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. http://www.cdc.
gov/globalhealth/security/pdf/ghs_overarching_target.pdf  
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
35
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
Accurate, timely surveillance data are critical during public 
health emergencies because these data can provide the information 
needed for appropriate resource allocation, assessment of the 
success of response, and planning for staffing and resource needs. 
This was especially true during the 2014–2016 Ebola virus 
disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa. During the epidemic, 
CDC, along with many other organizations, overcame challenges 
to conducting effective surveillance in the three countries that 
were heavily affected (Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone) and 
had limited public health infrastructure.
Establishing, Maintaining, and 
Improving Ebola Surveillance
Ebola surveillance in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone had 
two primary components: 1) case investigation and reporting 
Ebola Surveillance — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone
Lucy A. McNamara, PhD1
Ilana J. Schafer, DVM2
Leisha D. Nolen, MD, PhD3
Yelena Gorina, PhD4
John T. Redd, MD5
Terrence Lo, PhD3
Elizabeth Ervin, MPH6
Olga Henao, PhD7
Benjamin A. Dahl, PhD8
Oliver Morgan, PhD9
Sara Hersey, MPH3
Barbara Knust, DVM6
1Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
2Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, CDC
3Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
4Office of Analysis and Epidemiology, National Center for Health Statistics, CDC
5Ebola-Affected Countries Office, Center for Global Health, CDC
6Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
7Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
8Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, CDC
9Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
Corresponding author: Lucy A. McNamara, Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. T
elephone: 404-639-8743; 
E-mail: LMcNamara@cdc.gov.
Summary
Developing a surveillance system during a public health emergency is always challenging but is especially so in countries with limited public 
health infrastructure. Surveillance for Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in the West African countries heavily affected by Ebola (Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone) faced numerous impediments, including insufficient numbers of trained staff, community reticence to report cases and 
contacts, limited information technology resources, limited telephone and Internet service, and overwhelming numbers of infected persons. 
Through the work of CDC and numerous partners, including the countries’ ministries of health, the World Health Organization, and 
other government and nongovernment organizations, functional Ebola surveillance was established and maintained in these countries. 
CDC staff were heavily involved in implementing case-based surveillance systems, sustaining case surveillance and contact tracing, and 
interpreting surveillance data. In addition to helping the ministries of health and other partners understand and manage the epidemic, 
CDC’s activities strengthened epidemiologic and data management capacity to improve routine surveillance in the countries affected, even 
after the Ebola epidemic ended, and enhanced local capacity to respond quickly to future public health emergencies. However, the many 
obstacles overcome during development of these Ebola surveillance systems highlight the need to have strong public health, surveillance, 
and information technology infrastructure in place before a public health emergency occurs. Intense, long-term focus on strengthening 
public health surveillance systems in developing countries, as described in the Global Health Security Agenda, is needed.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
36 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and 2) contact tracing. Although other components of Ebola 
surveillance, such as community event-based surveillance, were 
important in these countries, case reporting and contact tracing 
made up the core of Ebola surveillance and are the focus of 
this report. Effective case reporting requires timely collection, 
reporting, and integration of epidemiologic, clinical, laboratory, 
and outcome data on all suspected, probable, and confirmed 
Ebola cases. These data help response staff understand the 
current impact and distribution of Ebola in the country and 
provide insight into whether the response is succeeding and 
where future response efforts should be targeted. Meanwhile, 
contact tracing promotes rapid identification of new cases 
and referral of those case-patients to isolation units, thereby 
improving clinical outcomes and reducing opportunities for 
transmission. Contact tracing requires individual tracking of 
each contact for 21 days after exposure and constant, effective 
community engagement (1).
By the end of the epidemic, the overall components of 
Ebola surveillance were similar in all three countries. Cases 
initially were identified through contact tracing; case-finding; 
or additional surveillance mechanisms, such as calls to the 
national alert system (2) and walk-ins to Ebola treatment 
units (ETUs), holding centers, and hospitals (Figure 1). 
Once a possible case was identified, surveillance staff gathered 
additional information about the possible case-patient and his 
or her contacts (Figure 1). Case data were then compiled at the 
prefecture, county, or district level in a local database or line 
list and transmitted to ministry of health staff working at the 
national level. Meanwhile, local staff initiated contact tracing 
to observe each contact’s health for 21 days after exposure. 
Contact lists were sometimes shared with the national level, 
but detailed contact tracing information usually was retained 
and used only locally. However, despite these broad similarities, 
surveillance system structure and information flow varied 
widely among areas.
Challenges to obtaining case-level information in Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone included reluctance of some 
communities to report cases; few and often inadequately 
trained outbreak response staff to collect, enter, synthesize, 
and analyze surveillance data; and difficulties in coordinating 
the many groups involved with surveillance and the response. 
Compounding these difficulties, particularly in Liberia and 
Sierra Leone, was the exponential increase in the number of 
cases reported during summer and fall 2014, which made 
timely collection and compilation of case information by 
surveillance staff increasingly difficult.
Despite these issues, Ebola surveillance was continuously 
maintained in each of the three countries heavily affected by 
Ebola. Data gathered through these surveillance systems are 
not complete or perfectly accurate, but they enabled analyses 
of case characteristics, risk factors for infection, and changes 
in case distribution over time (3–5). The data also were used 
to inform the indicators by which specific components of the 
Ebola response in the three countries were assessed. CDC’s 
process indicators (Box) enabled identification of gaps in 
surveillance data and communicated progress toward ending 
the epidemic to U.S. government leaders.
Guinea
The first CDC team deployed to Guinea soon after the 
outbreak was identified in March 2014. This team, along with 
the Guinean Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (MoH) and 
the World Health Organization (WHO), immediately began 
work on an Ebola surveillance system. The CDC team set up a 
national database using CDC’s Epi Info Viral Hemorrhagic Fever 
(VHF) application (http://epiinfovhf.codeplex.com/releases/), 
development of which began in early 2013. CDC provided 
on-site programming assistance to continue development and 
modify the application to suit local needs and trained partner 
organization staff to use this database. Within 2 weeks after 
outbreak identification, the database was being used daily to 
compile up-to-date case information from the initially affected 
prefectures (Gueckedou, Macenta, and Kissidougou and the 
capital city of Conakry) and to produce national situation 
reports. These data were also shared with WHO, which 
produced international situation reports that were then shared 
with CDC and other partners. WHO and the MoH continued 
to use this database throughout the emergency response.
Along with the MoH, Médecins Sans Frontières, and 
numerous other partners, CDC facilitated development and 
implementation of case identification and contact tracing 
procedures in Conakry and Gueckedou. The CDC team played 
a particularly critical role in starting contact tracing in Conakry 
by training contact tracers, organizing the contact tracing 
system, and implementing an initial system for contact data 
management using the Epi Info VHF application (transitioned 
to Microsoft Excel in August 2014). In rural areas, CDC staff 
supported contact tracing through data management, training, 
and quality control through direct supervision of local contact 
tracers. The CDC team also introduced a standardized case 
investigation form and trained partners to use the form. Finally, 
CDC staff helped coordinate transfer of Ebola case information 
from ETUs to data entry staff and helped verify and clean data 
entered into the national database.
Beginning in September 2014, the growing number of 
CDC response staff in Guinea enabled CDC to expand its 
support to the MoH and WHO through more intense field-
based case finding, contact listing and tracing, and case and 
contact investigations. CDC staff focused on improving rigor 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
37
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and oversight of these activities with the goal of improving 
documentation of each chain of transmission, which in turn 
improved investigation of cross-prefecture and cross-border 
movement of contacts.
Still, full implementation of strong case identification and 
contact tracing procedures sometimes lagged substantially 
behind the appearance of cases in affected prefectures (e.g., 6), 
in part because of limited numbers of trained staff and reliance 
on insufficiently supervised community agents (community 
members who each day check on contacts within their own 
or neighboring villages). To overcome this difficulty, CDC 
worked with the MoH and other partners to strengthen case 
investigations and contact tracing and to supplement passive 
case reporting with active case finding, including house-to-
house visits in affected areas (6,7). However, some persons 
and communities resisted surveillance efforts by not disclosing 
the status of contacts or cases or refusing to allow outbreak 
response staff into villages, which resulted in missed cases 
and increased transmission (8) (CDC, unpublished data, 
2014–2015). Nevertheless, as of May 13, 2016, Guinea had 
not reported any Ebola cases since the last Ebola patient twice 
tested negative on April 19, 2016.
FIGURE 1. Ebola surveillance network — Bo District, Sierra Leone, late November 2014
Alert from contact monitoring 
team or community
Call center alert
Hospital walk-in 
triage
Corpse
Safe burial
Probable/suspected case 
Burial team and lab 
technician dispatched
Case investigator and 
contact tracer dispatched 
Swab obtained, 
labeled, packaged, 
and sent to CDC 
lab
Create contact
line list
CIF completed
CIF taken to DHMT 
for copying 
CDC lab tests 
specimen and 
disseminates results
Swab negative —
Contacts no longer 
followed
Swab positive —
Contacts followed 
for 21 days
CIF copy 1 to VHF 
data entry staf
CIF copy 2 to CDC 
lab with swab
Living 
probable/suspected 
case in community
Case investigator and 
contact tracer dispatched 
Ambulance dispatched
Create contact 
line list
CIF completed
Patient transferred 
to hospital isolation 
unit
CIF taken to DHMT 
for copying 
CIF copy 1 to VHF 
data entry staf
CIF copy 2 to CDC  
lab with blood
CIF copy 3 to  
isolation unit with 
patient
Blood sample 
obtained, labeled, 
packaged, and 
sent to CDC lab
Blood negative —
Patient discharged 
from isolation. 
Followed 21 days 
as contact
CDC lab tests 
specimen and 
disseminates 
results
Blood positive —
Patient transferred 
with CIF to ETU for 
treatment
Patient contacts 
followed for 21 
days
ETU disseminates 
outcome data, 
VHF updated
CIF completed in 
triage
Contact tracer 
dispatched to 
community to 
create contact  
line list
Contact tracing
Laboratory component
Data entry
Case management
Case identifcation
CIF Copy 3 taken 
to DHMT for data 
entry
Information fow
Abbreviations: CIF = case investigation form; DHMT = District Health Management team; Ebola = Ebola virus disease; ETU = Ebola treatment unit; VHF = Epi Info Viral 
Hemorrhagic Fever application.
BOX. Process indicators of CDC’s response to the 2014–2016 Ebola 
virus disease epidemic — West Africa, 2015*
• National emergency management program 
established, functional, and intraconnected (yes/no)
• Percentage of affected subnational units with access to 
adequate bed capacity
• Percentage of new laboratory tests that are positive 
for Ebola
• Percentage of suspected community deaths of persons 
testing positive for Ebola
• Percentage of calls to burial teams responded to 
within 24 hours after request
• Percentage of cases that occur among known and 
monitored contacts
• Percentage of new infections among health care 
workers
• Percentage of respondents who report willingness to 
visit a health care facility if symptoms appear
* Indicators were updated periodically during the epidemic to reflect current 
information needs.
 Supplement
38 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Liberia
Liberia’s Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (renamed Ministry 
of Health [MoH] in October 2014) began surveillance when the 
first Ebola cases appeared in Liberia in March 2014 (9); however, 
when no new cases were reported during late April–early June, 
surveillance was discontinued. When Ebola resurged in mid-June 
2014, the MoH reestablished surveillance and began obtaining 
aggregate case counts from each county daily by telephone or 
e-mail. The CDC team that arrived in July 2014 immediately 
began collaborating with the MoH, WHO, and other partners on a 
case-based surveillance system, in which detailed information about 
each case is reported individually, to obtain more comprehensive 
and accurate information about the epidemic.
Initially, case-based surveillance data from throughout the 
country were transmitted by Excel line lists and paper forms to 
the MoH in Monrovia, where they were entered into an Epi Info 
VHF database. Lofa County started a second database in mid-
August 2014 to compile data for that county; this database was 
then transmitted to the MoH (daily when possible) to maintain 
a complete national database. During this period, however, Ebola 
incidence in Liberia increased much faster than data management 
capacity. The rapid increase in cases led to a quickly growing 
backlog of information to enter into the case-based surveillance 
database. To address this backlog, CDC staff performed data 
entry, trained new data entry and management staff, and fixed 
numerous software and hardware issues that hindered data entry.
CDC staff also initiated key improvements to the case-based 
surveillance system. In late August 2014, CDC and MoH 
staff implemented preprinted unique identification (ID) 
stickers that could be used on, for example, case report forms 
and laboratory samples to facilitate linking of multiple pieces 
of information pertaining to the same case-patient. In early 
September, CDC staff collaborated with the MoH to introduce 
a shorter case report form to make form completion and data 
entry easier. CDC staff also helped organize the surveillance 
and laboratory data flow, which faced logistical obstacles 
because of the outbreak’s broad geographic scale and the large 
number of partners involved in surveillance (Figure 2). Finally, 
CDC helped the MoH design and run surveillance training 
sessions for county public health staff to improve case finding, 
contact tracing, and case reporting throughout the country.
As the case-based surveillance system developed, comparisons 
with the aggregate case data received from telephone calls and 
e-mails demonstrated that the latter were inaccurate. Therefore, 
in October 2014 Liberia’s national situation reports transitioned 
reporting from aggregate case data to case-based data from 
laboratory and ETU line lists. This change resulted in an increase 
of 1,870 reported* cases during October 25–29, 2014 (Figure 3). 
Meanwhile, each county began to manage and enter data into its 
own case database rather than sending case identification forms to 
the MoH for entry. The initial plan was for each county to send an 
updated Epi Info VHF database to the MoH daily to maintain the 
national database. However, limited Internet connectivity, lags in 
data entry, and problems combining databases made this system 
unsustainable. Liberia switched to the District Health Information 
Software system (https://www.dhis2.org) (Health Information 
Systems Programme) for data transmission and management 
beginning in December 2014; even after this change, however, 
substantial lags in data entry meant that these detailed data were 
inaccurate for current case counts and difficult to directly apply 
to outbreak control.
As the incidence rate of Ebola in Liberia declined in 
October–December 2014, renewed emphasis was placed on 
controlling outbreaks in remote communities through active 
case finding, contact tracing, and community education 
(10,11). The MoH, CDC, and numerous partners conducted 
rapid response investigations in outlying areas of Liberia during 
October–November 2014 to establish patient care strategies 
and enhance contact tracing, active surveillance, and other 
response activities (12). In Montserrado County, CDC worked 
with county staff and partner agencies, especially Action 
Contre la Faim, to implement decentralized, sector-based 
contact tracing in January 2015; this approach resulted in more 
complete contact tracing and helped eliminate transmission in 
this area (13). Cases in Liberia subsequently dropped to zero 
from late May until early July 2015 and have remained at zero 
except for small clusters of illness in July and November 2015 
and March–April 2016.
After initially reaching zero cases, Liberia maintained 
surveillance through Ebola testing of dead bodies and health 
facility patients with symptoms consistent with suspected 
Ebola; community event–based surveillance to trigger 
alerts for events (e.g., suspicious deaths) associated with 
Ebola transmission in communities bordering neighboring 
countries; and establishment of isolation, infection control, 
and triage protocols at health facilities nationwide. Along with 
strengthening integrated disease surveillance and response for 
hemorrhagic fevers and priority diseases with symptoms that 
overlap with those of Ebola, these measures promoted rapid 
detection and control of new Ebola clusters.
Sierra Leone
When the CDC team arrived in Sierra Leone in early August 
2014, the country already had reported approximately 550 
Ebola cases. The team found that, because of Sierra Leone’s 
decentralized health system, districts were taking different 
approaches to control the epidemic, including using differing 
* Suspected, probable, or confirmed cases reported to the MoH.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
39
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
case definitions. CDC, WHO, the Sierra Leone Ministry of 
Health and Sanitation (MoHS), and other partners quickly 
began creation of a consistent national surveillance system. The 
CDC team helped develop and train local staff on standardized 
procedures for case notification, investigation, and reporting, 
as well as on standardized definitions of Ebola infection, 
transmission, and control, leading to standardization of case 
investigation protocols throughout the country.
Although Sierra Leone’s surveillance system is similar in 
many ways to those in Guinea and Liberia, it has several unique 
features. For example, beginning in October 2014, Sierra Leone’s 
policy was that all deaths, not just those of persons whose illness 
met the Ebola case definition, would be tested for Ebola, a 
unique approach that enabled Ebola laboratory result records 
to double as a short-term death registry. Sierra Leone also used 
multidisciplinary field teams to conduct periodic “surges” of 
house-to-house active case finding beginning with Western Area 
(Freetown and surrounding region) in December 2014.
The initial CDC teams also implemented Epi Info VHF 
databases that could be controlled and maintained at the 
district level but combined and analyzed nationally. The 
national Epi Info VHF database was maintained through the 
end of the epidemic and is often used for national-level and 
international-level data analyses because it provides the most 
comprehensive epidemiologic and laboratory data on Ebola 
cases available in Sierra Leone. However, a major challenge to 
Sierra Leone’s surveillance early in the epidemic was difficulty 
getting information from ETUs to district surveillance officers. 
FIGURE 2. National surveillance data flow for reporting Ebola — Liberia, late August 2014
Liberia MoHSW
Daily SitRep
Aggregate case 
reports from 
counties
Phone or 
e-mail
Lofa County
Foya ETU
No transmission 
mechanism in place
Gueckedou
lab (Guinea)
Case-based surveillance data
Case 
investigations
Counties other 
than Montserrado
or Lofa
Excel; not all counties sending; 
not received daily
Epi Info VHF database; 
transmission limited by 
Internet connectivity
ELWA3 
ETU
ELWA2 and JFK 
ETUs
No transmission 
mechanism in place
LIBR 
lab
Frequent changes to process 
and long reporting delays
Case 
investigations
ELWA3 
lab
E-mail
Burial 
team
Case 
investigations
Paper CIFs
Montserrado
County 
surveillance
Montserrado County
From 
deceased 
persons only
Paper CIFs
Transmission of Excel line lists
Patient samples
Transmission method as described
Paper or verbal transmission
Impediments to data transmission as described
Abbreviations: CIF = case investigation form; Ebola = Ebola virus disease; ELWA = Eternal Love Winning Africa; ETU = Ebola treatment unit; Excel = Microsoft Excel; 
JFK = John F. Kennedy; LIBR = Liberia Institute for Biomedical Research; MoHSW = Ministry of Health and Social Welfare; SitRep = situation report; VHF = Viral Hemorrhagic 
Fever application.
 Supplement
40 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
As a result, patients’ families often lacked information about the 
status or location of their loved ones, and patient outcome data 
collected in the surveillance system were highly incomplete. 
An analysis conducted in September 2014 demonstrated that 
although Sierra Leone’s Ebola case-fatality rate appeared to be 
31.6% when all reported confirmed and probable cases were 
included, the rate actually was 69.0% when only those with 
definitive outcome data available were included (5).
Throughout the epidemic,† CDC helped strengthen 
Ebola surveillance and contact tracing in Sierra Leone. CDC 
staff provided daily contact tracing support to the district 
surveillance officers and helped develop consistent messaging 
to counteract the fear and mistrust that lead to community 
resistance to case investigation and contact tracing. In October 
2014, CDC worked with the International Rescue Committee 
and the Bo District Health Management Team to develop and 
implement community event–based surveillance to supplement 
case finding and contact tracing, an initiative piloted in Bo 
and then adopted as part of the national surveillance strategy 
(14). CDC helped train local contact tracing staff beginning 
with Bo district in November 2014 and January 2015; CDC 
also helped support the “Western Area surge” strategy (15) 
implemented in December 2014, in which many additional 
district surveillance officers, contact tracers, and community 
mobilizers were recruited and trained across Western Area. The 
surge greatly improved contact tracing capacity in this region.
In January 2015, CDC staff helped distribute and train local 
and partner staff to use an updated case identification form 
with water-resistant unique ID stickers that enabled use of a 
universal ID by the laboratory, ETU, and district surveillance 
officers. CDC staff also were pivotal in identifying laboratory 
performance and coordination issues and, for some districts, 
distributing laboratory results to surveillance staff to help with 
contact tracing and patient management.
FIGURE 3. Total number of reported* suspected, probable, and confirmed cases of Ebola as reported through World Health Organization 
situation reports — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, March 2014–July 29, 2015†
Guinea
Liberia
Sierra Leone
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
Number
Month and year
Jun
May
Apr
Mar
Feb
Jan
Dec
Nov
Oct
Sep
Aug
Jul
Jun
May
Apr
Mar
Jul
2014
2015
Liberia – 
change to 
case-based 
reporting
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* Suspected, probable, or confirmed cases reported to ministries of health.
† Figure highlights increase in reported cases from Liberia due to transition from aggregate to case-based reporting in October 2014. Reported case counts temporarily 
increased in Guinea and Sierra Leone during the same period. Shortly thereafter, reported case counts for Guinea decreased again as several hundred cases initially 
reported as suspected were reclassified. Meanwhile, reported case counts from Sierra Leone also decreased because the World Health Organization shifted data 
sources from a combination of patient databases and country situation reports to national reports only.
† As of May 13, 2016, Sierra Leone had not identified any Ebola cases since the 
last Ebola patient was discharged on February 5, 2016.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Key Challenges to Ebola Surveillance
Case Definitions
Lack of a consistent Ebola case definition was an early 
impediment in the response. In Guinea and Liberia, 
involvement of CDC teams and their partners early in the 
response led to rapid adoption of a case definition similar 
to the one used by WHO and CDC (16). In contrast, in 
Sierra Leone, many districts initially adopted a narrower 
case definition requiring fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and one 
additional symptom. Use of this narrower case definition 
probably resulted in many missed cases early in the epidemic. 
After the CDC team arrived in Sierra Leone, CDC and Sierra 
Leone MoHS staff aligned the case definition with those in the 
neighboring countries, resulting in adoption of a broader case 
definition in mid-August 2014. However, even after central 
adoption of the new case definition, ensuring nationwide 
application of this definition was difficult. Only after several 
months did all the rural districts adopt the new version. Earlier 
nationwide standardization would have improved and unified 
the response in Sierra Leone.
Case Data Collection
Throughout the epidemic, missing case data and 
underreporting of cases were serious obstacles to obtaining 
accurate surveillance data. Many factors contributed to the 
often substantial amount of missing data on each reported 
case, including insufficient training of case investigation staff, 
logistical difficulties in getting case investigation forms to all 
parties who identified cases, and inadequate time to find and 
complete the initial case investigation form, which proved 
too long given the often overwhelming number of cases 
identified. CDC staff helped resolve these issues by training 
case investigation staff at the national and local levels and 
developing a shorter case investigation form. Meanwhile, 
underreporting of cases also was substantial; published estimates 
suggest that the true number of cases in some areas might have 
been 17%–250% higher than the number reported (17,18). 
Underreporting and missing data substantially impaired the 
ability of surveillance staff to understand the true magnitude 
and distribution of the epidemic and highlighted the need for 
streamlined, standardized, and flexible case reporting tools that 
could be easily adapted to accommodate infectious disease 
outbreaks, especially outbreaks of new or uncommon diseases.
Laboratory Testing
When the number of infected persons dramatically increased 
in Liberia and Sierra Leone in July 2014, few laboratories 
in-country were equipped to test samples from Ebola patients, 
resulting in substantial delays in sample transport, testing, 
and reporting. Difficulties linking laboratory results with 
epidemiologic data exacerbated reporting delays. In some 
instances, sample testing and reporting were delayed a week 
or longer, which hindered use of test results for patient 
management. To improve in-country laboratory capacity, CDC 
and the National Institutes of Health established an additional 
laboratory in Monrovia, Liberia, in August 2014; CDC also 
established a laboratory in Kenema, Sierra Leone (later moved 
to Bo), that tested up to 180 samples each day at the peak of 
the epidemic. Expanding laboratory capacity improved patient 
management and the overall function of the surveillance system 
and resulted in a shift toward reporting primarily confirmed 
cases (rather than suspected or probable cases) from all three 
countries by December 2014. The difficulties encountered 
in providing timely laboratory testing during this epidemic 
highlight the need to expand public health laboratory capacity 
in these countries.
Contact Tracing
Contact tracing teams in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone often were hindered by inadequate staffing to follow 
the sometimes enormous number of contacts, difficulties 
reaching remote villages, inadequate pay, and insufficient 
training. However, one of the greatest difficulties in contact 
tracing was community mistrust of contact tracers and other 
outbreak response staff. For example, this mistrust motivated 
individual contacts to deny their exposures and/or hide or flee 
from contact tracers and communities to bar outbreak response 
staff from entering or even erupt into violence (7,8,19) (CDC, 
unpublished data, 2014–2015). CDC staff in many areas of 
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone were physically threatened by 
local communities and forced to evacuate; other outbreak staff 
were injured and even killed by angry community members (7). 
Creating a strong network of trusted local health care workers 
to provide information and assistance during a public health 
crisis is critical to preventing such resistance during future 
public health emergencies.
Information Technology
Information technology (IT) is essential during a public 
health emergency for data to be rapidly collected, synthesized, 
and used to provide information for the response. Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone had limited IT and communications 
infrastructure. Internet and cell phone service are inadequate 
in many areas, especially in rural areas; power outages occur 
frequently; and availability of servers, routers, and other IT 
equipment is limited. In addition, in-country IT expertise 
 Supplement
42 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
is limited: only a tiny proportion of the population has the 
basic computer skills needed for data entry tasks, let alone the 
training to set up or troubleshoot IT systems.
To support Ebola surveillance, CDC has, by necessity, 
supported IT needs in the three countries through both 
on-site and remote assistance. This support included assistance 
setting up servers and other equipment, technical support and 
development of the Epi Info VHF application, and IT and 
computer training for local staff. In Sierra Leone, for instance, 
beginning in November 2014, CDC and WHO trained MoHS 
staff on data management, Microsoft Excel, the Epi Info VHF 
application, and computer security. Development of improved 
IT and communications infrastructure (especially increasing 
Internet access nationwide) and extensive IT training for local 
staff is needed to resolve the limitations in IT capacity in these 
and other countries before the next public health emergency.
Case Data Management
In Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, CDC staff were key 
to establishing and maintaining data management systems 
for case-based surveillance. Staff working on these systems 
faced numerous obstacles, including limited communications 
infrastructure, software and hardware issues, limited computer 
expertise among local staff, insufficient funding to pay local 
data entry and management staff, and often systemic problems 
with the surveillance system (Figure 2) that resulted in low-
quality incoming data. In addition, the huge volume of cases 
during summer and fall 2014 made obtaining, entering, 
cleaning, and verifying data on all cases particularly difficult 
and led to a high frequency of missing or erroneous data. 
These problems made using case-based surveillance strategies 
for timely case reporting difficult and highlight the need for 
robust surveillance and data management systems and extensive 
training and support to in-country users on the use of these 
systems before a public health emergency occurs.
Contact Data Management
Managing contact tracing data is complex and time-
consuming at the best of times because of the difficulty of 
maintaining an accurate contact list and the need to record 
each contact’s follow-up information daily. Because of the 
complexity of contact data management and limited numbers 
of local data management staff, CDC frequently assisted with 
contact data management in the countries heavily affected by 
Ebola, especially in rural areas.
Software for contact data management was limited. Excel 
was often used for this purpose in the three countries, but it 
lacks automated functions suitable for managing contact data. 
The frequent manipulations needed to update contact lists 
often resulted in substantial errors in the data. Paper-based 
systems have similar flaws and make analyzing contact data 
or sharing data among partners more difficult. Other software 
systems were implemented only occasionally. For instance, the 
mobile Sense Follow-up application (https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=com.ehealthafrica.lrsenseebola) was used 
in Montserrado and Margibi counties in Liberia to manage 
contact tracing around a small cluster of cases in mid-2015. 
CDC developed the Epi Info VHF application specifically to 
facilitate and link case and contact tracing data management for 
outbreaks of Ebola and other viral hemorrhagic fevers; however, 
limited flexibility in the application, difficulties changing 
contact tracing systems, limited familiarity with the contact 
tracing features of the application, and ongoing application 
development during the epidemic led to use of this tool as the 
primary contact data management tool in only a few areas, 
notably Kambia District, Sierra Leone. To prepare for future 
viral hemorrhagic fever outbreaks, it would be beneficial for 
CDC, WHO, and their partners to agree on and pilot a single 
contact data management software tool that can be quickly 
and easily implemented when needed.
Conclusion
Developing Ebola surveillance in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone was difficult because of the need to implement 
timely, accurate surveillance under emergency conditions 
over a wide area. The Ebola responders conducted impressive 
and meaningful work supporting Ebola surveillance in these 
three countries; however, the many challenges faced during 
surveillance implementation highlight the need to be prepared 
for public health emergencies before they occur. CDC and its 
partners can facilitate the public health response by developing 
and agreeing on standardized response systems with clear 
protocols and objectives before outbreaks occur and rapidly 
implementing these systems during an outbreak. In addition, 
CDC and other public health partners need to continue to 
support development of strong, sustainable public health 
surveillance, data management, and IT infrastructure and 
training in developing countries, as described in the Global 
Health Security Agenda (20), to frame the response to future 
public health emergencies. With the establishment of CDC 
offices in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, CDC is well-
positioned to continue supporting the expansion of public 
health and surveillance capacity infrastructure to improve the 
response to future epidemics.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
43
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acknowledgments
Sheree Boulet and Hannah Gould provided information about 
CDC’s process indicators. Candice Robinson provided the initial 
draft of Figure 1.
References
1. CDC. CDC methods for implementing and managing contact tracing 
for Ebola virus disease in less-affected countries. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/pdf/contact-tracing-guidelines.pdf
2. Miller LA, Stanger E, Senesi RG, et al. Use of a nationwide call center 
for Ebola response and monitoring during a 3-day house-to-house 
campaign—Sierra Leone, September 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:28–9.
3. Dietz PM, Jambai A, Paweska JT, Yoti Z, Ksaizek TG. Epidemiology and 
risk factors for Ebola virus disease in Sierra Leone—23 May 2014 to 
31 January 2015. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:1648–54.
4. Faye O, Boëlle PY, Heleze E, et al. Chains of transmission and control of Ebola 
virus disease in Conakry, Guinea, in 2014: an observational study. Lancet Infect 
Dis 2015;15:320–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71075-8
5. WHO Ebola Response Team. Ebola virus disease in West Africa—the 
first 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:1481–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1411100
6. Victory KR, Coronado F, Ifono SO, Soropogui T, Dahl BA. Ebola 
transmission linked to a single traditional funeral ceremony—Kissidougou, 
Guinea, December, 2014–January 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:386–8.
7. Enserink M. Infectious diseases. In Guinea, a long, difficult road to zero 
Ebola cases. Science 2015;348:485–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.348.6234.485
8. Dixon MG, Taylor MM, Dee J, et al. Contact tracing activities during the 
Ebola virus disease epidemic in Kindia and Faranah, Guinea, 2014. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:2022–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201//eid2111.150684
9. Sharma A, Heijenberg N, Peter C, et al. Evidence for a decrease in 
transmission of Ebola virus—Lofa County, Liberia, June 8–November 1, 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1067–71.
 
10. Blackley DJ, Lindblade KA, Kateh F, et al. Rapid intervention to reduce 
Ebola transmission in a remote village—Gbarpolu County, Liberia, 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:175–8.
 
11. Hagan JE, Smith W, Pillai SK, et al. Implementation of Ebola case-
finding using a village chieftaincy taskforce in a remote outbreak—
Liberia, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:183–5.
 
12. Nyenswah T, Fahnbulleh M, Massaquoi M, et al. Ebola epidemic—
Liberia, March–October 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1082–6.
 
13. Nyenswah T, Fallah M, Sieh S, et al. Controlling the last known cluster 
of Ebola virus disease—Liberia, January–February 2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:500–4. Erratum in MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:806.
 
14. Crowe S, Hertz D, Maenner M, et al. A plan for community event-based 
surveillance to reduce Ebola transmission—Sierra Leone, 2014–2015. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:70–3.
 
15. World Health Organization. Sierra Leone: Western Area surge combats 
Ebola proactively. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 
2014. http://www.who.int/features/2014/ebola-western-area-surge/en/
 
16. World Health Organization. Case definition recommendations for Ebola 
or Marburg virus diseases. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2014. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/
ebola/ebola-case-definition-contact-en.pdf
 
17. Meltzer MI, Atkins CY, Santibanez S, et al. Estimating the future number 
of cases in the Ebola epidemic—Liberia and Sierra Leone, 2014–2015. 
MMWR Suppl 2014;63(No. Suppl 3).
 
18. Scarpino SV, Iamarino A, Wells C, et al. Epidemiological and viral 
genomic sequence analysis of the 2014 Ebola outbreak reveals clustered 
transmission. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:1079–82.
 
19. Cohn S, Kutalek R. Historical parallels, Ebola virus disease and cholera: 
understanding community distrust and social violence with epidemics. 
PLoS Curr 2016;8:pii.
 
20. CDC. The Global Health Security Agenda. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
globalhealth/security/ghsagenda.htm  
 Supplement
44 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
The 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West 
Africa presented an unprecedented challenge for CDC and its 
partners, not only because of the complexity of responding to 
an Ebola outbreak of such proportion, duration, and intensity 
internationally, but also because of the exceptional situation 
created for U.S. clinical and public health laboratory systems. 
CDC’s role in health emergencies is complex; multilayered 
interactions range from state and local health care institutions 
and care providers to the national-level U.S. agencies and 
ministries of health internationally.
As with many other viral hemorrhagic fevers, Ebola can 
be difficult to differentiate clinically from other common 
infectious diseases and requires laboratory diagnostics to 
confirm or rule out Ebola virus (EBOV) infection when 
the level of suspicion is heightened. Rapid and reliable 
laboratory testing for diagnosis of suspected Ebola cases 
or of EBOV-infected persons is central to controlling the 
disease and serves multiple purposes, including differential 
diagnosis of cases and triage of patients into care, initiation 
of contact tracing, and safe discharge of EBOV-negative 
patients to their home communities.
Laboratory Response to Ebola — West Africa and United States
Tara K. Sealy, MSc1
Bobbie R. Erickson, MPH1
Céline H. Taboy, PhD1
Ute Ströher, PhD1
Jonathan S. Towner, PhD1
Sharon E. Andrews, MPH1
Laura E. Rose, MTS2
Elizabeth Weirich3
Luis Lowe, PhD2
John D. Klena, PhD1
Christina F. Spiropoulou, PhD1
Mark A. Rayfield, PhD4
Brian H. Bird, DVM, PhD1
1Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
2Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Division of Laboratory Services, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology and Laboratory Services, CDC
4Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
Corresponding author: Mark A. Rayfield, Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC. T
elephone: 404-718-4506; E-mail: mrayfield@cdc.gov.
Summary
The 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa highlighted the need to maintain organized laboratory systems or 
networks that can be effectively reorganized to implement new diagnostic strategies and laboratory services in response to large-scale events. 
Although previous Ebola outbreaks enabled establishment of critical laboratory practice safeguards and diagnostic procedures, this Ebola 
outbreak in West Africa highlighted the need for planning and preparedness activities that are better adapted to emerging pathogens or to 
pathogens that have attracted little commercial interest. The crisis underscored the need for better mechanisms to streamline development 
and evaluation of new diagnostic assays, transfer of material and specimens between countries and organizations, and improved processes 
for rapidly deploying health workers with specific laboratory expertise. The challenges and events of the outbreak forced laboratorians to 
examine not only the comprehensive capacities of existing national laboratory systems to recognize and respond to events, but also their 
sustainability over time and the mechanisms that need to be pre-established to ensure effective response. Critical to this assessment was 
the recognition of how response activities (i.e., infrastructure support, logistics, and workforce supplementation) can be used or repurposed 
to support the strengthening of national laboratory systems during the postevent transition to capacity building and recovery. This report 
compares CDC’s domestic and international laboratory response engagements and lessons learned that can improve future responses in 
support of the International Health Regulations and Global Health Security Agenda initiatives.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
45
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The increase in cases during March–October 2014 led to 
an influx of international support to the three most affected 
countries (Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone) as well as to 
Mali and Nigeria. The World Health Organization initially 
organized laboratory response activities as part of the Emerging 
and Dangerous Pathogens Laboratory Network and Global 
Outbreak Alert and Response Network (1).
These early activities were hampered by several factors. 
These included the lack of approved diagnostic tools adapted 
to such a large-scale outbreak; a shortage of skilled personnel; 
limited biosafety knowledge by local staff; inadequate supply 
chain management to provide for universal use of personal 
protective equipment; and weak national laboratory systems 
that could not support the rollout of standardized methods 
and mechanisms for safe collection, transport, and testing of 
specimens from persons suspected to have Ebola.
Laboratory Environment
International Response
Historically, the remote locations of Ebola outbreaks have 
required rapid, highly mobile, and transient responses. This 
changed with the recent Ebola epidemic in West Africa. From 
the early serology studies that retrospectively mapped the extent 
of the 1995 Ebola outbreak in Kikwit (2), recognition of the 
need to establish field laboratory capacities grew. By 2000, 
CDC’s Viral Special Pathogens Branch field laboratory in Gulu, 
Uganda, was able to provide next-day serology and reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) diagnostics 
on specimens for acute and convalescent case identification 
(3). This represented a transition for field laboratories from 
retrospectively mapping the extent of an outbreak to providing 
near real-time diagnostic service. These field techniques 
continued to be polished during later responses and ecologic 
studies that sought an animal reservoir for the virus. By 2005, 
the concept of a high-throughput field laboratory using 
semiautomated systems was firmly established (4,5). These 
field laboratories had become highly sophisticated but still 
could be broken down into a series of trunks that could be 
transported readily by one or two persons and set up in local 
structures (e.g., health care unit, house, or tent).
The greatest challenge to robust field operations was not 
the selection and arrangement of diagnostic equipment but 
rather the ability to ensure biosecurity and safety for staff 
during operations. These concerns were satisfied by physically 
separating sample processing of infectious materials from 
the remainder of the testing procedure and having the staff 
operate in complete personal protective equipment, including a 
powered air-purifying respirator or an N95 respirator to guard 
against unexpected exposures to infectious materials (6). This 
was the standard of operations in the earliest international 
laboratories responding to the Ebola outbreak in summer 2014, 
and many laboratories continued to operate in this manner. 
The CDC laboratory originally established under the Global 
Outbreak Alert and Response Network in Kenema District 
and later moved to Bo District, Sierra Leone, is one such 
example. Located in a small house, this laboratory provided 
rapid results for approximately 26,000 specimens, with a 
peak of 180 specimens in a single day. Diagnostic operations 
were maintained continuously from August 2014 until the 
facility closed in late October 2015, even during the 70-km 
transition from Kenema to Bo (7). These earlier lessons would 
help countries affected by Ebola develop recovery and capacity 
plans for both sustainable fixed laboratory structures and rapid 
response strategies in their national laboratory systems.
Domestic Response
During the domestic response to Ebola, the U.S. clinical 
laboratory environment presented a different set of challenges 
from those in West Africa. In the United States, many years 
of preparation for such an event, including coordinated 
preparedness activities, produced robust and adaptable 
laboratory systems capable of rapidly deploying new assays 
and technologies. This preparedness enabled ready adaptation 
of existing clinical and public health laboratory networks to 
respond to the need to scale up diagnostic testing for Ebola. 
However, many clinical laboratories had migrated to large-
scale high-volume laboratory structures that rely heavily 
on rapid specimen transport and reporting systems, often 
across multiple states. Regional facilities and laboratories in 
larger hospitals have open working spaces, high-throughput 
automated systems, robotic equipment, and multiple parallel 
testing of samples. This environment is not readily conducive to 
the introduction of isolated specimen-specific management and 
safeguard measures for samples from persons with suspected 
EBOV infection, and the multiple-barrier protective practices 
employed in field laboratories are not readily adaptable to these 
large open-floor–plan environments. These considerations 
increased concerns about and difficulties in standardizing 
biocontainment and safety procedures for routine clinical 
testing in open laboratory environments. Manufacturers 
could not guarantee the decontamination procedures for 
their products and announced they would void warranties 
on products used in Ebola care and treatment. The costs 
and liability concerns led many large referral laboratories to 
announce they would not accept routine clinical test specimens 
from persons suspected to have Ebola. These concerns within 
the health care facilities and referral laboratories initially led 
 Supplement
46 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to delays in routine diagnostic services to patients in whom 
Ebola was a concern (8,9).
CDC and public health partners worked closely with the 
public and private clinical laboratory sectors to establish 
guidance for managing and testing routine clinical specimens 
in situations where concern existed about EBOV infection 
(10). In addition, a tiered service model was established for 
clinical institutions and their laboratories that assess and 
provide care for patients exhibiting symptoms of possible 
Ebola or who were known to be infected with EBOV (11). 
State public health agencies identified and designated these 
geographically distributed facilities. Adjustments to the 
laboratory environment resulted from the collaborative 
engagement of multiple individuals and organizations, 
through peer-reviewed reports, national conference calls, 
webinars, electronic messaging and listserves, consults through 
professional associations, and other communications media. 
This collaboration was one of the greatest strengths of the 
response, particularly as it pertains to the laboratory.
CDC collaborated with the U.S. Department of Defense 
(DoD), the Association of Public Health Laboratories, and 
state and local public health agencies to meet the need for 
enhanced domestic diagnostic capacity by rapidly expanding 
EBOV testing within the Laboratory Response Network 
(LRN) (12). This network enabled quick distribution of testing 
capacity to well-equipped laboratories serving the entire United 
States, with staff trained to manage dangerous pathogens and 
operate under uniform practices, and established processes of 
communications with public health institutions.
The initial deployment of the DoD Ebola Zaire quantitative 
real-time polymerase chain reaction (EZ1 rRT-PCR) began in 
early August 2014 with 13 LRN laboratories. CDC selected 
these laboratories based on the known population of West 
African citizens in the area and their proximity to major airports. 
During August 2014–September 2015, a total of 59 laboratories 
were approved to test for EBOV. This enhanced network 
consisted of state, large city, and metropolitan county public 
health laboratories (10). The ability to incorporate EBOV testing 
into existing processes and networks readily, as is the case with 
the LRN, is further evidence of past lessons learned and the value 
of strong national laboratory systems. Commercial availability 
of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–authorized EBOV 
diagnostic tests is expanding these diagnostic services in facilities 
prepared to assess patients with suspected Ebola. Because of 
the consequences of a positive Ebola diagnosis and to ensure 
informed public health decision-making, the CDC reference 
laboratory must continue to confirm any presumptive positive 
Ebola diagnosis in these facilities.
Diagnostic Testing Strategies and 
New Assay Developments
Until this outbreak, few assays existed to detect, differentiate, 
and diagnose Ebola. The design and appropriate selection of 
diagnostic assays in Ebola evaluations depend on the patient’s 
disease state. When the index of suspicion for Ebola is low but 
not negligible, ruling it out becomes a biosafety requirement 
because the presence of EBOV will lead to changes in the type 
of patient care needed, such as heightened precautions and 
limited laboratory testing to reduce exposure risks to medical 
and laboratory personnel.
During the acute viremic phase of illness, RT-PCR–based 
techniques are the most sensitive diagnostic method. They are 
frequently used with serology (IgM and IgG) to track virus-
negative but antibody-positive survivors or for surveillance 
activities in geographic regions previously affected (2,3). The 
timing of specimen collection in regard to symptom onset is 
key to evaluating any person suspected to have Ebola. During 
symptom onset, blood specimens are usually PCR positive; 
however, in a small number of patients, circulating virus 
titers might not reach detectable levels in peripheral blood 
for 72 hours, enabling potential false-negative results. For this 
reason, if symptoms have been present for <3 days, a second 
specimen might be required 72 hours after symptom onset 
to definitively rule out Ebola. Critically ill patients are highly 
viremic, and virus is readily detectable in oral swabs from 
deceased persons. In survivors, the humoral immune response 
begins to manifest toward the end of the second week of disease 
with transient IgM and rising IgG titers as circulating virus 
titers decrease (2).
The most frequently implemented diagnostic tests are based on 
quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) targeting conserved domains 
within genes for the viral polymerase (L) and structural elements 
(NP
, VP40, and GP) of EBOV (species: Zaire ebolavirus). 
In October 2014, FDA issued emergency use authorizations 
(EUAs) for several EBOV RNA detection assays, including the 
DoD EZ1 Realtime RT-PCR, CDC’s qRT-PCRs for the viral NP 
and VP40, and the bioMerieux BioFire Film array assay (BioFire 
Defense, LLC, Salt Lake City, Utah). In November 2014, Altona 
Diagnostics’ RealStar Ebola Virus RT-PCR (Altona Diagnostics 
GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) followed, and in March 2015, 
Cepheid’s Xpert Ebola Assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, California) 
was authorized for use on its GeneXpert platform. Details about 
these authorizations, the products, and their approved uses are 
available on the FDA website (13). Within the United States, 
these products are designated for use with patients demonstrating 
signs and symptoms of Ebola and require confirmatory testing. 
All are authorized for use in Clinical Laboratory Improvement 
Amendments (CLIA)–designated moderate-to-high–complexity 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
47
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
laboratories with specific instrumentation. CDC’s combined 
NP and VP40 assays typify the normal testing algorithm and 
incorporate an endogenous human housekeeping gene control 
for extraction and amplification controls. The presence of viral 
RNA is confirmed when both targets and the housekeeping 
gene are amplified and detected. This algorithm remains the 
confirmatory strategy for U.S. cases and for samples referred to 
CDC as a World Health Organization Collaborating Center for 
Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers.
These key molecular diagnostic assays are available for both 
domestic and international use by U.S. agencies, but they 
require staff qualified to perform moderate-to-high–complexity 
tests as well as modified biosafety protocols and complex 
workflows. The need for low-complexity, screening point-
of-care assays to improve differential diagnosis and triage of 
suspected cases became evident early during the 2014–2016 
Ebola epidemic. CDC worked closely with various partners 
and organizations to promote development of innovative assays 
able to support this requirement. A full array of diagnostic 
tests is under development in the public and private sectors.
In March 2015, FDA issued the first EUA for a lateral-flow 
antigen-capture assay to Corgenix, Inc. (Broomfield, Colorado) 
for the ReEBOV Antigen Capture Rapid Test. In July 2015, 
the OraQuick Ebola Rapid Antigen Test from OraSure 
Technologies, Inc. (Bethlehem, Pennsylvania) also was issued 
an EUA. These simple robust tests are based on the capture 
of circulating viral antigens by polyclonal or monoclonal 
antibodies bound to a filter strip and are driven by the wicking 
of the specimen (generally body fluids such as whole blood, 
plasma, or oral fluids) and reagents across the strip. The tests 
require no complex equipment; can be read in 30 minutes; 
and are individually packaged, stable, and disposable. Thus, 
these tests can be distributed widely as point-of-care assays in 
alternative testing sites (e.g., primary care and triage centers) 
that lack laboratory capacity. This technology also lends itself to 
multipathogen detection because several pathogens possibly can 
be captured on a single strip, which might provide differential 
diagnosis for confounding agents (e.g., malaria parasites, 
Marburg virus, and Lassa fever virus). Implementation of 
point-of-care testing brings challenges in training clinical staff 
in its use as well as in waste management, quality assurance, 
and development of alternative testing algorithms. The tests 
are approved for use on patients with symptoms consistent 
with Ebola and require further confirmation.
As further antiviral therapeutics or vaccines are deployed, 
particular attention must be given to selecting diagnostic assays 
and testing algorithms that can distinguish persons receiving 
these therapeutics from persons with natural virus infection. 
In West Africa, this difficulty is already recognized; however, 
with careful planning, appropriate reagents can be selected to 
avoid confusion and provide robust and reliable laboratory 
diagnostic services.
Overcoming Challenges
The 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic provided an opportunity to 
test years of preparedness that required extensive support from 
public and private health sectors, associations, and multiple 
federal entities, ranging from the point of service up to the 
national level. The epidemic highlighted numerous difficulties 
common during the initial phases of laboratory responses 
to high-consequence pathogens, such as viral hemorrhagic 
fevers. Among these were timely and appropriate transport of 
specimens, limited availability of experienced staff, integration 
of testing for public health and case management needs, 
assurance of continuity of laboratory services for routine 
patient care, inadequate standard operating procedures in 
institutions, and need for sustainable diagnostic testing and 
differential testing strategies. The need to detect and respond 
to a pathogen for which no commercially available assays were 
readily available further complicated these efforts.
Domestically, CDC was able to rely heavily on the 
administrative structures and processes in place with the LRN 
and state and local public health agencies while operational 
practices and safeguards were addressed in the health care 
setting. In the United States, rapid implementation of 
heightened biosafety practices and distribution of specialized 
testing capabilities and guidance were required to support 
the laboratory systems of both clinical and public health 
laboratories. Fortunately, the existing framework of a 
robust and adaptable laboratory system enabled effective 
deployment of assays and response. Challenges were mostly 
caused by biosafety concerns from the use of high-throughput 
instrumentation rather than by an inability of the laboratory 
system to absorb and adapt to change.
Internationally, the need for capacity building and lack of 
overall laboratory system capacity were pronounced and were 
addressed in parallel as the response was implemented. Most 
often the question was not what had to be done but rather how 
it should be accomplished on a scale appropriate to the needs of 
the response. There were additional challenges in coordinating 
a multinational laboratory response; supplementing the 
limited infrastructure resources to support laboratories; and 
communicating among all partners, including established 
ministry of health structures and nascent emergency operations 
centers in each country.
The need to expand timely testing to support informed 
patient management and public health decision-making was 
an ongoing concern. That resource-poor communities lacked 
 Supplement
48 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
supplies for safe collection and proper transport of specimens 
was recognized early by responders. This deficiency slowed 
specimen processing times because care was needed to avoid 
broken glass, needles, and other dangerous conditions. CDC 
and its partners supplied each country with hundreds of 
International Air Transport Association–compliant plastic 
specimen-transport containers and developed a pictogram 
illustrating proper packaging (14,15). However, one 
underlying difficulty in fully addressing these needs was 
the lack of overall appreciation for the workflow processes 
common to all diagnostic testing: the preanalytical (e.g., 
sample collection, documentation, and transport), analytical, 
and postanalytical paths of work. A common consequence of 
this was use of the time from sample collection to aggregate 
data reporting as a measure of laboratory performance. This 
misunderstanding greatly hindered the process of identifying 
and rectifying preanalytical root causes, which are independent 
of the laboratory testing processes. Chief among these were 
inadequate documentation of time of symptom onset, patient 
clinical information, and time of sample transport to the 
laboratory. Failure to properly document symptom onset meant 
requests for retesting patients within the 72-hour window were 
not followed up, and the inconsistent use of patient identifiers 
made linking repeat testing to patient monitoring and 
epidemiologic data difficult. In many instances, test results did 
not follow the patient, who might have moved into treatment 
away from local clinics or holding centers. This problem was of 
particular concern if patients were moved before results were 
reported through official channels and the laboratory had no 
direct contact with the care center or patient.
As the epidemic progressed, communications and 
transportation networks expanded, with varying degrees of 
success, to meet these needs. The most notable examples included 
rapid specimen transport by helicopters, where available, and 
national electronic reporting databases with ever-increasing 
fidelity of patient information. However, the overall number of 
tests done never approached the available testing capacity in the 
most-affected countries and was directly linked to low overall 
specimen collection activities and specimen transport.
Conclusion
West Africa’s ability to develop long-term, sustainable 
laboratory capacity to recognize and respond to future threats 
to health security depends on improvements in the laboratory 
system. These improvements involve infrastructure reforms and 
organizational changes in laboratory networks, standardization 
of processes and procedures for rapid deployment of testing 
strategies, mechanisms to develop and adapt laboratory tools, 
and critical expansion of skilled workforce development as 
identified in the Global Health Security Agenda initiative (16).
Domestically, the U.S. public health laboratory infrastructure 
demonstrated its robust and flexible capacity to respond to a 
potential high-impact health emergency. However, further 
examination and refinement of biosafety and laboratory 
practices are needed to safely manage potentially hazardous 
patient specimens in today’s complex laboratory environment. 
The integrated and close cooperation of the U.S. national, 
state, and local agencies and professional advisory groups 
during this response was a tremendous asset. Nevertheless, 
these interactions should be strengthened further to guard 
against the next high-consequence health threat.
Establishment of emergency operations centers in both 
domestic and international settings during the response 
substantially benefited laboratories. These coordinating centers 
provided feedback mechanisms to enable recognition of core 
issues and provide for process improvements that would be 
difficult to achieve in the rigid administrative structures under 
which laboratories often operate in resource-poor settings. The 
growing role of laboratory technical working groups within 
ministries of health and engagement with the African Society 
for Laboratory Medicine indicate the successful transitioning 
of these efforts into established structures. Nevertheless, 
these nascent efforts must be refined into more effective and 
efficient entities for coordinating and assisting emergency 
laboratory responses. Recognition by the affected countries that 
residual structures, such as mobile laboratories and diagnostic 
equipment donated in the response, must migrate into defined 
functional roles within the established national laboratory 
network is essential to capitalize on the advances implemented 
during this health emergency. Close cooperation between the 
many international agencies and partners involved with a focus 
on long-term development strategies will help prevent a repeat 
of the West Africa Ebola tragedy and provide for sustainable 
public health capacities throughout West Africa and beyond.
Acknowledgement
Ebola Laboratory Response Team: Amanda Balish, Dianna Blau, 
Michael Bowen, Aaron Brault, Shelley Brown, Deborah Cannon, 
Barry Fields, Aridth Gibbons, Ben Humrighouse, Kevin Karem, Gena 
Lawrence, William Lonegran, Laura McMullan, Toby Merlin, Stuart 
Nichol, Christopher Paddock, Gerald Pellegrini, Lance Presser, Pierre 
Rollin, John Saindon, Angela Sanchez, Victoria Jersey Scott, Josh Self, 
Martin Steinau, Robyn Stoddard, Jorn Winter, and Galina Zemtsova.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
49
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
1. World Health Organization. Ground zero in Guinea: the Ebola outbreak 
smoulders—undetected—for more than 3 months. http://www.who.int/
csr/disease/ebola/ebola-6-months/guinea/en
2. Peters CJ, LeDuc JW. An introduction to Ebola: the virus and the disease. 
J Infect Dis 1999;179(Suppl 1):ix–xvi. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/514322
3. Towner JS, Rollin PE, Bausch DG, et al. Rapid diagnosis of Ebola 
hemorrhagic fever by reverse transcription-PCR in an outbreak setting and 
assessment of patient viral load as a predictor of outcome. J Virol 
2004;78:4330–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.78.8.4330-4341.2004
4. Towner JS, Khristova ML, Sealy TK, et al. Marburgvirus genomics and 
association with a large hemorrhagic fever outbreak in Angola. J Virol 
2006;80:6497–516. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00069-06
5. T
owner JS, Sealy TK, Ksiazek TG, Nichol ST
. High-throughput molecular 
detection of hemorrhagic fever virus threats with applications for outbreak settings. 
J Infect Dis 2007;196(Suppl 2):S205–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/520601
6. CDC. Guidance on personal protective equipment (PPE) to be used by 
healthcare workers during management of patients with confirmed Ebola 
or persons under investigation (PUIs) for Ebola who are clinically unstable 
or have bleeding, vomiting, or diarrhea in U.S. hospitals, including 
procedures for donning and doffing PPE. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/
ebola/healthcare-us/ppe/guidance.html
7. Flint M, Goodman CH, Bearden S, et al. Ebola virus diagnostics: the US 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention laboratory in Sierra Leone, 
August 2014 to March 2015. J Infect Dis 2015;212(Suppl 2):S350–8. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiv361
8. Karwowski MP
, Meites E, Fullerton KE, et al. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC). Clinical inquiries regarding Ebola virus disease 
received by CDC—United States, July 9–November 15, 2014. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1175–9.
 9. Van Beneden CA, Pietz H, Kirkcaldy RD, et al. Early identification and 
prevention of the spread of Ebola—United States. In: CDC response to 
the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United States. 
MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
10. CDC. Guidance for U.S. laboratories for managing and testing routine 
clinical specimens when there is a concern about Ebola virus disease 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/laboratories/safe-
specimen-management.html
 
11. CDC. Interim guidance for U.S. hospital preparedness for patients under 
investigation (PUIs) or with confirmed Ebola virus disease (EVD): a 
framework for a tiered approach. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
healthcare-us/preparing/hospitals.html
 
12. CDC. The Laboratory Response Network partners in preparedness. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
2016. https://emergency.cdc.gov/lrn/ 
 
13. US Food and Drug Administration. Emergency use authorizations. 
http://www.fda.gov/EmergencyPreparedness/Counterterrorism/
MedicalCountermeasures/MCMLegalRegulatoryandPolicyFramework/
ucm182568.htm#ebola
 
14. CDC. Packaging and shipping clinical specimens diagram. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/laboratories/shipping-specimens.html
 
15. World Health Organization. How to safely ship human blood samples 
from suspected Ebola cases within a country by road, rail and sea. http://
www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/blood-shipment/en
 
16. Global Health Securities Agenda. Action packages. http://www.ghsagenda.org 
 Supplement
50 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Infection Prevention and Control for Ebola in Health Care Settings — 
West Africa and United States
Jeffrey C. Hageman, MHS1
Carmen Hazim, MPH1,2
Katie Wilson, MPH1
Paul Malpiedi, MPH1
Neil Gupta, MD1
Sarah Bennett, MD3
Amy Kolwaite, MPH1
Abbigail Tumpey, MPH1
Kristin Brinsley-Rainisch, MPH1
Bryan Christensen, PhD1
Carolyn Gould, MD1
Angela Fisher1
Michael Jhung, MD4
Douglas Hamilton, MD5
Kerri Moran1
Lisa Delaney, MS6
Chad Dowell, MS6
Michael Bell, MD1
Arjun Srinivasan, MD1
Melissa Schaefer, MD1
Ryan Fagan, MD1
Nedghie Adrien2
Nora Chea, MD1
Benjamin J. Park, MD1
1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
2Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, Tennessee
3Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
4Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
5Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
6National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. CDC
Corresponding author: Jeffrey C. Hageman, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC. Telephone: 404-639-4951; E-mail: JHageman@cdc.gov.
Summary
The 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa underscores the need for health care infection prevention and 
control (IPC) practices to be implemented properly and consistently to interrupt transmission of pathogens in health care settings to patients 
and health care workers. Training and assessing IPC practices in general health care facilities not designated as Ebola treatment units or 
centers became a priority for CDC as the number of Ebola virus transmissions among health care workers in West Africa began to affect 
the West African health care system and increasingly more persons became infected. CDC and partners developed policies, procedures, and 
training materials tailored to the affected countries. Safety training courses were also provided to U.S. health care workers intending to 
work with Ebola patients in West Africa. As the Ebola epidemic continued in West Africa, the possibility that patients with Ebola could be 
identified and treated in the United States became more realistic. In response, CDC, other federal components (e.g., Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Preparedness and Response) and public health partners focused on health care worker training and preparedness for U.S. health 
care facilities. CDC used the input from these partners to develop guidelines on IPC for hospitalized patients with known or suspected 
Ebola, which was updated based on feedback from partners who provided care for Ebola patients in the United States. Strengthening 
and sustaining IPC helps health care systems be better prepared to prevent and respond to current and future infectious disease threats.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
51
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
Infection prevention and control (IPC) is an essential, 
ongoing requirement to protect patients and health care 
workers (HCWs) from the spread of infectious diseases in 
health care settings. The 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) 
epidemic in West Africa underscored how actions in health care 
settings can contain or amplify an infectious disease threat in a 
community. Failure to effectively and consistently implement 
IPC practices can lead to outbreaks among HCWs and 
patients. A smaller workforce after an outbreak might require 
the closing of facilities, as occurred during the 2014–2016 
Ebola epidemic. Closing of a facility not only affects outbreak 
control but can jeopardize the delivery of care (e.g., routine, 
trauma, cardiac emergency, and obstetric care).
During outbreaks of new and emerging infectious diseases, 
CDC provides guidance on IPC for U.S. health care settings 
to prevent spread of infections within health care facilities; 
coordinates and engages experts throughout CDC and 
federal and state partners for activities, such as developing 
additional guidance or tools; and communicates with and 
engages stakeholders to reach the broadest audience. During 
the Ebola epidemic, CDC expanded its domestic role and 
provided guidance and leadership internationally to train and 
educate HCWs in affected countries in West Africa and in 
the United States.
CDC Contributions and Impact
International Infection Prevention  
and Control
Early in the Ebola epidemic, Ebola transmission to HCWs 
occurred in health care facilities that were not Ebola treatment 
units (ETUs) (1–3). Health care facility assessments conducted 
by CDC and partners in 2014 documented substantial 
gaps in IPC. These gaps (i.e., a lack of IPC oversight, poor 
waste management procedures, a lack of triage and isolation 
protocols, frequent lack or misuse of personal protective 
equipment [PPE], and inadequate standard infection control 
precautions) increased the risk for Ebola transmission in non-
ETU health care settings (4,5).
Beginning in August 2014, CDC developed partnerships with 
ministries of health, the World Health Organization (WHO), 
and others to improve IPC rapidly at non-ETU health care 
facilities and to decrease the risk for Ebola transmission to 
HCWs. A critical first step was to establish national IPC task 
forces to coordinate infection control efforts within Guinea, 
Sierra Leone, and Liberia. Before these task forces were 
established, numerous organizations working to improve IPC 
within the affected countries had developed training materials 
that sometimes gave conflicting technical details and led to 
confusion among HCWs. The establishment of ministry of 
health–supported national IPC task forces within each country 
improved communication among partners and coordinated 
the development of technically sound and consistent standard 
operating procedures relevant for resource-limited clinical 
settings. These standard operating procedures listed procurement 
of PPE and other IPC supplies for health care facilities.
Along with the establishment of national IPC task forces, 
CDC and partners developed and trained local and facility-
level IPC leadership, also called IPC specialists or focal persons. 
IPC specialists oversaw IPC at facilities and led ongoing 
facility IPC improvements, including providing HCW 
training and ensuring availability of supplies. In addition to 
conducting IPC training, CDC and partners provided onsite 
mentorship and supportive supervision to rapidly implement 
IPC improvements. In Liberia, the first cadre of IPC specialists 
included medical residents and physicians from hospitals that 
closed because of the epidemic. These specialists supported 
10–15 hospitals, health centers, and clinics in 14 of 15 counties 
in the country. In Guinea, IPC specialists, trained and funded 
by partner organizations, were overseeing triage and IPC at 
large hospitals in the short term. In Sierra Leone, the Ministry 
of Health and Sanitation appointed permanent IPC specialists 
for the 25 Government hospitals in February 2015.
In addition to helping establish IPC policies and procedures, 
CDC also worked with partners to develop standard IPC 
training materials specific for available resource levels that were 
then tailored (e.g., translated into different languages) for use 
in the affected countries. These outlined the IPC practices that 
needed to be implemented in health care facilities, community 
care centers, patient transport systems, and communities (6). 
After CDC technical review of materials, IPC partners launched 
efforts intended to train HCWs in each of the three countries 
on proper screening, isolation, and notification procedures for 
patients arriving at non-ETU facilities. CDC staff participated 
in the trainings using a train-the-trainers framework, resulting in 
at least 765 master trainers delivering training to approximately 
24,000 HCWs in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone.
To supplement efforts to strengthen IPC practices system-
wide, a new strategy known as Ring IPC was introduced in 
which rapid, intensive, and short-term IPC support is delivered 
to health care facilities in areas of active Ebola transmission 
to help break the chain of transmission (7). Once high-risk 
facilities were identified, IPC assessments were conducted to 
guide technical assistance, medical supply distribution, and 
daily supportive supervision to ensure HCWs were trained to 
triage, isolate, and refer suspected and probable Ebola patients 
rapidly to ETUs.
 Supplement
52 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Ring IPC impacted several places. For example, in Liberia, 
three febrile HCWs were identified when screened for work; 
all were properly isolated and transferred to an ETU for testing 
(7). Sierra Leone integrated Ring IPC around clusters of Ebola 
patients in three districts. Guinea focused on minimizing 
transmission by rapidly investigating infected HCWs and 
remediating IPC lapses.
Training U.S. Health Care Workers 
Traveling to West Africa
The large number of infected HCWs caused workforce 
shortages in the three countries that were most heavily affected. 
Clinical staff from countries around the world, including the 
United States, volunteered to care for Ebola patients in ETUs. 
Although training courses, such as those offered by Médecins 
Sans Frontières (MSF) and WHO, had been developed to 
prepare ETU workers, requests for enrollment in available 
training courses exceeded capacity. In addition, no similar 
courses in the United States met the need for training U.S. 
clinicians on providing safe care for patients in West Africa.
To address the safety of U.S. medical volunteers, CDC 
formed a task force that developed a 3-day safety training 
course for U.S. HCWs intending to work in West Africa ETUs 
(8). Task force members traveled to Belgium in August 2014 
to participate in the MSF course. With the full collaboration 
and participation of MSF and WHO, the team used the two 
organizations’ Ebola materials as the foundation for the CDC 
course curriculum.
CDC conducted the course, called Preparing Healthcare 
Workers to Work in Ebola Treatment Units (ETUs) in 
Africa, at the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency’s 
Center for Domestic Preparedness in Anniston, Alabama. 
The team trained approximately 600 HCWs representing 
42 nongovernment organizations and 21 institutions, 
organizations, and agencies of the U.S. government. Of the 
HCWs trained, 276 were Commissioned Officers of the U.S. 
Public Health Service who staffed the Monrovia Medical 
Unit in Liberia during 2014–2015 (9) and provided care to 
infected HCWs. The training team also produced a tool kit 
of the training curriculum so that other organizations could 
replicate the course (10).
Developing Ebola IPC Guidance  
for U.S. Health Care Facilities
CDC is the lead federal agency for developing infection 
control guidance that U.S. health care facilities can use when 
implementing local protocols and procedures. This guidance 
is based on evidence found in published literature or gained 
from field experience. In situations where intervention is 
required for new or emerging infections and there is a paucity 
of data available, CDC develops guidance based on the best 
information available (e.g., existing CDC guidance for similar 
diseases, current epidemiologic and laboratory information, 
peer-reviewed evidence, and expert opinion). These documents 
typically are written to provide flexibility in implementation to 
account for differences in facility-specific characteristics (e.g., 
facility design and types of supplies available) across health care 
settings (e.g., hospitals compared with outpatient settings).
In August 2014, anticipating the possibility that Ebola could 
be diagnosed and treated in the United States and knowing 
that no U.S. health care facility had experience treating Ebola, 
CDC infection control, occupational safety and health, and 
Ebola experts developed and disseminated Infection Prevention 
and Control Recommendations for Hospitalized Patients with 
Known or Suspected EVD in U.S. Hospitals (11). These 
recommendations included guidance on patient placement, 
PPE use, aerosol-generating procedures, environmental 
infection control, monitoring and management of potentially 
exposed HCWs, and other critical aspects of prevention of 
Ebola transmission in hospitals. At the time, the recommended 
PPE for Ebola patient care was a gown, gloves, eye protection, 
and facemask; additional PPE (e.g., shoe covers, leg covers, 
double gloving, and respirator) for HCWs was recommended 
if the HCW anticipated contact with copious body fluids 
or would be performing aerosol-generating procedures. 
In September 2014, CDC and the Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) advised that 
all hospitals should prepare for the possibility that persons in 
West Africa with Ebola could travel to the United States and 
distributed a checklist to guide hospitals’ preparedness (12).
The importation of an Ebola case to a Dallas, Texas, 
health care facility and the subsequent spread of Ebola to 
two nurses who provided care demonstrated that HCW PPE 
recommendations needed to be more directive (e.g., only two 
recommended PPE ensemble options) and be standardized 
to facilitate training efforts as well as to ensure the proper 
supply distribution of the recommended PPE. In addition, 
CDC received feedback from partners, including those 
who had provided care for the Ebola patients in the United 
States, regarding invasive procedures or changes to routine 
processes (e.g., patient care staff remained in patient’s room 
for extended periods). As a result of these experiences, CDC 
updated the Ebola PPE guidance for HCWs in October 2014, 
emphasizing that facilities should choose a single standardized 
PPE approach for patient care, provide training and document 
competency in PPE use, and use a trained observer during 
donning and doffing. The observer would help to ensure 
that PPE was donned correctly and would alert the HCW to 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
53
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
possible contact with body fluids during doffing of used PPE 
(13). CDC received input from other federal agencies with 
regulatory oversight of health care and occupational safety and 
health issues, including the Food and Drug Administration, 
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the 
National Institutes of Health. Feedback was also received 
from nongovernment professional medical societies and 
organizations and public health authorities with expertise in 
Ebola, IPC, and occupational safety and health. Other sources 
of feedback were hospital staff who had safely cared for Ebola 
patients in the United States (Emory University Hospital in 
Atlanta, Georgia, and Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha, 
Nebraska) and in Africa (MSF).
Training and Educating HCWs  
in U.S. Health Care Facilities
Updating the infection control guidance was an important 
step to provide additional specificity; however, the delivery of 
information and the requirements for implementation needed 
to be strengthened. Challenges included the differing levels 
of preparedness among U.S. health care facilities, variations 
in HCWs’ roles and their baseline levels of infection control 
knowledge and training, and differences in the amount 
and types of infection control supplies (e.g., PPE) available 
to HCWs. To address these challenges, CDC developed 
partnerships with a diverse group of organizations to develop 
educational resources applicable to various settings and 
HCW types. CDC deployed teams to assess infection control 
readiness at facilities being designated by state authorities to 
care for and assess Ebola patients, with the goal of creating 
training and educational resources based on CDC guidance 
that are action-oriented, modular, accessible on mobile devices 
for on-demand use, available in multiple formats, and endorsed 
by key stakeholders. These tools also took into account best 
practices related to adult learning, risk communication, and 
clear communication. CDC training was delivered by using a 
multifaceted approach: onsite technical assistance, Web-based 
tools, video training and resources, webinars and conference 
calls, and in-person training.
Onsite Technical Assistance
CDC and ASPR collaborated with state health departments 
to improve facility readiness by assessing facilities that can safely 
care for a patient with Ebola and develop guidance to prepare 
U.S. health care facilities for Ebola. Facilities were designated 
in three tiers (14): Ebola treatment centers (ETCs) (14,15), 
assessment hospitals (14,16), and frontline health care facilities 
(14,17). Fifty-five state-designated ETCs were designated by 
state health authorities by February 2015, of which nine serve 
as regional treatment centers. ETCs are staffed, equipped, 
and have been assessed for their ability to provide care for an 
Ebola patient for the complete duration of illness. CDC teams 
assessed infection control readiness by visiting 81 facilities 
in 21 states and the District of Columbia that were being 
considered to serve as ETCs by January 2015.
CDC and ASPR worked with state and local public health 
officials to identify Ebola assessment hospitals through Ebola 
readiness assessment teams. These hospitals are intended to 
have the capability to evaluate and care for persons suspected 
of having Ebola for up to 96 hours, initiate or coordinate 
Ebola testing, and test for alternative illnesses. These hospitals 
can transfer patients to an ETC as needed. Ebola readiness 
assessment teams assess facilities for key capacities, including 
staff training, infection control, and PPE use. Through 
December 2015, Ebola readiness assessment teams assessed 
approximately 40 facilities.
Web-Based Tools
CDC’s Ebola HCW Web pages, which feature training 
videos and materials (e.g., job aids such as algorithms and 
checklists), were successively tailored during the fall of 2014 
to accommodate the growing needs of the response (18). 
Usability testing was conducted with stakeholders before the 
third redesign in December 2014 to ensure that users could 
easily access CDC’s guidelines and training information. The 
Ebola HCW Web pages were viewed approximately 7.5 million 
times in fall of 2014.
Web-Based Video Training
Effectively donning and doffing PPE are two of the most 
complex actions for HCWs caring for an Ebola patient. On 
October 31, 2014, within 11 days after releasing updated PPE 
guidance, CDC and Johns Hopkins Armstrong Institute for 
Patient Safety used human factors engineering methods to 
develop and launch an interactive Web-based video learning 
program detailing procedures for four main PPE combinations 
(19). To support facility preparedness, four Web-based video 
training modules were included for emergency department 
personnel in ETCs and Ebola assessment hospitals, providing 
detailed instructions on safely assessing and caring for patients 
with Ebola and other infectious diseases (20). By July 31, 2015, 
the PPE video modules had been viewed 576,410 times, with 
an estimated 518,682 minutes (8,644 hours) watched. The 
emergency department training modules were viewed a total 
of 15,675 times, with an estimated 1,405 hours watched.
Webinars and Conference Calls
CDC conducted approximately 160 webinars and 
conference calls, reaching approximately 160,000 U.S. health 
 Supplement
54 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
care providers. Most of these calls were conducted during July 
2014–January 2015 in collaboration with clinical professional 
partners (e.g., American Hospital Association).
Resources on Clinician-Specific Websites
During the fall of 2014, online clinical communities (e.g., 
Medscape) provided substantial additional outreach to U.S. 
health care providers. The public–private partnership between 
CDC and WebMD/Medscape enables rapid dissemination 
of urgent training and information to clinicians during 
public health crises. Medscape produced eight video expert 
commentaries and a short how-to video on donning and doffing 
PPE when caring for Ebola patients and collaborated with CDC 
to address questions from health care professionals (21). The 
Ebola commentaries on Medscape were viewed approximately 
386,000 times and have been promoted and used for HCW 
training throughout the United States and internationally.
In-Person Training
CDC linked with Partnership for Quality Care and numerous 
health care organizations and unions to conduct live training 
events in New York, New York; Los Angeles, California; and 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; these events reached approximately 
6,500 individuals in person and approximately 20,000 through 
live webcast (22,23). In addition, CDC, Emory University 
Hospital, and Nebraska Medical Center trained approximately 
1,000 HCWs from designated ETCs, Ebola assessment 
hospitals, and state health departments on all aspects of 
infection control and patient care for Ebola patients. On 
July 1, 2015, CDC and ASPR announced the launch of the 
National Ebola Training and Education Center, led by three 
institutions (Emory University Hospital, Nebraska Medical 
Center, and Bellevue Hospital in New York, New York) to 
continue and expand on efforts to ensure health care facilities 
and biocontainment centers maintain readiness to care for 
patients with Ebola in the United States (24).
Conclusion
Even after Ebola cases in West Africa have declined to zero, 
the infection control safety net must be sustained to prevent 
reemergence of the epidemic, and the lessons learned from 
this response augmented to improve infection control in U.S. 
health care facilities and globally. Emerging infectious diseases 
such as Ebola will inevitably occur, possibly without warning. 
Hospitals and other health care facilities must remain vigilant 
and prepared to implement prompt triage of potentially 
infectious patients and maintain recommended infection 
control practices during all patient care activities, regardless 
of patients’ known infection status.
As of March 2016, a total of 261 CDC or other U.S. 
government staff had deployed to West Africa to support 
IPC efforts. These IPC efforts have resulted in numerous 
improvements in safety and most likely have prevented 
infection in many patients and HCWs. Triage procedures were 
established at nearly all non-ETU key health care facilities, 
with trained staff to screen for suspected cases at entry 
points. HCWs, now trained on the use of PPE for standard 
and Ebola-specific precautions, routinely provide care using 
appropriate PPE. IPC specialists in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and 
Liberia have overseen numerous IPC improvements in waste 
management, hand hygiene, environmental decontamination, 
and other critical facility safety components. One of the last 
cases in Liberia, a symptomatic person with no known contact 
with an Ebola patient, was identified by a triage nurse before 
entry to the hospital; subsequent isolation resulted in no 
health care–associated cases or exposures (25). Overall, the 
number of HCW infections has declined dramatically, as has 
the proportion of cases occurring among HCWs (1). Taken 
together, IPC efforts have greatly reduced the likelihood of 
transmission in a health care setting, one of the major settings 
for Ebola transmission during this epidemic (1).
In West Africa, strengthening and sustaining IPC in health 
care systems established for the epidemic will help prevent 
future disease transmission. Equipment, supplies, and 
infrastructure are all essential elements of IPC, and access to 
them will need to be ensured. International partners will need 
to ensure that, at a minimum, HCWs always have access to 
gloves, especially at primary care points, such as hospitals, 
clinics, and other facilities where the risk for transmission is 
high. Reliable water, electricity, and waste disposal at health 
care facilities are critical, and such infrastructure improvements 
would further contribute to decreasing disease transmission in 
West Africa. In addition, effective, sustainable, and scalable 
lower-cost solutions, such as local production of alcohol-based 
hand rub, are needed.
In the United States, sustaining the education, training, and 
competency of HCWs on IPC practices is needed not only to 
prepare for emerging threats but also to prevent transmission 
of endemic disease in U.S. health care facilities. Common 
health-care–associated infections alone are responsible for 
substantial numbers of illnesses and even deaths among 
patients; in 2011, an estimated 722,000 U.S. patients 
acquired health-care–associated infections, and 75,000 died 
(26). Emphasis on microbiology and IPC principles for all 
HCWs that begins during medical, nursing, and other clinical 
education programs can help provide a foundation for safe care.
The Ebola response also highlighted the need for research 
and evaluation of new infection control practices and 
technologies to ensure that the safety of care keeps pace with 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
55
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
the ever-evolving health care system. Opportunities for health 
care innovations include ways to:
• improve the detection, triage, and isolation process for 
potentially infectious patients seeking care; ensure HCW and 
patient safety; and prevent spread within health care systems;
• upgrade the design and construction of health care facilities 
to make infection control as effective as possible (e.g., by 
eliminating crowded waiting rooms and providing pathways 
for patient triage and transport of infectious material);
• adopt innovative technologies for environmental cleaning 
and disinfection; and
• improve the design of PPE for health care so that it meets 
the needs of the personnel caring for patients (e.g., PPE 
designed to allow effective patient care interactions and 
facilitate removal without risk of contaminating the 
environment or the wearer).
In addition to training HCWs, implementing IPC across 
health care systems requires improving accountability and 
incentives to support sustained change, providing evidence-
based interventions and solutions to support facility 
improvements, and using public health data to track progress. 
As these processes are implemented, health care systems will be 
better prepared to prevent and respond to current and future 
infectious disease threats.
Acknowledgments
International acknowledgments: Mary Hamel, Jennifer 
MacFarquhar, Alexis Harvey, Rachel Smith, Alyssa Finley, David 
Fitter, David Miller, Elise Rodd, Emma Prasher, Eric Mintz, Fatima 
Ravat, Heidi Soeters, Hoang Dang, Lindsey Horton, Monica Patton, 
N’Deye Rosalie Niang, Ian Plumb, Negar Aliabadi, Siré Camara, 
Ellen Dotson, Evan Shukan, Bi Kakou Djassa, G. Laissa Ouedraogo, 
Melissa Briggs-Hagen, Jevon McFadden, Nadezhda Duffy, Megan 
Klingler, Kevin Clarke, Lauren Lewis, Jenny Lin, Sandra Jackson, 
Snigdha Vallabhaneni, Elinor Greene, Ben Levy, Carrie Nielsen, 
Leah Gilbert, Kendra Broadwater, Ibrahim Kamara, Eddie Jackson, 
Sophia Greer, Rey de Castro, Christopher Fletcher, Fatma Soud, 
Gabe McLemore, Alison Ridpath, Brooke Hoots, Eugene Lam, Ethel 
Taylor, Eric Esswein, Laura Cooley, Chris Gregory, Brenda Baker, 
Kipruto Chesang.
Domestic acknowledgements: Steve Boedigheimer, Mark Davis, 
Todd Talbert, Sherline Lee, Dahna Batts, and others on the State 
Coordination Task Force; John Brooks, Denise Jameson, Cynthia 
Whitney, Dana Meaney Delman, Peter Briss, Sue Gerber, John 
Jernigan, Joe Perz, and others on the Medical Care Task Force and 
Infection Control teams; Barbara Mahon, Paul Mead, Barbara Knust, 
Stephanie Bialek, Alicia Fry, Monina Klevens, Margaret (Peggy) 
Honein, Lyn Finelli, Gayle Langley, and others on the Epidemiology 
Team; Elissa Meites, Emily Koumans, Roxanne Barrow, Mary 
Kamb, LeAnne Fox, and others assisting with Domestic Inquiries; 
Stephanie Scrag, Alex Kallen, Chris Braden, Todd Weber, and the 
many persons who worked on the ground in Texas, Ohio, and New 
York City; Nicki Peski, Nicole Cohen, Clive Brown, and others on 
the Global Migration Task Force; Eric Kasowski, Inger Damon, and 
Jordan Tappero; Chief of Staff staff, including Sherrie Bruce, David 
Hutchins, and Stephen Papagiotas; and Anita Patel, Jeff Nemhauser, 
and Lauri Hicks, for leading efforts to assist CDC staff returning 
from West Africa; John Decker, Maryann D’Allesandro, Ron Shaffer, 
Selcen Kilinc-Balci, Christina Williams, Nicole Coffin, Rosa Herrera, 
Fred Maxineau, Cynthia Baur, John Horan, Peter Costa, Jennie 
Johnston, Adam Arthur, Nadia Ennis, Alfred Junior, Amy Nadel, 
Annic Jobin, Teresa Horan, Ayse Gurses, Lisa Maragakis, Glenn 
Platt, Neal Sikka, Jeff Wages, John O’Connor, Mary Choi, Dana 
Pitts, Rachel Kossover, Lacey Avery, Rachel Powell, Phyllis Silver.
References
 1. World Health Organization. Health worker Ebola infections in Guinea, 
Liberia and Sierra Leone: preliminary report. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization; 2015. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/
publications/ebola/health-worker-infections/en
 2. Matanock A, Arwady MA, Ayscue P
, et al. Ebola virus disease cases among 
health care workers not working in Ebola treatment units—Liberia, June–
August, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1077–81.
 3. Kilmarx PH, Clarke KR, Dietz PM, et al. Ebola virus disease in health 
care workers—Sierra Leone, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1168–71.
 4. Pathmanathan I, O’Connor KA, Adams ML, et al. Rapid assessment of 
Ebola infection prevention and control needs—six districts, Sierra Leone, 
October 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1172–4.
 5. Forrester JD, Pillai SK, Beer KD, et al. Assessment of Ebola virus disease, 
health care infrastructure, and preparedness—four counties, southeastern 
Liberia, August 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:891–3.
 6. CDC. Non-U.S. healthcare settings. International infection control for healthcare 
workers. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/hcp/non-us-healthcare-settings.html
 7. Nyenswah T, Massaquoi M, Gbanya MZ, et al. Initiation of a ring 
approach to infection prevention and control at non-Ebola health care 
facilities—Liberia, January–February 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:505–8.
 8. CDC. Preparing healthcare workers to work in Ebola treatment units (ETUs) 
in Africa. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/hcp/safety-training-course/
 9. Liberia: Monrovia Medical Unit Decommissioned. AllAfrica. 2016. 
http://allafrica.com/stories/201505051068.html
 
10. CDC. Preparing healthcare workers to work in Ebola treatment units 
(ETUs) in Africa: training toolkit announcement. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/hcp/safety-training-course/training-toolkit.html
 
11. CDC. Infection prevention and control recommendations for 
hospitalized patients under investigation (PUIs) for Ebola virus disease 
(EVD) in U.S. hospitals. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-
us/hospitals/infection-control.html
 
12. Bedard P
. CDC issues Ebola checklist: “Now is the time to prepare.” 
Washington Examiner. September 15, 2014. http://m.washingtonexaminer.
com/cdc-issues-ebola-checklist-now-is-the-time-to-prepare/article/2553396
 
13. CDC. Guidance on personal protective equipment to be used by healthcare 
workers during management of patients with Ebola virus disease in U.S. 
hospitals, including procedures for putting on (donning) and removing 
(doffing). Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/hcp/procedures-for-ppe.html
 Supplement
56 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
14. Van Beneden CA, Pietz H, Kirkcaldy RD, et al. Early identification and 
prevention of the spread of Ebola—United States. In: CDC’s response 
to the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United States. 
MMWR Suppl 2016;65(Suppl No. 3).
 
15. CDC. Hospital preparedness: a tiered approach. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/preparing/treatment-centers.html
 
16. CDC. Interim guidance for preparing Ebola assessment hospitals Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://
www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/preparing/assessment-hospitals.html
 
17. CDC. Interim guidance for preparing frontline healthcare facilities for 
patients under investigation (PUIs) for Ebola virus disease (EVD). 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/preparing/frontline-
healthcare-facilities.html
 
18. CDC. U.S. healthcare workers and settings. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/
ebola/healthcare-us/index.html
 
19. CDC. Guidance for donning and doffing personal protective equipment 
(PPE) during management of patients with Ebola virus disease in U.S. 
hospitals. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/hcp/ppe-training/index.html
 
20. CDC. Ebola preparedness: emergency department training modules. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/emergency-services/
emergency-department-training.html
 
21. Medscape. Medscape Ebola resource center. 2014. http://www.medscape.
com/resource/ebola
 
22. Greater New York Hospital Association. Ebola training. 2014. http://
www.gnyha.org/ebolatraining
 
23. Partnership for Quality Care. Ebola educational session—California. 
2014. http://pqc-usa.org/caeventebola/
 
24. US Department of Health and Human Services. HHS launches National 
Ebola Training and Education Center. Washington, DC: US Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2015. http://www.hhs.gov/news/
press/2015pres/07/20150701a.html
 
25. Christie A, Davies-Wayne GJ, Cordier-Lassalle T, et al. Possible sexual 
transmission of Ebola virus—Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:479–81. 
 
26. Magill SS, Edwards JR, Bamberg W, et al. Multistate point-prevalence survey 
of health care-associated infections. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1198–208.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
57
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
Before the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic 
in West Africa, reports of Ebola virus exportation to other 
countries were rare, a fact partially attributed to the remote, 
rural locations of previous outbreaks of Ebola. When Ebola 
spread in 2014 to the capital cities of Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone, where infected persons and their contacts had 
greater access to international airports, concerns arose about 
the potential for further international spread. These concerns 
were heightened in July 2014, after a Liberian-American 
businessman with symptomatic Ebola traveled from Monrovia, 
Liberia, via Togo to Lagos, Nigeria. This event triggered an 
outbreak in Nigeria that spread to a second city by air travel, 
infected 20 persons (confirmed and probable cases), resulted in 
the deaths of eight persons, and exposed almost 900 persons (1). 
Travel and Border Health Measures to Prevent  
the International Spread of Ebola
Nicole J. Cohen, MD1
Clive M. Brown, MBBS1
Francisco Alvarado-Ramy, MD1
Heather Bair-Brake, DVM1
Gabrielle A. Benenson, MPH1
Tai-Ho Chen, MD1
Andrew J. Demma, MS1
N. Kelly Holton1
Katrin S. Kohl, MD1
Amanda W. Lee, MPH1
David McAdam, MA1
Nicki Pesik, MD1
Shahrokh Roohi, MPH1
C. Lee Smith, MA(SS)1
Stephen H. Waterman, MD1
Martin S. Cetron, MD1
1Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
Corresponding author: Nicole J. Cohen, Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC. Telephone: 404-498-0743; E-mail: NCohen@cdc.gov.
Summary
During the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC implemented travel and border health measures to 
prevent international spread of the disease, educate and protect travelers and communities, and minimize disruption of international 
travel and trade. CDC staff provided in-country technical assistance for exit screening in countries in West Africa with Ebola outbreaks, 
implemented an enhanced entry risk assessment and management program for travelers at U.S. ports of entry, and disseminated information 
and guidance for specific groups of travelers and relevant organizations. New and existing partnerships were crucial to the success of this 
response, including partnerships with international organizations, such as the World Health Organization, the International Organization 
for Migration, and nongovernment organizations, as well as domestic partnerships with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and 
state and local health departments. Although difficult to assess, travel and border health measures might have helped control the epidemic’s 
spread in West Africa by deterring or preventing travel by symptomatic or exposed persons and by educating travelers about protecting 
themselves. Enhanced entry risk assessment at U.S. airports facilitated management of travelers after arrival, including the recommended 
active monitoring. These measures also reassured airlines, shipping companies, port partners, and travelers that travel was safe and might 
have helped maintain continued flow of passenger traffic and resources needed for the response to the affected region. Travel and border 
health measures implemented in the countries with Ebola outbreaks laid the foundation for future reconstruction efforts related to borders 
and travel, including development of regional surveillance systems, cross-border coordination, and implementation of core capacities at 
designated official points of entry in accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005). New mechanisms developed during this 
response to target risk assessment and management of travelers arriving in the United States may enhance future public health responses.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
58 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On August 8, 2014, an emergency committee convened by the 
Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO) 
under the International Health Regulations (2005) declared 
the Ebola epidemic in West Africa a Public Health Emergency 
of International Concern (2). Among the recommendations 
of the emergency committee were that countries with Ebola 
transmission should conduct exit screening at international 
airports, seaports, and major land crossings and that other 
countries should not generally ban travel or trade.
CDC’s initial response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa 
included communication to travelers (e.g., travel notices 
on CDC’s website, messaging displayed in airports) and 
enhancement of existing mechanisms to detect sick travelers 
entering the United States. Recognizing the importance of 
preventing further isolation of, and economic impact to, the 
countries with Ebola outbreaks and maintaining the essential 
flow of humanitarian aid workers and supplies, CDC sent 
teams to these countries in August 2014 to provide technical 
assistance with border health measures. The teams initially 
focused on training and capacity building to rapidly implement 
effective exit screening (i.e., screening of departing travelers for 
acute illness or possible exposures) at international airports (3). 
Although not routinely recommended, exit screening might be 
considered an important mechanism of source containment 
during an infectious disease outbreak to prevent international 
spread. Because the primary benefit of exit screening is protection 
of the international community, assisting in its effective 
implementation is a shared international responsibility.
In late 2014, two imported cases of Ebola were identified in the 
United States, one of which resulted in two domestic cases and 
extensive contact investigations in the community and for travelers 
on two domestic flights (4–7). Demands increased from some 
political leaders and members of the public to strengthen the domestic 
response, including banning air travel between the United States and 
the three countries with widespread transmission (8). Many public 
health professionals cautioned that such a ban would cause greater 
harm than good to the public health response by hampering travel of 
responders and delivery of supplies into the region and paradoxically 
could increase the risk for spread via covert and circuitous travel 
routes (9,10). T
o build on the exit screening already in place, CDC 
collaborated with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
to initiate an enhanced entry risk assessment and management 
program for travelers from countries with Ebola outbreaks. This 
unprecedented operation required coordination across multiple U.S. 
government agencies, as well as with airport authorities and health 
departments in all U.S. states and territories (3).
CDC’s travel and border health–related response to the Ebola 
epidemic comprised three goals: 1) prevent international spread 
of disease, 2) educate and protect travelers and communities, 
and 3) minimize disruption of international travel and trade. 
This report discusses specific measures, considerations for their 
implementation, and their potential use in response to future 
outbreaks of international public health concern (Table).
CDC’s Role: Working with Partners
International Response
Airports
In August 2014, after Ebola spread from Liberia to Nigeria by 
air travel, concerned airlines canceled flights to Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone, and multiple countries closed their borders to 
travelers from these countries (11); the shortage of commercial 
flights caused delays to the provision of humanitarian aid, 
resulting in shortages of medical supplies, personal protective 
equipment, and food (12). The few airlines that continued to 
fly to the countries with Ebola outbreaks insisted that departing 
travelers be screened before boarding (11). CDC Border Health 
teams in Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone, and 
later Mali and Senegal, helped airport and health authorities 
implement airport exit screening measures that included 
administering an exposure-and-symptom questionnaire and 
at least one temperature check with a handheld noncontact 
thermometer to all departing passengers. Health screeners were 
trained to conduct secondary assessments of travelers who 
reported possible exposures or who had symptoms compatible 
with Ebola. Symptomatic or exposed travelers were denied 
boarding and referred for further medical and public health 
assessment. As national databases of known contacts became 
more robust, they were matched against passenger manifests for 
departing flights. These measures helped countries with Ebola 
outbreaks meet WHO recommendations and ensured that 
some commercial air carriers continued to fly to these countries, 
serving as vital conduits for supplies and response personnel.
During August 2014–January 2016, approximately 300,000 
travelers were screened in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. 
Only four cases of Ebola were exported through air travel to 
other countries (United States [two cases], United Kingdom 
[one case], Italy [one case]) after exit screening was implemented; 
none of the infected travelers were overtly symptomatic at the 
time of travel (4,7,13,14). No Ebola cases were reported to have 
been detected during exit screening.
To support the international response, CDC developed 
Ebola communications tools, job aids for airline and airport 
staff, and messages specific to different organizations and 
populations. Information also was provided through webcasts 
and trainings, and some materials were made available on 
the CDC website as templates to assist other countries in 
developing their own communications resources.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
59
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Seaports
Countries in West Africa, including Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone, rely heavily on commercial maritime transport 
to deliver food and other critical commodities and to export 
supplies that sustain national economies (15). Keeping these 
supplies moving was critical to avoiding further strain on 
the countries’ already fragile systems. CDC assisted national 
seaport and maritime authorities by evaluating health security 
measures at major seaports and training staff how to recognize 
and respond to Ebola. Port authorities established temperature 
TABLE. Timeline of key travel-related events and CDC border health measures during the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa  
Date
Event/CDC action or recommendation
2014
March 23
WHO announces Ebola outbreak in Guinea.
March 26
CDC posts Level 2 travel notice* for Guinea.
March 30
First cases of Ebola confirmed in Liberia.
April 10
CDC posts Level 2 travel notice for Liberia.
May 27
First cases of Ebola confirmed in Sierra Leone.
June 4
CDC posts Level 2 travel notice for Sierra Leone.
July 9
CDC EOC is activated to support Ebola response.
July 20
Symptomatic infected traveler flies from Liberia to Nigeria, triggers outbreak in Nigeria.
July 31
CDC elevates travel notices for Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone to Level 3, recommending against nonessential travel to these countries.
August 4–11
CDC deploys border health teams to Guinea (August 4), Liberia (August 4), Sierra Leone (August 9), and Nigeria (August 11); CDC 
posts Level 2 travel notice for Nigeria (August 5).
August 7
First publication of CDC’s Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure with 
recommendations for self-monitoring.
August 8
WHO declares Ebola in West Africa a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
September 25
CDC downgrades Nigeria travel notice to Level 1.
September 30
First imported U.S. case identified in Texas.
October 6
Transmission of Ebola to a HCW reported in Spain.
October 11–16
Two domestic cases of Ebola diagnosed in Dallas, Texas, HCWs; one infected HCW travels domestically by commercial airline 
(October 10 and 13).
October 11–16
CDC and CBP begin enhanced entry risk assessment and management for travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone: 
October 11 at JFK and October 16 at four other airports (EWR, IAD, ORD, and ATL).
October 20
CDC removes travel notice for Nigeria.
October 21
CBP announces that travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone will be redirected to the five airports participating in 
enhanced entry risk assessment.
October 23
Second imported U.S. case identified in New York.
October 27
CDC updates Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure with 
recommendations for active and direct active monitoring.
October 27
Traveler from Guinea dies of Ebola in Mali, triggers outbreak in Mali.
November 13
CDC posts Level 2 travel notice for Mali.
November 17
Enhanced entry risk assessment and management begins for travelers from Mali.
December 29
Imported case of Ebola identified in the United Kingdom.
2015
January 6
Enhanced entry risk assessment and management discontinued for travelers from Mali.
January 7
CDC removes travel notice for Mali.
May 4
CDC downgrades Liberia travel notice to Level 2.
May 9
Liberia first declared free of Ebola transmission by WHO.
May 11
Imported case of Ebola identified in Italy.
June 17
Recommendation for monitoring changed to self-observation for travelers from Liberia.
September 3
CDC downgrades Liberia travel notice to Level 1.
September 21
Enhanced entry risk assessment and management discontinued for travelers from Liberia.
November 2
CDC downgrades Sierra Leone travel notice to Level 2.
November 7
Sierra Leone declared free of Ebola transmission by WHO.
November 10
Recommendation for monitoring changed to self-observation for travelers from Sierra Leone.
November 25
CDC downgrades Sierra Leone travel notice to Level 1 and Guinea travel notice to Level 2.
December 22
Enhanced entry risk assessment and management discontinued for travelers from Sierra Leone.
December 29
Guinea declared free of Ebola transmission by WHO; recommendation for monitoring changed to self-observation for travelers 
from Guinea; CDC downgrades Guinea travel notice to Level 1.
2016
February 19
Enhanced entry risk assessment and management discontinued for travelers from Guinea; CDC removes all Ebola travel notices.
March 29
WHO declares end of the Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
Abbreviations: ATL = Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport; CBP = Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Department of Homeland Security; Ebola = Ebola 
virus disease; EOC = Emergency Operations Center; EWR = Newark Liberty International Airport; HCW = health care worker; IAD = Washington Dulles International 
Airport; JFK = John F. Kennedy International Airport (New York City); ORD = Chicago O’Hare International Airport; WHO = World Health Organization.
* CDC travel notice definitions are available at http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/introduction/planning-for-healthy-travel-cdc-travelers-health-website-
and-mobile-applications.   
 Supplement
60 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
checkpoints for port access; reviewed and practiced emergency 
medical response procedures; established onsite isolation 
facilities; implemented personal protective equipment 
requirements for staff required to board vessels; and restricted 
access to vessels in port and disembarkation of seafarers, 
including cancellation of shore passes and crew transfers.
Land Borders
Ebola initially spread at the land borders of Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone, and frontiers between these countries and 
their neighbors posed the most difficulties for the border health 
component of the response. Movement across land borders 
also resulted in the introduction of Ebola into neighboring 
Senegal and Mali causing an outbreak in Mali that resulted in 
eight cases and six deaths; international sharing of information 
about contacts led to interventions that prevented transmission 
and contributed to successful containment in Senegal without 
further spread (16).
The origin of the epidemic highlighted weaknesses in routine 
and cross-border disease surveillance. In the border regions of 
West Africa, tribal and ethnic kinship affiliations rather than 
geopolitical boundaries define village communities. Official 
border points of entry (those where travelers are inspected by 
border officials) are sparse, understaffed, and underresourced; 
dozens of informal border crossings exist for every official 
point of entry; and travel volumes are high. For all of these 
reasons, land borders are porous and applying screening 
procedures at official land border crossings similar to those 
used at airports is impractical and probably ineffective. CDC, 
together with ministries of health, WHO, the International 
Organization for Migration, nongovernment organizations, 
and other international partners, strengthened disease 
surveillance in border communities and sharing of information 
across borders; implemented simple, sustainable measures 
(e.g., visual screening for illness at designated official border 
crossings); and developed clearly articulated plans for isolation, 
communication, assessment, referral, and transportation on the 
basis of existing and nearby resources. These organizations also 
coordinated improved mapping of geopositional landmarks, 
including official and informal border crossings, villages, and 
markets and other areas of congregation, as well as mapping 
of population movement patterns. This approach aimed to 
improve cross-border operations and situational awareness and 
engage community members in the public health response.
Domestic Response
Travel and border health measures within the United 
States evolved over time in response to changing needs, 
newly identified risks, and public concern. At the start of 
the epidemic, CDC strengthened coordination with U.S. 
port-of-entry and community partners to identify and 
assess risks for symptomatic or potentially exposed travelers. 
Communications materials supported a strategy that relied on 
educating travelers to self-monitor and seek health care if they 
developed symptoms.
In August 2014, CDC issued interim guidance that provided 
a standard for public health measures in the United States on 
the basis of clinical criteria and exposure risk (17). Measures 
ranged from monitoring (primarily self-monitoring) to 
controlled movement (e.g., preclusion from long-distance 
travel on commercial conveyances such as aircraft, ships, buses, 
or trains) and aimed to apply the least restrictive measures 
necessary to protect communities and travelers.
CDC issued revised interim guidance in October 2014 
(17) after the first imported case of Ebola in the United 
States was identified (and initially diagnosed as presumed 
sinusitis) in Dallas, Texas (4); an infected U.S. health care 
worker (HCW) flew on two domestic commercial flights, 
causing panic among U.S. travelers and disrupting the travel 
industry (6,18,19); and an infected humanitarian aid worker 
was reported to have been in public areas, including the New 
York City subway, during the early stages of his illness (7,20). 
CDC’s guidance was revised in response to assertions that self-
monitoring was insufficient; growing concerns about infected 
HCWs in Spain, the United States, and the West African 
countries with Ebola outbreaks (4,7,21,22); and renewed calls 
for travel bans (8). Demands to restrict movement of HCWs 
caring for patients with Ebola were countered by predictions 
that stringent restrictions would discourage HCWs from 
supporting the response in West Africa or taking care of 
patients with Ebola at designated facilities in the United 
States (23,24). The revised guidance recommended that state 
or local public health authorities assume responsibility for 
monitoring all potentially exposed persons for the duration of 
the 21-day incubation period (active monitoring); established 
a higher standard of monitoring (direct active monitoring that 
included daily direct observation by public health officials) 
for persons with greater potential risk for exposure, including 
HCWs; and provided guidance for possible application of 
movement restrictions within communities. Although CDC’s 
guidance represented a minimum standard, states could, 
and in many cases did, apply more restrictive measures (e.g., 
temporarily quarantining HCWs returning from West Africa) 
(25). Many of these measures were enacted before CDC 
issued the updated guidance.
To facilitate postarrival management of travelers, in October 
2014, CDC and DHS’s Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
began an enhanced entry risk assessment and management 
program for travelers arriving in the United States from 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
61
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
countries with Ebola outbreaks (3). To implement this program 
with maximum efficiency and minimal disruption to travel, 
CBP limited entry of air travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone (and for several weeks from Mali, during the 
outbreak in that country) to five airports: Hartsfield–Jackson 
Atlanta International Airport, Newark Liberty International 
Airport, Washington Dulles International Airport, John F. 
Kennedy International Airport (New York City), and Chicago 
O’Hare International Airport.
Enhanced entry risk assessment at U.S. airports included 
processes to identify travelers from countries with Ebola 
outbreaks, either through scheduled flight itineraries or during 
customs and immigration inspections. CBP officers and other 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security staff collected contact 
and locating information, administered an exposure-and-
symptom questionnaire, checked travelers’ temperatures with 
noncontact thermometers, and observed travelers for signs 
of illness. Data were entered electronically through an online 
interface and transmitted securely to CDC’s database and then 
to states. Travelers who were symptomatic or who reported 
possible exposures were referred to CDC for an in-depth 
public health risk assessment. Symptomatic travelers who 
met predefined criteria were referred for medical evaluation 
to designated assessment hospitals, in consultation with the 
health department with jurisdiction for the airport.
The enhanced entry risk assessment and management 
program enabled CDC to educate travelers individually 
about Ebola and the postarrival monitoring process. Screened 
travelers received a CDC CARE (Check and Report Ebola) kit 
containing information and tools (including a thermometer 
and prepaid cell phone) to facilitate monitoring and reporting 
to health departments (Figure 1).
Enhanced entry risk assessment was discontinued for travelers 
from Liberia on September 21, 2015; for travelers from Sierra 
Leone on December 22, 2015; and for travelers from Guinea 
on February 19, 2016. Of the approximately 38,000 travelers 
assessed at U.S. ports of entry during October 11, 2014–
February 18, 2016, only one was subsequently determined 
to have Ebola. The infected humanitarian aid worker arrived 
during the brief period between initiation of enhanced entry 
risk assessment and implementation of postarrival monitoring. 
He was asymptomatic upon arrival, and his illness was detected 
through self-monitoring and reporting to the local health 
department as recommended at the time (7).
To help enforce recommendations that travelers with 
certain exposures to Ebola should not travel on commercial 
conveyances and to further reduce the risk for Ebola spread 
through air travel, in March 2015 CDC revised criteria for 
use of federal travel restrictions to prevent travel by persons 
possibly exposed to Ebola or other communicable diseases but 
not yet considered contagious (26). The updated criteria gave 
CDC greater flexibility to control the movement of persons 
who might pose a public health threat during travel and to 
apply federal travel restrictions in support of outbreak control.
Communication
Throughout the response, CDC disseminated messages to 
inbound and outbound travelers through the CDC website, 
traditional and social media, partner outreach, and printed 
materials. Messages displayed in U.S. airports and in airports 
in countries with Ebola outbreaks reminded travelers to avoid 
travel while symptomatic, monitor themselves for illness, and 
seek health care should symptoms develop (Figure 2) (Figure 3) 
(Figure 4).
To provide international travelers with information to protect 
their health and, ultimately, the health of their communities, 
CDC regularly posts travel notices about disease outbreaks and 
international events. Notices are assigned a risk level (27) on 
the basis of the situation and available health recommendations 
and are escalated or deescalated as the analysis of risk to travelers 
changes (e.g., status of the outbreak or ability to access health 
care facilities). The highest risk level is Level 3 (i.e., warning), 
used only for situations in which the risk is so great that CDC 
recommends against nonessential travel to a destination. When 
considering issuance of Level 3 travel notices, CDC takes 
into account the health risk and impact to travelers and the 
potential for economic harm to the destination country and 
the travel industry.
During the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa, CDC 
initially posted Level 2 (i.e., alert) notices, which recommended 
enhanced precautions for travelers to Guinea (March 2014), 
Liberia (April 2014), and Sierra Leone (June 2014); later, 
Level 2 notices were added for Nigeria (August 2014) and Mali 
(November 2014) when Ebola outbreaks occurred in those 
countries. The notices for Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone 
were subsequently elevated to Level 3 in July 2014 to advise 
U.S. residents to avoid nonessential travel to these countries 
and enable their governments to respond most effectively 
to the epidemic by reducing the potential for difficulties 
posed by nonessential travelers. As the situation improved in 
Liberia and extensive control measures were put into place, 
CDC downgraded the notice for this country to Level 2 in 
May 2015, then to Level 1 (i.e., watch) in September 2015. 
Similarly, CDC downgraded the notices for Sierra Leone to 
Level 1 and Guinea to Level 2 in November 2015, and the 
notice for Guinea was downgraded to Level 1 in December 
2015. CDC removed all three notices on February 19, 2016, 
coinciding with the discontinuation of enhanced entry risk 
assessment at U.S. ports of entry.
 Supplement
62 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CDC also issued guidance for specific groups of travelers 
most at risk. Because humanitarian aid was essential to 
managing the epidemic, CDC posted guidance for aid workers 
and organizations to help ensure safe travel to and from the 
region. In contrast, CDC considered education-related travel 
to be nonessential and advised postponing travel in its guidance 
for colleges, universities, and students. CDC also published 
guidance for airlines, cruise ships, and cargo ships to help 
crew members manage sick travelers onboard when Ebola 
was suspected.
CDC Contributions and Impact
As CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic ends, travel and 
border health measures can be reviewed to assess whether 
they met the stated goals: 1) prevent international spread of 
disease, 2) educate and protect travelers and communities, 
and 3) minimize disruption of international travel and 
trade. These measures fall into four broad categories: 1) risk 
determination and characterization, 2) risk communication, 
3) risk assessment of persons, and 4) risk management on 
the basis of individual assessment. Although spread of Ebola 
through air travel is an inherently low-probability event, the 
consequences of such spread would be high, including potential 
for disruption of travel and trade to a highly vulnerable region. 
Thus, any consideration of travel and border health measures 
must balance public health risk against the perception of such 
risk by travelers, the travel industry, and government decision 
makers. These measures demand constant assessment and 
refinement to adjust to changing epidemic characteristics. 
When recommending and implementing such measures, 
CDC aims to protect civil liberties through the use of least 
restrictive means.
Although WHO declared the end of the Public Health 
Emergency of International Concern and recommended 
FIGURE 1. CDC CARE kit distributed to travelers to facilitate monitoring and reporting to health departments during the 2014–2016 Ebola 
epidemic in West Africa
Abbreviations: CARE = Check and Report Ebola; Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
63
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 2. Example of CDC messages displayed on posters at U.S. airports for travelers going to West Africa during the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
64 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 3. Example of CDC messages displayed on posters at airports in Sierra Leone* for departing travelers during the 2014–2016 Ebola 
epidemic in West Africa
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* Similar posters were displayed in airports in Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria, and Senegal.   
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
65
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
discontinuation of exit screening on March 29, 2016 (28), 
exit screening continued in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone 
in response to a cluster of cases in Guinea with limited spread 
to Liberia. As of June 6, 2016, when this report went to 
press, no new cases had been reported and exit screening was 
expected to end shortly. Exit screening successfully addressed 
vulnerabilities that enabled exportation of Ebola to Nigeria by 
an actively symptomatic traveler, minimizing the number of 
exported cases and preventing travel by overtly symptomatic 
persons (29). Separating the effectiveness of exit screening at 
airports from other public health measures (e.g., identifying and 
managing cases and exposed persons at the community level 
or educating travelers) or the deterrent effect of the screening 
process is difficult. However, these collaborations contributed 
meaningfully to controlling the epidemic. Exit screening was 
challenging for the affected countries because resources and 
staffing needs for these activities competed with other priorities. 
These difficulties most likely were offset by intangible benefits, 
including reassurance of airlines and travelers of the continued 
safety of air travel that no doubt contributed to the willingness 
of some airlines to maintain flight schedules within the region 
throughout the epidemic (11).
Operationally, the U.S. enhanced entry risk assessment and 
management program succeeded as a mechanism to assess 
individual risk, educate travelers, and facilitate postarrival 
management of travelers including active or direct active 
monitoring by public health authorities. Funneling of travelers 
from countries with Ebola outbreaks to selected airports rather 
than diverting airplanes was substantially less disruptive to the 
travel industry. The ability to track and monitor travelers in 
any U.S. state or territory, including their movement among 
states, resulted in rapid identification and evaluation of 
approximately 1,400 symptomatic travelers, none of whom had 
Ebola diagnosed. However, the operation was not without costs 
(e.g., high resource demands), much of which have been borne 
by the federal government, as well as the subsequent burden to 
health departments in the United States and inconvenience to 
airlines and travelers. The opportunity costs of diverted public 
health resources must also be taken into account.
FIGURE 4. Example of information displayed on electronic message boards at U.S. airports for travelers arriving from West Africa during the 
2014–2016 Ebola epidemic
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
66 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The more difficult task of preventing, detecting, and 
responding to the spread of Ebola across highly porous land 
borders in West Africa resulted in a multisector collaboration, 
greater awareness of population movement, enhanced 
procedures and resources to manage sick travelers in remote 
border locations, and improved binational and multinational 
communication and cooperation. Border officials and residents 
of border communities were trained to recognize sick travelers 
as sentinel events, contributing to more integrated surveillance 
and response systems that could help prevent unrecognized 
cross-border spread during future epidemics. However, much 
work remains to build and maintain these nascent border health 
systems as part of the broader public health infrastructure.
Travel and border health measures applied in the countries 
with Ebola outbreaks, domestically in the United States, and 
through various communications mechanisms might have 
averted a breakdown of global interconnectedness that would 
have damaged the Ebola response and severely disrupted 
international travel and trade to a highly vulnerable region. A 
new model was developed that replaced single-point screening 
at borders with a continuum of measures that started with 
pretravel information for travelers and ended with monitoring 
through the end of the potential incubation period. These 
measures provided an alternative to more stringent options 
(e.g., travel bans or widespread use of quarantine) and calmed 
the concerns of political leaders and the public. This experience 
managing a public health threat from a relatively remote area 
elevated interagency cooperation at the federal, state, local, 
and international levels and led to development, revision, and 
validation of new and old tools that were effective and might 
prove invaluable in the future.
Conclusion
The Ebola epidemic devastated Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone. However, the reconstruction process presents a unique 
opportunity to build sustainable public health infrastructure 
by leveraging resources and systems put in place to combat 
the epidemic, including helping countries comply with core 
capacities at designated official points of entry in accordance 
with the International Health Regulations (2005) (30) and 
developing systematic cross-border communication as part of 
plans to establish a West African surveillance network. Moving 
forward, the Global Health Security Agenda (31) presents an 
opportunity to reduce the risk for global spread of disease 
through migration and travel and to meet the crucial need 
for enhanced border health security in vulnerable regions of 
the world. In the United States, new mechanisms for targeted 
risk assessment and management of travelers can improve the 
efficiency of border health measures aimed at preventing the 
introduction and spread of high-consequence communicable 
diseases into the United States and enhance the public health 
response to future outbreaks involving travelers.
Acknowledgments
Yusra Ahmad, Andre Berro, Sena Blumensaadt, Denise Borntrager, 
Gary Brunette, Michelle Calio, Michelle Canady, Blanche Collins, 
Terrence Daley, Christopher de la Motte Hurst, Pamela Diaz, 
Annelise Doney, Onalee Grady-Erickson, Bruce Everett, Reena 
Gulati, Harlem Gunness, Yoni Haber, Christa Hale, Erin Hawes, 
Ronald Henry, Yonette Hercules, Jonathan Hill, Heather Joseph, 
Phyllis Kozarsky, Adam Langer, Laura Leidel, Susan Lippold, 
Carolina Luna-Pinto, Charlene Majersky, Ashley Marrone, Brian 
Maskery, J. Todd Mercer, Rebecca Merrill, Rebecca Myers, Pamela 
Nonnenmacher, Tina Objio, J. Miguel Ocana, Gabriel Palumbo, 
Kate Pearson, Joanna Regan, Alfonso Rodriguez Lainz, Kimberly 
Rogers, Erin Rothney, Lisa Rotz, Derek Sakris, Dana Schneider, Kate 
Shaw, Erica Sison, Ronald Smith, Amra Uzicanin, S. Sadie Ward, 
James Watkins, Erika Willacy, Racquel Williams, Kelly Winter, and 
the many other Division of Global Migration and Quarantine and 
CDC staff who supported the domestic and international activities 
of the Global Migration Task Force; CDC Ebola response staff in 
Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
 1. Shuaib F, Gunnala R, Musa EO, et al. Ebola virus disease outbreak—
Nigeria, July–September 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:867–72.
 2. World Health Organization. Statement on the 1st meeting of the IHR 
Emergency Committee on the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. August 8, 
2014. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2014/
ebola-20140808/en/
 3. Brown CM, Aranas AE, Benenson GA, et al. Airport exit and entry 
screening for Ebola—August–November 10, 2014. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1163–7.
 4. Chevalier MS, Chung W, Smith J, et al. Ebola virus disease cluster in 
the United States—Dallas County, Texas, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2014;63:1087–8.
 5. McCarty CL, Basler C, Karwowski M, et al. Response to importation 
of a case of Ebola virus disease—Ohio, October 2014. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1089–91.
 6. Regan JJ, Jungerman R, Montiel SH, et al. Public health response to 
commercial airline travel of a person with Ebola virus infection—United 
States, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:63–6.
 7. Yacisin K, Balter S, Fine A, et al. Ebola virus disease in a humanitarian 
aid worker—New York City, October 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:321–3.
 8. McAuliff M. Lawmakers ignore experts, push for Ebola travel ban. The 
Huffington Post. October 16, 2014. http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/2014/10/16/congress-ebola_n_5997214.html
 9. Nuzzo JB, Cicero AJ, Waldhorn R, Inglesby TV. Travel bans will increase 
the damage wrought by Ebola. Biosecur Bioterror 2014;12:306–9. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1089/bsp.2014.1030
 
10. Poletto C, Gomes MF, Pastore y Piontti A, et al. Assessing the impact 
of travel restrictions on international spread of the 2014 West African 
Ebola epidemic. Euro Surveill 2014;19:pii 20936. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.42.20936
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
67
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
11. Anderson M. Ebola: airlines cancel more flights to affected countries. The 
Guardian. August 22, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/
aug/22/ebola-airlines-cancel-flights-guinea-liberia-sierra-leone
 
12. Balen B. Ebola supplies sit as airlines cancel flights to countries with infection. 
The Guardian. September 8, 2014. http://guardianlv.com/2014/09/
ebola-supplies-sit-as-airlines-cancel-flights-to-countries-with-infection/
 
13. Gulland A. Second Ebola patient is treated in UK. BMJ 2014;349:g7861. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g7861
 
14. World Health Organization. Ebola virus disease—Italy. Disease Outbreak 
News, May 13, 2015. http://www.who.int/csr/don/13-may-2015-ebola/en/
 
15. Enhanced Integrated Framework. Trading toward prosperity: Sierra 
Leone diagnostic trade integration study update. December 2013. http://
www.enhancedif.org/en/document/trading-towards-prosperity-sierra-
leone-diagnostic-trade-integration-study-update-2013
 
16. Mirkovic K, Thwing J, Diack PA. Importation and containment of Ebola 
virus disease—Senegal, August–September 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2014;63:873–4.
 
17. CDC. Notes on the interim U.S. guidance for monitoring and movement 
of persons with potential Ebola virus exposure. February 19, 2016. 
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/exposure/monitoring-and-movement-of-
persons-with-exposure.html
 
18. Bever L. Chain reaction: concern about Ebola nurse’s flight prompts 
school closings in two states. The Washington Post. October 16, 2014. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/10/16/
after-concern-about-ebola-patients-flight-schools-close-in-two-cities/ 
 
19. Mejia 
P
. 
Planes, 
automobiles 
and 
cruise 
ships: 
vehicles 
for 
Ebola 
panic. 
Newsweek. 
October 17, 2014. http://www.newsweek.com/planes-automobiles-and-
cruise-ships-vehicles-ebola-panic-278206
 
20. Spencer C. Having and fighting Ebola—public health lessons from a 
clinician turned patient. N Engl J Med 2015;372:1089–91. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1501355
 
21. Forrester JD, Hunter JC, Pillai SK, et al. Cluster of Ebola cases among 
Liberian and U.S. health care workers in an Ebola treatment unit and 
adjacent hospital—Liberia, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:925–9.
 
22. Matanock A, Arwady MA, Ayscue P
, et al. Ebola virus disease cases 
among health care workers not working in Ebola treatment units—
Liberia, June–August, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1077–81.
 
23. Infectious Diseases Society of America. IDSA statement on involuntary 
quarantine of healthcare workers returning from Ebola-affected 
countries. http://www.idsociety.org/2014_ebola_quarantine/
 
24. Devaney T. Fauci calls Ebola quarantines “draconian.” The Hill. 
October 26, 2014. http://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/221890-top-
nih-officials-calls-quarantines-draconian
 
25. American Civil Liberties Union; Yale Global Health Justice Partnership. 
Fear, politics, and Ebola: how quarantines hurt the fight against Ebola 
and violate the Constitution. December 2015. https://www.aclu.org/
sites/default/files/field_document/aclu-ebolareport.pdf
 
26. CDC. Criteria for requesting federal travel restrictions for public health 
purposes, including for viral hemorrhagic fevers. 80 FR 16400. March 27, 
2015. https://federalregister.gov/a/2015-07118
 
27. CDC. CDC travel notice definitions. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/
yellowbook/2016/introduction/planning-for-healthy-travel-cdc-
travelers-health-website-and-mobile-applications
 
28. World Health Organization. Statement on the 9th meeting of the 
IHR Emergency Committee regarding the Ebola outbreak in West 
Africa. March 29, 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/
statements/2016/end-of-ebola-pheic/en/
 
29. Bogoch II, Creatore MI, Cetron MS, et al. Assessment of the potential 
for international dissemination of Ebola virus via commercial air travel 
during the 2014 West African outbreak. Lancet 2015;385:29–35. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61828-6
 
30. World Health Organization. International health regulations (2005), 
2nd ed. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2008.
 
31. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. Addressing the global health security 
agenda. [Editorial]. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:257. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)70719-4.   
 Supplement
68 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
During an emergency response, communication is often the 
first activity as responders mobilize (1). During the 2014–2016 
Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC’s 
response focused on two fronts, the epidemic epicenter in 
West Africa and at home in the United States. Media coverage 
and public opinion drove the demand for information in the 
United States, whereas in West Africa, the need for life-saving 
information was crucial. The numbers of persons infected and 
Lessons of Risk Communication and Health Promotion —  
West Africa and United States
Sara R. Bedrosian1
Cathy E. Young2
Laura A. Smith, MA2
Joanne D. Cox, MC3
Craig Manning4
Laura Pechta, PhD3
Jana L. Telfer, MA5
Molly Gaines-McCollom, MPH3
Kathy Harben1
Wendy Holmes, MS6
Keri M. Lubell, PhD3
Jennifer H. McQuiston, DVM1
Kristen Nordlund2
John O’Connor, MS2
Barbara S. Reynolds, PhD5
Jessica A. Schindelar, MPH1
Gene Shelley, PhD7
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD5
1 Division of Public Affairs, Office of the Associate Director for Communication, CDC
2Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
4Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
5Office of the Director, Office of the Associate Director for Communication, CDC
6Office of the Director, Office for State, Tribal, Local, and Territorial Support, CDC
7Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
Corresponding author: Sara Bedrosian, Division of Public Affairs, Office of the Associate Director for Communication, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-0677; 
E-mail: eri7@cdc.gov.
Summary
During the response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC addressed the disease on two fronts: 
in the epidemic epicenter of West Africa and at home in the United States. Different needs drove the demand for information in these 
two regions. The severity of the epidemic was reflected not only in lives lost but also in the amount of fear, misinformation, and stigma 
that it generated worldwide. CDC helped increase awareness, promoted actions to stop the spread of Ebola, and coordinated CDC 
communication efforts with multiple international and domestic partners. CDC, with input from partners, vastly increased the number 
of Ebola communication materials for groups with different needs, levels of health literacy, and cultural preferences. CDC deployed 
health communicators to West Africa to support ministries of health in developing and disseminating clear, science-based messages and 
promoting science-based behavioral interventions. Partnerships in West Africa with local radio, television, and cell phone businesses 
made possible the dissemination of messages appropriate for maximum effect. CDC and its partners communicated evolving science and 
risk in a culturally appropriate way to motivate persons to adapt their behavior and prevent infection with and spread of Ebola virus. 
Acknowledging what is and is not known is key to effective risk communication, and CDC worked with partners to integrate health 
promotion and behavioral and cultural knowledge into the response to increase awareness of the actual risk for Ebola and to promote 
protective actions and specific steps to stop its spread.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
69
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
lives lost, as well as the amount of fear, misinformation, and 
stigma that Ebola generated worldwide, reflected the severity 
of the epidemic.
Although CDC has worked with partners to develop 
and implement communication messages and products for 
international groups of intended recipients during many other 
public health emergencies and responses, some difficulties faced 
in the Ebola response in West Africa were different from those 
faced during previous, smaller occurrences (e.g., responding to 
fear of Ebola as it spread for the first time in densely populated 
urban settings in a region unfamiliar with the disease) (2). 
CDC supported the domestic and international responses by 
providing timely, customized messages for groups of recipients 
in West Africa and in the United States so communities could 
understand how to protect themselves and journalists could 
report accurate information quickly. CDC needed to depict 
information differently for each group: more abstractly for 
those in the United States and more literally for those in 
West Africa. For example, symptoms of Ebola were illustrated 
differently for each group (3). CDC’s communicators worked 
closely with counterparts in West Africa and in the United 
States to develop core messages that could be customized for 
different countries and groups during different phases of the 
response. Experts in communication, education, anthropology, 
and behavioral science helped support the ministries of health 
(MoHs) in the countries in West Africa most affected by Ebola, 
as well as partners to ensure that communities could obtain 
the information they needed to protect themselves through 
multiple channels (e.g., radio, cell phone text messages, posters 
and billboards, and face-to-face visits).
CDC has supported successful responses to Ebola for almost 
40 years, since the first recognized outbreak of Ebola in Zaire 
in 1976, but those outbreaks occurred in remote areas of East 
and Central Africa, were small, and usually were contained 
quickly (4). The size and scope of the West African epidemic 
were unprecedented (5). At the start of the response, CDC’s 
communication products were complex and text-based and did 
not contain much information that persons could act on to 
protect themselves from getting Ebola (6). As media coverage 
of Ebola, and the spread of the disease itself, expanded, the 
public’s need for information outpaced the ability of public 
health officials to respond (7). When the first case of Ebola 
was diagnosed in the United States in Dallas, Texas, the U.S. 
public’s resulting fear was disproportionate to the actual risk 
(8). In contrast, in West Africa, lack of understanding that 
germs spread disease led to belief that Ebola had causes other 
than a virus (e.g., witchcraft); this lack of understanding 
initially hindered public health efforts and contributed to the 
spread of the disease (9,10). MoHs, CDC, and their partners 
needed to launch and sustain coordinated communication 
efforts to address community needs in West Africa; CDC 
and state and local departments of health and their partners 
needed a communication approach to address needs in the 
United States. These efforts involved parallel, but different, 
approaches on the basis of the different cultures, available 
communications technologies, and circumstances in West 
Africa and the United States.
Communicating in West Africa
Before the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic, Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone did not have the public health infrastructure 
and corresponding risk communication experience needed for 
this epidemic. These countries had never experienced a case 
of Ebola, and the world had never seen an epidemic of this 
magnitude; collectively, the global public health community 
lacked experience in how to address this epidemic (11,12). 
Differences in governments, cultures, religions, languages, 
and tribes made having a single communication approach 
nearly impossible. Adding to these difficulties was a strong 
tradition of oral communication and a need for clear and 
literal illustrations that were also culturally appropriate. To 
be useful, communication materials had to be customized to 
accommodate different literacy levels, languages and dialects, 
and beliefs.
The number of languages and dialects spoken in the three 
countries that were most heavily affected demonstrates one 
impediment to communicating with West Africa’s diverse 
populations. Guineans speak an estimated 36 languages 
comprising 59 dialects; Liberians an estimated 31 languages 
comprising 100 dialects; and Sierra Leoneans an estimated 
25 languages comprising 76 dialects (13). Each country has 
an official language that was used for nationwide messaging 
(English for Liberia and Sierra Leone, French for Guinea), but 
many West Africans speak the official language as their second 
or third language (14), and literacy levels are among the lowest 
in the world. Literacy levels among persons aged ≥15 years for 
Guinea (30.4%), Liberia (47.6%), and Sierra Leone (48.1%) 
are much lower than the global average (84.0%) and that 
of the United States (99.0%) (15,16). Women in the three 
countries, who are often caregivers for the sick, have much 
lower literacy rates than men (Guinea: 22.8% for women, 
38.1% for men; Liberia: 32.8% for women, 62.4% for men; 
Sierra Leone: 37.7% for women, 58.7% for men) (15). Thus, 
health communication teams created predominately pictorial 
communication materials (3) and needed to engage with 
knowledgeable in-country partners to develop appropriate 
communication messages and materials with little existing 
communication research about the barriers persons faced, 
 Supplement
70 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
information on how they were interpreting messages, or the 
types of attitudes and values that needed to be activated to 
support behavior change (17).
Before this epidemic, Ebola was unknown in West Africa 
and so did not seem real for many persons until their family 
members and neighbors died of the disease (18). CDC and 
partners had to address beliefs that Ebola was caused by 
witchcraft or by something other than a virus; mistrust of 
outsiders; and cultural practices that contributed to the spread 
of the virus before responders could effectively implement 
public health interventions that are known to stop an outbreak 
(18). Instances of disbelief in Ebola, coupled with strong 
cultural traditions (e.g., caring for the sick at home, seeking 
care from traditional healers, washing and burying the dead) 
increased the risk for Ebola transmission (19–21). Fear, 
stigma, and superstition also complicated implementation of 
standard public health practices. Residents hid the sick and fled 
communities, breaking quarantine, because of social stigma 
surrounding Ebola; this stigma even extended to survivors 
who were no longer contagious but were still shunned by their 
communities. In addition, ill persons avoided Ebola treatment 
units and ambulances because they feared dying of Ebola, 
turned to traditional healers to counter what they believed 
to be witchcraft, and at times defied recommendations from 
public health authorities because of fear that those authorities 
were responsible for spreading Ebola through apparent cause 
and effect (2,22).
Lack of effective dialogue with communities and lack of 
public health resources early in the response inflamed public 
distrust of authorities (23) and outsiders. For example, the 
government of Liberia advised persons with symptoms of 
Ebola to seek immediate care at hospitals and clinics, but these 
facilities lacked sufficient numbers of beds and trained staff to 
care for the rapidly growing number of sick persons (24). CDC 
medical anthropologists supported response teams with rapid 
field assessments of community perceptions to guide message 
development and culturally appropriate information delivery 
(CDC, unpublished data, 2015).
Changing the behaviors that fueled the epidemic required 
each country to develop its own approach for adapting 
traditions and promoting protective actions that often ran 
counter to fundamental beliefs and day-to-day practices. In 
one example from Liberia, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
expressed a national goal to have no new cases of Ebola by 
Christmas 2014. In just 8 days after this announcement, CDC 
and partners worked with the Liberian Ministry of Health and 
Social Welfare to rapidly launch a national communication 
campaign, Ebola Must GO, based on specific interventions 
demonstrated to stop Ebola (25). By that time in the response, 
adequate Ebola treatment unit beds, ambulances, and rapid 
response teams were available in Liberia, so the campaign 
focused on protective actions that persons could take until help 
arrived. The campaign included the message “Stopping Ebola 
is Everybody’s Business” (25), which was a twist on a Liberian 
taboo: Che-che-polay (i.e., being a busybody). To address this 
taboo, this message in the campaign was designed to encourage 
persons to connect with their neighbors to show caring and to 
strengthen their community.
In another example from Sierra Leone, in mid-2014 the 
public was initially inundated with complex information 
about Ebola transmission (CDC, unpublished data, 2015). 
Recognizing the need to simplify and coordinate messaging, 
CDC and partners worked with the Sierra Leone National 
Ebola Response Centre to launch the Ebola Big Idea of the 
Week campaign on November 10, 2014. Approximately 80 
radio, television, and print journalists from across the country 
were trained by experts on critical communication topics from 
CDC and other partner organizations. The campaign focused 
on one culturally sensitive message each week (e.g., practicing 
safe burials, getting early treatment, supporting survivors to 
defuse stigma), engaged official and unofficial spokespersons, 
and used a wide range of available communication channels. 
This media campaign was extended through October 2015 and 
complemented numerous social mobilization and community 
engagement efforts.
In Guinea, coordinated communication strategies addressed 
cultural differences and focused on identifying trusted local 
spokespersons and Ebola survivors who could relate to diverse 
communities. These spokespersons were paired with French-
speaking staff members from CDC and partner organizations 
to convey messages about protective behaviors and the need 
for changes in established traditions to avoid further spread 
of disease. Messages were adjusted for a specific community 
and were provided to trusted community members who in 
turn conveyed the messages to ensure greater attention and 
adherence to recommendations (26).
All of these activities were conducted in the context of 
a coordinated global communication effort that included 
CDC working with in-country partners, such as MoHs, 
humanitarian aid organizations, and other international 
partners. This response spanned many countries and numerous 
stakeholders, each with its own culture, allegiances, way of 
offering support, and experience in West Africa. Central to 
the response was collaboration with these partners to deliver 
coordinated messages and avoid duplication of effort while 
respecting individuals and communities.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
71
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Communicating in the United States
Before the West Africa epidemic, Ebola was perceived 
in the United States as a distant threat that the media and 
entertainment industries had dramatized (27,28). When 
two infected U.S. clinicians who had worked in Liberia were 
brought to the United States for treatment in August 2014, 
some Americans questioned the wisdom of bringing patients 
with Ebola to the United States; they believed themselves to 
be at risk for the illness from those patients (29), and media 
reports and traffic to the CDC Ebola website soared (Figure). 
Around-the-clock news coverage of the escalating Ebola crisis 
reinforced and heightened public concern to the point of alarm 
when patients came to the United States (30,31).
Although the risk for Ebola transmission in the United States 
was low, the U.S. public began to view the disease as a serious threat 
to the nation’s health and security (32). The fear of a U.S. epidemic 
required a massive communication effort by CDC, larger than for 
any previous emergency response. To address this fear, messages 
intended to reassure (e.g., U.S. hospital capacity to manage a case 
of Ebola) and reduce anxiety increased confusion and mistrust 
when Ebola developed in two U.S. hospital workers (33).
As news of the epidemic in West Africa spread and aid 
workers returned to the United States, so did fear, and the 
rumors and stigma that arose from it affected both returning 
aid workers and persons from Africa living in or visiting the 
United States (34). Many Ebola responders faced hostility 
upon their return from West Africa; were ostracized by friends, 
families, and communities; and felt the effects of stigma at 
work or elsewhere (CDC, unpublished data, October 2015). 
For example, when some states indicated they would impose 
mandatory 21-day quarantines for health care workers 
returning from West Africa, the American Nurses Association 
urged “authorities to refrain from imposing more restrictive 
conditions than indicated in CDC guidelines, which will only 
raise the level of fear and misinformation” (35).
An assistant principal was asked to stay home from school 
for 21 days because she visited South Africa, approximately 
5,000 miles away from the epidemic (36). In one state, parents 
would not allow their children to go to school because the 
principal had attended a funeral in Africa, even though that 
part of Africa did not have Ebola cases (37). In response to 
fear of Ebola that extended to CDC staff returning from West 
Africa, CDC and the Georgia Department of Public Health 
FIGURE. U.S. news media stories* and CDC Ebola webpage† views, by day — July 21–December 31, 2014§
CDC Ebola webpage views
U.S. TV and radio stories
22
15
8
24
17
10
3
27
20
13
6
29
22
15
8
25
18
11
4
28
21
29
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
4,500
5,000
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
3,500,000
No. stories
No. webpage views
Month and day
Nov
Oct
Sep
Aug
Jul
Dec
Sources: National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC (webpage views); MetroMonitor (news media stories).  
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; TV = television.
* TV and radio news that mentioned Ebola.
† Daily number of visits to all CDC webpages related to Ebola. 
§ August 4: Second U.S. aid worker with Ebola arrives in United States for treatment. October 1–2: First case of Ebola diagnosed in the United States, in Dallas, Texas; 
CDC webpage views spike. October 13–15: Ebola diagnosed in two nurses in Dallas; at a news conference, CDC asks airline passengers who flew with one of the 
nurses to contact CDC; contact tracing begins in Ohio; President Barack Obama vows more aggressive Ebola response.  
 Supplement
72 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
jointly wrote a guidance letter to Georgia educators (38). This 
letter explained Ebola transmission and reassured Georgia 
educators about the measures being taken to protect their 
safety. The letter encouraged Georgia schools to allow children 
of asymptomatic travelers returning from countries affected by 
Ebola to continue attending class and encouraged the return 
to school of faculty or other school workers who had traveled 
to West Africa and were asymptomatic.
Universities canceled speaking engagements for persons 
who had recently visited West Africa (39). ABC News’ chief 
medical correspondent and former CDC Acting Director 
Richard Besser, MD, was asked to conduct a talk through 
Skype, rather than speak in person, at a conference after he 
returned from Liberia. Dr. Besser said, “The level of risk posed 
by my appearance was vanishingly small, but fear won anyway. I 
turned them down. I did not want to feed the idea that anyone 
who has been to West Africa, even if not sick, poses a risk. You 
cannot catch Ebola in a lecture hall hearing about the power 
of communication during a public health crisis. What we need 
to do is communicate, as strongly and as often as we can, what 
the real risks are and aren’t” (40).
During the Ebola response, the media and the public 
challenged simple health risk messages. The lack of relevant 
messages about actions the public could take to protect itself 
led to speculation that resulted in rumors and seeking of cures 
or other protective measures. For example, in November 2014, 
news media erroneously reported that CDC quarantined a 
Texas turkey farm because the turkeys were infected with 
Ebola (41). Other rumors capitalized on the public’s fear by 
promoting cures (e.g., vitamin C) (42–44) and selling products 
marketed as Ebola prevention (e.g., Ebola virus protection 
kits) (43,45). Calls and e-mails flooded CDC; for example, 
during October 2014, CDC-INFO received 24,827 calls 
and e-mails compared with 1,801 during September 2014. 
These inquiries asked whether mosquitoes could spread 
Ebola; expressed concerns about Ebola virus in products 
from Africa (e.g., soap, food); and suggested remedies for 
Ebola (e.g., soda, herbal teas and garlic) (CDC, unpublished 
data, 2014). CDC continually addressed these rumors with 
additional communication products and messages that sought 
to counter fears of Ebola spreading through handshakes, pets, 
or mosquitoes, for instance, with facts about transmission (46).
To outpace the fear-based messages on the news and social 
media sites and in communities in the United States, CDC 
and partners worked to educate a wide range of specific groups, 
including clinicians, school administrators, airport staff, 
businesses and their employees, West Africans in the United 
States, and community organizations. The challenge was to 
balance the communication needs of persons most likely to 
contact a person with Ebola (health care workers, travelers to 
outbreak countries) and the anxiety Ebola caused for persons 
at little or no risk. CDC held Twitter and Facebook chats; 
produced infographics, fact sheets, videos, public service 
announcements, podcasts, and guidelines at an unprecedented 
pace; and handled many interactive public events (e.g., press 
briefings), interviews, and telephone and e-mail inquiries from 
the media and the public. CDC engaged with persons and 
organizations representing West Africans living in the United 
States through regular conference calls on health protection 
messages that they were then encouraged to share with family 
and friends in their home countries. These activities, along 
with the containment of Ebola cases in Dallas and New York 
City, corresponded with a decrease in information seeking, as 
shown by webpage views decreasing despite high media interest 
(Figure). The response in the United States required intense 
focus to ease public concern at the same time CDC’s human 
resources were stretched as health communicators, educators, 
and others deployed to West Africa, sometimes multiple times.
Lessons Learned
For almost 40 years, since the 1976 Ebola outbreak in 
Zaire, CDC has responded to Ebola outbreaks. However, 
the 2014–2016 epidemic in West Africa pushed the limits 
of CDC’s knowledge and ability to communicate necessary 
information, not only in West Africa but also in the United 
States and globally. Working partnerships with MoHs and 
other local counterparts in West Africa were essential, as were 
collaborations with numerous U.S. partners, including many 
federal, state, and local agencies.
In societies where news outlets need to fill 24 hours 
every day and social media channels make reporting almost 
instantaneous, new strategies may be needed in the application 
of risk communication principles to avoid an information void 
that, in the absence of a constant flow of clear, science-based 
messages, becomes filled with speculation (47).
Response to this epidemic also required integration of health 
promotion and anthropology with more traditional public health 
functions. Anthropologists are experts in cultural knowledge; 
their role as cultural translators benefitted this public health 
crisis. Earlier inclusion of anthropologists into the 2014–2016 
Ebola response might have facilitated earlier community 
involvement and insight into factors contributing to resistance 
to public health interventions (e.g., the need to formally engage 
traditional leaders and community volunteer groups).
Some of CDC’s more memorable campaigns during the 
response involved engaging groups (e.g., journalists and local 
leaders in affected communities) as part of the life-saving 
message development and delivery effort, rather than simply 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
73
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
as receivers of information. Understanding these audiences’ 
perspectives and actively engaging them in finding solutions 
was critical. Likewise, establishing strong partnerships 
with other organizations (e.g., those serving West African 
communities living in the United States) ultimately expanded 
the reach of public health messaging when broad reach was 
essential to slowing disease transmission (19).
During this response, information about Ebola constantly 
evolved, and health communication messages and products 
needed to keep pace. For example, as the response unfolded, 
new developments in vaccines and therapeutic drugs (48) 
and increasing evidence of viral persistence in body fluids of 
survivors and of possible sexual transmission (49,50) required 
new messages. Responding agencies, such as CDC, need to 
recognize and acknowledge publicly that a key component 
of accurate messaging (i.e., scientific knowledge) will evolve 
during any response.
CDC had to balance rushing critical communication resources 
to Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone to help 
spread life-saving health protection messages with maintaining 
the resources needed domestically to assuage fears when Ebola 
was diagnosed in this country. The agency learned that it had 
to devote sufficient attention and resources to each front, a 
lesson it must apply in future global epidemic responses. For 
CDC to adequately support MoHs and partners during large 
outbreaks, it needs a large enough pool of health communication 
specialists, health educators, and behavioral scientists who have 
the training (in incident management systems, plain language 
communication, risk communication, and cultural competency) 
and readiness (fluency in local languages, predeployment 
training, and vaccinations) required to deploy.
Finally, CDC and other response partners must continue to 
adhere to plain language and clear communication standards, 
including revising materials to meet the needs of each group 
of intended recipients. To address the difficulties presented 
by the specific needs of local populations, CDC must 
collaborate with partners to build and share a coordinated 
body of communication-based research, demographic data, 
and information about how communities in different countries 
understand and process information.
Conclusion
Communication is an essential part of sustainable 
preparedness and long-term global health security. The Ebola 
epidemic demonstrated that tailored, culturally appropriate 
communication is one of the first activities responders use as new 
threats emerge, especially when public fear outpaces information 
that persons can use to protect themselves (51). Behavioral and 
communication sciences also are essential to persuade the public 
to suspend traditions, entrust their sick family and friends to 
strangers, and remain in isolation to protect themselves and 
others, even during critical times such as harvests.
This epidemic increased global knowledge about Ebola and 
resulted in the need for communication about newly discovered 
information, particularly related to survivors. New messaging 
about the possibility of sexual transmission from survivors, 
family planning, and maternal health is continuously being 
developed and updated to reflect the latest scientific data and 
needs to be balanced with reducing stigmatization of survivors. 
CDC communication developed for this response will continue 
to provide information for global health security capacity 
building long after the end of the West Africa Ebola epidemic; 
going forward, culturally appropriate risk communication and 
health promotion need to be central to this work.
References
 1. Rhoads SJ, Bush E, Haselow D, et al. Mobilizing a statewide network to 
provide Ebola education and support. Telemed J E Health 2015;22:153–8.
 2. Roca A, Afolabi MO, Saidu Y, Kampmann B. Ebola: a holistic approach 
is required to achieve effective management and control. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2015;135:856–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.015
 3. CDC. Infographics and illustrations. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
resources/infographics.html
 4. CDC. Ebola outbreaks 2000–2014. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
outbreaks/history/summaries.html
 5. CDC. Outbreaks chronology: Ebola virus disease. http://www.cdc.gov/
vhf/ebola/outbreaks/history/chronology.html
 6. CDC. Ebola virus disease. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/pdf/ebola-
factsheet.pdf
 7. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949
 8. Gilsinan K. “An epidemic of fear”: Ebola in the United States. The Atlantic. 
October 30, 2014. http://www.theatlantic.com/international/
archive/2014/10/an-epidemic-of-fear-ebola-in-the-united-states/382158/
 9. Hill M. Ebola virus in West Africa. August 8, 2014. http://anthropology.
msu.edu/anp204-us14/2014/08/08/ebola-virus-in-west-africa/
 
10. Rajewski G. What drives Ebola. TuftsNow. August 11, 2014. http://
now.tufts.edu/articles/what-drives-ebola
 
11. UNICEF. Misconceptions fuel Ebola outbreak in West Africa. July 11, 
2014. http://www.unicef.org/media/media_74256.html
 
12. World Health Organization. Factors that contributed to undetected 
spread of the Ebola virus and impeded rapid containment. January 2015. 
http://www.who.int/csr/disease/ebola/one-year-report/factors/en/
 
13. Ethnologue. Languages of the world: Western Africa. Dallas, TX: SIL 
International Publications. 2016. http://www.ethnologue.com/region/WAF
 
14. McArthur T. Concise Oxford companion to the English language: West 
African English. 1998. http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1O29-
WESTAFRICANENGLISH.html
 
15. Central Intelligence Agency. The world factbook. https://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/resources/the-world-factbook/
 
16. World by Map. Literacy rates of the countries of the world. 2015. http://
world.bymap.org/LiteracyRates.html
 Supplement
74 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
17. Long C. Health Communication Capacity Collaborative blog: 
misinformation and lack of communication can be key drivers of a 
deadly disease. September 4, 2014. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health. http://healthcommcapacity.org/
misinformation-lack-communication-can-key-drivers-deadly-disease/
 
18. Millman J. Wonkblog: the inevitable rise of Ebola conspiracy theories. The 
Washington Post. October 13, 2014. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
wonkblog/wp/2014/10/13/the-inevitable-rise-of-ebola-conspiracy-theories/
 
19. World Health Organization. Ebola response: what needs to happen in 
2015. http://www.who.int/csr/disease/ebola/one-year-report/response-
in-2015/en/
 
20. Focus1000; UNICEF; Catholic Relief Services. Study on public 
knowledge, attitudes, and practices relating to Ebola virus disease (EVD) 
prevention and medical care in Sierra Leone. September 2014. http://
reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Ebola-Virus-Disease-
National-KAP-Study-Final-Report_-final.pdf
 
21. Kobayashi M, Beer KD, Bjork A, et al. Community knowledge, attitudes, 
and practices regarding Ebola virus disease—five counties, Liberia, September–
October, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:714–8.
 
22. Nossiter A. Fear of Ebola breeds a terror of physicians. The New York 
Times. July 27, 2014. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/28/world/
africa/ebola-epidemic-west-africa-guinea.html?_r=2
 
23. WHO Ebola Response Team. Ebola virus disease in West Africa—the 
first 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:1481–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1411100
 
24. Lewnard JA, Ndeffo Mbah ML, Alfaro-Murillo JA, et al. Dynamics and 
control of Ebola virus transmission in Montserrado, Liberia: a 
mathematical modelling analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:1189–95. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)70995-8
 
25. World Health Organization. Ebola must go! 2014. http://www.afro.
who.int/en/liberia/press-materials/item/7247-ebola-must-go.html
 
26. World Health Organization. Involving everyone: social mobilization is 
key in an Ebola outbreak response in Guinea. May 2014. http://www.
who.int/features/2014/social-mobilisation/en/
 
27. Harvard School of Public Health News. Poll: most believe Ebola likely spread 
by multiple routes, including sneezing, coughing. [Press release]. Boston, MA: 
Harvard University, October 15, 2014. http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/
press-releases/poll-finds-most-believe-ebola-spread-by-multiple-routes/
 
28. Smith S. The roots of our Ebola fears. http://www.cnn.com/2014/08/06/
health/ebola-epidemic-fears/ 
 
29. Fox M. Is it safe to bring Ebola victims to the U.S.? NBC News. August 2, 
2014. http://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/ebola-virus-outbreak/
it-safe-bring-ebola-victims-u-s-n170731
 
30. Towers S, Afzal S, Bernal G, et al. Mass media and the contagion of fear: 
the case of Ebola in America. PLoS One 2015;10:e0129179. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0129179   
 
31. Rübsamen N, Castell S, Horn J, et al. Ebola risk perception in Germany, 
2014. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1012–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid2106.150013 
 
32. SteelFisher GK, Blendon RJ, Lasala-Blanco N. Ebola in the United 
States—public reactions and implications. N Engl J Med 2015;373:789–
91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1506290
 
33. Sharfstein JM. On fear, distrust, and Ebola. JAMA 2015;313:784. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.346
 
34. AHC Media. Bioethics panel: Ebola quarantines of asymptomatic health 
workers “morally wrong.” May 1, 2015. http://www.ahcmedia.com/
articles/135254-bioethics-panel-ebola-quarantines-of-asymptomatic-
health-workers-morally-wrong
 
35. American Nurses Association. ANA supports CDC guidance, not 
mandatory quarantine for health care professionals returning from treating 
Ebola patients in West Africa. October 29, 2014. http://nursingworld.
org/ANA-Supports-CDC-Guidance-Not-Mandatory-Quarantine
 
36. Associated Press. Stokes County assistant principal in South Africa raises 
concerns over Ebola. Winston-Salem Journal. October 21, 2014. http://
www.journalnow.com/news/state_region/stokes-county-assistant-
principal-in-south-africa-raises-concerns-over/article_1f340f26-5924-
11e4-82db-001a4bcf6878.html
 
37. Agence France-Presse. Fearing Ebola, some US communities take steps. 
October 18, 2014. https://www.yahoo.com/news/fearing-ebola-us-
communities-dramatic-steps-152044339.html?ref=gs
 
38. Georgia Department of Public Health. Ebola virus diseases [Letter]. 
Atlanta, GA: Georgia Department of Public Health. October 6, 2014. 
https://www.gadoe.org/Curriculum-Instruction-and-Assessment/CTAE/
Documents/Ebola-K-12-guidance-letter.pdf
 
39. McKenna M. Ebolanoia: the only thing we have to fear is Ebola fear itself. 
Wired. October 22, 2014. http://www.wired.com/2014/10/ebolanoia/
 
40. Besser RE. Fight fear of Ebola with the facts [Opinion]. The Washington 
Post. October 15, 2014. https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/
richard-e-besser-fight-fear-of-ebola-with-the-facts/2014/10/15/
dba7bd1e-5399-11e4-809b-8cc0a295c773_story.html
 
41. Daily Buzz Live. Texas turkey farm contaminated with Ebola, over 250,000 
holiday turkeys infected. November 10, 2014. http://dailybuzzlive.com/
texas-turkey-farm-contaminated-ebola-holiday-turkeys-infected/#
 
42. National 
Public 
Radio. 
FDA 
cracks 
down 
on 
fake 
Ebola 
cures 
sold 
online. 
October 
23, 
2014. http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2014/10/23/358318848/
fda-cracks-down-on-fake-ebola-cures-sold-online
 
43. Leonard K. Ebola scams hit the web. U.S. News. October 16, 2014. http://
www.usnews.com/news/articles/2014/10/16/ebola-scams-hit-the-web
 
44. Better Business Bureau. Be wary of fraudulent healthcare products and 
other Ebola-related scams. October 15, 2014. http://www.bbb.org/
memphis/news-events/bbb-warnings/2014/be-wary-of-fraudulent-
healthcare-products-and-other-ebola-related-scams/
 
45. Boyle L. “All you’ll need a hazmat suit for is Halloween”: doctors slam 
surge in useless online “Ebola survival kits” as America panic buys. Daily 
Mail. October 9, 2014. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2786556/
All-ll-need-Hazmat-suit-Halloween-Doctors-slam-surge-useless-online-
Ebola-survival-kits-America-panic-buys.html
 
46. CDC. Top 10 things you really need to know about Ebola. http://www.
catawbacountync.gov/phealth/immunize/top10ebola.pdf 
 
47. Fung IC, Tse ZT, Cheung CN, Miu AS, Fu KW. Ebola and the social 
media [Letter]. Lancet 2014;384:2207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(14)62418-1 
 
48. Hersey S, Martel LD, Jambai A, et al. Ebola virus disease—Sierra Leone 
and Guinea, August 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:981–
4. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6435a6
 
49. World Health Organization. Interim advice on the sexual transmission 
of the Ebola virus disease. January 21, 2016. http://www.who.int/
reproductivehealth/topics/rtis/ebola-virus-semen/en
 
50. Christie A, Davies-Wayne GJ, Cordier-Lassalle T, et al. Possible sexual 
transmission of Ebola virus—Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:479–81. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:1180.
 
51. ScienceNet. What Ebola taught us about risk communication. September 26, 
2014. http://www.scienceonthenet.eu/content/article/michele-bellone/
what-ebola-taught-us-about-risk-communication/september-2014  
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
75
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
As the epidemic of Ebola virus disease (Ebola) unfolded 
in West Africa in 2014, CDC prepared for the possible 
introduction of Ebola into the United States. The immediate 
objectives were to rapidly identify and isolate any cases of 
Ebola, prevent transmission of Ebola virus (EBOV), and ensure 
timely treatment of affected patients within the United States. 
CDC also sought to inform and prepare partners in the U.S. 
health care and public health systems.
In summer 2014, the lack of easy access to a diagnostic 
assay for EBOV complicated preparations for management of 
a patient with Ebola seeking care at any of the approximately 
6,500 urgent-care clinics and 5,000 acute-care hospitals in the 
50 states and the U.S. territories. Preparing the U.S. health care 
Early Identification and Prevention of the Spread of Ebola — 
United States
Chris A. Van Beneden, MD1
Harald Pietz2
Robert D. Kirkcaldy, MD3
Lisa M. Koonin, DrPH4
Timothy M. Uyeki, MD5
Alexandra M. Oster, MD6
Deborah A. Levy, PhD7
Maleeka Glover, ScD8
Matthew J. Arduino, DrPH9
Toby L. Merlin, MD8
David T. Kuhar, MD9
Christine Kosmos, RN, MS2
Beth P
. Bell, MD10
1Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
2Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
3Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
4Office of the Director, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
5Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
6Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
7Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
8Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
9Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
10National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
Corresponding author: Chris A. Van Beneden, Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. T
elephone: 404-639-3575; 
E-mail: CVanBeneden@cdc.gov.
Summary
In response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC prepared for the potential introduction of 
Ebola into the United States. The immediate goals were to rapidly identify and isolate any cases of Ebola, prevent transmission, and 
promote timely treatment of affected patients. CDC’s technical expertise and the collaboration of multiple partners in state, local, and 
municipal public health departments; health care facilities; emergency medical services; and U.S. government agencies were essential to 
the domestic preparedness and response to the Ebola epidemic and relied on longstanding partnerships. CDC established a comprehensive 
response that included two new strategies: 1) active monitoring of travelers arriving from countries affected by Ebola and other persons 
at risk for Ebola and 2) a tiered system of hospital facility preparedness that enabled prioritization of training. CDC rapidly deployed a 
diagnostic assay for Ebola virus (EBOV) to public health laboratories. Guidance was developed to assist in evaluation of patients possibly 
infected with EBOV, for appropriate infection control, to support emergency responders, and for handling of infectious waste. CDC rapid 
response teams were formed to provide assistance within 24 hours to a health care facility managing a patient with Ebola. As a result of 
the collaborations to rapidly identify, isolate, and manage Ebola patients and the extensive preparations to prevent spread of EBOV, the 
United States is now better prepared to address the next global infectious disease threat.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
76 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
system to handle a rare but often fatal illness for which most 
clinicians and public health providers had no experience was 
daunting, particularly given the public’s expectation that there 
should be zero risk that a person who has Ebola could enter 
the country. Furthermore, providers needed to be educated 
on how to identify and isolate patients with suspected Ebola 
in a way that minimized the delay of appropriate medical care 
for more common and often serious illnesses (e.g., malaria) in 
travelers from West Africa.
Achieving readiness for the possibility that a person with 
Ebola could enter the United States required extensive 
collaboration with state and local public health officials, 
doctors and nurses in health care settings ranging from small 
clinics to large hospitals, hospital administrators, emergency 
responders, federal agencies, and transportation officials. This 
report describes the U.S. approach to achieving domestic Ebola 
readiness and response capacity and highlights key successes 
and unique challenges of the multiple facets of this process.
U.S. Preparations for Possible 
Importation of Ebola and the Impact 
of the First Confirmed Case
During summer 2014, while the Ebola epidemic raged 
approximately 5,000 miles away, CDC used health advisories 
and conference calls with public health partners and health care 
professionals to educate providers about Ebola and to encourage 
vigilance for imported cases of Ebola in the United States. On 
July 9, 2014, CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center 
(EOC), enabling a coordinated domestic and international 
response. Recognizing the need to diagnose Ebola quickly, 
CDC identified and distributed to state and local public health 
laboratories a laboratory assay that could reliably detect infection 
with the EBOV strain circulating in West Africa. CDC contacted 
the U.S. Department of Defense, which had an assay prepared 
for Emergency Use Authorization by the Food and Drug 
Administration, and worked with the Department of Defense 
and the Association of Public Health Laboratories to rapidly 
introduce and validate the assay in public health laboratories 
through the Laboratory Response Network (1).
In the early months of the EOC’s activation, CDC updated and 
posted prevention guidance developed for multiple audiences, 
including hospitals where travelers with suspected exposures to 
EBOV could seek care, emergency medical service providers, air 
medical transport operators, aircraft crew and airport personnel, 
laboratorians handling specimens from patients with suspected 
Ebola, and mortuary workers (Table 1). U.S. hospitals were 
considered to be capable of safely managing patients with Ebola 
(i.e., similar to the domestic experience treating patients with 
other viral hemorrhagic fevers, such as Marburg and Lassa) 
if recommendations for isolation of patients, appropriate use 
of personal protective equipment (PPE), and environmental 
cleaning and disinfection were followed.
On September 25, 2014, a man who had recently traveled to 
the United States from Liberia became symptomatic (i.e., fever, 
headache, and abdominal pain) and sought care at a hospital in 
Dallas, Texas. His illness was diagnosed as presumed sinusitis 
(2); he was treated and discharged to home (Table 2). On 
September 28, he was transported by ambulance to the hospital 
because of persistent fever and progressive symptoms and was 
hospitalized; on September 30, he became the first patient 
to have laboratory-confirmed EBOV infection diagnosed 
in the United States. Health officials from CDC and Texas 
subsequently identified 48 persons who had contact with him 
before his isolation at the hospital and began monitoring them 
for early signs of infection (3).
Within 7 days after the patient’s death, on October 8, Ebola 
symptoms developed in two nurses directly involved in his care, 
and they were confirmed to have Ebola (secondary cases) (2). 
Neither nurse reported an unprotected exposure to infectious 
blood or body fluids. A total of 147 health care workers who 
were involved in the care of the index patient or the two 
secondary cases (regardless of PPE used) were therefore closely 
monitored for 21 days after their last exposure to an Ebola 
patient (3). Ebola did not develop in any community or health 
care–related contacts of the three Ebola patients, including the 
family members with whom the index patient was living before 
hospitalization. Both nurses subsequently recovered (2).
Assisting the U.S. Clinical Community
After diagnosis of the three Ebola cases in Texas, requests for 
clinical consultation and general guidance from CDC increased, 
peaking at 227 calls per week in mid-October. The most frequent 
requests were for assistance in determining whether a patient 
fit the criteria for a person under investigation,* therefore 
warranting evaluation for Ebola. In most (75%) situations, the 
patients had no identifiable risk factors for Ebola (4). For these 
inquiries, CDC typically offered reassurance, confirming that 
the patient was actually not at risk for Ebola, and encouraged 
providers to provide timely routine medical care.
* 1) Fever (subjective or temperature ≥100.4°F or ≥38.0°C) or symptoms, 
including severe headache, fatigue, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain, or unexplained hemorrhage AND 2) epidemiologic risk factors including 
contact with an Ebola patient or patient’s body fluids or travel to a country 
affected by Ebola within 21 days of symptom onset (http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/
ebola/healthcare-us/evaluating-patients/case-definition.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
77
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Patients who were isolated and evaluated for suspected Ebola 
were likely to experience delays in evaluation for and treatment of 
common but often serious (non-Ebola) illnesses. Basic diagnostic 
laboratory tests (e.g., complete blood counts, serum chemistries, 
malaria smears) and radiologic studies were often delayed for 
>2–3 days while patients were tested for EBOV (4). Although 
rapid identification and isolation (or transfer) of persons with 
suspected Ebola were important, so was the need to complete 
diagnostic testing quickly to enable proper management of other 
potentially life-threatening conditions (e.g., malaria, malignant 
hypertension, ectopic pregnancy) among persons arriving in the 
United States from West Africa (4).
Several reasons existed for this reluctance — or in some cases, 
refusal — to run basic diagnostic tests. The most recent (2009) 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
manual of biosafety (5) states that clinical specimens from 
persons with suspected Ebola should be manipulated only in 
a biosafety level (BSL)-4 facility, but most clinical laboratories 
are BSL-2. During the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic, CDC 
updated its guidance for handling clinical specimens outside 
TABLE 1. Key CDC guidance documents for use in domestic preparedness and response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa — United States, 
2014–2016
Category
Document
Public health preparedness  
and response
Case Definition for Ebola Virus Disease (EVD): http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/evaluating-patients/case-definition.html
Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/
ebola/exposure/monitoring-and-movement-of-persons-with-exposure.html
Hospital preparedness
Preparing for Ebola—a Tiered Approach (includes Preparing Frontline Healthcare Facilities; Preparing Ebola Assessment Hospitals; 
Preparedness Checklists): http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/preparing/index.html
Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Hospitalized Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) for Ebola Virus Disease 
(EVD) in U.S. Hospitals: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/hospitals/infection-control.html
Clinical guidance
Guidance for U.S. Laboratories for Managing and Testing Routine Clinical Specimens When There Is a Concern About Ebola Virus 
Disease: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/laboratories/safe-specimen-management.html
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) Information for Clinicians in U.S. Healthcare Settings: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/
preparing/clinicians.html
Guidance on Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to Be Used by Healthcare Workers During Management of Patients with Confirmed 
Ebola or Persons Under Investigation (PUIs) for Ebola Who Are Clinically Unstable or Have Bleeding, Vomiting, or Diarrhea in U.S. 
Hospitals, Including Procedures for Donning and Doffing PPE: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/ppe/guidance.html
For U.S. Healthcare Settings: Donning and Doffing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for Evaluating Persons Under Investigation 
(PUIs) for Ebola Who Are Clinically Stable and Do Not Have Bleeding, Vomiting, or Diarrhea: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
healthcare-us/ppe/guidance-clinically-stable-puis.html
Interim Guidance for Management of Survivors of Ebola Virus Disease in U.S. Healthcare Settings:  
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/evaluating-patients/guidance-for-management-of-survivors-ebola.html
Laboratory guidance
Guidance for U.S. Laboratories for Managing and Testing Routine Clinical Specimens When There Is a Concern About Ebola Virus 
Disease: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/laboratories/safe-specimen-management.html
Collection, Transport, and Submission of Specimens for Ebola Virus Testing: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/
laboratories/specimens.html
Infection control and waste 
management
Interim Guidance for Environmental Infection Control in Hospitals for Ebola Virus: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/
cleaning/hospitals.html
Ebola Waste Management: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/cleaning/waste-management.html
Procedures for Safe Handling and Management of Ebola-Associated Waste: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/cleaning/
handling-waste.html
Interim Guidance for U.S. Residence Decontamination for Ebola and Removal of Contaminated Waste: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/
ebola/prevention/cleaning-us-homes.html
Interim Guidance for Ebola Virus Cleaning, Disinfection, and Waste Disposal in Commercial Passenger Aircraft: http://www.cdc.gov/
vhf/ebola/prevention/cleaning-commercial-passenger-aircraft.html
Interim Guidance for Managers and Workers Handling Untreated Sewage from Individuals with Ebola in the United States: http://
www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/prevention/handling-sewage.html
Guidance for Safe Handling of Human Remains of Ebola Patients in U.S. Hospitals and Mortuaries: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
healthcare-us/hospitals/handling-human-remains.html
Guidance on Air Medical Transport for Patients with Ebola Virus Disease: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/emergency-
services/air-medical-transport.html
Interim Guidance for Emergency Medical Services Systems and 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering Points for Management of Patients 
Under Investigation for Ebola Virus Disease in the United States: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/emergency-
services/ems-systems.html
Patient transportation
Guidance on Air Medical Transport for Patients with Ebola Virus Disease: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/emergency-
services/air-medical-transport.html
Interim Guidance for Emergency Medical Services Systems and 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering Points for Management of Patients 
Under Investigation for Ebola Virus Disease in the United States: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/emergency-
services/ems-systems.html
Guidance for Developing a Plan for Interfacility Transport of Persons Under Investigation or Confirmed Patients with Ebola Virus 
Disease in the United States: http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/emergency-services/interfacility-transport.html  
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
78 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Abbreviated timeline of the domestic response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa — United States, 2014–2016
Date
Event
2014
July 9
CDC EOC is activated to support Ebola response.
August 2
HCW with Ebola diagnosed in West Africa is admitted to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta, Georgia.
August 7
First version of CDC Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure posted.
September 20
Businessman from Liberia arrives in Dallas, Texas, after negative fever screening on departure from Liberia and entry into United States.
September 25
After 1 day of symptoms, Liberian businessman seeks care at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, is treated for presumed sinusitis and 
discharged.
September 28
Liberian businessman remains ill, is admitted to hospital.
September 30
Ebola diagnosed in Liberian businessman; he becomes first person with Ebola diagnosed in the United States.
CDC and Texas health officials begin contact tracing and identify 48 total possible or confirmed contacts of the U.S. index patient before his 
isolation at the hospital; active monitoring of these contacts begins.
October 8
First person with Ebola diagnosed in the United States dies.
October 11–16
CDC and CBP begin enhanced entry risk assessment and management at five U.S. airports (JFK: October 11; EWR, IAD, ORD, and ATL: October 16) 
that receive approximately 94% of travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
October 11
A nurse (nurse 1) who provided care for the Ebola patient in Dallas develops fever, seeks care in an emergency department; Ebola is diagnosed.
October 12
CDC and Texas health officials begin active monitoring of household contact of nurse 1.
CDC begins active monitoring of 76 hospital workers who treated first patient with Ebola diagnosed in the United States.
Active monitoring begins for all 147 HCW contacts of any of the Ebola patients, irrespective of PPE use; monitoring continues until 21 days from 
their last exposure.
October 14
A second nurse (nurse 2) who provided care for the Ebola patient in Dallas develops fever and is hospitalized.
CDC, Texas, and Ohio health officials begin contact tracing of contacts of nurse 2 and active monitoring of three household contacts.
October 15
Ebola is diagnosed in nurse 2, who is transferred to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta.
CDC notifies a domestic airline that a passenger (nurse 2) who traveled from Cleveland, Ohio, to Dallas on October 13 tested positive for EBOV.
October 16
Nurse 1 is transferred from Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital to the National Institutes of Health hospital in Bethesda, Maryland.
October 19
CDC REP teams begin visits to U.S. hospitals to provide technical assistance.
October 20
CDC revises guidance on PPE for U.S. HCWs caring for Ebola patients.
October 21
CBP announces that all travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone will be routed to one of five participating U.S. airports for enhanced entry 
risk assessment and management.
October 23
New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene diagnoses Ebola in an HCW (HCW 1) who had returned to New York City from Guinea; 
patient is isolated at Bellevue Hospital.
October 24
CDC and New York City health officials begin contact tracing of HCW 1’s contacts before isolation at the hospital.
An asymptomatic HCW (HCW 2) who returned to the United States after treating patients in Sierra Leone is isolated by New Jersey officials at a 
nearby hospital.
October 27
CDC issues revised Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure.
Active postarrival monitoring begins for travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
HCW 2 is released from quarantine and drives from New Jersey to Maine.
October 28
Nurse 2 is discharged from Emory hospital after being declared Ebola virus free.
October 29
Monitoring is completed for 47 of 48 initial contacts of Dallas index patient.
October 30
Maine judge issues a 1-day court-ordered restriction of HCW 2’s movements.
October 31
Active monitoring is completed for passengers and crew on October 10 airline flight (Dallas to Cleveland) on which nurse 2 traveled.
November 3
HCW 2 agrees to daily monitoring by Maine state health department.
Active monitoring is completed for passengers and crew on October 13 airline flight (Cleveland to Dallas) on which nurse 2 traveled.
November 7
Active monitoring is completed for all 177 contacts of Ebola patient in Dallas and nurses 1 and 2 (some persons were contacts of more than one 
patient) after completing 21 days of monitoring; Ebola did not develop in any contacts.
November 10
Active monitoring of HCW 2 is discontinued.
November 11
HCW 1 is discharged from Bellevue Hospital in New York City.
November 17
Travelers from Mali are routed to one of five U.S. airports for enhanced entry risk assessment and management.
December 2
Guidance is released for tiered approach to health care facility preparedness.
2015
May 9
WHO declares end of the Ebola epidemic in Liberia.
June 29
New cases of Ebola are reported in Liberia.
September 3
WHO declares Liberia free of EBOV transmission for the second time.
November 7
WHO declares Sierra Leone free of EBOV transmission.
November 19
New cases of Ebola are reported in Liberia.
December 29
WHO declares Guinea free of EBOV transmission.
2016
January 14
WHO declares Liberia free of EBOV transmission for the third time.
February 19
U.S. government discontinues enhanced entry screening procedures and airline routing for Ebola.
CDC retires the Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure.
March 17
New cases of Ebola are reported in Guinea.
April 1–4
New cases of Ebola are reported in Liberia.
Abbreviations: ATL = Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport; CBP = Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Department of Homeland Security; Ebola = Ebola 
virus disease; EBOV = Ebola virus; EOC = Emergency Operations Center; EWR = Newark Liberty International Airport; HCW = health care worker; IAD = Washington 
Dulles International Airport; JFK = John F. Kennedy International Airport (New York City); ORD = Chicago O’Hare International Airport; PPE = personal protective 
equipment; REP = Rapid Ebola Preparedness; WHO = World Health Organization.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
79
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of a BSL-4 facility, but many laboratories considered the 
longstanding BSL-4 recommendation more appropriate. 
Also, clinical laboratories were concerned about the risk for 
aerosolization from instruments in highly automated clinical 
laboratories. Although CDC, and later other laboratories, 
provided guidance on conducting routine clinical laboratory 
tests using biosafety cabinets and point-of-care instruments 
(Table 1), many laboratories were not able to put these 
specialized systems in place.
CDC collaborated with other U.S. government partners, 
researchers, and manufacturers of medical countermeasures 
to assist health care providers with clinical management of 
Ebola patients in the United States. In early August 2014, 
Emory University Hospital (Atlanta, Georgia) hospitalized 
and treated the first Ebola patient medically evacuated to the 
United States (Table 2). During August 2014–March 2015, 
seven persons (six health care personnel and one journalist) 
who had Ebola diagnosed in West Africa were transported to 
the United States for clinical management; one died. These 
were in addition to two cases of Ebola diagnosed among 
persons traveling to the United States from countries affected 
by Ebola (the Dallas traveler and a health care worker who 
returned to New York City after working in Guinea) and the 
secondary EBOV infections in two nurses in Dallas (2,6). 
Extensive information sharing among clinicians managing 
these patients at the three specialized U.S. treatment centers,† 
Bellevue Hospital in New York City, Texas Health Presbyterian 
Hospital in Dallas, and hospitals in Europe contributed to 
substantial progress in understanding the clinical spectrum, 
complications, virology, and clinical management of Ebola, 
as well as the use of postexposure prophylaxis and medical 
countermeasures (2,7–11).
CDC’s outreach to clinicians included 1) directly assisting 
clinicians managing Ebola patients and Ebola survivors in 
the United States and sharing updated information with 
the general clinical community, including U.S. personnel 
deployed to the Monrovia Medical Unit in Liberia (12–15); 
2) assisting with coordination of medical evacuations of 
Ebola patients who were U.S. citizens or legal permanent 
residents from West Africa to the specialized U.S. treatment 
centers (7–9); 3) working with clinical and federal partners 
to further the development of investigational therapeutic 
drugs for Ebola patients; and 4) coordinating information 
sharing among clinicians managing Ebola patients in the 
United States and Europe (16).
Ensuring Early Identification 
by Tracking Travelers and 
Tracking Contacts of Persons with 
Confirmed Ebola
During October 11–16, 2014, shortly after the patient from 
Liberia died, staff with CDC and the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security’s Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
began enhanced entry risk assessment and management 
at five U.S. airports that received approximately 94% of 
travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone (17). This 
enhanced assessment followed growing concern that traveler 
self-monitoring might be insufficient to rapidly identify 
potential cases of Ebola (6). After travelers from countries 
affected by Ebola were screened for symptoms of Ebola and 
assigned an assessment of their personal risk, the responsibility 
for monitoring asymptomatic travelers for whom exposure 
to EBOV could not be ruled out and who were still in the 
21-day incubation period was transferred from CDC to state 
and local public health partners. On October 21, 2014, CBP 
announced that all travelers from countries affected by Ebola 
were to be routed to one of five participating U.S. airports, 
enabling a standard approach to enhanced entry risk assessment 
of travelers and rendering the program more manageable.
CDC’s Interim U.S. Guidance for Monitoring and Movement 
of Persons with Potential Ebola Virus Exposure, initially issued 
in August 2014 and revised October 27,§ recommended that 
state, local, and territorial health agencies actively contact 
persons with specific risk factors for Ebola daily for the 
21-day incubation period to assess them for symptoms and 
fever (18). Persons at low risk for Ebola (e.g., travelers from 
countries affected by Ebola without a known exposure) were 
asked to monitor their temperature twice a day, self-evaluate 
symptoms, and report daily to the designated health agency 
(active monitoring). Persons at high risk for exposure to EBOV 
(e.g., persons in contact with blood or other body fluids of 
known Ebola patients without proper PPE; health care workers 
who cared for patients even while using appropriate PPE) were 
to be under direct active monitoring; public health agencies 
conducted direct active monitoring for fever and symptoms 
twice daily, including direct observation by a public health 
official at least once a day. Each state and territory developed 
a plan to 1) monitor persons with possible EBOV exposure 
and locate those lost to follow-up and manage those who 
were noncompliant; 2) establish a 24/7 telephone number 
† Specialized treatment centers: Emory University Serious Communicable 
Diseases Unit, Atlanta, Georgia; the National Institutes of Health Clinical 
Center, Bethesda, Maryland; and the University of Nebraska Biocontainment 
Unit, Omaha, Nebraska.
§ Initial movement and monitoring guidance was posted on August 22, 2014; 
the guidance was reviewed and revised as needed throughout the response; the 
most recent guidance is available at http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/exposure/
monitoring-and-movement-of-persons-with-exposure.html.
 Supplement
80 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
for persons with symptoms to call; 3) establish and practice 
systems (e.g., emergency medical services [EMS]) to ensure 
the safe transport of ill persons to a health care facility; and 
4) identify the hospital to which a person would be referred 
should he or she become ill and ensure that the receiving health 
care facility was prepared at minimum to evaluate, isolate, and 
test (including collecting and shipping specimens) for Ebola.
Active monitoring of returning travelers and of health care 
providers and contacts of Ebola patients managed in the 
United States was a novel strategy introduced to facilitate early 
detection of new cases in the setting of no or minimal U.S. 
domestic transmission. Within 7 days after issuance of the 
revised CDC guidance in October 2014, all 50 states and two 
local jurisdictions were effectively monitoring travelers arriving 
from countries affected by Ebola and health care workers caring 
for Ebola patients in the United States (19). Approximately 
29,000 persons were monitored from October 2014 through 
December 2015.
Nationwide implementation of this active monitoring system 
brought many challenges. Additional resources were needed to 
rapidly establish and staff 24/7 call numbers and to develop 
plans for effective daily observation of each person under 
direct active monitoring (including those living in remote 
places) (17). CDC awarded $145 million of supplemental 
Ebola funds to support the resulting substantial increase 
in staffing needs. Monitoring travelers moving across state 
lines required coordination among state health departments. 
Health departments and CDC were expected to achieve 100% 
accountability for all travelers; several health departments 
creatively used social media and police missing person units 
to find persons lost to follow-up. Also, a number of states 
elected to implement much more restrictive policies than 
recommended by CDC, resulting in inconsistencies among 
state-specific policies (6). Several states used existing laws 
requiring monitoring, with legal penalties for those not in 
compliance. For example, a nurse returning from treating 
patients in Sierra Leone (and asymptomatic) was quarantined 
in a New Jersey hospital for nearly 3 days (Table 2). Although 
the average rate of successful active monitoring reached 
approximately 99% by early March 2015 (19), this approach 
detected no new confirmed Ebola cases. Throughout this 
process, CDC maintained regular and frequent contact with 
partners to build a closer and better integrated response among 
federal, state, and local public health officials. During the 
height of the response, some federal public health partners 
embedded staff within CDC and the EOC.
On February 19, 2016, when more than 45 days had passed since 
Guinea was declared free of EBOV transmission and widespread 
human-to-human transmission was at an end, the interim guidance 
was retired. CDC will consider the need for similar guidance during 
future outbreaks on the basis of the situation, taking into account 
the extent of the outbreak and the risk of importation and spread 
of disease into the United States (18).
A Tiered Approach to 
Hospital Readiness
During the early phase of the epidemic in West Africa, any 
U.S. facility with trained staff, isolation room capacity, and 
appropriate supplies and equipment was considered capable 
of caring for a patient with Ebola. However, because of the 
complexity of care and strict attention to infection control 
(20) required for safe treatment of Ebola patients, highlighted 
by secondary EBOV transmission to the two nurses in Texas, 
CDC determined that ensuring adequately trained staff, 
availability of designated space, and adequate specialized PPE 
might not be possible in all inpatient facilities throughout the 
entire U.S. health care system. This level of preparation was 
critical for facilities most likely to receive patients for evaluation 
of Ebola. Also, the likelihood of a person with possible Ebola 
seeking care in an emergency department or hospital was not 
equally distributed among all hospitals in the United States 
for several reasons. Many travelers from West Africa lived in 
or visited specific regions of the country, travelers who were 
symptomatic on arrival to the United States were directed to 
specific hospitals near one of the five airports, and all persons 
under active monitoring by state public health officials could be 
directed to a particular hospital for evaluation if they developed 
symptoms during their monitoring period.
CDC and the HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for 
Preparedness and Response (ASPR) developed a three-tiered 
approach to prepare U.S. acute health care facilities to safely 
and rapidly identify, isolate, evaluate, manage, and transfer (if 
needed) persons under investigation or patients with confirmed 
Ebola (21). The three tiers were frontline health care facilities, 
Ebola assessment hospitals, and Ebola treatment centers 
(Figure). CDC aimed to establish a limited number of Ebola 
treatment centers strategically in regions of the United States 
most likely to identify a person with Ebola.
Difficulties initially encountered included the few facilities 
with personnel trained to provide the complex care needed 
by Ebola patients, the limited number of facilities capable of 
managing children with Ebola, and a hesitancy of some facilities 
capable of providing care to Ebola patients to be identified 
publicly or to accept patients from other states. In addition, not 
all health care workers were trained in or familiar with using 
the specialized PPE recommended for care of Ebola patients. 
Some facilities struggled to identify dedicated space that was 
appropriately configured for Ebola management, and many 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
81
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
facilities had substantial problems acquiring sufficient quantities 
and types of PPE (e.g., an Ebola treatment center should have a 
5-day supply of PPE for a team of six nurses, three doctors, two 
laboratory technicians, two observers, and one environmental 
specialist for one to three shifts per day, depending on the health 
care worker’s role). Initially, PPE was ordered by facilities in high 
volumes with little strategic guidance, resulting in substantial 
delays in filling of orders and national shortages for some items. 
Manufacturers and distributors struggled to determine how 
much to increase production and how to prioritize orders and 
allocate limited resources.
CDC and ASPR, in collaboration with state and local public 
health authorities, produced detailed guidance for outpatient 
and inpatient facilities about managing persons under 
investigation and persons with confirmed Ebola (Table 1). 
Hospital Preparedness Program funding (22) was provided to 
states and eligible municipalities to improve surge capacity, 
including building needed infrastructure within health care 
systems, retrofitting hospitals to establish safe places to treat 
patients with Ebola, and reimbursement of care costs for 
confirmed Ebola patients. CDC also assembled Rapid Ebola 
Preparedness (REP) teams to assess infection control readiness 
FIGURE. Tiered approach for U.S. hospital and health care facility* preparedness for Ebola
•
Safely receives, isolates and cares for a patient with confrmed 
Ebola for duration of illness
•
Has sustainable stafng plan to manage several weeks of care
•
Has CDC Ebola Response Teams ready to provide assistance as 
needed
•
Has enough Ebola PPE for at least 7 days of care (will restock 
as needed)
•
Safely receives and isolates a 
patient with possible Ebola
•
Provides immediate laboratory evaluation and coordinates 
testing for Ebola virus
•
Cares for a patient for up to 5 days (including evaluation 
and management of alternative diagnoses) until Ebola 
diagnosis is confrmed or ruled out
•
Has enough Ebola PPE for up to 5 days of care
•
Quickly identifes and isolates patients with possible Ebola
•
Notifes facility infection control and state and local public 
health ofcials
•
Has enough Ebola PPE for at least 12–24 hours of care
Capabilities
Ebola
Treatment
Center
Ebola
Assessment
Hospital
Frontline
Health Care
Facility
All of the health care facilities will be prepared to do the following:
•
Ensure staf are appropriately trained and have documented competency in safe PPE practices
•
Have systems in place to safely manage waste disposal, cleaning, and disinfection
•
Adhere to infection control protocols
Prepares for patient transfer, if needed
Transfers a patient with confrmed Ebola to an Ebola 
treatment center in consultation with public health ofcials
Persons under active 
monitoring who 
develop signs and 
symptoms 
compatible with 
Ebola are referred 
for evaluation and 
possible testing by 
state or local public 
health ofcials to an 
Ebola assessment 
hospital or Ebola 
treatment center
Tier
Source: CDC; available at http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/preparing/hospitals.html. 
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; PPE = personal protective equipment.
* Ebola treatment center includes regional treatment centers for Ebola and other special pathogens. 
 Supplement
82 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of facilities interested in serving as Ebola treatment centers 
and provided on-site technical assistance regarding staffing, 
improvement in infection control, worker safety, laboratory 
processes, diagnostics, waste management, and other key areas. 
Initially, the REP teams provided direct technical assistance to 
hospitals near airports with a large number of persons traveling 
from countries that had widespread EBOV transmission and in 
communities where these travelers or large numbers of persons 
from West African countries reside. Beginning in October 
2014, REP teams traveled to approximately 80 U.S. hospitals 
to provide technical support.
During October–December 2014, after extensive 
preparations, 55 hospital facilities were designated Ebola 
treatment centers by state health officers in collaboration with 
hospital administrators. These facilities received direct CDC 
and HHS technical assistance and formulated comprehensive 
plans outlining policies and procedures for managing patients 
with confirmed Ebola, which included training staff and 
instituting infection control measures, acquiring equipment 
and PPE, creating plans for managing waste, and designating 
appropriate space to treat Ebola patients. By August 2015, 92% 
of persons being monitored were within 200 miles of an Ebola 
treatment center and within 50 miles of an assessment hospital.
CDC’s Ebola Response Teams
To improve the response capacity to EBOV infections in 
the United States, CDC established teams capable of rapidly 
providing on-site assistance to any health care facility treating 
a confirmed or probable case of Ebola. These CDC Ebola 
response teams could be immediately deployed to provide 
technical assistance for infection control procedures, clinical 
care, logistics of managing a patient with Ebola, contact 
tracing, and media relations (23).
Emergency Medical Services
Success of the three-tiered health care system plan rested 
on safe and rapid transport of a person under investigation 
or patient with confirmed Ebola to a designated facility 
to be evaluated or treated. EMS responders faced multiple 
challenges, such as the potential to enter uncontrolled 
environments including homes and public areas with little or 
no information about the patient’s risk factors and the need 
to transport patients over long distances during which the 
patient’s condition could worsen. Lack of experience with 
Ebola and limited access to appropriate PPE encountered early 
in the U.S. response compounded these challenges.
CDC collaborated with federal partners to rapidly develop 
guidance for EMS systems and 9-1-1 public safety answering 
points for managing persons under investigation or patients 
with confirmed Ebola (Table 1). CDC also hosted conference 
calls to provide a forum for EMS providers from Emory 
University Hospital and the University of Nebraska Medical 
Center to share their experiences transporting Ebola patients. 
Further guidance addressing the complexities of interfacility and 
interstate transport of persons under investigation and patients 
with confirmed Ebola was developed in collaboration with ASPR 
and the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (Table 1).
Environmental and Waste Management
All levels of health care facilities and EMS providers needed 
plans for the transport and disposal of waste generated by 
either persons under investigation or persons with confirmed 
Ebola. Fear, public perception, and the regulatory framework 
around handling Ebola-associated wastes proved to be common 
issues. These issues were encountered in health care facilities, 
patients’ homes, businesses that the patients frequented early 
in their disease, and a commercial passenger aircraft on which 
one patient flew while ill.
Although EBOV is susceptible to both physical and chemical 
inactivation, it is classified as a category A infectious substance¶ 
because of its associated high mortality rate. Therefore, items 
that are or might be contaminated must be treated onsite or 
packaged and transported to a hazardous waste or medical waste 
treatment site by a carrier with a special DOT permit. Once 
treated, the waste is no longer infectious and can be managed 
in accordance with state and local regulations regarding solid 
wastes. Unforeseen was the volume of waste generated, most 
of which was used PPE, and the packaging required for the 
waste because the packaging used was too large for the doors 
of most incinerators.
During the Ebola response, CDC collaborated with 
federal and state agencies and multiple other private and 
nongovernmental organizations to develop guidance for cleaning 
and disinfection applicable to various settings that included 
patient residences, commercial passenger and medical transport 
aircraft, ambulances, and health care facilities. Other guidance 
covered handling of medical, laboratory, liquid, and other wastes 
and the protection of waste handlers and sewage and wastewater 
workers from contact with untreated human wastes (Table 1).
¶ DOT Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR, 49 CFR, Parts 171-180); Ebola 
virus is classified as a category A infectious substance by the DOT and the 
United Nations. Category A refers to an infectious substance in a form capable 
of causing permanent disability or life-threatening or fatal disease in otherwise 
healthy humans or animals.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
83
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Conclusion
Coordination of preparedness efforts among CDC and state 
and local public health entities, health care organizations, and 
other HHS partners, the product of longstanding partnerships, 
was central to the rapid implementation of a comprehensive 
U.S. domestic response. The United States quickly deployed 
laboratory testing for EBOV. The closely integrated system of 
U.S. border entry risk assessment and postarrival monitoring 
was pivotal to reducing public concern and facilitating active, 
timely management of symptomatic travelers. Vulnerabilities 
in infection control capacity exposed during the early outbreak 
response resulted in ongoing intensive efforts for improvements 
at the national, state, and local levels. The importance of 
support functions (e.g., waste management, laboratory testing, 
and EMS), which are needed to successfully care for patients 
with a complex, unfamiliar, and often fatal disease such as 
Ebola, have been underscored. The tiered approach to health 
care preparedness for Ebola highlighted the critical functions 
needed at each level and made possible the prioritization of 
training and other interventions. This tiered approach is likely 
to be transferable to the next public health response to future 
threats; nine regional treatment centers designated by HHS 
to become special regional treatment centers for patients with 
Ebola have enhanced capabilities that can be used to treat 
patients with other severe, highly infectious diseases. The 
United States is now better prepared and continues to work 
to strengthen and support rapid and successful responses to 
the next infectious disease threat.
Acknowledgments
Steve Boedigheimer, Mark Davis, Todd Talbert, and others on the 
State Coordination Task Force and the Monitoring and Movement 
Unit; John Brooks, Denise Jamieson, Cynthia Whitney, Dana 
Meaney-Delman, Peter Briss, Fleetwood Loustalot, Sue Gerber, 
John Jernigan, Joe Perz, Jeff Hagemann, and others on the Medical 
Care Task Force and Infection Control Teams; Barbara Mahon, Paul 
Mead, Barbara Knust, Stephanie Bialek, Alicia Fry, Monina Klevens, 
Margaret (Peggy) Honein, Lyn Finelli, Gayle Langley, Brett Peterson, 
Diana Blau, and others on the Domestic Epidemiology Team; Elissa 
Meites, Emily Koumans, Roxanne Barrow, Mary Kamb, LeAnne 
Fox, and others assisting with domestic clinical inquiries; Stephanie 
Schrag, Alex Kallen, Chris Braden, Todd Weber, Lyle Petersen, 
Matt Moore, Carrie Reed, and the many persons who worked on 
the ground in Texas, Ohio, and New York City; Jean Randolph, 
Amy Valderrama, Kelly Dickinson, Sherline Lee, and others on the 
Healthcare Systems Response Team; members of the Clinical Team; 
Lisa Delaney, Renee Funk, Chad Dowell, Jill Shugart, and others 
on the Worker Safety and Health Team and with CDC’s National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; Anita Patel, Domestic 
PPE Lead; Nicki Peski, Nicole Cohen, Clive Brown, and others on 
the Global Migration Task Force; Ute Stroeher, Mark Rayfield, and 
the Laboratory Team; Chiefs of Staff Sherrie Bruce, David Hutchins, 
Peter Rzeszotarski, Toby Crafton, Elizabeth Bell, Serena Fuller, John 
Turner, and Stephen Papagiotas in particular for his contributions to 
the CDC Ebola Response Team; Jeff Nemhauser and Lauri Hicks for 
leading efforts to assist CDC staff returning from West Africa; Ed 
Rouse, Reed Sheridan, and the EOC Logistics Team; Inger Damon, 
Jordan Tappero, Eric Kasowski, and other incident managers and 
deputy incident managers; Julie Guarnizo, Beth Schweitzer, Rachel 
Holloway, Paula Rosenberg; and CDC Ebola response staff in Atlanta 
and in affected countries.
References
 1. CDC. The Laboratory Response Network partners in preparedness. 
http://emergency.cdc.gov/lrn/index.asp
 2. Liddell AM, Davey RT Jr, Mehta AK, et al. Characteristics and clinical 
management of a cluster of 3 patients with Ebola virus disease, including 
the first domestically acquired cases in the United States. Ann Intern 
Med 2015;163:81–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/M15-0530
 3. Chevalier MS, Chung W, Smith J, et al. Ebola virus disease cluster in 
the United States—Dallas County, Texas, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2014;63:1087–8.
 4. Karwowski MP
, Meites E, Fullerton KE, et al. Clinical inquiries regarding 
Ebola virus disease received by CDC—United States, July 9–November 
15, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1175–9.
 5. US Department of Health and Human Services. Biosafety in 
microbiological and biomedical laboratories. 5th edition. Atlanta, GA: 
CDC; 2009. HHS publication no. (CDC) 21-1112:238.
 6. Spencer C. Having and fighting Ebola—public health lessons from a 
clinician turned patient. N Engl J Med 2015;372:1089–91. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1501355
 7. Lyon GM, Mehta AK, Varkey JB, et al. Clinical care of two patients with 
Ebola virus disease in the United States. N Engl J Med 2014;371:2402–9. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1409838
 8. Kraft CS, Hewlett AL, Koepsell S, et al. The use of TKM-100802 and 
convalescent plasma in 2 patients with Ebola virus disease in the United States. 
Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:496–502. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ334
 9. Florescu DF, Kalil AC, Hewlett AL, et al. Administration of brincidofovir 
and convalescent plasma in a patient with Ebola virus disease. Clin Infect 
Dis 2015;61:969–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ395
 
10. Lai L, Davey R, Beck A, et al. Emergency postexposure vaccination with 
vesicular stomatitis virus-vectored Ebola vaccine after needlestick. JAMA 
2015;313:1249–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.1995
 
11. Wong KK, Davey RT Jr, Hewlett AL, et al. Use of post-exposure 
prophylaxis after occupational exposure to Zaire ebolavirus. Clin Infect 
Dis 2016;ciw256. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw256
 
12. Wong KK, Perdue CL, Malia J, et al. Supportive care of the first 2 Ebola 
virus disease patients at the Monrovia Medical Unit. Clin Infect Dis 
2015;61:e47–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ420
 
13. Varkey JB, Shantha JG, Crozier I, et al. Persistence of Ebola virus in 
ocular fluid during convalescence. N Engl J Med 2015;372:2423–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1500306
 
14. Epstein L, Wong KK, Kallen AJ, Uyeki TM. Post-Ebola signs and 
symptoms in U.S. survivors. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2484–6. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc1506576
 
15. Uyeki TM, Erickson BR, Brown S, et al. Ebola virus persistence in semen 
of male survivors. Clin Infect Dis 2016;ciw202. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciw202
 Supplement
84 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
16. Uyeki TM, Mehta AK, Davey RT Jr, et al.; Working Group of the 
U.S.–European Clinical Network on Clinical Management of Ebola 
Virus Disease Patients in the U.S. and Europe. Clinical management of 
Ebola virus disease in the United States and Europe. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:636–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1504874
 
17. Cohen NJ, Brown CM, Alvarado-Ramy F, et al. Travel and border health 
measures to prevent the international spread of Ebola. In: CDC response 
to the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United States. 
MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
18. CDC. Interim U.S. guidance for monitoring and movement of persons 
with potential Ebola virus exposure. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/Ebola/
exposure/monitoring-and-movement-of-persons-with-exposure.html
 
19. Stehling-Ariza T, Fisher E, Vagi S, et al. Monitoring of persons with risk 
for exposure to Ebola virus disease—United States, November 3, 2014–
March 8, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:685–9.
 
20. Hageman JC, Hazim C, Wilson K, et al. Infection prevention and control 
for Ebola in health care settings—West Africa and United States. In: 
CDC response to the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and 
United States. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
21. Koonin LM, Jamieson DJ, Jernigan JA, et al. Systems for rapidly 
detecting and treating persons with Ebola virus disease—United States. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:222–5.
 
22. Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response. Hospital Preparedness 
Program (HPP) Ebola Preparedness and Response Activities: 
development of a regional Ebola and other special pathogen treatment 
center for HHS Region 9. Washington, DC: US Department of Health 
and Human Services; 2015. FOA EP-U34–15–002. http://www.grants.
gov/view-opportunity.html?oppId=274709
 
23. CDC. Protecting America from Ebola: CDC’s Ebola response team. 
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/pdf/ebola-response-team.pdf  
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
85
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
During CDC’s response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus 
disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, U.S. and international 
public health decision-makers and stakeholders needed 
information early in the epidemic. This information included 
the number of Ebola cases that could be expected over time; 
the resources and personnel needed to respond adequately; 
and the impact of interventions, such as Ebola treatment units 
Modeling in Real Time During the Ebola Response
Martin I. Meltzer, PhD1
Scott Santibanez, MD1
Leah S. Fischer, PhD1
Toby L. Merlin, MD1
Bishwa B. Adhikari, PhD1
Charisma Y. Atkins, MPH1
Caresse Campbell, PhD2
Isaac Chun-Hai Fung, PhD1
Manoj Gambhir, PhD1
Thomas Gift, PhD3
Bradford Greening, PhD1
Weidong Gu, MD, PhD4
Evin U. Jacobson, PhD5
Emily B. Kahn, PhD1
Cristina Carias, PhD1
Lina Nerlander, MD5
Gabriel Rainisch, MPH1
Manjunath Shankar, MD, PhD1
Karen Wong, MD4
Michael L. Washington, PhD1
1Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
2Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Division of Sexually Transmitted Disease Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
4Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
5Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention-Surveillance and Epidemiology, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC
Corresponding author: Martin I. Meltzer, Division of Preparedness and Emerging Infections, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC. Telephone: 404-639-7778; E-mail: MMeltzer@cdc.gov.
Summary
To aid decision-making during CDC’s response to the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC activated 
a Modeling Task Force to generate estimates on various topics related to the response in West Africa and the risk for importation of cases 
into the United States. Analysis of eight Ebola response modeling projects conducted during August 2014–July 2015 provided insight into 
the types of questions addressed by modeling, the impact of the estimates generated, and the difficulties encountered during the modeling. 
This time frame was selected to cover the three phases of the West African epidemic curve. Questions posed to the Modeling Task Force 
changed as the epidemic progressed. Initially, the task force was asked to estimate the number of cases that might occur if no interventions 
were implemented compared with cases that might occur if interventions were implemented; however, at the peak of the epidemic, the 
focus shifted to estimating resource needs for Ebola treatment units. Then, as the epidemic decelerated, requests for modeling changed to 
generating estimates of the potential number of sexually transmitted Ebola cases. Modeling to provide information for decision-making 
during the CDC Ebola response involved limited data, a short turnaround time, and difficulty communicating the modeling process, 
including assumptions and interpretation of results. Despite these challenges, modeling yielded estimates and projections that public health 
officials used to make key decisions regarding response strategy and resources required. The impact of modeling during the Ebola response 
demonstrates the usefulness of modeling in future responses, particularly in the early stages and when data are scarce. Future modeling 
can be enhanced by planning ahead for data needs and data sharing, and by open communication among modelers, scientists, and others 
to ensure that modeling and its limitations are more clearly understood. 
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
86 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(ETUs), community care centers (CCCs), and safe burials. On 
August 4, 2014, CDC activated a Modeling* Task Force (CDC 
Modeling) and incorporated the task force into its incident 
management structure.
Models were used at the outset of the Ebola response in 
early September 2014 to estimate the impact of the epidemic 
with and without intervention. These models indicated not 
only that public health agencies had the means to stop the 
epidemic by using existing tools and strategies but also that the 
international community needed to act quickly with sufficient 
resources to stop the spread of the epidemic. The simple 
models (1–3) used by CDC Modeling enabled decisions to 
be made quickly during the response. This report summarizes 
1) CDC Modeling’s role, accomplishments, and impact; 2) key 
issues, challenges, and lessons learned; and 3) suggestions for 
modeling in future responses.
Personnel conducting this assessment comprised both CDC 
Modeling staff and other CDC staff. All documents produced 
by CDC Modeling during August 4, 2014–July 13, 2015, 
were assessed: five publications, approximately 40 internal 
memoranda that included multiple versions documenting 
the modeling process, 1,000 technical consulting e-mails, 
and 30 presentations, as well as numerous meeting notes. 
In-depth after-action discussions with CDC Modeling staff 
aided understanding of how models were developed and used 
in the response, the difficulties encountered, and the impact of 
the models on decision making. Other assessments were the 
amount and type of data used (data requirements), how readily 
data were available, and the time available before response 
leadership needed preliminary results (turnaround time). Within 
the context of CDC’s Ebola response, “impact” referred to the 
use of models to provide information for the response and make 
decisions. Models associated with major projects that resulted 
in a publication, written report, or internal memorandum were 
categorized into 1 of 3 phases of the West African epidemic 
curve: 1) start and incidence acceleration, 2) peak and incidence 
deceleration, and 3) final phase and extinguishing (Figure). Eight 
reviewed projects resulted in either a publication or an internal, 
predecisional memorandum.
CDC Role, Accomplishments, 
and Impact
Start and Acceleration
Initial modeling questions concerned resource needs and thus 
predicted the number of Ebola cases that could be expected over 
time with and without isolation, treatment, and safe burials. 
These estimates enabled CDC Modeling to evaluate the impact 
that interventions, such as ETUs, CCCs, and safe burials, could 
have on the epidemic. On the basis of these questions and the 
knowledge available at the time about virus characteristics and 
transmission, CDC Modeling developed a simple Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheet–based model called EbolaResponse (4). This model 
included input values that could be easily changed (e.g., the number 
of Ebola patients placed in ETUs) and thus, could estimate potential 
outcomes if the disease remained unchecked and assess the relative 
impact of interventions. Because data from the field were limited, 
CDC Modeling calculated a correction factor for underreporting 
(4). In late August 2014, the correction for underreporting was 
estimated to be approximately 2.5; in other words, the true case 
count was 2.5 times greater than the reported case count.
By using data available through late August 2014, CDC 
Modeling estimated that 550,000 total reported Ebola cases could 
occur in Liberia and Sierra Leone (1.4 million when corrected for 
underreporting) by January 20, 2015, if no additional interventions 
or behavior changes occurred and if current parameters continued 
without change (4). Conversely, CDC Modeling predicted that 
transmission would decline substantially by mid-January 2015 if 
approximately 70% of Ebola patients were placed into ETUs or 
CCCs (or an equivalent) and if safe burials were conducted when 
needed. If this 70% goal could be reached, it would “bend the 
curve,” causing transmission to drop off substantially. If a large-
scale response was delayed, the projected number of cases at the 
epidemic’s peak most likely would more than double and thus 
require more resources to control (4).
Initial estimates from EbolaResponse were published in 
September 2014 (4), with scenarios predicting that each month 
of delayed response would cause approximately 3.1 times more 
cases. Perhaps the most important message contained in the report 
was that public health agencies and the international community 
needed to act quickly with sufficient resources to stop the epidemic. 
On the basis of this information and other factors, including the 
United Nations Ebola virus disease outbreak overview of needs 
and requirements document (5), CDC leadership and U.S. 
government officials recommended a rapid increase in aid for the 
Ebola response. International donors provided approximately U.S. 
$154.6 million to support Ebola response activities in West Africa, 
including approximately $71 million from the United States (5). 
By March 2015, 10 countries had supplied approximately U.S. 
* For practical purposes, modeling is divided into two broad categories: statistical 
modeling and mathematical modeling. Statistical modeling is used when analysts 
have all, or almost all, the data from a given population, in an identified time 
step and locale, needed to analyze potential differences over time, between 
subgroups, or both. For this modeling, analysts use accepted means of statistically 
testing hypotheses, such as the t test or regression statistical models. Usual results 
include causality between variables. Mathematical modeling is used when not all 
the data are available to answer a given question. Analysts then either use data 
collected from different populations, often at different points in time and locales, 
or make assumptions based on expert opinion. Using these “islands of data,” 
analysts then construct a series of equations or simulations that describes the 
situation (e.g., disease transmission, logistics, or interventions). Usual results 
include possible decisions that could mitigate or improve a situation.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
87
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
$2.2 billion in aid, with the United States providing approximately 
$1.05 billion of that amount (6). Later analyses demonstrated how 
the increase in resources helped to ensure that the actual number 
of cases was far less than if prompt action had not been taken (7).
In another modeling project, CDC Modeling analyzed the regional 
spread of Ebola in West Africa. CDC Modeling used geographic 
information system software and various regression models to identify 
factors that could be used to calculate the probability of individual 
areas becoming affected next (8) and helped to provide data to 
decision-makers about allocating resources for surveillance, especially 
in the countries surrounding Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
CDC also needed data on the staff, equipment, and materials 
required to operate a typical ETU. CDC Modeling helped conduct 
a cost analysis to determine the budget needed to start up and run 
up to 1,000 ETU beds for 6 months, using the cost per bed from 
an interagency partner and publicly available data. CDC used this 
information internally to help guide resource allocation decisions.
Another study estimated the impact of ETUs and CCCs 
on Ebola transmission (7). Results suggested that during 
September 23–October 31, 2014, hospitalizing approximately 
20% of all Ebola patients in ETUs prevented an estimated 
2,244 cases. In addition, placing 35% of patients in CCCs 
or equivalent community settings that prevent transmission 
through reduced contact with patients, coupled with the use 
of safe burials, prevented an estimated 4,487 cases. Together, 
these interventions prevented an estimated 9,097 cases (7). The 
findings of this analysis provided evidence that interventions 
were working.
In September 2014, CDC Modeling began producing weekly 
predecisional memoranda for internal CDC use only, which 
provided estimates of the number of active cases (e.g., persons 
with Ebola and in need of a bed, either in an ETU or CCC) 
based on updated case counts from the field. These weekly 
updates provided senior leadership with situational awareness 
about the epidemic as it evolved. As data and case reporting 
improved through November 2014–March 2015, the need 
for projections to support decision making declined. However, 
projections indicated that the situation could change quickly and 
bolstered the need for public health agencies to avoid becoming 
complacent (4) (CDC, unpublished data, 2014).
Peak and Deceleration
As the epidemic progressed, public health officials developed 
plans to increase ETU capacities and developed methods to 
isolate patients in non-ETU settings to disrupt Ebola transmission 
(5,6). Senior U.S. leadership authorized personnel, funds, and 
supplies to help control the Ebola epidemic (5,6). Various 
philanthropic organizations and the U.S. Public Health Service 
agreed to operate ETUs and CCCs built by the U.S. military and 
others, and funded by the U.S. government. The governments 
of the United Kingdom, France, China, and other countries also 
helped to build and support treatment units that were run by 
FIGURE. Timeline* of CDC Modeling Task Force projects for decision making in response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa — August 2014–
July 2015
Peak and deceleration
Final phase and extinguishing
Estimate future number of Ebola cases in West Africa, with updates approximately every 2–4 
weeks.
Estimate efectiveness of interventions targeted toward Ebola 
outbreak in West Africa. 
Estimate probability of Ebola 
spread to districts with no Ebola 
cases and to cross international 
boundaries to previously 
unafected countries in Africa. 
Calculate personnel, equipment, 
and material needed to staf and 
operate ETUs. 
Estimate number of Ebola 
cases 
that might occur in United 
States. 
Estimate impact of presumptive malaria treatment during 
contact tracing; reduce number of persons seeking 
treatment at ETUs for non–Ebola-related fever. 
Estimate potential impact of using 
rapid Ebola diagnostic tests. 
Estimate potential number of 
Ebola cases from sexual 
transmission. 
Phase of West African Ebola epidemic curve
Start and acceleration
June   
May
April   
March
February
January
December 
November   
October  
September
July
August
2014
2015
2014
2015
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; ETUs = Ebola treatment units. 
* Arrows indicate approximate start and completion dates of projects.
 Supplement
88 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
international nongovernmental organizations and agencies (9). 
Once increased resources were allocated, questions arose about 
stocking and staffing the ETUs and preventing Ebola’s spread 
to patients within ETUs whose illnesses had been misclassified 
as Ebola. In one analysis, modelers considered ways to prevent 
Ebola’s spread to febrile persons with malaria whose illness had 
been misclassified as Ebola. Modelers analyzed the feasibility of 
treating all contacts of Ebola patients for malaria to prevent the 
onset of febrile malaria and subsequent admission to ETUs. If 
implemented, the intervention could avert admissions even for low 
levels of treatment compliance (10). Only a few clinics used this 
strategy. Although these strategies were implemented on a small 
scale, they might be useful on a wider scale for future responses.
CDC Modeling also contributed to the domestic U.S. 
response when the first imported case of Ebola prompted CDC 
and health departments to collaborate to improve hospital 
preparedness. State and local public health planners needed 
to know where in the United States travelers from West Africa 
were most likely to arrive, where they might seek treatment, and 
whether the United States had enough facilities designated to 
treat patients with Ebola. In a research letter, CDC Modeling 
and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ 
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority 
estimated the rate of new Ebola cases expected in the United 
States based on three categories of persons arriving from Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, and Guinea: 1) travelers who were not health care 
workers, 2) health care workers, and 3) medical evacuees (11). 
The rate of new infections in the United States was multiplied 
by treatment length to determine the number of Ebola patients 
expected to need treatment at any given time while the epidemic 
in West Africa continued. According to this analysis, the capacity 
of Ebola treatment centers in the United States (49 hospitals 
with 71 total beds) was sufficient to care for the model’s highest 
estimated number of patients with Ebola, with a large reserve 
capacity if epidemic conditions worsened (11).
Final Phase and Extinguishing
By May 2015, transmission of Ebola in West Africa had 
diminished substantially, and the response focused on 
eliminating transmission (12). Ebola virus was cultured from 
the semen of male Ebola survivors several months after clinical 
illness. Therefore, sex partners of these Ebola survivors could 
be infected but unaware of their infection while the illness is 
incubating. CDC Modeling was asked to project how often 
a person who acquired Ebola through sexual transmission 
and in whom the illness is incubating might arrive from West 
Africa into the United States (13). Using data from May and 
June 2015, modelers estimated that the projected frequency 
of a person traveling from West Africa who has acquired Ebola 
through sexual transmission and whose Ebola is incubating to 
be one traveler every 2.75 to 8.3 years (CDC, unpublished data, 
2015). These estimates were specific for May and June 2015. 
As long as a resurgence of Ebola does not occur, the risk of 
importation will decline over time as the number of survivors 
capable of transmitting Ebola declines.
CDC Modeling produced a predecisional memorandum for 
internal CDC use that provided estimates of the potential impact 
of rapid Ebola diagnostic tests, specifically, the ability to rapidly 
test a patient with fever or other symptoms possibly indicative of 
Ebola. Although nucleic acid tests are more accurate, they require 
well-established laboratories and fully trained personnel. Rapid 
diagnostic tests produce quick results, are simple to perform, and 
do not require electricity, which is an important consideration in 
remote areas. Decision-makers needed to know the best possible 
strategies for using rapid diagnostic tests and how decreasing or 
low prevalence of Ebola might affect potential strategies for using 
these tests. The model results suggested that using rapid tests 
during low-prevalence periods most likely would require a second 
sequential confirmatory test at the treatment center to decrease 
the false-positive test results (CDC, unpublished data, 2015). This 
modeling provided evidence to support the use of rapid Ebola tests 
in low-prevalence settings as an effective screening tool to rule 
out Ebola infection (<1% false negatives), enabling patients with 
Ebola-like symptoms, but with negative rapid test results, to be 
treated outside of Ebola isolation units. In addition, this modeling 
predicted the number of false-positive (and true negative) rapid 
test results that could be expected at various disease prevalence 
levels in the community (CDC, unpublished data, 2015).
Key Challenges and Lessons Learned
Throughout the response, relevant data were not always 
available, and available data frequently contained inconsistencies 
that took time and effort to resolve. In addition, reporting delays 
made the incidence of Ebola difficult to accurately calculate, 
a crucial input in the models produced by CDC Modeling. 
Expert opinion was needed when data were not available (e.g., 
when data from the field were limited and a correction factor 
was used to estimate the actual number of cases). Even when 
adequate data existed, because no data sharing agreements 
had been developed and executed, questions arose about who 
owned the data and who could use them for analysis. As a 
result, some modeling projects were delayed.
The urgency of the Ebola response required a short 
turnaround time for projects. CDC Modeling typically was 
given ≤1 week to answer questions. To reduce errors and 
ensure the reproducibility and accuracy of the estimates in 
this short time frame, the CDC Modeling had two teams that 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
89
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
cross-checked each other’s calculations, and other modelers at 
CDC reviewed the calculations during the clearance process. 
Each team had to clearly document its modeling methods so 
that other modelers could replicate the model. Therefore, for 
each model, CDC Modeling provided a technical appendix 
accessible to scientists within and outside of CDC.
Models and findings needed to be shared with the public, 
technical experts, responders, and other stakeholders. However, 
communicating about modeling is difficult when persons 
unfamiliar with modeling have difficulty interpreting what the 
estimates mean and understanding the nature of assumptions, 
uncertainty, and context. For example, if one assumption is 
disputed, nonmodelers might perceive this dispute as a reason 
to dismiss the entire model, rather than understand that 
defining assumptions and improving inputs is part of model 
development. Publishing manuscripts in scientific journals was, 
by itself, insufficient for communication. The immediate and 
primary purpose of the models was to provide information for 
decision-making, whereas publishing articles about the work 
provides information for future emergency responses.
Modeling in Future Responses
The benefits of incorporating modeling into major emergency 
responses were clear in the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic response 
(14). Models provided critical decision-making tools in real time 
and helped demonstrate to public health authorities that the 
epidemic could be stopped by using existing tools and strategies 
(4). Although initial model estimates of Ebola represented a 
worst-case scenario, the international community responded to 
ensure that these dire predictions would not be realized (14). 
The following comments were made regarding the accuracy of 
CDC models that forecasted the trajectory of the epidemic: 
“the model predicted that when the tipping point was reached, 
transmission would decline rapidly. This prediction was shown 
to be accurate in the following months in Liberia and Sierra 
Leone. . . . The predictions also closely matched the actual case 
trajectory after effective intervention” (14).
In future emergency responses, modeling can be improved in 
several ways. First, flexibility is needed to enable data collection 
to focus on data needs relative to the size of the epidemic 
and to collect the types of data modelers can use to produce 
improved, more accurate models (e.g., number of cases that 
can be expected over time based on available knowledge about 
pathogen characteristics and transmission, as well as the impact 
that interventions could have on the epidemic). For example, 
in a large-scale epidemic, data collection might focus on small 
amounts of very specific data from sentinel surveillance (1). 
Second, data-sharing agreements should be in place before an 
event. Finally, promoting ongoing dialogue will ensure that 
scientists and audiences understand data limitations and what 
can and cannot be reliably concluded from models.
Modeling is an important but underused public health tool. 
Prioritizing modeling in future responses will take hard work, 
commitment, education, and an openness in public health to 
new disciplines and approaches.
Acknowledgment
CDC Ebola response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
 1. Shrestha SS, Swerdlow DL, Borse RH, et al. Estimating the burden of 
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) in the United States (April 2009–
April 2010). Clin Infect Dis 2011;52(Suppl 1):S75–82. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciq012
 2. Reed C, Angulo FJ, Swerdlow DL, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of 
pandemic (H1N1) 2009, United States, April–July 2009. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2009;15:2004–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1512.091413
 3. Meltzer MI, Cox NJ, Fukuda K. The economic impact of pandemic 
influenza in the United States: priorities for intervention. Emerg Infect 
Dis 1999;5:659–71.
 4. Meltzer MI, Atkins CY, Santibanez S, et al. Estimating the future number 
of cases in the Ebola epidemic—Liberia and Sierra Leone, 2014–2015. 
MMWR Suppl 2014;63.
 5. US Agency for International Development. West Africa—Ebola 
outbreak. Fact sheet #6. Washington, DC: US Agency for International 
Development; 2014. https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/1864/09.17.14%20-%20USG%20West%20Africa%20
Ebola%20Outbreak%20Fact%20Sheet%20%236.pdf
 6. US Agency for International Development. West Africa—Ebola 
outbreak. Fact sheet #23. Washington, DC: US Agency for International 
Development; 2015. https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/1864/03.04.15%20-%20USG%20West%20Africa%20
Ebola%20Outbreak%20Fact%20Sheet%20%2323.pdf
 7. Washington ML, Meltzer ML. Effectiveness of Ebola treatment units 
and community care centers—Liberia, September 23–October 31, 2014. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:67–9.
 8. Rainisch G, Shankar M, Wellman M, Merlin T, Meltzer MI. Regional 
spread of Ebola virus, West Africa, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:444–
7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2103.141845
 9. Fink S, Belluck P
. One year later, Ebola outbreak offers lessons for next 
epidemic. The New York Times, March 22, 2015. http://www.nytimes.
com/2015/03/23/world/one-year-later-ebola-outbreak-offers-lessons-
for-next-epidemic.html?_r=0
 
10. Carias C, Greening B Jr, Campbell CG, Meltzer MI, Hamel MJ. 
Preventive malaria treatment for contacts of patients with Ebola virus 
disease in the context of the West Africa 2014–15 Ebola virus disease 
response: an economic analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;16:449–58. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00465-X
 
11. Rainisch G, Asher J, George D, et al. Estimating Ebola treatment needs, 
United States. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1273–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid2107.150286
 
12. CDC. Ebola: getting to zero. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.gov/
features/ebola-zero
 
13. Christie A, Davies-Wayne GJ, Cordier-Lassalle T, et al. Possible sexual 
transmission of Ebola virus—Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2015;64:479–81. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:1180.
 
14. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949  
 Supplement
90 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background
Because of the size and scope of the 2014–2016 Ebola 
virus disease (Ebola) epidemic in West Africa, CDC leaders 
activated the Incident Management System (IMS) and began 
coordinating its response from CDC’s Emergency Operations 
Center on July 9, 2014. At CDC, the IMS comprises a staffing 
structure and standardized operating procedures that are used to 
coordinate various response components and functions in areas 
such as surveillance, laboratory testing, operations, and logistics 
(1). Before the 2014–2016 epidemic, CDC had responded to 
smaller Ebola outbreaks, usually in remote rural areas in Uganda, 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and other areas of 
Africa, without the need for an IMS activation. CDC typically 
deployed multidisciplinary teams of four to 10 staff, for whom 
CDC’s Division of Emergency Operations (DEO) provided field 
equipment and travel arrangements. In the field, the deployed 
team was primarily responsible for arranging logistics, such as 
lodging, transportation (air and ground), meals, and specimen 
shipments. In some instances, if available, the team might have 
received additional logistic support from CDC country offices; 
U.S. embassies; or international partners, such as the World 
Health Organization’s Global Outbreak Alert and Response 
Network or Médecins Sans Frontières. DEO is available 24 hours 
a day, 7 days a week for field staff to coordinate additional 
assistance. This logistic support model functioned well for most 
prior small-scale outbreak responses.
In the early stages of the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic, CDC used 
this same model for logistic support. Small teams were deployed 
to Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone and received limited support 
from the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network and the 
U.S. Embassy or Consulate in-country. As the response mission 
in-country grew more complex and the teams grew in size, CDC 
needed to adapt to adequately deploy and support field teams.
By the end of July 2014, as the number of Ebola cases was rapidly 
increasing, CDC decided to deploy at least 50 staff members to the 
Safe and Effective Deployment of Personnel to Support the Ebola 
Response — West Africa
Edward N. Rouse, MPA1
Shauna Mettee Zarecki, MSN, MPH1
Donald Flowers, MS, MSS1
Shawn T. Robinson1
Reed J. Sheridan1
Gary D. Goolsby1
Jeffrey Nemhauser, MD2
Sachiko Kuwabara, PhD1
1Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
2Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC
Corresponding author: Edward Rouse, Division of Emergency Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-3902; 
E-mail: ERouse@cdc.gov.
Summary
From the initial task of getting “50 deployers within 30 days” into the field to support the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) 
epidemic response in West Africa to maintaining well over 200 staff per day in the most affected countries (Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone) during the peak of the response, ensuring the safe and effective deployment of international responders was an unprecedented 
accomplishment by CDC. Response experiences shared by CDC deployed staff returning from West Africa were quickly incorporated into 
lessons learned and resulted in new activities to better protect the health, safety, security, and resiliency of responding personnel. Enhanced 
screening of personnel to better match skill sets and experience with deployment needs was developed as a staffing strategy. The mandatory 
predeployment briefings were periodically updated with these lessons to ensure that staff were aware of what to expect before, during, and 
after their deployments. Medical clearance, security awareness, and resiliency programs became a standard part of both predeployment 
and postdeployment activities. Response experience also led to the identification and provision of more appropriate equipment for the 
environment. Supporting the social and emotional needs of deployed staff and their families also became an agency focus for care and 
communication. These enhancements set a precedent as a new standard for future CDC responses, regardless of size or complexity.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
91
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
three countries within 30 days. To do so required a shift in how the 
agency thought about and managed responses to Ebola outbreaks.
New Environment, New Workforce
CDC has large numbers of experienced staff working across 
the globe on major public health issues every day. From the start 
of the Ebola response, the agency had to balance maintenance 
of ongoing global (and domestic) public health efforts with 
surge staffing requirements for the response. Maintaining this 
balance required training and preparing staff from throughout 
CDC for challenging international assignments, the first 
international experience for many responders. CDC faced 
many challenges in identifying and preparing responders for this 
unique response, including deployments for ≥30 days, austere 
living conditions, food and water safety, language barriers, harsh 
climate conditions, coordination with new partners, frequent 
rotations of staff and leadership into and out of the response, 
transportation issues, exposures to endemic infectious diseases, 
and the risk for exposure to the potentially fatal Ebola virus. Each 
concern factored into CDC’s emergency response in West Africa.
Initially identifying experienced staff to deploy who met 
travel requirements was not difficult. As the response continued, 
increasing in size and scope, that was no longer the case. When the 
CDC director initially called for “50 deployers within 30 days” in 
July 2014, staff were identified with predeployment preparations 
well under way within 2 weeks. Those persons reported to West 
Africa with basic responder preparedness: mission awareness, 
deployment location, local points of contact, and basic physical 
health assessment, as well as medical kits (malaria prophylaxis, 
antibiotics, and first aid supplies), communications equipment 
(laptops, cell phones, and satellite phones), and field equipment 
(backpacks, insect repellent, sunscreen, ponchos, flashlights, 
respirators, and personal protective equipment).
Responding to the Challenge
The CDC IMS is the agency’s implementation of the National 
Incident Management System, used governmentwide in the 
United States to manage emergency response operations. At 
CDC, standard emergency management–based general staff 
sections support the science-based teams and task forces, which 
are the mechanisms CDC uses to apply its subject-matter 
expertise to the public health consequences of an incident. At 
IMS activation, these specialized teams and task forces are scaled 
up at CDC headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, to coordinate the 
scientific aspects of each unique response. Similarly, IMS logistics, 
planning, operations, finance, and other general staff sections 
must grow to effectively manage the day-to-day operations of 
the response. For instance, the IMS logistics section usually is 
staffed with two or three persons at the start of an activation. 
During the Ebola response, 23 staff members from across CDC 
rotated through the IMS logistics section to meet the growing 
needs of the response. Contractors, term-limited external hires, 
and staff from the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
further augmented the IMS logistics section, a solution likely 
to be considered in future large-scale responses.
Before this Ebola response, the only occasion for which had 
CDC deployed 50 persons simultaneously to an international 
location, let alone to multiple locations, was in 2000 in 
response to the earthquake in Haiti. Within 2 months of IMS 
activation for Ebola, approximately 100 staff members were 
in West Africa every day, and by January 2015, approximately 
200 were in the field daily. During the first year of CDC’s 
activation, from July 2014 through June 2015, approximately 
1,400 deployments had occurred to the three West African 
countries most heavily affected, totaling approximately 53,000 
person-days of deployment time. At the time of deactivation 
on March 31, 2016, there had been 2,292 deployments to 
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone (Table); this includes the 
TABLE. Number of CDC-supported international deployments and 
number of days deployed, by country or region — July 1, 2014–
March 31, 2016*
Country/ 
Region
No. 
deployments†
No. days deployed
Mean Maximum Minimum
Total no. 
person-days 
deployed†,§
Sierra Leone
1,099
36
276
2
39,791
Liberia
619
32
135
2
20,112
Guinea
442
36
131
2
15,872
All other Africa 
deployments¶
222
19
62
1
4,190
All other 
international 
deployments**
79
7
49
2
592
Total
2,461
33
276
1
80,557
 * Deployment dates on or after July 1, 2014, and return dates on or before March 
31, 2016, entered into Preparedness Workforce Management System as of April 
24, 2016, 1 pm Eastern daylight time. Deployments include staff from other 
agencies and partners supported through the CDC Emergency Operations Center 
(i.e., U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 43 deployments; Council 
of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, 35 deployments; and other partners) but 
do not include some deployments of Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), 
Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP), and other staff not processed by 
the CDC Emergency Operations Center. At the time of deactivation on March 31, 
2016, there had been 2,292 total deployments to Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone 
(this includes the PHAC, FETP
, and others not included in the table).
 † One person can be deployed multiple times.
 § Number of days CDC-supported responders were deployed using deployment 
start date and end date. Numbers might differ slightly from those provided 
in previous reports.
 ¶ Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, 
Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, People’s Republic of the Congo, Senegal, The 
Gambia, and Togo.
 ** Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Singapore, Switzerland, 
and United Kingdom.
 Supplement
92 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Field Epidemiology 
Training Program, and others not included in the table.
Whereas CDC’s DEO normally processes approximately 300 
emergency international travel requests each year, the Ebola 
response required processing of this many travel requests each 
month. In addition to the sheer quantity of deployments, CDC 
adapted to various travel-related challenges. For example, many 
airlines cancelled flights to and from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone for fear of spreading Ebola. By November 2014, only one 
airline had flights twice a week, which necessitated innovative 
approaches to travel coordination to get boots on the ground 
as quickly as possible. Compounding this challenge was severe 
winter weather in the United States and Europe, which affected 
departure and transit points, and labor stoppages occurred 
at European transit points. Because of the limited number 
of available and willing carriers to and from West Africa, 
CDC had few options for shipping supplies and equipment. 
To meet this need, deployed staff often hand-carried critical 
items in their personal luggage. To ensure the safe transfer of 
specimens from patients suspected or confirmed to have Ebola 
to CDC laboratories, CDC contracted special charter flights 
to transport thousands of specimens to Atlanta.
In the affected countries, deployed staff adapted to a number 
of logistics-related and other challenges. For example, as 
international partners expanded their own response operations 
in West Africa, CDC had to find ways to procure a sufficient 
quantity of increasingly scarce, safe, long-term lodging in all 
three highly affected countries. To ensure the effectiveness and 
safety of responders, CDC equipped them to work in austere 
conditions with communications and personal equipment, 
such as satellite phones, global positioning system trackers (to 
enhance the monitoring of location of staff for safety purposes), 
portable power supplies, water purifiers, “bug huts” to avoid 
mosquitoes and other pests, and lightweight sleeping bags. 
Enhanced coordination between logistics and procurement 
staff within the IMS became critical in ensuring rapid purchase 
and shipping of needed equipment and supplies.
Early in the response, agency leaders realized that CDC’s 
previous model for logistic support of Ebola responses had to 
adapt to ensure deployed staff were prepared and equipped 
adequately to respond. Not only was the number of staff 
in-country beyond the capability of the field teams to self-
support but also the absence of CDC country offices in any 
of the three countries, volume of deployments (Figure 1), 
and pointed feedback from early deployed staff drove changes 
in how staff were prepared for deployment and supported. 
Logistics staff were deployed to each of the three affected 
countries to coordinate in-country transportation; lodging; 
inventory management; supply shipments; procurement 
requests with the IMS Logistics Section in Atlanta; and, with 
the United Nations, in-country flights. CDC established close 
partnerships with the U.S. embassies and the U.S. Agency for 
International Development’s Disaster Assistance Response 
Team to meet these new mission requirements.
Response operations must rapidly adjust in accordance with 
lessons learned during any response, for which Ebola has been 
a prime example. For IMS activations, the IMS Evaluation 
Team conducts in-progress and after-action reviews to evaluate 
lessons learned and then tracks implementation of tasks to 
address identified issues. Because of the size and scope of the 
Ebola response, beginning in August 2014, the IMS Evaluation 
Team and CDC’s Worklife Wellness Office implemented 
Real-Time Evaluation (RTE) approaches to identify health 
and safety risks to responders to make appropriate course 
corrections during the response. RTE, increasingly used 
in international humanitarian emergencies, is defined as 
“an evaluation in which the primary objective is to provide 
feedback in a participatory way in real time (i.e., during the 
evaluation field work) to those executing and managing the 
humanitarian response” (2,3). The RTE approach included 
three voluntary opportunities for responders to provide 
feedback: 1) a structured survey completed online or in person 
that solicited information about a responder’s predeployment, 
deployment, and postdeployment experiences, 2) individual 
comment submissions sent through a CDC intranet-based 
submission system, and 3) in-person postdeployment group 
debriefs. The Worklife Wellness Office also implemented a 
predeployment and postdeployment well-being assessment 
process comprising three validated instruments (4–6) with 
confidential follow-up as needed. This new assessment process 
was integrated into medical history and physical screening 
processes used by CDC’s Occupational Health Clinic to ensure 
confidentiality and ease of access by deployed staff.
As the first deployed staff reported back to CDC, they 
confirmed many of the challenges listed above but, more 
importantly, provided awareness of new and long-term 
preparedness needs that, when addressed, would improve the 
effectiveness of hundreds of future deployments. Among these 
new challenges were preparation for the constant concern about 
exposure to Ebola with every personal or surface encounter. 
Of more impact perhaps was preparation of CDC staff for the 
death from Ebola of an international colleague who shared an 
office (or even a computer) with those CDC staff members. 
One of the most unexpected challenges was preparation of 
staff and their families for the stigma some deployed staff 
encountered after returning home, such as a spouse being 
asked not to come to work or a child denied entry to school. 
Within the first month after the response began, CDC started 
reevaluating its preparedness efforts to address these issues and 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
93
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to better provide for the health, safety, security, and resiliency 
of its most valued resource.
Staffing issues can challenge even small-scale responses. 
Identifying personnel who have skill sets that match the 
needs of the response and the ability to handle the rigors of 
a complex response in austere international settings requires 
strong coordination between in-country team leadership, 
staffing recruiters, employee supervisors and emergency 
coordinators in home centers or programs, and the staff to be 
deployed. Before a person deploys, the IMS leadership needs 
to address several key factors: ensuring the role in the field 
is well defined and the staff member to be deployed has the 
requisite skills for the job; ensuring he or she is ready mentally 
and emotionally; ensuring he or she has supervisory approval 
to leave the “day job” for at least 30 days and often much 
longer and that other staff can fill the void; and last but by no 
means least, determining how quickly the staff member can 
be prepared to deploy. Although hundreds of CDC personnel 
have deployed domestically over the years and are considered 
“deployment-ready,” few were prepared (in the early activation 
period) for international deployments, requirements for which 
include appropriate medical clearance and vaccinations, 
security training, and possession of a U.S. government (not 
personal) passport. Many had never considered volunteering 
to deploy internationally and therefore often required several 
weeks to complete vaccination requirements; online and 
in-person security training; passport and visa processing; 
and of critical importance, make any necessary personal 
and family arrangements. To meet new and more rigorous 
U.S. Department of State requirements for overseas travel, 
approximately 637 staff completed High-Threat Security 
Overseas Training, and many others completed the week-long 
Foreign Affairs Counter-Threat Course during the first year of 
the response. Although these delays occasionally exacerbated 
staffing gaps in the Ebola response, one positive long-term 
outcome of preparedness is a much larger deployment-ready 
international responder workforce at CDC.
Ideally, international responders would deploy long enough 
(≥3 months) to become familiar with the local context and 
environment, acquire tacit knowledge and skills specific to 
their roles, and establish meaningful and effective relationships 
with partners. However, work and personal commitments 
within a volunteer responder workforce limited the ability 
to recruit persons for such long deployments, which in turn 
led to the need for higher than optimal numbers of persons 
to address identified staffing gaps for the response. Although 
FIGURE 1. Approximate number of staff deployed internationally who were managed by the CDC Emergency Operations Center, by week — 
July 2014–June 2015
Ebola response – all other international
Ebola response – all other Africa
Ebola response – Guinea
Ebola response – Liberia
Ebola response – Sierra Leone
Non-Ebola response – international
0
50
100
150
200
250
27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
2014
2015
Number
Epidemiological week, month, and year
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
 Supplement
94 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
intense staffing efforts resulted in approximately 2,844 persons 
participating during the first year of the response, either in 
the field or in the CDC IMS, critical staffing gaps required 
constant recruitment efforts within CDC and were met 
through the hiring of additional staff, acquisition of contract 
assistance, and use of partner agency personnel (e.g., other 
operating divisions of the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned 
Corps, Federal Emergency Management Agency, National 
Disaster Medical System, PHAC, and academic institutions).
In addition to logistic and staffing support for the 
international component of the Ebola response during this 
period, CDC deployed approximately 1,300 staff throughout 
the United States, including to five CDC quarantine stations 
at major airports, where enhanced entry risk assessment 
and management of travelers from Ebola-affected countries 
was conducted; approximately 63 hospitals to assess Ebola 
readiness; Anniston, Alabama, for CDC-conducted Ebola 
treatment unit training (7); and Texas, Ohio, and New York 
for response activities related to patients with Ebola. Although 
CDC adapted to the surge and unique needs of internationally 
deployed staff, it still needed to ensure capacity to provide 
logistic and resiliency support for the domestic staff.
Establishing the Deployment Risk 
Mitigation Unit
CDC staff deploying to West Africa during the early months 
of the outbreak had limited preparation for the environment 
and conditions they would encounter. No one working in the 
Ebola response was untouched by the physical and mental toll 
of the work itself (e.g., long hours, long deployments, changing 
demands) or by the mental and emotional toll of observing 
Ebola’s devastating impact on West Africans. In addition, 
deployed personnel shared concerns about being exposed to, 
or becoming ill with, Ebola.
By September 2014, returning responders increasingly 
voiced concerns about health, safety, security, and well-being. 
Feedback indicated that better training and preparation 
were required to help responders anticipate on-the-ground 
needs and do their jobs safely. CDC needed to be able to 
reassure concerned communities, families, and employers. 
To accomplish this, the CDC IMS activated a new team, the 
Deployment Risk Mitigation Unit (DRMU).
Initially a team of four (unit lead, predeployment 
coordinator, in-country coordinator, and postdeployment 
coordinator), the DRMU was tasked with supporting the 
health, safety, security, and well-being of CDC responders 
and their families throughout the deployment process. The 
DRMU coordinated predeployment educational activities, 
developed medical evacuation (medevac) procedures with the 
U.S. Department of State (for Ebola-related and non–Ebola-
related health conditions), provided requisite health and safety 
supplies for in-country use by deployed staff (e.g., first aid 
kits, fire extinguishers, door stops to prevent unwanted entry 
into rooms at night), and recruited and deployed field safety 
officers to Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
The DRMU collaborated with the IMS Deployment 
Coordination team, U.S. Department of State (for medevacs), 
CDC’s Occupational Health Clinic, Employee Assistance 
Program, National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health, IMS Logistics Support Section, and other 
organizations. The DRMU led, oversaw, supported, or 
coordinated implementation of several strategies to address 
concerns about health, safety, security, and well-being, including 
predeployment assessments, training, and preparedness; 
placement of safety officers in affected countries; reintegration 
and acceptance of returning deployed personnel and their 
families into workplaces, schools, and the community; and 
postdeployment physical and resiliency monitoring.
The DRMU helped develop, implement, and evaluate 
more robust and thorough predeployment briefings for 
staff. These briefings had always been a routine part of 
emergency deployments, but based on input from returning 
personnel deployed to the Ebola-affected countries, they were 
expanded to include sessions on Ebola and infectious disease 
prevention; cultural awareness; safety precautions in-country; 
personal protective equipment; mental and emotional 
resiliency; guidance on team organization; and coordination 
with partners, such as the U.S. Agency for International 
Development’s Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, the lead 
U.S. government agency in-country. Briefings were held twice 
a week to share these lessons learned with personnel preparing 
to deploy for the first time.
Advanced planning for the medevac of deployed CDC 
personnel proved especially challenging because of the variety 
of staff possibly affected (CDC civil servants, locally employed 
staff, non–U.S. citizen employees, U.S. citizen nonemployee) 
and potential variety of circumstances (exposed, possibly 
exposed, febrile, or afebrile). Because of the difficulty of 
distinguishing Ebola from other diseases endemic to the area 
(e.g., malaria) (8) and because of the global panic surrounding 
importation of Ebola cases, routine medevac procedures 
were disrupted. Although U.S. citizens and legal permanent 
residents were assured of a medevac to the United States, 
non–U.S. citizens working for CDC were not.
Any U.S. citizen CDC staff member determined to have 
been exposed to Ebola or to be febrile was required to travel 
home on an aircraft arranged by the U.S. Department of State, 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
95
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
using the Aeromedical Biologic Containment System (ABCS). 
The ABCS is an isolation chamber, originally developed by 
CDC and others after the epidemic of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome in 2003 and designed to isolate persons having 
airborne illnesses, but capable of transporting only one 
person per flight (Figure 2). The ABCS was not otherwise 
commercially available and could be deployed only with the 
approval of the U.S. Department of State.
Resolving how to effect a medevac was substantially 
more complicated for non–U.S. citizen CDC staff. Because 
of immigration laws, evacuating non-U.S. citizens to the 
United States was highly problematic. Successfully locating 
medevac companies agreeable to transporting febrile persons 
traveling from Guinea, Liberia, or Sierra Leone to another 
country was a challenge. Then, many countries (even home 
countries) were themselves initially unwilling to accept an 
evacuee unless that person had completed a 21-day monitoring 
period elsewhere. Sorting through the myriad issues and the 
case-by-case nature of medevacs required substantial time and 
frequent coordination between CDC, the U.S. Department of 
State, and other U.S. and international government agencies. 
Ultimately, none of CDC’s deployed staff required medevac 
for febrile illness.
While the DRMU addressed predeployment and postdeploy-
ment health, safety, security, and well-being concerns from 
CDC’s Atlanta headquarters, field safety officers extended 
that support to teams working in-country. Field safety officers 
reported directly to the DRMU throughout the response, pro-
viding situational awareness on the most pressing health and 
safety issues. Moreover, the field safety officers worked with 
country leadership to address issues related to accountability 
(knowing the location of deployed responders, daily); encour-
age use of the buddy system among staff traveling outside the 
capitals; decrease generally risky behaviors (e.g., not wearing 
FIGURE 2. The Aeromedical Biologic Containment System installed in a Gulfstream III aircraft*
* Names of specific vendors, manufacturers, or products are included for public health and informational purposes; inclusion does not imply endorsement of the 
vendors, manufacturers, or products by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
 Supplement
96 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
seat belts); and support overall well-being (e.g., serving as 
confidantes to deployed personnel, encouraging behaviors that 
enhanced resiliency).
Field safety officers also served as a conduit for information 
between the DRMU and the U.S. Embassy Health Units as 
well as the regional security officers in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone. These regular interactions with the U.S. Embassy 
in each country enabled field safety officers to improve working 
relationships between the Embassy and deployed personnel, 
especially crucial when services from the U.S. Embassy Health 
Units or regional security officers were needed. Finally, field 
safety officers identified on-the-ground health, safety, and 
well-being issues that had deleteriously affected (or had the 
potential to deleteriously affect) responders’ ability to conduct 
their work. Among many of their accomplishments: field safety 
officers successfully helped identify and stop an outbreak of 
foodborne illness among deployed personnel by inspecting the 
suspected kitchen source for the outbreak and by collaborating 
with management to implement changes to operations and 
food-handling practices.
The ongoing findings of the RTE, as well as postdeployment 
physical and resiliency monitoring and outreach, demonstrated 
that deployed personnel appreciated these interventions and 
reported improvements in their predeployment process, logistic 
and resiliency support throughout the deployment, and availability 
of resources postdeployment to reduce stress or improve well-
being. As a result of these efforts, CDC responders experienced 
remarkably improved conditions while traveling to West Africa 
later in the 2014–2016 Ebola response compared with conditions 
experienced during the early phase of the response and those 
usually experienced in international deployments.
Lessons Learned
To mount a timely and effective response while ensuring 
the safety and well-being of deployed staff, CDC must be 
able to identify and prepare a cadre of staff willing and able to 
deploy internationally on reasonably short notice. Although 
some preparations, such as international visas and final 
medical clearance, cannot be completed until the destination 
is known, most actions can be completed well in advance, 
such as acquiring and maintaining an official U.S. government 
passport, completing annual medical and respirator clearance, 
and completing required safety and security training. Other 
personal preparations involve taking care of the “home front” 
(e.g., by providing for family members, pets, and residences).
The size and complexity of the Ebola response highlighted 
the need for focus on developing processes, plans, and 
procedures to acquire, access, use, and deploy assets, whether 
personnel or other resources, before an activation; doing so 
during a response often is not the most efficient, timely, or safe 
way to operate. Readiness for the next large response requires 
CDC to document and institutionalize a variety of procedures, 
such as returning retirees to the workforce, deploying non-
CDC staff, providing safety and resilience training to more 
staff, and increasing the number of CDC staff who have skills 
in different languages.
Establishment of the DRMU reflected a change in how CDC 
views and manages deployment risks. The DRMU significantly 
improved the preparation of CDC staff for deployment and, 
equally important, assisted in staff reintegration into the 
agency and their families upon their return. The employment 
of deployed safety officers not only eased concerns of other 
deployed staff but also provided field team leadership with a 
dedicated resource to ensure staff were operating safely, despite 
the long hours and austere conditions.
Deployment of dedicated logistics personnel freed CDC 
scientific staff from the distractions of coordinating lodging, 
transportation, and other support needs while simultaneously 
facilitating coordination with embassies and consulates. 
Furthermore, by providing a single contact to the IMS Logistics 
Section in Atlanta, field team support requirements were more 
efficiently identified and fulfilled. Before the 2014–2016 Ebola 
response, CDC had few logistics staff with the background or 
skills to operate effectively overseas. Although not every future 
response will require deployment of logistics staff, the pool of 
available logisticians is greater now, and a program to maintain 
and improve their skills is being developed.
Conclusion
The 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa required 
an unprecedented response from CDC. It challenged the 
agency’s routine operations; logistics; staffing; and responder 
health, safety, and resiliency programs to rapidly adjust to new 
geographic environments and increased, ever-changing staffing 
needs. CDC used new resources, innovative problem-solving, 
and critical partnerships to support the scientific, public health, 
and emergency responses of persons deployed and help the 
affected countries end the Ebola epidemic.
Acknowledgments
IMS Logistics team, IMS Deployment Coordination team, IMS 
Evaluation team, IMS Deployment Risk Mitigation Unit, CDC 
Occupational Health Clinic and Workforce Wellness Program, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, and Steve 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
97
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Ahrenholtz, Robert (Bob) Allin, Theresa Armstead, James Boiano, 
Michael Breitenstein, Kate Brett, Scott Brown, Sherrie Bruce, 
Jacqueline Burkholder, Charmaine Burton, Marion Carter, David 
Caruso, Joni Charme, Mary Choi, Lisa Clark, Pamela Clark, Gayle 
DeBord, Lisa Delaney, Patricia Doggett, Brent Doney, Kevin H. Dunn, 
Kevin L. Dunn, Adrienne Eastlake, Judi Eisenberg, Fred Frondarina, 
Karen Forbes, Kelli Foster, Stephanie Frink (FEMA), Renee Funk, 
Kevin Gallagher, John Gibbins, Johanna Gilstrap, Christine Godfrey, 
Thomasina Greene, Lindsey Gressard, Stephanie Griese, LaTarsha 
Hall, Nancy Habarta, Mark Hall, Brittani Harmon, Lauri Hicks, Ryan 
Hill, Steve Holland, Jennifer Hornsby-Myers, Gordon Hughes, Robert 
(Rob) Hutchinson (FEMA), Allen Hyde, Laura Jackson-Usher, Maria 
Jolly, David Kelley, David Kennedy, Richard Klomp, John Kools, Keri 
Lubell, David Maples, Tonya Martin, Larry Mastin, Stephen Miles, 
William Moore, Brian Morrison, Christopher Mozingo, Latoria 
Mullins, Jennifer Murphy, John Myers, Mahiyar Nasarwanji, Jeanine 
Neipert (FEMA), Samara Nelson, Andrea Okun, Alexandra Oster, 
Lauren Peel, Laura Perrone, Carol Pertowski, Xander Phoenix, Michelle 
Podgonik, Amanda Powell, Marilyn Radke, Ismaila Ramon, Jenny 
Raspberry, George Roark, Patricia Robinson, Dale A. Rose, Cecelia 
Sanders, Raymond Sarmiento, Melissa Seaton, Sharon Shipman, Jill 
Shugart, Lawrence (Gray) Smithson, Robin Soler, Erica Spies, Renee 
Stein, Marie Sweeney, Loren Tapp, James Tyson, Katherine Wargo, 
Holly G. Williams, Mac Williams, and Christine Zerbie. CDC Ebola 
response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
1. Leidel L, Groseclose S, Burney B, et al. CDC’s Emergency Management 
Program activities—worldwide, 2003–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2013;62:709–13.
2. Brusset E, Cosgrave J, MacDonald W. Real‐time evaluation in humanitarian 
emergencies. In: Ritchie LA, MacDonald W, eds. Enhancing disaster and 
emergency preparedness, response, and recovery through evaluation. New 
Directions for Evaluation 2010;126:9–20.
3. Cosgrave J, Ramalingam B, Beck T. Real-time evaluations of humanitarian 
action: an ALNAP guide. London, UK: ALNAP; 2009. http://www.alnap.
org/resource/5595
4. Connor KM, Davidson JR. Development of a new resilience scale: the 
Connor-Davidson resilience scale (CD-RISC). Depress Anxiety 2003;18:76–
82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/da.10113
5. Kessler RC, Andrews G, Colpe LJ, et al. Short screening scales to monitor 
population prevalences and trends in non-specific psychological distress. Psychol 
Med 2002;32:959–76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291702006074
6. Prins A, Ouimette P
, Kimerling R, et al. The primary care PTSD screen 
(PC-PTSD): development and operating characteristics. Prim Care 
Psychiatry 2004;9:9–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1185/135525703125002360
7. CDC. Preparing healthcare workers to work in Ebola treatment units (ETUs) 
in Africa. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/hcp/safety-training-course
8. CDC. Recommendations for managing and preventing cases of malaria in areas 
with Ebola. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/malaria-cases.html  
 Supplement
98 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Implementing an Ebola Vaccine Study — Sierra Leone
Marc-Alain Widdowson, VetMB1
Stephanie J. Schrag, PhD1
Rosalind J. Carter, PhD1
Wendy Carr, PhD1
Jennifer Legardy-Williams, MPH1
Laura Gibson, MPH2
Durodami R. Lisk, MBBS3
Mohamed I. Jalloh, MBChB4
Donald A. Bash-Taqi, MBBS, MMed3
Samuel A. Sheku Kargbo, MD, DMed5
Ayesha Idriss, MSc3
Gibrilla F. Deen, MD3
James B.W. Russell, MBChB3
Wendi McDonald, RN1
Alison P
. Albert, MPH1
Michelle Basket1
Amy Callis, MPH1
Victoria M. Carter, PhD1
Kelli R. Clifton Ogunsanya, MHA6
Julianne Gee, MPH1
Robert Pinner, MD1
Barbara E. Mahon, MD1
Susan T. Goldstein, MD1
Jane F. Seward, MBBS1
Mohamed Samai, MBChB, PhD3
Anne Schuchat, MD1
1National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
2Conceptual Mindworks, Inc., San Antonio, Texas
3College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences, Freetown, Sierra Leone
4Sierra Leone Police Medical Service, Freetown, Sierra Leone
5Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Freetown, Sierra Leone
6PricewaterhouseCoopers, Atlanta, Georgia
Corresponding author: Marc-Alain Widdowson, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. Telephone: 254-70-212-1124; 
E-mail: MWiddowson@cdc.gov.
Summary
In October 2014, the College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences of the University of Sierra Leone, the Sierra Leone Ministry of Health 
and Sanitation, and CDC joined the global effort to accelerate assessment and availability of candidate Ebola vaccines and began planning 
for the Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola (STRIVE). STRIVE was an individually randomized controlled phase II/III 
trial to evaluate efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety of the recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus Ebola vaccine (rVSV-ZEBOV). The study 
population was health care and frontline workers in select chiefdoms of the five most affected districts in Sierra Leone. Participants were 
randomized to receive a single intramuscular dose of rVSV-ZEBOV at enrollment or to receive a single intramuscular dose 18–24 weeks 
after enrollment. All participants were followed up monthly until 6 months after vaccination. Two substudies separately assessed detailed 
reactogenicity over 1 month and immunogenicity over 12 months. During the 5 months before the trial, STRIVE and partners built a 
research platform in Sierra Leone comprising participant follow-up sites, cold chain, reliable power supply, and vaccination clinics and hired 
and trained at least 350 national staff. Wide-ranging community outreach, informational sessions, and messaging were conducted before 
and during the trial to ensure full communication to the population of the study area regarding procedures and current knowledge about 
the trial vaccine. During April 9–August 15, 2015, STRIVE enrolled 8,673 participants, of whom 453 and 539 were also enrolled in the 
safety and immunogenicity substudies, respectively. As of April 28, 2016, no Ebola cases and no vaccine-related serious adverse events, which 
by regulatory definition include death, life-threatening illness, hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization, or permanent disability, 
were reported in the study population. Although STRIVE will not produce an estimate of vaccine efficacy because of low case frequency as 
the epidemic was controlled, data on safety and immunogenicity will support decisions on licensure of rVSV-ZEBOV.
The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
99
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Background to Trial Conception
By August 2014, the unprecedented scope and exponential 
growth of the 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease (Ebola) 
epidemic in West Africa raised concern that control might be 
impossible without vaccination and prompted research and 
public health communities to accelerate development of Ebola 
vaccines. During September 4–5, 2014, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) convened advisors to review the most 
promising vaccine candidates and to consider the ethics of 
using investigational products in the expanding epidemic. As a 
result of this meeting, WHO called for “a coordinated effort by 
the international community to remove unnecessary obstacles” 
to accelerate evaluation and licensing of Ebola vaccines while 
acknowledging that for these to occur, an extraordinary pace 
of vaccine development, evaluation, and production would 
be needed (1). The National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
and the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious 
Diseases were already engaged in human phase I (2) trials of 
Ebola vaccines, and an NIH partnership was establishing a 
phase II/III double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 
trial in Liberia of two of the leading Ebola vaccine candidates.
Since March 2014, CDC had been focused on the Ebola 
outbreak response, and in September 2014, the agency began 
to consider launching a second U.S. government–sponsored 
phase II/III Ebola vaccine trial in Sierra Leone. The rationale was 
to develop an alternative approach to a blinded, placebo-controlled 
trial that was potentially less complex and thus easier to implement 
in Sierra Leone, where government agencies were struggling to 
respond to a devastating epidemic, yet an approach that would still 
provide data on efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety for vaccine 
licensure. If the vaccine were efficacious, vaccination of a large 
number of trial participants also could protect persons at high 
risk and potentially help control the worsening outbreak. Two 
distinct approaches in different sites would also mitigate the risk 
that one approach might not be successful.
In October 2014, CDC established a partnership with Sierra 
Leone to conduct an Ebola vaccine clinical trial, while a WHO-led 
international consortium began planning an Ebola ring vaccination 
trial in Guinea. The CDC–Sierra Leone trial, subsequently named 
STRIVE (Sierra Leone T
rial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola), 
was led by the College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences 
(COMAHS) of the University of Sierra Leone, the Sierra Leone 
Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MoHS), and CDC. CDC 
sent technical staff in late October to Sierra Leone to work with 
COMAHS and MoHS leadership to start trial planning. During 
the initial conception, two further key principles were articulated: 
1) the trial was not to detract from the main epidemic response 
and 2) the trial would contribute to longer-term capacity building 
and transfer of skills within Sierra Leone.
Trial Design and Ethical 
Considerations
Early data from Sierra Leone suggested that health care 
workers (HCWs) had a 100-fold higher risk for Ebola than the 
general community (3); therefore, the study population was 
selected to include all staff at health care facilities (i.e., clinical 
and nonclinical workers) and other Ebola frontline workers 
(e.g., surveillance, burial, and ambulance team members). 
Power calculations indicated that at least 67 Ebola cases were 
needed in the study population to detect a vaccine efficacy of 
50%, and facility censuses and disease rates calculated near 
the peak of the epidemic led STRIVE collaborators to initially 
target a population of 6,000 participants in the five most 
heavily affected of the 14 districts of Sierra Leone. The logistics 
of travel and vaccine transport on poor roads, especially in 
the rainy season, necessitated choosing, within the selected 
districts, centrally located chiefdoms with the highest numbers 
of HCWs and Ebola cases.
A modified stepped wedge design (4) was initially considered 
for the study: health facilities and teams of health care and 
frontline workers throughout the study area would each 
be randomized to receive vaccine at a specified time over a 
6-month period until all staff in all facilities in the study area 
were offered vaccine. Ebola rates and adverse events would be 
compared at any one time between vaccinated and (up to that 
point) unvaccinated staff and facilities over the study period. 
However, several key logistic and methodologic limitations 
of this approach posed obstacles. First, the design required 
follow-up of the entire study population from the trial start; 
therefore, all staff in all facilities had to be enrolled before the 
first dose of vaccine could be administered. Second, once all 
staff in facilities were enrolled, very limited opportunity existed 
to expand the sample size, yet declining background rates of 
Ebola suggested this might be needed. Third, Ebola increasingly 
occurred in clusters as overall incidence declined; therefore, an 
imbalance of Ebola risk could easily occur between facilities with 
vaccinated staff and facilities with unvaccinated staff and lead 
to lower statistical power and unreliable results (5). Because of 
these limitations, STRIVE collaborators chose an individually 
randomized trial of health care and frontline workers assigned 
to different vaccination times. This approach would provide 
flexibility of implementation because staff in each facility 
could be enrolled independently from staff in other facilities 
(allowing for the possibility of increasing sample size easily), 
as well as more discrete units of randomization and greater 
statistical power. At screening and enrollment, participants 
were randomized to receive vaccine immediately (immediate 
vaccinees) or 18–24 weeks later (deferred vaccinees), and all 
were monitored monthly from enrollment until 6 months after 
 Supplement
100 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
vaccination for Ebola and for serious adverse events, which 
according to the regulatory definition involve hospitalization 
or prolongation of hospitalization, death, or reported life-
threatening illness or permanent disability (6). The STRIVE 
protocol was approved (7) by the Sierra Leone Ethics and 
Scientific Review Committee and the CDC Institutional 
Review Board (CDC-NCIRD-6689) and registered at https://
clinicaltrials.gov (identifier NCT02378753).
In early discussions with Sierra Leone partners when deaths 
from Ebola were highest, the use of a placebo was ruled out 
because of the logistic complexity of implementing a placebo 
and concerns that placebo recipients might feel protected 
against Ebola and put themselves at risk. The lack of placebo 
opened up the study to several biases. For instance, immediate 
vaccinees might be assigned to a higher risk duty or be less 
careful in using personal protective equipment (PPE) than 
deferred vaccinees. Immediate vaccinees also might be more 
likely than persons who had not yet been vaccinated to report 
adverse events possibly associated with the vaccine or seek care 
for illness, thus biasing potential safety signals especially for 
milder adverse events. Reporting of Ebola was considered less 
likely to be susceptible to bias because Ebola generally has a 
severe clinical picture and surveillance is comprehensive. To 
reduce bias, STRIVE staff emphasized to each participant that 
the level of protection afforded by the vaccine was unknown 
and therefore Ebola prevention behaviors should not be 
relaxed. Design elements were added to measure bias, such as 
questions about use of PPE or changes in duties. Nonetheless, 
these potential biases complicated the comparison of frequency 
of events between the immediate and deferred vaccinees 
(especially adverse events, because ultimately, no Ebola cases 
were reported in the study population).
In addition to the main study, STRIVE planned two 
substudies. The first was a safety substudy of 400 participants 
(200 vaccinated, 200 unvaccinated) at the start of the trial with 
follow-up for adverse events on days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 28 after 
enrollment. The second was an immunogenicity substudy of 
500 participants enrolled during June–September 2015 with 
blood draws at day 0, day 28, month 6, and once during 
months 9–12 after vaccination.
Because this clinical trial of an experimental live vaccine 
of unknown effectiveness and safety would be conducted 
in a population with high levels of poverty and low literacy 
in the midst of an Ebola epidemic, ethical issues were a 
foremost consideration. One concern was that fear of Ebola 
could lead to a skewed risk–benefit calculation by health care 
and frontline workers in their decision to receive a vaccine 
of unclear safety and efficacy. STRIVE staff also were aware 
that reimbursements for participation and free health care 
could further induce enrollment. Careful messaging about the 
uncertainty of protection afforded by the vaccine was used to 
prevent participants from undertaking tasks at work or in the 
community that could place them at greater risk for Ebola. 
To maintain the balance between immediate and deferred 
vaccine arms and the integrity of randomization, each site was 
provided with sealed allocation envelopes in a predetermined 
sequence. To ensure that participants correctly perceived the 
envelope sequence as entirely random, enrollees were asked to 
choose one of five envelopes next in sequence. These ethical 
and communication concerns were addressed with guidance 
from Sierra Leone STRIVE leadership and other partners. 
Active and transparent communication of risks and benefits to 
participants and the public continued throughout the trial as 
the risk–benefit balance changed with ebbing Ebola incidence.
STRIVE was also positioned to help the outbreak response 
with the shared priority of early identification and diagnosis 
of suspected Ebola cases through the continued monitoring 
of participants. One complication identified early in trial 
planning was that during the phase I trials the vaccine could 
cause fever, myalgia, and fatigue in the first day or two after 
administration. Recent vaccinees could have a mild vaccine 
reaction that met the definition of suspected Ebola and 
be referred to Ebola holding centers where they could be 
unnecessarily exposed to Ebola. Identification and treatment 
of true Ebola among vaccinees could not be substantially 
delayed, nor could associated public health responses (e.g., 
contact tracing) be impeded. After discussions with the 
response leadership in Sierra Leone, STRIVE leaders slightly 
modified the suspected case definition for trial participants 
for the first 48 hours after vaccine receipt to allow for a 
short delay in determining whether a person had suspected 
Ebola if that person was a recent vaccinee exhibiting only 
symptoms consistent with vaccination.* Any vaccinees with 
Ebola exposure or exhibiting any Ebola symptoms that were 
inconsistent with vaccination at any time were immediately 
treated as having suspected Ebola.
Vaccine Selection
In late summer and early fall 2014, only limited data from 
nonhuman primate studies existed on the two leading vaccine 
* Standard suspected Ebola case definition: Temperature ≥38°C (≥100.4°F ) and 
three or more of the following symptoms: headache, loss of appetite, fatigue, 
muscle/joint pain, diarrhea, unusual bleeding, difficulty breathing, nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, difficulty swallowing, or hiccups; OR illness after 
direct, unprotected Ebola contact or a breach in personal protective equipment 
in the past 21 days. Modified case definition applied to vaccine recipients in 
the first 48 hours after vaccination: same as for standard suspected Ebola case 
except that at least one symptom had to be one of the following symptoms not 
consistent with a vaccine reaction: diarrhea, unusual bleeding, difficulty 
breathing, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, difficulty swallowing, or hiccups.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
101
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
candidates poised to begin phase I trials in humans at that time. 
Both candidates used live recombinant virus vectors encoding 
the surface glycoprotein of the Ebola virus (EBOV). One was 
the replication-deficient recombinant chimpanzee adenovirus 
type-3 vectored vaccine (ChAd3-EBOV), developed by the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of NIH 
and licensed for development to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK); the 
second was the replication-competent, recombinant vesicular 
stomatitis virus vectored vaccine (rVSV-ZEBOV) developed 
by the Public Health Agency of Canada, licensed to NewLink 
Genetics Corporation then later to Merck and Co., Inc. 
(Merck), for further development.
In October 2014, a report suggested that a single dose of 
ChAd3-EBOV would protect macaques against lethal challenge 
of 1,000 plaque-forming units of EBOV administered 
intramuscularly (8). Although humoral and cell-mediated 
responses specific to the EBOV glycoprotein were elicited by 
the vaccine, protection seemed of short duration because deaths 
increased among macaques challenged at 10 months after 
initial vaccination. A second vaccination (a heterologous boost) 
of modified vaccinia Ankara with EBOV glycoprotein (MVA-
EBOV), given a month after initial vaccination with ChAd3-
EBOV, appeared more likely to provide durable protection 
(8). Challenge studies of rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine in nonhuman 
primates also provided evidence of protection and humoral 
immune response (9,10). Data on longevity of protection were 
not available for rVSV with EBOV glycoprotein, only for a 
vesicular stomatitis virus recombinant with Marburg virus, 
which, although related, is less virulent and therefore could 
not be used as proxy for Ebola virus (11).
By January 2015, some of the first human phase I data on 
immunogenicity and safety in small groups of healthy adults 
became available for both vaccines. Early results on humoral 
and cell-mediated responses of ChAd3-EBOV were promising 
overall, although somewhat mixed (12,13), and similarly 
encouraging humoral responses to rVSV-ZEBOV were 
found at day 28 after vaccination (14). These small studies of 
both vaccines had not detected any safety issues, but in mid-
December 2014, a phase I study under way in Switzerland that 
used rVSV-ZEBOV was paused to assess episodes of reported 
arthritis that began during the second week after vaccination. 
In early January 2015, the study was resumed at a lower dose of 
vaccine (15). Investigators of other phase I studies in the United 
States examined their data but did not initially detect similar 
adverse events (14), although an association was detected later 
in some other trials also.
In early 2015, intensive public health control measures led 
to decreasing intensity of the Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone, 
although the situation remained unpredictable. To provide useful 
data on efficacy for possible vaccine licensure, starting the trial as 
soon as possible was essential. Therefore, selection of a vaccine 
and filing by CDC (as trial sponsor) of an investigational new 
drug (IND) application became urgent. Although the use of a 
priming vaccination with ChAd3-EBOV boosted with a second 
vaccination with MVA-EBOV generally was seen as the best 
opportunity to provide durable protection with ChAd3-EBOV, 
this strategy presented several critical disadvantages. These 
included the need for longer follow-up (because of the interval 
between doses), the difficulty in attributing safety issues to two 
different products, the need for more space and staff to follow 
up and vaccinate participants twice, the need for more cold 
chain capacity, and the lack of human data on MVA-EBOV 
submitted to the Food and Drug Administration for evaluation 
in early 2015. Statistical power calculations made clear that 
comparing two vaccines would need an untenably large trial with 
HCWs, thus leaving the choice between a single-dose regimen 
of ChAd3-EBOV or rVSV-ZEBOV. An additional variable was 
that in early 2015, GSK and Merck were still examining data 
from dose-ranging studies to ascertain the optimum vaccine 
dose for trials and licensure.
STRIVE leadership convened expert groups that advised 
that, as a live replication-competent vaccine, a single dose of 
rVSV-ZEBOV was more likely to provide durable and rapid 
protection than ChAd3-EBOV. Moreover, ChAd3-EBOV 
was needed for other trials, and it was uncertain in January 
2015 whether sufficient doses of GSK’s final formulation of 
the vaccine would be available in time for STRIVE’s launch. 
For these reasons, in late January 2015, STRIVE leadership 
at COMAHS, MoHS, and CDC selected a single dose of 
rVSV-ZEBOV at the manufacturer-recommended dose of 
2 × 107 plaque-forming units/mL for the trial. At that time, 
<100 persons had received this or a higher dose of this vaccine 
in clinical trials. Merck and Newlink Genetics Corporation 
provided and shipped the vaccine doses necessary for the trial.
Establishing the Trial Platform
Trials conducted under IND regulations require a high 
level of rigor in methods and implementation and continuous 
monitoring and documentation for the data to be useful to the 
licensing pathway. Sierra Leone is still recovering from a civil 
war that ended in 2002, leaving a fragile infrastructure and 
limited clinical research capacity exacerbated by a paucity of 
physicians in the country (approximately 150 for a country of 
6 million persons in 2010 [16]). In addition, the fundamental 
requirements for the trial (i.e., clinics for vaccination, office 
space for data management, a reliably powered and mobile 
cold chain that could keep the vaccine at the required -80°C 
 Supplement
102 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
[-112°F], Internet access, and laboratory capacity) were either 
not available or adequate in Sierra Leone.
To meet the unprecedented challenge of sponsoring and 
leading an IND trial on short notice in this demanding 
context, STRIVE leadership at CDC began to identify relevant 
expertise throughout the agency, without detracting from the 
response. Insurance and medical evacuation considerations 
largely prevented use of nongovernment staff; therefore, efforts 
were initiated to hire external staff into U.S. government 
positions specifically for longer-term deployment. CDC also 
arranged with various partners to support the logistic needs 
and preparatory work for the trial and finding solutions to the 
many challenges (Table 1). The U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services’ Biomedical and Advanced Research 
and Development Authority committed expert staff and used 
existing mechanisms for clinical trials to fund and establish 
contracts to secure clinical monitoring, safety monitoring, 
data management, and cold chain assistance through multiple 
contract research organizations. The CDC Foundation raised 
donor funds that could be immediately used for early demands, 
such as infrastructure building, supplies, and hiring staff by 
an in-country nongovernment agency, eHealth Africa. WHO 
assessed the cold chain capacity in country and provided -80°C 
(-112°F) freezers necessary to store and transport the vaccine. 
Intellectual Ventures provided units of the newly developed 
Arktek, a system that uses alcohol-based refrigerants (phase-
change materials) that can maintain -80°C temperatures for 
several days with no power, enabling vaccine transport and 
short-term storage at district enrollment sites (17).
Provision of power, Internet, and even water for basic use 
proved challenging throughout the trial. Developing a reliable 
source of power for the cold chain storage depots and offices 
for data entry required establishment of several combinations 
of backup generators, solar power, and battery systems that 
were supported by international engineering expertise from 
the German Federal Agency for Technical Relief.
Early on, in response to the epidemic, COMAHS (medical, 
nursing, and pharmacy schools) closed so as not to put students 
and staff at increased risk for Ebola during training; thus these 
students and staff were able to work for the trial. However, 
very few had prior training in Good Clinical Practice and the 
precepts of human subject research required for a trial under 
IND regulations. Therefore, in March 2015, at least 350 staff 
were trained on site by CDC, COMAHS, MoHS, and two 
of the contract research organizations, FHI360 and Emmes 
Corporation. Retraining continued as the trial progressed and 
procedural issues were identified.
Communication
During the epidemic, the highly charged social environment 
made the conduct of a large trial of an IND with very limited 
data from previous human trials particularly delicate. STRIVE 
created a communication plan to 1) increase awareness and 
confidence in STRIVE among stakeholders and opinion 
leaders; 2) educate potential study participants on the risks 
and benefits of trial participation, informed consent, and 
confidentiality; 3) anticipate and prepare responses to public 
rumors, misinformation, controversy, or questions about 
the trial; and 4) ensure clear, consistent messages among 
all study staff and partners. In December 2014, formative 
research, including in-depth interviews and focus groups, was 
conducted with the general public, public health leaders, and 
groups eligible for vaccination to understand their knowledge, 
attitudes, and beliefs about Ebola vaccines and the vaccine trial.
STRIVE leadership was committed to transparency about 
the proposed design and to sharing all data available on the 
vaccine. Leaders from COMAHS and MoHS conducted 
TABLE 1. Challenges and solutions of implementing Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola
Challenge
Solution
No -80°C (-112°F ) freezers or method of transport at 
-80°C (-112°F )
Purchase and international shipping of freezers; phase change material transporters (Arktek)
No appropriate space for enrollment and vaccination
Identify, negotiate use, and renovate some facilities
No space for data entry and management
Build and renovate facilities
No reliable Internet for data entry, storage, and transmission
Installation of satellite routed Internet and wireless capacity
No reliable power for cold chain, laboratory, and participant 
follow-up sites
Installation of generators, solar panels, and backup batteries
Health status of population unknown; poor and dispersed 
health care access
Establish free medical care; provide supplies to upgrade intensive care unit at referral hospital
Misinformation and misconceptions on vaccines and the 
motives of the trial organizers
Focus groups, key informant interviews, informational sessions, extensive communication materials
Relevant supplies limited in country
Procure and ship supplies internationally
No basic equipment (e.g., centrifuges) in country for 
serology study
Procure and ship equipment internationally
No staff GCP training; inexperienced research staff
Conduct large scale, in person training; repeated retraining on operating procedures
Abbreviations: GCP = Good Clinical Practice; STRIVE = Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
103
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
numerous outreach sessions with tribal and religious leaders 
of selected chiefdoms, district health leaders, and professional 
organizations to explain the proposed trial, to understand 
concerns, and to garner support and feedback. Study team 
members also met with leaders of every eligible health facility. 
This outreach established relationships between STRIVE staff 
and the health care community in the study areas, which enabled 
continuous dialogue on the trial. In February 2015, STRIVE 
leadership presented the trial plans to the full government and 
to the news media.
Beginning in March 2015, the STRIVE team held 175 
informational sessions in facilities in the areas where the clinical 
trial was to take place to introduce it to potential participants 
using materials developed as a result of the formative research. 
At enrollment, participants were provided with similar 
materials on all aspects of the trial and an informed consent 
form. Participants also had 24-hour access to a hotline with 
trained staff to answer questions about the trial and procedures.
Trial Status
Seven trial enrollment sites were set up in five Sierra Leone 
districts (one in each of Western Urban, Western Rural, Bombali, 
and Tonkolili districts and three in Port Loko district). Enrollment 
and vaccinations began on April 9, 2015, in the Western Rural 
location; the other six sites were opened during the subsequent 
11 weeks and remained open for varying periods, depending on 
the estimated size of the local population of eligible frontline 
workers and HCWs (Figure 1). Enrollment ended on August 15, 
2015, and sites began reopening to vaccinate the deferred group on 
September 19, 2015. Vaccination was completed on December 12, 
2015, and as of April 28, 2016, on the basis of preliminary data, 
8,673 participants were enrolled and 8,016 vaccinated, of whom 
3,826 received deferred vaccination (Figure 2).
A total of 539 participants enrolled in the immunogenicity 
study. Of these, 509 provided baseline blood samples, of whom 
466 (92%) provided a day-28 blood sample and 411 (81%) 
FIGURE 1. Study sites and enrollment through October 2015 for the Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola
Abbreviations: COMAHS = College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences, University of Sierra Leone; STRIVE = Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola.
 Supplement
104 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
provided a 6-month blood sample. The blood draws for months 
 
9–12 after vaccination began in June 2016. The safety substudy 
enrolled 453 participants (227 immediate vaccinees and 226 
deferred vaccinees) in April 2015. As of April 28, 2016, a 
total of 64 participants had illnesses that were investigated as 
suspected Ebola, of whom 60 provided specimens for testing, 
but none were confirmed as Ebola. No serious adverse events 
related to vaccination have been reported; the data from the 
safety substudy are generally consistent with data found in 
phase I trials of the vaccine, and no association of vaccine with 
arthritis has been noted.
The Future
On August 3, 2015, the WHO-led consortium conducting 
the ring vaccination trial in Guinea that used rVSV-ZEBOV 
(Ebola ça Suffit!) reported interim vaccine efficacy results of 
100% (95% confidence interval: 75%–100%) and only one 
serious adverse event (a postvaccinal fever that resolved) (18). 
The trial design was one in which contacts and contacts-of-
contacts of index cases (rings) would be vaccinated immediately 
or 3 weeks after the report of an index case. With these 
encouraging results, the ring trial expanded to Sierra Leone in 
September 2015 with the change that all rings receive vaccine 
immediately. As of April 28, 2016, ring vaccination has been 
FIGURE 2. Timeline of Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola enrollment and implementation, by number of cases, enrollees, 
and month — seven sites,* Sierra Leone, July 2014–December 2015
Ebola cases (All Sierra Leone)
Ebola cases (STRIVE study area)
STRIVE cumulative enrollment
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
2014
2015
Month and year
Cumulative no. enrollees
No. Ebola cases
Study sites enrolling all 
participants and vaccinating 
immediate group
Outreach 
eforts 
initiated
(early Nov)
First feld 
site visit
(Oct 24)
Vaccine 
choice 
(Jan 30)
IND 
to 
FDA 
(Jan 28)
Cold chain 
and clinic 
renovations 
complete
SL pharmacy 
board 
approval 
(Mar 16)
Vaccine 
arrival in 
country 
(Mar 19)
FDA safe 
to proceed 
approval 
(Feb 27)
STRIVE 
study and 
safety 
substudy 
launch 
(Apr 9)
Immuno-
genicity
study 
launched 
(Jun 18)
Main study 
enrollment 
end 
(Aug 15)
Deferred 
vaccination 
start 
(Sep 19)
Deferred 
vaccination 
stop 
(Dec 12)
1
4
3
2
5
1
4
3
6
2
5
1
4
7
3
6
2
5
1
7
1
Source: Sierra Leone National Emergency Response Center situational reports. 
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; FDA = Food and Drug Administration; IND = investigational new drug application; SL = Sierra Leone; STRIVE = Sierra Leone 
Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola. 
* Active study sites (indicated by numbered boxes): 1 = Connaught Hospital (Western Urban district); 2 = College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences Library, 
University of Sierra Leone (Western Rural district); 3 = Port Loko Government Hospital (Port Loko district); 4 = Holy Spirit Hospital (Bombali district); 5 = Magburaka 
Government Hospital (Tonkolili district); 6 = St. John of God Hospital, Lunsar (Port Loko district); 7 = St. John of God Health Center, Kaffu Bullom (Port Loko district). 
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
105
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
conducted in response to three cases. Regulatory agencies will 
be evaluating rVSV-ZEBOV and other Ebola vaccines for 
licensure as more data on efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety 
become available. Until that time, access to candidate vaccines 
requires enrollment in a clinical trial.
On November 7, 2015, WHO declared the end of EBOV 
transmission in Sierra Leone. In January 2016, however, 
two new cases were reported in Sierra Leone. Several factors 
contribute to a persistent risk for new Ebola cases and clusters: 
1) an increase in standard patient care and handling with 
reduced protection; 2) increases in population movements, 
including introduction from neighboring countries; and 3) the 
persistence of viable EBOV in recovered patients, potentially 
resulting in recrudescence of illness or transmission through 
semen (19). Ongoing vigilance will be necessary, possibly 
in addition to a variety of vaccine approaches, to extinguish 
transmission altogether in the region. Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance 
has committed US $300 million to purchase a licensed vaccine 
and US $45 million for costs of vaccination campaigns (20).
Although STRIVE will not be able to measure vaccine 
efficacy because of the absence of reported EBOV transmission 
in HCWs during the study period, STRIVE will provide key 
data on safety, reactogenicity, and immunogenicity to inform 
licensure. The impact and accomplishments also extend beyond 
contributing data needed for vaccine licensure and support any 
vaccine deployment. These include lessons on acceptance of the 
vaccine; improved cold chain infrastructure, including various 
new technologies; capacity for basic laboratory work and data 
management; communication expertise; and staff experienced 
with this vaccine (Table 2). A longer-term benefit is a newly 
forged relationship between institutions in Sierra Leone and 
CDC, a relationship that has strengthened capacity in Sierra 
Leone to better and more rapidly investigate and control future 
infectious disease outbreaks and prevent any repeat of an Ebola 
epidemic of this scale.
Acknowledgments
Members of all implementing partners and STRIVE staff; Nancy 
Messonnier for efforts to set up STRIVE in the first several months; 
CDC Ebola response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries; all the 
study participants; the STRIVE Vaccine Research Group.
Disclosure of Relationship
The STRIVE study authors disclose that they have no financial 
conflicts of interest.
References
1. World Health Organization. Potential Ebola therapies and vaccines. Interim 
guidance 2014. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/137590/1/
WHO_EVD_HIS_EMP_14.1_eng.pdf
2. National Library of Medicine. FAQ. ClinicalTrials.gov—clinical trial 
phases. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/services/ctphases.html
3. Kilmarx PH, Clarke KR, Dietz PM, et al. Ebola virus disease in health 
care workers—Sierra Leone, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1168–71.
4. Hemming K, Haines TP
, Chilton PJ, Girling AJ, Lilford RJ. The stepped 
wedge cluster randomised trial: rationale, design, analysis, and reporting. 
BMJ 2015;350:h391. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h391
5. Bellan SE, Pulliam JR, Pearson CA, et al. Statistical power and validity 
of Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone: a simulation study of trial design 
and analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2015;15:703–10. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70139-8
6. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 600.80. Postmarketing 
reporting of adverse experiences. Federal Register 1997;62:52252–3.
7. CDC. Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola (STRIVE) 
Q&A. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/strive/qa.html
TABLE 2. Present and future impact and accomplishments of Sierra Leone Trial to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola
Impact
Accomplishments
Contribution to decision on licensing of Ebola vaccine
Generated data on 
• vaccine safety (serious adverse events*) for approximately 8,000 vaccinees; 
• vaccine safety (detailed reactogenicity) for participants randomized to either receive vaccine 
immediately (approximately 200) at enrollment or 18–24 weeks later (approximately 200); 
• vaccine immunogenicity among approximately 500 vaccinees; and 
• duration of humoral response among 300–500 vaccinees.
Supported rollout of licensed Ebola vaccines
Generated information about 
• vaccine acceptance in Sierra Leone communities, and 
• feasibility and logistics of use of Ebola vaccine with challenging storage and handling requirements. 
Developed communication plans and materials developed for trial built on research in community. 
Built cold chain capacity and power solutions to hold and transport vaccine at -80°C (-112°F).
Strengthened capacity to conduct public health research
Trained 
• at least 350 national staff in GCP and human subjects research, and 
• four national staff in laboratory practice. 
Built conference center for use as participant follow-up site. 
Developed foundation for long-term relationship between COMAHS and CDC.
Prevented Ebola infections
Vaccinated approximately 8,000 high-risk persons with vaccine that is likely effective during period 
when EBOV was still actively circulating.
Abbreviations: COMAHS = College of Medicine and Allied Health Sciences, University of Sierra Leone; Ebola = Ebola virus disease; EBOV = Ebola virus; GCP = Good 
Clinical Practice.
* According to the regulatory definition, serious adverse events involve hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization, death, or reported life-threatening illness 
or permanent disability. Food and Drug Administration 21 CFR Part 600.80. Postmarketing reporting of adverse experiences. Federal Register 1991;62;52252–3.
 Supplement
106 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 8. Stanley DA, Honko AN, Asiedu C, et al. Chimpanzee adenovirus vaccine 
generates acute and durable protective immunity against Ebolavirus 
challenge. Nat Med 2014;20:1126–9.
 9. Jones SM, Feldmann H, Ströher U, et al. Live attenuated recombinant 
vaccine protects nonhuman primates against Ebola and Marburg viruses. 
Nat Med 2005;11:786–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nm1258
 
10. Marzi A, Engelmann F
, Feldmann F
, et al. Antibodies are necessary for rVSV/
ZEBOV-GP-mediated protection against lethal Ebola virus challenge in 
nonhuman primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:1893–8. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1209591110
 
11. Mire CE, Geisbert JB, Agans KN, et al. Durability of a vesicular stomatitis 
virus-based Marburg virus vaccine in nonhuman primates. PLoS One 
2014;9:e94355. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0094355
 
12. Ledgerwood JE, Sullivan NJ, Graham BS. Chimpanzee adenovirus vector 
Ebola vaccine—preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2015;373:776. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc1505499
 
13. Rampling T, Ewer K, Bowyer G, et al. A monovalent chimpanzee 
adenovirus Ebola vaccine—preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2015 
[ahead of print]. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1411627
 
14. Regules JA, Beigel JH, Paolino KM, et al. A recombinant vesicular 
stomatitis virus Ebola vaccine—preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2015 
[ahead of print]. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1414216
 
15. Agnandji ST, Huttner A, Zinser ME, et al. Phase 1 trials of rVSV Ebola 
vaccine in Africa and Europe—preliminary report. N Engl J Med 2015 
[ahead of print]. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1502924
 
16. World Health Organization. Health workforce: density of physicians 
2015. http://gamapserver.who.int/gho/interactive_charts/health_
workforce/PhysiciansDensity_Total/atlas.html
 
17. Modified Arktek to support Ebola vaccine trials. http://www.intellectualventureslab.
com/invent/modified-arktek-to-support-ebola-vaccine-trials
 
18. Henao-Restrepo AM, Longini IM, Egger M, et al. Efficacy and 
effectiveness of an rVSV-vectored vaccine expressing Ebola surface 
glycoprotein: interim results from the Guinea ring vaccination cluster-
randomised trial. Lancet 2015;386:857–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(15)61117-5
 
19. Christie A, Davies-Wayne GJ, Cordier-Lassalle T, et al. Possible sexual 
transmission of Ebola virus—Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:479–81. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:1180.
 
20. Gavi. Gavi commits to purchasing Ebola vaccine for affected countries. 
2014. http://www.gavi.org/Library/News/Press-releases/2014/
Gavi-commits-to-purchasing-ebola-vaccine-for-affected-countries/  
    ISSN: 2380-8950 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of charge 
in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/su/su6503a1.htm?s_
cid=su6503a1_w. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, 
Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
