 Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
DOI 10.1007/s00204-017-1962-5
REVIEW ARTICLE
Glyphosate toxicity and carcinogenicity: a review of the scientific 
basis of the European Union assessment and its differences 
with IARC
Jose V. Tarazona1 · Daniele Court‑Marques1 · Manuela Tiramani1 · Hermine Reich1 · 
Rudolf Pfeil2 · Frederique Istace1 · Federica Crivellente1 
Received: 15 January 2017 / Accepted: 21 March 2017 / Published online: 3 April 2017 
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
for some representatives uses. Two complementary expo-
sure assessments, human-biomonitoring and food-resi-
dues-monitoring, suggests that actual exposure levels are 
below these reference values and do not represent a public 
concern.
Keywords Glyphosate · Toxicity · Carcinogenicity · 
IARC · EFSA · Public health · Consumer risk
Introduction
Glyphosate is the most widely used herbicide in the world. 
A broad spectrum herbicide, its uses include weed control 
in agriculture, vegetation control in non-agricultural areas, 
and harvesting aid as crop desiccant. Its use in agricul-
ture has increased considerably due to the development of 
glyphosate-resistant GM crop varieties; the herbicide has 
also been used to control illegal crops through massive 
aerial applications (Solomon et al. 2007). The widespread 
use and public debate regarding these uses have aroused 
societal concern and a scientific controversy on the toxic-
ity of glyphosate (Faria 2015) beyond the scientific debate 
(Blaylock 2015).
Glyphosate was considered an advantageous herbicide 
until its use led to the evolution of glyphosate-resistant 
weeds (Duke and Powles 2008) and studies suggest-
ing effects of glyphosate-based formulations in humans 
and wildlife were published. Interest in glyphosate has 
increased exponentially among scientists, and the subject 
accounted for 5% of the articles on pesticides included 
in PubMed during 2015. About 25% of the articles cover 
the toxicity endpoints in humans and all types of organ-
isms, and the majority is conducted with glyphosate-
based formulations, containing other ingredients. Some 
Abstract Glyphosate is the most widely used herbicide 
worldwide. It is a broad spectrum herbicide and its agri-
cultural uses increased considerably after the development 
of glyphosate-resistant genetically modified (GM) varie-
ties. Since glyphosate was introduced in 1974, all regu-
latory assessments have established that glyphosate has 
low hazard potential to mammals, however, the Interna-
tional Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) concluded 
in March 2015 that it is probably carcinogenic. The IARC 
conclusion was not confirmed by the EU assessment or the 
recent joint WHO/FAO evaluation, both using additional 
evidence. Glyphosate is not the first topic of disagreement 
between IARC and regulatory evaluations, but has received 
greater attention. This review presents the scientific basis 
of the glyphosate health assessment conducted within the 
European Union (EU) renewal process, and explains the 
differences in the carcinogenicity assessment with IARC. 
Use of different data sets, particularly on long-term toxic-
ity/carcinogenicity in rodents, could partially explain the 
divergent views; but methodological differences in the 
evaluation of the available evidence have been identified. 
The EU assessment did not identify a carcinogenicity haz-
ard, revised the toxicological profile proposing new toxico-
logical reference values, and conducted a risk assessment 
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this 
article (doi:10.1007/s00204-017-1962-5) contains supplementary 
material, which is available to authorized users.
 
* Jose V. Tarazona 
 
Jose.Tarazona@efsa.europa.eu
1 
Pesticides Unit, European Food Safety Authority, Via Carlo 
Magno 1/A, 43126 Parma, Italy
2 
Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), Berlin, 
Germany
 2724
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
ingredients may be more toxic than glyphosate for non-
plant species (Kim et al. 2013; Mesnage et al. 2013; 
Nobels et al. 2011), ingredients classified as carcino-
genic or mutagenic are not expected to be used and must 
be indicated in the label, however, the full composition 
of the formulation is not disclosed by the manufacturers, 
therefore, it is impossible for researchers to apply mix-
ture toxicity methods and attribute toxicity to specific 
ingredients.
The risk assessment of a pesticide for human health 
integrates two aspects. First, the hazard identification clari-
fies the toxicological profile of the substance, setting the 
type of health effects it is expected to produce in humans 
depending on the level of exposure, triggering the hazard 
classification and setting the toxicological reference values 
to be used in the risk assessment. Then, for each intended 
use, the expected level of exposure is calculated and com-
pared with the reference values. While the hazard potential 
is intrinsic and, therefore, expected to be equivalent in all 
evaluations, the risk is related to the use of the substance—
which is defined as the likelihood and magnitude of adverse 
effects—and strongly depends on the patterns and condi-
tions of use.
Glyphosate has been the subject of regular assess-
ments by national and international regulatory agencies 
(JMPR 2006; Williams et al. 2000). All had established 
that glyphosate has a relatively low toxicity in mammals. 
However, a recent report from the International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC) concluded that the herbicide 
and its formulated products are probably carcinogenic in 
humans (Guyton et al. 2015a, b; IARC 2015). The aim of 
IARC’s assessments is to identify carcinogenicity hazards 
as a first step in carcinogenic risk assessment. IARC assess-
ments do not include recommendations regarding regula-
tory or legislative decisions; they are scientific evaluations 
informing regulatory assessments. Consequently, the IARC 
conclusion triggered a reconsideration of the evidence on 
carcinogenicity in the EU evaluation, and more recently by 
the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. The 
European Union renewal process (European Food Safety 
Authority 2015a, b; Germany 2015) was the first compre-
hensive regulatory assessment of glyphosate conducted 
after the IARC evaluation. Following a detailed assess-
ment of all available information, the European assessment 
reached a different conclusion, increasing the scientific and 
social debate. In 2016 the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on 
Pesticide Residues concluded that glyphosate is not carci-
nogenic in rats but could not exclude the possibility that it 
is carcinogenic in mice at very high doses, this information 
was used in the risk assessment concluding that glypho-
sate is unlikely to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans from 
exposure through the diet (JMPR 2016). This manuscript 
explores possible reasons for the different conclusions, with 
a focus on the EU assessment, as this is the evaluation in 
which the authors have been involved.
Typically, regulatory assessments come to conclusions 
similar to those of IARC, but there are exceptions (Pearce 
et al. 2015). Scientific divergences may result from differ-
ent sets of evidence, different approaches and methods, or 
different interpretations when weighing ambiguous results. 
Divergences are particularly likely when one evaluation 
includes additional evidence. In this context, it is important 
to mention that the EU evaluation, which considered stud-
ies not available to IARC, also updated the toxicological 
profile of glyphosate, proposing new toxicological refer-
ence values.
IARC monographs cover carcinogenicity hazard identifi-
cation. When statistical associations between exposure and 
cancer incidences are observed in epidemiological studies, 
the assessment of causal relationships may lead to divergent 
conclusions (Rhomberg 2015a, b). The comparison of both 
glyphosate assessments is used below to explain the differ-
ent aims, methods and possible divergences between regu-
latory and IARC assessments—focusing on the glyphosate 
carcinogenicity hazard identification as a case study—and, 
more importantly, their role in the assessment of risks to 
consumers and public health concerns. The example is par-
ticularly useful as both evaluations were conducted within 
the same period, and as the EU assessment, based on the 
United Nations Globally Harmonised System (UN-GHS) 
for classification of chemicals, is also relevant in the broad 
international context.
Methodology: scientific assessment 
of carcinogenicity and its use in the regulatory 
context
Pesticides are heavily regulated chemicals and require pre-
marketing authorisation in most jurisdictions. The EU sys-
tem also includes a renewal process, requiring all pesticides 
to be regularly re-assessed in the light of new scientific 
developments and information requirements. The EFSA 
assessment (European Food Safety Authority 2015b) fol-
lowed an evaluation carried out by the European Commis-
sion in 2002.
The identification of carcinogenic chemicals and carcin-
ogens in food is of high societal and scientific interest (Bar-
low and Schlatter 2010). The communication of the out-
come of the risk assessment is complex and controversial 
in the case of equivocal results (Downes and Foster 2015). 
The identification of a mutagenic or genotoxic mechanism 
plays an important role in risk assessment and requires a 
critical evaluation of the data as well as expert judgment 
(Eastmond 2012). The hazard assessment is linked to the 
classification; the EU uses the hazard assessment system 
 2725
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
for chemicals developed by the United Nations following 
the 1992 UN Earth Summit (Pratt 2002). This Globally 
Harmonised System for classifying chemicals replaces pre-
vious national and international approaches, is specifically 
recommended by FAO to be used for pesticides, and is 
implemented in the EU Classification, labelling and pack-
aging (CLP) regulation—(EC) No 1272/2008—and other 
jurisdictions (UNECE http://www.unece.org/trans/danger/
publi/ghs/implementation_e.html).
IARC and regulatory assessments are usually comple-
mentary. The different roles, methods and information 
sources of IARC and regulatory assessments, as well as 
the implications for public health, must be considered in 
case of divergences and are summarised in Table 1. IARC 
identifies carcinogenic hazards resulting from occupational, 
environmental, and lifestyle exposures and agents as a first 
step of the risk assessment process, and has developed an 
internationally recognised grouping system that includes 
defined criteria and methodology (Guyton et al. 2015a, 
b; Lauby-Secretan et al. 2016; Pearce et al. 2015; Straif 
et al. 2014). The recently developed approach for assess-
ing mechanistic information, based on the characteristics 
of IARC group 1 carcinogens, was applied for glyphosate 
(Smith et al. 2016). Regarding data sources, IARC assess-
ments are primarily based on published evidence, i.e. sci-
entific publications and regulatory assessments; industry-
sponsored studies are used when reviewed and reported 
in regulatory evaluations, becoming a relevant secondary 
source for regulated agents such as pesticides. Both, scien-
tific publications and mandatory industry-sponsored stud-
ies, were primary sources in the EU evaluation.
For pesticides, IARC identifies the “carcinogenic 
agent” as the active pesticide substance and its commercial 
formulations; the specific role of the other formulation 
ingredients in the occurrence of effects is not considered 
separately from the active ingredients. This is in line with 
the role of human evidence in IARC assessments. Epide-
miological studies of farmers and consumers have very 
limited information on actual exposure levels (Ntzani et al. 
2013), and use the pesticide active substance as descriptor, 
combining individuals exposed to different formulations 
without discriminating the different compositions. In the 
regulatory context, each formulation should be assessed 
according to its composition, identifying the role of the 
active substance and of the other ingredients; and the risk 
management measures are set for the chemical responsible 
for the effect, either active substance or co-formulant.
The UN-GHS and IARC frameworks use different ter-
minology, but the definitions for sufficient and limited evi-
dence in humans and in animals are similar and can be used 
to establish equivalences between both schemes, as pre-
sented in Table 2.
This approach allows a comparison of the pesticides 
evaluated by IARC with the current EU classification 
(Table 3 and supplementary material Annex 1). The EU 
classification includes scientific assessments conducted by 
the European Chemicals Bureau of the European Commis-
sion—some, but not all, based on EFSA evaluations—and 
by the Committee for Risk Assessment of the European 
Chemicals Agency.
A total of 53 pesticides have been assessed under both 
systems. For about half—29 out of 53—the classifications 
are equivalent; the EU classification is more severe/con-
servative for 14 pesticides and less severe/conservative for 
11. It should be noted that 8 out of the 11 pesticides with 
more severe/conservative classification by IARC are those 
Table 1  Comparison of IARC and regulatory assessments roles and methodological elements
Issue
IARC
EU regulatory assessment
Role
Hazard based identification. First step to be used by authorities 
in their risk assessments. No regulatory power
Scientific assessment covering hazard identification (classifica-
tion), hazard characterisation (setting toxicological reference 
values), exposure assessment, and risk characterisation
Formal support for decision making
Coverage
IARC selection, based on criteria such as identified concern or 
human exposure. Chemical, physical, biological or behav-
ioural “agents”
58 pesticides
Mandatory, 1355 pesticide active substances in the EU data 
base. Chemical and microbial pesticides
Method
IARC developed methodology, described in the “preamble”. 
Applicable to all agents
For chemical pesticides, hazard identification based on UN GHS 
criteria
Detailed guidance from ECHA available
Sources
Review of published information. Summaries of industry 
sponsored studies used as secondary source if obtained from 
regulatory agency reports
Full set of mandatory (OECD guidelines) GLP studies and 
epidemiological data
Review of scientific peer-review publications, last 10 years
Information collected through a public consultation
Formulations “Agent” grouped as active substance and all formulated prod-
ucts together
UN GHS principles applied to the active and then to each for-
mulation, accounting for all other ingredients
 2726
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
Table 2  Proposed equivalences between the UN-GHS and IARC classification schemes
Category 1A
Category 1B
Category 2
No classification
UN-GHS and CLP
Substances known to have 
carcinogenic potential for 
humans
Largely based on human 
evidence
Substances presumed to have 
carcinogenic potential for 
humans
Largely based on animal 
evidence
Substances suspected to have 
carcinogenic potential for 
humans
Evidence obtained from 
human and/or animal 
studies but not sufficiently 
convincing to place the
Substance in Category 1A 
or 1B
No sufficient evidence for classifying the substance as carcino-
genic
Group 1
Group 2A
Group 2B
Group 3
Group 4
IARC
The agent is a carcinogen for 
humans. This category is 
only used when sufficient 
indications of carcinogenic-
ity for humans are available
The agent is probably carci-
nogenic for humans. The 
classification of an agent 
in this category is recom-
mended if there is no formal 
evidence of carcinogenic-
ity in humans, but cor-
roborating indicators of its 
carcinogenicity for humans 
and sufficient evidence of 
carcinogenicity in experi-
mental animals
The agent is possibly carci-
nogenic for humans. There 
is limited evidence of 
carcinogenicity in humans 
and evidence for animals, 
or insufficient evidence for 
human beings but sufficient 
evidence of carcinogenicity 
in experimental animals
Agent not classifiable as to its 
carcinogenicity to humans. 
(Insufficient evidence for 
human beings and insuffi-
cient or limited for animals)
Agent probably not carcino-
genic for humans. (Evidence 
suggesting lack of carcino-
genicity in humans and in 
experimental animals)
 2727
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
assessed in recent IARC monographs. New substances 
are evaluated and others re-evaluated regularly, leading to 
changes in the classification; thus the table represents just 
a “screen-shot” of two rolling processes. Differences with 
IARC and between jurisdictions have also been reported 
for other regulatory assessments (Choi and Lim 2010). 
Both IARC and regulatory classifications are based on the 
information available at the time of the evaluation. For pes-
ticides, the identification of possible concerns triggers the 
generation of additional evidence and a subsequent evalu-
ation; consequently, some differences are not real scientific 
divergences but the result of expert re-evaluations based on 
different sources of evidence. This may have played a role 
in the case of glyphosate, as discussed below.
Discussion
Understanding the divergence: glyphosate 
carcinogenicity assessment
The carcinogenicity of glyphosate has been reviewed by 
several national and international agencies (Ibrahim 2015). 
The outcome of the EU assessment, the differences with 
the IARC evaluation (IARC 2015), and the authors’ views 
explaining these differences, are summarised below. Addi-
tional details are provided in the supporting information.
Human evidence
IARC (2015) offered the most up-to-date review of human 
epidemiological studies on glyphosate. Positive evidence 
regarding an association between exposure to glyphosate 
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, observed in some case-con-
trol studies but not confirmed by cohort studies, was con-
sidered sufficient by IARC to conclude on “limited evi-
dence” in humans. Limited evidence is defined as a positive 
association observed between exposure to the agent and 
cancer, for which a causal interpretation is considered to 
be credible, but chance, bias or confounding could not be 
ruled out with reasonable confidence. This definition was 
developed by IARC and introduced in the UN-GHS cri-
teria (United Nations 2003) and EU Regulation (EC) No 
1272/2008. EFSA re-assessed the same information; the 
association with non-Hodgkin lymphoma was discussed 
during an expert meeting. The statistically significant asso-
ciation was considered limited due to low power, lack of 
consistency, and the view that greater weight should be 
given to the cohort study for non-rare tumours. Consider-
ing causality, the majority of the experts concluded that the 
epidemiological evidence was very limited, and insufficient 
for classification. Although the role of the weight attributed 
to case–control studies versus cohort studies cannot be fully 
ruled out, the main reason for the divergent views could 
be the possibility of bias, chance results and confounding 
effects, as IARC concluded that the limited evidence in 
humans was supported by sufficient evidence of carcino-
genic potential in animals and strong mechanistic evidence 
for genotoxicity and oxidative stress. As explained below, 
the EU evaluation used additional evidence regarding ani-
mal carcinogenicity and genotoxicity, and reached different 
conclusions.
Carcinogenicity in animals
Information sources There is only one published study 
on the carcinogenicity of the active substance glyphosate in 
rats (Chruscielska et al. 2000), which showed no significant 
increase in tumour incidences in any treated group. Two 
additional published studies on glyphosate formulations, the 
first one on initiation-promotion in mice (George et al. 2010) 
and the second one, a study of rats (Seralini et al. 2014) 
that was retracted and republished creating some contro-
versies (Fagan et al. 2015), were considered inadequate by 
IARC and EFSA for carcinogenicity assessment (European 
Food Safety Authority 2012; IARC 2015). Consequently, 
industry-sponsored studies, required by several jurisdic-
tions worldwide, have constituted the basis for the assess-
ment of animal carcinogenicity by both IARC and EFSA. 
As expected for a regulatory assessment, EFSA assessed the 
original study reports. According to their principles, IARC 
used unpublished studies based on secondary sources, i.e. 
the information on the studies as published by JMPR (2004) 
and US-EPA (1993). The time difference, over a decade, 
between the IARC monograph and the published regula-
tory assessments must be considered. Five new studies, not 
assessed by the JMPR and US-EPA, and therefore, not con-
sidered by IARC, were considered valid and included in the 
Table 3  Overall comparison of the carcinogenicity assessments of pesticides conducted by EFSA and IARC (see supplementary material for 
information on the pesticides classified in each category)
Category 1A
Category 1B
Category 2
No classification
Not assessed/no 
data
EU
0
17
53
30
4
Group 1
Group 2A
Group 2B
Group 3
Group 4
Not assessed
IARC
3
8
13
34
0
56
 2728
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
EU assessment. The IARC assessment is based on the re-
assessment of industry-sponsored studies, two in mice and 
four studies in rats, plus the negative published study in rats. 
The EU assessment included five additional valid studies, 
two in mice and three in rats; one mouse study was excluded 
due to a likely viral infection in the experimental population 
and one rat study was considered inadequate due to study 
deficiencies. Table 4 summarises the studies used in the EU 
assessment; additional information is provided in Table S-2 
as supplementary material, with links to the detailed sum-
maries for each study and its assessment as published in the 
EFSA background document (Germany 2015). Additional 
information and raw data have been published as supple-
mentary information in a recent industry-sponsored review 
of glyphosate carcinogenicity (Greim et al. 2015).
Assessment of the available evidence In its weight of evi-
dence, the IARC Working Group considered a statistically 
significant trend for renal tumours in male mice in one study 
(study A in Tables 4, 5) and for haemangiosarcoma in the 
other (study B in Tables 4, 5). No statistically significant 
increase in tumour incidence in females was observed in 
these studies. In the weight of evidence in rats, the IARC 
Working Group considered increases in the incidence of 
adenomas, with no evidence of progression to carcinomas, 
in pancreatic islet cells in males (studies E and F in Table 4), 
hepatic cells in males (study E in Table 4) and thyroid C-cell 
in females (study E in Table 4). No increase in tumour inci-
dence was observed in three studies (studies G, K and M in 
Table 4). The EU assessment followed the weight of evi-
dence approach required by the UN-GHS criteria (United 
Nations 2015) and further clarified in the ECHA guidance 
(European Chemicals Agency 2015). The statistical signifi-
cance found in trend analysis in some studies was balanced 
against the lack of statistical significance in pair-wise com-
parison tests, lack of consistency in multiple animal studies, 
slightly increased incidences only at dose levels at or above 
the Maximum Tolerable Dose (MTD), lack of pre-neoplas-
tic lesions and/or whether the studies fell within the relevant 
historical control range. A specific comparison of tumour 
incidences in male CD-1 mice from four carcinogenicity 
studies (no change in tumour incidence was observed in 
females) is provided in Table 5, and the detailed scientific 
assessment and weight of evidence for each tumour type is 
summarised in Table 6.
Comparison of both weight of evidence approaches As 
indicated by Portier et al. (Portier et al. 2014), individual sci-
entific studies are rarely, if ever, conclusive. In our view, this 
is particularly relevant when assessing the carcinogenicity 
potential in humans using animal studies, and supports the 
need for a consistency check combining all available studies 
as mandated in the UN-GHS criteria.
In the absence of conclusive human evidence, and 
despite some views suggesting the need for re-assessing 
its relevance (Beyer et al. 2011; Marone et al. 2014; Osi-
mitz et al. 2013), rodent long-term toxicity/carcinogenicity 
studies are used for predicting carcinogenicity in humans 
(Doktorova et al. 2012). False positives and false negatives 
should both be considered, weighing the evidence (Lutter 
et al. 2015; Rhomberg 2015a, b; Rhomberg et al. 2013) 
and assessing specifically human relevance; and linked to 
the MTD concept, the relevance of toxicity-induced carci-
nogenic effects observed in experimental animals only at 
very high doses. The UN-GHS, and therefore, the EU CLP 
approach are based on UN harmonised criteria for weigh-
ing the evidence from rodent studies. Regulatory (European 
Chemicals Agency 2015) and non-regulatory (McGregor 
et al. 2010) guidance is available for weighing the evidence 
in line with the UN-GHS criteria. Table 7 summarises the 
assessment of the different UN-GHS Weight of Evidence 
elements in the EU assessment, and includes a comparison 
with the weight provided in the IARC evaluation. It should 
be noted that the authors of this paper did not participate in 
the IARC assessment, and therefore, the IARC columns are 
based on the information extracted from the IARC pream-
ble and monograph, and do not reflect the Working Group 
discussions except when specifically reported in the mono-
graph. The elements detailed in Tables 5, 6 and 7, and used 
in the EU evaluation, are not only specific components of 
the regulatory guidance (European Chemicals Agency 
2015), but, as described below, are also fully supported by 
current scientific knowledge on the assessment of animal 
studies.
Due to the large number of studies, the assessment of 
chance results is particularly relevant. Dose–response 
within the study, consistency among similar studies, 
consistency or justified differences between sexes, and 
comparison with historical controls, are considered key 
elements for identifying chance effects. The Bradford 
Hill guidelines published in 1965 are still considered 
a reference for assessing causality (Wakeford 2015), 
and have been included in the IPCS framework and its 
respective updates (Boobis et al. 2006, 2008; Meek et al. 
2014a; Sonich-Mullin et al. 2001). Although the frame-
work focuses on the relevance of the mode of action, 
dose–response relationships and consistency among stud-
ies are also indicated as key elements. The statistical 
assessment is the first step for assessing the results of the 
toxicity tests, and has received significant attention from 
both, regulatory bodies (e.g. OECD guidelines on testing 
and assessments of chemicals) and academics (Hothorn 
2014); nevertheless, the statistical analysis should be con-
sidered part of an overall assessment. This is particularly 
relevant in cases such as glyphosate, where the statistical 
analysis is inconsistent or inconclusive, with significant 
 2729
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
Table 4  Review of long-term chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies considered during the EU assessment
Study reference—Authors
Duration, strain, study type
Dose levels 
(NOAEL/LOAEL)
mg/kg bw per day
Critical effect at the LOAEL
Mice long-term chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies used in the EU evaluation
 A - Knezevich and Hogan (1983)
2 year, CD-1, OECD TG 451/453
0, 157, 814, 4841
(157/814)
Males: body weight reduction, hepatocellular 
centrilobular hypertrophy and bladder epithe-
lial hyperplasia
 B - Atkinson et al. (1993)
2 year, CD-1, OECD TG 451
0, 100, 300, 1000
(1000/>1000)
Equivocal enlarged/firm thymus, not associated 
with histopathological findings (considered 
not biologically relevant)
 C - Sugimoto (1997)
18 month, CD-1 (ICR), OECD TG 451
0, 153, 787, 4116
(153/787)
Body weight gain, reduction food consumption 
and efficiency, loose stool, caecum distended 
and increased weight, prolapse and anus 
ulceration
 D - Wood et al. (2009)
18 month, CD-1 (ICR), OECD TG 451
0, 71, 234, 810
(810/>810)
No adverse effects observed
Rat long-term chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies used in the EU evaluation
 E - Lankas (1981)
26 month, Sprague–Dawley rat, combined 
chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity;, Not Good 
Laboratory Practice (GLP) compliant
0, 3, 10.3, 31.5
(31.5/>31.5)
No adverse effects observed*
 F - Stout and Ruecker (1990)
2 year, Sprague–Dawley rat, US-EPA F 83 − 5
0, 89, 362, 940
(89/362)
Reduction body weight and gain, increase liver 
weight, stomach mucosal inflammation, cata-
racts, decrease urine pH, survival <50% in all 
groups incl. controls
 G - Atkinson et al. (1993)
2 year, Sprague–Dawley rat, US-EPA F 83 − 5
0, 10, 100, 300, 1000
(100/300)
Pronounced salivary gland findings, increase 
AP and liver weight
 H - Suresh (1996)
2 year, Wistar rat, OECD TG 453
0, 6.3, 59.4, 595.2
(60/595.2)
Cataracts, increase AP
 I - Lankas 1997
12 month, Wistar rat, OECD TG 452
0, 141, 560, 1409
(141/560)
Reduction in body weight, food cons and utili-
zation, increase AP, focal basophilia of acinar 
cells of parotid salivary gland (not weighed)
 J - Enomoto (1997)
2 year, Sprague–Dawley rat, OECD TG 453
0, 104, 354, 1127
(104/354)
Reduction body weight, gain, food cons (ini-
tially) and utilization, increase loose stool, 
increase tail masses due to follicular hyper-
keratosis and abscesses, caecum: distension 
and increase weight, pH reduction and dark 
appearance of urine
 K - Brammer (2001)
2 year, Wistar rat, OECD TG 453
0, 121, 361, 1214
(361/1214)
Reduction body weight, food cons and (ini-
tially) utilization, clinical chemistry findings 
(increase AP and ALAT activity and bilirubin, 
decrease urine pH), kidney papillary necrosis, 
prostatic and periodontal inflammation
 2730
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
*The dose levels used in this study are too low and the study is not considered adequate to assess glyphosate chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity
**Study N found unreliable after detailed assessment, due to the occurrence of viral infection in all groups including controls
***Study O was considered not acceptable because no core information on the test substance such as batch number or purity was given and, thus, it is not clear what was in fact tested. Further-
more, the study presented many deficiencies
Table 4  (continued)
Study reference—Authors
Duration, strain, study type
Dose levels 
(NOAEL/LOAEL)
mg/kg bw per day
Critical effect at the LOAEL
 L - Wood et al. (2009)
2 year, Wistar rat, OECD TD 453
0, 86, 285, 1077
(285/1077)
Reduction body weight gain, transient increase 
AP, changes in distribution of renal minerali-
sation, increase adipose infiltration of bone 
marrow (indicative of hypoplasia)
 M - Chruzielska et al., 2000
24 month, Wistar rat, in drinking water
0, 300, 900 or 2700 mg/L
No significant increase in tumour incidence
Industry-sponsored GLP studies considered non-acceptable during the EU assessment
 N - Kumar (2001)**
18 month, Swiss albino mice, OECD TG 451
Title: Carcinogenicity Study with Glyphosate Technical in Swiss Albino Mice
 O - Bhide (1997)***
2 year Sprague–Dawley rat, OECD TG 453
Title: Combined Chronic Toxicity/Carcinogenicity Study of Glyphosate Technical in Sprague 
Dawley Rat
Published studies conducted with glyphosate-based formulations and considered non-reliable for the assessment of glyphosate carcinogenicity during the EU assessment
 P - George et al. (2010
carcinogenicity)
Non-guideline mechanistic study conducted 
with topical application of glyphosate-based 
formulation
Title: Studies on glyphosate-induced carcinogenicity in mouse skin: A proteomic approach
 Q - Seralini et al. (2012), re-published 2014
24-month study (10 males and 10 females per 
group) Sprague–Dawley rats in drinking 
water
Title: Long term toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and a Roundup-tolerant genetically modified 
maize
 2731
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
differences in the trend, but not in the pair-wise analysis. 
Lack of consistency at similar doses in the same species 
and strain and lack of dose–response relationships can be 
observed for malignant lymphomas in mice (Tables 5, 6) 
and adenomas in rat (Table 6). Kobayashi et al. (2010) 
reviewed the grounds for considering statistically signifi-
cant changes as incidental, observing similar trends for 
unpublished and peer-reviewed scientific publications. 
Lack of dose–response is reported as the main justifica-
tion for disregarding the results as incidental, followed 
by lack of physiological/toxicological significance of the 
effects and the comparison with historical controls. These 
studies support the concern surrounding conclusions that 
are based only on statistical significance of increased 
tumour incidences in a particular study, without consid-
erations of the biological relevance of the finding.
Although the concurrent control group is always the 
most relevant comparator, the use of historical control data, 
also in combination with background incidental lesions 
(McInnes and Scudamore 2014), can be essential in cases 
of equivocal results to detect both, false positive and false 
negative situations. In addition to best practices (Greim 
et al. 2003; Keenan et al. 2009), graphical visualisations 
(Elmore and Peddada 2009) and statistical approaches 
(Dinse and Peddada 2011; Peddada et al. 2007) have been 
developed, although direct comparison with the historical 
control range in the test laboratory around the time of the 
study is the approach mostly used in the regulatory context, 
and preferred in the EU assessment. This approach was 
considered for malignant lymphomas and haemangiosarco-
mas in mice when the studies reported the historical range 
for the test laboratory.
Excessive toxicity, for instance toxicity at doses exceed-
ing the MTD, can cause effects such as cell death (necro-
sis) with associated regenerative hyperplasia, which in 
turn can lead to tumour development as a secondary effect, 
unrelated to the intrinsic potential of the substance itself 
to cause tumours at lower and less toxic doses (European 
Chemicals Agency 2015; Knight et al. 2006). Also in the 
assessment of cell proliferation as mode of action for non-
genotoxic carcinogens, systemic toxicity and overt cyto-
toxicity in the target tissue should be avoided (Wood et al. 
2015). It has been suggested that almost all chemicals, 
including those non-genotoxic and without structural alerts 
for carcinogenicity, would produce statistically significant 
trends if tested at or above the MTD in a sufficiently large 
number of animals (Gaylor 2005). Significant trends for 
tumour induction were observed in two mouse studies but 
only at very high doses, well above the proposed top dose 
for carcinogenicity studies (OECD 2012) of 1000 mg/kg 
bw per day; clear indications of toxicity were observed at 
these high doses, such as reduced body weight, histopatho-
logical changes in the bladder and liver, and other toxic 
Table 5  Summary of selected tumour incidences in male CD-1 mice from four studies with glyphosate and historical control data
Study ID: A = TOX9552381 (1983), PWG re-evaluation; B = TOX9552382 (1993); C = ASB2012-11493 (1997); D = ASB2012-11492 (2009)
*Study A: Malign lymphoblastic tumours (3 categories) instead of malignant lymphoma which was not mentioned as a pathological entity
**Whole body/multiple organ
***Dosage exceeded the OECD-recommended limit dose of 1000 mg/kg bw/day and the MTD
Numbers in bold refer to values within acceptable HCD; no HCD is available for the other values (not bold) and no exceedance of HCD was recorded in mice treated with glyphosate
# 
Renal tumours: combined incidence of adenoma and carcinoma
Dose range
Tumour incidence/number of animals examined
Control group
Low dose
Intermediate dose
High dose
Very high 
dose***
Dose (mg/kg bw per day)
0
0
0
0
71
100
157
165
234
300
810
814
838
1000
4348
4841
Study ID
A
B
C
D
D
B
A
C
D
B
D
A
C
B
C
A
Study duration (months)
24
24
18
18
18
24
24
18
18
24
18
24
18
24
18
24
Survival
20/50
26/50
26/50
39/51
41/51
25/50
16/50
34/50
39/51
29/50
35/51
17/50
27/50
25/50
29/50
26/50
Renal  
tumours#
1/49
2/50
0/50
0/51
0/51
2/50
0/49
0/50
0/51
0/50
0/51
1/50
0/50
0/50
2/50
3/50
Malignant lymphoma*
2/48
4/50
2/50
0/51
1/51
2/50
5/49
2/50
2/51
1/50
5/51
4/50
0/50
6/50
6/50
2/49
Haemangiosarcoma**
0/48
0/50
0/50
2/51
1/51
0/50
0/49
0/50
2/51
0/50
1/51
1/50
0/50
4/50
2/50
0/49
 2732
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
signs; consequently, the tumour induction trends were con-
sidered confounding effects due to excessive toxicity.
Mechanistic assessment
The relevance of the mode of action for humans constitutes 
the basis of the IPCS framework (Boobis et al. 2006, 2008; 
Meek et al. 2014a; Sonich-Mullin et al. 2001). Mode of 
action is defined as a biologically plausible series of key 
events leading to an effect (Sonich-Mullin et al. 2001) and 
involves interdependent networks of events with feedback 
loops. Differences in networks between and within human 
and animal populations account, in part, for interspecies 
differences and human variability (Meek et al. 2014a). Cur-
rent approaches explore the applicability of the Adverse 
Outcome Pathway approach (Collier et al. 2016; Edwards 
et al. 2016; Zhou 2015) as a framework for linking the 
initial molecular interactions with the tumour promotion 
though plausible key events (Becker et al. 2015; Downes 
and Foster 2015). As the EU evaluation concluded that the 
incidences were due to chance and bias and the evidence 
does not indicate that glyphosate is an animal carcino-
gen, no further assessment of relevance for humans was 
required.
IARC, with a different focus, not targeted to individ-
ual chemicals but to a broad range of agents, has recently 
developed a new weight of evidence scheme, by extracting 
the “key characteristics” from the physical/chemical/bio-
logical/behavioural agents classified by IARC in category 
1 (Smith et al. 2016). These key characteristics are defined 
as common properties, not to be considered mechanisms 
of Adverse Outcome Pathways, although are postulated as 
a method to synthesize information and develop adverse 
outcome networks. The ten characteristics are the abilities 
of an agent to: (1) act as an electrophile either directly or 
after metabolic activation; (2) be genotoxic; (3) alter DNA 
Table 6  Summary of the weight of evidence of the EU assessment for the different tumour types
Tumour type/species
Significant trends
Weight of evidence in EU assessment
Renal tumours, mice
2 out of 4 studies
TOX9552381
(6% combined adenomas and carcinomas in males 
at 4841 mg/kg bw day)
ASB2012-11493
(4% adenomas in males at 4348 mg/kg bw day)
Both studies, trends observed only at high dose 
(>4000 mg/kg bw per day), where general toxicity 
(such as reduced bw, histopathological findings in 
liver, and bladder in one study and reduced bw gain, 
severe gastro-intestinal effects in the other) may be 
confounding factors
No statistical significance in a pair-wise comparison
One trend in one study did not consider the higher 
survival at the top dose
Malignant lymphomas, mice
2 out of 4 studies
ASB2012-11493
(12% males at 4348 mg/kg bw day)
ASB2012-11492
(10% males at 810 mg/kg bw day)
Malignant lymphomas is one of the most common 
neoplasms in CD-1 mice, females being more prone 
to this tumour type than males
No statistical significance in a pair-wise comparison
First study within historical controls and trend 
observed only at high dose (>4000 mg/kg bw per 
day), where general toxicity may be a confounding 
factor
Second study inconsistency in results among 4 stud-
ies comparing similar dose levels
Haemangiosarcomas, mice
2 out of 4 studies
TOX9552382
(8% males at 1000 mg/kg bw day)
ASB2012-11493
(4% males at 4348 mg/kg bw day)
No statistical significance in a pair-wise comparison
First study within historical control range
Second study trend observed only at high dose 
(>4000 mg/kg bw per day) where general toxicity 
may be a confounding factor
Hepatocellular adenomas, rats
1 out of 8 studies
TOX9300244
(15% males at 940 mg/kg bw day)
No statistical significance in a pair-wise comparison
Marginal trends in benign tumours limited to one sex, 
not reproduced among 8 long term studies (3 stud-
ies in SD rats and 5 studies in Wistar rats)
Thyroid C-cell adenomas, rats
1 out of 8 studies
TOX9300244
(10% females at 457 and 1183 mg/kg bw day)
No statistical significance in a pair-wise comparison
Marginal trends in benign tumours limited to one sex, 
not reproduced among 8 long term studies (3 stud-
ies in SD rats and 5 studies in Wistar rats)
Pancreatic islet cell adenomas, rats
Incidences without dose response trends in 2 out of 
8 studies
Lack of dose–response does not support an effect 
related to glyphosate administration
All other tumours, mice and rats
No increased incidences observed in 4 mice and 8 
rat studies
No observed incidences in a large number of valid 
studies
 2733
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
Table 7  Summary of the UN-GHS Weight of Evidence (WoE) elements in the EU assessment and comparison with the weight provided in the IARC assessment
UN-GHS and EU CLP WoE ele-
ments
Regulatory guidance (ECHA, 2015) 
and scientific support
Evaluation method in the IARC 
Preamble
Relevance for the glyphosate WoE
EU assessment
Comments on IARC assessment
(a) Tumour type and background 
incidence
Relevance for humans, due to 
the relevance of the mode of 
action(Meek et al. 2014a, b), or 
tissues with no human equivalents. 
Spontaneous incidences and use of 
historical control data(Dinse and 
Peddada 2011; Greim et al. 2003; 
Keenan et al. 2008; Ma et al. 2002; 
Massarelli et al. 2013)
Relevance for humans, e.g. species-
specific mechanism that does not 
operate in humans
The use of historical data is men-
tioned
All valid studies are considered 
negative. No need for mode of 
action evaluation
Historical control data from the 
same laboratory were considered 
when available
All tumours were assumed relevant 
for humans
No information on the use of histori-
cal control data is provided except 
the consideration of some tumours 
as “rare”
(b) Multi-site responses
If observed, increases the evidence 
(Dybing et al. 1997)
Consistency of the results across 
target organ(s) and spectrum of 
neoplastic response
No significant incidences observed 
in the valid studies
Consistency among studies was 
considered
Based on statistically significant 
trends for different tumour types. 
Assessment limited to a subset of 
the available studies
(c) Progression of lesions to malig-
nancy
If observed, increases the evidence
The spectrum of neoplastic 
response, from preneoplastic 
lesions and benign tumours to 
malignant neoplasms
Specifically considered for indi-
vidual studies
Specifically considered for individual 
studies
(d) Reduced tumour latency
Only relevant for unusual tumours
Sufficient for considering the agent 
as carcinogen
Not relevant
No indications are provided
(e) Whether responses are in single 
or both sexes
A consistent mode of action is 
required for tumours observed in 
only one sex
No specific indications for the evalu-
ation of tumours occurring in a 
single sex are provided
Contributes to the lack of consist-
ency assessment as no sex related 
mode of action is postulated
All trends were significant only in one 
sex, but no sex mediated mode of 
action is discussed
(f) Whether responses are in a single 
species or several species
If observed in several species 
increases the evidence
If observed in several species 
increases the evidence
No significant incidents were identi-
fied for mice or rats
Based on positive trends in both mice 
and rats
(g) Structural similarity to a 
substance(s) for which there is 
good evidence of carcinogenicity
Includes SAR, QSAR, read across 
and grouping
The possibility for using information 
from structurally similar agents is 
mentioned
Not relevant, the assessment is 
based on studies on glyphosate
Not relevant, the assessment is based 
on studies on glyphosate
(h) Routes of exposure
Includes local tumours
The exposure route should be 
mentioned
Assessment based on oral studies
Assessment based on oral studies
(i) Comparison of absorption, distri-
bution, metabolism and excretion 
between test animals and humans
Also relevant for considering the 
role of metabolites
Comparison should be made when 
possible
Not relevant
Not relevant
(j) The possibility of a confounding 
effect of excessive toxicity at test 
doses
Effects observed only at doses 
exceeding the maximum toler-
able dose should be checked for 
confounding effects of excessive 
toxicity
Not mentioned in the preamble. 
NOAELs and LOAECs for each 
study are not reported
Considered for tumours in mice
Effects observed only at high doses 
with excessive toxicity are included 
in the trend assessment. No addi-
tional information is provided
 2734
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
repair or cause genomic instability; (4) induce epigenetic 
alterations; (5) induce oxidative stress; (6) induce chronic 
inflammation; (7) be immunosuppressive; (8) modulate 
receptor-mediated effects; (9) cause immortalization; and 
(10) alter cell proliferation, cell death, or nutrient supply. It 
should be noted that this new approach has been applied to 
the recent IARC monographs, including the assessment of 
glyphosate.
Genotoxicity
The EU evaluation considers in vitro genotoxicity tests and 
in vivo studies performed in mammals, as those are con-
sidered to be more relevant for the assessment of the risk 
to humans (Yauk et al. 2015). Sixteen in vivo studies in 
somatic cells and two in vivo studies on germ cells were 
reported on rodents orally treated with dose levels up to 
5000 mg/kg bw, or via intraperitoneal injections. All stud-
ies were conducted according to internationally validated 
guidelines; some non-GLP published studies gave negative 
results, while two non-GLP studies were positive in mice 
treated intraperitoneally with dose levels in the range of the 
intraperitoneal  
LD50 for mice, one study presenting major 
flaws. No genotoxic effects on germ cells were detected in 
rats or mice treated orally at dose levels up to 2000 mg/kg 
bw. The induction of DNA strand breaks observed in mice 
treated intraperitoneally with doses close to or in excess 
of the  
LD50 has been associated to secondary effects of 
cytotoxicity (JMPR 2006; Kier 2015). Modes of action 
associated with secondary cytotoxicity should be excluded 
from the assessment of the intrinsic genotoxicity potential 
(Bryce et al. 2014; Kitamoto et al. 2015).
IARC combines information on glyphosate and glypho-
sate-based formulations, compiling studies on humans, 
other mammals, other vertebrates, invertebrates, and plants. 
Regarding in vivo mammalian studies, IARC reports posi-
tive effects for 5 out of 11 studies; four negative studies 
on micronucleus formation and dominant lethal mutation 
reported by JMPR (2006) are not included in the IARC 
evaluation. Positive effects are described only for intraperi-
toneal administrations at doses of 300 mg/kg bw. Although 
these effects had been previously postulated as secondary 
to (cyto)toxicity (Heydens et al. 2008; JMPR 2006), the 
role of (cyto)toxicity is not discussed in the IARC mono-
graph. Positive effects are mostly observed in the liver, 
an organ that is considered inappropriate for assessing in 
vivo genotoxic effects after intraperitoneal administration 
(JMPR 2006).
A recent meta-analysis on micronuclei frequency (Ghisi 
et al. 2016) has confirmed that positive effects are limited 
to intraperitoneal administrations, and that the response is 
much higher for glyphosate-based formulations than for 
the active substance. Cytotoxicity of the surfactants added 
Table 7  (continued)
UN-GHS and EU CLP WoE ele-
ments
Regulatory guidance (ECHA, 2015) 
and scientific support
Evaluation method in the IARC 
Preamble
Relevance for the glyphosate WoE
EU assessment
Comments on IARC assessment
(k) Mode of action and its relevance 
for humans, such as cytotoxic-
ity with growth stimulation, 
mitogenesis, immunosuppression, 
mutagenicity
The IPCS framework and related 
approaches (Boobis et al. 2006, 
2008; Meek et al. 2014a; Sonich-
Mullin et al. 2001) offers general 
guidance, IARC (1994, 1999) 
and ECHA (2015) list specific 
tumours considered not relevant 
for humans. Mutagenicity and 
genotoxicity play a key role in 
the assessment and in particular 
the assessment of non-threshold 
genotoxic-carcinogenic modes of 
action
The possible mechanism should 
be identified when possible. The 
assessment of genotoxicity is 
described in the preamble, in vivo 
data on humans and mammals 
have preference. No mention to the 
“ten key characteristic approach” 
is included in the preamble
The genotoxicity assessment is 
based on mammalian studies, 
and concluded as negative for 
glyphosate, as all studies are nega-
tive except at very high doses with 
confounding cytotoxicity. Geno-
toxicity of a co-formulant and of 
some glyphosate formulations 
cannot be ruled out, and should be 
addressed
The conclusion of strong evidence on 
genotoxicity and oxidative stress for 
glyphosate and glyphosate based 
formulations is one of the key 
arguments of the IARC proposal. 
The differences between glyphosate 
and glyphosate based formulations 
reported in several studies are pre-
sented but no further discussed
 2735
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
to the formulations is presented as a plausible explana-
tion, while the cytotoxicity of glyphosate in intraperitoneal 
administrations at high doses is not discussed. Significant 
differences are observed for males but not for females, a 
general difference is reported in the comparison of mam-
malian and non-mammalian systems, although similar 
responses are observed for mice and crocodilians (Ghisi 
et al. 2016).
Non‑genotoxic modes of action
Non-genotoxic modes of action for carcinogenicity are 
assumed for about 9% of IARC classifications (Hernandez 
et al. 2009) and include endocrine disruption, tumour pro-
motion, tissue-specific toxicity and inflammation, cytotox-
icity and immune suppression, inhibition of gap-junction 
intercellular communications (GJICs), and other mecha-
nisms (Benigni et al. 2013; Hernandez et al. 2009).
In the EU evaluation, the lack of evidence for carcino-
genic potential of glyphosate meant that no further thought 
regarding the mode of action was considered necessary. 
IARC assessed the “key characteristics of human carcino-
gens” (Smith et al. 2016), concluding that there is weak 
evidence for receptor-mediated effects, cell proliferation or 
death, and immune effects, and strong evidence of oxida-
tive stress.
Role of surfactants and other co‑formulants
The EU assessment focuses on glyphosate, aiming to estab-
lish the properties of the active substance to be considered 
in the assessment of each formulation by individual Mem-
ber States. IARC has a different approach, addressing both 
glyphosate and its formulations. The potential role of the 
co-formulants, which differ among formulations, is not 
assessed; however, the IARC monograph reports a large 
number of mechanistic studies with negative results for 
glyphosate but positive results for glyphosate-based formu-
lations, as well as differences between formulations con-
taining similar concentrations of glyphosate, indicating that 
other ingredients could lead to the effects observed when 
testing formulations (Coalova et al. 2014; Cox and Surgan 
2006). Similar results are observed for other pesticides and 
particularly for herbicides (Cavas 2011); this is not surpris-
ing, as the mode of action leading the herbicidal activity is 
usually not linked to the toxicological profile in mammals.
Surfactants are frequently used in herbicide formula-
tions, including glyphosate. Polyethoxylated tallowa-
mines are several orders of magnitude more cytotoxic than 
glyphosate (Mesnage et al. 2013); the mode of action is cell 
death with inhibition of the mitochondrial succinate dehy-
drogenase activity and membrane damage leading to necro-
sis. This mode of action is different from glyphosate, while 
similar to that observed for glyphosate-based formulations 
(Benachour and Seralini 2009). These tallowamines also 
produce oxidative and DNA damage (Nobels et al. 2011), 
and increase the apoptotic potential of glyphosate (Kim 
et al. 2013). Other surfactants as well as solvents used in 
pesticides formulations are cytotoxic and, possibly, geno-
toxic (Nobels et al. 2011).
The cytotoxicity and potential genotoxicity of other 
ingredients should be considered before assuming that the 
effects observed for a formulated product are linked to the 
active substance. Secondary genotoxic effects produced by 
cytotoxicity should also be distinguished from true geno-
toxic potential (Bryce et al. 2014; Kitamoto et al. 2015). 
In fact, the UN and EU guidance recommends carcino-
genicity and genotoxicity studies to be conducted on indi-
vidual chemicals, limiting testing of mixtures/formulations 
to cases where synergistic effects are expected (United 
Nations 2015).
From hazard assessment to public health risk 
assessment
While IARC focuses exclusively on the hazard identifica-
tion, regulatory assessments also include the estimation of 
the toxicological potency of the substance and the setting 
of toxicological reference values to be used in the human 
health risk assessment. The toxicological reference values 
offer quantitative indications of the toxicity of a chemical, 
indicating the levels of human exposure that, according to 
the current scientific knowledge, are considered acceptable 
from a regulatory perspective. The recent EFSA evalu-
ation has changed significantly the toxicological profile 
of glyphosate, compared to the previous EU assessment 
(Table 8).
The Acute Reference Dose (ARfD) and Acceptable 
Daily Intake (ADI) represent oral doses that should not be 
exceeded in a single event (or repeated within 24 h) or daily 
in long term exposures, respectively. The Acceptable Oper-
ator Exposure Level (AOEL) represents a systemic daily 
dose that should not be exceeded in non-dietary exposures. 
Figure 1 visualises the current and previous EU toxicologi-
cal reference values for glyphosate, compared with those 
established for the entire group of herbicides assessed in the 
EU. The ranking and percentile within the distribution of 
ca. 150 herbicides assessed in the EU (data extracted from 
the EU pesticides database http://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/
pesticides/eu-pesticides-database/public/?event=homepage
&language=EN) gives an indication of the relative toxicity 
of glyphosate to humans compared to the other herbicides. 
In contrast with previous evaluations, effects produced after 
acute exposures were considered relevant, requiring an 
ARfD and an acute risk assessment (European Food Safety 
Authority 2015b). The human, animal and mechanistic 
 2736
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
evidence indicates that glyphosate cannot be considered as 
a potent DNA reactive tumour-initiating chemical, and that 
a risk assessment based on threshold toxicological refer-
ence values is scientifically valid (SCOEL 2013). The data 
summarised in Tables 4, 5 and 6 confirms that the proposed 
reference values (Table 8) provide sufficient protection for 
all effects observed in the carcinogenicity and long-term 
toxicity studies, including the trends for tumour induction 
considered as sufficient evidence by IARC.
Glyphosate has a relative low long-term dietary toxic-
ity, being within the 10% of herbicides with higher ADI. 
Regarding short-term dietary exposure, the EU assessment 
proposed an ARfD which ranks glyphosate as slightly more 
toxic (45th percentile) than the average for herbicides. This 
new toxicological profile requires the re-assessment of 
health risks, which had only considered chronic exposure 
until now (Shao-Wen and Chun-Hong 2015). The need for 
personal protective equipment for glyphosate applicators is 
identified in the EFSA Conclusion. The need for an ARfD 
triggers also new considerations regarding the role of spo-
radic AOEL exceedance when addressing the risk of short-
term inhalation and dermal exposures during application, 
including bystander and resident exposure in aerial applica-
tions, which are standard practice outside the EU in forest 
(Rolando et al. 2013) and for the control of illegal crops 
(Benner et al. 2016). Exposure estimations for children 
entering the area after application (Solomon et al. 2007) are 
higher than the proposed toxicological threshold.
Regarding residues in food, a comprehensive update 
of the dietary risk assessment will be performed in the 
EU, following the decision on the approval of glypho-
sate, covering all EU uses and the residues expected on 
imported food. Meanwhile, Niemann et al. (2015) have 
compiled information on human biomonitoring data, 
and concluded that current exposures are well below the 
toxicological references values; exposure of European 
Table 8  Summary of the recent EU toxicological assessment of glyphosate and derivation of reference doses of risk assessment
Relevant endpoints
mg/kg body weight (per day)
Uncertainty factor
Reference dose for risk assessment mg/kg 
bw (per day)
Chronic dietary toxicity
Rat overall NOAEL: 100
Mice overall NOAEL: 150
Rodent reproductive NOAEL: 300
Rat neurotoxicity NOAEL: 617
Dog short-term NOAEL: 300
Critical endpoint: Rabbit NOAEL: 50 
(maternal and developmental, also rel-
evant for short-term exposures)
100
Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI): 0.5
Acute dietary toxicity
100
Acute Reference Dose (ARfD): 0.5
Chronic non-dietary toxicity
100 × 5 (accounting for 
20% oral absorption)
Acceptable Operator Exposure Level 
(AOEL): 0.1
Fig. 1  Graphical representa-
tion of the EFSA proposed 
changes in the glyphosate 
toxicological profile expressed 
as the relative toxicity ranking. 
This ranking represents the 
percentile of each glyphosate’s 
Toxicological Reference Value 
within the distribution of 141 
herbicides assessed in the EU 
(data extracted from the EU 
pesticides database. http://
ec.europa.eu/food/plant/pesti-
cides/eu-pesticides-database/
public/?event=activesubstance.
selection&language=EN on 25 
May 2016)
 2737
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
citizens seems to be lower than that of Americans. To 
complement these estimations, an indicative consumer 
exposure assessment based on EU monitoring data for 
glyphosate residues in food generated by competent 
authorities in the EU Member States is described below. 
The assessment covers over 10,000 samples of different 
types of food analysed for glyphosate residues between 
2012 and 2014 (Fig. 2). Member States focussed the con-
trol activities for glyphosate mainly on crops relevant for 
human consumption, where the presence of glyphosate 
was expected, such as cereals (almost 4000 samples), fol-
lowed by fruits, vegetables, pulses and oilseeds; it should 
be noted that only limited information is available on 
feed products such as soya beans (only nine soya beans 
samples were analysed). Overall glyphosate was detected 
in 6.3% of the samples, mostly in cereals (11.7% of the 
samples analysed contained residues above the Limit 
of Quantification), but also in lentils, linseed and table 
grapes, mostly from outside the EU. The legal limits were 
exceeded in 0.2% of the samples analysed for glyphosate. 
A very conservative risk assessment screening has been 
conducted with the EFSA PRIMO model (European Food 
Safety Authority 2007), using conservative assumptions. 
Table 9 summarises the residue levels measured in food 
items which were identified as main contributors in the 
risk assessment using European food consumption data. 
The data have been extracted from the EU pesticides 
residues monitoring programme (European Food Safety 
Authority 2016). Detailed information is provided in the 
supporting information.
Fig. 2  Summary of EU 
monitoring data on glyphosate 
residues in food (2012–2014)
Table 9  Glyphosate residue 
levels reported for the food 
items contributing with over 
0.1% of the ADI or 2% of 
the ARfD in the European 
consumers’ risk assessment 
(EFSA 2016)
$ 
The mean value is similar to the Limit of Quantification
Food item
Number of samples 
analysed for glyphosate
Percentage of samples 
with residues > LOQ
Maximum level
mg/kg
Mean value
mg/kg
Apples
215
1.9
0.10
0.02$
Barley
188
18.6
8.00
0.24
Beans (dry)
132
11.4%
4.00
0.16
Beans (with pods)
123
0.8%
0.05
0.02$
Lentils (dry)
277
30.3%
19.00
0.59
Oranges
192
0.5%
0.10
0.03$
Peas (dry)
41
37.7%
6.39
0.59
Peas (with pods)
38
7.9%
1.40
0.13
Peas (without pods)
22
0%
0.10
0.04$
Potatoes
88
0%
0.10
0.02$
Rye
557
4.1%
3.40
0.13
Wheat
2318
13.2%
4.00
0.14
 2738
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
The acute risk assessment used the maximum reported 
result. The chronic risk assessment used mean residue 
concentrations, assuming that residues below the Limit 
of Quantification (LOQ) actually occurred in concentra-
tions equivalent to the LOQ; considering that over 94% 
of the samples analysed did not contain residues above 
the LOQ, this assumption contributes to the conservatism 
of the estimated exposure. The chronic exposure was well 
below the ADI (0.5% for unprocessed products and 0.6% 
of the ADI when processed foods are included). In the 
acute risk assessment, the highest exposure was calcu-
lated for lentils (23.4% of the ARfD), followed by beans 
(14.6%) and wheat (11.6%). Pending on the on-going 
EFSA assessment, these estimations further support the 
conclusion that glyphosate residues in food do not repre-
sent a public health concern for European citizens.
Conclusions
The following main factors should be considered when 
explaining the differences between IARC and the EU 
evaluations: the evidence and information sources, the 
methodology and the overall aim. The comparison is 
summarised in Table 10.
Evidence in humans
The same epidemiological studies were used in both 
assessments; all studies focussed on farmers exposed to 
formulations. For pesticides, the regulatory dossier may 
include information on medical surveillance and epi-
demiological studies on manufacturing plant personnel 
directly exposed to the active substance; but this was not 
the case for glyphosate. The key IARC role in compiling 
and evaluating human evidence is well proven, and the 
EU assessment was updated to consider recent publica-
tions included in the IARC monograph. The same weak 
evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of glyphosate 
was interpreted differently by IARC and EFSA. IARC 
considered the association between exposure to glypho-
sate and non-Hodgkin lymphoma as “limited evidence in 
humans”; while in the EU assessment, most experts con-
sidered the evidence as “very limited” and insufficient for 
triggering the classification. The difference in the inter-
pretation between IARC and the EU is mainly related 
to the fact that IARC is because IARC considered that 
glyphosate is carcinogenic in animals, and concluded that 
strong evidence for two mechanisms, genotoxicity and 
oxidative stress, supported the plausibility of the weak 
association in humans.
Evidence on carcinogenicity in experimental animal 
models
Regarding animal carcinogenicity, three main aspects 
should be considered for understanding the different con-
clusions from IARC and EFSA. Lack of consistency among 
studies on the same species and strain at equivalent doses 
supported the conclusion of chance results in the EU 
evaluation. IARC, however, could not use some studies 
included in the EU evaluation, since the EU assessment 
was on-going and only a draft was available at the time 
of the IARC Working Group meeting, limiting the capac-
ity for checking consistency among studies. Second, the 
lack of consistency between sexes; according to the UN-
GHS criteria, a plausible sex-related mechanism should be 
investigated in these cases, and was not identified in the EU 
assessment. No specific guidance is provided in the IARC 
evaluation and no indication is provided in the monograph. 
Third, the role of secondary effects observed at doses with 
excessive toxicity. For regulatory assessments, when classi-
fication is linked to labelling and risk management options, 
secondary effects due to excessive doses are excluded 
as the assessment focuses on the intrinsic capacity of the 
chemical to induce tumours at lower, less toxic doses. This 
element is not described in the IARC methodology, and the 
IARC Working Group considered as positive trends those 
triggered by tumour incidences at doses with demonstrated 
excessive toxicity. Regulatory assessments have access 
to full study reports; for IARC, unpublished industry-
sponsored studies are secondary information sources, and 
their use is limited to the study summaries from previous 
assessments published by other agencies. Despite not hav-
ing access to the original study reports, the IARC Working 
Group was able to run new statistical analyses, although 
its capacity for verifying details relevant for assessing 
the biological relevance was limited by the level of detail 
provided in the reports published by the regulatory agen-
cies. The comparison with the WHO expert group JMPR 
assessments for glyphosate, conducted in 2004 and 2016, 
is informative regarding the value of granting the experts 
access to the full study reports.
Evidence on genotoxicity and other mechanisms 
of carcinogenicity
Regarding sources of mechanistic information, genotox-
icity/mutagenicity should be discussed independently of 
other possible mechanisms. As observed for glyphosate, 
both industry-sponsored and scientific publications offer 
relevant information on the genotoxicity potential of pes-
ticides that has raised interest among the scientific commu-
nity. On one hand, IARC included one industry-sponsored 
study reported by the US-EPA but not those reported by 
 2739
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
Table 10  Comparative summary of IARC and EU assessments and conclusions
SD standard deviation
Issue
IARC
EU regulatory assessment
Epidemiological studies
 Evidence
Same human evidence based on published epidemiological studies. Different animal and mechanistic conclusions in the plausibility assessment
 Assessment
Positive and negative associations. Associations considered biologically 
plausible
Positive and negative associations. Associations considered week and lack-
ing biological plausibility
 Conclusion
Sufficient for “Limited evidence” in humans
Contradictory evidence, insufficient to be considered as “limited evidence”
Animal carcinogenicity
 Evidence (see Table 4)
US EPA and JMPR reports summarising industry studies results
Full industry study reports, covering a larger data set for mice and rats
 Assessment (see Tables 5, 6)
Positive trends in one sex in some studies. Pair-wise comparisons without 
dose–response. No indication on consistency assessment between stud-
ies, sexes or consideration of excessive toxicity
Large data set with mostly negative findings. Positive findings were 
inconsistent (between sexes, statistical approaches, and among studies), 
observed only at very high doses above the Maximum Tolerable Dose, or 
lack of dose response
 Conclusion
Sufficient evidence for carcinogenicity in animals
Unlikely to be carcinogenic in animals according to UN GHS weight of 
evidence
Genotoxicity
 Evidence
5 published in vivo studies on mammals, 1 secondary reference to industry 
studies and studies on formulations. Large coverage of non-mammalian 
species and formulations
Focus on 16 in vivo studies on mammals; guideline studies supported by 
additional published studies. Assessment limited to mammals and glypho-
sate active substance
 Assessment
Biomarkers of DNA adducts and various types of chromosomal dam-
age generally positive in the liver but only at high intraperitoneal doses 
(300 mg/kg bw) with mixed results for the kidney and bone marrow
Inconsistent effects between glyphosate and glyphosate formulations 
reported for several studies, but not further assessed
Positive clastogenic effects in 2 out of 6 intraperitoneal studies at high toxic 
doses (above i.p.  
LD50) in studies showing methodological deficiencies. 1 
weak positive out of 8 oral studies limited to high dose, one sex, and high 
SD
Positive results in indicative studies such as DNA strand breaks do not 
detect mutagenicity, rather cytotoxicity
Consistent negative results for gene mutation in both bacteria and mamma-
lian cells
 Conclusion
Strong evidence that exposure to glyphosate is genotoxic
Unlikely to be genotoxic in humans. No classification for mutagenicity
Overall conclusion on carcinogenicity
 Hazard
Probably carcinogenic in humans. IARC Group 2A
Unlikely to be carcinogenic in humans. No classification as carcinogen
 2740
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
JMPR (JMPR 2006); on the other hand, IARC reviewed 
effects observed in non-mammalian systems, which were 
considered of limited relevance for the assessment of car-
cinogenicity in humans in the regulatory assessment. IARC 
also assessed glyphosate-based formulations.
An important difference among IARC and regulatory 
assessment is the identification of a non-threshold geno-
toxic mode of action for carcinogenicity. This is not part of 
the IARC evaluation, while for regulatory assessment this 
is a key element triggering the risk assessment methodol-
ogy. The IARC monograph used genotoxicity and oxida-
tive stress as supporting mechanistic evidence; according 
to IARC principles, no indication is provided regarding 
threshold or non-threshold modes of action. The IARC 
allocation in group 2A may suggest that for the IARC 
Working Group the evidence on genotoxicity was insuffi-
cient for considering glyphosate as a potent DNA reactive 
non-threshold genotoxic human carcinogen. In fact, all oral 
studies, even at very high doses, are negative and the only 
in vivo mammalian positive evidence was for intraperito-
neal studies at very high doses at which (cyto)toxicity is 
expected. This is again linked to the consideration of sec-
ondary effects due to severe systemic toxicity described 
above for the animal studies, which should be excluded 
for the classification of genotoxicity and carcinogenicity 
according to the UN-GHS criteria.
Other mechanistic studies should be discussed in con-
nection with the methodological approach. With the excep-
tion of genotoxicity, mechanistic data on the mode of 
action are used in the regulatory context for assessing the 
relevance for humans, and are mostly used to downgrade 
the classification (Boobis et al. 2006; Clewell 2005; Meek 
et al. 2014a). Mechanistic data can be pivotal in IARC 
evaluations with inconclusive evidence in humans (Cogli-
ano et al. 2008; Lauby-Secretan et al. 2016); and IARC has 
used mechanistic data for upgrading 52 agents and down-
grading 8 agents (Cogliano et al. 2008). The recent review 
of the IARC approach for assessing mechanistic informa-
tion may further change this picture. Strong evidence on 
non-genotoxic mechanisms is included in the recent IARC 
assessments for lindane, DDT and 2,4-D (Loomis et al. 
2015). Moreover, mechanistic information is essential in 
the assessment of causality versus chance and bias.
To summarise, definitions for limited and sufficient evi-
dence in humans and animals are identical for IARC and 
the UN-GHS; however, differences in criteria and meth-
odological considerations for weighing and assessing the 
evidence can lead to divergent interpretations between the 
IARC assessment and regulatory evaluations following the 
UN-GHS criteria, even when based on the same evidence.
The differences between IARC and regulatory assess-
ments are related not only to parallel historical devel-
opments, but to the different overall scope. IARC 
classifications represent a first step, alerting on the car-
cinogenicity potential of a broad range of agents; scien-
tific regulatory assessments are connected to specific risk 
management recommendations, such as labelling, pack-
aging requirements, use restrictions, etc., and produce the 
basis to be used in the risk assessment. In this different 
context, the focus and role of conservativeness is very 
different. While IARC assessments are not connected to 
risk management decisions, and are based exclusively on 
published information, without access to the full study 
reports for regulated products, regulatory assessments 
may identify data gaps and request additional studies to 
confirm or exclude potential concerns identified during 
their evaluation.
Human health safety is a critical issue for understand-
ing the consequences of scientific divergences regarding 
the carcinogenicity classification of glyphosate. Regulatory 
assessments cover all relevant effects, not only carcino-
genicity. Effects other than tumour induction were respon-
sible for setting the NOAELs of the long-term toxicity–car-
cinogenicity studies, and the toxicological reference values 
were established from critical effects observed at lower 
dose levels in other studies. From a health assessment per-
spective, the IARC-EFSA scientific divergence is at lower 
dose levels that are in reality of limited, if any, relevance. 
The toxicological reference values proposed by EFSA pro-
vide a margin of protection of about four orders of mag-
nitude for the trends in tumour induction and genotoxic 
damage at toxic levels reported by IARC. Those effects are 
expected only in concomitance with other signs of toxic-
ity and at exposure levels orders of magnitude higher than 
the toxicological reference values recommended by EFSA. 
Risk assessments based on human biomonitoring and mon-
itoring of levels of glyphosate residues in food have not 
identified concerns for consumers, and a full consumers’ 
risk assessment of all EU uses is on-going.
Acknowledgements The authors are staff personnel of the Euro-
pean Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and the German Federal Institute 
for Risk Assessment (BfR). The authors declare no competing finan-
cial interests. The content of this paper is the exclusive responsibil-
ity of the authors; the opinion of the Authority is that presented in 
the EFSA Conclusion and institutional documents. The authors want 
to thank the contribution of all experts that participated in the Euro-
pean peer review of glyphosate, particularly the experts from the (co)
rapporteur Member State, as well as the comments and support from 
other EFSA colleagues and the reviewers that have improved the orig-
inal manuscript.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made.
 2741
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
References
Barlow S, Schlatter J (2010) Risk assessment of carcinogens in 
food. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 243:180–190
Becker RA, Patlewicz G, Simon TW, Rowlands JC, Budinsky RA 
(2015) The adverse outcome pathway for rodent liver tumor 
promotion by sustained activation of the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 73:172–190
Benachour N, Seralini G-E (2009) Glyphosate formulations induce 
apoptosis and necrosis in human umbilical, embryonic, and 
placental cells. Chem Res Toxicol 22:97–105
Benigni R, Bossa C, Tcheremenskaia O (2013) Nongenotoxic car-
cinogenicity of chemicals: mechanisms of action and early 
recognition through a new set of structural alerts. Chem Rev 
113:2940–2957
Benner P, Mena H, Schneider R (2016) Modeling glyphosate aerial 
spray drift at the ecuador-colombia border. Appl Math Modell 
40:373–387
Beyer LA, Beck BD, Lewandowski TA (2011) Historical perspec-
tive on the use of animal bioassays to predict carcinogenicity: 
evolution in design and recognition of utility. Crit Rev Toxicol 
41:321–338
Blaylock RL (2015) Civility in scientific publishing: the glyphosate 
paper. Surg Neurol Int 6:163–163
Boobis AR, Cohen SM, Dellarco V, McGregor D, Meek ME, Vick-
ers C et al (2006) Ipcs framework for analyzing the relevance 
of a cancer mode of action for humans. Crit Rev Toxicol 
36:781–792
Boobis AR, Doe JE, Heinrich-Hirsch B, Meek ME, Munn S, Ruchi-
rawat M et al (2008) Ipcs framework for analyzing the rel-
evance of a noncancer mode of action for humans. Crit Rev 
Toxicol 38:87–96
Bryce SM, Bemis JC, Mereness JA, Spellman RA, Moss J, Dickinson 
D et al (2014) Interpreting in vitro micronucleus positive results: 
simple biomarker matrix discriminates clastogens, aneugens, and 
misleading positive agents. Environ Mol Mutagen 55:542–555
Cavas T (2011) In vivo genotoxicity evaluation of atrazine and 
atrazine-based herbicide on fish carassius auratus using the 
micronucleus test and the comet assay. Food Chem Toxicol 
49:1431–1435
Choi SJ, Lim KC (2010) A study on classification and management 
system for carcinogens. J Korea Safety Manage Sci 12:107–119
Chruscielska KGB, Brzezinski J, Kita K et al (2000) Glyphosate: 
evaluation of chronic activity and possible far-reaching effects-
Part 1. Studies on chronic toxicity. Pestycydy (3–4):11–20
Clewell H (2005) Use of mode of action in risk assessment: Past, 
present, and future. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 42:3–14
Coalova I, de Molina MdCR, Chaufan G (2014) Influence of the 
spray adjuvant on the toxicity effects of a glyphosate formula-
tion. Toxicol Vitro 28:1306–1311
Cogliano VJ, Boan RA, Straif K, Grosse Y, Secretan B, Ghissassi 
FE (2008) Use of mechanistic data in iarc evaluations. Environ 
Mol Mutagen 49:100–109
Collier ZA, Gust KA, Gonzalez-Morales B, Gong P, Wilbanks 
MS, Linkov I et al. (2016) A weight of evidence assessment 
approach for adverse outcome pathways. Regul Toxicol Phar-
macol RTP 75:46–57.
Cox C, Surgan M (2006) Unidentified inert ingredients in pesti-
cides: Implications for human and environmental health. Envi-
ron Health Perspect 114:1803–1806
Dinse GE, Peddada SD (2011) Comparing tumor rates in current 
and historical control groups in rodent cancer bioassays. Stat 
Biopharm Res 3:97–105.
Doktorova TY, Pauwels M, Vinken M, Vanhaecke T, Rogiers V 
(2012) Opportunities for an alternative integrating testing 
strategy for carcinogen hazard assessment? Crit Rev Toxicol 
42:91–106
Downes N, Foster J (2015) Regulatory forum opinion piece: Car-
cinogen risk assessment: the move from screens to science. 
Toxicol Pathol 43:1064–1073
Duke SO, Powles SB (2008) Glyphosate: a once-in-a-century herbi-
cide. Pest Manag Sci 64:319–325
Dybing E, Sanner T, Roelfzema H, Kroese D, Tennant RW (1997) 
T25: a simplified carcinogenic potency index: description of 
the system and study of correlations between carcinogenic 
potency and species/site specificity and mutagenicity. Pharma-
col Toxicol 80:272–279
Eastmond DA (2012) Factors influencing mutagenic mode of action 
determinations of regulatory and advisory agencies. Mutat Res 
Rev Mutat Res 751:49–63
Edwards SW, Tan Y-M, Villeneuve DL, Meek ME, McQueen CA 
(2016) Adverse outcome pathways-organizing toxicological 
information to improve decision making. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther 356:170–181
Elmore SA, Peddada SD (2009) Points to consider on the statisti-
cal analysis of rodent cancer bioassay data when incorporating 
historical control data. Toxicol Pathol 37:672–676
European Chemicals Agency (2015) Guidance on the application of 
clp criteria. European chemicals agency echa-15-g-05-en
European Food Safety Authority (2007) Pesticide residue intake 
model (primo) rev. 2
European Food Safety Authority (2015a) Peer review report to 
the conclusion regarding the peer review of the pesticide risk 
assessment of the active substance glyphosate
European Food Safety Authority (2015b) Conclusion on the peer 
review of the pesticide risk assessment of the active substance 
glyphosate. EFSA J 13:4302–4302
European Food Safety Authority (2016) The 2014 European union 
report on pesticide residues in food. EFSA J 14:4611, p 139. 
doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2016.4611
European Food Safety Authority (2012) Final review of the Séralini 
et al. (2012a) publication on a 2-year rodent feeding study with 
glyphosate formulations and GM maize NK603 as published 
online on 19 september 2012 in food and chemical toxicology. 
EFSA J 10(11):2986. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2012.2986
Fagan J, Traavik T, Bohn T (2015) The seralini affair: degenera-
tion of science to re-science? Environmental Sciences Europe 
27:(29 August 2015)-(2029 August 2015)
Faria MA (2015) Glyphosate, neurological diseases—and the scien-
tific method. Surg Neurol Int 6:132–132
Gaylor DW (2005) Are tumor incidence rates from chronic bio-
assays telling us what we need to know about carcinogens? 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 41:128–133
George J, Prasad S, Mahmood Z, Shukla Y (2010) Studies on 
glyphosate-induced carcinogenicity in mouse skin: a prot-
eomic approach. J Proteomics 73:951–964
Germany (2015) Final addendum to the renewal assessment report 
on glyphosate, compiled by efsa
Ghisi NdC, de Oliveira EC, Prioli AJ (2016) Does exposure to 
glyphosate lead to an increase in the micronuclei frequency? A 
systematic and meta-analytic review. Chemosphere 145:42–54
Greim H, Gelbke HP, Reuter U, Thielmann HW, Edler L (2003) 
Evaluation of historical control data in carcinogenicity studies. 
Human Exp Toxicol 22:541–549
Greim H, Saltmiras D, Mostert V, Strupp C (2015) Evaluation of 
carcinogenic potential of the herbicide glyphosate, drawing on 
tumor incidence data from fourteen chronic/carcinogenicity 
rodent studies. Crit Rev Toxicol 45:185–208
Guyton KZ, El Ghissassi F, Benbrahim-Talaa L, Grosse Y, Loomis 
D, Straif K (2015a) Recent progress in mechanistic data 
 2742
 
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743
1 3
evaluation: the iarc monographs perspective. Environ Mol 
Mutagen 56:S84–S84
Guyton KZ, Loomis D, Grosse Y, El Ghissassi F, Benbrahim-Tallaa 
L, Guha N et al (2015b) Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvinphos, 
parathion, malathion, diazinon, and glyphosate. Lancet Oncol 
16:490–491
Hernandez LG, van Steeg H, Luijten M, van Benthem J (2009) 
Mechanisms of non-genotoxic carcinogens and importance of 
a weight of evidence approach. Mutation Res Rev Mutation 
Res 682:94–109
Heydens WF, Healy CE, Hotz KJ, Kier LD, Martens MA, Wilson 
AGE et al (2008) Genotoxic potential of glyphosate formu-
lations: mode-of-action investigations. J Agric Food Chem 
56:1517–1523
Hothorn LA (2014) Statistical evaluation of toxicological bioas-
says—a review. Toxicol Res 3:418–432.
IARC (2015) Monographs, volume 112: some organophosphate 
insecticides and herbicides: tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, mal-
athion, diazinon and glyphosate. Iarc working group. Lyon; 
3–10 march 2015. Iarc monogr eval carcinog risk chem hum
Ibrahim YA (2015) A regulatory perspective on the potential carci-
nogenicity of glyphosate. J Toxicol Health 2:1
JMPR (2006) Pesticide residues in food – 2004. Joint fao/who 
meeting on pesticide residues evaluations 2004 part ii—toxico-
logical. Who/pcs/06.1. Who, malta.
JMPR (2016) Pesticide residues in food—2016. Special Session 
of the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. FAO 
Plant Protection Paper 227. Rome
Keenan C, Elmore S, Franckecarroll S, Kemp R, Kerlin R, Pletcher 
J et al (2008) Stp working group for historical control data of 
proliferative rodent lesions. Toxicol Pathol 36:157–157
Keenan C, Elmore S, Francke-Carroll S, Kemp R, Kerlin R, Ped-
dada S et al (2009) Best practices for use of historical control 
data of proliferative rodent lesions. Toxicol Pathol 37:679–693
Kier LD (2015) Review of genotoxicity biomonitoring studies of 
glyphosate-based formulations. Crit Rev Toxicol 45:209–218
Kim Y-h, Hong J-r, Gil H-w, Song H-y, Hong S-y (2013) Mixtures 
of glyphosate and surfactant tn20 accelerate cell death via 
mitochondrial damage-induced apoptosis and necrosis. Toxi-
col in Vitro 27:191–197
Kitamoto S, Matsuyama R, Uematsu Y, Ogata K, Ota M, Yamada T 
et al (2015) Optimal dose selection of n-methyl-n-nitrosourea 
for the rat comet assay to evaluate DNA damage in organs with 
different susceptibility to cytotoxicity. Mutation Res Genetic 
Toxicol Environ Mutagen 786:129–136
Knight A, Bailey J, Balcombe J (2006) Animal carcinogenicity 
studies: 2. Obstacles to extrapolation of data to humans. Atla-
Alternatives Lab Anim 34:29–38
Kobayashi K, Sakuratani Y, Abe T, Nishikawa S, Yamada J, Hirose 
A et al (2010) Relation between statistics and treatment-related 
changes obtained from toxicity studies in rats: if detected a 
significant difference in low or middle dose for quantitative 
values, this change is considered as incidental change? J Toxi-
col Sci 35:79–85
Lauby-Secretan B, Loomis D, Baan R, El Ghissassi F, Bouvard 
V, Benbrahim-Tallaa L et al (2016) Use of mechanistic data 
in the iarc evaluations of the carcinogenicity of polychlorin-
ated biphenyls and related compounds. Environ Sci Pollut Res 
23:2220–2229
Loomis D, Guyton K, Grosse Y, El Ghissasi F, Bouvard V, Benbra-
him-Tallaa L et al (2015) Carcinogenicity of lindane, ddt, and 
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. Lancet Oncol 16:891–892
Lutter R, Abbott L, Becker R, Borgert C, Bradley A, Charnley G 
et al (2015) Improving weight of evidence approaches to 
chemical evaluations. Risk Anal 35:186–192
Ma YP, Guo JH, Shi NZ, Tang ML (2002) On the use of historical 
control information for trend test in carcinogenesis. Biometrics 
58:917–927
Marone PA, Hall WC, Hayes AW (2014) Reassessing the two-year 
rodent carcinogenicity bioassay: a review of the applicability to 
human risk and current perspectives. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 
68:108–118
Massarelli R, Adamou A, Henning G, Kangas L (2013) Comparison 
of historical control data in two strains of rat used in carcinogen-
icty studies. Int J Toxicol 32:71–71
McGregor D, Boobis A, Binaglia M, Botham P, Hoffstadt L, Hub-
bard S et al (2010) Guidance for the classification of carcinogens 
under the globally harmonised system of classification and label-
ling of chemicals (ghs). Crit Rev Toxicol 40:245–285
McInnes EF, Scudamore CL (2014) Review of approaches to the 
recording of background lesions in toxicologic pathology studies 
in rats. Toxicol Lett 229:134–143
Meek ME, Boobis A, Cote I, Dellarco V, Fotakis G, Munn S et al 
(2014a) New developments in the evolution and application of 
the who/ipcs framework on mode of action/species concordance 
analysis. J Appl Toxicol 34:1–18
Meek ME, Palermo CM, Bachman AN, North CM, Lewis RJ (2014b) 
Mode of action human relevance (species concordance) frame-
work: evolution of the bradford hill considerations and compara-
tive analysis of weight of evidence. J Appl Toxicol 34:595–606
Mesnage R, Bernay B, Seralini GE (2013) Ethoxylated adjuvants of 
glyphosate-based herbicides are active principles of human cell 
toxicity. Toxicology 313:122–128
Niemann L, Sieke C, Pfeil R, Solecki R (2015) A critical review of 
glyphosate findings in human urine samples and comparison 
with the exposure of operators and consumers. Journal Fur Ver-
braucherschutz Und Lebensmittelsicherheit-Journal of Consumer 
Protection and Food Safety 10:3–12
Nobels I, Spanoghe P, Haesaert G, Robbens J, Blust R (2011) Tox-
icity ranking and toxic mode of action evaluation of commonly 
used agricultural adjuvants on the basis of bacterial gene expres-
sion profiles. PLOS ONE 6(11):e24139. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0024139
Ntzani EECM, Ntritsos G, Evangelou E, Tzoulaki I (2013) Literature 
review on epidemiological studies linking exposure to pesticides 
and health effects. Efsa supporting publication 2013:En-497, pp 
159
OECD (2012) Guidance document 116 on the conduct and design 
of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies, supporting test 
guidelines 451, 452 and 453 2nd edition. Series on testing and 
assessment no. 116. Env/jm/mono(2011)47.
Osimitz TG, Droege W, Boobis AR, Lake BG (2013) Evaluation of 
the utility of the lifetime mouse bioassay in the identification of 
cancer hazards for humans. Food Chem Toxicol 60:550–562
Pearce N, Blair A, Vineis P, Ahrens W, Andersen A, Anto JM et al 
(2015) Iarc monographs: 40 years of evaluating carcinogenic 
hazards to humans. Environ Health Perspect 123:507–514
Peddada SD, Dinse GE, Kissling GE (2007) Incorporating historical 
control data when comparing tumor incidence rates. J Am Stat 
Assoc 102:1212–1220
Portier CJ, Goldman LR, Goldstein BD (2014) Inconclusive find-
ings: now you see them, now you don’t! Environ Health Perspect 
122:A36–A36
Pratt IS (2002) Global harmonisation of classification and labelling of 
hazardous chemicals. Toxicol Lett 128:5–15
Rhomberg L (2015a) Hypothesis-based weight of evidence: an 
approach to assessing causation and its application to regulatory 
toxicology. Risk Anal 35:1114–1124
Rhomberg LR (2015b) Contrasting directions and directives on haz-
ard identification for formaldehyde carcinogenicity. Regul Toxi-
col Pharmacol 73:829–833
 2743
Arch Toxicol (2017) 91:2723–2743 
1 3
Rhomberg LR, Goodman JE, Bailey LA, Prueitt RL, Beck NB, Bevan 
C et al (2013) A survey of frameworks for best practices in 
weight-of-evidence analyses. Crit Rev Toxicol 43:753–784
Rolando CA, Garrett LG, Baillie BR, Watt MS (2013) A sur-
vey of herbicide use and a review of environmental fate 
in new zealand planted forests. N Z J For Sci 43(1):17. 
doi:10.1186/1179-5395-43-17
SCOEL (2013) Methodology for the derivation of occupational expo-
sure limits (version 7). Scientific committee on occupational 
exposure limits, scoel
Seralini G-E, Clair E, Mesnage R, Gress S, Defarge N, Malatesta M 
et al (2014) Republished study: long-term toxicity of a roundup 
herbicide and a roundup-tolerant genetically modified maize. 
Environ Sci Eur 26:14. doi:10.1186/s12302-014-0014-5
Shao-Wen H, Chun-Hong L (2015) Toxic effects and exposure risk 
assessment of glyphosate. J Food Saf Quality 6:880–885
Smith MTGK, Gibbons CF, Fritz JM, Portier CJ, Rusyn I, DeMarini 
DM, Caldwell JC, Kavlock RJ, Lambert P, Hecht SS, Bucher JR, 
Stewart BW, Baan R, Cogliano VJ, Straif K (2016) Key charac-
teristics of carcinogens as a basis for organizing data on mecha-
nisms of carcinogenesis. Environ Health Perspect 124:713–721. 
doi:10.1289/ehp.1509912
Solomon KR, Anadon A, Carrasquilla G, Cerdeira AL, Marshall J, 
Sanin L-H (2007) Coca and poppy eradication in colombia: 
environmental and human health assessment of aerially applied 
glyphosate. In: Reviews of environmental contamination and 
toxicology, vol 190, (Ware GW (ed)), 43–125
Sonich-Mullin C, Fielder R, Wiltse J, Baetcke K, Dempsey J, Fenner-
Crisp R et al (2001) Ipcs conceptual framework for evaluating a 
mode of action for chemical carcinogenesis. Regul Toxicol Phar-
macol 34:146–152
Straif K, Loomis D, Guyton K, Grosse Y, Lauby-Secretan B, El 
Ghissassi F et al (2014) Future priorities for the iarc mono-
graphs. Lancet Oncol 15:683–684
United Nations (2003) Globally harmonized system of classification 
and labelling of chemicals (ghs), first edition. United nations, 
new york and geneva.
United Nations (2015) Globally harmonized system of classification 
and labelling of chemicals (ghs), revision 6. United nations, new 
york and geneva
Wakeford R (2015) Association and causation in epidemiology—half 
a century since the publication of bradford hill’s interpretational 
guidance. J R Soc Med 108:4–6
Williams GM, Kroes R, Munro IC (2000) Safety evaluation and risk 
assessment of the herbicide roundup and its active ingredient, 
glyphosate, for humans. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 31:117–165
Wood CE, Hukkanen RR, Sura R, Jacobson-Kram D, Nolte T, Odin 
M et al (2015) Scientific and regulatory policy committee (srpc) 
review*: interpretation and use of cell proliferation data in can-
cer risk assessment. Toxicol Pathol 43:760–775
Yauk CL, Aardema MJ, van Benthem J, Bishop JB, Dearfield KL, 
DeMarini DM et al (2015) Approaches for identifying germ cell 
mutagens: report of the 2013 iwgt workshop on germ cell assays. 
Mutation Res Genetic Toxicol Environ Mut 783:36–54
Zhou B (2015) Adverse outcome pathway: framework, applica-
tion, and challenges in chemical risk assessment. J Environ Sci 
35:191–193
