 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
“It pains me because as a woman you have to
breastfeed your baby”: decision-making about
infant feeding among African women living
with HIV in the UK
Shema Tariq,1,2 Jonathan Elford,1 Pat Tookey,3 Jane Anderson,4 Annemiek de Ruiter,5
Rebecca O’Connell,6 Alexandra Pillen2
1School of Health Sciences,
City University London,
London, UK
2Department of Anthropology,
University College London,
London, UK
3MRC Centre of Epidemiology
for Child Health, UCL Institute
of Child Health, London, UK
4Centre for the Study of Sexual
Health and HIV, Homerton
University Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK
5Harrison Wing, Guy’s and
St Thomas’ NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK
6Greenway Centre, Newham
University Hospital, London,
UK
Correspondence to:
Dr Shema Tariq, Research
Department of Infection and
Population Health, University
College London, Mortimer
Market Centre, Off Capper
Street, London WC1E 6JB, UK;
s.tariq@ucl.ac.uk
Received 30 June 2015
Revised 30 October 2015
Accepted 6 December 2015
Published Online First
12 January 2016
To cite: Tariq S, Elford J,
Tookey P, et al. Sex Transm
Infect 2016;92:331–336.
ABSTRACT
Objectives UK guidance advises HIV-positive women
to abstain from breast feeding. Although this eliminates
the risk of postnatal vertical transmission of HIV, the
impact of replacement feeding on mothers is often
overlooked. This qualitative study examines, for the first
time in the UK, decision-making about infant feeding
among African women living with HIV.
Methods Between 2010 and 2011, we conducted
semistructured interviews with 23 HIV-positive African
women who were pregnant or had recently given birth.
We recruited participants from three HIV antenatal clinics
in London.
Results Women highlighted the cultural importance of
breast feeding in African communities and the social
pressure to breast feed, also describing fears that
replacement feeding would signify their HIV status.
Participants had significant concerns about physical and
psychological effects of replacement feeding on their
child and felt their identity as good mothers was
compromised by not breast feeding. However, almost all
chose to refrain from breast feeding, driven by the desire
to minimise vertical transmission risk. Participants’
resilience was strengthened by financial assistance with
replacement feeding, examples of healthy formula-fed
children and support from partners, family, peers and
professionals.
Conclusions The decision to avoid breast feeding
came at considerable emotional cost to participants.
Professionals should be aware of the difficulties
encountered by HIV-positive women in refraining from
breast feeding, especially those from migrant African
communities where breast feeding is culturally
normative. Appropriate financial and emotional support
increases women’s capacity to adhere to their infant-
feeding decisions and may reduce the emotional
impact.
INTRODUCTION
This
risk of
transmitting
HIV
through
breast
feeding is approximately 16% in the absence of
antiretroviral therapy (ART).1 Exclusive replace-
ment feeding (feeding an infant milk other than
breast milk, such as formula) eliminates the risk of
vertical
transmission
through
breast
feeding.
However, in low-income settings it presents signifi-
cant operational challenges and is associated with
increased infant mortality secondary to diarrhoeal
illness and malnutrition, when compared with
exclusive breast feeding in HIV-positive mothers.2 3
WHO guidelines therefore recommend that the
majority of mothers living with HIV in low-income
settings exclusively breast feed with the provision
of ART to mother or child reducing the transmis-
sion risk to between 0% and 6%.4 5
In high-income settings such as the UK, wide-
spread access to clean water and formula means
that the risk of vertical transmission of HIV asso-
ciated with breast feeding outweighs that of infant
malnutrition and diarrhoeal illness. As a result, UK
guidance
recommends
exclusive
replacement
feeding for all women diagnosed with HIV
.6
7
Where a mother has an undetectable viral load on
ART and chooses to breast feed, exclusive breast
feeding, careful monitoring of both mother and
child and cessation of breast feeding by 6 months
are advised.7
Between
1200
and
1400
pregnancies
are
reported in the UK each year among women with
diagnosed
HIV
infection
(http://www.ucl.ac.uk/
silva/nshpc/slides, accessed 06 May 2015), with one
of the lowest vertical transmission rates globally at
<0.5%.8 Little is known about factors that shape
infant-feeding decisions in women living with HIV
in the UK, the vast majority of whom have
migrated
from
sub-Saharan
Africa.9
Numerous
studies conducted in sub-Saharan Africa have high-
lighted the structural and sociocultural constraints
experienced by HIV-positive women when making
infant-feeding decisions, and it is widely acknowl-
edged that in many of these settings these decisions
are highly conflicted.10 Previous case reports and
small studies suggest that the avoidance of breast
feeding is also challenging for women in the UK
and the US, especially those from migrant African
communities.11–13
In this paper, we present the first qualitative
study in the UK to explore, in detail, decision-
making about infant feeding among mothers living
with HIV
, with specific reference to migrant African
women.
METHODS
W
e present an analysis of qualitative data obtained
from semistructured interviews drawn from a larger
mixed-methods observational study designed to
Tariq S, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2016;92:331–336. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224
331
Behaviour
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224 on 12 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 explore HIV-positive African women’s engagement with HIV
care during and after pregnancy. The full methods of the larger
study are described elsewhere.9
T
wenty-three pregnant women were recruited from three spe-
cialist NHS HIV antenatal clinics in London. These three sites
were among the five hospitals reporting the largest numbers of
pregnancies in HIV-positive women between 2000 and 2010
(data extracted from the National Study of HIV in Pregnancy
and Childhood, available from authors on request), each site
looking after approximately 40–50 pregnant women living with
HIV annually. Since the first published UK guidelines on man-
agement of HIV in pregnancy in 2001, HIV-positive mothers
have been advised to completely abstain from breast feeding.
Interviews were conducted between October 2010 and October
2011. During this time, the British HIV Association published a
position statement reinforcing the advice to abstain from breast
feeding, but for the first time explicitly stating that breast
feeding against medical advice in the context of effective ART
and maternal virological suppression was not grounds for auto-
matic referral to child protection services.7
Healthcare professionals working at each study site identified
and approached women attending for HIV antenatal care who
were eligible for the study. W
omen were eligible if they were of
black African ethnicity, were born in sub-Saharan Africa, were
diagnosed with HIV and were pregnant (at any gestation). Of
the 23 women who agreed to take part in the study, one chose
to defer her interview until after delivery due to poor health.
Sampling was purposive in order to recruit women from a range
of African regions, with a range of migration histories and with
different durations of HIV diagnosis (see table 1 for sociodemo-
graphic characteristics of participants). Recruitment continued
until we reached data saturation. Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants.
Initial face-to-face interviews (n=19) were conducted within
clinics by the first author with an interpreter present if required
(n=1). Topics included experiences of pregnancy, attitudes to
medical interventions, psychosocial support, experiences of
healthcare during pregnancy and experiences of stigma and dis-
crimination. A minority of initial interviews (n=4) were con-
ducted by telephone due to participant preference (figure 1).
The 22 women who had been interviewed during pregnancy
were invited to participate in a second interview within
12 months of giving birth, of whom 14 consented to be inter-
viewed a second time (figure 1).
Interviews were audio-recorded unless participants expressed
objections. In these rare cases (n=2), extensive contemporan-
eous written notes were taken. All interviews were transcribed
verbatim and analysed in NVivo V
.9.0 (QSR International,
2010). The first author undertook a thematic analysis of inter-
view data, using the constant comparative method usually
associated
with
grounded
theory.14
This
is
an
inductive
process where each transcript is read several times and sec-
tions of the text coded within the database. W
e began with
initial open coding, a process where codes are identified from
data without restriction. Coded text was then compared and
linked across all the interviews leading to the development of
broader thematic categories. For the purposes of this analysis,
we reduced the data by extracting text that referred to infant
feeding.
The codebook and explanatory framework were developed
by the first author in discussion with AP
. Emergent findings
were also presented to a forum of women living with HIV at
one of the collaborating sites in order to ascertain the validity of
data interpretation.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
The notion of risk as socially constructed, as outlined by
Douglas and Wildavsky,15 is a useful framework for under-
standing decision-making about infant feeding in the context
of HIV
. This approach recognises that the perception of risk is
dependent upon context and that decisions about risk are
socially
embedded.
This
is
in
contrast
to
the
technical
approach to risk, the dominant paradigm in public health.16
Table 1
Interview participant characteristics
Characteristic
Number of participants (n=23)
African region of birth
East Africa
10
West Africa
10
Southern Africa
0
Middle Africa
3
Highest level of education completed*
Primary
1
Secondary
9
Higher
13
Employed
No
9
Yes
14
Marital status
Married/cohabiting
8
In a non-cohabiting relationship
8
Single
7
Duration of residence in UK (years)
<1
1
1–4
4
5–10
12
>10
6
Immigration status†
Insecure
9
Secure
14
Diagnosis of HIV
Prior to current pregnancy
20
During current pregnancy
3
Children prior to current pregnancy
Yes
20
No
3
*Secondary education was defined as up to secondary school. Higher education was
defined as college or university education (including higher professional
qualifications).
†Secure immigration status was defined as being a UK citizen, a recognised refugee
or having exceptional or indefinite leave to remain. Anyone not in these categories
was defined as having insecure immigration status.
Figure 1
Recruitment and follow-up of interview participants. *One
woman was recruited and interviewed postnatally face to face. ftf,
face-to-face interview; tel, telephone interview; ltfu, lost to follow-up.
332
Tariq S, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2016;92:331–336. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224
Behaviour
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224 on 12 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 The technical approach assumes that decisions about risk are
made by an individual who is free to make choices, that these
are
rational
choices
underpinned
by
a
value-free
cost-versus-benefit analysis and that those who do not sub-
scribe to the consensus about dangers are irrational or poorly
informed.15 17
The social construction of risk has informed previous HIV
prevention research, generating important insights into ‘high
risk’ behaviours such as barebacking18 and sexual and injecting
risk-taking among people who use drugs.19 In this paper, we
draw upon this theoretical framework to explore the social
meanings of both breast feeding and replacement feeding for
women living with HIV
, how participants’ decisions about
infant feeding are located within a social domain and the
various factors that constrain their capacity to make choices.
RESULTS
Of the 15 women interviewed postnatally, only one described
breast feeding her infant. Of the remaining eight women who
were not interviewed postnatally, all stated their intention to
avoid breast feeding completely. Participants were knowledge-
able about the risks of breast feeding and emphasised the para-
mount importance of minimising the risk of HIV transmission
to their child. However, the decision to abstain from breast
feeding was often fraught and characterised by feelings of guilt,
sorrow and fear. Of the 23 women interviewed, only 4 women
appeared not to be conflicted about their choice to formula-feed
their infant. In the following sections, we refer to illustrative
quotes (box 1) from interviews by number.
Difficulties in avoiding breast feeding
Emotional impact
In abstaining from breast feeding, participants felt an acute sense
of personal loss, often crying when discussing their decision and
describing themselves as ‘sad’, ‘unhappy’ and ‘devastated’. It was
clear that avoiding breast feeding came at a significant emotional
cost (1.a.i). Furthermore, the decision not to breast feed was not
an isolated event; rather it was a process that continued through-
out their child’s infancy. W
omen often found themselves revisit-
ing their decision either on feeding their baby or when
questioned by others as to why they were not breast feeding.
This served as a painful reminder of their HIV-positive status (1.
a.ii). Many participants were concerned that abstaining from
breast feeding would lead to poor infant health and affect their
ability to bond with their child (1.a.iii, 1.a.iv).
Practical difficulties
W
omen highlighted the work involved in replacement feeding in
terms of preparing equipment and formula (1.b.i). For those
who were sole caregivers, the practical demands of replacement
feeding without the support of a partner were especially great.
Furthermore on migrating to the UK, many had left behind
support networks that they could ordinarily draw support
from. An even greater challenge was the significant cost of
formula (1.b.ii). For women who did not qualify for state-
funded financial assistance, buying formula often put a strain on
household finances. Those with insecure immigration status and
no recourse to public funds found themselves in an even more
precarious situation. They were often financially dependent on
friends, family and partners, who were sometimes unaware of
their HIV status and were unwilling to provide financial
assistance.
Social barriers
Participants felt a strong cultural imperative to breast feed, espe-
cially as African women coming from cultures where breast
feeding is highly valued (1.c.i). For many, breast feeding was
intrinsically tied to being both a good woman and a good
mother (1.c.ii). Infant-feeding decisions were deeply embedded
within women’s social networks. They described being scruti-
nised and their feeding decisions commented upon (1.c.iii).
Furthermore, avoiding breast feeding also raised suspicions
about their HIV-positive status, which women were reluctant to
disclose due to widespread HIV-related stigma (1.c.iv). With
public breast feeding common in many participants’ communi-
ties, the bottle-fed infant therefore functioned as a visible surro-
gate marker for an HIV-positive status. Finally, as part of the
African Diaspora in the UK, our participants were particularly
aware of the differences in international public health policy on
HIV and infant feeding. Through the strong links they main-
tained with their home countries, many knew of HIV-positive
women who had been advised to breast feed or had themselves
received conflicting advice from medical staff in Africa and in
the UK. This discrepancy was a source of confusion for some
participants, prompting them to question the validity of the
advice they were receiving.
Breast feeding against advice
Only one participant in this study disclosed that she had breast
fed her child. Her social situation was precarious in that she was
a single mother of two with no leave to remain in the UK and
therefore no recourse to public funds. She lived with her family,
to whom she had not disclosed her HIV status, and was finan-
cially dependent on them. On the birth of her second child, she
had decided to supplement formula with breast feeding, satisfied
that her HIV was well controlled and believing that there was
no risk of HIV transmission (2).
Her decision to breast feed was partly underpinned by her
own
understanding
of
the
risk
of
vertical
transmission.
However, her decision was largely socially embedded, shaped by
financial dependency on her family and the need to keep her
HIV-status hidden. She had not discussed her decision to breast
feed with her medical team because “they said I shouldn’t do
it.” However, the absence of an open discussion with clinicians
about her feeding intentions had resulted in the participant
practicing mixed feeding, rather than breast feeding with appro-
priate monitoring which would have been the safer option in
this complex situation.
Fostering resilience
Despite the challenges outlined above, the overwhelming major-
ity of participants adhered to their decision to abstain from
breast feeding. W
omen who had disclosed their HIV status to
partners or family members, and had their support, found it
easier to adhere to their decision as they often received practical
and financial assistance, as well as validation of their decision in
front of others (3.a.). Those who had not breast fed previous
children and seen them thrive also displayed more confidence in
subsequent decisions to avoid breast feeding (3.b.). Finally, the
provision of free milk vouchers and equipment through clinics
was a way of supporting women, many of whom were socially
vulnerable, to exclusively feed their infants formula (3.c.).
DISCUSSION
Since 2001, UK guidance has continued to advise mothers
living with HIV to completely abstain from breast feeding in
Tariq S, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2016;92:331–336. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224
333
Behaviour
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224 on 12 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 line with guidelines in other high-income settings such as the US
and France.20 21 This is the first qualitative study in the UK to
explore, in detail, infant-feeding decisions made by women
living with HIV
, and one of the first studies to be conducted
internationally in a high-income setting. Informed by theories
on the social construction of risk, our analysis highlights how
our participants’ infant-feeding decisions were socially embed-
ded. Although their decisions were driven by the desire to
secure the health of their babies, they were subject to a range of
competing concerns including cultural expectations of mother-
hood, relationships within their social networks and economic
and social vulnerability.
The complexity of infant-feeding decisions in the context of
HIV
is
widely
recognised
throughout
sub-Saharan
Africa.
Studies have revealed how decision-making about infant feeding
in many African countries extend beyond the mother–child
dyad, with spouses, extended family and the wider local
community all contributing to decisions.22–24 In these settings,
where breast feeding is the only culturally acceptable form of
infant feeding, abstaining from breast feeding arouses suspicion
and
may
function
as
a
surrogate
marker of
a
mother’s
HIV-positive status.25–28
Our work demonstrates how HIV-positive women’s decisions
to abstain from breast feeding in high-income settings can be
similarly complex, echoing findings from previous case reports
and
small
studies
conducted
in
the
UK
and
the
North
America.11–13 Although the considerable infrastructural barriers
to replacement feeding faced by women in low-income settings
may not be encountered in countries such as the UK, our partici-
pants were still subjected to economic constraints and sociocul-
tural pressures to breast feed. Furthermore, our study highlights
how strategies to prevent vertical transmission of HIV dominate
pregnancy for women living with HIV and also continue into the
postnatal period, often at significant emotional cost.
Box 1
Illustrative quotes
1. Difficulties in avoiding breast feeding
a. Emotional impact of avoiding breast feeding
i. Emotional cost: Even up to this very day I feel bad I’ve not been able to give him the best, you know, natural way of feeding.
That kind of hits me in a way. (306, 36, married, PNI)
ii. Reminder of HIV status: At times you want to forget this thing, HIV. If you keep explaining you have to tell lies within yourself.
It’s a kind of emotional trauma. (202, 38, relationship, ANI)
iii. Fears about infant health: I wanted to [breastfeed], because from what I read in all the books, breast milk was the best, so I
wanted to give my baby. (209, 33, married, PNI)
iv. Concerns about infant bonding: When a baby doesn’t breastfeed, it doesn’t listen to you. The baby that breastfeeds, you
know, they have more love than the baby who doesn’t. (200, 30, relationship, ANI)
b. Practical difficulties
i. Preparation of feed: It’s a lot of work. All the time keep sterilising, washing, boiling water, it’s not easy. During the nights I’ll
get up stressed, because I have to get up and boil water all those times if he cries, or if he needs to drink. (204, 29, married,
PNI)
ii. Lack of financial resources: The formula as well is very expensive and you’re thinking, ‘Oh my God, if I was breastfeeding I
wouldn’t be spending so much money on just buying milk all the time.’ At some point [in a previous pregnancy] we could not
afford it […] it was so expensive. (304, 28, married, ANI)
c. Social barriers
i. Cultural value of breast feeding: Sometimes I feel it’s so hard … that’s what really makes me feel sad when I look at my baby,
as a black woman, because in our culture in Africa you’re supposed to breastfeed for two years. (207, 27, single, ANI)
ii. Maternal identity: I just accept it but in my heart it pains me because as a woman you have to breastfeed your baby. (301, 42,
married, ANI)
iii. Social pressure: My church members they ask questions too much […] they want to know everything. They have a mothers’
room where you can go with your baby. When everybody was there and feeding their baby [they ask] ‘why you don’t want to
breast feed?’ (103, 39, married, ANI)
iv. Disclosure of HV status: You always have to explain that this baby is taking medication and then that you’re not breastfeeding.
So everything adds up and you know it’s [suspicions about her HIV-status] just going to be out there. (304, 28, married, ANI)
2. Breast feeding against advice
My doctor was telling me everything was OK with my blood; that it’s undetectable. So I thought maybe I should just try. I
know it’s not possible for the baby to get the virus except during birth.
(303, 25, relationship, PNI)
3. Fostering resilience
a. Support from others: My husband tells [others] that ‘not every women always like breastfeeds, I don’t know if she’s shy to show
her breasts outside’. (204, 29, married, PNI)
b. Previous experience of not breast feeding: My first daughter wasn’t breastfed and she’s okay so this one now is not going to be
breastfed. (208, 42, single, ANI)
c. Financial assistance:
Respondent: I was given the voucher to buy some milk and I will get a voucher every month as well.
Interviewer: Does that help?
Respondent: Yes, it does. [The clinic] is very kind. (208, 42, single, ANI)
(participant ID, age, relationship status, antenatal (ANI) or postnatal (PNI) interview)
334
Tariq S, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2016;92:331–336. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224
Behaviour
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224 on 12 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 Where our study differs from those conducted in low-
income settings is in its focus on migrant women. Our partici-
pants’ location within the African Diaspora gave them an acute
awareness of international variations in public health policy on
HIV and infant feeding, sometimes resulting in confusion.
Furthermore, the poverty and lack of citizenship rights that
often accompany migration forced some of our participants
into economic dependency, presenting a further challenge to
their ability to abstain from breast feeding.
Our findings should be interpreted with caution. This study
focused on African migrant women and may not reflect the
experiences
of
women
from
other
cultural
groups.
Participants were recruited in London and their experience
may differ from those in other areas where there is likely to
be less access to specialist clinical and support services.
Furthermore, in recruiting participants from NHS clinics we
accept that our findings are unlikely to capture the experi-
ences of women who are poorly engaged with clinical
services.
However, this is one of very few qualitative studies to date of
infant feeding among women living with HIV in a high-income
setting, allowing us to suggest ways in which professionals can
strengthen HIV-positive mothers’ resilience.
The majority of HIV-positive women in high-income set-
tings are likely to abstain from breast feeding in order to min-
imise
the
risk
of
vertical
transmission.
Healthcare
professionals should continue to be aware of the difficulties
encountered by women in adhering to guidance to abstain
from breast feeding, and strive to create an environment
where women feel able to express their concerns openly.
Furthermore, staff should be prepared to explicitly and
clearly address the discrepancies between national and inter-
national guidance on HIV and breast feeding in order to min-
imise confusion. Healthcare professionals, partners, family
and peer ‘mentor-mothers’29 have an important supportive
role. This includes addressing women’s concerns about the
impact of exclusive replacement feeding on infant health and
providing advice on bonding, such as maintaining skin-to-skin
contact. Lastly, the provision of free formula and sterilising
equipment should be guaranteed across all UK clinics in order
to allow HIV-positive women, many of whom are socio-
economically marginalised, to feed their babies safely without
having to disclose their HIV status to those they are econom-
ically dependent upon.
Antenatal teams should continue to provide opportunities for
open and non-judgemental conversations about breastfeeding
intentions, and be prepared to support the minority of women
who choose to breast feed to do so safely, in line with current
UK guidance on infant feeding and HIV
.7 As further data
emerge to support breast feeding in the context of maternal
virological suppression, increasing numbers of women living
with HIV may choose to breast feed. Finally, teams should be
aware that exclusive breast feeding could also be challenging in
communities
where
mixed
feeding
may
be
the
cultural
norm,23 30 and that women may need specific counselling and
education around this.
In conclusion, this study highlights that adherence to
national guidance to abstain from breast feeding can be
fraught
and
complex
for
HIV-positive
African
migrant
women living in the UK. The onus is on healthcare profes-
sionals to understand the difficulties HIV-positive mothers
may encounter and to provide material and psychosocial
support in order to promote maternal well-being and prevent
disengagement from HIV care.
Key messages
▸ In high-income settings such as the UK, mothers living with
HIV are advised to abstain from breast feeding to prevent
vertical transmission of HIV to their infants.
▸ This is the first qualitative study in a high-income setting to
explore the impact of mode of infant feeding on women
living with HIV.
▸ In this study, which focuses on migrant African women, all
but one woman chose to refrain from breast feeding;
however, this came at considerable emotional cost.
▸ Financial assistance with replacement feeding and
appropriate support from partners, family, peers and
healthcare providers strengthens women’s resilience in
maintaining their decision not to breast feed.
Handling editor Jackie A Cassell
Twitter Follow Shema Tariq at @savoy__truffle
Acknowledgements The authors thank all the participants in this study. They also
acknowledge the contribution of the study teams at each collaborating site: Guys
and St Thomas’ Hospital (Claire Williams, Rozanna Issa and Alice Sharp); Homerton
University Hospital (Rageshri Dhairyawan, Athavan Umaipalan, Lynne Sivyour and
Sifiso Mguni) and Newham University Hospital (Lisa Welcland, Rhonda Reddington
and Cheryl Tawana).
Contributors ST, JE, PT and AP conceived and designed the study. ST collected the
data. JA, ROC and AdR identified and recruited participants. ST analysed the data,
with supervision from JE, PT and AP, and drafted the first version of this article. All
authors critically reviewed the first version of the article and approved the final draft
for publication.
Funding Medical Research Council (G0701648 ID 85538).
Competing interests None declared.
Ethics approval This study had ethical approval from City University Research
Ethics Committee (ref. PhD/09-10/10) and the West London Research Ethics
Committee on behalf of the NHS sites (ref. 10/10707/49).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement Additional unpublished data are available on request
from the first author by emailing her on s.tariq@ucl.ac.uk. These data comprise
original pseudonomised transcripts of interviews. Requests for data will be
considered on a case-by-case basis by the first author in conjunction with JE,
PT and AP.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use,
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Nduati R, John G, Mbori-Ngacha D, et al. Effect of breastfeeding and formula
feeding on transmission of HIV-1. JAMA 2000;283:1167–74.
2
Iliff PJ, Piwoz EG, Tavengwa NV, et al. Early exclusive breastfeeding reduces the
risk of postnatal HIV-1 transmission and increases HIV-free survival. AIDS
2005;19:699–708.
3
Coovadia HM, Rollins NC, Bland RM, et al. Mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1
infection during exclusive breastfeeding in the first 6 months of life: an intervention
cohort study. Lancet 2007;369:1107–16.
4
Siegfried N, Brocklehurst P, Sint TT. Antiretrovirals for reducing the risk of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;
(7):CD003510.
5
Horvath T, Madi B, Iuppa I, et al. Interventions for preventing late postnatal
mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;(1):
CD006734.
6
BHIVA/CHIVA Guidelines Writing Group. Infant Feeding in the UK. London: British
HIV Association, 2010.
7
Taylor GP, Clayden P, Dhar J, et al. British HIV Association guidelines for the management
of HIV infection in pregnant women 2012. HIV Med 2012;13(Suppl 2):87–157.
Tariq S, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2016;92:331–336. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224
335
Behaviour
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224 on 12 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 8
Townsend CL, Byrne L, Cortina-Borja M, et al. Earlier initiation of ART and further
decline in mother-to-child HIV transmission rates, 2000–2011. AIDS 2014;28:1049–57.
9
Tariq S, Pillen A, Tookey PA, et al. The impact of African ethnicity and migration on
pregnancy in women living with HIV in the UK: design and methods. BMC Public
Health 2012;12:596.
10
Tuthill E, McGrath J, Young S. Commonalities and differences in infant feeding
attitudes and practices in the context of HIV in sub-Saharan Africa: a metasynthesis.
AIDS Care 2014;26:214–25.
11
Levison J, Weber S, Cohan D. Breastfeeding and HIV-infected women in the United
States: harm reduction counseling strategies. Clin Infect Dis 2014;59:304–9.
12
Oliver S, Petty J. Breast-feeding and HIV transmission: an analysis of the factors
influencing HIV positive mothers decision to breast-feed – a case study approach.
J Neonatal Nurs 2012;18:155–62.
13
Treisman K, Jones FW, Shaw E. The experiences and coping strategies of United
Kingdom-based African women following an HIV diagnosis during pregnancy.
J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care 2014;25:145–57.
14
Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N. Qualitative research in health care: analysing
qualitative data. BMJ 2000;320:114–16.
15
Douglas M, Wildavsky AB. Risk and culture: an essay on the selection of technological
and environmental dangers. London, UK: University of California Press, 1983.
16
Tansey J, O’riordan T. Cultural theory and risk: a review. Health Risk Soc
1999;1:71–90.
17
Douglas M, Calvez M. The self as risk taker: a cultural theory of contagion in
relation to AIDS. Sociol Rev 1990;38:445–64.
18
Ridge DT. ‘It was an incredible thrill’: the social meanings and dynamics of younger
gay men’s experiences of barebacking in Melbourne. Sexualities 2004;7:259–79.
19
Rhodes T. Risk theory in epidemic times: sex, drugs and the social organisation of
‘risk behaviour’. Sociol Health Illn 1997;19:208–27.
20
Mandelbrot L, Berrebi A, Matheron S, et al. HIV and pregnancy: 2013 guidelines from
the French expert working group. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod 2014;43:534–48.
21
Panel on Treatment of HIV-Infected Pregnant Women and Prevention of Perinatal
Transmission. Recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant
HIV-1-infected women for maternal health and interventions to reduce perinatal HIV
transmission in the United States. Secondary recommendations for use of
antiretroviral drugs in pregnant HIV-1-infected women for maternal health and
interventions to reduce perinatal HIV transmission in the United States, 2014. http://
aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/PerinatalGL.pdf.
22
Kasinga F, Mogotlane SM, van Rensburg GH. Knowledge of pregnant
women on transmission of HIV infection through breast feeding. Curationis
2008;31:21–6.
23
Cames C, Saher A, Ayassou KA, et al. Acceptability and feasibility of infant-feeding
options: experiences of HIV-infected mothers in the World Health Organization
Kesho Bora mother-to-child transmission prevention (PMTCT) trial in Burkina Faso.
Matern Child Nutr 2010;6:253–65.
24
Buskens I, Jaffe A, Mkhatshwa H. Infant feeding practices: realities and mind sets of
mothers in Southern Africa. AIDS Care 2007;19:1101–9.
25
Blystad A, Moland KM. Technologies of hope? Motherhood, HIV and infant feeding
in eastern Africa. Anthropol Med 2009;16:105–18.
26
Doherty T, Chopra M, Nkonki L, et al. Effect of the HIV epidemic on infant feeding
in South Africa: “When they see me coming with the tins they laugh at me”.
Bull World Health Organ 2006;84:90–6.
27
Sadoh WE, Sadoh AE. Experiences of HIV positive mothers who chose not to
breastfeed their babies in Nigeria. Afr J Reprod Health 2009;13:27–35.
28
Chinkonde JR, Hem MH, Sundby J. HIV and infant feeding in Malawi: public health
simplicity in complex social and cultural contexts. BMC Public Health 2012;12:700.
29
McColl K. Mentor mothers to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV. BMJ
2012;344:e1590.
30
Levy JM, Webb AL, Sellen DW. “On our own, we can’t manage”: experiences with
infant feeding recommendations among Malawian mothers living with HIV.
Int Breastfeed J 2010;5:15.
336
Tariq S, et al. Sex Transm Infect 2016;92:331–336. doi:10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224
Behaviour
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://sti.bmj.com/
Sex Transm Infect: first published as 10.1136/sextrans-2015-052224 on 12 January 2016. Downloaded from 
