 Neural Contributions to Muscle Fatigue: From the Brain to the 
Muscle and Back Again
Janet L. Taylor1,2, Markus Amann3, Jacques Duchateau4, Romain Meeusen5,6, and Charles 
L. Rice7
1Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, Australia
2School of Medical Sciences, the University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
3Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
4Laboratory of Applied Biology and Neurophysiology, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Université Libre 
de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
5Human Physiology Research Group Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
6School of Public Health, Tropical Medicine and Rehabilitation Sciences, James Cook University, 
Queensland, Australia
7School of Kinesiology, and Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, The University of Western 
Ontario, London, Canada
Abstract
During exercise, there is a progressive reduction in the ability to produce muscle forces. Processes 
within the nervous system, as well as within the muscles contribute to this fatigue. In addition to 
impaired function of the motor system, sensations associated with fatigue, and impairment of 
homeostasis can contribute to impairment of performance during exercise. This review discusses 
some of the neural changes that accompany exercise and the development of fatigue. The role of 
brain monoaminergic neurotransmitter systems in whole-body endurance performance is 
discussed, particularly with regard to exercise in hot environments. Next, fatigue-related 
alterations in the neuromuscular pathway are discussed in terms of changes in motor unit firing, 
motoneuron excitability and motor cortical excitability. These changes have mostly been 
investigated during single-limb isometric contractions. Finally, the small-diameter muscle afferents 
that increase firing with exercise and fatigue are discussed. These afferents have roles in 
cardiovascular and respiratory responses to exercise, and in impairment of exercise performance 
through interaction with the motor pathway, as well as providing sensations of muscle discomfort. 
Thus, changes at all levels of the nervous system including the brain, spinal cord, motor output, 
sensory input and autonomic function occur during exercise and fatigue. The mix of influences 
and the importance of their contribution varies with the type of exercise being performed.
Correspondence: Dr Janet Taylor, Neuroscience Research Australia, Barker St, Randwick, 2031, NSW, Australia, 
j.taylor@neura.edu.au. 
Conflicts of Interest
Other authors have nothing to declare.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016 November ; 48(11): 2294–2306. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000923.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
central fatigue; monoaminergic; Motor unit; motoneuron; motor cortex; muscle afferent
Introduction
In humans, muscle fatigue can be defined as any exercise-induced reduction in the ability to 
produce force or power with a muscle or muscle group. Ultimately the production of force or 
power depends on contractile mechanisms within skeletal muscle fibres. However, a chain of 
processes in the nervous system and the muscle precede voluntary muscle contraction and 
changes at any level of this pathway could also impair force or power generation. It is well 
recognised that fatigue of the muscle itself occurs through multiple mechanisms related to 
both the contractile apparatus and how it is engaged through depolarisation of the muscle 
fiber membrane. Commonly, fatigue through processes at or distal to the neuromuscular 
junction is known as peripheral fatigue (e.g.14, 31). However, neural drive to the muscle 
determines if, when and to what degree muscle fibers are activated. Hence, processes within 
the central nervous system (CNS) that reduce neural drive to the muscle can also contribute 
to the decline in force or power and compromise performance. This phenomenon is known 
as central fatigue (Figure 1) and applies to single-joint exercise (e.g. elbow flexion) 
involving a relatively small muscle mass, but also to multiple-joint and whole body exercise 
(e.g. cycling) involving a large muscle mass
In health, muscle fatigue limits athletic performance and other strenuous or prolonged 
activity. When it impacts on everyday tasks, such as carrying a heavy shopping bag or a 
child, or climbing flights of stairs, it is managed by swapping from one set of muscles to 
another or by periods of rest or reduced activity. However, in many disorders, muscle fatigue 
is increased and restricts daily life. Such disorders include neurological, muscular, 
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases but also with aging and frailty, and any disorder that 
enforces inactivity and leads to deconditioning.
Fatigue can alter overt performance, such that the task is performed more slowly or clumsily 
or even cannot be performed successfully, or it can alter the neuromuscular activity required 
to perform the task and this may be evident as increased electrical activity of the muscle 
(electromyogram, EMG). Additionally, there are sensations that accompany muscle fatigue, 
such as muscle pain or discomfort and perception of increased effort. In whole body 
exercise, disturbances to homeostasis of multiple systems provide signals that impact 
directly or indirectly on the motor system. Thus, there are multiple neural alterations that are 
associated with exercise-induced fatigue. Some of these alterations represent processes that 
reduce voluntary muscle force and so contribute to fatigue. In contrast, others reflect 
compensation to allow successful task performance despite impairment elsewhere in the 
neuromuscular system.
This review will discuss some of the neural changes that occur with fatiguing exercise. It 
will start with the influence of different neurotransmitter systems on whole-body exercise 
performance and the development of fatigue. Next, it will focus on changes within the direct 
neuromuscular pathway by describing the behaviour of motor units, motoneurons and the 
Taylor et al.
Page 2
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 motor cortex during fatiguing contractions. Finally, it will discuss the contribution of small-
diameter muscle afferents which fire with fatigue to impairment of exercise performance.
Brain changes associated with performance
Neurotransmitters dictate and create the communication between neurons in different brain 
regions and neuronal pathways. Generally speaking, nerve cells in the brain have a tendency 
to fire all the time. There is an incessant, irregular discharge from billions of nerve cells, 
giving a massive ‘background noise’. Probably none of the neurons in the brain are exposed 
only to excitation, and certainly no nerve cells are affected solely by inhibitory signals. 
Therefore, understanding the function of various neurotransmitters is important in 
understanding their role during whole body exercise and fatigue. The monoamines serotonin 
(5-Hydroxitryptamine; 5-HT), dopamine (DA) and noradrenaline (NA) play a key role in 
signal transduction between neurons, and exercise-induced changes in the concentrations of 
these neurotransmitters (especially 5-HT and DA) have been linked to central fatigue That 
is, fatigue that arises from changes within the central nervous system (or proximal to the 
neuromuscular junction; 14) In 1987, Newsholme and his co-workers proposed the so-called 
“Central Fatigue Hypothesis”, which stated that fatigue was caused by an increase in brain 
5-HT concentration, which induced negative effects on arousal, lethargy, sleepiness and 
mood (65). It was proposed that this mechanism could influence the perception of effort and 
therefore, fatigue (65). Many studies have challenged the ‘central fatigue’ hypothesis. Some 
studies observed, in accordance with the hypothesis, a negative effect of an increase in 5-HT 
concentration on performance, whereas others could not confirm that finding (for review see 
81). The contrasting findings in literature probably result from the complexity of the 5-HT 
neurotransmitter system, as many different receptors and receptor subtypes have been 
identified, each with different functions and interactions. The lack of consensus amongst 
studies that have tried to manipulate the neurotransmitter system suggest that 5-HT is not the 
key-factor in the development of central fatigue; it also indicates that the results could also 
be ‘drug-specific’.
Mixed effects on performance are also observed for drugs that influence the catecholamines 
NA and DA, with different results from drugs that manipulate NA or DA or both 
neurotransmitters at the same time. The NA reuptake inhibitor reboxetine has been shown to 
exert no effect or negative effects on endurance exercise performance in normal ambient 
temperature (52, 72, 79). However, it is not certain that this is solely through central 
mechanisms, as reboxetine can also have peripheral effects through the sympathetic system, 
such as vasodilatation and increased heart rate, and an influence of these on peformance 
cannot be ruled out. DA can be manipulated by methylphenidate, which both increases 
release and inhibits reuptake of DA, and thus, creates a large increase in the extracellular 
concentration of DA in the synapse. Methylphenidate improved exercise performance, with a 
longer time to task failure and a higher power output during cycling at a fixed rating of 
perceived exertion (90). On the other hand, it did not improve self-paced time trial 
performance in 18°C (80). This contrast suggests that the exercise protocol used to induce 
fatigue may also influence the outcome. Finally, after administration of a dual DA/NA 
reuptake inhibitor (bupropion), subjects finished a predetermined amount of work in the 
same time (89 min) as after administration of a placebo (71), illustrating that even when a 
Taylor et al.
Page 3
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 combined reuptake inhibitor is used, it can be difficult to alter exercise performance through 
neurotransmitter manipulation. In a different protocol (97) using the same drug, bupropion, 
subjects first cycled for one hour at 55% of maximal workload, immediately followed by a 
time trial to measure performance. Again, there was no difference in performance in a 
normal environmental temperature, but compared to placebo, core temperature was 
significantly elevated during the time trial with no changes in the subjects’ ratings of 
perceived exertion and thermal stress scale (97). This increase in temperature indicates that 
the manipulation of the catecholaminergic system could cause a perturbation of 
thermoregulation. Fatigue during whole body exhaustive exercise is sometimes influenced 
by disturbances of neurotransmitter homeostasis, however, in ‘normal’ temperature it seems 
difficult to challenge fatigue mechanisms and perturb performance through drugs that 
influence neurotransmitter systems.
Fatigue in high environmental temperature
Neurotransmitters play a key role in the control of thermoregulation and are thought to 
mediate thermoregulatory responses. Serotonergic (5-HT), NA and DA pathways to the 
hypothalamus indicate their key role in temperature regulation (81). Therefore, shifts in the 
extracellular concentrations of these neurotransmitters could be expected to contribute to 
changes in thermal regulation and consequently to the onset of fatigue, specifically when 
exercise is undertaken in a warm (e.g. 30°C) environment (81). In a series of experiments the 
influence of neurotransmission on endurance performance in the heat was examined (for a 
recent review see 77). This paradigm was chosen because in the previous experiments with 
bupropion, core temperature was elevated by ~0.3° throughout the experiment compared to 
the placebo situation. Thus exercise in a hot environment in combination with manipulation 
of neurotransmitter systems could be a way to explore the brain mechanisms that limit 
performance in the heat.
When the 5-HT reuptake inhibitor citalopram was used to increase the brain content of 5-HT 
(78), no significant changes in endurance performance were detected. Also other studies (88, 
89), were not able to influence performance and therefore fatigue during exercise in a hot 
environment. Thus, 5-HT is certainly not exclusively responsible for the onset of central 
fatigue during prolonged exercise in normal or high environmental temperature.
As in the normal temperature environment, the NA and DA neurotransmitter systems may 
have different effects on performance in a warm environment. NA reuptake inhibition by 
administration of reboxetine reduced performance in the heat. Subjects took 20% longer to 
complete a cycling time trial after reboxetine administration compared to the placebo 
administration (79).
Administration of methylphenidate, which increases DA in synapses, improved time trial 
performance in 30°C by 16%, an outcome that coincided with an average maximal core 
temperature of 40±0.6°C, much higher than in the placebo trial (39.1±0.7°C). Strikingly, 
both the ratings of perceived exertion and the thermal sensation were not different from the 
placebo. This indicates that subjects did not feel they were producing more power and 
consequently more heat. The authors concluded that the ‘safety switch’ or the mechanisms 
Taylor et al.
Page 4
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 existing in the body to prevent harmful effects, are overridden by the drug administration 
(80). Taken together, these data indicate strong ergogenic effects of an increased DA 
concentration in the brain, without any change in the perception of effort.
Similarly, Watson et al. (97) examined the combined effects of DA and NA (by use of 
bupropion) on time trial performance in the heat, and found a significant improvement 
compared to placebo. Coinciding with this ergogenic effect the authors observed core 
temperatures that were significantly higher compared to the placebo situation (bupropion 
40.0±0.3°C, placebo 39.7±0.3°C, P=0.017). Like methylphenidate (80), bupropion may also 
dampen or override inhibitory signals arising from the central nervous system to cease 
exercise due to hyperthermia, and enable an individual to continue to maintain a high power 
output (97). This outcome may suggest that after acute administration of bupropion the 
initial central influence originates from the DA neurotransmitter system, rather than from the 
NA system. Possible underlying mechanisms were explored in an animal study which 
showed that acute intraperitoneal bupropion injection produced increases in brain and core 
temperature and a decrease in tail temperature (heat loss mechanism) through an increase in 
NA and DA in the pre-optic area of the anterior hypothalamus (40). Thus it seems that the 
manipulation of neurotransmission in the ‘thermoregulation center’ of the brain (pre-optic 
anterior hypothalamus) is one of the mechanisms that negatively influences the rise in core 
temperature, therefore disturbing the adaptation to a homeostatic challenge.
Manipulation of neurotransmitter systems during exercise in the heat can also affect the 
pacing strategies subjects use during time trials (76). That is, there are effects on how 
subjects expend effort over the duration of a time trial (or race) and hence, effects on the 
time distribution of speed, power output or use of energetic reserves. After DA reuptake 
inhibition compared with placebo, subjects are able to maintain a higher power output 
throughout a time trial. Manipulation of serotonin and, especially, NA, have the opposite 
effect and force subjects to decrease power output early in the time trial. Interestingly, after 
manipulation of brain serotonin, subjects are often unable to perform an end sprint, 
indicating an absence of a reserve capacity or motivation to increase power output. Taken 
together, it appears that many factors, such as ambient conditions and manipulation of brain 
neurotransmitters, have the potential to influence power output during exercise, and might 
thus be involved as regulatory mechanisms in the complex skill of pacing (76).
Brain mechanisms responsible for fatigue during whole body exercise are complex, and are 
likely to involve integrative pathways. In normal ambient temperature, manipulation of 
monoaminergic neurotransmitters during exercise gives equivocal results. Effects become 
clearer with exercise in high ambient temperatures, and the thermoregulatory system may 
have an important influence on performance. As shown by changes in perceived exertion and 
pacing strategy, as well as body temperature, it seems that not only motor and 
thermoregulatory pathways, but also sensory and cognitive pathways work in concert to 
control power output and the development of fatigue during self-paced whole body exercise.
Taylor et al.
Page 5
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Changes in the neuromuscular pathway with fatiguing exercise
Voluntary movements and muscle forces are generated by muscle fibers which are controlled 
by the firing of spinal motoneurons. These receive sensory and descending signals from 
multiple sources. The corticospinal tract from the primary motor cortex to the spinal cord is 
especially important for the control of voluntary movement in humans. During fatiguing 
exercise, changes occur at each level of this neuromuscular pathway (Figure 1).
Motor unit firing in fatiguing contractions
The intimate connection between the central nervous system and the muscle is captured by 
the definition of the motor unit (MU); the spinal motoneuron and the muscle fibers 
innervated by its axon. The MU is the functional (controllable) or elemental portion of the 
neuromuscular system involved in motor output. The central nervous system through a 
variety of excitatory and inhibitory inputs and intrinsic properties of the motoneuron, 
ultimately activates MUs to achieve force output; Sherrington's final common pathway. The 
tight link and high fidelity of the muscle fiber's response to motoneuron output allows 
insights into spinal motoneuron function from electromyographic recordings of the 
peripheral muscle.
For the activation of muscle fibers, MUs are recruited or derecruited in a usually robust 
orderly fashion based on motoneuron size (see 41), essentially controlling the amount of 
muscle tissue being activated. Once a MU is recruited, force output can be further modulated 
by the rates of action potentials arriving at the muscle fiber. Muscle fibers are extremely 
responsive to relatively small variations in MU firing rates, taking advantage of the ‘active 
state’ processes (41). When first recruited in a healthy system, MUs usually fire at 5-8 Hz 
(41), although in certain tasks some MUs may initially fire doublets (2-3 action potentials at 
100 Hz or more) to rapidly enhance rates of force development (39).
During brief non-fatiguing voluntary contractions in humans, mean MU firing rates as high 
as 50-60 Hz have been recorded from different (usually limb) muscles (27). Therefore, the 
working mean firing rate range varies a remarkable 8-10 fold, although muscle seems most 
responsive to rates between 10 and 40 Hz (30), and these are the more frequently recorded 
rates from large numbers of MUs.
In fatiguing contractions, MU recruitment has been less well-studied than firing rates, but it 
seems that recruitment order is not changed although recruitment thresholds may be altered 
depending on the task (2, 17, 28). Additionally during long endurance lower intensity tasks, 
new MUs are likely recruited and active MUs may drop-out (derecruited) for a period of 
time and then become activated again (67). This process is referred to as MU rotation or 
substitution (41). Changes in MU firing rate during a variety of fatiguing tasks, albeit 
studied mostly under isometric contractions, have been well described in many human 
muscles. Because of the muscle's responsiveness to changes in rates of excitation and the 
large range of rates recorded from human MUs, it is perhaps not surprising to expect rates to 
be modulated when the system is challenged or stressed with repetitive activation. But 
similar to other portions of the system described herein, the type of fatiguing task is a key 
factor.
Taylor et al.
Page 6
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 During isometric contractions, the most consistent finding is that MU rates decline during 
intermittent or sustained maximal voluntary contractions (MVC) perhaps by as much as 50% 
compared with initial values regardless of their starting rate (12, 31, 99) - however there are 
rare exceptions to this observation (59). As discussed below, fatigue induced reductions in 
firing rates are due to one or a combination of a decline in neural drive, local intrinsic 
adaptations of the motoneuron (41), or to peripheral inhibitory feedback mechanisms. The 
relative contributions of these effects probably depend on the muscle studied and the 
duration of the high-intensity task. Studies in healthy aged adults with an altered MU system 
(42) expressing lower initial firing rates show the same response during high intensity tasks 
(21). This indicates that a reduction in firing rate is a fundamental response of the system's 
output. However, during submaximal fatiguing tasks MU firing rates show extremely 
variable responses that are not easy to categorize. At moderate intensity (40-50% MVC) 
during intermittent actions, first recruited MUs usually show declines in firing rates but units 
recruited during the task may increase their rates (17, 50) presumably in an effort to sustain 
the force. During contractions below 30-35% MVC, MU rate changes vary among units. No 
change, increases in rates, decreases in rates, or variable changes among MUs within the 
same experiment have been reported (reviewed in 37). At intensities of 20% or less of MVC 
during long duration contractions, units may show no change in rates but increases in 
variability in inter-discharge intervals as task failure approaches (67). Indeed, many factors 
including whether sustained or intermittent tasks, muscles of upper limb or lower limb, 
proximal or distal muscles, the composition and architecture of the muscle in terms of 
muscle fiber types and MU numbers, and training status among others can all be reasonably 
speculated to variably influence rate changes with submaximal fatiguing contractions. Thus, 
many potential factors need to be considered or carefully controlled when interpreting and 
comparing results across studies. Furthermore, unlike at higher contractile intensities, the 
opportunity for changes in recruitment and de-recruitment of MUs is much greater in 
fatiguing submaximal tasks, which can have an impact on discharge rates. However, 
relatively few studies have assessed concurrently the interaction between recruitment and 
rate coding during fatiguing tasks (61). Finally, interpretations of fatigue-related changes in 
MU output in many studies cited here have necessarily been directed by findings obtained 
from single MUs, but from a functional aspect the system utilizes groups of concurrently 
activated MUs. Therefore, further understanding of these processes would benefit from 
assessments of multiple MU pools during fatiguing contractions.
Dynamic contractions have been less well-studied due to the technical challenges of making 
reliable recordings of individual MUs during muscle length and architectural changes 
associated with joint rotations. Although initial MU firing rates can be higher due to greater 
central drive or other facilitatory processes related to fast shortening contractions when 
compared with isometric contractions (38), during dynamic fatiguing shortening 
contractions either at submaximal (37) or high intensity levels (19), maximal rates decline 
and with greater declines for the higher intensity task. Similar to isometric studies, MU 
firing rates show variable or no changes following a submaximal fatiguing shortening task 
(35, 37). Following muscle-damaging eccentric contractions, when strength was reduced 
immediately and for the subsequent 24h, the very few studies indicate that MU firing rates 
are slightly increased in relation to substantially lower recruitment thresholds compared with 
Taylor et al.
Page 7
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 before the eccentric tasks (82 for review). With continuing improvements and validation of 
high-density surface electrodes (28) and miniaturization of intramuscular multi-channel 
electrode arrays (64), recording of MU properties may be forthcoming from more 
complicated dynamic fatiguing tasks involving multiple joint actions such as walking or 
cycling.
Motoneuron excitability during fatiguing contractions
The one-to-one relationship of the firing of a motoneuron and the muscle fibers that it 
innervates means that the behavior of MUs (see above) represents the output of the 
motoneurons during fatiguing contractions. This output is influenced by the intrinsic 
properties of the motoneurons, the effects of neuromodulators such as serotonin and 
noradrenaline, and synaptic input from sensory feedback and descending drive (Figure 2). 
All of these influences can change with fatiguing exercise and these changes vary with task.
Several lines of evidence suggest that repetitive activation of motoneurons leads to a 
reduction in their excitability or response to excitatory synaptic input. First, in animal 
preparations, an individual motoneuron activated by current injection fires repetitively but 
this firing slows with time (for review 15). Second, in humans, feedback of the firing rate of 
a motoneuron can be provided through single MU recording. When subjects voluntarily hold 
this firing rate steady over several minutes, additional MUs are progressively recruited. This 
implies that the target motoneuron requires progressively more descending drive to maintain 
the same output (46). Third, muscle responses to stimulation of corticospinal axons at the 
cervicomedullary junction (cervicomedullary motor evoked potentials; CMEPs) are reduced 
when measured from the elbow flexor muscles during sustained MVCs (see 92). As direct 
cortical projections to motoneurons lack presynaptic inhibition, the reduction in CMEP 
suggests a reduction in motoneuron excitability. Furthermore, this reduction is magnified if 
the influence of descending drive on the motoneurons is temporarily removed by preceding 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which briefly inhibits voluntary output from motor 
cortex. Without ongoing descending drive, motoneurons are profoundly less responsive after 
only 15 s of maximal activity (63). Finally, if similar stimuli (CMEP in the period of EMG 
silence following TMS) are delivered during a sustained submaximal voluntary contraction, 
CMEPs are also progressively reduced in size. However, small CMEPs are more affected 
than larger CMEPs (62). Because smaller, lower-threshold motoneurons are recruited before 
larger motoneurons (i.e. size principle), both in voluntary contractions and in responses to 
corticospinal stimulation, the differential effect suggests a reduction in the excitability of the 
motoneurons that fired repetitively in the sustained voluntary contraction with little effect on 
the larger, higher-threshold motoneurons (see 17). If repetitively active motoneurons are 
specifically reduced in excitability compared to non-active or less active motoneurons in the 
same pool, this suggests a change in intrinsic properties as the underlying mechanism, 
because other influences such as altered afferent or descending input would affect 
motoneurons across the pool. The specific intrinsic properties that change with repetitive 
activation are as yet unknown.
Descending neuromodulatory systems are likely to be important for exercise (48). For 
example, in reduced preparations, monoamines such as serotonin, noradrenaline and 
Taylor et al.
Page 8
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dopamine, promote locomotion or influence its rhythmicity through diverse actions on 
neurons in the locomotor circuits (e.g. 83). As yet, the integration of these systems into the 
control of voluntary movement is not well understood, but the serotonergic system has 
recently been proposed to contribute to fatigue (18). The actions of serotonin on 
motoneurons are complex (68). Descending serotonergic neurons synapse onto the dendrites 
and soma of motoneurons, where serotonin acts via 5-HT2 receptors to increase the 
excitability of the motoneurons (e.g. 48, 68). Such excitatory actions should aid in motor 
output rather than contribute to fatigue. Indeed, during rhythmic movements such as 
walking, the presence of neuromodulators may counteract the changes in intrinsic properties 
which lead to reduced excitability with repetitive firing of motoneurons (16). However, in 
addition to the 5-HT2 receptors, inhibitory 5-HT1A receptors have been identified on the 
axon initial segment of motoneurons. In turtle spinal cord, a high level of descending 
serotonergic drive results in spillover of serotonin from the synapses on the dendrites to the 
receptors on the axon initial segment and inhibits motoneuron firing (18 ). During motor 
tasks, serotonin is thought to be released relatively diffusely in the spinal cord (48). Studies 
in animals suggest more release with increased speed of treadmill running, but an eventual 
decrease with prolonged exercise (29, 34). Indirect measures in humans suggest that release 
is graded with the strength of voluntary contraction (98). Thus, the descending serotonergic 
system could reduce motoneuron excitability and contribute to fatigue either through 
withdrawal of its facilitatory actions at the dendrites, as may happen with prolonged 
exercise, or through spill over and activation of its inhibitory extrasynaptic receptors with 
strong contractions. So far, there is no direct evidence of serotonin's role at the motoneurons 
in fatigue although 5-HT1A receptors are present on human motoneurons (53) and human 
motoneuron excitability can be reduced by ingestion of a 5-HT1A agonist (20).
In addition to intrinsic changes of the motoneuron properties with repetitive activity and 
through neuromodulatory systems, the excitability of the motoneuron pool can be modulated 
by the afferent feedback (26, 92). The ionotropic synaptic input received by the motoneuron 
during fatiguing contractions comprises concurrent increases in excitatory (descending drive 
and muscle spindle afferents) and inhibitory (group Ib, group III and IV and Renshaw cell) 
afferent feedback. The inhibitory influence of Golgi tendon organs (group Ib afferent) and 
Renshaw cells should not play a substantial role as their activity is mainly diminished during 
fatigue (31). In contrast, firing of group III and IV muscle afferents is increased and it is well 
accepted that this leads to reduced motoneuron firing. The exact mechanisms of this 
reduction remain debated but likely include direct inhibition of some motoneuron pools, 
presynaptic inhibition of Ia afferents and supraspinal effects that reduce descending drive 
(25, 43, 60, 70, 99). The widespread influences of group III and IV muscle afferents on 
muscle fatigue are further discussed below (see Feedback from fatigue-sensitive muscle 
afferents).
Among the sensory receptors, muscle spindles have a facilitatory effect on the motoneuron 
pool. This facilitation can be modulated by change in the transduction properties of the 
sensory receptor and in the transmission of the Ia pathway. A pioneering study using 
microneurography reported a progressive decline in the discharge of muscle spindle 
afferents from the human pretibial muscles during a sustained (~1 min) submaximal 
Taylor et al.
Page 9
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 isometric contraction (≤30% MVC) (58). This observation suggested that a progressive 
disfacilitation of the alpha motoneuron pool, associated with depressed gamma motoneuron 
activation and hence, decreased spindle firing, may contribute to the decline in MU 
discharge rate during a sustained contraction (58).
However, the facilitatory effect of muscle spindle output on the motoneuron pool can also be 
modulated by altered transmission prior to the motoneuron (i.e. presynaptic inhibitory 
mechanisms). This has been studied by the measurement of changes in short- and long-
latency reflexes evoked by weak electrical stimulation of the Ia fibres of the corresponding 
muscle (23, 25). The short-latency reflex (Hoffmann or H reflex) comprises a spinal loop 
through largely monosynaptic input to the motoneurons, whereas the long-latency reflex 
involves transmission of the induced activity to supraspinal centers to evoke cortical output, 
which in turn reaches the motoneurons in the spinal cord.
When subjects sustained an MVC with the abductor pollicis brevis until force declined to 
50% of maximum, the amplitude of the H reflex decreased progressively by 30% without 
any change in the amplitude of the long-latency reflex (25). As both reflex responses share 
the same motoneuron pool, the differential changes indicated a reduction in Ia afferent input 
by mechanism(s) located prior to the motoneuron. This implies that, not only may spindle 
firing be decreased as noted above, but that the efficacy of Ia input to facilitate the 
motoneuron pool is also progressively reduced. A comparable decrease in H-reflex 
amplitude was also seen in fatiguing submaximal (25% and 50% MVC) contractions held to 
failure (23). Furthermore, when normalized to the duration of the contraction, the rate of 
change of the H reflex was similar regardless of the intensity and duration of the contraction.
In contrast to the consistent reduction in H-reflex amplitude for the different intensities and 
durations of contraction, the amplitude of the long-latency reflex varied with the target force. 
Although, the long-latency reflex was unchanged at the end of the sustained MVC, it 
exhibited a progressive decline in amplitude for submaximal contractions (25% and 50% 
MVC) (23). This reduction was greater for the lower target force and longer duration of 
contraction (25% MVC). Because the long-latency reflex follows a supraspinal pathway that 
does not involve presynaptic inhibitory mechanisms, these results suggest that the reduced 
amplitude may reflect intrinsic changes of the motoneuron properties and the effect of 
neuromodulatory systems. Control of excitatory synaptic input at a presynaptic level has also 
been observed for the antagonist muscles. During a sustained submaximal contraction of the 
elbow flexors, the H-reflex response in triceps brachii decreased, whereas the amplitude of 
the CMEP, which is not influenced by presynaptic inhibition, increased (54). This specific 
modulation likely allows a precise control of co-activation during submaximal fatiguing 
contractions (24). Regardless of the exact mechanisms, these observations indicate a subtle 
control of the afferent feedback to the motoneuron pool of both agonist and antagonist 
muscles during fatiguing tasks.
Together, the results of these studies suggest that changes in the intrinsic properties of active 
motoneurons and disfacilitation of the motoneuron pool both occur during prolonged 
fatiguing contractions. In addition, an influence of descending neuromodulatory systems is 
Taylor et al.
Page 10
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 probable. Thus, multiple mechanisms likely explain why spinal motoneurons become 
progressively harder to activate.
Motor cortical drive and excitability during fatiguing contractions
During a sustained MVC, the surface EMG activity drops progressively because 
motoneurons a) become less responsive to synaptic input, b) receive decreased afferent 
feedback from muscle spindles and c) receive insufficient descending drive due to 
supraspinal fatigue (Figure 2; 92). In contrast, during a submaximal task sustained for a long 
period of time surface EMG activity increases progressively. In sustained isometric 
contractions, this is associated with an increase in size of MEPs evoked by transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS) (e.g. 51, 54, 87). Thus, augmented excitatory descending drive 
is usually thought to represent a compensation mechanism for contractile failure and the loss 
of spinal excitability (44, 51, 54, 87). Indeed, intramuscular EMG recordings indicate that 
although some MUs can stop discharging during the course of a sustained submaximal 
fatiguing contraction about a single joint (17, 69), enhanced descending drive recruits 
additional MUs (17, 33). Furthermore, the discharge rate of the newly activated MUs 
progressively increases after their recruitment before a later decline, as is the case for MUs 
activated from the beginning of the task (17, 75).
The intensification of descending drive is, however, limited in capacity and time, and a 
progressive reduction of the ability of the brain to drive the muscle maximally can be 
observed during and shortly after both maximal and submaximal single-limb and whole-
body exercise. Stimulation of the motor cortex with a single TMS pulse during a brief MVC 
provides a method to assess the maximality of the output from the brain in humans (32). The 
presence of a twitch-like response on the force signal indicates that the voluntary output of 
the brain is not maximal because extra output can be evoked, and also that it is suboptimal to 
activate all MUs at their full capacity despite the subject's maximal effort. This may not 
necessarily indicate a reduction in motor cortical output or excitability, as the same 
descending drive could become less effective with reduced motoneuron excitability. 
However, as output remains untapped by voluntary effort, it does suggest a failure to employ 
all resources to generate output from the motor cortex (32, 93). Thus, an exercise-related 
increase of the superimposed twitch during an MVC is a classical marker of supraspinal 
fatigue. Using this method, supraspinal fatigue is relatively modest (accounting for ~25% of 
the loss of force) for short-duration sustained MVCs (~2 min) and most of the fatigability 
encountered is located in the muscle (32). In contrast, for long-duration submaximal 
contractions (≤15% MVC), the reduced ability of the brain to drive the muscle develops 
incrementally during the effort and contributes to a greater extent (50-66%) to the whole 
level of fatigability than during a brief MVC (92). Similarly, greater supraspinal fatigue also 
occurs with lower intensity, but longer duration, whole body exercise (94).
Despite the development of supraspinal fatigue, EMG responses to TMS suggest increased 
excitability of the motor cortex during fatiguing single-limb contractions. During 
submaximal contractions, increases in MEP size are associated with increases in voluntary 
EMG and at least partly reflect augmented cortical excitability associated with more 
voluntary cortical output (51, 53, 87). When the submaximal task requires EMG to be 
Taylor et al.
Page 11
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 maintained steady, MEPs do not increase, but subcortically-evoked CMEPs decrease, with 
the comparison again suggesting an increase in cortical excitability (62). Similarly, during 
sustained maximal contractions or in brief MVCs performed in the midst of a submaximal 
task, MEPs increase in size despite reductions in ongoing EMG. However, some inhibitory 
responses to TMS also increase during fatiguing efforts, so that changes in the primary 
motor cortex are not as simple as just extra excitation (for review 36, 92). Furthermore, 
during cycling to task failure, MEPs in the knee extensors do not increase, raising the 
possibility that neural changes with fatigue differ in single-limb and locomotor exercise (84).
Imaging studies also offer insight into the activity of the motor cortex and other areas of the 
brain during fatiguing single-limb contractions. During prolonged submaximal contractions 
with hand muscles, as EMG increases, the fMRI BOLD signal increases progressively in the 
contralateral sensorimotor cortex, as well as in other motor areas, including the 
supplementary motor area, cingulate motor area and the ipsilateral sensorimotor cortex (57, 
95). In contrast, although activation in cortical motor areas also increases during sustained 
maximal efforts, EMG and voluntary activation decrease, demonstrating that the increases in 
brain activity are not sufficient to maintain neural drive to the muscle (74). While the 
increases in the BOLD signal in the motor cortex may suggest increases in motor cortical 
output during both submaximal and maximal tasks, the interpretation of such changes is 
complex. Indeed, both excitatory and inhibitory activity could contribute to the extra BOLD 
response, along with recruitment of neurons engaging muscles not critical to the task and the 
effects of changing sensory feedback (74). Therefore, it is unclear how much of the 
increased response reflects an increase in descending drive to the fatigued muscle (74). For 
submaximal efforts, increasing voluntary EMG indicates increased excitatory input to the 
motoneuron pool and strongly suggests that motor cortical output is increasing. However, for 
maximal efforts, fMRI does not distinguish whether supraspinal fatigue is associated with a 
decrease in motor cortical output or an unchanged or increased output that has become less 
effective.
Cortical and spinal contributions to task failure
To determine the relative influence of spinal and cortical mechanisms on the endurance time, 
Klass and colleagues (51) compared two tasks that differed by the type of load used. The 
tasks consisted of sustaining a submaximal contraction at 20% maximum with the elbow 
flexor muscles while subjects either supported an inertial load (position task) or produced an 
equivalent constant torque against a rigid restraint (force task). Despite the similar load 
torque in both conditions, the time to task failure was about half as long for the position task 
as for the force task (see also 44, 51). At the end of the two tasks, when the subject was 
unable to continue, the superimposed twitch evoked by TMS, reflecting supraspinal fatigue, 
was increased similarly. The level of peripheral fatigue, assessed by the muscle twitch 
evoked by a single maximal electrical stimulation of the motor nerve, was also similar in 
both conditions. In contrast, the time course of change for the H-reflex response, induced by 
weak electrical stimulus of the Ia fibres in the brachial plexus, differed between the two 
tasks. It declined more quickly and to a greater extent for the position task, which suggested 
that spinal mechanisms constrained the endurance time in the position task compared to the 
force task (51).
Taylor et al.
Page 12
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Another approach to examine the contribution of the reduced output from the brain on the 
performance of a motor task is to manipulate pharmacologically the concentration of some 
brain neurotransmitters by the administration of drugs that inhibit specifically the reuptake 
of these neurotransmitters (see Brain changes associated with performance). Klass et al. 
(52) compared the influence of reuptake inhibitors for NA (reboxetine) or DA 
(methylphenidate) with a placebo on the performance of well-trained subjects on a 30-min 
time trial performed on a cycle ergometer at ~75% of maximum power production. With 
inhibition of NA reuptake, average power produced during the time trial was reduced 
compared to the other two conditions. As a consequence, the time to complete the time trial 
was comparable for the placebo and DA conditions, but ~12 % longer for the NA condition. 
Interestingly, the level of voluntary activation, assessed by TMS at 10 min after the time 
trial, was also different from pre-exercise values (~97%) only for the NA group (~8% 
reduction). Consistent with these observations, the time to complete a reaction time test, that 
assessed psychomotor vigilance, remained unchanged after the time trial for the placebo 
group, was faster with inhibition of DA reuptake, and was slower with inhibition of NA 
reuptake. In conclusion, manipulation of the brain neurotransmitter NA, but not DA, 
compromised neural adjustments during the time trial in well-trained individuals.
Together, these findings indicate that the endurance time of a fatiguing task is reduced by a 
depressed synaptic input from Ia afferent feedback and a decline in the capacity of the 
central nervous system to provide maximal excitation to the motoneurons. The rate-limiting 
adjustments of these two factors that constrain muscle function during fatiguing contractions 
are, however, task-dependent.
Feedback from fatigue-sensitive muscle afferents
As noted above, muscle contractions activate various receptors linked with sensory neurons 
innervating skeletal muscle. This stimulation changes the discharge frequency of these 
nerves and consequently their feedback to the central nervous system (CNS) including the 
brain and the spinal cord. Sensory nerves can be separated by their function, diameter, and 
conduction velocity (with the latter two depending on the degree of myelination) and have 
been classified as group I – IV. The small-diameter muscle afferents (i.e. groups III and IV) 
are most closely related to the changes in neural activity observed during fatiguing 
contractions . Most of the thinly myelinated group III afferents are mechanically sensitive 
and respond to muscle contraction and/or stretch, whereas group IV (and some group III) 
muscle afferents and associated receptors (see below) are sensitive to various intramuscular 
metabolites and metabolic changes within the contracting muscle as well as noxious levels 
of mechanical strain.
Recent findings in animals (45, 56); and humans (73) suggest the existence of two 
subgroups of metabosensitive group III/IV muscle afferents characterized by anatomical and 
functional differences (5). One subtype, the so-called metabo- or ergoreceptors, respond to 
innocuous levels of intramuscular metabolites (lactate, ATP, protons) associated with 
‘normal’ (i.e. freely perfused and predominantly aerobic) exercise (11, 55) up to strenuous 
intensities. In contrast, the other subtype, the so-called metabo-nociceptors, only respond to 
higher (and concurrently noxious) levels of metabolites present in muscle during ischaemic 
Taylor et al.
Page 13
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contractions or following hypertonic saline infusions – but not to non-noxious metabolite 
concentrations associated with normal exercise (45, 56, 73). The specific phenotypical 
distinction of metaboreceptors vs metabo-nociceptors remains elusive to date. It is, however, 
recognized that molecular differences between the two subtypes includes the differential 
expression of purinergic receptors (P2X2,3,4), transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 
and/or 2 (TRPV1/2), and acid-sensing ion current 1, 2, and 3 (ASIC 1-3) (45, 56). Although 
the two different subtypes of group III/IV muscle afferents project to the same location in 
the superficial dorsal horn (45), it is currently unknown to what degree each subtype is 
anatomically linked to lamina I neurons which have direct projections to various supraspinal 
sites.
Group III and IV muscle afferents have been documented to substantially influence the 
development of peripheral and central fatigue during both single-joint and whole body 
exercise.
Role of Afferents in Peripheral Fatigue
Group III/IV muscle afferents affect the development of peripheral fatigue through their 
involvement in the regulation of the cardiovascular, hemodynamic, and ventilatory response 
to exercise (Figure 3). The very rapid increases in these parameters after the onset of 
exercise are substantially influenced by group III/IV-mediated feedback from the working 
muscle (49) and central command (i.e. a feedforward signal originating within the brain and 
related to motor output) (96). Exercise-induced increases in ventilation and central (i.e. 
cardiac output) and peripheral (i.e. limb blood flow) hemodynamics promote optimal arterial 
oxygenation and muscle perfusion which together assure that O2 demand and delivery are 
matched in working muscles (22). Important in this context is the fact that muscle blood 
flow and O2 delivery depict key components in the rate of development of peripheral fatigue 
during both single joint exercise and activities including a large muscle mass (e.g. whole 
body exercise) (12). Specifically, decreases in blood flow/O2 delivery exacerbate this rate, 
while increases attenuate this rate (4). Consequently, by facilitating the circulatory and 
ventilatory response to exercise, group III/IV muscle afferents ensure adequate muscle blood 
flow/O2 delivery and thereby prevent premature fatigue of the contracting muscle (3).
Aging might shift this positive influence of muscle afferent feedback on the development of 
peripheral fatigue through altering the role of these neurons in determining central and 
peripheral hemodynamics. Briefly while group III/IV-mediated feedback plays a clear role in 
facilitating limb blood flow and therefore O2 delivery during exercise in the young, these 
afferents seem to actually reduce limb vascular conductance in the elderly and may explain 
the limited exercise-induced peripheral vasodilation / limb blood flow often associated with 
aging (86). While this would suggest that group III/IV muscle afferents may actually 
facilitate the development of peripheral fatigue during exercise in the elderly, there is 
currently no data confirming this hypothesis.
Heart failure clearly exacerbates the group III/IV-mediated impact on vascular conductance 
and muscle blood flow / O2 delivery seen in healthy older individuals and exacerbates the 
development of fatigue during physical activity (10). Patients with heart failure are 
characterized by exaggerated group III and/or IV-mediated afferent feedback, which is 
Taylor et al.
Page 14
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thought to account for the exaggerated sympathoexcitation (10, 66). Recent data 
demonstrate that when heart failure patients perform exercise with pharmacologically 
(lumbar intrathecal fentanyl) blocked group III/IV muscle afferents, sympathetic outflow is 
attenuated and leg blood flow/O2 delivery significantly increased compared to control 
exercise. Importantly, this blockade-induced increase also attenuated the development of 
fatigue (as assessed via the pre- to post-exercise decrease in MVC) in these patients (10). 
Therefore, the abnormally elevated neural feedback (i.e., related to group III/IV muscle 
afferents) associated with heart failure exacerbates the rate of development of fatigue in 
patients with heart failure.
Role of Muscle Afferents in Central Fatigue
Feedback from group III/IV muscle afferents during fatiguing exercise directly or indirectly 
impairs the output from spinal motoneurons, which can compromise voluntary muscle 
activation and consequently exercise performance (Figure 3; 7, 13, 32, 91). This interaction 
has been demonstrated during single joint exercise where the output from motoneurons (i.e. 
surface EMG) and voluntary muscle activation (estimated from superimposed twitches 
elicited by TMS) was found to progressively decrease during a 2 min maximal, isometric 
elbow flexion but to recover to pre-exercise baseline levels within minutes after the cessation 
of exercise. However, when, at the end of exercise, a blood pressure cuff was inflated around 
the arm to trap metabolites within the elbow flexors and therefore to maintain the firing of 
group III/IV muscle afferents during the post-exercise rest period, motoneuronal output and 
voluntary muscle activation remained low and did not recover until the cuff was deflated, 
circulation restored, and group III/IV-mediated feedback recovered (32). As noted above, 
reduced motoneuron output has been variously attributed to direct inhibition of the 
motoneurons for some muscles, a reduction in excitatory input through presynaptic 
inhibition of Ia afferents and reduction of descending drive.
Group III/IV muscle afferents also exert inhibitory influences on the output from 
motoneurons during whole-body exercise. This was shown in a series of studies where 
subjects performed high-intensity cycling exercise to exhaustion under control conditions 
and with pharmacologically blocked (lumbar intrathecal fentanyl) afferent feedback from 
locomotor muscle. The unanimous observation was that output from spinal motoneurons 
(estimated via surface EMG) is less restricted and significantly higher during exercise with 
blocked group III/IV locomotor muscle afferents compared to the identical exercise 
performed with intact feedback (3, 6, 7). Interestingly, this inhibitory influence on 
motoneuronal output is not only specific to the working and fatiguing locomotor muscle, but 
can also cross-over to affect muscles / muscle groups not directly involved in the locomotor 
task (85). Together, these observations highlight the significant involvement of group III/IV 
muscle afferents in the development of central fatigue during intense whole body endurance 
exercise.
Investigating the effect of group III/IV muscle afferents on performance during longer 
duration, predominantly aerobic, exercise is challenging. The difficulty arises from the 
twofold role these neurons play in an exercising human. Specifically, although they limit 
motoneuronal output and consequently voluntary muscle activation, their contribution to 
Taylor et al.
Page 15
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 attenuate the development of peripheral fatigue (by facilitating circulation and respiration 
during exercise, see above) is essential. Therefore, manipulating muscle afferents during 
exercise affects both central and peripheral mechanisms of fatigue and the net effect depends 
on how one effect outweighs the other. In a recent study designed to circumvent this caveat, 
subjects performed dynamic single leg knee-extensor exercise to task failure (inability to 
maintain 85% of peak power output) in one leg immediately followed by the identical task in 
the other leg (9). The goal was to determine whether afferent feedback arising from the 
knee-extensor, which was first exercised/exhausted, limits endurance exercise performance 
of the consecutively exercising contralateral knee-extensor. Various control experiments 
allowed the exclusion of other limiting influences on the endurance performance of the 
consecutively exercising contralateral leg (e.g. no peripheral fatigue, uncompromised 
ventilatory and circulatory responses). Afferent feedback associated with exercise to 
exhaustion in the first leg (~9 min) reduced endurance time to exhaustion of the 
consecutively exercised contralateral leg by nearly 50%. It was concluded that group III/IV 
muscle afferent feedback associated with exhaustive endurance exercise has an inhibitory 
effect on the CNS which limits output from motoneurons and therefore endurance 
performance (9). A similar cross-over effect on motoneuronal output and associated impact 
on exercise performance was also documented to occur from muscles in the upper body 
(fatiguing arm cranking) to the legs (cycling) (47).
Conclusion
During fatiguing exercise there are many changes in the nervous system. Some of these 
contribute to fatigue and others compensate to allow continued task performance despite 
reduced muscle forces. In the neuromuscular pathway, slowing or cessation of MU firing 
contributes to the loss of force that marks fatigue, whereas recruitment of additional MUs 
can compensate for it. These changes in MU firing result from a combination of influences 
on the motoneurons including alterations in intrinsic properties, afferent input, and 
descending neuromodulatory and synaptic inputs. In turn, each of the inputs to the 
motoneurons are susceptible to fatigue-related effects, which also depend on the specific 
exercise being performed. An important sensory signal of fatigue comes from the firing of 
group III/IV muscle afferents. This afferent signal interacts with the autonomic nervous 
system (8), as well as with various levels of the motor system (31), and also contributes to 
conscious sensations of muscle discomfort and fatigue (73). Finally, modulation of brain 
neurotransmitters can alter endurance performance. Such changes are exacerbated by 
exercise in the heat and may represent the interaction of homeostatic functions, such as 
temperature regulation, with the motor system and conscious sensations of fatigue. Thus, 
changes in the neuromuscular, sensory and homeostatic systems can all contribute to fatigue 
with exercise. The mix of influences on exercise performance will depend on the task and 
the conditions under which it is performed.
Acknowledgements
The results of the present study do not constitute endorsement by ACSM.
Source of Funding.
Taylor et al.
Page 16
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 JLT is supported by a Research Fellowship and grant from the National Health and Medical Research Council of 
Australia. MA is supported by the US National Institute of Health (HL-103786 and HL-116579) and a Veterans 
Affairs grant (1I21RX001572). CLR is supported by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada (NSERC).
References
1. Abbiss CR, Peiffer JJ, Meeusen R, Skorski S. Role of ratings of perceived exertion during self-paced 
exercise: what are we actually measuring? Sports Med. 2015; 45(9):1235–43. [PubMed: 26054383] 
2. Adam A, De Luca CJ. Recruitment order of motor units in human vastus lateralis muscle is 
maintained during fatiguing contractions. J Neurophysiol. 2003; 90(5):2919–27. [PubMed: 
14615422] 
3. Amann M, Blain GM, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA. Implications of group III 
and IV muscle afferents for high intensity endurance exercise performance in humans. J Physiol. 
2011; 589:5299–309. [PubMed: 21878520] 
4. Amann M, Calbet JA. Convective oxygen transport and fatigue. J Appl Physiol. 2008; 104(3):861–
70. [PubMed: 17962570] 
5. Amann M, Light AR. From Petri dish to human: new insights into the mechanisms mediating 
muscle pain and fatigue, with implications for health and disease. Exp Physiol. 2015; 100(9):989–
90. [PubMed: 26331215] 
6. Amann M, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, Eldridge MW, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA. Somatosensory 
feedback from the limbs exerts inhibitory influences on central neural drive during whole body 
endurance exercise. J Appl Physiol. 2008; 105(6):1714–24. [PubMed: 18787091] 
7. Amann M, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA. Opioid-mediated muscle afferents 
inhibit central motor drive and limit peripheral muscle fatigue development in humans. J Physiol. 
2009; 587(Pt 1):271–83. [PubMed: 19015193] 
8. Amann M, Sidhu SK, Weavil JC, Mangum TS, Venturelli M. Autonomic responses to exercies: 
group III/IV muscle afferents and fatigue. Auton Neurosci. 2015; 188:19–23. [PubMed: 25458423] 
9. Amann M, Venturelli M, Ives SJ, et al. Peripheral fatigue limits endurance exercise via a sensory 
feedback-mediated reduction in spinal motoneuronal output. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013; 115(3):
355–64. [PubMed: 23722705] 
10. Amann M, Venturelli M, Ives SJ, et al. Group III/IV muscle afferents impair limb blood in patients 
with chronic heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2014; 174:368–75. [PubMed: 24794967] 
11. Bangsbo J, Johansen L, Graham T, Saltin B. Lactate and H+ effluxes from human skeletal muscles 
during intense, dynamic exercise. J Physiol. 1993; 462:115–33. [PubMed: 8331579] 
12. Barclay JK. A delivery-independent blood flow effect on skeletal muscle fatigue. J Appl Physiol. 
1986; 61(3):1084–90. [PubMed: 3759747] 
13. Bigland-Ritchie BR, Dawson NJ, Johansson RS, Lippold OC. Reflex origin for the slowing of 
motoneurone firing rates in fatigue of human voluntary contractions. J Physiol. 1986; 379:451–9. 
[PubMed: 3560001] 
14. Bigland-Ritchie B, Jones DA, Hosking GP, Edwards RH. Central and peripheral fatigue in 
sustained maximum voluntary contractions of human quadriceps muscle. Clin Sci Mol Med. 1978; 
54(6):609–14. [PubMed: 657729] 
15. Brownstone RM. Beginning at the end: repetitive firing properties in the final common pathway. 
Prog Neurobiol. 2006; 78(3-5):156–72. [PubMed: 16725251] 
16. Brownstone RM, Krawitz S, Jordan LM. Reversal of the late phase of spike frequency adaptation 
in cat spinal motoneurons during fictive locomotion. J Neurophysiol. 2011; 105(3):1045–50. 
[PubMed: 21177992] 
17. Carpentier A, Duchateau J, Hainaut K. Motor unit behaviour and contractile changes during fatigue 
in the human first dorsal interosseus. J Physiol. 2001; 534(Pt 3):903–12. [PubMed: 11483719] 
18. Cotel F, Exley R, Cragg SJ, Perrier JF. Serotonin spillover onto the axon initial segment of 
motoneurons induces central fatigue by inhibiting action potential initiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2013; 110(12):4774–9. [PubMed: 23487756] 
Taylor et al.
Page 17
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Cowling B, Harwood B, Copithorne DB, Rice CL. Changes in anconeus motor unit firing rates 
during high-intensity dynamic elbow extensor fatiguing contractions. Med. Sci. Sports and Ex. 
2015; 47(Suppl 1)(5):322.
20. D'Amico, JM.; Butler, AA.; Butler, JE.; Gandevia, SC.; Taylor, JL. Activation of 5HT1A receptors: 
a plausible contributor to central fatigue.. Congress of the European College of Sport Science; 
Malmo, Sweden. 2015; 
21. Dalton BH, Harwood B, Davidson AW, Rice CL. Recovery of motoneuron output is delayed in old 
men following high-intensity fatigue. J Neurophysiol. 2010; 103(2):977–85. [PubMed: 20032234] 
22. Dempsey, JA.; Johnson, JM.; Wagner, PD. Control of respiratory and cardiovascular system.. In: 
Rowell, LB.; Shepherd, JT., editors. Handbook of Physiology Section 12: Exercise: Regulation and 
Integration of Multiple Systems. Oxford University Press; New York: 1996. p. 331-838.
23. Duchateau J, Balestra C, Carpentier A, Hainaut K. Reflex regulation during sustained and 
intermittent submaximal contractions in humans. J Physiol. 2002; 541(Pt 3):959–67. [PubMed: 
12068054] 
24. Duchateau J, Baudry S. The neural control of coactivation during fatiguing contractions revisited. J 
Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2014; 24(6):780–8. [PubMed: 25225169] 
25. Duchateau J, Hainaut K. Behaviour of short and long latency reflexes in fatigued human muscles. J 
Physiol. 1993; 471:787–99. [PubMed: 8120833] 
26. Enoka RM, Baudry S, Rudroff T, Farina D, Klass M, Duchateau J. Unraveling the neurophysiology 
of muscle fatigue. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2011; 21(2):208–19. [PubMed: 21071242] 
27. Enoka RM, Fuglevand AJ. Motor unit physiology: some unresolved issues. Muscle Nerve. 2001; 
24(1):4–17. [PubMed: 11150961] 
28. Farina D, Merletti R, Enoka RM. The extraction of neural strategies from the surface EMG: an 
update. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014; 117(11):1215–30. [PubMed: 25277737] 
29. Fornal CA, Martin-Cora FJ, Jacobs BL. “Fatigue” of medullary but not mesencephalic raphe 
serotonergic neurons during locomotion in cats. Brain Res. 2006; 1072(1):55–61. [PubMed: 
16412992] 
30. Fuglevand AJ, Lester RA, Johns RK. Distinguishing intrinsic from extrinsic factors underlying 
firing rate saturation in human motor units. J Neurophysiol. 2015; 113(5):1310–22. [PubMed: 
25475356] 
31. Gandevia SC. Spinal and supraspinal factors in human muscle fatigue. Physiol Rev. 2001; 81(4):
1725–89. [PubMed: 11581501] 
32. Gandevia SC, Allen GM, Butler JE, Taylor JL. Supraspinal factors in human muscle fatigue: 
evidence for suboptimal output from the motor cortex. J Physiol. 1996; 490(Pt 2):529–36. 
[PubMed: 8821149] 
33. Garland SJ, Enoka RM, Serrano LP, Robinson GA. Behavior of motor units in human biceps 
brachii during a submaximal fatiguing contraction. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1994; 76(6):2411–9. 
[PubMed: 7928865] 
34. Gerin C, Becquet D, Privat A. Direct evidence for the link between monoaminergic descending 
pathways and motor activity. I. A study with microdialysis probes implanted in the ventral 
funiculus of the spinal cord. Brain Res. 1995; 704(2):191–201. [PubMed: 8788914] 
35. Griffin L, Ivanova T, Garland SJ. Role of limb movement in the modulation of motor unit 
discharge rate during fatiguing contractions. Exp Brain Res. 2000; 130(3):392–400. [PubMed: 
10706437] 
36. Gruet M, Temesi J, Rupp T, Levy P, Millet GY, Verges S. Stimulation of the motor cortex and 
corticospinal tract to assess human muscle fatigue. Neuroscience. 2013; 231:384–99. [PubMed: 
23131709] 
37. Harwood B, Choi I, Rice CL. Reduced motor unit discharge rates of maximal velocity dynamic 
contractions in response to a submaximal dynamic fatigue protocol. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2012; 
113(12):1821–30. [PubMed: 23085960] 
38. Harwood B, Davidson AW, Rice CL. Motor unit discharge rates of the anconeus muscle during 
high-velocity elbow extensions. Exp Brain Res. 2011; 208(1):103–13. [PubMed: 21107544] 
Taylor et al.
Page 18
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Harwood B, Rice CL. Short interspike intervals and double discharges of anconeus motor unit 
action potentials for the production of dynamic elbow extensions. J Neurophysiol. 2014; 111(10):
2039–46. [PubMed: 24554783] 
40. Hasegawa H, Piacentini MF, Sarre S, Michotte Y, Ishiwata T, Meeusen R. Influence of brain 
catecholamines on the development of fatigue in exercising rats in the heat. J Physiol. 2008; 
586(1):141–9. [PubMed: 17947314] 
41. Heckman CJ, Enoka RM. Motor unit. Compr Physiol. 2012; 2(4):2629–82. [PubMed: 23720261] 
42. Hepple RT, Rice CL. Innervation and neuromuscular control in ageing skeletal muscle. J Physiol. 
Oct.2015 Epub ahead of print. 
43. Hilty L, Lutz K, Maurer K, et al. Spinal opioid receptor-sensitive muscle afferents contribute to the 
fatigue-induced increase in intracortical inhibition in healthy humans. Exp Physiol. 2011; 96(5):
505–17. [PubMed: 21317218] 
44. Hunter SK, Enoka RM. Changes in muscle activation can prolong the endurance time of a 
submaximal isometric contraction in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2003; 94(1):108–18. 
[PubMed: 12391034] 
45. Jankowski MP, Rau KK, Ekmann KM, Anderson CE, Koerber HR. Comprehensive phenotyping of 
group III and IV muscle afferents in mouse. J Neurophysiol. 2013; 109(9):2374–81. [PubMed: 
23427306] 
46. Johnson KV, Edwards SC, Van Tongeren C, Bawa P. Properties of human motor units after 
prolonged activity at a constant firing rate. Exp Brain Res. 2004; 154(4):479–87. [PubMed: 
14574429] 
47. Johnson MA, Sharpe GR, Williams NC, Hannah R. Locomotor muscle fatigue is not critically 
regulated after prior upper body exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2015; 119(7):840–850. [PubMed: 
26272315] 
48. Johnson MD, Heckman CJ. Gain control mechanisms in spinal motoneurons. Front Neural 
Circuits. 2014; 8:81. [PubMed: 25120435] 
49. Kaufman, MP.; Forster, HV. Reflexes controlling circulatory, ventilatory and airway responses to 
exercise.. In: Rowell, LB.; Shepherd, JT., editors. Handbook of Physiology Section 12: Exercise: 
Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems. Oxford University Press; New York: 1996. p. 
381-447.
50. Kelly LA, Racinais S, Cresswell AG. Discharge properties of abductor hallucis before, during, and 
after an isometric fatigue task. J Neurophysiol. 2013; 110(4):891–8. [PubMed: 23678020] 
51. Klass M, Lévénez M, Enoka RM, Duchateau J. Spinal mechanisms contribute to differences in the 
time to failure of submaximal fatiguing contractions performed with different loads. J 
Neurophysiol. 2008; 99(3):1096–104. [PubMed: 18184884] 
52. Klass M, Roelands B, Lévénez M, et al. Effects of noradrenaline and dopamine on supraspinal 
fatigue in well-trained men. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012; 44(12):2299–308. [PubMed: 22776872] 
53. Laporte AM, Doyen C, Nevo IT, Chauveau J, Hauw JJ, Hamon M. Autoradiographic mapping of 
serotonin 5-HT1A, 5-HT1D, 5-HT2A and 5-HT3 receptors in the aged human spinal cord. J Chem 
Neuroanat. 1996; 11(1):67–75. [PubMed: 8841890] 
54. Lévénez M, Garland SJ, Klass M, Duchateau J. Cortical and spinal modulation of antagonist 
coactivation during a submaximal fatiguing contraction in humans. J Neurophysiol. 2008; 99(2):
554–63. [PubMed: 18046002] 
55. Li J, King NC, Sinoway LI. ATP concentrations and muscle tension increase linearly with muscle 
contraction. J Appl Physiol. 2003; 95(2):577–83. [PubMed: 12716867] 
56. Light AR, Hughen RW, Zhang J, Rainier J, Liu Z, Lee J. Dorsal root ganglion neurons innervating 
skeletal muscle respond to physiological combinations of protons, ATP, and lactate mediated by 
ASIC, P2X, and TRPV1. J Neurophysiol. 2008; 100(3):1184–201. [PubMed: 18509077] 
57. Liu JZ, Shan ZY, Zhang LD, Sahgal V, Brown RW, Yue GH. Human brain activation during 
sustained and intermittent submaximal fatigue muscle contractions: an FMRI study. J 
Neurophysiol. 2003; 90(1):300–12. [PubMed: 12634278] 
58. Macefield G, Hagbarth KE, Gorman R, Gandevia SC, Burke D. Decline in spindle support to 
alpha-motoneurones during sustained voluntary contractions. J Physiol. 1991; 440:497–512. 
[PubMed: 1839558] 
Taylor et al.
Page 19
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 59. Macefield VG, Fuglevand AJ, Howell JN, Bigland-Ritchie B. Discharge behaviour of single motor 
units during maximal voluntary contractions of a human toe extensor. J Physiol. 2000; 528(Pt 1):
227–34. [PubMed: 11018121] 
60. Martin PG, Smith JL, Butler JE, Gandevia SC, Taylor JL. Fatigue-sensitive afferents inhibit 
extensor but not flexor motoneurons in humans. J Neurosci. 2006; 26(18):4796–802. [PubMed: 
16672652] 
61. McManus L, Hu X, Rymer WZ, Lowery MM, Suresh NL. Changes in motor unit behavior 
following isometric fatigue of the first dorsal interosseous muscle. J Neurophysiol. 2015; 113(9):
3186–96. [PubMed: 25761952] 
62. McNeil CJ, Giesebrecht S, Gandevia SC, Taylor JL. Behaviour of the motoneurone pool in a 
fatiguing submaximal contraction. J Physiol. 2011; 589(Pt 14):3533–44. [PubMed: 21606110] 
63. McNeil CJ, Martin PG, Gandevia SC, Taylor JL. The response to paired motor cortical stimuli is 
abolished at a spinal level during human muscle fatigue. J Physiol. 2009; 587(Pt 23):5601–12. 
[PubMed: 19805743] 
64. Muceli S, Poppendieck W, Negro F, et al. Accurate and representative decoding of the neural drive 
to muscles in humans with multi-channel intramuscular thin-film electrodes. J Physiol. 2015; 
593(17):3789–804. [PubMed: 26174910] 
65. Newsholme, EA.; Acworth, I.; Blomstrand, E. Amino acids, brain neurotransmitters and a 
functional link between muscle and brain that is important in sustained exercise.. In: Benzi, G., 
editor. Advances in Myochemistry. John Libbey Eurotext; London: 1987. p. 127-33.
66. Notarius CF, Atchison DJ, Floras JS. Impact of heart failure and exercise capacity on sympathetic 
response to handgrip exercise. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2001; 280(3):H969–76. [PubMed: 
11179037] 
67. Pascoe MA, Holmes MR, Stuart DG, Enoka RM. Discharge characteristics of motor units during 
long-duration contractions. Exp Physiol. 2014; 99(10):1387–98. [PubMed: 25016025] 
68. Perrier JF, Rasmussen HB, Christensen RK, Petersen AV. Modulation of the intrinsic properties of 
motoneurons by serotonin. Curr Pharm Des. 2013; 19(24):4371–84. [PubMed: 23360270] 
69. Peters EJ, Fuglevand AJ. Cessation of human motor unit discharge during sustained maximal 
voluntary contraction. Neurosci Lett. 1999; 274(1):66–70. [PubMed: 10530521] 
70. Pettorossi VE, Della Torre G, Bortolami R, Brunetti O. The role of capsaicin-sensitive muscle 
afferents in fatigue-induced modulation of the monosynaptic reflex in the rat. J Physiol. 1999; 
515(Pt 2):599–607. [PubMed: 10050025] 
71. Piacentini MF, Meeusen R, Buyse L, De Schutter G, De Meirleir K. Hormonal responses during 
prolonged exercise are influenced by a selective DA/NA reuptake inhibitor. Br J Sports Med. 2004; 
38(2):129–33. [PubMed: 15039245] 
72. Piacentini MF, Meeusen R, Buyse L, et al. No effect of a noradrenergic reuptake inhibitor on 
performance in trained cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002; 34(7):1189–93. [PubMed: 12131261] 
73. Pollak KA, Swenson JD, Vanhaitsma TA, et al. Exogenously applied muscle metabolites 
synergistically evoke sensations of muscle fatigue and pain in human subjects. Exp Physiol. 2014; 
99.2:368–80. [PubMed: 24142455] 
74. Post M, Steens A, Renken R, Maurits NM, Zijdewind I. Voluntary activation and cortical activity 
during a sustained maximal contraction: an fMRI study. Hum Brain Mapp. 2009; 30(3):1014–27. 
[PubMed: 18412114] 
75. Riley ZA, Maerz AH, Litsey JC, Enoka RM. Motor unit recruitment in human biceps brachii 
during sustained voluntary contractions. J Physiol. 2008; 586(8):2183–93. [PubMed: 18292128] 
76. Roelands B, de Koning J, Foster C, Hettinga F, Meeusen R. Neurophysiological determinants of 
theoretical concepts and mechanisms involved in pacing. Sports Med. 2013; 43(5):301–11. 
[PubMed: 23456493] 
77. Roelands B, De Pauw K, Meeusen R. Neurophysiological effects of exercise in the heat. Scand J 
Med Sci Sports. 2015; 25(Suppl 1):65–78. [PubMed: 25943657] 
78. Roelands B, Goekint M, Buyse L, et al. Time trial performance in normal and high ambient 
temperature: is there a role for 5-HT? Eur J Appl Physiol. 2009; 107(1):119–26. [PubMed: 
19533165] 
Taylor et al.
Page 20
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 79. Roelands B, Goekint M, Heyman E, et al. Acute norepinephrine reuptake inhibition decreases 
performance in normal and high ambient temperature. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008; 105(1):206–
12. [PubMed: 18499777] 
80. Roelands B, Hasegawa H, Watson P, et al. The effects of acute dopamine reuptake inhibition on 
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008; 40(5):879–85. [PubMed: 18408610] 
81. Roelands B, Meeusen R. Alterations in central fatigue by pharmacological manipulations of 
neurotransmitters in normal and high ambient temperature. Sports Med. 2010; 40(3):229–46. 
[PubMed: 20199121] 
82. Semmler JG. Motor unit activity after eccentric exercise and muscle damage in humans. Acta 
Physiol (Oxf). 2014; 210(4):754–67. [PubMed: 24761463] 
83. Sharples SA, Koblinger K, Humphreys JM, Whelan PJ. Dopamine: a parallel pathway for the 
modulation of spinal locomotor networks. Front Neural Circuits. 2014; 8:55. [PubMed: 24982614] 
84. Sidhu SK, Cresswell AG, Carroll TJ. Motor cortex excitability does not increase during sustained 
cycling exercise to volitional exhaustion. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2012; 113(3):401–9. [PubMed: 
22678968] 
85. Sidhu SK, Weavil JC, Venturelli M, et al. Spinal mu-opioid receptor-sensitive lower limb muscle 
afferents determine corticospinal responsiveness and promote central fatigue in upper limb muscle. 
J Physiol. 2014; 592(Pt 22):5011–24. [PubMed: 25172953] 
86. Sidhu SK, Weavil JC, Venturelli M, et al. Aging alters muscle reflex control of autonomic 
cardiovascular responses to rhythmic contractions in humans. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2015; 309(9):H1479–89. [PubMed: 26386110] 
87. Sogaard K, Gandevia SC, Todd G, Petersen NT, Taylor JL. The effect of sustained low-intensity 
contractions on supraspinal fatigue in human elbow flexor muscles. J Physiol. 2006; 573(Pt 2):
511–23. [PubMed: 16556656] 
88. Strachan AT, Leiper JB, Maughan RJ. Paroxetine administration failed [corrected] to influence 
human exercise capacity, perceived effort or hormone responses during prolonged exercise in a 
warm environment. Exp Physiol. 2004; 89(6):657–64. [PubMed: 15328306] 
89. Strachan AT, Leiper JB, Maughan RJ. Serotonin2C receptor blockade and thermoregulation during 
exercise in the heat. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2005; 37(3):389–94. [PubMed: 15741836] 
90. Swart J, Lamberts RP, Lambert MI, et al. Exercising with reserve: exercise regulation by perceived 
exertion in relation to duration of exercise and knowledge of endpoint. Br J Sports Med. 2009; 
43(10):775–81. [PubMed: 19211587] 
91. Taylor JL, Butler JE, Allen GM, Gandevia SC. Changes in motor cortical excitability during 
human muscle fatigue. J Physiol. 1996; 490(Pt 2):519–28. [PubMed: 8821148] 
92. Taylor JL, Gandevia SC. A comparison of central aspects of fatigue in submaximal and maximal 
voluntary contractions. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008; 104(2):542–50. [PubMed: 18032577] 
93. Taylor JL, Todd G, Gandevia SC. Evidence for a supraspinal contribution to human muscle fatigue. 
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2006; 33(4):400–5. [PubMed: 16620309] 
94. Thomas K, Goodall S, Stone M, Howatson G, St Clair Gibson A, Ansley L. Central and peripheral 
fatigue in male cyclists after 4-, 20-, and 40-km time trials. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015; 47(3):
537–46. [PubMed: 25051388] 
95. van Duinen H, Renken R, Maurits N, Zijdewind I. Effects of motor fatigue on human brain activity, 
an fMRI study. Neuroimage. 2007; 35(4):1438–49. [PubMed: 17408974] 
96. Waldrop, TG.; Eldridge, FL.; Iwamoto, GA.; Mitchell, JH. Central neural control of respiration and 
circulation during exercise.. In: Rowell, LB.; Shepherd, JT., editors. Handbook of Physiology 
Section 12: Exercise: Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems. Oxford University Press; 
New York: 1996. p. 333-80.
97. Watson P, Hasegawa H, Roelands B, Piacentini MF, Looverie R, Meeusen R. Acute dopamine/
noradrenaline reuptake inhibition enhances human exercise performance in warm, but not 
temperate conditions. J Physiol. 2005; 565(Pt 3):873–83. [PubMed: 15831540] 
98. Wei K, Glaser JI, Deng L, et al. Serotonin affects movement gain control in the spinal cord. J 
Neurosci. 2014; 34(38):12690–700. [PubMed: 25232107] 
99. Woods JJ, Furbush F, Bigland-Ritchie B. Evidence for a fatigue-induced reflex inhibition of 
motoneuron firing rates. J Neurophysiol. 1987; 58(1):125–37. [PubMed: 3039078] 
Taylor et al.
Page 21
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Schematic of neural contributions to muscle fatigue in single joint exercise
Peripheral fatigue is attributed to processes at or distal to the neuromuscular junction 
whereas central fatigue is attributed to processes within the nervous system. In the 
neuromuscular pathway, force is generated by contraction of the muscle fibers. Strength and 
timing of contraction are controlled by the firing of the motoneurons. Motoneuron firing is 
influenced by the properties of the motoneurons, feedback from sensory input and by 
descending drive. There are fatigue-related changes at all of these levels (Changes in the 
neuromuscular pathway with fatiguing exercise). As well as influencing the neuromuscular 
Taylor et al.
Page 22
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pathway, group III/IV muscle afferent feedback interacts with cardiovascular and respiratory 
processes via the autonomic nervous system (Feedback from fatigue-sensitive muscle 
afferents). In addition, departures from homeostasis during whole body exercise influence 
performance through supraspinal mechanisms (Brain changes associated with 
performance).
Taylor et al.
Page 23
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Influences on the firing of spinal motoneurons during fatiguing maximal contractions
During fatiguing maximal contractions, motoneuron firing rates decrease. There are multiple 
influences on the motoneurons. Those described in the text are illustrated. First, repetitive 
activation (repeated firing) of motoneurons makes them less excitable, but the precise 
mechanism is not known. Second, group III and IV muscle afferents are mechanically and/or 
chemically sensitive, and increase their firing during fatiguing contractions. These afferents 
inhibit some motoneuron pools but excite others. Third, group Ia muscle afferents (from 
muscle spindles) are thought to decrease their firing and also to undergo additional 
presynaptic inhibition. This represents a decrease in excitatory drive to the motoneurons. 
Fourth, supraspinal fatigue, measured during maximal isometric contractions, suggests that 
excitatory drive from the motor cortex is also lower than it could be. Finally, it has been 
Taylor et al.
Page 24
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 proposed that high serotonergic drive from the medulla may result in inhibition of 
motoneurons through activation of extrasynaptic receptors.
Taylor et al.
Page 25
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Group III and IV muscle afferents increase central fatigue but attenuate peripheral 
fatigue
Firing of group III and IV muscle afferents increases during fatiguing contractions. During 
exercise, these afferents produce reflex increases in heart rate, blood pressure and respiration 
to improve muscle blood flow and oxygenation. This slows the development of fatigue of the 
muscle itself (peripheral fatigue). At the same time, the afferent firing also leads to a 
reduction in voluntary neural drive to the muscle. That is, it contributes to central fatigue. 
The precise pathway for this effect is not known. The afferents evoke sensations of muscle 
discomfort and fatigue, increase supraspinal fatigue, presynaptically inhibit Ia input to 
motoneurons, and have differing actions on different motoneuron pools.
Taylor et al.
Page 26
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
