 A Framework to Improve Surgeon Communication
in High-Stakes Surgical Decisions
Best Case/Worst Case
Lauren J. Taylor, MD; Michael J. Nabozny, MD; Nicole M. Steffens, MPH; Jennifer L. Tucholka, BS;
Karen J. Brasel, MD, MPH; Sara K. Johnson, MD; Amy Zelenski, PhD; Paul J. Rathouz, PhD; Qianqian Zhao, MS;
Kristine L. Kwekkeboom, RN, PhD; Toby C. Campbell, MD, MSCI; Margaret L. Schwarze, MD, MPP
IMPORTANCE Although many older adults prefer to avoid burdensome interventions with
limited ability to preserve their functional status, aggressive treatments, including surgery,
are common near the end of life. Shared decision making is critical to achieve
value-concordant treatment decisions and minimize unwanted care. However,
communication in the acute inpatient setting is challenging.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate the proof of concept of an intervention to teach surgeons to use the
Best Case/Worst Case framework as a strategy to change surgeon communication and
promote shared decision making during high-stakes surgical decisions.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Our prospective pre-post study was conducted from
June 2014 to August 2015, and data were analyzed using a mixed methods approach. The
data were drawn from decision-making conversations between 32 older inpatients with an
acute nonemergent surgical problem, 30 family members, and 25 surgeons at 1 tertiary care
hospital in Madison, Wisconsin.
INTERVENTIONS A 2-hour training session to teach each study-enrolled surgeon to use the
Best Case/Worst Case communication framework.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES We scored conversation transcripts using OPTION 5,
an observer measure of shared decision making, and used qualitative content analysis to
characterize patterns in conversation structure, description of outcomes, and deliberation
over treatment alternatives.
RESULTS The study participants were patients aged 68 to 95 years (n = 32), 44% of whom
had 5 or more comorbid conditions; family members of patients (n = 30); and surgeons
(n = 17). The median OPTION 5 score improved from 41 preintervention (interquartile range,
26-66) to 74 after Best Case/Worst Case training (interquartile range, 60-81). Before training,
surgeons described the patient’s problem in conjunction with an operative solution, directed
deliberation over options, listed discrete procedural risks, and did not integrate preferences
into a treatment recommendation. After training, surgeons using Best Case/Worst Case
clearly presented a choice between treatments, described a range of postoperative
trajectories including functional decline, and involved patients and families in deliberation.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Using the Best Case/Worst Case framework changed surgeon
communication by shifting the focus of decision-making conversations from an isolated
surgical problem to a discussion about treatment alternatives and outcomes. This
intervention can help surgeons structure challenging conversations to promote shared
decision making in the acute setting.
JAMA Surg. 2017;152(6):531-538. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2016.5674
Published online February 1, 2017.
Invited Commentary page 538
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Department of
Surgery, University of Wisconsin,
Madison (Taylor, Nabozny, Tucholka,
Schwarze); Denver Public Health,
Denver Health and Hospital
Authority, Denver, Colorado
(Steffens); Department of Surgery,
Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland (Brasel);
Department of Medicine, University
of Wisconsin, Madison (Johnson,
Zelenski, Campbell); Department of
Biostatistics and Medical Informatics,
University of Wisconsin, Madison
(Rathouz, Zhao); School of Nursing,
University of Wisconsin, Madison
(Kwekkeboom); Department of
Medical History and Bioethics,
University of Wisconsin, Madison
(Schwarze).
Corresponding Author: Margaret L.
Schwarze, MD, MPP, G5/315 CSC,
600 Highland Ave, Madison, WI
53792 (schwarze@surgery.wisc.edu).
Research
JAMA Surgery | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
531
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 F
or frail older adults, acute surgical problems often
have life-altering effects. Serious complications are
common1-4; 20% of patients aged older than 65 years
who undergo urgent or emergent abdominal surgery die
within 30 days,5 and those who survive often lose their
independence.6,7 Despite this grim trajectory, nearly one-
third of Medicare beneficiaries have an operation during
their last year of life.8 These procedures may be inconsistent
with patients’long-term goals, as most Americans prefer to
avoid onerous treatments with limited capacity to preserve
their functional status.9,10
Best-practice guidelines endorse shared decision mak-
ing (SDM) in the context of serious illness to present
options, engage patients in deliberation about treatment
outcomes, and integrate patient preferences into a
recommendation.11-13 However, describing a complex and
often uncertain prognosis is a formidable task. In accor-
dance with informed consent, surgeons traditionally rely on
disclosure of discrete procedural complications14 aided by
robust risk calculators.15,16 Nonetheless, enumerating a 20%
chance of stroke or a 25% risk of renal failure does not allow
patients to consider how they might experience adverse
outcomes or encourage deliberation to ensure decisions
align with individual preferences.14,17,18 Furthermore,
efforts to assist patients and families are hindered by the
acute nature of surgical illness and lack of preexisting
patient-doctor relationships.12
Scenario planning is a strategy to facilitate decision mak-
ing in the setting of uncertainty. A well-constructed scenario
encourages people to comprehend a new, previously unimagi-
nable reality and prepare for major shifts in a way simple fore-
casting cannot.19-21 This approach may be useful for older pa-
tientsbecauseacutesurgicalconditionsportendamajorhealth
change compounded by prognostic uncertainty.
Buildingonthepracticeofscenarioplanning19,20andacon-
ceptual model of SDM,22,23 we designed the Best Case/Worst
Case (BC/WC) framework as a strategy to change how sur-
geons communicate with patients about serious illness.24-26
Best Case/Worst Case combines narrative description and a
handwritten graphic aid to illustrate choice between treat-
ments and engage patients and families. Surgeons use stories
to describe how patients might experience a range of possible
outcomes in the best case, worst case, and most likely sce-
narios (Figure 1). We hypothesize that training surgeons to use
BC/WC will promote SDM during preoperative communica-
tion in high-stakes surgical decisions.
Methods
From July 2014 until August 2015, we performed a prospec-
tive, pre-post pilot study to evaluate the proof of concept of
an intervention training surgeons to use the BC/WC frame-
workatatertiarycarehospitalinMadison,Wisconsin.TheUni-
versity of Wisconsin instutional review board approved this
study and participants gave written informed consent. Sur-
geons were compensated $245 for completing the training ses-
sion, and all other study participants were not compensated.
Participants
Study staff screened inpatient rosters to identify patients aged
65 years and older with acute, nonemergent surgical prob-
lems and confirmed the surgeon would offer surgery and an
alternative treatment. Eligible patients met 1 of the following
criteria: a Porock frailty score27 of 21 or more, a more than 40%
risk for serious complication or more than 8% risk for peri-
operativemortalityusingtheAmericanCollegeofSurgeonsrisk
calculator,28 or indication from the surgeon that comorbidi-
ties would affect long-term outcomes. We also recruited 1 fam-
ily member present during the decision-making conversa-
tion. Patients without decision-making capacity were enrolled
with consent from their surrogate. We excluded deaf or non-
English speaking individuals and patients with an emergent
indication for surgery—such as ruptured aneurysm or perfo-
rated viscus—as these patients are typically rushed to the op-
erating room with little time for shared decision making.
Intervention
Excepting the senior author, we invited all 30 surgeons at the
University of Wisconsin Hospital who practice cardiotho-
racic, vascular, or acute care surgery to participate. Surgeons
completed a 2-hour training session to learn the BC/WC frame-
work using simulation with standardized patients and 1-on-1
coachingwithanexpertinpalliativecareandeducation(S.K.J.,
A.Z., and T.C.C.). Postintervention, surgeons used BC/WC with
study-enrolled inpatients. Details of surgeon training are re-
ported elsewhere29 and training materials are available on-
line (http://www.hipxchange.org/BCWC).
Data Collection
We recorded demographics, presenting diagnosis, opera-
tionsperformed,intensivecareadmissions,palliativecarecon-
sultations, discharge disposition, and death within 30 days.
We audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim the primary sur-
geon-patient decision-making conversation for each patient
enrolled pre- and postintervention and archived copies of the
graphic aid for patients enrolled after the surgeon completed
BC/WC training.
Key Points
Question Does an intervention to train surgeons to use the Best
Case/Worst Case framework change surgeon communication and
promote shared decision making for high-stakes surgical
decisions?
Findings In this pre- and postintervention study that included 32
frail older inpatients with acute surgical problems, objective
measures of shared decision making improved postintervention.
Surgeons who used Best Case/Worst Case emphasized a
treatment choice, described outcomes rather than discrete
procedural risks, and involved patients and families in deliberation.
Meaning Use of the Best Case/Worst Case framework can
promote shared decision making, and this intervention may help
surgeons structure challenging treatment conversations to
support patients and families.
Research Original Investigation
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
532
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Data Analysis
OPTION 5 is an observer measure of shared decision making
based on a 100 point scale.30 Originally developed for pri-
mary care consultations, this validated instrument permits
quantitative measurement of the physician’
s effort to
include patients in decision making. We calibrated this mea-
sure to the surgical setting within 5 domains: presentation of
treatment options, surgeon-patient partnership, description
of treatments, elicitation of preferences, and integration of
preferences with a recommendation (eAppendix in the
Supplement). Four investigators (L.J.T., J.L.T., K.J.B., and
M.L.S.) independently scored each transcript. We summa-
rized quantitative data using descriptive statistics and calcu-
lated intraclass correlation (ICC) between the 4 raters using
the “psych” package in R version 3.2.1 (R Foundation for Sta-
tistical Computing), assuming raters were a random sample
from the population of raters (ICC: 2, k).31,32 We also com-
puted ICC to quantify the reliability expected in a new set of
2 raters.
After OPTION 5 scoring, investigators independently
analyzed all preintervention and postintervention tran-
scripts using qualitative content analysis. We used an induc-
tive coding strategy to generate and attach codes to the data
to catalog themes, constructs and occurrences, and a group
process with code adjudication as a gateway to higher-level
analysis. We also employed a deductive strategy to compare
pre- and postintervention transcripts by examining conver-
sation content within the domains of OPTION 5. This
approach served as an additional opportunity to ensure the
rigor of our inductive analysis and pinpoint disconfirming
data. We drafted construct tables to ensure that the themes
were accurately represented in the data and used qualitative
research software, NVivo 10 (QSR International), to organize
codes and support theme comparison.
Results
Twenty-five surgeons completed the BC/WC training; 1 de-
clined participation and 4 were unable to attend a session af-
ter multiple scheduling attempts. Seventeen of these trained
surgeons led a decision-making conversation with study-
enrolled patients. We approached 53 patients; 32 patients and
30 family members enrolled. Surgical problems ranged from
intestinal obstruction to critical limb ischemia (Table 1). Al-
ternative treatments included antibiotics, less-invasive pro-
cedures including feeding tubes or drain placement, or sim-
ply “no surgery.
” Postintervention, all surgeons offered at least
2 options and used BC/WC to present best and worst case sce-
narios; 1 did not construct the graphic aid and 1 failed to de-
scribe the most likely scenarios. We lost the data for 1 conver-
sation because of a technical failure.
Assessment of Shared Decision Making
The median OPTION 5 score improved from 41 preinterven-
tion (interquartile range, 26-66) to 74 (interquartile range, 60-
81) after training (Figure 2). The intraclass correlation was 0.80
(95% CI, 0.64-0.90) for the mean score across 4 raters. Assum-
ing scores were generated as the average of 2 raters, the esti-
mated ICC was 0.67 (95% CI, 0.48-0.81).
Our qualitative analysis reinforced these findings. Our de-
ductive analysis demonstrated a postintervention difference
incommunicationcontentforeachOPTION5domain(Table2),
and our inductive analysis revealed a shift in how surgeons
structuredconversationsaccordingto3primaryelements:pre-
sentation of treatment options, description of treatments, and
deliberation over alternatives (Figure 3). Before the surgeons
underwent training, conversations with patients began with
an explanation of the problem and an operative solution fol-
lowed by a surgeon-led deliberation about the patient’
s can-
didacy for surgery. Postintervention, the discussion focused
on making a treatment decision within the context of the pa-
tient’
soverallhealth.Surgeonsdescribedoutcomesratherthan
risks, and sought to clarify patient values and goals, using this
information during deliberation to revise treatment options to
match preferences.
Presentation of Options: Preintervention
Before training, surgeons universally initiated conversations
with detailed explanations of the disease process, linking the
acute illnesses to a surgical solution. Surgeons introduced ill-
nessassomethingthatrequiredaction,forexample,“Theprob-
lem is a mechanical problem, so now something needs to be
doneheretosolvetheproblem.
”Toillustratehowsurgerycould
remedy an abnormality, surgeons explained the disease using
language like “blockage” or “narrowing” coupled with an in-
tervention to “bypass” or “widen.”
Whileallsurgeonsofferedachoice,framingdiseasesasde-
viations from normal undermined the value of nonoperative
Figure 1. Best Case/Worst Case Graphic Aid
Surgery
Best case:
Long surgery
ICU, 3-5 days
Hospital, 1-2 weeks
Nursing home
Most likely:
ICU, 1-2 weeks
Long-term dialysis
Death, 2-3 months
Worst case:
Complications after 
surgery
Death in ICU, unable 
to talk to family
Best case:
Time to say goodbye
to family
Pain controlled
Death at home
Most likely:
Groggy, unable to talk 
to family
Death in hospital
Worst case:
Death in hospital before
family has time 
to gather
Supportive care
Example of a Best Case/Worst Case graphic aid that the surgeon would create
and use during a decision-making discussion for an older patient with a serious
surgical problem. The box represents the worst case scenario, the star
represents the best case scenario, and the oval indicates the most likely
outcome. ICU indicates intensive care unit.
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
Original Investigation Research
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
533
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 treatment because surgery was initially described as the so-
lution. One surgeon explained, “the choice to help you fix that
and avoid that outcome [death], it’
s obviously another sur-
gery”withoutconcedingthatsurgerycouldalsoresultindeath.
To describe alternatives, surgeons favored “no surgery” or
“medical management” without explicitly offering palliative
care or hospice. Some surgeons did not offer any nonoper-
ativetreatment,askingpatientstochoosebetweensurgerynow
or surgery in the future. A few emphasized valid alternatives
and aimed to promote value-concordant decisions, for ex-
ample, “I wanted to come and talk to you guys about differ-
ent options because I think neither of them is wrong…we need
to know what you think would be best for him.”
Description of Treatments: Preintervention
Surgeons candidly disclosed discrete procedural risks like “a
risk of stroke to the brain and also pneumonia because we
have to put the [breathing] tube in,” noting that some com-
plications necessitated further procedures, for example,
“water may accumulate in the chest, then we may need to
put the needle and remove the water.” Some used percent-
ages to quantify the likelihood of adverse events such as
“the risk of re-intubation is…7 to 8 percent” and referenced
patient age, comorbidities, and past operations to support
their overall risk assessment.
Surgeons acknowledged treatment impact on quality of
life, noting that “complications…may keep him in the hospi-
tal for a while and have significant impact on his life.” How-
ever, they did not integrate comorbidities or functional sta-
tus within a description of how patients might experience
adverse outcomes, whether patients could live indepen-
dently or enjoy specific activities. Rather than describing how
death might occur, some used overt statements like “there is
risk of death with esophagectomy,
” while others favored using
euphemism to suggest postoperative mortality, for example,
“Chances of having something come up that we can’
t get over
and get you out of the hospital are…fairly possible.”
Deliberation: Preintervention
Surgeons cited physical examination findings and physi-
ologic signs like leukocytosis or tachycardia as cause to reject
nonoperative options. One surgeon explained, “If your ab-
dominal exam gets much worse…we’
re finished. We go to the
operating room.
” Surgeons rationalized decisions based on pa-
tienteligibility,discussingcomorbidities,overallfunctionalsta-
tus,andpreoperativetestingtojustifyspecifictreatments.Oth-
ersdescribedsurgeryasa“bigdeal,
”placingonusonthepatient
with questions like “the decision you have to make is…what
Table 1. Description of Patient Characteristics
Characteristic
Control
(n=12)
Intervention
(n=20)
Age, median (range)
78.5 (68-88)
86.5 (67-95)
Male, No. (%)
9 (75)
7 (35)
White, No. (%)
12 (100)
19 (95)
Comorbid conditions, No. (%)
0 to ≤2
2 (17)
7 (35)
>2 to ≤4
1 (8)
8 (40)
≥5
9 (75)
5 (25)
Patients without decision making
capacity, No. (%)
0
5 (20)
Education, No. (%)
Some high school or less
0 (0)
2 (10)
High school diploma or GED
4 (33)
7 (35)
Vocational degree or some college
1 (8)
2 (10)
College degree
5 (42)
1 (5)
Graduate degree or higher
1 (8)
2 (10)
Unknown
1 (8)
6 (30)
Proposed surgical treatment, No. (%)
General surgery
5 (42)
16 (80)
Bowel resection
4
11
Cholecystectomy
1
2
Nonemergent surgery for traumaa
0
2
Paraesophageal hernia repair
0
1
Cardiothoracic
5 (42)
1 (5)
Pleurodesis
1
0
Esophagectomy
1
0
Cardiac valve replacement/repair
2
1
Coronary artery bypass grafting
1
0
Vascular
2 (16)
3 (15)
Vascular bypass
2
2
Amputation
0
1
Received proposed surgery, No. (%)
5 (42)
10 (50)
ICU admission within 30 d, No. (%)
2 (16)
3 (15)
Palliative care consult or hospice
admission within 30 d, No. (%)
4 (33)
6 (30)
Discharge disposition, No. (%)
Home
6 (50)
4 (20)
Assisted living
0 (0)
1 (5)
Skilled nursing facility
3 (25)
9 (45)
Hospice
2 (17)
1 (5)
Death in hospital within 30 d of
treatment
1 (8)
5 (25)
Abbreviations: GED, general education development; ICU, intensive care unit.
aHip hemiarthroplasty and tracheostomy for patients admitted to the trauma
service following a fall and motor vehicle collision, respectively.
Figure 2. OPTION 5 Scores
100
80
60
40
20
90
70
50
30
10
0
Intervention
OPTION 5 Scores
Control
Box plots depicting OPTION 5 scores for patients in the control and intervention
arms. Dot indicates mean score within each treatment arm.
Research Original Investigation
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
534
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 you’
rewillingtogothroughtosortofgetbetterornot”toevalu-
ate whether the patient had the “mental drive and the will-
ingness to live” to tolerate the burdens of surgery and post-
operative care.
Fewsurgeonsengagedinmoreexplicitdiscussionsofgoals
and values, favoring generalized statements like “Some people
tell me they don’
t want an operation regardless” and queries
like “Does that make sense?” to evaluate understanding. They
did not personalize these assertions with elicitation and inte-
gration of the patient’
s goals with a course of action. After pre-
senting options, surgeons noted, “it’
s up to you [to decide];”
only 1 surgeon clearly reinforced partnership, referencing “the
decision that you and I make.”
Presentation of Options: Postintervention
After their training, surgeons abbreviated description of the
disease process and treatment and explicitly demonstrated a
choice between surgery and a valid alternative, using the
graphic aid to augment discussion. One surgeon stated, “We
have a choice to make…I want to use this little diagram to…go
throughthechoices.
”Bypresentingthedecisionaspreference-
sensitive, surgeons highlighted the importance of patient and
family input because “either choice is reasonable given your
sense of where this problem has hit you in your life.” Sur-
geons integrated description of the proposed operation into
their narrative about how patients might experience best and
worst case scenarios, for example, “even under the best of cir-
cumstances that would be a big enough operation for you that
even if you did great, you’
d be in the hospital for another week,
and it’
d be a couple of months probably to get over this…it’
s
certainly not going to make you any stronger than you were a
month ago.”
Description of Treatments: Postintervention
Instead of discrete risks, surgeons discussed the expected hos-
pital course, incorporated patients’unique comorbidities, and
described anticipated functional decline. Surgeons ex-
plained complications by illustrating the worst case scenario
involving a constellation of setbacks and burdensome inter-
ventions, for example, “Your breathing would get worse, you’
d
stay in the ICU with a breathing tube, we’
d have to talk about
feeding tubes…you’
d still have that pain, and you still wouldn’
t
beabletomovearound.
”Similarly,surgeonsprovidedclearde-
scriptions about how death might occur, for example, “You’
d
have complications from the surgery that wouldn’
t allow you
to really get better. And you’
d die in the intensive care unit or
somewhereinthehospital…thatwouldn’
toccurrightaway,but
it might occur in a few weeks.”
To convey prognostic uncertainty, surgeons positioned
the most likely scenario between the boundaries of the best
and worst case. Rather than using statistics, surgeons incor-
porated phrases like “I think it’
s more likely that we can get
Table 2. Results of Deductive Coding Analysis Demonstrating the Contrast Between Content of Pre- and Postintervention Conversations Based
on the Domains of OPTION 5
OPTION 5 Domain
Preintervention Observations
Representative Quotations
Postintervention Observations
Representative Quotations
Presentation of
options
• Surgeon described the acute
problem with a surgical
solution
• Surgeon described the
nonoperative alternative as
secondary
“To get that opened up, we need
surgery.”
“If we do not do the procedure
and the focus becomes on
comfortable care, then obviously
that …will not take care of your
heart [valve] problem.”
• Surgeon called attention to a
clear treatment choice
• Surgeon presented the
nonoperative option as a valid
choice
“We have a choice to make…”
“The other option is to take him
home and make him comfortable
and not to have the surgical
procedure.”
Surgeon-patient
partnership
• Surgeon supported patient as
decision maker
• Surgeon provided
information to assist decision
making but decision left up to
the patient
“It’
s your decision, so it’
s the
right decision.”
“… to give you the most
information that you can have to
make the decision for yourself.”
• Surgeon provided explicit
support and offered guidance
to the patient and family in
deliberation
“…[I’
m] try[ing] to relate to
what your choices are…but also
I think to guide you.”
Treatment description
• Surgeon described isolated
risks using probabilities to
convey likelihood of adverse
events
• Surgeon described death as a
risk of surgery
“Those risks are bleeding, um,
infection in the area we operate,
damaging the liver…damaging
the intestines around in that
area.”
“Expected mortality rate is in
between 5 and 10 percent”
• Surgeon used stories to
describe treatment outcomes
• Surgeon incorporated the
patient’
s chronic health
problems and frailty
• Surgeon described death as
an outcome of treatment rather
than a risk
“Under the best of circumstances,
that would involve being in the
hospital for probably a week
maybe two…because of your
age and the heart problems…
that might involve being in the
intensive care unit.”
“Worst case scenario we pull
the breathing tube…you’
re
struggling with coughing and
secretions that you have, you,
your ribs hurt…and you pass
away fairly quickly.”
Preference elicitation
• Surgeon assessed for
understanding
• Surgeon requested a
treatment decision
• Surgeon queried if patient
was willing to tolerate the
burdens of treatment
“Do you have any questions?”
“What do you think you’
d be
interested in?”
“The decision you have to make
is…what you’
re willing to do
given what this is.”
• Surgeon solicited information
about the patient’
s appraisal of
specific outcomes
“How are you thinking about the
difference between walking and
not walking, because to me that
was the big difference between
these 2 [choices]…And so I
wonder if you could tell us how
you think about that?”
Preference
integration
• Surgeon encouraged the
patient to choose
• Surgeon made a
recommendation based on
operative risk or disease
characteristics
“The choice is up to you.”
“After looking at the foot I’
m
inclined not to be doing more
angioplasty… I’
m leaning to you
choosing the antibiotics and
getting him off his foot right
now.”
• Surgeon made an effort to
match patient preferences with
treatment decisions
“But to really recover from this,
and really have a reasonable
outcome, you’
d have to be
aggressive, and not everyone
wants that, and I’
m not sure
that you would want that.”
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
Original Investigation Research
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
535
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 you through the thing than not, but it’
s kind of more in the
middle than you might want” and referenced the graphic aid
to illustrate the location of the most likely outcome. An
example of this was, “If you look at where we are between
best case and worst case, with nonsurgical treatment we’
re
here. And with surgical treatment, we’
re somewhere in
here.
”
Deliberation: Postintervention
Surgeons involved patients and families by explicitly asking
them to evaluate plausible health trajectories because “dif-
ferent people in this moment could feel differently…how do
you feel about that?” Surgeons requested input about spe-
cific outcomes, asking, for example, “if we do surgery you’
re
likely going to a nursing facility, is that something you’
d be
ok with?” However, the ability to incorporate patient inclina-
tions within a recommendation was mixed. Some revised
options based on patient input, adjusting “no surgery” to
hospice after sensing interest in a palliative strategy and
aimed to match treatment choice with patient preferences,
noting “…[I’
m] try[ing] to relate to what your choices are-
…but also I think to guide you.” Others provided less assis-
tance, asking patients to decide independently. A few clearly
integrated patient preferences within their recommenda-
tion, for example, “This is what I know about her…she didn’
t
want a lot of these interventions…we’
re gonna do a maxi-
mum amount of those things if we decide to go for sur-
gery…so…surgery where she ends up in a nursing home,
with complications from surgery, is not something that she
ever wanted.
”
Discussion
We trained surgeons to use the BC/WC framework to discuss
treatment options with frail older inpatients facing high-
stakes surgical decisions. This intervention promoted SDM as
measured by a combination of OPTION 5 and qualitative analy-
sis whereby we observed a pronounced shift in conversation
structure and content postintervention in 3 primary areas: pre-
sentation of options, description of treatments, and delibera-
tion over alternatives. Surgeons who used BC/WC empha-
sized a difficult decision and presented 2 authentic options.
Rather than disclosing isolated procedural risks, trained sur-
geonsdescribedhowpatientsmightexperiencetreatmentsand
asked them to evaluate outcomes based on personal goals.
Nonetheless, surgeons’ability to integrate patient prefer-
ences into a recommendation varied.
The aim of the BC/WC framework is to clarify the limits of
what is possible so patients and families can manage uncer-
tainty and prepare for poor outcomes. Similar to corporate de-
cision making, simple forecasting and risk prediction are only
helpful in times of relative stability, when decision makers can
assumethattomorrowwillbesimilartotoday.19,20Akintocon-
ditions of economic volatility, assumptions of stability fail frail
older patients and their families in the setting of acute ill-
ness. Thus, a well-designed scenario does not seek to predict
the future. Rather, the goal is to explore a set of plausible fu-
tures and describe a path from the present to a longer-term
outcome.33 Scenarios improve decisions by allowing people to
understand the interplay between elements34—an acute sur-
gical problem and underlying frailty—and develop a new men-
tal model. Within this new reality, patients can think strate-
gically and make decisions based on what is most important
to them. These observations have important implications for
surgeons, patients, and families.
For surgeons, BC/WC provides a framework to promote
SDM and clarify outcomes. Despite efforts to improve prog-
nostication, studies suggest that surgeons’risk estimates are
highlyvariable35,36andphysiciansareoverlyoptimisticincom-
municating prognosis.37,38 In part, this inconsistency stems
from a lack of confidence in prognostic accuracy, particularly
forlong-termoutcomes,andadesiretopreservehope.37,39Pre-
senting a range of plausible scenarios within the boundaries
of a best and worst case may mitigate concerns about deliv-
eringaninaccuratepredictionandhelpdefinethelimitsofwhat
is possible with surgery. Best Case/Worst Case allows sur-
geons to set expectations so patients can maintain hope for the
best and prepare for the worst.40 Furthermore, incorporating
descriptions of the effect of surgery on overall quality of life
can help surgeons preoperatively identify patients for whom
even the best case surgical outcome is unacceptable.
For patients and families, BC/WC promotes a compari-
son of treatment outcomes and structures conversations so
surgeons can learn what outcomes matter to them. While
traditional models suggest desire for decision-making
responsibility varies by individual and clinical scenario,41,42
newer theories posit that most patients prefer to be involved
but are unsure how to engage.43 Best Case/Worst Case can
Figure 3. Conversation Structure
Preintervention
A
Postintervention
B
Disease description
linked to operative
treatment
Disclosure of 
isolated
procedural risks
Surgeon-led
deliberation over
treatment options
Selected quotations
“This aortic valve is 
getting smaller…to take
care of this problem…we
either need to change 
the valve or put another 
valve in.”
“And the risk of 
requiring a 
tracheostomy is 
probably…I would 
say probably two to 
three percent.”
“MRI, angiogram, and
echocardiogram, your
blood tests all so far 
are pointing towards 
a major advantage of 
heart surgery.”
Focus on 
a choice 
between valid 
alternatives
Narrative 
description 
of treatment 
outcomes
Solicitation of patient 
values and attempt to 
match preferences 
with treatment
Selected quotations
“We have to…decide
on which of these
paths to take. And a 
lot of that I think 
depends on your 
sense of…where 
you’
ve been in the 
last year.”
“You’
d be in a nursing 
home for a month or 
two…if you were on 
dialysis you probably 
wouldn’
t make it
home…you might
not be strong enough
for that.”
“To treat this surgically,
I know that the peritoneal
dialysis catheter means
a lot to you, that’
s 
why I needed you to 
know that that option 
wouldn’
t stay there 
for you.”
Results of inductive coding analysis demonstrating the differences in
communication patterns preintervention (A) and postintervention (B).
Research Original Investigation
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
536
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 help surgeons encourage patients to consider how they
might value postoperative outcomes and avoid the percep-
tion that surgery is imperative. By presenting multiple sce-
narios, BC/WC supports the Lynn and DeGrazia44 “outcomes
model” of medical decision making in which the physician
avoids the need to fix the physiologic abnormality45,46 and
elevates the validity of nonoperative alternatives. Further-
more, visualizing scenarios may clarify important misunder-
standings, for example, the perception of the worst case as a
painless death in the operating room47 or assumptions about
postoperative quality of life.
Limitations
This study has strengths and limitations. Taken together, our
mixed-methods approach suggests teaching surgeons to use
BC/WC improves observer-rated SDM in the acute setting,
but our small, single-center study was not powered to
observe differences in OPTION 5 as a stand-alone measure.
Because of significant challenges recruiting seriously ill
older patients, we were unable to gather data from a post-
intervention conversation with all of the trained surgeons.
Given space constraints, the formal analysis of our training
program is reported elsewhere.29 Although we demon-
strated that our intervention can distinctly change how sur-
geons communicate in high-stakes discussions, we were
unable to identify a measurable health outcome that would
allow us to test whether this intervention improves clinical
outcomes beyond shared decision making. All patients in
this study were old and frail, yet significant heterogeneity in
patient preferences, surgical indication, and postoperative
consequences makes defining the “right treatment choice”
and the “good outcome” a formidable methodological chal-
lenge for this and future studies.
Conclusions
Training surgeons to use the BC/WC framework promotes SDM
for frail older patients with acute surgical problems. This in-
terventionhelpssurgeonspresenttreatmentoutcomesanden-
gage patients and families in a conversation closer to best prac-
tice guidelines.12 With this proof of concept, this intervention
can be used to change surgeon behavior to support patients
and families in difficult treatment decisions.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: November 24, 2016.
Published Online: February 1, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2016.5674
Author Contributions: Dr Schwarze had full access
to all the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Concept and design: Taylor, Nabozny, Steffens,
Johnson, Zelenski, Kwekkeboom, Campbell,
Schwarze.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Taylor, Nabozny, Steffens, Tucholka, Brasel,
Johnson, Rathouz, Zhao, Campbell.
Drafting of the manuscript: Taylor, Rathouz,
Schwarze.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Taylor, Nabozny, Steffens,
Tucholka, Brasel, Johnson, Zelenski, Rathouz, Zhao,
Kwekkeboom, Campbell.
Statistical analysis: Taylor, Rathouz, Zhao,
Campbell, Schwarze.
Obtained funding: Steffens, Campbell, Schwarze.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Nabozny, Steffens, Tucholka, Johnson, Zelenski.
Study supervision: Steffens, Rathouz, Campbell,
Schwarze.
No additional contributions: Brasel, Kwekkeboom.
Other - teaching intervention: Johnson.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: Dr Taylor is supported by
training award T32CA090217 from the National
Institutes of Health. Dr Schwarze is supported by
training award KL2TR000428 from the Clinical and
Translational Science Award program, the Grants
for Early Medical/Surgical Specialists'Transition to
Aging Research Award (GEMSSTAR
R03AG047920), and the Jahnigen Career
Development Award from the American Geriatrics
Society/ Society of Vascular Surgery. Dr Schwarze
received outside research support from the
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute,
the Greenwall Foundation, and the National
Palliative Care Research Center. Dr Campbell is
supported by the Cambia Health Foundation
Sojourns Scholar Program.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The National
Institutes of Health, the American Geriatrics
Society/Society of Vascular Surgery, and the Cambia
Health Foundation had no role in the design and
conduct of the study; collection, management,
analysis, and interpretation of the data;
preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript;
and decision to submit the manuscript for
publication.
Disclaimer: The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of
Health.
Meeting Presentation: This study was presented
and received a Best Paper award at the American
Geriatrics Society Annual Meeting; May 21, 2016;
Long Beach, CA.
Additional Contributions: We thank Nora
Jacobson, PhD, University of Wisconsin for her
thoughtful review of a previous version of this
manuscript. Dr Jacobson was not compensated for
her contribution. We thank the University of
Wisconsin-Madison Institute for Clinical and
Translational Research Qualitative Research Group,
which is supported by the Clinical and Translational
Science Award program through grant
UL1TR000427 from the National Institutes of
Health National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences.
REFERENCES
1. Finlayson E, Fan Z, Birkmeyer JD. Outcomes in
octogenarians undergoing high-risk cancer
operation: a national study. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;
205(6):729-734.
2. Saxton A, Velanovich V. Preoperative frailty and
quality of life as predictors of postoperative
complications. Ann Surg. 2011;253(6):1223-1229.
3. Louis DJ, Hsu A, Brand MI, Saclarides TJ.
Morbidity and mortality in octogenarians and older
undergoing major intestinal surgery. Dis Colon
Rectum. 2009;52(1):59-63.
4. Massarweh NN, Legner VJ, Symons RG,
McCormick WC, Flum DR. Impact of advancing age
on abdominal surgical outcomes. Arch Surg.
2009;144(12):1108-1114.
5. Cooper Z, Mitchell SL, Gorges RJ, Rosenthal RA,
Lipsitz SR, Kelley AS. Predictors of mortality up to 1
year after emergency major abdominal surgery in
older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015;63(12):2572-2579.
6. Robinson TN, Wu DS, Stiegmann GV, Moss M.
Frailty predicts increased hospital and six-month
healthcare cost following colorectal surgery in older
adults. Am J Surg. 2011;202(5):511-514.
7. Farhat JS, Velanovich V, Falvo AJ, et al. Are the
frail destined to fail? frailty index as predictor of
surgical morbidity and mortality in the elderly.
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(6):1526-1530.
8. Kwok AC, Semel ME, Lipsitz SR, et al. The
intensity and variation of surgical care at the end of
life: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2011;378
(9800):1408-1413.
9. Fried TR, Van Ness PH, Byers AL, Towle VR,
O’Leary JR, Dubin JA. Changes in preferences for
life-sustaining treatment among older persons with
advanced illness. J Gen Intern Med. 2007;22(4):
495-501.
10. Somogyi-Zalud E, Zhong Z, Hamel MB, Lynn J.
The use of life-sustaining treatments in hospitalized
persons aged 80 and older. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2002;50(5):930-934.
11. Kon AA, Davidson JE, Morrison W, Danis M,
White DB. Shared decision-making in intensive care
units. executive summary of the American College
of Critical Care Medicine and American Thoracic
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
Original Investigation Research
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
537
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Society policy statement. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2016;193(12):1334-1336.
12. Cooper Z, Koritsanszky LA, Cauley CE, et al.
Recommendations for best communication
practices to facilitate goal-concordant care for
seriously ill older patients with emergency surgical
conditions. Ann Surg. 2016;263(1):1-6.
13. Bernacki RE, Block SD; American College of
Physicians High Value Care Task Force.
Communication about serious illness care goals:
a review and synthesis of best practices. JAMA
Intern Med. 2014;174(12):1994-2003.
14. Neuman MD, Bosk CL. What we talk about
when we talk about risk: refining surgery’s hazards
in medical thought. Milbank Q. 2012;90(1):135-159.
15. Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, et al.
Development and evaluation of the universal ACS
NSQIP surgical risk calculator: a decision aid and
informed consent tool for patients and surgeons.
J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(5):833-842.e3.
16. Cohen ME, Ko CY, Bilimoria KY, et al. Optimizing
ACS NSQIP modeling for evaluation of surgical
quality and risk: patient risk adjustment, procedure
mix adjustment, shrinkage adjustment, and surgical
focus. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(2):336-346.e1.
17. D’Amico TA, Krasna MJ, Krasna DM, Sade RM.
No heroic measures: how soon is too soon to stop?
Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87(1):11-18.
18. Lidz CW, Meisel A, Osterweis M, Holden JL,
Marx JH, Munetz MR. Barriers to informed consent.
Ann Intern Med. 1983;99(4):539-543.
19. Wack P. Scenarios: uncharted waters ahead.
Harv Bus Rev. 1985;63(5)73-89. https://hbr.org
/1985/09/scenarios-uncharted-waters-ahead.
Accessed February 26, 2016.
20. Wack P. Scenarios: shooting the rapids. Harv
Bus Rev. 1985;63(6)139-150. https://hbr.org/1985
/11/scenarios-shooting-the-rapids. Accessed February
26, 2016.
21. Schwartz P. The Art of the Long View: Planning
for the Future in an Uncertain World. New York, NY:
Doubleday/Currency; 1991.
22. Elwyn G, Frosch D, Volandes AE, Edwards A,
Montori VM. Investing in deliberation: a definition
and classification of decision support interventions
for people facing difficult health decisions. Med
Decis Making. 2010;30(6):701-711.
23. Elwyn G, Frosch D, Thomson R, et al. Shared
decision making: a model for clinical practice. J Gen
Intern Med. 2012;27(10):1361-1367.
24. Kruser JM, Nabozny MJ, Steffens NM, et al.
“Best Case/Worst Case”: qualitative evaluation of a
novel communication tool for difficult
in-the-moment surgical decisions. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2015;63(9):1805-1811.
25. Schwarze ML, Kehler JM, Campbell TC.
Navigating high risk procedures with more than just
a street map. J Palliat Med. 2013;16(10):1169-1171.
26. Best Case/Worst Case. Best Case/ Worst Case
(BC/WC) communication tool–whiteboard video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=FnS3K44sbu0. Accessed March 29, 2016.
27. Porock D, Parker-Oliver D, Petroski GF, Rantz M.
The MDS Mortality Risk Index: The evolution of a
method for predicting 6-month mortality in nursing
home residents. BMC Res Notes. 2010;3:200-207.
28. American College of Surgeons National Surgical
Quality Improvement Program. ACS NSQIP surgical
risk calculator. http://riskcalculator.facs.org/.
Accessed August 28, 2015.
29. Kruser JM, Taylor LJ, Nabozny MJ, et al. Best
case/worst case: training surgeons to use a novel
communication tool for high-risk acute surgical
problems [published January 3, 2017]. J Pain
Symptom Manage. doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2016
.11.014
30. Elwyn G, Edwards A, Wensing M, Hood K,
Atwell C, Grol R. Shared decision making:
developing the OPTION scale for measuring patient
involvement. Qual Saf Health Care. 2003;12(2):93-99.
31. Shrout PE, Fleiss JL. Intraclass correlations: uses
in assessing rater reliability. Psychol Bull. 1979;86
(2):420-428.
32. McGraw KO, Wong SP. Forming inferences
about some intraclass correlation coefficients.
Psychol Methods. 1996;1(1):30-46. doi:10.1037
/1082-989X.1.130
33. Schwab P, Cerutti F, Hélène von Reibnitz U.
Foresight–using scenarios to shape the future of
agricultural research. Foresight. 2003;5(1):55-61.
doi:dx.doi.org/10.1108/14636680310471299
34. Amer M, Daim TU, Jetter A. A review of
scenario planning. Futures. 2013;46:23-40.
doi:dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2012.10.003
35. Cauley CE, Block SD, Koritsanszky LA, et al.
Surgeons’ perspectives on avoiding nonbeneficial
treatments in seriously ill older patients with
surgical emergencies: a qualitative study. J Palliat
Med. 2016;19(5):529-537.
36. Sacks GD, Dawes AJ, Ettner SL, et al. Surgeon
perception of risk and benefit in the decision to
operate. Ann Surg. 2016;264(6):896-903.
37. Lamont EB, Christakis NA. Prognostic
disclosure to patients with cancer near the end of
life. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134(12):1096-1105.
38. Glare P, Virik K, Jones M, et al. A systematic
review of physicians’ survival predictions in
terminally ill cancer patients. BMJ. 2003;327
(7408):195-198.
39. Stone PC, Lund S. Predicting prognosis in
patients with advanced cancer. Ann Oncol. 2007;18
(6):971-976.
40. Back AL, Arnold RM, Quill TE. Hope for the
best, and prepare for the worst. Ann Intern Med.
2003;138(5):439-443.
41. Singh JA, Sloan JA, Atherton PJ, et al. Preferred
roles in treatment decision making among patients
with cancer: a pooled analysis of studies using the
Control Preferences Scale. Am J Manag Care. 2010;
16(9):688-696.
42. Degner LF, Sloan JA, Venkatesh P. The Control
Preferences Scale. Can J Nurs Res. 1997;29(3):21-43.
43. Joseph-Williams N, Elwyn G, Edwards A.
Knowledge is not power for patients: a systematic
review and thematic synthesis of patient-reported
barriers and facilitators to shared decision making.
Patient Educ Couns. 2014;94(3):291-309.
44. Lynn J, DeGrazia D. An outcomes model of
medical decision making. Theor Med. 1991;12(4):
325-343.
45. Neuman MD. Surgeons’ decisions and the
financial and human costs of medical care. N Engl J
Med. 2010;363(25):2382-2383.
46. Silverman WA. Medical decisions: an appeal for
reasonableness. Pediatrics. 1996;98(6, pt 1):
1182-1184.
47. Nabozny MJ, Kruser JM, Steffens NM, et al.
Constructing high-stakes surgical decisions: it’s
better to die trying. Ann Surg. 2016;263(1):64-70.
Invited Commentary
The Evolution of Informed Consent for Surgery Using
the Best Case/Worst Case Framework
Peter Angelos, MD, PhD
For the last several decades, surgery has been preceded by
the surgeon obtaining informed consent from the patient. In
the traditional informed consent process, the surgeon
explains the risks, benefits,
and alternatives to surgery
to patients so that they can
make an informed decision about whether to proceed with
an operation. In recent years, surgical options have
increased while the numbers of frail, elderly patients need-
ing surgery have also increased. This confluence of events
has exposed a weakness of the classic informed consent
discussion—namely, the manner in which the discussion of
operative risks may be isolated from the patient’
s overall
condition and future goals.
Especially when discussing surgery with a frail, elderly pa-
tient, the focus has too often been on the operation alone, with
little integration of that discussion into the patient’
s goals and
wishes with regard to quality of life. Even though, as a sur-
Related article page 531
Research Original Investigation
Best Case/Worst Case Framework
538
JAMA Surgery
June 2017
Volume 152, Number 6
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
