 What Do the Public Know About Anatomy? Anatomy
Education to the Public and the Implications
Adam M. Taylor
,1* Peter Diggle,2 Quenton Wessels3
1Clinical Anatomy Learning Centre, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster,
United Kingdom
2Centre for Health Informatics, Computing and Statistics, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, United Kingdom
3Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Namibia, Windhoek, Namibia
Public knowledge of the anatomical “self” is lacking and evidence points towards a
growing need for anatomy education to the wider public. The public were offered the
opportunity to learn human anatomy and complete an anatomical knowledge survey
afterwards. Sixty-three participants volunteered to attempt to place 20 anatomical struc-
tures on a blank human body template. Responses were scored independently and then
collated. A mixed effects logistic model was used to examine any associations with par-
ticipants’ as a random effect and all other factors as fixed effects. Results showed a sta-
tistically significant quadratic trend with age. Participants in health-related employment
scored significantly higher than those not in health-related employment. There was a sig-
nificant interaction between gender and organ type with males scoring higher than
females in identifying muscles, but not in identifying internal organs. The current study
demonstrates the general public’s eagerness to learn anatomy despite their limited knowl-
edge of the human body, and the need for widening participation. Furthermore, it raises
an awareness of the anatomical literacy needs of the general public, especially in school
children and young adults. Furthermore, it emphasizes the value of health literacy as a
focus in undergraduate medical education. Anatomy literacy appears to be neglected,
and this experience provides an example of a possible mode of public engagement in
anatomy. Anat Sci Educ 00: 000–000. V
C 2017 American Association of Anatomists.
Key words: gross anatomy education; medical education; public education; public
engagement; anatomy outreach programs; widening participation
INTRODUCTION
The general public’s fascination with the structure and func-
tion of the human body coincides with the history of medi-
cine,
particularly
anatomical
dissections.
Cadaveric
dissections gradually gained popularity as a result of the sci-
entific revival in medieval Italy at the beginning of the four-
teenth
century
(Gosh,
2015).
Anatomical
instruction,
particularly the work of Italian physicians and anatomists
Mondino de Luzzi (ca. 1270–1326) at Bologna, and Andreas
Vesalius (1514–1564) at Padua, evolved to become public
events for all to learn (Ferrari, 1987; Gosh, 2015). The per-
sistent large crowds drawn by anatomy museums of the Vic-
torian medical landscape and the modern day “Body Worlds”
exhibits bears witness to society’s interest in anatomy (Goel-
ler, 2007; Bates, 2008). “Body Worlds” is a public exhibition
demonstrating various parts of the human anatomy from
deceased individuals (human and other species) that have
been plastinated to preserve them. “Body Worlds” raises
many ethical and moral questions, but its stated intended use
is to engage the public and enable them to learn about the
body (Morriss-Kay, 2002; Fonseca and Finn, 2016). Public
engagement in anatomical teaching and exhibits provide an
opportunity to assess the existing knowledge gap with the
aim to facilitate health literacy, demonstrate the importance
of sound anatomical knowledge to doctors and healthcare
professionals and improve the targeting and efficiency of
health
campaigns.
Previous
studies
have
assessed
the
*Correspondence to: Dr. Adam M. Taylor, Lancaster Medical School,
Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lan-
caster LA1 4YB. United Kingdom. E-mail: a.m.taylor@lancaster.ac.uk
Received 7 April 2017; Revised 5 September 2017; Accepted 11
October 2017.
Published
online
00
Month
2017
in
Wiley
Online
Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI 10.1002/ase.1746
V
C 2017 American Association of Anatomists
Anatomical Sciences Education
MONTH 2017
Anat Sci Educ 00:00–00 (2017)
RESEARCH REPORT
 knowledge of the general public before and after visiting ana-
tomical exhibitions such as Body Worlds, demonstrating a
statistically significant increase in anatomical knowledge after
visiting such an exhibit (Jones, 2002; Goeller, 2007; Fonseca
and Finn, 2016). There is an opportunity to mirror public
engagement and interest in anatomical learning with educa-
tion, which can serve as a tool for improving the general
population’s experience when focusing on their health and
communicating with medical professionals.
General knowledge of the anatomical “self” is lacking and
has far-reaching implications for health literacy as outlined in
the following section. Health literacy has been defined as the
ability to “obtain, process, and understand health informa-
tion and services needed to make appropriate health deci-
sions” (Nielsen-Bohlman et al., 2004). Health literacy has
become one of the core competencies in undergraduate medi-
cal education (Williams et al., 1998; Kripalani and Weiss,
2006; GMC, 2009, 2015). Anatomical literacy is taken for
granted due to the part and parcel nature of the use of ana-
tomical terms in medicine. Body knowledge in patients visit-
ing certain specialty clinics and in the general population has
been assessed, demonstrating that even individuals who have
acute medical problems associated with individual organs
cannot reliably demonstrate the location of the affected organ
above the level of knowledge of the general population. The
exceptions to this trend relates to individuals with liver or
kidney problems (Weinman et al., 2009, Bernhard et al.,
2016). Patients’ lack of knowledge is not surprising given
that it is not their profession to know this material; however,
it does aid in diagnosis when making initial contact with a
healthcare professional. It has been shown that medical ter-
minology is not well understood by the general public (Lerner
et al., 2000). Further complications in understanding have
been
shown
to
arise
from
medical
professionals
over-
estimating the knowledge-level of their patients (Kelly and
Haidet, 2007). The impact of inadequacies in health literacy
is far-reaching and forms a major barrier that hinders effec-
tive treatment. For instance, patients with chronic diseases
such as diabetes and hypertension require patient education
in order to monitor their conditions and achieve adequate
control (Williams et al., 1998). In subjects that are “anatomy
heavy” such as medicine, the need for anatomical knowledge
is essential (Drake et al., 2009). The sheer breadth and depth
of anatomical knowledge required of students is vast and
assessment driven learning is inevitable, particularly when the
weighting of anatomy within the exam is considered (Wor-
mald, 2009). It is important however to highlight that assess-
ment of anatomy is linked to the purpose, that is, to future
competent clinical practice (Smith and McManus, 2015). The
breadth and depth of anatomical knowledge for competent
future practice will depend upon the chosen specialty, but
should always be greater than that of the patients they serve.
Plain language communication is a major challenge for many
healthcare providers due to their use of medical terminology that
has become part and parcel of their profession. A recent poll by
Prostate Cancer UK, a charity organization in the United King-
dom, found more than 50% of the 2,000 men they surveyed did
not know the anatomical location of the prostate, 17% of the
individuals
were
unaware
they
had
a
prostate
and
only
8% knew its function (Fiore, 2016). This leads one to question
the efficacy of contemporary health campaigns across the globe
where the target audience lacks basic anatomical knowledge.
Public health campaigns raise public awareness of the per-
tinent health issues such as smoking and lung cancer in the
hope to improve health and reduce the need for medical
treatment for morbidities associated with certain lifestyle
choices. There are questions that should be asked such as
would these campaigns be necessary, or perhaps more effec-
tive if more was taught about the human body in outreach
and educational programs at schools? Evidence from the
United States has already demonstrated that there is a
demand for knowledge on the human body from young stu-
dents but teachers are often not equipped with the resources
or knowledge to delivery relevant material (Baram-Tsabari
and Yarden, 2007; Burns, 2008, 2012).
Growing evidence points towards the demand for anatomy
courses for members of the public (Gillingwater and Findlater,
2015). This in turn has the potential to form a facet of patient
education initiatives, specifically health education which aims
to improve the health behaviors of individuals, groups or com-
munities (Whitehead, 2004). Lancaster Medical School, as part
of Lancaster University’s “Campus in the City” initiative and
public engagement, recently provided the public with the
opportunity to view the human body in 3D. This provided the
authors with an opportunity to showcase the fascinating field
of anatomy, assess the public’s knowledge and perceptions of
anatomy and anatomical structures, and demystify erroneous
concepts. The aim of this study was to provide an interactive
platform for the general public to learn anatomy. Furthermore,
the study also assessed their knowledge on the location of vari-
ous organs of the human body and examined trends associated
with age, gender, education, work in healthcare settings and
recent visit to a healthcare professional.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
During the spring of 2016 members of the public in the City
of Lancaster had the opportunity to attend a “Campus in the
City (CITC)”. This was setup in an empty retail outlet which
was branded with University logo and advertising. The CITC
represented an opportunity to engage the public in the vari-
ous academic endeavors of Lancaster University. Over ten
weeks the academic content of the CITC changed. The event
utilized for this public engagement and research was the
“human body” event, organized by two anatomists and held
over four days attracting four hundred and fifty-nine visitors.
Attendees were given the opportunity to learn more about
human anatomy and if interested the opportunity to complete
an anatomical knowledge survey. An opportunity was pro-
vided to explore any structure of interest, which was then
projected in 3D via a Cyber-Anatomy Med software (Cyber-
Anatomy Corp., Coralville, IA) connected to an Optoma GT
1080 short throw projector (Optoma Europe Ltd, Watford,
UK). The software package provided the participants with an
opportunity to discover more than 4,300 high-resolution digi-
tal structures and over 13,000 identifiable landmarks. Partici-
pants also had the opportunity to explore the structures of
the human body through anatomical models, including; a
detailed torso and heart, a skull, an articulated skeleton, and
a model of the pelvic viscera. Sixty-three participants agreed
to complete the “body knowledge” survey. The inclusion cri-
teria were that participants were willing to take part and
able to read and understand the material that formed part of
the questionnaire, any who could not meet these criteria were
excluded from the study. Participants were given a question-
naire with two parts. Part 1 assessed their knowledge of the
human body; this part of the questionnaire consisted of an
image of the human body alongside letters corresponding to
2
Taylor et al.
 common structures within the human body. The participants
were asked to place the correct letter onto the body in the
place where they considered the organ to be located. Partici-
pants were asked to place the following on the body template
(Appendix A): brain, cornea, lungs, liver, diaphragm, heart,
stomach, appendix, bladder, kidneys, pancreas, gallbladder,
spleen, adrenals, thyroid, hamstrings, biceps, triceps, quadri-
ceps, cruciate ligament, Achilles tendon. The authors chose
the structures based on what appears to come up in everyday
life, sports, TV shows and commercials—things that most
people will have encountered. The muscles are those that
people frequently discuss in terms of keeping fit and sports
injuries seen in professional and amateur sports. The abdomi-
nal structures were selected as common structures that indi-
viduals are likely to have come across in everyday life, TV
programs and are found on basic internet searches for
abdominal pain. The Achilles tendon was used as an example
of how to complete the diagram and placed on the answer
sheet. Part 2 of the questionnaire asked for demographics of
the participant; “age”, “gender”, “highest academic qual-
ification”, “work in healthcare?”, and “any visit to a health-
care professional in the last week?”
After the event, all answer sheets were read by two anato-
mists and scored independently for correct placement of
organs. Correct location(s) on each participant sheet were
determined by placing an “answer” version of the location of
the organs within the body. This correct answer version con-
sisted of an acetate print out of the participant “blank can-
vas” version with the organs drawn onto it by a qualified
anatomist. A placement by a participant was deemed to be
correct if the letter was more than 50% contained within the
boundary of the “answer version”. The study was approved
by Faculty of Health and Medicine Research Ethics Commit-
tee, Lancaster University.
The data were analyzed using a mixed effects logistic model
implemented in the R statistical software (R Foundation for Sta-
tistical Computing, Vienna, Austria), with subject as a random
effect and fixed effects as follows: type of structure (05 internal
organ,
15 muscle);
gender
(05 F,
15 M);
health-related
employment (05 no, 15 yes); visit to health professional within
previous week (05 no, 15 yes), highest educational qualifica-
tion (none, General Certificate of Secondary Education [GCSE],
A-level or equivalent, university degree); and a quadratic func-
tion of age in years. This mixed effects model allowed for unex-
plained variation in different subjects’ ability to give correct
answers (random effects) when drawing inferences about the
effect of subject-level covariates (fixed effects).
RESULTS
The “human body” event was not a formal educational inter-
vention with a follow-up summative assessment. Rather, the
informal setting and open forum platform served as an
opportunity to ask the researchers about the anatomy of the
human body. The participants were from a group of sixty-
three whose mean age was 36.5 years (SD 6 16.4, range 8–
74), their gender comprised 36 females, 26 males and one (1)
individual who preferred not to disclose their gender and was
excluded from the gender analysis.
Figure 1 shows the number of correct answers for each
organ, by gender. The only organ which 100% of respond-
ents answered correctly was the brain. The biceps muscle and
the cornea were the next most correctly answered structures.
At the other end of the spectrum the adrenal glands were the
structures that fewest respondents were able to identify;
<15% of people knew where they were located, with many
believing them to be located in the neck. The spleen was the
next most weakly identified structure, with 20% answering
correctly closely followed by the gallbladder with only 25%
of respondents being correct. All of the structures in the ques-
tionnaire contributed to the reliability, with Cronbach’s a of
0.724, this increased slightly with the removal of the bladder
(0.745) or heart (0.726).
The number of correct answers (out of 20) ranged from 2 to
20 and showed a weak, but statistically significant (P5 0.029)
quadratic trend with age (Figure 2). Subjects in health-related
employment scored significantly higher than those not in health-
related employment (P< 0.001, odds ratio 3.296). There was a
significant
interaction
between
gender
and
organ
type
(P5 0.002) with males scoring higher than females in identifying
muscles, but not in identifying internal organs. There were no
significant associations with highest educational qualification
(P5 0.476) or visit to health professional within previous week
(P5 0.254). Parameter estimates and standard errors for the
final model are shown in Table 1. The estimates seen here repre-
sent the change in log odds of the outcome of difference
between the two levels of the factor of interest (i.e., the respond-
ent’s ability to answer correctly). The coefficients for age and
age squared together describe how the ability to answer correctly
varies with age, initially rising with age but then falling (Fig. 2).
DISCUSSION
The value of the current study is two-fold. First, it demon-
strates the general public’s eagerness to learn anatomy. Second,
it highlights the varied level of anatomical knowledge of the
public. The latter aspect emphasizes the value of health educa-
tion for the public. The second benefit also offers a reminder
of the need for anatomical knowledge and literacy as focal
points in United Kingdom and wider undergraduate medical
Figure 1.
A graph showing the number of the correct answers by structure for males
(blue) and females (red) as percentage of correct responses. The brain was
answered correctly by 100% of respondents. The adrenal glands, spleen and
gallbladder
were
the
structures
which
were
identified
most
poorly
by
respondents.
Anatomical Sciences Education
MONTH 2017
3
 education. Whilst many of the public do not have or need for-
mal anatomical knowledge, it is beneficial in monitoring and
explaining their own health. This study demonstrates that the
general population has a wide and varied knowledge about the
human body that increases with age. The level of academic
qualification does not correlate with ability to identify struc-
tures. This work adds to the hypothesis of previous work that
has already shown that there are disparities in the ability of
the general population and patients in identifying structures,
even those with organ or structure specific disorders (Rashid
and Jagger, 1996, Weinman et al., 2009; Ramanayake et al.,
2014). Health campaigns that specifically target certain dis-
eases or disorders, although they have shown increased referral
rates (Meecham et al., 2016) they may still be missing people
due to weak anatomical knowledge of whether they have that
organ or where it is? In our study many internal organs were
poorly identified and individuals who had visited a healthcare
professional prior to the quiz fared no better than those who
hadn’t. This suggests that “Dr. Google” may not have all the
answers and having visited a healthcare professional in the pre-
vious week did not help them with their anatomical knowl-
edge. Furthermore this indicates that tasks as simple as
identifying organs and structures on the correct side of the
body is not straightforward for the general public, hence a
clear and competent knowledge of basic anatomy is a funda-
mental requirement for modern healthcare professionals. This
study went one step further in assessing knowledge than other
already published studies in that current participants were not
given a multiple choice option of locations, they were given a
blank canvas in order to try and place the correct location,
making it much harder to answer correctly. The work under-
taken in this manuscript also represents a more complete
assessment of the knowledge of the public, as it has been
shown that multiple choice testing allows reactivation of mar-
ginal knowledge (Brame and Biel, 2015). The anatomical
understanding and knowledge used by medical professionals is
learnt over many years and applied in practice long before
practitioners are able to interact safely with patients.
A positive performance in respondents who indicated they
worked in the broad field of healthcare fared better than those
who didn’t. The bracket of “worked in healthcare” covers a
huge number of professions, from surgeons through to phar-
macists and healthcare assistants; regardless of their actual
profession, their exposure to the human body and anatomy
would be expected to raise their knowledge level above that of
the general public; something that the public relies on. The
volume of anatomy and physiology and how to apply them
are learned over many years, with these subjects often forming
core components of their curricula (Kaveevivitchai et al.,
2009). Evidence points towards improved consultation and
patient satisfaction when doctors and patients have a shared
anatomical/medical vocabulary (Williams and Ogden, 2004).
It is reassuring that these results support an improved perfor-
mance in individuals who work in healthcare (Spielmann and
Oliver, 2005; Gupta et al., 2008; Kong et al., 2015), this is
not always the case, a small number of studies have shown a
lack of distinction in performance; established doctors showing
less anatomical knowledge than medical students in certain
areas of medicine and anatomy (Segaren et al., 2012).
It is well known that ageing increases the likelihood of
diseases and disorders and that these patients will have con-
sulted medical professionals on a more regular basis (Burkle
et al., 2007; Akushevich et al., 2013). These patients will
likely also have explored internet-based resources and there-
fore may be familiar with the location of the structure that is
causing them pain (Jeannot et al., 2004). This may explain
the average higher number of correct answers in the 40–49
age bracket than those from either side, as data from the
United Kingdom show that the number of consultation rates
per person begins to increase in the 40s (Ackermann Rau
et al., 2014). Furthermore, this age group may become more
aware of the location of structures and organs that cause
conditions that necessitate an understanding of where these
structures are. Weinman et al. (2009) documented similar
findings in their study; participants from specific diagnostic
groups, liver disease and diabetes, were more accurate in
identifying the organs involved.
Table 1.
Parameter Estimates (log-odds ratio scale) and Standard Errors
(in parentheses) for the Fitted Logistic Model
Effect
Estimate (Standard Error)
Age
0.092 (0.057)
Age-squared
20.076 (0.029)
Gender
0.112 (0.189)
Organ type
0.066 (0.181)
Gender-by-type interaction
0.916 (0.294)
Health-related employment
1.193 (0.297)
For binary factors (e.g., gender or organ type) each estimate rep-
resents the change in log odds of the outcome (i.e., the respond-
ent’s ability to answer correctly) between the two levels of the
factor. The coefficients for age and age squared together describe
how the ability to answer correctly varies with age, initially ris-
ing with age but then falling (Fig. 2).
Figure 2.
Scores (percentage of correct answers out of 20, solid dots) against age in
years, with modeled relationship between score and age (black solid curve).
Gender was not significantly associated with score, but is indicated for com-
pleteness (blue for females, red for males).
4
Taylor et al.
 It has also been argued that individuals with lower levels of
education need special skills and support for understanding
health-related information (Hippisley-Cox and Vinogradova,
2009). The data presented here do not support the hypothesis
that those with fewer or lower educational qualifications per-
form significantly worse than others, although the individuals
with the lowest scores were from this demographic profile.
This study is the first, to the authors’ knowledge, that looks at
the performance of individuals under the age of 18. The youn-
gest respondents were aged 8, 8, 11, 11, 12, and 17 answered
9, 3, 10, 6, 2, and 10 out of 20 correct, respectively. The age
of many of the under 18 respondents places them within the
“pre-adolescent” age bracket. It has been demonstrated that
these students show a desire to learn about the human body,
but may be limited initially due to the lack of knowledge of
relevant content from their educators (Burns, 2008). Educa-
tional outreach to students of this age has a two-fold benefit (i)
they have a desire to learn given the anatomical and physiolog-
ical changes that are occurring as they grow and move through
puberty. (ii) They are at an age where experimentation with
substances such as tobacco becomes likely. Educational out-
reach which combines normal anatomy and
pathological
changes that result from life choices is likely to be more benefi-
cial at this age and linked to improved health outcomes in later
life (Burns, 2012). Innovative and highly successful outreach
programs can be utilized to identify the individual needs of stu-
dents and the staff educating them, using a variety of settings
which provide the scope for better educational and health out-
comes (Burns, 2002). The role of universities in providing out-
reach education in this field suggests that there are limited
knowledge and opportunities within core educational curricu-
lar. In the United Kingdom there are a variety of providers that
offer secondary educational courses as part of GCSE and A-
Level qualifications. However, the amount of anatomy in them
is very limited. The Government of United Kingdom docu-
ments give very little information about what specifics linked
to anatomical structures are taught; rather they are somewhat
vague with only direct reference to the heart in its physiological
role, instead focusing heavily on cellular structure and func-
tion(s) (Department for Education, 2014). An improvement in
delivery of basic anatomical knowledge within primary and
secondary education may have beneficial health outcomes in
later life, as well as reducing burden on healthcare services by
ensuring
competent
communication
between
patient
and
healthcare professional.
Study Limitations
This pilot observational cross sectional study employed a
small sample size compared with similar publications (Wein-
man et al., 2009; Ramanayake et al., 2014). The authors did
not explore specific diagnostic groups such as diabetes, car-
diovascular disorders and liver disease. The choice of individ-
uals to participate was interpreted by researchers as them
doing so through their own interest in anatomy and health
and thus may represent a biased population that are at the
more informed end of the general public spectrum of knowl-
edge. Similarly, it cannot be compared how the demographics
of the participants are representative of the other attendees
on the day, as these data were not collected.
This study is also England/UK-centric and may not be rep-
resentative of the knowledge of other areas of the world
where different educational content as part of compulsory
education or prevalence of different diseases that affect the
population may lead to a different level of knowledge of a
given area.
Finally, Lancaster is one of western Lancashire’s major
healthcare hubs and this explains the high proportion of
healthcare providers in this study. However, the value of this
possible skewed representation of the general population of
Lancaster highlights the need to strengthen the existing ana-
tomical literacy.
CONCLUSIONS
Health agencies such as the National Health Service are suc-
cessfully working on improving the general public’s under-
standing of health and wellbeing. Advertising campaigns for
health screening related to structures such as the prostate and
abdominal aorta, see increased referral rates, but little is
known about whether individuals actually know where these
structures are within their own body (Meecham et al., 2016).
Body knowledge of the general public appears to vary greatly
and this brings into question their individual decision-making
about their own care. Effective communication between doc-
tor and patient and a matched vocabulary significantly
impacts the efficiency of a consultation as well as the patient
compliance (Williams and Ogden, 2004). The data gathered
suggest that there are gender differences in being able to iden-
tify internal organs versus muscles. The type-by-gender inter-
action is significantly positive, which is explained by the fact
that the success rate for males identifying muscles is signifi-
cantly higher than all three other categories, that is, males
and females are more-or-less equally good at identifying inter-
nal organs, but males are better than females at identifying
muscles. This information, along with recent data showing
how functional brain imaging predicts the success of public
health campaigns (Falk et al., 2016), should be considered by
medical students, health care professionals and public health
campaigners when consulting with patients and designing
health literature and education materials. Future research is
needed to determine the expected anatomical literacy of the
general public.
This study extends beyond data collection and points
towards a possible mode of public engagement in anatomy.
An event such as the Lancaster University’s CITC, involving
undergraduate students as facilitators, has the potential to
highlight the existing gaps in health literacy and to form a
bridge
between
healthcare
professionals
and
patients
(Chinn, 2011). An additional advantage relates to the bio-
ethical considerations when using human or cadaveric mate-
rial in public engagement (Myser, 2007). The sometimes
understated value of anatomical models circumvents such
issues. Technological advances in the computerized represen-
tation of the human body further has become more realistic
and serves as an alternative to controversial use of human
material in the public domain (Murgitroyd et al., 2015).
Finally, medical students should be reminded that their ana-
tomical knowledge should be better than that of their
patients, and the best place to begin to learn this is in medi-
cal school.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank all the members of the public
who kindly completed the questionnaires and “The Campus in
Anatomical Sciences Education
MONTH 2017
5
 the City” team for the opportunity to run the human body
event.
NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
ADAM M. TAYLOR, Ph.D., B.Sc. (Hons.), S.F.H.E.A, is a
senior lecturer in anatomy and Director of the Clinical Anat-
omy Learning Centre, in Lancaster Medical School, Faculty of
Health and Medicine, at Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
He teaches embryology, microscopic and gross anatomy to
first-, second-, and third-year medical and biomedical students.
His research interests include rheumatology, microscopic anat-
omy, gross anatomy, medical education, and medical history.
PETER J. DIGGLE, PhD, M.Sc., B.Sc. (Hons.), is a distin-
guished professor in CHICAS (Centre for Health Informatics,
Computing and Statistics) in Lancaster Medical School, Faculty
of Health and Medicine, at Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
He teaches statistical methods for biomedical and public health
applications to postgraduate students. His research interests
include longitudinal data analysis, spatial statistics, environmen-
tal, and tropical disease epidemiology and health surveillance.
QUENTON
WESSELS,
Ph.D.,
M.Sc.
(Clin.
Educ.),
F.H.E.A., is a senior lecturer in the Department of Anatomy,
School
of
Medicine,
University
of
Namibia,
Windhoek,
Namibia. He teaches embryology and microscopic and gross
anatomy to first- and second-year medical and pharmacy stu-
dents. His research interests include microscopic anatomy,
gross anatomy, medical education, and medical history.
LITERATURE CITED
Ackermann Rau S, Sakarya S, Abel T. 2014. When to see a doctor for com-
mon health problems: Distribution patterns of functional health literacy across
migrant populations in Switzerland. Int J Public Health 59:967–974.
Akushevich I, Kravchenko J, Ukraintseva S, Arbeev K, Yashin AI. 2013. Time
trends of incidence of age-associated diseases in the US elderly population:
Medicare-based analysis. Age Ageing 42:494–500.
Baram-Tsabari A, Yarden A. 2007. Interest in biology: A developmental shift
characterized using self-generated questions. Am Biol Teach 69:532–540.
Bates AW. 2008. “Indecent and demoralising representations”: Public anatomy
museums in mid-Victorian England. Med Hist 52:1–22.
Bernhard JC, Isotani S, Matsugasumi T, Duddalwar V, Hung AJ, Suer E, Baco
E, Satkunasivam R, Djaladat H, Metcalfe C, Hu B, Wong K, Park D, Nguyen
M, Hwang D, Bazargani ST, de Castro Abreu AL, Aron M, Ukimura O, Gill
IS. 2016. Personalized 3D printed model of kidney and tumor anatomy: A use-
ful tool for patient education. World J Urol 34:337–345.
Brame CJ, Biel R. 2015. Test-enhanced learning: The potential for testing to
promote greater learning in undergraduate science courses. CBE Life Sci Educ
14:es4.
Burns ER. 2002. Anatomy of a successful K-12 educational outreach program
in the health sciences: Eleven years experience at one medical sciences campus.
Anat Rec 269:181–193.
Burns ER. 2008. Functional anatomy of the cardiovascular system: Profes-
sional development for PreK-3 teachers using a “train and equip” method
results in learning opportunities for students. Anat Sci Educ 1:119–125.
Burns ER. 2012. Healthy Lungs: Cancer education for middle school teachers
using a “train and equip” method. J Cancer Educ 27:179–185.
B€
urkle A, Caselli G, Franceschi C, Mariani E, Sansoni P, Santoni A, Vecchio
G, Witkowski JM, Caruso C. 2007. Pathophysiology of ageing, longevity and
age related diseases. Immun Ageing 4:4.
Chinn D. 2011. Critical health literacy: A review and critical analysis. Soc Sci
Med 73:60–67.
Department for Education. 2014. GCE AS and A Level Subject Content for
Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Psychology. 1st Ed. London, UK: Department
of Education.
41 p. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/593849/Science_AS_and_level_formatted.pdf
[accessed 23 August 2017].
Drake RL, McBride JM, Lachman N, Pawlina W. 2009. Medical education in
the anatomical sciences: The winds of change continue to blow. Anat Sci Educ
2:253–259.
Falk EB, O’Donnell MB, Tompson S, Gonzalez R, Dal Cin S, Strecher V,
Cummings KM, An L. 2016. Functional brain imaging predicts public health
campaign success. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 11:204–214.
Ferrari G. 1987. Public anatomy lessons and the carnival: The anatomy theatre
of Bologna. Past Present 117:50–106.
Fiore N. 2016. Prostate cancer. Nurs Stand 30:17.
Fonseca GR, Finn GM. 2016. The impact of body worlds on adult visitors’
knowledge on human anatomy: A preliminary study. Clin Anat 29:439–445.
GMC. 2009. General Medical Council. Tomorrow’s Doctors: Outcomes and
Standards, for Undergraduate Medical Education. Regulating Doctors, Ensuring
Good Medical Practice. 3rd Ed. London, UK: General Medical Council. 104 p.
GMC. 2015. General Medical Council. Outcomes for Graduates (Tomorrow’s
Doctors) 1st Ed. Manchester, UK: General Medical Council. 20 p.
Gillingwater TH, Findlater GS. 2015. Anatomy: Back in the public spotlight.
Lancet 385:1825.
Goeller A. 2007. Interior landscapes: Anatomy art and the work of Gunther
Von Hagens. Genus Gend Mod Cult 9:271–289.
Gosh SK. 2015. Human cadaveric dissection: A historical account from ancient
Greece to the modern era. Anat Cell Biol 48:153–169.
Gupta Y, Morgan M, Singh A, Ellis H. 2008. Junior doctors’ knowledge of
applied clinical anatomy. Clin Anat 21:334–338.
Hippisley-Cox J, Vinogradova Y. 2009. Trends in Consultation Rates in Gen-
eral Practice 1995 to 2008: Analysis of the QResearchV
R Database. 1st Ed.
Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK: QResearch and NHS Health and Social Care
Information
Centre.
23
p.
URL:
http://content.digital.nhs.uk/catalogue/
PUB01077/tren-cons-rate-gene-prac-95-09-95-08-rep.pdf [accessed
11 May
2017].
Jeannot JG, Froehlich F, Wietlisbach V, Burnand B, Terraz O, Vader JP. 2004.
Patient use of the Internet for health care information in Switzerland. Swiss
Med Wkly 134:307–312.
Jones DG. 2002. Re-inventing anatomy: The impact of plastination on how
we see the human body. Clin Anat 15:436–440.
Kaveevivitchai C, Chuengkriankrai B, Luecha Y, Thanooruk R, Panijpan B,
Ruenwongsa P. 2009. Enhancing nursing students’ skills in vital signs assess-
ment by using multimedia computer-assisted learning with integrated content
of anatomy and physiology. Nurse Educ Today 29:65–72.
Kelly PA, Haidet P. 2007. Physician overestimation of patient literacy: A
potential source of health care disparities. Pat Educ Couns 66:119–122.
Kong VY, Oosthuizen GV, Sartorius B, Keene CM, Clarke DL. 2015. Correla-
tion between ATLS training and junior doctors’ anatomical knowledge of inter-
costal chest drain insertion. J Surg Educ 72:600–605.
Kripalani S, Weiss BD. 2006. Teaching about health literacy and clear commu-
nication. J Gen Intern Med 21:888–890.
Lerner EB, Jehle DV, Janicke DM, Moscati RM. 2000. Medical communica-
tion: Do our patients understand? Am J Emerg Med 18:764–766.
Meecham L, Jacomelli J, Pherwani AD, Earnshaw J. 2016. Self-referral to the
NHS abdominal aortic aneurysm screening programme. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg 52:317–321.
Morriss-Kay G. 2002. Review. J Anat 200:535–536.
Murgitroyd E, Madurska M, Gonzalez J, Watson A. 2015. 3D digital anatomy
modelling - Practical or pretty? Surgeon 13:177–180.
Myser C. 2007. Taking public education seriously: BODY WORLDS, the sci-
ence museum, and democratizing bioethics education. Am J Bioeth 7:34–36.
Nielsen-Bohlman L, Panzer AM, Kindig DA (Editors). 2004. Health Literacy:
A Prescription to End Confusion. 1st Ed. Washington, DC: National Acade-
mies Press. 345 p.
Ramanayake BS, Liyanagoda NE, Dahanayake PK. 2014. Do patients under-
stand medical communication? Patients’ knowledge on anatomical location of
organs in human body. Sci Res J 2:12–16.
Rashid A, Jagger C. 1996. Patients’ knowledge of anatomical location of
major organs within the human body: A comparison between Asians and non-
Asians. Fam Pract 13:450–454.
Segaren N, Vaghela K, Markar S, Gilleard O, Segaren N, Shanmugarajah K.
2012. The anatomical knowledge of healthcare professionals referring to a
hand trauma centre. Int J Surg 10:S79.
Smith CF, McManus B. 2015. The integrated anatomy practical paper: A robust
assessment method for anatomy education today. Anat Sci Educ 8:63–73.
Spielmann PM, Oliver CW. 2005. The carpal bones: A basic test of medical
students’ and junior doctors’ knowledge of anatomy. Surgeon 3:257–259.
Weinman J, Yusuf G, Berks R, Rayner S, Petrie KJ. 2009. How accurate is
patients’ anatomical knowledge: A cross-sectional, questionnaire study of six
patient groups and a general public sample. BMC Fam Pract 10:43.
Whitehead D. 2004. Health promotion and health education: Advancing the
concepts. J Adv Nurs 37:311–320.
Williams MV, Baker DW, Parker RM, Nurss JR. 1998. Relationship of func-
tional health literacy to patients’ knowledge of their chronic disease. A
study of patients with hypertension and diabetes. Arch Intern Med 158:
166–172.
Williams N, Ogden J. 2004. The impact of matching the patient’s vocabulary:
A randomized control trial. Fam Pract 21:630–635.
Wormald BW, Schoeman S, Somasunderam A, Penn M. 2009. Assessment
drives learning: An unavoidable truth? Anat Sci Educ 2:199–204.
6
Taylor et al.
 APPENDIX
Questionnaire completed by participants.
Anatomical Sciences Education
MONTH 2017
7
