 Annual Research Review: Enduring neurobiological effects of 
childhood abuse and neglect
Martin H. Teicher1,2 and Jacqueline A. Samson1,2
1Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
2Developmental Biopsychiatry Research Program, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, USA
Abstract
Background and Scope—Childhood maltreatment is the most important preventable cause of 
psychopathology accounting for about 45% of the population attributable risk for childhood onset 
psychiatric disorders. A key breakthrough has been the discovery that maltreatment alters 
trajectories of brain development. This review aims to synthesize neuroimaging findings in 
children who experienced caregiver neglect as well as from studies in children, adolescents and 
adults who experienced physical, sexual and emotional abuse. In doing so we provide preliminary 
answers to questions regarding the importance of type and timing of exposure, gender differences, 
reversibility and the relationship between brain changes and psychopathology. We also discuss 
whether these changes represent adaptive modifications or stress-induced damage.
Findings—Parental verbal abuse, witnessing domestic violence and sexual abuse appear to 
specifically target brain regions (auditory, visual and somatosensory cortex) and pathways that 
process and convey the aversive experience. Maltreatment is associated with reliable 
morphological alterations in anterior cingulate, dorsal lateral prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex, 
corpus callosum and adult hippocampus, and with enhanced amygdala response to emotional faces 
and diminished striatal response to anticipated rewards. Evidence is emerging that these regions 
and interconnecting pathways have sensitive exposure periods when they are most vulnerable. 
Early deprivation and later abuse may have opposite effects on amygdala volume. Structural and 
functional abnormalities initially attributed to psychiatric illness may be a more direct 
consequence of abuse.
Conclusion—Childhood maltreatment exerts a prepotent influence on brain development and 
has been an unrecognized confound in almost all psychiatric neuroimaging studies. These brain 
changes may be best understood as adaptive responses to facilitate survival and reproduction in 
the face of adversity. Their relationship to psychopathology is complex as they are discernible in 
both susceptible and resilient individuals with maltreatment histories. Mechanisms fostering 
resilience will need to be a primary focus of future studies.
Keywords
Child abuse; neglect; neuroimaging; resilience; stress
Correspondence: Martin H. Teicher, Developmental Biopsychiatry Research Program, McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Belmont 
MA 02478, USA; martin_teicher@hms.harvard.edu. 
Conflicts of interest statement: no conflicts declared
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2016 March ; 57(3): 241–266. doi:10.1111/jcpp.12507.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
The deleterious effects of childhood maltreatment and early deprivation are widely reported 
and acknowledged. Both retrospective and prospective studies document associations 
between exposure to early maltreatment and poorer psychological and physical functioning 
in adulthood. Survivors of childhood maltreatment show higher prevalence of depression, 
anxiety, substance abuse, eating disorders, suicidal symptomatology, psychosis and 
personality disorder (see (2009; Bendall, Jackson, Hulbert, & McGorry, 2008; Norman, et 
al., 2012; Teicher & Samson, 2013) for recent reviews) as well as diminished cognitive 
functioning (de Bellis, Hooper, Spratt, & Woolley, 2009; Gould, et al., 2012) and poorer 
treatment response (Nanni, Uher, & Danese, 2012; Teicher & Samson, 2013). Green and 
colleagues (2010) estimated that maltreatment accounted for 45% of the population 
attributable risk for childhood onset psychiatric disorders. In addition, survivors of 
childhood maltreatment show higher adult rates of inflammation (Danese, Pariante, Caspi, 
Taylor, & Poulton, 2007), metabolic syndrome (Danese, et al., 2009), arthritis (Spitzer, et 
al., 2013), ischemic heart disease (Dong, et al., 2004), cancer (Brown, et al., 2010) and 
shortened telomeres (Price, Kao, Burgers, Carpenter, & Tyrka, 2013) associated with 
reduced life expectancy (Brown, et al., 2009). The exact pathways leading to these diverse 
negative outcomes remain to be revealed.
In this review, we examine the rapidly expanding body of research on the potential 
neurobiological consequences of childhood abuse and neglect, and summarize the most 
salient overarching discoveries. For this purpose we included all studies we could identify 
that were published in English and presented a statistical analysis on the association between 
maltreatment (broadly defined) and brain measures of structure, function or connectivity as 
assessed using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or positron emission tomography (PET).
At the present time a reasonably clear picture is emerging on the relationship between 
maltreatment and alterations in structure and function of stress-susceptible brain regions. 
New studies are also revealing substantial alterations in connectivity and network 
architecture. What is much less clear is the link between these discernible differences and 
psychopathology, which may require a revision in our understanding of the neurobiological 
basis of psychiatric disorders and a reconceptualization of resilience. Throughout the review 
we will emphasize the importance of type and timing of exposure, possible differences 
between abuse and neglect, and the moderating influence of gender.
Categories of Maltreatment
Studies of maltreatment typically examine the deleterious effects of childhood physical, 
sexual or emotional abuse. Key components of emotional maltreatment include verbal 
abuse, manipulation (e.g., placing the child in situations intended to elicit shame, guilt or 
fear in order to serve the emotional needs of the perpetrator or to persuade the child to 
perform actions against his or her will), denigrating or destroying things of value to the 
child, or placing the child in situations that are harmful, such as witnessing domestic 
violence (Teicher & Samson, 2013). Maltreatment also includes parental neglect, which can 
Teicher and Samson
Page 2
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 be physical neglect (failure to provide for the child’s basic needs such as food, clothing, 
physical safety, adequate supervision, medical and dental health) or emotional neglect 
(failure to provide for the child’s basic emotional needs). Emotionally neglectful parents 
may be emotionally unresponsive to a child’s distress, fail to attend to the child’s social 
needs or expect the child to routinely manage situations that are beyond his/her maturity 
level or are not safe (Teicher & Samson, 2013).
The potential impact of childhood adversity on brain structure and function is a relatively 
new area of inquiry and the categories of maltreatment studied have shifted over time. 
Earlier studies tended to focus specifically on subjects with histories of physical or sexual 
abuse or who witnessed domestic violence. These trauma-exposed subjects were often 
preselected for histories of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (e.g., (Bremner, et al., 
1997; Carrion, et al., 2001; De Bellis, et al., 1999b)), borderline personality disorder (e.g., 
(Brambilla, et al., 2004; Driessen, et al., 2000; Schmahl, Vermetten, Elzinga, & Bremner, 
2003)) or dissociative identity disorder (e.g., (Stein, Koverola, Hanna, Torchia, & McClarty, 
1997; Vermetten, Schmahl, Lindner, Loewenstein, & Bremner, 2006)), and were likely 
exposed to multiple types of abuse. This was followed by a large number of studies that used 
self-report scales, predominantly the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) (Bernstein, et 
al., 1994). Typically, the CTQ was used as a quantitative measure of severity of exposure 
(regardless of type) within mixed samples (with and without psychopathology) (Malykhin, 
Carter, Hegadoren, Seres, & Coupland, 2012), community samples (Teicher, Anderson, & 
Polcari, 2012) or samples without discernible psychopathology (Dannlowski, et al., 2012; 
Edmiston, et al., 2011). Other studies used the CTQ to study the relationship between brain 
findings and specific categories of abuse; often revealing strong associations with the 
emotional abuse (Carballedo, et al., 2012), emotional neglect (Bogdan, Williamson, & 
Hariri, 2012; Frodl, Reinhold, Koutsouleris, Donohoe, et al., 2010) or physical neglect 
(Frodl, Reinhold, Koutsouleris, Reiser, & Meisenzahl, 2010) subscales. A few studies have 
limited recruitment to subjects exposed to only one type of maltreatment (e.g., parental 
verbal abuse (Choi, Jeong, Rohan, Polcari, & Teicher, 2009; Tomoda, et al., 2011), peer 
emotional abuse (Teicher, Samson, Sheu, Polcari, & McGreenery, 2010), harsh corporal 
punishment (Sheu, Polcari, Anderson, & Teicher, 2010; Tomoda, Suzuki, et al., 2009)). 
Interestingly, some of the most recent studies have focused predominantly on subjects with 
emotional maltreatment (Hanson, Hariri, & Williamson, in press; van der Werff, et al., 
2013b; van Harmelen, Hauber, et al., 2014; van Harmelen, van Tol, et al., 2014).
Shortly after initial reports of the effects of maltreatment on brain structures were published, 
studies emerged on the neurobiological consequences of early deprivation, focusing on 
institutionally reared orphans (e.g., (Chugani, et al., 2001; Eluvathingal, et al., 2006)). Mean 
duration of institutional care varied across studies from 8 (Goff, et al., 2013) – 63 months 
(Tottenham, et al., 2010). In many of these studies the orphans were adopted internationally 
into relatively affluent families (e.g., (Bauer, Hanson, Pierson, Davidson, & Pollak, 2009; 
Govindan, Behen, Helder, Makki, & Chugani, 2010)). These studies provide insight into the 
consequences of physical and emotional neglect during infancy and early childhood. The 
Bucharest Early Intervention Project is a remarkable controlled trial in which Romanian 
orphans were randomly assigned to either a newly established system of high-level foster 
home care versus continued institutional care (Smyke, Zeanah, Fox, & Nelson, 2009). This 
Teicher and Samson
Page 3
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 study provides compelling data on the impact and reversibility of early neglect on brain 
development (McLaughlin, et al., 2014; Sheridan, Fox, Zeanah, McLaughlin, & Nelson, 
2012).
Key hypotheses regarding maltreatment and brain development
Thoughts about the potential effects of childhood abuse on brain development began with 
the idea that repeated exposure to stress could kindle the developing limbic system (B. van 
der Kolk & Greenberg, 1987). Findings of spike and sharp-wave electroencephalogram 
(EEG) abnormalities (Ito, et al., 1993) and symptoms of ‘limbic irritability’ (Teicher, Glod, 
Surrey, & Swett, 1993), similar to the clinical and EEG findings observed in individuals 
with temporal lobe epilepsy, provided some support, as did early findings of reduced 
hippocampal volume (Bremner, et al., 1997; Stein, et al., 1997). Interestingly, ‘limbic 
irritability’ has endured, in our studies, as the symptom cluster most strongly associated with 
exposure to childhood maltreatment (Teicher & Parigger, 2015; Teicher, Samson, Polcari, & 
McGreenery, 2006; Teicher, et al., 2010; Teicher & Vitaliano, 2011).
Based on preclinical studies, we went on to propose a more expansive hypothesis, that 
abusive experiences would induce a cascade of stress-mediated effects on hormones and 
neurotransmitters that would affect the development of vulnerable brain regions (Anderson, 
Teicher, Polcari, & Renshaw, 2002; Teicher, 2000; Teicher, Andersen, Polcari, Anderson, & 
Navalta, 2002). The first stage of the hypothesized cascade entails stress-induced 
programming of the glucocorticoid, noradrenergic, and vasopressin-oxytocin stress response 
systems to augment or alter stress responses. These neurohumors, along with stress-induced 
release of neurotransmitters, would then affect basic processes including neurogenesis, 
synaptic overproduction and pruning, and myelination during sensitive periods in genetically 
susceptible individuals. These effects would likely target specific stress-susceptible brain 
regions including: hippocampus, amygdala, neocortex, cerebellum and white matter tracts 
(Teicher, et al., 2002). Brain structures likely to be especially vulnerable to the effects of 
childhood abuse would have one of more of the following features: (i) a protracted postnatal 
development; (ii) a high density of glucocorticoid receptors; and (iii) some degree of 
postnatal neurogenesis (Teicher, et al., 2003).
We also introduced an alternative perspective on the nature of these brain changes. The 
predominant view of researchers in the field is that stress is harmful for the brain and 
particularly harmful for the developing brain (Lupien, McEwen, Gunnar, & Heim, 2009; 
National Scientific Council on the Developing Child, 2005). From this viewpoint stress-
induced alterations constitute damage, and psychopathology may then emerge as a result of 
this damage. However, it does not seem entirely plausible that natural forces have not 
selected for brains resistant to the effects of early stress, given the degree to which early 
stress has been an integral part of our ancestry.
Our alternative view is that the brain is modified by early stress in a potentially adaptive 
way (Teicher, 2000, 2002; Teicher, et al., 2003). Briefly, we have proposed that exposure to 
substantial levels of childhood maltreatment nudges the brain along alternative 
developmental pathways to facilitate reproduction and survival in what, based on 
Teicher and Samson
Page 4
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experience, appears to be a malevolent stress-filled world. In this case psychopathology may 
emerge due to the mismatch between the world the brain was modified to survive in and the 
world it finds itself in during subsequent developmental stages.
These two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. There may be types of exposure that 
trigger adaptive responses and experiences that are so egregious as to damage the brain in 
non-adaptive ways. It is also likely that polymorphisms that influence the expression of 
molecules involved in neurotransmission, stress response, or brain development may render 
some individuals more susceptible to both the positive and negative impact of early 
experience (e.g., (Beaver & Belsky, 2012)). We will see however that many of the reported 
alterations make sense as potentially adaptive responses.
Key questions
In this review we will touch on eight key questions. First, does childhood abuse affect brain 
structure and function? Second, does the type of maltreatment matter or are they all 
stressors? Third, does age at the time of abuse matter? Fourth, what is the temporal 
association between exposure and brain changes? Fifth, are boys and girls affected in the 
same way? Sixth, do the observed structural and functional consequences make more sense 
as adaptive responses or as non-specific damage? Seventh, are the neurobiological 
consequences of childhood maltreatment reversible? Finally, what is the relationship 
between childhood abuse, brain changes and psychiatric illness?
Few of these questions have been explored in a systematic manner. Nevertheless, some 
preliminary answers can be gleaned from the existing body of literature. There is also a 
pressing mechanistic question – how does childhood maltreatment ‘get under the skin’ to 
produce these neurobiological effects? There are some intriguing insights available from 
translational studies regarding epigenetic and neuroinflammatory mechanisms but little to 
say as relevant clinical data are just emerging (e.g., (G. E. Miller & Cole, 2012; Zhang, 
Labonte, Wen, Turecki, & Meaney, 2013)), though this is an active area of inquiry.
Morphometry - Overview
Research on the neurobiological effects of childhood abuse began with studies assessing 
alterations in electrophysiology (Ito, Teicher, Glod, & Ackerman, 1998; Ito, et al., 1993; 
Schiffer, Teicher, & Papanicolaou, 1995; Teicher, et al., 1997), but were quickly eclipsed by 
MRI studies assessing structural differences, and this constitutes the lion share of research 
on this topic. Most studies have used a region of interest (ROI) approach, and have focused 
primarily on hippocampus, amygdala and cerebral cortex, as regions known to be stress-
susceptible. A significant number of studies have also used global approaches, such as voxel 
based morphometry and tract-based spatial statistics, to identify alterations without 
preselection of ROIs.
Hippocampus
The hippocampus is a key limbic structure that is critically involved in the formation and 
retrieval of memories, including autobiographical memories (Nadel, Campbell, & Ryan, 
Teicher and Samson
Page 5
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2007). The hippocampus also contains place cells, which along with grid cells in the 
interconnecting entorhinal cortex, provide an internal positioning system for the 
spatiotemporal representation of places, routes, and associated experiences (Moser, Kropff, 
& Moser, 2008). Hippocampal abnormalities have been reported in several different 
psychiatric disorders including: post-traumatic stress disorder, major depression, 
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder (Geuze, Vermetten, & 
Bremner, 2005).
The hippocampus is also the most obvious target in the brain to reflect the potential effects 
of childhood maltreatment. Densely populated with glucocorticoid receptors (Morimoto, 
Morita, Ozawa, Yokoyama, & Kawata, 1996), it is highly susceptible to damage from 
excessive levels of glucocorticoids (Sapolsky, Krey, & McEwen, 1985) such as cortisol. 
Further, preclinical studies showed that excessive exposure to glucocorticoids led to 
reversible atrophy of dendritic processes on pyramidal cells in the Cornu Ammonis (CA, 
particularly the CA3 subfield) and suppression of neurogenesis within the dentate gyrus 
(DG) (Sapolsky, 1996).
On balance there is compelling evidence that adults with histories of maltreatment have 
smaller hippocampi than non-maltreated comparison subjects. At the time of writing, we 
identified 37 papers reporting hippocampal findings in adults with childhood maltreatment, 
and 30 of these papers reported one or more significant differences between groups with 
versus without exposure, or an inverse correlation between severity of exposure and volume. 
Three papers reporting non-significant effects reported nearly significant reductions (Cohen, 
et al., 2006), or correlations (Kumari, et al., 2013; Woodward, Kuo, Schaer, Kaloupek, & 
Eliez, 2013) (in the non-violent sample). Another studied failed to find differences in a 
geriatric sample (mean age 70.9±3.7) (Ritchie, et al., 2012) and may have been confounded 
by effects of aging. All three of the remaining studies that did not find significant 
hippocampal changes examined only female participants and had relatively small sample 
sizes (Landre, et al., 2010; Lenze, Xiong, & Sheline, 2008; Pederson, et al., 2004).
These limitations are important as recent research suggests that female hippocampi may be 
less vulnerable to the effects of stress. For example, Samplin (Samplin, Ikuta, Malhotra, 
Szeszko, & Derosse, 2013) found in a group of 67 healthy adults without psychopathology 
that history of emotional abuse was associated with reduced hippocampal volume in males 
but not females. Frodl et al (Frodl, Reinhold, Koutsouleris, Reiser, et al., 2010) reported 
greater male than female reductions in hippocampal white matter volume with exposure to 
neglect. Most striking, Everaerd (Everaerd, et al., 2012) found in a sample of 357 
participants that severe childhood abuse was associated with reduced hippocampal volume 
but only in males, and specifically in males who carried the short-allele of the serotonin 
transporter promoter polymorphism. Further, a meta-analysis of PTSD studies revealed 
greater effects of trauma exposure on hippocampal volume in males than females (Karl, et 
al., 2006). Increased resilience in females may be due to a potential neuroprotective effect of 
estrogen as observed in translational studies (McEwen, 2010). This is not to say that 
maltreatment has no effect on hippocampal volume in females. Indeed, 12 of 15 published 
studies reported reductions in hippocampal volume in samples with all female participants. 
Teicher and Samson
Page 6
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 However, small N studies that only include female participants may well be underpowered 
given the potentially weaker effects of stress on the female hippocampus.
The relationship between childhood maltreatment and hippocampal volume is less clear 
when we focus specifically on studies involving children or adolescents, as has been 
previously reported (e.g., (Andersen & Teicher, 2004; Teicher, et al., 2003)). Overall, we 
identified 16 relevant papers, in which 9 showed no significant decrease in volume, 
including two analyses that revealed a significant increase in white (Tupler & De Bellis, 
2006) or gray matter volume (Whittle, et al., 2013). However, this latter study also showed a 
significant attenuation in hippocampal development over the next 3.8 years in maltreated 
subjects, which was indirectly mediated by psychopathology. Pediatric subjects in studies 
reporting no significant reduction had a mean age of 11.26±2.25 years (n = 596). In contrast, 
subjects in the studies reporting a significant reduction or growth attenuation had a mean age 
of 12.65±3.01 years (n = 681), a small but possibly meaningful difference if the positive 
studies contained a higher percentage of post-pubertal participants. This fits with the 
hypothesis that there may be a silent period between exposure to maltreatment and 
discernible neurobiological differences, with observable cross-sectional differences 
becoming fully discernible in the period between puberty and adulthood (Andersen & 
Teicher, 2004).
Two retrospective studies provide data on potential sensitive exposure periods. In a study of 
women with histories of childhood sexual abuse, Andersen et al (2008) reported that 
bilateral hippocampal volume appeared to be most significantly affected by exposure at 3–5 
years of age and to a lesser degree at 11–13 years of age. Similarly, in a cross-sectional 
analysis of a mixed-gender longitudinal sample with disturbed attachment and exposure to 
emotional abuse and neglect but not sexual abuse, Pechtel et al., (2014) found that right 
hippocampal volume appeared to be most sensitive to maltreatment at 7 and 14 years of age. 
These observations are supported by preclinical studies showing that early separation stress 
has much greater effects on synaptic density in hippocampus than prefrontal cortex, whereas 
adolescent stress exerts greater effects on prefrontal cortex than hippocampus (Andersen & 
Teicher, 2004, 2008). Two studies reported that maltreatment was specifically associated 
with reduction in volume of hippocampal subfields containing CA3 and dentate gyrus 
(Pagliaccio, et al., 2014; Teicher, et al., 2012), revealing that the same portions of the 
hippocampus known to be susceptible to stress in laboratory animals are also the most 
susceptible in humans. This is important information as it supports the hypothesis that 
maltreatment affects dendritic arborization of pyramidal cells in CA3 and neurogenesis in 
the dentate gyrus.
One recent study by Luby et al (Luby, et al., 2013) is worth noting. They assessed 
hippocampal volume in 3–6-year-old preschool children (n=145, oversampled for risk for 
major depression), who were followed longitudinally for 3–6 years and scanned at 6–12 
years of age (mean 9.7±0.8 years). They found that left hippocampus volume was 
substantially influenced by affluence versus poverty (income-needs ratio), and that 
supportive-hostile parenting and stressful life events mediated this relationship. Right 
hippocampal volume was not significantly associated with income/needs ratio, but was 
correlated with supportive-hostile parenting. One reason why they may have observed 
Teicher and Samson
Page 7
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 effects on hippocampal volume in young children, while other studies have not, is that they 
appeared to have assessed exposure to adversity during peak hippocampal sensitive periods 
(Andersen, et al., 2008; Pechtel, et al., 2014). Second, they also used a direct observational 
measure of supportive-hostile parenting during this time. Third, they used regression rather 
than between group comparisons, which better accounts for graded differences in exposure. 
Hence, this study appeared to be optimally designed for detecting an early effect.
Interestingly, some studies showed only significant left-sided findings, others only right 
sided and others both. Adult studies with significant left only findings predominantly 
recruited samples in which most or all subjects had no psychopathology (3/7) or PTSD (2/7). 
Adult studies with significant right only findings predominantly recruited samples with 
borderline personality disorder (BPD) (3/6) or no psychopathology (2/6). Studies with both 
right and left significant findings predominantly recruited subjects with BPD (4/10) or major 
depression (3/10). None of the studies with left only significance were based on samples 
with BPD versus 7/16 with right or right and left significance (Fisher exact, p = 0.057). 
Further, all studies that we identified that were based on BPD samples and provided separate 
right/left results had right-sided findings. This suggests a potential role of right hippocampal 
abnormalities in BPD. It may be the case that maltreatment-related alterations in right 
hippocampal development serve as a risk factor for BPD. However, there are other 
possibilities. Reduced right hippocampal volume may have been a preexisting risk factor for 
both maltreatment and development of BPD. Alternatively, BPD may arise from other 
neurobiological factors, but right hippocampal abnormalities may then emerge as a result of 
BPD symptomatology or behaviors (e.g., intense unstable relationships, suicide attempts, 
substance use). Nevertheless, this is an intriguing observation worth pursuing through 
longitudinal studies.
These studies also make a critically important point regarding potential neurobiological 
differences between maltreated and non-maltreated individuals with the same primary DSM 
or ICD diagnosis (Teicher & Samson, 2013). For example, reduced hippocampal volume is 
probably the most frequently reported neuroimaging finding in studies comparing patients 
with major depression (MDD) to healthy controls (Cole, Costafreda, McGuffin, & Fu, 
2011). However, Vythilingam et al (2002) and Opel et al (2014) reported that reduced 
hippocampal volume was restricted to the MDD subgroup with histories of maltreatment. In 
addition, any association between depression and hippocampal volume was lost once 
maltreatment was taken into account (Opel, et al., 2014; Teicher, et al., 2012). Further, 
reduced hippocampal volume has also been reported in studies of adults that include resilient 
subjects exposed to childhood maltreatment who have not developed psychopathology 
(Baker, et al., 2013; Carballedo, et al., 2012; Dannlowski, et al., 2012; Everaerd, et al., 2012; 
Gatt, et al., 2009; Samplin, et al., 2013; Teicher, et al., 2012).
Overall, maltreatment appears to exert a predominant influence on hippocampal 
development regardless of presence or absence of psychiatric disorders. Hence, 
maltreatment has likely been an insidious confound in nearly all psychiatric neuroimaging 
studies. Eight different psychiatric disorders have been associated with reduced hippocampal 
volume (Geuze, et al., 2005), and maltreatment is a major risk factor for all of these 
disorders. This suggests that the disordered group likely contained significantly more 
Teicher and Samson
Page 8
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 individuals with histories of maltreatment than the control group; seriously confounding the 
influence of psychopathology with the effects of maltreatment. Further, healthy control 
groups also contain a variable proportion of maltreated individuals, which can substantially 
contaminate the results if undetected (Shenk, Noll, Peugh, Griffin, & Bensman, 2015). If 
reduced hippocampal volume is primarily a consequence of childhood maltreatment it would 
explain why this finding has been seen across a vast array of psychiatric disorders. 
Moreover, between study differences in prevalence rates of maltreatment in clinical versus 
control groups would also explain why findings relating hippocampal volume to 
psychopathology have been inconsistent. The bottom line is that studies assessing the 
pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders need to take into account the confounding 
influence of childhood maltreatment, and claims about the role of hippocampal 
abnormalities in psychiatric disorders need to be reevaluated.
Amygdala
The amygdala is another key limbic structure that is critically involved in encoding of 
implicit emotional memories (J. E. LeDoux, 1993) and in detecting and responding to salient 
stimuli such as facial expressions and potential threats (Derntl, et al., 2009). Structural or 
functional abnormalities in the amygdala have been observed in a wide array of psychiatric 
disorders including: post-traumatic stress disorder, social phobias and specific phobias (Shin 
& Liberzon, 2010); unipolar and bipolar depression (Grotegerd, et al., 2014); drug addiction 
(Koob & Volkow, 2010); autism (Kleinhans, et al., 2010); borderline personality disorder 
(Goodman, et al., 2014) and schizophrenia (Suslow, et al., 2013).
Like the hippocampus, the amygdala has a high density of glucocorticoid receptors on 
stress-susceptible pyramidal cells (Sarrieau, et al., 1986) and a postnatal developmental 
trajectory characterized by rapid initial growth followed by more sustained growth to peak 
volumes between 9–11 years with gradual pruning thereafter (Uematsu, et al., 2012). 
Consequently, the amygdala should also be highly susceptible to exposure to early stress, 
and this vulnerability is borne out in translational studies (Caldji, Francis, Sharma, Plotsky, 
& Meaney, 2000; Eiland, Ramroop, Hill, Manley, & McEwen, 2012; Malter Cohen, et al., 
2013). Interestingly, both psychological stressors and stress hormone stimulate dendritic 
arborization and new spine formation on pyramidal cells in the amygdala, leading to an 
increase in volume (Mitra, Jadhav, McEwen, Vyas, & Chattarji, 2005; Vyas, Jadhav, & 
Chattarji, 2006), which is opposite to the effects of stress on the hippocampus. Further, 
stress-induced amygdala hypertrophy, unlike hippocampal hypothrophy, endures long after 
cessation of the stressor (Vyas, Pillai, & Chattarji, 2004).
Maltreatment-related alterations in amygdala volume should then be readily discernible 
based on these translational findings. However, that is not the case. Overall, we identified 27 
studies reporting amygdala volume findings in subjects with maltreatment histories, or who 
were reared for periods of time in an institution, or by chronically depressed mothers. Eight 
of these studies reported a significant reduction, 13 reported no significant difference, and 4 
reported a significant increase. Two studies delineated a more complex relationship, which 
will be discussed below. However, the results are not that inconsistent on deeper inspection. 
All but one of the non-significant studies that provided data on amygdala volumes (e.g., 
Teicher and Samson
Page 9
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9/10) observed a non-significant decrease, averaging 5.9% right and 5.0% left. Studies 
reporting a significant decrease (and providing volume data) reported a mean right/left 
percent reduction of 18.8% and 21.6%. Hence, the vast majority of maltreatment studies 
reported either a non-significant or significant decrease (17/21).
Studies reporting a significant increase were distinctly different from those observing some 
degree of decrease. Two studies reported results from institutionally-reared children (Mehta, 
et al., 2009; Tottenham, et al., 2010), one study reported results from children with 
chronically depressed mothers (Lupien, et al., 2011), and another reported results from a 
longitudinal sample in which 83% of the adult maltreated subjects had disturbed attachment 
bonds as infants (Pechtel, et al., 2014). Hence, increased amygdala volumes were observed 
primarily in subjects with early exposure to emotional and/or physical neglect.
In contrast, studies reporting significant reductions in amygdala volume predominantly 
evaluated adults or an older adolescent sample (6/8 studies) with exposure to multiple forms 
of maltreatment across development. Five of the eight studies also focused on subjects with 
current psychopathology (i.e., BDP (Driessen, et al., 2000) (Schmahl, et al., 2003), 
dissociative identity disorder (Vermetten, et al., 2006), major depression (Malykhin, et al., 
2012), or substance use disorders (Van Dam, Rando, Potenza, Tuit, & Sinha, 2014)). Hence, 
studies showing significant reductions in amygdala volume had, on average, much older 
participants, greater degrees of psychopathology and exposure to multiple types of abuse 
during childhood.
Recent studies by Kuo et al (2012), Whittle et al (2013) and Pechtel and colleagues (2014) 
provide potentially important insights. Kuo et al (2012) evaluated a group of 87 combat 
veterans for whom data were available on exposure to DSM-defined Criterion A traumatic 
events at or before 13 years of age. Childhood trauma was associated with a non-significant 
increase in amygdala volume and a highly significant interactive effect with degree of 
combat exposure. Subjects with childhood trauma had a progressive decrease in amygdala 
volume with increasing levels of combat experience. In contrast, amygdala volume showed 
no relationship to combat exposure in subjects without childhood trauma. Hence, early 
exposure appeared to sensitize the amygdala resulting in volume reductions with subsequent 
exposure to stress.
Whittle et al (2013) have published the only large sample longitudinal neuroimaging study 
in maltreated subjects. Imaging was obtained on 139 subjects at 12.6±0.5 years of age and 
repeated 3.8±0.2 years later (n=117). Maltreatment was associated with a non-significant 
increase in left amygdala volume at baseline. More dramatically, CTQ maltreatment scores 
were associated with a substantial effect on amygdala growth during late adolescence. 
Mediation modeling showed a robust direct suppressive effect of maltreatment on amygdala 
development. Hence, this study also provides some evidence that early exposure to 
maltreatment may increase volume but that later exposure to maltreatment results in a more 
reliable decrease in volume.
Pechtel et al (2014) provided data from a small (n = 18) group of adult subjects in which 
quality of attachment was evaluated as infants using the strange intruder paradigm. They 
Teicher and Samson
Page 10
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were compared to a group of healthy controls unexposed to any childhood adversity (n = 
33). Right and left amygdala volume was increased in the longitudinal sample. Sensitive 
period analysis using the Maltreatment and Abuse Chronology of Exposure Scale (MACE) 
(Teicher & Parigger, 2015) showed that the right amygdala was exquisitely sensitive to 
exposure to maltreatment at 10–11 years of age, and that only a modest degree of exposure 
was required to produce maximal hypertrophy. Indeed, even a few of the healthy controls, 
who fell below threshold for moderate exposure to any type of maltreatment, had sufficient 
exposure during the sensitive period to trigger hypertrophy. They also presented data from 
this sample (unpublished observation) that left amygdala volume was directly correlated (r = 
0.68) with degree of attachment disturbance at 18 months of age. The key findings from this 
study are that amygdala hypertrophy may be observable in adulthood in a sample with 
relatively low levels of exposure to adversity after childhood, and that left and right 
amygdala may have very different sensitive exposure periods.
Overall, these studies are compatible with the hypothesis that early exposure to maltreatment 
or neglect may result in an initial increase in amygdala volume, particularly noticeable 
during childhood. However, early exposure may also sensitize the amygdala to further stress 
and result in a substantial reduction in amygdala volume that would be most noticeable in 
late adolescence or adulthood. Additionally, the relationship between exposure and 
amygdala volume may be affected independently by presence or absence of 
psychopathology (Kuo, et al., 2012; Whittle, et al., 2013). The complex interplay between 
early exposure, later exposure and presence/absence of psychopathology on amygdala 
volume may provide a good explanation for between-study variability.
Cerebral Cortex - Overview
The cerebral cortex, like the hippocampus and amygdala, possesses a population of stress-
susceptible pyramidal cells with a high density of glucocoticoid receptors that peak during 
late adolescence – early adulthood (Sinclair, Webster, Wong, & Weickert, 2011). There is 
also a population of glucocorticoid receptors on glial cells that are most densely distributed 
during the neonatal period and gradually decline. This suggests that the cerebral cortex may 
have two periods of heightened stress sensitivity; one during the period from infancy to 
early childhood, and the other during the period from late-adolescence to early adulthood 
(Sarrieau, et al., 1986). Sensitivity during adolescence to early adulthood also fits with the 
protracted developmental course of prefrontal cortical regions. Sensory and motor cortical 
regions, in contrast, develop earlier (Lenroot, et al., 2009), and likely have earlier sensitive 
exposure periods. For this reason, and to foster greater clarity, we will divide our 
understanding of the potential effects of childhood maltreatment on cortical development 
into three sections. The first will focus on overall measures of cortical development that are 
not region specific. The second section will focus on development of higher-order 
association or polysensory cortex, and the third on primary and secondary sensory cortex.
Maltreatment and overall cortical development
A striking observation that emerged from the Bucharest Early Intervention Project was an 
overall 6.5% and 6.4% reduction in cortical gray and white matter volume, respectively, in 
Teicher and Samson
Page 11
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 orphans subject to early deprivation and who continued in institutional care (Sheridan, et al., 
2012). Identically reared orphans who were randomly assigned to high quality foster care 
(between 7 – 33 months of age), showed a remarkably similar 6.4% reduction in gray matter 
volume. However, white matter volume appeared to recover in the adopted group so that the 
difference between adopted and never institutionalized controls was no longer statistically 
significant. Likewise, the difference between adopted orphans and those experiencing 
continued institutional care was non-significant, suggesting an intermediate effect. These 
studies were not adjusted for differences in intracranial volume.
Similar differences can be found in unadjusted cortical gray and white matter volume 
measures from samples of children selected for exposure to physical abuse, sexual abuse or 
witnessing domestic violence (e.g., (Carrion, et al., 2001; De Bellis, et al., 1999b; De Bellis, 
et al., 2002)). For example, De Bellis et al (2002) provided unadjusted data indicating a 
4.8% and 5.9% reduction in gray and white matter volume in a childhood trauma-exposed 
subjects from a sociodemographically matched sample, which is important factor as poverty 
is also associated with attenuated cortical gray and white matter development (Luby, et al., 
2013).
It is worth noting however that maltreatment-related differences in cortical gray and white 
matter volume disappear if the data are corrected for differences in intracranial volume (De 
Bellis, et al., 1999b; De Bellis, et al., 2002). This indicates that cortical loss was 
proportional to the overall reduction in brain size. However, the reduction was not evenly 
distributed throughout the cortex, and appeared to be primarily prefrontal as indicated by a 
substantial increase in prefrontal cortex cerebrospinal fluid (De Bellis, et al., 1999b; De 
Bellis, et al., 2002). Consequently, several studies have focused on specific cortical regions, 
assessing differences in volume, thickness, surface area and gyrification.
Maltreatment and Association Cortex
We have identified 41 published studies that provide morphometric data on association or 
polysensory cortical regions in individuals with histories of childhood maltreatment, neglect 
or early deprivation. Attenuated development of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was the 
most consistent findings. These include reports of reduced ACC volume (e.g., (Baker, et al., 
2013; Cohen, et al., 2006; Thomaes, et al., 2010)), diminished thickness (Gupta, et al., 2015; 
Heim, Mayberg, Mletzko, Nemeroff, & Pruessner, 2013), and decreased N-acetylaspartate 
to creatine ratio, indicative of neuronal loss or neuronal dysfunction (De Bellis, Keshavan, 
Spencer, & Hall, 2000). Most studies reported both right and left sided reductions, though a 
few found only right-sided differences (Kitayama, Quinn, & Bremner, 2006; Tomoda, 
Suzuki, et al., 2009), and significant thinning was observed only on the left side (Gupta, et 
al., 2015; Heim, et al., 2013).
Two other portions of prefrontal cortex were reported to have reduced volume, or blood 
flow in multiple studies. Attenuated dorsolateral prefrontal cortex measures have been 
reported in subjects with borderline personality disorder (Brambilla, et al., 2004), with 
exposure to harsh corporal punishment or physical abuse (Hanson, et al., 2010; Sheu, et al., 
2010; Tomoda, Suzuki, et al., 2009), and in maltreated subjects with no psychopathology 
Teicher and Samson
Page 12
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Carballedo, et al., 2012; Edmiston, et al., 2011). Similarly, reduced gray matter volume, 
blood flow or thickness has been reported in orbitofrontal cortex of Romanian orphans 
(Chugani, et al., 2001; McLaughlin, et al., 2014), subjects with physical, sexual or 
Department of Social Services documented abuse (De Brito, et al., 2013; Hanson, et al., 
2010; Thomaes, et al., 2010) and maltreated subjects without psychopathology (Gerritsen, et 
al., 2012). Total prefrontal gray matter volume appeared to be most sensitive to 
maltreatment between 14–16 years of age (Andersen, et al., 2008).
These three portions of prefrontal cortex are believed to play an important role in decision 
making and emotional regulation. Moreover, neuroplastic changes in function and 
connectivity of these structures appears to be a critical factor in the preoccupation/
anticipation and disrupted inhibitory control components of addiction (Koob & Volkow, 
2010). Maltreatment-related alterations in these structures is but one of the ways that 
maltreatment affects the brain to enhance risk for addiction.
Sheffield et al (2013) published an important study in which they used voxel-based 
morphometry to identify differences in gray matter density in psychotic disorder patients 
with and without maltreatment and healthy controls. They found that overall gray matter 
differences correlated with degree of exposure to sexual abuse and were limited to psychotic 
disorder patients with sexual abuse. Further, they found that psychotically disordered 
patients with sexual abuse histories differed significantly from healthy controls in medial 
and inferior frontal, inferior and superior temporal, and precentral gyri as well as inferior 
parietal lobe. However, psychotically disordered patients without sexual abuse histories only 
differed significantly from controls in cerebellar gray matter volume. Psychotic disorder 
patients with versus without sexual abuse histories differed significantly in gray matter 
volume in bilateral anterior cingulate cortex and left inferior frontal gyrus.
Similarly, Kumari et al (2014) reported that group differences in anterior cingulate volume 
between patients with schizophrenia, antisocial personality disorder and healthy controls 
disappeared once history of psychosocial deprivation was taken into account. Hence, 
childhood abuse appears to exert a prepotent influence on cortical development even in 
subjects with the most severe psychiatric disorders, and efforts to identify the 
neurobiological correlates of psychopathology, as noted above, must disambiguate the 
confounding effects of abuse or neglect (Sheffield, et al., 2013). This concern is underscored 
by the observation that prefrontal cortical deficits can be reliably observed in adults with 
childhood maltreatment histories but who show no history of psychopathology (Carballedo, 
et al., 2012; Edmiston, et al., 2011; Gerritsen, et al., 2012).
Sensory Cortex, Fiber Pathways and Exposure to Specific Types of 
Maltreatment
An intriguing story has emerged from a handful of studies assessing the effects of exposure 
to a specific type of abuse in relatively homogeneous collections of subjects. The first set of 
studies focused on young adults whose history of maltreatments was limited to severe 
exposure to parental verbal abuse. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and tract-based spatial 
statistics (TBSS) were used to identify fiber tracts that differed significantly in measures of 
Teicher and Samson
Page 13
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fractional anisotropy (as an indicator of overall integrity) in verbally abused subjects versus 
healthy controls. TBSS is an unbiased global analytical technique in which all major fiber 
bundles are evaluated without preselecting a pathway of interest. Three fiber tracts were 
identified that differed significantly between exposed subjects and unexposed controls 
(Choi, et al., 2009). The most significant difference was found in the left arcuate fasciculus. 
This is a fiber tract that links the superior temporal gyrus with frontal cortex, interconnects 
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, and is critically involved in human language (Rilling, et al., 
2008). Diminished fractional anisotropy measures in this pathway were associated with 
lower verbal comprehension and verbal IQ scores (Choi, et al., 2009).
Fractional anisotropy was also reduced in the left cingulum bundle and left fornix (Choi, et 
al., 2009). The cingulum bundle supports prefrontal (cingulate), parietal, and temporal lobe 
interactions. Reduced integrity was observed specifically in the parahippocampal 
subdivision and correlated with depressive and dissociative symptoms (Choi, et al., 2009). 
Reduced FA in this tract has also been observed in adolescence at risk for psychopathology 
with exposure to physical abuse, sexual abuse or witnessing domestic violence (Huang, 
Gundapuneedi, & Rao, 2012). Although this pathway has been implicated in major 
depression, a recent paper reported that FA in the rostral, dorsal and parahippocampal 
cingulum was strongly influenced by childhood adversity, but was not influenced by 
presence or absence of major depression (Ugwu, Amico, Carballedo, Fagan, & Frodl, 2014).
Fibers forming the fornix begin in the right and left hippocampi as the fimbria, converge in 
the midline, course anteriorly and diverge near the anterior commissure. The 
precommissural portion innervates septal nuclei and nucleus accumbens, while the 
postcommissural branch innervates mammillary bodies and the anterior nucleus of the 
thalamus, which projects to cingulate cortex. Reduced integrity in the fornix in these 
subjects was associated with symptoms of anxiety and somatization (Choi, et al., 2009).
MRI scans from an overlapping group of subjects exposed repeatedly to parental verbal 
abuse but to no other forms of maltreatment were evaluated using voxel based morphometry 
(VBM) (Tomoda, et al., 2011). This is another unbiased whole brain techniques that 
identifies significant clusters of altered gray matter density without preselection of regions 
of interest. A significant cluster of increased gray matter density was found in the left 
superior temporal gyrus corresponding to primary auditory cortex (Tomoda, et al., 2011). 
Hence, these two global analytical techniques found that the most reliable correlates of 
exposure to severe parental verbal abuse were gray matter volume alterations in the left 
auditory cortex and diminished integrity of the left arcuate fasciculus language pathway.
TBSS and VBM were then used to assess the potential effects of visually witnessing 
multiple episodes of domestic violence during childhood. TBSS identified one pathway - the 
left inferior longitudinal fasciculus - that differed significantly in fractional anisotropy 
between subjects witnessing domestic violence and unexposed controls (Choi, Jeong, 
Polcari, Rohan, & Teicher, 2012). This fiber tract connects visual (occipital) and temporal 
cortex and is the key component of the visual–limbic pathway that subserves emotional, 
learning and memory functions that are modality specific to vision. More detailed analyses 
indicated that radial but not axial diffusivity was affected suggesting alterations in 
Teicher and Samson
Page 14
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 myelination. Sensitive period analysis using artificial intelligence found that this pathway 
was most vulnerable to witnessing domestic violence between 7–13 years of age (Choi, et 
al., 2012), which corresponds to peak period of rapid myelination. FA values correlated 
inversely with ratings of depression, anxiety, somatization, ‘limbic irritability’ and 
neuropsychological measures of processing speed (Choi, et al., 2012).
Tomoda et al., (2012) evaluated volumetric scans from an overlapping group of subjects 
who visually witnessed multiple episodes of domestic violence using VBM and surface-
based analyses (FreeSurfer) to delineate alterations in volume and thickness. The most 
robust difference in gray matter density was found in the right lingual gyrus (BA18). 
Thickness in this region was also reduced, as was thickness in left and right secondary visual 
cortex (V2) and left occipital pole. The lingual gyrus is an early processing component of 
the visual system involved in visual memory for shapes, faces and letters, and appears to be 
involved in nonconscious processing (e.g., processing outside of conscious awareness) 
(Slotnick & Schacter, 2006). Theses regions were maximally sensitive to exposure to 
witnessing domestic violence between 11–13 years of age (Tomoda, et al., 2012). Regional 
reductions in GMV and thickness were observed in both psychiatrically susceptible and 
resilient subjects who witnessed domestic violence. In short, visually witnessing domestic 
violence was specifically associated with alterations in gray matter volume in portions of 
visual cortex and in the pathway interconnecting visual and limbic systems.
VBM and surface-based analyses was also used to identify the potential consequences of 
exposure to multiple episodes of forced sexual abuse in young women without preselection 
of regions. Subjects in this sample were raised by non-abusive parents but experienced 
extra-familial sexual abuse, or were abuse sexually by relatives who were not part of the 
household (Tomoda, Navalta, Polcari, Sadato, & Teicher, 2009). Gray matter volume was 
markedly reduced in bilateral primary visual (V1) and visual association cortices of abused 
subjects. Extent of gray matter reduction was directly related to duration of sexual abuse 
before age 12 (Tomoda, Navalta, et al., 2009). Gray matter volume of left and right V1 
correlated with measure of visual memory. Cortical surface-based analysis indicated that 
gray matter volume of abused subjects was reduced in the right lingual gyrus (as seen in 
subjects witnessing domestic violence) and in the left fusiform and left middle occipital gyri 
(Tomoda, Navalta, et al., 2009). These are regions involved in facial recognition and 
processing (Puce, Allison, Gore, & McCarthy, 1995).
In an independent study Heim et al (2013) measured cortical thickness in a group of women 
with or without prepubertal exposure to abuse or neglect. Exposure to childhood sexual 
abuse was specifically associated with thinning of the portion of somatosensory cortex 
representing the clitoris and surrounding genital area (Heim, et al., 2013). In contrast, 
thinning in precuneus bilaterally and the left anterior and posterior cingulate cortex were 
observed in women reporting emotional abuse (Heim, et al., 2013). These regions are part of 
the default mode network and involved in self-awareness and self-referential thinking. 
Remarkably, exposure to childhood sexual abuse appeared to target gray matter volume in 
portions of visual cortex related to facial recognition and processing and thickness of 
somatosensory cortex specifically involved in processing and experiencing tactile sensations 
from the genitals.
Teicher and Samson
Page 15
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 It is compelling that unbiased analytical techniques found alterations in sensory systems and 
pathways in maltreated individuals that were specifically tied to one or two sensory 
modalities. Based on these studies we hypothesized that brain regions and fiber tracts that 
process and convey the adverse sensory input of the abuse may be specifically modified by 
this experience, particularly in subjects exposed to a single type of maltreatment. We have 
hypothesized that exposure to multiple types of maltreatment may more commonly produce 
alterations in corticolimbic regions involved in emotional processing and stress response 
(Choi, et al., 2012; Tomoda, et al., 2012). These studies provide strong support for the 
overarching hypothesis that brain changes in maltreated individuals represent modifications 
or adaptations rather than non-specific damage. Further, the close correspondence between 
type of maltreatment and associated sensory system abnormalities provides independent 
neuroimaging support for the veracity of retrospective self-report regarding type of abuse 
experienced. Heim and colleagues (Heim, et al., 2013) proposed that neuroplastic cortical 
adaptations may protectively shield a child from the sensory processing of the specific 
abusive experience. However, thinning of the somatosensory cortex may lead to the 
development of behavioral problems, such as sexual dysfunction, later in life. Similarly, 
alterations in visual-limbic and linguistic pathways and associated cortical regions may lead 
to impairments in verbal comprehension, visual recall and emotional responses to witnessed 
events.
Corpus Callosum and Additional Fiber Tracts
One of the earliest and most consistent finding in maltreated children (e.g., (De Bellis, et al., 
1999b; De Bellis, et al., 2002; Teicher, et al., 2004)) and adults (e.g., (Andersen, et al., 2008; 
Teicher, et al., 2010)) is reduced area or integrity of the corpus callosum. Significant 
reductions in area or fractional anisotropy were reported in 16 of 21 identified studies, with 
the remaining studies typically reported reductions that fell short of statistical significance.
One interesting variation was a report by Galinowski et al (2015) who assessed the 
relationship between exposure to negative life events and fractional anisotropy in a large 
sample of adolescents. They reported an increase in FA in corpus callosum segments II and 
III in resilient subjects (i.e., individuals with low risk of mental disorder despite high 
exposure to lifetime stress). However, they also observed a linear trend for corpus callosal 
FA to be greater in resilient subjects than controls, and greater in controls than susceptible 
subjects. Hence, it is possible that the nature of the response of the corpus callosum to early 
stress may play a significant role in determining psychiatric resilience. However, as this was 
a cross-sectional study other alternatives need to be considered, such as the possibility that 
increased fractional anisotropy in the corpus callosum could have been a preexisting 
protective factor.
Several studies suggest that exposure to maltreatment is associated with a 2-fold greater 
reduction in corpus callosum area in boys than girls (De Bellis & Keshavan, 2003; De 
Bellis, et al., 1999b; De Bellis, et al., 2002; Teicher, et al., 2004; Teicher, et al., 1997). We 
also reported that corpus callosal area appeared to be most susceptible to neglect in males 
and to sexual abuse in females (Teicher, et al., 2004). This may be a result of males having 
an earlier sensitive period, as neglect tends to be most harmful during infancy and early 
Teicher and Samson
Page 16
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 childhood. In contrast, likelihood of exposure to sexual abuse in females increases with age 
(Teicher & Parigger, 2015), and we reported that the midportion of the female corpus 
callosum was particularly susceptible to sexual abuse between 9–10 years of age (Andersen, 
et al., 2008). Preclinical studies have identified prominent sex differences in corpus 
callosum response to early experience (Juraska & Kopcik, 1988).
A particularly important study by Sheridan et al (Sheridan, et al., 2012) provided data on the 
potential reversibility of the effects of early neglect on the corpus callosum. Using data from 
the Bucharest Early Intervention Project, they found significant reductions in corpus callosal 
area in orphans who remained in institutional care. Corpus callosum area, however, was 
non-significantly reduced relative to controls in orphans randomly assigned at about 15 
months of age to high level foster care, suggesting either that the effects of very early 
neglect were substantially reversed, or that the corpus callosum was significantly affected by 
experiences taking place in the institutionalized group in the period between random 
assignment and scanning.
The most frequently reported reductions in corpus callosum area were in segments IV and V 
(anterior and posterior midbody) followed by segments VI and VII (isthmus and splenium). 
Maltreatment-related alterations in anterior portions (I–III, rostrum, genu and rostral body) 
have been reported in only a few studies, most notably in maltreated subjects with bipolar I 
disorder versus non-maltreated bipolar I and healthy controls (Bucker, et al., 2014) and in 
subjects with no psychopathology (Paul, et al., 2008). The greater vulnerability of central 
and posterior segments is consistent with the observation that these portions of the corpus 
callosum manifest the greatest degree of growth between 5 – 18 years of age (Luders, 
Thompson, & Toga, 2010).
The corpus callosum is the largest white matter tract and plays a critically important role in 
interhemispheric communication, particularly between contralateral cortical regions. Motor, 
somatosensory and parietal association cortices are interconnected through segments IV and 
V. Superior and inferior temporal cortices, posterior parietal cortex and occipital corticies 
are interconnected through segments VI and VII. Interestingly, IQ measures correlate most 
strongly with thickness in these corpus callosum segments, and is consistent with the finding 
that inter-hemispheric communication between these more posterior cortical regions plays 
an important role in problem solving (Luders, et al., 2007).
Reduced corpus callosal thickness has been reported in children with ADHD (Luders, et al., 
2009) and in children and adults with bipolar disorder (Arnone, McIntosh, Chandra, & 
Ebmeier, 2008; Baloch, Brambilla, & Soares, 2009). However, a study by Bucker et al 
(Bucker, et al., 2014) suggests that reduced corpus callosum thickness may be limited, at 
least initially, to bipolar patients with histories of childhood maltreatment. This possibility is 
supported by the observation of an inverse relationship between number of adverse 
childhood experiences and axial diffusivity in several fiber tracts in hospitalized bipolar 
patients, including the corpus callosum (Benedetti, et al., 2014). These studies buttress our 
concern that previously reported neuroimaging findings of differences between psychiatric 
groups and healthy controls need to be reevaluated to take into account the prepotent 
influence of maltreatment.
Teicher and Samson
Page 17
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We likely know more about the impact of abuse and neglect on the corpus callosum than 
other fiber tracts, as it is massive, readily discernible on MRI and easy to measure. The 
development of diffusion tensor imaging and tract-based spatial statistical techniques have 
made it possible to evaluate maltreatment-related differences in less prominent pathways, 
including the arcuate fasciculus, cingulum bundle, fornix and inferior longitudinal fasciculus 
discussed in the previous section. Vulnerability of two additional pathways has come to 
light.
Eluvathingal et al (2006) and Govindan et al (2010) reported that there were significant 
reductions in FA in the uncinate fasciculus of orphans exposed to about three years of early 
deprivation, and FA in this pathway correlated inversely with duration of time in the 
orphanage (Govindan, et al., 2010). The uncinate fasciculus interconnects limbic regions 
(i.e., amygdala and hippocampus) with orbitofrontal cortex, and abnormalities in the 
integrity of this pathway have been associated with a number of different psychiatric 
disorders including social anxiety disorder (Phan, et al., 2009), schizophrenia (Kawashima, 
et al., 2009), bipolar disorder (McIntosh, et al., 2008), schizotypal personality disorder 
(Gurrera, et al., 2007), major depression (de Kwaasteniet, et al., 2013) and psychopathy (M. 
C. Craig, et al., 2009). We do not know the extent to which these clinical relationships are 
confounded by exposure to neglect or early life stress. We do know that within a 
hospitalized sample of bipolar I patients that adverse childhood experiences were inversely 
associated with uncinate fasciculus integrity, suggesting that maltreatment may account for a 
substantial portion of the variance (Benedetti, et al., 2014).
Reduced integrity of the superior longitudinal fasciculus has also been reported in orphans 
with early deprivation (Govindan, et al., 2010), in adolescents exposed to physical abuse, 
sexual abuse or witnessing domestic violence (Huang, et al., 2012), and in hospitalized 
bipolar adults with childhood adversity (Benedetti, et al., 2014). This is a very long fiber 
pathway that primarily interconnects parietal and frontal cortical regions. This pathway 
conveys information regarding the spatial location of body parts, awareness of visual space 
and somatosensory information, such as language articulation, to portions of prefrontal 
cortex involved in motor planning, working memory and speech. The previously mentioned 
arcuate fasciculus, which interconnects Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas, is also considered to 
be part of this pathway. Reduced FA in the superior longitudinal fasciculus has been 
observed in children and adults with ADHD (Hamilton, et al., 2008; Wolfers, et al., 2015), 
bipolar disorder (Benedetti, et al., 2011; Frazier, et al., 2007), major depression (Lai & Wu, 
2014) and schizophrenia (Clark, et al., 2012; Melicher, et al., 2015).
Sun et al (Sun, et al., 2015) recently reported that first episode individuals with 
schizophrenia can be clustered into two groups: one with pervasive white matter deficits and 
another with deficits limited specifically to the superior longitudinal fasciculus. It would be 
interesting to know whether there is a relationship between these patient clusters and history 
of exposure to maltreatment.
Teicher and Samson
Page 18
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Striatum
Relatively few studies have reported associations between maltreatment and morphology of 
striatal regions, and the results have been inconsistent. Interest in this region will likely 
increase given the recent finding that neuroblasts generated throughout adult life in the 
lateral ventricle wall migrate specifically to the striatum and integrate as interneurons (Ernst, 
et al., 2014). Non-significant increases in caudate volume with maltreatment have been 
reported in three studies (Bremner, et al., 1997; De Bellis, et al., 1999a; De Bellis, et al., 
2002), significant decreases in two (Baker, et al., 2013; Cohen, et al., 2006), non-significant 
decreases in three (Brambilla, et al., 2004; Kumari, et al., 2013; McLaughlin, et al., 2014) 
and no difference and no apparent sensitive period in another (Pechtel, et al., 2014). 
Similarly, significantly increased putamen volumes have been reported in two studies 
(Brambilla, et al., 2004; Kumari, et al., 2013), non-significant increases in another (De 
Bellis, et al., 1999a), non-significant mixed hemispheric effects in one (De Bellis, et al., 
2002) and a non-significant decrease in a fifth study (McLaughlin, et al., 2014). An overall 
inverse correlation between CTQ scores and striatal gray matter volume (not distinguishing 
caudate from putamen) was reported by Edmiston (2011).
There are a number of possible explanations for the inconsistent findings. First, these 
regions may not be sensitive to the effects of early life stress in humans. Second, exposure to 
certain types of maltreatment at specific ages may result in an increase in volume, and at 
other times a decrease (e.g., (Walsh, et al., 2014; Whittle, et al., 2013)). Third, the effects 
may be complicated or obscured by psychopathology. Fourth, there could be unrecognized 
gender differences (Edmiston, et al., 2011). Fifth, early life stress may have a more 
discernible influence on function or connectivity than structure.
In this regard we observed a prominent increase in T2-relaxation time (an indirect and 
inverse measure of resting cerebral blood volume) in right caudate, putamen, nucleus 
accumbens and substantia nigra in young adults exposed to high levels of harsh corporal 
punishment (Sheu, et al., 2010). Further, as will be presented below, there is consistent 
evidence that maltreatment is associated with reduced anticipatory reward response in 
portions of the striatum, suggesting a consistent influence of maltreatment on function but 
not volume.
Cerebellum
Three pieces of information suggest that the cerebellum should be highly sensitive to the 
effects of early life stress. First, the cerebellum has the highest density of glucocorticoid 
receptors during the neonatal period in rats (Pavlik & Buresova, 1984) and the density of 
glucocorticoid receptors in the cerebellum of non-human primates has been reported to 
substantially exceed receptor density in the hippocampus (Sanchez, Young, Plotsky, & Insel, 
2000). Second, postnatal neurogenesis occurs in cerebellum, though during a more 
circumscribed period than in the hippocampus or striatum (Walton, 2012). Third, exposure 
to high levels of glucocorticoids during early development exerted a more persistent effect 
on cerebellar than hippocampal volume in rats (Ferguson & Holson, 1999).
Teicher and Samson
Page 19
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Few studies, however, have examined the associations between maltreatment and cerebellar 
measures. Overall, 8 of 10 identified studies reported significantly lower volume measures 
in one or more portions of the cerebellum and another study reported an increase in resting 
T2-relaxation time, corresponding to a decrease in cerebral blood volume, in the cerebellar 
vermis of women with histories of childhood sexual abuse (Anderson, Teicher, et al., 2002). 
Altogether, five studies reported significant alterations in the vermis (Anderson, Teicher, et 
al., 2002; Baldacara, et al., 2011; Carrion, et al., 2009; Hanson, et al., 2010; Walsh, et al., 
2014), which is the midsaggital portion interconnecting the two hemispheres. Six studies 
have identified significantly lower volumes in the hemispheres or the entire structure (Bauer, 
et al., 2009; De Bellis & Kuchibhatla, 2006; Edmiston, et al., 2011; Hanson, et al., 2010; 
Kumari, et al., 2013; Walsh, et al., 2014). These studies are heterogeneous with samples that 
include children exposed to physical abuse, sexual abuse or witnessing domestic violence 
with PTSD symptoms or diagnosis, adoptees from Rumania, Russia, China and other 
Eastern countries, children without psychopathology, older adolescents studied 
longitudinally, adults with histories of childhood sexual abuse, PTSD resilient and 
susceptible adults with post-childhood trauma and varying degrees of early life trauma, 
violent and non-violent adults with schizophrenia, antisocial personality disorder and 
healthy controls.
Our interest in the cerebellar vermis stems from the work of Harlow (1965) on the 
deleterious effects of maternal separation and early isolation. Mason and Berkson (1975) 
showed that the availability of a swinging wire primate surrogate greatly diminished the 
degree of psychopathology (aggression, self-stimulation) seen in adults as a result of early 
maternal deprivation. Prescott (1980) suggested that both proprioceptive and vestibular 
stimulation was protective, and this information is integrated and processed within the 
flocculus and ventral paraflocculus or the cerebellum proper and lobules IX and X of the 
cerebellar vermis (Meng, Laurens, Blazquez, & Angelaki, 2015).
Heath (Heath, 1972) found that primates reared in isolation had epileptiform EEG patterns 
in their fastigial nuclei, which project from the vermis to the limbic system and modulate 
seizure susceptibility (Cooper & Upton, 1978, 1985; Heath, 1977). Interestingly, we found a 
strong inverse relationship between resting cerebral blood volume in the vermis and 
symptoms of limbic irritability (Anderson, Teicher, et al., 2002). Based on it’s connections 
the vermis has been described as the “limbic cerebellum” (Snow, Stoesz, & Anderson, 
2015). Abnormal vermal volume measures have been reported in autism (Courchesne, 
Yeung-Courchesne, Press, Hesselink, & Jernigan, 1988), as well as in schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder, major depression and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (Baldacara, Borgio, 
Lacerda, & Jackowski, 2008). Indeed, volumetric deficits in lobules VIII-X are amongst the 
strongest morphometric findings in ADHD (Berquin, et al., 1998; Bledsoe, Semrud-
Clikeman, & Pliszka, 2009; Castellanos, et al., 2001). Further, blood flow and metabolic 
activity in the vermis is strongly affected by the stimulant drug methylphenidate (Anderson, 
Polcari, Lowen, Renshaw, & Teicher, 2002; Volkow, et al., 2003), and chronic treatment 
appears to reverse vermal abnormalities in children with ADHD (Bledsoe, et al., 2009). The 
relationship between psychopathology and cerebellar abnormalities however, needs to be 
reexamined to take into account the potential confounding effects of childhood 
maltreatment.
Teicher and Samson
Page 20
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Functional Imaging Studies
In recent years there has been a marked increase in studies using specific tasks to assess 
differences between maltreated individuals and unexposed controls in functional brain 
response. Two tasks have received the most attention. In the emotional faces paradigm, 
subjects view images of faces with different emotional expressions. Typically, subjects see 
neutral, angry, sad, fearful and sometimes happy faces. In some versions of this task they 
press a button to indicate the subject’s gender. In another version they see a relatively large 
image of a face in the upper center and two smaller images to the right and left below, and 
select the right or left image that matches the center. Button presses are intended to have 
participants focus on the task, but not to consciously identify the facial expression. Most 
studies specifically analyze the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) response of the 
amygdala to negative versus neutral images to provide information on the functional 
properties of a brain circuit involved in threat detection, evaluation and response (Ohman, 
2005; Suslow, et al., 2006).
Another substantial number of studies use the monetary incentive delay task (Knutson, 
Adams, Fong, & Hommer, 2001). Briefly, in this task subjects are given a cue regarding the 
monetary value of a trial and then following a delay perform a task to try to either receive 
the payment or avoid the anticipated loss, and then receive the results. This is a clever task 
that can provide information on reward prediction, anticipation, outcome processing, and 
consumption. There are three key features of this task. First, the ventral striatum (which 
contains the nucleus accumbens and more ventral aspects of the caudate and putamen) is 
activated proportionally to the magnitude of the anticipated gain but not loss (Knutson, 
Adams, et al., 2001). Second, received reward activates portions of the ventromedial frontal 
cortex (Knutson, Fong, Adams, Varner, & Hommer, 2001). Third, response in the dorsal 
striatum (dorsal caudate and putamen) is related to the valence (positive/negative) and the 
subject’s level of motivation (E. M. Miller, Shankar, Knutson, & McClure, 2014). Overall, 
these two tasks provide important information of the positive and negative valence system, 
and play a critical role in approach and avoidance decisions.
Threat Detection and Response
Overall, we identified nine functional imaging studies assessing response to emotional faces 
in this paradigm, and all are consistent in reporting that maltreatment is associated with 
enhanced amygdala reactivity to emotional faces. Increased amygdala activation has been 
observed in orphans who experienced care-giver deprivation (Goff, et al., 2013; Maheu, et 
al., 2010; Tottenham, et al., 2011), as well as in children exposed to either family violence 
(McCrory, et al., 2011), stressful life events (Suzuki, et al., 2014) or physical or sexual 
abuse with symptoms of post-traumatic stress (Garrett, et al., 2012). It has also been 
reported in maltreated adults with depression (Grant, Cannistraci, Hollon, Gore, & Shelton, 
2011), as well as in adults selected from the general population (Bogdan, et al., 2012) and 
resilient maltreated adults with no history of psychopathology (Dannlowski, et al., 2012).
Interestingly, brain regions and pathways involved in regulating response to threatening 
stimuli (Herman & Mueller, 2006; J. LeDoux, 1996; J. E. LeDoux, 2002; Maren, Phan, & 
Teicher and Samson
Page 21
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liberzon, 2013) overlap extensively with regions found to differ structurally in maltreated 
individuals (Teicher & Samson, 2013). These include: thalamus, visual cortex, anterior 
cingulate cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, amygdala and hippocampus. Further, 
diminished integrity has also been observed in the fiber tracts that interconnect these regions 
in subjects with histories of maltreatment. Affected pathways in this circuit include the 
inferior longitudinal fasciculus, superior longitudinal fasciculus/arcuate fasciculus, uncinate 
fasciculus, cingulum bundle and fornix. Hence, most of the previously discussed regions and 
fiber tracts turn out to be key components of this threat detection and response circuit. 
Overall, these findings fit with the hypothesis that maltreatment-related alterations can be 
best understood as adaptive modifications, which in this case lead to enhanced threat 
detection and more rapid recognition of fearful stimuli (Masten, et al., 2008). Interestingly, 
this circuit has a rapidly responsive non-conscious subcortical path and a slower conscious 
cortical path to the amygdala. Maltreatment-related alterations in sensory cortex, as noted 
above, may diminish the influence of the conscious component favoring a rapid but less 
nuanced response via the subcortical pathway.
Evidence is also emerging regarding sensitive exposure periods for a number of regions and 
pathways within this circuit. This includes the hippocampus (Andersen, et al., 2008; Pechtel, 
et al., 2014), amygdala (Pechtel, et al., 2014), prefrontal regions (Andersen, et al., 2008; 
Baker, et al., 2013), visual cortex (Tomoda, et al., 2012), and inferior longitudinal fasciculus 
(Choi, et al., 2012). Peak periods of sensitivity vary from 3–5 years of age in hippocampus 
to 14–16 years of age in prefrontal cortex (Andersen, et al., 2008), with the other 
components falling in between. Taken together, the circuit as a whole appears to be 
vulnerable throughout childhood, even though the individual parts appear to have more 
circumscribed periods of risk. This also fits with the hypothesis that enhanced threat 
detection is a highly conserved adaptive response to maltreatment that can occur regardless 
of age at the time of exposure. If this finding holds it may have important clinical 
implication, as degree of reversibility may depend on regions affected (e.g., amygdala 
versus hippocampus), and optimal treatment strategies may vary based on whether affected 
components are cortical or subcortical.
Reward Anticipation
Another consistent functional imaging finding reported in six studies is diminished BOLD 
response in the striatal regions of maltreated individuals to anticipated reward in the 
monetary incentive delay task. This finding has been observed in both children and adults 
and includes: orphans experiencing early deprivation (Mehta, et al., 2010); children with 
reactive attachment disorder (Takiguchi, et al., in press); maltreated children at high risk for 
depression (Hanson, et al., in press); a birth cohort studied as adults who experienced early 
family adversity (Boecker, et al., 2014) and adults reporting exposure to physical, sexual or 
emotional abuse (Dillon, et al., 2009).
The principal regions regulating this response are key components of the reward system and 
consist of the mesolimbic and striatal target territories of the midbrain dopamine neurons 
(Haber & Knutson, 2010). These include the anterior cingulate cortex, orbital prefrontal 
cortex, ventral striatum and ventral pallidum. Other structures regulating this circuit include 
Teicher and Samson
Page 22
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dorsal prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, thalamus, lateral habenular nucleus, and 
pedunculopontine and raphe nuclei in the brainstem (Haber & Knutson, 2010). As noted 
above, maltreatment-related morphological differences have been observed in many of these 
regions. In particular, findings of reduced volume, thickness or blood flow have been 
reported in anterior cingulate cortex (Baker, et al., 2013; Cohen, et al., 2006; Heim, et al., 
2013; Thomaes, et al., 2010), orbitofrontal cortex (Chugani, et al., 2001; Gerritsen, et al., 
2012; Hanson, et al., 2010; Thomaes, et al., 2010), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brambilla, 
et al., 2004; Carballedo, et al., 2012; Edmiston, et al., 2011; Hanson, et al., 2010; Sheu, et 
al., 2010; Tomoda, Suzuki, et al., 2009) and hippocampus (e.g., (Dannlowski, et al., 2012; 
Everaerd, et al., 2012; Opel, et al., 2014; Pagliaccio, et al., 2014; Teicher, et al., 2012)).
Interestingly, while all of the monetary incentive delay task studies showed reduced striatal 
response to anticipated reward anticipation, morphological studies focusing on the striatum 
have been inconsistent. There are two likely possibilities. First, the consistent observation of 
diminished striatal activation to reward anticipation in maltreated individuals may stem from 
molecular changes within the striatum that are not accompanied by reliable morphological 
differences (e.g., (Brake, Zhang, Diorio, Meaney, & Gratton, 2004)). Second, reduced 
striatal response may arise as a secondary consequence of alterations in other portions of the 
circuit. These same considerations also apply to the observation of enhanced amygdala 
response to threatening stimuli in maltreated individuals, which is a more consistent finding 
than maltreatment-related alterations in amygdala volume.
Reduced BOLD response to anticipated reward magnitude in the ventral striatum can also be 
construed as a potentially adaptive response. Indeed, it goes hand-in-hand with increased 
amygdala response to threat, as both may serve to tip the balance in an approach - avoidance 
conflict situation to avoidance. This shift in balance may be judicious and increase 
likelihood of survival and reproductive success (i.e., the passing of genes onto subsequent 
generations) in an environment fraught with danger. The downside is that they may also lead 
to symptoms of depression/anhedonia (Pizzagalli, et al., 2009; Wacker, Dillon, & Pizzagalli, 
2009) or anxiety (Etkin, et al., 2004; Redlich, Grotegerd, et al., 2014) and enhance risk for 
addiction (Balodis & Potenza, 2015).
Maltreatment and Network Architecture
Neuroimaging studies of maltreated individuals have predominantly focused on region of 
interest in an effort to assess differences in morphology or connectivity. While these studies 
have played a critical role in shaping our understanding of the impact of maltreatment on the 
developing brain, there is increasing recognition that the brain is organized into complex 
networks and that alterations in network architecture may provide a means to better 
understand the causes and consequences of psychopathology.
Brain network architecture is studied using techniques from social network analysis and 
graph theory (He & Evans, 2010), which have been applied to four types of networks. The 
lion share of interest has been devoted to functional connectivity networks discernible in 
resting state fMRI followed by structural connectivity networks based on diffusion tensor 
Teicher and Samson
Page 23
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 imaging of fiber tracts (He & Evans, 2010) and electrophysiological networks derived from 
electroencephalography or magnetoencephalography (van Straaten & Stam, 2013).
Interestingly, structural connectivity networks can also be delineated by studying between 
subject intraregional correlations in measures of cortical thickness or gray matter volume, as 
regions that correlate in size with each other across a large number of subjects tend to be 
interconnected through white matter tracts or functionally coupled (He & Evans, 2010). We 
employed this approach to study cortical network architecture in 256 subjects with and 
without histories of maltreatment (Teicher, Anderson, Ohashi, & Polcari, 2014). We 
evaluated a 112 node network consisting of all cortical regions and used graph theory to 
determine the central importance of each node in the maltreated and unexposed networks. 
Overall, 9 nodes differed significantly between maltreated and control subjects in two or 
more measures of central importance. The most significant differences between these 
networks were marked reductions in the centrality of the left anterior cingulate and left 
temporal pole, and increased centrality of right precuneus and right anterior insula in the 
maltreated networks (Teicher, et al., 2014).
Regions with greater centrality in the healthy control network are involved in emotional 
regulation, attention or social cognition. The anterior cingulate plays an important role in the 
regulation of emotions (Stevens, Hurley, & Taber, 2011) and monitoring of motivation, 
cognitive and motor responses in situations of potential conflict (Haber & Knutson, 2010). 
The temporal pole is involved in social cognition, especially theory of mind, in which an 
individual accurately attributes thought, intentions or beliefs to others (Ross & Olson, 2010). 
The occipital pole is the first cortical region where visual information is processed, 
conveyed to visual association cortex, and through reciprocal connections contributes to 
conscious awareness (Silvanto, Lavie, & Walsh, 2005). The rostral anterior portion of the 
middle frontal gyrus is activated by social cognition tasks, which involve self-knowledge, 
person perception and mentalizing (Amodio & Frith, 2006).
Regions with greater centrality in the maltreated network, in contrast, appear to be involved 
primarily in aspects of self-awareness. The precuneus is a major component of the posterior 
default mode network and is involved in self-referential thinking and self-centered mental 
imagery (Cavanna & Trimble, 2006). The anterior insula plays a critical role in 
interoception, providing the substrate for all subjective feelings from the body (A. D. Craig, 
2009). The anterior insula is often activated in conjunction with the anterior cingulate and 
together act as limbic sensory and motor cortices that respectively engender the feelings 
(insula) and the motivations (cingulate) that constitute emotions (A. D. Craig, 2009). Craig 
(2009) has hypothesized that the anterior insula plays a critical role in self-awareness.
Taken together the cortical network organization of maltreated individuals may result in a 
diminished capacity to regulate impulses and emotions, accurately attribute thoughts and 
intentions to others, and to be mindful of oneself in a social context. Conversely, this 
network structure may lead to a heightened experience of internal emotions and cravings 
along with a greater tendency to think about oneself and to engage in self-centered mental 
imagery. This fits with the knowledge that psychotherapies have been designed over the 
Teicher and Samson
Page 24
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 years to enhance emotional regulation, to correct misconceptions about self and others, to 
diminish focus on internal feelings and to reduce harmful self-centered thinking.
A number of other studies have emerged in recent years focusing on resting state networks 
in maltreated individuals (e.g., (Cisler, et al., 2013; Elton, et al., 2014)). The most 
comprehensive examined a high-density resting-state network in depressed patients with and 
without histories of neglect and healthy controls (Wang, et al., 2014). There were some 
overlapping network differences that distinguished both groups of depressed subjects from 
controls. However, the major finding was that depressed patients with histories of early 
neglect had much more prominent alterations in prefrontal-limbic-thalamic-cerebellar 
functional connectivity than depressed patients without histories of neglect (Wang, et al., 
2014). Marked network differences between maltreatment and non-maltreated individuals 
with the same primary diagnosis raise important questions about the relationship between 
neurobiology and psychopathology.
Ecophenotypes
We have recently summarized data that suggests that maltreated and non-maltreated 
individuals with the same primary psychiatric diagnosis are clinically, neurobiologically and 
genetically distinct. Further, we proposed that the maltreated subgroup be considered a 
unique ecophenotype and so designated diagnostically (Teicher & Samson, 2013). This 
claim is most clearly supported by neuroimaging studies that reveal the prepotent role of 
childhood maltreatment. As indicated above, reduced hippocampal volume has been 
considered an important component in the pathophysiology of major depression (Cole, et al., 
2011). However, this finding appears to be restricted to the maltreated ecophenotype 
(Chaney, et al., 2014; Opel, et al., 2014; Vythilingam, et al., 2002). Further, it is more 
directly a consequence of maltreatment than a link to depression as it is reliably observed in 
adults with histories of maltreatment but no history of depression or psychopathology 
(Baker, et al., 2013; Carballedo, et al., 2012; Dannlowski, et al., 2012; Samplin, et al., 
2013). Hence, within the maltreated ecophenotype with major depression, and other 
disorders associated with reduced hippocampal volume (Geuze, et al., 2005), a critical 
question becomes the factors determining susceptibility versus resilience (defined here as 
presence or absence of overt psychopathology in maltreated individuals) as both outcomes 
are associated in adults with reduced hippocampal volume. One possibility is that reduced 
hippocampal volume may have no particular role and emerge an incidental finding. Another 
possibility is that reduced hippocampal volume may be of major importance, but masked in 
resilient individuals by compensatory changes in other regions (e.g., (Galinowski, et al., 
2015; van der Werff, et al., 2013a)) or through alterations in molecular expression. These 
compensatory adaptations could then serve as novel therapeutic targets that may be 
exploited to counterbalance maltreatment-related hippocampal abnormalities. This line of 
research however, would have no relevance to depressed individuals unexposed to 
maltreatment, underscoring the importance of distinguishing these subtypes.
Reduced hippocampal volume is not the only neurobiological finding that distinguishes 
maltreated and non-maltreated subgroups within a diagnostic category. Hyperreactive 
amygdala response to emotional stimuli has been considered an important contributor to the 
Teicher and Samson
Page 25
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pathophysiology of mood and anxiety disorders (Mayberg, 1997; Sheline, et al., 2001; Stein, 
Simmons, Feinstein, & Paulus, 2007; Thomas, et al., 2001). However, this finding may be 
limited to the maltreated subgroup (Grant, et al., 2011) and is also discernible in maltreated 
subjects without psychopathology (Dannlowski, et al., 2012; McCrory, et al., 2011). If these 
observations are replicated it would imply that enhance amygdala reactivity to emotional 
stimuli would be relevant to susceptible and resilient individuals with histories of 
maltreatment, but not relevant to unexposed subjects with anxiety or depression.
A third major maltreatment-related finding is reduced volume of the anterior cingulate 
cortex. This region has been proposed to play an important role in major depression 
(Redlich, Almeida, et al., 2014), anxiety disorders (Shang, et al., 2014), psychotic disorders 
(Witthaus, et al., 2009) and substance abuse (Koob & Volkow, 2010). Recent studies have 
shown that reduced anterior cingulate volume may be restricted to maltreated but not non-
maltreated individuals with depression (Malykhin, et al., 2012) and psychotic disorders 
(Sheffield, et al., 2013). Further, this finding is also reliably observed in maltreated subjects 
with no history of psychopathology (Baker, et al., 2013; Carballedo, et al., 2012; Cohen, et 
al., 2006; Gerritsen, et al., 2012; Tomoda, Suzuki, et al., 2009). Hence, further research may 
indicate that volumetric abnormalities in the anterior cingulate are relevant to susceptible 
and resilient subjects with histories of maltreatment but not to psychiatrically ill subjects 
without maltreatment.
This concern may also apply to other regions and pathways that have been reported to differ 
significantly between maltreated individuals without psychopathology and healthy 
unexposed controls. The list includes: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Carballedo, et al., 
2012; Edmiston, et al., 2011; Gatt, et al., 2009; Tomoda, Suzuki, et al., 2009); occipital 
cortex (Edmiston, et al., 2011; Tomoda, Navalta, et al., 2009) and findings of decreased FA 
in portions of the corpus callosum (Paul, et al., 2008; Seckfort, et al., 2008; Teicher, et al., 
2010). In short, we believe that there is a compelling reason to subtype individuals by 
histories of maltreatment or early life stress, and that this may turn out to be one of the most 
important distinctions to be made by researchers and clinicians.
Conclusions
We set out in this review with a series of questions in mind, and have provided some 
answers. First, childhood abuse has been repeatedly found to be associated with alterations 
in brain structure and function. This is very likely a causal relationship as some identical 
regional findings can be seen in animals randomly assigned to experience early life stress 
(Teicher, Tomoda, & Andersen, 2006), and many studies have reported a clear dose-
response relationship between severity of exposure and magnitude of the neurobiological 
findings (e.g., (Dannlowski, et al., 2012; Edmiston, et al., 2011; Teicher, et al., 2012; 
Treadway, et al., 2009)). Further, results for many regions are consistent across laboratories 
and populations, and the temporal relationship is supported by the available longitudinal 
studies (Boecker, et al., 2014; Carrion, Weems, & Reiss, 2007; De Bellis, Hall, Boring, 
Frustaci, & Moritz, 2001; Walsh, et al., 2014; Whittle, et al., 2013). Hence, the primary 
maltreatment-related neuroimaging findings appear, by-in-large, to satisfy Hill’s most 
important criteria for a causal association (Hill, 1965).
Teicher and Samson
Page 26
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Second, type of maltreatment appears to matter. This is best illustrated in the studies 
showing that exposure to specific types of abuse appear to selectively target sensory systems 
and pathways that convey and process the aversive experience. On the other hand, there are 
many similar findings between studies assessing the impact of exposure to early neglect 
versus those assessing the consequence of exposure to more active forms of abuse. A few 
differences however, have been observed. Increased amygdala volume has been reported 
specifically in individuals exposed to caregiver neglect, raised with chronically depressed 
mothers, or who experienced disrupted attachments. In contrast, studies assessing effects of 
abuse have reported either significant or non-significant reductions in amygdala volume. 
Similarly, reduced hippocampal volume has been reported with good consistency in adults 
with histories of maltreatment, but has rarely been reported in subjects with early 
deprivation or neglect (negative: (Hanson, et al., 2015; Lupien, et al., 2011; Sheridan, et al., 
2012; Tottenham, et al., 2010); positive: (Mehta, et al., 2009)). However, this observation is 
confounded, as the average age of subjects in the negative neglect studies was only about 10 
years of age but 16 years of age in the positive study. Deficits in hippocampal volume are 
more reliably discerned in maltreated adolescents and adults than in prepubertal subjects. 
We also reported that corpus callosal area appeared to be most susceptible to neglect in 
males and to sexual abuse in females.
These findings show that type of maltreatment matters and they raise concerns about the 
alternative approach of counting up adverse childhood experiences to provide a simple 
composite score. If different types of maltreatment are associated with specific 
neurobiological alterations, and therefore pose risk for differing forms of psychopathology, 
then this information may prove critical in designing or selecting optimal treatments. 
Further, findings of a progressive increase in risk, symptom severity or brain change in 
association with composite exposure scores has led to the premature conclusion that the key 
factor determining outcome of early adversity is ‘cumulative burden’ (Khan, et al., 2015). 
An alternative explanation is that exposure to more types of adversity increases the risk of 
experiencing a critical type of abuse at a critical age. We have recently reported that type 
and timing of exposure provides a much better explanation regarding risk for depression in 
maltreated individuals than cumulative burden (Khan, et al., 2015).
This leads to the third point, which is that age of exposure matters. There is emerging 
evidence for sensitive exposure periods for hippocampus, amygdala, prefrontal cortex, 
occipital cortex, and inferior longitudinal fasciculus. Fourth, the temporal association 
between exposure and brain changes is unclear. Almost all of the key neuroimaging findings 
have been observed in both children and adults, suggesting that effects likely emerge with a 
few years. The notable exception pertains to reports of reduced hippocampal volume, which 
have been observed much more reliably in maltreated adults than children. This is consistent 
with the presence of a silent period between exposure and affect. Longitudinal studies 
however suggest that differences in trajectories of hippocampal development can be seen 
within a few years in maltreated children (De Bellis, et al., 2001; Luby, et al., 2013; Whittle, 
et al., 2013). A reasonable explanation is that relatively small effects of maltreatment on 
hippocampus development occur shortly after exposure and that these can be detected using 
within subject longitudinal designs. However, robust differences that can be reliably 
Teicher and Samson
Page 27
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 observed in cross-sectional studies may take many years to emerge, or may be unmasked by 
developmental alterations taking place following puberty (Andersen & Teicher, 2004).
Fifth, gender differences have been reported in several studies. Maltreatment is associated 
with a greater reduction in corpus callosum area in boys than girls. Hippocampal volume 
also appears to be more strongly affected by exposure to stress in males than females. On the 
other hand, differences in resting-state functional connectivity between anterior cingulate 
and hippocampus or amygdala may be more reliably observed in females (Herringa, et al., 
2013). Also, males and females have been reported to show different regional patterns of 
response in an emotional oddball task that used fearful faces or scrambled face distractors 
(Crozier, Wang, Huettel, & De Bellis, 2014) and in a stop signal attention task (Elton, et al., 
2014).
Sixth, many of the maltreatment-related findings appear to make sense as neuroplastic 
adaptive responses. These include alterations in auditory cortex and arcuate fasciculus in 
children experiencing verbal abuse, visual cortex and visual limbic pathway in subjects 
visually witnessing domestic violence, and thinning of genital representation area in 
somatosensory cortex of sexually abused females. Also, enhanced amygdala response to 
emotional faces, and diminished striatal response to anticipated reward also makes sense as 
adaptations that would tip the balance in approach avoidance situations toward avoidance.
Adaptive in this sense means that the alterations are experience-dependent responses to the 
environment and not simply non-specific stress-induced impairments. We need to reiterate 
the hypothesis that these alterations are adaptations to an anticipated stress-filled malevolent 
world. In a just society they will appear maladaptive and in need of treatment, just as 
adaptations that soldiers make during prolonged periods of combat may be maladaptive back 
home (B. A. van der Kolk, 2014). Childhood adversity is associated with markedly 
increased risk of teenage pregnancy (Hillis, et al., 2004), which is linked to greatly increased 
risk for subsequent pregnancies. It is also strongly associated in males with risk of 
impregnating a teen (Anda, et al., 2002) and in both men and women with having a large 
number of sexual partners (Dube, Felitti, Dong, Giles, & Anda, 2003). From a psychosocial 
and medical perspective these are troubling behaviors but can also be viewed as an adaptive 
strategy for passing on your genes in an uncertain world.
Seventh, we know little regarding the reversibility of the potential neurobiological 
consequences of childhood maltreatment. The Bucharest Early Intervention Study suggests 
that white matter abnormalities may be more reversible than gray matter abnormalities. We 
are currently conducting a trial of mindfulness meditation in maltreated young adults with 
Diane Yan and Sara Lazar. Preliminary findings have been presented showing that 
mindfulness (versus waiting list control) is associated in improvement in a hippocampal-
dependent cognitive performance measure, and with an increase in hippocampal subfield 
volumes. This will be a fruitful area for further research.
Finally, the relationship between childhood abuse, brain changes and psychiatric illness is 
perplexing. There is good evidence to suggest that some of the key neuroimaging findings 
that have been tied to psychopathology, such as reduced hippocampal and anterior cingulate 
Teicher and Samson
Page 28
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 volumes, attenuated corpus callosal area, and enhanced amygdala response to fearful faces 
may be restricted within each diagnostic group to the maltreated ecophenotype. However, 
the observation that these neuroimaging findings can also be observed in apparently resilient 
individuals with histories of maltreatment but without psychopathology raises concerns 
about the relationship between these findings and psychiatric disorders. Our best guess is 
that these morphological and functional findings play an important role in psychiatric 
symptomatology but that they may be balanced by compensatory changes in resilient 
subjects. This will also be an important focus of future studies. Another key point is that the 
high incidence of comorbid conditions and the apparent problems the field has encountered 
with categorical approaches to diagnosis may be due, at least in part, to maltreatment-related 
alterations in brain structure and function that appear to result in the same constellation of 
neurobiological alterations and a wide array of diagnoses. What is clear is that studies on the 
neurobiological basis of psychopathology must take maltreatment history into account. 
Abuse and neglect have confounded neuroimaging studies on psychopathology for the last 
30 years and may be responsible for many erroneous assumptions and conclusions.
Acknowledgments
This works was supported, in part, by awards from the US National Institute of Mental Health (5R01 MH091391) 
and National Institute on Drug Abuse (5RO1 DA017846) to MHT. All authors have declared that they have no 
competing or potential conflict of interest pertaining to the present article. This review was invited by the Editors of 
JCPP (for which the first author has been offered a small honorarium towards expenses) and has been subject to full 
external peer review. The authors would like to thank current and former members of the Developmental 
Biopsychiatry Research Program at McLean Hospital, for their efforts and insights leading to our present 
perspective.
References
Amodio DM, Frith CD. Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2006; 7(4):268–277. [PubMed: 16552413] 
Anda RF, Chapman DP, Felitti VJ, Edwards V, Williamson DF, Croft JB, et al. Adverse childhood 
experiences and risk of paternity in teen pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2002; 100(1):37–45. [PubMed: 
12100801] 
Andersen SL, Teicher MH. Delayed effects of early stress on hippocampal development. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004; 29(11):1988–1993. [PubMed: 15316569] 
Andersen SL, Teicher MH. Stress, sensitive periods and maturational events in adolescent depression. 
Trends Neurosci. 2008; 31(4):183–191. [PubMed: 18329735] 
Andersen SL, Tomoda A, Vincow ES, Valente E, Polcari A, Teicher MH. Preliminary evidence for 
sensitive periods in the effect of childhood sexual abuse on regional brain development. J 
Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2008; 20(3):292–301. [PubMed: 18806232] 
Anderson CM, Polcari A, Lowen SB, Renshaw PF, Teicher MH. Effects of methylphenidate on 
functional magnetic resonance relaxometry of the cerebellar vermis in boys with ADHD. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2002; 159(8):1322–1328. [PubMed: 12153824] 
Anderson CM, Teicher MH, Polcari A, Renshaw PF. Abnormal T2 relaxation time in the cerebellar 
vermis of adults sexually abused in childhood: potential role of the vermis in stress-enhanced risk 
for drug abuse. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2002; 27(1–2):231–244. [PubMed: 11750781] 
Arnone D, McIntosh AM, Chandra P, Ebmeier KP. Meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging 
studies of the corpus callosum in bipolar disorder. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2008; 118(5):357–362. 
[PubMed: 18644004] 
Baker LM, Williams LM, Korgaonkar MS, Cohen RA, Heaps JM, Paul RH. Impact of early vs. late 
childhood early life stress on brain morphometrics. Brain Imaging Behav. 2013; 7(2):196–203. 
[PubMed: 23247614] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 29
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Baldacara L, Borgio JG, Lacerda AL, Jackowski AP. Cerebellum and psychiatric disorders. Rev Bras 
Psiquiatr. 2008; 30(3):281–289. [PubMed: 18833430] 
Baldacara L, Jackowski AP, Schoedl A, Pupo M, Andreoli SB, Mello MF, et al. Reduced cerebellar 
left hemisphere and vermal volume in adults with PTSD from a community sample. J Psychiatr 
Res. 2011; 45(12):1627–1633. [PubMed: 21824628] 
Ball JS, Links PS. Borderline personality disorder and childhood trauma: evidence for a causal 
relationship. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2009; 11(1):63–68. [PubMed: 19187711] 
Baloch HA, Brambilla P, Soares JC. Corpus callosum abnormalities in pediatric bipolar disorder. 
Expert Rev Neurother. 2009; 9(7):949–955. [PubMed: 19589045] 
Balodis IM, Potenza MN. Anticipatory reward processing in addicted populations: a focus on the 
monetary incentive delay task. Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 77(5):434–444. [PubMed: 25481621] 
Bauer PM, Hanson JL, Pierson RK, Davidson RJ, Pollak SD. Cerebellar volume and cognitive 
functioning in children who experienced early deprivation. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 66(12):1100–
1106. [PubMed: 19660739] 
Beaver KM, Belsky J. Gene-environment interaction and the intergenerational transmission of 
parenting: testing the differential-susceptibility hypothesis. Psychiatr Q. 2012; 83(1):29–40. 
[PubMed: 21553075] 
Bendall S, Jackson HJ, Hulbert CA, McGorry PD. Childhood trauma and psychotic disorders: a 
systematic, critical review of the evidence. Schizophr Bull. 2008; 34(3):568–579. [PubMed: 
18003630] 
Benedetti F, Bollettini I, Radaelli D, Poletti S, Locatelli C, Falini A, et al. Adverse childhood 
experiences influence white matter microstructure in patients with bipolar disorder. Psychol Med. 
2014; 44(14):3069–3082. [PubMed: 25065766] 
Benedetti F, Yeh PH, Bellani M, Radaelli D, Nicoletti MA, Poletti S, et al. Disruption of white matter 
integrity in bipolar depression as a possible structural marker of illness. Biol Psychiatry. 2011; 
69(4):309–317. [PubMed: 20926068] 
Bernstein DP, Fink L, Handelsman L, Foote J, Lovejoy M, Wenzel K, et al. Initial reliability and 
validity of a new retrospective measure of child abuse and neglect. Am J Psychiatry. 1994; 151(8):
1132–1136. [PubMed: 8037246] 
Berquin PC, Giedd JN, Jacobsen LK, Hamburger SD, Krain AL, Rapoport JL, et al. Cerebellum in 
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder - a Morphometric Mri Study. Neurology. 1998; 50(4):
1087–1093. [PubMed: 9566399] 
Bledsoe J, Semrud-Clikeman M, Pliszka SR. A magnetic resonance imaging study of the cerebellar 
vermis in chronically treated and treatment-naive children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder combined type. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(7):620–624. [PubMed: 19150052] 
Boecker R, Holz NE, Buchmann AF, Blomeyer D, Plichta MM, Wolf I, et al. Impact of early life 
adversity on reward processing in young adults: EEG-fMRI results from a prospective study over 
25 years. PLoS One. 2014; 9(8):e104185. [PubMed: 25118701] 
Bogdan R, Williamson DE, Hariri AR. Mineralocorticoid receptor Iso/Val (rs5522) genotype 
moderates the association between previous childhood emotional neglect and amygdala reactivity. 
Am J Psychiatry. 2012; 169(5):515–522. [PubMed: 22407082] 
Brake WG, Zhang TY, Diorio J, Meaney MJ, Gratton A. Influence of early postnatal rearing 
conditions on mesocorticolimbic dopamine and behavioural responses to psychostimulants and 
stressors in adult rats. Eur J Neurosci. 2004; 19(7):1863–1874. [PubMed: 15078560] 
Brambilla P, Soloff PH, Sala M, Nicoletti MA, Keshavan MS, Soares JC. Anatomical MRI study of 
borderline personality disorder patients. Psychiatry Res. 2004; 131(2):125–133. [PubMed: 
15313519] 
Bremner JD, Randall P, Vermetten E, Staib L, Bronen RA, Mazure C, et al. Magnetic resonance 
imaging-based measurement of hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder related to 
childhood physical and sexual abuse–a preliminary report. Biol Psychiatry. 1997; 41(1):23–32. 
[PubMed: 8988792] 
Brown DW, Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Edwards VJ, Malarcher AM, Croft JB, et al. Adverse childhood 
experiences are associated with the risk of lung cancer: a prospective cohort study. BMC Public 
Health. 2010; 10:20. [PubMed: 20085623] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 30
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Brown DW, Anda RF, Tiemeier H, Felitti VJ, Edwards VJ, Croft JB, et al. Adverse childhood 
experiences and the risk of premature mortality. Am J Prev Med. 2009; 37(5):389–396. [PubMed: 
19840693] 
Bucker J, Muralidharan K, Torres IJ, Su W, Kozicky J, Silveira LE, et al. Childhood maltreatment and 
corpus callosum volume in recently diagnosed patients with bipolar I disorder: data from the 
Systematic Treatment Optimization Program for Early Mania (STOP-EM). J Psychiatr Res. 2014; 
48(1):65–72. [PubMed: 24183241] 
Caldji C, Francis D, Sharma S, Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ. The effects of early rearing environment on 
the development of GABAA and central benzodiazepine receptor levels and novelty-induced 
fearfulness in the rat. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2000; 22(3):219–229. [PubMed: 10693149] 
Carballedo A, Lisiecka D, Fagan A, Saleh K, Ferguson Y, Connolly G, et al. Early life adversity is 
associated with brain changes in subjects at family risk for depression. World J Biol Psychiatry. 
2012; 13(8):569–578. [PubMed: 22515408] 
Carrion VG, Weems CF, Eliez S, Patwardhan A, Brown W, Ray RD, et al. Attenuation of frontal 
asymmetry in pediatric posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2001; 50(12):943–951. 
[PubMed: 11750890] 
Carrion VG, Weems CF, Reiss AL. Stress predicts brain changes in children: a pilot longitudinal study 
on youth stress, posttraumatic stress disorder, and the hippocampus. Pediatrics. 2007; 119(3):509–
516. [PubMed: 17332204] 
Carrion VG, Weems CF, Watson C, Eliez S, Menon V, Reiss AL. Converging evidence for 
abnormalities of the prefrontal cortex and evaluation of midsagittal structures in pediatric 
posttraumatic stress disorder: an MRI study. Psychiatry Res. 2009; 172(3):226–234. [PubMed: 
19349151] 
Castellanos FX, Giedd JN, Berquin PC, Walter JM, Sharp W, Tran T, et al. Quantitative brain 
magnetic resonance imaging in girls with attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2001; 58(3):289–295. [PubMed: 11231836] 
Cavanna AE, Trimble MR. The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural 
correlates. Brain. 2006; 129(Pt 3):564–583. [PubMed: 16399806] 
Chaney A, Carballedo A, Amico F, Fagan A, Skokauskas N, Meaney J, et al. Effect of childhood 
maltreatment on brain structure in adult patients with major depressive disorder and healthy 
participants. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2014; 39(1):50–59. [PubMed: 23900024] 
Choi J, Jeong B, Polcari A, Rohan ML, Teicher MH. Reduced fractional anisotropy in the visual 
limbic pathway of young adults witnessing domestic violence in childhood. Neuroimage. 2012; 
59(2):1071–1079. [PubMed: 21985907] 
Choi J, Jeong B, Rohan ML, Polcari AM, Teicher MH. Preliminary evidence for white matter tract 
abnormalities in young adults exposed to parental verbal abuse. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(3):227–
234. [PubMed: 18692174] 
Chugani HT, Behen ME, Muzik O, Juhasz C, Nagy F, Chugani DC. Local brain functional activity 
following early deprivation: a study of postinstitutionalized Romanian orphans. Neuroimage. 
2001; 14(6):1290–1301. [PubMed: 11707085] 
Cisler JM, James GA, Tripathi S, Mletzko T, Heim C, Hu XP, et al. Differential functional 
connectivity within an emotion regulation neural network among individuals resilient and 
susceptible to the depressogenic effects of early life stress. Psychol Med. 2013; 43(3):507–518. 
[PubMed: 22781311] 
Clark K, Narr KL, O’Neill J, Levitt J, Siddarth P, Phillips O, et al. White matter integrity, language, 
and childhood onset schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2012; 138(2–3):150–156. [PubMed: 
22405729] 
Cohen RA, Grieve S, Hoth KF, Paul RH, Sweet L, Tate D, et al. Early life stress and morphometry of 
the adult anterior cingulate cortex and caudate nuclei. Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 59(10):975–982. 
[PubMed: 16616722] 
Cole J, Costafreda SG, McGuffin P, Fu CH. Hippocampal atrophy in first episode depression: a meta-
analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. J Affect Disord. 2011; 134(1–3):483–487. 
[PubMed: 21745692] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 31
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cooper IS, Upton AR. Effects of cerebellar stimulation on epilepsy, the EEG and cerebral palsy in 
man. Electroencephalography & Clinical Neurophysiology - Supplement. 1978; (34):349–354. 
[PubMed: 312191] 
Cooper IS, Upton AR. Therapeutic implications of modulation of metabolism and functional activity 
of cerebral cortex by chronic stimulation of cerebellum and thalamus. Biological Psychiatry. 1985; 
20(7):811–813. [PubMed: 3873965] 
Courchesne E, Yeung-Courchesne R, Press GA, Hesselink JR, Jernigan TL. Hypoplasia of cerebellar 
vermal lobules VI and VII in autism. N Engl J Med. 1988; 318(21):1349–1354. [PubMed: 
3367935] 
Craig AD. How do you feel–now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009; 
10(1):59–70. [PubMed: 19096369] 
Craig MC, Catani M, Deeley Q, Latham R, Daly E, Kanaan R, et al. Altered connections on the road to 
psychopathy. Mol Psychiatry. 2009; 14(10):946–953. 907. [PubMed: 19506560] 
Crozier JC, Wang L, Huettel SA, De Bellis MD. Neural correlates of cognitive and affective 
processing in maltreated youth with posttraumatic stress symptoms: does gender matter? Dev 
Psychopathol. 2014; 26(2):491–513. [PubMed: 24621958] 
Danese A, Moffitt TE, Harrington H, Milne BJ, Polanczyk G, Pariante CM, et al. Adverse childhood 
experiences and adult risk factors for age-related disease: depression, inflammation, and clustering 
of metabolic risk markers. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009; 163(12):1135–1143. [PubMed: 
19996051] 
Danese A, Pariante CM, Caspi A, Taylor A, Poulton R. Childhood maltreatment predicts adult 
inflammation in a life-course study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104(4):1319–1324. 
[PubMed: 17229839] 
Dannlowski U, Stuhrmann A, Beutelmann V, Zwanzger P, Lenzen T, Grotegerd D, et al. Limbic scars: 
long-term consequences of childhood maltreatment revealed by functional and structural magnetic 
resonance imaging. Biol Psychiatry. 2012; 71(4):286–293. [PubMed: 22112927] 
De Bellis MD, Hall J, Boring AM, Frustaci K, Moritz G. A pilot longitudinal study of hippocampal 
volumes in pediatric maltreatment-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2001; 
50(4):305–309. [PubMed: 11522266] 
de Bellis MD, Hooper SR, Spratt EG, Woolley DP. Neuropsychological findings in childhood neglect 
and their relationships to pediatric PTSD. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2009; 15(6):868–878. 
[PubMed: 19703321] 
De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS. Sex differences in brain maturation in maltreatment-related pediatric 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2003; 27(1–2):103–117. [PubMed: 
12732227] 
De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Clark DB, Casey BJ, Giedd JN, Boring AM, et al. Developmental 
traumatology. Part II: Brain development. Biol Psychiatry. 1999a; 45(10):1271–1284. [PubMed: 
10349033] 
De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Clark DB, Casey BJ, Giedd JN, Boring AM, et al. A.E. Bennett 
Research Award. Developmental traumatology. Part II: Brain development. Biol Psychiatry. 
1999b; 45(10):1271–1284. [PubMed: 10349033] 
De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Shifflett H, Iyengar S, Beers SR, Hall J, et al. Brain structures in 
pediatric maltreatment-related posttraumatic stress disorder: a sociodemographically matched 
study. Biol Psychiatry. 2002; 52(11):1066–1078. [PubMed: 12460690] 
De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Spencer S, Hall J. N-Acetylaspartate concentration in the anterior 
cingulate of maltreated children and adolescents with PTSD. Am J Psychiatry. 2000; 157(7):1175–
1177. [PubMed: 10873933] 
De Bellis MD, Kuchibhatla M. Cerebellar volumes in pediatric maltreatment-related posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 60(7):697–703. [PubMed: 16934769] 
De Brito SA, Viding E, Sebastian CL, Kelly PA, Mechelli A, Maris H, et al. Reduced orbitofrontal and 
temporal grey matter in a community sample of maltreated children. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 
2013; 54(1):105–112. [PubMed: 22880630] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 32
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 de Kwaasteniet B, Ruhe E, Caan M, Rive M, Olabarriaga S, Groefsema M, et al. Relation between 
structural and functional connectivity in major depressive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 74(1):
40–47. [PubMed: 23399372] 
Derntl B, Habel U, Windischberger C, Robinson S, Kryspin-Exner I, Gur RC, et al. General and 
specific responsiveness of the amygdala during explicit emotion recognition in females and males. 
BMC Neurosci. 2009; 10:91. [PubMed: 19653893] 
Dillon DG, Holmes AJ, Birk JL, Brooks N, Lyons-Ruth K, Pizzagalli DA. Childhood adversity is 
associated with left basal ganglia dysfunction during reward anticipation in adulthood. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2009; 66(3):206–213. [PubMed: 19358974] 
Dong M, Giles WH, Felitti VJ, Dube SR, Williams JE, Chapman DP, et al. Insights into causal 
pathways for ischemic heart disease: adverse childhood experiences study. Circulation. 2004; 
110(13):1761–1766. [PubMed: 15381652] 
Driessen M, Herrmann J, Stahl K, Zwaan M, Meier S, Hill A, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging 
volumes of the hippocampus and the amygdala in women with borderline personality disorder and 
early traumatization. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000; 57(12):1115–1122. [PubMed: 11115325] 
Dube SR, Felitti VJ, Dong M, Giles WH, Anda RF. The impact of adverse childhood experiences on 
health problems: evidence from four birth cohorts dating back to 1900. Prev Med. 2003; 37(3):
268–277. [PubMed: 12914833] 
Edmiston EE, Wang F, Mazure CM, Guiney J, Sinha R, Mayes LC, et al. Corticostriatal-limbic gray 
matter morphology in adolescents with self-reported exposure to childhood maltreatment. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2011; 165(12):1069–1077. [PubMed: 22147775] 
Eiland L, Ramroop J, Hill MN, Manley J, McEwen BS. Chronic juvenile stress produces corticolimbic 
dendritic architectural remodeling and modulates emotional behavior in male and female rats. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2012; 37(1):39–47. [PubMed: 21658845] 
Elton A, Tripathi SP, Mletzko T, Young J, Cisler JM, James GA, et al. Childhood maltreatment is 
associated with a sex-dependent functional reorganization of a brain inhibitory control network. 
Hum Brain Mapp. 2014; 35(4):1654–1667. [PubMed: 23616424] 
Eluvathingal TJ, Chugani HT, Behen ME, Juhasz C, Muzik O, Maqbool M, et al. Abnormal brain 
connectivity in children after early severe socioemotional deprivation: a diffusion tensor imaging 
study. Pediatrics. 2006; 117(6):2093–2100. [PubMed: 16740852] 
Ernst A, Alkass K, Bernard S, Salehpour M, Perl S, Tisdale J, et al. Neurogenesis in the striatum of the 
adult human brain. Cell. 2014; 156(5):1072–1083. [PubMed: 24561062] 
Etkin A, Klemenhagen KC, Dudman JT, Rogan MT, Hen R, Kandel ER, et al. Individual differences 
in trait anxiety predict the response of the basolateral amygdala to unconsciously processed fearful 
faces. Neuron. 2004; 44(6):1043–1055. [PubMed: 15603746] 
Everaerd D, Gerritsen L, Rijpkema M, Frodl T, van Oostrom I, Franke B, et al. Sex modulates the 
interactive effect of the serotonin transporter gene polymorphism and childhood adversity on 
hippocampal volume. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012; 37(8):1848–1855. [PubMed: 22434222] 
Ferguson SA, Holson RR. Neonatal dexamethasone on day 7 causes mild hyperactivity and cerebellar 
stunting. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1999; 21(1):71–76. [PubMed: 10023803] 
Frazier JA, Breeze JL, Papadimitriou G, Kennedy DN, Hodge SM, Moore CM, et al. White matter 
abnormalities in children with and at risk for bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord. 2007; 9(8):799–809. 
[PubMed: 18076529] 
Frodl T, Reinhold E, Koutsouleris N, Donohoe G, Bondy B, Reiser M, et al. Childhood stress, 
serotonin transporter gene and brain structures in major depression. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2010; 35(6):1383–1390. [PubMed: 20147891] 
Frodl T, Reinhold E, Koutsouleris N, Reiser M, Meisenzahl EM. Interaction of childhood stress with 
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex volume reduction in major depression. J Psychiatr Res. 2010; 
44(13):799–807. [PubMed: 20122698] 
Galinowski A, Miranda R, Lemaitre H, Paillere Martinot ML, Artiges E, Vulser H, et al. Resilience 
and corpus callosum microstructure in adolescence. Psychol Med. 2015:1–10.
Garrett AS, Carrion V, Kletter H, Karchemskiy A, Weems CF, Reiss A. Brain activation to facial 
expressions in youth with PTSD symptoms. Depress Anxiety. 2012; 29(5):449–459. [PubMed: 
22553009] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 33
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gatt JM, Nemeroff CB, Dobson-Stone C, Paul RH, Bryant RA, Schofield PR, et al. Interactions 
between BDNF Val66Met polymorphism and early life stress predict brain and arousal pathways 
to syndromal depression and anxiety. Mol Psychiatry. 2009; 14(7):681–695. [PubMed: 19153574] 
Gerritsen L, Tendolkar I, Franke B, Vasquez AA, Kooijman S, Buitelaar J, et al. BDNF Val66Met 
genotype modulates the effect of childhood adversity on subgenual anterior cingulate cortex 
volume in healthy subjects. Mol Psychiatry. 2012; 17(6):597–603. [PubMed: 21577214] 
Geuze E, Vermetten E, Bremner JD. MR-based in vivo hippocampal volumetrics: 2. Findings in 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Mol Psychiatry. 2005; 10(2):160–184. [PubMed: 15356639] 
Goff B, Gee DG, Telzer EH, Humphreys KL, Gabard-Durnam L, Flannery J, et al. Reduced nucleus 
accumbens reactivity and adolescent depression following early-life stress. Neuroscience. 2013; 
249:129–138. [PubMed: 23262241] 
Goodman M, Carpenter D, Tang CY, Goldstein KE, Avedon J, Fernandez N, et al. Dialectical 
behavior therapy alters emotion regulation and amygdala activity in patients with borderline 
personality disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2014; 57:108–116. [PubMed: 25038629] 
Gould F, Clarke J, Heim C, Harvey PD, Majer M, Nemeroff CB. The effects of child abuse and 
neglect on cognitive functioning in adulthood. J Psychiatr Res. 2012; 46(4):500–506. [PubMed: 
22336639] 
Govindan RM, Behen ME, Helder E, Makki MI, Chugani HT. Altered water diffusivity in cortical 
association tracts in children with early deprivation identified with Tract-Based Spatial Statistics 
(TBSS). Cereb Cortex. 2010; 20(3):561–569. [PubMed: 19546156] 
Grant MM, Cannistraci C, Hollon SD, Gore J, Shelton R. Childhood trauma history differentiates 
amygdala response to sad faces within MDD. J Psychiatr Res. 2011; 45(7):886–895. [PubMed: 
21276593] 
Green JG, McLaughlin KA, Berglund PA, Gruber MJ, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky AM, et al. Childhood 
adversities and adult psychiatric disorders in the national comorbidity survey replication I: 
associations with first onset of DSM-IV disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010; 67(2):113–123. 
[PubMed: 20124111] 
Grotegerd D, Stuhrmann A, Kugel H, Schmidt S, Redlich R, Zwanzger P, et al. Amygdala excitability 
to subliminally presented emotional faces distinguishes unipolar and bipolar depression: an fMRI 
and pattern classification study. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014; 35(7):2995–3007. [PubMed: 24038516] 
Gupta A, Labus J, Kilpatrick LA, Bonyadi M, Ashe-McNalley C, Heendeniya N, et al. Interactions of 
early adversity with stress-related gene polymorphisms impact regional brain structure in females. 
Brain Struct Funct. 2015
Gurrera RJ, Nakamura M, Kubicki M, Dickey CC, Niznikiewicz MA, Voglmaier MM, et al. The 
uncinate fasciculus and extraversion in schizotypal personality disorder: a diffusion tensor imaging 
study. Schizophr Res. 2007; 90(1–3):360–362. [PubMed: 17126532] 
Haber SN, Knutson B. The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human imaging. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35(1):4–26. [PubMed: 19812543] 
Hamilton LS, Levitt JG, O’Neill J, Alger JR, Luders E, Phillips OR, et al. Reduced white matter 
integrity in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuroreport. 2008; 19(17):1705–1708. 
[PubMed: 18841089] 
Hanson JL, Chung MK, Avants BB, Shirtcliff EA, Gee JC, Davidson RJ, et al. Early stress is 
associated with alterations in the orbitofrontal cortex: a tensor-based morphometry investigation of 
brain structure and behavioral risk. J Neurosci. 2010; 30(22):7466–7472. [PubMed: 20519521] 
Hanson JL, Hariri AR, Williamson DE. Blunted ventral striatum development in adolescence reflects 
emotional neglect and predicts depressive symptoms. Biological Psychiatry. (in press). 
Hanson JL, Nacewicz BM, Sutterer MJ, Cayo AA, Schaefer SM, Rudolph KD, et al. Behavioral 
problems after early life stress: contributions of the hippocampus and amygdala. Biol Psychiatry. 
2015; 77(4):314–323. [PubMed: 24993057] 
Harlow HF, Dodsworth RO, Harlow MK. Total social isolation in monkeys. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 1965; 54(1):90–97. [PubMed: 
4955132] 
He Y, Evans A. Graph theoretical modeling of brain connectivity. Curr Opin Neurol. 2010; 23(4):341–
350. [PubMed: 20581686] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 34
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Heath RG. Electroencephalographic studies in isolation-raised monkeys with behavioral impairment. 
Diseases of the Nervous System. 1972; 33(3):157–163. [PubMed: 4623343] 
Heath RG. Modulation of emotion with a brain pacemaker. Treatment for intractable psychiatric 
illness. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease. 1977; 165(5):300–317. [PubMed: 303280] 
Heim CM, Mayberg HS, Mletzko T, Nemeroff CB, Pruessner JC. Decreased cortical representation of 
genital somatosensory field after childhood sexual abuse. Am J Psychiatry. 2013; 170(6):616–
623. [PubMed: 23732967] 
Herman JP, Mueller NK. Role of the ventral subiculum in stress integration. Behav Brain Res. 2006; 
174(2):215–224. [PubMed: 16876265] 
Herringa RJ, Birn RM, Ruttle PL, Burghy CA, Stodola DE, Davidson RJ, et al. Childhood 
maltreatment is associated with altered fear circuitry and increased internalizing symptoms by 
late adolescence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110(47):19119–19124. [PubMed: 24191026] 
Hill AB. The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation? Proc R Soc Med. 1965; 58:295–
300. [PubMed: 14283879] 
Hillis SD, Anda RF, Dube SR, Felitti VJ, Marchbanks PA, Marks JS. The association between adverse 
childhood experiences and adolescent pregnancy, long-term psychosocial consequences, and 
fetal death. Pediatrics. 2004; 113(2):320–327. [PubMed: 14754944] 
Huang H, Gundapuneedi T, Rao U. White matter disruptions in adolescents exposed to childhood 
maltreatment and vulnerability to psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012; 37(12):
2693–2701. [PubMed: 22850736] 
Ito Y, Teicher MH, Glod CA, Ackerman E. Preliminary evidence for aberrant cortical development in 
abused children: a quantitative EEG study. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical 
Neurosciences. 1998; 10:298–307. [PubMed: 9706537] 
Ito Y, Teicher MH, Glod CA, Harper D, Magnus E, Gelbard HA. Increased prevalence of 
electrophysiological abnormalities in children with psychological, physical, and sexual abuse. 
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 1993; 5:401–408. [PubMed: 8286938] 
Juraska JM, Kopcik JR. Sex and environmental influences on the size and ultrastructure of the rat 
corpus callosum. Brain Res. 1988; 450(1–2):1–8. [PubMed: 3401704] 
Karl A, Schaefer M, Malta LS, Dorfel D, Rohleder N, Werner A. A meta-analysis of structural brain 
abnormalities in PTSD. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2006; 30(7):1004–1031. [PubMed: 16730374] 
Kawashima T, Nakamura M, Bouix S, Kubicki M, Salisbury DF, Westin CF, et al. Uncinate fasciculus 
abnormalities in recent onset schizophrenia and affective psychosis: a diffusion tensor imaging 
study. Schizophr Res. 2009; 110(1–3):119–126. [PubMed: 19328656] 
Khan A, McCormack HC, Bolger EA, McGreenery CE, Vitaliano G, Polcari A, et al. Childhood 
Maltreatment, Depression, and Suicidal Ideation: Critical Importance of Parental and Peer 
Emotional Abuse during Developmental Sensitive Periods in Males and Females. Front 
Psychiatry. 2015; 6:42. [PubMed: 25870565] 
Kitayama N, Quinn S, Bremner JD. Smaller volume of anterior cingulate cortex in abuse-related 
posttraumatic stress disorder. J Affect Disord. 2006; 90(2–3):171–174. [PubMed: 16375974] 
Kleinhans NM, Richards T, Weaver K, Johnson LC, Greenson J, Dawson G, et al. Association 
between amygdala response to emotional faces and social anxiety in autism spectrum disorders. 
Neuropsychologia. 2010; 48(12):3665–3670. [PubMed: 20655320] 
Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW, Hommer D. Anticipation of increasing monetary reward 
selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci. 2001; 21(16):RC159. [PubMed: 11459880] 
Knutson B, Fong GW, Adams CM, Varner JL, Hommer D. Dissociation of reward anticipation and 
outcome with event-related fMRI. Neuroreport. 2001; 12(17):3683–3687. [PubMed: 11726774] 
Koob GF, Volkow ND. Neurocircuitry of addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35(1):217–
238. [PubMed: 19710631] 
Kumari V, Gudjonsson GH, Raghuvanshi S, Barkataki I, Taylor P, Sumich A, et al. Reduced thalamic 
volume in men with antisocial personality disorder or schizophrenia and a history of serious 
violence and childhood abuse. Eur Psychiatry. 2013; 28(4):225–234. [PubMed: 22944337] 
Kumari V, Uddin S, Premkumar P, Young S, Gudjonsson GH, Raghuvanshi S, et al. Lower anterior 
cingulate volume in seriously violent men with antisocial personality disorder or schizophrenia 
Teicher and Samson
Page 35
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and a history of childhood abuse. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2014; 48(2):153–161. [PubMed: 
24234836] 
Kuo JR, Kaloupek DG, Woodward SH. Amygdala volume in combat-exposed veterans with and 
without posttraumatic stress disorder: a cross-sectional study. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012; 
69(10):1080–1086. [PubMed: 23026958] 
Lai CH, Wu YT. Alterations in white matter micro-integrity of the superior longitudinal fasciculus and 
anterior thalamic radiation of young adult patients with depression. Psychol Med. 2014; 44(13):
2825–2832. [PubMed: 25065445] 
Landre L, Destrieux C, Baudry M, Barantin L, Cottier JP, Martineau J, et al. Preserved subcortical 
volumes and cortical thickness in women with sexual abuse-related PTSD. Psychiatry Res. 2010; 
183(3):181–186. [PubMed: 20688488] 
LeDoux J. Emotional networks and motor control: a fearful view. Prog Brain Res. 1996; 107:437–446. 
[PubMed: 8782535] 
LeDoux JE. Emotional memory systems in the brain. Behav Brain Res. 1993; 58(1–2):69–79. 
[PubMed: 8136051] 
LeDoux, JE. Synaptic Self: how our brains become who we are. Harmondsworth, England: Viking 
Penguin; 2002. 
Lenroot RK, Schmitt JE, Ordaz SJ, Wallace GL, Neale MC, Lerch JP, et al. Differences in genetic and 
environmental influences on the human cerebral cortex associated with development during 
childhood and adolescence. Hum Brain Mapp. 2009; 30(1):163–174. [PubMed: 18041741] 
Lenze SN, Xiong C, Sheline YI. Childhood adversity predicts earlier onset of major depression but not 
reduced hippocampal volume. Psychiatry Res. 2008; 162(1):39–49. [PubMed: 18068956] 
Luby J, Belden A, Botteron K, Marrus N, Harms MP, Babb C, et al. The effects of poverty on 
childhood brain development: the mediating effect of caregiving and stressful life events. JAMA 
Pediatr. 2013; 167(12):1135–1142. [PubMed: 24165922] 
Luders E, Narr KL, Bilder RM, Thompson PM, Szeszko PR, Hamilton L, et al. Positive correlations 
between corpus callosum thickness and intelligence. Neuroimage. 2007; 37(4):1457–1464. 
[PubMed: 17689267] 
Luders E, Narr KL, Hamilton LS, Phillips OR, Thompson PM, Valle JS, et al. Decreased callosal 
thickness in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(1):84–88. 
[PubMed: 18842255] 
Luders E, Thompson PM, Toga AW. The development of the corpus callosum in the healthy human 
brain. J Neurosci. 2010; 30(33):10985–10990. [PubMed: 20720105] 
Lupien SJ, McEwen BS, Gunnar MR, Heim C. Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, 
behaviour and cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009; 10(6):434–445. [PubMed: 19401723] 
Lupien SJ, Parent S, Evans AC, Tremblay RE, Zelazo PD, Corbo V, et al. Larger amygdala but no 
change in hippocampal volume in 10-year-old children exposed to maternal depressive 
symptomatology since birth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108(34):14324–14329. [PubMed: 
21844357] 
Maheu FS, Dozier M, Guyer AE, Mandell D, Peloso E, Poeth K, et al. A preliminary study of medial 
temporal lobe function in youths with a history of caregiver deprivation and emotional neglect. 
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2010; 10(1):34–49. [PubMed: 20233954] 
Malter Cohen M, Jing D, Yang RR, Tottenham N, Lee FS, Casey BJ. Early-life stress has persistent 
effects on amygdala function and development in mice and humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013; 110(45):18274–18278. [PubMed: 24145410] 
Malykhin NV, Carter R, Hegadoren KM, Seres P, Coupland NJ. Fronto-limbic volumetric changes in 
major depressive disorder. J Affect Disord. 2012; 136(3):1104–1113. [PubMed: 22134041] 
Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I. The contextual brain: implications for fear conditioning, extinction and 
psychopathology. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013; 14(6):417–428. [PubMed: 23635870] 
Mason WA, Berkson G. Effects of maternal mobility on the development of rocking and other 
behaviors in rhesus monkeys: a study with artificial mothers. Dev Psychobiol. 1975; 8(3):197–
211. [PubMed: 820583] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 36
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Masten CL, Guyer AE, Hodgdon HB, McClure EB, Charney DS, Ernst M, et al. Recognition of facial 
emotions among maltreated children with high rates of post-traumatic stress disorder. Child 
Abuse Negl. 2008; 32(1):139–153. [PubMed: 18155144] 
Mayberg HS. Limbic-cortical dysregulation: a proposed model of depression. J Neuropsychiatry Clin 
Neurosci. 1997; 9(3):471–481. [PubMed: 9276848] 
McCrory EJ, De Brito SA, Sebastian CL, Mechelli A, Bird G, Kelly PA, et al. Heightened neural 
reactivity to threat in child victims of family violence. Current Biology. 2011; 21(23):R947–
R948. [PubMed: 22153160] 
McEwen BS. Stress, sex, and neural adaptation to a changing environment: mechanisms of neuronal 
remodeling. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010; (1204 Suppl):E38–59. [PubMed: 20840167] 
McIntosh AM, Munoz Maniega S, Lymer GK, McKirdy J, Hall J, Sussmann JE, et al. White matter 
tractography in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 64(12):1088–1092. 
[PubMed: 18814861] 
McLaughlin KA, Sheridan MA, Winter W, Fox NA, Zeanah CH, Nelson CA. Widespread reductions 
in cortical thickness following severe early-life deprivation: a neurodevelopmental pathway to 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2014; 76(8):629–638. [PubMed: 
24090797] 
Mehta MA, Golembo NI, Nosarti C, Colvert E, Mota A, Williams SC, et al. Amygdala, hippocampal 
and corpus callosum size following severe early institutional deprivation: the English and 
Romanian Adoptees study pilot. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2009; 50(8):943–951. [PubMed: 
19457047] 
Mehta MA, Gore-Langton E, Golembo N, Colvert E, Williams SC, Sonuga-Barke E. Hyporesponsive 
reward anticipation in the basal ganglia following severe institutional deprivation early in life. J 
Cogn Neurosci. 2010; 22(10):2316–2325. [PubMed: 19929329] 
Melicher T, Horacek J, Hlinka J, Spaniel F, Tintera J, Ibrahim I, et al. White matter changes in first 
episode psychosis and their relation to the size of sample studied: a DTI study. Schizophr Res. 
2015; 162(1–3):22–28. [PubMed: 25660467] 
Meng H, Laurens J, Blazquez PM, Angelaki DE. In vivo properties of cerebellar interneurons in the 
macaque caudal vestibular vermis. J Physiol. 2015; 593(1):321–330. [PubMed: 25556803] 
Miller EM, Shankar MU, Knutson B, McClure SM. Dissociating motivation from reward in human 
striatal activity. J Cogn Neurosci. 2014; 26(5):1075–1084. [PubMed: 24345173] 
Miller GE, Cole SW. Clustering of depression and inflammation in adolescents previously exposed to 
childhood adversity. Biol Psychiatry. 2012; 72(1):34–40. [PubMed: 22494534] 
Mitra R, Jadhav S, McEwen BS, Vyas A, Chattarji S. Stress duration modulates the spatiotemporal 
patterns of spine formation in the basolateral amygdala. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 
102(26):9371–9376. [PubMed: 15967994] 
Morimoto M, Morita N, Ozawa H, Yokoyama K, Kawata M. Distribution of glucocorticoid receptor 
immunoreactivity and mRNA in the rat brain: an immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization 
study. Neurosci Res. 1996; 26(3):235–269. [PubMed: 9121734] 
Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser MB. Place cells, grid cells, and the brain’s spatial representation system. 
Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:69–89. [PubMed: 18284371] 
Nadel L, Campbell J, Ryan L. Autobiographical memory retrieval and hippocampal activation as a 
function of repetition and the passage of time. Neural Plast. 2007; 2007:90472. [PubMed: 
18274617] 
Nanni V, Uher R, Danese A. Childhood maltreatment predicts unfavorable course of illness and 
treatment outcome in depression: a meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2012; 169(2):141–151. 
[PubMed: 22420036] 
National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. Excessive Stress Disrupts the Architecture of the 
Developing Brain: Working Paper #3. 2005
Norman RE, Byambaa M, De R, Butchart A, Scott J, Vos T. The long-term health consequences of 
child physical abuse, emotional abuse, and neglect: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS 
Med. 2012; 9(11):e1001349. [PubMed: 23209385] 
Ohman A. The role of the amygdala in human fear: automatic detection of threat. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005; 30(10):953–958. [PubMed: 15963650] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 37
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Opel N, Redlich R, Zwanzger P, Grotegerd D, Arolt V, Heindel W, et al. Hippocampal atrophy in 
major depression: a function of childhood maltreatment rather than diagnosis? 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014; 39(12):2723–2731. [PubMed: 24924799] 
Pagliaccio D, Luby JL, Bogdan R, Agrawal A, Gaffrey MS, Belden AC, et al. Stress-system genes and 
life stress predict cortisol levels and amygdala and hippocampal volumes in children. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014; 39(5):1245–1253. [PubMed: 24304824] 
Paul R, Henry L, Grieve SM, Guilmette TJ, Niaura R, Bryant R, et al. The relationship between early 
life stress and microstructural integrity of the corpus callosum in a non-clinical population. 
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2008; 4(1):193–201. [PubMed: 18728817] 
Pavlik A, Buresova M. The neonatal cerebellum: the highest level of glucocorticoid receptors in the 
brain. Brain Research. 1984; 314(1):13–20. [PubMed: 6697248] 
Pechtel P, Lyons-Ruth K, Anderson CM, Teicher MH. Sensitive periods of amygdala development: 
the role of maltreatment in preadolescence. Neuroimage. 2014; 97:236–244. [PubMed: 
24736182] 
Pederson CL, Maurer SH, Kaminski PL, Zander KA, Peters CM, Stokes-Crowe LA, et al. 
Hippocampal volume and memory performance in a community-based sample of women with 
posttraumatic stress disorder secondary to child abuse. J Trauma Stress. 2004; 17(1):37–40. 
[PubMed: 15027791] 
Phan KL, Orlichenko A, Boyd E, Angstadt M, Coccaro EF, Liberzon I, et al. Preliminary evidence of 
white matter abnormality in the uncinate fasciculus in generalized social anxiety disorder. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2009; 66(7):691–694. [PubMed: 19362707] 
Pizzagalli DA, Holmes AJ, Dillon DG, Goetz EL, Birk JL, Bogdan R, et al. Reduced caudate and 
nucleus accumbens response to rewards in unmedicated individuals with major depressive 
disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2009; 166(6):702–710. [PubMed: 19411368] 
Prescott JW. Somatosensory affectional deprivation (SAD) theory of drug and alcohol use. NIDA 
Research Monograph. 1980; 30:286–296. [PubMed: 6256634] 
Price LH, Kao HT, Burgers DE, Carpenter LL, Tyrka AR. Telomeres and early-life stress: an 
overview. Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 73(1):15–23. [PubMed: 22831981] 
Puce A, Allison T, Gore JC, McCarthy G. Face-sensitive regions in human extrastriate cortex studied 
by functional MRI. J Neurophysiol. 1995; 74(3):1192–1199. [PubMed: 7500143] 
Redlich R, Almeida JJ, Grotegerd D, Opel N, Kugel H, Heindel W, et al. Brain morphometric 
biomarkers distinguishing unipolar and bipolar depression. A voxel-based morphometry-pattern 
classification approach. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014; 71(11):1222–1230. [PubMed: 25188810] 
Redlich R, Grotegerd D, Opel N, Kaufmann C, Zwitserlood P, Kugel H, et al. Are you gonna leave 
me? Separation anxiety is associated with increased amygdala responsiveness and volume. Soc 
Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014
Rilling JK, Glasser MF, Preuss TM, Ma X, Zhao T, Hu X, et al. The evolution of the arcuate fasciculus 
revealed with comparative DTI. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11(4):426–428. [PubMed: 18344993] 
Ritchie K, Jaussent I, Portet F, Courtet P, Malafosse A, Maller J, et al. Depression in elderly persons 
subject to childhood maltreatment is not modulated by corpus callosum and hippocampal loss. J 
Affect Disord. 2012; 141(2–3):294–299. [PubMed: 22537685] 
Ross LA, Olson IR. Social cognition and the anterior temporal lobes. Neuroimage. 2010; 49(4):3452–
3462. [PubMed: 19931397] 
Samplin E, Ikuta T, Malhotra AK, Szeszko PR, Derosse P. Sex differences in resilience to childhood 
maltreatment: effects of trauma history on hippocampal volume, general cognition and 
subclinical psychosis in healthy adults. J Psychiatr Res. 2013; 47(9):1174–1179. [PubMed: 
23726669] 
Sanchez MM, Young LJ, Plotsky PM, Insel TR. Distribution of corticosteroid receptors in the rhesus 
brain: relative absence of glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampal formation. J Neurosci. 
2000; 20(12):4657–4668. [PubMed: 10844035] 
Sapolsky RM. Stress, Glucocorticoids, and Damage to the Nervous System: The Current State of 
Confusion. Stress. 1996; 1(1):1–19. [PubMed: 9807058] 
Sapolsky RM, Krey LC, McEwen BS. Prolonged glucocorticoid exposure reduces hippocampal neuron 
number: implications for aging. J Neurosci. 1985; 5(5):1222–1227. [PubMed: 3998818] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 38
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sarrieau A, Dussaillant M, Agid F, Philibert D, Agid Y, Rostene W. Autoradiographic localization of 
glucocorticosteroid and progesterone binding sites in the human post-mortem brain. J Steroid 
Biochem. 1986; 25(5B):717–721. [PubMed: 3807360] 
Schiffer F, Teicher MH, Papanicolaou AC. Evoked potential evidence for right brain activity during 
the recall of traumatic memories. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 1995; 
7:169–175. [PubMed: 7626959] 
Schmahl CG, Vermetten E, Elzinga BM, Bremner JD. Magnetic resonance imaging of hippocampal 
and amygdala volume in women with childhood abuse and borderline personality disorder. 
Psychiatry Research-Neuroimaging. 2003; 122(3):193–198.
Seckfort DL, Paul R, Grieve SM, Vandenberg B, Bryant RA, Williams LM, et al. Early life stress on 
brain structure and function across the lifespan: A preliminary study. Brain Imaging Behav. 
2008; 2:49–58.
Shang J, Fu Y, Ren Z, Zhang T, Du M, Gong Q, et al. The common traits of the ACC and PFC in 
anxiety disorders in the DSM-5: meta-analysis of voxel-based morphometry studies. PLoS One. 
2014; 9(3):e93432. [PubMed: 24676455] 
Sheffield JM, Williams LE, Woodward ND, Heckers S. Reduced gray matter volume in psychotic 
disorder patients with a history of childhood sexual abuse. Schizophr Res. 2013; 143(1):185–191. 
[PubMed: 23178105] 
Sheline YI, Barch DM, Donnelly JM, Ollinger JM, Snyder AZ, Mintun MA. Increased amygdala 
response to masked emotional faces in depressed subjects resolves with antidepressant treatment: 
an fMRI study. Biol Psychiatry. 2001; 50(9):651–658. [PubMed: 11704071] 
Shenk CE, Noll JG, Peugh JL, Griffin AM, Bensman HE. Contamination in the Prospective Study of 
Child Maltreatment and Female Adolescent Health. J Pediatr Psychol. 2015
Sheridan MA, Fox NA, Zeanah CH, McLaughlin KA, Nelson CA 3rd. Variation in neural 
development as a result of exposure to institutionalization early in childhood. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2012; 109(32):12927–12932. [PubMed: 22826224] 
Sheu YS, Polcari A, Anderson CM, Teicher MH. Harsh corporal punishment is associated with 
increased T2 relaxation time in dopamine-rich regions. Neuroimage. 2010; 53(2):412–419. 
[PubMed: 20600981] 
Shin LM, Liberzon I. The neurocircuitry of fear, stress, and anxiety disorders. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35(1):169–191. [PubMed: 19625997] 
Silvanto J, Lavie N, Walsh V. Double dissociation of V1 and V5/MT activity in visual awareness. 
Cereb Cortex. 2005; 15(11):1736–1741. [PubMed: 15703247] 
Sinclair D, Webster MJ, Wong J, Weickert CS. Dynamic molecular and anatomical changes in the 
glucocorticoid receptor in human cortical development. Mol Psychiatry. 2011; 16(5):504–515. 
[PubMed: 20308989] 
Slotnick SD, Schacter DL. The nature of memory related activity in early visual areas. 
Neuropsychologia. 2006; 44(14):2874–2886. [PubMed: 16901520] 
Smyke AT, Zeanah CH Jr, Fox NA, Nelson CA 3rd. A new model of foster care for young children: 
the Bucharest early intervention project. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2009; 18(3):721–
734. [PubMed: 19486847] 
Snow WM, Stoesz BM, Anderson JE. The Cerebellum in Emotional Processing: Evidence from 
Human and Non-Human Animals. AIMS Neuroscience. 2015; 1(1):96–119.
Spitzer C, Wegert S, Wollenhaupt J, Wingenfeld K, Barnow S, Grabe HJ. Gender-specific association 
between childhood trauma and rheumatoid arthritis: a case-control study. J Psychosom Res. 
2013; 74(4):296–300. [PubMed: 23497830] 
Stein MB, Koverola C, Hanna C, Torchia MG, McClarty B. Hippocampal volume in women 
victimized by childhood sexual abuse. Psychol Med. 1997; 27(4):951–959. [PubMed: 9234472] 
Stein MB, Simmons AN, Feinstein JS, Paulus MP. Increased amygdala and insula activation during 
emotion processing in anxiety-prone subjects. Am J Psychiatry. 2007; 164(2):318–327. 
[PubMed: 17267796] 
Stevens FL, Hurley RA, Taber KH. Anterior cingulate cortex: unique role in cognition and emotion. J 
Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2011; 23(2):121–125. [PubMed: 21677237] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 39
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sun H, Lui S, Yao L, Deng W, Xiao Y, Zhang W, et al. Two Patterns of White Matter Abnormalities 
in Medication-Naive Patients With First-Episode Schizophrenia Revealed by Diffusion Tensor 
Imaging and Cluster Analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015
Suslow T, Lindner C, Dannlowski U, Walhofer K, Rodiger M, Maisch B, et al. Automatic amygdala 
response to facial expression in schizophrenia: initial hyperresponsivity followed by 
hyporesponsivity. BMC Neurosci. 2013; 14:140. [PubMed: 24219776] 
Suslow T, Ohrmann P, Bauer J, Rauch AV, Schwindt W, Arolt V, et al. Amygdala activation during 
masked presentation of emotional faces predicts conscious detection of threat-related faces. Brain 
Cogn. 2006; 61(3):243–248. [PubMed: 16510224] 
Suzuki H, Luby JL, Botteron KN, Dietrich R, McAvoy MP, Barch DM. Early life stress and trauma 
and enhanced limbic activation to emotionally valenced faces in depressed and healthy children. 
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014; 53(7):800–813. e810. [PubMed: 24954829] 
Takiguchi S, Fujisawa TX, Mizushima S, Saito DN, Okamoto Y, Shimada K, et al. Ventral striatum 
dysfunction in children and adolescents with reactive attachment disorder: A functional MRI 
Study. BJPsych Open. (in press). 
Teicher MH. Wounds that time won’t heal: The neurobiology of child abuse. Cerebrum. 2000; 4(2):
50–67.
Teicher MH. Scars that won’t heal: the neurobiology of child abuse. Sci Am. 2002; 286(3):68–75. 
[PubMed: 11857902] 
Teicher MH, Andersen SL, Polcari A, Anderson CM, Navalta CP. Developmental neurobiology of 
childhood stress and trauma. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2002; 25(2):397–426. vii–viii. [PubMed: 
12136507] 
Teicher MH, Andersen SL, Polcari A, Anderson CM, Navalta CP, Kim DM. The neurobiological 
consequences of early stress and childhood maltreatment. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2003; 27(1–
2):33–44. [PubMed: 12732221] 
Teicher MH, Anderson CM, Ohashi K, Polcari A. Childhood maltreatment: altered network centrality 
of cingulate, precuneus, temporal pole and insula. Biol Psychiatry. 2014; 76(4):297–305. 
[PubMed: 24209775] 
Teicher MH, Anderson CM, Polcari A. Childhood maltreatment is associated with reduced volume in 
the hippocampal subfields CA3, dentate gyrus, and subiculum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 
109(9):E563–572. [PubMed: 22331913] 
Teicher MH, Dumont NL, Ito Y, Vaituzis C, Giedd JN, Andersen SL. Childhood neglect is associated 
with reduced corpus callosum area. Biol Psychiatry. 2004; 56(2):80–85. [PubMed: 15231439] 
Teicher MH, Glod CA, Surrey J, Swett C Jr. Early childhood abuse and limbic system ratings in adult 
psychiatric outpatients. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1993; 5(3):301–306. [PubMed: 
8369640] 
Teicher MH, Ito Y, Glod CA, Andersen SL, Dumont N, Ackerman E. Preliminary evidence for 
abnormal cortical development in physically and sexually abused children using EEG coherence 
and MRI. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1997; 821:160–175. [PubMed: 
9238202] 
Teicher MH, Parigger A. The ’Maltreatment and Abuse Chronology of Exposure’ (MACE) Scale for 
the Retrospective Assessment of Abuse and Neglect During Development. PLoS One. 2015; 
10(2):e0117423. [PubMed: 25714856] 
Teicher MH, Samson JA. Childhood maltreatment and psychopathology: A case for ecophenotypic 
variants as clinically and neurobiologically distinct subtypes. Am J Psychiatry. 2013; 170(10):
1114–1133. [PubMed: 23982148] 
Teicher MH, Samson JA, Polcari A, McGreenery CE. Sticks, stones, and hurtful words: relative effects 
of various forms of childhood maltreatment. Am J Psychiatry. 2006; 163(6):993–1000. [PubMed: 
16741199] 
Teicher MH, Samson JA, Sheu YS, Polcari A, McGreenery CE. Hurtful words: association of 
exposure to peer verbal abuse with elevated psychiatric symptom scores and corpus callosum 
abnormalities. Am J Psychiatry. 2010; 167(12):1464–1471. [PubMed: 20634370] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 40
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Teicher MH, Tomoda A, Andersen SL. Neurobiological consequences of early stress and childhood 
maltreatment: are results from human and animal studies comparable? Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006; 
1071:313–323. [PubMed: 16891580] 
Teicher MH, Vitaliano GD. Witnessing violence toward siblings: an understudied but potent form of 
early adversity. PLoS One. 2011; 6(12):e28852. [PubMed: 22216127] 
Thomaes K, Dorrepaal E, Draijer N, de Ruiter MB, van Balkom AJ, Smit JH, et al. Reduced anterior 
cingulate and orbitofrontal volumes in child abuse-related complex PTSD. J Clin Psychiatry. 
2010; 71(12):1636–1644. [PubMed: 20673548] 
Thomas KM, Drevets WC, Dahl RE, Ryan ND, Birmaher B, Eccard CH, et al. Amygdala response to 
fearful faces in anxious and depressed children. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001; 58(11):1057–1063. 
[PubMed: 11695953] 
Tomoda A, Navalta CP, Polcari A, Sadato N, Teicher MH. Childhood sexual abuse is associated with 
reduced gray matter volume in visual cortex of young women. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 66(7):642–
648. [PubMed: 19560122] 
Tomoda A, Polcari A, Anderson CM, Teicher MH. Reduced Visual Cortex Gray Matter Volume and 
Thickness in Young Adults Who Witnessed Domestic Violence during Childhood. PLoS One. 
2012; 7(12):e52528. [PubMed: 23300699] 
Tomoda A, Sheu YS, Rabi K, Suzuki H, Navalta CP, Polcari A, et al. Exposure to parental verbal 
abuse is associated with increased gray matter volume in superior temporal gyrus. Neuroimage. 
2011; 54(Suppl 1):S280–286. [PubMed: 20483374] 
Tomoda A, Suzuki H, Rabi K, Sheu YS, Polcari A, Teicher MH. Reduced prefrontal cortical gray 
matter volume in young adults exposed to harsh corporal punishment. Neuroimage. 2009; 
47(Suppl 2):T66–71. [PubMed: 19285558] 
Tottenham N, Hare TA, Millner A, Gilhooly T, Zevin JD, Casey BJ. Elevated amygdala response to 
faces following early deprivation. Dev Sci. 2011; 14(2):190–204. [PubMed: 21399712] 
Tottenham N, Hare TA, Quinn BT, McCarry TW, Nurse M, Gilhooly T, et al. Prolonged institutional 
rearing is associated with atypically large amygdala volume and difficulties in emotion 
regulation. Dev Sci. 2010; 13(1):46–61. [PubMed: 20121862] 
Treadway MT, Grant MM, Ding Z, Hollon SD, Gore JC, Shelton RC. Early adverse events, HPA 
activity and rostral anterior cingulate volume in MDD. PLoS One. 2009; 4(3):e4887. [PubMed: 
19325704] 
Tupler LA, De Bellis MD. Segmented hippocampal volume in children and adolescents with 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 59(6):523–529. [PubMed: 16199014] 
Uematsu A, Matsui M, Tanaka C, Takahashi T, Noguchi K, Suzuki M, et al. Developmental 
trajectories of amygdala and hippocampus from infancy to early adulthood in healthy individuals. 
PLoS One. 2012; 7(10):e46970. [PubMed: 23056545] 
Ugwu ID, Amico F, Carballedo A, Fagan AJ, Frodl T. Childhood adversity, depression, age and 
gender effects on white matter microstructure: a DTI study. Brain Struct Funct. 2014
Van Dam NT, Rando K, Potenza MN, Tuit K, Sinha R. Childhood maltreatment, altered limbic 
neurobiology, and substance use relapse severity via trauma-specific reductions in limbic gray 
matter volume. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014; 71(8):917–925. [PubMed: 24920451] 
van der Kolk, B.; Greenberg, MS. The psychobiology of the trauma response: Hyperarousal, 
constriction, and addiction to traumatic reexposure. In: van der Kolk, B., editor. Psychological 
Trauma. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1987. p. 63-87.
van der Kolk, BA. The body keeps the score: brain, mind and body in the healing of trauma. New 
York: Viking; 2014. 
van der Werff SJ, Pannekoek JN, Veer IM, van Tol MJ, Aleman A, Veltman DJ, et al. Resilience to 
childhood maltreatment is associated with increased resting-state functional connectivity of the 
salience network with the lingual gyrus. Child Abuse Negl. 2013a; 37(11):1021–1029. [PubMed: 
23948312] 
van der Werff SJ, Pannekoek JN, Veer IM, van Tol MJ, Aleman A, Veltman DJ, et al. Resting-state 
functional connectivity in adults with childhood emotional maltreatment. Psychol Med. 2013b; 
43(9):1825–1836. [PubMed: 23254143] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 41
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 van Harmelen AL, Hauber K, Gunther Moor B, Spinhoven P, Boon AE, Crone EA, et al. Childhood 
emotional maltreatment severity is associated with dorsal medial prefrontal cortex responsivity to 
social exclusion in young adults. PLoS One. 2014; 9(1):e85107. [PubMed: 24416347] 
van Harmelen AL, van Tol MJ, Dalgleish T, van der Wee NJ, Veltman DJ, Aleman A, et al. 
Hypoactive medial prefrontal cortex functioning in adults reporting childhood emotional 
maltreatment. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014; 9(12):2026–2033. [PubMed: 24493840] 
van Straaten EC, Stam CJ. Structure out of chaos: functional brain network analysis with EEG, MEG, 
and functional MRI. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013; 23(1):7–18. [PubMed: 23158686] 
Vermetten E, Schmahl C, Lindner S, Loewenstein RJ, Bremner JD. Hippocampal and amygdalar 
volumes in dissociative identity disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2006; 163(4):630–636. [PubMed: 
16585437] 
Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Ma Y, Fowler JS, Zhu W, Maynard L, et al. Expectation enhances the regional 
brain metabolic and the reinforcing effects of stimulants in cocaine abusers. J Neurosci. 2003; 
23(36):11461–11468. [PubMed: 14673011] 
Vyas A, Jadhav S, Chattarji S. Prolonged behavioral stress enhances synaptic connectivity in the 
basolateral amygdala. Neuroscience. 2006; 143(2):387–393. [PubMed: 16962717] 
Vyas A, Pillai AG, Chattarji S. Recovery after chronic stress fails to reverse amygdaloid neuronal 
hypertrophy and enhanced anxiety-like behavior. Neuroscience. 2004; 128(4):667–673. 
[PubMed: 15464275] 
Vythilingam M, Heim C, Newport J, Miller AH, Anderson E, Bronen R, et al. Childhood trauma 
associated with smaller hippocampal volume in women with major depression. Am J Psychiatry. 
2002; 159(12):2072–2080. [PubMed: 12450959] 
Wacker J, Dillon DG, Pizzagalli DA. The role of the nucleus accumbens and rostral anterior cingulate 
cortex in anhedonia: integration of resting EEG, fMRI, and volumetric techniques. Neuroimage. 
2009; 46(1):327–337. [PubMed: 19457367] 
Walsh ND, Dalgleish T, Lombardo MV, Dunn VJ, Van Harmelen AL, Ban M, et al. General and 
specific effects of early-life psychosocial adversities on adolescent grey matter volume. 
Neuroimage Clin. 2014; 4:308–318. [PubMed: 25061568] 
Walton RM. Postnatal neurogenesis: of mice, men, and macaques. Vet Pathol. 2012; 49(1):155–165. 
[PubMed: 21825313] 
Wang L, Dai Z, Peng H, Tan L, Ding Y, He Z, et al. Overlapping and segregated resting-state 
functional connectivity in patients with major depressive disorder with and without childhood 
neglect. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014; 35(4):1154–1166. [PubMed: 23408420] 
Whittle S, Dennison M, Vijayakumar N, Simmons JG, Yucel M, Lubman DI, et al. Childhood 
maltreatment and psychopathology affect brain development during adolescence. J Am Acad 
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013; 52(9):940–952. e941. [PubMed: 23972696] 
Witthaus H, Kaufmann C, Bohner G, Ozgurdal S, Gudlowski Y, Gallinat J, et al. Gray matter 
abnormalities in subjects at ultra-high risk for schizophrenia and first-episode schizophrenic 
patients compared to healthy controls. Psychiatry Res. 2009; 173(3):163–169. [PubMed: 
19616415] 
Wolfers T, Onnink AM, Zwiers MP, Arias-Vasquez A, Hoogman M, Mostert JC, et al. Lower white 
matter microstructure in the superior longitudinal fasciculus is associated with increased response 
time variability in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 
2015; 40(3):140154.
Woodward SH, Kuo JR, Schaer M, Kaloupek DG, Eliez S. Early adversity and combat exposure 
interact to influence anterior cingulate cortex volume in combat veterans. Neuroimage Clin. 
2013; 2:670–674. [PubMed: 24179818] 
Zhang TY, Labonte B, Wen XL, Turecki G, Meaney MJ. Epigenetic mechanisms for the early 
environmental regulation of hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor gene expression in rodents and 
humans. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013; 38(1):111–123. [PubMed: 22968814] 
Teicher and Samson
Page 42
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key Points
•
Childhood maltreatment is associated with consistent alterations in corpus 
callosum, anterior cingulate, dorsolateral prefrontal, orbitofrontal cortex and 
adult hippocampus.
•
Maltreatment is consistently associated with enhanced amygdala response to 
threatening stimuli and diminished striatal response to anticipated reward.
•
Brain regions and pathways reported to differ in maltreated individuals are 
predominantly part of circuits regulating threat detection and reward 
anticipation.
•
Exposure to single types of abuse is associated with specific alterations in 
regions and pathways that covey the aversive experience.
•
Maltreatment-associated brain changes make sense as adaptive responses to 
early adversity that can alter stress response and shift approach – avoidance 
decisions.
•
Relationships between brain changes and psychopathology are complex as these 
changes have been reported in maltreated subjects without psychopathology.
Teicher and Samson
Page 43
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
