 Separate Circuitries Encode the Hedonic and Nutritional Values 
of Sugar
Luis A. Tellez1,2, Wenfei Han1,2, Xiaobing Zhang3, Tatiana L. Ferreira1,2,4, Isaac O. Perez1, 
Sara J. Shammah-Lagnado5, Anthony N. van den Pol3, and Ivan E. de Araujo1,2,6,*
1The John B Pierce Laboratory, New Haven CT, USA
2Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven CT, USA
3Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven CT, USA
4Mathematics, Computing and Cognition Center, Federal University of ABC, Santo André SP
, 
09210, Brazil
5Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Biomedical Sciences Institute, University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo SP
, Brazil
6Department of Physiology, Yale University School of Arts and Sciences, New Haven CT, USA
Abstract
Sugar exerts its potent reinforcing effects via both gustatory and post-ingestive pathways. It is 
however unknown if sweetness and nutritional signals engage segregated brain networks to 
motivate ingestion. We show in mice that separate basal ganglia circuitries mediate the hedonic 
and nutritional actions of sugar. We found that, during sugar intake, suppressing hedonic value 
inhibited dopamine release in ventral but not dorsal striatum, whereas suppressing nutritional 
value inhibited dopamine release in dorsal but not ventral striatum. Consistently, cell-specific 
ablation of dopamine-excitable cells in dorsal, but not ventral, striatum inhibited sugar’s ability to 
drive the ingestion of unpalatable solutions. Conversely, optogenetic stimulation of dopamine-
excitable cells in dorsal, but not ventral, striatum substituted for sugar in its ability to drive the 
ingestion of unpalatable solutions. Our data demonstrate that sugar recruits a distributed 
dopamine-excitable striatal circuitry that acts to prioritize energy seeking over taste quality.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Corresponding Author: Ivan E de Araujo, The John B. Pierce Laboratory & Yale University School of Medicine, 290 Congress 
Avenue, New Haven CT 06519, USA, Phone: +1 (203) 5629901 x204, Fax: +1 (203) 6244950, ; Email: IAraujo@jbpierce.org, ; 
Email: ivan.araujo@yale.edu 
Author Contributions IEA conceived the study. IEA and LAT designed experiments. LAT, WH, and TLF performed gastrointestinal 
and stereotaxic surgeries, performed behavioural/optogenetic experiments, performed microdialysis studies, and analysed data. WH, 
SJL and TLF performed histological analysis and imaging. XG and AvdP performed whole-cell patch clamp experiments, performed 
high-res imaging of brain slices, and analysed data. IOP and LAT performed in vivo electrophysiological experiments and analysed 
data. IEA wrote manuscript. All authors actively participated in interpreting all data and in manuscript editing.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 March ; 19(3): 465–470. doi:10.1038/nn.4224.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Unlike artificial sweeteners, sugar promotes ingestive behaviour via both gustatory and post-
ingestive pathways1–4. However, the neural mechanisms mediating sugar’s dual control over 
behaviour remain elusive. Specifically, it remains unknown if gustatory and post-ingestive 
signals recruit shared or segregated neural circuitries to promote intake. Overcoming our 
incomplete understanding of how calories modify the reward value of sweet substances 
should provide novel strategies for curbing excess sugar intake4.
In the vertebrate brain, the striatal areas of the basal ganglia are crucial for selecting reward-
based actions and evaluating their outcome5–8. Within the striatum, the anatomical 
segregation between dorsal and ventral regions is an evolutionarily conserved trait9 
previously linked to dissociable behavioural functions6,10. The execution of these 
anatomically specific behavioural functions critically depends, in turn, on striatal dopamine 
signalling7,11,12. We therefore investigated whether the distinction between gustatory vs. 
post-ingestive reward reflects the anatomical specialization between ventral vs. dorsal 
dopamine-controlled striatal sectors.
Results
Taste and nutrition separately control dopamine levels
We started by monitoring dopamine release in both ventral (“VS”) and dorsal (“DS”) striatal 
sectors during the active intake of nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners. Briefly, mice 
licked a spout containing a non-caloric sweetener (i.e. sucralose), such that lick detection by 
the contact lickometer triggered intra-gastric infusions of solutions containing either 
sucralose or sugar (i.e. D-glucose). This procedure, performed concomitantly to brain 
microdialysis (Supplementary Fig. 1A–B), eliminates potential confounds associated with 
differences in taste quality/intensity between sugars and artificial sweeteners. We chose D-
glucose to model sugar ingestion due to its unvarying presence in sugared products.
We observed increased dopamine release above baseline levels in VS during sweetener 
intake, irrespective of which solution was administered intra-gastrically (Figure 1A). 
However, dopamine release in DS increased above baseline levels only when sweetener 
intake was accompanied by intra-gastric infusions of glucose (Figure 1B), suggesting 
selective sensitivity of DS-projecting dopamine cells to sugar. We thus assessed the impact 
on dopamine release produced by lessening the hedonic value of the solutions. We achieved 
this by adulterating the sucralose solution with the bitter compound denatonium benzoate. In 
these experiments, licking the sweet/bitter stimulus was always accompanied by intra-gastric 
infusions of glucose. Intriguingly, while sweetener adulteration suppressed sugar-induced 
dopamine release in VS (which did not surpass baseline levels), evoked dopamine release 
remained similarly robust, rising above baseline levels in DS (Figures 1C and 
Supplementary Fig. 1C–D). Note that sugar-induced changes in dopamine levels failed to 
rise above baseline levels in VS despite the energy content of the solutions. Thus, while 
energy per se is capable of driving dopamine release in VS3,13, taste quality gates this sugar-
induced ventral dopamine efflux14,15.
Tellez et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We then performed the reciprocal experiment by replacing (D-)glucose with its non-
metabolizable enantiomer L-glucose: In these experiments, licking the sweet stimulus was 
accompanied by intra-gastric infusions of the non-metabolizable sugar. In striking symmetry 
with the previous experiment, whereas replacing D-glucose with L-glucose suppressed 
sugar-induced dopamine release in DS (which did not surpass baseline levels), sweetness-
induced dopamine release remained similarly robust, rising above baseline levels in VS 
(Figures 1D and Supplementary Fig. 1E–F). Importantly, the observed sugar-induced 
changes in dopamine levels were not associated with licking rates per se (Supplementary 
Fig. 1G–H). In fact, intra-gastric infusions performed outside any behavioural context (i.e. in 
the absence of licking activity) produced sugar-induced increases in dopamine levels that 
were statistically indistinguishable from those observed during the behavioural sessions 
(Supplementary Fig. 1I–J). Furthermore, sugar-induced dopamine release did not require 
intra-gastric glucose to be a novel stimulus, nor did it evoke unspecific motoric activities 
(Supplementary Fig. 2). In sum, whereas taste quality regulates dopamine release in ventral 
striatum, increases in dopamine release in dorsal striatum are under strict metabolic control.
Increasing dopamine levels mimics taste and nutrition
We next analysed the functional implications of metabolism-driven dopamine release in DS. 
We found that hungry mice consume significantly more of the unpalatable solution when 
associated with intra-gastric sugar compared to intra-gastric artificial sweetener 
(Supplementary Fig. 3A–B). Consistent with a role for DS dopamine signalling in this 
phenomenon6,10,11, perfusion of either VS or DS with dopamine via reverse microdialysis 
induced robust licking of the unpalatable solution (Supplementary Fig. 3C–D). In sum, 
hungry mice endure unpalatable solutions when those are associated with gut energy 
sensing, an effect mirrored by artificially increasing extracellular dopamine levels in DS and 
VS (thereby mimicking the effects of nutrition and sweetness on dopamine release).
D1r neurones in dorsal striatum drive nutrient seeking
We next tested whether striatal dopamine signalling mediates the functional organization of 
basal ganglia pathways in terms of hedonics versus nutrition. Since dopamine increases the 
excitability of D1r-expressing neurones16,17, we specifically focused on their role in sugar 
reward. We first performed loss-of-function cell ablation studies. We achieved cell-specific 
ablation of D1r-neurones in DS or VS by virally introducing a Cre-dependent caspase into 
D1r-Cre mice. Specifically, the Cre-dependent viral construct AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp18 
was stereotaxically injected bilaterally into DS or VS of D1r-Cre mice. Non-Cre mice 
transfected with AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp were used as controls.
We first assessed the impact of cell-specific ablations on taste responses by employing brief-
access licking tests19. Test stimuli consisted of a sucralose solution mixed to increasing 
levels of the bittering agent denatonium. We found that ventrally-ablated (“VS-casp”) mice 
were significantly more impacted by the lowest concentrations of denatonium, whereas 
dorsally-ablated (“DS-casp”) mice were similar to controls (“WT-casp”, Figure 2A). Similar 
results are obtained when increasing concentrations of sweetener are used to mask bitterness 
(Supplementary Fig. 3E). We then performed the converse experiment by presenting mice 
with a fixed bitter solution, and pairing licks to increasing concentrations of intra-gastric 
Tellez et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glucose. When the concentration of the glucose infusate was low, VS-casp mice were again 
significantly more impacted by bitterness than DS-casp and WT-casp mice (Figure 2B). 
Now, upon increasing the concentration of the glucose infusate, both VS-casp and WT-casp 
control mice markedly increased responding only to reach similarly high levels; however, 
DS-casp mice failed to do so, remaining at their baseline levels (Figures 2B and 
Supplementary Fig. 3F). The lesion-specific differences then diminish upon infusions of 
more satiating intra-gastric loads (Supplementary Fig. 3F).
We inquired if the above phenomena generalizes to learned chemosensory cues by 
employing a taste-nutrient learning paradigm1,2. Naïve DS-casp, VS-casp, and WT-casp 
mice were initially tested on brief-access two-bottle preferences involving a sucralose 
solution and an unpalatable bitter/sweet mixture. Not surprisingly, all mice preferred to lick 
the sweet-only solution (Figure 2C). Next, mice were exposed to one-bottle learning 
sessions where licks for the sweet solution were paired to intra-gastric infusions of the non-
nutritive sweetener. Then, on a different day, licks for the bitter/sweet solution were paired 
to intra-gastric infusions of the nutritive glucose. Two-bottle preference tests were performed 
again on a fourth testing day. All mice markedly shifted preferences towards the unpalatable 
nutritive stimulus, except DS-casp mice, which continued to prefer the non-nutritive but 
palatable solution (Figure 2D). In sum, VS and DS D1r-neurone populations separately 
mediate the gustatory and nutritional actions of sugar. Importantly, the lesions affected 
neither licking rates nor the amounts of intra-gastric sugar infused during conditioning 
(Supplementary Fig. 3G). Neuroanatomical criteria were employed to verify the specificity 
of the lesions (Figure 2E–H; Supplementary Fig. 3H–K shows the analyses of sham lesions).
Activating D1r neurones in dorsal striatum mimics sugar
We further explored the circuit basis of the above phenomena by performing optogenetic 
gain-of-function studies. Using slice electrophysiological recordings, we confirmed 
increased excitability of mouse D1r-expressing neurones in the presence of dopamine 
(Figure 3A–B). We thus tested the hypothesis that artificial activation of D1r-neurones in DS 
would substitute for sugar during ingestion of unpalatable adulterated sweeteners. Specific 
expression of the light-sensitive Channelrhodopsin (ChR2) in D1r-neurones was achieved by 
stereotaxically injecting the Cre-dependent viral construct AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-
EYFP into the VS and DS of D1r-Cre mice20,21. Slice electrophysiological recordings 
confirmed robust excitation of D1r-neurones by 473nm laser pulses (Figures 3C and 
Supplementary Fig. 4). Cre-dependent expression of ChR2 was confirmed by 
neuroanatomical criteria (Figures 3D and Supplementary Fig. 5A–B).
During optogenetic experiments mice licked a spout containing sucralose such that detected 
licks triggered, instead of intra-gastric infusions, light pulses to VS or DS. While 
optogenetic stimulation of D1r-neurones in VS significantly enhanced sucralose licking, it 
failed to attenuate the suppressive effects produced by adulterating sucralose with 
denatonium (Figure 3E). The ability of VS stimulation to drive intake thus depends on the 
hedonic properties of the stimulus, and suggests the involvement of alternative circuits in 
intake suppression. However, stimulation of D1r-neurones in DS not only increased intake of 
sucralose, but also completely annulled the suppressive effects produced by the bitter toxin 
Tellez et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Figure 3F and Supplementary Movie 1). Importantly, this was not due to altered taste 
perception upon light activation (Supplementary Fig. 6A), or to ceiling effects 
(Supplementary Fig. 6B–E). Optical activation induced self-stimulation (Supplementary Fig. 
6F–H) but not increased locomotor activity (Supplementary Fig. 6I). Moreover, optical 
activation did not alter the animals’ sensitivity to either satiety or aversive sensory stimuli 
(Supplementary Fig. 6J–K). These data suggest that optical stimulation did not disrupt goal-
direct action by inducing unspecific insensitivity to devaluation. In sum, D1r-neurone 
stimulation in DS, but not VS, substituted for sugar in its ability to drive ingestion of 
unpalatable stimuli.
Additionally, using a conditioned taste aversion paradigm, we found that DS, but not VS, 
D1r-neurone stimulation overrode unpalatability produced by associating a novel sweetener 
(Rebaudioside A) to visceral malaise (Figure 3G). Thus, unpalatability resulting from either 
innate bitterness or learned sickness is consistently overridden by DS stimulation. 
Remarkably, such disparities in VS and DS response patterns appear to be limited to 
contexts associated with food intake: using a nose-poke-based protocol20, we found equally 
potent D1r-neurone self-stimulation in both regions (Figure 3H).
In addition to increasing excitability of striatal D1r-neurones, dopamine concomitantly 
diminishes excitability of D2r-neurones16,17. In fact, D2r-neurones cooperate with D1r-
neurones to control goal-directed actions22 and play a critical role in compulsive eating23. 
We therefore investigated the effects of optogenetically inhibiting D2r-neurones on the 
intake of both the sweet and adulterated solutions. Interestingly, inhibition of D2-neurones in 
VS slightly enhanced licking of the sweet solution without attenuating the aversive effects of 
adulteration by bitterness (Supplementary Fig. 5C). Inhibition of D2-neurones in DS, in 
contrast, did not affect licking of sweet solutions and only slightly attenuated adulteration 
effects (Supplementary Fig. 5D). Thus, unlike the case of D1r-neurone stimulation, 
unpalatability was not fully overridden by D2r-neurone inhibition. We note however that the 
above does not rule out an important role for D2r-neurones in controlling sugar ingestion. 
Future experiments must determine the effects on intake of ablating D2r-neurones in 
striatum.
D1r neurones in dorsal striatum override taste aversion
The major projections of DS D1r-neurones are to the entopeduncular nucleus and the pars 
reticulata of Substantia nigra (SNr). Because SNr is preferentially responsive to oral-facial 
movements24, this target was chosen for optic and chemogenetic manipulations. In contrast, 
a major outflow of VS D1r-neurones is directed to the ventral pallidum (VP). These DS and 
VS D1r-targets are consistent with ChR2 terminal labelling (Figure 3D). Now, because DS 
and VS D1r-neurones are GABAergic7,9, the net outcome of stimulating D1r-striatal 
neurones is the inhibition of their downstream targets25. We therefore reasoned that 
optogenetic activation of SNr and VP would counteract the effects of stimulating DS and 
VS, respectively.
Consistent with an inhibitory tone exerted by VS and DS on VP and SNr, respectively, 
optogenetic activation of VP indiscriminately suppressed sweet intake, whereas the 
inhibitory effects produced SNr activation were gated by the presence of sugar in gut 
Tellez et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Fig. 7). These results provide initial support for the concept that sugar 
stimulation of dorsal pathways drives intake independently of the dopaminergic state of 
ventral pathways.
We thus explicitly tested the hypothesis that the dorsal DS=>SNr pathway controls sugar 
intake independently of the sweetness-sensitive VS=>VP ventral pathway. We employed a 
combination of optogenetics and chemogenetics26. One group of animals was ChR2-
tranfected in VS, and optical fibres placed immediately above the D1r-neurone terminals in 
VP. A second group of animals was ChR2-tranfected in DS, and optical fibres placed 
immediately above the D1r-neurone terminals in SNr. To reversibly increase activity levels 
in the ventral output station, animals in both groups were stereotaxically injected with the 
construct AAV-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCitrine in VP (preparation illustrated in 
Supplementary Fig. 8).
In vivo neuronal activation and slice electrophysiology measures confirmed that D1r-
positive VS terminals inhibit their VP targets via GABAergic mechanisms (Supplementary 
Fig. 9). We found that, in the absence of light pulses, administering the designer drug 
clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) robustly suppressed sweetener intake in both DS and VS-
implanted animals (Figure 4A). Consistently, optogenetic activation of VS=>VP terminals 
produced an increase in sweetener intake that was blocked by activating VP with CNO 
(Figure 4B, red). However, activating VP with CNO produced no inhibitory effects on the 
robust increases in sweetener intake associated with optogenetically activating DS=>SNr 
terminals (Figure 4B, blue). Stimulation of dorsal pathways is therefore sufficient to override 
suppressive commands associated with VP activation. These effects are pathway-specific: 
when animals expressed hM3D(Gq) in SNr, CNO administration effectively inhibited 
increases in intake associated with optogenetic activation of DS=>SNr terminals (Figures 
4C). Consistent with our overall model, optogenetic activation of DS=>SNr terminals 
strongly stimulated the intake of the unpalatable bitter sugar solution, an effect partially 
blocked by CNO administration (Figure 4D). Reliable activation of hM3D(Gq)-transfected 
neurones in VP and SNr was confirmed in vivo using early gene and multi-channel 
electrophysiological measurememts (Figures 4E–F and Supplementary Figs. 10–11). 
Overall, these results reveal that the dorsal DS=>SNr pathway operates, to a large extent, 
independently of the (ventral) VS=>VP pathway.
Discussion
Our data imply a model for sugar reward where hedonic and metabolic positive controls on 
intake are encoded and mediated by separate sensorimotor circuits. We found in vertebrates 
that the dorsal, but not ventral, basal ganglia descending pathway is recruited only when 
energy is present in a sweet solution. Importantly, the activation of dorsal pathways is 
sufficient to override inhibitory signals generated by ventral pathways during the ingestion 
of aversive substances. Such circuit logic implemented in the striatum allows the organism 
to prioritize energy seeking over sensory quality.
This general trait appears to be conserved in invertebrates: Drosophila flies favour 
metabolizable over non-metabolizable sugars independently of sweet receptor activity27. 
Tellez et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Consistently, dopaminergic signalling mediates the ability of Drosophila to determine the 
nutritional value of sweet tastes28, to the extent that separate dopamine neurones mediate the 
mnemonic encoding of gustatory and nutritional cues29. The separation of gustatory and 
post-ingestive reinforcement at the dopaminergic circuitry level thus emerges as an 
evolutionary conserved trait affecting both vertebrate and invertebrates.
We found that this dopaminergic circuitry responds to intra-gastric infusions of sugar 
independently of any behavioural requirements (Supplementary Figure 1I–J). The question 
thus arises of how dopamine receptor signalling may assign “value” to the sugar stimulus. 
To resolve this apparent inconsistency, we first define the equivocal term “value”30. We 
interpret “value” as a stimulus property whose detection by the nervous system is sufficient 
to alter the probability of subsequent responding to this stimulus. The assignment of 
hedonic/nutritional “value” to the sugar stimulus is thus operationally defined by the 
augmenting effect of gustatory/post-ingestive signals on the probability of responding. This 
is functionally equivalent to the standard interpretation of “value” in behavioral 
neuroscience, where the term refers to the motivating properties of a stimulus for 
instrumental action30. Consistently, we found that while gut-induced dopamine release 
constitutes a physiological reflex, such reflex alters the probability of responding by 
recruiting downstream dopamine-excitable cells in striatum (Figures 2,3). This gut-triggered 
mechanism thereby supports the assignment of “value” to sweet solutions. The same effect 
promptly extends to Pavlovian values30, as demonstrated by taste-nutrient conditioning 
studies (Figure 2C–D). Overall, nigrostriatal dopamine cells may be conceptualized as 
sensorimotor interneurons linking physiological nutrient sensing to the assignment of 
“value” to goal-directed actions and sensory stimuli.
At least one fundamental issue remains nonetheless unaddressed. According to the model 
delineated above, nutritional control over intake must ultimately translate into oral-motor 
consummatory patterns. Our studies support a mechanism via which, upon sugar intake, 
metabolic cues act on D1r-expressing neurones in dorsal striatum to selectively bias goal-
directed action. We postulate that this is achieved via the release of brainstem oral-motor 
centres from tonic inhibition by SNr25. Our model specifically predicts that the descending 
pathway from SNr to the premotor reticular formation31 links nutrient sensing in basal 
ganglia to the execution of feeding motor programs (Supplementary Fig. 12). Future 
research must determine the molecular identity of the circuitry that links energy sensing in 
forebrain to the motor central pattern generators implemented in brainstem.
METHODS
Subjects
A total of 170 adult male mice were used, including 74 C57BL6/J wild-type mice, 68 D1-
dopamine receptor Cre-recombinase male mice (Drd1a-cre+, strain EY262, Gensat), 12 D2-
dopamine receptor Cre-recombinase mice (B6.FVB(Cg)-Tg(Drd2-cre)ER44Gsat/Mmcd, 
Gensat) and 16 Ai32 mice (B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm32(CAG-COP4*H134R/EYFP)Hze/J, 
Jackson Laboratory). At the time of experiments animals were 8–20 weeks old, and had no 
previous experiences with any of the experimental conditions. All animals were group 
housed (<4 cage) previous to the beginning of experimental sessions. After randomized 
Tellez et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 assignment to an experimental group, all animals were housed individually. Animals were 
housed under a 6AM/6PM light/dark cycle. Experiments were performed consistently 
between 4PM-12AM to maximize motivation for feeding behaviour. Each individual animal 
was exposed to one single experimental group. All experiments were conducted in 
accordance with the J.B. Pierce Laboratory and Yale University regulations on usage of 
animals in research.
Surgical procedures
Gastric catheter implantation—Once animals had been anaesthetized with an I.P. 
injection of a ketamine/xylazine (100/15 mg kg−1), a midline incision was made into the 
abdomen. The stomach was exteriorized through the midline incision and a purse string 
suture was placed in its non-glandular region, into which the tip of MicroRenathane tubing 
(Braintree Scientific Inc., Braintree, MA, USA) was inserted. The purse string was tightened 
around the tubing, which was then tunnelled subcutaneously to the dorsum via a small hole 
made into the abdominal muscle; a small incision to the dorsum between the shoulder plates 
was then made to allow for catheter exteriorization. Incisions were sutured and thoroughly 
disinfected and the exterior end of the catheter was plugged.
Microdialysis guiding cannulae implantation—For animals used in the microdialysis 
experiments, anesthesia was induced with I.P. injection of a ketamine/xylazine (100/15 mg 
kg−1) and the mouse was placed on a stereotaxic apparatus (David Kopf, Tujunga, CA, 
USA) under constant flow of 1% isoflurane anaesthesia (1.5 l min−1). For the dorsal striatal 
region a circular craniotomy was drilled at AP = 1.0 mm and ML =±1.7 mm implantation of 
a guide cannulae (DV = −2.0 mm from skull surface) for posterior insertion of a 
microdialysis probe whose exposed dialysis membrane was 2mm high; for the ventral 
striatal region a circular craniotomy was drilled at AP = 1.5 mm and ML =±0.6 mm 
implantation of a guide cannulae (DV = −4.0 mm from skull surface) for posterior insertion 
of a microdialysis probe whose exposed dialysis membrane was 1mm high.
Viral delivery of transgenes—Adeno-associated viruses (AAVs, serotype 5, University 
of North Carolina Vector Core) carrying genes of interest were obtained from the University 
of North Carolina Vector Core Services. All injections were bilateral into the structure of 
interest. For Cre-dependent transfection with the blue light-sensitive ion channel 
channelrhodopsin (ChR2), the construct AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP was used. 
For Cre-dependent transfection with a green light-sensitive archeorhodopsin (eArch3.0), the 
construct AAV-EF1a-DIO-eArch3.0-EYFP was used. For combination with chemogenetic 
stimulation (DREADDs), AAV-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCitrine was also injected in 
the relevant site and receptors activated by clozapine-N-oxide at 1mg/kg ip. Control animals 
were of the corresponding strain, transfected with a light-insensitive Cre-dependent ion 
channel (AAV-hSyn-DIO-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCitrine). For Cre-dependent caspase-
mediated ablation of dopamine-excitable neurons in striatum, the Cre-dependent viral 
construct AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp was used. All procedures, including fiber placement and 
laser activation, were identical for ChR2+ and ChR2- mice.
Tellez et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Caspase-mediated ablation of dopamine-excitable cells: To achieve Cre-dependent 
caspase-mediated ablation of dopamine-excitable neurons in striatum, the Cre-dependent 
viral construct AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp (serotype 5, University of North Carolina Vector 
Core) was stereotaxically injected (0.5 μL per hemisphere) into the dorsal or ventral striatum 
of D1r-Cre mice at same coordinates used for optogenetic experiments. The two control 
groups included D1r-Cre mice transfected with AAV5-GFP constructs, and non-Cre mice 
transfected with AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp. Cell-specificity of the ablations was confirmed 
via neuroanatomical retrograde tracing methods. The fluorescent retrograde tracer Red 
Retrobeads (LumaFluor) was injected into the Substantia Nigra, pars reticulata (0.1μl), the 
exclusive ipsilateral target of D1r-expressing neurons of dorsal striatum on one hemisphere, 
and into the Globus Pallidus (0.1μl), the exclusive ipsilateral target of D2r-expressing 
neurons of dorsal striatum, on the other hemisphere. It was then confirmed, using fluorescent 
microscopy, the strong labeling throughout dorsal striatum on the same hemisphere in which 
the retrograde fluorescent beads were injected into globus pallidus, and weaker labeling 
throughout dorsal striatum on the same hemisphere in which the retrograde fluorescent 
beads were injected into Substantia Nigra pars reticulata. Equivalent Retrobead injections 
were made into the ventral pallidum, the preferential target of ventral striatal D1r-expressing 
neurons. To allow visualization of the relevant anatomical landmarks, images show the 
Retrobead fluorescence signal overlaid on a bright field image of the same section.
Stereotaxic viral injections and optic fibres implantation—For animals used in the 
optogenetics experiments, anaesthesia was induced with an I.P. injection of a ketamine/
xylazine (100/15 mg kg−1) and the mouse was placed on a stereotaxic apparatus (David 
Kopf, Tujunga, CA, USA) under constant flow of 1% isoflurane anaesthesia (1.5 l min−1). 
All viral injections were done bilateral, using modified microliter syringes (Hamilton) with a 
22 needle gauge. The tip of the needle was placed at the target regions and the injections 
were performed at a rate of 0.1μL min−1 (for coordinates and volumes see below). Once the 
injection was finished the needle was left in place for 10 min and then slowly removed. 
Immediately after the viral injection the optic fibres were implanted (200 μm core, 0.22NA, 
Doric Lenses). To allow time for viral expression, animals were housed for at least 2 weeks 
following injection before any experiments were initiated.
Drd1a- and Drd2-cre mice were used for injections at the dorsal and ventral striatal regions. 
The coordinates used for dorsal striatum were AP = 1.0 mm, ML =±1.7 and DV = −3.0 mm 
(from skull surface) and 1 μL of AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP virus was injected 
per hemisphere. The coordinates used for ventral striatum were AP = 1.5 mm, ML =±0.6 
and DV = −4.5 mm (from skull surface) and 0.5 μL of either the AAV-EF1a-DIO-
hChR2(H134R)-EYFP or AAV-EF1a-DIO-eArch3.0-EYFP viruses was injected per 
hemisphere.
Ai32 mice, which express a channelrhodopsin-2/EYFP fusion protein upon exposure to Cre 
recombinase, were used for ChR2 expression in ventral pallidum and Substantia Nigra pars 
reticulata regions. The coordinates used for ventral pallidum were AP = 0.7 mm, ML =±1.0 
and DV = −4.9 mm (from skull surface). The coordinates used for Substantia Nigra 
reticulata were AP = −3.2 mm, ML =±1.6 and DV = 4.4 mm (from skull surface). In both 
cases 0.5 μL of AAV-CMV-Cre virus was injected per hemisphere.
Tellez et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Drd1a-cre mice were used for the experiments involving the simultaneous activation of 
striatal regions (dorsal and ventral) and their downstream targets (Substantia Nigra pars 
reticulata and ventral pallidum, respectively). AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP virus 
was injected in the striatal regions and AAV-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCitrine virus was 
injected in the downstream targets. The coordinates and volumes employed were the same as 
described before for the corresponding areas.
Stereotaxic viral injections and electrode array implantation—Drd1a-cre mice 
were used for the extracellular recording experiments, anaesthesia was induced with I.P. 
injection of a ketamine/xylazine (100/15 mg kg−1), a small incision was made into the 
abdominal muscle and 3 cm MicroRenathane tubing was inserted in to the intraperitoneal 
cavity. The purse string was tightened around the tubing, which was then tunnelled 
subcutaneously to the dorsum via a small hole made between the shoulder plates to allow for 
catheter exteriorization. Immediately after, the mouse was placed on a stereotaxic apparatus 
(David Kopf, Tujunga, CA, USA) under constant flow of ~1% isoflurane anaesthesia (1.5 l 
min−1) for viral injections and electrode implantation. AAV-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-
mCitrine virus was then injected either in substantia nigra compacta or ventral pallidum. The 
procedure for the virus injection was the same as described before. Once the virus injection 
was completed, an electrode array consisting of 16 tungsten microwires (35-μm diameter) 
targeting substantia nigra compacta or ventral pallidum was implanted. Locations of 
electrodes were confirmed histologically.
Slice electrophysiology
On the day of the experiments, Drd1a-cre mice with selective ChR2 expression in striatal 
D1r neurons were anesthetized with isoflurane and decapitated for electrophysiological 
identification of striatal D1r-neurones and circuit mapping. Brains were quickly removed 
and immersed in an ice-cold high-sucrose solution containing (in mM): 220 sucrose, 2.5 
KCl, 6 MgCl2, 1 CaCl2, 1.23 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 10 glucose (gassed with 95% 
O2 / 5% CO2; 300–305 mOsm). Coronal brain slices 300 μm thick were sectioned using a 
vibratome. Brain slices were then transferred to an incubation chamber filled with an 
artificial CSF (ACSF) solution containing (in mM) 124 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 2 CaCl2, 
1.23 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 10 glucose (gassed with 95% O2 / 5% CO2; 300–305 
mOsm) at room temperature (22 °C). After a 1–2 hrs recovery period, slices containing 
striatum, VP or SNr were selected and transferred to a recording chamber mounted on a 
BX51WI upright microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The recording chamber was 
perfused with a continuous flow of gassed ACSF. A dual-channel heat controller (Warner 
Instruments, Hamden, CT) was used to control the temperature of recording solution at 33 
± 1 °C. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were performed on striatum D1r neurons and 
neurons in VP and SNr that were visualized using an infrared-differential interference 
contrast (DIC) optical system combined with a monochrome CCD camera and a monitor. 
Pipettes were pulled from thin-walled borosilicate glass capillary tubes (length 75 mm, outer 
diameter 1.5 mm, inner diameter 1.1mm, World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, Fl) using a 
P-97 micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA). Pipette solution containing (in 
mM) 145 K-gluconate, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 1.1 EGTA, 2 Mg-ATP, 0.5 Na2-GTP, and 5 
Na2-phosphocreatine (pH 7.3 with KOH; 290–295 mOsm) were used for whole-cell 
Tellez et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recording. The pipettes of resistances ranging from 3 to 6 MΩ were used for experiment. 
EPC-10 patch-clamp amplifier (HEKA Instruments, Bellmore, NY) and PatchMaster 2.20 
software (HEKA Elektronik, Lambrecht/Pfalz, Germany) were used to acquire and analyze 
data. Pipette and cell capacitance were compensated during experiment and neurons which 
the series resistance was >20 MΩ and changed >15% were excluded from the statistics. 
Traces were processed using Igor Pro 6.36 (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR). Inhibitory 
postsynaptic currents were recorded at the holding potential of −40 mV. An LED array 
(BXRAC2002, Bridgelux, Livermore, CA) was used to evoke the stimulation for optogenetic 
activation of ChR2 channels in brain slices. Continuous stimulation and stimulation of 10 ms 
duration with different frequency (1, 5, 10 or 20 Hz) were used in the experiment to test 
photostimulation-evoked response.
Stimuli and behavioural apparatus
The following taste stimuli were used as stated in the corresponding experiments:
2mM sucralose, a mixture of 3mM denatonium benzoate and 2mM sucralose (sweet/bitter 
mixture) and 3mM Rebaudioside A. 2mM sucralose, and L and D-glucose solutions at a 
concentration of 50% (w/v) were used for the intra-gastric infusion coupled to oral intake 
experiments. All reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and prepared fresh in distilled 
water.
Feeding/Licking experiments were conducted in either one of three identical mouse 
behaviour chambers enclosed in a ventilated and sound-attenuating cubicle (Med Associates 
Inc., St. Albans, VT, USA). Each chamber was equipped with a slot for sipper tubing 
placement located in the centre of one of the walls and hidden by a software-controlled door, 
which was opened at the beginning of the sessions. From then on licking was voluntary and 
the animals were allowed to initiate or interrupt licking ad libitum. The sipper was 
connected to a contact-based lick detection device allowing for measurements of licking 
responses with 10 ms resolution. All lick timestamps were saved in a computer file for 
posterior analysis. Software controlled lasers and infusion pumps equipped with TTL input 
devices were connected to the behavioural chambers and programmed to automatically 
trigger laser and/or infusions in response to the detection of licks. MED-PC® IV (Med 
Associates Inc., St. Albans, VT, USA) was used as the platform for programming all 
experiments.
Behavioural sessions
Prior to obtaining the final behavioural test, animals were habituated to the behavioural 
boxes and the experimental conditions during five daily 1 h sessions.
i.
Animals used for the extracellular dopamine measurements were trained to drink 
sucralose while receiving an intra-gastric infusion of sucralose. The exterior part of 
the gastric catheter was connected to a segment of MicroRenathane tubing secured 
to the tip of a 3mL standard syringe containing the solutions to be infused and 
mounted on the syringe pump. The syringe pump was placed near a small hole 
made on the superior part of the sound attenuating box in such a way that mice 
were able to move freely inside the behavioural chambers. During the task, a 
Tellez et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 detected lick triggered an intra-gastric infusion that lasted 3 seconds (at a rate of 
0.6mL min−1; 30μL/infusion). Licks detected while an infusion was taking place 
had no programmed consequences. In order to get the animals used to the 
microdialysis settings, during these sessions the mice were also connected to 
dummy microdialysis probes. All sessions lasted for 1 hour. During the 
experimental session, the drinking solution and the syringe content were changed 
according to the different experimental conditions.
Mice exposed to the bitter-triggered intra-gastric infusions were exposed to these 
experimental conditions for three daily sessions before the dopamine measurements 
were performed (numbers of licks in each case: Habituation Day 1: 160±22, 
Habituation day 2: 162±13, VS or DS microdialysis day (i.e. day 3 or 4, 
counterbalanced): 118±14 or 131±23, repeated–measures one-way ANOVA across 
testing days F[3,15]=0.92, p=0.45. All paired t-tests involving the number of licks 
during microdialysis versus habituation p>0.25). The bitter solutions were never 
present in any of the intra-gastric infusates in any condition, only in solutions 
available for licking.
ii.
Animals used for the optogenetic experiments were first trained to drink 2mM 
sucralose while plugged to the optic fibres but without receiving blue light pulses: 
and then later the drinking solutions and light stimulation were changed according 
to the different experimental conditions. To couple consumption to laser activation, 
detected licks triggered a 473nm blue laser source via TTL pulses as described in 
our previously for intra-gastric infusions. Intensity at tip of fibres was estimated at 
approximately 5mW. Constant pulses of light were used for D1 stimulation lasting 
0.5 seconds, whereas 10Hz pulses lasting 1s were used for ventral pallidum and 
subtantia nigra reticulata stimulation. Licks detected while the laser was on had no 
programmed consequences. In the D1- stimulation experiments were licking was 
coupled to intra-gastric infusions, the duration of the light pulses was the same than 
the infusions (constant light pulses lasting 3s). All stimulations were performed 
bilaterally.
iii. Conditioned taste aversion. On the first session D1-Cre mice were exposed for 30 
minutes to a new tastant (the artificial sweetener Rebaudioside A) and 15 min after 
the end of the session the animals received an I.P. injection of the malaise-inducing 
agent lithium chloride (0.35 M, 10 μl/g body weight). On the following day, 
conditioned aversion was tested. During this 30 minutes session, all groups 
received a 1s light pulse per every 20 licks produced. Licks detected while the laser 
was on had no programmed consequences. All stimulations were performed 
bilaterally.
iv.
Nose poke task. Mice were placed in an operant box equipped with two slots for 
nose pokes at symmetrical locations on one of the cage walls. Nose pokes were 
connected to a photo-beam detection device allowing for measurements of 
responses with 10 ms resolution, and only one of them triggered the laser (1 second 
constant stimulation). The active side was counterbalance among animals and 
responses detected while the laser was on had no programmed consequences. Two 
Tellez et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consecutive days of stimulation sessions were done and on the third day one 
extinction test was performed (meaning both nose pokes were inactive). All 
responses timestamps were saved in a computer file for posterior analysis. All 
experimental sessions were 30 min long. The preference ratio was calculated as 
follows:
where n denotes the detected number of responses for the corresponding side 
during a given session.
v.
Opto and chemogenetic experiments. Clozapine N-oxide was dissolved in saline to 
a concentration of 0.1 mg ml−1 and injected I.P. 25 min before the beginning of the 
behavioural sessions. CNO was administered to each mouse (1mg kg−1 body 
weight). During the behavioural sessions licks triggered the laser as described 
before (1 second constant stimulation).
vi. To assess if D1-stimulation had an effect on the taste perception we performed 
short-term two-bottle preference tests. These experiments were carried out in a 
chamber equipped with two slots for sipper tubing placements, at symmetrical 
locations on one of the cage walls. Both sippers were connected to a contact-based 
lick detection device allowing for measurements of licking responses and responses 
produced in both sippers triggered the laser (0.5 seconds constant stimulation). One 
of the sippers contained sucralose and the other the bitter mixture. To eliminate the 
influence of side-biases, mice were tested for four consecutive sessions with the 
content of the sipper being switched across session. All sessions lasted for 10 min. 
Preference ratio for sucralose was calculated as described before for the nose 
pokes.
vii. For intra-gastric preloads, volume was determined from the averaged infused 
volume across animals during habituation (~0.75mL glucose; the same volume was 
used for sucralose preloads). Preload infusions were performed 10min previous to 
behavioural tests, at 0.1 mL min−1 infusion rate. During behavioural testing, the 
animals were allowed to drink and self-infuse as described above. Sessions lasted 
for 1 hour.
Nose-poking for obtaining food pellets—The same apparatus above was used in a 
goal-directed task in which mice were trained to poke on the active hole to obtain sugared 
food pellets (0.02g, BioServe). Four consecutive days of training sessions were performed, 
after which all mice showed high preferences for the active hole (see Extended Figure 2 for 
details). On the fifth and sixth days the tests were performed after an intra-gastric preload 
infusion of glucose or sucralose. Preload volume was determined from the averaged infused 
volume across animals during behavioural sessions (~0.75mL glucose; the same volume was 
used for sucralose preloads). Preload infusions were performed 10min previous to 
behavioural tests, at 0.1 mL min−1 infusion rate. Sessions lasted for 1 hour or 30 rewards 
earned, whatever the first occurrence.
Tellez et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The preference ratio for the active hole was calculated as above:
Outcomes were also quantified as rewards earned for further analyses.
Brief access tests—These tests were performed to assess if cell-specific ablation of D1r-
neurones in DS or VS impact on hedonic responses as measured in classical brief-access 
tests. In these sessions, the licking spout was composed of four 20-gauge stainless-steel 
needles cemented together to prevent the mixing of the solutions; each needle was connected 
to a solenoid valve which in turn was connected to 50mL syringes containing the solutions 
employed in the corresponding session. Onset of the first trial is signaled by the vertical 
lifting of a sliding door within the behavioral apparatus described above. Only a single 
sipper, located behind the sliding door, was available in these sessions. The opening/closing 
of one of four solenoid valves was calibrated to deliver 5-μl drops of liquid, such that taste 
delivery was triggered by the detected licks. Each trial lasted for 5s from the time of the first 
detected lick, after which the sliding door is lowered. The taste stimuli were randomized 
across trials. Each session lasted for 20min. The following variations were performed:
Tolerance to bitter. Mixtures employed were: 1. 2mM Sucralose + 0.5mM Denatonium; 
2. 2mM Sucralose + 1.5mM Denatonium; 3. 2mM Sucralose + 3.0mM Denatonium; 
and 4. 2mM Sucralose + 6mM Denatonium.
Masking bitterness. Mixture employed were: 1. 2mM Sucralose + 6mM Denatonium; 2. 
4mM Sucralose + 6mM Denatonium; 3. 6mM Sucralose + 6mM Denatonium; and 4. 
8mM Sucralose + 6mM Denatonium.
Sweetness. The taste stimuli employed were: 1. 0.5mM Sucralose; 2. 2mM Sucralose; 
3. 4mM Sucralose; and 4. 6mM Sucralose.
Sugar-driven consumption of unpalatable solutions—To assess if cell-specific 
ablation of D1r-neurones in DS or VS impacts on the acceptance of unpalatable solutions 
instrumentally coupled to intra-gastric of D-glucose, the following experiment was 
performed. Mice were exposed to bitter-triggered intra-gastric infusions of four different D-
glucose concentrations (0.5%, 10%, 25% and 50%), each one presented in independent 
sessions. Glucose concentration was randomized across mice and sessions. All sessions 
lasted 1h.
Taste-Nutrient Conditioning—First, short-term (5 min) two-bottle preference tests 
between sucralose and the bitter mixture were used to determine the short-term, oral relative 
preferences for each of these compounds before and after conditioning. To eliminate the 
influence of side-biases, mice were tested for two consecutive sessions with the content of 
the sipper being switched across sessions, and the outcome averaged. Conditioning sessions 
consisted of two separate 1 h one-bottle sessions. In one session, sucralose licks triggered 
intra-gastric infusions of sucralose. In a different session (on the next day), licks to the bitter 
mixture triggered intra-gastric infusions of D-glucose. The order of the conditioning 
sessions was counterbalanced across mice. On the following day after the second 
Tellez et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conditioning, session, the two-bottle preference tests were repeated as above. Preference 
ratios for sucralose were calculated as described for the nose pokes.
Open field tests—To assess locomotor activity in response to our treatments, animals 
were placed on a novel Plexiglass arena (Med-Associates, 25cm×30cm). The total area was 
divided into 9 equal rectangular subareas (8.3×10cm), demarcated with yellow tape. 
Immediately above the central subarea a 150W lamp was activated to induce natural 
aversion to this particular location, as usually performed. Animals were tested once in this 
arena. The 10-min sessions were digitally recorded with a Sony HDR-CX440 camera. Data 
were analysed by replaying the sessions in slow-motion. Outcomes were the number of 
sequential crossings over different adjacent yellow lines (representing total locomotor 
activity), and relative time spent within the illuminated central part of the arena. In sessions 
involving intra-gastric preloads, preload volume was determined from the averaged infused 
volume across animals during previous behavioural sessions (~0.75mL glucose; the same 
volume was used for sucralose preloads). Preload infusions were performed 10min previous 
to behavioural tests, at 0.1 mL min−1 infusion rate. In sessions involving optical stimulation, 
laser source was continuously on throughout the session at intermittent ON/OFF intervals of 
30sec, such that a randomization was performed to determine whether the laser source 
would be on during any particular 30 sec interval.
Control mice for optogenetics experiments—To control for genetic background, 
Chr2-independent light stimulation effects, and Cre-driven membrane receptor expression, 
D1-Cre mice were injected with the DREADD construct AAV-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-
mCitrine and implanted with optical fibres exactly as ChR2-transfected mice. This thus 
produced Cre-dependent expression of a light-insensitive receptor in striatum. We observed 
that light pulses had no effects whatsoever on these animals and therefore omitted these data 
from main figures (where differential effects of VS vs. DS stimulation are shown, thereby 
evidencin light-independent effects) for simplicity. For completion however we show that 
light pulses produced no effects whatsoever on self-stimulatory rates in control mice, in 
stark contrast to VS and DS ChR2+ mice in which D1-neurone self-stimulation was highly 
rewarding (See Extended Data Figure 7).
Analyses of optically-triggered licking activity—Lifting vertically sliding door 
within the behavioral apparatus above signaled the beginning of a new trial. In each trial, the 
laser source was TTL-activated and left on during intervals of 1, 3, 5 or 7 seconds upon the 
detection of 13 consecutive licks to the sipper located behind the sliding door. A lick 
produced while laser source was on did not produce further stimulation. The length of 
stimulation was randomized across trials. Each trail lasted for 15s and the timer of the trial 
started to run after the laser was turned on. The sessions lasted for 1h.
Dopamine measurements during behaviour
During the experimental sessions, microdialysate samples from these freely moving mice 
were collected, separated and quantified by HPLC coupled to electro-chemical detection 
methods (‘HPLC-ECD’). Briefly, after recovery from surgery and habitation to the 
behavioural chambers, a microdialysis probe (CMA-7, cut off 6 kDa, CMA Microdialysis, 
Tellez et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stockholm, Sweden) was inserted into the striatum through the guide cannula (the 
corresponding CMA-7 model). After insertion, probes were connected to a syringe pump 
and perfused at 1.2 μl min−1 with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF; Harvard Apparatus, 
Holliston, MA, USA). After a 40 min washout period and a subsequent 30 min pre-intake 
baseline sampling, dialysate samples were collected every 10 min and immediately manually 
injected into a HTEC-500 HPLC unit (Eicom, Japan). Analytes were then separated via an 
affinity column (PP-ODS, Eicom), and compounds subjected to redox reactions within an 
electro-chemical detection unit (amperometric DC mode, applied potential range from 0 to 
2000 mV, 1 mV steps). Resulting chromatograms were analysed using the software EPC-300 
(Eicom), and actual sample concentrations were computed based on peak areas obtained 
from a 0.5 pg μl−1 dopamine standard solution (Sigma) and expressed as percentage changes 
with respect to the mean dopamine concentration associated with the baseline (i.e. pre-
behavioural task) sampling period. Locations of microdialysis probes were confirmed 
histologically.
Reverse microdialysis—Reverse microdialysis was used to perfuse DS or VS with 
dopamine during ingestion of sucralose or sucralose+bitter. Licks were not followed by 
intra-gastric infusions in these experiments. Concentrations of the perfusates were chosen 
based on the average baseline dopamine levels previously observed with forward 
microdialysis, and increased 5 times to account for dilution (DS[DA]= 1.75 μg/mL = 9.22 
μM; VS[DA]= 0.6 μg/mL =3.16 μM). Control sessions were identical except that only 
artificial cerebral spinal fluid (aCSF, Harvard Apparatus) was perfused. Perfusion rate was 
1.5 μL/min. After a washout period of 40 minutes, mice were placed in the behavioral boxes 
while continuously perfused with aCSF. For the DA perfusion sessions, after the animal 
produced the first 20 licks, the aCSF perfusate was switched to aCSF+DA. On these sessions 
samples were collected every 10 min and analyzed as described before to confirm that the 
reverse microdialysis was effective.
Electrophysiological recordings and firing rate analysis
Neural electrical activity was recorded from a movable 2 × 8 array of 16 tungsten 
microwires using a multichannel acquisition processor (Tucker-Davis Technologies). Only 
single neurons with action potentials of signal-to-noise ratios >3:1 were analyzed. The 
action potentials were isolated online by means of voltage-time threshold windows and a 
three-principal components contour templates algorithm. Spikes were resorted using Offline 
Sorter software (Plexon). Data was then imported into Matlab for analysis using custom-
written software. To calculate the firing rate, instantaneous firing rate for was smoothed 
using Matlab smooth with a 60 s moving average. To test the significance of firing rate 
changes, we used an individual unit analysis. A one-factor ANOVA was performed on each 
unit to determine whether the mean firing rate after the I.P. injection (of either Saline or 
CNO) was significantly different from that before the injection (baseline) and units were 
classified in three populations: excited, inhibited; and neutral. Finally, an odd-ratio test was 
performed on those population to determine the change in ratios (CNO:SAL). All recordings 
were performed in the home cages and the I.P. catheter was used to deliver the I.P. injections. 
The exterior part of the I.P. catheter was connected to a segment of MicroRenathane tubing 
secured to the tip of a 1mL standard syringe containing the solutions to be injected and 
Tellez et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mounted on the syringe pump. The syringe pump was placed on top of the cage in such a 
way that mice were able to move freely inside the home cage. The CNO dose was the same 
used for the behavioural experiments (1mg kg body weight−1). The rate of the injections was 
calculated in such a way that all injections lasted for 1 min.
Histological Analyses
Mice were sacrificed with a lethal dose of ketamine and xylazine (400 mg ketamine + 20 mg 
xylazine kg body weight−1 I.P.). All animals were transcardially perfused with filtered 
saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. Following perfusion, brains were left in 4% 
paraformaldehyde for 24 hours and then moved to a 20% sucrose solution in PBS for 2 days. 
Brains were then frozen and cut into four series 40 μm sections (either coronal or sagittal) 
with a sliding microtome equipped with a freezing stage. To identify fibre and electrode 
locations, relevant sections were identified and mounted on slides. Sections were then 
photographed under bright field and fluorescence. For c-fos measurements, unilateral 
stimulation was performed using 1 minute ON/1 minute OFF cycles during 10 minutes. For 
striatal stimulation 0.5s on/0.5s off cycles were used during the ON cycles, and 10Hz was 
used for pallidum and Substantia Nigra stimulation. 90 minutes after the stimulation 
protocols mice were sacrificed and perfused as described before.
Fos Expression analyses: To visualize Fos immunoreactivity, we used the ABC/DAB 
procedure. Briefly, brain sections were first rinsed with 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer 
(KPBS, pH 7.4), then immersed into a incubating solution [2% normal goat serum (NGS) 
and 0.3% Triton X-100 in KPBS] containing a rabbit polyclonal antiserum directed against 
the N-terminal region of the Fos gene (Ab-5, Calbiochem; dilution 1:10000) and incubated 
at 4 °C for 36 h. After primary antibody incubation, tissues were washed in 0.02 M KPBS 
and incubated at room temperature for 2h with goat anti-rabbit, biotinylated secondary IgG 
(anti-rabbit IgG, Vector Laboratories, 1:200), washed again in 0.02 M KPBS and 
subsequently reacted for 1 h with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (“ABC” method, 
Vectastain Elite ABC kit, Vector Co) at room temperature. A nickel diaminobenzidine 
(Nickel-DAB) glucose oxidase reaction was used to visualize Fos-like immunoreactive cells. 
Finally, sections were washed in KPBS and mounted, air-dried, dehydrated in alcohol, 
cleared in xylene, and coverslipped.
Fos expression was analysed and quantified as follows: Coronal sections at ~160μm 
intervals throughout the rostral-caudal extent of the ventral pallidum and the Substantia 
Nigra reticulata were photographed at 10× magnification and montaged with Adobe 
Photoshop to preserve anatomical landmarks. Fos+ neurons were counted manually on each 
slice (5 slices per animal for ventral pallidum and 7 slices per animal for substantia nigra 
reticulata) and expressed as the cumulative sum of Fos+ neurons within the relevant regions 
for each animal.
Overall Experimental Design and Analysis
Overall design: Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of 
the experiments, due to the nature of most experiments (stereotaxic position of microdialysis 
probe, laser state ON vs. OFF). Data were collected and processed as blocks according to 
Tellez et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the experimental conditions. Animals were randomly assigned to the different experimental 
groups.
Exclusion criteria: No animals that completed the appropriate experimental condition, or 
any associated data points, were removed from the final analyses. A priori criteria 
determined that animals showing post-surgical signs of distress or excess weight loss were 
removed before the completion of the studies. For optogenetic experiments, a priori 
exclusion criteria related to lack of expression of Cre-dependent ChR2 in striatal neurons. 
One entire group of animals (N=6) was replaced due to lack of ChR2+ expression in any 
striatal neuron.
Sample sizes: Samples sizes were determined based on our own previous studies employing 
similar neurochemical, optogenetic and behavioral approaches. Samples sizes adopted in our 
current study were sufficient for detecting robust effect sizes while complying with 
guidelines enforcing minimal animal usage and distress.
Statistical Analyses: Data analyses were performed using SPSS (PASW Statistics Release 
18.0.0) and Matlab (v.14a, MathWorks). Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this 
was not formally tested due to normality tests being inconclusive when small sample sizes 
are employed (normal probability plots instead). Consistently with the overall experimental 
design and group assignments, statistical analyses only made use of standard linear model 
(Pearson correlation) analyses as standard well as one- or two-way (repeated measures) 
ANOVAs and post-hoc t-tests tests whenever relevant. All p-values associated with the t-
tests performed correspond to two-tailed tests, and all post-hoc tests were corrected for 
multiple comparisons by employing Bonferroni correction. All data are reported as mean
±s.e.m. Every experimental group entered in statistical analyses was associated with the 
corresponding computation of its mean±s.e.m.
Code availability
MED-PC® IV (Med Associates Inc., St. Albans, VT, USA) was used as the platform for 
programming all experimental schedules involving behavioural and optogenetic protocols. 
All custom codes employed to generate behavioural and optogenetic data are freely available 
upon request.
A Supplementary Methods Checklist is available.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants R01DC014859 and R01CA180030 (to I.E.A.); R01 DK103176, 
DK084052, and NS48476 (to A.vdP.); China Scholarship Council 201206260072 (to W.H.); and FAPESP (Sao 
Paulo) 2013/09405-3 (to T.L.F.).
Tellez et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Holman GL. Intragastric reinforcement effect. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1968; 69:432–441. 
[PubMed: 5349026] 
2. Sclafani A. Post-ingestive positive controls of ingestive behavior. Appetite. 2001; 36:79–83. 
[PubMed: 11161347] 
3. de Araujo IE, Oliveira-Maia AJ, Sotnikova TD, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG, Nicolelis MA, Simon 
SA. Food reward in the absence of taste receptor signaling. Neuron. 2008; 57:930–941. [PubMed: 
18367093] 
4. Zuker CS. Food for the brain. Cell. 2015; 161:9–11. [PubMed: 25815979] 
5. Stephenson-Jones M, Kardamakis AA, Robertson B, Grillner S. Independent circuits in the basal 
ganglia for the evaluation and selection of actions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:E3670–
3679. [PubMed: 24003130] 
6. Everitt BJ, Robbins TW. Neural systems of reinforcement for drug addiction: from actions to habits 
to compulsion. Nat Neurosci. 2005; 8:1481–1489. [PubMed: 16251991] 
7. Gerfen CR, Surmeier DJ. Modulation of striatal projection systems by dopamine. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2011; 34:441–466. [PubMed: 21469956] 
8. Costa RM. Plastic corticostriatal circuits for action learning: what’s dopamine got to do with it? Ann 
N Y Acad Sci. 2007; 1104:172–191. [PubMed: 17435119] 
9. Grillner S, Robertson B, Stephenson-Jones M. The evolutionary origin of the vertebrate basal 
ganglia and its role in action selection. J Physiol. 2013; 591:5425–5431. [PubMed: 23318875] 
10. Yin HH, Ostlund SB, Balleine BW. Reward-guided learning beyond dopamine in the nucleus 
accumbens: the integrative functions of cortico-basal ganglia networks. Eur J Neurosci. 2008; 
28:1437–1448. [PubMed: 18793321] 
11. Wickens JR, Horvitz JC, Costa RM, Killcross S. Dopaminergic mechanisms in actions and habits. 
J Neurosci. 2007; 27:8181–8183. [PubMed: 17670964] 
12. Palmiter RD. Dopamine signaling in the dorsal striatum is essential for motivated behaviors: 
lessons from dopamine-deficient mice. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008; 1129:35–46. [PubMed: 
18591467] 
13. Ren X, Ferreira JG, Zhou L, Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Yeckel CW, De Araujo IE. Nutrient Selection 
in the Absence of Taste Receptor Signaling. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:8012–8023. [PubMed: 
20534849] 
14. Roitman MF, Wheeler RA, Carelli RM. Nucleus accumbens neurons are innately tuned for 
rewarding and aversive taste stimuli, encode their predictors, and are linked to motor output. 
Neuron. 2005; 45:587–597. [PubMed: 15721244] 
15. Hajnal A, Norgren R. Taste pathways that mediate accumbens dopamine release by sapid sucrose. 
Physiol Behav. 2005; 84:363–369. [PubMed: 15763573] 
16. Ericsson J, Stephenson-Jones M, Perez-Fernandez J, Robertson B, Silberberg G, Grillner S. 
Dopamine differentially modulates the excitability of striatal neurons of the direct and indirect 
pathways in lamprey. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:8045–8054. [PubMed: 23637194] 
17. Planert H, Berger TK, Silberberg G. Membrane properties of striatal direct and indirect pathway 
neurons in mouse and rat slices and their modulation by dopamine. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e57054. 
[PubMed: 23469183] 
18. Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, Prabhakaran M, Alvarado M, Juntti SA, Unger EK, Wells JA, 
Shah NM. Sexually dimorphic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus govern mating in both 
sexes and aggression in males. Cell. 2013; 153:896–909. [PubMed: 23663785] 
19. Glendinning JI, Gresack J, Spector AC. A high-throughput screening procedure for identifying 
mice with aberrant taste and oromotor function. Chem Senses. 2002; 27:461–474. [PubMed: 
12052783] 
20. Kravitz AV, Tye LD, Kreitzer AC. Distinct roles for direct and indirect pathway striatal neurons in 
reinforcement. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:816–818. [PubMed: 22544310] 
21. Lobo MK, Covington HE 3rd, Chaudhury D, Friedman AK, Sun H, Damez-Werno D, Dietz DM, 
Zaman S, Koo JW, Kennedy PJ, Mouzon E, Mogri M, Neve RL, Deisseroth K, Han MH, Nestler 
Tellez et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 EJ. Cell type-specific loss of BDNF signaling mimics optogenetic control of cocaine reward. 
Science. 2010; 330:385–390. [PubMed: 20947769] 
22. Cui G, Jun SB, Jin X, Pham MD, Vogel SS, Lovinger DM, Costa RM. Concurrent activation of 
striatal direct and indirect pathways during action initiation. Nature. 2013; 494:238–242. 
[PubMed: 23354054] 
23. Johnson PM, Kenny PJ. Dopamine D2 receptors in addiction-like reward dysfunction and 
compulsive eating in obese rats. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:635–641. [PubMed: 20348917] 
24. DeLong MR, Crutcher MD, Georgopoulos AP. Relations between movement and single cell 
discharge in the substantia nigra of the behaving monkey. J Neurosci. 1983; 3:1599–1606. 
[PubMed: 6875659] 
25. Wurtz RH, Hikosaka O. Role of the basal ganglia in the initiation of saccadic eye movements. Prog 
Brain Res. 1986; 64:175–190. [PubMed: 3523602] 
26. Sternson SM, Roth BL. Chemogenetic tools to interrogate brain functions. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
2014; 37:387–407. [PubMed: 25002280] 
27. Dus M, Min S, Keene AC, Lee GY, Suh GS. Taste-independent detection of the caloric content of 
sugar in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:11644–11649. [PubMed: 21709242] 
28. Burke CJ, Huetteroth W, Owald D, Perisse E, Krashes MJ, Das G, Gohl D, Silies M, Certel S, 
Waddell S. Layered reward signalling through octopamine and dopamine in Drosophila. Nature. 
2012
29. Yamagata N, Ichinose T, Aso Y, Placais PY, Friedrich AB, Sima RJ, Preat T, Rubin GM, Tanimoto 
H. Distinct dopamine neurons mediate reward signals for short- and long-term memories. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:578–583. [PubMed: 25548178] 
30. O’Doherty JP. The problem with value. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014; 43:259–268. [PubMed: 
24726573] 
31. Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Costa MS, Ricardo JA. Afferent connections of the parvocellular reticular 
formation: a horseradish peroxidase study in the rat. Neuroscience. 1992; 50:403–425. [PubMed: 
1279462] 
Tellez et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Gustatory and nutritional signals separately control dopamine levels in ventral versus 
dorsal striatum
A. Higher ventral striatal DA levels were observed during sucralose licking upon intra-
gastric infusions of both glucose (N=6) and sucralose (N=6, two-way mixed model ANOVA, 
Sucralose vs. glucose effect F[1,4]=0.006, p=0.94). Graph displays changes in DA during 
the 1h intake session after 30min baseline sampling. Raster plot shows across-animals 
average lick rates for each (sucralose vs. glucose) session type, with total lick counts shown 
in 10 minutes bins. Onset of licking is shown by green arrow. Sessions involving sucralose 
infusions are shown as dotted lines, and sessions involving glucose infusions as solid lines. 
For comparisons against baseline see Supplementary Fig. 1. B. Higher dorsal striatal DA 
levels were observed upon intra-gastric infusions of glucose (N=6) compared to sucralose 
(N=6, F[1,10]=8.2, *p=0.017). Note DA levels upon sucralose infusions remained at 
baseline levels (represented by horizontal dotted line). C. Adulteration of the sucralose 
solution with bitter compound inhibited DA release in VS (n=7) but not DS (n=8, Two-way 
mixed effects ANOVA, DS vs. VS effect F[1,13]=15.7, *p=0.002). All animals received D-
glucose intra-gastric infusions upon licking. D. Intra-gastric infusions of non-metabolizable 
L-glucose inhibited sugar-induced dopamine release in DS but not VS (n=6, Two-way 
within-subjects ANOVA, DS vs. VS effect F[1,5]=13.9, *p=0.013). VS and DS were 
sampled simultaneously (licks shown in one raster, dark). DA=dopamine. DS=Dorsal 
striatum. n.s.=Statistically-non-significant. VS=Ventral striatum.
Tellez et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Cell-specific ablation of D1r-neurones in dorsal, but not in ventral, striatum is 
necessary for sugar-driven consumption of unpalatable solutions
A. Cell-specific ablation of D1r-neurones in VS, but not in DS, increased the sensitivity to 
unpalatable solutions (Two-way RM-ANOVA, bitterness × lesion site F[6,57]=3.38, 
p=0.006; group effect F[2,16]=3.59, p=0.048). VS-casp mice were particularly sensitive to 
the lower concentrations of bitter (One-way ANOVA main effect of lesion F[2,21]=6.19, 
p=0.008; VS-casp versus DS-casp [Bonferroni-corrected *p=0.013,] or WT-casp control 
[Bonferroni-corrected *p=0.029 and #p=0.036] groups. B. Cell-specific ablation of D1r-
neurones in DS, but not VS, abolished sugar-induced consumption of unpalatable solutions 
(Two-way RM-ANOVA, glucose concentration × lesion site effect F[2,19]=11.2, p=0.001; 
lesion site effect F[2,19]=4.4, p=0.027; glucose concentration effect F[1,19]=32.12, 
p=0.000018). Note that in the non-nutritive (0.5% glucose) condition ventrally-lesioned VS-
casp mice are more sensitive to bitterness than both control WT-casp and dorsally-lesioned 
DS-casp mice (One-way ANOVA group effect F[2,21]=7.07, p=0.005; VS-casp versus DS-
casp [Bonferroni-corrected *p=0.023] and WT-casp [Bonferroni-corrected *p=0.007]. This 
effect was completely reversed by increasing the glucose concentration to nutritive levels, 
Tellez et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 such that DS-casp mice failed to display the similar increases in responding (One-way 
ANOVA group effect F[2,21]=7.09, p=0.005; DS-casp versus VS-casp [Bonferroni-
corrected **p=0.024] and WT-casp [Bonferroni-corrected **p=0.007]. C. Taste-nutrient 
learning. Three groups of sugar/sweet naïve, food-restricted mice (WT-casp, N=8; DS-casp, 
N=7; and VS-casp, N=7) were exposed to short-access 5-min two-bottle test between 
sucralose and an adulterated bitter/sucralose mix. As expected, all groups strongly preferred 
sucralose to the bitter mix (one-sample t tests against indifference ratio of 0.5, marked as red 
horizontal dotted line: WT-casp, *p=0.0000012; DS-casp, *p=0.00026; VS-casp, 
*p=0.000042]. D. Next, the animals were exposed to 1h conditioning one-bottle sessions 
where intake of the bitter mixture was paired to intra-gastric infusions of D-glucose, and 
intake of sucralose was paired to intra-gastric infusions of sucralose. Following the 
conditioning sessions, while WT-casp [Bonferroni-corrected *p=0.036] and VS-casp 
[Bonferroni-corrected *p=0.045] mice shifted preferences away from sweetness towards the 
nutritive bitter taste, DS-casp mice failed to shift preferences in response to gut glucose 
sensing [preference for sucralose > bitter mix, p=0.074]. EH. When Retrobeads were 
injected into globus pallidus (GP, dotted line in G, targeted by D2r-expressing neurons of 
DS) of DS-casp mice, strong labeling was observed throughout DS (F). In contrast, weak 
labelling was observed in DS (G) when Retrobeads were injected into SNr, on the opposite 
hemisphere to the one receiving a Retrobeads deposit in GP (dotted line in H). SNr is 
exclusively targeted by D1r-expressing neurons of DS. The same fluorescence (or lack 
thereof) pattern was observed in all animals sustaining the same injections. Abbreviations: 
DS-casp: Caspase-driven D1r-dependent lesions in DS of D1r-Cre mice (N=7); VS-casp: 
Caspase-driven D1r-depedent lesions in VS of D1r-Cre mice (N=7); WT-casp: Viral delivery 
of Cre-dependent caspase in DS/VS of non-Cre mice (N=8). n.s. = non-statistically 
significant.
Tellez et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Optogenetic stimulation of D1r-neurones in dorsal, but not in ventral, striatum 
substitutes for sugar in driving consumption of unpalatable solutions
A. Representative traces showing DS D1r-neurone firing as evoked by a depolarizing current 
injection (380 pA, 1s) in the presence of dopamine (30μM, black) and control (shown in red) 
solutions. B. Mean action potential (AP) counts during 1s depolarization in the presence of 
dopamine and control solutions (N=6, paired t-test, *p=0.013). C. Optogenetic activation of 
a ChR2+ D1r-neurone by 1Hz blue light pulses (10ms) and by a continuous light train (see 
additional analyses in Supplementary Fig. 4). This experiment was successfully replicated in 
10 cells sampled from two mice. D. EYFP visualization confirms that ChR2 transfection was 
contained to VS and DS. Note the dense bundle of axon terminals in VP and SNr, 
respectively. Panels are composites of sequential 10× images of one entire sagital section. 
The same fluorescence pattern is observed in all six animals sustaining the same injections. 
E. In animals transfected with ChR2 in VS, adulteration of the sucralose solution by the 
bitter toxin produced a drastic decrease in intake (Laser OFF, N=6, paired T-test sweet vs. 
Tellez et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 bitter t[5]=10.03, *p=0.0002) that was not reversed by D1r-neurone optogenetic stimulation 
(Laser ON: t[5]=10.5, *p=0.0001). F. In animals transfected with ChR2 in DS, adulteration 
of the sucralose solution produced a drastic decrease in intake (Laser OFF, N=5, t[4]=7.24, 
*p=0.002) that was nevertheless totally reversed by D1r-neurone optogenetic stimulation 
(Laser ON: t[4]=0.28, p=0.79). G. Conditioned sweet taste aversion (CTA) induced by 
visceral malaise decreased intake in control (ChR2-negative) mice (sweetener intake pre- vs. 
post-malaise N=5, paired t-test t[4]=5.76, Bonferroni *p=0.01). Mice transfected with ChR2 
in VS failed to increase intake despite laser stimulation (N=6, t[5]=2.7, Bonferroni p=0.1). 
However, laser stimulation of DS markedly increased intake despite conditioned aversion 
(N=6, t[5]=4.5, Bonferroni **p=0.01). Overall group effect F[2,14]=13.1, p=0.001. H. 
Optogenetic self-stimulation of VS and DS as triggered by nose pokes (in the absence of 
food cues) produced equal numbers of pokes in the active vs. inactive holes (ratio between 
pokes in active vs. inactive holes is shown, DS (N=5) vs. VS (N=6) effect t[9]=0.76, 
p=0.47).
Tellez et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. The dorsal striato-nigral pathway overrides inhibitory signals released by ventral 
output regions
We employed a combination of optogenetics and DREADDS. Animals expressed the 
designer receptor hM3D(Gq) in either VP or SNr (DREADD denoted by syringes in relevant 
locations, see scheme in Supplementary Fig. 8). One group of animals (“VS=>VP pathway”) 
was ChR2-tranfected in VS, and optical fibres placed immediately above the D1r-neurone 
terminals in VP (N=5). A second group of animals (“DS=>SNr pathway”) was ChR2-
tranfected in DS, and optical fibres placed immediately above the D1r-neurone terminals in 
SNr (N=5). A. In the absence of light pulses, CNO administration robustly suppressed 
sweetener intake in both groups (VS=>VP group, CNO vs. saline effect paired t-test 
t[4]=14.54, Bonferroni *p=0.00052; DS=>SNr group, t[4]=8.45, **p=0.004). B. 
Optogenetic activation of VS=>VP terminals produced an increase in sweetener intake that 
was annulled by activating VP with CNO (t[4]=5.37, Bonferroni *p=0.024). However, 
activating VP with CNO produced no effects on the robust increases in sweetener intake 
Tellez et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associated with optogenetically activating DS=>SNr terminals (t[4]=0.98, p=0.38). C. To 
assess pathway-specificity, one additional group of animals expressed hM3D(Gq) in SNr 
instead of VP. ChR2 was tranfected in DS, and optical fibres were placed immediately above 
the D1r-neurone terminals in SNr. Optogenetic activation of DS=>SNr terminals produced 
an increase in sweetener intake that was weakened by activating SNr with CNO (t[4]=4.8, 
*p=0.0083). CNO alone had no effect (p=0.60). D. Optogenetic activation of DS=>SNr 
terminals produced a robust increase in bitter intake that was weakened by activating SNr 
with CNO. Paired sample t-test 2-tailed t[4]=6.6, *p=0.0027. CNO alone had no effect, 
t[4]=0.3, p=0.79. Reliable activation of hM3D(Gq)-transfected neurones in VP (E) and SNr 
(F) by administration of the designer drug clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) was confirmed in vivo 
using multi-channel electrophysiological recordings. Dotted line represents onset of CNO 
injections. Graph shows average firing rate activity over sessions. Shadowed area around 
trace represents s.e.m. n.s.= Statistically non-significant.
Tellez et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
