 May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
1
Review
published: 26 May 2017
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00080
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Jeffrey Witkin, 
Lilly Research Labs, USA
Reviewed by: 
Mary Margaret Sweeney, 
Johns Hopkins School 
of Medicine, USA 
 
Shobhit Jain, 
Banaras Hindu University, India
*Correspondence:
Jennifer L. Temple 
jltemple@buffalo.edu
†These authors have contributed 
equally to this work.
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Psychopharmacology, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 30 January 2017
Accepted: 24 April 2017
Published: 26 May 2017
Citation: 
Temple JL, Bernard C, Lipshultz SE, 
Czachor JD, Westphal JA and 
Mestre MA (2017) The Safety of 
Ingested Caffeine: 
A Comprehensive Review. 
Front. Psychiatry 8:80. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00080
The Safety of ingested Caffeine:  
A Comprehensive Review
Jennifer L. Temple1,2*†, Christophe Bernard3†, Steven E. Lipshultz4†, Jason D. Czachor4, 
Joslyn A. Westphal4 and Miriam A. Mestre4
1 
Department of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA, 2 
Department of Community Health 
and Health Behavior, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA, 3Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, INS, Inst Neurosci Syst, Marseille, 
France, 4 
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Children’s Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI, USA
Caffeine is the most widely consumed psychoactive drug in the world. Natural sources 
of caffeine include coffee, tea, and chocolate. Synthetic caffeine is also added to prod-
ucts to promote arousal, alertness, energy, and elevated mood. Over the past decade, 
the introduction of new caffeine-containing food products, as well as changes in con-
sumption patterns of the more traditional sources of caffeine, has increased scrutiny by 
health authorities and regulatory bodies about the overall consumption of caffeine and 
its potential cumulative effects on behavior and physiology. Of particular concern is the 
rate of caffeine intake among populations potentially vulnerable to the negative effects of 
caffeine consumption: pregnant and lactating women, children and adolescents, young 
adults, and people with underlying heart or other health conditions, such as mental 
illness. Here, we review the research into the safety and safe doses of ingested caffeine 
in healthy and in vulnerable populations. We report that, for healthy adults, caffeine 
consumption is relatively safe, but that for some vulnerable populations, caffeine con-
sumption could be harmful, including impairments in cardiovascular function, sleep, and 
substance use. We also identified several gaps in the literature on which we based 
recommendations for the future of caffeine research.
Keywords: caffeine, energy drinks, pregnancy, children, adolescence
iNTRODUCTiON
Caffeine is the most widely consumed psychoactive drug in the world (1) and one of the most 
comprehensively studied ingredients in the food supply. It occurs naturally in the leaves and seeds 
of many plants and has a taste bitter enough to deter pests (2). Natural sources of dietary caffeine 
include coffee, tea, and chocolate. Synthetic caffeine is also added to products to enhance their 
stimulant properties. Historically, this addition was limited to soda-type beverages, but over the 
past decade, caffeine has been added to a diverse variety of foods and non-food items to promote 
arousal, alertness, energy, and elevated mood (3–5). This recent increase in caffeine-containing food 
products, as well as changes in patterns of consumption of the more traditional sources of caffeine, 
has increased scrutiny by health authorities and regulatory bodies of the overall consumption of 
caffeine and its potential cumulative effects on behavior and physiology. Of particular concern is 
the rate of caffeine intake among populations potentially vulnerable to its negative effects. Health 
and regulatory authorities have recently highlighted the risk of consumption among pregnant and 
lactating women, children, adolescents, young adults, and people with underlying heart and other 
health conditions.
In light of these concerns, we conducted a comprehensive review of all relevant published clinical 
and intervention trials, observational studies, systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and expert reviews 
 2
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
on the use and safety of caffeine in humans, complemented where 
needed (e.g., for aspects of safety or mechanisms of action) with 
evidence from animal studies. We evaluated the strengths and 
limitations of the evidence on the safety of ingested caffeine, 
specifically focusing on the safety of caffeine-containing foods 
(e.g., beverages and solid foods). We summarize here what is 
known and what remains to be learned about caffeine intake 
and safety in healthy and vulnerable populations and highlight 
needed research.
DieTARY SOURCeS OF CAFFeiNe
Adults commonly consume caffeine in coffee and tea, both 
of which contain natural caffeine in their leaves or beans (6). 
Energy drinks often contain caffeine from natural products such 
as extracts from guarana leaves. In addition to coffee, tea, and 
energy drinks, caffeine is also naturally present in cocoa beans 
and thus in chocolate. The amount of caffeine in chocolate varies 
by the percentage of cocoa it contains, with 100% cocoa chocolate 
(unsweetened baking chocolate) containing around 240 mg 
caffeine/100 g, 55% cocoa (bittersweet) containing 124 mg caf-
feine/100 g, and 33% cocoa (milk chocolate) containing 45 mg 
caffeine/100 g (7). Synthetic caffeine is also added to soda and 
energy drinks (8), which are commonly consumed by children 
and adolescents worldwide, and to other food and non-food prod-
ucts with niche markets for subsets of consumers, such as juice, 
chewing gum, water, cookies, hot sauce, candy, beef jerky, mints, 
syrup, waffles, shampoo, soap, lip balm, eye cream, body scrub, 
and body lotion. These products are primarily marketed with 
claims that they provide energy, alertness, or are “age-defying.” 
Last year, the FDA announced that it will begin investigating the 
safety of caffeine added to food products, with a special emphasis 
on children and adolescents.1
Caffeine is a constituent of many over-the-counter pain reliev-
ers and prescription drugs because the vasoconstricting and anti-
inflammatory effects of caffeine act as a compliment to analgesics, 
in some cases increasing the effectiveness of pain relievers by up 
to 40% (9–14). Caffeine is used for general pain relief in medica-
tions such as Midol™ and Vanquis™, which contain doses rang-
ing from 33 to 60 mg. It is used therapeutically in combination 
with ergotamine to treat migraine headaches and in combination 
with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics. Anacin™, 
Excedrin™, Goody’s™ headache powder, and pain reliever 
plus contain between 32 and 65 mg of caffeine, and prescription 
headache medications, including Fiorinal, Orphenadrine, and 
Synalgos, contain between 30 and 60 mg of caffeine.
Alone, caffeine is used as a somnolytic to counteract drowsiness 
(e.g., NoDoze™ and Vivarin™ each contain 200 mg of caffeine), 
to enhance seizure duration in electroconvulsive therapy, and to 
treat respiratory depression in neonates, postprandial hypoten-
sion, and obesity (15–18). Similar synergistic additive effects of 
caffeine and medications also occur in treatments for asthma 
and gall bladder disease, attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, 
shortness-of-breath in newborns, low blood pressure, and weight 
1 https://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm350570.htm.
loss (19–24). Between 50 and 200 mg of caffeine is added to 
some weight-loss supplements (Dexatrim™, Hydroxycut™, and 
Nutrisystem™ Energi-Zing Shake) for its purported effects on 
appetite suppression and increased metabolism (25).
eSTiMATeS OF CAFFeiNe 
CONSUMPTiON
Recent estimates in adults suggest that more than 85% of adults 
in the U.S. regularly consume caffeine, with an average daily 
intake of about 180 mg/day, about the amount of caffeine in up 
to two cups of coffee (6, 26). Among children and adolescents, 
caffeine use appears to be either stable or slightly decreasing 
over time, despite the influx of new caffeine-containing products 
on the market. For example, a study by Ahluwalia and Herrick 
using NHANES data reports that about 75% of U.S. children 
between 6 and 19 years old consume caffeine, with an average 
consumption of 25 mg/day in children 2–11 years old and 50 mg/
day in children 12–17 years old (8). Another study also using the 
NHANES dataset reports average caffeine consumption in chil-
dren and adolescents as 35 mg/day, with 4–8 years old consuming 
 
15 mg/day, 9–13 years old consuming 26 mg/day, and 14–19 years 
old consuming 61 mg/day (27).
Coffee consumption varies worldwide: Finland and Norway 
are at the top of the list, with averages of 9.6 and 7.2 kg of coffee 
consumed per capita per year. The U.S. ranks 22nd, with 3.1 kg. A 
1984 study showed that Canada and the U.S. had per capita rates 
of caffeine consumption that were triple the worldwide average 
but that were still half of what was consumed in countries such as 
Sweden and the United Kingdom (U.K.) (28). A more recent study 
from the Canadian Community Health Survey found that coffee 
was the second most popular drink among Canadian adults, with 
water being the first (29). The U.K.’s National Diet and Nutrition 
Survey also collected information on caffeine consumption 
through foods and beverages from adults and children. These data 
show that, on average, adults in the U.K. consume about 130 mg/
day of caffeine and that children consume about 35 mg/day (30). 
A study from Japan using 4-day food diaries reported average 
daily caffeine consumption as about 260 mg/day in adults (31). 
Finally, people in Finland, Norway, the Netherlands, and Sweden 
are consistently reported to drink the most caffeine, primarily 
from coffee. However, these estimates are derived from sales of 
coffee and not from surveys of individual intake.
TReNDS iN CAFFeiNe CONSUMPTiON
Trends in caffeine consumption have been stable among adults for 
the past two decades (6). Among children aged 2–19 years old, caf-
feine consumption increased significantly from the 1970s through 
the 1990s (5, 32). This increase was also marked by a decrease in 
dairy consumption and an increase in soda consumption (32). 
More recent data suggest that caffeine consumption has remained 
stable among this age group since the 1990s (8, 33), a finding 
similar to that in adults. This stability is somewhat surprising, given 
the marked increase in the number, variety, and availability of caf-
feinated beverages introduced in the past decade. Some researchers 
 3
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
speculate that this stability reflects a lag in data collection or in 
consumption trends from when products are introduced to the 
market to when data are collected (for example, the most recent 
NHANES data on caffeine consumption are from 2011). Another 
potential explanation is that a possible decline in consumption 
among younger children has been offset by increased consumption 
among older adolescents and young adults attracted to the increas-
ing number of new caffeine-containing products. Targeted market-
ing strategies seem to support this explanation. Advertisements 
for caffeinated energy drinks, the fastest growing segment of the 
beverage market (34, 35), are specifically aimed at adolescent and 
young adult males (36, 37). Given the popularity and prevalence of 
energy drinks, caffeine consumption could reasonably be expected 
to increase quickly among children and adolescents.
Caffeine intake usually begins in childhood, most often in 
the form of chocolate, soda, and chocolate milk (8). As children 
become adolescents, they increase consumption of soda and 
begin to add beverages with greater caffeine content, such as cof-
fee and energy drinks (8). Average caffeine intakes increase from 
about 50 mg/day in childhood (aged 2–11 years) to 180 mg/day 
in adulthood (6). This amount is about 2 mg/kg/day in children, 
2.4 mg/kg/day in women, and 2.0 mg/kg/day in men. This shift 
in absolute caffeine intake from childhood to adulthood is related 
to changes in the pattern of consumption, with adults adopting 
a more regular, daily pattern of consumption relative to children 
(6). In addition, the dietary sources of caffeine shift over the lifes-
pan: adults primarily consume coffee and tea, whereas children 
and adolescents consume primarily soda and chocolate, which 
contain much lower amounts of caffeine.
The pattern of caffeine use changes across the lifespan has 
not been studied, but tolerance to the effects of caffeine has been 
speculated to increase the desire for larger doses to reverse the 
impact of overnight caffeine withdrawal (38). In addition, once 
caffeine intake is great enough to disrupt sleep, or if sleep duration 
is shortened by other factors, caffeine is often used to promote 
morning arousal, which can further disrupt sleep, creating a pat-
tern in which caffeine is both the cause and the cure for too little 
sleep (38, 39). Variations in caffeine sensitivity and consumption 
may relate to polymorphisms in enzymes that degrade caffeine 
and in adenosine receptors, which are the primary targets of 
caffeine (40).
THe PHARMACOKiNeTiCS OF CAFFeiNe
Caffeine works by binding to adenosine receptors located in the 
central and peripheral nervous systems as well as in various organs, 
such as the heart, and blood vessels. Adenosine is a molecule 
involved in numerous biochemical pathways, mostly for energy 
transfer (in the form of adenosine triphosphate, the basic fuel 
of cells) and signaling. Adenosine is a neuromodulator that can 
promote sleep, affect memory and learning, and protect cells after 
insults. Adenosine can also act on several types of cognate recep-
tors: for example, A1, A2a, A2b, and A3, which are G-coupled 
proteins. In the central nervous system, activating A1 receptors 
inhibits the release of neurotransmitters, whereas activating A2a 
receptors promotes their release (41). During early stages of brain 
development, the predominant effect of caffeine is to antagonize 
type 2A adenosine receptors, slowing down the migration speed of 
some neurons (42). At toxic doses (i.e., extreme doses that humans 
rarely absorb), caffeine can alter other cellular functions, releasing 
Ca2+ from intracellular stores at lethal levels (43). The toxic dose 
effects are not considered here because, although they are of great 
concern to the medical profession and may be on the rise, they 
are still rare compared to other, non-lethal caffeine effects and the 
precise mechanism of caffeine toxicity has not been investigated in 
humans.
Absorption and Metabolism
Caffeine is usually ingested. Caffeine is soluble in water and lipids, 
easily crosses the blood–brain barrier, and can be found in all 
body fluids, including saliva and cerebrospinal fluid. Importantly, 
caffeine ingested by women perinatally will be present in the 
umbilical cord and breast milk. Hence, it will also be present in 
the fetus and in breastfed infants. Caffeine is absorbed rapidly 
and totally in the small intestine in less than 1 h (44) and diffuses 
rapidly in other tissues (45). Absorption by the small intestine 
does not seem to vary by sex, genetic background, environmental 
factors, or other variables (46), although specific studies are still 
needed to confirm this premise. Caffeine concentrations peak in 
saliva 45 min after ingestion (47) and in serum after about 2 h 
(48). Caffeine has a relatively long half-life of 3–7 h in adults. In 
neonates, the half-life is even longer—between 65 and 130 h—
because of their immature kidneys and liver. Peak concentrations 
are important because the effects of caffeine depend in part on 
the length of time it remains in tissues. Clearly, the effects are age 
dependent and depend on complex genetic and environmental 
interactions.
Caffeine is primarily metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome 
P450 oxidase enzyme system; in particular, by the CYP1A2 
enzyme. However, this oxidase enzyme system is also present in 
other tissues, including the brain (49). Caffeine metabolism is 
affected by several factors, described in detail below.
Genetic variation
The CYP1A2 gene, which encodes for a cytochrome P450 
enzyme, has a large genetic variability. At least 150 single-nucle-
otide polymorphisms can accelerate caffeine clearance (50). The 
metabolic consequences of this polymorphism on caffeine down-
stream effects should be studied in humans. Genetic variation 
 
(i.e., increased or decreased activity of the cytochrome P450 
oxidase enzyme) may increase or decrease the possible harmful 
effects of caffeine (e.g., during pregnancy) and any beneficial 
effects (e.g., on memory and learning during aging or in 
pathologies, such as Alzheimer’s disease). The half-life of caf-
feine may also be increased in liver diseases, which decreases 
P450 activity (50).
The molecular targets of caffeine, namely the adenosine recep-
tors, also have great genetic variability. For example, common 
variants of the gene encoding for the A2a receptor can disrupt 
sleep (51) or cause anxiety in some individuals (52) after ingest-
ing caffeine. More studies are needed to determine the effects of 
genetic variants on the consequences of caffeine consumption 
(53), not only in the central nervous system but also in other 
organs, such as the heart (40).
 TAble 1 | Summary of outcome measures investigated.
Outcome
impact of 
caffeine
Comments
Cognitive effects
 
More effective in withdrawn and fatigued 
individuals
Neurological disorders
 
More pronounced benefits in women
Pain relief
 
Works along with other pain relievers to 
improve their effectiveness
Cardiovascular 
function
 
Dose-dependent effects on BP and HR. 
Harmful in cardiac patients
Vascular system
 
Caffeine causes vasoconstriction. Can 
increase risk for myocardial ischemia
Reproductive effects
 
High caffeine increases risk of miscarriage
Congenital anomalies
 
No clear association with caffeine
Birth weight
 
Negative correlation between caffeine 
intake and birth weight
Lactation
 
Could increase fussiness and impair sleep 
in infants
Behavioral disorders 
in children
 
Energy drink consumption is positively 
associated with negative behavioral 
outcomes
Sleep disturbance
 
Caffeine disrupts sleep in all populations 
studied
Death
 
Rare
Cancer
 
No clear association, but few studies
Unstable bladder
 
Primarily in women with preexisting 
bladder symptoms
Drug Interactions
 
Potential negative interactions with many 
medications
Hydration and diuresis
 
No clear relationship
Arrows indicate whether caffeine increases, decreases, or has no impact on the 
outcome and the number of arrows indicates the strength of the relationship.
4
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
Circadian Rhythms
The expression of the cytochrome P450 epoxygenases is regulated 
in a circadian manner (54). Although this effect was discovered 
in cultured rodent cells, it may apply to many species, including 
humans (55). The implications are particularly important because 
the effects of caffeine (at least the duration of its activity) will 
differ during the circadian cycle. Because caffeine can alter sleep, 
it may also change the circadian rhythm, leading to a change in 
expression patterns for the cytochrome P450. One interesting 
hypothesis is whether caffeine consumption in adolescents and 
adults disrupts the expression of P450 in relation to its circadian 
rhythm. If the expression is downregulated, the effects of caffeine 
could be prolonged and produce a negative feedback loop.
Steroid Hormones
The cytochrome P450 oxidase enzyme system is the same enzyme 
that metabolizes steroid hormones (56). Thus, steroid hormones 
slow caffeine metabolism. In women, this effect slows the 
metabolism of caffeine during pregnancy and when taking oral 
contraceptives (57). However, studies have not found marked dif-
ferences in caffeine metabolism between the luteal and follicular 
phases of the menstrual cycle (57, 58). Oral contraceptives tend 
to double the half-life of caffeine (59).
Pregnancy
The half-life of caffeine is on average 8.3 h longer during pregnancy 
and may be as much as 16 h longer than usual (60, 61). This longer 
half-life means that the effects of caffeine will be longer lasting in 
women and in the fetus. Given the effects that caffeine may have 
on brain development, this increased half-life in pregnant women 
should be taken into account when considering safety issues.
infancy
Caffeine is eliminated more slowly during early infancy, requiring 
perhaps 80 h in preterm and healthy-term neonates, because of 
the reduced efficiency of cytochrome P450 (62, 63). Elimination 
is likely to be at least as slow in the fetus. Fetal exposure to caf-
feine during pregnancy may potentially have long-lasting effects, 
especially in the brain. By age 6 months, infants eliminate caffeine 
at the same rate as that of adults (62).
Substance Use
Cigarette smoking doubles the rate of caffeine clearance by increas-
ing liver enzyme activity, which may explain the higher rate of caf-
feine consumption among smokers (64). Substantial alcohol intake 
increases the half-life of caffeine and decreases its clearance (65).
CeNTRAl AND PeRiPHeRAl eFFeCTS  
OF CAFFeiNe
The general effects of caffeine on body functions are summa-
rized in Table 1.
Cognitive effects
Caffeine can influence objective and perceived cognitive 
performance by increasing alertness and wakefulness (66–68). 
Acute caffeine can also improve performance on memory tasks 
(69, 70). Finally, caffeine improves psychomotor vigilance, such 
as reaction time (71–73). The impact of caffeine appears to be 
greater under conditions that would negatively impact per-
formance, such as acute caffeine withdrawal (74–76) or sleep 
deprivation (71, 77). In fact, studies that have employed long-
term caffeine withdrawal methodology have consistently failed 
to find cognitive enhancing effects of acute caffeine (78–82). 
Nevertheless, in 2001, the Institute of Medicine’s Food and 
Nutrition Board Committee on Military Nutrition Research 
reported that ingesting 150 mg of caffeine enhances cognitive 
performance for at least 10 h (83), and this recommendation 
has not been updated in light of more recent empirical findings.
Numerous preclinical studies have found that antagonizing 
adenosine receptors, including with caffeine, has neuropro-
tective effects during aging and in neurological disorders by 
slowing cognitive decline and the progression of the disorders 
[reviewed in Ref. (84, 85)]. Based on these animal studies, 
several large longitudinal clinical studies in different countries 
have established an inverse relationship between coffee con-
sumption and memory decline during normal aging (86–88). 
 5
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
However, a study of 4,200 women and 1,800 men reported 
that caffeine consumption reduced cognitive decline only in 
women (69). In addition, a more recent study in a small group 
of women (89) failed to replicate the findings of the Ritchie 
study, demonstrating that more work is needed to understand 
the relationship between habitual caffeine consumption and 
cognitive performance. Finally, large cohort studies of men and 
women have also found an inverse relationship between caffeine 
consumption and the risk of Parkinson’s disease (90–92) and 
Alzheimer’s disease (93–95).
Pain Relief
Caffeine has long been used to treat pain. However, its pain-
reduction effects were not properly studied until 1984, when 
Lachance (96) documented that additive caffeine reduced the 
dose of acetaminophen necessary to achieve the target of a 40% 
reduction in pain scores (96). Since then, the vasoconstricting 
action of caffeine, secondary to adenosine receptor antago-
nism, has been associated with pain relief (97). Several studies 
have reported that acute dietary caffeine consumption can 
reduce pain (98, 99). In addition, caffeine in doses of between 
300 and 500 mg can soothe post-dural puncture headaches, 
which is the most common complication of lumbar puncture 
procedures (100).
Cardiovascular effects
In general, acute intake of caffeine stimulates a modest increase 
in blood pressure (both systolic and diastolic), effects on heart 
rate (bradycardia or tachycardia, depending on dose), and neu-
roendocrine effects (release of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and 
renin) (101). These effects suggest that the mechanism of action 
is an increase in intracellular calcium concentrations, the release 
of norepinephrine, and the sensitization of dopamine receptors. 
These events may lead to supraventricular and ventricular tach-
yarrhythmias, especially at high doses. One proposed mechanism 
for caffeine-related cardiac arrhythmias is, again, the blockade of 
adenosine receptors (102, 103).
Patients with cardiac disease are often warned about the 
potential harmful effects of caffeine. For example, 94% of several 
hundred physicians from Minnesota and Vermont recommended 
reducing or stopping caffeine for patients reporting heart palpita-
tions (104). However, this advice has been based primarily on 
anecdote and folklore (105, 106). Many of caffeine’s health effects 
occur after sympathetic excitation. Today, however, data suggest 
that caffeine does have cardiac effects, and arrhythmia is among 
them (107). Moreover, effects that do exist differ by dose and 
between habitual and non-habitual users. This severity of these 
threats often depends on such factors as preexisting medical 
conditions as well as the quantity of the ingredients taken and 
the length of time a person has been exposed to these substances. 
Many of the ingredients that include caffeine alone or in combi-
nation with other active substances have the potential to interact 
with prescription and over-the-counter medications. At typical 
caffeine doses, however, studies have documented mild changes 
in heart rate and blood pressure, a slight increase in sympathetic 
activity, and small changes in cardiac electrophysiological prop-
erties (105, 108–110).
vascular System effects
Caffeine is believed to improve endothelial cell function at rest by 
increasing intracellular calcium concentrations, which stimulates 
the expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase, which in turn 
stimulates the endothelial cells to produce nitric oxide. The nitric 
oxide then diffuses into vascular smooth muscle, which lies just 
underneath the endothelial cells, causing vasodilation (111). 
Caffeine can also bind directly to the vascular smooth muscle cell 
receptors and, through similar mechanisms, cause vasoconstric-
tion (112).
The above information not withstanding, consuming caffeine 
immediately before or during exercise can be harmful and may 
increase the risk for myocardial ischemia (113). Indirect labora-
tory measures indicate that caffeine consumed immediately 
before exercising substantially reduces myocardial blood flow 
in healthy individuals (114). Several mechanisms may explain 
this reduction (114), including the ability of caffeine to block 
adenosine receptors that modulate coronary vasomotor tone. 
This vasoconstrictive effect might be more pronounced among 
caffeine-naïve individuals or in those who quickly ingest higher 
amounts of caffeine: for example, by consuming energy drinks. 
When caffeine blocks adenosine receptors, it reduces the ability 
of the coronary arteries to improve their flow commensurate with 
the increased myocardial demand of exercise, which could result 
in supply demand ischemia (114).
CAFFeiNe TOXiCiTY
Seifert et al. (115) examined data from calls to the U.S. National 
Poison Data System made between October 1, 2010 and 
September 30, 2011 related to caffeine exposure and energy drink 
consumption (115). Of 2.3 million calls, 4,854 (0.2%) were energy 
drink related. Of the 1,480 calls related to exposures not involving 
alcohol, 51% concerned children under the age of 6, and 77% 
were the result of unintentional ingestion. The overall incidence 
of moderate-to-major adverse effects of energy drink-related 
toxicity was 15.2% for non-alcoholic energy drinks. The seven 
cases with major adverse effects consisted of three with seizure, 
two with non-ventricular dysrhythmia, one with ventricular dys-
rhythmia, and one with tachypnea. Of the same 1,480 calls, 946 
concerned products containing caffeine only and 534 concerned 
products with caffeine-containing additives, such as guarana (a 
plant whose seeds are high in caffeine) or taurine (a naturally 
occurring organic acid often used as a nutritional supplement). 
Compared to energy drinks with additives, caffeine-only expo-
sures involved a significantly greater proportion of cases less than 
6 years old (50.7%) and a greater proportion of unintentional 
exposures (76.7%). The proportion of cases involving additives 
referred to a health-care facility was also significantly greater, as 
was the incidence of toxic effects of any severity. One caveat to this 
study is that information on preexisting medical conditions was 
not available for the cases studied. Research in this area should 
attempt to include and account for preexisting health conditions.
Researchers have also expressed concern about unintentional 
caffeine consumption and an increase in overconsumption of 
caffeinated energy drinks in children and young adults. For 
 6
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
example, Bronstein et al. (116) identified 48,177 poison center 
calls related to caffeine consumption and 6,724 calls related 
specifically to energy drink consumption. Seifert et al. (115) also 
reported that 55% of calls regarding caffeine consumption were 
related to unintentional exposures (115, 116). A study of 13- to 
17-year olds admitted to urban emergency rooms in the U.S. 
found that more than half reported consuming energy drinks in 
the past month, and those who had were also more likely to report 
that they had “gotten into trouble at home, school, or work” than 
those who consumed other types of caffeinated beverages [OR: 
3.12 (1.24–7.88)] (117).
In March 2013, 18 scientific and medical experts sent the 
FDA commissioner a report summarizing the research findings 
on energy drink consumption in children. This report concluded 
“… there is neither sufficient evidence of safety nor a consensus 
of scientific opinion to conclude that the high levels of added 
caffeine in energy drinks are safe under the conditions of their 
intended use, as required by the FDA’s Generally Recognized As 
Safe standards for food additives. To the contrary, the best avail-
able scientific evidence demonstrates a robust correlation between 
the caffeine levels in energy drinks and adverse health and safety 
consequences, particularly among children, adolescents, and 
young adults” (118). Furthermore, the Institute of Medicine has 
recommended that drinks containing caffeine should not be sold 
to children at school (119). In addition, The American Academy 
of Pediatrics’ Committee on Nutrition and the Council on Sports 
Medicine and Fitness recently concluded that “rigorous review 
and analysis of the literature reveal that caffeine and other stimu-
lant substances contained in energy drinks have no place in the 
diet of children and adolescents” (120).
Death
Death from caffeine ingestion appears to be rare. This rarity 
may be related, in part, to the marked gastric irritation from 
caffeine that results in spontaneous emesis. Nevertheless, several 
hospitalizations and some deaths from caffeine toxicity have been 
reported (121). For example, between 2005 and 2011, there were 
79,438 emergency room visits attributable to overconsumption of 
energy products containing high levels of caffeine in patients aged 
12 years and older (121). In most of these cases, the mechanism 
seems to be tachyarrhythmia and involves unusually high doses of 
caffeine (>3 mg/kg) (121). Most deaths after caffeine intoxication 
were caused by overdoses of diet pills and stimulants, and most 
have occurred in young patients without known underlying heart 
disease or any variant of normal, such as mitral valve prolapse. 
In one non-fatal adverse event report, no predisposing factors 
or structural cardiac abnormality were associated with atrial 
fibrillation (122). In this case, caffeine-induced atrial fibrillation 
spontaneously reverted to normal sinus rhythm.
Reproductive effects
Caffeine consumption is associated with fertility indices in some 
studies but not in others. An extensive literature review by the 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory concluded that chronic caffeine 
intake in humans is related to adverse effects on conception and 
reproduction, such as delayed conception and decreased fecun-
dity. These effects appeared at caffeine doses above 200 mg/day 
(121). A separate review concluded that for healthy adults, intakes 
below 400 mg/day were not associated with adverse reproductive 
effects; however, the authors recommended consumption below 
300 mg/day for women of reproductive age (123). In addition, 
some researchers argue that any association between caffeine 
intake and reproductive outcomes may be explained by other 
variables, such as maternal smoking or substance use and that 
research should address confounding, as well as errors in measur-
ing exposure (124).
Reports regarding caffeine consumption and spontaneous 
abortions have also been conflicting. Weng et al. (125) reported a 
hazard ratio of 2.23 for spontaneous abortion among 164 women 
who consumed 200 mg/day or more of caffeine and of 1.34 for 899 
women who consumed less than 200 mg/day (125). After adjust-
ing for pregnancy symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting, other 
researchers found that consuming doses of 200 mg/day or more 
still almost doubled the risk of spontaneous abortion. A meta-
analysis by Chen et al. (126) reported that, compared to a no or 
very low caffeine intake reference group (0–50 mg/day during 
pregnancy), every additional 100 mg/day of caffeine (about the 
amount contained in a typical cup of coffee) increased the risk of 
pregnancy loss (both miscarriage and stillbirth) by 7% (126). In 
addition, among women consuming more than 700 mg/day, the 
risk of pregnancy loss was increased by 72%. Similar findings were 
reported by Li et al. (127), who found in a separate meta-analysis 
of 26 studies that the risk of pregnancy loss increased by 19% for 
every additional 150 mg of caffeine consumed per day and by 8% 
for every additional 2 cups of coffee (about 200 mg) per day (127). 
However, Savitz et al. (128) reported no association among 2407 
women who were interviewed regarding caffeine intake before 
experiencing spontaneous abortion (128). This finding suggests 
that recall bias may explain the increased hazards of spontane-
ous abortion reported by Weng et al. (125) and potentially other 
researchers (125). Other comprehensive reviews have reported 
some evidence that caffeine intakes of more than 300 mg/day have 
been associated with spontaneous abortion and low birth weight, 
but all have stressed the need for further research before a causal 
relationship can be established (129, 130). A recent study from 
the Nurses Health Study shows pre-pregnancy coffee consump-
tion at levels ≥4 serving/day is associated with an increased risk 
of spontaneous abortions, particularly at 8–19 weeks gestational 
age (131).
Congenital Anomalies
No clear association has been found in humans between mod-
erate doses of caffeine ingestion during pregnancy and birth 
defects, including congenital heart disease (132). For example, 
the National Birth Defects Prevention Study found variable 
results for this possible association (133). In another study of 
2,030 malformed infants, the risk of congenital anomalies was 
not related to the total maternal daily caffeine ingestion below 
400 mg/day (or up to 4 cups of coffee) during pregnancy (134). 
Other studies have found that the frequency of all congenital 
malformations, including congenital heart defects, was no higher 
than expected among women who drank between four and 
eight cups of coffee daily during their pregnancy (135, 136). The 
Institute of Medicine’s Workshop on Potential Health Hazards 
 7
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
Associated with Consumption of Caffeine in Food and Dietary 
Supplements found that risk of congenital defects from caffeine 
was not increased in the range of amounts women typically 
consumed during pregnancy (121).
The consequences of caffeine consumption during pregnancy 
on offspring have recently been studied in mice (137). Caffeine 
consumption by the dam (the human equivalent of two to three 
cups of coffee per day) was associated with caffeine concentra-
tions in the offspring brain that were similar to those in the 
umbilical cords of women drinking two to three cups of coffee 
per day (138). At early stages of development, specific types of 
neurons arise in particular brain regions and then migrate to their 
target areas. Caffeine slowed the migration of these neurons by 
50% by antagonizing adenosine type 2A receptors. As a result, 
these neurons were late at being incorporated into the circuitry, 
with negative consequences: pups were more susceptible to sei-
zures, and in adulthood, in utero exposed mice had mild cognitive 
deficits. This study was the first to document that caffeine expo-
sure during pregnancy could harm the offspring. Generalizing 
the results of animal studies to humans is always speculative, 
but these results strongly justify conducting prospective studies 
in humans. Interestingly, in keeping with animal data, greater 
exposure to caffeine during pregnancy is associated with a lower 
IQ in children at age 5.5 years (139). This finding again supports 
the need for additional studies in humans.
birth weight effects
Several studies have reported a significant negative association 
between maternal caffeine consumption and birth weight (84, 85, 
140–142). However, two other large prospective cohort studies 
reported a dose-dependent positive association between caffeine 
intake during pregnancy and the risk of adverse birth weight-
related outcomes, such as fetal growth restriction and small for 
gestational age babies (143, 144). In these studies, caffeine intake 
and adverse birth weight-related outcomes were found at all 
amounts of maternal caffeine intake. In both studies, the risk for 
adverse birth-related outcomes increased notably at a caffeine 
dose of 200 mg/day from all nutritional sources. In addition, 
one study of 1,207 pregnant women reported that, although they 
tended to reduce consumption of caffeine during pregnancy, a 
moderate decrease in caffeine intake to 100 mg/day in the third 
trimester of pregnancy did not decrease the risk of adverse birth 
weight-related outcomes (145).
Two separate meta-analyses of different sets of studies by Rhee 
et al. (142) and Chen et al. (146) reported odds ratios of having 
a newborn classified as low-birth weight (less than 2,500 g) for 
maternal caffeine consumption above 50 mg/day when compared 
to intakes below 50 mg/day. Furthermore, both meta-analyses 
found an increased risk of low-birth weight offspring for every 
100 mg/day increase in maternal caffeine consumption (OR, 
1.03–1.62). Another study by Hoyt et al. (140) found the odds 
ratios of having a low-birth weight baby increased to a range of 
1.3–2.1 in women consuming more than 300 mg/day of caffeine 
during pregnancy (140).
Taken together, these studies provide substantial evidence 
of a negative association between maternal caffeine consump-
tion and infant birth weight. Even so, the studies all relied on 
maternal self-report about caffeine intake; thus, the data may not be 
 
accurate. Furthermore, it is possible that additional variables, not 
controlled for in the analyses, could explain these relationships. 
For example, chronic sleep loss during pregnancy is also associ-
ated with poor birth outcomes, including low birth weight (147). 
Thus, pregnant women with disrupted sleep might use more caf-
feine to increase alertness, so the impact on birth weight could be 
related to short sleep duration and not to caffeine. Although this 
conclusion is speculative, it highlights the importance of consid-
ering additional variables when interpreting correlational data.
lactation
Caffeine may cause irritability and sleep disruption in nursing 
infants whose mothers consume caffeine (148), but the findings 
are equivocal (149). In addition, some evidence indicates that caf-
feine intake can reduce production of breast milk (148). Mothers 
are often advised by their doctors to reduce or eliminate caffeine 
intake if they feel that their infant shows signs of caffeine sensitiv-
ity, but there is no evidence in the literature of detrimental effects 
of caffeine ingestion during lactation in the general population. 
Behavioral issues, such as fussiness, jitteriness, and poor sleep 
patterns, have been reported among infants breastfed by mothers 
who consumed 10 or more cups of coffee (~1 g of caffeine) per 
day (121). The effects of caffeine in breast milk can be amplified 
in preterm infants or infants less than 5 months old because they 
metabolize caffeine so slowly (121). In addition, an intake of more 
than 450 mL (about two cups) of coffee per day may decrease breast 
milk iron concentrations, which could contribute to infant anemia 
(150). However, the European Food Safety Authority concluded 
that a single dose of 200 mg or less of caffeine (about two cups) 
consumed by lactating women, as well as chronic intakes at or 
below 200 mg, pose no safety concerns for breastfed infants (151).
Outcomes after infancy
Few studies have examined the impact of maternal caffeine 
intake on outcomes after infancy. One study by Klebanoff and 
Keim (152, 153) using 2,197 mother–child dyads measured 
child IQ and problem behaviors and examined correlations with 
maternal paraxanthine concentrations (a metabolite of caffeine) 
taken between 20 and 26 weeks of gestation (152, 153). This study 
found no meaningful relationship between maternal caffeine 
intake during pregnancy and a range of behavioral and cognitive 
measures in children 4–7 years old. However, another study of 
1,083 mother–child pairs revealed that children who were born 
to mothers who estimated caffeine intake >200 mg/day during 
pregnancy had an odds ratio of 2.3 (95% confidence interval of 
1.13–4.69) of having a child with a lower IQ at age of 5.5 years 
compared to the reference population of mothers reporting 
<100 mg/day of caffeine consumption (139). A study by Li et al. 
(154) reported that maternal caffeine intake was associated with 
increased odds of childhood obesity, with each 100-mg increase 
in daily maternal caffeine intake being associated with a 23% 
higher odds of obesity at age 15 years (127), although a study 
by Klebanoff and Keim found no relationships between maternal 
caffeine consumption and childhood obesity (152, 153).
The above studies are correlational; thus, causation cannot 
be determined. In addition, the maternal caffeine intake in 
 8
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
these studies was estimated based on self-reports. One potential 
explanation for the discrepancies described above is the method 
used to determine caffeine use. In the study by Klebanoff and 
Keim (152, 153), which found no significant relationship between 
maternal caffeine intake and outcomes after infancy, measured 
serum caffeine concentrations and did not use self-report 
 
(152, 153). By contrast, the studies that found significant relation-
ships between maternal intake and measures in the offspring after 
infancy relied exclusively on retrospective self-reports, several 
years after the fact, about prenatal caffeine consumption by moth-
ers after they gave birth and during the first two trimesters of 
pregnancy, respectively. Caffeine intake was estimated from food-
frequency questionnaires or interviews in which women reported 
how often and how much they consumed coffee, tea, and soda. 
Other variables affecting self-reported caffeine consumption and 
offspring behavioral outcomes might explain these relationships, 
but in the study that relied entirely on serum concentrations, such 
variables were not identified. These studies also measured dif-
ferent outcomes in the offspring. Klebanoff and Keim (152, 153) 
had the most comprehensive battery of cognitive and behavioral 
outcomes, but Galera et al. (139) only measured IQ (The Wechsler 
Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence Third Edition), and 
 
Li et al. (127) only measured weight and weight gain in the 
offspring (139, 152–154). Meaningful comparisons of studies 
are difficult when the methods for assessing caffeine intake and 
the outcomes are different. Research with objective measures of 
caffeine intake and standard outcomes is needed.
OTHeR eXiSTeNT, eMeRGiNG, OR MiNOR 
iSSUeS
Cancer
Most of the research examining linkages between caffeine and 
cancer has been conducted on coffee and tea and not on caffeine 
specifically, which makes it difficult to determine the mechanism. 
The International Agency for Research on Cancer has concluded 
that the evidence is insufficient to conclude that caffeine, as con-
sumed by a typical coffee drinker, is carcinogenic (121). Several 
large prospective trials have reached the same conclusion (123, 
155, 156). Furthermore, Nawrot et al. (123) concluded in their 
review of the research that caffeine is unlikely to be a human 
carcinogen at levels less than 500 mg/day, to the equivalent of 
five cups of coffee (123).
Unstable bladder
Excessive caffeine intake (more than 400 mg/day) may increase 
the risk of detrusor instability (unstable bladder) in women (157). 
For women with preexisting bladder symptoms, even moderate 
caffeine intake (200–400 mg/day) may increase the risk for 
unstable bladder (157). This finding was confirmed in another 
case–control study of women who were given 200 mg of caffeine 
citrate (158). In addition, caffeine intake of 4.5 mg/kg/day caused 
early urgency and frequency of urination in men and women 
with overactive bladder (159). However, these studies did not 
examine whether a decrease in caffeine intake was associated with 
improvements in overactive bladder symptoms. Studies should 
address this issue.
Caffeine–Drug interactions
According to www.drugs.com (a site owned by The Drugsite 
Trust, a privately held Trust administered by two New Zealand 
Pharmacists), 85 drugs (430 brand and generic names) are 
known to interact with caffeine, of which 11 can lead to major 
interactions.2 Because caffeine consumption is at an all-time high 
and prescription drug use is more prevalent than ever, the risk of 
negative caffeine and prescription drug interactions is increasing 
(160, 161). Because of the popularity of caffeine, clinicians should 
be conscious of the pharmacokinetic interactions between dietary 
caffeine and over-the-counter and prescription medications, and 
they should provide the necessary guidance to the patient includ-
ing dietary restrictions. We also recommend that the potential 
interaction with these drugs be appropriately addressed on the 
labeling.
Hydration and Diuresis
Caffeine has a diuretic effect (123, 162, 163). However, in one 
clinical trial, different doses of caffeine (up to 6 mg/kg body 
weight) consumed by 59 habitual caffeine consumers after a 6-day 
run-in period of 3 mg/kg of caffeine did not markedly change 
hydration-related biomarkers, suggesting that increasing doses 
of caffeine did not induce hypohydration in these participants 
(164). These findings are supported by two similar studies, one in 
which 5 mg/kg body weight of caffeine was consumed daily for 
4 consecutive days by 30 men who normally consumed less than 
100 mg/day (42) and one in which 4 mg/kg body weight/day of 
caffeine from coffee was consumed for 3 consecutive days by 50 
adult male habitual coffee consumers who usually consumed 3–6 
cups of coffee/day (165). These findings suggest that the diuretic 
effects from consuming between 4 and 6 mg/kg body weight/
day of caffeine are not likely to have adverse consequences for 
healthy adults who are habitual consumers of caffeine. Similar 
studies should be conducted in populations that vary by health 
status, age, and sex.
POPUlATiONS AT-RiSK FOR HARMFUl 
eFFeCTS OF CAFFeiNe
Pregnant and lactating women
Pregnant women and fetuses may be particularly vulnerable to 
the effects of caffeine. Caffeine is a biologically active molecule 
that can act on multiple targets and affect numerous functions 
positively or negatively. At early stages of fetal development, 
caffeine may have deleterious effects (137). A recent prospective 
study suggests that preconception caffeine consumption may 
also pose a risk to pregnancy, with pre-pregnancy consumption 
of >400 mg of caffeine/day increasing the risk of spontaneous 
abortion by 11% compared with women who consumed <50 mg 
of caffeine/day (131). Many psychoactive compounds can cross 
the placental barrier and alter the development of the fetal brain. 
Once caffeine enters the fetal circulation, it is metabolized slowly 
because neither the placenta nor the fetus itself has cytochrome 
2 https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB00201#pharmacology.
 9
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
P450, the enzyme that metabolizes caffeine (166). This reduced 
caffeine metabolism results in a longer half-life and increased 
caffeine exposure to the fetus (141, 167). The American College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends limiting 
 
caffeine consumption during pregnancy to less than 200 mg/day 
(168). In the late 1970s, most women maintained their intake dur-
ing pregnancy at an average of about 190 mg/day3 (5). In the 1980s 
and 1990s, the average maternal caffeine consumption declined 
to about 125 mg/day (5). Consumption was reported to be about 
123 mg/day between 1997 and 2007 (84, 85) and was even lower 
(58 mg/day) in a 1999 survey (169). This decline has been attrib-
uted to FDA warnings that excess caffeine consumption during 
pregnancy may adversely affect neonates (170). Interestingly, 
however, in a small cohort of 105 women who drank coffee before 
pregnancy, 65% reported an aversion to coffee during the first 
trimester, and 95% voluntarily reduced their consumption during 
this trimester (171), so perhaps women might be naturally averse 
to caffeinated products during pregnancy.
Data on caffeine consumption during lactation are limited. One 
small study from Poland reported that average caffeine intake in a 
sample of lactating women ranged from 127 to 163 mg/day (172).
Children and Adolescents
Young children may be vulnerable to the effects of caffeine because 
they weigh less. For example, a typical can of soda contains about 
45 mg of caffeine on average. In an adult weighing 70 kg, the 
effective dose is 0.6 mg/kg, but in a child weighing 20 kg, the 
effective dose of the same soda would be 2.25 mg/kg. In compari-
son, the average caffeine intake in adults is 180 mg/day, resulting 
in an average effective dose of 2.5 mg/kg. Thus, the physiological 
impact of a single soda in a child may be equivalent to the impact 
of two cups of coffee in an average-sized adult. Adolescents may 
also be particularly vulnerable to the sleep-disrupting effects of 
caffeine because they may also use caffeinated beverages to stay 
awake (173, 174).
Data have been collected in children and adolescents using 
dose–response and placebo-controlled research methods. 
Outcomes, such as cardiovascular function (175–178), mood 
(179–181), and cognitive performance (82, 182), have all been 
measured at caffeine doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg. None of 
the results suggest that caffeine at these doses is acutely harmful 
to children and adolescents (183).
Some studies suggest an association between caffeine con-
sumption and longer term behavioral problems in youth, such 
as anger, violence, sleep disturbances, and alcohol and drug use 
(180, 184). Researchers in Iceland surveyed 7,400 adolescents 
(aged 14 and 15 years) and found that most reported consum-
ing caffeine on a typical day and that caffeine intake (primarily 
from soda and energy drinks) was related to daytime sleepiness 
and anger for both sexes (185). In a 2013 study of 3,747 15- to 
16-year olds, self-reported caffeine intake was strongly associated 
with self-reported violent behavior and conduct disorders (186). 
3 It is difficult to calculate the caffeine intake relative to body weight during preg-
nancy because women begin pregnancy at a broad range of weights, gain weight at 
different rates, and gain different amounts of weight. Because of this, only absolute 
caffeine intake is shown in this section.
In this study, 21% of participants consumed at least one energy 
drink per day.
Other studies have found that anxiety can be produced at a wide 
range of doses (200–2,000 mg of caffeine/day), but many of these 
studies have used psychiatric patients or patients with a preexisting 
 
anxiety disorder (123). Other effects in these studies included 
nervousness, fidgeting, jitteriness, restlessness, hyperactivity, and 
sleeplessness (123, 187, 188). When children were stratified by 
prestudy caffeine intake, emotions and behaviors differed between 
low- and high-dose consumers (187, 188). Children consuming 
high doses were more easily frustrated and were more nervous dur-
ing baseline tests than were the children consuming lower doses. 
Other studies have found that children with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder have higher rates of caffeine abuse, perhaps 
due to the additive effects of caffeine on dopamine action at the 
dopamine D2 dopamine receptor, similar to the way guanfacine 
works for children with this disorder (189, 190).
The safety of high-dose caffeine and energy drinks in younger 
individuals and caffeine-naïve individuals has not yet been 
determined. The consumption of highly caffeinated energy 
drinks has been associated with elevated blood pressure, altered 
heart rates, and severe cardiac events in children, adolescents, and 
young adults, especially those with underlying cardiovascular 
diseases (115, 177, 191, 192). For example, a study of 50 young 
adults found that consuming a sugar-free energy drink contain-
ing 80 mg of caffeine (slightly less than the caffeine contained 
in one cup of coffee) was associated with changes in platelet 
and endothelial function great enough to increase the risk for 
severe cardiac events in susceptible individuals (193). These 
findings show how the acute effects of caffeine on heart rate 
might result in cardiovascular events requiring hospitalization, 
especially in at-risk young adults. In addition, caffeine’s effects on 
blood pressure are more pronounced among African-American 
children than among Caucasian children (mean difference in 
blood pressure averaging 6.5 mm Hg) (175, 194). High doses of 
caffeine may exacerbate cardiac conditions for which stimulants 
are contraindicated (195–198). In particular, ion channelopathies 
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which is the most prevalent 
genetic cardiomyopathy in children and young adults (0.2% of the 
population), are of concern because of the risk of hypertension, 
syncope, arrhythmias, and sudden death (197, 199).
Patients with Mental illness
Another population that may be at risk for adverse effects of 
caffeine are patients with mental illness. Caffeine antagonism 
of adenosine receptors can result in enhanced dopaminergic 
signaling, thought to be due to a combination of increased 
dopamine release (200, 201), upregulation of dopamine recep-
tors, and increased affinity of dopamine receptors for dopamine 
in the striatum and nucleus accumbens (202). Furthermore, 
adenosine receptors can form heterodimers with dopamine 
receptors (203), which can modulate dopamine signaling. For 
some psychiatric illness, such as Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s 
disease, and depression, caffeine antagonism of adenosine recep-
tors may improve symptoms (204, 205) and slow the progres-
sion of neurodegeneration (206, 207), although these findings 
are equivocal with some studies reporting caffeine increases 
 10
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
depressive symptoms (208). For other mental illness, such as 
schizophrenia, caffeine may exacerbate psychotic symptoms 
(209), although the majority of this literature is informed by 
case studies, with very few double-blind placebo-controlled 
studies (210). There is also good evidence that higher caffeine 
use is associated with greater reporting of anxiety symptoms 
(211, 212) and may increase risk of symptom relapse (213) and 
suicide among bipolar disorder patients (214). Finally, there is 
strong empirical evidence that caffeine potentiates the rewarding 
effects of drugs of abuse (215–217), which suggests that caffeine 
use can increase vulnerability to substance use disorder (218). 
The lack of randomized control trials on the impact of caffeine 
in patients with mental illness makes it difficult to determine 
safe doses, effects of acute and chronic caffeine, and potential 
interactions between caffeine and medications. Currently, there 
are no specific recommendations for caffeine consumption for 
individuals with mental or psychiatric illness, but it may be 
worth consideration by physicians and psychologists treating 
patients with mental illness.
CAFFeiNe AND AlCOHOl
Another increasingly popular form of caffeine consumption is to 
mix alcohol with energy drinks. In fact, there are several recent 
reviews on this topic (219–221). We will briefly highlight this 
literature here. In 2010, the FDA removed pre-mixed alcohol-
energy drinks from the market because caffeine was determined 
to be an unsafe additive to alcohol,4 in part because it promoted 
excessive drinking (222). However, energy drinks can be legally 
mixed with alcohol in the U.S. if they are sold separately. In 
fact, this practice is popular among college students, as sug-
gested by the increase in self-reports over the past 5–10 years 
(223–229). The research on alcohol-mixed energy drinks is still 
developing, and the vast majority has been conducted in the 
U.S. and Australia. Much of this research consists of surveys 
of college-age young adults immediately after they leave bars 
where they have been drinking (230–233). Self-report is often 
unreliable, but self-report while intoxicated may be particularly 
problematic. Similarly, intoxication may confound retrospective 
assessments of alcohol consumption and related behaviors and 
attitudes.
More recently, several well-controlled, objective, laboratory-
based studies on the impact of alcohol-mixed energy drinks 
 
have been conducted. In many studies, the combination of 
 
alcohol and energy drinks results in higher rates of binge drink-
ing, reductions in perceived intoxication, faster rates of self-
paced alcohol consumption, or increases in risk taking behavior 
(225, 234–239). These data are equivocal, however, with studies 
showing that caffeine combined with alcohol does not always 
increase the amount of alcohol consumed (240) or does not have 
an impact on risk taking behavior (235, 241). Potential reasons 
for these discrepancies may be difference in the doses of caf-
feine and alcohol, differences in the administration paradigm, 
and an influence of expectancy of caffeine effects on alcohol 
 
4 https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/PublicHealthFocus/ucm234900.htm.
intoxication (241). More work is needed in this area to be able to 
draw stronger conclusions.
CAFFeiNe-RelATeD DiAGNOSeS
The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual-IV (242) included four caffeine-related diagnoses: caffeine 
intoxication, caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, caffeine-induced 
sleep disorder, and caffeine-related disorder not otherwise 
specified (242). Caffeine intoxication is diagnosed if clinically 
significant impairment results from the following criteria: (1) 
recent consumption of caffeine, usually in excess of 250 mg, (2) five 
(or more) of the following: restlessness, nervousness, excitement, 
insomnia, flushed face, diuresis, gastrointestinal disturbance, mus-
cle twitching, rambling flow of thought and speech, tachycardia 
or cardiac arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility, psychomotor 
agitation, and (3) the symptoms in criteria (2) have to cause clini-
cally significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or 
other important areas of functioning and these symptoms cannot 
be attributable to another medical condition or mental disorder. 
Caffeine-induced anxiety and sleep disorder retain the diagnosis 
for substance/medication-induced anxiety and sleep disorders, but 
require that clinically significant symptoms occur in association 
with caffeine intoxication or withdrawal (243). Caffeine-related 
disorder not otherwise specified classifies symptoms related to 
caffeine use or withdrawal that do not fit into the aforementioned 
categories.
The latest edition of the DSM (243) has officially recognized 
caffeine withdrawal disorder and outlines guidelines for criteria 
for caffeine use disorder in a section on emerging measures and 
models (243). The diagnosis of caffeine withdrawal syndrome is 
empirically based on detailed analyses of decades of studies of 
symptoms [reviewed by Juliano and Griffiths (244)]. Caffeine 
withdrawal disorder is diagnosed when an individual experi-
ences clinically significant impairment related to withdrawal 
symptoms after abrupt cessation of caffeine intake, including 
headache, difficulty concentrating, fatigue, nausea, flu-like 
symptoms, and changes in mood. These symptoms typically 
begin 12–24 h after caffeine cessation and may continue for 
3–7 days. Ongoing research on caffeine withdrawal suggests 
that this continues to be an important problem and will help 
refine and clarify this diagnosis (245, 246). Avoidance of caffeine 
withdrawal, with or without a diagnosis of caffeine withdrawal 
disorder, may motivate individuals to consume more caffeine. 
This could result in chronic, excessive consumption of caffeine. 
When this excess consumption results in clinically significant 
impairment, an individual may meet the criteria for caffeine use 
disorder (247–249). Although not an official DSM diagnosis, 
the proposed criteria for caffeine use disorder include having 
all three of the following criteria met: (1) persistent desire or 
unsuccessful effort to control caffeine use, (2) “use despite harm,” 
and (3) withdrawal. Having these proposed criteria outlined will 
allow researchers to collect data to provide reliable and valid 
empirical studies of the prevalence of this phenomenon (250). 
This is critical because the progression of inclusion of caffeine-
related diagnoses is directly related to an increase in empirical 
support for such disorders.
 11
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
ReCOMMeNDATiONS ON SAFe iNTAKe 
levelS AND liMiTS ON iNTAKe
Caffeine reaches maximum plasma concentration 15–120 min 
after ingestion (251), which might explain why energy drink-
related adverse events are usually reported a few hours after con-
sumption. The threshold of caffeine toxicity appears to be around 
400 mg/day in healthy adults (19 years or older), 100 mg/day 
in healthy adolescents (12–18 years old), and 2.5 mg/kg/day in 
healthy children (less than 12 years old) (123, 192). For compari-
son, one standard sized can of a popular energy drink provides 
77 mg of caffeine (or 1.1 mg/kg/day) for a 70-kg male and twice 
that, 2.2 mg/kg/day, for a 35-kg pre-teen (252). Recommended 
safety thresholds vary, however. For example, the European 
Food and Safety Authority considers 3-mg/kg body weight/day 
of habitual caffeine consumption to be safe for children and 
adolescents (253).5
A comprehensive review of the effects of caffeine consumption 
on human health concluded that for healthy adults, moderate 
chronic intakes of caffeine up to 400 mg/day are not associated 
with adverse effects on cardiovascular health, calcium balance 
and bone status, behavior, cancer risk, or male fertility (123). 
However, the recommended intake is much lower for pregnant 
or nursing mothers. The European Commission’s Scientific 
Committee of Food Safety Authority and Health Canada both 
recommend that women consume no more than 300 mg of 
caffeine/day during pregnancy (121, 253). In addition, despite 
conflicting results regarding the association between caffeine 
consumption and spontaneous abortion, the American College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that pregnant 
women restrict their caffeine intake to less than 200 mg/day (121).
For most children, adolescents, and young adults, safe levels 
of caffeine consumption have not been established. Because 
deleterious effects of heavy caffeine use have been documented 
in those who have cardiovascular issues, studies of safe doses 
and the effects of chronic use are paramount in understanding 
the implications of caffeine. This research should seek to better 
characterize the effects of caffeine use before, during, and after 
exercise, the interactions of caffeine use with alcohol and medica-
tions, such as stimulants, and the effects of prolonged caffeine 
use. A better understanding of caffeine’s effects in individuals 
with cardiac problems will better equip health-care providers 
to screen and identify at-risk individuals, and in turn, to better 
educate and counsel these cardiac patients. Such information 
will also help health-care leaders to work with families, schools, 
and other community services to change marketing strategies, 
improve the dissemination of information, and identify at-risk 
behaviors and age groups. Finally, the health-care providers and 
regulatory agencies must begin collecting and archiving better 
data on the adverse events and health effects of caffeine consump-
tion to improve estimates about its scope, effects, and outcomes. 
Analyses of a comprehensive, centralized database would help 
direct research, education, and funding to support these popula-
tions. In addition, agencies like the U.S. FDA and Health Canada 
5 http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/4102.
need to initiate programs to educate consumers, especially 
children and adolescents, about the dangers of highly caffein-
ated products, to reconsider applying the U.S. FDA’s Generally 
Recognized as Safe standard to energy drinks and other beverages 
with added caffeine, and requiring manufacturers to include the 
caffeine content on product labels. Because of the potentially 
harmful adverse effects and developmental effects of caffeine, 
the consensus among the research and medical communities is 
that any dietary intake of caffeinated energy drinks should be 
 
discouraged for all children (123, 192).
One of the primary concerns about energy drinks is that the 
actual caffeine content is not often given on the product’s packag-
ing or on its website (120). The total amount of caffeine contained 
in some energy drinks can exceed 500 mg (equivalent to 14 cans 
of common caffeinated soft drinks or 5 cups of coffee) and is high 
enough to be toxic in children and young adults (34). Given these 
concerns, the American Academy of Pediatrics released the fol-
lowing recommendation to the United States Senate Committee 
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation:
Due to the potentially harmful health effects of caffeine, 
dietary intake should be discouraged for all children. 
Because the actual stimulant content of energy drinks 
is hard to determine, energy drinks pose an even greater 
health risk than simple caffeine. Therefore, energy 
drinks are not appropriate for children and adolescents 
and should never be consumed (2014).
In 2010, Health Canada convened an Expert Panel6 on 
Caffeinated Energy Drinks to develop a plan to more effectively 
address the safety concerns related to caffeinated energy drinks 
currently marketed in Canada. The Panel issued their recommen-
dations to Health Canada in the fall of 2010.7 Health Canada ana-
lyzed the recommendations, completed a health risk assessment, 
and continued to gather and exchange information with major 
food safety regulators within the country and internationally. 
This initiative resulted in a proposed management approach that 
was consistent with the strategies in the Panel’s recommenda-
tions. Components of this approach include regulating product 
formulation and labeling, addressing potential health risks and 
adverse effects, providing enhanced education and communica-
tion to consumers, and addressing uncertainties and data gaps 
through research on long-term effects. Long-term research was 
made a priority, to further investigate risks to consumers, to iden-
tify serious adverse event signals (such as cardiac events and to a 
lesser extent, seizures), and finally to better manage caffeine labe-
ling and dosing limits. The data have reconfirmed that moderate 
daily caffeine intake at dosages of up to 400 mg/day are not associ-
ated with adverse effects. However, the data show that women of 
childbearing age and children may be at higher risk from caffeine, 
which has therefore led to separate guidelines for these at-risk 
groups. However, several products containing stimulant drugs do 
6 http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/prodnatur/activit/groupe-expert-panel/index-
eng.php.
7 http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/securit/addit/caf/ced-response-bec-eng.php.
 12
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
not have a natural health product license and exemption numbers 
that clearly describe their caffeine content. Therefore, the Panel 
recommended that Health Canada ensure that all products meet 
strict labeling that includes a full disclosure of the exact caffeine 
dose. Finally, the Panel recommended that Health Canada, in col-
laboration with the provinces and territories, consider beginning 
a surveillance system in sentinel emergency rooms across the 
country to actively search for serious adverse drug reactions asso-
ciated with consuming drinks containing stimulant drugs with or 
without alcohol or other products. The proposal details how this 
system could be modeled after the nation’s long-running IMPACT 
system that monitors immunizations and related adverse events 
through a network of 12 Canadian centers, representing 90% of 
all tertiary care pediatric beds. A similar database, The Canadian 
Health Measures Survey,8 launched in 2007, contains data from 
voluntary household interviews that collects important health 
information (e.g., physical measurements, nutrition, and blood 
and urine samples).
FUTURe ReSeARCH
Several questions remain about caffeine consumption and pat-
terns of intake. First, it is not clear how much caffeine is being 
consumed from “uncommon” or unidentified sources of caffeine, 
such as foods and medications. These sources are often overlooked 
in large national surveys and, thus, caffeine intake may be under-
estimated. Second, caffeine may be indirectly harmful because it 
is consumed with other substances that are harmful. For example, 
coffee drinking may promote donut eating or cigarette smoking, 
or energy drink consumption may promote alcohol intake. 
Third, future studies need to investigate absorption, distribution, 
metabolism, and excretion of caffeine occurring in non-natural 
forms (such as encapsulated forms), which may influence phar-
macokinetics, and thus effects. Finally, most research has relied 
on self-report and correlational analysis, which limits the ability 
to determine causality and directionality.
Despite all that is known about caffeine intake and safety of 
caffeine consumption, certain gaps in our knowledge need to be 
addressed:
 
(1) Identifying at-risk populations for caffeine toxicity. We already 
know that small children and pregnant women, as well as 
individuals with cardiac or vascular disease, are likely to be 
particularly vulnerable to the harmful effects of caffeine. 
Furthermore, there is some evidence that individuals with 
mental illness may also be at risk for harmful effects of caf-
feine on symptoms, but the majority of these relationships 
have been described in case studies. More randomized con-
trol trials need to be conducted in patients with mental illness 
to determine safe doses for caffeine ingestion. In addition to 
the known vulnerable populations, there may be individuals, 
such as the elderly or individuals with underlying medical 
conditions, who are not part of any vulnerable population 
but who, for genetic or metabolic reasons, may be susceptible 
8 http://www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=5071.
to harmful effects. The Federal Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration reported that from 2007 
to 2011, the number of emergency room visits involving 
energy drinks doubled across the U.S., from 10,068 to 20,783. 
However, for adults aged 40 years and older, emergency room 
visits involving energy drinks nearly quadrupled during that 
same period (from 1,382 to 5,233).9 This finding suggests 
that energy drink consumption in older people is increasing 
with perhaps a greater risk of negative outcomes. Identifying 
and warning at-risk individuals to avoid caffeine-containing 
products would be desirable.
 
(2) Determining how best to disseminate information about 
caffeine content in a meaningful and truthful way without 
causing alarm. Although the preponderance of evidence 
suggests that caffeine is safe for most people, there may be 
reasons to limit caffeine use in some populations. Providing 
more information about safe levels may be useful, but the 
information must be understandable to the population and 
based on evidence, rather than on supposition. Adding 
information about caffeine content on the products them-
selves may not be enough. The best way to educate consum-
ers about safe levels of caffeine consumption needs to be 
determined. For example, evidence suggests that “natural 
frequencies” are an effective way to communicate risk. For 
example, one could explain “For every 1,000 children who 
consume energy drinks, XX will have CNS symptoms.” 
However, research is necessary to fill in the blank in this 
statement (254).
 
(3) Conducting prospective, longitudinal studies to determine how 
caffeine use relates to behavioral and health-related outcomes, 
such as the duration and quality of sleep, potential for 
abuse, and impact on the use of other substances, including 
controlled (cigarettes and e-cigarettes) and uncontrolled 
(marijuana, cocaine) drugs. Cross-sectional data suggest 
that caffeine use is generally safe, but rigorous longitudinal 
studies have not yet determined the effect of chronic caffeine 
consumption on development in children and adolescents.
 
(4) Further exploring the potential health benefits of caffeine. 
Although much of this document has focused on potential 
harmful effects of caffeine, some health benefits of caffeine 
remain under explored. In particular, some research suggests 
that caffeine may slow age-related cognitive decline (255, 256), 
reduce risk of some neurological disorders (90, 257, 258), 
and promote longevity (156).
 
(5) Developing better systems of documenting and sharing adverse 
events. In addition to identifying at-risk or vulnerable 
populations, as mentioned earlier, and potentially dangerous 
combinations of caffeine with other substances (e.g., alcohol), 
we need a better system of documenting adverse events and 
sharing that documentation among scientists and clinicians. 
Systematically collecting all adverse events, poison center 
data, and emergency room visits associated with caffeine 
consumption (for example, energy drink consumption), 
9 http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/DAWN126/DAWN126/sr126-
energy-drinks-use.pdf.
 13
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
together with more comprehensive evaluation of additional 
risk factors, is necessary to accurately determine the risks of 
toxicity for youth and other vulnerable individuals.
 
(6) Improving knowledge of the potential dangers from consuming 
energy drinks before, during, and after athletic activity will 
be essential to identify the potential dangers of direct and 
implied claims of enhanced athletic performance, which is 
common in energy drink marketing. Long-term systematic 
assessment of energy drink and general caffeine intake at 
the population level, specifically intake by youth, should be 
a priority.
CONClUSiON
When taken together, the literature reviewed here suggests that 
ingested caffeine is relatively safe at doses typically found in com-
mercially available foods and beverages. There are some trends 
in caffeine consumption, such as alcohol-mixed energy drinks, 
that may increase risk of harm. There are also some populations, 
such as pregnant women, children, and individuals with mental 
illness, who may also be considered vulnerable for harmful effects 
of caffeine. Excess caffeine consumption is increasingly being rec-
ognized by health-care professionals and by regulatory agencies 
as potentially harmful. More research needs to be conducted to 
address these emerging concerns and provide empirical support 
for the recommendations.
AUTHOR CONTRibUTiONS
JT, CB, and SL contributed equally to the preparation of this 
comprehensive review. JC, JW, and MM helped gather additional 
references and prepare the manuscript after the initial major 
review of the literature was conducted.
FUNDiNG
CB is funded by l’Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR, 
ANR-14-CE13-0032-02 ADONIS), JT is funded by the National 
Institutes of Health (DA021759, DA030386, and DK106265). 
SL is funded by the National Institutes of Health (HL111459, 
HL109090, HL078522, HL053392, HL079233, HL087000, 
HL095127, HD060325, NR012885, CA127642, CA068484, and 
HD052104).
ReFeReNCeS
1. Nehlig A. Are we dependent upon coffee and caffeine? A review on human 
and animal data. Neurosci Biobehav Rev (1999) 23:563–76. doi:10.1016/
S0149-7634(98)00050-5 
2. Friedman M. Overview of antibacterial, antitoxin, antiviral, and antifungal 
activities of tea flavonoids and teas. Mol Nutr Food Res (2007) 51:116–34. 
doi:10.1002/mnfr.200600173 
3. Dews PB. Caffeine. Annu Rev Nutr (1982) 2:323–41. doi:10.1146/annurev.
nu.02.070182.001543 
4. Lieberman HR, Wurtman RJ, Emde GG, Coviella IL. The effects of caffeine 
and aspirin on mood and performance. J Clin Psychopharmacol (1987) 
7:315–20. doi:10.1097/00004714-198710000-00004 
5. Frary CD, Johnson RK, Wang MQ. Food sources and intakes of caffeine in 
the diets of persons in the United States. J Am Diet Assoc (2005) 105:110–3. 
doi:10.1016/j.jada.2004.10.027 
6. Fulgoni  VL III, Keast DR, Lieberman HR. Trends in intake and sources 
of caffeine in the diets of US adults: 2001-2010. Am J Clin Nutr (2015) 
101:1081–7. doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.080077 
7. Muller C, Vetter F, Richter E, Bracher F. Determination of caffeine, myos-
mine, and nicotine in chocolate by headspace solid-phase microextraction 
coupled with gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J Food Sci 
(2014) 79:T251–5. doi:10.1111/1750-3841.12339 
8. Ahluwalia N, Herrick K. Caffeine intake from food and beverage sources 
and trends among children and adolescents in the United States: review of 
national quantitative studies from 1999 to 2011. Adv Nutr (2015) 6:102–11. 
doi:10.3945/an.114.007401 
9. Laska EM, Sunshine A, Mueller F, Elvers WB, Siegel C, Rubin A. Caffeine 
as an analgesic adjuvant. JAMA (1984) 251:1711–8. doi:10.1001/jama.251. 
13.1711 
10. Migliardi JR, Armellino JJ, Friedman M, Gillings DB, Beaver WT. Caffeine 
as an analgesic adjuvant in tension headache. Clin Pharmacol Ther (1994) 
56:576–86. doi:10.1038/clpt.1994.179 
11. Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Ryan  RE Jr, Saper J, Silberstein S, Sheftell F. Efficacy 
and safety of acetaminophen, aspirin, and caffeine in alleviating migraine 
headache pain: three double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trials. 
Arch Neurol (1998) 55:210–7. doi:10.1001/archneur.55.2.210 
12. Krymchantowski AV. Overuse of symptomatic medications among 
chronic (transformed) migraine patients: profile of drug consumption. Arq 
Neuropsiquiatr (2003) 61:43–7. doi:10.1590/S0004-282X2003000100007 
13. Diener HC, Pfaffenrath V, Pageler L, Peil H, Aicher B. The fixed combination 
of acetylsalicylic acid, paracetamol and caffeine is more effective than single 
substances and dual combination for the treatment of headache: a multicentre, 
randomized, double-blind, single-dose, placebo-controlled parallel group 
study. Cephalalgia (2005) 25:776–87. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2982.2005.00948.x
14. Renner B, Clarke G, Grattan T, Beisel A, Mueller C, Werner U, et al. Caffeine 
accelerates absorption and enhances the analgesic effect of acetaminophen. 
J Clin Pharmacol (2007) 47:715–26. doi:10.1177/0091270007299762 
15. Gerull R, Manser H, Kuster H, Arenz T, Nelle M, Arenz S. Increase of caffeine 
and decrease of corticosteroids for extremely low-birthweight infants with 
respiratory failure from 1997 to 2011. Acta Paediatr (2013) 102:1154–9. 
doi:10.1111/apa.12419 
16. Ong AC, Myint PK, Potter JF. Pharmacological treatment of postprandial 
reductions in blood pressure: a systematic review. J Am Geriatr Soc (2014) 
62:649–61. doi:10.1111/jgs.12728 
17. Ohara T, Muroyama K, Yamamoto Y, Murosaki S. Oral intake of a combina-
tion of glucosyl hesperidin and caffeine elicits an anti-obesity effect in healthy, 
moderately obese subjects: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled 
trial. Nutr J (2016) 15:6. doi:10.1186/s12937-016-0123-7 
18. Pinkhasov A, Biglow M, Chandra S, Pica T. Pretreatment with caffeine citrate 
to increase seizure duration during electroconvulsive therapy: a case series. 
J Pharm Pract (2016) 29:177–80. doi:10.1177/0897190014549838 
19. Stephenson PE. Physiologic and psychotropic effects of caffeine on man. A 
review. J Am Diet Assoc (1977) 71:240–7. 
20. Curatolo PW, Robertson D. The health consequences of caffeine. Ann Intern 
Med (1983) 98:641–53. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-98-5-641 
21. Snyder SH, Sklar P. Behavioral and molecular actions of caffeine: focus 
 
on adenosine. J Psychiatr Res (1984) 18:91–106. doi:10.1016/0022-3956(84) 
90001-3 
22. Misciagna 
G, 
Leoci 
C, 
Guerra 
V, 
Chiloiro 
M, 
Elba 
S, 
Petruzzi 
J, 
et 
al. 
Epidemiology 
of cholelithiasis in southern Italy. Part II: risk factors. Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol (1996) 8:585–93. doi:10.1097/00042737-199606000-00017 
23. Leitzmann MF, Willett WC, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, Spiegelman D, 
Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of coffee consumption and the risk 
of symptomatic gallstone disease in men. JAMA (1999) 281:2106–12. 
doi:10.1001/jama.281.22.2106 
24. Welsh EJ, Bara A, Barley E, Cates CJ. Caffeine for asthma. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev (2010) (1):CD001112. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001112.pub2 
25. Sawynok J. Pharmacological rationale for the clinical use of caffeine. Drugs 
(1995) 49:37–50. doi:10.2165/00003495-199549010-00004 
 14
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
26. Mitchell DC, Knight CA, Hockenberry J, Teplansky R, Hartman TJ. Beverage 
caffeine intakes in the U.S. Food Chem Toxicol (2014) 63:136–42. doi:10.1016/j.
fct.2013.10.042 
27. Drewnowski A, Rehm CD. Sources of caffeine in diets of US children and 
adults: trends by beverage type and purchase location. Nutrients (2016) 8:154. 
doi:10.3390/nu8030154 
28. Gilbert RM. Caffeine consumption. Prog Clin Biol Res (1984) 158:185–213. 
29. Garriguet D. Beverage consumption of Canadian adults. Health Rep (2008) 
19:23–9. 
30. Fitt E, Pell D, Cole D. Assessing caffeine intake in the United Kingdom diet. 
Food Chem (2013) 140:421–6. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.07.092 
31. Yamada M, Sasaki S, Murakami K, Takahashi Y, Okubo H, Hirota N, et al. 
Estimation of caffeine intake in Japanese adults using 16 d weighed diet records 
based on a food composition database newly developed for Japanese popula-
tions. Public Health Nutr (2010) 13:663–72. doi:10.1017/S1368980009992023 
32. Harnack L, Stang J, Story M. Soft drink consumption among US children and 
adolescents: nutritional consequences. J Am Diet Assoc (1999) 99:436–41. 
doi:10.1016/S0002-8223(99)00106-6 
33. Ahluwalia N, Herrick K, Moshfegh A, Rybak M. Caffeine intake in children 
in the United States and 10-y trends: 2001-2010. Am J Clin Nutr (2014) 
100:1124–32. doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.082172 
34. Reissig CJ, Strain EC, Griffiths RR. Caffeinated energy drinks – a 
growing problem. Drug Alcohol Depend (2009) 99:1–10. doi:10.1016/j.
drugalcdep.2008.08.001 
35. Bailey RL, Saldanha LG, Dwyer JT. Estimating caffeine intake from energy 
drinks and dietary supplements in the United States. Nutr Rev (2014) 
72(Suppl 1):9–13. doi:10.1111/nure.12138 
36. Emond JA, Gilbert-Diamond D, Tanski SE, Sargent JD. Energy drink con-
sumption and the risk of alcohol use disorder among a national sample of 
adolescents and young adults. J Pediatr (2014) 165:1194–200. doi:10.1016/j.
jpeds.2014.08.050 
37. Kumar G, Onufrak S, Zytnick D, Kingsley B, Park S. Self-reported advertising 
exposure to sugar-sweetened beverages among US youth. Public Health Nutr 
(2015) 18:1173–9. doi:10.1017/S1368980014001785 
38. Childs E, de Wit H. Subjective, behavioral, and physiological effects of acute 
caffeine in light, nondependent caffeine users. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
(2006) 185:514–23. doi:10.1007/s00213-006-0341-3 
39. Bartel KA, Gradisar M, Williamson P. Protective and risk factors for 
adolescent sleep: a meta-analytic review. Sleep Med Rev (2015) 21:72–85. 
doi:10.1016/j.smrv.2014.08.002 
40. Cornelis MC, El-Sohemy A, Campos H. Genetic polymorphism of the 
adenosine A2A receptor is associated with habitual caffeine consumption. 
Am J Clin Nutr (2007) 86:240–4. 
41. Gomes CV, Kaster MP, Tome AR, Agostinho PM, Cunha RA. Adenosine recep-
tors and brain diseases: neuroprotection and neurodegeneration. Biochim 
Biophys Acta (2011) 1808:1380–99. doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2010.12.001 
42. Silva AM, Judice PB, Matias CN, Santos DA, Magalhaes JP, St-Onge MP, 
et al. Total body water and its compartments are not affected by ingesting 
a moderate dose of caffeine in healthy young adult males. Appl Physiol Nutr 
Metab (2013) 38:626–32. doi:10.1139/apnm-2012-0253 
43. Banerjee P, Ali Z, Levine B, Fowler DR. Fatal caffeine intoxication: a 
series of eight cases from 1999 to 2009. J Forensic Sci (2014) 59:865–8. 
doi:10.1111/1556-4029.12387 
44. Arnaud MJ. Metabolism of 1,3,7-trimethyldihydrouric acid in the rat: new 
metabolic pathway of caffeine. Experientia (1976) 32:1238–40. doi:10.1007/
BF01953069 
45. Levitt DG. Quantitation of small intestinal permeability during nor-
mal human drug absorption. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol (2013) 14:34. 
doi:10.1186/2050-6511-14-34 
46. Arnaud MJ. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of natural methylxan-
thines in animal and man. Handb Exp Pharmacol (2011) 200:33–91. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-13443-2_3 
47. Liguori A, Hughes JR, Grass JA. Absorption and subjective effects of caffeine 
from coffee, cola and capsules. Pharmacol Biochem Behav (1997) 58:721–6. 
doi:10.1016/S0091-3057(97)00003-8 
48. Skinner TL, Jenkins DG, Leveritt MD, McGorm A, Bolam KA, Coombes JS, 
et al. Factors influencing serum caffeine concentrations following caffeine 
ingestion. J Sci Med Sport (2014) 17:516–20. doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2013. 
07.006 
49. Booth Depaz IM, Toselli F, Wilce PA, Gillam EM. Differential expression of 
cytochrome P450 enzymes from the CYP2C subfamily in the human brain. 
Drug Metab Dispos (2015) 43:353–7. doi:10.1124/dmd.114.061242 
50. Sachse C, Brockmoller J, Bauer S, Roots I. Functional significance of a C–>A 
polymorphism in intron 1 of the cytochrome P450 CYP1A2 gene tested 
with caffeine. Br J Clin Pharmacol (1999) 47:445–9. doi:10.1046/j.1365- 
2125.1999.00898.x 
51. Retey JV, Adam M, Khatami R, Luhmann UF, Jung HH, Berger W, et al. A 
genetic variation in the adenosine A2A receptor gene (ADORA2A) contrib-
utes to individual sensitivity to caffeine effects on sleep. Clin Pharmacol Ther 
(2007) 81:692–8. doi:10.1038/sj.clpt.6100102 
52. Alsene K, Deckert J, Sand P, de Wit H. Association between A2a receptor gene 
polymorphisms and caffeine-induced anxiety. Neuropsychopharmacology 
(2003) 28:1694–702. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300232 
53. Yang A, Palmer AA, de Wit H. Genetics of caffeine consumption and 
responses to caffeine. Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2010) 211:245–57. 
doi:10.1007/s00213-010-1900-1 
54. Carver KA, Lourim D, Tryba AK, Harder DR. Rhythmic expression of 
cytochrome P450 epoxygenases CYP4x1 and CYP2c11 in the rat brain and 
vasculature. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2014) 307:C989–98. doi:10.1152/
ajpcell.00401.2013 
55. Kosir R, Spaninger K, Rozman D. Circadian events in human diseases and in 
cytochrome P450-related drug metabolism and therapy. IUBMB Life (2013) 
65:487–96. doi:10.1002/iub.1160 
56. Chang SY, Chen C, Yang Z, Rodrigues AD. Further assessment of 17alpha-
ethinyl estradiol as an inhibitor of different human cytochrome P450 forms 
in vitro. Drug Metab Dispos (2009) 37:1667–75. doi:10.1124/dmd.109.026997 
57. Zaigler M, Rietbrock S, Szymanski J, Dericks-Tan JS, Staib AH, Fuhr U. 
Variation of CYP1A2-dependent caffeine metabolism during menstrual cycle 
in healthy women. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther (2000) 38:235–44. doi:10.5414/
CPP38235 
58. Kamimori GH, Joubert A, Otterstetter R, Santaromana M, Eddington ND. 
The effect of the menstrual cycle on the pharmacokinetics of caffeine in nor-
mal, healthy eumenorrheic females. Eur J Clin Pharmacol (1999) 55:445–9. 
doi:10.1007/s002280050654 
59. Abernethy DR, Todd EL. Impairment of caffeine clearance by chronic use 
of low-dose oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
(1985) 28:425–8. doi:10.1007/BF00544361 
60. Knutti R, Rothweiler H, Schlatter C. Effect of pregnancy on the pharma-
cokinetics of caffeine. Eur J Clin Pharmacol (1981) 21:121–6. doi:10.1007/
BF00637512 
61. Brazier JL, Ritter J, Berland M, Khenfer D, Faucon G. Pharmacokinetics of 
caffeine during and after pregnancy. Dev Pharmacol Ther (1983) 6:315–22. 
62. Aranda JV, Collinge JM, Zinman R, Watters G. Maturation of caffeine elimi-
nation in infancy. Arch Dis Child (1979) 54:946–9. doi:10.1136/adc.54.12.946 
63. Parsons WD, Neims AH. Prolonged half-life of caffeine in healthy tem new-
born infants. J Pediatr (1981) 98:640–1. doi:10.1016/S0022-3476(81)80784-6 
64. Parsons WD, Neims AH. Effect of smoking on caffeine clearance. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther (1978) 24:40–5. doi:10.1002/cpt197824140 
65. George J, Murphy T, Roberts R, Cooksley WG, Halliday JW, Powell LW. 
Influence of alcohol and caffeine consumption on caffeine elimination. Clin 
Exp Pharmacol Physiol (1986) 13:731–6. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1681.1986.
tb02414.x 
66. Heaney RP, Recker RR. Effects of nitrogen, phosphorus, and caffeine on 
calcium balance in women. J Lab Clin Med (1982) 99:46–55. 
67. Heaney RP. Effects of caffeine on bone and the calcium economy. Food Chem 
Toxicol (2002) 40:1263–70. doi:10.1016/S0278-6915(02)00094-7 
68. McLellan TM, Caldwell JA, Lieberman HR. A review of caffeine’s effects on 
cognitive, physical and occupational performance. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
(2016) 71:294–312. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.09.001 
69. Ritchie K, Carriere I, de Mendonca A, Portet F, Dartigues JF, Rouaud O, 
et al. The neuroprotective effects of caffeine: a prospective population 
study (the Three City Study). Neurology (2007) 69:536–45. doi:10.1212/01.
wnl.0000266670.35219.0c 
70. Corley J, Jia X, Kyle JA, Gow AJ, Brett CE, Starr JM, et al. Caffeine consump-
tion and cognitive function at age 70: the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 study. 
Psychosom Med (2010) 72:206–14. doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181c92a9c 
71. Kamimori GH, McLellan TM, Tate CM, Voss DM, Niro P, Lieberman HR. 
Caffeine improves reaction time, vigilance and logical reasoning during 
 15
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
extended periods with restricted opportunities for sleep. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) (2015) 232:2031–42. doi:10.1007/s00213-014-3834-5 
72. Smit  HJ,  Rogers PJ. Effects of low doses of caffeine on cognitive performance, 
mood and thirst in low and higher caffeine consumers. Psychopharmacology 
(Berlin) (2000) 152:167–73. doi:10.1007/s002130000506
73. Rees K, Allen D, Lader M. The influences of age and caffeine on psychomotor 
and cognitive function. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) (1999) 145(2):181–8. 
doi:10.1007/s002130051047
74. James JE. Acute and chronic effects of caffeine on performance, mood, head-
ache, and sleep. Neuropsychobiology (1998) 38:32–41. doi:10.1159/000026514 
75. Yeomans MR, Ripley T, Davies LH, Rusted JM, Rogers PJ. Effects of 
caffeine on performance and mood depend on the level of caffeine 
abstinence. Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2002) 164:241–9. doi:10.1007/
s00213-002-1204-1 
76. Rogers PJ, Heatherley SV
, Mullings EL, Smith JE. Faster but not smarter: 
effects of caffeine and caffeine withdrawal on alertness and performance. 
Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) 
(2013) 
226:229–40. 
doi:10.1007/s00213-012-2889-4 
77. Ramakrishnan S, Laxminarayan S, Wesensten NJ, Kamimori GH, Balkin TJ, 
Reifman J. Dose-dependent model of caffeine effects on human vigilance 
during total sleep deprivation. J Theor Biol (2014) 358:11–24. doi:10.1016/j.
jtbi.2014.05.017 
78. James JE, Gregg ME, Kane M, Harte F. Dietary caffeine, performance and 
mood: enhancing and restorative effects after controlling for withdrawal 
reversal. Neuropsychobiology (2005) 52:1–10. doi:10.1159/000086172 
79. James JE, Rogers PJ. Effects of caffeine on performance and mood: 
 
withdrawal reversal is the most plausible explanation. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) (2005) 182:1–8. doi:10.1007/s00213-005-0084-6 
80. Judelson DA, Armstrong LE, Sokmen B, Roti MW, Casa DJ, Kellogg MD. 
Effect of chronic caffeine intake on choice reaction time, mood, and visual 
vigilance. Physiol Behav (2005) 85:629–34. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.06.011 
81. Rogers PJ, Heatherley SV, Hayward RC, Seers HE, Hill J, Kane M. Effects 
of caffeine and caffeine withdrawal on mood and cognitive performance 
degraded by sleep restriction. Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2005) 179:742–52. 
doi:10.1007/s00213-004-2097-y 
82. Heatherley SV, Hancock KM, Rogers PJ. Psychostimulant and other effects 
of caffeine in 9- to 11-year-old children. J Child Psychol Psychiatry (2006) 
47:135–42. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2005.01457.x 
83. Institute of Medicine. Caffeine for the Sustainment of Mental Task Performance: 
Formulations for Military Operations. Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press (2001).
84. Chen JF, Lee CF, Chern Y. Adenosine receptor neurobiology: overview. Int 
Rev Neurobiol (2014) 119:1–49. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-801022-8.00001-5 
85. Chen L, Bell EM, Browne ML, Druschel CM, Romitti PA; National Birth 
Defects Prevention Study. Exploring maternal patterns of dietary caffeine 
consumption before conception and during pregnancy. Matern Child Health 
J (2014) 18:2446–55. doi:10.1007/s10995-014-1483-2 
86. Hameleers PA, Van Boxtel MP, Hogervorst E, Riedel WJ, Houx PJ, 
Buntinx F, et al. Habitual caffeine consumption and its relation to memory, 
attention, planning capacity and psychomotor performance across multiple 
age groups. Hum Psychopharmacol (2000) 15:573–81. doi:10.1002/hup.218 
87. van Boxtel MP, Schmitt JA, Bosma H, Jolles J. The effects of habitual caffeine 
use on cognitive change: a longitudinal perspective. Pharmacol Biochem 
Behav (2003) 75:921–7. doi:10.1016/S0091-3057(03)00171-0 
88. van Gelder BM, Buijsse B, Tijhuis M, Kalmijn S, Giampaoli S, Nissinen A, 
et al. Coffee consumption is inversely associated with cognitive decline in 
elderly European men: the FINE Study. Eur J Clin Nutr (2007) 61:226–32. 
doi:10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602495 
89. Perry  CS III, Thomas AK, Taylor HA, Jacques PF, Kanarek RB. The impact of 
caffeine use across the lifespan on cognitive performance in elderly women. 
Appetite (2016) 107:69–78. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2016.07.028 
90. Ross GW, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, White LR, Tanner CM. Relationship 
between caffeine intake and parkinson disease. JAMA (2000) 284:1378–9. 
doi:10.1001/jama.284.11.1378
91. Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, Kawachi I, Colditz GA, Speizer FE, et al. 
Prospective study of caffeine consumption and risk of Parkinson’s disease in 
men and women. Ann Neurol (2001) 50:56–63. doi:10.1002/ana.1052 
92. Saaksjarvi K, Knekt P, Rissanen H, Laaksonen MA, Reunanen A, Mannisto S. 
Prospective study of coffee consumption and risk of Parkinson’s disease. Eur 
J Clin Nutr (2008) 62:908–15. doi:10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602788 
93. Lindsay J, Laurin D, Verreault R, Hebert R, Helliwell B, Hill GB, et al. Risk 
factors for Alzheimer’s disease: a prospective analysis from the Canadian 
Study of Health and Aging. Am J Epidemiol (2002) 156:445–53. doi:10.1093/
aje/kwf074 
94. Eskelinen MH, Ngandu T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto M. Midlife 
coffee and tea drinking and the risk of late-life dementia: a population-based 
CAIDE study. J Alzheimers Dis (2009) 16:85–91. doi:10.3233/JAD-2009-0920 
95. Gelber RP, Petrovitch H, Masaki KH, Ross GW, White LR. Coffee intake in 
midlife and risk of dementia and its neuropathologic correlates. J Alzheimers 
Dis (2011) 23:607–15. doi:10.3233/JAD-2010-101428 
96. Lachance MP. The pharmacology and toxicology of caffeine. J Food Saf (1982) 
4:71–112. doi:10.1111/j.1745-4565.1982.tb00435.x 
97. Myers DE, Shaikh Z, Zullo TG. Hypoalgesic effect of caffeine in exper-
imental ischemic muscle contraction pain. Headache (1997) 37:654–8. 
doi:10.1046/j.1526-4610.1997.3710654.x 
98. Leathwood PD, Pollet P. Diet-induced mood changes in normal populations. 
J Psychiatr Res (1982) 17:147–54. doi:10.1016/0022-3956(82)90016-4 
99. Larroque B, Kaminski M, Lelong N, Subtil D, Dehaene P. Effects of birth 
weight of alcohol and caffeine consumption during pregnancy. Am 
J Epidemiol (1993) 137:941–50. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116764 
100. Lee WC, Neugut AI, Garbowski GC, Forde KA, Treat MR, Waye JD, et al. 
Cigarettes, 
alcohol, 
coffee, 
and 
caffeine 
as 
risk 
factors 
for 
colorectal 
adenomatous 
polyps. Ann Epidemiol (1993) 3:239–44. doi:10.1016/1047-2797(93)90025-Y 
101. Cannon ME, Cooke CT, McCarthy JS. Caffeine-induced cardiac arrhythmia: 
an unrecognised danger of healthfood products. Med J Aust (2001) 174:520–1.
102. Higgins JP, Tuttle TD, Higgins CL. Energy beverages: content and safety. 
Mayo Clin Proc (2010) 85:1033–41. doi:10.4065/mcp.2010.0381 
103. Wolk BJ, Ganetsky M, Babu KM. Toxicity of energy drinks. Curr Opin Pediatr 
(2012) 24:243–51. doi:10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283506827
104. Hughes JR, Amori G, Hatsukami DK. A survey of physician advice about 
caffeine. J Subst Abuse (1988) 1:67–70. doi:10.1016/S0899-3289(88)80009-9 
105. Myers MG, Harris L. High dose caffeine and ventricular arrhythmias. Can 
J Cardiol (1990) 6:95–8. 
106. Pelchovitz DJ, Goldberger JJ. Caffeine and cardiac arrhythmias: a review of 
the evidence. Am J Med (2011) 124:284–9. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.10.017 
107. Ward AE, Lipshultz SE, Fisher SD. Energy drink-induced near-fatal ven-
tricular arrhythmia prevented by an intracardiac defibrillator decades after 
operative “repair” of tetralogy of Fallot. Am J Cardiol (2014) 114:1124–5. 
doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.07.028 
108. Chelsky LB, Cutler JE, Griffith K, Kron J, McClelland JH, McAnulty JH. 
Caffeine and ventricular arrhythmias. An electrophysiological approach. 
JAMA (1990) 264:2236–40. doi:10.1001/jama.1990.03450170084027 
109. Jackman M, Wendling P, Friars D, Graham TE. Metabolic catecholamine, 
and endurance responses to caffeine during intense exercise. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) (1996) 81:1658–63. 
110. Corti R, Binggeli C, Sudano I, Spieker L, Hänseler E, Ruschitzka F, et al. 
Coffee acutely increases sympathetic nerve activity and blood pressure inde-
pendently of caffeine content: role of habitual versus nonhabitual drinking. 
Circulation (2002) 106:2935–40. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000046228.97025.3A 
111. Sumpio BE, Riley JT, Dardik A. Cells in focus: endothelial cell. Int J Biochem 
Cell Biol (2002) 34:1508–12. doi:10.1016/S1357-2725(02)00075-4 
112. Echeverri D, Montes FR, Cabrera M, Galan A, Prieto A. Caffeine’s 
vascular mechanisms of action. Int J Vasc Med (2010) 2010:834060. 
doi:10.1155/2010/834060 
113. Namdar M, Schepis T, Koepfli P, Gaemperli O, Siegrist PT, Grathwohl R, 
et al. Caffeine impairs myocardial blood flow response to physical exercise in 
patients with coronary artery disease as well as in age-matched controls. PLoS 
One (2009) 4:e5665. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005665 
114. Higgins JP, Babu KM. Caffeine reduces myocardial blood flow during exer-
cise. Am J Med (2013) 126(730):e731–8. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.12.023 
115. Seifert SM, Seifert SA, Schaechter JL, Bronstein AC, Benson BE, Hershorin ER, 
et al. An analysis of energy-drink toxicity in the National Poison Data System. 
Clin Toxicol (Phila) (2013) 51:566–74. doi:10.3109/15563650.2013.820310 
116. Bronstein AC, Spyker DA, Cantilena  LR Jr, Green JL, Rumack BH, Dart RC. 
2010 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’ 
National Poison Data System (NPDS): 28th Annual Report. Clin Toxicol 
(Phila) (2011) 49:910–41. doi:10.3109/15563650.2011.635149 
117. Jackson DA, Cotter BV, Merchant RC, Babu KM, Baird JR, Nirenberg T, et al. 
Behavioral and physiologic adverse effects in adolescent and young adult 
 16
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
emergency department patients reporting use of energy drinks and caffeine. 
Clin Toxicol (Phila) (2013) 51:557–65. doi:10.3109/15563650.2013.820311 
118. Arria MA, O’Brien MC, Griffiths RR, Crawford PB. Letter to Commissioner 
Hamburg Re: The Use of Caffeine in Energy Drinks. NY Times (2013). 
Available from: http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/business/Bestof 
 
ScienceLetter_v22.pdf
119. Institute of Medicine. Nutrition Standards for Foods in Schools: Leading the 
Way toward Healthier Youth. Washington, DC: National Academy Press 
(2007).
120. Committee on Nutrition and the Council on Sports Medicine and Fitness. 
Sports drinks and energy drinks for children and adolescents: are they 
appropriate? Pediatrics (2011) 127:1182–9. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0965 
121. Institute of Medicine. Caffeine in Food and Dietary Supplements: Examining 
Safety. Washington, DC: National Academies Press (2014).
122. Artin B, Singh M, Richeh C, Jawad E, Arora R, Khosla S. Caffeine-
related atrial fibrillation. Am J Ther (2010) 17:e169–71. doi:10.1097/
MJT.0b013e3181df8cf8 
123. Nawrot P, Jordan S, Eastwood J, Rotstein J, Hugenholtz A, Feeley M. 
Effects of caffeine on human health. Food Addit Contam (2003) 20:1–30. 
doi:10.1080/713599662 
124. Peck JD, Leviton A, Cowan LD. A review of the epidemiologic evidence con-
cerning the reproductive health effects of caffeine consumption: a 2000-2009 
update. Food Chem Toxicol (2010) 48:2549–76. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2010.06.019 
125. Weng X, Odouli R, Li DK. Maternal caffeine consumption during pregnancy 
and the risk of miscarriage: a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
(2008) 198(279):e271–8. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2007.10.803 
126. Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, Chong MF, Pan A, van Dam RM. Maternal 
caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of pregnancy loss: a categorical 
and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Public Health Nutr 
(2016) 19:1233–44. doi:10.1017/S1368980015002463
127. Li J, Zhao H, Song JM, Zhang J, Tang YL, Xin CM. A meta-analysis of risk of 
pregnancy loss and caffeine and coffee consumption during pregnancy. Int 
J Gynaecol Obstet (2015) 130:116–22. doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2015.03.033 
128. Savitz DA, Chan RL, Herring AH, Howards PP, Hartmann KE. Caffeine 
and miscarriage risk. Epidemiology (2008) 19:55–62. doi:10.1097/
EDE.0b013e31815c09b9 
129. Dlugosz L, Belanger K, Hellenbrand K, Holford TR, Leaderer B, Bracken MB. 
Maternal 
caffeine 
consumption 
and 
spontaneous 
abortion: 
a 
prospective 
cohort 
study. Epidemiology (1996) 7:250–5. doi:10.1097/00001648-199605000-00006 
130. Hinds TS, West WL, Knight EM, Harland BF. The effect of caffeine on 
pregnancy outcome variables. Nutr Rev (1996) 54:203–7. doi:10.1111/j. 
1753-4887.1996.tb03933.x 
131. Gaskins AJ, Rich-Edwards JW, Williams PL, Toth TL, Missmer SA, 
 
Chavarro JE. Pre-pregnancy caffeine and caffeinated beverage intake and 
risk of spontaneous abortion. Eur J Nutr (2016). doi:10.1007/s00394-016- 
1301-2 
132. Jenkins KJ, Correa A, Feinstein JA, Botto L, Britt AE, Daniels SR, et al. 
Noninherited risk factors and congenital cardiovascular defects: current 
knowledge: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association 
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young: endorsed by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics. Circulation (2007) 115:2995–3014. doi:10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.183216 
133. Browne ML, Hoyt AT, Feldkamp ML, Rasmussen SA, Marshall EG, 
Druschel CM, et al. Maternal caffeine intake and risk of selected birth defects 
in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol 
Teratol (2011) 91:93–101. doi:10.1002/bdra.20752 
134. Rosenberg L, Mitchell AA, Shapiro S, Slone D. Selected birth defects in 
relation to caffeine-containing beverages. JAMA (1982) 247:1429–32. 
doi:10.1001/jama.1982.03320350033024 
135. Linn S, Schoenbaum SC, Monson RR, Rosner B, Stubblefield PG, Ryan KJ. No 
association between coffee consumption and adverse outcomes of pregnancy. 
N Engl J Med (1982) 306:141–5. doi:10.1056/NEJM198201213060304 
136. Olsen J, Overvad K, Frische G. Coffee consumption, birthweight, and 
reproductive failures. Epidemiology (1991) 2:370–4. doi:10.1097/00001648- 
199109000-00011 
137. Silva CG, Metin C, Fazeli W, Machado NJ, Darmopil S, Launay PS, et al. 
Adenosine receptor antagonists including caffeine alter fetal brain development 
in mice. Sci Transl Med (2013) 5:197ra104. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3006258 
138. Bjorklund O, Kahlstrom J, Salmi P, Fredholm BB. Perinatal caffeine, acting 
on maternal adenosine A(1) receptors, causes long-lasting behavioral 
changes in mouse offspring. PLoS One (2008) 3:e3977. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0003977 
139. Galera C, Bernard JY, van der Waerden J, Bouvard MP, Lioret S, Forhan A, 
et al. Prenatal caffeine exposure and child IQ at age 5.5 years: the EDEN 
mother-child cohort. Biol Psychiatry (2016) 80:720–6. doi:10.1016/j.
biopsych.2015.08.034 
140. Hoyt AT, Browne M, Richardson S, Romitti P, Druschel C; National Birth 
Defects Prevention Study. Maternal caffeine consumption and small 
for gestational age births: results from a population-based case-control 
study. Matern Child Health J (2014) 18:1540–51. doi:10.1007/s10995-013- 
1397-4 
141. Partosch F, Mielke H, Stahlmann R, Gundert-Remy U. Caffeine intake in 
pregnancy: relationship between internal intake and effect on birth weight. 
Food Chem Toxicol (2015) 86:291–7. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2015.11.005 
142. Rhee J, Kim R, Kim Y, Tam M, Lai Y, Keum N, et al. Maternal caffeine con-
sumption during pregnancy and risk of low birth weight: a dose-response 
meta-analysis of observational studies. PLoS One (2015) 10:e0132334. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0132334 
143. Group CS. Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of fetal growth 
restriction: a large prospective observational study. BMJ (2008) 337:a2332. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.a2332 
144. Sengpiel V, Elind E, Bacelis J, Nilsson S, Grove J, Myhre R, et al. Maternal 
caffeine intake during pregnancy is associated with birth weight but not 
with gestational length: results from a large prospective observational cohort 
study. BMC Med (2013) 11:42. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-11-42 
145. Bech BH, Nohr EA, Vaeth M, Henriksen TB, Olsen J. Coffee and fetal death: 
a cohort study with prospective data. Am J Epidemiol (2005) 162:983–90. 
doi:10.1093/aje/kwi317 
146. Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, Chong MF, Pan A, van Dam RM. Maternal 
caffeine intake during pregnancy is associated with risk of low birth weight: 
a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. BMC Med (2014) 
12:174. doi:10.1186/s12916-014-0174-6 
147. Palagini L, Gemignani A, Banti S, Manconi M, Mauri M, Riemann D. Chronic 
sleep loss during pregnancy as a determinant of stress: impact on pregnancy 
outcome. Sleep Med (2014) 15:853–9. doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2014.02.013 
148. Liston J. Breastfeeding and the use of recreational drugs – alcohol, caffeine, 
nicotine and marijuana. Breastfeed Rev (1998) 6:27–30. 
149. Ryu JE. Caffeine in human milk and in serum of breast-fed infants. Dev 
Pharmacol Ther (1985) 8:329–37. 
150. Munoz LM, Lonnerdal B, Keen CL, Dewey KG. Coffee consumption as a 
factor in iron deficiency anemia among pregnant women and their infants in 
Costa Rica. Am J Clin Nutr (1988) 48:645–51. 
151. Authority EFS. Scientific opinion on the safety of caffeine. EFSA J (2015) 
13:4102. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4102 
152. Klebanoff MA, Keim SA. Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and 
child cognition and behavior at 4 and 7 years of age. Am J Epidemiol (2015) 
182:1023–32. doi:10.1093/aje/kwv136 
153. Klebanoff MA, Keim SA. Maternal serum paraxanthine during pregnancy 
and offspring body mass index at ages 4 and 7 years. Epidemiology (2015) 
26:185–91. doi:10.1097/EDE.0000000000000220 
154. Li DK, Ferber JR, Odouli R. Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and 
risk of obesity in offspring: a prospective cohort study. Int J Obes (Lond) 
(2015) 39:658–64. doi:10.1038/ijo.2014.196 
155. Nkondjock A. Coffee consumption and the risk of cancer: an overview. 
Cancer Lett (2009) 277:121–5. doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2008.08.022 
156. Freedman ND, Park Y, Abnet CC, Hollenbeck AR, Sinha R. Association of 
coffee drinking with total and cause-specific mortality. N Engl J Med (2012) 
366:1891–904. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1112010 
157. Arya LA, Myers DL, Jackson ND. Dietary caffeine intake and the risk for 
detrusor instability: a case-control study. Obstet Gynecol (2000) 96:85–9. 
doi:10.1097/00006250-200007000-00018 
158. Creighton SM, Stanton SL. Caffeine: does it affect your bladder? Br J Urol 
(1990) 66:613–4. doi:10.1111/j.1464-410X.1990.tb07192.x 
159. Lohsiriwat S, Hirunsai M, Chaiyaprasithi B. Effect of caffeine on bladder 
function in patients with overactive bladder symptoms. Urol Ann (2011) 
3:14–8. doi:10.4103/0974-7796.75862 
 17
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
160. Carrillo JA, Benitez J. Clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions 
between dietary caffeine and medications. Clin Pharmacokinet (2000) 
39:127–53. doi:10.2165/00003088-200039020-00004 
161. Zhong W, Maradit-Kremers H, St Sauver JL, Yawn BP, Ebbert JO, Roger VL, 
et al. Age and sex patterns of drug prescribing in a defined American popu-
lation. Mayo Clin Proc (2013) 88:697–707. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2013.04.021 
162. Passmore AP, Kondowe GB, Johnston GD. Renal and cardiovascular 
effects of caffeine: a dose-response study. Clin Sci (Lond) (1987) 72:749–56. 
doi:10.1042/cs0720749 
163. Riesenhuber A, Boehm M, Posch M, Aufricht C. Diuretic potential of energy 
drinks. Amino Acids (2006) 31:81–3. doi:10.1007/s00726-006-0363-5 
164. Armstrong LE, Pumerantz AC, Roti MW, Judelson DA, Watson G, Dias JC, 
et al.  Fluid, electrolyte, and renal indices of hydration during 11 days of con-
trolled caffeine consumption. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab (2005) 15:252–65. 
165. Killer SC, Blannin AK, Jeukendrup AE. No evidence of dehydration with mod-
erate daily coffee intake: a counterbalanced cross-over study in a free-living 
population. PLoS One (2014) 9:e84154. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0084154 
166. Arnaud MJ, Bracco I, Sauvageat JL, Clerc MF. Placental transfer of the 
major caffeine metabolite in the rat using 6-amino-5[N-formylmethylami-
no]1,3[Me-14C]-dimethyluracil administered orally or intravenously to the 
pregnant 
rat. 
Toxicol 
Lett 
(1983) 
16:271–9. 
doi:10.1016/0378-4274(83)90187-X 
167. Knutti R, Rothweiler H, Schlatter C. The effect of pregnancy on the 
pharmacokinetics of caffeine. Arch Toxicol Suppl (1982) 5:187–92. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-68511-8_33 
168. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG committee 
opinion no. 461: tracking and reminder systems. Obstet Gynecol (2010) 
116:464–6. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181eeb27a 
169. Knight CA, Knight I, Mitchell DC, Zepp JE. Beverage caffeine intake in 
US consumers and subpopulations of interest: estimates from the Share of 
Intake Panel survey. Food Chem Toxicol (2004) 42:1923–30. doi:10.1016/j.
fct.2004.05.002 
170. FDA. Statement by Jere E. Govan, Commissioner of Food and Drugs. H. H. 
Services. HHS News (1980). p. 80–136.
171. Lawson CC, LeMasters GK, Wilson KA. Changes in caffeine consumption as a 
signal of pregnancy. Reprod Toxicol (2004) 18:625–33. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox. 
2004.03.004 
172. Pituch A, Hamulka J, Wawrzyniak A, Zdanowski K. [Assessment of stimulant 
use especially caffeine intake in selected group of the breastfeeding women]. 
Rocz Panstw Zakl Hig (2012) 63:171–8. 
173. Drescher AA, Goodwin JL, Silva GE, Quan SF. Caffeine and screen time 
in adolescence: associations with short sleep and obesity. J Clin Sleep Med 
(2011) 7:337–42. doi:10.5664/JCSM.1182 
174. Aepli A, Kurth S, Tesler N, Jenni OG, Huber R. Caffeine consuming children 
and adolescents show altered sleep behavior and deep sleep. Brain Sci (2015) 
5:441–55. doi:10.3390/brainsci5040441 
175. Savoca MR, Evans CD, Wilson ME, Harshfield GA, Ludwig DA. The associa-
tion of caffeinated beverages with blood pressure in adolescents. Arch Pediatr 
Adolesc Med (2004) 158:473–7. doi:10.1001/archpedi.158.5.473 
176. Turley KR, Bland JR, Evans WJ. Effects of different doses of caffeine on 
exercise responses in young children. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2008) 40:871–8. 
doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e318165984c 
177. Temple JL, Dewey AM, Briatico LN. Effects of acute caffeine administration 
on adolescents. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol (2010) 18:510–20. doi:10.1037/
a0021651 
178. Temple JL. Factors that influence the reinforcing value of foods and bever-
ages. Physiol Behav (2014) 136:97–103. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.04.037 
179. Temple JL, Ziegler AM. Gender differences in subjective and physiological 
responses to caffeine and the role of steroid hormones. J Caffeine Res (2011) 
1:41–8. doi:10.1089/jcr.2011.0005 
180. Owens JA, Mindell J, Baylor A. Effect of energy drink and caffeinated beverage 
consumption on sleep, mood, and performance in children and adolescents. 
Nutr Rev (2014) 72(Suppl 1):65–71. doi:10.1111/nure.12150 
181. Temple JL, Ziegler AM, Martin C, de Wit H. Subjective responses to caffeine 
are influenced by caffeine dose, sex, and pubertal stage. J Caffeine Res (2015) 
5:167–75. doi:10.1089/jcr.2015.0022 
182. Walach H, Schmidt S, Dirhold T, Nosch S. The effects of a caffeine 
placebo and suggestion on blood pressure, heart rate, well-being and 
cognitive performance. Int J Psychophysiol (2002) 43:247–60. doi:10.1016/
S0167-8760(01)00188-X 
183. Ruxton CH. The suitability of caffeinated drinks for children: a systematic 
review of randomised controlled trials, observational studies and expert 
panel guidelines. J Hum Nutr Diet (2014) 27:342–57. doi:10.1111/jhn.12172 
184. Carskadon MA, Tarokh L. Developmental changes in sleep biology and 
potential effects on adolescent behavior and caffeine use. Nutr Rev (2014) 
72(Suppl 1):60–4. doi:10.1111/nure.12147 
185. James JE, Kristjansson AL, Sigfusdottir ID. Adolescent substance use, sleep, 
and academic achievement: evidence of harm due to caffeine. J Adolesc 
(2011) 34:665–73. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2010.09.006 
186. Kristjansson  AL I, Sigfusdottir D, Frost SS, James JE. Adolescent caffeine 
consumption and self-reported violence and conduct disorder. J Youth 
Adolesc (2013) 42:1053–62. doi:10.1007/s10964-013-9917-5 
187. Rapoport JL, Elkins R, Neims A, Zahn T, Berg CJ. Behavioral and autonomic 
effects of caffeine in normal boys. Dev Pharmacol Ther (1981) 3:74–82. 
188. Rapoport JL, Jensvold M, Elkins R, Buchsbaum MS, Weingartner H, Ludlow C, 
 
et al. Behavioral and cognitive effects of caffeine in boys and adult males. 
J Nerv Ment Dis (1981) 169:726–32. doi:10.1097/00005053-198111000- 
00007 
189. Fredholm BB, Svenningsson P. Striatal adenosine A2A receptors – where are 
they? What do they do? Trends Pharmacol Sci (1998) 19:46–8. doi:10.1016/
S0165-6147(97)01160-7 
190. Biederman J, Wilens T, Mick E, Spencer T, Faraone SV. Pharmacotherapy 
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder reduces risk for substance use 
disorder. Pediatrics (1999) 104:e20. doi:10.1542/peds.104.2.e20 
191. Turley KR, Desisso T, Gerst JW. Effects of caffeine on physiological responses 
to exercise: boys versus men. Pediatr Exerc Sci (2007) 19:481–92. doi:10.1123/
pes.19.4.481 
192. Seifert SM, Schaechter JL, Hershorin ER, Lipshultz SE. Health effects of 
energy drinks on children, adolescents, and young adults. Pediatrics (2011) 
127:511–28. doi:10.1542/peds.2009-3592 
193. Worthley MI, Prabhu A, De Sciscio P, Schultz C, Sanders P, Willoughby SR. 
Detrimental effects of energy drink consumption on platelet and endothelial 
function. Am J Med (2010) 123:184–7. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.09.013 
194. Savoca MR, MacKey ML, Evans CD, Wilson M, Ludwig DA, Harshfield GA. 
Association of ambulatory blood pressure and dietary caffeine in adolescents. 
Am J Hypertens (2005) 18:116–20. doi:10.1016/j.amjhyper.2004.08.011 
195. Lipshultz SE, Frassica JJ, Orav EJ. Cardiovascular abnormalities in infants 
prenatally exposed to cocaine. J Pediatr (1991) 118:44–51. doi:10.1016/
S0022-3476(05)81842-6 
196. Frassica JJ, Orav EJ, Walsh EP, Lipshultz SE. Arrhythmias in children pre-
natally exposed to cocaine. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med (1994) 148:1163–9. 
doi:10.1001/archpedi.1994.02170110049008 
197. Lipshultz SE, Sleeper LA, Towbin JA, Lowe AM, Orav EJ, Cox GF, et al. The 
incidence of pediatric cardiomyopathy in two regions of the United States. N 
Engl J Med (2003) 348:1647–55. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa021715 
198. Lipshultz SE, Wong JC, Lipsitz SR, Simbre  VC II, Zareba KM, Galpechian V, 
 
et al. Frequency of clinically unsuspected myocardial injury at a children’s 
hospital. Am Heart J (2006) 151:916–22. doi:10.1016/j.ahj.2005.06.029 
199. Colan SD, Lipshultz SE, Lowe AM, Sleeper LA, Messere J, Cox GF, et al. 
Epidemiology and cause-specific outcome of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
in children: findings from the Pediatric Cardiomyopathy Registry. Circulation 
(2007) 115:773–81. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.621185 
200. Solinas M, Ferre S, You ZB, Karcz-Kubicha M, Popoli P, Goldberg SR. 
Caffeine induces dopamine and glutamate release in the shell of the nucleus 
accumbens. J Neurosci (2002) 22:6321–4. 
201. Quarta D, Ferre S, Solinas M, You ZB, Hockemeyer J, Popoli P, et al. 
Opposite modulatory roles for adenosine A1 and A2A receptors on gluta-
mate and dopamine release in the shell of the nucleus accumbens. Effects 
of chronic caffeine exposure. J Neurochem (2004) 88:1151–8. doi:10.1046/ 
j.1471-4159.2003.02245.x 
202. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Logan J, Alexoff D, Fowler JS, Thanos PK, et al. Caffeine 
increases striatal dopamine D2/D3 receptor availability in the human brain. 
Transl Psychiatry (2015) 5:e549. doi:10.1038/tp.2015.46 
203. Ciruela F, Gomez-Soler M, Guidolin D, Borroto-Escuela DO, Agnati LF, 
Fuxe K, et al. Adenosine receptor containing oligomers: their role in the 
control of dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission in the brain. Biochim 
Biophys Acta (2011) 1808:1245–55. doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.02.007 
204. Arendash GW, Mori T, Cao C, Mamcarz M, Runfeldt M, Dickson A, et al. 
Caffeine reverses cognitive impairment and decreases brain amyloid-beta 
 18
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
levels in aged Alzheimer’s disease mice. J Alzheimers Dis (2009) 17:661–80. 
doi:10.3233/JAD-2009-1087 
205. Wang L, Shen X, Wu Y, Zhang D. Coffee and caffeine consumption and 
depression: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 
(2016) 50:228–42. doi:10.1177/0004867415603131 
206. Chu YF, Chang WH, Black RM, Liu JR, Sompol P, Chen Y, et al. Crude 
caffeine reduces memory impairment and amyloid beta(1-42) levels in an 
Alzheimer’s mouse model. Food Chem (2012) 135:2095–102. doi:10.1016/j.
foodchem.2012.04.148 
207. Sonsalla PK, Wong LY, Harris SL, Richardson JR, Khobahy I, Li W, et al. 
Delayed caffeine treatment prevents nigral dopamine neuron loss in a 
progressive rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Exp Neurol (2012) 234:482–7. 
doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.01.022 
208. Azagba S, Langille D, Asbridge M. An emerging adolescent health risk: 
caffeinated energy drink consumption patterns among high school students. 
Prev Med (2014) 62:54–9. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.01.019 
209. Lucas PB, Pickar D, Kelsoe J, Rapaport M, Pato C, Hommer D. Effects of 
the acute administration of caffeine in patients with schizophrenia. Biol 
Psychiatry (1990) 28:35–40. doi:10.1016/0006-3223(90)90429-6 
210. Wang HR, Woo YS, Bahk WM. Caffeine-induced psychiatric manifesta-
tions: a review. Int Clin Psychopharmacol (2015) 30:179–82. doi:10.1097/
YIC.0000000000000076 
211. Hofmeister EH, Muilenburg JL, Kogan L, Elrod SM. Over-the-counter 
stimulant, depressant, and nootropic use by veterinary students. J Vet Med 
Educ (2010) 37:403–16. doi:10.3138/jvme.37.4.403 
212. Richards G, Smith A. Caffeine consumption and self-assessed stress, anxiety, 
and depression in secondary school children. J Psychopharmacol (2015) 
29:1236–47. doi:10.1177/0269881115612404 
213. Rizkallah E, Belanger M, Stavro K, Dussault M, Pampoulova T, Chiasson JP, 
et al. Could the use of energy drinks induce manic or depressive relapse among 
abstinent substance use disorder patients with comorbid bipolar spectrum dis-
order? Bipolar Disord (2011) 13:578–80. doi:10.1111/j.1399-5618.2011.00951.x 
214. Baethge C, Tondo L, Lepri B, Baldessarini RJ. Coffee and cigarette use: 
 
association with suicidal acts in 352 Sardinian bipolar disorder patients. 
Bipolar Disord (2009) 11:494–503. doi:10.1111/j.1399-5618.2009.00727.x 
215. Schenk S, Worley CM, McNamara C, Valadez A. Acute and repeated 
exposure to caffeine: effects on reinstatement of extinguished cocaine-taking 
behavior in rats. Psychopharmacology (Berl) (1996) 126:17–23. doi:10.1007/
BF02246406 
216. Gasior M, Jaszyna M, Munzar P, Witkin JM, Goldberg SR. Caffeine potentiates 
the discriminative-stimulus effects of nicotine in rats. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) (2002) 162:385–95. doi:10.1007/s00213-002-1113-3 
217. Munzar P, Justinova Z, Kutkat SW
, Ferre S, Goldberg SR. Adenosinergic 
modulation of the discriminative-stimulus effects of methamphetamine in 
rats. Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2002) 161:348–55. doi:10.1007/s00213-002- 
1075-5 
218. Kendler KS, Myers J, O Gardner C. Caffeine intake, toxicity and dependence 
and lifetime risk for psychiatric and substance use disorders: an epidemiologic 
and co-twin control analysis. Psychol Med (2006) 36:1717–25. doi:10.1017/
S0033291706008622 
219. McKetin R, Coen A, Kaye S. A comprehensive review of the effects of 
mixing caffeinated energy drinks with alcohol. Drug Alcohol Depend (2015) 
151:15–30. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.01.047
220. Marczinski CA, Fillmore MT. Energy drinks mixed with alcohol: what are the 
risks? Nutr Rev (2014) 72(Suppl 1):98–107. doi:10.1111/nure.12127
221. Peacock A, Pennay A, Droste N, Bruno R, Lubman DI. ‘High’ risk? A sys-
tematic review of the acute outcomes of mixing alcohol with energy drinks. 
Addiction (2014) 109:1612–33. doi:10.1111/add.12622 
222. Jones SC, Barrie L, Berry N. Why (not) alcohol energy drinks? A qualitative 
study with Australian university students. Drug Alcohol Rev (2012) 31:281–7. 
doi:10.1111/j.1465-3362.2011.00319.x 
223. Miller KE. Wired: energy drinks, jock identity, masculine norms, and risk 
taking. J Am Coll Health (2008) 56:481–9. doi:10.3200/JACH.56.5.481-490 
224. O’Brien MC, McCoy TP, Rhodes SD, Wagoner A, Wolfson M. Caffeinated 
cocktails: energy drink consumption, high-risk drinking, and alcohol-related 
consequences among college students. Acad Emerg Med (2008) 15:453–60. 
doi:10.1111/j.1553-2712.2008.00085.x 
225. Marczinski CA. Alcohol mixed with energy drinks: consumption patterns 
and motivations for use in U.S. college students. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health (2011) 8:3232–45. doi:10.3390/ijerph8083232 
226. Marczinski CA, Fillmore MT, Bardgett ME, Howard MA. Effects of energy 
drinks mixed with alcohol on behavioral control: risks for college students 
consuming trendy cocktails. Alcohol Clin Exp Res (2011) 35:1282–92. 
doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2011.01464.x 
227. Arria AM, Caldeira KM, Bugbee BA, Vincent KB, O’Grady KE. Energy drink 
use patterns among young adults: associations with drunk driving. Alcohol 
Clin Exp Res (2016) 40:2456–66. doi:10.1111/acer.13229 
228. Bonar EE, Green MR, Ashrafioun L. Characteristics of university students 
who mix alcohol and energy drinks. J Am Coll Health (2017) 13:1–6. 
 
doi:10.1080/07448481.2017.1280799 
229. Linden-Carmichael AN, Lau-Barraco C. Alcohol mixed with energy drinks: 
daily context of use. Alcohol Clin Exp Res (2017) 41:863–69. doi:10.1111/
acer.13357 
230. Thombs DL, O’Mara RJ, Tsukamoto M, Rossheim ME, Weiler RM, 
 
Merves ML, et al. Event-level analyses of energy drink consumption 
and alcohol intoxication in bar patrons. Addict Behav (2010) 35:325–30. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2009.11.004 
231. Hughes K, Quigg Z, Bellis MA, Calafat A, van Hasselt N, Kosir M, et al. 
Drunk and disorganised: relationships between bar characteristics and 
customer intoxication in European drinking environments. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health (2012) 9:4068–82. doi:10.3390/ijerph9114068 
232. Pennay A, Lubman DI. Alcohol and energy drinks: a pilot study exploring 
patterns of consumption, social contexts, benefits and harms. BMC Res Notes 
(2012) 5:369. doi:10.1186/1756-0500-5-369 
233. Verster JC, Benjaminsen JM, van Lanen JH, van Stavel NM, Olivier B. Effects 
of mixing alcohol with energy drink on objective and subjective intoxication: 
results from a Dutch on-premise study. Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2015) 
232:835–42. doi:10.1007/s00213-014-3715-y 
234. Marczinski CA, Fillmore MT, Henges AL, Ramsey MA, Young CR. Mixing 
an energy drink with an alcoholic beverage increases motivation for 
more alcohol in college students. Alcohol Clin Exp Res (2013) 37:276–83. 
doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01868.x 
235. Peacock A, Bruno R, Martin FH, Carr A. The impact of alcohol and energy 
drink consumption on intoxication and risk-taking behavior. Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res (2013) 37:1234–42. doi:10.1111/acer.12086 
236. Ulbrich A, Hemberger SH, Loidl A, Dufek S, Pablik E, Fodor S, et al. Effects 
of alcohol mixed with energy drink and alcohol alone on subjective intoxica-
tion. Amino Acids (2013) 45:1385–93. doi:10.1007/s00726-013-1603-0 
237. Peacock A, Bruno R. Young adults who mix alcohol with energy drinks: 
 
typology of risk-taking behaviour. Addict Behav (2015) 45:252–8. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2015.02.012 
238. Marczinski CA, Fillmore MT, Maloney SF, Stamates AL. Faster self-paced 
rate of drinking for alcohol mixed with energy drinks versus alcohol alone. 
Psychol Addict Behav (2017) 31:154–61. doi:10.1037/adb0000229
239. Marczinski CA, Fillmore MT, Stamates AL, Maloney SF. Desire to drink 
alcohol is enhanced with high caffeine energy drink mixers. Alcohol Clin Exp 
Res (2016) 40:1982–90. doi:10.1111/acer.13152 
240. Sweeney MM, Meredith SE, Evatt DP, Griffiths RR. Effects of caffeine on alco-
hol reinforcement: beverage choice, self-administration, and subjective ratings. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2017) 234:877–88. doi:10.1007/s00213-017-4528-6 
241. Heinz AJ, de Wit H, Lilje TC, Kassel JD. The combined effects of alcohol, caf-
feine, and expectancies on subjective experience, impulsivity, and risk-taking. 
Exp Clin Psychopharmacol (2013) 21:222–34. doi:10.1037/a0032337 
242. Association AP. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association (1994).
243. Association AP. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association (2013).
244. Juliano LM, Griffiths RR. A critical review of caffeine withdrawal: empirical 
validation of symptoms and signs, incidence, severity, and associated features. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) (2004) 176:1–29. doi:10.1007/s00213-004-2000-x 
245. Juliano LM, Huntley ED, Harrell PT, Westerman AT. Development of the 
caffeine withdrawal symptom questionnaire: caffeine withdrawal symptoms 
cluster into 7 factors. Drug Alcohol Depend (2012) 124:229–34. doi:10.1016/j.
drugalcdep.2012.01.009 
 19
Temple et al.
Caffeine Safety
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
May 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 80
246. Budney AJ, Brown PC, Griffiths RR, Hughes JR, Juliano LM. Caffeine 
withdrawal and dependence: a convenience survey among addiction profes-
sionals. J Caffeine Res (2013) 3:67–71. doi:10.1089/jcr.2013.0005 
247. Meredith SE, Juliano LM, Hughes JR, Griffiths RR. Caffeine use disorder: a 
comprehensive review and research agenda. J Caffeine Res (2013) 3:114–30. 
doi:10.1089/jcr.2013.0016 
248. Budney AJ, Lee DC, Juliano LM. Evaluating the validity of caffeine use 
disorder. Curr Psychiatry Rep (2015) 17:74. doi:10.1007/s11920-015-0611-z 
249. Evatt DP, Juliano LM, Griffiths RR. A brief manualized treatment for prob-
lematic caffeine use: a randomized control trial. J Consult Clin Psychol (2016) 
84:113–21. doi:10.1037/ccp0000064 
250. Addicott MA. Caffeine use disorder: a review of the evidence and future impli-
cations. Curr Addict Rep (2014) 1:186–92. doi:10.1007/s40429-014-0024-9 
251. Arnaud MJ. The pharmacology of caffeine. Prog Drug Res (1987) 31:273–313. 
252. Oddy WH, O’Sullivan TA. Energy drinks for children and adolescents. BMJ 
(2009) 339:b5268. doi:10.1136/bmj.b5268 
253. Miles-Chan JL, Charriere N, Grasser EK, Montani JP, Dulloo AG. The blood 
pressure-elevating effect of red bull energy drink is mimicked by caffeine 
but through different hemodynamic pathways. Physiol Rep (2015) 3:e12290. 
doi:10.14814/phy2.12290 
254. Gigerenzer G. Reckoning with Risk: Learning to Live with Uncertainty. 
London: Penguin Books Ltd (2003).
255. Valls-Pedret C, Lamuela-Raventos RM, Medina-Remon A, Quintana M, 
Corella D, Pinto X, et al. Polyphenol-rich foods in the Mediterranean diet 
are associated with better cognitive function in elderly subjects at high car-
diovascular risk. J Alzheimers Dis (2012) 29:773–82. doi:10.3233/JAD-2012- 
111799 
256. Vercambre MN, Berr C, Ritchie K, Kang JH. Caffeine and cognitive decline 
in elderly women at high vascular risk. J Alzheimers Dis (2013) 35:413–21. 
doi:10.3233/JAD-122371 
257. Agim ZS, Cannon JR. Dietary factors in the etiology of Parkinson’s disease. 
Biomed Res Int (2015) 2015:672838. doi:10.1155/2015/672838 
258. Nehlig A. Effects of coffee/caffeine on brain health and disease: what 
should I tell my patients? Pract Neurol (2016) 16:89–95. doi:10.1136/
practneurol-2015-001162
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors prepared this comprehensive review 
at the request of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Once 
the draft was completed, we were given permission to publish the manuscript. SL 
has served as an expert for legal cases involving caffeine-containing energy drinks.
Copyright © 2017 Temple, Bernard, Lipshultz, Czachor, Westphal and Mestre. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums 
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the 
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
