   789
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
European evidence-based guidelines on pancreatic 
cystic neoplasms
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas
AbstrAct
Evidence-based guidelines on the management of 
pancreatic cystic neoplasms (PCN) are lacking. This 
guideline is a joint initiative of the European Study 
Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas, United 
European Gastroenterology, European Pancreatic Club, 
European-African Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association, 
European Digestive Surgery, and the European Society 
of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. It replaces the 2013 
European consensus statement guidelines on PCN. 
European and non-European experts performed 
systematic reviews and used GRADE methodology 
to answer relevant clinical questions on nine topics 
(biomarkers, radiology, endoscopy, intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), mucinous cystic neoplasm 
(MCN), serous cystic neoplasm, rare cysts, (neo)adjuvant 
treatment, and pathology). Recommendations include 
conservative management, relative and absolute 
indications for surgery. A conservative approach is 
recommended for asymptomatic MCN and IPMN 
measuring <40 mm without an enhancing nodule. 
Relative indications for surgery in IPMN include a main 
pancreatic duct (MPD) diameter between 5 and 9.9 
mm or a cyst diameter ≥40 mm. Absolute indications 
for surgery in IPMN, due to the high-risk of malignant 
transformation, include jaundice, an enhancing mural 
nodule >5 mm, and MPD diameter >10 mm. Lifelong 
follow-up of IPMN is recommended in patients who are 
fit for surgery. The European evidence-based guidelines 
on PCN aim to improve the diagnosis and management 
of PCN.
IntroductIon
Pancreatic cystic neoplasms (PCN) are estimated to 
be present in 2–45% of the general population.1–4 
PCN comprise a clinically challenging entity as 
their biological behaviour ranges from benign to 
malignant disease. Consequently, correct manage-
ment of PCN may prevent progression to pancre-
atic cancer while minimising the need for lifelong 
screening and related costs.5 Unfortunately, it is 
often difficult to differentiate between the various 
types of PCN.6 In 2013, the European Study Group 
on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas, in association 
with United European Gastroenterology (UEG) and 
the European Pancreatic Club (EPC), published a 
European expert consensus statement on PCN.7 
In 2016, as a group, these stakeholders felt that 
sufficient data were available to mandate an update 
of these guidelines. In contrast to the previous Euro-
pean,7 and international8 guidelines, an evidence-
based approach was chosen. Similar to the previous 
European,7 but in contrast to other (inter-)national 
guidelines,8 9 the present guideline deals with all 
common PCN. The European evidence-based 
guidelines on PCN aim to improve the diagnosis 
and management of all PCN, and identify areas that 
require further research.
Methods
This guideline is a joint initiative of the European 
Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas, 
the UEG, the EPC, the European-African Hepa-
to-Pancreato-Biliary Association (E-AHPBA), Euro-
pean Digestive Surgery (EDS) and the European 
Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) and 
involves both European and non-European experts 
(online supplementary appendix 1).
A methodology committee (gastroenterologists, 
surgeons, radiologists, oncologists, endoscopists, 
basic scientists) identified the nine most important 
topics: biomarkers, radiology, endoscopy, intra-
ductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), 
mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN), serous cystic 
neoplasm (SCN), rare cysts and (neo)adjuvant treat-
ment and pathology. Next, multidisciplinary expert 
groups were formed and each assigned to one topic. 
In March 2016, each expert group received a list 
of questions about their topic. The groups could 
suggest changes and add relevant questions based 
on their expertise and available literature. Once 
all questions were finalised, the following steps 
were taken: (a) a systematic literature search was 
performed in the PubMed, Embase and Cochrane 
databases, and the systematic review included 
randomised or observational cohort studies with a 
minimum of 20 patients or systematic reviews on 
PCN, which were published in English, and avail-
able in full text; (b) based on the literature review, 
recommendations were formulated including a 
GRADE rating for the quality of the evidence and 
the strength of the recommendation10–12; (c) rele-
vant remarks concerning the recommendations—
for instance, about subgroups or availability of 
diagnostic/therapeutic strategies, were included; (d) 
a table of relevant studies was provided. The results 
of these evidence-based recommendations were 
presented and discussed at a plenary meeting of the 
European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the 
Pancreas in October 2016 during the UEG week.
In January 2017, each expert group submitted 
the modified version of their task to the method-
ology committee. A synthesis of the work from 
different groups was completed in April 2017 
(MDC and MGB) and this document was circulated 
and approved by all the group leaders. Finally, in 
October 2017, the final recommendations were 
discussed at a plenary meeting of the European 
to cite: The European Study 
Group on Cystic Tumours of 
the Pancreas. Gut 
2018;67:789–804.
correspondence to
The European Study Group on 
Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas, 
Pancreatic Surgery Unit, Division 
of Surgery, Department of 
Clinical Science, Intervention 
and Technology (CLINTEC), 
Center for Digestive Diseases, 
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm 
14186, Sweden;  
marco. 
del. 
chiaro@ 
ki. 
se
Received 15 January 2018
Revised 13 February 2018
Accepted 13 February 2018
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 790
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas during the 
UEG week. Thereafter, in November 2017, all members of the 
expert groups were surveyed and asked about their agreement 
with the final recommendations on a five-point scale (ie, defi-
nitely agree, moderately agree, neutral, moderately disagree, 
definitely disagree) via an anonymous web-based vote. Recom-
mendations with at least 75% consensus (combining ‘definitely’ 
and ‘moderately’ agree) were accepted as ‘strong agreement’; 
otherwise ‘weak agreement’ was listed. The results of this survey 
were added to the evidence-based recommendation in order to 
provide readers with more insight into the level of agreement 
among experts. In December 2017, the members of the method-
ology committee and the group leaders approved the final draft.
Each statement includes the grade of evidence, strength of the 
recommendation, voting result and, where appropriate, remarks.
definitions
PCN are defined and classified according to the WHO criteria13 
(table 1). Disease-free survival was defined as the length of time 
the patient lives after primary treatment without any signs or 
symptoms of recurrence.
recoMMendAtIons
This guideline aims to provide evidence-based guidelines for the 
diagnosis and treatment of PCN.
1 biomarkers
1.1 What is the role of blood and cystic biomarkers in the diagnosis 
and follow-up of PCN in current clinical practice?
Blood
There are no available DNA, RNA or protein biomarkers in blood 
for clinical use to differentiate pancreatic cyst type or identify 
high-grade dysplasia or cancer. Serum cancer antigen (CA) 19.9 
may be considered in IPMN where there is concern for malignant 
transformation14–16 (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Cyst fluid
DNA markers, in particular, mutations in GNAS and KRAS, have 
shown promise in identifying mucin-producing cysts. In cases in 
which the diagnosis is unclear, and a change in diagnosis will alter 
management, analysis of these mutations using highly sensitive 
techniques, such as next-generation sequencing (NGS), may be 
considered17–20 (GRADE 2C, strong agreement). 
Currently, there is insufficient evidence to support the use of 
RNA or non-carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) protein markers in 
pancreatic cysts (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
The role of CEA in cyst fluid is discussed in recommendation 
3.4.
Additional biomarkers in the differential diagnosis of PCN are 
amylase/lipase levels. Amylase may exclude pancreatic pseudo-
cysts (amylase <250 
U/L; sensitivity 0.44, specificity 0.98), but 
does not differentiate between other non-mucinous and muci-
nous cysts.21 22
2 radiology
2.1 What is the accuracy of MRI/cholangiopancreatography (MRI/
MRCP) and CT for identifying the specific type of PCN?
The reported accuracy for identifying the specific type of PCN is 
between 40% and 95% for MRI/MRCP and between 40% and 
81% for CT.23–27
PCN are increasingly being detected, with a reported prev-
alence of 2.1–2.6% for CT28 29 and of 13.5–45% for MRI/
MRCP
,2 30 31 with the difference between CT and MRI most 
probably due to the higher contrast resolution of MRI 
compared with CT and thus increased sensitivity but not spec-
ificity. However, the accuracy remains relatively low, using 
either single, or combining imaging modalities, for identifying 
the specific type of PCN,6 for differentiating small PCN from 
non-neoplastic or non-epithelial cysts, or for connection to the 
ductal system.6 32
2.2 Which radiological (cross-sectional) imaging method is preferred 
for the surveillance of patients with PCN taking into consideration 
accuracy, cost, and modality-related risk factors?
Pancreatic MRI is the preferred method for follow-up of PCN 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Dedicated pancreatic protocol CT and pancreatic MRI/MRCP 
are reported to have a similar accuracy for the characterisation of 
PCN.33–35 MRI/MRCP is more sensitive than CT for identifying 
communication between a PCN and the pancreatic duct system, 
and the presence of a mural nodule or internal septations. In addi-
tion, MRI/MRCP is very sensitive for identifying whether a patient 
has single or multiple PCN, with the latter favouring a diagnosis 
of multifocal side-branch IPMN.25 33 36 37 Patients with PCN may 
require lifelong imaging follow-up. This is important, as studies 
have shown that repeated exposure to ionising radiation following 
CT increases the risk of malignancy.38 39
2.3 Are there specific clinical scenarios where use of one cross-
sectional imaging modality (CT/MRI) instead of another, or 
combined use is preferable?
In general, MRI is the preferred method for the investigation of 
patients with PCN. Multimodality imaging should be considered 
in cases where the identification of calcification is important, for 
tumour staging, or for diagnosing postoperative recurrent disease 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
The use of CT should be considered in the following clinical 
situations:
a. For the detection of parenchymal, mural or central 
calcification, and especially when differentiating pseudocysts 
associated with chronic pancreatitis from PCN.40 41
table 1 Classification of cystic lesions of the pancreas
epithelial neoplastic
epithelial non-neoplastic
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm all types
Mucinous cystic neoplasm
Serous cystic neoplasm
Lymphoepithelial cyst
Mucinous non-neoplastic cyst
Enterogeneous cyst
Retention cyst/dysontogenetic cyst
Peri-ampullary duodenal wall cyst
Serous cystadenocarcinoma
Cystic neuroendocrine tumour G1−2
Acinar cell cystadenoma
Cystic acinar cell carcinoma
Solid pseudopapillary neoplasm
Accessory-splenic epidermoid cyst
Cystic hamartoma
Cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst)
Endometrial cyst
Congenital cyst (in malformation 
syndromes)
Cystic ductal adenocarcinoma
Cystic pancreatoblastoma
Cystic metastatic epithelial neoplasm
Others
non-epithelial neoplastic
non-epithelial non-neoplastic
Benign non-epithelial neoplasm (eg, 
lymphangioma)
Malignant non-epithelial neoplasms (eg, 
sarcomas)
Pancreatitis-associated pseudocyst
Parasitic cyst
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 791
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
b. When there is suspicion of a malignant PCN or concomitant 
pancreatic cancer, and when assessment of vascular 
involvement, peritoneal, or metastatic disease is required.
c. When there is suspicion of postoperative recurrence of 
pancreatic cancer.
2.4 What are the minimum technical requirements for MRI or CT for 
the diagnosis and surveillance of patients with PCN?
No definite MRI or CT protocol can be recommended for the 
diagnosis or surveillance of patients with PCN because of the 
wide spread of published data and the lack of dedicated compar-
ative studies (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
In 2016, a short protocol for the surveillance of PCN 
that included T2-weighted ultrafast spin echo technique 
(T2-HASTE) and T1-weighted pre-contrast imaging was found 
in one retrospective study to provide equivalent information to 
a longer protocol which included diffusion-weighted imaging 
(DWI) and contrast enhanced T1-weighted sequences.42 DWI 
may be added to this short protocol in order to minimise the 
risk of missing a concomitant pancreatic cancer. A combination 
of T2-HASTE and DWI has been shown to have similar accu-
racy to a comprehensive contrast-enhanced MRI protocol for 
the detection of pancreatic cancer.43 A recent study suggested 
that MRI with MRCP has a better diagnostic performance 
than endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) for differentiating malig-
nant from benign pancreatic IPMN and MCN,44 but conclu-
sive evidence is lacking.
3 endoscopy
3.1 What are the indications for performing EUS in PCN?
EUS is recommended as an adjunct to other imaging modalities 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
EUS is helpful for identifying PCN with features that should be 
considered for surgical resection. Similar to MRI andCT (see 3.1 
statement), EUS is imperfect at identifying the exact type of PCN 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
EUS is recommended if the PCN has either clinical or radiological 
features of concern identified during the initial investigation or 
follow-up (GRADE 2C strong agreement).
Data for EUS-based differentiation between benign and malig-
nant PCN are conflicting.45–48 In addition, there is considerable 
interobserver variation in EUS-based diagnoses.49 50
3.2 When should contrast harmonic enhanced EUS (CH-EUS) be 
performed for PCN and does it alter management?
CH-EUS should be considered for further evaluation of mural 
nodules. CH-EUS is also helpful in assessing vascularity within 
the cyst and septations (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
The presence of hyperenhancement of a mural nodule, solid 
mass, or septations on CH-EUS raises concern for malignant 
transformation, and EUS-fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the 
lesion should be considered (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
CH-EUS seems superior to standard EUS and CT for the iden-
tification of mural nodules.51 52 Interobserver agreement is excel-
lent for Sonazoid, and moderate for Sonovue.51 53
3.3 What are the indications and contraindications for EUS-FNA for 
PCN?
EUS-FNA improves diagnostic accuracy in PCN for differentiating 
mucinous versus non-mucinous PCN, and malignant versus benign 
PCN, in cases where CT or MRI are unclear (GRADE 2C, strong 
agreement).
A combined analysis of cyst fluid CEA, cyst fluid lipase levels, 
and cytology provides the highest accuracy for differentiating 
mucinous from non-mucinous PCN (GRADE 2C, strong 
agreement).
EUS-FNA should only be performed when the results are expected 
to change clinical management (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
EUS-FNA should not be performed if the diagnosis is already 
established by cross-sectional imaging, or where there is a clear 
indication for surgery (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Relative contraindications for EUS-FNA in PCN is a distance 
of >10 
mm between the cyst and the transducer, the presence of 
a high-risk of bleeding due to bleeding disorder, or the use of dual 
antiplatelet drugs (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
The role of EUS-FNA in the diagnosis of PCN is still a matter 
of debate and consensus in the literature is lacking.54 55
3.4 When EUS-FNA is performed, which tests should be performed 
and what is their yield?
Evaluation of cyst fluid CEA, combined with cytology, or KRAS/
GNAS mutation analyses (although the latter is not yet standard 
management), may be considered for differentiating an IPMN or 
MCN from other PCN (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
To differentiate benign PCN from those harbouring high-grade 
dysplasia or cancer, EUS-FNA may be considered, and any solid 
component or thickened cyst wall targeted for cytology (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
Brush cytology, and forceps biopsy are not recommended owing to 
a lack of high-quality evidence. Further studies are required before 
these tests can be considered in clinical practice (GRADE 1C, 
strong agreement).
In a recent meta-analysis cytological analysis of cyst fluid had 
42% sensitivity and 99% specificity for differentiating mucinous 
from non-mucinous PCN.56 A cyst fluid CEA level of ≥192 
ng/
mL can distinguish mucinous, from non-mucinous cysts, with a 
sensitivity of 52–78% 
and specificity of 63–91%.57–64 Differenti-
ating between MCN and IPMN based on CEA and/or cytology is 
not possible and CEA seems inaccurate to differentiate between 
benign mucinous cysts and cysts with high-grade dysplasia or an 
associated invasive carcinoma.65
3.5 What is the diagnostic performance of EUS +/−FNA?
EUS morphology alone has a modest diagnostic yield (GRADE 2C, 
strong agreement). 
EUS-FNA is recommended to achieve a better performance for diag-
nosing PCN (GRADE 1C, strong agreement).
The reported accuracy of EUS morphology alone for 
differentiating mucinous from non-mucinous PCN is rela-
tively low (48–94%),54 58 59 66 67 with a sensitivity of 36–91%, 
and a specificity of 45–81%.54 58 59 66 Although cytology is 
highly specific (83–100%),54 58 59 66 68 it is relatively insensi-
tive (27–48%),54 58 59 66 68 resulting in low diagnostic accuracy 
(8–59%).58 59 66
Combination tests, such as EUS morphology, cytology and 
cyst fluid CEA, provide greater accuracy in detecting mucinous 
PCN than either EUS morphology or cytology alone.58 59
3.6 What are the potential adverse events associated with EUS-
FNA of PCN? Are there any measures that can be taken to prevent 
complications?
EUS-FNA for PCN is a safe procedure with a relatively low risk 
(3.4%) of complications (GRADE 2B, strong agreement).
No specific measures are suggested to minimise the risk of compli-
cations in EUS-FNA (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 792
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
Following EUS-FNA, 44/1313 (3.4%) patients developed 
an adverse event.69–75 These complications were mild in 34, 
moderate in nine, and severe in one patient(s). One retrospective 
study of 253 patients found that antibiotic prophylaxis had no 
effect on the risk of infection (7% vs 9.3%), although conclusive 
evidence is lacking.76 Current practice is often a single shot anti-
biotic treatment after EUS-FNA of a cystic lesion.
3.7 Is there any role for endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and/or pancreatoscopy and/or 
confocal laser endomicroscopy (nCLE) in the diagnosis of PCN?
ERCP should not be used as a diagnostic modality for differenti-
ating PCN (GRADE 1C, strong agreement).
Pancreatoscopy may be used in selected cases to provide informa-
tion on the location and extent of main duct (MD)-IPMN and can 
be useful in differentiating chronic pancreatitis from MD-IPMN 
(GRADE 2C, weak agreement).
nCLE should not be used for the differential diagnosis of PCN 
(GRADE 1C, weak agreement).
ERCP has a higher risk of adverse events, and a lower sensi-
tivity and specificity for identifying the type of PCN than 
conventional radiology and EUS, and should not be used for this 
indication.77 78
The accuracy rate of pancreatoscopy is higher in MD-IPMN 
(88%) than in branch duct (BD)-IPMN (67%).79 Intraoperative 
main pancreatic duct (MPD) pancreatoscopy combined with 
frozen section of intraductal biopsies may be helpful in estab-
lishing the extent of IPMN involvement of the MPD, and assist 
surgical decision-making about the extent of resection required.80 
Although promising, further studies are required and it should 
not be used in routine clinical care. A major concern about nCLE 
is the rate of adverse events (7–9%).81 82 Some suggest that nCLE 
could be useful in correctly diagnosing serous cystadenomas, and 
thereby might prevent unnecessary surgery in these patients.83 84
4 IPMn
4.1 What is the risk of malignant progression of an IPMN lesion and 
what risk factors are predictive of cancer progression?
Jaundice, the presence of an enhancing mural nodule (≥5 
mm) or a 
solid component, positive cytology, or a MPD measuring ≥10 
mm 
are highly predictive of malignancy and should be evaluated in all 
patients fit for surgery (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
MPD dilatation between 5 and 9.9 
mm, cystic growth-
rate ≥5 
mm/year, Increased level of serum CA 19.9 (>37 
U/mL), 
symptoms, enhancing mural nodules (<5 
mm), and/or a cyst 
diameter ≥40 
mm are also associated with an increased risk for 
high-grade dysplasia or cancer (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
Nine studies, including 1510 surgically resected IPMN, 
have concluded that the presence of jaundice, a contrast-en-
hancing mural nodule or solid component, or MPD dilatation 
of ≥10 
mm, has a positive predictive value for malignancy 
of 56–89%.85–92 Several series including surgically resected 
IPMN have reported a high risk of harbouring at least high-
grade dysplasia or cancer of 37–91% 
even for a MPD size of 
5–9.9 
mm.93–95 Several studies have recently identified serum CA 
19.9 as an independent predictor of malignancy in IPMN.14–16 
Analyses of surgical series of patients with BD-IPMNs who have 
undergone surgical resection, have found that a mural nodule 
measuring ≥5 
mm on EUS has a sensitivity of 73–85% 
and spec-
ificity of 71–100% for the presence of high-grade dysplasia or 
cancer.96–99 The presence of a cyst size ≥30 
mm, without any 
other radiological or clinical risk factors, has a positive predic-
tive value for malignancy of between 27% and 33%.85–92 Patients 
with an IPMN measuring ≥30 
mm have a 5% risk of developing 
malignancy, from which they will die within 3 years, whereas the 
5 
years disease-free survival after resection of IPMN is 96%.100 
Even for BD-IPMN <30 
mm, the 5-year risk for developing 
malignancy is reported to be 45% if a cyst increases in size 
by >2 
mm/year.101 One study, with imaging surveillance for 36 
months, detected a 20-fold higher risk of malignant progression 
in IPMN whose size increased >5 
mm/year or had a total growth 
of 10 
mm.102 In predominantly surgical series the presence of 
new-onset diabetes, pancreatitis, and abdominal pain have been 
associated with malignancy at varying rates, indicating that the 
level of evidence for these risk factors is low.14 85–91 Table 2 
shows the risk of high-grade dysplasia or malignancy according 
to the dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in IPMN.
Follow-up of BD-IPMN is required as progression of disease 
is expected in about 10–15% of patients during 3–5 
years of 
follow-up. Surveillance should also include the entire pancreatic 
gland because of an increased risk of new-onset cancer.103 104 In 
patients with MD-IPMN and those with mixed-type (MT)-IPMN 
several factors may predict progression during surveillance (eg, 
diffuse MPD dilatation, serum CA 19-9, serum alkaline phos-
phatase, and absence of extrapancreatic cysts).105 106
4.2 What are the clinical implications of the presence of potential 
risk factors, including morphological features, with regard to 
determining follow-up investigations, and the decision to proceed 
with surgical resection
For patients with an IPMN without an indication for operative 
intervention, routine follow-up is recommended. A 6-month 
follow-up in the first year, and yearly follow-up thereafter is 
adequate when no risk factors are present that establish an indi-
cation for surgery. Changes in clinical symptoms should trigger 
investigations (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
For patients with relative indication for surgery (see statement 
 
4.12), the ‘elderly’, and those affected by severe comorbidity, 
a 6-month follow-up is recommended. (GRADE 1B, strong 
agreement).
In young individuals, the risk of malignancy and surgery has to 
be balanced against the burden of lifelong follow-up.107 However, 
table 2 Risk of high-grade dysplasia or malignancy according to dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in IPMN
reference
study design
number of patients
MPd dilatation
Patients with either high-grade 
dysplasia or malignancy (%)
Ogawa et al127 2008
Retrospective
61
≥6 mm
91
Shin et al128 2010
Retrospective
204
≥6 mm
30
Abdeljawad et al95 2014
Retrospective
52
≥8 mm
56
Hackert et al94 2015
Retrospective
320
≥5 mm
59
Seo et al93 2016
Retrospective
158
≥5 mm
49
MPD, main pancreatic duct.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 793
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
after partial pancreatectomy for IPMN lifelong follow-up is still 
indicated. Resection therefore does not eliminate the need for 
regular follow-up screening.
4.3 Is there a certain size cut-off point for resecting an IPMN 
regardless of the absence of clinical symptoms or (other) risk 
factors? Is age of the patient a co-factor that should be analysed to 
define better management strategy?
Patients with IPMNs >40 
mm have an increased risk of harbouring 
malignancy (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
Several studies including both surgically resected or observed 
IPMN have reported an increased risk of malignancy ranging 
from 12% to 47% in cases of a cyst ≥30 
mm.85 96 108–110 In some 
of these series, the risk of malignancy produced by cyst size was 
stratified by the presence of other features for malignancy, indi-
cating that cyst size alone is not an appropriate indication for 
surgery since the risk of malignancy is actual but low.92 111 If 
multiple risk factors are present the sensitivity to detect malig-
nancy increases.89 112
4.4 What is the best imaging modality for the follow-up of IPMN?
MRI is the preferred imaging modality for the follow-up of IPMN. 
EUS can be used in selected cases (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
See section 3 for details.
4.5 Should the progress of IPMN be followed for as long as the 
patient is fit for surgery?
The risk of IPMN progression increases over the time, therefore 
patients affected by IPMN without indication for surgery should 
be followed up until they are no longer fit for surgery (GRADE 
1B, strong agreement).
The risk of progression of IPMN increases over the time as 
does the risk of developing indications for surgical resection. 
Interruption of surveillance is not recommended if the patient 
is fit for a potential surgical resection.107 113 114 A single study on 
IPMN concluded that patients with a Charlson-age comorbidity 
index ≥7 have an 11-fold risk of comorbidity-related death 
within 3 years and only 6% of patients will die of malignant 
IPMN.115
4.6 Should patients with IPMNs be screened for other tumours 
(including pancreatic cancer)?
The incidence of new extra-pancreatic neoplasms during the 
follow-up evaluation of pancreatic IPMN is not significantly 
greater than in the general population. Comprehensive screening 
outside the national protocols might not be necessary. Patients 
with IPMN are at risk of developing pancreatic cancer and atten-
tion should be paid to its concomitant development even when 
an IPMN has been successfully resected (GRADE 1C, strong 
agreement).
A systematic review concluded that the available data remain 
inconclusive.116 T
wo large studies including both surgically 
resected or followed IPMN did not find any difference in terms 
of incidence of extra-pancreatic neoplasms in patients with 
IPMN if compared with the general population.117 118
4.7 Should MD-IPMN always be resected?
Patients with MD-IPMN who are fit for surgery should undergo 
resection (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
Surgery for MD-IPMN is universally accepted considering the 
high-rate of malignancy due to MD-IPMN,93 119 even though 
no randomised trials comparing surgery with observation are 
available. As discussed in statement 4.1 above, a MD-IPMN 
measuring between 5 and 9.9 
mm is a relative indication for 
surgical resection, while MD-IPMN measuring ≥10 
mm (see 
statement 4.1 for details) is an absolute indication for surgical 
resection.
4.8 Should mixed-type (MT)-IPMN be managed in a similar manner 
to MD-IPMN?
MT-IPMN carries a risk of malignant transformation that is 
comparable to MD-IPMN, and resection is therefore advised in 
patients who are fit for surgery (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Few studies have investigated MT-IPMN as a single entity. 
Malignancy rates appear similar for MT-IPMN and MD-IPMN.120 
Recently, a pathological classification distinguishing minimal 
(microscopic) and extensive (macroscopic) involvement of the 
MPD showed a significant difference in the risk of high-grade 
dysplasia or cancer (17% and 70% respectively).121 However, 
this classification can be used only after resection, and is thus 
irrelevant for clinical assessment before surgery.
4.9 What type of resection is indicated when the entire MPD is 
dilated on imaging?
Pancreatoduodenectomy with frozen section analysis of the resec-
tion margins is recommended for patients with MPD dilatation 
comprising the entire length of the pancreas (GRADE 2C, strong 
agreement).
In cases in which there is a mural nodule within the MPD further 
along the duct, or in patients with an increased risk for malignancy 
(ie, patients with familial pancreatic cancer), a total pancreatec-
tomy can be considered (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
It is important to assess the MPD for a mural nodule 
before surgical exploration (see sections 2 and 3 for details). 
There are conflicting data and opinions about the extent of 
surgery for MD-IPMN.122 Some authors advocate total pancre-
atectomy in every patient affected by MD-IPMN with radio-
logical involvement of the entire MPD because of the relatively 
high-risk of high-grade dysplasia and cancer.123 124 Others 
suggest total pancreatectomy only when there is a positive 
family history of pancreatic cancer,125 or partial pancreatectomy 
followed by close surveillance, with completion pancreatectomy 
where progression or recurrence is suspected.126 In this situation, 
pancreatoscopy may be useful to determine the extent of MPD 
involvement (see statement 3.7 for details). Where there is either 
a radiological suspicion, or histological proof of an IPMN-as-
sociated invasive carcinoma in the head of the pancreas, total 
pancreatectomy is not recommended, as the cancer will deter-
mine the prognosis.
4.10 At what MPD diameter should surgery be considered?
Recent studies demonstrate malignancy rates of 30–90% 
even in 
cases with a MPD dilatation of >5 
mm.93–95 127–131Consequently, 
the threshold of MPD dilatation for surgical resection is >5 
mm 
in both MD-IPMN and MT-IPMN (GRADE 2C, weak agreement).
The main goal of surgery is to resect IPMNs when high-
grade dysplasia is present, and before patients develop pancre-
atic cancer. Given the recent studies, and the goal of surgery, a 
cut-off point of >5 
mm is reasonable (see figure 1).
4.11 What are the absolute criteria for resection of BD-IPMN?
The presence of jaundice, cytology positive for high-grade 
dysplasia or cancer, the presence of a contrast-enhancing mural 
nodule (≥5 
mm) or solid mass should be considered as absolute 
indications for surgery (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 794
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
See statements 4.1–4.2, for a detailed description of the ratio-
nale for this.
4.12 Which are the relative criteria for resection of BD-IPMN?
Growth rate ≥5 
mm/year, increased serum CA 19.9 level (>37 
U/
mL in the absence of jaundice), MPD diameter between 5 and 
9.9 
mm, cyst diameter ≥40 
mm, symptoms (new-onset of 
diabetes mellitus or acute pancreatitis), and contrast- enhancing 
mural nodules <5 
mm can be considered relative indications for 
surgical resection (GRADE 2C, strong agreement). 
Table 3 shows absolute and relative indications for surgery.
CA 19.9 values in the serum >37 
U/mL have been associated 
with a positive predictive value of 74.0% and accuracy of 81.7% 
to identify patients with invasive IPMN. Highly elevated levels 
of CA 19.9 may thus be helpful as an additional but not sole 
indicator for invasive IPMN.132
A recent large cohort of patients, who underwent surveillance 
for IPMN in accordance with the previous European expert 
statement, validates the safety of observation of BD-IPMN 
measuring <40 
mm in the absence of other risk factors.107 
However, other data show that even small IPMN may develop into 
high-grade dysplasia or cancer. This highlights the importance of 
evaluating for the presence of multiple risk factors.88 133–135 The 
greater the number of risk factors, the higher the probability of 
malignancy.136 137 Table 4 shows the risk of high-grade dysplasia 
or malignancy according to cyst size in BD-IPMN.
4.13 Which kind of surgery should be performed for patients with 
BD-IPMN?
The surgical approach for most BD-IPMN is an oncological 
resection with standard lymphadenectomy. Parenchyma-sparing 
pancreatectomy (PSP) is a non-oncological procedure, which is 
suitable only for lesions with a very low probability of malig-
nancy—for example in patients without risk factors who have a 
strong wish to be operated on (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Considering that surgery is indicated only for lesions with 
a potential risk of cancer or high-grade dysplasia, the indications 
for PSP are very limited. Diagnostic use of these procedures is 
reported occasionally in patients at increased risk of malignancy 
(ie, familial pancreatic cancer).138 Since the morbidity of PSP is 
the same as that of conventional pancreatectomies, the advan-
tage of performing PSP over conventional pancreatectomy is 
unclear.139 140
4.14 When is full lymph node dissection required?
An oncologic resection including standard lymphadenectomy is 
the preferred procedure for IPMN with an absolute indication for 
resection141 142(GRADE 1C, strong agreement).
4.15 How should multifocal BD-IPMN be evaluated for surgery? Is it 
safe to leave in place BD-IPMN without clinical or radiological signs 
of high-grade dysplasia or cancer when resecting another part of 
the pancreas?
In multifocal BD-IPMN, each cyst should be evaluated individ-
ually for the presence of features associated with malignancy. 
Cysts without concerning features can undergo surveillance143–148 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
In cases of multifocal IPMN each lesion should be evalu-
ated for surgical resection as a single entity according to the 
criteria reported in statements 4.10–4.11. Once this appraisal 
is performed, a tailored surgical approach can be planned. An 
intraoperative analysis of the surgical margins may help to deter-
mine the need for expanded resection.145 149
table 3 Absolute and relative indications for surgery in IPMN
Absolute indications
relative indications
Positive cytology for malignancy/HGD
Grow-rate ≥5 mm/year
Solid mass
Increased levels of serum CA 19.9 
(>37 U/mL)*
Jaundice (tumour related)
MPD dilatation between 5 and 9.9 mm
Enhancing mural nodule (≥5 mm)
Cyst diameter ≥40 mm
MPD dilatation ≥10 mm
New onset of diabetes mellitus
Acute pancreatitis (caused by IPMN)
Enhancing mural nodule (<5 mm)
*In the absence of jaundice.
HGD, high-grade dysplasia; IPMN, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm; MPD, 
main pancreatic duct.
Figure 1 Indications for surgery. EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; IPMN, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 795
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
4.16 Should frozen section analysis be performed routinely in IPMN 
undergoing surgical resection?
Frozen section analysis of the pancreatic resection margin should 
be performed for all partial pancreatectomies and PSP in patients 
with IPMN (GRADE 1C, strong agreement).
Although frozen section analysis is recommended, data on its 
clinical impact on the resection margin of an IPMN undergoing 
surgical resection are contradictory.126 149–164
4.17 How will the frozen section result alter the surgical procedure?
If high-grade dysplasia or cancer is present at the surgical margin, 
further resection is warranted, up to a total pancreatectomy. 
In contrast, the presence of lower grades of dysplasia may not 
require any further resection (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Extending the resection may be considered in young fit 
patients, especially those at an increased risk for cancer (ie, 
familial pancreatic cancer), with low-grade dysplasia at the 
resection margin. Frozen section analysis is useful for detecting 
microscopic spread of cancerous lesions but is unable to detect 
the presence of discontinuous (skip) lesions, which occur in 
6−42% of cases.165–167 Moreover, detailed observation of the 
remnant MPD using intraoperative pancreatoscopy may provide 
identification of preoperatively undetected lesions.80 168 169 
Patients should always be counselled about the potential need 
for a total pancreatectomy.
4.18 What is the value of the frozen section in resected IPMN with 
cancer?
Frozen section examination of the pancreas resection margin 
should be performed in patients with an IPMN and cancer. In 
cases with a resection margin, which on frozen section is posi-
tive for pancreatic cancer, it is strongly recommended that the 
resection is extended. In cases of high-grade dysplasia at the 
resection margin, extension of the resection should be considered. 
No extension of the resection margin is indicated for low-grade 
dysplasia (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Data vary on the value of a positive frozen section to predict 
IPMN cancer recurrence after surgery.126 149 150 154–157 159 161 170 171 
An IPMN associated with invasive carcinoma, with no lymph 
node metastases, appears to be associated with a better long-
term outcome than pancreatic cancer.172 For this reason, exten-
sion of the resection margin in cases of cancer or high-grade 
dysplasia appears reasonable in these patients.
4.19 How are surgical outcomes affected by cyst location, 
comorbidity, patient age, and how should these features be 
weighted?
The surgical strategy should be individualised for each patient, 
based on the type of surgical resection, the patients’ age, 
comorbidities, and the patient´s preference (GRADE 2C, strong 
agreement).
A more conservative approach may be considered for IPMN 
located in the head of the pancreas in elderly patients or patients 
with multiple comorbidities.100 107 173 However, this conservative 
approach should be weighted with the potential risk of progres-
sion107 or development of high-grade dysplasia or cancer.174
4.20 How should patients be followed up who underwent surgical 
resection for an IPMN?
Lifelong surveillance is recommended following resection of 
an IPMN as long as the patient is fit and is willing to undergo 
surgery if indicated. Patients with evidence of anIPMN-asso-
ciated invasive carcinoma should be followed up in the same 
manner as those with a resected pancreatic cancer. IPMN with 
high-grade dysplasia or MD-IPMN should have close follow-up 
every 6 months for the first 2 
years, followed by yearly surveil-
lance. IPMN with low-grade dysplasia should be followed up in 
the same manner as non-resected IPMN (see statement 4.2 and 
figure 1 for details). Patients with IPMN in the remnant pancreas, 
who do not have high-grade dysplasia or MD-IPMN, should be 
followed up in the same manner as non-resected BD-IPMN (see 
section 4.15 and figure 1 for details). Follow-up imaging using 
MRI or EUS is recommended (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Several studies have reported that IPMN recurrence is possible 
5 to 10 years after resection.175 176 The risk of BD-IPMN and 
MD-IPMN recurrence is similar (7–8%).161 Resected IPMN with 
low-grade dysplasia have a low risk of recurrence (5.4−10%) 
with disease-free survival of approximately 52 months, while 
IPMN with high-grade dysplasia or an IPMN-associated invasive 
carcinoma have a higher risk (>50%), with disease-free survival 
of 29 months.85 161
4.21 What preoperative investigation should be performed for a 
patient with an IPMN-associated invasive carcinoma? Should the 
same criteria be used as for pancreatic cancer?
The diagnostic investigation for an IPMN-associated invasive 
cancer should follow the same algorithm used for pancreatic 
cancer177 (GRADE 1C, strong agreement).
No studies have examined the differences between an 
IPMN-associated invasive carcinoma and spontaneous pancre-
atic cancer with respect to local tumour extension or staging for 
distant metastases.
4.22 Should patients with an IPMN and a family history of 
pancreatic cancer be managed in a similar manner to patients with 
an IPMN but no family history?
We recommend that the management of asymptomatic patients 
with an IPMN and a positive family history of pancreatic cancer 
table 4 Risk of high-grade dysplasia or malignancy according to cyst size in branch duct IPMN
reference
study design
number of patients
cyst size
Patients with either high-grade 
dysplasia or malignancy (%)
Woo et al109 2009
Retrospective
190
>30 mm
28.5%
Sadakari et al110 2010
Retrospective
73
>30 mm
3.6%
26.3% (if MPD>5 mm)
Ohtsuka et al143 2012
Retrospective
172
>30 mm
29.2%
Hirono et al96 2012
Retrospective
134
>30 mm
47.4%
Sahora et al85 2013
Retrospective
240
>30 mm
12%
Masica et al, 2017
Retrospective
584
>40 mm
88% sensitivity
40% specificity
IPMN, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm; MPD, main pancreatic duct.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 796
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
is the same as that of patients with a sporadic IPMN (GRADE 2C, 
weak agreement).
There is no reported evidence that IPMN occurring in patients 
with a family history of pancreatic cancer have more rapid progres-
sion to high-grade dysplasia or cancer than sporadic cases.178–181
4.23 Should patients who have undergone an organ transplant, and 
have an IPMN be managed in the same way as non-transplanted 
patients with IPMN?
We recommend that surveillance of patients who have undergone 
an organ transplant and have an IPMN should be the same as for 
non-transplanted patients182–186 (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
4.24 Should patients who have an IPMN which fulfils criteria for 
surgical resection but who are not surgical candidates be treated 
with ablative techniques?
Further studies are required to clarify the indications for, and 
safety of, EUS-guided ablative injection techniques (ethanol, 
paclitaxel), radiofrequency ablation, or cryoablation for treat-
ment of IPMNs. These should not be performed outside of clinical 
trials approved by the  institutional review board (GRADE 1C, 
strong agreement).
EUS ablative procedures for the treatment of IPMN are not 
standardised and their efficacy is unclear. Furthermore, there is 
a lack of reliable markers to indicate successful and complete 
ablation.187–191
5 Mucinous cystic neoplasm
5.1 Should patients with MCN always undergo surgical resection?
MCN ≥40 
mm should undergo surgical resection. Resection is 
also recommended for MCN which are symptomatic or have risk 
factors (ie, mural nodule) irrespective of their size192 (GRADE 1B, 
strong agreement).
The rate at which the size of an MCN increases should be 
considered. Some case reports have suggested considerably 
faster growth of MCN during pregnancy, potentially leading 
to tumour rupture.193 Therefore, patients with MCN should be 
observed closely during pregnancy.
5.2 Is it safe to follow up presumed MCN, which measures <40 mm?
It is safe to follow up presumed MCN that measure <40 
mm, in 
the absence of risk features such as a suspicious mural nodule or 
symptoms192 (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
For patients with MCN measuring between 30 and 40 
mm, 
clinicians can incorporate other factors such as age, comorbid-
ities, patient’s surgical risk, and patient preference. For cysts 
measuring <30 
mm, it may be difficult to make a definitive diag-
nosis of an MCN, and smaller MCN may sometimes be diffi-
cult to distinguish other cystic lesions. We therefore recommend 
similar surveillance for MCN and IPMN measuring <3 
cm.
5.3 How should MCN, which is not resected, be followed up?
MCN measuring <40 
mm without a mural nodule or symptoms 
may undergo surveillance with MRI, EUS, or a combination of 
both.7 194 Surveillance is recommended every 6 
months for the 
first year, then annually if no changes are observed. Patients with 
an MCN measuring <40 
mm and with no concerning features or 
symptoms should have lifelong surveillance as long as they are fit 
for surgery (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Earlier studies have evaluated features associated with 
malignant transformation for all mucinous lesions combined. 
However, IPMNs and MCN may have different rates of growth 
and malignant transformation and different features predictive 
of malignancy.195
5.4 Is cyst fluid analysis recommended for MCN?
See statement 3.3.
5.5 Which surgical procedure(s) should be performed for an MCN?
To avoid incomplete treatment of invasive carcinoma, a standard 
oncologic resection (distal pancreatectomy in 90–95% of MCN) 
with lymph node dissection and splenectomy is indicated for any 
MCN with imaging features indicating high-grade dysplasia or 
cancer (GRADE 1B, strong agreement).
MCN without suspect features with a low risk of malignancy 
can be treated with a non-oncological resection (distal pancre-
atectomy with splenic preservation with or without preservation 
 
of splenic vessels, or PSP) (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
A PSP may be considered in selected patients to decrease the long-
term risk of diabetes, provided the anatomical location is favour-
able (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
PSP are associated with higher early morbidity and longer 
hospitalisation.139 140 196 A laparoscopic approach is feasible for 
MCN. Its benefit over an open approach is comparable to other 
indications.197
6 serous cystic neoplasm
6.1 Does malignant SCN exist? is there a risk of malignant 
transformation?
SCN is a benign entity. There are essentially no deaths that are 
attributable to dissemination/malignant behaviour of an SCN. 
Specific mortality due to an SCN is nearly zero198 199 (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
Cases reported as ‘malignant’200–202 do not fulfil the WHO 
criteria for an SCN.
6.2 If there is a clear diagnosis of an SCN, can follow-up be 
discontinued?
Asymptomatic patients with radiological evidence of an SCN 
should be followed up for 1 
year. After 1 
year, symptom-based 
follow-up is recommended (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
6.3 When does a possible SCN require follow-up?
Only when the diagnosis is uncertain is follow-up required. In 
these cases, a patient should undergo the same follow-up as for a 
BD-IPMN (see section 4.15, and figure 1 for details) (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
6.4 When does a SCN require surgery and which procedure should 
be performed?
When the diagnosis of SCN is clear, surgery is recommended only 
 
in patients with symptoms related to the compression of adjacent 
organs (ie, bile duct, stomach, duodenum, portal vein) (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
The size of about 60% of SCN remains stable. An increase 
in cyst size is seen in 40% but the rate of growth is slow and 
new onset of symptoms is very rare.198 203–211
7 other uncommon and undefined cystic tumours of the 
pancreas
7.1 When the diagnosis of a cyst is unclear based on a specific 
imaging modality, should other investigations always be 
undertaken?
For a cyst measuring <15 
mm, either cross-sectional imaging or 
EUS alone may be performed.212
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 797
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
For cysts ≥15 
mm, or if the diagnosis is unclear, both 
cross-sectional imaging and EUS should be performed, including 
EUS-FNA if warranted.
7.2 How should a small, undefined cyst be followed up?
Cysts which are of unclear aetiology, have no risk factors for 
malignancy, and measure <15 
mm, should be re-examined after 
1 
year. If stable for 3 years, follow-up may be extended to every 2 
years.209 Cysts measuring ≥15 
mm should be followed up every 6 
months during the first year and annually thereafter107 (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
As an undefined cyst may be mucinous by nature, surveillance 
is recommended.85 107 Most studies report that the risk of malig-
nant transformation of PCN increases with size. This probably 
also applies to cysts of unclear aetiology.
A prospective population-based study found that uniden-
tified cysts are very common (49% when including diam-
eters of ≥2 
mm), increase in number and size with age of the 
population (57% of subjects), but have no effect on pancreatic 
disease-associated mortality over 5 years.32
Recommendations that include 6-month surveillance intervals 
may therefore constitute overtreatment in cases where IPMN 
and MCN have been ruled out.
7.3 Duration of follow-up of undefined cysts
Patients with undefined cysts should undergo lifelong follow-up, 
unless the patient is unwilling, or unfit to undergo pancreatic 
surgery (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
The long-term evolution of PCN is still largely unknown, 
which also applies to undefined pancreatic cysts. Therefore, 
no rational term for termination of surveillance can be given. 
However, recent data suggest that the risk of progression 
increases over time.107
7.4 Should all solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPN) be resected?
Radical resection should be performed for all SPN (GRADE 1B, 
strong agreement).
Even in the absence of a large series, the surgical resection of 
SPN is internationally recommended and associated with posi-
tive long-term outcome.213 214
7.5 Can locally advanced SPN be resected? Should synchronous or 
metachronous metastases be resected?
In cases of locally advanced, metastatic or recurrent SPNs, an 
aggressive surgical approach, with complete resection is indicated 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
SPNs are rare, and there is a lack of high-quality studies to 
guide care. Most studies are small, retrospective case series, 
making comparison between studies difficult.215–217
7.6 How is the diagnosis of a cystic pancreatic neuroendocrine 
tumour (PNEN) established?
A definitive diagnosis of a cystic PNEN can be established 
only  by histological examination. A preoperative diagnosis 
is often suspected based on particular features of cross-sec-
tional imaging, and can be confirmed by EUS-guided cytology 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Cystic PNEN often have a peripheral hypervascular rim visible 
on an arterial phase CT scan.218–220 However, SCN may have 
a similar appearance, hampering differentiation. Data on func-
tional imaging with Octreoscan, or Gallium Octreotate positron 
emission tomography in cystic PNEN are limited.
7.7 What are the indications to resect cystic PNEN and which 
procedures are recommended?
For cystic PNEN >20 
mm, surgery is recommended (pancreato-
duodenectomy, distal pancreatectomy, or enucleation (including 
lymphadenectomy), according to tumour localisation).
For asymptomatic cystic PNEN ≤2 
cm, in the absence of signs of 
malignant behaviour, surveillance is recommended (GRADE 2C, 
strong agreement).
A recent meta-analysis concluded that cystic PNENs tend to be 
biologically less aggressive than their solid counterparts. Despite 
this, cystic PNENs have an approximately 20% risk of malig-
nancy, with a 5-year overall survival of 87–100%.221 A small 
tumour diameter is a favourable prognostic factor among 
PNENs. Therefore, small cystic PNENs ≤20 
mm may be consid-
ered as indolent tumours with a small risk of malignant transfor-
mation222 and an observational strategy has been suggested in 
the absence of symptoms.
7.8 Which are the rare cystic pancreatic lesions? When should they 
be considered and how is the diagnosis established?
Rare cystic pancreatic lesions include hydatid cysts, haeman-
gioma, lymphoepithelial cysts, acinar cell cystadenomas, 
desmoid cysts, and haemolymphangiomas.223–229 Such cysts 
require a multidisciplinary approach, in an expert pancre-
atic centre, to determine the optimum management strategy. 
Surgery may be necessary if the diagnosis remains unclear 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
8 Adjuvant and neoadjuvant treatment
8.1 Is adjuvant treatment recommended for resected IPMN or MCN 
with associated invasive carcinoma? if yes, what is the optimal 
regimen?
Adjuvant systemic chemotherapy is recommended for IPMN 
with an associated invasive carcinoma with or without posi-
tive lymph node status, as they have more aggressive biological 
behaviour165 230–239 (GRADE 1C, strong agreement).
 As for patients with pancreatic cancer, adjuvant treatment 
can also be recommended for patients without lymph node 
involvement, but there is no scientific evidence to support this.
Adjuvant treatment of MCN-associated invasive carcinoma is 
similar to sporadic pancreatic adenocarcinoma, although no 
evidence is available to support or refute this approach (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
No specific recommendation can be given for which chemo-
therapy agent should be used, as there is substantial heterogeneity 
among studies. The most commonly used drugs are 5-fluorouracil 
and gemcitabine, similar to adjuvant treatment of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
8.2 Is neoadjuvant treatment recommended for locally advanced 
carcinoma associated with an IPMN or MCN?
No recommendation can be made for neoadjuvant treatment of 
locally advanced IPMN- or MCN-associated invasive carcinoma, as 
there are insufficient data240–243 (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
T
wo case reports have been published, supporting the use 
of preoperative chemotherapy for IPMN and MCN.244 245 An 
approach similar to that used for patients with pancreatic cancer 
can be considered, given the similarities between the two diseases.
8.3 Is adjuvant or neoadjuvant treatment indicated for SPN? If yes, 
what is the optimum regimen?
Neoadjuvant therapy for SPN is not routinely recommended, 
as there are no studies proving its efficacy (GRADE 2C, strong 
agreement).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 798
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
The only data for neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy for SPN 
are from case reports, the majority of which report different 
chemotherapy regimens, and many of which were used in a palli-
ative setting after postsurgical recurrence.246–252
8.4 Is palliative chemotherapy recommended for non-resectable or 
recurrent malignant cystic tumours of the pancreas?
Systemic palliative chemotherapy for non-resectable or recurrent 
malignant cystic tumours may be considered as for pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma, although there is no evidence available to support 
or refute this approach230 253 254 (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Given the similarity to pancreatic cancer, palliative chemo-
therapy may be considered for patients with non-resectable, 
recurrent, or metastatic disease occurring in the setting of a 
malignant IPMN or MCN, analogous to pancreatic cancer.
8.5 Is surgical resection of metastases, or recurrence of an IPMN or 
MCN cancer justified?
Surgical resection of metastasis, or local recurrence cannot 
be recommended because there are no studies evaluating this 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
9 Pathology
9.1 How should PCN surgical specimens be examined?
Specimen dissection
Axial specimen slicing is the standard in an increasing number 
of European countries and pancreatic centres255 256 (GRADE 2C, 
strong agreement).
No studies have been published on the optimal grossing of 
pancreatic resection specimens with cystic lesions.
Macroscopic examination
Size, uni-/multilocularity, wall thickness, solid areas/mural 
nodules, cyst content, relationship to the duct system, and 
appearance of the background pancreas should be documented. 
In the case of macroscopically visible invasive carcinoma, a full 
macroscopic description is required, similar to that documented 
in ductal adenocarcinoma. The spatial relationship and distance 
of the cancer from the cystic lesion should be recorded.257 258 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Tissue sampling
Extensive sampling is paramount to establish an accurate diag-
nosis. Sampling of the resection margins should be conducted as 
recommended for pancreatic specimens resected for pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
The minimum number of tissue samples that should be taken 
to ensure accurate diagnosis has not been established for PCN.
9.2 How should surgical specimens with an IPMN lesion be 
examined and reported?
Gross examination
See statement 1.1. Involvement of the MPD and/or branch duct(s), 
the length of the MPD that is macroscopically involved, and the 
largest diameter of the dilated MPD or of the cyst, in cases of 
BD-IPMNs, should be recorded. In cases of multifocal BD-IPMNs, 
the largest diameter of each lesion should be reported257 (GRADE 
2C, strong agreement).
Histopathological examination
IPMN without an invasive carcinoma:the histological subtype 
should be documented (gastric, intestinal, pancreatobiliary or 
oncocytic), based on morphology and immunohistochemical 
staining.259 260 For grading of dysplasia in an IPMN, the use 
of a two-tiered classification system (low-grade vs high-grade 
dysplasia) is recommended258(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
IPMNs with associated invasive carcinoma:the largest diameter of 
the invasive lesion should be measured and reported, in addition 
to the overall size of the lesion. The associated invasive carcinoma 
should be reported according to the WHO and Union for Inter-
national Cancer Control (UICC) recommendations.261 If transi-
tion from an IPMN to invasive carcinoma is not demonstrable, 
complete sampling of the intervening tissues should be conducted 
to substantiate whether the IPMN and invasive carcinoma are 
truly separate.258 (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
The term ‘malignant IPMN’ should not be used. Instead, it 
should be simply stated whether invasion is present or not.257 258 
It is important to assess the histological subtype of IPMN, since 
it is associated with prediction of postoperative patient prog-
nosis. The pancreatobiliary subtype, for example, is considered 
to be strongly associated with malignancy.262
9.3 How to examine and report surgical specimens with an MCN?
Gross examination
See statement 9.1.
Histopathological examination
The use of a two-tiered grading system for dysplasia (low vs high-
grade) is recommended.257 The terms malignant MCN, invasive 
MCN, or mucinous cystadenocarcinoma should be abandoned 
and replaced by ‘MCN with associated invasive carcinoma’, 
according to the WHO and UICC recommendations258 263 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement)
9.4 Use of potential molecular markers
See statement 1.1.
9.5 Methodology for evaluation of cytology in PCN
EUS-FNA is the preferred method for obtaining cytology in PCN. 
The preparation of the aspirated fluid may differ between labora-
tories: direct smears for thick mucus, cytospins, and liquid-based 
preparation for fluid material (GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
Cytology for PCN has a low sensitivity but a high specificity 
(see statement 3.5).263 Low sensitivity and frequent non-diag-
nostic yield are mainly due to low cellularity of the aspirated 
fluid.
9.6 How to interpret and report PCN cytology
A six-tiered classification system can be used.259 The mucinous or 
non-mucinous nature of a PCN and the degree of dysplasia are 
the most significant determinants of patient management264 265 
(GRADE 2C, strong agreement).
International consensus on standardised terminology for 
pancreas cytology is lacking.
dIscussIon
The European evidence-based guidelines on PCN aim to 
improve the diagnosis and management of PCN. Eventually, 
the European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas 
strives to develop a global evidence-based guideline for PCN in a 
joint venture with the various national and international guide-
line groups, in order to harmonise care and to avoid confusion 
caused by conflicting statements. Future studies should deal with 
the optimal diagnosis (aetiology and neoplastic grade), appro-
priate selection criteria for surgery, surgical strategy (ie, partial 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 799
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
or total pancreatectomy), and follow-up strategy. Especially, 
identification of patients who do not require follow-up and may 
be discharged deserves further attention, as patient burden and 
societal costs of lifelong follow-up with cross-sectional imaging 
are substantial.
Compared with the recently updated Fukuoka guidelines,8 
this evidence-based guideline shows similar relative and abso-
lute indications for surgery based on radiological findings. This 
guideline is, however, more conservative in the management of 
side-branch IPMN. Furthermore, new-onset diabetes mellitus is 
a relative indication for surgery, whereas this is not mentioned in 
the Fukuoka guidelines.
Also, a recent international survey revealed that consensus 
is lacking among international experts about the management 
of MT/MD-IPMN.122 These dilemmas clearly demonstrate that 
future prospective, multicentre studies are required to provide 
the necessary evidence to guide management, see box 1. The 
European study group supports the international multicentre 
PACYFIC study (www. 
pacyfic. 
net), an accessible cyst registry, 
which aims to obtain long-term follow-up of over 5000 
people with an asymptomatic pancreatic cyst.
correction notice This article has been corrected since it published Online First. 
Massimo Falconi has been added to the collaborator list.
Acknowledgements The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the 
Pancreas is grateful to the UEG, EPC, E-AHPBA, EDS, ESGE and Cancerfonden 
Sweden for their support and thanks Professor Patrick Bossuyt, Academic Medical 
Center Amsterdam for the methodological support.
collaborators This guideline has been made possible by a large group of 
collaborators. These collaborators formed the writing committee, methodology 
committee, nine review groups and the manuscript committee. The initial draft of the 
manuscript was written by Marco Del Chiaro (Karolinska) with the help of Lianne 
Scholten, Marc G Besselink (both AMC). The following collaborators were each 
involved in one or more of the committees and review groups (see supplementary 
material for details): Marco Del Chiaro, Marc G Besselink, Lianne Scholten, Marco J 
Bruno, Djuna L Cahen, Thomas M Gress, Jeanin E van Hooft, Markus M Lerch, Julia 
Mayerle, Thilo Hackert, Sohei Satoi, Alessandro Zerbi, David Cunningham, Claudio 
De Angelis, Marc Giovannini, Enrique de-Madaria, Peter Hegyi, Jonas Rosendahl, 
Helmut Friess, Riccardo Manfredi, Philippe Lévy, Francisco X Real, Alain Sauvanet, 
Mohammed Abu Hilal, Giovanni Marchegiani, Irene Esposito, Paula Ghaneh, Marc 
RW Engelbrecht, Paul Fockens, Nadine CM van Huijgevoort, Christopher Wolfgang, 
Claudio Bassi, Natalya B Gubergrits, Caroline Verbeke, Günter Klöppel, Aldo Scarpa, 
Giuseppe Zamboni, Anne Marie Lennon, Malin Sund, Nikolaos Kartalis, Lars 
Grenacher, Massimo Falconi, Urban Arnelo, Kostantin V Kopchak, Kofi Oppong, Colin 
McKay, Truls Hauge, Kevin Conlon, Mustapha Adham, Güralp O Ceyhan, Roberto 
Salvia, Christos Dervenis, Peter Allen, François Paye, Detlef K Bartsch, Matthias Löhr, 
Massimiliano Mutignani, Johanna Laukkarinen, Richard Schulick, Roberto Valente, 
Thomas Seufferlein, Gabriele Capurso, Ajith Siriwardena, John P Neoptolemos, Aldis 
Pukitis, Ralf Segersvärd, A Aghdassi, S Andrianello, P Bossuyt, R Bülow, K Cárdenas-
Jaén, P Cortegoso, M Fontana, L Haeberle, M Heckler, A Litvin, K Mann, C Michalski, 
P Michl, G Nappo, G Perri, S Persson, F Scheufele, F Sclafani, M Schmidt, L Venezia, F 
Volker, M-P Vullierm, and L Wüsten. 
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Not required.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Ip IK, Mortele KJ, Prevedello LM, et al. Focal cystic pancreatic lesions: 
assessing variation in radiologists’ management recommendations. Radiology 
2011;259:136–41.
 2 Girometti R, Intini S, Brondani G, et al. Incidental pancreatic cysts on 3D turbo spin 
echo magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography: prevalence and relation with 
clinical and imaging features. Abdom Imaging 2011;36:196–205.
 3 Chang YR, Park JK, Jang JY, et al. Incidental pancreatic cystic neoplasms in an 
asymptomatic healthy population of 21,745 individuals: large-scale, single-center 
cohort study. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:e5535.
 4 de Jong K, Nio CY, Hermans JJ, et al. High prevalence of pancreatic cysts detected 
by screening magnetic resonance imaging examinations. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2010;8:806–11.
 5 Del Chiaro M, Segersvärd R, Lohr M, et al. Early detection and prevention 
of pancreatic cancer: is it really possible today? World J Gastroenterol 
2014;20:12118–31.
 6 Del Chiaro M, Segersvärd R, Pozzi Mucelli R, et al. Comparison of preoperative 
conference-based diagnosis with histology of cystic tumors of the pancreas. Ann 
Surg Oncol 2014;21:1539–44.
 7 Del Chiaro M, Verbeke C, Salvia R, et al. European experts consensus statement on 
cystic tumours of the pancreas. Dig Liver Dis 2013;45:703–11.
 8 Tanaka M, Fernández-Del Castillo C, Kamisawa T, et al. Revisions of international 
consensus Fukuoka guidelines for the management of IPMN of the pancreas. 
Pancreatology 2017;17:738–53.
 9 Vege SS, Ziring B, Jain R, et al. American Gastroenterological Association Institute 
guideline on the diagnosis and management of asymptomatic neoplastic pancreatic 
cysts. Gastroenterology 2015;148:819–22. quize12-3.
 10 Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al. Use of GRADE grid to reach decisions on 
clinical practice guidelines when consensus is elusive. BMJ 2008;337:a744.
 11 Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of 
recommendations. BMJ 2004;328:1490.
 12 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating 
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924–6.
 13 Hruban RH, Kloeppel G, Bofetta P, et al. Tumours of the pancreas. In: Bosman 
FT, Carneiro F, Hruban RH, eds. WHO classification of tumours of the 
digestive system. 4th ed. Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 
2010:280–330.
box 1 current clinical dilemmas in pancreatic cystic 
neoplasms (Pcn) and topics for future research
Diagnostic investigation
 
► Which modality can most reliably distinguish neoplastic from 
non-neoplastic cysts (eg, imaging, needle-based confocal 
laser endomicroscopy, cyst fluid analysis, secretin-stimulated 
pancreatic juice collections)?
 
► Which modality can most reliably detect high-grade dysplasia 
or early cancer (neoplastic progression) in patients with PCN, 
to enable timely resection?
Surgery
 
► What are absolute and relative (contra)indications for surgery 
in main duct (MD) and branch duct intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm (BD-IPMN), especially in the subgroup 
30–40 mm BD-IPMN?
 
► How extensive should a resection for MD-IPMN be (total vs 
partial pancreatectomy)?
 
► Is there a role for pre-/intraoperative pancreatoscopy to 
determine the extent of resection in MD-IPMN?
 
► What is the potential benefit of preventive surgery in relation 
to potential side effects, especially in patients with increased 
surgical risk or a limited life expectancy due to comorbidity?
Surveillance
 
► What is a cost-effective and personalised approach to 
surveillance of (undefined) PCN?
 
► Which risk factors for progression need to be considered 
(eg, cyst size, smoking, diabetes mellitus, concurrent 
immunosuppression, familial pancreatic cancer history, other 
genetic syndromes)?
 
► What is the optimal modality and follow-up scheme for 
patients after a partial pancreatic resection for IPMN?
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 800
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
 14 Jang JY, Park T, Lee S, et al. Proposed nomogram predicting the individual risk of 
malignancy in the patients with branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms of the pancreas. Ann Surg 2017;266:1062–8.
 15 Wang W, Zhang L, Chen L, et al. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and 
carbohydrate antigen 19-9 for prediction of malignancy and invasiveness in 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: a meta-analysis. 
Biomed Rep 2015;3:43–50.
 16 Kim JR, Jang JY, Kang MJ, et al. Clinical implication of serum carcinoembryonic 
antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 for the prediction of malignancy in 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of pancreas. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 
2015;22:699–707.
 17 Singhi AD, Nikiforova MN, Fasanella KE, et al. Preoperative GNAS and 
KRAS testing in the diagnosis of pancreatic mucinous cysts. Clin Cancer Res 
2014;20:4381–9.
 18 Springer S, Wang Y, Dal Molin M, et al. A combination of molecular markers and 
clinical features improve the classification of pancreatic cysts. Gastroenterology 
2015;149:1501–10.
 19 Singhi AD, Zeh HJ, Brand RE, et al. American Gastroenterological Association 
guidelines are inaccurate in detecting pancreatic cysts with advanced neoplasia: a 
clinicopathologic study of 225 patients with supporting molecular data. Gastrointest 
Endosc 2016;83:1107–17.
 20 Kadayifci A, Atar M, Wang JL, et al. Value of adding GNAS testing to pancreatic cyst 
fluid KRAS and carcinoembryonic antigen analysis for the diagnosis of intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms. Dig Endosc 2017;29:111–7.
 21 Al-Rashdan A, Schmidt CM, Al-Haddad M, et al. Fluid analysis prior to surgical 
resection of suspected mucinous pancreatic cysts. A single centre experience. J 
Gastrointest Oncol 2011;2:208–14.
 22 van der Waaij LA, van Dullemen HM, Porte RJ. Cyst fluid analysis in the differential 
diagnosis of pancreatic cystic lesions: a pooled analysis. Gastrointest Endosc 
2005;62:383–9.
 23 Jang DK, Song BJ, Ryu JK, et al. Preoperative diagnosis of pancreatic cystic lesions: 
the accuracy of endoscopic ultrasound and cross-sectional imaging. Pancreas 
2015;44:1329–33.
 24 Lee HJ, Kim MJ, Choi JY, et al. Relative accuracy of CT and MRI in the differentiation 
of benign from malignant pancreatic cystic lesions. Clin Radiol 2011;66:315–21.
 25 Sainani NI, Saokar A, Deshpande V, et al. Comparative performance of MDCT and 
MRI with MR cholangiopancreatography in characterizing small pancreatic cysts. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol 2009;193:722–31.
 26 Visser BC, Muthusamy VR, Yeh BM, et al. Diagnostic evaluation of cystic pancreatic 
lesions. HPB (Oxford) 2008;10:63–9.
 27 Song SJ, Lee JM, Kim YJ, et al. Differentiation of intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms from other pancreatic cystic masses: comparison of multirow-detector CT 
and MR imaging using ROC analysis. J Magn Reson Imaging 2007;26:86–93.
 28 Laffan TA, Horton KM, Klein AP, et al. Prevalence of unsuspected pancreatic cysts on 
MDCT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008;191:802–7.
 29 Spinelli KS, Fromwiller TE, Daniel RA, et al. Cystic pancreatic neoplasms: observe or 
operate. Ann Surg 2004;239:651–7.
 30 Lee KS, Sekhar A, Rofsky NM, et al. Prevalence of incidental pancreatic cysts in the 
adult population on MR imaging. Am J Gastroenterol 2010;105:2079–84.
 31 Zhang X-M, Mitchell DG, Dohke M, Holland GA, et al. Pancreatic cysts: depiction on 
single-shot fast spin-echo MR images. Radiology 2002;223:547–53.
 32 Kromrey ML, Bülow R, Hübner J, et al. Prospective study on the incidence, prevalence 
and 5-year pancreatic-related mortality of pancreatic cysts in a population-based 
study. Gut 2018;67:138–45.
 33 Sahani DV, Kambadakone A, Macari M, et al. Diagnosis and management of cystic 
pancreatic lesions. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2013;200:343–54.
 34 Chaudhari VV, Raman SS, Vuong NL, et al. Pancreatic cystic lesions: discrimination 
accuracy based on clinical data and high resolution CT features. J Comput Assist 
Tomogr 2007;31:860–7.
 35 de Jong K, Nio CY, Mearadji B, et al. Disappointing interobserver agreement among 
radiologists for a classifying diagnosis of pancreatic cysts using magnetic resonance 
imaging. Pancreas 2012;41:278–82.
 36 Waters JA, Schmidt CM, Pinchot JW, et al. CT vs MRCP: optimal classification of 
IPMN type and extent. J Gastrointest Surg 2008;12:101–9.
 37 Pilleul F, Rochette A, Partensky C, et al. Preoperative evaluation of intraductal 
papillary mucinous tumors performed by pancreatic magnetic resonance imaging 
and correlated with surgical and histopathologic findings. J Magn Reson Imaging 
2005;21:237–44.
 38 Berland LL, Silverman SG, Gore RM, et al. Managing incidental findings on 
abdominal CT: white paper of the ACR incidental findings committee. J Am Coll 
Radiol 2010;7:754–73.
 39 Sodickson A, Baeyens PF, Andriole KP, et al. Recurrent CT, cumulative radiation 
exposure, and associated radiation-induced cancer risks from CT of adults. Radiology 
2009;251:175–84.
 40 Curry CA, Eng J, Horton KM, et al. CT of primary cystic pancreatic neoplasms: can CT 
be used for patient triage and treatment? AJR Am J Roentgenol 2000;175:99–103.
 41 Demos TC, Posniak HV, Harmath C, et al. Cystic lesions of the pancreas. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol 2002;179:1375–88.
 42 Pozzi-Mucelli RM, Rinta-Kiikka I, Wünsche K, et al. Pancreatic MRI for the 
surveillance of cystic neoplasms: comparison of a short with a comprehensive 
imaging protocol. Eur Radiol 2017;27:41–50.
 43 Kartalis N, Lindholm TL, Aspelin P, et al. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging of pancreas tumours. Eur Radiol 2009;19:1981–90.
 44 Hwang J, Kim YK, Min JH, Jeong WK, et al. Comparison between MRI with MR 
cholangiopancreatography and endoscopic ultrasonography for differentiating 
malignant from benign mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Eur Radiol 
2018;28:179–87.
 45 Donahue TR, Hines OJ, Farrell JJ, et al. Cystic neoplasms of the pancreas: results of 
114 cases. Pancreas 2010;39:1271–6.
 46 Kim JH, Eun HW, Park HJ, et al. Diagnostic performance of MRI and EUS in the 
differentiation of benign from malignant pancreatic cyst and cyst communication 
with the main duct. Eur J Radiol 2012;81:2927–35.
 47 Gress F, Gottlieb K, Cummings O, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound characteristics of 
mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas. Am J Gastroenterol 2000;95:961–5.
 48 Yamao K, Nakamura T, Suzuki T, et al. Endoscopic diagnosis and staging of mucinous 
cystic neoplasms and intraductal papillary-mucinous tumors. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat 
Surg 2003;10:142–6.
 49 Ahmad NA, Kochman ML, Lewis JD, et al. Can EUS alone differentiate between 
malignant and benign cystic lesions of the pancreas? Am J Gastroenterol 
2001;96:3295–300.
 50 Ahmad NA, Kochman ML, Brensinger C, et al. Interobserver agreement among 
endosonographers for the diagnosis of neoplastic versus non-neoplastic pancreatic 
cystic lesions. Gastrointest Endosc 2003;58:59–64.
 51 Kamata K, Kitano M, Omoto S, et al. Contrast-enhanced harmonic endoscopic 
ultrasonography for differential diagnosis of pancreatic cysts. Endoscopy 
2016;48:35–41.
 52 Harima H, Kaino S, Shinoda S, et al. Differential diagnosis of benign and malignant 
branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm using contrast-enhanced 
endoscopic ultrasonography. World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:6252–60.
 53 Fusaroli P, Kypraios D, Mancino MG, et al. Interobserver agreement in contrast 
harmonic endoscopic ultrasound. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;27:1063–9.
 54 de Jong K, van Hooft JE, Nio CY, et al. Accuracy of preoperative workup in 
a prospective series of surgically resected cystic pancreatic lesions. Scand J 
Gastroenterol 2012;47:1056–63.
 55 Ardengh JC, Lopes CV, de Lima-Filho ER, et al. Impact of endoscopic ultrasound-
guided fine-needle aspiration on incidental pancreatic cysts. A prospective study. 
Scand J Gastroenterol 2014;49:114–20.
 56 Gillis A, Cipollone I, Cousins G, et al. Does EUS-FNA molecular analysis carry 
additional value when compared to cytology in the diagnosis of pancreatic cystic 
neoplasm? A systematic review. HPB (Oxford) 2015;17:377–86.
 57 Al-Haddad M, DeWitt J, Sherman S, et al. Performance characteristics of molecular 
(DNA) analysis for the diagnosis of mucinous pancreatic cysts. Gastrointest Endosc 
2014;79:79–87.
 58 Brugge WR, Lewandrowski K, Lee-Lewandrowski E, et al. Diagnosis of pancreatic 
cystic neoplasms: a report of the cooperative pancreatic cyst study. Gastroenterology 
2004;126:1330–6.
 59 Cizginer S, Turner BG, Turner B, Bilge AR, et al. Cyst fluid carcinoembryonic 
antigen is an accurate diagnostic marker of pancreatic mucinous cysts. Pancreas 
2011;40:1024–8.
 60 Gaddam S, Ge PS, Keach JW, et al. Suboptimal accuracy of carcinoembryonic antigen 
in differentiation of mucinous and nonmucinous pancreatic cysts: results of a large 
multicenter study. Gastrointest Endosc 2015;82:1060–9.
 61 Jin DX SA, Vollmer CM, Jhala N, et al. A lower cyst fluid CEA cut-off increases 
diagnostic accuracy in identifying mucinous pancreatic cystic lesions. J Pancreas 
2015;16:271–7.
 62 Kadayifci A, Al-Haddad M, Atar M, et al. The value of KRAS mutation testing 
with CEA for the diagnosis of pancreatic mucinous cysts. Endosc Int Open 
2016;4:E391–6.
 63 Khalid A, Zahid M, Finkelstein SD, et al. Pancreatic cyst fluid DNA analysis in 
evaluating pancreatic cysts: a report of the PANDA study. Gastrointest Endosc 
2009;69:1095–102.
 64 Winner M, Sethi A, Poneros JM, et al. The role of molecular analysis in the diagnosis 
and surveillance of pancreatic cystic neoplasms. JOP 2015;16:143–9.
 65 Ngamruengphong S, Bartel MJ, Raimondo M. Cyst carcinoembryonic antigen in 
differentiating pancreatic cysts: a meta-analysis. Dig Liver Dis 2013;45:920–6.
 66 Sedlack R, Affi A, Vazquez-Sequeiros E, et al. Utility of EUS in the evaluation of cystic 
pancreatic lesions. Gastrointest Endosc 2002;56:543–7.
 67 Koito K, Namieno T, Nagakawa T, et al. Solitary cystic tumor of the pancreas: EUS-
pathologic correlation. Gastrointest Endosc 1997;45:268–76.
 68 Morris-Stiff G, Lentz G, Chalikonda S, et al. Pancreatic cyst aspiration analysis for 
cystic neoplasms: mucin or carcinoembryonic antigen--which is better? Surgery 
2010;148:638–45. discussion 44-5.
 69 Tarantino I, Fabbri C, Di Mitri R, et al. Complications of endoscopic ultrasound fine 
needle aspiration on pancreatic cystic lesions: final results from a large prospective 
multicenter study. Dig Liver Dis 2014;46:41–4.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 801
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
 70 Barresi L, Tarantino I, Traina M, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle 
aspiration and biopsy using a 22-gauge needle with side fenestration in pancreatic 
cystic lesions. Dig Liver Dis 2014;46:45–50.
 71 Al-Haddad M, Wallace MB, Woodward TA, et al. The safety of fine-needle aspiration 
guided by endoscopic ultrasound: a prospective study. Endoscopy 2008;40:204–8.
 72 Lee LS, Saltzman JR, Bounds BC, et al. EUS-guided fine needle aspiration of 
pancreatic cysts: a retrospective analysis of complications and their predictors. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;3:231–6.
 73 Varadarajulu S, Eloubeidi MA. Frequency and significance of acute intracystic 
hemorrhage during EUS-FNA of cystic lesions of the pancreas. Gastrointest Endosc 
2004;60:631–5.
 74 O’Toole D, Palazzo L, Arotçarena R, et al. Assessment of complications of EUS-guided 
fine-needle aspiration. Gastrointest Endosc 2001;53:470–4.
 75 Bournet B, Migueres I, Delacroix M, et al. Early morbidity of endoscopic ultrasound: 
13 years’ experience at a referral center. Endoscopy 2006;38:349–54.
 76 Guarner-Argente C, Shah P, Buchner A, et al. Use of antimicrobials for EUS-guided 
FNA of pancreatic cysts: a retrospective, comparative analysis. Gastrointest Endosc 
2011;74:81–6.
 77 Suzuki R, Thosani N, Annangi S, et al. Diagnostic yield of EUS-FNA-based cytology 
distinguishing malignant and benign IPMNs: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Pancreatology 2014;14:380–4.
 78 Siech M, Tripp K, Schmidt-Rohlfing B, et al. Cystic tumours of the pancreas: 
diagnostic accuracy, pathologic observations and surgical consequences. 
Langenbecks Arch Surg 1998;383:56–61.
 79 Hara T, Yamaguchi T, Ishihara T, et al. Diagnosis and patient management 
of intraductal papillary-mucinous tumor of the pancreas by using peroral 
pancreatoscopy and intraductal ultrasonography. Gastroenterology 
2002;122:34–43.
 80 Navez J, Hubert C, Gigot JF, et al. Impact of intraoperative pancreatoscopy with 
intraductal biopsies on surgical management of intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm of the pancreas. J Am Coll Surg 2015;221:982–7.
 81 Konda VJ, Meining A, Jamil LH, et al. A pilot study of in vivo identification of 
pancreatic cystic neoplasms with needle-based confocal laser endomicroscopy under 
endosonographic guidance. Endoscopy 2013;45:1006–13.
 82 Nakai Y, Iwashita T, Park DH, et al. Diagnosis of pancreatic cysts: EUS-guided, 
through-the-needle confocal laser-induced endomicroscopy and cystoscopy trial: 
DETECT study. Gastrointest Endosc 2015;81:1204–14.
 83 Le Pen C, Palazzo L, Napoléon B. A health economic evaluation of needle-based 
confocal laser endomicroscopy for the diagnosis of pancreatic cysts. Endosc Int Open 
2017;5:E987–95.
 84 Napoléon B, Lemaistre AI, Pujol B, et al. A novel approach to the diagnosis of 
pancreatic serous cystadenoma: needle-based confocal laser endomicroscopy. 
Endoscopy 2015;47:26–32.
 85 Sahora K, Mino-Kenudson M, Brugge W, et al. Branch duct intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms: does cyst size change the tip of the scale? A critical analysis of 
the revised international consensus guidelines in a large single-institutional series. 
Ann Surg 2013;258:466–75.
 86 Fritz S, Klauss M, Bergmann F, et al. Pancreatic main-duct involvement in branch-
duct IPMNs: an underestimated risk. Ann Surg 2014;260:848–55. discussion 55-6.
 87 Aso T, Ohtsuka T, Matsunaga T, et al. "High-risk stigmata" of the 2012 
international consensus guidelines correlate with the malignant grade of 
branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Pancreas 
2014;43:1239–43.
 88 Nguyen AH, Toste PA, Farrell JJ, et al. Current recommendations for surveillance and 
surgery of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms may overlook some patients 
with cancer. J Gastrointest Surg 2015;19:258–65.
 89 Roch AM, Ceppa EP, DeWitt JM, et al. International consensus guidelines 
parameters for the prediction of malignancy in intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm are not properly weighted and are not cumulative. HPB (Oxford) 
2014;16:929–35.
 90 Goh BK, Thng CH, Tan DM, et al. Evaluation of the Sendai and 2012 International 
Consensus Guidelines based on cross-sectional imaging findings performed for 
the initial triage of mucinous cystic lesions of the pancreas: a single institution 
experience with 114 surgically treated patients. Am J Surg 2014;208:202–9.
 91 Dortch JD, Stauffer JA, Asbun HJ. Pancreatic resection for side-branch intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm (SB-IPMN): a contemporary single-institution 
experience. J Gastrointest Surg 2015;19:1603–9.
 92 Robles EP, Maire F, Cros J, et al. Accuracy of 2012 International Consensus 
Guidelines for the prediction of malignancy of branch-duct intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. United European Gastroenterol J 
2016;4:580–6.
 93 Seo N, Byun JH, Kim JH, et al. Validation of the 2012 International Consensus 
Guidelines using computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging: branch 
duct and main duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Ann 
Surg 2016;263:557–64.
 94 Hackert T, Fritz S, Klauss M, et al. Main-duct intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm: high cancer risk in duct diameter of 5 to 9 
mm. Ann Surg 
2015;262:875–80. discussion 80-1.
 95 Abdeljawad K, Vemulapalli KC, Schmidt CM, et al. Prevalence of malignancy in 
patients with pure main duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms. Gastrointest 
Endosc 2014;79:623–9.
 96 Hirono S, Tani M, Kawai M, et al. The carcinoembryonic antigen level in 
pancreatic juice and mural nodule size are predictors of malignancy for branch 
duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Ann Surg 
2012;255:517–22.
 97 Kawada N, Uehara H, Nagata S, et al. Mural nodule of 10 mm or larger as predictor 
of malignancy for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas: 
pathological and radiological evaluations. Pancreatology 2016;16:441–8.
 98 Kobayashi N, Sugimori K, Shimamura T, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonographic findings 
predict the risk of carcinoma in branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms of the pancreas. Pancreatology 2012;12:141–5.
 99 Shimizu Y, Yamaue H, Maguchi H, et al. Predictors of malignancy in intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas: analysis of 310 pancreatic resection 
patients at multiple high-volume centers. Pancreas 2013;42:883–8.
 
100 Crippa S, Bassi C, Salvia R, et al. Low progression of intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms with worrisome features and high-risk stigmata 
undergoing non-operative management: a mid-term follow-up analysis. Gut 
2017;66:495–506.
 
101 Kang MJ, Jang JY, Kim SJ, et al. Cyst growth rate predicts malignancy in patients with 
branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2011;9:87–93.
 
102 Kwong WT, Lawson RD, Hunt G, et al. Rapid growth rates of suspected pancreatic 
cyst branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms predict malignancy. Dig 
Dis Sci 2015;60:2800–6.
 
103 Han Y, Lee H, Kang JS, et al. Progression of pancreatic branch duct intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm associates with cyst size. Gastroenterology 
2018;154:576–84.
 
104 Lafemina J, Katabi N, Klimstra D, et al. Malignant progression in IPMN: a cohort 
analysis of patients initially selected for resection or observation. Ann Surg Oncol 
2013;20:440–7.
 
105 Roch AM, Ceppa EP, Al-Haddad MA, et al. The natural history of main duct-involved, 
mixed-type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm: parameters predictive of 
progression. Ann Surg 2014;260:680–8.
 
106 Roch AM, DeWitt JM, Al-Haddad MA, et al. Nonoperative management of main 
pancreatic duct-involved intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm might be indicated 
in select patients. J Am Coll Surg 2014;219:122–9.
 
107 Del Chiaro M, Ateeb Z, Hansson MR, et al. Survival analysis and risk for progression 
of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasia of the pancreas (IPMN) under 
surveillance: a single-institution experience. Ann Surg Oncol 2017;24:1120–6.
 
108 Masica DL, Dal Molin M, Wolfgang CL, et al. A novel approach for selecting 
combination clinical markers of pathology applied to a large retrospective cohort of 
surgically resected pancreatic cysts. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2017;24:145–52.
 
109 Woo SM, Ryu JK, Lee SH, et al. Branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms in a retrospective series of 190 patients. Br J Surg 2009;96:405–11.
 
110 Sadakari Y, Ienaga J, Kobayashi K, et al. Cyst size indicates malignant transformation 
in branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas without 
mural nodules. Pancreas 2010;39:232–6.
 
111 Jang JY, Park T, Lee S, et al. Validation of international consensus guidelines for the 
resection of branch duct-type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms. Br J Surg 
2014;101:686–92.
 
112 Ohtsuka T, Kono H, Nagayoshi Y, et al. An increase in the number of predictive 
factors augments the likelihood of malignancy in branch duct intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. Surgery 2012;151:76–83.
 
113 Crippa S, Pezzilli R, Bissolati M, et al. Active surveillance beyond 5 years is required 
for presumed branch-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms undergoing 
non-operative management. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:1153–61.
 
114 Lawrence SA, Attiyeh MA, Seier K, et al. Should patients with cystic lesions of the 
pancreas undergo long-term radiographic surveillance? Results of 3024 patients 
evaluated at a single institution. Ann Surg 2017;266:536–44.
 
115 Sahora K, Ferrone CR, Brugge WR, et al. Effects of comorbidities on outcomes of 
patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2015;13:1816–23.
 
116 Pugliese L, Keskin M, Maisonneuve P, et al. Increased incidence of extrapancreatic 
neoplasms in patients with IPMN: fact or fiction? A critical systematic review. 
Pancreatology 2015;15:209–16.
 
117 Larghi A, Panic N, Capurso G, et al. Prevalence and risk factors of extrapancreatic 
malignancies in a large cohort of patients with intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas. Ann Oncol 2013;24:1907–11.
 
118 Marchegiani G, Malleo G, D’Haese JG, et al. Association between pancreatic 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms and extrapancreatic malignancies. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:1162–9.
 
119 Mimura T, Masuda A, Matsumoto I, et al. Predictors of malignant intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. J Clin Gastroenterol 2010;44:e224–e229.
 
120 Tian X, Gao H, Ma Y, et al. Surgical treatment and prognosis of 96 cases of 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: a retrospective cohort 
study. Int J Surg 2015;13:49–53.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 802
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
 
121 Sahora K, Fernández-del Castillo C, Dong F, et al. Not all mixed-type intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms behave like main-duct lesions: implications of minimal 
involvement of the main pancreatic duct. Surgery 2014;156:611–21.
 
122 Scholten L, van Huijgevoort NC, Bruno M, et al. Surgical management of main duct 
IPMN and mixed type IPMN: an international survey and case-vignette study among 
experts. Pancreatology 2017;17:S87.
 
123 Ito T, Doi R, Yoshizawa A, et al. The distribution of atypical epithelium in main-duct 
type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. J Hepatobiliary 
Pancreat Sci 2011;18:241–9. discussion 6-9.
 
124 Watanabe Y, Nishihara K, Niina Y, et al. Validity of the management 
strategy for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm advocated by the 
international consensus guidelines 2012: a retrospective review. Surg Today 
2016;46:1045–52.
 
125 He J, Cameron JL, Ahuja N, et al. Is it necessary to follow patients after resection 
of a benign pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm? J Am Coll Surg 
2013;216:657–65. discussion 65-7.
 
126 Tamura K, Ohtsuka T, Ideno N, et al. Treatment strategy for main duct intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas based on the assessment of 
recurrence in the remnant pancreas after resection: a retrospective review. Ann Surg 
2014;259:360–8.
 
127 Ogawa H, Itoh S, Ikeda M, et al. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of 
the pancreas: assessment of the likelihood of invasiveness with multisection CT. 
Radiology 2008;248:876–86.
 
128 Shin SH, Han DJ, Park KT, et al. Validating a simple scoring system to predict 
malignancy and invasiveness of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the 
pancreas. World J Surg 2010;34:776–83.
 
129 Jun DY, Kwon HJ, Kim SG, et al. Predictive factors for invasive intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. Korean J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg 
2011;15:237–42.
 
130 Kawakubo K, Tada M, Isayama H, et al. Disease-specific mortality among patients 
with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2014;12:486–91.
 
131 Kang MJ, Jang JY, Lee S, et al. Clinicopathological meaning of size of main-duct 
dilatation in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of pancreas: proposal of a 
simplified morphological classification based on the investigation on the size of main 
pancreatic duct. World J Surg 2015;39:2006–13.
 
132 Fritz S, Hackert T, Hinz U, et al. Role of serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and 
carcinoembryonic antigen in distinguishing between benign and invasive intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. Br J Surg 2011;98:104–10.
 
133 Wong J, Weber J, Centeno BA, et al. High-grade dysplasia and adenocarcinoma are 
frequent in side-branch intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm measuring less 
than 3 cm on endoscopic ultrasound. J Gastrointest Surg 2013;17:78–85. discussion 
p-5.
 
134 Jang JY, Kim SW, Lee SE, et al. Treatment guidelines for branch duct type intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: when can we operate or observe? 
Ann Surg Oncol 2008;15:199–205.
 
135 Fritz S, Klauss M, Bergmann F, et al. Small (Sendai negative) branch-duct IPMNs. Ann 
Surg 2012;256:313–20.
 
136 Goh BK. International guidelines for the management of pancreatic intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms. World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:9833–7.
 
137 Sugiyama M, Izumisato Y, Abe N, et al. Predictive factors for malignancy in 
intraductal papillary-mucinous tumours of the pancreas. Br J Surg 2003;90:1244–9.
 
138 Del Chiaro M, Verbeke CS, Kartalis N, et al. Short-term results of a magnetic 
resonance imaging-based Swedish screening program for individuals at risk for 
pancreatic cancer. JAMA Surg 2015;150:512–8.
 
139 Faitot F, Gaujoux S, Barbier L, et al. Reappraisal of pancreatic enucleations: a single-
center experience of 126 procedures. Surgery 2015;158:201–10.
 
140 Goudard Y, Gaujoux S, Dokmak S, et al. Reappraisal of central pancreatectomy a 
12-year single-center experience. JAMA Surg 2014;149:356–63.
 
141 Partelli S, Fernandez-Del Castillo C, Bassi C, et al. Invasive intraductal papillary 
mucinous carcinomas of the pancreas: predictors of survival and the role of lymph 
node ratio. Ann Surg 2010;251:477–82.
 
142 Tol JA, Gouma DJ, Bassi C, et al. Definition of a standard lymphadenectomy 
in surgery for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: a consensus statement 
by the International Study Group on Pancreatic Surgery (ISGPS). Surgery 
2014;156:591–600.
 
143 Ohtsuka T, Kono H, Tanabe R, et al. Follow-up study after resection of intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas; special references to the multifocal 
lesions and development of ductal carcinoma in the remnant pancreas. Am J Surg 
2012;204:44–8.
 
144 Salvia R, Partelli S, Crippa S, et al. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the 
pancreas with multifocal involvement of branch ducts. Am J Surg 2009;198:709–14.
 
145 Fritz S, Schirren M, Klauss M, et al. Clinicopathologic characteristics of patients with 
resected multifocal intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. Surgery 
2012;152:S74–S80.
 
146 Rosenblatt R, Dorfman V, Epelboym I, et al. Demographic features and natural 
history of intermediate-risk multifocal versus unifocal intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms. Pancreas 2015;44:478–83.
 
147 Matthaei H, Norris AL, Tsiatis AC, et al. Clinicopathological characteristics and 
molecular analyses of multifocal intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the 
pancreas. Ann Surg 2012;255:326–33.
 
148 Kwon JH, Kim SC, Song KB, et al. Surgical outcomes of multifocal branch duct 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of pancreas. Korean J Hepatobiliary 
Pancreat Surg 2014;18:152–8.
 
149 Yamaguchi J, Kaneoka Y, Maeda A, et al. Positive surgical margins in surgically 
treated unifocal and multifocal IPMN. Int J Surg 2016;28:51–5.
 
150 Fujii T, Kato K, Kodera Y, et al. Prognostic impact of pancreatic margin status 
in the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Surgery 
2010;148:285–90.
 
151 Marchegiani G, Mino-Kenudson M, Ferrone CR, et al. Patterns of recurrence after 
resection of IPMN. Ann Surg 2015;262:1108–14.
 
152 Pea A, Yu J, Rezaee N, et al. Targeted DNA sequencing reveals patterns of local 
progression in the pancreatic remnant following resection of intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas. Ann Surg 2017;266:133-141.
 
153 White R, D’Angelica M, Katabi N, et al. Fate of the remnant pancreas after 
resection of noninvasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. J Am Coll Surg 
2007;204:987–93. discussion 93-5.
 
154 Park J, Lee KT, Jang TH, et al. Risk factors associated with the postoperative 
recurrence of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Pancreas 
2011;40:46–51.
 
155 Nara S, Shimada K, Sakamoto Y, et al. Clinical significance of frozen section analysis 
during resection of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm: should a positive 
pancreatic margin for adenoma or borderline lesion be resected additionally? J Am 
Coll Surg 2009;209:614–21.
 
156 Landa J, Allen P, D’Angelica M, et al. Recurrence patterns of intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas on enhanced computed tomography. J Comput 
Assist Tomogr 2009;33:838–43.
 
157 Leng KM, Wang ZD, Zhao JB, et al. Impact of pancreatic margin status and lymph 
node metastases on recurrence after resection for invasive and noninvasive 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: a meta-analysis. Dig Surg 
2012;29:213–25.
 
158 Miller JR, Meyer JE, Waters JA, et al. Outcome of the pancreatic remnant following 
segmental pancreatectomy for non-invasive intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm. HPB (Oxford) 2011;13:759–66.
 
159 Moriya T, Traverso W. Fate of the pancreatic remnant after resection for an intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm: a longitudinal level II cohort study. Arch Surg 
2012;147:528–34.
 
160 Bhardwaj N, Dennison AR, Maddern GJ, et al. Management implications of resection 
margin histology in patients undergoing resection for IPMN: a meta-analysis. 
Pancreatology 2016;16:309–17.
 
161 Kang MJ, Jang JY, Lee KB, et al. Long-term prospective cohort study of patients 
undergoing pancreatectomy for intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm 
of the pancreas: implications for postoperative surveillance. Ann Surg 
2014;260:356–63.
 
162 Frankel TL, LaFemina J, Bamboat ZM, et al. Dysplasia at the surgical margin is 
associated with recurrence after resection of non-invasive intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms. HPB (Oxford) 2013;15:814–21.
 
163 Xourafas D, Tavakkoli A, Clancy TE, et al. Noninvasive intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms and mucinous cystic neoplasms: recurrence rates and postoperative 
imaging follow-up. Surgery 2015;157:473–83.
 
164 Yogi T, Hijioka S, Imaoka H, et al. Risk factors for postoperative recurrence of 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas based on a long-term 
follow-up study: proposals for follow-up strategies. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 
2015;22:757–65.
 
165 Raut CP, Cleary KR, Staerkel GA, et al. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms 
of the pancreas: effect of invasion and pancreatic margin status on recurrence and 
survival. Ann Surg Oncol 2006;13:582–94.
 
166 Eguchi H, Ishikawa O, Ohigashi H, et al. Role of intraoperative cytology combined 
with histology in detecting continuous and skip type intraductal cancer 
existence for intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer 
2006;107:2567–75.
 
167 Farrell JJ, Fernández-del Castillo C. Pancreatic cystic neoplasms: management and 
unanswered questions. Gastroenterology 2013;144:1303–15.
 
168 Kaneko T, Nakao A, Nomoto S, et al. Intraoperative pancreatoscopy with the 
ultrathin pancreatoscope for mucin-producing tumors of the pancreas. Arch Surg 
1998;133:263–7.
 
169 Pucci MJ, Johnson CM, Punja VP, et al. Intraoperative pancreatoscopy: a valuable 
tool for pancreatic surgeons? J Gastrointest Surg 2014;18:1100–7.
 
170 Yokoyama Y, Nagino M, Oda K, et al. Clinicopathologic features of re-resected cases 
of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs). Surgery 2007;142:136–42.
 
171 Cuillerier E, Cellier C, Palazzo L, et al. Outcome after surgical resection of intraductal 
papillary and mucinous tumors of the pancreas. Am J Gastroenterol 2000;95:441–5.
 
172 Salvia R, Fernández-del Castillo C, Bassi C, et al. Main-duct intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: clinical predictors of malignancy and long-
term survival following resection. Ann Surg 2004;239:678–85. discussion 85-7.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 803
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
 
173 Piciucchi M, Crippa S, Del Chiaro M, et al. Outcomes of intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm with "Sendai-positive" criteria for resection undergoing non-
operative management. Dig Liver Dis 2013;45:584–8.
 
174 Ammori JB, Do RK, Brennan MF, et al. Uncinate duct dilation in intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: a radiographic finding with potentially 
increased malignant potential. J Gastrointest Surg 2014;18:911–6.
 
175 Marchegiani G, Mino-Kenudson M, Ferrone CR, et al. Oncocytic-type intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms: a unique malignant pancreatic tumor with good 
long-term prognosis. J Am Coll Surg 2015;220:839–44.
 
176 Paini M, Crippa S, Scopelliti F, et al. Extent of surgery and implications of 
transection margin status after resection of IPMNs. Gastroenterol Res Pract 
2014;2014:1–10.
 
177 Ducreux M, Cuhna AS, Caramella C, et al. Cancer of the pancreas: ESMO 
Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 
2015;26(suppl 5):v56–v68.
 
178 Canto MI, Harinck F, Hruban RH, et al. International Cancer of the Pancreas 
Screening (CAPS) consortium summit on the management of patients with increased 
risk for familial pancreatic cancer. Gut 2013;62:339–47.
 
179 Konings IC, Harinck F, Poley JW, et al. Prevalence and progression of pancreatic cystic 
precursor lesions differ between groups at high risk of developing pancreatic cancer. 
Pancreas 2017;46:28–34.
 
180 Bartsch DK, Slater EP, Carrato A, et al. Refinement of screening for familial pancreatic 
cancer. Gut 2016;65:1314–21.
 
181 Vasen H, Ibrahim I, Ponce CG, et al. Benefit of surveillance for pancreatic cancer in 
high-risk individuals: outcome of long-term prospective follow-up studies from three 
European expert centers. J Clin Oncol 2016;34:2010–9.
 
182 Agarwal A, Scott FI, Ahmad NA, et al. Chronic immunosuppression does not 
potentiate the malignant progression of mucinous pancreatic cystic lesions. 
Pancreatology 2016;16:900–4.
 
183 Dorfman V, Verna EC, Poneros JM, et al. Progression of incidental intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas in liver transplant recipients. Pancreas 
2016;45:620–5.
 
184 Gill KR, Pelaez-Luna M, Keaveny A, et al. Branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm of the pancreas in solid organ transplant recipients. Am J Gastroenterol 
2009;104:1256–61.
 
185 Lennon AM, Victor D, Zaheer A, et al. Liver transplant patients have a risk of 
progression similar to that of sporadic patients with branch duct intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms. Liver Transpl 2014;20:1462–7.
 
186 Vidhyarkorn S, Siripongsakun S, Yu J, et al. Longterm follow-up of small pancreatic 
cystic lesions in liver transplant recipients. Liver Transpl 2017;23:324–9.
 
187 Oh HC, Brugge WR. EUS-guided pancreatic cyst ablation: a critical review (with 
video). Gastrointest Endosc 2013;77:526–33.
 
188 Oh HC, Seo DW, Song TJ, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonography-guided ethanol lavage 
with paclitaxel injection treats patients with pancreatic cysts. Gastroenterology 
2011;140:172–9.
 
189 Gan SI, Thompson CC, Lauwers GY, et al. Ethanol lavage of pancreatic cystic lesions: 
initial pilot study. Gastrointest Endosc 2005;61:746–52.
 
190 Park JK, Song BJ, Ryu JK, et al. Clinical outcomes of endoscopic ultrasonography-
guided pancreatic cyst ablation. Pancreas 2016;45:889–94.
 
191 Gómez V, Takahashi N, Levy MJ, et al. EUS-guided ethanol lavage does not 
reliably ablate pancreatic cystic neoplasms (with video). Gastrointest Endosc 
2016;83:914–20.
 
192 Nilsson LN, Keane MG, Shamali A, et al. Nature and management of pancreatic 
mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN): a systematic review of the literature. 
Pancreatology 2016;16:1028–36.
 
193 Naganuma S, Honda K, Noriki S, et al. Ruptured mucinous cystic neoplasm with an 
associated invasive carcinoma of pancreatic head in a pregnant woman: report of a 
case and review of literature. Pathol Int 2011;61:28–33.
 
194 Tanaka M, Fernández-del Castillo C, Adsay V, et al. International consensus 
guidelines 2012 for the management of IPMN and MCN of the pancreas. 
Pancreatology 2012;12:183–97.
 
195 Crippa S, Fernández-Del Castillo C, Salvia R, et al. Mucin-producing neoplasms of the 
pancreas: an analysis of distinguishing clinical and epidemiologic characteristics. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8:213–9.
 
196 Iacono C, Verlato G, Ruzzenente A, et al. Systematic review of central 
pancreatectomy and meta-analysis of central versus distal pancreatectomy. Br J Surg 
2013;100:873–85.
 
197 Mehrabi A, Hafezi M, Arvin J, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
laparoscopic versus open distal pancreatectomy for benign and malignant lesions of 
the pancreas: it’s time to randomize. Surgery 2015;157:45–55.
 
198 Jais B, Rebours V, Malleo G, et al. Serous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas: a 
multinational study of 2622 patients under the auspices of the International 
Association of Pancreatology and European Pancreatic Club (European Study Group 
on Cystic Tumors of the Pancreas). Gut 2016;65:305–12.
 
199 Reid MD, Choi HJ, Memis B, et al. Serous neoplasms of the pancreas: a 
clinicopathologic analysis of 193 cases and literature review with new insights 
on macrocystic and solid variants and critical reappraisal of so-called "serous 
cystadenocarcinoma". Am J Surg Pathol 2015;39:1597–610.
 
200 Strobel O, Z’graggen K, Schmitz-Winnenthal FH, et al. Risk of malignancy in serous 
cystic neoplasms of the pancreas. Digestion 2003;68:24–33.
 
201 Galanis C, Zamani A, Cameron JL, et al. Resected serous cystic neoplasms of 
the pancreas: a review of 158 patients with recommendations for treatment. J 
Gastrointest Surg 2007;11:820–6.
 
202 Khashab MA, Shin EJ, Amateau S, et al. Tumor size and location correlate 
with behavior of pancreatic serous cystic neoplasms. Am J Gastroenterol 
2011;106:1521–6.
 
203 Pelaez-Luna MC, Moctezuma-Velázquez C, Hernández-Calleros J, et al. Serous 
cystadenomas follow a benign and asymptomatic course and do not present a 
significant size change during follow-up. Rev Invest Clin 2015;67:344–9.
 
204 Reid MD, Choi H, Balci S, et al. Serous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas: 
clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics. Semin Diagn Pathol 
2014;31:475–83.
 
205 El-Hayek KM, Brown N, O’Rourke C, et al. Rate of growth of pancreatic serous 
cystadenoma as an indication for resection. Surgery 2013;154:794–802. 
discussion -2.
 
206 Malleo G, Bassi C, Rossini R, et al. Growth pattern of serous cystic neoplasms of the 
pancreas: observational study with long-term magnetic resonance surveillance and 
recommendations for treatment. Gut 2012;61:746–51.
 
207 Menard A, Tomlinson G, Cleary S, et al. Serous cystadenomas of the pancreas: long-
term follow-up measurement of growth rate. Can Assoc Radiol J 2011;62:190–6.
 
208 Chalian H, Töre HG, Rezai P, et al. MDCT evaluation of the growth kinetics of 
serous and benign mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas. Cancer Imaging 
2011;11:116–22.
 
209 Das A, Wells CD, Nguyen CC. Incidental cystic neoplasms of pancreas: what is the 
optimal interval of imaging surveillance? Am J Gastroenterol 2008;103:1657–62.
 
210 Tseng JF, Warshaw AL, Sahani DV, et al. Serous cystadenoma of the pancreas: tumor 
growth rates and recommendations for treatment. Ann Surg 2005;242:413–9. 
discussion 9-21.
 
211 Bassi C, Salvia R, Molinari E, et al. Management of 100 consecutive cases of 
pancreatic serous cystadenoma: wait for symptoms and see at imaging or vice 
versa? World J Surg 2003;27:319–23.
 
212 Morris-Stiff G, Falk GA, Chalikonda S, et al. Natural history of asymptomatic 
pancreatic cystic neoplasms. HPB (Oxford) 2013;15:175–81.
 
213 Kim MJ, Choi DW, Choi SH, et al. Surgical treatment of solid pseudopapillary 
neoplasms of the pancreas and risk factors for malignancy. Br J Surg 
2014;101:1266–71.
 
214 Cai Y, Ran X, Xie S, et al. Surgical management and long-term follow-up of solid 
pseudopapillary tumor of pancreas: a large series from a single institution. J 
Gastrointest Surg 2014;18:935–40.
 
215 Wang WB, Zhang TP, Sun MQ, et al. Solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas 
with liver metastasis: clinical features and management. Eur J Surg Oncol 
2014;40:1572–7.
 
216 Cheng K, Shen B, Peng C, et al. Synchronous portal-superior mesenteric vein or 
adjacent organ resection for solid pseudopapillary neoplasms of the pancreas: a 
single-institution experience. Am Surg 2013;79:534–9.
 
217 Lee HS, Kim HK, Shin BK, et al. A rare case of recurrent metastatic solid 
pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas. J Pathol Transl Med 2017;51:87–91.
 
218 Kawamoto S, Johnson PT, Shi C, et al. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with cystlike 
changes: evaluation with MDCT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2013;200:W283–90.
 
219 Park HS, Kim SY, Hong SM, et al. Hypervascular solid-appearing serous cystic 
neoplasms of the pancreas: differential diagnosis with neuroendocrine tumours. Eur 
Radiol 2016;26:1348–58.
 
220 Jang KM, Kim SH, Song KD, et al. Differentiation of solid-type serous cystic neoplasm 
from neuroendocrine tumour in the pancreas: value of abdominal MRI with 
diffusion-weighted imaging in comparison with MDCT. Clin Radiol 2015;70:153–60.
 
221 Koh YX, Chok AY, Zheng HL, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
clinicopathologic characteristics of cystic versus solid pancreatic neuroendocrine 
neoplasms. Surgery 2014;156:83–96.
 
222 Partelli S, Cirocchi R, Crippa S, et al. Systematic review of active surveillance 
versus surgical management of asymptomatic small non-functioning pancreatic 
neuroendocrine neoplasms. Br J Surg 2017;104:34–41.
 
223 Akbulut S, Yavuz R, Sogutcu N, et al. Hydatid cyst of the pancreas: report of an 
undiagnosed case of pancreatic hydatid cyst and brief literature review. World J 
Gastrointest Surg 2014;6:190–200.
 
224 Mondal U, Henkes N, Henkes D, Rosenkranz L. Cavernous hemangioma of 
adult pancreas: a case report and literature review. World J Gastroenterol 
2015;21:9793–802.
 
225 Matsubayashi H, Aikawa Y, Sugiura T, et al. Pancreatic lymphoepithelial cyst showing 
multiple floating ball-like appearances. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis 2016;25:239–42.
 
226 Wolf AM, Shirley LA, Winter JM, et al. Acinar cell cystadenoma of the pancreas: 
report of three cases and literature review. J Gastrointest Surg 2013;17:1322–6.
 
227 Albayrak A, Yildirim U, Aydin M. Dermoid cyst of the pancreas: a report of an unusual 
case and a review of the literature. Case Rep Pathol 2013;2013:1–5.
 
228 Dong F, Zheng Y, Wu JJ, et al. Hemolymphangioma: a rare differential diagnosis of 
cystic-solid or cystic tumors of the pancreas. World J Gastroenterol 2013;19:3520–3.
 
229 Kim YS, Cho JH. Rare nonneoplastic cysts of pancreas. Clin Endosc 2015;48:31–8.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 804
The European Study Group on Cystic Tumours of the Pancreas. Gut 2018;67:789–804. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027
Guidelines
 
230 Otsuka T, Morizane C, Nara S, et al. Gemcitabine in patients with intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasm with an associated invasive carcinoma of the pancreas. 
Pancreas 2013;42:889–92.
 
231 Alexander BM, Fernandez-Del Castillo C, Ryan DP, et al. Intraductal papillary 
mucinous adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: clinical outcomes, prognostic factors, 
and the role of adjuvant therapy. Gastrointest Cancer Res 2011;4:116–21.
 
232 Worni M, Akushevich I, Gloor B, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy in the treatment of 
invasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas: an analysis 
of the surveillance, epidemiology, and end results registry. Ann Surg Oncol 
2012;19:1316–23.
 
233 Turrini O, Waters JA, Schnelldorfer T, et al. Invasive intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm: predictors of survival and role of adjuvant therapy. HPB 2010;12:447–55.
 
234 Wasif N, Bentrem DJ, Farrell JJ, et al. Invasive intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm versus sporadic pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a stage-matched comparison 
of outcomes. Cancer 2010;116:3369–77.
 
235 Swartz MJ, Hsu CC, Pawlik TM, et al. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy after pancreatic 
resection for invasive carcinoma associated with intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm of the pancreas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2010;76:839–44.
 
236 Le H, Ziogas A, Rhee JM, et al. A population-based, descriptive analysis of malignant 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev 2008;17:2737–41.
 
237 Caponi S, Vasile E, Funel N, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy seems beneficial 
for invasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms. Eur J Surg Oncol 
2013;39:396–403.
 
238 McMillan MT, Lewis RS, Drebin JA, et al. The efficacy of adjuvant therapy for 
pancreatic invasive intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). Cancer 
2016;122:521–33.
 
239 Fong ZV, Castillo CF. Intraductal papillary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the 
pancreas: clinical outcomes, prognostic factors, and the role of adjuvant therapy. 
Viszeralmedizin 2015;31:43–6.
 
240 Hirono S, Tani M, Kawai M, et al. Treatment strategy for intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas based on malignant predictive factors. Arch 
Surg 2009;144:345–9. discussion 9-50.
 
241 Yachha SK, Chetri K, Saraswat VA, et al. Management of childhood pancreatic 
disorders: a multidisciplinary approach. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 
2003;36:206–12.
 
242 Maire F, Hammel P, Terris B, et al. Prognosis of malignant intraductal papillary 
mucinous tumours of the pancreas after surgical resection. Comparison with 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Gut 2002;51:717–22.
 
243 Le Borgne J, de Calan L, Partensky C. Cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinomas of 
the pancreas: a multiinstitutional retrospective study of 398 cases. French Surgical 
Association. Ann Surg 1999;230:152–61.
 
244 Westermark S, Rangelova E, Ansorge C, et al. Cattell-Braasch maneuver 
combined with local hypothermia during superior mesenteric artery resection in 
pancreatectomy. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2016;401:1241–7.
 
245 Di Marco M, Vecchiarelli S, Macchini M, et al. Preoperative gemcitabine and 
oxaliplatin in a patient with ovarian metastasis from pancreatic cystadenocarcinoma. 
Case Rep Gastroenterol 2012;6:530–7.
 
246 Sacco Casamassima MG, Gause CD, Goldstein SD, et al. Pancreatic surgery for 
tumors in children and adolescents. Pediatr Surg Int 2016;32:779–88.
 
247 Prasad TV, Madhusudhan KS, Srivastava DN, et al. Transarterial chemoembolization 
for liver metastases from solid pseudopapillary epithelial neoplasm of pancreas: a 
case report. World J Radiol 2015;7:61–5.
 
248 Hofmann H, von Haken R, Werner J, et al. Unresectable isolated hepatic 
metastases from solid pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas: a case report of 
chemosaturation with high-dose melphalan. Pancreatology 2014;14:546–9.
 
249 Honore C, Goere D, Dartigues P, et al. Peritoneal carcinomatosis from solid 
pseudopapillary neoplasm (Frantz’s tumour) of the pancreas treated with HIPEC. 
Anticancer Res 2012;32:1069–73.
 
250 Ansari D, Elebro J, Tingstedt B, et al. Single-institution experience with solid 
pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas. Scand J Gastroenterol 2011;46:1492–7.
 
251 Maffuz A, Bustamante FT, Silva JA, et al. Preoperative gemcitabine for unresectable, 
solid pseudopapillary tumour of the pancreas. Lancet Oncol 2005;6:185–6.
 
252 Matsuda Y, Imai Y, Kawata S, et al. Papillary-cystic neoplasm of the pancreas with 
multiple hepatic metastases: a case report. Gastroenterol Jpn 1987;22:379–84.
 
253 Valente R, Capurso G, Pierantognetti P, et al. Simultaneous intraductal papillary 
neoplasms of the bile duct and pancreas treated with chemoradiotherapy. World J 
Gastrointest Oncol 2012;4:22–5.
 
254 Irtan S, Galmiche-Rolland L, Elie C, et al. Recurrence of solid pseudopapillary 
neoplasms of the pancreas: results of a nationwide study of risk factors and 
treatment modalities. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2016;63:1515–21.
 
255 Esposito I, Kleeff J, Bergmann F, et al. Most pancreatic cancer resections are R1 
resections. Ann Surg Oncol 2008;15:1651–60.
 
256 Verbeke CS, Gladhaug IP. Dissection of pancreatic resection specimens. Surg Pathol 
Clin 2016;9:523–38.
 
257 Adsay V, Mino-Kenudson M, Furukawa T, et al. Pathologic evaluation and reporting 
of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas and other tumoral 
intraepithelial neoplasms of pancreatobiliary tract. Ann Surg 2016;263:162–77.
 
258 Basturk O, Hong SM, Wood LD, et al. A revised classification system and 
recommendations from the Baltimore consensus meeting for neoplastic precursor 
lesions in the pancreas. Am J Surg Pathol 2015;39:1730–41.
 
259 Furukawa T, Klöppel G, Volkan Adsay N, et al. Classification of types of intraductal 
papillary-mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas: a consensus study. Virchows Arch 
2005;447:794–9.
 
260 Furukawa T, Hatori T, Fujita I, et al. Prognostic relevance of morphological types of 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Gut 2011;60:509–16.
 
261 Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittenkind CH, eds. TNM classification of malignant 
tumours. 8th edn: Wiley-Blackwell, 2017:272.
 
262 Distler M, Kersting S, Niedergethmann M, et al. Pathohistological subtype predicts 
survival in patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the 
pancreas. Ann Surg 2013;258:324–30.
 
263 Scourtas A, Dudley JC, Brugge WR, et al. Preoperative characteristics and cytological 
features of 136 histologically confirmed pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms. 
Cancer Cytopathol 2017;125:169–77.
 
264 Pitman MB, Yaeger KA, Brugge WR, et al. Prospective analysis of atypical epithelial 
cells as a high-risk cytologic feature for malignancy in pancreatic cysts. Cancer 
Cytopathol 2013;121:29–36.
 
265 Pitman MB, Centeno BA, Ali SZ, et al. Standardized terminology and nomenclature 
for pancreatobiliary cytology: the Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology guidelines. 
Diagn Cytopathol 2014;42:338–50.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-316027 on 24 March 2018. Downloaded from 
