 Genome-wide association analysis identifies novel blood 
pressure loci and offers biological insights into cardiovascular 
risk
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Elevated blood pressure is the leading heritable risk factor for cardiovascular disease worldwide. 
We report genetic association of blood pressure (systolic, diastolic, pulse pressure) among UK 
Biobank participants of European ancestry with independent replication in other cohorts, and 
robust validation of 107 independent loci. We also identify new independent variants at 11 
previously reported blood pressure loci. Combined with results from a range of in silico functional 
analyses and wet bench experiments, our findings highlight new biological pathways for blood 
pressure regulation enriched for genes expressed in vascular tissues and identify potential 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
†Corresponding authors: Paul Elliott (p.elliott@imperial.ac.uk) and Mark Caulfield (m.j.caulfield@qmul.ac.uk).
#A full list of ICBP consortium members and affiliations can be found at the end of the paper.
URLs
UK Biobank: https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/
Genotype imputation and genetic association studies using UK Biobank data: http://biobank.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/crystal/refer.cgi?id=157020
UK Biobank Axion Array Content Summary: http://biobank.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/crystal/refer.cgi?id=146640
Exome chip design: http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/Exome_Chip_Design
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) database: www.gtexportal.org
GREAT Enrichment: http://bejerano.stanford.edu/great
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software: www.qiagen.com/ingenuity
Chembl: www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/
Drug Gene Interaction database: dgidb.genome.wustl.edu
FORGE (accessed 16 Aug 2016): http://browser.1000genomes.org/Homo_sapiens/UserData/Forge?db=core
Fantom5 data (accessed 16 Aug 2016): http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/
ENCODE DNase I data (wgEncodeAwgDnaseMasterSites; accessed 20 Aug 2016 using Table browser)
ENCODE cell type data (accessed 20 Aug 2016), http://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE/cellTypes.html.
Servier Medical Art: www.servier.fr/servier-medical-art
Conflicts/Disclosures
MJC is Chief Scientist for Genomics England, a wholly owned UK government company. He leads the 100,000 Genomes Project 
which includes syndromic forms of blood pressure.
Author Contributions
Central analysis: HRW, CPC, HG, MRB, MPSL, MR, IT, BM, IK, EE.
Writing of the paper: HRW*, MRB, EE, CPC, HG, IT, BM, MR, MJC*, PE* (*Writing group leads).
Working group membership: MJC*, HRW, EE, IT, PBM, LVW, NJS, MT, JMMH, MDT, IN, BK, HG, MRB, CPC, JSK, PE* (*Co-
Chairs).
Replication consortium contributor: [ICBP-1000G] GBE, LVW, DL, AC, MJC, MDT, POR, JK, HS; [CHD Exome+ Consortium ] 
PSu, RC, DSa, JMMH [ExomeBP Consortium] JPC, FD, PBM [T2D-GENES Consortium and GoT2DGenes Consortium] CML; 
[CHARGE] GBE, CL, AK, DL, CNC, DIC; [iGEN-BP] ML, JCC, NK, JH, EST, PE, JSK, PVDH.
Replication study contributor: [Lifelines] NV, PVDH, HS, AMS; [GS:SFHS] JM, CH, DP, SP; [EGCUT] TE, MA, RM, AM; 
[PREVEND] PVDH, NV, RTG, SJLB; [ASCOT] HRW, MJC, PBM, PS, NP, AS, DS, ST; [BRIGHT] HRW, MJC, PBM, MB, MF, JC; 
[Airwave] HG, EE, MPSL, IK, IT, PE.
All authors critically reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2017 March ; 49(3): 403–415. doi:10.1038/ng.3768.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 therapeutic targets for hypertension. Results from genetic risk score models raise the possibility of 
a precision medicine approach through early lifestyle intervention to offset the impact of blood 
pressure raising genetic variants on future cardiovascular disease risk.
Elevated blood pressure (BP) is a strong, heritable1–4 and modifiable driver of risk for 
stroke and coronary artery disease and a leading cause of global mortality and morbidity5,6. 
At the time of analysis, genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analyses, and 
analyses of bespoke or exome content, have identified and replicated genetic variants of 
mostly modest or weak effect on blood pressure at over 120 loci7–11. Here, we report 
association analyses between BP traits and genetic variants among ˜150,000 participants in 
UK Biobank, a prospective cohort study of 500,000 men and women aged 40-69 years with 
extensive baseline phenotypic measurements, stored biological samples12, and follow-up by 
electronic health record linkage13. We undertake independent replication in large 
international consortia and other cohorts, providing robust validation of our findings and 
new biological insights into BP regulation.
Our study design is summarized in Fig. 1. Briefly, data are available for 152,249 UK 
Biobank participants genotyped using a customised array (including GWAS and exome 
content) and with genome-wide imputation based on 1000 Genomes and UK10K sequencing 
data14. (Further details on the UK Biobank imputation are available at the UK Biobank 
website.) After quality measures and exclusions (see Online Methods), we study 140,886 
unrelated individuals of European ancestry with two seated clinic BP measurements using 
the Omron HEM-7015IT device (Supplementary Table 1). We carry out GWAS analyses of 
systolic (SBP), diastolic (DBP) and pulse pressure (PP) using single-variant linear regression 
under an additive model, based on ˜9.8 million single nucleotide variants (SNVs) with minor 
allele frequency (MAF) ≥1% and imputation quality score (INFO) >0.1. For SNVs with P 
<1x10-6, we take forward for replication the sentinel SNV (i.e. with lowest P-value) at each 
locus, defined by linkage disequilibrium (LD) r2 < 0.2, within a 1Mb interval. We similarly 
analyze exome content for variants with MAF ≥0.01%, including rare variants, taking into 
replication the sentinel SNV (P < 1x10-5) from loci that are non-overlapping (r2 <0.2) with 
the GWAS findings. Overall we took sentinel SNVs from 240 loci into replication: 218 from 
GWAS and 22 from exome analysis (r2 < 0.2 and >500kb from previously reported BP 
SNVs at the time of analysis and not annotated to previously reported BP genes; 
Supplementary Table 2).
The replication resources comprise individuals of European ancestry from a large BP meta-
analysis consortium (ICBP cohorts listed in Supplementary Note) and further cohorts with 
1000 Genomes data for GWAS (Supplementary Table 3), and two large BP exome consortia. 
We use P <5x10-8 to denote genome-wide significance in the combined (discovery and 
replication) meta-analyses, with P < 0.01 for support in the replication data alone and 
concordant direction of effect. Additionally, we take forward for replication potential 
secondary signals at 51 previously reported BP loci at the time of analysis (excluding the 
HLA region).
et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 To better understand the functional consequences of our findings, we carry out a series of in 
silico investigations and experimental analysis of gene expression in relevant vascular tissue 
for selected putative functional SNVs (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Results
Genetic variants at novel and previously unvalidated loci
Of the 240 loci taken forward to replication, we validate 107 loci at P < 5x10-8, of which 
102 derive from the GWAS analysis replicated and meta-analyzed in a total of 330,956 
individuals (Tables 1-3; Supplementary Fig. 2a-c; Supplementary Fig. 3a), and a further five 
from the exome analysis in a total of 422,604 individuals (Tables 1-3 and Supplementary 
Fig. 3b; Supplementary Tables 4, 5 and 6). Thirty-two of these validated loci are novel 
findings. Since the time of analysis, the remaining 75 loci have also been reported in another 
study15, although at least 53 of these were previously unvalidated (Tables 1-3), hence we 
now validate these loci for the first time. We therefore present results here for all 107 
validated loci in our study. Most SNVs also show association with hypertension in the UK 
Biobank data, for example 93 of the 107 validated sentinel SNVs are nominally significant 
(P < 0.01) (Supplementary Table 7).
Of the 107 validated loci, 24 are reported for association with SBP as the primary trait (most 
significant from combined meta-analysis), 41 for DBP and 42 for PP, although many loci are 
associated with more than one BP trait (Supplementary Fig. 4). For example, in the 
combined meta-analysis, 24 validated loci are associated with both SBP and DBP, 11 with 
SBP and PP, one locus with DBP and PP and four loci (NADK-CPSF3L, GTF2B, 
METTL21A-AC079767.3 and PAX2) with all three traits at genome-wide significance (Fig. 
2).
After conditional analysis on the sentinel SNV we identify an independent validated 
secondary SNV at five of the 107 loci (Supplementary Table 8a; Supplementary Table 9). 
Compared with previously reported SNVs at the time of analysis, the contribution of our 
validated loci increases the percentage trait variance explained by ˜1%, e.g. to 3.56% for 
SBP.
We report signals at known hypertension drug targets, including the angiotensin converting 
enzyme (ACE) locus (rs4308, P = 6.8 x 10-14, ACE-inhibitors), CACNA2D2 (rs743757, P = 
2.4 x 10-10, calcium channel blockers), MME (rs143112823 in the RP11-439C8.2 locus, P = 
1.4 x 10-14, omapatrilat), ADRA2B (rs2579519 in the GPAT2-FAHD2CP locus, P = 4.8 x 
10-12, beta blockers), SLC14A2 (rs7236548, P = 2.0 x 10-18, nifedipine), and 
phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A; rs66887589, P = 3.4 x 10-15, sildenafil).
Additionally, we evaluate our validated SNVs, where available, in cohorts of non-European 
ancestry9–11, while recognizing that these analyses are likely underpowered 
(Supplementary Table 10). We find concordance in direction of effect (P <0.05) for GWAS 
SNVs for all three BP traits among individuals of East Asian ancestry and for DBP for South 
Asian ancestry, also for exome SNVs among individuals of Hispanic ancestry, pointing to 
cosmopolitan effects for many of the BP associated variants.
et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 A PhenoScanner16 search showed that 27 of our 107 validated sentinel SNVs (or proxies; r2 
≥ 0.8) exhibit genome-wide significant associations with other traits (Supplementary Fig. 5), 
including coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction (where BP is likely on the 
causal pathway17), cardiovascular risk factors (e.g. lipids, height, body mass index) and 
non-cardiovascular traits (e.g. lung function, cancer, Alzheimer’s).
Variants at previously reported loci at time of analysis
In conditional analyses, we identify 22 secondary SNVs (17 common, one rare, four low-
frequency variants) that are conditionally independent of the BP associated SNVs at 16 
previously reported loci at the time of analysis (Supplementary Table 8b; Supplementary 
Tables 11 and 12). One rare variant (rs138582164, MAF=0.1%) in the CDH17 locus 
anticipated to act as an exonic stop/gain mutation at the GEM gene is associated with a 
relatively large effect on PP (3.5 mm Hg per allele copy, Supplementary Table 8b). At three 
previously reported loci (EBF1, PDE3A, JAG1) we identify multiple independent secondary 
SNVs in addition to the previously reported SNVs (Supplementary Table 11).
The UK Biobank data show support (P < 0.01) for 119 of 122 previously reported BP loci at 
the time of analysis (159 of 163 SNVs) for one or more BP traits (Supplementary Fig. 2 a-c; 
Supplementary Table 13). We do not show support for one SNV (rs11066280, RPL6-
ALDH1) identified from a GWAS of East Asian ancestry18, which may indicate ancestry-
specific effects. We compare the MAF and effect sizes in UK Biobank with published results 
of previously reported variants (Supplementary Fig. 6), indicating consistency of results 
between the two sources of data.
We also examine findings for low-frequency and rare gene mutations previously reported to 
be associated with monogenic hypertension disorders19 and included on the UK Biobank 
gene array. Despite lack of power overall, the variant with the lowest P-value (rs387907156; 
KLH3; MAF=0.02%) has a seemingly large effect on BP: 8.2 mm Hg (SE=4.1, P = 0.046) 
per allele for SBP; 5.6 mm Hg (SE=2.6, P = 0.048) for PP (Supplementary Table 14).
Functional analyses
We annotate the 107 validated loci to 212 genes (based on LD r2 ≥0.8) and seek putative 
function from in silico analyses and gene expression experiments. Candidate genes with the 
strongest supporting evidence are indicated in the last column of Supplementary Table 4 
with an indication of the supporting data source. All genome-wide significant variants in LD 
(r2>0.8) with the variants reported here, ranked by supporting evidence, are annotated in 
Supplementary Table 15. Of the 107 validated sentinel SNVs three are Indels; all other 
variants are single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We identify non-synonymous SNVs at 
13 of the 107 validated loci (Supplementary Table 16), three of which are predicted to be 
damaging (ANNOVAR) in TFAP2D (rs78648104), NOX4 (rs56061986) and CCDC141 
(rs17362588, reported to be associated with heart rate20) (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Beyond 
the coding regions we identify 29 SNVs in 3’UTRs which are predicted to significantly 
weaken or cause loss of miRNA regulation by altering the recognition motif in seven genes, 
and strengthen or create target sites for miRNA binding in 13 genes (based on miRNASNP 
db, Supplementary Table 16).
et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 From our expression Quantitative Trait locus (eQTL) analysis (GTEx), 59 of the 107 
validated loci contain variants with eQTLs in at least one tissue (Supplementary Table 17); 
arterial tissue has the largest number of loci with eQTLs (Supplementary Fig. 7), with 
targeted in silico analysis showing six loci with eQTLs in arterial tissue (Supplementary 
Table 16). For example, the GTEx tibial artery eQTL in SF3A3 (rs4360494) shows strong in 
silico supporting evidence, including an arterial DNase I site within which the major C allele 
removes a predicted AP-2 binding site (Supplementary Fig. 8). Hence we prioritized this 
gene for in vitro functional analysis (see below).
By considering all loci reported here (our 107 validated loci, and previously reported loci at 
the time of analysis), our DEPICT analysis identifies enrichment of expression across 31 
tissues and cells (Supplementary Fig. 9; Supplementary Table 18), with greatest enrichment 
in the arteries (P = 1.9 x 10-6, false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%). We use FORGE to 
investigate and identify significant (FDR, P <0.05) cell type specific enrichment within 
DNase I hypersensitive sites in a range of tissues including dermal and lung microvascular 
endothelial cell types, and cardiac fibroblasts (Supplementary Fig. 10). For a set of curated 
candidate regulatory SNVs from our 107 validated loci (see Supplementary Note), 
widespread enrichment is found in microvascular endothelium, aortic smooth muscle, aortic 
fibroblasts, vascular epithelium, heart and skin (Supplementary Fig. 10). In addition, we 
identify significant enrichment of histone marks in a wide range of cell types, including 
strong enrichment seen for H3K4Me3 (an activating modification found near promoters) 
marks in umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) (Supplementary Fig. 11). To explore 
expression at the level of cardiovascular cell types specifically, we use Fantom5 reference 
transcript expression data (see Online Methods) to cluster the 212 genes annotated to our 
107 validated loci according to tissue specificity (Supplementary Fig. 12), with the 
significantly clustered genes forming four tissue-specific clusters, including a vascular 
smooth muscle cell (VSMC) and fibroblast cluster, an endothelial cell cluster (including 
probable endothelial cells in highly vascularized tissues), and a combined vascular cell 
cluster.
Additionally, Ingenuity pathway analysis and upstream transcriptional analysis show 
enrichment of canonical pathways implicated in cardiovascular disease, including those 
targeted by antihypertensive drugs, such as the alpha-adrenergic, CXCR4, endothelin 
signalling and angiotensin receptor pathways (Supplementary Table 19). In keeping with 
vascular mediation of genetic influence we identify diphenyleneiodonium, an inhibitor of 
flavin-containing oxidases, including NAD(P)H oxidase (NOX), which is reported to reverse 
endothelial dysfunction (and hypertension) in a rat model21.
To identify long range target genes of non-coding variants, we use chromatin interaction 
(Hi-C) data from HUVEC, as enhancers and silencers often form chromatin loops with their 
target promoter. In most loci the strongest promoter interaction involves a gene in high LD 
with the SNV, but for 21 loci we find a distal potential target gene (Supplementary Table 
16). Pathway analysis of the distal genes shows greatest enrichment in regulators of cardiac 
hypertrophy.
et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We evaluate pleiotropy using the Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool 
(GREAT) to study enrichment of mouse phenotype and human disease ontology terms 
across all loci reported here. These highlight cardiovascular system abnormalities and 
vascular disease as the most highly enriched terms (Supplementary Fig. 5b & 5c).
Collectively evidence from eQTLs, DEPICT, DNase I sites, histone marks, Hi-C data and 
ontological analyses indicates predominant vascular and cardiovascular tissue involvement 
for genes within the BP associated loci.
We also look for association of our validated sentinel SNVs with metabolomic signatures. 
Three SNVs within the NOX4, KCNH4 and LHFPL2 loci show significant associations 
(family-wise error rate < 5%) with lipoprotein sub-fractions from 1H Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy analysis of 2,000 Airwave study samples (Supplementary 
Tables 20 and 21). The results for these variants suggest a link between BP regulation and 
lipid metabolism. Eleven SNVs (including at LHFPL2 locus) show association (family wise 
error rate < 5%) with metabolites in blood or urine from the publicly available 
“Metabolomics GWAS Server” resource based on mass spectrometry22,23 (Supplementary 
Table 21), including sugar acids, sphingolipids, fatty acids, glycerophospholipids, organic 
acids and benzene derivatives.
Several genes and variants with putative function are highlighted in our in silico analysis as 
having biological support (e.g. eQTLs or nsSNVs) and those with novelty and tractability to 
laboratory investigation (e.g. expression in available tissue models) are prioritized. Sentinel 
variants in three genes which were highly significant in the combined meta-analysis (Tables 
2 and 3) are selected for experimental testing and were successfully genotyped, each for at 
least 100 samples. We select ADAMTS7 due to strong biological support (e.g. mouse 
knockout phenotype), SF3A3 due to eQTLs, and NOX4 as it contains a rare nsSNV 
(Supplementary Table 9) in addition to common variant associations. We use quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to study the impact of these sentinel variants on gene 
expression in human VSMCs and endothelial cells (ECs) (see Online Methods). For SF3A3, 
the major C allele of variant rs4360494 associated with increased PP (0.278 mmHg ±0.03, 
P=3.7x10-16, N=307,682) is associated with SF3A3 expression in human VSMCs, although 
not in endothelial cells (Supplementary Fig. 13a); and the T allele of SNV rs62012628 in 
ADAMTS7 associated with lower DBP (0.238 mmHg ±0.03, P=5.1x10-12, N=244,143), is 
associated with reduced ADAMTS7 expression in human VSMCs (Supplementary Fig. 
13b), while the minor A allele of SNV rs2289125 at the NOX4 locus associated with lower 
PP (-0.377 mmHg ±0.04, P=9.1x10-22, N=282,851) correlates with increased NOX4 
expression in ECs though not VSMCs (Supplementary Fig. 13c). Our study thus finds 
evidence for novel cis-eQTLs in ADAMTS7 and NOX4 in addition to validating the 
previously reported GTEx eQTL in SF3A3, and supports the vascular expression of these 
genes.
Genetic risk score analyses
We create an unbiased genetic risk score (GRS) (Supplementary Table 22) to evaluate, in an 
independent cohort (Airwave, see Online Methods), the impact of the combination of all loci 
reported here on BP levels and risk of hypertension. When compared with the lowest 
et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 quintile of the distribution of the GRS, individuals >50 years in the highest quintile have 
sex-adjusted mean SBP higher by 9.3 mm Hg (95% CI 6.9 to 11.7 mm Hg, P =1.0 x 10-13) 
and an over two-fold higher risk of hypertension (OR 2.32 95% CI 1.76 to 3.06; P=2.8 x 
10-9) compared with individuals in the lowest quintile (Fig. 3; Supplementary Table 23). 
Similar results were obtained from GRS associations with BP and hypertension within UK 
Biobank (Supplementary Table 24). In UK Biobank – based on self-reported health data, 
record linkage to Hospital Episode Statistics and mortality follow-up data (Supplementary 
Table 25) – we show that the GRS is associated with increased risk of stroke, coronary heart 
disease and all cardiovascular outcomes; comparing the upper and lower fifths of the GRS 
distribution, sex-adjusted odds ratios are 1.34 (95% CI 1.20 to 1.49, P =1.5×10-7), 1.38 
(95% CI 1.30 to 1.47, P= 4.3×10-23) and 1.35 (95% CI 1.27 to 1.42, P=1.3×10-25) 
respectively (Fig. 3; Supplementary Table 26). Results are also provided for incident-only 
cases (Supplementary Table 27).
Discussion
A key attribute of this study is the combination of a large, single discovery sample with 
standardized BP measurement and dense 1000 Genomes/UK10K imputation, yielding a high 
quality dataset with ˜9.8 million variants14, taking advantage of major international 
consortia for parallel replication of common and low-frequency variants. In total we include 
GWAS data from 330,956 individuals and exonic SNVs from a total of 422,604 individuals. 
This strategy resulted in 107 robustly validated loci for BP traits, including 32 loci that have 
not previously been reported, and at least 53 further loci validated for the first time. Despite 
its size, our study is still under-powered to find low-frequency variants. Our findings are 
mostly common variants, with similarly modest effect sizes as variants previously reported 
at the time of analysis (Supplementary Fig. 14). The lack of rare variant discovery could also 
be due to the challenge of detecting rare variants from imputed data. There may be greater 
potential for identifying rare variants from the future release of genetic data for all 500,000 
UK Biobank participants.
Our findings point to new biology as well as highlighting gene regions in systems that have 
previously been implicated in the genetics of BP. Several of our validated loci affect 
atherosclerosis or vascular remodelling (ADAMTS7, THBS2, CFDP1) and exhibit locus 
pleiotropy in prior genome-wide association studies for coronary artery disease or carotid 
intimal-media thickness24–26 (Supplementary Fig. 5a and Fig. 4). In previous work we have 
shown that expression of ADAMTS7 is upregulated and increases vascular smooth muscle 
cell migration in response to vascular injury in relation to a distinct coronary artery variant 
(rs3825807, not in LD with our sentinel SNV; r2 = 0.17)27. In endothelial cells ADAMTS7 
encodes a metalloproteinase to cleave thrombospondin-1 encoded by THBS2 which leads to 
reduced endothelial cell migration and plays a role in neo-intimal repair in the vessel wall27. 
Our functional work indicates that the allele associated with lower DBP is also associated 
with lower ADAMTS7 expression in human VSMCs; this fits with the murine knockout that 
exhibits reduced atherosclerosis. SF3A3 encodes a splicing factor with no prior links to BP 
other than our reported association and eQTL. At the CFDP1 locus our sentinel SNV is in 
high LD (r2 = 0.95) with a variant previously associated with carotid intimal-medial 
thickness. Collectively our findings highlight a potential common mechanism among these 
et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 genes in vascular remodelling that has previously been observed in small resistance arteries 
in essential hypertension28.
NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) has an established role in the endothelium where it enhances 
vasodilatation and reduces blood pressure in vivo29. This oxidase generates reactive oxygen 
species in the endothelium and may contribute to salt sensitive hypertension in the kidney 
and the vasculature30–32. We found that the allele of the common variant at the NOX4 
locus correlates with increased tissue specific NOX4 expression in endothelial cells rather 
than VSMCs (Supplementary Fig. 13c). NOX4 mediates endothelial cell apoptosis and 
facilitates vascular collagen synthesis contributing to endothelial dysfunction and arterial 
stiffness, and may explain the association with PP33,34.
We identify several loci containing genes involved in vascular signalling and second 
messenger systems such as PDE5A and PDE10A35–37. The phosphodiesterase PDE5A 
hydrolyzes cyclic GMP and is inhibited by sildenafil which leads to vasodilatation38. This 
finding fits with our previous discoveries of a role for gene loci encoding elements of 
natriuretic peptide-nitric oxide pathway and guanylate cyclase signalling systems in BP 
regulation18,39,40. Our findings strengthen the case for evaluating the opportunity to 
repurpose PDE5A inhibitors for use in hypertension.
The importance of microvascular function is emphasised by the solute carrier transporters 
such as SLC14A2 encoding a urea transporter, which has previously been linked to 
autosomal dominant Streeten type orthostatic hypotensive disorder41 and BP response to 
nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker antihypertensive drug42. SLC8A1 encodes a sodium 
calcium exchanger expressed in cardiomyocytes which alters cardiac contractility and 
hypertrophy and shows abnormal BP in SLC8A1 transgenic mice43. Variants at SLC35F1 
have previously been associated with resting heart rate and ventricular size which could 
contribute to BP elevation44.
We also identify loci that are involved in cardiovascular development (GATA2, KIAA1462, 
FBN2, FN1 and HAND2) such as fibrillin 2 (FBN2) which overlaps in action with fibrillin 1 
in development of the aortic matrix45–49. In addition, fibronectin expression is increased in 
hypertension and in atherosclerosis but it may also play a role in the development of the 
heart49–51.
Our analysis validates loci containing genes with prior physiological connection to BP such 
as BDNF, FAM208A, and CACNA2D252–54. The neurotrophin Brain Derived 
Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) modulates angiotensin 11 in the brain to elevate BP in 
experimental models; higher serum levels correlate with reduced risk of cardiovascular 
disease and mortality52. In experimental models FAM208A, which is thought to be a 
transcription factor, is a strong candidate for a QTL for BP54. The gene CACNA2D2 
encodes a subunit of the L-type calcium channel that is most abundantly expressed in the 
atrium and in neurones and may be a target for negatively chronotropic and inotropic 
calcium channel antagonists which reduce BP55.
We examine long range genomic interactions using Hi-C, whereby the promoter region has a 
strong chromatin interaction with a novel SNV. One example is EPAS1, which is ˜200kb 
et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 away from the SNV (rs11690961). It encodes hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha, which affects 
catecholamine homeostasis, protects against heart failure and mutations in the gene are 
associated with pulmonary hypertension56. Another such gene is INHBA, 1.3Mb away from 
the SNV (rs12531683), which is elevated in pulmonary hypertension and contributes to 
vascular remodelling by inducing expression of endothelin-1 and plasminogen activator 
inhibitor-1 in pulmonary smooth muscle cells57.
Our observation of 9-10 mm Hg higher BP at age 50+ years when comparing the top vs 
bottom fifths of the BP GRS distribution has potential clinical and public health 
implications. We stratified by age due to a significant interaction of the GRS with age (P 
ranging between 9.96×10-11 and 1.16×10-3 for interaction with continuous BP traits, P = 
0.012 for hypertension). Measuring the GRS in early life raises the possibility of adopting an 
early precision medicine approach to offset the genetic risk through lifestyle intervention 
(i.e. reduced sodium intake, increased potassium intake, maintenance of optimal weight, low 
adult alcohol consumption and regular exercise)58–60. Studies of non-pharmacologic 
approaches to BP control indicate that 10 mm Hg or more reduction in SBP is an achievable 
goal through lifestyle measures alone61, while recent evidence suggests that favorable 
lifestyle may offset the cardiovascular sequelae associated with high genetic risk62. As the 
above data are observational, the extent to which adherence to lifestyle recommendations 
amongst high genetic risk individuals might result in favorable outcomes remains uncertain; 
given the substantial effect of GRS on BP by middle-age, the potential for adopting early 
lifestyle intervention amongst individuals at high genetic risk, along with population-wide 
measures to lower BP, warrants further study.
Since the completion of our study, another BP GWAS using UK Biobank data has been 
published15, as part of a larger single-stage combined meta-analysis without replication; it 
reported a total of 316 loci, including 241 loci identified from the meta-analysis involving 
UK Biobank that were not tested for validation. Of the 107 validated loci reported in our 
study, 32 are discovered and validated for the first time in our analysis of UK Biobank. In 
addition, 75 sentinel SNVs are in LD (r2 ≥ 0.2) with the recently reported loci15 and we 
validate at least 53 of these for the first time in our study (indicated by “GIU” in Tables 1-3). 
Furthermore we note that 49 of the reported loci from the recent study15 did not validate in 
our large independent replication resource.
In summary we describe 107 validated loci for BP offering new biology, identifying 
potential new therapeutic targets and raising the possibility of a precision medicine approach 
to modify risk of hypertension and cardiovascular outcomes. Altogether, this represents a 
major advance in our understanding of the genetic architecture of BP.
Data Availability Statement
The data generated during the current study are available from the UK Biobank data 
repository (http://biota.osc.ox.ac.uk), which can be accessed by researchers upon 
application. This includes the derived GWAS analysis results summary data from our UK 
Biobank discovery data for all three BP traits. The genetic and phenotypic UK Biobank data 
are also available upon application to the UK Biobank (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk). All 
replication data generated during this study are included in the published article. For 
et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 example, association results of look-up variants from our replication analyses and the 
subsequent combined meta-analyses are contained within all Supplementary Tables 
provided.
Online Methods
UK Biobank data
Our GWAS analysis is performed using data from the interim release of the first ˜150k UK 
Biobank (UKB) participants (Supplementary Note): ˜100k individuals from UK Biobank 
genotyped at ˜800,000 single nucleotide variants (SNVs) with a custom Affymetrix UK 
Biobank Axiom Array chip and ˜50k individuals genotyped with a custom Affymetrix UK 
BiLEVE Axiom Array chip from the UK BiLEVE study63, a subset of UKB. SNVs were 
imputed centrally by UKB using a merged UK10K sequencing + 1000G imputation 
reference panel. UK Biobank array design and protocols are available on the UK Biobank 
website.
Quality control
Following QC procedures already carried out centrally by UKB, we exclude discordant 
SNVs and samples with QC failures, gender discordance and high heterozygosity/
missingness. We further restrict our data to a subset of individuals of European ancestry. By 
applying kmeans clustering to the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) data a total of 
N=145,315 Europeans remain (Supplementary Fig. 15). We use the kinship data to exclude 
1st and 2nd degree relatives, with N=141,647 unrelated individuals remaining. Finally we 
restrict our data to non-pregnant individuals with two automated BP measurements 
available, resulting in a maximum of N=140,886 individuals for analysis (Supplementary 
Note).
Phenotypic data
After calculating the mean SBP and DBP values from the two BP measurements, we adjust 
for medication use by adding 15 and 10 mmHg to SBP and DBP, respectively, for 
individuals reported to be taking BP-lowering medication (21.4% of individuals)64. PP is 
calculated as SBP minus DBP, according to the medication-adjusted traits. Hypertension, 
used in secondary analyses, is defined as: (i) SBP ≥ 140 mmHg, or (ii) DBP ≥ 90 mmHg, 
(iii) or taking BP-lowering medication; otherwise individuals are classified as non-
hypertensive. Descriptive summary statistics are provided for all individuals (Supplementary 
Table 1).
Statistical methods
Statistical approaches used for the discovery and replication of loci are reported in detail 
below. We also describe methods used for: identification of secondary signals; lookups in 
non-European populations and for monogenic BP genes; functional and experimental 
methods; construction of a genetic risk score for analysis with BP traits and cardiovascular 
outcomes. All P-values are from two-sided tests.
et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Analysis models—For the GWAS, we perform linear regression analyses of the three 
(untransformed) continuous, medication-adjusted BP traits (SBP, DBP, PP) for all measured 
and imputed genetic variants in dosage format using SNPTEST software65 under an additive 
genetic model. We carry out a similar analysis for the exome content. Quantile-quantile plots 
are shown in Supplementary Fig. 16. Each analysis includes the following covariates: sex, 
age, age2, body mass index, top ten PCs and a binary indicator variable for UK Biobank vs 
UK BiLEVE to adjust for the different genotyping chips. We also run an association analysis 
within UKB for validated BP SNVs and hypertension using logistic regression under an 
additive model with adjustments as above. There are 76,554 hypertensive cases and the 
64,384 remaining participants are treated as non-hypertensive controls. This sample size is 
slightly larger than the N=140,866 used in the main analyses, since participants with only 
one BP measurement, but with reported BP-lowering medication, could be included as 
hypertensive.
Previously reported variants—We compile a list of all SNVs previously reported to be 
associated with BP at the time of analysis (Supplementary Table 13). This list includes all 
published SNVs which have been identified and validated from previous GWAS, 
CardioMetabochip and exome chip projects7–11. We augment this list to include all 34,459 
SNVs in Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) with these previously reported SNVs, according to a 
threshold of r2 ≥ 0.2. Results for all these variants are extracted for each of the three BP 
traits, to check previously reported BP associations in the UKB data, according to whether 
the sentinel SNV or a variant at the locus in LD (r2 ≥ 0.2) with it showed evidence of 
support (P < 0.01) for association with at least one of the three BP traits.
Replication strategy—We use three independent external data sets for replication 
(Supplementary Note). First, for the GWAS analysis based on advanced 1000G imputation 
enhanced by UK10K data we consider SNVs with MAF ≥ 1% and perform a reciprocal 
replication exchange with the International Consortium of Blood Pressure (ICBP) 1000G 
meta-analysis (max N = 150,134). The imputation strategy for ICBP 1000G meta-analysis is 
based on an earlier imputation grid for the 1000G project. In addition, we recruit further 
cohorts with 1000G data which had not contributed to the ICBP-1000G discovery meta-
analysis: ASCOT-UK (N = 3,803), ASCOT-SC (N = 2,462), BRIGHT (N = 1,791), 
Generation Scotland (GS) (N = 9,749), EGCUT (N = 5,468), Lifelines (N = 13,292) and 
PREVEND (N = 3,619). This gives a total of N = 190,318 independent replication samples 
for the GWAS analysis.
Second, because the UK Biobank and UK BiLEVE genotyping chips contain exome 
content, we sought replication from two BP exome consortia (European exome consortium 
and the Cohorts for Heart and Ageing research in Genome Epidemiology – CHARGE BP 
exome consortium), to allow validation of coding variants and variants with lower frequency. 
The European exome consortium (N = 161,926) and CHARGE consortium (N = 119,792) 
give a total of N = 281,718 independent replication samples for the exome analysis.
Note that the lookups for GWAS and exome discovery are distinct sets of SNVs. Loci are 
assigned sequentially, prioritising the primary GWAS discovery first, then considering any 
et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 remaining loci with non-overlapping exome content for replication in the independent 
exome replication resources.
Statistical criteria for replication—For the GWAS discovery, there are ˜9.8 million 
SNVs with MAF ≥ 1% and INFO > 0.1. We consider for follow-up any SNVs with P < 
1x10-6 for any of the three BP traits. For the exome discovery, there are 149,026 exome 
SNVs (Supplementary Note) which were polymorphic with INFO > 0.1; for follow-up we 
consider all SNVs with MAF ≥ 0.01% and P < 1x10-5. All such SNVs are annotated to loci 
according to both an LD threshold of r2 ≥ 0.2 and a 1Mb interval region (see Supplementary 
Note), and signals are classified either as belonging to unvalidated loci, or being potential 
secondary signals at previously reported loci at the time of analysis.
Selection of variants for follow-up—The sentinel (most significant) SNV from each 
association signal is selected for follow-up, all of which are pairwise-independent by LD (r2 
< 0.2). For the GWAS discovery, we check that potential lookup SNVs are covered within 
the ICBP-1000G replication data (Supplementary Note; Supplementary Tables 28 and 29). 
Of the 235 novel loci containing previously unreported SNVs with MAF ≥ 1%, INFO > 0.1 
and P<1x10-6, 218 are covered, and similarly 100 of the 123 potential secondary SNVs at 51 
of the 54 previously reported BP loci are available for follow-up. For the exome discovery, 
by following up SNVs with MAF ≥ 0.01%, INFO > 0.1 and P < 1x10-5 across the three BP 
traits, we carry forward for replication sentinel SNVs at 22 unvalidated loci, and potential 
secondary SNVs at three previously reported loci at the time of analysis. We produce locus 
zoom plots for each of the lookup variants.
Replication meta-analyses—The replication and combined meta-analyses are 
performed within METAL software66 using fixed effects inverse variance weighted meta-
analysis (Supplementary Note). The combined meta-analysis of both the UKB discovery (N 
= 140,886) and GWAS replication meta-analysis (max N = 190,070) include a total 
maximum sample size of N = 330,956. For the exome combined meta-analysis, we 
synthesize data from the UKB discovery exome content (max N=140,866), with the 
replication dataset from both exome consortia (total max N=281,718), giving a maximum 
sample size of N=422,604.
Validation Criteria—In our study a signal is declared validated if it satisfies ALL of the 
following three criteria:
(i)
the sentinel SNV is genome-wide significant (P < 5×10-8) in the combined meta-
analysis for any of the three BP traits;
(ii)
the sentinel SNV shows evidence of support (P < 0.01) in the replication meta-
analysis alone for association with the most significantly associated BP trait 
from the combined meta-analysis (NB: P < 0.01 is more stringent than a range 
of thresholds calculated according to False Discovery Rate (FDR), see 
Supplementary Methods);
et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (iii)
the sentinel SNV has concordant direction of effect between the UKB discovery 
and the replication meta-analysis for the most significantly associated BP trait 
from the combined meta-analysis.
Secondary signals—By conditional analysis within UKB data we assess all validated 
secondary signals from our validated and previously reported loci at the time of analysis for 
independence from the sentinel or previously reported SNV, respectively (Supplementary 
Note). We declare a secondary signal to be independent of the previously reported SNV if 
there is less than a 1.5 fold difference between the main association and conditional 
association P-values on a –log10 scale, i.e. if –log10(P) / -log10(P_cond) < 1.5. Note that 
the lookup criteria already ensure that the secondary variant is not in LD (r2 < 0.2) with the 
previously reported SNV. If more than one SNV in a region is found to be independent we 
undertake further rounds of iterative conditional analysis.
Lookups in non-European ancestries—As a secondary analysis, we look up 102 and 
5 validated SNVs from the GWAS and exome analyses, respectively, in non-European 
ancestry samples. These comprise analysis of East Asian (N = 31,513) and South Asian (N = 
33,115) ancestry data from the iGEN-BP consortium11 for the GWAS lookups, and South 
Asian (N = 25,937), African American (N = 21,488) and Hispanic (N = 4,581) ancestry data 
from the CHARGE BP exome consortium10 and CHD+ Exome consortium9, for the exome 
content lookups (Supplementary Note). We carry out a binomial (sign) test based on the 
number of SNVs with consistent directions of effect between UKB and each of the non-
European ancestry samples.
Monogenic blood pressure gene lookups—The UKB arrays include some rare 
coding variants for monogenic disorders. We collate a list of all specific mutation variants 
within genes known to be associated with monogenic BP disorders19. Results from the UKB 
association analyses for all three BP traits are extracted for any of these SNVs directly 
covered within the UKB dataset (Supplementary Table 14). Note that a search of proxies did 
not augment the list of available variants, so results are reported for the specific variants 
only.
Functional analyses—In order to prioritize associated SNVs, we use an integrative 
bioinformatics approach to collate functional annotation (Supplementary Table 30) at both 
the variant and gene level for each SNV within the BP loci (all SNVs in LD r2 ≥ 0.8 with the 
BP-associated SNVs). At the variant level we use ANNOVAR67 to obtain comprehensive 
functional characterization of variants, including gene location, conservation and amino acid 
substitution impact based on a range of prediction tools including SIFT and polyphen2. All 
nonsynonymous variants were predicted damaging by two or more methods.
We use the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) genome browser to review sequence 
specific context of SNVs in relation to function, particularly in the Encyclopedia of DNA 
Elements (ENCODE) dataset68. We use the UCSC table browser to annotate SNVs in 
ENCODE regulatory regions. We evaluate SNVs for impact on putative micro RNA target 
sites in the 3’ un-translated regions (3’UTR) of transcripts by a query of the miRNASNP 
database69. We evaluate all SNVs in LD (r2 ≥ 0.8) with our validated sentinel SNVs for 
et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 evidence of mediation of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) in all 44 tissues using the 
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) database, in order to identify validated loci which are 
highly expressed, and to highlight specific tissue types which show eQTLs for a large 
proportion of validated loci. We further seek to identify validated loci with the strongest 
evidence of eQTL associations in arterial tissue, in particular.
At the gene level, we use Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (IPA®,QIAGEN 
Redwood City) to review genes with prior links to BP, based on annotation with the “Blood 
Pressure” Medline Subject Heading (MESH) term which is annotated to 684 genes. We also 
use IPA to identify genes which interact with BP MESH annotated genes, and evaluate genes 
for evidence of small molecule druggability based on queries of Chembl and Drug Gene 
Interaction database.
We then perform overall enrichment testing across all loci. Firstly, we use DEPICT70 (Data-
driven Expression Prioritized Integration for Complex Traits) to identify highly expressed 
tissues and cells within the BP loci. DEPICT uses a large number of microarrays (˜37k) to 
identify cells and tissues where the genes are highly expressed and uses precomputed GWAS 
phenotypes to adjust for co-founding sources. DEPICT provides a P-value of enrichment 
and false discovery rates adjusted P-values for each tissue/cells tested.
Furthermore, to investigate regulatory regions, we employ a two tiered approach to 
investigate cell type specific enrichment within DNase I sites using FORGE, which tests for 
enrichment of SNVs within DNase I sites in 123 cell types from the Epigenomics Roadmap 
Project and ENCODE71 (Supplementary Note). Validated sentinel SNVs from our study are 
analysed along with previously reported SNVs at the time of analysis and secondary signals 
(with P-value < 1×10-4) to evaluate the overall tissue specific enrichment of BP associated 
variants. In a second analysis we use FORGE (with no LD filter) to investigate directly our 
curated candidate regulatory SNVs for overlap with cell-specific DNase I signals.
GenomeRunner72 is used to search for enrichment of validated and previously reported 
sentinel SNVs with histone modification mark genomic features (Supplementary Note). 
Relevant cardiovascular tissue expression is investigated using Fantom5 reference transcript 
expression data (fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5) (Supplementary Note).
We use IPA (IPA®,QIAGEN Redwood City) to identify biological pathways and 
transcriptional upstream regulators enriched for genes within the BP loci. The transcriptional 
upstream regulator analysis aims to identify transcription factors, compounds, drugs, kinases 
and other molecules, for which the target is one of the BP genes under investigation.
We query SNVs against PhenoScanner16 to investigate trait pleiotropy, extracting all 
association results with nominal significance at P < 0.05 for full reporting (Supplementary 
Table 16), and then extract genome-wide significant results to highlight the validated loci 
with strongest evidence of association with other traits (Supplementary Fig. 5a). We also use 
the Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool (GREAT) to study gene set 
enrichment of mouse phenotype and disease ontology terms within our validated and 
previously reported loci at the time of analysis, using default SNV to gene mapping 
settings73.
et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We carry out metabolomics analysis using two sets of data. First we use 1H NMR lipidomics 
data on plasma from a subset of 2,000 participants of the Airwave Health Monitoring 
Study74,75 (Supplementary Note). For each validated BP-associated SNV we ran 
association tests with the lipidomics data using linear regression analyses, adjusted for age 
and sex. We computed significance thresholds using a permutation derived family wise error 
rate (5%) to account for the high correlation structure of these data (ENT=35)76. We also 
test each validated SNV against published genome-wide vs metabolome-wide associations 
in plasma and urine using publicly available data from the “Metabolomics GWAS Server” to 
identify metabolites that have been associated with variants of interest at P < 3.0 x 10-4 
(Bonferroni corrected P for validated signals)22,23.
Experimental methods—We prioritize genes for laboratory testing on the basis of 
evidence for SNV function (including coding variants, eQTLs and Hi-C interactions), 
biological support for relevance to BP (from literature review) and transgenic phenotype. We 
perform genotyping and Quantitative Reverse-Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (q 
RT-PCR) for the selected sentinel variants of interest using human vascular smooth muscle 
cells and endothelial cells and test for expression levels (Supplementary Note; 
Supplementary Table 31). All three SNVs were tested using an additive model.
Genetic risk scores—Genetic risk scores (GRS) are constructed using the independent 
Airwave study74 data to assess the combined effect of the BP-associated variants on BP and 
risk of hypertension (Supplementary Note), whilst avoiding bias by “winners curse”. We 
create weighted GRSs for all pairwise-independent, LD-filtered (r2 < 0.2) previously 
reported variants at the time of analysis and our validated variants (sentinel and secondary 
SNVs) combined, using available SNVs (Supplementary Table 22). For the previously 
reported variants, we weight BP increasing alleles by the beta coefficients from the UKB 
analysis. For our validated variants, beta coefficients of the replication meta-analysis are 
used as independent, unbiased weights.
For the variance explained analyses within the independent Airwave cohort, we use three 
trait-specific GRSs (SBP, DBP, PP). Each GRS includes all variants, but weights are trait-
specific, using the beta coefficients from the analysis of each of the three different BP traits, 
e.g. the SBP-GRS is weighted by the beta coefficients from the SBP-GWAS. To calculate 
the percent of variance for each BP trait explained by its corresponding trait-specific GRS, 
not accounted for by known factors, we generate the residuals from the regression model of 
each trait against covariates of age, age2, sex and body mass index. We then fit a second 
linear model for the trait residuals with all the variants in the GRS plus the top 10 PCs.
For risk score analyses we calculate a single BP GRS, as the average of the SBP and DBP 
GRSs. We standardize the average GRS to have mean of zero and standard deviation of one. 
We assess the association of the continuous average GRS variable with each BP trait by 
simple linear regression. We also run a logistic regression to examine the association of the 
average GRS with risk of hypertension. We perform each analysis both with and without 
adjustment for sex. We test for interaction between age (< 50, and ≥50 years) and the effect 
of the GRS on BP. We then compare BP levels and risk of hypertension for individuals in the 
et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 top and bottom 20% of the GRS distribution at ≥50 years using linear and logistic 
regression, respectively.
We also assess the association of the average BP GRS with cardiovascular outcomes in the 
UKB data. We include all pairwise-independent previously reported BP variants at the time 
of analysis, and our validated variants. We use logistic regression with binary outcome 
variables for coronary heart disease, stroke and cardiovascular disease (see Supplementary 
Note) and GRS as explanatory variable (with and without sex adjustment).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
The UK Biobank Cardio-metabolic Traits Consortium Blood Pressure Working 
Group, Helen R Warren#1,2, Evangelos Evangelou#3,4, Claudia P Cabrera#1,2, He 
Gao#3,5, Meixia Ren#1,2, Borbala Mifsud#1, Ioanna Ntalla1, Praveen Surendran6, 
Chunyu Liu7,8,9, James P Cook10, Aldi T Kraja11, Fotios Drenos12,13, Marie Loh3,14, 
Niek Verweij15,16,17,18, Jonathan Marten19, Ibrahim Karaman3, Marcelo P Segura 
Lepe3,20, Paul F O’Reilly21, Joanne Knight22, Harold Snieder23, Norihiro Kato24, 
Jiang He25, E Shyong Tai26,27, M Abdullah Said15, David Porteous28, Maris Alver29, 
Neil Poulter30, Martin Farrall31, Ron T Gansevoort32, Sandosh Padmanabhan33, 
Reedik Mägi29, Alice Stanton34, John Connell35, Stephan J L Bakker36, Andres 
Metspalu29, Denis C Shields37, Simon Thom38, Morris Brown1,2, Peter Sever38, 
Tõnu Esko16,29, Caroline Hayward19, Pim van der Harst15, Danish Saleheen39,40,41, 
Rajiv Chowdhury6, John C Chambers3,42,43,44, Daniel I Chasman45,46, Aravinda 
Chakravarti47, Christopher Newton-Cheh16,17,18, Cecilia M Lindgren16,48,49, Daniel 
Levy7,9, Jaspal S Kooner43,50,51, Bernard Keavney52,53, Maciej Tomaszewski52,53, 
Nilesh J Samani54,55, Joanna M M Howson6, Martin D Tobin56, Patricia B 
Munroe1,2, Georg B Ehret47,57, Louise V Wain56, Michael R Barnes#1,2, Ioanna 
Tzoulaki#3,4,5, Mark J Caulfield#1,2,†, Paul Elliott#3,5,† on behalf of the UK Biobank 
CardioMetabolic Consortium BP working group;, collaboration with The 
International Consortium of Blood Pressure#, (ICBP) 1000G Analyses, The CHD 
Exome+ Consortium, The ExomeBP Consortium, The T2D-GENES Consortium, 
The GoT2DGenes Consortium, The Cohorts for Heart and Ageing Research in 
Genome Epidemiology (CHARGE) BP Exome Consortium, and The International 
Genomics of Blood Pressure (iGEN-BP) Consortium
Affiliations
1William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK 2National Institute for 
Health Research Barts Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, UK 3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
School of Public Health, Imperial College London, UK 4Department of Hygiene and 
Epidemiology, University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece 5MRC-PHE 
et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial College London, London, UK 
6Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 7Population Sciences Branch, National 
Heart Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA 
8Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA 9National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, USA 
10Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK 11Division of 
Statistical Genomics, Department of Genetics and Center for Genome Sciences 
and Systems Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis MO, 
USA 12MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, School of Social and Community 
Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK 13Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, 
Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Rayne Building, University College London, 
London, WC1E 6JF
, UK 14Translational Laboratory in Genetic Medicine, Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 15Department of 
Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands 16Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad 
Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, USA 17Center for Human Genetic 
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 18Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 19MRC 
Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 20Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany 21Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK 
22Data Science Institute, Lancester University, Lancaster, UK 23Department of 
Epidemiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands 24Department of Gene Diagnostics and Therapeutics, 
Research Institute, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan 
25Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and 
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA 26Saw Swee Hock School of Public 
Health, National University of Singapore and National University Health System, 
Singapore 27Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore 28Centre for Genomic & Experimental Medicine, 
Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 
29Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia 30Imperial Clinical 
Trials Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK 31Division 
of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, Wellcome Trust 
Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 32Department of 
Nephrology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands 33Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK 34Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Royal 
College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland 35Ninewells Hospital & Medical 
School, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK 36Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands 37School of Medicine, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland 38National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, 
et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 London, UK 39Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, USA 40Centre for Non-Communicable 
Diseases, Karachi, Pakistan 41Department of Public Health and Primary Care, 
University of Cambridge, UK 42Ealing Hospital National Health Service (NHS) Trust, 
Middlesex, UK 43Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK 44Lee Kong 
Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 45Division 
of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston MA, USA 
46Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 47Center for Complex Disease 
Genomics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA 48Wellcome Trust Center for 
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK 49The Big Data 
Institute at the Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery, University 
of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK 50Department of Cardiology, Ealing Hospital NHS 
Trust, Southall, Middlesex, UK 51National Heart and Lung Institute, Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Hammersmith Campus, Imperial College London, London, UK 52Division 
of Cardiovascular Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK 53Division of Medicine, Central Manchester NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK 
54Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, BHF 
Cardiovascular Research Centre, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, UK 55NIHR Leicester 
Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, UK 
56Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK 
57Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, 
Switzerland
Acknowledgements
HRW, CPC, MR, MRB, PBM, MB and MJC were funded by the National Institutes for Health Research (NIHR) as 
part of the portfolio of translational research of the NIHR Biomedical Research Unit at Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry.
HG was funded by the NIHR Imperial College Health Care NHS Trust and Imperial College London Biomedical 
Research Centre.
MR was a recipient from China Scholarship Council (No. 2011632047).
BM holds an MRC eMedLab Medical Bioinformatics Career Development Fellowship, funded from award MR/
L016311/1.
JMMH was funded by the UK Medical Research Council (G0800270), British Heart Foundation (SP/09/002), UK 
National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, European Research Council 
(268834), European Commission Framework Programme 7 (HEALTH-F2-2012-279233).
BK holds a British Heart Foundation Personal Chair (CH/13/2/30154).
NJS holds a chair funded by the British Heart Foundation and is a NIHR Senior Investigator.
FD was funded by the MRC Unit at the University of Bristol (MC_UU_12013/1-9).
PSu was funded by the UK Medical Research Council (G0800270).
CL and AK were funded by the NHLBI intramural funding.
et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 CNC was funded by the National Institutes of Health (HL113933, HL124262).
PVDH was funded by the ZonMw grant 90.700.441, Marie Sklodowska-Curie GF (call: H2020-MSCA-IF-2014, 
Project ID: 661395).
NV was supported by Marie Sklodowska-Curie GF grant (661395) and ICIN-NHI.
NP received funding from the UK National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre at Imperial 
College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London and also from his Senior Investigator Award.
PS was supported by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and 
Imperial College London.
ST was supported by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and 
Imperial College London.
PFO received funding from the UK Medical Research Council (MR/N015746/1) and the Wellcome Trust 
(109863/Z/15/Z).
IK was supported by the EU PhenoMeNal project (Horizon 2020, 654241).
AC was funded by the National Institutes of Health (HL128782, HL086694).
MF was supported by the Wellcome Trust core award (090532/Z/09/Z) and the BHF Centre of Research 
Excellence, Oxford (RE/13/1/30181).
CH was funded by an MRC core grant for QTL in Health and Disease programme.
Some of this work used the ALICE and SPECTRE High Performance Computing Facilities at the University of 
Leicester.
MJC is a National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) senior investigator.
PE is a National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) senior investigator and acknowledges support from the NIHR 
Biomedical Research Centre at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London, and the 
NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Health Impact of Environmental Hazards (HPRU-2012-10141). As 
director of the MRC-PHE Centre for Environment and Health, PE acknowledges support from the Medical 
Research Council and Public Health England (MR/L01341X/1).
This work used the computing resources of the UK MEDical BIOinformatics partnership - aggregation, integration, 
visualisation and analysis of large, complex data (UK MED-BIO) which is supported by the Medical Research 
Council (MR/L01632X/1).
This research was supported by the British Heart Foundation (grant SP/13/2/30111).
Project title: Large-scale comprehensive genotyping of UK Biobank for cardiometabolic traits and diseases: UK 
CardioMetabolic Consortium (UKCMC).
This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under Application Number 236.
International Consortium of Blood Pressure (ICBP) 1000 Genomes 
Discovery Contributors
Louise V. Wain (56), Ahmad Vaez (23,58), Rick Jansen (59), Roby Joehanes (60,9), Peter J. 
van der Most (23), A. Mesut Erzurumluoglu (56), Paul O'Reilly (21), Claudia P. Cabrera 
(1,2), Helen R. Warren (1,2), Lynda M. Rose (45), Germaine C. Verwoert (61), Jouke-Jan 
Hottenga (62), Rona J. Strawbridge (63,64), Tonu Esko (29,65,66), Dan E. Arking (47), 
Shih-Jen Hwang (67,68), Xiuqing Guo (69), Zoltan Kutalik (70,71), Stella Trompet (72,73), 
Nick Shrine (56), Alexander Teumer (74,75), Janina S. Ried (76), Joshua C. Bis (77), Albert 
V. Smith (78,79), Najaf Amin (80), Ilja M. Nolte (23), Leo-Pekka Lyytikäinen (81,82), 
et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Anubha Mahajan (48), Nicholas J. Wareham (83), Edith Hofer (84,85), Peter K. Joshi (86), 
Kati Kristiansson (87), Michela Traglia (88), Aki S. Havulinna (87), Anuj Goel (89,48), 
Mike A. Nalls (90,91), Siim Sõber (92), Dragana Vuckovic (93,94), Jian'an Luan (83), 
Fabiola Del Greco M. (95), Kristin L. Ayers (96), Jaume Marrugat (97), Daniela Ruggiero 
(98), Lorna M. Lopez (99,100,101), Teemu Niiranen (87), Stefan Enroth (102), Anne U. 
Jackson (103), Christopher P. Nelson (54,55), Jennifer E. Huffman (19), Weihua Zhang 
(3,50), Jonathan Marten (19), Ilaria Gandin (94), Sarah E Harris (99,28), Tatijana Zemonik 
(104), Yingchang Lu (105), Evangelos Evangelou (3,4), Nabi Shah (106,107), Martin H. de 
Borst (36), Massimo Mangino (108,109), Bram P. Prins (110), Archie Campbell (28,111), 
Ruifang Li-Gao (112), Ganesh Chauhan (113,114), Christopher Oldmeadow (115), Gonçalo 
Abecasis (116), Maryam Abedi (117), Caterina M. Barbieri (88), Michael R. Barnes (1,2), 
Chiara Battini (56), BIOS Consortium (118), Tineka Blake (56), Michael Boehnke (103), 
Erwin P. Bottinger (105), Peter S. Braund (54,55), Morris Brown (1,2), Marco Brumat (94), 
Harry Campbell (86), John C. Chambers (3,50,43), Massimiliano Cocca (94), Francis 
Collins (119), John Connell (35), Heather J. Cordell (120), Jeffrey J. Damman (121), Gail 
Davies (99,122), Eco J. de Geus (62), Renée de Mutsert (112), Joris Deelen (123), Yusuf 
Demirkale (124), Alex S.F. Doney (106), Marcus Dörr (125,75), Martin Farrall (89,48), 
Teresa Ferreira (48), Mattias Frånberg (63,64,126), He Gao (3), Vilmantas Giedraitis (127), 
Christian Gieger (128), Franco Giulianini (45), Alan J. Gow (99,129), Anders Hamsten 
(63,64), Tamara B. Harris (130), Albert Hofman (61,131), Elizabeth G. Holliday (115), 
Marjo-Riitta Jarvelin (132,133,134,5), Åsa Johansson (102), Andrew D. Johnson (9,135), 
Pekka Jousilahti (87), Antti Jula (87), Mika Kähönen (136,137), Sekar Kathiresan 
(18,17,16), Kay-Tee Khaw (41), Ivana Kolcic (138), Seppo Koskinen (87), Claudia 
Langenberg (83), Marty Larson (9), Lenore J. Launer (130), Benjamin Lehne (3), David 
C.M. Liewald (99,122), Lifelines Cohort Study (118), Li Lin (57), Lars Lind (139), François 
Mach (57), Chrysovalanto Mamasoula (140), Cristina Menni (108), Borbala Mifsud (1), 
Yuri Milaneschi (141), Anna Morgan (94), Andrew D. Morris (142), Alanna C. Morrison 
(143), Peter J. Munson (124), Priyanka Nandakumar (47), Quang Tri Nguyen (124), Teresa 
Nutile (98), Albertine J. Oldehinkel (144), Ben A. Oostra (80), Elin Org (29), Sandosh 
Padmanabhan (145,111), Aarno Palotie (146), Guillaume Paré (147), Alison Pattie (122), 
Brenda W.J.H. Penninx (141), Neil Poulter (30), Peter P. Pramstaller (95,148,149), Olli T. 
Raitakari (150,151), Meixia Ren (1,152), Kenneth Rice (153), Paul M. Ridker (45,46), 
Harriëtte Riese (144), Samuli Ripatti (146), Antonietta Robino (154), Jerome I. Rotter (155), 
Igor Rudan (86), Yasaman Saba (156), Aude Saint Pierre (95,157), Cinzia F. Sala (88), 
Antti-Pekka Sarin (146), Reinhold Schmidt (84), Rodney Scott (115,158,159), Marc A. 
Seelen (36), Denis C. Shields (37), David Siscovick (160), Rossella Sorice (98,161), Alice 
Stanton (34), David J. Stott (33), Johan Sundström (139), Morris Swertz (162), Kent D. 
Taylor (163,164), Simon Thom (165), Ioanna Tzoulaki (3), Christophe Tzourio 
(113,114,166), André G. Uitterlinden (61,167), Understanding Society Scientific group 
(118), Uwe Völker (168,75), Peter Vollenweider (169), Sarah Wild (86), Gonneke 
Willemsen (62), Alan F. Wright (19), Jie Yao (69), Sébastien Thériault (147), David Conen 
(170), Attia John (115,158,159), Peter Sever (38), Stéphanie Debette (113,114,171), Dennis 
O. Mook-Kanamori (112,172), Eleftheria Zeggini (110), Tim D. Spector (108), Pim van der 
Harst (15), Colin N.A. Palmer (106), Anne-Claire Vergnaud (3), Ruth J.F. Loos 
(83,173,174), Ozren Polasek (138), John M. Starr (99,175), Giorgia Girotto (94,93), 
et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Caroline Hayward (19,111), Jaspal S. Kooner (38,50,43), Cecila M. Lindgren (66,48), 
Veronique Vitart (19), Nilesh J. Samani (54,55), Jaakko Tuomilehto (176,177,178,179), Ulf 
Gyllensten (102), Paul Knekt (87), Ian J. Deary (99,122), Marina Ciullo (98,161), Roberto 
Elosua (97), Bernard D. Keavney (52), Andrew A. Hicks (95), Robert A. Scott (83), Paolo 
Gasparini (93,94), Maris Laan (92,180), YongMei Liu (181), Hugh Watkins (89,48), 
Catharina A. Hartman (144), Veikko Salomaa (87), Daniela Toniolo (88), Markus Perola 
(87,146,182), James F. Wilson (86,19), Helena Schmidt (156,183), Jing Hua Zhao (83), 
Terho Lehtimäki (81,82), Cornelia M. van Duijn (80), Vilmundur Gudnason (78,79), Bruce 
M. Psaty (77,184,185,186), Annette Peters (76), Rainer Rettig (187), Alan James (188,189), 
J Wouter Jukema (72), David P. Strachan (190), Walter Palmas (191), Andres Metspalu (29), 
Erik Ingelsson (192,193), Dorret I. Boomsma (62), Oscar H. Franco (61), Murielle Bochud 
(70), Christopher Newton-Cheh (194,18,16,66), Patricia B. Munroe (1,2), Paul Elliott (5), 
Daniel I. Chasman (45,46), Aravinda Chakravarti (47), Joanne Knight (22), Andrew P. 
Morris (10,48), Daniel Levy (7,68), Martin D. Tobin (56), Harold Snieder (23), Mark J. 
Caulfield (1,2), Georg B. Ehret (47,57)
58. Research Institute for Primordial Prevention of Non-communicable Disease, Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran
59. Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center, Neuroscience Campus 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
60. Hebrew SeniorLife, Harvard Medical School, 1200 Centre Street Room #609, Boston, 
MA 02131, USA
61. Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, 3000CA, The Netherlands
62. Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, EMGO+ institute, 
VU University medical center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
63. Cardiovascular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, 17176, Sweden
64. Centre for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Universitetsjukhuset, Solna, 171 76, Sweden
65. Divisions of Endocrinology/Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
66. Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
67. The Population Science Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National Heart Lung 
and Blood Institute national Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
68. The Framingham Heart Study, Framingham MA 01702, USA
69. The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Department of 
Pediatrics, LABioMed at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 1124 W. Carson Street, Torrance, 
CA 90502, USA
et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 70. Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Route de la 
Corniche 10, 1010 Lausanne, Switzerland
71. Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland
72. Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2300RC, The 
Netherlands
73. Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
2300RC, The Netherlands
74. Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 17475, 
Germany
75. DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Greifswald, 
Greifswald, 17475, Germany
76. Institute of Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, 
Germany
77. Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
78. Icelandic Heart Assoication, Kopavogur, Iceland
79. Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland
80. Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, 
3000CA, The Netherlands
81. Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere 33520, Finland
82. Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere 
33014, Finland
83. MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, 
Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK
84. Clinical Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurology, Medical University 
Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 22, 8036 Graz, Austria
85. Institute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation, Medical University Graz, 
Auenbruggerplatz 2, 8036 Graz, Austria
86. Centre for Global Health Research, Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences and 
Informatics, University of Edinburgh EH89AG, Scotland, UK
87. Department of Health, National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, 
Finland
et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 88. Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milano, 
Italy
89. Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK
90. Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, NIH, Bethesda, 20892, USA
91. Kelly Services, Rockville, MD, USA
92. Human Molecular Genetics Research Group, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of Tartu, Riia St.23, 51010 Tartu, Estonia
93. Experimental Genetics Division, Sidra Medical and Research Center, PO Box 26999, 
Doha, Qatar
94. Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Strada di 
Fiume 447, Trieste, 34100, Italy
95. Center for Biomedicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano (EURAC), Bolzano, Italy - 
Affiliated Institute of the University of Lübeck, Germany
96. Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA
97. Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Genetics, IMIM. Dr Aiguader 88, Barcelona, 08003, 
Spain
98. Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, via P. Castellino 111, 
80131 Napoli, Italy
99. Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, 7 
George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK
100. Department of Psychiatry, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Education and 
Research Centre, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
101. University College Dublin, UCD Conway Institute, Centre for Proteome Research, 
UCD, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland
102. Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala Universitet, Science for 
Life Laboratory, Husargatan 3, Uppsala, SE-75108, Sweden
103. Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
104. Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Croatia
105. The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icachn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA
et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 106. Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical 
School, Dundee, DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK
107. Department of Pharmacy, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad, 
22060, Pakistan
108. Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, Kingâ’™s College London, 
Lambeth Palace Rd, London, SE1 7EH, UK
109. National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, London SE1 9RT, 
UK
110. Department of Human Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, CB10 1HH, United 
Kingdom
111. Generation Scotland, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK
112. Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands
113. INSERM U 1219, Bordeaux Population Health center, Bordeaux, France
114. Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France
115. Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton, NSW 2305, Australia
116. Center for Statistical Genetics, Dept. of Biostatistics, SPH II, 1420 Washington 
Heights, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA
117. Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran
118. SPECIAL REFERENCE
119. Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
120. Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
121. Department of Pathology, Amsterdam Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
122. Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, 7 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 
9JZ, UK
123. Department of Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
2300RC, The Netherlands
124. Center for Information Technology, NIH, USA
et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 125. Department of Internal Medicine B, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
17475, Germany
126. Department of Numerical Analysis and Computer Science, Stockholm University, 
Lindstedtsvägen 3, Stockholm, 100 44, Sweden
127. Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Geriatrics, Uppsala 752 37, Sweden
128. Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Deutsches Forschungszentrum fuer Gesundheit und 
Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, München, Germany
129. Department of Psychology, School of Life Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, 
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
130. Intramural Research Program, Laboratory of Epidemiology, Demography, and 
Biometry, National Institute on Aging, USA
131. Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 
02115, USA
132. Center For Life-course Health Research, P.O. Box 5000, FI-90014 University of Oulu, 
Finland
133. Biocenter Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, Aapistie 5A, FI-90014 University of Oulu, Finland
134. Unit of Primary Care, Oulu University Hospital, Kajaanintie 50, P.O. Box 20, FI-90220 
Oulu, 90029 OYS, Finland
135. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Human 
Genomics Branch, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA
136. Department of Clinical Physiology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere 33521, 
Finland
137. Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Tampere School of Medicine, 
Tampere 33014, Finland
138. Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Croatia
139. Department of Medical Sciences, Cardiovascular Epidemiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala 751 85, Sweden
140. Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
141. Department of Psychiatry, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU 
University Medical Center, A.J. Ernststraat 1187, 1081 HL Amsterdam, The Netherlands
142. School of Molecular, Genetic and Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Medical School,Teviot Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9AG, Scotland, UK
et al.
Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 143. Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, School of 
Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 1200 Pressler St., 
Suite 453E, Houston, TX 77030, USA
144. Interdisciplinary Center Psychopathology and Emotion Regulation (IPCE), University 
of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30001, 9700 
RB Groningen, The Netherlands
145. British Heart Foundation Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, Institute of 
Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK
146. Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland
147. Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 1280 Main St 
W, Hamilton, L8S 4L8, Canada
148. Department of Neurology, General Central Hospital, Bolzano, Italy
149. Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany
150. Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Turku University Hospital, 
Turku 20521, Finland
151. Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Turku, Turku 20014, Finland
152. Department of Cardiology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fujian Medical University, 
Fuzhou 350001, China
153. Department of Biostatistics University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
154. Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Via dell'Istria 65, 
Trieste, 34200, Italy
155. The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Departments of 
Pediatrics and Medicine, LABioMed at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 1124 W. Carson 
Street, Torrance, CA 90502, USA
156. Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Centre for Molecular Medicine, 
Medical University of Graz, Harrachgasse 21, 8010 Graz, Austria
157. INSERM U1078, Etablissement Français du Sang, 46 rue Félix Le Dantec, CS 51819, 
Brest Cedex 2 29218, France
158. Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan NSW 2308, Australia
159. John Hunter Hospital, New Lambton NSW 2305, Australia
et al.
Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 160. The New York Academy of Medicine. 1216 5th Ave, New York, NY 10029, USA
161. IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Isernia, Italy
162. Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, PO Box 30001, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands
163. Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences. Los Angeles BioMedical 
Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA, 90502, USA
164. Division of Genetic Outcomes, Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical 
Center, Torrance, CA, 90502, USA
165. International Centre for Circulatory Health, Imperial College London, W2 1PG, UK
166. Department of Public Health, Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France
167. Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, 3000CA, The Netherlands
168. Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, 17475, Germany
169. Department of Internal Medicine, Lausanne Universiyt Hospital, CHUV, 1011 
Lausanne, Switzerland
170. Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton Ontario, Canada
171. Department of Neurology, Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France
172. Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands
173. The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, The Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA
174. Mindich Child health Development Institute, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA
175. Alzheimer Scotland Dementia Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, 7 George 
Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK
176. Diabetes Prevention Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, 00271 Helsinki, 
Finland
177. South Ostrobothnia Central Hospital, 60220 Seinäjoki, Finland
178. Red RECAVA Grupo RD06/0014/0015, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 28046 Madrid, 
Spain
179. Centre for Vascular Prevention, Danube-University Krems, 3500 Krems, Austria
et al.
Page 27
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 180. Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Ravila Str. 
19, 50412 Tartu, Estonia
181. Division of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
27106, USA
182. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
183. Department of Neurology, Medical University Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 22, 8036 Graz, 
Austria
184. Department of Epidemiology University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
185. Department of Health Services, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
186. Group Health Research Institute, Group Health, Seattle, WA, 98101, USA
187. Institute of Physiology, University Medicine Greifswald, Karlsburg, 17495, Germany
188. Department of Pulmonary Physiology and Sleep, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 
Hospital Avenue, Nedlands 6009,H57, Western Australia
189. School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Australia
190. Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London, London 
SW17 0RE, UK
191. Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, 622 West 168th Street, 
PH 9, East, 107, New York, NY 10032, USA
192. Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala 752 37, Sweden
193. Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
194. Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA
References
1. Munoz M, et al. Evaluating the contribution of genetics and familial shared environment to common 
disease using the UK Biobank. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:980–3. [PubMed: 27428752] 
2. Feinleib M, et al. The NHLBI twin study of cardiovascular disease risk factors: methodology and 
summary of results. Am J Epidemiol. 1977; 106:284–5. [PubMed: 562066] 
3. Poulter NR, Prabhakaran D, Caulfield M. Hypertension. Lancet. 2015; 386:801–12. [PubMed: 
25832858] 
4. Mongeau JG, Biron P, Sing CF. The influence of genetics and household environment upon the 
variability of normal blood pressure: the Montreal Adoption Survey. Clin Exp Hypertens A. 1986; 
8:653–60. [PubMed: 3489574] 
et al.
Page 28
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 5. Forouzanfar MH, et al. Global, regional, and national comparative risk assessment of 79 
behavioural, environmental and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks in 188 
countries, 1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet. 
2015; 386:2287–323. [PubMed: 26364544] 
6. Sundstrom J, et al. Blood pressure-lowering treatment based on cardiovascular risk: a meta-analysis 
of individual patient data. Lancet. 2014; 384:591–8. [PubMed: 25131978] 
7. Cabrera CP, et al. Exploring hypertension genome-wide association studies findings and impact on 
pathophysiology, pathways, and pharmacogenetics. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems 
Biology and Medicine. 2015; 7:73–90. [PubMed: 25655479] 
8. Ehret GB, et al. The genetics of blood pressure regulation and its target organs from association 
studies in 342,415 individuals. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:1171–1184. [PubMed: 27618452] 
9. Surendran P, et al. Trans-ancestry meta-analyses identify rare and common variants associated with 
blood pressure and hypertension. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:1151–1161. [PubMed: 27618447] 
10. Liu C, et al. Meta-analysis identifies common and rare variants influencing blood pressure and 
overlapping with metabolic trait loci. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:1162–1170. [PubMed: 27618448] 
11. Kato N, et al. Trans-ancestry genome-wide association study identifies 12 genetic loci influencing 
blood pressure and implicates a role for DNA methylation. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:1282–93. 
[PubMed: 26390057] 
12. Elliott P, Peakman TC. The UK Biobank sample handling and storage protocol for the collection, 
processing and archiving of human blood and urine. Int J Epidemiol. 2008; 37:234–44. [PubMed: 
18381398] 
13. Sudlow C, et al. UK biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of 
complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Med. 2015; 12:e1001779. [PubMed: 25826379] 
14. Huang J, et al. Improved imputation of low-frequency and rare variants using the UK10K 
haplotype reference panel. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8111. [PubMed: 26368830] 
15. Hoffmann TJ, et al. Genome-wide association analyses using electronic health records identify new 
loci influencing blood pressure variation. Nat Genet. 2016
16. Staley JR, et al. PhenoScanner: a database of human genotype-phenotype associations. 
Bioinformatics. 2016; 32:3207–3209. [PubMed: 27318201] 
17. Ettehad D, et al. Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016; 387:957–67. [PubMed: 26724178] 
18. Kato N, et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies common variants 
associated with blood pressure variation in east Asians. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:531–8. [PubMed: 
21572416] 
19. Munroe PB, Barnes MR, Caulfield MJ. Advances in Blood Pressure Genomics. Circulation 
Research. 2013; 112:1365–1379. [PubMed: 23661711] 
20. den Hoed M, et al. Identification of heart rate–associated loci and their effects on cardiac 
conduction and rhythm disorders. Nature genetics. 2013; 45:621–631. [PubMed: 23583979] 
21. Hamilton CA, Brosnan MJ, McIntyre M, Graham D, Dominiczak AF. Superoxide excess in 
hypertension and aging: a common cause of endothelial dysfunction. Hypertension. 2001; 37:529–
34. [PubMed: 11230330] 
22. Shin SY, et al. An atlas of genetic influences on human blood metabolites. Nat Genet. 2014; 
46:543–50. [PubMed: 24816252] 
23. Raffler J, et al. Genome-Wide Association Study with Targeted and Non-targeted NMR 
Metabolomics Identifies 15 Novel Loci of Urinary Human Metabolic Individuality. PLoS Genet. 
2015; 11:e1005487. [PubMed: 26352407] 
24. van Setten J, et al. Genome-wide association study of coronary and aortic calcification implicates 
risk loci for coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis. 2013; 228:400–5. 
[PubMed: 23561647] 
25. McCarthy JJ, et al. Large scale association analysis for identification of genes underlying 
premature coronary heart disease: cumulative perspective from analysis of 111 candidate genes. J 
Med Genet. 2004; 41:334–41. [PubMed: 15121769] 
et al.
Page 29
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 26. van Meurs JB, et al. Common genetic loci influencing plasma homocysteine concentrations and 
their effect on risk of coronary artery disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013; 98:668–76. [PubMed: 
23824729] 
27. Pu X, et al. ADAMTS7 cleavage and vascular smooth muscle cell migration is affected by a 
coronary-artery-disease-associated variant. Am J Hum Genet. 2013; 92:366–74. [PubMed: 
23415669] 
28. Rizzoni D, Agabiti-Rosei E. Structural abnormalities of small resistance arteries in essential 
hypertension. Intern Emerg Med. 2012; 7:205–12. [PubMed: 21380549] 
29. Ray R, et al. Endothelial Nox4 NADPH oxidase enhances vasodilatation and reduces blood 
pressure in vivo. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011; 31:1368–76. [PubMed: 21415386] 
30. Touyz RM, Montezano AC. Vascular Nox4: a multifarious NADPH oxidase. Circ Res. 2012; 
110:1159–61. [PubMed: 22539753] 
31. Steppan J, Barodka V, Berkowitz DE, Nyhan D. Vascular stiffness and increased pulse pressure in 
the aging cardiovascular system. Cardiol Res Pract. 2011; 2011:263585. [PubMed: 21845218] 
32. Yan F, et al. Nox4 and redox signaling mediate TGF-beta-induced endothelial cell apoptosis and 
phenotypic switch. Cell Death Dis. 2014; 5:e1010. [PubMed: 24457954] 
33. Chan EC, et al. Nox4 modulates collagen production stimulated by transforming growth factor 
beta1 in vivo and in vitro. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013; 430:918–25. [PubMed: 
23261430] 
34. Vasa-Nicotera M, et al. miR-146a is modulated in human endothelial cell with aging. 
Atherosclerosis. 2011; 217:326–30. [PubMed: 21511256] 
35. Tian X, et al. Phosphodiesterase 10A upregulation contributes to pulmonary vascular remodeling. 
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e18136. [PubMed: 21494592] 
36. Takimoto E, et al. Chronic inhibition of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase 5A prevents and reverses 
cardiac hypertrophy. Nat Med. 2005; 11:214–22. [PubMed: 15665834] 
37. Perez NG, et al. Phosphodiesterase 5A inhibition induces Na+/H+ exchanger blockade and 
protection against myocardial infarction. Hypertension. 2007; 49:1095–103. [PubMed: 17339532] 
38. Oliver JJ, Melville VP, Webb DJ. Effect of regular phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibition in 
hypertension. Hypertension. 2006; 48:622–7. [PubMed: 16940217] 
39. Levy D, et al. Genome-wide association study of blood pressure and hypertension. Nat Genet. 
2009; 41:677–87. [PubMed: 19430479] 
40. Newton-Cheh C, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies eight loci associated with blood 
pressure. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:666–76. [PubMed: 19430483] 
41. DeStefano AL, et al. Autosomal dominant orthostatic hypotensive disorder maps to chromosome 
18q. Am J Hum Genet. 1998; 63:1425–30. [PubMed: 9792870] 
42. Hong X, et al. Genetic polymorphisms of the urea transporter gene are associated with 
antihypertensive response to nifedipine GITS. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 2007; 29:3–10. 
[PubMed: 17344938] 
43. Takimoto E, et al. Sodium calcium exchanger plays a key role in alteration of cardiac function in 
response to pressure overload. FASEB J. 2002; 16:373–8. [PubMed: 11874986] 
44. Ronaldson PT, Davis TP. Targeting transporters: promoting blood-brain barrier repair in response 
to oxidative stress injury. Brain Res. 2015; 1623:39–52. [PubMed: 25796436] 
45. Carta L, et al. Fibrillins 1 and 2 perform partially overlapping functions during aortic development. 
J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:8016–23. [PubMed: 16407178] 
46. Kazenwadel J, et al. Loss-of-function germline GATA2 mutations in patients with MDS/AML or 
MonoMAC syndrome and primary lymphedema reveal a key role for GATA2 in the lymphatic 
vasculature. Blood. 2012; 119:1283–91. [PubMed: 22147895] 
47. Akashi M, Higashi T, Masuda S, Komori T, Furuse M. A coronary artery disease-associated gene 
product, JCAD/KIAA1462, is a novel component of endothelial cell-cell junctions. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2011; 413:224–9. [PubMed: 21884682] 
48. Cakstina I, et al. Primary culture of avian embryonic heart forming region cells to study the 
regulation of vertebrate early heart morphogenesis by vitamin A. BMC Dev Biol. 2014; 14:10. 
[PubMed: 24552295] 
et al.
Page 30
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 49. Wang J, Karra R, Dickson AL, Poss KD. Fibronectin is deposited by injury-activated epicardial 
cells and is necessary for zebrafish heart regeneration. Dev Biol. 2013; 382:427–35. [PubMed: 
23988577] 
50. Dietrich T, et al. ED-B fibronectin (ED-B) can be targeted using a novel single chain antibody 
conjugate and is associated with macrophage accumulation in atherosclerotic lesions. Basic Res 
Cardiol. 2007; 102:298–307. [PubMed: 17468934] 
51. Stoynev N, et al. Gene expression in peripheral blood of patients with hypertension and patients 
with type 2 diabetes. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2014; 15:702–9. [PubMed: 23337395] 
52. Erdos B, Backes I, McCowan ML, Hayward LF, Scheuer DA. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
modulates angiotensin signaling in the hypothalamus to increase blood pressure in rats. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015; 308:H612–22. [PubMed: 25576628] 
53. Chan SH, Wu CW, Chang AY, Hsu KS, Chan JY. Transcriptional upregulation of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor in rostral ventrolateral medulla by angiotensin II: significance in superoxide 
homeostasis and neural regulation of arterial pressure. Circ Res. 2010; 107:1127–39. [PubMed: 
20814019] 
54. Crespo K, Menard A, Deng AY. Retinoblastoma-associated protein 140 as a candidate for a novel 
etiological gene to hypertension. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2016; 38:533–40. [PubMed: 27391979] 
55. Watanabe Y, et al. Accumulation of common polymorphisms is associated with development of 
hypertension: a 12-year follow-up from the Ohasama study. Hypertens Res. 2010; 33:129–34. 
[PubMed: 19927152] 
56. Gale DP, Harten SK, Reid CD, Tuddenham EG, Maxwell PH. Autosomal dominant erythrocytosis 
and pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with an activating HIF2 alpha mutation. Blood. 
2008; 112:919–21. [PubMed: 18650473] 
57. Yndestad A, et al. Elevated levels of activin A in clinical and experimental pulmonary 
hypertension. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009; 106:1356–64. [PubMed: 19196915] 
58. Sacks FM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches 
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med. 
2001; 344:3–10. [PubMed: 11136953] 
59. Intersalt: an international study of electrolyte excretion and blood pressure. Results for 24 hour 
urinary sodium and potassium excretion. Intersalt Cooperative Research Group. BMJ. 1988; 
297:319–28. [PubMed: 3416162] 
60. Whelton PK, et al. Primary prevention of hypertension: clinical and public health advisory from 
The National High Blood Pressure Education Program. JAMA. 2002; 288:1882–8. [PubMed: 
12377087] 
61. Chan Q, et al. An Update on Nutrients and Blood Pressure. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2016; 23:276–
89. [PubMed: 26686565] 
62. Khera AV, et al. Genetic Risk, Adherence to a Healthy Lifestyle, and Coronary Disease. New 
England Journal of Medicine. 2016
63. Wain LV, et al. Novel insights into the genetics of smoking behaviour, lung function, and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (UK BiLEVE): a genetic association study in UK Biobank. Lancet 
Respir Med. 2015; 3:769–81. [PubMed: 26423011] 
64. Tobin MD, Sheehan NA, Scurrah KJ, Burton PR. Adjusting for treatment effects in studies of 
quantitative traits: antihypertensive therapy and systolic blood pressure. Stat Med. 2005; 24:2911–
35. [PubMed: 16152135] 
65. Marchini J, Howie B, Myers S, McVean G, Donnelly P. A new multipoint method for genome-
wide association studies by imputation of genotypes. Nat Genet. 2007; 39:906–913. [PubMed: 
17572673] 
66. Willer CJ, Li Y, Abecasis GR. METAL: fast and efficient meta-analysis of genomewide association 
scans. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:2190–1. [PubMed: 20616382] 
67. Wang K, Li M, Hakonarson H. ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from high-
throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:e164. [PubMed: 20601685] 
68. Barnes MR. Exploring the landscape of the genome. Methods Mol Biol. 2010; 628:21–38. 
[PubMed: 20238074] 
et al.
Page 31
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 69. Gong J, et al. Genome-wide identification of SNPs in microRNA genes and the SNP effects on 
microRNA target binding and biogenesis. Hum Mutat. 2012; 33:254–63. [PubMed: 22045659] 
70. Pers TH, et al. Biological interpretation of genome-wide association studies using predicted gene 
functions. Nat Commun. 2015; 6
71. Dunham I, Kulesha E, Iotchkova V, Morganella S, Birney E. FORGE: A tool to discover cell 
specific enrichments of GWAS associated SNPs in regulatory regions [version 1; referees: 2 
approved with reservations]. F1000Research. 2015; 4
72. Dozmorov MG, Cara LR, Giles CB, Wren JD. GenomeRunner: automating genome exploration. 
Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:419–20. [PubMed: 22155868] 
73. McLean CY, et al. GREAT improves functional interpretation of cis-regulatory regions. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2010; 28:495–501. [PubMed: 20436461] 
74. Elliott P, et al. The Airwave Health Monitoring Study of police officers and staff in Great Britain: 
rationale, design and methods. Environ Res. 2014; 134:280–5. [PubMed: 25194498] 
75. Petersen M, et al. Quantification of lipoprotein subclasses by proton nuclear magnetic resonance-
based partial least-squares regression models. Clin Chem. 2005; 51:1457–61. [PubMed: 
15961551] 
76. Chadeau-Hyam M, et al. Metabolic profiling and the metabolome-wide association study: 
significance level for biomarker identification. J Proteome Res. 2010; 9:4620–7. [PubMed: 
20701291] 
et al.
Page 32
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. 
Study design schematic for discovery and validation of loci. N: sample size; QC: Quality 
Control; PCA: Principal Component Analysis; BP: blood pressure; SBP: systolic BP; DBP: 
diastolic BP; PP: pulse pressure; SNVs: single nucleotide variants; BMI: body mass index; 
UKB: UK Biobank; UKBL: UK BiLEVE; GWAS: Genome-wide association study; MAF: 
Minor Allele Frequency; P: P-value; LD: Linkage Disequilibrium; 1000G: 1000 Genomes. 
UKBBvsUKBL: a binary indicator variable for UK Biobank vs UK BiLEVE to adjust for 
the different genotyping chips
et al.
Page 33
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. 
Venn diagram of 107 validated loci from our study. This shows concordance of significant 
associations across the three blood pressure phenotypes for the 107 validated sentinel 
variants (Tables 1-3) from both the GWAS and exome analyses, according to genome-wide 
significance in the combined meta-analysis. The locus names labelled within the Venn 
Diagram correspond to Tables 1-3, and relate to the nearest annotated gene. The loci names 
in bold font highlight the 32 novel loci which are reported for the first time in our study.
et al.
Page 34
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. 
Distribution of Genetic Risk Score (GRS) and its relationship with blood pressure, 
hypertension and CVD outcomes. The GRS is based on all reported loci: both previously 
reported loci at the time of analysis; and all validated blood pressure variants from this 
study. (a) Distribution of GRS in Airwave and sex-adjusted odds ratio of hypertension in age 
50+ comparing each of the upper four GRS quintiles with the lowest quintile; dotted lines 
represent the upper 95% confidence intervals. (b) Mean blood pressures and standard 
deviation in bracket in Airwave age 50+ across GRS quintiles. (c) Distribution of GRS in 
UKB and sex-adjusted odds ratio of CVD, CAD and stroke comparing each of the upper 
four GRS quintiles with the lowest quintile; dotted lines represent the upper 95% confidence 
intervals. (d) Count of CVD, CAD and stroke (events and deaths) across GRS quintiles in 
UKB participants
et al.
Page 35
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. 
Summary of gene cardiovascular expression from validated loci. Genes are shown on the 
basis of their tissue expression and supporting evidence summarised in Supplementary Table 
16, based on Knockout (KO) phenotype, previously reported blood pressure biology or a 
strong functional rationale: eQTL (expression Quantitative Trait Loci), nsSNV (non-
synonymous SNV), Hi-C. Multiple lines of evidence indicate the central importance of the 
vasculature in blood pressure regulation and we thus highlight existing drugged (*) and 
druggable (#) targets among these genes. Illustrations used elements with permission from 
et al.
Page 36
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Servier Medical Art. We note that some druggable genes may carry a safety liability, such as 
GJA1, which has known association with QT interval20
et al.
Page 37
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
et al.
Page 38
Table 1
Loci validated with SBP as primary trait: combined meta-analysis results from (a) GWAS 
and (b) Exome for the sentinel variant
(a) GWAS
Locus
Chr
Pos
rsID
EA
EAF
N
Beta
SE
P
Note
NADK-CPSF3L
1
1,685,921
rs139385870
D
0.5
281,890
-0.352
0.05
1.3x10-12
GIU
CELA2A
1
15,798,197
rs3820068
A
0.81
310,776
0.425
0.06
1.1x10-12
GIU
GTF2B
1
89,360,158
rs10922502
A
0.62
323,666
-0.382
0.05
2.2x10-15
GIU
FOSL2
2
28,635,740
rs7562
T
0.52
319,942
0.263
0.05
1.9x10-8
PRKD3
2
37,517,566
rs13420463
A
0.77
330,307
0.356
0.05
7.0x10-11
GIU
METTL21A-AC079767.3
2
208,526,140
rs55780018
T
0.54
304,567
-0.391
0.05
5.9x10-16
GIU
RYK
3
134,000,025
rs9859176
T
0.4
322,428
0.322
0.05
1.3x10-11
G
NPNT
4
106,911,742
rs13112725
C
0.76
306,370
0.435
0.06
1.5x10-14
GIU
TMEM161B
5
87,514,515
rs10059921
T
0.08
298,543
-0.526
0.09
4.0x10-9
GIU
FBN2
5
127,868,199
rs6595838
A
0.3
328,401
0.344
0.05
7.6x10-12
GIU
CASC15
6
22,130,601
rs6911827
T
0.45
326,471
0.296
0.05
2.0x10-10
GIU
TFAP2D
6
50,683,009
rs78648104
T
0.92
305,426
-0.481
0.08
1.3x10-8
MKLN1
7
131,059,056
rs13238550
A
0.4
325,647
0.331
0.05
1.9x10-12
HIPK2
7
139,463,264
rs1011018
A
0.2
325,110
-0.329
0.06
1.5x10-8
ZFAT
8
135,612,745
rs894344
A
0.6
329,834
-0.258
0.05
3.2x10-8
PAX2
10
102,604,514
rs112184198
A
0.1
323,791
-0.659
0.08
3.6x10-18
GIU
MCF2L
13
113,636,156
rs9549328
T
0.23
313,787
0.318
0.06
1.5x10-8
GI
FERMT2
14
53,377,540
rs9888615
T
0.29
326,235
-0.318
0.05
3.5x10-10
GIU
PPP2R5E
14
63,928,546
rs8016306
A
0.8
329,869
0.335
0.06
3.7x10-9
ABHD17C
15
81,013,037
rs35199222
A
0.45
323,407
0.322
0.05
5.2x10-12
GI
CFDP1
16
75,331,044
rs11643209
T
0.42
309,242
-0.339
0.05
1.8x10-12
GI
CRK
17
1,333,598
rs12941318
T
0.49
299,739
-0.269
0.05
2.5x10-8
GIU
ACOX1
17
73,949,045
rs2467099
T
0.22
326,401
-0.307
0.06
3.3x10-8
GIU
(b) Exome
SSPN
12
26,438,189
rs6487543
A
0.77
244,842
0.3
0.05
6.3x10-10
Locus: named according to nearest annotated gene(s); Chr: chromosome; Pos: build 37; EA: effect allele; EAF: EA frequency in UK Biobank; 
Beta: effect estimate; SE: Standard Error of effect; P: P-value; N: total sample size analyzed; Note: indicates loci published since our analysis15 
from GERA (G), GERA+ICBP(HapMap) (GI) or GERA+ICBP(HapMap)+UKB (GIU) analyses.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
et al.
Page 39
Table 2
Loci validated with DBP as primary trait: combined meta-analysis results from (a) GWAS 
and (b) Exome for the sentinel variant
(a) GWAS
Locus
Chr
Pos
rsID
EA
EAF
N
Beta
SE
P
Note
chr1mb25
1
25,030,470
rs6686889
T
0.25
322,575
0.185
0.03
3.6x10-9
DNM3
1
172,357,441
rs12405515
T
0.56
328,543
-0.165
0.03
1.4x10-9
GIU
GPATCH2
1
217,718,789
rs12408022
T
0.26
320,983
0.198
0.03
2.4x10-10
GIU
CDC42BPA
1
227,252,626
rs10916082
A
0.73
327,636
-0.177
0.03
8.4x10-9
WNT3A
1
228,191,075
rs2760061
A
0.47
312,761
0.23
0.03
2.1x10-16
GIU
SDCCAG8
1
243,471,192
rs953492
A
0.46
325,253
0.22
0.03
7.4x10-16
G
ADCY3
2
25,139,596
rs55701159
T
0.89
321,052
0.285
0.04
7.2x10-11
SLC8A1
2
40,567,743
rs4952611
T
0.58
309,395
-0.157
0.03
4.0x10-8
AC016735.1
2
43,167,878
rs76326501
A
0.91
318,127
0.419
0.05
3.6x10-18
GPAT2-FAHD2CP
2
96,675,166
rs2579519
T
0.63
311,557
-0.197
0.03
4.8x10-12
TEX41
2
145,646,072
rs1438896
T
0.3
329,278
0.234
0.03
2.0x10-15
GIU
CCDC141
2
179,786,068
rs79146658
T
0.91
321,318
-0.311
0.05
2.4x10-10
G
TMEM194B
2
191,439,591
rs7592578
T
0.19
304,672
-0.24
0.04
9.5x10-12
TNS1
2
218,668,732
rs1063281
T
0.6
315,354
-0.2
0.03
1.3x10-12
GIU
CAMKV-ACTBP13
3
49,913,705
rs36022378
T
0.8
319,983
-0.202
0.03
4.7x10-9
GIU
CACNA2D2
3
50,476,378
rs743757
C
0.14
328,836
0.245
0.04
2.4x10-10
GIU
FAM208A
3
56,726,646
rs9827472
T
0.37
323,058
-0.177
0.03
4.3x10-10
GIU
RP11-439C8.2
3
154,707,967
rs143112823
A
0.09
297,343
-0.403
0.05
1.4x10-14
GIU
SENP2
3
185,317,674
rs12374077
C
0.35
327,513
0.163
0.03
9.2x10-9
GIU
PDE5A
4
120,509,279
rs66887589
T
0.52
324,397
-0.215
0.03
3.4x10-15
GIU
POC5
5
75,038,431
rs10078021
T
0.63
314,172
-0.164
0.03
1.3x10-8
G
CPEB4
5
173,377,636
rs72812846
A
0.28
312,601
-0.209
0.03
2.2x10-11
GIU
PKHD1
6
51,832,494
rs13205180
T
0.49
325,419
0.168
0.03
7.0x10-10
GIU
PDE10A
6
166,178,451
rs147212971
T
0.06
296,010
-0.36
0.06
1.6x10-9
GIU
SLC35F1
6
118,572,486
rs9372498
A
0.08
330,625
0.334
0.05
1.8x10-11
GIU
SNX31
8
101,676,675
rs2978098
A
0.54
324,424
0.165
0.03
1.5x10-9
RP11-273G15.2
8
144,060,955
rs62524579
A
0.53
268,645
-0.175
0.03
3.8x10-9
GIU
MTAP
9
21,801,530
rs4364717
A
0.55
327,173
-0.175
0.03
1.3x10-10
BDNF
11
27,728,102
rs11030119
A
0.31
330,002
-0.163
0.03
2.9x10-8
GIU
MYEOV
11
69,079,707
rs67330701
T
0.09
276,760
-0.367
0.05
2.1x10-12
GIU
RP11-321F6.1
15
66,869,072
rs7178615
A
0.37
318,076
-0.179
0.03
2.6x10-10
ADAMTS7
15
79,070,000
rs62012628
T
0.29
244,143
-0.238
0.03
5.1x10-12
chr15mb95
15
95,312,071
rs12906962
T
0.68
319,952
-0.221
0.03
5.6x10-14
GIU
PPL
16
4,943,019
rs12921187
T
0.43
326,469
-0.174
0.03
2.5x10-10
G
FBXL19
16
30,936,743
rs72799341
A
0.24
324,502
0.185
0.03
5.8x10-9
GIU
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
et al.
Page 40
(a) GWAS
Locus
Chr
Pos
rsID
EA
EAF
N
Beta
SE
P
Note
CMIP
16
81,574,197
rs8059962
T
0.42
319,839
-0.17
0.03
1.3x10-9
ACE
17
61,559,625
rs4308
A
0.37
319,394
0.213
0.03
6.8x10-14
GIU
MAPK4
18
48,142,854
rs745821
T
0.76
330,954
0.189
0.03
1.4x10-9
CCNE1
19
30,294,991
rs62104477
T
0.33
320,347
0.177
0.03
1.2x10-9
GIU
PLCB1
20
8,626,271
rs6108168
A
0.25
327,368
-0.211
0.03
1.1x10-11
(b) Exome
MRAS
3
138,119,952
rs2306374
T
0.84
281,715
-0.184
0.03
7.4x10-9
GIU
Locus: named according to nearest annotated gene(s); Chr: chromosome; Pos: build 37; EA: effect allele; EAF: EA frequency in UK Biobank; 
Beta: effect estimate; SE: Standard Error of effect; P: P-value; N: total sample size analyzed; Note: indicates loci published since our analysis15 
from GERA (G), GERA+ICBP(HapMap) (GI) or GERA+ICBP(HapMap)+UKB (GIU) analyses.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
et al.
Page 41
Table 3
Loci validated with PP as primary trait: combined meta-analysis results from (a) GWAS 
and (b) Exome for the sentinel variant
(a) GWAS
Locus
Chr
Pos
rsID
EA
EAF
N
Beta
SE
P
Note
chr1mb9
1
9,441,949
rs9662255
A
0.43
310,618
-0.207
0.03
1.9x10-10
GIU
SF3A3
1
38,455,891
rs4360494
C
0.55
282,851
0.278
0.03
3.7x10-16
G
RP4-710M16.1-PPAP2B
1
56,576,924
rs112557609
A
0.35
325,952
0.227
0.03
6.8x10-12
FGGY
1
59,653,742
rs3889199
A
0.71
329,486
0.351
0.03
1.8x10-24
G
C2orf43
2
20,881,840
rs2289081
C
0.36
329,140
-0.223
0.03
5.5x10-12
GI
PRKCE
2
46,363,336
rs11690961
A
0.88
327,847
0.34
0.05
3.9x10-12
GIU
CEP68
2
65,283,972
rs74181299
T
0.62
324,224
0.23
0.03
9.6x10-13
GIU
TCF7L1
2
85,491,365
rs11689667
T
0.54
330,634
0.176
0.03
1.7x10-8
GIU
FN1
2
216,300,482
rs1250259
A
0.74
325,485
-0.314
0.04
8.7x10-19
G
GATA2
3
128,201,889
rs62270945
T
0.03
279,925
0.607
0.1
1.8x10-9
GIU
PALLD
4
169,717,148
rs1566497
A
0.42
320,948
0.236
0.03
1.9x10-13
GI
chr4mb174
4
174,584,663
rs17059668
C
0.92
313,277
-0.332
0.06
2.8x10-8
LHFPL2
5
77,837,789
rs10057188
A
0.46
325,985
-0.205
0.03
6.7x10-11
GIU
GJA1
6
121,781,390
rs11154027
T
0.47
316,708
0.207
0.03
1.1x10-10
ESR1
6
152,397,912
rs36083386
I
0.11
323,303
0.439
0.05
1.5x10-18
G
FNDC1
6
159,699,125
rs449789
C
0.14
325,584
0.359
0.05
2.4x10-15
GIU
THBS2
6
169,587,103
rs1322639
A
0.78
319,866
0.316
0.04
4.8x10-17
G
SUGCT
7
40,447,971
rs76206723
A
0.1
328,162
-0.346
0.05
7.4x10-12
GIU
SLC20A2
8
42,324,765
rs2978456
T
0.55
304,964
-0.188
0.03
1.2x10-8
GIU
TRAPPC9
8
141,060,027
rs4454254
A
0.63
330,022
-0.261
0.03
5.1x10-16
SCAI
9
127,900,996
rs72765298
T
0.87
316,271
-0.374
0.05
2.7x10-14
GI
KIAA1462
10
30,317,073
rs9337951
A
0.34
299,646
0.28
0.04
2.5x10-15
G
ARHGAP12
10
32,082,658
rs10826995
T
0.71
327,373
-0.212
0.03
1.1x10-9
GIU
PRDM11
11
45,208,141
rs11442819
I
0.11
326,483
-0.279
0.05
7.1x10-9
GIU
NOX4
11
89,224,453
rs2289125
A
0.21
307,682
-0.377
0.04
9.1x10-22
G
CEP164
11
117,283,676
rs8258
T
0.38
327,038
0.236
0.03
2.9x10-13
G
CCDC41
12
94,880,742
rs139236208
A
0.1
291,244
-0.363
0.06
1.6x10-10
G
RP11-61O1.1
14
98,587,630
rs9323988
T
0.63
327,551
-0.212
0.03
4.1x10-11
GIU
VAC14
16
70,755,610
rs117006983
A
0.01
250,766
0.986
0.14
4.1x10-12
CDH13
16
83,045,790
rs7500448
A
0.75
321,958
0.329
0.04
1.1x10-19
G
KIAA0753
17
6,473,828
rs7226020
T
0.56
303,389
-0.256
0.03
2.3x10-14
GIU
TP53-SLC2A4
17
7,571,752
rs78378222
T
0.99
294,053
0.904
0.14
1.8x10-10
GIU
KCNH4-HSD17B1
17
40,317,241
rs79089478
T
0.97
318,326
0.584
0.1
3.1x10-9
PYY
17
42,060,631
rs62080325
A
0.66
315,689
-0.186
0.03
4.0x10-8
MRC2
17
60,767,151
rs740698
T
0.56
311,450
-0.228
0.03
3.1x10-12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
et al.
Page 42
(a) GWAS
Locus
Chr
Pos
rsID
EA
EAF
N
Beta
SE
P
Note
SLC14A2
18
43,097,750
rs7236548
A
0.18
330,075
0.352
0.04
2.0x10-18
G
SLC24A3
20
19,465,907
rs6081613
A
0.28
315,546
0.263
0.04
1.6x10-13
GIU
ARVCF
22
19,967,980
rs12628032
T
0.3
310,292
0.24
0.03
5.5x10-12
GIU
XRCC6
22
42,038,786
rs73161324
T
0.05
267,722
0.496
0.07
2.8x10-11
(b) Exome
CD34
1
208,024,820
rs12731740
T
0.1
279,078
-0.249
0.04
1.1x10-8
ZNF638
2
71,627,539
rs3771371
T
0.57
280,285
-0.16
0.03
5.8x10-9
GIU
CRACR2B
11
828,916
rs7126805
A
0.73
145,162
0.222
0.04
3.3x10-9
Locus: named according to nearest annotated gene(s); Chr: chromosome; Pos: build 37; EA: effect allele; EAF: EA frequency in UK Biobank; 
Beta: effect estimate; SE: Standard Error of effect; P: P-value; N: total sample size analyzed; Note: indicates loci published since our analysis15 
from GERA (G), GERA+ICBP(HapMap) (GI) or GERA+ICBP(HapMap)+UKB (GIU) analyses.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 28.
