 Third edition
FOR THE TREATMENT
OF MALARIA
GUIDELINES
 Third edition
FOR THE TREATMENT
OF MALARIA
GUIDELINES
 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria – 3rd edition.
1.Malaria – drug therapy. 2.Malaria – diagnosis. 3.Antimalarials – administration and dosage. 4. 
Drug Therapy, Combination. 5.Guideline. I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 154912 7 
  
 
(NLM classification: WC 770)
© World Health Organization 2015
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO 
website (www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 
20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; 
e-mail: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications –whether for sale or for non-
commercial distribution– should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website (www.
who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not 
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent 
approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that 
they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of 
a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary 
products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the 
information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed 
without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation 
and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be 
liable for damages arising from its use. 
Printed in Italy
Design and layout: Paprika-annecy.com
For technical information, please contact:
Dr P. Olumese
Global Malaria Programme
World Health Organization
20, avenue Appia – CH-1211 Geneva 27
Tel: +41 22 791 4424
Fax:+41 22 791 4824
E-mail: olumesep@who.int
 Contents
1 | Introduction 
................................................................................................................................................................. 15
2 |  
Clinical malaria and epidemiology...................................................................................................................... 23
3 | Diagnosis of malaria 
..................................................................................................................................................27
4 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria ................................................................... 31
5 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in special Risk Groups ............................................47
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
.............. 59
7 | Treatment of severe malaria 
.................................................................................................................................. 71
8 |  
Management of malaria cases in special situations ..................................................................................... 89
9 |  
Artemisinin-based combination therapies not currently recommended for general use 
................ 93
10 | Mass drug administration .................................................................................................................................... 95
11 |  
Chemoprevention in special risk groups ........................................................................................................ 99
12 |  
Quality of antimalarial medicines 
...................................................................................................................107
13 |  
Monitoring the efficacy and safety of antimalarial drugs and resistance 
.........................................111
14 |  
National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis and treatment, 
and implementation ............................................................................................................................................115
Annex 1 | Preparation of the guidelines 
......................................................................................................125
Annex 2 |  
Malaria transmission and antimalarial medicines 
...............................................................129
Annex 3 | Malaria diagnosis 
.............................................................................................................................137
Annex 4 |  
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation  
(GRADE) for assessing the quality of evidence 
.......................................................................145
Annex 5 |  
Pharmacology of antimalarial drugs 
.........................................................................................205
Annex 6 |  
Treatment of Plasmodium vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi infections...........285
Annex 7 |  
Resistance to antimalarial medicines  
......................................................................................299
  Glossary
Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT). A combination of an artemisinin 
derivative with a longer-acting antimalarial that has a different mode of action.
Asexual cycle. The life cycle of the malaria parasite in the host, from merozoite 
invasion of red blood cells to schizont rupture (merozoite  ring stage 
 
 trophozoite  schizont  merozoites). The duration is approximately 24 h in 
Plasmodium knowlesi, 48 h in P. falciparum, P. ovale and P. vivax and 72 h in P. malariae.
Asexual parasitaemia. The presence of asexual parasites in host red blood cells. 
The level of asexual parasitaemia determined by microscopy can be expressed in 
several ways: the percentage of infected red blood cells, the number of infected 
red cells per unit volume of blood, the number of parasites seen in one field 
on high power microscopy examination of a thick blood film, or the number of 
parasites seen per 200–1000 white blood cells on high-power examination of a 
thick blood film.
Asymptomatic parasitaemia. The presence of asexual parasites in the blood 
without symptoms of illness.
Cerebral malaria. Severe P. falciparum malaria with coma (Glasgow coma scale < 11, 
Blantyre coma scale < 3); malaria with coma persisting for > 30 min after a seizure.
Combination treatment. A combination of two or more classes of antimalarial 
drug with unrelated mechanisms of action.
Cure. Elimination of the malaria parasites that caused the treated illness.
Drug resistance. The ability of a parasite strain to survive and/or to multiply despite 
the administration and absorption of a drug given in doses equal to or higher 
than those usually recommended, provided the exposure is adequate. Resistance 
to antimalarial agents arises because of the selection of parasites with genetic 
changes (mutations or gene amplifications) that confer reduced susceptibility.
Gametocytes. The sexual stages of malaria parasites that infect anopheline 
mosquitoes when taken up during a blood meal. 
Fixed-dose combination. A combination in which two antimalarial drugs are 
formulated together in the same tablet, capsule, powder, suspension or granule.
Hyperparasitaemia. A high density of parasites in the blood, which increases the 
risk of deterioration to severe malaria (although the risk varies in different endemic 
areas according to the level of transmission) and of subsequent treatment failure. 
In this document, the term is used to refer to a parasite density > 4% (~ 200 000/
µL). Patients with P. falciparum parasite densities > 10% and patients with P. knowlesi 
parasite densities > 100 000/µL (~ 2%) are considered to have severe malaria even 
if they do not have evidence of vital organ dysfunction. 
3
 Hypnozoites. Persistent liver stages of P. vivax and P. ovale malaria that remain 
dormant in host hepatocytes for 3–45 weeks before maturing to form hepatic 
schizonts, which then burst and release merozoites that infect red blood cells. 
This is the cause of relapses.
Malaria pigment (haemozoin). A dark-brown granular material formed by malaria 
parasites as a by-product of haemoglobin digestion. Pigment is evident in mature 
trophozoites and schizonts. It may also be phagocytosed by monocytes, macrophages 
and polymorphonuclear neutrophils.
Merozoite. Parasite released into the host bloodstream when a hepatic or 
erythrocytic schizont bursts. The merozoites then invade red blood cells. 
Monotherapy. Antimalarial treatment with a single medicine: either a single 
active compound or a synergistic combination of two compounds with related 
mechanisms of action.
Plasmodium. A genus of protozoan vertebrate blood parasites that includes the 
causal agents of malaria. P. falciparum, P. malariae, P. ovale (two species) and P. vivax 
cause malaria in humans. Human infections with the monkey malaria parasite 
P. knowlesi and very occasionally with other simian malaria species may occur in 
forested regions of South-East Asia.
Pre-erythrocytic development. The development of the malaria parasite when 
it first enters the host. After inoculation into a human by a female anopheline 
mosquito, sporozoites invade hepatocytes in the host liver and multiply there for 
5–12 days, forming hepatic schizonts. These then burst, liberating merozoites into 
the bloodstream, where they subsequently invade red blood cells.
Radical cure. This term refers to both cure of blood-stage infection and prevention 
of relapses by killing hypnozoites (in P. vivax and P. ovale infections only).
Rapid diagnostic test (RDT). An antigen-based stick, cassette or card test for 
malaria in which a coloured line indicates the presence of plasmodial antigens.
Recrudescence. Recurrence of asexual parasitaemia following antimalarial treatment 
comprising the same genotype(s) that caused the original illness. This results from 
incomplete clearance of asexual parasitaemia because of inadequate or ineffective 
treatment. It must be distinguished from re-infection (usually determined by 
molecular genotyping in endemic areas). Recrudescence is different from relapse 
in P. vivax and P. ovale infections.
Recurrence. Recurrence of asexual parasitaemia after treatment, due to recrudescence, 
relapse (in P. vivax and P. ovale infections only) or a new infection.
Relapse. Recurrence of asexual parasitaemia in P. vivax and P. ovale malaria 
deriving from persisting liver stages; occurs when the blood-stage infection has 
been eliminated but hypnozoites persist in the liver and mature to form hepatic 
schizonts. After an interval of weeks or months, the hepatic schizonts burst and 
liberate merozoites into the bloodstream. 
4
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Ring stage. Young, usually ring-shaped, intra-erythrocytic malaria parasites, before 
malaria pigment is evident by microscopy.
Schizont. Mature malaria parasite in host liver cells (hepatic schizont) or red 
blood cells (erythrocytic schizont) that is undergoing nuclear division by a process 
called schizogony.
Selection pressure. Resistance to antimalarial agents emerges and spreads 
because of the survival advantage of resistant parasites in the presence of the 
drug. The selection pressure reflects the intensity and magnitude of selection: the 
greater the proportion of parasites in a given population exposed to concentrations 
of an antimalarial agent that allow proliferation of resistant but not sensitive 
parasites, the greater is the selection pressure.
Severe anaemia. Haemoglobin concentration of < 5 g/100 mL (haematocrit < 15%).
Severe falciparum malaria. Acute falciparum malaria with signs of severity 
 
and/or evidence of vital organ dysfunction. 
Sporozoite. Motile malaria parasite that is infective to humans, inoculated by a 
feeding female anopheline mosquito, that invades hepatocytes.
Transmission intensity. This is the frequency with which people living in an area 
are bitten by anopheline mosquitoes carrying human malaria sporozoites. It is 
often expressed as the annual entomological inoculation rate, which is the average 
number of inoculations with malaria parasites received by one person in 1 year.
Trophozoite. The stage of development of malaria parasites growing within 
host red blood cells from the ring stage to just before nuclear division. Mature 
trophozoites contain visible malaria pigment.
Uncomplicated malaria. Symptomatic malaria parasitaemia with no signs of severity 
and/or evidence of vital organ dysfunction.
Vectorial capacity. Number of potential new infections that the population of a 
given anopheline mosquito vector would distribute per malaria case per day at 
a given place and time.
5
 Abbreviations
ACT 
artemisinin-based combination therapy
bw 
body weight
CI 
confidence interval
DTP 
diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (vaccine)
GRADE Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation
G6PD 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
HRP2 
histidine-rich protein 2
IPTp  
intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy
IPTi 
intermittent preventive treatment in infancy
PCR 
polymerase chain reaction
PfHRP2 Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein-2
pLDH 
parasite-lactate dehydrogenase
Pvdhfr Plasmodium vivax dihydrofolate reductase gene
RDT 
rapid diagnostic test
RR 
relative risk, or risk ratio
SMC 
seasonal malaria chemoprevention
SP 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine
6
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 Malaria case management, consisting of early diagnosis and prompt effective 
treatment, remains a vital component of malaria control and elimination strategies. 
This third edition of the WHO Guidelines for the treatment of malaria contains 
updated recommendations based on new evidence particularly related to dosing 
in children, and also includes recommendations on the use of drugs to prevent 
malaria in groups at high risk. 
Core principles
The following core principles were used by the Guidelines Development Group 
that drew up these Guidelines. 
1. Early diagnosis and prompt, effective treatment of malaria
Uncomplicated falciparum malaria can progress rapidly to severe forms of the 
disease, especially in people with no or low immunity, and severe falciparum 
malaria is almost always fatal without treatment. Therefore, programmes should 
ensure access to early diagnosis and prompt, effective treatment within 24–48 h 
of the onset of malaria symptoms. 
2. Rational use of antimalarial agents
To reduce the spread of drug resistance, limit unnecessary use of antimalarial 
drugs and better identify other febrile illnesses in the context of changing malaria 
epidemiology, antimalarial medicines should be administered only to patients 
who truly have malaria. Adherence to a full treatment course must be promoted. 
Universal access to parasitological diagnosis of malaria is now possible with the 
use of quality-assured rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), which are also appropriate 
for use in primary health care and community settings. 
3. Combination therapy
Preventing or delaying resistance is essential for the success of both national and 
global strategies for control and eventual elimination of malaria. To help protect 
current and future antimalarial medicines, all episodes of malaria should be treated 
with at least two effective antimalarial medicines with different mechanisms of 
action (combination therapy). 
4. Appropriate weight-based dosing
To prolong their useful therapeutic life and ensure that all patients have an equal 
chance of being cured, the quality of antimalarial drugs must be ensured and 
antimalarial drugs must be given at optimal dosages. Treatment should maximize 
the likelihood of rapid clinical and parasitological cure and minimize transmission 
from the treated infection. To achieve this, dosage regimens should be based on 
the patient’s weight and should provide effective concentrations of antimalarial 
drugs for a sufficient time to eliminate the infection in all target populations. 
8
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Recommendations
Diagnosis of malaria
All cases of suspected malaria should have a parasitological test (microscopy 
or Rapid diagnostic test (RDT)) to confirm the diagnosis.
Both microscopy and RDTs should be supported by a quality assurance programme. 
Good practice statement
Treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Treat children and adults with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria (except 
pregnant women in their first trimester) with one of the following recommended 
artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACT):
• artemether + lumefantrine 
• artesunate + amodiaquine
• artesunate + mefloquine 
• dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine
• artesunate + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine (SP)
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Duration of ACT treatment
ACT regimens should provide 3 days’ treatment with an artemisinin derivative. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Revised dose recommendation for dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine in young children
Children < 25kg treated with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine should receive 
a minimum of 2.5 mg/kg body weight (bw) per day of dihydroartemisinin and 
20 mg/kg bw per day of piperaquine daily for 3 days. 
Strong recommendation based on pharmacokinetic modelling
Reducing the transmissibility of treated P. falciparum infections
In low-transmission areas, give a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw primaquine 
with ACT to patients with P. falciparum malaria (except pregnant women, infants 
aged < 6 months and women breastfeeding infants aged < 6 months) to reduce 
transmission. Testing for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency 
is not required. 
Strong recommendation, low-quality evidence
9
 Treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in special risk groups 
First trimester of pregnancy
Treat pregnant women with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria during the first 
trimester with 7 days of quinine + clindamycin. 
Strong recommendation
Infants less than 5kg body weight
Treat infants weighing < 5 kg with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with 
ACT at the same mg/kg bw target dose as for children weighing 5 kg.
Strong recommendation
Patients co-infected with HIV
In people who have HIV/AIDS and uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria, avoid 
artesunate + SP if they are being treated with co-trimoxazole, and avoid 
artesunate + amodiaquine if they are being treated with efavirenz or zidovudine. 
Good practice statement
Non-immune travellers
Treat travellers with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria returning to non-endemic 
settings with ACT. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Hyperparasitaemia
People with P. falciparum hyperparasitaemia are at increased risk for treatment 
failure, severe malaria and death and should be closely monitored, in addition 
to receiving ACT. 
Good practice statement
Treating uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria 
Blood stage infection
If the malaria species is not known with certainty, treat as for uncomplicated 
P. falciparum malaria. 
Good practice statement
In areas with chloroquine-susceptible infections, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria with either ACT 
(except pregnant women in their first trimester) or chloroquine.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
In areas with chloroquine-resistant infections, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria (except pregnant 
women in their first trimester) with ACT. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Treat pregnant women in their first trimester who have chloroquine-resistant 
P. vivax malaria with quinine.
Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence
10
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Preventing relapse in P. vivax or P. ovale malaria
The G6PD status of patients should be used to guide administration of primaquine 
for preventing relapse. 
Good practice statement
To prevent relapse, treat P. vivax or P. ovale malaria in children and adults (except 
pregnant women, infants aged < 6 months, women breastfeeding infants aged 
< 6 months, women breastfeeding older infants unless they are known not to 
be G6PD deficient, and people with G6PD deficiency) with a 14-day course 
(0.25-0.5 mg/kg bw daily) of primaquine in all transmission settings.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
In people with G6PD deficiency, consider preventing relapse by giving primaquine 
base at 0.75 mg/kg bw once a week for 8 weeks, with close medical supervision 
for potential primaquine-induced haemolysis. 
Conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence
When G6PD status is unknown and G6PD testing is not available, a decision to 
prescribe primaquine must be based on an assessment of the risks and benefits 
of adding primaquine. 
Good practice statement
Pregnant and breastfeeding women
In women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, consider weekly chemoprophylaxis 
with chloroquine until delivery and breastfeeding are completed, then, on the 
basis of G6PD status, treat with primaquine to prevent future relapse.
Conditional recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
Treating severe malaria 
Treat adults and children with severe malaria (including infants, pregnant 
women in all trimesters and lactating women) with intravenous or intramuscular 
artesunate for at least 24 h and until they can tolerate oral medication. Once 
a patient has received at least 24 h of parenteral therapy and can tolerate oral 
therapy, complete treatment with 3 days of ACT (add single dose primaquine 
in areas of low transmission). 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Revised dose recommendation for parenteral artesunate in young children
Children weighing < 20 kg should receive a higher dose of artesunate (3 mg/kg 
bw per dose) than larger children and adults (2.4 mg/kg bw per dose) to ensure 
equivalent exposure to the drug. 
Strong recommendation based on pharmacokinetic modelling
Parenteral alternatives where artesunate is not available
If artesunate is not available, use artemether in preference to quinine for 
treating children and adults with severe malaria.
Conditional recommendation, low-quality evidence
11
 Treating cases of suspected severe malaria pending transfer to a higher-
level facility (pre-referral treatment)
Pre-referral treatment options
Where complete treatment of severe malaria is not possible but injections are 
available, give adults and children a single intramuscular dose of artesunate, and 
refer to an appropriate facility for further care. Where intramuscular artesunate 
is not available use intramuscular artemether or, if that is not available, use 
intramuscular quinine. 
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
Where intramuscular injection of artesunate is not available, treat children < 6 years 
with a single rectal dose (10mg/kg bw) of artesunate, and refer immediately 
to an appropriate facility for further care. Do not use rectal artesunate in older 
children and adults.
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
Chemoprevention for special risk groups
Intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy
In malaria-endemic areas in Africa, provide intermittent preventive treatment 
with SP to all women in their first or second pregnancy (SP-IPTp) as part of 
antenatal care. Dosing should start in the second trimester and doses should 
be given at least 1 month apart, with the objective of ensuring that at least 
three doses are received. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Intermittent preventive treatment in infants
In areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission of Africa, where SP is 
still effective, provide intermittent preventive treatment with SP to infants 
(< 12 months of age) (SP-IPTi) at the time of the second and third rounds of 
vaccination against diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (DTP) and vaccination 
against measles.
Strong recommendation
Seasonal malaria chemoprevention
In areas with highly seasonal malaria transmission in the sub-Sahel region 
of Africa, provide seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) with monthly 
amodiaquine + SP for all children aged < 6 years during each transmission season.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
12
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Antimalarial drug quality
National drug and regulatory authorities should ensure that the antimalarial 
medicines provided in both the public and the private sectors are of acceptable 
quality, through regulation, inspection and law enforcement.
Good practice statement
Monitoring the efficacy of antimalarial drugs 
All malaria programmes should regularly monitor the therapeutic efficacy of 
antimalarial drugs using the standard WHO protocols.
Good practice statement
National adaptation and implementation
The choice of ACTs in a country or region should be based on optimal efficacy, 
safety and adherence. 
Good practice statement
Drugs used in IPTp, SMC and IPTi should not be used as a component of first-
line treatments in the same country or region. 
Good practice statement
When possible, use:
•  
fixed-dose combinations rather than co-blistered or loose, single-agent 
formulations; and
•  
for young children and infants, paediatric formulations, with a preference 
for solid formulations (e.g. dispersible tablets) rather than liquid 
formulations.
Good practice statement
13
  1 | INTRODUCTION
 1.1 | BACKGROUND
Malaria remains an important cause of illness and death in children and adults in 
countries in which it is endemic. Malaria control requires an integrated approach, 
including prevention (primarily vector control) and prompt treatment with effective 
antimalarial agents. Since publication of the first edition of the Guidelines for 
the treatment of malaria in 2006 and the second edition in 2010, all countries in 
which P. falciparum malaria is endemic have progressively updated their treatment 
policy from use of monotherapy with drugs such as chloroquine, amodiaquine and 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine (SP) to the currently recommended artemisinin-based 
combination therapies (ACT). The ACTs are generally highly effective and well 
tolerated. This has contributed substantially to reductions in global morbidity 
and mortality from malaria. Unfortunately, resistance to artemisinins has arisen 
recently in P. falciparum in South-East Asia, which threatens these gains.
The treatment recommendations in this edition of the Guidelines have a firm 
evidence base for most antimalarial drugs, but, inevitably, there are still information 
gaps. The Guidelines will therefore remain under regular review, with updates every 
2 years or more frequently as new evidence becomes available. The treatment 
recommendations in the main document are brief; for those who wish to study 
the evidence base in more detail, a series of annexes is provided, with references 
to the appropriate sections of the main document. 
1.2 | OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the Guidelines are to: 
•  
assist policy-makers to design and refine effective national treatment policies 
on the basis of the best available evidence;
•  
help hospital and clinical care providers to design and refine effective treatment 
protocols on the basis of the best available evidence;
• promote the use of safe, effective malaria treatment; and
•  
protect currently effective malaria treatment against the development of resistance.
1.3 | SCOPE
The Guidelines provide a framework for designing specific, detailed national 
treatment protocols, taking into account local patterns of resistance to antimalarial 
drugs and health service capacity. 
The Guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations on: 
•  
the treatment of uncomplicated and severe malaria in all age groups and 
situations, including in young children, pregnant women, people who are HIV 
positive, travellers from non-malaria-endemic regions and in epidemics and 
complex emergency situations; and
•  
the use of antimalarial drugs as preventive therapy in healthy people living 
in malaria-endemic areas who are high risk, in order to reduce morbidity and 
1 | Introduction
16
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 mortality from malaria. The two approaches used are intermittent preventive 
treatment (IPT) and seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC). 
No guidance is given in this edition on the use of antimalarial agents to prevent 
malaria in people travelling from non-endemic settings to areas of malaria 
transmission. This is available in the WHO, International travel and health guidance.1 
1.4 | TARGET AUDIENCE
The Guidelines are designed primarily for policy-makers in ministries of health, 
who formulate country-specific treatment guidelines. Other groups that may 
find them useful include health professionals (doctors, nurses and paramedical 
officers) and public health and policy specialists working in hospitals, research 
institutions, medical schools, non-governmental organizations and agencies that 
are partners in health or malaria control, the pharmaceutical industry and primary 
health-care services.
1.5 |  
METHODS USED TO MAKE  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS
This third edition of the Guidelines for the treatment of malaria was prepared in 
accordance with the latest WHO standard methods for guideline development.2 This 
involves planning, “scoping” and needs assessment, establishment of a guideline 
development group, formulation of key questions (population, participants or 
patients; intervention or indicator; comparator or control; outcome: “PICO”), 
commissioning reviews, applying Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) to the quality of the evidence and making 
recommendations.3 This method (see Annex 1) ensures a transparent link between 
the evidence and the recommendations.
1.5.1 | SOURCES OF EVIDENCE 
After the scoping meeting, the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group at the Liverpool 
School of Tropical Medicine in Liverpool, England, was commissioned to undertake 
systematic reviews and to assess the quality of the evidence for each priority 
question. All the reviews involved extensive searches for published and unpublished 
trials and highly sensitive searches of the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group trials 
register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE®, Embase 
and LILACS. All the reviews are published on line in the Cochrane Library.
1  
WHO International travel and health. Geneva : World Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.who.int/ith/en/).
2  
WHO handbook for guideline development. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012 (http://www.who.int/kms/
guidelines_review_committee/en/).
3  
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist G, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y, Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, for the GRADE Working Group. 
Rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of 
evidence and strength of recommendations 2008. BMJ 336:924-926. 
1 | Introduction
17
 When little evidence was available from randomized trials, the group considered 
published reviews of non-randomized studies.
A subgroup on dosing reviewed published studies from MEDLINE® and Embase 
on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of antimalarial medicines. 
They also used raw data from the WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network, 
a repository of clinical and laboratory data on pharmacokinetics and dosing 
simulations in individual patients, including measurements using validated assays 
of concentrations of antimalarial medicines in plasma or whole blood. The data 
came either from peer-reviewed publications or were submitted to regulatory 
authorities for drug registration. Population pharmacokinetics models were 
constructed, and the concentration profiles of antimalarial medicines in plasma 
or whole blood were simulated (typically 1000 times) for each weight category 
to inform dose recommendations. 
1.5.2 | QUALITY OF EVIDENCE
The quality of the evidence from systematic reviews was assessed for each 
outcome and rated on a four-point scale, after consideration of the risk for bias 
(including publication bias) and the consistency, directness and precision of the 
effect estimates. The terms used in the quality assessments refer to the confidence 
that the guideline development group had in the estimate and not to the scientific 
quality of the investigations reviewed: 
Quality of evidence
Interpretation
High
The group is very confident in the estimates of 
effect and considers that further research is very 
unlikely to change this confidence.
Moderate
The group has moderate confidence in the 
estimate of effect but considers that further 
research is likely to have an important impact on 
their confidence and may change the estimate.
Low
The group has low confidence in the estimate 
of effect and considers that further research is 
very likely to have an important impact on their 
confidence and is likely to change the estimate.
Very low
The group is very uncertain about the estimate  
of effect.
1 | Introduction
18
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 1.5.3 | FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The systematic reviews, the GRADE and other relevant materials were securely 
provided to all members of the Guideline Development Group. Recommendations 
were formulated after considering the quality of the evidence, the balance of 
benefits and harm and the feasibility of the intervention based on the four core 
principles listed in the executive summary. Although cost is a critical factor in 
setting national antimalarial treatment policies, cost was not formally considered. 
The dose recommendations were designed to ensure equivalent exposure of 
all patient groups to the drug. A revised dose regimen was recommended when 
there was sufficient evidence that the dose should be changed in order to achieve 
the target exposure. The Guideline Development Group discussed both the 
proposed wording of the recommendations and the rating of its strength. Areas of 
disagreement were resolved through extensive discussions at the meetings, e-mail 
and teleconferencing. The final draft was circulated to the Guideline Development 
Group and external peer reviewers. The external comments were addressed where 
possible and incorporated into the revised guidelines. Consensus was reached on 
all the recommendations, strength of evidence and the wording of the guidelines. 
Voting was not required at any stage.
Factor considered 
Rationale
Balance of benefits  
and harm
The more the expected benefits outweigh 
the expected risks, the more likely it is that 
a strong recommendation will be made. 
When the balance of benefits and harm is 
likely to vary by setting or is a fine balance, a 
conditional recommendation is more likely.
Values and preferences
If the recommendation is likely to be 
widely accepted or highly valued, a strong 
recommendation is more likely. 
Feasibility
If an intervention is achievable in the settings 
in which the greatest impact is expected, a 
strong recommendation is more likely.
1.5.4 | TYPES OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Three types of recommendations are presented in the guidelines
•  
Treatment recommendations: These recommendations were formulated using the 
GRADE approach, supported by systematic reviews of the evidence, with formal 
assessment of the quality of evidence, that were used by the panel in making the 
recommendations. However, a small number of treatment recommendations are 
not accompanied by GRADE tables, and these have been labelled as ‘evidence not 
1 | Introduction
19
 graded’. These recommendations were made when the panel considered there 
to be such limited evidence available on alternatives to current practice that 
they could do little but recommend the status quo pending further research.
•  
Dosing recommendations: These recommendations were formulated using 
mathematical modelling, based on summaries of systematically collected 
pharmacokinetic data, to predict drug exposures in people of different body-
weights, particularly those who are generally under-represented in clinical trials 
such as young infants.
•  
Good practice statements: These statements reflect a consensus among 
the panel, that the net benefits of adherence to the statement are large, 
unequivocal and the implications of the statement are common sense. 
 
These statements are made to re-emphasize the basic principles of good care, 
or good management practice with implementation, such as quality assurance 
of antimalarial medicines. 
1.5.5 | STRENGTH OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Each recommendation was then classified as strong or conditional:
Strength of 
recommendation
Interpretation
For policy-makers
For clinicians
For patients
Strong
This 
recommendation 
can be adopted 
as policy in most 
situations.
Most individuals 
should 
receive the 
recommended 
course of action.
Most people in 
your situation 
would want the 
recommended 
course of action.
Conditional
Substantial 
debate should 
be conducted 
at national 
level, with the 
involvement 
of various 
stakeholders.
Be prepared to 
help individuals 
in making a 
decision that is 
consistent with 
their own values.
The majority 
of people in 
your situation 
would want the 
recommended 
course of action, 
but many would 
not.
1.5.6 | PRESENTATION OF EVIDENCE 
(RECOMMENDATIONS)
For clarity, the guidelines are presented in a simple descriptive form in the main 
document, with the recommendations. The recommendations are summarized 
in boxes at the start of each section (green), an evidence box (blue) is presented 
for each of the recommendation with a link made to the the GRADE profiles and 
decision tables. The complete GRADE tables, the pharmacokinetics underlying 
dose revisions, and additional references are provided in annexe 4.
1 | Introduction
20
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 1.5.7 | FUNDING
The preparation and printing of the guidelines were funded exclusively by the WHO 
Global Malaria Programme. No external source of funding either from bilateral 
technical partners or from industry was solicited or used. 
1.5.8 | MANAGEMENT OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All members of the guideline development group and external expert reviewers 
made declarations of interest, which were managed in accordance with WHO 
procedures and cleared by the Legal Department. The WHO Guideline Steering 
Group and the co-chairs of the Guidelines Development Group were satisfied that 
there had been a transparent declaration of interests. No case necessitated the 
exclusion of any of the Guideline Development Group member or an external peer 
reviewer. The members of the guideline development group and a summary of 
declaration of interest listed in Annex 1.
1.5.9 | DISSEMINATION
The guidelines will be disseminated as a printed publication and electronically on 
the WHO web site in three languages (English, French and Spanish). A library of all 
supporting documentation will be also available on the web site. WHO headquarters 
will work closely with the regional and country offices to ensure the wide dissemination 
of the guidelines to all malaria endemic countries. There will also be dissemination 
through regional, sub-regional and country meetings. Member States will be supported 
to adapt and implement these guidelines (further details on national adaptation 
and implementation provided in Chapter 14).
1.5.10 | UPDATING
The evidence will be reviewed regularly and updated every 2 years or more 
frequently as new evidence becomes available. A mechanism will be established for 
periodic monitoring and evaluation of use of the treatment guidelines in countries.
1.5.11 | USER FEEDBACK
An online survey was carried out to obtain feedback from users of the second 
edition of the Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, and the responses were used 
in updating this edition.
1 | Introduction
  2 |  
CLINICAL MALARIA  
AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
 2.1 | ETIOLOGY AND SYMPTOMS 
Malaria is caused by infection of red blood cells with protozoan parasites of the 
genus Plasmodium inoculated into the human host by a feeding female anopheline 
mosquito. The five human Plasmodium species transmitted from person to person 
are P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale (two species) and P. malariae. Increasingly, human 
infections with the monkey malaria parasite P. knowlesi are being reported from 
the forested regions of South-East Asia and particularly the island of Borneo. 
The first symptoms of malaria are nonspecific and similar to those of a minor 
systemic viral illness. They comprise headache, lassitude, fatigue, abdominal 
discomfort and muscle and joint aches, usually followed by fever, chills, perspiration, 
anorexia, vomiting and worsening malaise. In young children, malaria may also 
present with lethargy, poor feeding and cough. At this early stage of disease 
progression, with no evidence of vital organ dysfunction, a rapid, full recovery is 
expected, provided prompt, effective antimalarial treatment is given. If ineffective 
or poor-quality medicines are given or if treatment is delayed, particularly in 
P. falciparum malaria, the parasite burden often continues to increase and the 
patient may develop potentially lethal severe malaria. Disease progression to 
severe malaria may take days but can occur within a few hours. 
Severe malaria usually manifests with one or more of the following: coma (cerebral 
malaria), metabolic acidosis, severe anaemia, hypoglycaemia, acute renal failure or 
acute pulmonary oedema. If left untreated, severe malaria is fatal in the majority 
of cases. 
2.2 | CLASSIFICATION OF ENDEMICITY 
The nature of the clinical disease depends strongly on the background level of 
acquired protective immunity, which is a consequence of the pattern and intensity 
of malaria transmission in the area of residence.4
Where the transmission of malaria is stable, i.e. where populations are continuously 
exposed fairly constantly to a high frequency of malarial inoculation (entomological 
inoculation rate, > 10/year), partial immunity to clinical disease and a reduced 
risk of developing severe malaria are acquired in early childhood. The pattern 
of acquired immunity is similar across the sub-Sahel region, where malaria 
transmission is intense only during the 3- or 4-month rainy season and relatively 
low at other times. In both these situations, clinical disease is confined mainly to 
4  
High transmission area: hyperendemic or holoendemic area in which the prevalence rate of 
P. falciparum parasitaemia among children aged 2–9 years is > 50% most of the year. In these 
areas, virtually all exposed individuals have been infected by late infancy or early childhood. 
Moderate transmission area: mesoendemic area in which the prevalence rate of P. falciparum parasitaemia among 
children aged 2–9 years is 11–50% during most of the year. The maximum prevalence of malaria occurs in 
childhood and adolescence. Low transmission area: hypoendemic area in which the prevalence rate of P. falciparum 
parasitaemia among children aged 2–9 years is ≤ 10% during most of the year. Malaria infection and disease may 
occur at a similarly low frequency at any age, as little immunity develops. 
2 | Clinical malaria and epidemiology
24
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 young children, who may develop high parasite densities that can progress very 
rapidly to severe malaria. In contrast, in these settings adolescents and adults are 
partially immune and seldom suffer clinical disease, although they often continue 
to have low blood-parasite densities. Immunity is modified in pregnancy, and it is 
gradually lost, at least partially, when individuals move out of the endemic areas 
for long periods (usually many years). 
In areas of unstable malaria transmission, which prevail in much of Asia and 
Latin America and the remaining parts of the world where malaria is endemic, 
the intensity of malaria transmission fluctuates widely by season and year and over 
relatively small distances. P. vivax is an important cause of malaria in these regions. 
The entomological inoculation rate is usually < 5/year and often < 1/year, although 
there are usually small foci of higher transmission in areas in which asymptomatic 
parasitaemia is common. The generally low transmission retards acquisition of 
immunity, so that people of all ages—adults and children alike—suffer from acute 
clinical malaria, with a significant risk for progression to severe malaria if it is 
untreated. Epidemics may occur in areas of unstable malaria transmission when 
the inoculation rate increases rapidly because of a sudden increase in vectorial 
capacity. Epidemics manifest as a very high incidence of malaria in all age groups 
and can overwhelm health services. In epidemics, severe malaria is common if 
prompt, effective treatment is not widely available. Non-immune travellers to 
a malaria endemic area are at particularly high risk for severe malaria if their 
infections are not detected promptly and treated effectively. 
With effective malaria control, such as population-wide coverage with effective 
vector control and wide-scale deployment of ACTs, the number of inoculations is 
usually greatly reduced. This will be followed in time by a corresponding change 
in the clinical epidemiology of malaria in the area and an increasing risk for an 
epidemic if control measures are not sustained (see Annex 2). 
2 | Clinical malaria and epidemiology
25
  3 | DIAGNOSIS OF MALARIA
 Recommendations on malaria diagnosis
All cases of suspected malaria should have a parasitological test (microscopy 
or Rapid diagnostic test (RDT)) to confirm the diagnosis.
Both microscopy and RDTs should be supported by a quality assurance programme. 
Good practice statement
Prompt, accurate diagnosis of malaria is part of effective disease management. 
All patients with suspected malaria should be treated on the basis of a confirmed 
diagnosis by microscopy examination or RDT testing of a blood sample. Correct 
diagnosis in malaria-endemic areas is particularly important for the most vulnerable 
population groups, such as young children and non-immune populations, in whom 
falciparum malaria can be rapidly fatal. High specificity will reduce unnecessary 
treatment with antimalarial drugs and improve the diagnosis of other febrile 
illnesses in all settings. 
WHO strongly advocates a policy of “test, treat and track” to improve the quality 
of care and surveillance (section 13). 
3.1 | SUSPECTED MALARIA 
The signs and symptoms of malaria are non-specific. Malaria is suspected clinically 
primarily on the basis of fever or a history of fever. There is no combination of 
signs or symptoms that reliably distinguishes malaria from other causes of fever; 
diagnosis based only on clinical features has very low specificity and results in 
overtreatment. Other possible causes of fever and whether alternative or additional 
treatment is required must always be carefully considered. The focus of malaria 
diagnosis should be to identify patients who truly have malaria, to guide rational 
use of antimalarial medicines. 
In malaria-endemic areas, malaria should be suspected in any patient presenting 
with a history of fever or temperature ≥ 37.5 °C and no other obvious cause. In areas 
in which malaria transmission is stable (or during the high-transmission period of 
seasonal malaria), malaria should also be suspected in children with palmar pallor 
or a haemoglobin concentration of < 8 g/dL. High-transmission settings include 
many parts of sub-Saharan Africa and some parts of Oceania.
In settings where the incidence of malaria is very low, parasitological diagnosis 
of all cases of fever may result in considerable expenditure to detect only a few 
patients with malaria. In these settings, health workers should be trained to 
identify patients who may have been exposed to malaria (e.g. recent travel to a 
malaria-endemic area without protective measures) and have fever or a history 
of fever with no other obvious cause, before they conduct a parasitological test. 
3 | Diagnosis of malaria
28
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 In all settings, suspected malaria should be confirmed with a parasitological test. 
The results of parasitological diagnosis should be available within a short time 
(< 2 h) of the patient presenting. In settings where parasitological diagnosis is 
not possible, a decision to provide antimalarial treatment must be based on the 
probability that the illness is malaria. 
In children < 5 years, the practical algorithms for management of the sick child 
provided by the WHO–United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) strategy for 
Integrated Management of Childhood Illness5 should be used to ensure full 
assessment and appropriate case management at first-level health facilities and 
at the community level. 
3.2 | PARASITOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS
The benefit of parasitological diagnosis relies entirely on an appropriate management 
response of health care providers. The two methods used routinely for parasitological 
diagnosis of malaria are light microscopy and immunochromatographic RDTs. 
The latter detect parasite-specific antigens or enzymes that are either genus or 
species specific.
Both microscopy and RDTs must be supported by a quality assurance programme. 
Antimalarial treatment should be limited to cases with positive tests, and patients 
with negative results should be reassessed for other common causes of fever and 
treated appropriately. 
In nearly all cases of symptomatic malaria, examination of thick and thin blood 
films by a competent microscopist will reveal malaria parasites. Malaria RDTs 
should be used if quality-assured malaria microscopy is not readily available. 
RDTs for detecting PfHRP2 can be useful for patients who have received incomplete 
antimalarial treatment, in whom blood films can be negative. This is particularly 
likely if the patient received a recent dose of an artemisinin derivative. If the initial 
blood film examination is negative in patients with manifestations compatible with 
severe malaria, a series of blood films should be examined at 6–12-h intervals, 
or an RDT (preferably one detecting PfHRP2) should be performed. If both the 
slide examination and the RDT results are negative, malaria is extremely unlikely, 
and other causes of the illness should be sought and treated. 
This document does not include recommendations for use of specific RDTs or for 
interpreting test results. For guidance, see the WHO manual Universal access to 
malaria diagnostic testing.6
5  
Integrated management of childhood illness for high HIV settings: chart booklet. Geneva, World Health 
Organization; 
2008 
(http://www.who.int/child_adolescent_health/documents/9789241597388/en/index.html, 
accessed 29 October 2009).
6  
Universal access to malaria diagnostic testing—an operational manual. Revised. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013 (http://www.who.int/entity/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241502092/en/index.html).
3 | Diagnosis of malaria
29
 In patients with suspected severe malaria and in other high-risk groups, such as 
patients living with HIV/AIDS, absence or delay of parasitological diagnosis should 
not delay an immediate start of antimalarial treatment.
At present, molecular diagnostic tools based on nucleic-acid amplification 
techniques (e.g. loop-mediated isothermal amplification or PCR) do not have a 
role in the clinical management of malaria.
Where P. vivax malaria is common and microscopy is not available, it is recommended 
that a combination RDT be used that allows detection of P. vivax (pLDH antigen 
from P. vivax) or pan-malarial antigens (Pan-pLDH or aldolase). 
3 | Diagnosis of malaria
30
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 4 |  
TREATMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED 
PLASMODIUM FALCIPARUM MALARIA
 Treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Treat children and adults with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria (except pregnant 
women in their first trimester) with one of the following recommended ACTs:
• artemether + lumefantrine 
• artesunate + amodiaquine
• artesunate + mefloquine 
• dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine
• artesunate + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine (SP).
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Duration of ACT treatment
ACT regimens should provide 3 days’ treatment with an artemisinin derivative. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Revised dose recommendation for dihydroartemisinin + 
piperaquine in young children
Children weighing <25kg treated with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine should 
receive a minimum of 2.5 mg/kg bw per day of dihydroartemisinin and 20 mg/
kg bw per day of piperaquine daily for 3 days. 
Strong recommendation based on pharmacokinetic modelling
Reducing the transmissibility of treated P. falciparum infections
In low-transmission areas, give a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw primaquine 
with ACT to patients with P. falciparum malaria (except pregnant women, infants 
aged < 6 months and women breastfeeding infants aged < 6 months) to reduce 
transmission. G6PD testing is not required.
Strong recommendation, low-quality evidence
4.1 | DEFINITION OF  
UNCOMPLICATED MALARIA
A patient who presents with symptoms of malaria and a positive parasitological 
test (microscopy or RDT) but with no features of severe malaria is defined as 
having uncomplicated malaria (see section 7.1 for definition of severe malaria). 
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
32
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 4.2 | THERAPEUTIC OBJECTIVES
The clinical objectives of treating uncomplicated malaria are to cure the infection 
as rapidly as possible and to prevent progression to severe disease. “Cure” is 
defined as elimination of all parasites from the body. The public health objectives 
of treatment are to prevent onward transmission of the infection to others and to 
prevent the emergence and spread of resistance to antimalarial drugs. 
4.3 | TREATMENT OF P. FALCIPARUM MALARIA
4.3.1 | ARTEMISININ-BASED COMBINATION THERAPY 
 Treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Treat children and adults with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria (except 
pregnant women in their first trimester) with an ACT. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
GRADE (Annex 4, A4.1 and A4.2)
In the absence of resistance to the partner drug, the five recommended ACTs 
have all been shown to achieve a PCR - adjusted treatment failure rate of < 5% in 
many trials in several settings in both adults and children (high-quality evidence).
Other considerations
The guideline development group decided to recommend a menu of approved 
combinations, from which countries can select first- and second-line treatment.
Sinclair D, Zani B, Donegan S, Olliaro PL, Garner P. Artemisinin-based combination therapy 
for treating uncomplicated malaria. Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 2009; 3:CD007483. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007483.pub2.
Zani B, Gathu M, Donegan S, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for 
treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database of Systemat Rev 
2014;1:CD010927. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010927.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
33
 ACT is a combination of a rapidly acting artemisinin derivative with a longer-acting 
(more slowly eliminated) partner drug. The artemisinin component rapidly clears 
parasites from the blood (reducing parasite numbers by a factor of approximately 
10 000 in each 48-h asexual cycle) and is also active against the sexual stages of 
parasite that mediate onward transmission to mosquitos. The longer-acting partner 
drug clears the remaining parasites and provides protection against development 
of resistance to the artemisinin derivative. Partner drugs with longer elimination 
half-lives also provide a period of post-treatment prophylaxis.
The five ACTs recommended for treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria are: 
• artemether + lumefantrine
• artesunate + amodiaquine
• artesunate + mefloquine 
• artesunate + SP
• dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine.
4.3.2 | DURATION OF TREATMENT 
Duration of ACT treatment 
ACT regimens should provide 3 days’ treatment with an artemisinin-derivative. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.3)
In four randomized controlled trials in which the addition of 3 days of artesunate 
to SP was compared directly with 1 day of artesunate with SP:
•  
Three days of artesunate reduced the PCR-adjusted treatment failure 
rate within the first 28 days from that with 1 day of artesunate (RR, 0.45; 
95% CI, 0.36–0.55, four trials, 1202 participants, high-quality evidence).
•  
Three days of artesunate reduced the number of participants who had 
gametocytaemia at day 7 from that with 1 day of artesunate (RR, 0.74; 
95% CI, 0.58–0.93, four trials, 1260 participants, high-quality evidence).
Other considerations
The guideline development group considered that 3 days of artemisinin 
derivative are necessary to provide sufficient efficacy, promote good adherence 
and minimize the risk of drug resistance resulting from incomplete treatment.
A 3-day course of the artemisinin component of ACTs covers two asexual cycles, 
ensuring that only a small fraction of parasites remain for clearance by the partner 
drug, thus reducing the potential development of resistance to the partner drug. 
Shorter courses (1–2 days) are therefore not recommended, as they are less 
effective, have less effect on gametocytes and provide less protection for the 
slowly eliminated partner drug.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
34
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 4.3.3 | DOSING OF ACTS
ACT regimens must ensure optimal dosing to prolong their useful therapeutic life, 
i.e. to maximize the likelihood of rapid clinical and parasitological cure, minimize 
transmission and retard drug resistance.
It is essential to achieve effective antimalarial drug concentrations for a sufficient 
time (exposure) in all target populations in order to ensure high cure rates. 
The dosage recommendations below are derived from understanding the relationship 
between dose and the profiles of exposure to the drug (pharmacokinetics) and the 
resulting therapeutic efficacy (pharmacodynamics) and safety. Some patient groups, 
notably younger children, are not dosed optimally with the “dosage regimens 
recommended by manufacturers, which compromises efficacy and fuels resistance. 
In these guidelines when there was pharmacological evidence that certain patient 
groups are not receiving optimal doses, dose regimens were adjusted to ensure 
similar exposure across all patient groups. 
Weight-based dosage recommendations are summarized below. While age-based 
dosing may be more practical in children, the relation between age and weight 
differs in different populations. Age-based dosing can therefore result in under-
dosing or over-dosing of some patients, unless large, region-specific weight-for-age 
databases are available to guide dosing in that region. 
Factors other than dosage regimen may also effect exposure to a drug and thus 
treatment efficacy. The drug exposure of an individual patient also depends on 
factors such as the quality of the drug, the formulation, adherence and, for some 
drugs, co-administration with fat. Poor adherence is a major cause of treatment 
failure and drives the emergence and spread of drug resistance. Fixed-dose 
combinations encourage adherence and are preferred to loose (individual) tablets. 
Prescribers should take the time necessary to explain to patients why they should 
complete antimalarial course.
Artemether + lumefantrine
(For further details, see Annex 5, A5.3.)
Formulations currently available: Dispersible or standard tablets containing 20 mg 
artemether and 120 mg lumefantrine, and standard tablets containing 40 mg 
artemether and 240 mg lumefantrine in a fixed-dose combination formulation. 
The flavoured dispersible tablet paediatric formulation facilitates use in young 
children. 
Target dose range: A total dose of 5–24 mg/kg bw of artemether and 29–144 mg/
kg bw of lumefantrine
Recommended dosage regimen: Artemether + lumefantrine is given twice a day 
for 3 days (total, six doses). The first two doses should, ideally, be given 8 h apart.
 
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
35
 Body weight (kg)
Dose (mg) of artemether + lumefantrine given twice daily  
for 3 days
5 to < 15
20 + 120
15 to < 25
40 + 240
25 to < 35
60 + 360
≥ 35
80 + 480
Factors associated with altered drug exposure and treatment response: 
•  
Decreased exposure to lumefantrine has been documented in young children 
(<3 years)as well as pregnant women, large adults, patients taking mefloquine, 
rifampicin or efavirenz and in smokers. As these target populations may be at 
increased risk for treatment failure, their responses to treatment should be 
monitored more closely and their full adherence ensured.
•  
Increased exposure to lumefantrine has been observed in patients concomitantly 
taking lopinavir- lopinavir/ritonavir-based antiretroviral agents but with no 
increase in toxicity; therefore, no dosage adjustment is indicated. 
Additional comments: 
•  
An advantage of this ACT is that lumefantrine is not available as a monotherapy 
and has never been used alone for the treatment of malaria. 
•  
Absorption of lumefantrine is enhanced by co-administration with fat. Patients 
or caregivers should be informed that this ACT should be taken immediately 
after food or a fat containing drink (e.g. milk), particularly on the second and 
third days of treatment. 
Artesunate + amodiaquine
(For further details see Annex 5, A5.1 and A5.4.)
Formulations currently available: A fixed-dose combination in tablets containing 25 + 
67.5 mg, 50 + 135 mg or 100 + 270 mg of artesunate and amodiaquine, respectively 
Target dose and range: The target dose (and range) are 4 (2–10) mg/kg bw per 
day artesunate and 10 (7.5–15) mg/kg bw per day amodiaquine once a day for 3 
days. A total therapeutic dose range of 6–30 mg/kg bw per day artesunate and 
22.5–45 mg/kg bw per dose amodiaquine is recommended. 
Body weight (kg)
Artesunate + amodiaquine dose (mg) given daily for 3 days
4.5 to < 9 
25 + 67.5 
9 to < 18 
50 + 135 
18 to < 36 
100 + 270 
≥ 36 
200 + 540 
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
36
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Factors associated with altered drug exposure and treatment response: 
•  
Treatment failure after amodiaquine monotherapy was more frequent among 
children who were underweight for their age. Therefore, their response to 
artesunate + amodiaquine treatment should be closely monitored. 
•  
Artesunate + amodiaquine is associated with severe neutropenia, particularly 
in patients co-infected with HIV and especially in those on zidovudine and/or 
cotrimoxazole. Concomitant use of efavirenz increases exposure to amodiaquine 
and hepatotoxicity. Thus, concomitant use of artesunate + amodiaquine by patients 
taking zidovudine, efavirenz and cotrimoxazole should be avoided, unless this 
is the only ACT promptly available. 
Additional comments: 
•  
No significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of amodiaquine or its metabolite 
desethylamodiaquine have been observed during the second and third trimesters 
of pregnancy; therefore, no dosage adjustments are recommended.
•  
No effect of age has been observed on the plasma concentrations of amodiaquine 
and desethylamodiaquine, so no dose adjustment by age is indicated. Few data 
are available on the pharmacokinetics of amodiaquine in the first year of life. 
Artesunate + mefloquine
(For further details, see Annex 5, A5.4 and A5.10.)
Formulations currently available: A fixed-dose formulation of paediatric tablets 
containing 25 mg artesunate and 55 mg mefloquine hydrochloride (equivalent to 
50 mg mefloquine base) and adult tablets containing 100 mg artesunate and 220 
mg mefloquine hydrochloride (equivalent to 200 mg mefloquine base) 
Target dose and range: Target doses (ranges) of 4 (2–10) mg/kg bw per day artesunate 
and 8.3 (5–11) mg/kg bw per day mefloquine, given once a day for 3 days
Body weight (kg)
Artesunate + mefloquine dose (mg) given daily for 3 days
5 to < 9 
25 + 55 
9 to < 18 
50 + 110 
18 to < 30 
100 + 220 
≥ 30 
200 + 440 
Additional comments: 
•  
Mefloquine was associated with increased incidences of nausea, vomiting, 
dizziness, dysphoria and sleep disturbance in clinical trials, but these symptoms 
are seldom debilitating, and, where this ACT has been used, it has generally 
been well tolerated. To reduce acute vomiting and optimize absorption, the total 
mefloquine dose should preferably be split over 3 days, as in current fixed-dose 
combinations. 
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
37
 •  
As concomitant use of rifampicin decreases exposure to mefloquine, potentially 
decreasing its efficacy, patients taking this drug should be followed up carefully 
to identify treatment failures. 
Artesunate + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine
(For further details, see Annex 5, A5.4 and A5.13.)
Formulations: Currently available as blister-packed, scored tablets containing 50 mg 
artesunate and fixed dose combination tablets comprising 500 mg sulfadoxine + 
25 mg pyrimethamine. There is no fixed-dose combination.
Target dose and range: A target dose (range) of 4 (2–10) mg/kg bw per day artesunate 
given once a day for 3 days and a single administration of at least 25 / 1.25 (25–70 
/ 1.25–3.5) mg/kg bw sulfadoxine / pyrimethamine given as a single dose on day 1
Body 
weight (kg)
Artesunate dose given daily  
for 3 days (mg)
Sulfadoxine / pyrimethamine 
dose (mg) given as a single 
dose on day 1
5 to < 10 
25 mg
250 / 12.5 
10 to < 25 
50 mg
500 / 25 
25 to < 50 
100 mg
1000 / 50 
≥ 50 
200 mg
1500 / 75 
Factors associated with altered drug exposure and treatment response: The low dose of 
folic acid (0.4 mg daily) that is required to protect the fetuses of pregnant women 
from neural tube defects do not reduce the efficacy of SP, whereas higher doses (5 
mg daily) do significantly reduce its efficacy and should not be given concomitantly.
Additional comments: 
•  
The disadvantage of this ACT is that it is not available as a fixed-dose combination. 
This may compromise adherence and increase the risk for distribution of loose 
artesunate tablets, despite the WHO ban on artesunate monotherapy. 
•  
Resistance is likely to increase with continued widespread use of SP, sulfalene–
pyrimethamine and cotrimoxazole (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole). Fortunately, 
molecular markers of resistance to antifols and sulfonamides correlate well 
with therapeutic responses. These should be monitored in areas in which this 
drug is used.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
38
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine
(For further details, see Annex 5, A5.8.)
Revised dose recommendation for dihydroartemisinin-pipe-
raquine in young children 
Children weighing <25kg treated with dihydroarteminsinin + piperaquine 
should receive a minimum of 2.5 mg/kg bw per day of dihydroartemisinin and 
 
20 mg/kg bw per day of piperaquine daily for 3 days. 
Strong recommendation based on pharmacokinetic modelling
The dosing subgroup reviewed clinical efficacy and safety data together with 
all available dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine pharmacokinetic data (6 published 
studies and 10 studies from the WWARN database; total 652 patients) and then 
conducted simulations of piperaquine exposures for each weight group. These 
showed lower exposure in younger children with higher risks of treatment failure. 
The revised dose regimens are predicted to provide equivalent piperaquine 
exposures across all age groups. The subgroup also reviewed preliminary results 
from an unpublished study using doses similar to those now recommended in 
this guidelines (n=100).
Other considerations
This dose adjustment is not predicted to result in higher peak piperaquine 
concentrations than in older children and adults, and as there is no evidence of 
increased toxicity in young children, the GRC concluded that the predicted benefits 
of improved antimalarial exposure are not at the expense of increased risk.
Tarning J, Zongo I, Some FA, Rouamba N, Parikh S, Rosenthal PJ, et al. Population 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of piperaquine in children with uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:497–505. 
The WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network DP Study Group. The effect of dosing regimens 
on the antimalarial efficacy of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine: a pooled analysis of individual 
patient data. PLoS Med 2013;10: e1001564.
Formulations: Currently available as a fixed-dose combination in tablets containing 
40 mg dihydroartemisinin and 320 mg piperaquine and paediatric tablets contain 
20 mg dihydroartemisinin and 160 mg piperaquine.
Target dose and range: A target dose (range) of 4 (2–10) mg/kg bw per day 
dihydroartemisinin and 18 (16–27) mg/kg bw per day piperaquine given once a day 
for 3 days for adults and children weighing ≥ 25 kg. The target doses and ranges 
for children weighing < 25 kg are 4 (2.5–10) mg/kg bw per day dihydroartemisinin 
and 24 (20–32) mg/kg bw per day piperaquine once a day for 3 days. 
Recommended dosage regimen: The dose regimen currently recommended by the 
manufacturer provides adequate exposure to piperaquine and excellent cure 
rates (> 95%), except in children < 5 years, who have a threefold increased risk 
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
39
 for treatment failure. Children in this age group have significantly lower plasma 
piperaquine concentrations than older children and adults given the same 
 
mg/kg bw dose. Children weighing < 25 kg should receive at least 2.5 mg/kg bw 
dihydroartemisinin and 20 mg/kg bw piperaquine to achieve the same exposure 
as children weighing ≥ 25 kg and adults. 
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine should be given daily for 3 days.
Body weight (kg)
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine dose (mg) given daily 
for 3 days
5 to < 8 
20 + 160 
8 to < 11 
30 + 240 
11 to < 17 
40 + 320 
17 to < 25 
60 + 480 
25 to < 36 
80 + 640 
36 to < 60 
120 + 960 
60 < 80 
160 + 1280 
 >80
200 + 1600 
Factors associated with altered drug exposure and treatment response: 
•  
High-fat meals should be avoided, as they significantly accelerate the absorption 
of piperaquine, thereby increasing the risk for potentially arrhythmogenic delayed 
ventricular repolarization (prolongation of the corrected electrocardiogram QT 
interval). Normal meals do not substantially alter the absorption of piperaquine.
•  
As malnourished children are at increased risk for treatment failure, their response 
to treatment should be monitored closely. 
• Dihydroartemisinin exposure is lower in pregnant women. 
•  
Piperaquine is eliminated more rapidly by pregnant women, shortening the 
post-treatment prophylactic effect of dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine. As this 
does not affect primary efficacy, no dosage adjustment is recommended for 
pregnant women.
Additional comments: Piperaquine prolongs the QT interval by approximately the 
same amount as chloroquine but by less than quinine. It is not necessary to perform 
an electrocardiogram before prescribing dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, but this 
ACT should not be used in patients with congenital QT prolongation or who have 
a clinical condition or are on medications (see Annex 5.14) that prolong the QT 
interval. There has been no evidence of piperaquine-related cardiotoxicity in large 
randomized trials or in extensive deployment.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
40
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 4.4 | RECURRENT FALCIPARUM MALARIA
Recurrence of P. falciparum malaria can result from re-infection or recrudescence 
(treatment failure). Treatment failure may result from drug resistance or inadequate 
exposure to the drug due to sub-optimal dosing, poor adherence, vomiting, unusual 
pharmacokinetics in an individual or substandard medicines. It is important to 
determine from the patient’s history whether he or she vomited the previous 
treatment or did not complete a full course of treatment. 
When possible, treatment failure must be confirmed parasitologically. This may 
require referring the patient to a facility with microscopy or LDH-based RDTs, 
as P. falciparum histidine-rich protein-2 (PfHRP2)-based tests may remain positive 
for weeks after the initial infection, even without recrudescence. Referral may be 
necessary anyway to obtain second-line treatment. In individual patients, it may 
not be possible to distinguish recrudescence from re-infection, although lack of 
resolution of fever and parasitaemia or their recurrence within 4 weeks of treatment 
are considered failures of treatment with currently recommended ACTs. In many 
cases, treatment failures are missed because patients are not asked whether they 
received antimalarial treatment within the preceding 1–2 months. Patients who 
present with malaria should be asked this question routinely.
4.4.1 | FAILURE WITHIN 28 DAYS
The recommended second-line treatment is an alternative ACT known to be 
effective in the region. Adherence to 7-day treatment regimens (with artesunate or 
quinine both of which should be co-administered with + tetracycline, or doxycycline 
or clindamycin) is likely to be poor if treatment is not directly observed; these 
regimens are no longer generally recommended. The distribution and use of 
oral artesunate monotherapy outside special centres is strongly discouraged, 
and quinine-containing regimens are not well tolerated. 
4.4.2 | FAILURE AFTER 28 DAYS
Recurrence of fever and parasitaemia > 4 weeks after treatment may be due to 
either recrudescence or a new infection. The distinction can be made only by PCR 
genotyping of parasites from the initial and the recurrent infections. 
As PCR is not routinely used in patient management, all presumed treatment 
failures after 4 weeks of initial treatment should, from an operational standpoint, 
be considered new infections and be treated with the first-line ACT. However, reuse 
of mefloquine within 60 days of first treatment is associated with an increased 
risk for neuropsychiatric reactions, and an alternative ACT should be used.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
41
 4.5 |  
REDUCING THE TRANSMISSIBILITY OF 
TREATED P. FALCIPARUM INFECTIONS 
IN AREAS OF LOW-INTENSITY 
TRANSMISSION
 
Reducing the transmissibility of P. falciparum infections
In low-transmission areas, give a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw primaquine 
with ACT to patients with P. falciparum malaria (except pregnant women, infants 
aged < 6 months and women breastfeeding infants aged < 6 months) to reduce 
transmission. G6PD testing is not required.
Strong recommendation, low-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.4)
In an analysis of observational studies of single-dose primaquine, data from 
mosquito feeding studies on 180 people suggest that adding 0.25 mg/kg 
primaquine to treatment with an ACT can rapidly reduce the infectivity of 
gametocytes to mosquitoes. 
In a systematic review of eight randomized controlled trials of the efficacy of 
adding single-dose primaquine to ACTs for reducing the transmission of malaria, 
in comparison with ACTs alone:
•  
Single doses of > 0.4 mg/kg bw primaquine reduced gametocyte carriage 
at day 8 by about two thirds (RR, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.19–0.59, two trials, 269 
participants, high-quality evidence); and
•  
Single doses of primaquine > 0.6 mg/kg bw reduced gametocyte carriage 
at day 8 by about two thirds (RR, 0.29; 95% CI, 0.22–0.37, seven trials, 
1380 participants, high-quality evidence).
There have been no randomized controlled trials of the effects on the incidence 
of malaria or on transmission to mosquitos. 
Other considerations
The guideline development group considered that the evidence of a dose–
response relation from observational studies of mosquito feeding was sufficient 
to conclude the primaquine dose of 0.25mg/kg bw significantly reduced 
 
P .falciparum transmissibility.
Graves PM, Gelband H, Garner P. Primaquine or other 8-aminoquinoline for reducing 
P. falciparum transmission. Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 2014; 6:CD008152. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008152.pub3.
White NJ, Qiao LG, Qi G, Luzzatto L. Rationale for recommending a lower dose of primaquine as 
a Plasmodium falciparum gametocytocide in populations where G6PD deficiency is common. 
Malar J 2012;11:418.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
42
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 The population benefits of reducing malaria transmission with gametocytocidal 
drugs such as primaquine require that a very high proportion of treated patients 
receive these medicines and that there is no large transmission reservoir of 
asymptomatic parasite carriers. This strategy is therefore likely to be effective only 
in areas of low-intensity malaria transmission, as a component of pre-elimination 
or elimination programmes. 
In light of concern about the safety of the previously recommended dose of 0.75 
mg/kg bw in individuals with G6PD deficiency, a WHO panel reviewed the safety 
of primaquine as a P. falciparum gametocytocide and concluded that a single dose 
of 0.25 mg/kg bw of primaquine base is unlikely to cause serious toxicity, even in 
people with G6PD deficiency.7 Thus, where indicated a single dose of 0.25mg/kg 
bw of primaquine base should be given on the first day of treatment, in addition 
to an ACT, to all patients with parasitologically confirmed P.falciparum malaria 
except for pregnant women, infants < 6 months of age and women breastfeeding 
infants < 6 months of age, because there are insufficient data on the safety of its 
use in these groups. (For further details, see Annex 5, A5.11.)
Dosing table based on the most widely currently available tablet strength (7.5mg base)
Body weight (kg)
Single dose of primaquine (mg base)
10a to < 25 
3.75 
25 to < 50 
7.5 
50 to 100 
15
a Dosing of young children weighing < 10 kg is limited by the tablet sizes currently available. 
4.6 | INCORRECT APPROACHES TO TREATMENT
4.6.1 | USE OF MONOTHERAPY
The continued use of artemisinins or any of the partner medicines alone will 
compromise the value of ACT by selecting for drug resistance. 
As certain patient groups, such as pregnant women, may need specifically tailored 
combination regimens, single artemisinin derivatives will still be used in selected 
referral facilities in the public sector, but they should be withdrawn entirely from 
the private and informal sectors and from peripheral public health care facilities. 
7  
Recht J, Ashley E, White N. Safety of 8-aminoquinoline antimalarial medicines. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2014 (http://who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241506977/en/).
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
43
 Similarly, continued availability of amodiaquine, mefloquine and SP as monotherapies 
in many countries is expected to shorten their useful therapeutic life as partner 
drugs of ACT, and they should be withdrawn wherever possible. 
4.6.2 | INCOMPLETE DOSING
In endemic regions, some semi-immune malaria patients are cured by an incomplete 
course of antimalarial drugs or by a treatment regimen that would be ineffective 
in patients with no immunity. In the past, this led to different recommendations for 
patients considered semi-immune and those considered non-immune. As individual 
immunity can vary considerably, even in areas of moderate-to-high transmission 
intensity, this practice is no longer recommended. A full treatment course with 
a highly effective ACT is required whether or not the patient is considered to be 
semi-immune. 
Another potentially dangerous practice is to give only the first dose of a treatment 
course to patients with suspected but unconfirmed malaria, with the intention 
of giving the full treatment if the diagnosis is confirmed. This practice is unsafe, 
could engender resistance, and is not recommended. 
4.7 |  
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
4.7.1 | CAN THE PATIENT TAKE ORAL MEDICATION?
Some patients cannot tolerate oral treatment and will require parenteral or rectal 
administration for 1–2 days, until they can swallow and retain oral medication 
reliably. Although such patients do not show other signs of severity, they should 
receive the same initial antimalarial treatments recommended for severe malaria 
(see chapter 7, 7.4.). Initial rectal or parenteral treatment must always be followed 
by a full 3-day course of ACT. 
4.7.2 | USE OF ANTIPYRETICS 
In young children, high fevers are often associated with vomiting, regurgitation of 
medication and seizures. They are thus treated with antipyretics and, if necessary, 
fanning and tepid sponging. Antipyretics should be used if the core temperature 
is > 38.5 ºC. Paracetamol (acetaminophen) at a dose of 15 mg/kg bw every 4 h 
is widely used; it is safe and well tolerated and can be given orally or as a 
suppository. Ibuprofen (5 mg/kg bw) has been used successfully as an alternative 
in the treatment of malaria and other childhood fevers, but, like aspirin and other 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, it is no longer recommended because of the 
risks of gastrointestinal bleeding, renal impairment and Reye’s syndrome. 
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
44
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 4.7.3 | USE OF ANTI-EMETICS 
Vomiting is common in acute malaria and may be severe. Parenteral antimalarial 
treatment may therefore be required until oral administration is tolerated. Then a 
full 3-day course of ACT should be given. Anti-emetics are potentially sedative 
and may have neuropsychiatric adverse effects, which could mask or confound the 
diagnosis of severe malaria. They should therefore be used with caution.
4.7.4 | MANAGEMENT OF SEIZURES
Generalized seizures are more common in children with P. falciparum malaria than 
in those with malaria due to other species. This suggests an overlap between the 
cerebral pathology resulting from falciparum malaria and febrile convulsions. 
As seizures may be a prodrome of cerebral malaria, patients who have more than 
two seizures within a 24-h period should be treated as for severe malaria. If the 
seizures continue, the airways should be maintained and anticonvulsants given 
(parenteral or rectal benzodiazepines or intramuscular paraldehyde). When the 
seizure has stopped, the child should be treated as indicated in section 7.10.5, 
if his or her core temperature is > 38.5 ºC. There is no evidence that prophylactic 
anticonvulsants are beneficial in otherwise uncomplicated malaria, and they are 
not recommended.
4 | Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
45
  5 |  
TREATMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED 
P. FALCIPARUM MALARIA IN 
SPECIAL  RISK GROUPS 
 Treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in special risk groups
First trimester of pregnancy
Treat pregnant women with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria during the 
first trimester with 7 days of quinine + clindamycin. 
Strong recommendation, very low- quality evidence
Infants less than 5kg body weight
Treat infants weighing < 5 kg with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with an 
ACT at the same mg/kg bw target dose as for children weighing 5 kg.
Strong recommendation, very low- quality evidence
Patients co-infected with HIV
In people who have HIV/AIDS and uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria, avoid 
artesunate + SP if they are also receiving co-trimoxazole, and avoid artesunate 
+ amodiaquine if they are also receiving efavirenz or zidovudine. 
Good practice statement
Non-immune travellers
Treat travellers with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria returning to non-
endemic settings with an ACT. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Uncomplicated hyperparasitaemia
People with P. falciparum hyperparasitaemia are at increased risk of treatment 
failure, severe malaria and death so should be closely monitored, in addition 
to receiving an ACT. 
Good practice statement
Several important patient sub-populations, including young children, pregnant women 
and patients taking potent enzyme inducers (e.g. rifampicin, efavirenz), have altered 
pharmacokinetics, resulting in sub-optimal exposure to antimalarial drugs. This increases 
the rate of treatment failure with current dosage regimens. The rates of treatment 
failure are substantially higher in hyperparasitaemic patients and patients in areas with 
artemisinin-resistant falciparum malaria, and these groups require greater exposure 
to antimalarial drugs (longer duration of therapeutic concentrations) than is achieved 
with current ACT dosage recommendations. It is often uncertain how best to achieve 
this. Options include increasing individual doses, increasing the frequency or duration of 
dosing, or adding an additional antimalarial drug. Increasing individual doses may not, 
however, achieve the desired exposure (e.g. lumefantrine absorption becomes saturated), 
or the dose may be toxic due to transiently high plasma concentrations (piperaquine, 
mefloquine, amodiaquine, pyronaridine). An additional advantage of lengthening the 
duration of treatment (by giving a 5-day regimen) is that it provides additional exposure 
of the asexual cycle to the artemisinin component as well as augmenting exposure to 
the partner drug. The acceptability, tolerability, safety and effectiveness of augmented 
ACT regimens in these special circumstances should be evaluated urgently. 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
48
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 5.1 | PREGNANT AND LACTATING WOMEN 
Malaria in pregnancy is associated with low-birth-weight infants, increased anaemia 
and, in low-transmission areas, increased risks for severe malaria, pregnancy loss 
and death. In high-transmission settings, despite the adverse effects on fetal 
growth, malaria is usually asymptomatic in pregnancy or is associated with only 
mild, non-specific symptoms. There is insufficient information on the safety, efficacy 
and pharmacokinetics of most antimalarial agents in pregnancy, particularly during 
the first trimester. 
5.1.1 | FIRST TRIMESTER
First trimester of pregnancy
Treat pregnant women with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria during the 
first trimester with 7 days of quinine + clindamycin.
Strong recommendation
Evidence supporting the recommendation (see Annex 4, A4.5)
Data available were not suitable for evaluation using the GRADE methodology, 
as there is no /almost no evidence for alternative treatment using ACT.
Safety assessment from published prospective data on 700 women exposed 
in the first trimester of pregnancy has not indicated any adverse effects of 
artemisinin-derivatives on pregnancy or on the health of the fetus or neonate. 
The currently available data are only sufficient to exclude a ≥ 4.2-fold increase 
in risk of any major defect detectable at birth (background prevalence assumed 
to be 0.9%), if half the exposures occur during the embryo-sensitive period 
(4–9 weeks post-conception). 
Other considerations
The limited data available on the safety of artemisinin-derivatives in early 
pregnancy allow for some reassurance in counselling women accidentally 
exposed to an artemisinin-derivative early in the first trimester. There is no 
need for them to have their pregnancy interrupted because of this exposure.
In the absence of adequate safety data on the artemisinin-derivatives in the 
first trimester of pregnancy the Guideline Development Group was unable to 
make recommendations beyond reiterating the status quo.
McGready R, Lee SJ, Wiladphaingern J, et al. Adverse effects of falciparum and vivax malaria and 
the safety of antimalarial treatment in early pregnancy: a population-based study. Lancet Infect 
Dis. 2012;12:388-96.
Mosha D, Mazuguni F, Mrema S, et al. Safety of artemether-lumefantrine exposure in first 
trimester of pregnancy: an observational cohort. Malar J. 2014; 13: 197e. 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
49
 Because organogenesis occurs mainly in the first trimester, this is the time of greatest 
concern for potential teratogenicity, although development of the nervous system 
continues throughout pregnancy. The antimalarial medicines considered safe in the 
first trimester of pregnancy are quinine, chloroquine, clindamycin and proguanil. 
The safest treatment regimen for pregnant women in the first trimester with 
uncomplicated falciparum malaria is therefore quinine + clindamycin (10mg/kg 
bw twice a day) for 7 days (or quinine monotherapy if clindamycin is not available). 
An ACT or oral artesunate + clindamycin is an alternative if quinine + clindamycin is 
not available or fails.
In reality, women often do not declare their pregnancy in the first trimester or may not 
yet be aware that they are pregnant. Therefore, all women of childbearing age should 
be asked about the possibility that they are pregnant before they are given antimalarial 
agents; this is standard practice for administering any medicine to potentially pregnant 
women. Nevertheless, women in early pregnancy will often be exposed inadvertently 
to the available first-line treatment, mostly ACT. Published prospective data on 700 
women exposed in the first trimester of pregnancy indicate no adverse effects of 
artemisinins (or the partner drugs) on pregnancy or on the health of fetuses or neonates. 
The available data are sufficient to exclude a ≥ 4.2-fold increase in risk of any major 
defect detectable at birth (background prevalence assumed to be 0.9%), if half the 
exposures occur during the embryo-sensitive period (4–9 weeks post-conception). 
These data provide assurance in counselling women exposed to an antimalarial drug 
early in the first trimester and indicate that there is no need for them to have their 
pregnancy interrupted because of this exposure. 
5.1.2 | SECOND AND THIRD TRIMESTERS
Experience with artemisinin derivatives in the second and third trimesters (over 
4000 documented pregnancies) is increasingly reassuring: no adverse effects on the 
mother or fetus have been reported. The current assessment of risk–benefit suggests 
that ACTs should be used to treat uncomplicated falciparum malaria in the second and 
third trimesters of pregnancy. The current standard six-dose artemether + lumefantrine 
regimen for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria has been evaluated in 
 
> 1000 women in the second and third trimesters in controlled trials and has been found 
to be well tolerated and safe. In a low-transmission setting on the Myanmar–Thailand 
border, however, the efficacy of the standard six-dose artemether + lumefantrine regimen 
was inferior to 7 days of artesunate monotherapy. The lower efficacy may have been 
due to lower drug concentrations in pregnancy, as was also recently observed in a 
high-transmission area in Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Although many 
women in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy in Africa have been exposed 
to artemether + lumefantrine, further studies are under way to evaluate its efficacy, 
pharmacokinetics and safety in pregnant women. Similarly, many pregnant women in 
Africa have been treated with amodiaquine alone or combined with SP or artesunate; 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
50
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 however, amodiaquine use for the treatment of malaria in pregnancy has been formally 
documented in only > 1300 pregnancies. Use of amodiaquine in women in Ghana in 
the second and third trimesters of pregnancy was associated with frequent minor side-
effects but not with liver toxicity, bone marrow depression or adverse neonatal outcomes. 
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine was used successfully in the second and third 
trimesters of pregnancy in > 2000 women on the Myanmar–Thailand border for rescue 
therapy and in Indonesia for first-line treatment. SP
, although considered safe, is not 
appropriate for use as an artesunate partner drug in many areas because of resistance 
to SP
. If artesunate + SP is used for treatment, co-administration of daily high doses 
(5 mg) of folate supplementation should be avoided, as this compromises the efficacy 
of SP
. A lower dose of folate (0.4–0.5 mg bw/day) or a treatment other than artesunate 
+ SP should be used. 
Mefloquine is considered safe for the treatment of malaria during the second and third 
trimesters; however, it should be given only in combination with an artemisinin derivative. 
Quinine is associated with an increased risk for hypoglycaemia in late pregnancy, and it 
should be used (with clindamycin) only if effective alternatives are not available. 
Primaquine and tetracyclines should not be used in pregnancy. 
5.1.3 | DOSING IN PREGNANCY
Data on the pharmacokinetics of antimalarial agents used during pregnancy are limited. 
Those available indicate that pharmacokinetic properties are often altered during 
pregnancy but that the alterations are insufficient to warrant dose modifications at 
this time. With quinine, no significant differences in exposure have been seen during 
pregnancy. Studies of the pharmacokinetics of SP used in IPTp in many sites show 
significantly decreased exposure to sulfadoxine, but the findings on exposure to 
pyrimethamine are inconsistent. Therefore, no dose modification is warranted at this time. 
Studies are available of the pharmacokinetics of artemether + lumefantrine, artesunate 
+ mefloquine and dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine. Most data exist for artemether + 
lumefantrine; these suggest decreased overall exposure during the second and third 
trimesters. Simulations suggest that a standard six-dose regimen of lumefantrine given 
over 5 days, rather than 3 days, improves exposure, but the data are insufficient to 
recommend this alternative regimen at present. Limited data on pregnant women treated 
with dihydroartemesinin + piperaquine suggest lower dihydroartemisinin exposure 
and no overall difference in total piperaquine exposure, but a shortened piperaquine 
elimination half-life was noted. The data on artesunate + mefloquine are insufficient to 
recommend an adjustment of dosage. No data are available on the pharmacokinetics 
of artesunate + amodiaquine in pregnant women with falciparum malaria, although 
drug exposure was similar in pregnant and non-pregnant women with vivax malaria.
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
51
 5.1.4 | LACTATING WOMEN
The amounts of antimalarial drugs that enter breast milk and are consumed 
by breastfeeding infants are relatively small. Tetracycline is contraindicated in 
breastfeeding mothers because of its potential effect on infants’ bones and teeth. 
Pending further information on excretion in breast milk, primaquine should not 
be used for nursing women, unless the breastfed infant has been checked for 
G6PD deficiency.
5.2 |  
YOUNG CHILDREN AND INFANTS 
(INCLUDING THOSE WHO  
ARE MALNOURISHED)
Artemisinin derivatives are safe and well tolerated by young children; therefore, 
the choice of ACT is determined largely by the safety and tolerability of the partner 
drug. 
SP (with artesunate) should be avoided in the first weeks of life because it displaces 
bilirubin competitively and could thus aggravate neonatal hyperbilibinaemia. 
Primaquine should be avoided in the first 6 months of life (although there are no data 
on its toxicity in infants), and tetracyclines should be avoided throughout infancy. 
With these exceptions, none of the other currently recommended antimalarial 
treatments has shown serious toxicity in infancy. 
Delay in treating P. falciparum malaria in infants and young children can have 
fatal consequences, particularly for more severe infections. The uncertainties 
noted above should not delay treatment with the most effective drugs available. 
In treating young children, it is important to ensure accurate dosing and retention 
of the administered dose, as infants are more likely to vomit or regurgitate 
antimalarial treatment than older children or adults. Taste, volume, consistency and 
gastrointestinal tolerability are important determinants of whether the child retains 
the treatment. Mothers often need advice on techniques of drug administration 
and the importance of administering the drug again if it is regurgitated within 1 
h of administration. Because deterioration in infants can be rapid, the threshold 
for use of parenteral treatment should be much lower.
5.2.1 | OPTIMAL ANTIMALARIAL DOSING IN  
YOUNG CHILDREN
Although dosing on the basis of body area is recommended for many drugs in young 
children, for the sake of simplicity, antimalarial drugs have been administered as 
a standard dose per kg bw for all patients, including young children and infants. 
This approach does not take into account changes in drug disposition that occur 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
52
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 with development. The currently recommended doses of lumefantrine, piperaquine, 
SP, artesunate and chloroquine result in lower drug concentrations in young children 
and infants than in older patients. Adjustments to previous dosing regimens for 
dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine in uncomplicated malaria and for artesunate in 
severe malaria are now recommended to ensure adequate the drug exposure in 
this vulnerable population. The available evidence for artemether + lumefantrine, 
SP and chloroquine does not indicate dose modification at this time, but young 
children should be closely monitored, as reduced drug exposure may increase the 
risk for treatment failure. Limited studies of amodiaquine and mefloquine showed 
no significant effect of age on plasma concentration profiles. 
In community situations where parenteral treatment is needed but cannot be 
given, such as for infants and young children who vomit antimalarial drugs 
repeatedly or are too weak to swallow or are very ill, give rectal artesunate and 
transfer the patient to a facility in which parenteral treatment is possible. Rectal 
administration of a single dose of artesunate as pre-referral treatment reduces 
the risks for death and neurological disability, as long as this initial treatment 
is followed by appropriate parenteral antimalarial treatment in hospital. Further 
evidence on pre-referral rectal administration of artesunate and other antimalarial 
drugs is given in section 7.5.
5.2.2 | OPTIMAL ANTIMALARIAL DOSING IN INFANTS
Infants less than 5kg body weight
Treat infants weighing < 5 kg with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with an 
ACT at the same mg/kg bw target dose as for children weighing 5 kg.
Strong recommendation
Evidence supporting the recommendation (see Annex 4, A4.6)
Data available were not suitable for evaluation using the GRADE methodology.
In most clinical studies, subgroups of infants and older children were not 
distinguished, and the evidence for young infants (< 5 kg) is insufficient for 
confidence in current treatment recommendations. Nevertheless despites 
these uncertainties, infants need prompt, effective treatment of malaria. There 
is limited evidence that artemether + lumefantrine and dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine achieve lower plasma concentrations in infants than in older 
children and adults. 
Other considerations
The Guideline Development Group considered the currently available evidence 
too limited to warrant formal evidence review at this stage, and was unable to 
recommend any changes beyond the status quo. Further research is warranted.
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
53
 The pharmacokinetics properties of many medicines in infants differ markedly 
from those in adults because of the physiological changes that occur in the first 
year of life (Annex 5). Accurate dosing is particularly important for infants. The only 
antimalarial agent that is currently contraindicated for infants (<6 months) is 
primaquine. 
ACT is recommended and should be given according to body weight at the same mg/
kg bw dose for all infants, including those weighing < 5 kg, with close monitoring 
of treatment response. The lack of infant formulations of most antimalarial drugs 
often necessitates division of adult tablets, which can lead to inaccurate dosing. 
When available, paediatric formulations and strengths are preferred, as they 
improve the effectiveness and accuracy of ACT dosing. 
5.2.3 |  
OPTIMAL ANTIMALARIAL DOSING IN 
MALNOURISHED YOUNG CHILDREN
Malaria and malnutrition frequently coexist. Malnutrition may result in inaccurate 
dosing when doses are based on age (a dose may be too high for an infant with 
a low weight for age) or on weight (a dose may be too low for an infant with 
a low weight for age). Although many studies of the efficacy of antimalarial 
drugs have been conducted in populations and settings where malnutrition was 
prevalent, there are few studies of the disposition of the drugs specifically in 
malnourished individuals, and these seldom distinguished between acute and 
chronic malnutrition. Oral absorption of drugs may be reduced if there is diarrhoea 
or vomiting, or rapid gut transit or atrophy of the small bowel mucosa. Absorption 
of intramuscular and possibly intrarectal drugs may be slower, and diminished 
muscle mass may make it difficult to administer repeated intramuscular injections 
to malnourished patients. The volume of distribution of some drugs may be larger 
and the plasma concentrations lower. Hypoalbuminaemia may reduce protein 
binding and increase metabolic clearance, but concomitant hepatic dysfunction 
may reduce the metabolism of some drugs; the net result is uncertain. 
Small studies of the pharmacokinetics of quinine and chloroquine showed 
alterations in people with different degrees of malnutrition. Studies of SP in 
IPTp and of amodiaquine monotherapy and dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine for 
treatment suggest reduced efficacy in malnourished children. A pooled analysis 
of data for individual patients showed that the concentrations of lumefantrine 
on day 7 were lower in children < 3 years who were underweight for age than in 
adequately nourished children and adults. Although these findings are concerning, 
they are insufficient to warrant dose modifications (in mg/kg bw) of any antimalarial 
drug in patients with malnutrition, however, their response to treatment should 
be monitored more closely. 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
54
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 5.3 | LARGE AND OBESE ADULTS 
Large adults are at risk for under-dosing when they are dosed by age or in standard 
pre-packaged adult weight-based treatments. In principle, dosing of large adults 
should be based on achieving the target mg/kg bw dose for each antimalarial 
regimen. The practical consequence is that two packs of an antimalarial drug might 
have to be opened to ensure adequate treatment. For obese patients, less drug 
is often distributed to fat than to other tissues; therefore, they should be dosed 
on the basis of an estimate of lean body weight, ideal body weight. Patients who are 
heavy but not obese require the same mg/kg bw doses as lighter patients.
In the past, maximum doses have been recommended, but there is no evidence 
or justification for this practice. As the evidence for an association between dose, 
pharmacokinetics and treatment outcome in overweight or large adults is limited, 
and alternative dosing options have not been assessed in treatment trials, it is 
recommended that this gap in knowledge be assessed urgently. In the absence of 
data, treatment providers should attempt to follow up the treatment outcomes of 
large adults whenever possible.
5.4 | PATIENTS CO-INFECTED WITH HIV 
There is considerable geographical overlap between malaria and HIV infection, 
and many people are co-infected. Worsening HIV-related immunosuppression may 
lead to more severe manifestations of malaria. In HIV-infected pregnant women, 
the adverse effects of placental malaria on birth weight are increased. In areas of 
stable endemic malaria, HIV-infected patients who are partially immune to malaria 
may have more frequent, higher-density infections, while in areas of unstable 
transmission, HIV infection is associated with increased risks for severe malaria 
and malaria-related deaths. Limited information is available on how HIV infection 
modifies therapeutic responses to ACTs. Early studies suggested that increasing 
HIV-related immunosuppression was associated with decreased treatment response 
to antimalarial drugs. There is presently insufficient information to modify the 
general malaria treatment recommendations for patients with HIV/AIDS. 
Therapeutic interactions must be taken into consideration (See Annex 5, 5.14). 
Studies on prophylaxis with trimethoprim + sulfamethoxazole in HIV-infected 
children and adults show significant protection against malaria, even in areas 
with high rates of antifolate resistance. In studies of drug interactions between 
antiretroviral medicines and ACTs, HIV-co-infected individuals on trimethoprim + 
sulfamethoxazole and antiretroviral treatment, particularly zidovudine-containing 
regimens, had high rates of neutropenia when artesunate + amodiaquine was used 
for malaria treatment. HIV-infected children had a seven- to eightfold increased 
risk for neutropenia 14 days after starting of artesunate + amodiaquine than HIV-
uninfected children. Hepatotoxicity has been documented when efavirenz was 
given with artesunate + amodiaquine, which may be due to inhibition of CYP2C8-
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
55
 mediated amodiaquine metabolism by efavirenz. Data on the safety of nevirapine-based 
regimens in people receiving amodiaquine + artesunate are lacking, but lower levels 
of amodiaquine and its metabolite desethylamodiaquine have been reported when 
they were given together with nevirapine.
More data are available on use of artemether + lumefantrine with antiretroviral 
treatment. A study in children with uncomplicated malaria in a high-transmission 
area of Africa showed a decreased risk for recurrent malaria after treatment with 
artemether + lumefantrine in children receiving lopinavir–ritonavir-based antiretroviral 
treatment as compared with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor-based 
antiretroviral treatment. Evaluation of pharmacokinetics in these children and in 
healthy volunteers showed significantly higher exposure to lumefantrine and lower 
exposure to dihydroartemisinin with lopinavir–ritonavir-based antiretroviral treatment, 
but no adverse consequences. Conversely, efavirenz-based antiretroviral treatment 
was associated with a two- to fourfold decrease in exposure to lumefantrine in 
healthy volunteers and malaria-infected adults and children, with increased rates of 
recurrent malaria after treatment. Close monitoring is required. Increasing artemether 
+ lumefantrine dosing with efavirenz-based antiretroviral treatment has not yet been 
studied. Exposure to lumefantrine and other non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitor-based antiretroviral treatment, namely nevirapine and etravirine, did not 
show consistent changes that would require dose adjustment.
Studies of administration of quinine with lopinavir–ritonavir or ritonavir alone in healthy 
volunteers gave conflicting results. The combined data are insufficient to justify dose 
adjustment. Single-dose atovaquone 
– proguanil with efavirenz, lopinavir–ritonavir or 
atazanavir–ritonavir were all associated with a significantly decreased area under the 
concentration–time curve for atovaquone (two- to fourfold) and proguanil (twofold), 
which could well compromise treatment or prophylactic efficacy. There is insufficient 
evidence to change the current mg/kg bw dosing recommendations; however, these 
patients should also be monitored closely. 
5.5 | PATIENTS CO-INFECTED  
WITH TUBERCULOSIS 
Rifamycins, in particular rifampicin, are potent CYP3A4 inducers with weak antimalarial 
activity. Concomitant administration of rifampicin during quinine treatment of adults 
with malaria was associated with a significant decrease in exposure to quinine and a 
five-fold higher recrudescence rate. Similarly, concomitant rifampicin with mefloquine 
in healthy adults was associated with a there-fold decrease in exposure to mefloquine. 
In adults co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis who were being treated with rifampicin, 
administration of artemether + lumefantrine resulted in significantly lower exposure to 
artemether, dihydroartemisinin and lumefantrine (nine-
, six- and there-fold decreases, 
respectively). There is insufficient evidence at this time to change the current mg/kg bw 
dosing recommendations; however, as these patients are at higher risk of recrudescent 
infections they should be monitored closely. 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
56
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 5.6 | NON-IMMUNE TRAVELLERS 
Non-immune travellers
Treat travellers with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria returning to non-
endemic settings with an ACT.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.1 and A4.2)
Studies have consistently demonstrated that the five WHO recommended ACTs 
have less than 5% PCR-adjusted treatment failure rates in settings without 
resistance to the partner drug (high quality evidence). 
Other considerations
The Guideline Development Group considered the evidence of superiority of 
ACTs over non-ACTs from endemic settings to be equally applicable to those 
travelling from non-endemic settings.
Travellers who acquire malaria are often non-immune people living in cities in 
endemic countries with little or no transmission or are visitors from non-endemic 
countries travelling to areas with malaria transmission. Both are at higher risk for 
severe malaria. In a malaria-endemic country, they should be treated according to 
national policy, provided the treatment recommended has a recent proven cure 
rate > 90%. Travellers who return to a non-endemic country and then develop 
malaria present a particular problem, and the case fatality rate is often high; 
doctors in non-malarious areas may be unfamiliar with malaria and the diagnosis 
is commonly delayed, and effective antimalarial drugs may not be registered or 
may be unavailable. However prevention of transmission or the emergence of 
resistance are not relevant outside malaria-endemic areas. If the patient has 
taken chemoprophylaxis, the same medicine should not be used for treatment. 
Treatment of P. vivax, P. ovale and P. malariae malaria in travellers should be the 
same as for patients in endemic areas (see section 6). 
There may be delays in obtaining artesunate, artemether or quinine for the 
management of severe malaria outside endemic areas. If only parenteral quinidine 
is available, it should be given, with careful clinical and electrocardiographic 
monitoring (see section 7). 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
57
 5.7 | UNCOMPLICATED HYPERPARASITAEMIA
Uncomplicated hyperparasitaemia is present in patients who have ≥ 4% parasitaemia 
but no signs of severity. They are at increased risk for severe malaria and for 
treatment failure and are considered an important source of antimalarial drug 
resistance. In falciparum malaria, the risk for progression to severe malaria with 
vital organ dysfunction increases at higher parasite densities. In low-transmission 
settings, mortality begins to increase when the parasite density exceeds 100 000/
µL (~2% parasitaemia). On the north-west border of Thailand, before the general 
introduction of ACT, parasitaemia > 4% without signs of severity was associated with 
a 3% mortality rate (about 30-times higher than from uncomplicated falciparum 
malaria with lower densities) and a six-times higher risk of treatment failure. 
The relationship between parasitaemia and risks depends on the epidemiological 
context: in higher-transmission settings, the risk of developing severe malaria in 
patients with high parasitaemia is lower, but “uncomplicated hyperparasitaemia” 
is still associated with a significantly higher rate of treatment failure. 
Patients with a parasitaemia of 4–10% and no signs of severity also require 
close monitoring, and, if feasible, admission to hospital. They have high rates 
of treatment failure. Non-immune people such as travellers and individuals in 
low-transmission settings with a parasitaemia > 2% are at increased risk and 
also require close attention. Parasitaemia > 10% is considered to indicate severe 
malaria in all settings.
It is difficult to make a general recommendation about treatment of uncomplicated 
hyperparasitaemia, for several reasons: recognizing these patients requires an 
accurate, quantitative parasite count (they will not be identified from semi-
quantitative thick film counts or RDTs), the risks for severe malaria vary considerably, 
and the risks for treatment failure also vary. Furthermore, little information is 
available on therapeutic responses in uncomplicated hyperparasitaemia. As the 
artemisinin component of an ACT is essential in preventing progression to severe 
malaria, absorption of the first dose must be ensured (atovaquone – proguanil alone 
should not be used for travellers presenting with uncomplicated hyperparasitaemia). 
Longer courses of treatment are more effective; both giving longer courses of ACT 
and preceding the standard 3-day ACT regimen with parenteral or oral artesunate 
have been used. 
5 | Treatment of uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria in special risk groups
58
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 6 |  
TREATMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED 
MALARIA CAUSED BY P. VIVAX, 
P. OVALE,  P. MALARIAE OR  
P. KNOWLESI 
 Treating uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
malaria 
Blood stage infection
If the malaria species is not known with certainty, treat as for uncomplicated 
P. falciparum malaria.
Good practice statement
In areas with chloroquine-susceptible infections, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria with either an 
ACT (except pregnant women in their first trimester) or chloroquine.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
In areas with chloroquine-resistant infections, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria (except pregnant 
women in their first trimester) with an ACT. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Treat pregnant women in their first trimester who have chloroquine-resistant 
P. vivax malaria with quinine.
Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence
Preventing relapse in P. vivax or P. ovale malaria
The G6PD status of patients should be used to guide administration of primaquine 
for preventing relapse. 
Good practice statement
To prevent relapse, treat P. vivax or P. ovale malaria in children and adults 
(except pregnant women, infants aged < 6 months, women breastfeeding 
infants aged < 6 months, women breastfeeding older infants unless they are 
known no to be G6PD deficient, and people with G6PD deficiency) with a 
 
14-day course (0.25-0.5 mg/kg bw daily) of primaquine in all transmission settings.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
In people with G6PD deficiency, consider preventing relapse by giving primaquine 
base at 0.75 mg/kg bw once a week for 8 weeks, with close medical supervision 
for potential primaquine-induced adverse haematological effects. 
Conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence
When the G6PD status is unknown and G6PD testing is not available, a decision 
to prescribe primaquine must be based on an assessment of the risks and 
benefits of adding primaquine. 
Good practice statement
Pregnant and breast feeding women
In women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, consider weekly chemoprophylaxis 
with chloroquine until delivery and breastfeeding are completed, then, on the 
basis of G6PD status, treat with primaquine to prevent future relapse.
Conditional recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
60
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 P. vivax is the second most important causative agent of human malaria. Approximately 
35% of the world’s population is at risk. P. vivax accounts for approximately 9%8 
of malaria cases worldwide and is the dominant malaria species outside Africa. 
P. vivax is prevalent in endemic areas in Asia, Central and South America, the Middle 
East and Oceania. In Africa, P. vivax is relatively uncommon, except in the Horn of 
Africa. In West Africa, P. vivax is rare except in Mauritania and Mali. In most areas 
in which P. vivax is prevalent, malaria transmission rates are low, and the affected 
populations therefore achieve little immunity. Consequently, people of all ages 
are at risk. The exception is the island of New Guinea, where transmission in some 
parts is intense. The other human malaria parasite species P. malariae and P. ovale 
(two sympatric species) are generally less prevalent, but they are distributed 
worldwide, especially in the tropical areas of Africa. During the past decade, there 
have been many reported human infections with P. knowlesi, a simian parasite in 
the forested areas of South-East Asia. In parts of the island of Borneo, this is now 
the main species causing malaria. Further information is provided in Annex 6.
Of the species of Plasmodium that affect humans, only P. vivax and P. ovale form 
hypnozoites, which are dormant parasite stages in the liver that cause relapses 
of infection weeks to years after the primary infection. Thus, a single mosquito 
inoculation may result in repeated bouts of illness. P. vivax exists in two general 
forms: the more prevalent tropical form, which causes malaria that relapses at 
frequent intervals (typically every 3 weeks unless slowly eliminated antimalarial 
drugs are given, in which case the interval is 5–7 weeks) and tends to be less 
susceptible to primaquine; and a temperate form, in which there may be a long 
(~9-month) incubation period or a similarly long interval between primary illness 
and relapse. The temperate form of P. vivax is more sensitive to primaquine. 
Infection with P. vivax during pregnancy reduces the birth weight of the infant, 
as does P. falciparum. In primigravidae, the birth weight reduction is approximately 
two thirds of that associated with P. falciparum (110 g compared with 170 g), 
but this adverse effect does not decrease with successive pregnancies, unlike in 
P. falciparum infections. P. knowlesi infections in humans are potentially dangerous; 
the patient may deteriorate rapidly because this parasite has a 24-h asexual cycle 
(quotidian) and so the parasite burden may expand rapidly, resulting in severe 
and sometimes fatal illness. 
6.1 | THERAPEUTIC OBJECTIVE
The objective of treating malaria caused by P. vivax and P. ovale is to cure both 
blood-stage and liver-stage infections (called radical cure), thereby preventing 
recrudescence and relapse, respectively.
8  
WHO. World malaria report 2014. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (http://who.int/malaria/publications/
world_malaria_report_2014/en/).
6 | Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
61
 6.2 | DIAGNOSIS
The clinical features of uncomplicated malaria are non-specific, and diagnosis 
of malaria requires blood testing. Malaria species are usually differentiated by 
microscopy. Young ring forms of all species look similar, but older stages and 
gametocytes have species-specific characteristics, except for the two forms of 
 
P. ovale, which appear identical. P. knowlesi malaria is frequently misdiagnosed as 
P. malariae, so any case of high parasitaemia with “P. malariae-like” parasites in or 
near an area where long- or pig-tailed macaque monkeys live should be treated 
as P. knowlesi until proved otherwise. P. knowlesi infections require confirmation 
by PCR. RDTs based on lateral flow immunochromatography are available for 
the detection of P. vivax, and their performance has improved in recent years, 
although their sensitivity for the other non-falciparum malarias is low. Molecular 
genotyping of P. vivax parasites is less useful in studies of therapeutic efficacy 
than in falciparum malaria as relapses may be due to either the same genotype 
that caused the initial illness or a different one. 
6.3 |  
SUSCEPTIBILITY OF P. VIVAX, P. OVALE, 
P. MALARIAE AND P. KNOWLESI TO 
ANTIMALARIAL DRUGS
Few recent data are available on the susceptibility of P. ovale, P. malariae and 
P. knowlesi to antimalarial agents in vivo. These species are all regarded as 
sensitive to chloroquine, although chloroquine resistance was reported recently 
in P. malariae. Experience indicates that P. ovale and P. malariae are also susceptible 
to amodiaquine, mefloquine and the artemisinin derivatives and to ACT. Their 
susceptibility to antifolate antimalarial drugs, such as SP, is less certain. P. knowlesi 
is also sensitive to quinine, mefloquine, atovaquone – proguanil and artemether 
+ lumefantrine and severe knowlesi malaria responds well to artesunate. 
The susceptibility of P. vivax has been studied extensively, and, now that short-
term culture methods have been standardized, the results of clinical studies are 
supported by in vitro observations. P. vivax is generally still sensitive to chloroquine, 
but resistance is increasing. High-level resistance to chloroquine is prevalent 
throughout the island of New Guinea, in Oceania and in parts of Indonesia. Lower-
level resistance is found in other parts of South-East Asia and parts of South America. 
On the Indian subcontinent where most of the world’s P. vivax malaria occurs, 
the parasites are mainly sensitive to chloroquine. Resistance to pyrimethamine 
has increased rapidly in some areas, rendering SP ineffective. There are insufficient 
data on current susceptibility to proguanil, although resistance to proguanil was 
selected rapidly when it was first used in areas endemic for P. vivax malaria. 
In general, P. vivax is sensitive to all the other antimalarial drugs. In contrast to 
P. falciparum, asexual stages of P. vivax are also susceptible to primaquine. Thus, 
chloroquine + primaquine can be considered as a combination treatment for 
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
62
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 blood-stage infections, in addition to providing radical cure. The only drugs with 
significant activity against the hypnozoites are the 8-aminoquinolines (primaquine, 
bulaquine, tafenoquine). There is no standardized in vitro method for assessing 
the hypnozoiticidal activity of antimalarial drugs. In vivo assessments suggests 
that tolerance of P. vivax to primaquine is greater in eastern Asia and Oceania 
than elsewhere.
6.4 | TREATMENT OF BLOOD-STAGE INFECTION
Treating uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
malaria
In areas with chloroquine-susceptible infections, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria with either an 
ACT (except pregnant women in their first trimester) or chloroquine.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
In areas with chloroquine-resistant infections, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria (except pregnant 
women in their first trimester) with an ACT. 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
6 | Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
63
 GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.7 and A4.8)
In a systematic review of ACTs for the treatment of P. vivax malaria, five trials 
were conducted in Afghanistan, Cambodia, India, Indonesia and Thailand between 
2002 and 2011 with a total of 1622 participants which compared ACTs directly 
with chloroquine. In comparison with chloroquine:
•  
ACTs cleared parasites from the peripheral blood more quickly 
(parasitaemia after 24 h of treatment: RR, 0.42; 95% CI, 0.36–0.50, four 
trials, 1652 participants, high-quality evidence); and
•  
ACTs were at least as effective in preventing recurrent parasitaemia 
before day 28 (RR, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.18–1.90, five trials, 1622 participants, 
high-quality evidence). 
In four of these trials, few cases of recurrent parasitaemia were seen before 
day 28 with both chloroquine and ACTs. In the fifth trial, in Thailand in 2011, 
increased recurrent parasitaemia was seen after treatment with chloroquine 
(9%), but was infrequent after ACT (2%) (RR, 0.25; 95% CI, 0.09–0.66, one trial, 
437 participants).
ACT combinations with long half-lives provided a longer prophylactic effect 
after treatment, with significantly fewer cases of recurrent parasitaemia 
between day 28 and day 42 or day 63 (RR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.40–0.82, three trials, 
1066 participants, moderate-quality evidence). 
Other considerations
The guideline development group recognized that, in the few settings in which 
P. vivax is the only endemic species and where chloroquine resistance remains 
low, the increased cost of ACT may not be worth the small additional benefits. 
Countries where chloroquine is used for treatment of vivax malaria should 
monitor for chloroquine resistance and change to ACT when the treatment 
failure rate is > 10% at day 28. 
Gogtay N, Kannan S, Thatte UM, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-based combination therapy 
for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax malaria. Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 2013; 
10:CD008492. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008492.pub3.
6.4.1 | UNCOMPLICATED P. VIVAX MALARIA
In areas with chloroquine-sensitive P. vivax
For chloroquine-sensitive vivax malaria, oral chloroquine at a total dose of 25 mg 
base/kg bw is effective and well tolerated. Lower total doses are not recommended, 
as these encourage the emergence of resistance. Chloroquine is given at an 
initial dose of 10 mg base/kg bw, followed by 10 mg/kg bw on the second day 
and 5 mg/kg bw on the third day. In the past, the initial 10-mg/kg bw dose was 
followed by 5 mg/kg bw at 6 h, 24 h and 48 h. As residual chloroquine suppresses 
the first relapse of tropical P. vivax (which emerges about 3 weeks after onset of 
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
64
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 the primary illness), relapses begin to occur 5–7 weeks after treatment if radical 
curative treatment with primaquine is not given. 
ACTs are highly effective in the treatment of vivax malaria, allowing simplification 
(unification) of malaria treatment; i.e. all malaria infections can be treated with an 
ACT. The exception is artesunate + SP, where resistance significantly compromises 
its efficacy. Although good efficacy of artesunate + SP was reported in one study in 
Afghanistan, in several other areas (such as South-East Asia) P. vivax has become 
resistant to SP more rapidly than P. falciparum. The initial response to all ACTs is 
rapid in vivax malaria, reflecting the high sensitivity to artemisinin derivatives, but, 
unless primaquine is given, relapses commonly follow. The subsequent recurrence 
patterns differ, reflecting the elimination kinetics of the partner drugs. Thus, 
recurrences, presumed to be relapses, occur earlier after artemether + lumefantrine 
than after dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine or artesunate + mefloquine because 
lumefantrine is eliminated more rapidly than either mefloquine or piperaquine. 
A similar temporal pattern of recurrence with each of the drugs is seen in the 
P. vivax infections that follow up to one third of acute falciparum malaria infections 
in South-East Asia.
In areas with chloroquine-resistant P. vivax
ACTs containing piperaquine, mefloquine or lumefantrine are the recommended 
treatment, although artesunate + amodiaquine may also be effective in some areas.
In the systematic review of ACTs for treating P. vivax malaria, dihydroartemisinin + 
piperaquine provided a longer prophylactic effect than ACTs with shorter half-lives 
(artemether + lumefantrine, artesunate + amodiaquine), with significantly fewer 
recurrent parasitaemias during 9 weeks of follow-up (RR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.40–0.82, 
three trials, 1066 participants). The half-life of mefloquine is similar to that of 
piperaquine, but use of dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine in P. vivax mono-infections 
has not been compared directly in trials with use of artesunate + mefloquine.
In the first-trimester of pregnancy, quinine should be used in place of ACTs (section 5.1). 
6.4.2 |  
UNCOMPLICATED P. OVALE, P. MALARIAE  
OR P. KNOWLESI MALARIA
Resistance of P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi to antimalarial drugs is not 
well characterized, and infections caused by these three species are generally 
considered to be sensitive to chloroquine. In only one study, conducted in Indonesia, 
was resistance to chloroquine reported in P. malariae. 
The blood stages of P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi should therefore be treated 
with the standard regimen of ACT or chloroquine, as for vivax malaria. 
6 | Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
65
 6.4.3 | MIXED MALARIA INFECTIONS 
Mixed malaria infections are common in endemic areas. For example, in Thailand, 
despite low levels of malaria transmission, 8% of patients with acute vivax malaria 
also have P. falciparum infections, and one third of acute P. falciparum infections 
are followed by a presumed relapse of vivax malaria (making vivax malaria the 
most common complication of falciparum malaria).
Mixed infections are best detected by nucleic acid-based amplification techniques, 
such as PCR; they may be underestimated with routine microscopy. Cryptic P. falciparum 
infections in vivax malaria can be revealed in approximately 75% of cases by RDTs 
based on the PfHRP2 antigen, but several RDTs cannot detect mixed infection or 
have low sensitivity for detecting cryptic vivax malaria. ACTs are effective against all 
malaria species and so are the treatment of choice for mixed infections. 
6.5 |  
TREATMENT OF THE LIVER STAGES 
(HYPNOZOITES) OF P. VIVAX AND P. OVALE
Preventing relapse in P. vivax or P. ovale malaria
To prevent relapse, treat P. vivax or P. ovale malaria in children and adults (except 
pregnant women, infants aged < 6 months, women breastfeeding infants < 
6 months, women breastfeeding older infants unless they are known not to 
be G6PD deficient and people with G6PD deficiency) with a 14-day course of 
primaquine in all transmission settings.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
In people with G6PD deficiency, consider preventing relapse by giving primaquine 
base at 0.75 mg base/kg bw once a week for 8 weeks, with close medical 
supervision for potential primaquine-induced adverse haematological effects. 
Conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
66
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.9 and A4.10)
In a systematic review of primaquine for radical cure of P. vivax malaria, 14 days of 
primaquine was compared with placebo or no treatment in 10 trials, and 14 days 
was compared with 7 days in one trial. The trials were conducted in Colombia, 
Ethiopia, India, Pakistan and Thailand between 1992 and 2006. 
In comparison with placebo or no primaquine:
•  
14 days of primaquine (0.25 mg/kg bw per day) reduced relapses during 
15 months of follow-up by about 40% (RR, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.48–0.75, 10 
trials, 1740 participants, high-quality evidence).
In comparison with 7 days of primaquine:
•  
14 days of primaquine (0.25 mg/kg bw per day) reduced relapses during 
6 months of follow-up by over 50% (RR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.25–0.81, one 
trial, 126 participants, low-quality evidence).
No direct comparison has been made of higher doses (0.5 mg/kg bw for 14 
days) with the standard regimen (0.25 mg/kg bw for 14 days).
Twelve of the 15 trials included in the review explicitly excluded people with 
G6PD deficiency; the remaining three did not report on this aspect. No serious 
adverse events were reported.
Other considerations
In the absence of evidence to recommend alternatives, the guideline development 
group considers 0.75 mg/kg bw primaquine given once weekly for 8 weeks to 
be the safest regimen for people with mild-to-moderate G6PD deficiency. 
Galappaththy GNL, Tharyan P, Kirubakaran R. Primaquine for preventing relapse in people 
with Plasmodium vivax malaria treated with chloroquine. Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 
2013;10:CD004389. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004389.pub3.
6.5.1 | PRIMAQUINE FOR PREVENTING RELAPSE 
To achieve radical cure (cure and prevention of relapse), relapses originating from 
liver hypnozoites must be prevented by giving primaquine. The frequency and 
pattern of relapses varies geographically, with relapse rates generally ranging 
from 8% to 80%. Temperate long-latency P. vivax strains are still prevalent in many 
areas. Recent evidence suggests that, in endemic areas where people are inoculated 
frequently with P. vivax, a significant proportion of the population harbours dormant 
but “activatable” hypnozoites. The exact mechanism of activation of dormant 
hypnozoites is unclear. There is evidence that systemic parasitic and bacterial 
infections, but not viral infections, can activate P. vivax hypnozoites, which explains 
why P. vivax commonly follows P. falciparum infections in endemic areas where both 
parasites are prevalent. Thus, the radical curative efficacy of primaquine must be 
6 | Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
67
 set against the prevalent relapse frequency and the likely burden of “activatable” 
hypnozoites. Experimental studies on vivax malaria and the relapsing simian 
malaria P. cynomolgi suggest that the total dose of 8-aminoquinoline given is the 
main determinant of radical curative efficacy. In most therapeutic assessments, 
primaquine has been given for 14 days. Total doses of 3.5 mg base/kg bw 
 
(0.25 mg/kg bw per day) are required for temperate strains and 7 mg base/kg 
bw (0.5 mg/kg bw per day) is needed for the tropical, frequent-relapsing P. vivax 
prevalent in East Asia and Oceania. Primaquine causes dose-limiting abdominal 
discomfort when taken on an empty stomach; it should always be taken with food.
Primaquine formulation: If available, administer scored tablets containing 7.5 or 
15 mg of primaquine. Smaller-dose tablets containing 2.5 and 5 mg base are 
available in some areas and facilitate accurate dosing in children. When scored 
tablets are not available, 5 mg tablets can be used.
Therapeutic dose: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg bw per day primaquine once a day for 14 days 
(see Annex 5, A5.11).
Use of primaquine to prevent relapse in high-transmission settings was not 
recommended previously, as the risk for new infections was considered to outweigh 
any benefits of preventing relapse. This may have been based on underestimates 
of the morbidity and mortality associated with multiple relapses, particularly 
in young children. Given the benefits of preventing relapse and in the light of 
changing epidemiology worldwide and more aggressive targets for malaria control 
and elimination, the group now recommends that primaquine be used in all settings.
6.5.2 |  
PRIMAQUINE AND GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE 
DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
Any person (male or female) with red cell G6PD activity < 30% of the normal 
mean has G6PD deficiency and will experience haemolysis after primaquine. 
Heterozygote females with higher mean red cell activities may still show 
substantial haemolysis. G6PD deficiency is an inherited sex-linked genetic 
disorder, which is associated with some protection against P. falciparum and 
 
P. vivax malaria but increased susceptibility to oxidant haemolysis. The prevalence of 
G6PD deficiency varies, but in tropical areas it is typically 3–35%; high frequencies 
are found only in areas where malaria is or has been endemic. There are many 
(> 180) different G6PD deficiency genetic variants; nearly all of which make the 
red cells susceptible to oxidant haemolysis, but the severity of haemolysis may 
vary. Primaquine generates reactive intermediate metabolites that are oxidant 
and cause variable haemolysis in G6PD-deficient individuals. It also causes 
methemoglobinaemia. The severity of haemolytic anaemia depends on the dose 
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
68
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 of primaquine and on the variant of the G6PD enzyme. Fortunately, primaquine is 
eliminated rapidly so haemolysis is self-limiting once the drug is stopped. In the 
absence of exposure to primaquine or another oxidant agent, G6PD deficiency 
rarely causes clinical manifestationsso, many patients are unaware of their G6PD 
status. Screening for G6PD deficiency is not widely available outside hospitals, 
but rapid screening tests that can be used at points of care have recently become 
commercially available. 
•  
In patients known to be G6PD deficient, primaquine may be considered at a 
dose of 0.75 mg base/kg bw once a week for 8 weeks. The decision to give or 
withhold primaquine should depend on the possibility of giving the treatment 
under close medical supervision, with ready access to health facilities with 
blood transfusion services. 
•  
Some heterozygote females who test as normal or not deficient in qualitative 
G6PD screening tests have intermediate G6PD activity and can still haemolyse 
substantially. Intermediate deficiency (30–80% of normal) and normal enzyme 
activity (> 80% of normal) can be differentiated only with a quantitative test. 
In the absence of quantitative testing, all females should be considered as 
potentially having intermediate G6PD activity and given the 14-day regimen 
of primaquine, with counselling on how to recognize symptoms and signs of 
haemolytic anaemia. They should be advised to stop primaquine and be told 
where to seek care should these signs develop. 
•  
If G6PD testing is not available, a decision to prescribe or withhold primaquine 
should be based on the balance of the probability and benefits of preventing 
relapse against the risks of primaquine-induced haemolytic anaemia. This depends 
on the population prevalence of G6PD deficiency, the severity of the prevalent 
genotypes and on the capacity of health services to identify and manage 
primaquine-induced haemolytic reactions. 
6 | Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
69
 6.5.3 |  
PREVENTION OF RELAPSE IN PREGNANT OR 
LACTATING WOMEN AND INFANTS
Preventing relapse in pregnant or lactating women
In women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, consider weekly chemoprophylaxis 
with chloroquine until delivery and breastfeeding are completed, then, on the 
basis of G6PD status, treat with primaquine to prevent future relapse.
Conditional recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.11)
In a systematic review of malaria chemoprophylaxis in pregnant women, 
chloroquine prophylaxis against P. vivax during pregnancy was directly 
evaluated in one trial conducted in Thailand in 2001. In comparison with 
no chemoprophylaxis:
•  
Chloroquine prophylaxis substantially reduced recurrent P. vivax malaria 
(RR, 0.02; 95% CI, 0.00–0.26, one trial, 951 participants, moderate-
quality evidence).
Radeva-Petrova D, ter Kuile FO, Sinclair D, Kayentao K, Garner P. Drugs for preventing malaria in 
pregnant women in endemic areas: any drug regimen versus placebo/no treatment. Cochrane 
Database Systemat Rev 2014; 10:CD000169. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000169.pub3.
Primaquine is contraindicated in pregnant women, infants < 6months of age and 
in lactating women (unless the infant is known not to be G6PD deficient). 
As an alternative, chloroquine prophylaxis could be given to suppress relapses 
after acute vivax malaria during pregnancy. Once the infant has been delivered 
and the mother has completed breastfeeding, primaquine could then be given to 
achieve radical cure.
Few data are available on the safety of primaquine in infancy, and in the past 
primaquine was not recommended for infants. There is, however, no specific reason 
why primaquine should not be given to children aged 6 months to 1 year (provided 
they do not have G6PD deficiency), as this age group may suffer multiple relapses 
from vivax malaria. The guideline development group therefore recommended 
lowering the age restriction to 6 months.
6 |  
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. vivax, P. ovale, 
P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
70
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 7 | TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA
 Treating severe malaria
Treat adults and children with severe malaria (including infants, pregnant 
women in all trimesters and lactating women) with intravenous or intramuscular 
artesunate for at least 24 h and until they can tolerate oral medication. Once a 
patient has received at least 24 h of parenteral therapy and can tolerate oral 
therapy, complete treatment with 3 days of an ACT (add single dose primaquine 
in areas of low transmission). 
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Revised dose recommendation for parenteral artesunate in young 
children
Children weighing < 20 kg should receive a higher dose of artesunate 
 
(3 mg/kg bw per dose) than larger children and adults (2.4 mg/kg bw per dose) 
to ensure equivalent exposure to the drug. 
Strong recommendation based on pharmacokinetic modelling
Parenteral alternatives when artesunate is not available
If parenteral artesunate is not available, use artemether in preference to quinine 
for treating children and adults with severe malaria.
Conditional recommendation, low-quality evidence
Treating cases of suspected severe malaria pending transfer to a 
higher-level facility (pre-referral treatment)
Pre-referral treatment options
Where complete treatment of severe malaria is not possible but injections are 
available, give adults and children a single intramuscular dose of artesunate, 
and refer to an appropriate facility for further care. Where intramuscular 
artesunate is not available use intramuscular artemether or, if that is not 
available, use intramuscular quinine. 
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
Where intramuscular injections of artesunate are not available, treat children 
< 6 years with a single rectal dose (10 mg/kg bw) of artesunate, and refer 
immediately to an appropriate facility for further care. Do not use rectal 
artesunate in older children and adults.
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
Mortality from untreated severe malaria (particularly cerebral malaria) approaches 
100%. With prompt, effective antimalarial treatment and supportive care, the rate 
falls to 10–20% overall. Within the broad definition of severe malaria some 
syndromes are associated with lower mortality rates (e.g. severe anaemia) and 
others with higher mortality rates (e.g. acidosis). The risk for death increases in 
the presence of multiple complications. 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
72
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Any patient with malaria who is unable to take oral medications reliably, shows 
any evidence of vital organ dysfunction or has a high parasite count is at increased 
risk for dying. The exact risk depends on the species of infecting malaria parasite, 
the number of systems affected, the degree of vital organ dysfunction, age, 
background immunity, pre-morbid, and concomitant diseases, and access to 
appropriate treatment. Tests such as a parasite count, haematocrit and blood 
glucose may all be performed immediately at the point of care, but the results 
of other laboratory measures, if any, may be available only after hours or days. 
As severe malaria is potentially fatal, any patient considered to be at increased risk 
should be given the benefit of the highest level of care available. The attending 
clinician should not worry unduly about definitions: the severely ill patient requires 
immediate supportive care, and, if severe malaria is a possibility, parenteral 
antimalarial drug treatment should be started without delay.
7.1 | DEFINITIONS
7.1.1 | SEVERE FALCIPARUM MALARIA
For epidemiological purposes, severe falciparum malaria is defined as one or more 
of the following, occurring in the absence of an identified alternative cause and 
in the presence of P. falciparum asexual parasitaemia. 
•  
Impaired consciousness: A Glasgow coma score < 11 in adults or a Blantyre coma 
score < 3 in children
•  
Prostration: Generalized weakness so that the person is unable to sit, stand or 
walk without assistance 
• Multiple convulsions: More than two episodes within 24 h
•  
Acidosis: A base deficit of > 8 mEq/L or, if not available, a plasma bicarbonate 
level of < 15 mmol/L or venous plasma lactate ≥ 5 mmol/L. Severe acidosis 
manifests clinically as respiratory distress (rapid, deep, laboured breathing).
•  
Hypoglycaemia: Blood or plasma glucose < 2.2 mmol/L (< 40 mg/dL)
•  
Severe malarial anaemia: Haemoglobin concentration ≤ 5 g/dL or a haematocrit of 
≤ 15% in children < 12 years of age (< 7 g/dL and < 20%, respectively, in adults) 
with a parasite count > 10 000/µL
•  
Renal impairment: Plasma or serum creatinine > 265 µmol/L (3 mg/dL) or blood 
urea > 20 mmol/L
•  
Jaundice: Plasma or serum bilirubin > 50 µmol/L (3 mg/dL) with a parasite count 
> 100 000/ µL
•  
Pulmonary oedema: Radiologically confirmed or oxygen saturation < 92% on room 
air with a respiratory rate > 30/min, often with chest indrawing and crepitations 
on auscultation
•  
Significant bleeding: Including recurrent or prolonged bleeding from the nose, 
gums or venepuncture sites; haematemesis or melaena
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
73
 •  
Shock: Compensated shock is defined as capillary refill ≥ 3 s or temperature 
gradient on leg (mid to proximal limb), but no hypotension. Decompensated 
shock is defined as systolic blood pressure < 70 mm Hg in children or 
 
< 80 mm Hg in adults, with evidence of impaired perfusion (cool peripheries or 
prolonged capillary refill).
• Hyperparasitaemia: P. falciparum parasitaemia > 10%.
7.1.2 | SEVERE VIVAX AND KNOWLESI MALARIA
Severe vivax malaria is defined as for falciparum malaria but with no parasite 
density thresholds.  
Severe knowlesi malaria is defined as for falciparum malaria but with two 
differences: 
• P. knowlesi hyperparasitaemia: parasite density > 100 000/µL
• Jaundice and parasite density > 20 000/µL.
7.2 | THERAPEUTIC OBJECTIVES
The main objective of the treatment of severe malaria is to prevent the patient 
from dying. Secondary objectives are prevention of disabilities and prevention of 
recrudescent infection.
Death from severe malaria often occurs within hours of admission to a hospital 
or clinic, so it is essential that therapeutic concentrations of a highly effective 
antimalarial drug be achieved as soon as possible. Management of severe malaria 
comprises mainly clinical assessment of the patient, specific antimalarial treatment, 
additional treatment and supportive care.
7.3 | CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
Severe malaria is a medical emergency. An open airway should be secured in 
unconscious patients and breathing and circulation assessed. The patient should 
be weighed or body weight estimated, so that medicines, including antimalarial 
drugs and fluids, can be given appropriately. An intravenous cannula should be 
inserted, and blood glucose (rapid test), haematocrit or haemoglobin, parasitaemia 
and, in adults, renal function should be measured immediately. A detailed clinical 
examination should be conducted, including a record of the coma score. Several 
coma scores have been advocated: the Glasgow coma scale is suitable for adults, 
and the simple Blantyre modification is easily performed in children. Unconscious 
patients should undergo a lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis to 
exclude bacterial meningitis. 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
74
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 The degree of acidosis is an important determinant of outcome; the plasma 
bicarbonate or venous lactate concentration should be measured, if possible. 
If facilities are available, arterial or capillary blood pH and gases should be 
measured in patients who are unconscious, hyperventilating or in shock. Blood 
should be taken for cross-matching, a full blood count, a platelet count, clotting 
studies, blood culture and full biochemistry (if possible). Careful attention should 
be paid to the patient’s fluid balance in severe malaria in order to avoid over- or 
under-hydration. Individual requirements vary widely and depend on fluid losses 
before admission. 
The differential diagnosis of fever in a severely ill patient is broad. Coma and fever 
may be due to meningoencephalitis or malaria. Cerebral malaria is not associated 
with signs of meningeal irritation (neck stiffness, photophobia or Kernig’s sign), 
but the patient may be opisthotonic. As untreated bacterial meningitis is almost 
invariably fatal, a diagnostic lumbar puncture should be performed to exclude 
this condition. There is also considerable clinical overlap between septicaemia, 
pneumonia and severe malaria, and these conditions may coexist. When possible, 
blood should always be taken on admission for bacterial culture. In malaria-endemic 
areas, particularly where parasitaemia is common in young age groups, it is difficult 
to rule out septicaemia immediately in a shocked or severely ill obtunded child. 
In all such cases, empirical parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started 
immediately, together with antimalarial treatment.
7.4 | TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA
It is essential that full doses of effective parenteral (or rectal) antimalarial treatment 
be given promptly in the initial treatment of severe malaria. This should be 
followed by a full dose of effective ACT orally. Two classes of medicine are available 
for parenteral treatment of severe malaria: artemisinin derivatives (artesunate 
or artemether) and the cinchona alkaloids (quinine and quinidine). Parenteral 
artesunate is the treatment of choice for all severe malaria. The largest randomized 
clinical trials ever conducted on severe falciparum malaria showed a substantial 
reduction in mortality with intravenous or intramuscular artesunate as compared 
with parenteral quinine. The reduction in mortality was not associated with an 
increase in neurological sequelae in artesunate-treated survivors. Furthermore, 
artesunate is simpler and safer to use.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
75
 7.4.1 | ARTESUNATE
Treating severe malaria
Treat adults and children with severe malaria (including infants, pregnant 
women in all trimesters and lactating women) with intravenous or intramuscular 
artesunate for at least 24 h. Once a patient has received at least 24 h of parenteral 
therapy and can tolerate oral therapy, complete treatment with 3 days of an ACT.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.12)
In a systematic review of artesunate for severe malaria, eight randomized 
controlled trials with a total of 1664 adults and 5765 children, directly compared 
parenteral artesunate with parenteral quinine. The trials were conducted in 
various African and Asian countries between 1989 and 2010. 
In comparison with quinine, parenteral artesunate:
•  
Reduced mortality from severe malaria by about 40% in adults (RR, 0.61; 
95% CI, 0.50–0.75, five trials, 1664 participants, high-quality evidence);
•  
Reduced mortality from severe malaria by about 25% in children (RR, 
0.76; 95% CI, 0.65–0.90, four trials, 5765 participants, high-quality 
evidence); and
•  
Was associated with a small increase in neurological sequelae in 
children at the time of hospital discharge (RR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.01–1.83, 
three trials, 5163 participants, moderate-quality evidence), most of which, 
however, slowly resolved, with little or no difference between artesunate 
and quinine 28 days later (moderate-quality evidence).
Other considerations
The guideline development group considered that the small increase in 
neurological sequelae at discharge after treatment with artesunate was due 
to the delayed recovery of the severely ill patients, who would have died had 
they received quinine. This should not be interpreted as a sign of neurotoxicity.
Although the safety of artesunate given in the first trimester of pregnancy 
has not been firmly established, the guideline development group considered 
that the proven benefits to the mother outweigh any potential harm to the 
developing fetus.
Sinclair D, Donegan S, Isba R, Lalloo DG. Artesunate versus quinine for treating severe malaria. 
Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 2012;6:CD005967. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD005967.pub4.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
76
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dosing of artesunate injection in severe malaria
Revised dose recommendation for parenteral artesunate in 
young children with severe malaria
Children weighing less than 20 kg should receive a higher parenteral dose of 
artesunate (3 mg/kg/dose) than larger children and adults (2.4 mg/kg/dose) to 
ensure equivalent drug exposure. 
Strong recommendation based on pharmacokinetic modelling
The dosing subgroup reviewed all available pharmacokinetic data on artesunate 
and the main biologically active metabolite dihydroartemisinin following 
administration of artesunate in severe malaria (published pharmacokinetic 
studies from 71 adults and 265 children). Simulations of artesunate and 
dihydroartemisinin exposures were conducted for each age group. These showed 
underexposure in younger children. The revised parenteral dose regimens are 
predicted to provide equivalent artesunate and dihydroartemisinin exposures 
across all age groups.
Other considerations
Individual parenteral artesunate doses between 1.75 and 4 mg/kg have been 
studied and no toxicity has been observed. The GRC concluded that the predicted 
benefits of improved antimalarial exposure in children are not at the expense 
of increased risk.
Hendriksen IC, Mtove G, Kent A, Gesase S, Reyburn H, Lemnge MM, et al. Population 
pharmacokinetics of intramuscular artesunate in African children with severe malaria: 
implications for a practical dosing regimen. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2013;93:443–50. 
Zaloumis SG, Tarning J, Krishna S, Price RN, White NJ, Davis TM, McCaw JM, Olliaro P, Maude 
RJ, Kremsner P, Dondorp A, Gomes M, Barnes K, Simpson JA. Population pharmacokinetics of 
intravenous artesunate: a pooled analysis of individual data from patients with severe malaria. 
CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2014;3:e145.
Artesunate is dispensed as a powder of artesunic acid, which is dissolved in 
sodium bicarbonate (5%) to form sodium artesunate. The solution is then diluted 
in approximately 5 mL of 5% dextrose and given by intravenous injection or by 
intramuscular injection into the anterior thigh. 
The solution should be prepared freshly for each administration and should not 
be stored. Artesunate is rapidly hydrolysed in-vivo to dihydroartemisinin, which 
provides the main antimalarial effect. Studies of the pharmacokinetics of parenteral 
artesunate in children with severe malaria suggest that they have less exposure than 
older children and adults to both artesunate and the biologically active metabolite 
dihydroartemisinin. Body weight has been identified as a significant covariate in studies 
of the pharmacokinetics of orally and rectally administered artesunate, which suggests 
that young children have a larger apparent volume of distribution for both compounds 
and should therefore receive a slightly higher dose of parenteral artesunate to achieve 
exposure comparable to that of older children and adults.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
77
 Artesunate and post-treatment haemolysis
Delayed haemolysis starting >1 week after artesunate treatment of severe malaria 
has been reported in hyperparasitaemic non-immune travellers. Between 2010 
and 2012, there were six reports involving a total of 19 European travellers 
with severe malaria who were treated with artesunate injection and developed 
delayed haemolysis. All except one were adults (median age, 50 years; range, 
 
5–71 years). In a prospective study involving African children, the same phenomenon 
was reported in 5 (7%) of the 72 hyperparasitaemic children studied. Artesunate 
rapidly kills ring-stage parasites, which are then taken out of the red cells by the 
spleen; these infected erythrocytes are then returned to the circulation but with 
a shortened life span, resulting in the observed haemolysis. Thus, post-treatment 
haemolysis is a predictable event related to the life-saving effect of artesunate. 
Hyperparasitaemic patients must be followed up carefully to identify late-onset 
anaemia. 
7.4.2 |  
PARENTERAL ALTERNATIVES WHEN 
ARTESUNATE IS NOT AVAILABLE
Parenteral alternatives when artesunate is not available
If parenteral artesunate is not available, use intramuscular artemether in 
preference to quinine for treating children and adults with severe malaria.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
78
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.13 and A4.14)
A systematic review of intramuscular artemether for severe malaria comprised 
two randomized controlled trials in Viet Nam in which artemether was compared 
with artesunate in 494 adults, and 16 trials in Africa and Asia in which artemether 
was compared with quinine in 716 adults and 1447 children. The trials were 
conducted between 1991 and 2009.
In comparison with artesunate, intramuscular artemether was not as effective 
at preventing deaths in adults in Asia (RR, 1.80; 95% CI, 1.09–2.97; two trials, 
494 participants, moderate-quality evidence).
Artemether and artesunate have not been directly compared in randomized 
trials in African children.
In comparison with quinine:
•  
Intramuscular artemether prevented a similar number of deaths 
in children in Africa (RR, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.76–1.20; 12 trials, 1447 
participants, moderate-quality evidence). 
•  
Intramuscular artemether prevented more deaths in adults in Asia (RR, 
0.59; 95% CI, 0.42–0.83; four trials, 716 participants, moderate-quality 
evidence).
Other considerations
Indirect comparisons of parenteral artesunate and quinine and of artemether and 
quinine were considered by the guideline development group with what is known 
about the pharmacokinetics of the two drugs. They judged the accumulated 
indirect evidence to be sufficient to recommend parenteral artesunate rather 
than intramuscular artemether for use in all age groups.
Esu E, Effa EE, Opie ON, Uwaoma A, Meremikwu MM. Artemether for severe malaria. Cochrane 
Database Systemat Rev 2014;9:CD010678. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010678.pub2.
Artemether 
Artemether is two to three times less active than its main metabolite 
dihydroartemisinin. Artemether can be given as an oil-based intramuscular 
injection or orally. In severe falciparum malaria, the concentration of the parent 
compound predominates after intramuscular injection, whereas parenteral 
artesunate is hydrolysed rapidly and almost completely to dihydroartemisinin. 
Given intramuscularly, artemether may be absorbed more slowly and more 
erratically than water-soluble artesunate, which is absorbed rapidly and reliably 
after intramuscular injection. These pharmacological advantages may explain the 
clinical superiority of parenteral artesunate over artemether in severe malaria. 
Artemether is dispensed dissolved in oil (groundnut, sesame seed) and given by 
intramuscular injection into the anterior thigh. 
Therapeutic dose: The initial dose of artemether is 3.2 mg/kg bw intramuscularly (to 
the anterior thigh). The maintenance dose is 1.6 mg/kg bw intramuscularly daily. 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
79
 Quinine
Quinine treatment for severe malaria was established before the methods for 
modern clinical trials were developed. Several salts of quinine have been formulated 
for parenteral use, but the dihydrochloride is the most widely used. The peak 
concentrations after intramuscular quinine in severe malaria are similar to those 
after intravenous infusion. Studies of pharmacokinetics show that a loading dose 
of quinine (20 mg salt/kg bw, twice the maintenance dose) provides therapeutic 
plasma concentrations within 4 h. The maintenance dose of quinine (10 mg salt/
kg bw) is administered at 8-h intervals, starting 8 h after the first dose. If there is 
no improvement in the patient’s condition within 48 h, the dose should be reduced 
by one third, i.e. to 10 mg salt/kg bw every 12 h. 
Rapid intravenous administration of quinine is dangerous. Each dose of parenteral 
quinine must be administered as a slow, rate-controlled infusion (usually diluted 
in 5% dextrose and infused over 4 h). The infusion rate should not exceed 5 mg 
salt/kg bw per h. 
Whereas many antimalarial drugs are prescribed in terms of base, for historical 
reasons quinine doses are usually recommended in terms of salt (usually sulphate 
for oral use and dihydrochloride for parenteral use). Recommendations for the 
doses of this and other antimalarial agents should state clearly whether the salt 
or the base is being referred to; doses with different salts must have the same 
base equivalents. Quinine must never be given by intravenous bolus injection, 
as lethal hypotension may result. 
Quinine dihydrochloride should be given by rate-controlled infusion in saline 
or dextrose solution. If this is not possible, it should be given by intramuscular 
injection to the anterior thigh; quinine should not be injected into the buttock in 
order to avoid sciatic nerve injury. The first dose should be split, with 10 mg/kg bw 
into each thigh. Undiluted quinine dihydrochloride at a concentration of 300 mg/
mL is acidic (pH 2) and painful when given by intramuscular injection, so it is best 
to administer it either in a buffered formulation or diluted to a concentration of 
60–100 mg/mL for intramuscular injection. Gluconate salts are less acidic and 
better tolerated than the dihydrochloride salt when given by the intramuscular 
and rectal routes. 
As the first (loading) dose is the most important in the treatment of severe malaria, 
it should be reduced only if there is clear evidence of adequate pre-treatment 
before presentation. Although quinine can cause hypotension if administered 
rapidly, and overdose is associated with blindness and deafness, these adverse 
effects are rare in the treatment of severe malaria. The dangers of insufficient 
treatment (i.e. death from malaria) exceed those of excessive initial treatment. 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
80
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 7.5 | PRE-REFERRAL TREATMENT OPTIONS 
Treating cases of suspected severe malaria pending transfer to 
higher-level facilities (pre-referral treatment)
Where complete treatment of severe malaria is not possible but injections are 
available, give adults and children a single intramuscular dose of artesunate, 
and refer to an appropriate facility for further care. Where intramuscular 
artesunate is not available use intramuscular artemether or, if that is not 
available, use intramuscular quinine. 
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
Where intramuscular injections of artesunate are not available, treat children 
 
< 6 years with a single rectal dose (10mg/kg bw) of artesunate, and refer 
immediately to an appropriate facility for further care. Do not use rectal 
artesunate in older children and adults.
Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.15 and A4.16)
In a systematic review of pre-referral treatment for suspected severe malaria, 
in a single large randomized controlled trial of 17 826 children and adults in 
Bangladesh, Ghana and the United Republic of Tanzania, pre-referral rectal 
artesunate was compared with placebo. 
In comparison with placebo:
•  
Rectal artesunate reduced mortality by about 25% in children < 6 years 
(RR, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.59–0.93; one trial, 8050 participants, moderate-
quality evidence).
•  
Rectal artesunate was associated with more deaths in older children and 
adults (RR, 2.21; 95% CI, 1.18–4.15; one trial 4018 participants, low-
quality evidence).
Other considerations
The guideline development group could find no plausible explanation for the 
finding of increased mortality among older children and adults in Asia who 
received rectal artesunate, which may be due to chance. Further trials would 
provide clarification but are unlikely to be done. The group was therefore unable 
to recommend its use in older children and adults. 
In the absence of direct evaluations of parenteral antimalarial drugs for pre-
referral treatment, the guideline development group considered the known 
benefits of artesunate in hospitalized patients and downgraded the quality 
of evidence for pre-referral situations. When intramuscular injections can 
be given, the group recommends intramuscular artesunate in preference to 
rectal artesunate.
Okebe J, Eisenhut M. Pre-referral rectal artesunate for severe malaria. Cochrane Database 
Systemat Rev 2014;5:CD009964. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009964.pub2.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
81
 The risk for death from severe malaria is greatest in the first 24 h, yet, in most 
malaria-endemic countries, the transit time between referral and arrival at a 
health facility where intravenous treatment can be administered is usually long, 
thus delaying the start of appropriate antimalarial treatment. During this time, 
the patient may deteriorate or die. It is therefore recommended that patients, 
particularly young children, be treated with a first dose of one of the recommended 
treatments before referral (unless the referral time is < 6 h). 
The recommended pre-referral treatment options for children < 6 years, 
in descending order of preference, are intramuscular artesunate; rectal artesunate; 
intramuscular artemether; and intramuscular quinine. For older children and 
adults, the recommended pre-referral treatment options, in descending order of 
preference, are intramuscular injections of artesunate; artemether; and quinine. 
Administration of an artemisinin derivative by the rectal route as pre-referral 
treatment is feasible and acceptable even at community level. The only trial of rectal 
artesunate as pre-referral treatment showed the expected reduction in mortality 
of young children but unexpectedly found increased mortality in older children 
and adults. As a consequence, rectal artesunate is recommended for use only in 
children aged < 6 years and only when intramuscular artesunate is not available. 
When rectal artesunate is used, patients should be transported immediately to a 
higher-level facility where intramuscular or intravenous treatment is available. 
If referral is impossible, rectal treatment could be continued until the patient can 
tolerate oral medication. At this point, a full course of the recommended ACT for 
uncomplicated malaria should be administered. 
The single dose of 10 mg/kg bw of artesunate when given as a suppository should 
be administered rectally as soon as a presumptive diagnosis of severe malaria is 
made. If the suppository is expelled from the rectum within 30 min of insertion, 
a second suppository should be inserted and the buttocks held together for 
 
10 min to ensure retention of the dose.
7.6 |  
ADJUSTMENT OF PARENTERAL DOSING 
IN RENAL FAILURE OR HEPATIC 
DYSFUNCTION
The dosage of artemisinin derivatives does not have to be adjusted for patients 
with vital organ dysfunction. However quinine accumulates in severe vital organ 
dysfunction. If a patient with severe malaria has persisting acute kidney injury or 
there is no clinical improvement by 48 h, the dose of quinine should be reduced by 
one third, to 10 mg salt/kg bw every 12 h. Dosage adjustments are not necessary 
if patients are receiving either haemodialysis or haemofiltration. 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
82
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 7.7 | FOLLOW-ON TREATMENT
The current recommendation of experts is to give parenteral antimalarial drugs for 
the treatment of severe malaria for a minimum of 24 h once started (irrespective 
of the patient’s ability to tolerate oral medication earlier) or until the patient can 
tolerate oral medication, before giving the oral follow-up treatment. 
After initial parenteral treatment, once the patient can tolerate oral therapy, it is 
essential to continue and complete treatment with an effective oral antimalarial 
drug by giving a full course of effective ACT (artesunate + amodiaquine, artemether 
+ lumefantrine or dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine). If the patient presented 
initially with impaired consciousness, ACTs containing mefloquine should be 
avoided because of an increased incidence of neuropsychiatric complications. 
When an ACT is not available, artesunate + clindamycin, artesunate + doxycycline, 
quinine + clindamycin or quinine + doxycycline can be used for follow-on treatment. 
Doxycycline is preferred to other tetracyclines because it can be given once daily 
and does not accumulate in cases of renal failure, but it should not be given to 
children < 8 years or pregnant women. As treatment with doxycycline is begun only 
when the patient has recovered sufficiently, the 7-day doxycycline course finishes 
after the artesunate, artemether or quinine course. When available, clindamycin 
is preferred in children and pregnant women. 
7.8 | CONTINUING SUPPORTIVE CARE
Patients with severe malaria require intensive nursing care, preferably in an intensive 
care unit where possible. Clinical observations should be made as frequently 
as possible and should include monitoring of vital signs, coma score and urine 
output. Blood glucose should be monitored every 4 h, if possible, particularly in 
unconscious patients.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
83
 7.9 | MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
Severe malaria is associated with a variety of manifestations and complications, 
which must be recognized promptly and treated as shown below.
Immediate clinical management of severe manifestations and complications 
 
of P. falciparum malaria
Manifestation or complication
Immediate managementa
Coma (cerebral malaria)
Maintain airway, place patient on his or 
her side, exclude other treatable causes 
of coma (e.g. hypoglycaemia, bacterial 
meningitis); avoid harmful ancillary 
treatments, intubate if necessary.
Hyperpyrexia
Administer tepid sponging, fanning, 
a cooling blanket and paracetamol. 
Convulsions
Maintain airways; treat promptly 
with intravenous or rectal diazepam, 
lorazepam, midazolam or intramuscular 
paraldehyde. Check blood glucose.
Hypoglycaemia 
Check blood glucose, correct 
hypoglycaemia and maintain with 
glucose-containing infusion. Although 
hypoglycaemia is defined as glucose < 2.2 
mmol/L, the threshold for intervention is 
< 3 mmol/L for children < 5 years and < 
2.2 mmol/L for older children and adults.
Severe anaemia 
Transfuse with screened fresh whole 
blood. 
Acute pulmonary oedemab
Prop patient up at an angle of 
45o, give oxygen, give a diuretic, 
stop intravenous fluids, intubate and 
add positive end-expiratory pressure or 
continuous positive airway pressure in 
life-threatening hypoxaemia.
Acute kidney injury
Exclude pre-renal causes, check 
fluid balance and urinary sodium; 
if in established renal failure, 
add haemofiltration or haemodialysis, or, 
if not available, peritoneal dialysis. 
Spontaneous bleeding 
and coagulopathy
Transfuse with screened fresh whole 
blood (cryoprecipitate, fresh frozen 
plasma and platelets, if available); 
give vitamin K injection.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
84
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Metabolic acidosis
Exclude or treat hypoglycaemia, 
hypovolaemia and septicaemia. If severe, 
add haemofiltration or haemodialysis.
Shock
Suspect septicaemia, take blood 
for cultures; give parenteral broad-
spectrum antimicrobials, correct 
haemodynamic disturbances.
a It is assumed that appropriate antimalarial treatment will have been started in all cases.
b Prevent by avoiding excess hydration
7.10 | ADDITIONAL ASPECTS OF MANAGEMENT
7.10.1 | FLUID THERAPY 
Fluid requirements should be assessed individually. Adults with severe malaria 
 
are very vulnerable to fluid overload, while children are more likely to be dehydrated. 
The fluid regimen must also be adapted to the infusion of antimalarial drugs. 
Rapid bolus infusion of colloid or crystalloids is contraindicated. If available, 
haemofiltration should be started early for acute kidney injury or severe metabolic 
acidosis, which do not respond to rehydration. As the degree of fluid depletion 
varies considerably in patients with severe malaria, it is not possible to give general 
recommendations on fluid replacement; each patient must be assessed individually 
and fluid resuscitation based on the estimated deficit. In high-transmission 
settings, children commonly present with severe anaemia and hyperventilation 
(sometimes termed “respiratory distress”) resulting from severe metabolic acidosis 
and anaemia; they should be treated by blood transfusion. In adults, there is a very 
thin dividing line between over-hydration, which may produce pulmonary oedema, 
and under-hydration, which contributes to shock, worsening acidosis and renal 
impairment. Careful, frequent evaluation of jugular venous pressure, peripheral 
perfusion, venous filling, skin turgor and urine output should be made. 
7.10.2 | BLOOD TRANSFUSION
Severe malaria is associated with rapid development of anaemia, as infected, 
once infected and uninfected erythrocytes are haemolysed and/or removed from the 
circulation by the spleen. Ideally, fresh, cross-matched blood should be transfused; 
however, in most settings, cross-matched virus-free blood is in short supply. As for 
fluid resuscitation, there are not enough studies to make strong evidence-based 
recommendations on the indications for transfusion; the recommendations given 
here are based on expert opinion. In high-transmission settings, blood transfusion 
is generally recommended for children with a haemoglobin level of < 5 g/100 mL 
(haematocrit < 15%). In low-transmission settings, a threshold of 20% (haemoglobin, 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
85
 7 g/100 mL) is recommended. These general recommendations must, however, 
be adapted to the individual, as the pathological consequences of rapid development 
of anaemia are worse than those of chronic or acute anaemia when there has 
been adaptation and a compensatory right shift in the oxygen dissociation curve.
7.10.3 | EXCHANGE BLOOD TRANSFUSION 
Many anecdotal reports and several series have claimed the benefit of exchange 
blood transfusion in severe malaria, but there have been no comparative trials, 
and there is no consensus on whether it reduces mortality or how it might work. 
Various rationales have been proposed: 
•  
removing infected red blood cells from the circulation and therefore lowering 
the parasite burden (although only the circulating, relatively non-pathogenic 
stages are removed, and this is also achieved rapidly with artemisinin derivatives);
•  
rapidly reducing both the antigen load and the burden of parasite-derived toxins, 
metabolites and toxic mediators produced by the host; and
•  
replacing the rigid unparasitized red cells by more easily deformable cells, 
therefore alleviating microcirculatory obstruction.
Exchange blood transfusion requires intensive nursing care and a relatively 
large volume of blood, and it carries significant risks. There is no consensus on 
the indications, benefits and dangers involved or on practical details such as the 
volume of blood that should be exchanged. It is, therefore, not possible to make 
any recommendation regarding the use of exchange blood transfusion.
7.10.4 | CONCOMITANT USE OF ANTIBIOTICS 
The threshold for administering antibiotic treatment should be low in severe malaria. 
Septicaemia and severe malaria are associated, and there is substantial diagnostic 
overlap, particularly in children in areas of moderate and high transmission. Thus broad-
spectrum antibiotic treatment should be given with antimalarial drugs to all children 
with suspected severe malaria in areas of moderate and high transmission until a 
bacterial infection is excluded. After the start of antimalarial treatment, unexplained 
deterioration may result from a supervening bacterial infection. Enteric bacteria (notably 
Salmonella) predominated in many trial series in Africa, but a variety of bacteria have 
been cultured from the blood of patients with a diagnosis of severe malaria. 
Patients with secondary pneumonia or with clear evidence of aspiration should be given 
empirical treatment with an appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotic. In children with 
persistent fever despite parasite clearance, other possible causes of fever should be 
excluded, such as systemic Salmonella infections and urinary tract infections, especially 
in catheterized patients. In the majority of cases of persistent fever, however, no other 
pathogen is identified after parasite clearance. Antibiotic treatment should be based 
on culture and sensitivity results or, if not available, local antibiotic sensitivity patterns.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
86
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 7.10.5 | USE OF ANTICONVULSANTS
The treatment of convulsions in cerebral malaria with intravenous (or, if this is 
not possible, rectal) benzodiazepines or intramuscular paraldehyde is similar 
to that for repeated seizures from any cause. In a large, double-blind, placebo-
controlled evaluation of a single prophylactic intramuscular injection of 20 mg/kg 
bw of phenobarbital to children with cerebral malaria, the frequency of seizures 
was reduced but the mortality rate was increased significantly. This resulted from 
respiratory arrest and was associated with additional use of benzodiazepine. 
 
A 20 mg/kg bw dose of phenobarbital should not be given without respiratory support. 
It is not known whether a lower dose would be effective and safer or whether 
mortality would not increase if ventilation were given. In the absence of further 
information, prophylactic anticonvulsants are not recommended.
7.10.6 | TREATMENTS THAT ARE NOT 
RECOMMENDED
In an attempt to reduce the high mortality from severe malaria, various adjunctive 
treatments have been evaluated, but none has proved effective and many have been 
shown to be harmful. Heparin, prostacyclin, desferroxamine, pentoxifylline, low-
molecular-mass dextran, urea, high-dose corticosteroids, aspirin anti-TNF antibody, 
cyclosporine A, dichloroacetate, adrenaline, hyperimmune serum, N-acetylcysteine and 
bolus administration of albumin are not recommended. In addition, use of corticosteroids 
increases the risk for gastrointestinal bleeding and seizures and has been associated 
with prolonged coma resolution times when compared with placebo.
7.11 | TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA 
DURING PREGNANCY
Women in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy are more likely to have 
severe malaria than other adults, and, in low-transmission settings, this is often 
complicated by pulmonary oedema and hypoglycaemia. Maternal mortality is 
approximately 50%, which is higher than in non-pregnant adults. Fetal death and 
premature labour are common. 
Parenteral antimalarial drugs should be given to pregnant women with severe 
malaria in full doses without delay. Parenteral artesunate is the treatment of choice 
in all trimesters. Treatment must not be delayed. If artesunate is unavailable, 
intramuscular artemether should be given, and if this is unavailable then parenteral 
quinine should be started immediately until artesunate is obtained. 
Obstetric advice should be sought at an early stage, a paediatrician alerted and 
blood glucose checked frequently. Hypoglycaemia should be expected, and it is 
often recurrent if the patient is receiving quinine. Severe malaria may also present 
immediately after delivery. Postpartum bacterial infection is a common complication 
and should be managed appropriately. 
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
87
 7.12 | TREATMENT OF SEVERE P. VIVAX MALARIA
Although P. vivax malaria is considered to be benign, with a low case-fatality 
rate, it may cause a debilitating febrile illness with progressive anaemia and 
can also occasionally cause severe disease, as in P. falciparum malaria. Reported 
manifestations of severe P. vivax malaria include severe anaemia, thrombocytopenia, 
acute pulmonary oedema and, less commonly, cerebral malaria, pancytopenia, 
jaundice, splenic rupture, haemoglobinuria, acute renal failure and shock. 
Prompt effective treatment and case management should be the same as for severe 
P. falciparum malaria (see section 7.4). Following parenteral artesunate, treatment 
can be completed with a full treatment course of oral ACT or chloroquine (in 
countries where chloroquine is the treatment of choice). A full course of radical 
treatment with primaquine should be given after recovery.
7 | Treatment of severe malaria
88
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 8 |  
MANAGEMENT OF MALARIA CASES 
IN SPECIAL SITUATIONS
 8.1 | EPIDEMICS AND  
HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES
Environmental, political and economic changes, population movement and war 
can all contribute to the emergence or re-emergence of malaria in areas where it 
was previously eliminated or well controlled. The displacement of large numbers 
of people with little or no immunity within malaria-endemic areas increases the 
risk for malaria epidemics among the displaced population, while displacement of 
people from an endemic area to an area where malaria has been eliminated can 
result in re-introduction of transmission and a risk for epidemics in the resident 
population. 
Climate change may also alter transmission patterns and the malaria burden globally 
by producing conditions that favour vector breeding and there by increasing the 
risks for malaria transmission and epidemics. 
8.1.1 | PARASITOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS  
DURING EPIDEMICS
In the acute phase of epidemics and complex emergency situations, facilities 
for laboratory diagnosis with good-quality equipment and reagents and skilled 
technicians are often not available or are overwhelmed. Attempts should be made 
to improve diagnostic capacity rapidly, including provision of RDTs. If diagnostic 
testing is not feasible, the most practical approach is to treat all febrile patients 
as suspected malaria cases, with the inevitable consequences of over-treatment 
of malaria and potentially poor management of other febrile conditions. If this 
approach is used, it is imperative to monitor intermittently the prevalence of 
malaria as a true cause of fever and revise the policy appropriately. This approach 
has sometimes been termed “mass fever treatment”. This is not the same as and 
should not be confused with “mass drug administration”, which is administration 
of a complete treatment course of antimalarial medicines to every individual in 
a geographically defined area without testing for infection and regardless of the 
presence of symptoms (see section 10).
8.1.2 |  
MANAGEMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED 
FALCIPARUM MALARIA DURING EPIDEMICS
The principles of treatment of uncomplicated malaria are the same as those 
outlined in section 4. Active case detection should be undertaken to ensure that 
as many patients as possible receive adequate treatment, rather than relying on 
patients to come to a clinic.
8 | Management of malaria cases in special situations
90
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 8.1.3 | MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA  
DURING EPIDEMICS
The principles of treatment of severe malaria during epidemics are the same as 
those outlined in section 7. In humanitarian emergencies, when there are many 
patients and many present late, effective triage, with immediate resuscitation and 
treatment, are essential. In epidemic situations, severe malaria is often managed in 
temporary clinics or in situations in which staff shortages and the high workload 
make intensive case monitoring difficult. 
8.1.4 |  
EPIDEMICS OF MIXED FALCIPARUM AND 
VIVAX OR VIVAX MALARIA 
ACTs (except artesunate + SP) should be used to treat uncomplicated malaria in 
mixed-infection epidemics, as they are highly effective against all malaria species. 
In areas with pure P. vivax epidemics, ACTs or chloroquine (if prevalent strains are 
sensitive) should be used. 
8.1.5 | ANTI-RELAPSE THERAPY FOR P. VIVAX MALARIA 
Administration of 14-day primaquine anti-relapse therapy for vivax malaria may 
be impractical in epidemic situations because of the duration of treatment and 
the difficulty of ensuring adherence. If adequate records are kept, therapy can 
be given in the post-epidemic period to patients who have been treated with 
blood schizontocides.
8.2 | MALARIA ELIMINATION SETTINGS
8.2.1 |  
USE OF GAMETOCYTOCIDAL DRUGS TO 
REDUCE TRANSMISSION
ACT reduces P. falciparum gametocyte carriage and transmission markedly, but this 
effect is incomplete, and patients presenting with gametocytaemia may be infectious 
for days or occasionally weeks, despite ACT. The strategy of using a single dose 
of primaquine to reduce infectivity and thus P. falciparum transmission has been 
widely used in low transmission settings. 
Use of primaquine as a P
. falciparum gametocytocide has a particular role in programmes to 
eliminate P
. falciparum malaria. The population benefits of reducing malaria transmission 
by gametocytocidal drugs require that a high proportion of patients receive these 
medicines. WHO recommends the addition of a single dose of primaquine (0.25 
8 | Management of malaria cases in special situations
91
 mg base/kg bw) to ACT for uncomplicated falciparum malaria as a gametocytocidal 
medicine, particularly as a component of pre-elimination or elimination programmes. 
A recent review of the evidence on the safety and effectiveness of primaquine as a 
gametocytocide of P. falciparum indicates that a single dose of 0.25 mg base/kg bw is 
effective in blocking infectivity to mosquitos and is unlikely to cause serious toxicity 
in people with any of the G6PD variants. Thus, the G6PD status of the patient does not 
have to be known before primaquine is used for this indication. 
8.3 | ARTEMISININ-RESISTANT  
FALCIPARUM MALARIA
Artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum is now prevalent in parts of Cambodia, the Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam. There is currently no 
evidence for artemisinin resistance outside these areas. The particular advantage of 
artemisinins over other antimalarial drugs is that they kill circulating ring-stage parasites 
and thus accelerate therapeutic responses.This is lost in resistance to artemisinin. As a 
consequence, parasite clearance is slowed, and ACT failure rates and gametocytaemia 
both increase. The reduced efficacy of artemisinin places greater selective pressure on the 
partner drugs, to which resistance is also increasing. This situation poses a grave threat. 
In the past chloroquine resistant parasites emerged near the Cambodia–Thailand border 
and then spread throughout Asia and Africa at a cost of millions of lives. In Cambodia, 
where artemisinin resistance is worst, none of the currently recommended treatment 
regimens provides acceptable cure rates (> 90%), and continued use of ineffective drug 
regimens fuels the spread of resistance. In Cambodia use of atovaquone–proguanil 
instead of ACT resulted in very rapid emergence of resistance to atovaquone. 
In this dangerous, rapidly changing situation, local treatment guidelines cannot be based 
on a solid evidence base; however, the risks associated with continued use of ineffective 
regimens are likely to exceed the risks of new, untried regimens with generally safe 
antimalarial drugs. At the current levels of resistance, the artemisinin derivatives still 
provide significant antimalarial activity; therefore, longer courses of treatment with 
existing or new augmented combinations or treatment with new partner medicines (e.g. 
artesunate + pyronaridine) may be effective. Studies to determine the best treatments 
for artemisinin-resistant malaria are needed urgently. 
It is strongly recommended that single-dose primaquine (as a gametocytocide) be 
added to all falciparum malaria treatment regimens (section 4.5). For the treatment 
of severe malaria in areas with established artemisinin resistance, it is recommended 
that parenteral artesunate and parenteral quinine be given together in full doses, 
as described in section 7.4. 
8 | Management of malaria cases in special situations
92
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 9 |  
ARTEMISININ-BASED COMBINATION 
THERAPIES NOT CURRENTLY 
RECOMMENDED FOR  
GENERAL USE 
 The pipeline for new antimalarial drugs is healthier than ever before, and several 
new compounds are in various stages of development. Some novel antimalarial 
agents are already registered in some countries. The decision to recommend 
antimalarial drugs for general use depends on the strength of the evidence for 
safety and efficacy and the context of use. In general, when there are no satisfactory 
alternatives, newly registered drugs may be recommended; however, for global or 
unrestricted recommendations, considerably more evidence than that submitted 
for registration is usually required, to provide sufficient confidence for their safety, 
efficacy and relative merits as compared with currently recommended treatments. 
Several new antimalarial drugs or new combinations have been introduced 
recently. Some are still in the pre-registration phase and are not discussed here. 
Artesunate + pyronaridine, arterolane + piperaquine, artemisinin + piperaquine 
base and artemisinin + napththoquine are new ACTs, which are registered and 
used in some countries. In addition, there are several new generic formulations 
of existing drugs. None of these yet has a sufficient evidence base for general 
recommendation (i.e. unrestricted use). 
A systematic review of artesunate + pyronaridine included six trials with a total 
of 3718 patients. Artesunate + pyronaridine showed good efficacy as compared 
with artemether + lumefantrine and artesunate + mefloquine in adults and 
older children with P. falciparum malaria, but the current evidence for young 
children is insufficient to be confident that the drug is as effective as currently 
recommended options. In addition, regulatory authorities noted slightly higher 
hepatic transaminase concentrations in artesunate + pyronaridine recipients than 
in comparison groups and recommended further studies to characterize the risk 
for hepatotoxicity. Preliminary data from repeat-dosing studies are reassuring 
(see Annex 4, A4.17). 
Arterolane + piperaquine is a combination of a synthetic ozonide and piperaquine 
phosphate that is registered in India for use only in adults There are currently 
insufficient data to make general recommendations.
Artemisinin + piperaquine base combines two well-established, well-tolerated 
compounds. It differs from previous treatments in that the piperaquine is in the 
base form, the artemisinin dose is relatively low, and the current labelling is for 
only a 2-day regimen. There are insufficient data from clinical trials for a general 
recommendation, and there is concern that the artemisinin dose regimen provides 
insufficient protection against resistance to the piperaquine component. 
Artemisinin + naphthoquine is also a combination of two relatively old compounds 
that is currently being promoted as a single-dose regimen, contrary to WHO 
advice for 3 days of the artemisinin derivative. There are currently insufficient 
data from rigorously conducted randomized controlled trials to make general 
recommendations (see Annex 4, A4.18).
Many ACTs are generics. The bioavailability of generics of currently recommended 
drugs must be comparable to that of the established, originally registered product, 
and the satisfactory pharmaceutical quality of the product must be maintained.
9 |  
Artemisinin-based combination therapies not currently recommended  
for general use
94
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 10 | MASS DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
 Mass antimalarial drug administration has been used extensively in various forms 
over the past 80 years. The objective is to provide therapeutic concentrations of 
antimalarial drugs to as large a proportion of the population as possible in order 
to cure any asymptomatic infections and also to prevent reinfection during the 
period of post-treatment prophylaxis.9 Mass drug administration rapidly reduces 
the prevalence and incidence of malaria in the short term, but more studies are 
required to assess its longer-term impact, the barriers to community uptake, and its 
potential contribution to the development of drug resistance.10 In an analysis of 38 
mass drug administration projects carried out since 1932,11 only one was reported 
to have succeeded in interrupting malaria transmission permanently. In this study, 
chloroquine, SP and primaquine were provided weekly to the small population of 
Aneityum Island in Vanuatu for 9 weeks before the rainy season, in combination 
with distribution of insecticide-treated nets.12 
There is considerable divergence of opinion about the benefits and risks of mass 
antimalarial drug administration. As a consequence, it has been little used in recent 
years; however, renewed interest in malaria elimination and the emerging threat 
of artemisinin resistance has been accompanied by reconsideration of mass drug 
administration as a means for rapidly eliminating malaria in a specific region or area. 
During mass campaigns, every individual in a defined population or geographical 
area is requested to take antimalarial treatment at approximately the same time and 
at repeated intervals in a coordinated manner. This requires extensive community 
engagement to achieve a high level of community acceptance and participation. 
The optimum timing depends of the elimination kinetics of the antimalarial 
(e.g. in current initiatives using dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, the drug is 
given monthly for 3 months at treatment doses, as the residual piperaquine 
levels suppress reinfections for 1 month). Depending on the contraindications 
for the medicines used, pregnant women, young infants and other population 
groups may be excluded from the campaign. Thus, the drugs used, the number 
of treatment rounds, the optimum intervals and the support structures necessary 
are all context-specific and are still subject to active research. In the past, vivax 
elimination programmes were based on pre-seasonal mass radical treatment 
with primaquine (0.25 mg/kg/for 14 days) without testing for G6PD deficiency or 
monitoring primaquine-induced haemolysis, although in some cases interrupted 
regimens were used: 4 days’ treatment, 3 days of no treatment, then continuation 
to complete the course (usually 11 days) if the drug was well tolerated.13
9  
White NJ. How antimalarial drug resistance affects post-treatment prophylaxis. Malar J 2008;11:7–9.
10  
Poirot E, Skarbinski J, Sinclair D, Kachur SP, Slutsker L, Hwang J. Mass drug administration for malaria. Cochrane 
Database Systemat Rev 2013;11:CD008846. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008846.pub2. 
11  
von Seidlein L, Greenwood BM. Mass administration of antimalarial drugs. Trends Parasitol 2003;19:790–6.
12  
Kaneko A, Taleo G, Kalkoa M, Yamar S, Kobayakawa T, Björkman A. Malaria eradication on islands. Lancet 
2000;356:1560–4.
13  
Kondrashin A, Baranova AM, Ashley EA, Recht J, White NJ, Sergiev VP. Mass primaquine treatment to eliminate vivax 
malaria: lessons from the past. Malar J 2014;13:51.
10 | Mass drug administration
96
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Both mass drug administration and mass screening and treatment require 
that a high proportion of the target population is reached by the intervention. 
This requires informed, enthusiastic community participation and comprehensive 
support structures.
Once mass drug administration is terminated, if malaria transmission is not 
interrupted or importation of malaria is not prevented, then malaria endemicity 
in the area will eventually return to its original levels (unless the vectorial 
capacity is reduced in parallel and maintained at a very low level). The time it 
takes to return to the original levels of transmission will depend on the prevailing 
vectorial capacity.14 If malaria is not eliminated from the target population, 
then mass drug administration may provide a significant selective pressure for the 
emergence of resistance. The rebound in malaria may be associated temporarily 
with higher morbidity and mortality if drug administration was maintained 
long enough for people to lose herd immunity against malaria. For this reason, 
mass drug administration should not be started unless there is a good chance 
that focal elimination will be achieved. In some circumstances (e.g. containment 
of artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum), elimination of only one species may be 
 
the objective. 
 
14  
Vectorial capacity: number of new infections that the population of a given anopheline mosquito vector would 
distribute per case per day at a given place and time, assuming the human population is not immune. Factors 
affecting vectorial capacity include: the density of female anophelines relative to humans; their longevity, 
frequency of feeding and propensity to bite humans; and the length of the extrinsic (i.e. in the mosquito) cycle of 
the parasite. 
10 | Mass drug administration
97
  11 |  
CHEMOPREVENTION IN 
SPECIAL RISK GROUPS 
 Chemoprevention for special risk groups 
Intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy
In malaria-endemic areas in Africa, provide intermittent preventive treatment 
with SP to all women in their first or second pregnancy (SP-IPTp) as part of 
antenatal care. Dosing should start in the second trimester and doses should 
be given at least 1 month apart, with the objective of ensuring that at least 
three doses are received.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Intermittent preventive treatment in infants
In areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission in Africa, where SP is 
still effective, provide intermittent preventive treatment with SP to infants 
 
(< 12 months of age) (SP-IPTi) at the time of the second and third rounds of 
vaccination against DTP and vaccination against measles.
Strong recommendation
Seasonal malaria chemoprevention
In areas with highly seasonal malaria transmission in the sub-Sahel region 
of Africa, provide seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) with monthly 
amodiaquine + SP for all children < 6 years during each transmission season.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
Chemoprevention is the use of antimalarial medicines for prophylaxis and 
for preventive treatment. The use of medicines for chemoprophylaxis is not 
addressed in detail in the current guidelines, beyond a short description of general 
 
condition of use. 
Malaria may be prevented by taking drugs that inhibit liver-stage (pre-erythrocytic) 
development (causal prophylaxis) or drugs that kill asexual blood stages (suppressive 
prophylaxis). Causal prophylactics (atovaquone + proguanil, primaquine) can be 
stopped soon after leaving an endemic area, whereas suppressive prophylactics 
must be taken for at least 4 weeks after leaving the area in order to eliminate 
asexual parasites emerging from the liver weeks after exposure. For travellers, 
chemoprophylaxis is started before entering the endemic area to assess tolerability 
and for slowly eliminated drugs to build up therapeutic concentrations.
The objective of preventive treatment is to prevent malarial illness by maintaining 
therapeutic drug levels in the blood throughout the period of greatest risk. Current 
WHO-recommended malaria chemopreventive therapies include IPTp, IPTi and SMC.
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups
100
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 11.1 |  
INTERMITTENT PREVENTIVE 
TREATMENT OF MALARIA IN PREGNANCY 
WITH SULFADOXINE–PYRIMETHAMINE 
Intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy (IPTp)
In malaria-endemic areas in Africa, provide SP-IPTp to all women in their first or 
second pregnancy as part of antenatal care. Dosing should start in the second 
trimester and doses should be given at least 1 month apart, with the objective 
of ensuring that at least three doses are received.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.19)
In a systematic review of IPTp, seven trials involving direct comparison of two 
doses of SP with three or more doses monthly were evaluated. The trials were 
conducted in Burkina Faso, Kenya, Malawi, Mali and Zambia between 1996 
and 2008.
In comparison with two doses of SP, three or more doses:
•  
Increased the mean birth weight by about 56 g (95% CI, 29–83; seven 
trials, 2190 participants, high-quality evidence);
•  
Reduced the number of low-birth-weight infants by about 20% (RR, 0.80; 
95% CI, 0.69–0.94; seven trials, 2190 participants, high-quality evidence);
•  
Reduced placental parasitaemia by about 50% (RR, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.38–
0.68; six trials, 1436 participants, high-quality evidence); and
•  
Reduced maternal parasitaemia by about 33% (RR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.52–
0.89; seven trials, 2096 participants, high-quality evidence).
The trials conducted to date have not been large enough to detect or exclude 
effects on spontaneous miscarriage, stillbirth or neonatal mortality (very low-
quality evidence).
Other considerations
The guideline development group noted that the beneficial effects were obvious 
in women in their first and second pregnancies. There was less information 
on women in their third or later pregnancy, but the available information was 
consistent with benefit. 
Kayentao K, Garner P
, van Eijk AM, Naidoo I, Roper C, Mulokozi A, et al. Intermittent preventive therapy 
for malaria during pregnancy using 2 vs 3 or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine and risk of 
low birth weight in Africa: systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2013;309:594–604.
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups 101
 Malaria infection during pregnancy is a major public health problem, with substantial 
risks for the mother, her fetus and the newborn. WHO recommends a package of 
interventions for preventing and controlling malaria during pregnancy, which includes 
promotion and use of insecticide-treated nets, appropriate case management with 
prompt, effective treatment and, in areas with moderate to high transmission of 
P. falciparum, administration of IPTp-SP
. 
In the systematic review summarized in the box above, the reduction in risk for low 
birth weight was consistent for a wide range of levels of resistance to SP
. The group 
that received three or more doses also had less placental malaria. There were no 
differences in serious adverse events between the two groups. On the basis of these 
results, WHO now recommends that, in areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission of 
Africa, IPTp-SP be given to all pregnant women at each scheduled antenatal care visit, starting 
as early as possible in the second trimester, provided that the doses of SP are given at 
least 1 month apart. The objective is to ensure that at least three doses are received.
In several countries in Africa, some P. falciparum parasites carry quintuple mutations 
(triple Pfdhfr and double Pfdhps), which are associated with therapeutic failure of 
SP treatment. IPTp-SP remains effective in preventing the adverse consequences of 
malaria on maternal and fetal outcomes in areas where a high proportion (> 90%) of 
P. falciparum parasites carry these quintuple mutations. Therefore, IPTp-SP should still 
be administered to women in these areas. In areas where P. falciparum carrying six 
mutations (either Pfdhfr 164 or Pfdhps 581) are prevalent, the efficacy of IPTp-SP may 
be compromised. It is unclear by how much. 
There are currently insufficient data to define the level of P. falciparum transmission 
at which IPTp-SP may cease to be cost-effective from a public health point of view. 
Furthermore, the natural fluctuations in malaria incidence from year to year, the low 
cost of the intervention and the challenges of IPTp re-introduction after withdrawal 
indicate that caution must be exercised in discontinuing IPTp-SP because of recent 
reductions in transmission. More data will be needed to allow the formulation of more 
specific guidelines. 
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups
102
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 11.2 |  
INTERMITTENT PREVENTIVE 
TREATMENT OF MALARIA IN INFANTS 
WITH SULFADOXINE–PYRIMETHAMINE
Intermittent preventive treatment in infants
In areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission in Africa, where SP is still 
effective, provide intermittent preventive treatment with SP to infants (< 12 
months of age) (SP-IPTi) at the time of the second and third rounds of vaccination 
against diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (DTP) and vaccination against measles.
Strong recommendation – from 2010, evidence not re-evaluated
Evidence supporting the recommendation (see Annex 4, A4.20) 
The recommendation is based on a pooled analysis of 6 randomised pacebo 
controlled studies on SP-IPTi conducted in areas of moderate to high transmission 
of malaria:
•  
SP-IPTi delivered through EPI provides an overall protection in the first 
year of life against clinical malaria [30.3% (95% CI: 19.8%–39.4%)], 
anaemia [21.3% (95% CI: 8.3%–32.5%)], hospital admissions associated 
with malaria parasitaemia [38.1% (95% CI 12.5%–56.2%)], and all-cause 
hospital admissions [22.9% (95% CI: 10.0%–34.0%)]. SP-IPTi offers a 
personal protection against clinical malaria for a period of approximately 
35 days following the administration of each dose.
Other considerations
The recommendation was formulated at the fourth consultative meeting of 
the Technical Expert Group (TEG) of Preventive Chemotherapy, GMP, WHO, April 
2009 which reviewed all evidence available at the time. The evidence was not 
re-evaluated during this guideline process and therefore the quality of evidence 
has not been formally assessed.
Aponte JJ, Schellenberg D, Egan A, et al. Efficacy and safety of intermittent preventive treatment 
with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for malaria in African infants: a pooled analysis of six 
randomised, placebo-controlled trials. Lancet. 2009 ;374:1533-42.
The vast majority of malaria cases and deaths in Africa occur in young children. 
The key interventions recommended to prevent and control malaria in this 
vulnerable group include use of insecticide-treated nets or indoor residual 
spraying, prompt access to diagnosis and treatment and, in areas of Africa with 
moderate to high transmission of P. falciparum, administration of IPTi. This consists 
of co-administration of a full therapeutic course of SP with the second and third 
vaccinations against DTP and vaccination against measles delivered in the Expanded 
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups 103
 Programme on Immunization at routine schedules—usually at 10 weeks, 14 weeks 
and about 9 months of age—to infants at risk for malaria.15
WHO recommends co-administration of SP-IPTi in areas with moderate-to-high malaria 
transmission (annual entomological inoculation rate ≥ 10) of Africa, and where parasite 
resistance to SP is not high, defined as a prevalence of the Pfdhps 540 mutation of ≤ 50%.
The studies showed no evidence of any adverse effects of SP-IPTi on infants’ 
serological responses to vaccines (DTP, polio, hepatitis B, Haemophilus influenzae 
B, yellow fever or measles). A rebound effect in terms of greater susceptibility to 
malaria after termination of SP-IPTi, although reported in some studies, was not 
found in the pooled analysis.
SP-IPTi should not be given to infants receiving a sulfa-based medication for treatment 
or prophylaxis, including co-trimoxazole (trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole), which is 
widely used as prophylaxis against opportunistic infections in HIV-infected infants.
Surveillance of molecular markers of SP resistance should accompany SP-IPTi, 
in particular the distribution and prevalence of Pfdhps 540 mutations, which is a 
surrogate measure of SP efficacy.
15  
Policy recommendation on intermittent preventive treatment during infancy with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine 
(SP-IPTi) for Plasmodium falciparum malaria control in Africa. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010 (http://
www.who.int/malaria/news/WHO_policy_recommendation_IPTi_032010.pdf).
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups
104
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 11.3 |  
SEASONAL MALARIA CHEMOPREVENTION 
WITH AMODIAQUINE + SULFADOXINE– 
PYRIMETHAMINE
 
Seasonal malaria chemoprophylaxis
In areas with highly seasonal malaria transmission in the sub-Sahel region of 
Africa, provide SMC with monthly amodiaquine + SP for all children < 6 years 
during each transmission season.
Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence
GRADE (see Annex 4, A4.21)
In a systematic review SMC was directly compared with no prophylaxis in seven 
trials with a total of 12 589 children. All the trials were conducted in West Africa, 
and six of seven trials were restricted to children < 5 years.
In comparison with no chemoprophylaxis, SMC:
•  
Prevented up to 75% of malaria episodes (rate ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 
0.17–0.38; six trials, 9321 participants, high-quality evidence);
•  
Prevented up to 75% of severe malaria episodes (rate ratio, 0.27; 95% CI, 
0.10–0.76; two trials, 5964 participants, high-quality evidence); and
•  
May be associated with a reduction in mortality (risk ratio, 0.66; 95% CI, 
0.31–1.39; six trials, 9533 participants, moderate-quality evidence).
These effects remained even when use of insecticide-treated nets was high 
(two trials, 5964 participants, high-quality evidence).
The current regimen (amodiaquine + SP) caused vomiting after the first dose 
in some children (high-quality evidence). 
Meremikwu MM, Donegan S, Sinclair D, Esu E, Oringanje C. Intermittent preventive treatment for 
malaria in children living in areas with seasonal transmission. Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 
2012;2:CD003756. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003756.pub4.
Throughout the Sahel subregion, most mortality and morbidity from malaria among 
children occurs during the rainy season, which is generally short. The interventions 
currently recommended by WHO for the control of malaria are use of insecticide-
treated nets and/or indoor residual spraying for vector control, prompt access to 
diagnostic testing of suspected malaria and treatment of confirmed cases. SMC is 
defined as intermittent administration of full treatment courses of an antimalarial 
medicine during the malaria season to prevent illness, with the objective of 
maintaining therapeutic antimalarial drug concentrations in the blood throughout 
the period of greatest risk.
SMC is therefore recommended in areas of highly seasonal malaria transmission 
throughout the Sahel subregion. A complete treatment course of amodiaquine + SP 
should be given to children aged 3–59 months at monthly intervals, beginning 
at the start of the transmission season, to a maximum of four doses during the 
transmission season (provided both drugs retain sufficient antimalarial efficacy).
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups 105
 The results of clinical trials indicate that a high level of protection against 
uncomplicated clinical malaria is likely to be maintained for 4 weeks after 
administration of each course of amodiaquine + SP; thereafter, protection appears 
to decay rapidly.
Treatment of breakthrough P. falciparum infections during the period of SMC should 
not include either amodiaquine or SP, and, in areas where SMC is implemented, 
alternative antimalarial combinations containing neither amodiaquine nor SP must 
be made available for the treatment of clinical malaria in the target age group.
IPTi and SMC should not be administered concomitantly; therefore, IPTi should 
not be used in target areas for SMC. SMC should not be given to children with 
severe acute illness or who are unable to take oral medication, or to HIV-positive 
children receiving co-trimoxazole, or children who have received a dose of either 
amodiaquine or SP during the past month or children with allergy to either drug.
11 | Chemoprevention in special risk groups
106
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 12 |  
QUALITY OF 
ANTIMALARIAL MEDICINES
 Antimalarial drug quality
National drug and regulatory authorities should ensure that the antimalarial 
medicines provided in both the public and the private sectors are of acceptable 
quality, through regulation, inspection and law enforcement.
Good practice statement
The two general classes of poor-quality medicines are those that are falsified 
(counterfeit), in which there is criminal intent to deceive and the drug contains 
little or no active ingredient (and often other potentially harmful substances), 
and those that are substandard, in which a legitimate producer has included incorrect 
amounts of active drug and/or excipients in the medicine, or the medicine has 
been stored incorrectly or for too long and has degraded. Falsified antimalarial 
tablets and ampoules containing little or no active pharmaceutical ingredients are 
a major problem in some areas. They may be impossible to distinguish at points 
of care from the genuine product and may lead to under-dosage and high levels 
of treatment failure, giving a mistaken impression of resistance, or encourage the 
development of resistance by providing sub-therapeutic blood levels. They may 
also contain toxic ingredients.
Substandard drugs result from poor-quality manufacture and formulation, chemical 
instability or improper or prolonged storage. Artemisinin and its derivatives in 
particular have built-in chemical instability, which is necessary for their biological 
action but which causes pharmaceutical problems both in their manufacture 
and in their co-formulation with other compounds. The problems of instability 
are accelerated under tropical conditions. The requirement for stringent quality 
standards is particularly important for this class of compounds. Many antimalarial 
drugs are stored in conditions of high heat and humidity and sold beyond their 
expiry dates.
In many malaria-endemic areas, a large proportion of the antimalarial drugs used 
are generic products purchased in the private sector. They may contain the correct 
amounts of antimalarial drug, but, because of their formulation, are inadequately 
absorbed. Antimalarial medicines must be manufactured according to good 
manufacturing practice, have the correct drug and excipient contents, be proved 
to have bioavailability that is similar to that of the reference product, have been 
stored under appropriate conditions and be dispensed before their expiry date. 
12 | Quality of antimalarial medicines
108
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Tools to assess drug quality at points of sale are being developed, but the capacity 
of medicines regulatory agencies in most countries to monitor drug quality is still 
limited. Legal and regulatory frameworks must be strengthened, and there should 
be greater collaboration between law enforcement agencies, customs and excise 
authorities and medicines regulatory agencies to deal more effectively with falsified 
medicines. Private sector drug distribution outlets should have more information 
and active engagement with regulatory agencies. WHO, in collaboration with other 
United Nations agencies, has established an international mechanism to prequalify 
manufacturers of ACTs on the basis of their compliance with internationally 
recommended standards of manufacture and quality. Manufacturers of antimalarial 
medicines with prequalified status are listed on the prequalification web site.16 
16  
Prequalification programme: A United Nations programme managed by WHO. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2009 (http://apps.who.int/prequal/).
12 | Quality of antimalarial medicines 109
 110
 13 |  
MONITORING THE EFFICACY 
AND SAFETY OF ANTIMALARIAL 
DRUGS AND  RESISTANCE 
 Monitoring of antimalarial drug efficacy and safety, and resis-
tance
All malaria programmes should regularly monitor the therapeutic efficacy of 
antimalarial drugs using the standard WHO protocols.
Good practice statement
When adapting and implementing these guidelines, countries should also 
strengthen their systems for monitoring and evaluating their national programmes. 
The systems should allow countries to track the implementation and impact of new 
recommendations, better target their programmes to the areas and populations 
at greatest need and detect decreasing antimalarial efficacy and drug resistance 
as early as possible. See also Annex 7.
13.1 | ROUTINE SURVEILLANCE
WHO promotes universal coverage with diagnostic testing and antimalarial 
treatment and strengthened malaria surveillance systems. In the “test, track, treat” 
initiative, it is recommended that every suspected malaria case is tested, that every 
confirmed case is treated with a quality-assured antimalarial medicine and that 
the disease is tracked by timely, accurate surveillance systems. Surveillance and 
treatment based on confirmed malaria cases will lead to better understanding 
of the disease burden and enable national malaria control programmes to direct 
better their resources to where they are most needed. 
13.2 | THERAPEUTIC EFFICACY 
Monitoring of therapeutic efficacy in falciparum malaria involves assessing clinical 
and parasitological outcomes of treatment for at least 28 days after the start of 
adequate treatment and monitoring for the reappearance of parasites in blood. 
The exact duration of post-treatment follow-up is based on the elimination half-
life of the partner drug in the ACT being evaluated. 
PCR genotyping should be used in therapeutic monitoring of antimalarial drug 
efficacy against P. falciparum to distinguish between recrudescence (true treatment 
failure) and new infections. 
An antimalarial medicine that is recommended in the national malaria treatment 
policy should be changed if the total treatment failure proportion is ≥ 10%, 
as assessed in vivo by monitoring therapeutic efficacy. A significantly declining 
trend in treatment efficacy over time, even if failure rates have not yet fallen to the 
≥ 10% cut-off, should alert programmes to undertake more frequent monitoring 
and to prepare for a potential policy change.
13 | Monitoring the efficacy and safety of antimalarial drugs and resistance
112
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Assessing therapeutic responses is more difficult in vivax malaria than in falciparum 
malaria, as relapses cannot be distinguished from recrudescence or reinfection. 
Relapse of tropical P. vivax infection may occur about 3 weeks after treatment. 
However these early relapses (or any newly acquired infections) should be 
suppressed by therapeutic doses of slowly eliminated antimalarial drugs such as 
chloroquine, mefloquine and piperaquine. Reappearance of parasitaemia within 28 
days of treatment (whether relapse, recrudescence or re-infection) can therefore 
still be used as a proxy measure of resistance.
13.3 | RESISTANCE
Antimalarial drug resistance is the ability of a parasite strain to survive and/or 
multiply despite administration and absorption of an antimalarial drug given 
in doses equal to or higher than those usually recommended, provided that 
drug exposure is adequate. Resistance to antimalarial drugs arises because of 
selection of parasites with genetic changes (mutations or gene amplifications) 
that confer reduced susceptibility. Resistance has been documented to all classes 
of antimalarial medicines, including the artemisinin derivatives, and it is a major 
threat to malaria control. Widespread inappropriate use of antimalarial drugs 
exerts a strong selective pressure on malaria parasites to develop high levels 
of resistance. Resistance can be prevented or its onset slowed considerably by 
combining antimalarial drugs with different mechanisms of action and ensuring 
high cure rates through full adherence to correct dose regimens. If different drugs 
with different mechanisms of resistance are used together, the emergence and 
spread of resistance should be slowed.
Clinical and parasitological assessment of therapeutic efficacy should include:
• confirmation of the quality of the antimalarial medicines tested;
•  
molecular genotyping to distinguish between re-infections and recrudescence 
and to identify genetic markers of drug resistance; 
• studies of parasite susceptibility to antimalarial drugs in culture; and
•  
measurement of antimalarial drug levels to assess exposure in cases of slow 
therapeutic response or treatment failure.
13.4 | PHARMACOVIGILANCE
Governments should have effective pharmacovigilance systems (such as the 
WHO pregnancy registry) to monitor the safety of all drugs, including antimalarial 
medicines. The safety profiles of the currently recommended antimalarial drugs are 
reasonably well described and supported by an evidence base of several thousand 
participants (mainly from clinical trials); however, rare but serious adverse drug 
reactions will not be detected in clinical trials of this size, particularly if they 
occur primarily in young children, pregnant women or people with concurrent 
13 | Monitoring the efficacy and safety of antimalarial drugs and resistance 113
 illness, who are usually under-represented in clinical trials. Rare but serious 
adverse drug reactions are therefore detected only in prospective phase IV post-
marketing studies or population-based pharmacovigilance systems. In particular, 
more data are urgently needed on the safety of ACTs during the first trimester of 
pregnancy and on potential interactions between antimalarial and other commonly 
 
used medicines. 
13 | Monitoring the efficacy and safety of antimalarial drugs and resistance
114
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 14 |  
NATIONAL ADAPTATION OF THE 
GENERIC FRAMEWORK FOR MALARIA 
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT, AND 
IMPLEMENTATION
 National adaptation and implementation
The choice of ACT in a country or region should be based on optimal efficacy, 
safety and adherence. 
Good practice statement
Drugs used in IPTp, SMC and IPTi should not be used as a component of first-
line treatment in the same country or region. 
Good practice statement
When possible:
•  
use fixed-dose combinations rather than co-blistered or loose, single-
agent formulations; and
•  
for young children and infants, use paediatric formulations, with a 
preference for solid formulations (e.g. dispersible tablets) rather than 
liquid formulations.
Good practice statement
These guidelines provide a generic framework for malaria diagnosis and treatment 
policies worldwide; however, national policy-makers will be required to adapt 
these recommendations on the basis of local priorities, malaria epidemiology, 
parasite resistance and national resources.
14.1 | NATIONAL DECISION-MAKING
National decision-makers are encouraged to adopt inclusive, transparent, 
rigorous approaches. Broad, inclusive stakeholder engagement in the design and 
implementation of national malaria control programmes will help to ensure they 
are feasible, appropriate, equitable and acceptable. Transparency and freedom 
from financial conflicts of interest will reduce mistrust and conflict, while rigorous 
evidence-based processes will ensure that the best possible decisions are made 
for the population.
14.2 |  
INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR NATIONAL 
DECISION-MAKING
Selection of first- and second-line antimalarial medicines will require reliable 
national data on their efficacy and parasite resistance, which in turn require 
that appropriate surveillance and monitoring systems are in place (see section 
13). In some countries, the group adapting the guidelines for national use might 
have to re-evaluate the global evidence base with respect to their own context. 
The GRADE tables in Annex 4 may serve as a starting-point for this assessment. 
14 |  
National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis and 
treatment, and implementation
116
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Decisions about coverage, feasibility, acceptability and cost may require input 
from various health professionals, community representatives, health economists, 
academics and health system managers. 
14.3 | OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS
The recommendations made in these guidelines provide an opportunity to improve 
malaria case management further, to reduce unnecessary morbidity and mortality 
and to contribute to continued efforts towards elimination. Failure to implement the 
basic principles of combination therapy and rational use of antimalarial medicines 
will risk promoting the emergence and spread of drug resistance, which could 
undo all the recent gains in malaria control and elimination.
14.4 |  
GENERAL GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR 
CHOOSING A CASE MANAGEMENT 
STRATEGY AND TOOLS 
14.4.1 | CHOOSING A DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGY
The two methods currently considered suitable for routine patient management 
are light microscopy and RDTs. Different strategies may be adopted in different 
health care settings. The choice between RDTs and microscopy depends on local 
circumstances, including the skills available, the patient case-load, the epidemiology 
of malaria and use of microscopy for the diagnosis of other diseases. When the 
case-load of patients with fever is high, the cost of each microscopy test is likely 
to be less than that of an RDT; however, high-throughput, high-quality microscopy 
may be less operationally feasible. Although several RDTs allow diagnosis of both 
P. falciparum and P. vivax infections, microscopy has further advantages, including 
accurate parasite counting (and thus identification of high parasite density), 
prognostication in severe malaria, speciation of other malaria parasites and 
sequential assessment of the response to antimalarial treatment. Microscopy may 
help to identify other causes of fever. High-quality light microscopy requires well-
trained, skilled staff, good staining reagents, clean slides and, often, electricity to 
power the microscope. It requires a quality assurance system, which is often not 
well implemented in malaria-endemic countries. 
In many areas, malaria patients are treated outside the formal health services, 
e.g. in the community, at home or by private providers. Microscopy is generally 
not feasible in the community, but RDTs might be available, allowing access to 
confirmatory diagnosis of malaria and the correct management of febrile illnesses. 
14 | National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis 
and treatment, and implementation
117
 The average sensitivity of HRP2-detecting RDTs is generally greater than that of 
RDTs for detecting pLDH of P. falciparum, but the latter are slightly more specific 
because the HRP2 antigen may persist in blood for days or weeks after effective 
treatment. HRP2-detecting RDTs are not suitable for detecting treatment failure. 
RDTs are slightly less sensitive for detecting P. malariae and P. ovale. The WHO 
Malaria RDT Product Testing programme provides comparative data on the 
performance of RDT products to guide procurement. Since 2008, 210 products 
have been evaluated in five rounds of product testing.17, 18
For the diagnosis of severe malaria, microscopy is preferred, as it provides a 
diagnosis of malaria and assessment of other important parameters of prognostic 
relevance in severely ill patients (such as parasite count and stage of parasite 
development and intra-leukocyte pigment). In severe malaria, an RDT can be 
used to confirm malaria rapidly so that parenteral antimalarial treatment can be 
started immediately. Where possible, however, blood smears should be examined 
by microscopy, with frequent monitoring of parasitaemia (e.g. every 12 h) during 
the first 2–3 days of treatment in order to monitor the response. 
14.4.2 | CHOOSING ACT 
In the absence of resistance, all the recommended ACTs have been shown to result 
in parasitological cure rates of > 95%. Although there are minor differences in 
the oral absorption, bioavailability and tolerability of the different artemisinin 
derivatives, there is no evidence that these differences are clinically significant in 
currently available formulations. It is the properties of the partner medicine and 
the level of resistance to it that determine the efficacy of a formulation. 
Policy-makers should also consider:
• local data on the therapeutic efficacy of the ACT,
• local data on drug resistance,
• the adverse effect profiles of ACT partner drugs,
•  
the availability of appropriate formulations to ensure adherence,
• cost.
In parts of South-East Asia, artemisinin resistance is compromising the efficacy of 
ACTs and placing greater selection pressure on resistance to the partner medicines. 
Elsewhere, there is no convincing evidence for reduced susceptibility to the 
artemisinins; therefore, the performance of the partner drugs is the determining 
factor in the choice of ACT, and the following principles apply:
•  
Resistance to mefloquine has been found in parts of mainland South-East 
Asia where this drug has been used intensively. Nevertheless, the combination 
with artesunate is very effective, unless there is also resistance to artemisinin. 
17  
Malaria rapid diagnostic test performance. Results of WHO product testing of malaria RDTs: round 5. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2014 (http://who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241507554/en/).
18  
Information note on recommended selection criteria for procurement of malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (http://who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/rdt_selection_criteria/en/).
14 |  
National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis and 
treatment, and implementation
118
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Resistance to both components has compromised the efficacy of artesunate + 
mefloquine in western Cambodia, eastern Myanmar and eastern Thailand. 
•  
Lumefantrine shares some cross-resistance with mefloquine, but this has not 
compromised its efficacy in any of the areas in which artemether + lumefantrine 
has been used outside South-East Asia. 
•  
Until recently, there was no evidence of resistance to piperaquine anywhere, 
but there is now reduced susceptibility in western Cambodia. Elsewhere, 
the dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine combination is currently highly effective. 
•  
Resistance to SP limits its use in combination with artesunate to the few areas 
in which susceptibility is retained. 
•  
Amodiaquine remains effective in combination with artesunate in parts of Africa 
and the Americas, although elsewhere resistance to this drug was prevalent 
before its introduction in an ACT. 
14.5 |  
CONSIDERATIONS IN USE OF 
ARTEMISININ-BASED COMBINATION 
THERAPY
Oral artemisinin and its derivatives (e.g. artesunate, artemether, dihydroartemisinin) 
should not be used alone. In order to simplify use, improve adherence and minimize 
the availability of oral artemisinin monotherapy, fixed-dose combination ACTs are 
strongly preferred to co-blistered or co-dispensed loose tablets and should be used 
when they are readily available. Fixed-dose combinations of all recommended ACT 
are now available, except artesunate + SP. Fixed-dose artesunate + amodiaquine 
performs better than loose tablets, presumably by ensuring adequate dosing. 
Unfortunately, paediatric formulations are not yet available for all ACTs. 
The choice of ACT in a country or region should be based on optimal efficacy and 
adherence, which can be achieved by:
•  
minimizing the number of formulations available for each recommended 
treatment regimen,
•  
using, where available, solid formulations instead of liquid formulations, even for 
young patients.
Although there are some minor differences in the oral absorption and bioavailability 
of different artemisinin derivatives, there is no evidence that such differences in 
currently available formulations are clinically significant. It is the pharmacokinetic 
properties of the partner medicine and the level of resistance to it that largely 
determine the efficacy and choice of combinations. Outside South-East Asia, there is 
no convincing evidence yet for reduced susceptibility to the artemisinins; therefore, 
the performance of the partner drug is the main determinant in the choice of ACT, 
according to the following principles:
•  
Drugs used in IPTp, SMC or chemoprophylaxis should not be used as first-line 
treatment in the same country or region. 
14 | National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis 
and treatment, and implementation
119
 •  
Resistance to SP limits use of artesunate + SP to areas in which susceptibility 
is retained. 
Thus, in the majority of malaria-endemic countries, first-line ACTs remain 
highly effective, although resistance patterns change over time and should be 
closely monitored.
14.6 | CHOOSING AMONG FORMULATIONS
Use of fixed-dose combination formulations will ensure strict adherence to the 
central principle of combination therapy. Monotherapies should not be used, except 
as parenteral therapy for severe malaria or SP chemoprevention, and steps should 
be taken to reduce and remove their market availability. Fixed-dose combination 
formulations are now available for all recommended ACTs except artesunate + SP.
Paediatric formulations should allow accurate dosing without having to break 
tablets and should promote adherence by their acceptability to children. 
Paediatric formulations are currently available for artemether + lumefantrine, 
dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine and artesunate + mefloquine.
14.7 |  
OTHER OPERATIONAL ISSUES IN 
MANAGING EFFECTIVE TREATMENT
Individual patients derive the maximum benefit from an ACT if they can access 
it within 24–48 h of the onset of malaria symptoms. The impact in reducing 
transmission at a population level depends on high coverage rates and the 
transmission intensity. Thus, to optimize the benefits of deploying ACTs, they should 
be available in the public health delivery system, the private sector and the 
community, with no financial or physical barrier to access. A strategy for ensuring full 
access (including community management of malaria in the context of integrated 
case management) must be based on analyses of national and local health systems 
and may require legislative changes and regulatory approval, with additional local 
adjustment as indicated by programme monitoring and operational research. 
To optimize the benefits of effective treatment, wide dissemination of national 
treatment guidelines, clear recommendations, appropriate information, education 
and communication materials, monitoring of the deployment process, access and 
coverage, and provision of adequately packaged antimalarial drugs are needed. 
14 |  
National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis and 
treatment, and implementation
120
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 14.7.1 | COMMUNITY 
CASE 
MANAGEMENT 
OF 
MALARIA 
Community case management is recommended by WHO to improve access to prompt, 
effective treatment of malaria episodes by trained community members living as 
close as possible to the patients. Use of ACTs in this context is feasible, acceptable 
and effective.19 Pre-referral treatment for severe malaria with rectal artesunate and 
use of RDTs are also recommended in this context. Community case management 
should be integrated into community management of childhood illnesses, which 
ensures coverage of priority childhood illnesses outside of health facilities. 
14.7.2 | HEALTH EDUCATION
From the hospital to the community, education is vital to optimizing antimalarial 
treatment. Clear guidelines in the language understood by local users, posters, 
wall charts, educational videos and other teaching materials, public awareness 
campaigns, education and provision of information materials to shopkeepers and 
other dispensers can improve the understanding of malaria. They will increase the 
likelihood of better prescribing and adherence, appropriate referral and unnecessary 
use of antimalarial medicines.
14.7.3 | ADHERENCE TO TREATMENT
Patient adherence is a major determinant of the response to antimalarial drugs, 
as most treatments are taken at home without medical supervision. Studies on 
adherence suggest that 3-day regimens of medicines such as ACTs are completed 
reasonably well, provided that patients or caregivers are given an adequate 
explanation at the time of prescribing or dispensing. Prescribers, shopkeepers and 
vendors should therefore give clear, comprehensible explanations of how to use 
the medicines. Co-formulation probably contributes importantly to adherence. User-
friendly packaging (e.g. blister packs) also encourages completion of a treatment 
course and correct dosing.
19  
Ajayi IO, Browne EN, Bateganya F, Yar D, Happi C, Falade CO, et al. Effectiveness of artemisinin-based combination 
therapy used in the context of home management of malaria: a report from three study sites in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Malar J 2008;7:190.
14 | National adaptation of the generic framework for malaria diagnosis 
and treatment, and implementation
121
  A
1
A
2
A
3
A
4
A
5
A
6
A
7
Annex 1. Preparation of the guidelines 
129
Annex 2. Malaria transmission and antimalarial medicines 
134 
Annex 3. Diagnosis of malaria 
142 
Annex 4. Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation 
150
Annex 5. Pharmacology of antimalarial drugs 
210
Annex 6. Treatment of infections due to P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi 
290
Annex 7. Resistance to antimalarial medicines 
304 
LIST OF ANNEXES
  Annex 1 | Preparation of the guidelines
The guideline development process
Since the first and second editions of the guidelines were issued in 2006 and 2010, 
respectively, WHO methods for preparing guidelines have continued to evolve. 
This third edition of the Guidelines for the treatment of malaria was prepared in 
accordance with the updated WHO standard methods for guideline development.1 
This involved planning, “scoping” and needs assessment, establishment of a 
guidelines development group, formulation of key questions (PICO questions: 
population, participants or patients; intervention or indicator; comparator or control; 
outcome), commissioning reviews, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) and making recommendations. This method 
ensures a transparent link between the evidence and the recommendations. 
The GRADE system is a uniform, widely adopted approach based on explicit 
methods for formulating and evaluating the strength of recommendations for 
specific clinical questions on the basis of the robustness of the evidence.
The Technical Guidelines Development Group, co-chaired by Professor Fred Binka 
and Professor Nick White (other participants are listed below), organized a technical 
consultation on preparation of the third edition of the Guidelines. Declarations of 
conflicts of interest were received from all participants. 
A WHO guideline steering group facilitated the scoping meeting, which was 
convened in February 2013, to set priorities and identify which sections of the 
second edition of Guidelines were to be reviewed and to define potential new 
recommendations. Draft PICO questions were formulated for collation and review 
of the evidence. A review of data on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
was considered necessary to support dose recommendations, and a subgroup was 
formed for this purpose.
After the scoping meeting, the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group at the Liverpool 
School of Tropical Medicine in Liverpool, England, was commissioned to undertake 
systematic reviews and to assess the quality of the evidence for each priority 
question. The reviews involved extensive searches for published and unpublished 
reports of trials and highly sensitive searches of the Cochrane Infectious Diseases 
Group trials register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE®, 
Embase and LILACS. All the reviews will be published on line in the Cochrane 
Library. When insufficient evidence was available from randomized trials, published 
reviews of non-randomized studies were considered.
A subgroup of the GDG on dosage recommendations reviewed published studies 
from MEDLINE® and Embase on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
of antimalarial medicines. For analyses of pharmacokinetics and simulations of 
dosing, they used raw clinical and laboratory data from the Worldwide Antimalarial 
Resistance Network on the concentrations of antimalarial agents in plasma or 
1 WHO handbook for guideline development. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012 (http://www.who.int/kms/
guidelines_review_committee/en/).
A
1
125
 whole blood measured with validated assays in individual patients. The data had 
either been included in peer-reviewed publications or been submitted to regulatory 
authorities for drug registration. Population pharmacokinetics models were 
constructed, and the plasma or whole blood concentration profiles of antimalarial 
medicines were simulated (typically 1000 times) for different weight categories. 
The guideline development group met in two technical meetings, in November 
2013 and June 2014, to develop and finalize recommendations based on the 
GRADE tables constructed on the basis of answers to the PICO questions. The new 
Guidelines were written by a subcommittee of the group. At various times during 
preparation of the guidelines, sections of the document or recommendations were 
reviewed by external experts and users who were not members of the group; these 
external peer reviewers are listed below. 
Treatment recommendations were agreed by consensus, supported by systematic 
reviews and review of information on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. 
Areas of disagreement were discussed extensively to reach consensus; voting 
was not required.
Members of the guidelines development group
Professor K.I. Barnes, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Cape Town, 
South Africa
Professor F. Binka, (co-Chair), University of Health and Allied Sciences, Ho, Volta 
Region, Ghana
Professor A. Bjorkman, Division of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Professor M.A. Faiz, Dev Care Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Professor P. Garner, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom
Professor O. Gaye, Service de Parasitologie, Faculté de Médicine, Université Cheikh 
Anta Diop, Dakar-Fann, Senegal
Dr S. Lutalo, King Faisal Hospital, Kigali, Rwanda 
Dr E. Juma, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Clinical Research, 
Nairobi, Kenya
Dr A. McCarthy, Tropical Medicine and International Health Clinic, Division of 
Infectious Diseases, Ottawa Hospital General Campus, Ottawa, Canada
Professor O. Mokuolu, Department of Paediatrics, University of Ilorin Teaching 
Hospital, Ilorin, Nigeria
Dr D. Sinclair, International Health Group, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom
Dr L. Slutsker, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Dr E. Tjitra, National Institute of Health and Development, Ministry of Health, 
Jakarta, Indonesia
126
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dr N. Valecha, National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India
Professor N. White (co-Chair), Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, 
Bangkok, Thailand
Members of the sub-group on dose recommendations 
Professor K. Barnes, (co-chair), Division of Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Cape Town, South Africa 
Professor F. Binka, University of Health and Allied Sciences, Ho, Volta Region, Ghana
Dr E. Juma, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Clinical Research, 
Nairobi, Kenya
Professor O. Mokuolu, Department of Paediatrics, University of Ilorin Teaching 
Hospital, Ilorin, Nigeria
Dr S. Parikh, Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Public Health, 
Connecticut, USA
Dr J. Tarning, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand
Dr D.J. Terlouw, Malawi-Liverpool Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, 
Blantyre, Malawi
Professor N. White (co-Chair), Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, 
Bangkok, Thailand
Guideline Steering Group
Dr A. Bosman, Global Malaria Programme, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr K. Carter, Malaria Regional Adviser, WHO Regional Office for the Americas
Dr N. Dhingra-Kumar, Health Systems Policies and Workforce, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr M. Gomes, Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, 
WHO, Geneva, Switzerland 
Dr P.E. Olumese (Secretary), Global Malaria Programme WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr F. Pagnoni, Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, 
WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr A.E.C. Rietveld, Global Malaria Programme WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr P. Ringwald, Global Malaria Programme WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr. M. Warsame, Global Malaria Programme WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr W. Were, Child and Adolescent Health, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
A
1
127
 External reviewers
Dr F. ter-Kuile, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom
Dr R. McGready, Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand
Professor F. Nosten, Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand
External contributors to Annex 5 (Pharmacology of Antimalarial Drugs)
C. Brunschwig, Department of Chemistry, Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, South Africa. 
F. Chigutsa, WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network, University of Cape Town, 
South Africa
L. Workman, WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network, University of Cape Town, 
South Africa
Declaration of interests
Participants in the technical consultation for the review of the Guidelines for the 
treatment of malaria and the external expert reviewers of the Guidelines reported 
relevant interests, in accordance with WHO procedures. These were discussed 
extensively by the committee. Although it was considered that none of the 
declared interests had direct relevance to the deliberations or recommendations 
of the meeting, the panel members with declared interests were excluded from 
the subcommittees on GRADE and recommendations and the drafting group. 
The declared interests, as per WHO regulations, were cleared through the Legal 
Department of WHO. 
Dr K. Barnes reported being a recipient of grants from the Malaria Medicine Venture 
to undertake clinical trials to evaluate novel antimalarial medicines.
Dr F. Binka reported being a member of the INDEPTH network that was a recipient 
of a research grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to conduct Phase 
IV post licensure studies on “Eurartesim”.
Dr P. Garner reported receiving a grant from Department of International 
Development (UK) to help ensure global guidelines and decisions are based on 
reliable evidence. 
Dr N. Valecha reported serving as an investigator for clinical trial supported by the 
Department of Science and Technology India, and Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited. 
There were no monetary benefits and no conflicts with the subject of this review.
Professor N. White reported being an advisor to all pharmaceutical companies 
developing new antimalarial medicines. This is done on a pro-bono basis, it does 
not include consultancy fees nor any form of remuneration. 
128
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Annex 2 |  
Malaria transmission and 
antimalarial medicines
Principles of malaria transmission
Malaria is spread among people by mosquitoes belonging to the genus Anopheles. 
The female mosquito is infected by gametocytes, the sexual stages of the malaria 
parasite, when they take a blood meal from an infected person. Male and female 
gametocytes then fuse to form zygotes (ookinetes), which embed in the gut wall 
as oocysts and then undergo further development in the insect for 6–12 days. 
The mature oocysts rupture to liberate motile sporozoites, which migrate to the 
mosquito salivary glands to await inoculation into humans through the bite of 
the mosquito carrying them (1). 
The intensity of malaria transmission in an area is the rate at which people are 
inoculated with malaria parasites by infected mosquitoes. It is expressed as the 
annual entomological inoculation rate (EIR), which is the number of infectious 
mosquito bites received by an individual in 1 year. The EIR determines to a large 
extent the epidemiology of malaria and the pattern of clinical disease in an area. 
The upper end of the EIR range is found in a few parts of tropical Africa, where rates 
of 500–1000 can be reached (2). At the lower end of the range, EIRs of ≤ 0.01 are 
found in the temperate climates of the Caucasus and Central Asia, where malaria 
transmission is only barely sustained. Between these extremes are situations of 
unstable seasonal malaria, such as in much of Asia and Latin America, where the 
EIRs are < 10 and often 1–2, and situations of stable but seasonal malaria, as in 
much of West Africa, where the EIR is 10–100. 
The proportion of infected mosquitoes in a locality reflects the capacity of the 
vectors to transmit malaria (vectorial capacity) and the number of infected and 
infectious humans in the area. Lowering the infectivity of infected persons to 
mosquito vectors contributes to reducing malaria transmission and eventually to 
reducing the incidence and prevalence of the disease. The relation between EIR and 
the prevalence of malaria is, however, complex: it is affected by vectorial capacity, 
the pattern of acquisition and loss of immunity to malaria and access to effective 
drug treatment in the area. The hypothetical relation represented in Figure A2.1 
assumes no drug treatment. In areas of low transmission, where the EIR is < 1 or 2, 
a reduction in the inoculation rate will result in an almost proportionate reduction 
in the prevalence (and incidence rate) of malaria. When the EIR exceeds 10, there is 
great redundancy in the infectious reservoir, and larger reductions in transmission 
are required to make a significant impact on malaria prevalence. Experience with 
major interventions, such as use of insecticide-treated nets and artemisinin-based 
combination therapy, suggests that effective transmission-reducing interventions 
reduce mortality and even morbidity in most situations (1–4).
A
2
129
 Figure A2.1. Relation between entomological inoculation rate and parasite 
prevalence (on the assumption that no infections are treated)
Parasite prevalence (%) 
  0.1                  1                  10                 100             1000   
   100 
    80 
    60 
    40 
    20 
      0 
Annual entomological inoculation rate
 
Effect of medicines on malaria transmission
Medicines can reduce malaria transmission by two mechanisms (5): early, effective 
treatment and reducing infectivity.
Early, effective treatment of a malaria blood infection with any antimalarial medicine 
will reduce gametocytaemia by eliminating the asexual blood stages from 
which gametocytes derive. The faster the clearance of asexual blood parasites, 
the greater the reduction in infectivity. The potent anti-infective properties of 
artemisinins result partly from rapid clearance of parasites. In P. vivax, P. malariae 
and P. ovale infections, gametocytes are susceptible to all the antimalarial 
drugs, have a short developmental period (2–3 days) and have short-lived 
mature gametocytes. Effective treatment of the asexual blood infection alone 
abolishes infectivity to mosquitoes. In P. falciparum infections, gametocytes take 
longer to develop (7–10 days), and for most of this time they are sequestered 
in the microcirculation (particularly in the bone marrow and spleen). Treated 
 
P. falciparum infections may remain infectious for more than 1 week after patients 
have been successfully treated unless they also take a specific anti-gametocyte 
medication (primaquine, see below). 
Infectivity can be lowered either by a direct effect on gametocytes (gametocytocidal 
effect; primaquine) or on the parasite developmental stages in the mosquito 
(sporontocidal effect; antifols, atovaquone) or by killing feeding mosquitoes 
(endectocidal effect; avermectins). The antimalarial drugs used to treat the asexual 
stages of P. falciparum do not reduce the infectivity of mature infective gametocytes 
(3–5). Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in fact increases gametocyte carriage, but it 
also reduces the infectivity of drug-sensitive parasites. Artemisinins are the most 
potent gametocytocidal drugs of those currently used to treat acute malaria 
(6–11). They kill young gametocytes, preventing new infective gametocytes from 
entering the circulation, but they have less effect on mature gametocytes that may 
130
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 be present in the circulation at the time of treatment (6). The 8-aminoquinoline 
primaquine acts on mature gametocytes rapidly, reducing their transmissibility 
to mosquitoes and accelerating gametocyte clearance (12–20). Thus, addition of 
primaquine to ACTs in the treatment of P. falciparum infections rapidly and potently 
reduces the transmissibility of the treated infection (Figure A2.2). 
Figure A2.2. Dose–response relations for primaquine in reducing the infectivity 
of Plasmodium falciparum-infected individuals to anopheline mosquitoes
Oocyst positive (%)
  0                            0.065       0.13       
0.25      
0.5  >0.75   
   100 
    80 
    60 
    40 
    20 
      0 
Primaquine dose (mg base/kg)
 
29 
4 
6 
48
 
7 
Assessed <  48 hrs  
after primaquine  
15mg  
45mg  
30mg  
10 
13 
26 
13
0.5
 
Sporozoite positive (%)
  0                            0.065       0.13       
0.25      
0.5  >0.75   
   100 
    80 
    60 
    40 
    20 
      0 
Primaquine dose (mg base/kg)
 
29 
4 
6 
48
 
5 
Assessed <  48 hrs  
after primaquine  
15mg  
45mg  
30mg  
10 
13 
21 
12 
A
2
131
 Pooled data from all studies conducted (17). Vertical axes show the proportions 
of fed anopheline mosquitoes that were infected. Oocyst formation (upper graph) 
and sporozoite formation (lower graph) assessed from blood sampled 48 h after a 
dose of primaquine. Primaquine given with an artemisinin derivative is shown in 
green, and primaquine given with no antimalarial medicine or a non-artemisinin 
derivative is shown in red. In these studies, 29 patients received no primaquine. 
The size of the circle is proportional to the number of patients in each group 
(shown within). Corresponding adult primaquine doses are indicated in squares.
In areas of low-to-moderate transmission 
The most direct consequences of lowering parasite infectivity by the use of 
medicines are seen in areas of low transmission, where symptomatic patients 
contribute significantly to the infectious reservoir. Reducing infectiousness has a 
significant impact on malaria transmission and thus the prevalence of infection 
and the incidence of disease. 
In areas of high-transmission 
In high-transmission areas, infected but asymptomatic people constitute an 
important part of the infectious reservoir. Even though treated cases (mainly 
children) have higher densities of gametocytes and infectivity is positively related 
to gametocyte density, symptomatic patients comprise only a minority of the 
infective reservoir (21–23). In high-transmission settings, a considerable reduction 
in transmission rates is required to reduce parasite prevalence (and incidence of 
disease). Adding transmission-blocking drugs to antimalarial treatment is not 
cost–effective. As malaria control intensifies in highly endemic countries, however, 
transmission rates are declining; infectivity-reducing drug regimens may therefore 
further reduce transmission and play an important role in sustaining achievements. 
Thus, the use of antimalarial medicines specifically to reduce infectivity:
• is justified in low-transmission settings and
•  
will be beneficial in high-transmission settings when transmission rates have 
been lowered by effective malaria control.
Strategies to reduce the transmission of drug-resistant parasites
Continued use of an antimalarial drug to which parasites are partially resistant will 
confer a selective advantage to resistant parasites and favour their transmission. 
In the presence of the drug, partially resistant infections are accompanied by more 
gametocytaemia than those that are sensitive (6, 7, 24). Furthermore, drug resistance 
leads to recrudescence associated with higher rates of gametocyte carriage than 
primary infections. Thus, cumulatively drug-resistant infections generate more 
gametocytaemia and therefore greater transmission potential than sensitive ones 
(25, 26). Secondly, under some circumstances, gametocytes carrying resistant genes 
may be more infectious to mosquitoes, producing greater numbers of oocysts and 
infecting a higher proportion of mosquitoes than those carrying sensitive genes (27). 
There is some evidence that mosquito control measures preferentially eliminate 
drug-resistant parasites (28). This evidence is supported by field experience in: 
132
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 •  
Zimbabwe, where house spraying with insecticides to reduce malaria transmission 
was associated with a decrease in drug resistance (29), and 
•  
focal regions in India and Sri Lanka, where a combination of intense vector-
control measures and switching to an effective medicine led to significant 
reductions and, in some instances, even elimination of chloroquine-resistant 
P. falciparum from those foci. 
As one of the earliest features of drug resistance is increased gametocyte carriage, 
addition of a transmission-blocking drug such as primaquine will negate this 
transmission advantage and slow the spread of resistance.
Summary and conclusions
Antimalarial medicines play an important role in reducing malaria transmission and 
in curtailing the spread of drug-resistant parasites. Good access to diagnosis and 
early, effective treatment will reduce malaria transmission. Antimalarial medicines 
with specific gametocytocidal activity (e.g. artemisinin derivatives, primaquine) 
will reduce falciparum malaria transmission even further, particularly in areas of 
low transmission. 
References
1. 
 
  
Bousema T, Drakeley C. Epidemiology and infectivity of Plasmodium 
falciparum and Plasmodium vivax gametocytes in relation to malaria control 
and elimination. Clin Microbiol Rev 2011;24:377–410. 
2.   
Hay SI, Rogers DJ, Toomer JF, Snow RW. Annual Plasmodium falciparum 
entomological inoculation rates (EIR) across Africa: literature survey, Internet 
access and review. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2000;94:113–27. 
3.   
Lengeler C, Smith TA, Armstrong-Schellenberg J. Focus on the effect of bed 
nets on malaria morbidity and mortality. Parasitol Today 1997;13:123–4. 
4.   
Molineaux L. Malaria and mortality: some epidemiological considerations. 
Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1997;91:811–25. 
5.   
White NJ. The role of anti-malarial drugs in eliminating malaria. Malar J 
2008;7(Suppl 1):S8. 
6.   
Hogh B. The differing impact of chloroquine and pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine 
upon the infectivity of malaria species to the mosquito vector. Am J Trop Med 
Hyg 1998;58:176–82. 
7.   
Robert V, Awono-Ambere HP, Le Hesran JY, Trape JF. Gametocytemia and 
infectivity to mosquitoes of patients with uncomplicated Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria attacks treated with chloroquine or sulfadoxine plus 
pyrimethamine. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2000;62:210–6. 
8.   
Price RN, Nosten F, Luxemburger C, ter Kuile FO, Paiphun L, 
Chongsuphajaisiddhi T, et al. Effects of artemisinin derivatives on malaria 
transmissibility. Lancet 1996;347:1654–8. 
9.   
Targett G, Drakeley C, Jawara M, von Seidlein L, Coleman R, Deen J, et al. 
Artesunate reduces but does not prevent post treatment transmission of 
Plasmodium falciparum to Anopheles gambiae. J Infect Dis 2001;183:1254–9. 
A
2
133
 10.  
Drakeley CJ, Jawara M, Targett GA, Walraven G, Obisike U, Coleman R, et al. 
Addition of artesunate to chloroquine for treatment of Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria in Gambian children causes a significant but short-lived reduction in 
infectiousness for mosquitoes. Trop Med Int Health 2004;9:53–61. 
11.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Chotivanich K, Chantra A, Clemens R, Looareesuwan 
S, White NJ. Activities of artesunate and primaquine against asexual- and 
sexual-stage parasites in falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2004;48:1329–34. 
12.  
Chotivanich K, Sattabongkot J, Udomsangpetch R, Looareesuwan S, Day NPJ, 
Coleman RE, et al. Transmission-blocking activities of quinine, primaquine, 
and artesunate. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006;50:1927–30. 
13.  
El-Sayed B, El-Zaki SE, Babiker H, Gadalla N, Ageep T, Mansour F, et al. A 
randomized open-label trial of artesunate-sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine 
with or without primaquine for elimination of sub-microscopic P. falciparum 
parasitaemia and gametocyte carriage in eastern Sudan. PLoS One 
2007;2:e1311. 
14.  
Shekalaghe S, Drakeley C, Gosling R, Ndaro A, van Meegeren M, Enevold A, 
et al. Primaquine clears submicroscopic Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes 
that persist after treatment with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine and 
artesunate. PLoS One 2007;2:e1023. 
15.  
White NJ. Primaquine to prevent transmission of falciparum malaria. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2013;13:175–81. 
16.  
Single dose primaquine as a gametocytocide in Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria; updated WHO policy recommendation. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012 (http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/who_
pq_policy_recommendation/en/). 
17.  
White NJ, Qiao LG, Qi G, Luzzatto L. Rationale for recommending a lower 
dose of primaquine as a Plasmodium falciparum gametocytocide in 
populations where G6PD deficiency is common. Malar J 2012;11:418. 
18.  
Eziefula AC, Bousema T, Yeung S, Kamya M, Owaraganise A, Gabagaya 
G, et al. Single dose primaquine for clearance of Plasmodium falciparum 
gametocytes in children with uncomplicated malaria in Uganda: a 
randomised, controlled, double-blind, dose-ranging trial. Lancet Infect Dis 
2014;14:130–9. 
19.  
Smithuis F, Kyaw Kyaw M, Phe O, Win T, Phyo Aung P, Phyo Oo AP, et 
al. Effectiveness of five artemisinin combination regimens with or 
without primaquine in uncomplicated falciparum malaria: an open-label 
randomised trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2010;10:673–81.
20.  
White NJ, Ashley EA, Recht J, Delves MJ, Ruecker A, Smithius FM, et al. 
Assessment of therapeutic responses to gametocytocidal drugs in 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Malar J 2014;13:483.
21.  
Githeko AK, Brandling-Bennett AD, Beier M, Atieli F, Owaga M, Collins FH. 
The reservoir of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in a holoendemic area of 
western Kenya. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1992;86:355–8. 
134
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 22.  
Churcher TS, Bousema T, Walker M, Drakeley C, Schneider P, Ouédraogo AL, 
et al. Predicting mosquito infection from Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte 
density and estimating the reservoir of infection. E-life 2013;2:e00626.
23.  
Ouedraogo AL, Bousema T, Schneider P, de Vlas SJ, Ilboudo-Sanogo E, Cuzin-
Ouattara N, et al. Substantial contribution of submicroscopical Plasmodium 
falciparum gametocyte carriage to the infectious reservoir in an area of 
seasonal transmission. PLoS One 2009;4:e8410. 
24.  
Barnes KI, Little F, Mabuza A, Mngomezulu N, Govere J, Durrheim D, et al. 
Increased gametocytemia after treatment: an early parasitological indicator 
of emerging sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in falciparum malaria. J 
Infect Dis 2008;197:1605–13. 
25.  
Handunnetti S, Gunewardena DM, Pathirana PP, Ekanayake K, Weerasinghe 
S, Mendis KN. Features of recrudescent chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium 
falciparum infections confer a survival advantage on parasites, and have 
implications for disease control. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1996;90:563–7. 
26.  
Price RN, Tjitra E, Guerra CA, Yeung S, White NJ, Anstey NM. Risk factors for 
gametocyte carriage in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med 
Hyg 1999;60:1019–23. 
27.  
De Roode JC, Culleton R, Cheesman SJ, Carter R, Read AF. Host 
heterogeneity is a determinant of competitive exclusion or coexistence 
in genetically diverse malaria infections. Proc R Soc London Ser B Biol Sci 
2004;271:1073–80. 
28.  
Molyneux DH, Floyd K, Barnish G, Fèvre EM. Transmission control and drug 
resistance in malaria: a crucial interaction. Parasitol Today 1999;15:238–40. 
29.  
Mharakurwa S, Mutambu SL, Mudyiradima R, Chimbadzwa T, Chandiwana 
SK, Day KP. Association of house spraying with suppressed levels of drug 
resistance in Zimbabwe. Malar J 2004;3:35. 
A
2
135
  Annex 3 | Malaria diagnosis
Symptom-based (clinical) diagnosis 
Malaria is a common cause of fever and illness in endemic areas (1, 2). Malaria 
cannot be diagnosed accurately with any one set of clinical criteria, as the signs 
and symptoms (fever, chills, headache and anorexia) are non-specific and are 
common to many diseases and conditions. The appropriateness of particular 
clinical diagnostic criteria varies from area to area according to the intensity 
of transmission, the prevalent species of malaria parasite and other prevailing 
causes of fever (3). The concurrent incidence of other diseases with malaria may 
also affect its presentation. HIV/AIDS increases the risk for malaria illness and 
the progression to severe malaria, although the risk also depends on the malaria 
transmission intensity in the area and the age of the patient. HIV/AIDS also 
increases the incidence of febrile diseases that are not malaria, further complicating 
symptom-based diagnosis of malaria (4). 
Detailed weighting and scoring systems for clinical signs and symptoms of malaria 
may improve the accuracy of clinical diagnosis but still result in low sensitivity and 
specificity (studies in The Gambia achieved a sensitivity of 70–88% and a specificity 
of 63–82%). These methods may be too complicated to implement and supervise 
under operational conditions, and many of the key symptoms and signs of malaria 
in one area may not be applicable elsewhere (5, 6). A review of 10 studies indicated 
that use of the more restrictive criteria in clinical algorithms resulted in only trivial 
savings in drug costs in comparison with the use of a fever-based diagnosis, and, 
in areas of high prevalence, greatly increased the probability of missing malaria 
infections (7). The diagnosis of malaria therefore requires blood testing.
Light microscopy
Microscopy not only provides a highly sensitive, specific diagnosis of malaria when 
performed well but also allows quantification of malaria parasites and identification 
of the infecting species. Light microscopy involves relatively high costs for training 
and supervision, and the accuracy of diagnosis is strongly dependent on the 
competence of the microscopist. Microscopy technicians may also contribute to 
the diagnosis of non-malarial diseases.
Although nucleic acid amplification-based tests are more sensitive, light microscopy 
is still considered the “field standard” against which the sensitivity and specificity 
of other methods must be assessed. A skilled microscopist can detect asexual 
parasites at a density of < 10 per µL of blood, but under typical field conditions, 
the limit of sensitivity is approximately 100 parasites per µL (8). This limit of 
detection approximates the lower end of the pyrogenic density range. Thus, 
microscopy provides good specificity for diagnosing malaria as the cause of a 
presenting febrile illness. More sensitive methods allow detection of an increasing 
proportion of cases of incidental parasitaemia in endemic areas, thus reducing the 
specificity of a positive test. Light microscopy has other important advantages: 
A
3
137
 •  
low direct costs, if laboratory infrastructure to maintain the service is available;
• high sensitivity, if the performance of microscopy is high;
• differentiation of Plasmodia species;
•  
determination of parasite densities – notably identification of hyperparasitaemia;
• detection of gametocytaemia;
• allows monitoring of responses to therapy and
• can be used to diagnose many other conditions.
Good performance of microscopy can be difficult to maintain, because of the 
requirements for adequate training and supervision of laboratory staff to ensure 
competence in malaria diagnosis, electricity, good quality slides and stains, provision 
and maintenance of good microscopes and maintenance of quality assurance and 
control of laboratory services.
Numerous attempts have been made to improve malaria microscopy, but none has 
proven to be superior to the classical method of Giemsa staining and oil-immersion 
microscopy for performance in typical health care settings (9). 
Rapid diagnostic tests 
Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are immuno-chromatographic tests for detecting 
parasite-specific antigens in a finger-prick blood sample. Some tests allow 
detection of only one species (P. falciparum); others allow detection of one or 
more of the other species of human malaria parasites (P. vivax, P. malariae and 
 
P. ovale) (10–12). They are available commercially in various formats, e.g. dipsticks, 
cassettes and cards. Cassettes and cards are easier to use in difficult conditions 
outside health facilities. RDTs are relatively simple to perform and to interpret, 
and they do not require electricity or special equipment.
Since 2012, WHO has recommended that RDTs should be selected in accordance 
with the following criteria, based on the results of the assessments of the WHO 
Malaria RDT Product Testing programme (13):
•  
For detection of P. falciparum in all transmission settings, the panel detection 
score against P. falciparum samples should be at least 75% at 200 parasites/µL.
•  
For detection of P. vivax in all transmission settings the panel detection score 
against P. vivax samples should be at least 75% at 200 parasites/µL.
• The false positive rate should be less than 10%.
• The invalid rate should be less than 5%.
Current tests are based on the detection of histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP2), which 
is specific for P. falciparum, pan-specific or species-specific Plasmodium lactate 
dehydrogenase (pLDH) or pan-specific aldolase. The different characteristics of 
these antigens may affect their suitability for use in different situations, and these 
should be taken into account in programmes for RDT implementation. The tests 
have many potential advantages, including: 
•  
rapid provision of results and extension of diagnostic services to the lowest-level 
health facilities and communities;
138
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 •  
fewer requirements for training and skilled personnel (for instance, a general 
health worker can be trained in 1 day); and
•  
reinforcement of patient confidence in the diagnosis and in the health service 
in general. 
They also have potential disadvantages, including:
•  
inability, in the case of PfHRP2-based RDTs, to distinguish new infections from 
recently and effectively treated infections, due to the persistence of PfHRP2 in 
the blood for 1–5 weeks after effective treatment;
•  
the presence in countries in the Amazon region of variable frequencies of HRP2 
deletions in P. falciparum parasites, making HRP2-based tests not suitable in 
this region;
• poor sensitivity for detecting P. malariae and P.ovale; and
•  
the heterogeneous quality of commercially available products and the existence 
of lot-to-lot variation. 
In a systematic review (14), the sensitivity and specificity of RDTs in detecting 
 
P. falciparum in blood samples from patients in endemic areas attending ambulatory 
health facilities with symptoms suggestive of malaria were compared with the 
sensitivity and specificity of microscopy or polymerase chain reaction. The average 
sensitivity of PfHRP2-detecting RDTs was 95.0% (95% confidence interval [CI], 
93.5–96.2%), and the specificity was 95.2% (93.4–99.4%). RDTs for detecting 
pLDH from P. falciparum are generally less sensitive and more specific than those 
for detecting HRP2, with an average sensitivity (95% CI) of 93.2% (88.0–96.2%) 
and a specificity of 98.5% (96.7–99.4%). Several studies have shown that health 
workers, volunteers and private sector providers can, with adequate training and 
supervision, use RDTs correctly and provide accurate malaria diagnoses. The criteria 
for selecting RDTs or microscopy are listed in Table A3.1.
Table A3.1. Technical strengths and limitations of RDTs and microscopy to be taken 
into account in selecting the best option in different clinical situations and settings
Criterion
Characteristic of 
diagnostic test
Target cases and 
clinical setting
Recommended 
diagnostic test
RDT
Microscopy
Parasite 
density
RDTs give only 
a positive or a 
negative result.
Microscopy 
can also show 
parasite density.
Uncomplicated 
malaria
Yes
Yes
Severe malaria on 
admission
Not 
alonea
Yes
Follow-up of 
admitted patientsb
No
Yes
A
3
139
 Criterion
Characteristic of 
diagnostic test
Target cases and 
clinical setting
Recommended 
diagnostic test
RDT
Microscopy
Antigen 
persistence
RDTs detect 
persisting 
antigens 
after parasite 
clearance.c
Microscopy 
gives a negative 
result as soon as 
the parasite is 
cleared from the 
patient’s blood.
Confirmed malaria 
with persisting 
fever despite 
antimalarial 
treatment
No
Yes
Cases of confirmed 
malaria not 
previously tested 
for malaria
Yes
Yes
Persisting fever 
in people who 
did not receive 
antimalarial 
treatment
Yes
Yes
Electricity 
supply
RDTs do 
not require 
electricity.
Microscopy 
requires 
a reliable 
electricity supply.
Health centres 
and hospitals
Yes
Yes
Health workers 
in the community 
and at health 
posts
Yes
No
Time for test 
completion
RDTs can be 
performed 
relatively quickly.
Microscopy 
requires more 
time.
Settings with low 
work-load per 
health worker, 
e.g. small health 
facilities and 
facilities in areas 
of low endemicity
Yes
Yes
Settings with 
high work-load 
per health worker, 
e.g. outpatient 
departments of 
hospitals or health 
centres in areas of 
high endemicity
Yes
Not alonea
140
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Criterion
Characteristic of 
diagnostic test
Target cases and 
clinical setting
Recommended 
diagnostic test
RDT
Microscopy
Competence 
and training 
requirements
RDTs are 
relatively easy to 
perform.
Microscopy is 
more complex 
and requires 
the competence 
of a trained 
microscopist.d
Health workers 
with limited 
training in 
laboratory 
procedures or 
in settings with 
limited resources 
for supervisiond
Yes
No
Settings in which 
specific training 
in microscopy can 
be given and a 
laboratory quality 
management 
system is 
functioninge
Yes
No
a This diagnostic test should not be used exclusively, and the other test is necessary.
b Parasite density is required to monitor response to treatment.
c  
RDTs to detect pLDH may give positive results up to 5–6 days after disappearance of the parasite, while those to 
detect HRP2 give positive results up to 1–5 weeks after disappearance of the parasite.
d Both diagnostic techniques require minimum specific training.
e Both diagnostic techniques require regular supervisory support.
Diagnosis with either microscopy or RDTs is expected to reduce overuse of 
antimalarial medicines by ensuring that treatment is given only to patients with 
confirmed malaria infection, as opposed to treating all patients with fever (15). 
Although providers of care may be willing to perform diagnostic tests, they do not, 
however, always respond appropriately to the results. This is especially true when 
they are negative. It is therefore important to ensure the accuracy of parasite-
based diagnosis and also to demonstrate this to users and to provide them with 
the resources to manage both positive and negative results adequately (16).
Immunodiagnosis and nucleic acid amplification test methods
Detection of antibodies to parasites, which may be useful for epidemiological 
studies, is neither sensitive nor specific enough to be of use in the management 
of patients suspected of having malaria (17).
Techniques to detect parasite nucleic acid, e.g. polymerase chain reaction and 
loop-mediated isothermal amplification, are highly sensitive and very useful for 
detecting mixed infections, in particular at low parasite densities that are not 
detectable by conventional microscopy or with RDTs. They are also useful for 
studies of drug resistance and other specialized epidemiological investigations 
(18); however, they are not generally available for large-scale field use in malaria-
endemic areas, nor are they appropriate for routine diagnosis in endemic areas 
where a large proportion of the population may have low-density parasitaemia. 
A
3
141
 These techniques may be useful for population surveys and focus investigation 
in malaria elimination programmes.
At present, nucleic acid-based amplification techniques have no role in the clinical 
management of malaria or in routine surveillance systems (19). 
References
1. 
  
Marsh K, English M, Peshu N, Crawley J, Snow R. Clinical algorithm for malaria 
in Africa. Lancet 1996;347:1327–9.
2.   
Redd SC, Kazembe PN, Luby SP, Nwanyanwu O, Hightower AW, Ziba C, et al. 
Clinical algorithm for treatment of Plasmodium falciparum in children. Lancet 
347:223–7.
3.   
WHO Expert Committee on Malaria: twentieth report. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2000 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 892).
4.   
Nwanyanwu OC, Kumwenda N, Kazembe PN, Jemu S, Ziba C, Nkhona 
WC, et al. Malaria and human immunodeficiency virus infection among 
male employees of a sugar estate in Malawi. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
1997;91:567–9.
5.   
Bojang KA, Obaro S, Morison LA. A prospective evaluation of a clinical 
algorithm for the diagnosis of malaria in Gambian children. Trop Med Int 
Health 2000;5:231–6.
6.   
Olaleye BO, Williams LA, D’Alessandro U, Weber MM, Mulholland K, Okorrie 
C, et al. Clinical predictors of malaria in Gambian children with fever or a 
history of fever. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1998;92:300–4.
7.   
Chandramohan D, Jaffar S, Greenwood B. Use of clinical algorithms for 
diagnosing malaria. Trop Med Int Health 2002;7:45–52.
8.   
World Health Organization. Malaria diagnosis. Memorandum from a WHO 
meeting. Bull World Health Organ 1988;66:575.
9.   
Kawamoto F, Billingsley PF. Rapid diagnosis of malaria by fluorescence 
microscopy. Parasitol Today 1992;8:69–71.
10.   
Malaria diagnosis: new perspectives. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2000 (WHO/CDS/RBM/2000.14).
11.   
Malaria rapid diagnosis: making it work. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2003 (RS/2003/GE/05(PHL)).
12.   
The use of rapid diagnostic tests. Geneva: Roll Back Malaria, WHO Regional 
Office for the Western Pacific, UNDP/World Bank/WHO/UNICEF Special 
Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases; 2004.
13.   
Malaria rapid diagnostic test performance: results of WHO product testing 
of malaria RDTs: rounds 1–4. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
14.   
Abba K, Deeks JJ, Olliaro P, Naing CM, Jackson SM, Takwoingi Y, Donegan S, 
Garner P. Rapid diagnostic tests for diagnosing uncomplicated P. falciparum 
malaria in endemic countries. Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 
2011;7:CD008122. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008122.pub2.
15.   
Thiam S, Thior M, Faye B, Ndiop M, Diouf ML, Diouf MB, et al. Major 
reduction in anti-malarial drug consumption in Senegal after nation-wide 
introduction of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. PLoS One 2011;6:e18419. 
142
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 16.   
Universal access to malaria diagnostic testing: an operational manual. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.
17.   
Voller A. The immunodiagnosis of malaria. In: Wernsdorfer WH, McGregor I, 
editors. Malaria, Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1988:815–27.
18.   
Bates I, Iboro J, Barnish G. Challenges in monitoring the impact of 
interventions against malaria using diagnostics. In: Reducing malaria’s 
burden. Evidence of effectiveness for decision-makers. Washington DC: 
Global Health Council; 2003:33–9.
19.   
WHO Evidence Review Group on Malaria Diagnosis in Low Transmission 
Settings. Meeting report. In: Malaria Policy Advisory Committee Meeting, 
12–14 March 2014, Session 10. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 
(http://www.who.int/entity/malaria/mpac/mpac_mar2014_diagnosis_low_
transmission_settings_report.pdf?ua=1).
A
3
143
  Annex 4 |  
Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation (GRADE) for assessing 
the quality of evidence 
This Annex gives the results of Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) based on responses to questions of importance 
to patient outcomes (population, participants or patients; intervention or indicator; 
comparator or control; outcome: PICO) and the resulting recommendations. 
The GRADE system is a uniform, widely adopted approach based on explicit methods 
for formulating and evaluating the strength of recommendations for specific 
clinical questions on the basis of the robustness of the evidence. The method 
ensures a transparent link between the evidence and the recommendations (see 
section 1.5 and Annex 1).
Questions:
A4.1
Are artemisinin-based combinations superior to non-artemisinin 
combinations for treating confirmed P. falciparum malaria?
A4.2
Is dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine a safe, effective alternative to 
other WHO-approved ACTs?
A4.3
Are ACTs containing 3 days of an artemisinin derivative more 
effective than ACTs containing 1 day of an artemisinin derivative?
A4.4
Does addition of a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg base primaquine to 
ACTs reduce P. falciparum transmission to a greater extent than 
ACTs alone in areas of low transmission?
A4.5
Are artemisinin-derivatives safe in the first trimester 
of pregnancy?
A4.6
Should infants with uncomplicated malaria receive higher mg/kg 
bw doses of ACT than older children?
A4.7
In settings where P. vivax parasites are susceptible to 
chloroquine, do ACTs improve the cure rate to a greater extent 
than chloroquine?
A4.8
In settings where P. vivax parasites are resistant to chloroquine, 
do ACTs improve the cure rate and reduce the relapse rate to a 
greater extent than chloroquine?
A4.9
Do 14-day courses of primaquine reduce relapse rates to a greater 
extent than shorter courses in people treated for P. vivax malaria?
A4.10
What is the optimal primaquine regimen for radical cure of P. vivax 
malaria in people with G6PD deficiency?
A4.11
In settings where P. vivax parasites are susceptible to chloroquine, 
is chloroquine prophylaxis during pregnancy safe and effective?
A4.12
Is parenteral artesunate superior to parenteral quinine in 
preventing death from severe malaria?
A
4
145
 A4.13
Is parenteral artesunate superior to intramuscular artemether in 
preventing death from severe malaria?
A4.14
Is intramuscular artemether superior to parenteral quinine in 
preventing death from severe malaria?
A4.15
For pre-referral treatment, do intramuscular antimalarial drugs 
reduce the number of deaths to a greater extent than rectal 
artesunate in adults and children with signs of severe malaria?
A4.16
Does pre-referral rectal artesunate reduce the number of deaths 
in adults and children with signs of severe malaria to a greater 
extent than placebo?
A4.17
Is artesunate + pyronaridine a safe, effective alternative to other 
WHO-approved ACTs?
A4.18
Is artemisinin + naphthoquine a safe, effective alternative to other 
WHO-approved ACTs?
A4.19
Are three or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine during 
pregnancy more effective than two doses?
A4.20
In areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission where SP is 
still effective, does intermittent treatment with SP alongside 
routine vaccination reduce morbidity and mortality compared to 
no intervention?
A4.21
Does seasonal malaria chemoprevention reduce morbidity and 
mortality from malaria to a greater extent than no intervention?
146
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.1 Are artemisinin-based combinations superior to non-artemisinin combinations for treating confirmed P. falciparum malaria?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Treat adults and children with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria (including infants, 
pregnant women in their second and third trimesters and breastfeeding women) with 
ACT. 
Studies have consistently demonstrated that 
the five WHO-recommended ACTs result in < 
5% PCR-adjusted treatment failures in settings 
with no resistance to the partner drug (high-
quality evidence).
Increased cost
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
•  
The WHO-approved first-line ACT options are: artemether + lumefantrine, 
artesunate + amodiaquine, artesunate + mefloquine, dihydroartemisinin + 
piperaquine and artesunate + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine.
•  
These options are recommended for adults and children, including infants, lactating 
women and pregnant women in their second and third trimester.
•  
In deciding which ACTs to adopt in national treatment policies, national policy-
makers should take into account: the pattern of resistance to antimalarial drugs 
in the country, the relative efficacy and safety of the combinations, their cost, 
the availability of paediatric formulations and the availability of co-formulated 
products. 
•  
Fixed-dose combinations are preferred to loose tablets or co-blistered products.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group decided to recommend a “menu” of 
approved combinations from which countries can select first- and second-
line therapies. Modelling studies suggest that having multiple first-line ACTs 
available for use may help to prevent or delay the development of resistance.
A
4
147
 A4.2 Is dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine a safe, effective alternative to other WHO-approved ACTs?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine is recommended for general use.
A PCR-adjusted treatment failure rate of  
< 5% has been seen consistently in trials 
of dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine (high-
quality evidence).
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine has a longer 
half-life than artemether + lumefantrine, 
and fewer new infections occur within 9 weeks of 
treatment with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
(high-quality evidence).
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine and artesunate 
+ mefloquine have similar half-lives, and a 
similar frequency of new infections is seen within 
9 weeks of treatment (moderate-quality evidence).
A few more 
patients receiving 
dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine than 
those given artesunate 
+ mefloquine had a 
prolonged QT interval 
(low-quality evidence), 
and a few more 
patients receiving 
dihydroartemisinin + 
piperaquine than those 
given artesunate + 
mefloquine or artemether 
+ lumefantrine 
had borderline 
QT prolongation.
No sudden cardiac deaths 
have been reported.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
•  
A systematic review showed that the dosing regimen of dihydroartemisinin + 
piperaquine currently recommended by the manufacturers leads to sub-optimal 
drug concentrations and an increased risk of treatment failure in young children. 
The group recommends a revised dosing regimen based on pharmacokinetic 
models.
•  
Further studies of the risk for QT interval prolongation have been requested by the 
European Medicines Agency.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group recommended dihydroartemisinin + 
piperaquine for use in 2009 but re-evaluated the evidence in 2013 because 
additional data on its safety had become available. 
The group noted the small absolute prolongation of the QT interval with 
dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine but was satisfied that the increase was 
of comparable magnitude to that observed with chloroquine and was not 
important clinically. 
The group also noted that the drug has been extensively studied, and no 
sudden unexpected cardiac episodes have been reported.
148
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine versus artemether + lumefantrine for treating people with proven uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in Africa
Patients or population: Patients with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic settings in Africa 
Intervention: Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine once daily for 3 days 
Comparison: Artemether + lumefantrine twice daily for 3 days 
Source: Zani B, Gathu M, Donegan S, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD010927. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010927
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(trials)
Quality of evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artemether 
+ lumefantrine
Dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine
Treatment failure on 
day 28
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.34  
(0.30 to 0.39)
6200 (9 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1–4
Important
23 per 100
8 per 100 (7 to 9)
PCR-adjusted
RR 0.42  
(0.29 to 0.62)
5417 (9 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1–3,5
Important
3 per 100
1 per 100 (1 to 2)
Treatment failure on 
day 63
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.71  
(0.65 to 0.78)
3200 (2 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1,3,4,6,7
Important
45 per 100
32 per 100 (29 to 35)
PCR-adjusted
RR 0.72  
(0.50 to 1.04)
2097 (2 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1,3,7–9
Critical
6 per 100
4 per 100 (3 to 6)
The assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the 
intervention (and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
No serious risk of bias: Trials generally have little risk of bias. Exclusion of studies with high or unclear risk for selection bias or detection bias did not change the result.
2  
No serious inconsistency: All the trials had similar results, and statistical heterogeneity was low.
3  
No serious indirectness: The trials were conducted in different transmission settings in east, west and southern Africa. Most studies were limited to children.
4  
No serious imprecision: The 95% CI implies appreciable benefit, and the meta-analysis is adequately powered to detect this result.
5  
No serious imprecision: Although there is a benefit in favour of dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, the PCR-adjusted treatment failure rate was < 5% with both drugs.
6  
No serious inconsistency: At this time, there is inconsistency between trials; both show a benefit with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, but the size of the benefit differs.
7  
Seven studies in east, west and southern Africa had outcomes at day 42, when dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine still had an advantage over artemether + lumefantrine for PCR-unadjusted treatment 
failure (RR, 0.60; 95% CI; 0.53 to 0.67, seven studies, 3301, high-quality evidence) and for PCR-adjusted treatment failure (RR, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.41 to 0.81, seven studies, 2559 participants, high-quality 
evidence).
8  
No serious inconsistency: The treatment failure rate with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine was < 5% in both trials.
9  
No serious imprecision: Both ACTs performed well in these two trials, with low rates of treatment failure.
A
4
149
 Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine versus artesunate + mefloquine for treating people with proven uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in Asia
Patients or population: Patients with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic settings in Asia 
Intervention: Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine once daily for 3 days 
Comparison: Artesunate + mefloquine once daily for 3 days 
Source: Zani B, Gathu M, Donegan S, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD010927. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010927. 
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No of participants 
(trials)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artesunate 
+ mefloquine
Dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine
Treatment failure on 
day 28
PCR-unadjusted
RR 1.02  
(0.28 to 3.72)
3487 (8 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1–4
Important
2 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 8)
PCR-adjusted
RR 0.41  
(0.21 to 0.8)
3467 (8 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1,2,3,5
Important
1 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 1)
Treatment failure on 
day 63
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.84  
(0.69 to 1.03)
2715 (5 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,6–8
Important
12 per 100
10 per 100 (8 to 13)
PCR-adjusted 
RR 0.5  
(0.3 to 0.84)
2500 (5 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1,7–,9
Critical
3 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 3)
The assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the 
intervention (and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
No serious risk of bias: Trials generally have little risk of selection or detection bias. Exclusion of trials with high or unclear risk of bias did not change the result.
2  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: in six trials, very few recurrences of parasitaemia were found in both groups. Two trials conducted mainly in areas in Thailand with multi-drug resistance 
showed increased risks for recurrent parasitaemia with artesunate + mefloquine.
3  
No serious indirectness: The trials were conducted in adults and children in Cambodia, India, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam.
4  
No serious imprecision: Overall, no significant difference between treatments; however, dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine may be superior where P. falciparum is resistant to mefloquine.
5  
No serious imprecision: Overall, a statistically significant benefit with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, although the benefit may be present only where there is resistance to mefloquine.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: of the five trials, one in Thailand in 2005 showed a statistically significant benefit with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, one in Myanmar in 2009 
showed a benefit with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, and three found no difference.
7  
No serious indirectness: The trials were conducted in adults and children in Cambodia, India, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar and Thailand.
8  
No serious imprecision: Overall, no significant difference between treatments. Although some trials found statistically significant differences, these may not be clinically important.
9  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: Slight variation among trials, only one showing a statistically significant benefit with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine.
150
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine versus artemether + lumefantrine for uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Patients or population: Patients with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
Comparison: Artemether + lumefantrine 
Source: Zani B, Gathu M, Donegan S, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD010927. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010927
Outcome
No. of participants with adverse events (95% CI)
No. of participants 
(trials)
Quality of the evidence 
(GRADE)
Artemether 
+ lumefantrine
Dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine
Serious adverse events (including deaths)
6 per 1000
10 per 1000 (6 to 17)
7022 (8 trials)
Moderate1–4
Gastroenterological
Early vomiting
2 per 100
3 per 100 (2 to 5)
2695 (3 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Vomiting
9 per 100
9 per 100 (8 to 11)
6761 (9 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Nausea
2 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 7)
547 (2 trials)
Low2,3,5,7
Diarrhoea
12 per 100
12 per 100 (10 to 14)
4889 (7 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Abdominal pain
19 per 100
16 per 100 (12 to 20)
911 (5 trials)
Low2,3,5,8
Anorexia
15 per 100
14 per 100 (12 to 17)
3834 (5 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Neuro-psychiatric
Headache
27 per 100
33 per 100 (25 to 44)
309 (2 trials)
Low2,3,5,8
Sleeplessness
1 per 100
3 per 100 (1 to 9)
547 (2 trials)
Low2,3,5,7
Dizziness
3 per 100
4 per 100 (2 to 11)
547 (2 trials)
Low3,5,7
Sleepiness
0 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 0)
384 (1 trial)
Low2,3,5,7
Weakness
17 per 100
18 per 100 (15 to 21)
1812 (5 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
A
4
151
 Cardio-respiratory
Cough
42 per 100
42 per 100 (40 to 45)
4342 (5 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Coryza
68 per 100
66 per 100 (60 to 72)
832 (2 trials)
Low1,2,3,8
Prolonged QT interval  
(adverse event)
3 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 5)
1548 (1 trial)
Low8,10,11
Prolonged QT interval 
(Bazett correction)
7 per 100
9 per 100 (6 to 11)
1548 (1 trial)
Low5,8,11
Prolonged QT interval 
(Fridericia correction)
0 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 2)
1548 (1 trial)
Low5,8,11
Musculoskeletal or 
dermatological 
Pruritis
2 per 100
4 per 100 (2 to 6)
2033 (5 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Facial oedema
0 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 0)
384 (1 trial)
Low2,3,5,7
The assumed risk for adverse events in the artemether + lumefantrine group is an average across trials; the corresponding risk associated with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
(and its 95% CI) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: All but one of the trials were open label; however, we did not downgrade for this outcome.
2  
No serious inconsistency: The finding is consistent across all trials. Statistical heterogeneity is low.
3  
No serious indirectness: The trials were conducted mainly in children in Africa; few trials in Asia or in adults.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: No statistically significant difference was detected between treatments; however the sample size does not exclude the possibility of rare but clinically 
important differences.
5  
Downgraded by 1 for risk of bias: The majority of trials were open label.
6  
No serious imprecision: No effect found, and the CIs around the absolute effects exclude clinically important differences.
7  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: There are limited data.
8  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The result does not reach statistical significance.
9  
No serious imprecision: The total number of participants is high, and the findings are precise.
10  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: This trial was unblinded. Only a few of the recorded prolonged QT intervals were registered as adverse events, which removed the statistical significance. 
The reasons for this are unclear.
11  
No serious indirectness: This single trial was conducted in children in Burkina Faso, Kenya, Mozambique, Uganda and Zambia.
152
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine versus artesunate + mefloquine for treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Patients or population: Patients with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
Comparison: Artesunate + mefloquine 
Source: Zani B, Gathu M, Donegan S, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD010927. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010927
Outcome
No. of participants with adverse events (95% CI)
No. of participants 
(trials)
Quality of the evidence 
(GRADE)
Artesunate + mefloquine
Dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine
Serious adverse events (including deaths)
8 per 1000
9 per 1000 (4 to 18)
3522 (8 trials)
Moderate1–4
Gastroenterological
Early vomiting
7 per 100
6 per 100 (5 to 8)
4114 (9 trials)
Moderate2,3,5,6
Nausea
20 per 100
14 per 100 (12 to 16)
4531 (9 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,8
Vomiting
13 per 100
8 per 100 (6 to 10)
2744 (5 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,8
Anorexia
15 per 100
13 per 100 (11 to 15)
3497 (6 trials)
Low3,5,7,9
Diarrhoea
6 per 100
8 per 100 (6 to 11)
2217 (5 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,8
Abdominal pain
11 per 100
11 per 100 (9 to 13)
3887 (7 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,10
Neuro-psychiatric
Headache
12 per 100
10 per 100 (8 to 12)
2039 (4 trials)
Low3,5,8,11
Dizziness
36 per 100
26 per 100 (24 to 28)
4531 (9 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,8
Sleeplessness
21 per 100
10 per 100 (8 to 13)
2551 (6 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,8
Fatigue
8 per 100
3 per 100 (2 to 6)
872 (2 trials)
Low5,7,12
Nightmares
10 per 100
1 per 100 (0 to 7)
220 (1 trial)
Low5,12
Anxiety
11 per 100
1 per 100 (0 to 4)
522 (1 trial)
Low5,12
Blurred vision
9 per 100
4 per 100 (2 to 9)
464 (1 trial)
Low5,12
Tinnitus
9 per 100
4 per 100 (1 to 11)
220 (1 trial)
Low5,12
A
4
153
 Cardio-respiratory
Palpitations
18 per 100
11 per 100 (8 to 15)
1175 (3 trials)
Moderate3,5,7,8
Cough
10 per 100
8 per 100 (5 to 12)
1148 (1 trial)
Low5,9
Dyspnoea
9 per 100
3 per 100 (1 to 10)
220 (1 trial)
Low5,13
Prolonged QT interval 
(adverse event)
4 per 100
5 per 100 (3 to 9)
1148 (1 trial)
Low9,14,15
Prolonged QT interval 
(Bazett correction)
4 per 100
9 per 100 (5 to 15)
1148 (1 trial)
Low5,9,15
Prolonged QT interval 
(Fridericia correction)
5 per 100
4 per 100 (3 to 8)
1148 (1 trial)
Low5,9,15
Musculoskeletal/ 
dermatological
Arthralgia
6 per 100
5 per 100 (3 to 9)
1148 (1 trial)
Moderate5,10,14
Myalgia
6 per 100
6 per 100 (4 to 10)
1148 (1 trial)
Moderate5,10,14
Urticaria
2 per 100
1 per 100 (0 to 4)
719 (2 trials)
Low5,13
Pruritus
3 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 4)
872 (2 trials)
Low5,13
Rash
1 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 7)
220 (1 trial)
Low5,13
The assumed risk for adverse events in the artesunate + mefloquine group is the average risk across trials; the corresponding risk with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
(and its 95% CI) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). CI, confidence interval.
1  
No serious risk of bias: Only eight of the 11 reports made any comment on serious adverse events. None of these eight trials was blinded. 
2  
No serious inconsistency: None of the eight trials found statistically significant differences.
3  
No serious indirectness: These trials included both adults and children and were conducted in Asia and South America.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for imprecision: These trials do not exclude the possibility of rare but clinically important adverse effects.
5  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: All trials were open label.
6  
No serious imprecision: The 95% CI around the absolute effect is narrow and excludes clinically important differences.
7  
No serious inconsistency: This finding was consistent across trials, with no significant statistical heterogeneity.
8  
No serious imprecision: The result is statistically significant, and the meta-analysis has adequate power to detect this effect.
9  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: This result does not reach statistical significance.
10  
No serious imprecision: No difference was found between treatments, and the sample is large enough for detection of any differences.
11  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: There is moderate heterogeneity among trials.
12  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Only two trials assessed this outcome.
13  
Downgraded by 1 for imprecision: Limited data available, and the result is not statistically significant.
14  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: This trial is unblinded. Only a few of the recorded prolonged QT intervals were registered as adverse events, which removed the statistical significance. The 
reasons for this are unclear.
15  
No serious indirectness: This single large trial was conducted in adults and children in India, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Thailand.
154
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.3 Are ACTs containing 3 days of an artemisinin derivative more effective than ACTs containing 1 day of an artemisinin derivative?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
The first-line ACT should contain at least 3 days’ treatment with an 
artemisinin derivative.
Fewer patients taking ACTs containing 3 
days of an artemisinin derivative experience 
treatment failure within the first 28 days (high-
quality evidence).
Fewer participants taking ACTs containing 
3 days of an artemisinin derivative have 
gametocytaemia at day 7 (high-quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
•  
Longer ACT treatment may be required to achieve > 90% cure rate in areas with 
artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum, but there are insufficient trials to make definitive 
recommendations.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group considers that 3 days of an 
artemisinin derivative are necessary to provide sufficient efficacy, 
promote good adherence and minimize the risk for drug resistance due to 
incomplete treatment.
A
4
155
 Are ACTs containing 3 days of an artemisinin derivative more effective than ACTs containing 1 day of an artemisinin-derivative?
Patients or population: Adults and children with uncomplicated malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic settings 
Intervention: Artesunate 4 mg/kg bw once daily for 3 days plus sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine on day 1 
Control: Artesunate 4 mg/kg bw once daily for 1 day plus sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine on day 1 
Source: Kramer C, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-based combination treatments containing three days of artemisinin versus combinations containing one day of artemisinin. 
Unpublished analysis including four studies1-4
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artesunate 1 day
Artesunate 3 days
Parasitological 
failure
At day 14
RR 0.36  
(0.27 to 0.5)
1276 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High5-8
Important
19 per 100
7 per 100 (5 to 10)
At day 28 PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.62  
(0.54 to 0.71)
1260 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High5-8
Important
47 per 1000
25 per 100 (21 to 31)
At day 28 PCR-adjusted
RR 0.45  
(0.36 to 0.55)
1202 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High5-8
Critical
33 per 100
14 per 100 (12 to 18)
156
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Gametocytaemia
At day 7
RR 0.74  
(0.58 to 0.93)
1260 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High5-7,8
Important
20 per 100
15 per 100 (12 to 19)
At day 14
RR 0.8  
(0.57 to 1.14)
1199 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate5,7,8
Important
11 per 100
8 per 100 (6 to 12)
At day 28
RR 0.36  
(0.14 to 0.92)
898 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate5,7,9
Important
3 per 100
1 per 100 (1 to 3)
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; ACT, artemisinin-based combination therapy; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
Obonyo CO, Ochieng F, Taylor WRJ, Ochola SA, Mugitu K, Olliaro P. Artesunate plus sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for uncomplicated malaria in Kenyan children: a randomized, double blind, palcebo-
controlled trial. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2003;97:585-91.
2  
Obonyo CO, Taylor W, Ekvall H, Kaneko A, ter Kuile F, Olliaro P. Effect of artesuante plus sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine on haematological recovery and anaemia, in Kenyan children with uncomplicated, 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 2006;101(4):281-295.
3  
Priotto G, Kabakyenga J, Pinoges L, Ruiz A, Eriksson T, Coussement F. Artesunate and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine combinations for the treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in 
Uganda: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2003;97(3):325-330.
4  
von Seidlin L, Milligan P, Pinder M, Bojang K, Anyalebechi C, Gosling R. Efficacy of artesunate plus pyrimethamine-sulphadoxine for uncomplicated malaria in Gambian children: a double blind, 
randomised, controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:352-57.No serious risk of bias: All four studies adequately concealed allocation and reported double blinding. 
5  
No serious inconsistency: All four studies found reductions with 3 days of artesunate, although there was some variation in the size of this effect.
6  
No serious indirectness: The four trials were conducted in children with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in the Gambia, Kenya, Malawi and Uganda. The same screening methods and inclusion 
criteria were used. Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine was the partner antimalarial drug in all four trials. Resistance to sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine was noted at three study sites, parasitological failure 
with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine alone being seen in 10–13% of participants in the Gambia, 27% in Kenya and 25% in Uganda.
7  
No serious imprecision: The confidence intervals are narrow, and the intervals comprise clinically important effects.
8  
No serious imprecision: The confidence intervals are narrow and do not include no effect.
9  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: As gametocytaemia at this time was rare in both groups, the studies have inadequate power to confidently detect important differences.
A
4
157
 A4.4  
Does addition of a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw primaquine base to ACTs reduce P. falciparum transmission to a greater extent than 
ACTs alone in areas of low transmission?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In low-transmission areas, also give a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw primaquine to 
reduce onward transmission of P. falciparum. G6PD testing is not necessary (except for 
pregnant and breastfeeding women and infants aged < 1 year).
Single doses of primaquine > 0.4 mg/kg bw 
reduced gametocyte carriage at day 8 by around 
two thirds (moderate-quality evidence).
There are too few trials of doses < 0.4 mg/kg bw 
to quantify the effect on gametocyte carriage 
(low-quality evidence).
Analysis of observational data from mosquito 
feeding studies suggests that 0.25 mg/kg bw may 
rapidly reduce the infectivity of gametocytes to 
mosquitoes. 
People with severe G6PD 
deficiency are at risk 
for haemolysis. At this 
dose, however, the risk is 
thought to be small; there 
are insufficient data to 
quantify this risk.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Conditional
Remarks
•  
This recommendation excludes high-transmission settings, as symptomatic patients 
make up only a small proportion of the total population carrying gametocytes 
within a community, and primaquine is unlikely to affect transmission.
•  
A major concern of national policy-makers in using primaquine has been the small 
risk for haemolytic toxicity in G6PD-deficient people, especially where G6PD testing 
is not available. 
•  
Life-threatening haemolysis is considered unlikely with the 0.25mg/kg bw dose and 
without G6PD testing.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Low
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group considered the evidence on dose–
response relations in the observational mosquito-feeding studies of reduced 
transmissibility with the dose of 0.25 mg/kg bw and the judgement of 
the WHO Evidence Review Group (November 2012). Their view was that 
the potential public health benefits of single low-dose (0.25 mg/kg bw) 
primaquine in addition to an ACT for falciparum malaria, without G6PD 
testing, outweigh the potential risk for adverse effects.
158
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Single-dose primaquine for preventing transmission of P. falciparum parasites when given with artemisinin-based treatments
Patients or population: People with symptomatic malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Short-course primaquine plus malaria treatment including an artemisinin derivative 
Control: Malaria treatment with an artemisinin derivative alone 
Sources: Graves PM, Gelband H, Garner P. Primaquine or other 8-aminoquinoline for reducing Plasmodium falciparum transmission. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews 2015, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD008152. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008152.pub4.  
White NJ, Qiao LG, Qi G, Luzzatto L. Rationale for recommending a lower dose of primaquine as a Plasmodium falciparum gametocytocide in populations where G6PD 
deficiency is common. Malar J 2012;11:418.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Comment
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
ACT 
ACT + primaquine
Malaria incidence, 
prevalence or 
entomological 
inoculation rate
–
–
–
0 trials
–
People infectious 
to mosquitoes
–
–
–
0 trials
–
Limited 
observational data 
from mosquito 
feeding studies 
suggests that 0.25 
mg/kg bw may 
rapidly reduce 
the infectivity of 
gametocytes to 
mosquitoes. 
A
4
159
 Participants with 
gametocytes on 
microscopy or PCR1 
(day 8)
Dose < 0.4 mg/kg bw
RR 0.67  
(0.44 to 1.02)
223 (1 trial)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 2–4 
Low
34 per 100
23 per 100 (15 to 35)
Dose 0.4–0.6 mg/kg bw
RR 0.30 
(0.16 to 0.56)
219 (1 trial)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 2,4–6 
Moderate 
35 per 100
11 per 100 (6 to 20)
Dose > 0.6 mg/kg bw
RR 0.29  
(0.22 to 0.37)
1380 (7 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High7–9
30 per 100
9 per 100 (7 to 11)
Mean percentage 
change in 
haemoglobin (Hb)10
15% mean drop in Hb 
from baseline in the 
control group 
Mean drop in Hb from 
baseline in the intervention 
groups was 3% lower (10% 
lower to 4% higher)
101 (1 trial)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low 10,11
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and 
its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; ACT, artemisinin-based combination therapy; RR, risk ratio; AUC, area under the concentration–time curve
1  
AUC estimates (log10 AUC for days 1–43) are included as footnotes for each dosing stratum.
2  
No serious risk of bias: Includes one trial with no risk of bias detected.
3  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: One small trial with CIs that include 50% reduction and no effect.
4  
No data on percentage reduction in log10 AUC for days 1–43 at this dose
5  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: A single trial with few events
6  
Not downgraded for serious indirectness: This is a single trial in a single setting.
7  
Includes seven trials, with 11 comparisons: One trial included five separate comparisons of artesunate + amodiaquine, dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine, artesunate + mefloquine and artemether + 
lumefantrine.
8  
No serious inconsistency: While there is marked quantitative heterogeneity, the studies with no demonstrable effect had few events. Not downgraded.
9  
Percentage reduction in log10 AUC for days 1–43: range, 21.1–87.5%. We included four trials with 12 comparisons. We excluded one trial as having a high risk of bias due to small sample size and 
large difference in baseline gametocyte count in the two groups.
10  
One trial reported a relative decrease in haemoglobin against baseline in both groups on days 8, 15, 29 and 43 in all participants irrespective of G6PD status. No difference at any time between 
participants receiving primaquine and those that not did not. We present the data for day 43 in this table.
11  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious indirectness: the percentage of people with large drops in haemoglobin, not the mean change in the population, is the important safety outcome, and the 
estimates are averages in a small population (N = 99) that includes people with normal G6PD function. The study is therefore unlikely to detect effects in a small subgroup with a relatively 
uncommon adverse event.
160
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.5  
Are artemisinin-derivatives safe in the first trimester of pregnancy?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Treat pregnant women with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria during the first 
trimester with 7 days of quinine + clindamycin. 
Treat pregnant women in their first trimester who have chloroquine-resistant P. vivax 
malaria with quinine.
Published prospective 
data on 700 women 
exposed in the first 
trimester of pregnancy 
have not indicated 
any adverse effects of 
artemisinin-derivatives 
on pregnancy or on the 
health of the fetus or 
neonate. 
The currently available 
data are only sufficient 
to exclude a ≥ 4.2-fold 
increase in risk of any 
major defect detectable 
at birth (background 
prevalence assumed 
to be 0.9%), if half the 
exposures occur during 
the embryo-sensitive 
period (4–9 weeks post-
conception).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Previous data indicated that the antimalarial medicines considered safe in the 
first trimester of pregnancy are quinine, chloroquine, clindamycin and proguanil. 
This evidence was not revisited during this guideline process.
The limited data available on the safety of artemisinin-derivatives in early pregnancy 
allow for some reassurance in counselling women accidentally exposed to an 
artemisinin-derivative early in the first trimester, and there is no need for them to 
have their pregnancy interrupted because of this exposure.
McGready R, Lee SJ, Wiladphaingern J, et al. Adverse effects of falciparum and vivax 
malaria and the safety of antimalarial treatment in early pregnancy: a population-based 
study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2012;12:388-96.
Mosha D, Mazuguni F, Mrema S, et al. Safety of artemether-lumefantrine exposure in first 
trimester of pregnancy: an observational cohort. Malar J. 2014; 13: 197e.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Rationale for the recommendation
In the absence of adequate safety data on the artemisinin-derivatives in the first 
trimester of pregnancy the Guideline Development Group was unable to make 
recommendations beyond reiterating the status quo.
A
4
161
 A4.6  
Should infants with uncomplicated malaria receive higher mg/kg doses of ACT than older children?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Treat infants weighing < 5 kg with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with an ACT. 
The weight-adjusted dose should achieve the same mg/kg bw target dose as for 
children weighing 5 kg.
There is some evidence 
that artemether + 
lumefantrine and 
dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine may 
achieve lower plasma 
concentrations in infants 
than in older children 
and adults.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group considered the currently available 
evidence too limited to warrant formal evidence review at this stage, and was 
unable to recommend any changes beyond the status quo. Further research 
is warranted.
162
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.7  
In settings where P. vivax parasites are susceptible to chloroquine, do ACTs improve cure rate to a greater extent than chloroquine?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In areas with chloroquine-susceptible P. vivax, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated non-falciparum malaria with either chloroquine or ACT.
ACTs clear parasites more quickly than 
chloroquine (high-quality evidence).
ACTs with long half-lives provide a longer period 
of suppressive post-treatment prophylaxis 
against relapses and new infections (high-
quality evidence).
Simplified national protocols for all forms of 
uncomplicated malaria.
Adequate treatment of undiagnosed  
P. falciparum in mixed infections.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Conditional
Remarks
 
Current methods cannot distinguish recrudescence from relapse or relapse from newly 
acquired infections, but the aim of treatment is to ensure that the rates of recurrent 
parasitaemia of any origin are < 10%.
Primaquine has significant asexual stage activity against vivax malaria and augments 
the therapeutic response to chloroquine. When primaquine is given routinely for 14 
days, it may mask low-level chloroquine resistance and prevent vivax recurrence 
within 28 days.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group recognized that, in the few settings in 
which P. vivax is the only endemic species and where chloroquine resistance 
remains low, the increased cost of ACT may not be worth the small additional 
benefits. In these settings, chloroquine may still be considered, but countries 
should monitor chloroquine resistance and change to ACT when the treatment 
failure rate is > 10% on day 28.
A
4
163
 A4.8  
In settings where P. vivax parasites are resistant to chloroquine, do ACTs improve cure rate and reduce relapse rate to a greater extent 
than chloroquine?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In areas with chloroquine-resistant P. vivax, treat adults and children with 
uncomplicated P. vivax malaria with ACT (including infants, pregnant women in their 
second and third trimester and breastfeeding women).
ACTs clear parasites more quickly than 
chloroquine (high-quality evidence).
ACTs are at least as effective as chloroquine in 
preventing recurrent parasitaemia before day 28 
(high-quality evidence). 
ACTs with long half-lives (artesunate + 
mefloquine, dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine) 
provide a longer period of suppressive post-
treatment prophylaxis against relapses and new 
infections (high-quality evidence).
Adequate treatment of undiagnosed  
P. falciparum in mixed infections.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Current methods do not distinguish recrudescence from relapse or relapse from newly 
acquired infection, but the aim of treatment is to ensure that the rates of recurrent 
parasitaemia of any origin is < 10% within 28 days.
When primaquine is not given for radical cure, slowly eliminated ACT that prevents 
recurrent parasitemia before day 28 should be used (dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
or artesunate + mefloquine).
Primaquine has significant asexual stage activity against vivax malaria and augments 
the therapeutic response to chloroquine. When primaquine is given routinely for 14 
days, it may mask low-level chloroquine resistance and prevent vivax recurrence 
within 28 days.
When primaquine is given routinely for 14 days, ACTs with shorter half-lives 
(artemether + lumefantrine, or artesunate + amodiaquine) may be sufficient to keep 
the rate of recurrent parasitaemia before day 28 below 10%.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group recognized that, in the few settings in 
which P. vivax is the only endemic species and where chloroquine resistance 
remains low, the increased cost of ACT may not be worth the small additional 
benefits. In these settings, chloroquine may still be considered, but countries 
should monitor chloroquine resistance and change to ACT when the treatment 
failure rate is > 10% on day 28.
164
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Artemisinin-based combination therapy versus chloroquine for uncomplicated P. vivax malaria
Patient or population: Adults and children with uncomplicated P. vivax malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas in which chloroquine is still effective for the first 28 days 
Intervention: Artemisinin-based combination therapy 
Comparison: Chloroquine 
Source: Gogtay N, Kannan S, Thatte UM, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-based combination therapy for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax malaria. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD008492. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008492.pub3.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Chloroquine
ACT
Remaining parasitaemia at 
24 h
52 per 100
22 per 100 (19 to 26)
RR 0.42  
(0.36 to 0.50)
1652 (4 studies1)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2–5
Important
Still febrile after 24 h
29 per 100
16 per 100 (12 to 20)
RR 0.55  
(0.43 to 0.7)
990 (2 studies6)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate2,4,5,7
Important
Effective treatment of blood-
stage infection as assessed by 
recurrent parasitaemia before 
day 28
3 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 6)
RR 0.58  
(0.18 to 1.90)
1622 (5 studies8)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2,3,4,9
Critical
A
4
165
 Post-treatment prophylaxis 
as assessed by recurrent 
parasitaemia between day 28 
and day 42, 56 or 63
With primaquine
RR 0.27  
(0.08 to 0.94)
376 (1 study10)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low11,12
Important
6 per 100
2 per 100 (0 to 6)
Without primaquine
RR 0.57  
(0.40 to 0.82)
1066 (3 studies13)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate3,5,14
Important
40 per 100
23 per 100 (16 to 33)
Serious adverse events
0 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 2)
RR 1  
(0.14 to 7.04)
1775 (5 studies8)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2–4,9
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and 
its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; ACT, artemisinin-based combination therapy
1  
These four studies are from Afghanistan, Cambodia, Thailand, India and Indonesia.
2  
No serious study limitations: Three studies adequately concealed allocation to be at low risk of selection bias. Removal of the remaining trials did not substantially change the result.
3  
No serious inconsistency: The findings of all the trials are consistent.
4  
No serious indirectness: The findings of these studies can reasonably be applied to other settings with similar transmission and resistance patterns.
5  
No serious imprecision: The studies show a clinically and statistically significant benefit of ACT.
6  
These two studies are from Afghanistan, Cambodia, Thailand, India and Indonesia.
7  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: In one additional trial which could not be included in the meta-analysis, fever clearance was not significantly different between groups.
8  
These five studies are from Afghanistan, Cambodia, Thailand, India and Indonesia.
9  
No serious imprecision: No clinically important difference between ACTs and chloroquine. Although the 95% CI around the relative effect is very wide, recurrent parasitaemia before day 28 and 
serious adverse events were very rare; consequently, the 95% CI around the absolute effect is very narrow.
10  
This single multi-site study was conducted in Cambodia, Thailand, India and Indonesia.
11  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: This study delayed primaquine until day 28; therefore, the course was not completed until day 42, the last day of the trial. The effect might not be present 
if primaquine is given in the usual way (on completion of 3 days of ACT). The period of follow-up was not long enough to fully assess this effect; the inevitable relapse might simply be delayed, 
rather than a reduction in clinical episodes.
12  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: Although the result is statistically significant, the 95% CI is wide and includes the possibility of no appreciable benefit.
13  
One study continued follow-up until day 56, one to day 42 and one to day 63. (Primaquine was administered to the participants after day 63.)
14  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Both studies were conducted in Afghanistan where primaquine is not recommended because of a high prevalence of G6PD deficiency. The period of 
follow-up was not long enough to fully assess this effect; the inevitable relapse might simply be delayed, rather than a reduction in clinical episodes.
166
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine versus alternative artemisinin-based combination treatment for uncomplicated P. vivax malaria
Patients or population: Adults and children with uncomplicated P. vivax malaria 
Settings: Settings with high transmission of P. vivax (chloroquine resistance is also reported as high) 
Intervention: Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
Comparison: Alternative ACTs 
Source: Gogtay N, Kannan S, Thatte UM, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-based combination therapy for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax malaria. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD008492. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008492.pub3.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Alternative ACT
Dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine
Effective treatment of blood-
stage parasites as assessed by 
recurrent parasitaemia before 
day 28
35 per 100
7 per 100 (3 to 17)
RR 0.20  
(0.08 to 0.49)
334 (3 studies1)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate2–5
Post-treatment prophylaxis 
as assessed by recurrent 
parasitaemia between days 28 
and 42
With primaquine
RR 0.21  
(0.1 to 0.46)
179 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low5–8
34 per 100
7 per 100 (3 to 16)
Without primaquine
RR 0.40  
(0.14 to 1.10)
66 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low9–11
33 per 100
13 per 100 (5 to 37)
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; DHA-P: dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine; ACT: Artemisinin-based combination therapy.
1  
These three studies are from Papua New Guinea and Indonesia.
2  
No serious risk of bias: Allocation was adequately concealed in these studies, resulting in a low risk of bias.
3  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: There was some clinical heterogeneity between trials. Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine did not perform as well in Papua New Guinea as it has 
elsewhere; however, it was still superior to artemether + lumefantrine and artesunate+sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine.
4  
No serious indirectness: Studies included adults and children and were conducted in areas where transmission is high and chloroquine resistance is well documented.
5  
No serious imprecision: Both limits of the 95% CI suggest an appreciable clinical benefit with dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Losses to follow-up were high (> 20% at this time).
7  
No serious inconsistency: Statistical heterogeneity was low.
8  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: One trial delayed administration of primaquine until day 28; therefore, the course will not have been completed until the last day of the trial. The second 
trial offered unsupervised primaquine to all participants on completion of ACT. This reflects normal practice, but it is not clear how many participants completed their course. The period of follow-up 
was not long enough to fully assess this effect; the inevitable relapse might simply be delayed, rather than a reduction in clinical episodes.
9  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Losses to follow-up were high (> 20% at this time).
10  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Only one study assessed this outcome. Recurrent parasitaemia was higher with all three ACTs than seen elsewhere, and the results are therefore not easily 
extrapolated to other sites.
11  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The 95% CI of the effect estimate is wide and includes an important clinical benefit and no difference between treatments.
A
4
167
 A4.9  
Do 14-day courses of primaquine reduce relapse rates to a greater extent than shorter courses in people treated for P. vivax malaria?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
To prevent future relapse, treat people with P. vivax or P. ovale malaria with a 14-day 
course of primaquine (except pregnant or breastfeeding women and people with 
G6PD deficiency).
14-day courses of primaquine added to 
chloroquine reduce relapse rates to a 
greater extent than chloroquine alone (high-
quality evidence).
14-day courses of primaquine added to 
chloroquine may result in fewer relapses than 
7-day courses (low-quality evidence).
Primaquine is known 
to cause haemolysis 
in people with G6PD 
deficiency. 
Of the 15 trials included 
in the Cochrane review, 
12 explicitly excluded 
people with G6PD 
deficiency; in three trials, 
it was unclear whether 
participants were tested 
for G6PD deficiency or 
excluded. None of the 
trials reported serious 
or treatment-limiting 
adverse events.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
The widely used primaquine regimen of 0.25 mg base/kg bw per day for 14 days is 
based on studies of long-latency Korean P. vivax.
In South-East Asia and Oceania, P. vivax relapses at 3-week intervals and is more 
resistant to primaquine. Consequently, higher doses of primaquine have been used 
(0.375–0.5 mg base/kg bw per day), but there are few data from comparative trials.
Primaquine is contraindicated in pregnancy and lactation < 6 months post partum, 
unless the infant has been tested for G6PD deficiency. It could be given to women who 
have delivered and ceased breastfeeding.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
Primaquine has not previously been recommended in high-transmission 
settings, where the risk of new infections was considered to outweigh any 
benefits of reduced spontaneous relapses.
In the light of changing epidemiology worldwide and more aggressive targets 
for malaria control and elimination, the group now recommends primaquine 
for radical cure of P. vivax in all settings.
168
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.10  
What is the optimal primaquine regimen for radical cure of P. vivax malaria in people with G6PD deficiency?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In people with G6PD deficiency, consider relapse prevention with primaquine at 0.75 
mg base/kg bw once a week for 8 weeks.
There are no comparative trials of the efficacy 
or safety of primaquine in people with 
G6PD deficiency.
Primaquine is known 
to cause haemolysis 
in people with G6PD 
deficiency. 
Of the 15 trials included 
in the Cochrane review, 
12 explicitly excluded 
people with G6PD 
deficiency; in three trials, 
it was unclear whether 
participants were tested 
for G6PD deficiency or 
excluded. None of the 
trials reported serious 
or treatment-limiting 
adverse events.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Conditional
Remarks
 
Primaquine is contraindicated in pregnancy and lactation, unless the infant has been 
tested for G6PD deficiency. It could be given to women once they have delivered and 
ceased breastfeeding.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Very low
Rationale for the recommendation
In the absence of evidence to recommend alternatives, the Guideline 
Development Group considers a regimen of 0.75 mg/kg bw primaquine given 
once weekly for 8 weeks to be the safest for people with G6PD deficiency.
A
4
169
 Primaquine (14 days) versus no intervention or placebo for preventing relapses in people with P. vivax malaria treated for blood-stage infection with chloroquine
Patients or population: People with P. vivax malaria1 
Intervention: Primaquine (0.25 mg/kg bw) for 14 days plus chloroquine (25 mg/kg bw for 3 days)  
Comparison: Chloroquine alone (25 mg/kg bw for 3 days) 
Source: Galappaththy GNL, Tharyan P, Kirubakaran R. Primaquine for preventing relapse in people with Plasmodium vivax malaria treated with chloroquine. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD004389. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004389.pub3.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
No primaquine 
Primaquine 14 days 
P. vivax relapse defined as 
reappearance of P. vivax 
parasitaemia > 30 days after 
starting primaquine
8 per 100
5 per 100 (4 to 6)
RR 0.60  
(0.48 to 0.75)
1740 (10 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2–5
Important
Serious adverse events
None reported
None reported
Cannot be estimated
1740 (10 studies)
6
Important
Other adverse events
None reported
None reported
Cannot be estimated
1740 (10 studies)
Important
The assumed risk is the median risk in the control group; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and its 
95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
Studies conducted in Ethiopia, India (4), Pakistan (4) and Thailand.
2  
No serious study limitations: Three studies were at high risk of bias; however, they contributed only 15.5% weight to the pooled effect estimates, and their removal from the sensitivity analysis did 
not alter the results appreciably.
3  
No serious inconsistency: Results were consistent within subgroups based on duration of follow-up < 6 months or > 6 months and whether treatment was supervised or not; the I2 value for the 
pooled effect estimate from the 10 trials was 30%.
4  
No serious indirectness: The trials included children and were done in transmission settings and countries representative of the vivax malaria burden. The outcome used was the best estimate 
currently available in the absence of widely available validated molecular techniques to differentiate relapse from new infections.
5  
No serious imprecision: The upper and lower limits of the 95% CI of the pooled relative risk indicate appreciable benefit with chloroquine + primaquine for 14 days. The total number of events was 
< 300, but the total sample size was larger than the optimal information size, given the magnitude of risk reduction.
6  
Of the 15 trials included in the Cochrane review, 12 explicitly excluded people with G6PD deficiency; in three trials, it was unclear whether participants were tested for G6PD deficiency or excluded. 
None of the trials reported serious or treatment-limiting adverse events.
170
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 14-day course of primaquine versus 7-day course to reduce spontaneous relapse of P. vivax in people treated for blood-stage infections with chloroquine
Patients or population: People with P. vivax malaria1 
Intervention: Primaquine (0.25 mg/kg bw) for 14 days plus chloroquine (25 mg/kg bw for 3 days)  
Comparison: Primaquine (0.25 mg/kg bw) for 7 days plus chloroquine alone (25 mg/kg bw for 3 days) 
Source: Galappaththy GNL, Tharyan P, Kirubakaran R. Primaquine for preventing relapse in people with Plasmodium vivax malaria treated with chloroquine. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD004389. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004389.pub3.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of the 
evidence (GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
7 days primaquine
14 days primaquine 
P. vivax relapse defined as 
reappearance of P. vivax 
parasitaemia > 30 days after 
starting primaquine
42 per 100
19 per 100  
(11 to 34)
RR 0.45  
(0.25 to 0.81)
126 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
low 2,3
Critical
Severe adverse events
None reported
None reported
Cannot be estimated
126 (1 study)
–
Important
Other adverse events
Not reported
Not reported
Cannot be estimated
126 (1 study)
–
Important
The assumed risk is the median risk in the control group; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and its 
95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
This single study was conducted in Colombia.
2  
Serious indirectness: The trial authors did not include children < 15 years. Another trial in the same area by the same group of investigators immediately afterwards included children. The results for 
3 days of primaquine versus 14 days of primaquine did not differ in children from that in adults. Duration of follow-up was 2 months. While this ensures detection of early relapse, it does not cover 
relapses after 2 months. The relapse rates at 6 months showed that most relapses occur by 2 months. The effects of 7 days of primaquine were assessed in only one trial. We therefore downgraded 
the evidence by 1.
3  
Serious imprecision: Although the upper and lower limits of the 95% CI of the risk ratio in this trial showed statistically significant, clinically appreciable benefit with 14 days of primaquine over 7 
days of primaquine, the total number of events was 38 and the sample size of the trial was 104. This is lower than the optimal information size. We downgraded the evidence by 1.
A
4
171
 A4.11  
In settings where P. vivax parasites are susceptible to chloroquine, is chloroquine prophylaxis during pregnancy safe and effective?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Primaquine is contraindicated in pregnant or breastfeeding women with P. vivax 
malaria. Therefore, consider weekly chemoprophylaxis with chloroquine until delivery 
and breastfeeding are completed, then treat with 14 days of primaquine to prevent 
future relapse.
Chloroquine prophylaxis reduced recurrent 
P. vivax malaria in pregnant women (moderate-
quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Conditional
Remarks
 
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Moderate
Rationale for the recommendation
172
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Chloroquine prophylaxis to prevent P. vivax malaria during pregnancy
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Chloroquine prophylaxis 
Comparison: Placebo 
Source: Radeva-Petrova D, Kayentao K, ter Kuile FO, Sinclair D, Garner P. Drugs for preventing malaria in pregnant women in endemic areas: any drug regimen versus 
placebo or no treatment. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD000169. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000169.pub3.
Maternal outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of the evidence 
(GRADE)
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Placebo
Chloroquine prophylaxis
Clinical malaria
–
–
–
–
–
P. vivax parasitemia
7 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 2)
RR 0.02 
(0.00 to 0.26)
951 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–3
Severe anaemia in third trimester
–
–
–
–
–
Anaemia in third trimester
509 per 1000
484 per 1000 (458 to 514)
RR 0.95  
(0.90 to 1.01)
951 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,2,4
Adverse events 
The assumed risk is the median risk in the control group; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and its 
95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: This study had a low risk of bias in all domains.
2  
No serious indirectness: This study was conducted in Thailand between 1998 and 2001. Chloroquine was administered as four tablets at enrolment, followed by two tablets once a week until 
delivery.
3  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: Although the intervention appeared to prevent all episodes of P. vivax malaria, there were few events, even in the control group.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The finding of a small clinical benefit did not reach statistical significance.
A
4
173
 A4.12  
Is parenteral artesunate superior to parenteral quinine in preventing death from severe malaria?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Treat adults and children with severe malaria with intravenous or intramuscular 
artesunate for at least 24 h (including infants, pregnant women in all trimesters and 
lactating women).
In both adults and children, parenteral artesunate 
prevented more deaths than parenteral quinine 
(high-quality evidence).
For intravenous administration, artesunate is 
given as a bolus, whereas quinine requires slow 
infusion. 
For intramuscular administration, artesunate is 
given in a smaller volume than quinine.
Artesunate is associated 
with a small increase in 
neurological sequelae 
at the time of hospital 
discharge (moderate-
quality evidence). 
The difference is no 
longer evident on day 28 
after discharge (moderate-
quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Parenteral artesunate is recommended as first-line treatment for adults, children, 
infants and pregnant women in all trimesters of pregnancy.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group considered the small increase in 
neurological sequelae at discharge associated with artesunate to be due to 
prolonged recovery of severely ill patients who would have died if they had 
received quinine. This should not be interpreted as a sign of neurotoxicity.
Although the safety of artesunate in the first trimester of pregnancy has not 
been firmly established, the group considered that the proven benefits to the 
mother outweigh the potential harms to the developing fetus.
174
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Artesunate versus quinine for treating children with severe malaria
Patients or population: Children with severe malaria
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas
Intervention: Artesunate
Comparison: Quinine
Source: Sinclair D, Donegan S, Isba R, Lalloo DG. Artesunate versus quinine for treating severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 6. Art. No.: 
CD005967. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005967.pub4.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Quinine
Artesunate
Death
109 per 1000
83 per 1000 (71 to 98)
RR 0.76 
(0.65 to 0.9)
5765 (4 studies1)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2–5
Critical
Neurological sequelae on 
day 28
11 per 1000
14 per 1000 (8 to 22)
RR 1.23 
(0.74 to 2.03)
4857 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate6–9
Important
Neurological sequelae 
at discharge
28 per 1000
38 per 1000 (28 to 51)
RR 1.36 
(1.01 to 1.83)
5163 (3 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate2–4,11
Important
Time to hospital 
discharge (days)
See comment
See comment
Not estimable
113 (3 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate2,4,12,13
Important
A
4
175
 Hypoglycaemia episodes
30 per 1000
19 per 1000 (13 to 26)
RR 0.62 
(0.45 to 0.87)
5765 (4 studies1)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2–4,14
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
One large multicentre trial and two small trials compared artesunate with quinine in children aged < 15 years. In addition, one large multicentre study included a subgroup of 202 children in this 
age group.
2  
No serious study limitations: All the trials adequately concealed allocation and can be considered at low risk of bias. The trials were unblinded, but this is unlikely to have biased this objective 
outcome.
3  
No serious inconsistency: There was no statistical heterogeneity between the trials (I² = 0%).
4  
No serious indirectness: Most of the data are from the single multicentre trial with centres in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Uganda 
and the United Republic of Tanzania, where the established, standard doses of artesunate and quinine (with loading dose) were used. The median age of children in this trial was 2.9 years in the 
quinine group and 2.8 in the artesunate group.
5  
No serious imprecision: Both limits of the 95% CI of the pooled effect imply an appreciable clinical benefit with artesunate. The number of people who must be treated to prevent one childhood 
death is 38.
6  
Serious study limitations: 41/170 (24%) patients with neurological sequelae at discharge were not available for assessment at day 28.
7  
No serious inconsistency: Not applicable, as only one trial.
8  
No serious indirectness: This trial was conducted in 11 centres in Africa, with standard dosing of artesunate and quinine. The nature of the neurological sequelae is not described.
9  
No serious imprecision: The 95% CI around the absolute effect is narrow. The worst-case scenario is a 1.2% increase in neurological sequelae at day 28.
11  
Serious imprecision: The effect estimate indicates clinically important harm; however, the 95% CI includes the possibility of no clinically important difference between the two interventions.
12  
No serious inconsistency: None of the trials found evidence of a large difference between the two treatment groups.
13  
Serious imprecision: We were unable to pool the data as they were reported only as medians and range or intraquartile range. There is no evidence of a clinically important benefit with artesunate 
on this outcome.
14  
No serious imprecision: The result is statistically significantly in favour of artesunate. The sample size is adequate to detect a 40% risk reduction with 80% power and 95% confidence.
176
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Artesunate versus quinine for treating adults with severe malaria
Patient or population: Adults with severe malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Artesunate 
Comparison: Quinine 
Source: Sinclair D, Donegan S, Isba R, Lalloo DG. Artesunate versus quinine for treating severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 6. Art. No.: 
CD005967. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005967.pub4.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of the 
evidence (GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Quinine
Artesunate
Death
241 per 1000
147 per 1000 
(121 to 181)
RR 0.61  
(0.5 to 0.75)
1664 (5 studies1)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2–5
Critical
Neurological sequelae 
at day 28
 – 
 – 
 – 
– 
– 
Important
Neurological sequelae 
at discharge
3 per 1000
9 per 1000 
(2 to 44)
RR 2.97  
(0.6 to 14.64)
1259 (1 study6)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate7–10
Important
Time to hospital 
discharge (days)
See comment
See comment
Not estimable
113 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate11–14
Important
A
4
177
 Hypoglycaemia episodes
47 per 1000
17 per 1000 
(9 to 32)
RR 0.36  
(0.19 to 0.68)
1372 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High11,13,15,16
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
One large multicentre trial and four smaller trials assessed artesunate vs quinine in adults.
2  
No serious study limitations: Two of the smaller studies did not conceal allocation, and none of the studies was blinded; however, most data are from studies in which allocation was concealed, and 
the lack of blinding is unlikely to introduce bias for an objective outcome such as death.
3  
No serious inconsistency: The point estimates of all five trials favoured artesunate. No significant statistical heterogeneity was detected (I² = 0%).
4  
No serious indirectness: All five trials were conducted in Asia but in a variety of settings (Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam), and included age groups > 15–16 years. Of 
the four small trials, two did not give the loading dose of quinine, but there was no statistical heterogeneity between these two trials and the large multicentre trial, in which the loading dose was 
given.
5  
No serious imprecision: Both limits of the 95% CI imply a clinically important benefit with artesunate.
6  
Only one trial measured the incidence of neurological sequelae in adults, reported as unpublished data from the authors.
7  
No serious study limitations: This trial was unblinded, but the nature of the sequelae makes observer or reporting bias unlikely.
8  
No serious inconsistency: Not applicable, as only one trial.
9  
No serious indirectness: This trial was conducted in sites in four countries in Asia with the standard doses of artesunate and quinine (with loading dose). Of the 10 sequelae that occurred in this trial 
(the additional two were in children), five were psychiatric sequelae, four were a persistent problem with balance, and two were hemiparesis.
10  
Serious imprecision: Neurological sequelae appear to be rare after severe malaria in adults; however, the 95% CI includes the possibility of clinically important harm with artesunate.
11  
No serious study limitations: The large multicentre study adequately concealed allocation and can be considered at low risk of bias. The smaller trial did not did not. Neither trial was blinded.
12  
No serious inconsistency: Neither trial found a statistically significant difference in time to hospital discharge.
13  
No serious indirectness: This evidence is from multiple sites in Asia (Bangladesh, India, Indonesia and Myanmar), and both trials used standard drug doses.
14  
Serious imprecision: We were unable to pool data because of the way in which they were presented, but there is no evidence of a benefit on this outcome with artesunate.
15  
No serious inconsistency: There was no statistical heterogeneity (I² = 0%).
16  
No serious imprecision: This result is statistically significantly in favour of artesunate. The sample size was adequate to detect a 75% risk reduction with 80% power and 95% confidence.
178
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.13  
Is parenteral artesunate superior to parenteral quinine in preventing death from severe malaria?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Treat children and adults with severe malaria with parenteral artesunate for at least 
24 h.
In children > 12 years and adults, parenteral 
artesunate probably prevents more deaths 
than intramuscular artemether (moderate-
quality evidence).
No randomized controlled trials have been 
conducted in children aged ≤ 12 years.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Intramuscular artemether should be considered only when parenteral artesunate is 
not available.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Moderate
Rationale for the recommendation
Indirect comparisons of artesunate and quinine and of artemether and 
quinine were considered by the Guideline Development Group, with what is 
known about the pharmacokinetics of the two drugs. The group considered 
that the accumulated indirect evidence is sufficient to recommend artesunate 
over artemether for all age groups.
A
4
179
 Artemether versus artesunate for treating adults with severe malaria
Patient or population: Adults with severe malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic countries 
Intervention: Intramuscular artemether 
Comparison: Intravenous or intramuscular artesunate 
Source: Esu E, Effa EE, Opie ON, Uwaoma A, Meremikwu MM. Artemether for severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD010678. 
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010678.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artemether
Artesunate
Death
148 per 1000
81 per 1000 
(50 to 136)
RR 0.55 
(0.34 to 0.92)
494 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Critical
Coma resolution time
–
–
Not pooled
494 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,3,5,6
Important
Neurological sequelae 
at discharge
–
–
–
–
Important
Parasite clearance time
–
–
Not pooled
494 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,3,6,7
Important
Fever clearance time
–
–
Not pooled
494 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1,3,68
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: The trials were generally well conducted and had a low risk of bias.
2  
No serious inconsistency: There is no statistical heterogeneity.
3  
No serious indirectness: The two studies were conducted in Thailand and Viet Nam; both compared intramuscular artemether with intravenous artesunate in adults.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: These trials and the meta-analysis have inadequate power to detect a difference in mortality or to prove equivalence.
5  
No serious inconsistency: Both studies suggest an advantage with artesunate, although this was statistically significant only in the small trial.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: These data could not be pooled.
7  
No serious inconsistency: Neither study found a difference between treatments.
8  
No serious inconsistency: One trial found no statistically significant difference, and the other, small trial found a benefit with artesunate.
180
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.14  
Is intramuscular artemether superior to parenteral quinine in preventing death from severe malaria?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
If parenteral artesunate is not available, use artemether in preference to quinine for 
treating children and adults with severe malaria.
In children, artemether is probably equivalent 
to quinine in preventing death (moderate-
quality evidence).
In children > 5 years and adults, artemether may 
be superior to quinine (moderate-quality evidence).
Artemether is easier to administer, requiring a 
smaller fluid volume for intramuscular injection.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Conditional
Remarks
 
Quinine is retained as an option for treating severe malaria when artesunate or 
artemether is not available or is contraindicated.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Moderate
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group considered the possible superiority, 
the ease of administration and the better adverse-event profile of artemether 
as sufficient to recommend artemether over quinine as a second-line 
treatment option for severe malaria.
A
4
181
 Artemether versus quinine for treating children with severe malaria
Patient or population: Children with severe malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic countries 
Intervention: Intramuscular artemether 
Comparison: Intravenous or intramuscular quinine 
Source: Esu E, Effa EE, Opie ON, Uwaoma A, Meremikwu MM. Artemether for severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD010678. 
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010678.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Quinine
Artemether
Death
170 per 1000
164 per 1000 
(129 to 204)
RR 0.96  
(0.76 to 1.2)
1447 (12 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Critical
Coma resolution time
The mean time in 
control groups ranged 
from 17.4 to 42.4 h.
The mean time was 5.45 h 
shorter in the intervention 
groups (7.90 to 3.00 h shorter)
–
358 (6 trials)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low3,5–7
Important
Neurological sequelae 
at discharge
220 per 1000
185 per 1000 (145–235)
RR 0.84  
(0.66 to 1.07)
968 (7 trials)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1–3,8
Important
Parasite clearance time 
The mean time in 
control groups ranged 
from 22.4 to 61.3 h.
The mean time was 9.03 h 
shorter in the intervention 
groups (11.43 to 6.63 
h shorter)
–
420 (7 trials)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,3,7,9
Important
182
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Fever clearance time
The mean time in 
control groups ranged 
from 18 to 61 h.
The mean time was 3.73 h 
shorter in the intervention 
groups (6.55 to 0.92 
h shorter)
–
457 (8 trials)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low3,10–12
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies, as given in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect 
of the intervention (and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: Various risks of bias, but exclusion of trials with high or unclear risk of selection bias did not change this result.
2  
No serious inconsistency: None of the individual trials found statistically significant effects, and there was no statistical heterogeneity between trials.
3  
No serious indirectness: Trials were conducted in East and West Africa and India. All were in children with severe malaria (aged < 15 years), and most compared the standard dose of intramuscular 
artemether with the WHO recommended dose of intravenous quinine.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: These trials and the meta-analysis had inadequate power to detect a difference or to prove equivalence.
5  
Downgraded by 2 for serious risk of bias: Four of the six trials had unclear risk of selection bias. When these four trials are excluded, the result becomes nonsignificant.
6  
No serious inconsistency: Statistically significant differences were seen in only two of the six trials; however, statistical heterogeneity between trials was low, and the result of the meta-analysis is 
significant.
7  
No serious imprecision: The result is statistically significant, and the meta-analysis has adequate power to detect this effect.
8  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: These trials and the meta-analysis have inadequate power to detect a difference or to prove equivalence. The 95% CI is very wide and includes 
clinically important differences and no effect.
9  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: The mean difference in parasite clearance time ranged from a 2-h increase with artemether to a 15-h decrease.
10  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Four of the seven trials had unclear risks of selection bias. When these four trials are excluded, the result becomes nonsignificant.
11  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: The mean difference in fever clearance time ranged from a 25-h increase with artemether to an 18-h decrease.
12  
No serious imprecision: The meta-analysis has adequate power to detect this effect. The result is statistically significant but may not be clinically important.
A
4
183
 Artemether versus quinine for treating adults with severe malaria
Patients or population: Adults with severe malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic countries 
Intervention: Intramuscular artemether 
Comparison: Intravenous or intramuscular quinine 
Source: Esu E, Effa EE, Opie ON, Uwaoma A, Meremikwu MM. Artemether for severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD010678. 
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010678.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Quinine
Artemether
Death
208 per 1000
123 per 1000 
(87 to 173)
RR 0.59  
(0.42 to 0.83)
716 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Critical
Coma resolution time
–
–
Not pooled
683 (3 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1,5,6
Important
Neurological sequelae 
at discharge
4 per 1000
12 per 1000 
(1 to 111)
RR 2.92  
(0.31 to 27.86)
560 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low7,8
Important
Parasite clearance time
–
–
Not pooled
716 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,3,6.9
Important
Fever clearance time
–
–
Not pooled
716 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1,3,6,10
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies, as given in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect 
of the intervention (and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: The trials were generally well conducted and with low risk of bias.
2  
No serious inconsistency: Statistically significant differences were seen in only one of the four studies; however, statistical heterogeneity among the trials was low, and the results of the meta-
analysis are statistically significant.
3  
No serious indirectness: All four trials compared intramuscular artemether with intravenous quinine in adults: two studies in Thailand, one each in Papua New Guinea and Viet Nam. 
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: These trials and the meta-analysis had inadequate power to detect a difference in mortality or to prove equivalence.
5  
Downgraded by 1 for inconsistency: One trial found a shorter median coma resolution time with quinine, and one trial found no difference; the third trial reported mean coma recovery time 
incompletely.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for imprecision: The data could not be pooled.
7  
No serious risk of bias: This single trial had a low risk of bias.
8  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: Neurological sequelae in adults were uncommon. This trial had inadequate power to detect or exclude clinically important differences.
9  
No serious inconsistency: The two largest studies both found shorter median clearance times with artemether.
10  
Downgraded by 1 for inconsistency: One trial found a shorter median fever clearance time with quinine, and two trials found a shorter time with artemether.
184
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.15  
For pre-referral treatment, do intramuscular antimalarial drugs reduce the number of deaths to a greater extent than rectal 
artesunate in adults and children with signs of severe malaria?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In settings where complete treatment of severe malaria is not possible but injections 
are available, give adults and children a single intramuscular dose of artesunate, 
and refer to an appropriate facility for further care.
No studies of direct comparison of rectal 
artesunate with parenteral antimalarial drugs for 
pre-referral treatment.
In hospital care, parenteral artesunate reduces 
the number of deaths to a greater extent than 
parenteral quinine (high-quality evidence) and 
probably reduces the number of deaths from 
that with intramuscular artemether (moderate-
quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
This recommendation applies to all people with suspected severe malaria, including 
infants, lactating women and pregnant women in all trimesters.
Where intramuscular artesunate is not available, use rectal artesunate (in children < 6 
years), intramuscular artemether or intramuscular quinine.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Moderate
Rationale for the recommendation
In the absence of direct comparative evaluations of parenteral antimalarial 
drugs for pre-referral treatment, the Guideline Development Group considered 
the known benefits of artesunate in hospitalized patients and downgraded 
the quality of evidence for use in pre-referral situations. When intramuscular 
injections can be given, the panel recommends intramuscular artesunate in 
preference to rectal artesunate.
A
4
185
 A4.16  
Does pre-referral rectal artesunate reduce the number of deaths in adults and children with signs of severe malaria to a greater 
extent than placebo?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In settings where intramuscular injections are not available, give children aged < 
6 years a single rectal dose of artesunate, and refer immediately to an appropriate 
facility for further care.
Pre-referral rectal artesunate probably reduces 
mortality in children aged < 6 years (moderate-
quality evidence).
Older children and adults 
may be at increased risk 
for mortality, although 
the reasons for this 
finding from a single 
study are unclear (low-
quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
The current evidence suggests that, in older adults and children, more deaths occur 
with rectal artesunate than with placebo. Rectal artesunate should not be used unless 
other treatment options are not available.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Moderate
Rationale for the recommendation
In people with signs of severe malaria living in remote areas, prompt 
antimalarial treatment and prompt referral prevent mortality.
The Guideline Development Group could find no plausible explanation for the 
finding of increased mortality among older children and adults in Asia, which 
may be due to chance. Further trials would help clarify this but are unlikely 
to be done. The group was therefore unable to recommend its use in older 
children and adults. 
186
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Rectal artesunate versus placebo for pre-referral treatment of severe malaria in children
Patients or population: Children aged < 5 years with severe malaria 
Settings: Rural settings in Africa and Asia where parenteral treatment is not available 
Intervention: Rectal artesunate plus referral for definitive treatment 
Comparison: Placebo plus referral for definitive treatment 
Source: Okebe J, Eisenhut M. Pre-referral rectal artesunate for severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 5. Art. No.: CD009964. 
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009964.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Placebo
Rectal artesunate
All-cause mortality 
Follow-up: 7–30 days
In Asia
RR 0.44  
(0.23 to 0.82)
2010 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1–4
Critical
31 per 1000
14 per 1000 
(7 to 26)
In Africa
RR 0.81  
(0.63 to 1.04)
6040 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1,2,3,5
44 per 1000
36 per 1000 
(28 to 46)
Overall
RR 0.74  
(0.59 to 0.93)
8050 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,2,3,6
41 per 1000
30 per 1000 
(24 to 38)
The assumed risk is the risk of the control group in the single study. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: Allocation was concealed, and trial participants and staff were blinded to treatment allocation.
2  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: In Asia, older children and adults were also randomized to artesunate or placebo, and mortality was significantly higher in those given rectal artesunate; 
the cause is unclear.
3  
No serious indirectness: This trial was conducted in community settings in Bangladesh, Ghana and the United Republic of Tanzania.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The number of events was low.
5  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The 95% confidence interval is wide and includes no difference.
6  
No serious imprecision: The result is statistically significant, and the study had adequate power to detect this effect.
A
4
187
 Rectal artesunate versus placebo for pre-referral treatment of severe malaria in adults
Patients or population: Children aged > 6 years and adults with severe malaria 
Settings: Rural settings where parenteral treatment is not available 
Intervention: Rectal artesunate plus referral for definitive treatment 
Comparison: Placebo plus referral for definitive treatment 
Source: Okebe J, Eisenhut M. Pre-referral rectal artesunate for severe malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 5. Art. No.: CD009964. 
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009964.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Placebo
Rectal artesunate
All-cause mortality 
Follow-up: 7–30 days
7 per 1000
15 per 1000 (8 to 29)
RR 2.21  
(1.18 to 4.15)
4018 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1–4
Critical
The assumed risk is the risk of the control group in the single study. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: Allocation was concealed, and trial participants and staff were blinded to treatment allocation.
2  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: Rectal artesunate appears beneficial in children < 5 years and harmful in older children and adults. This finding is difficult to explain.
3  
No serious indirectness: This trial was conducted in a single setting in Bangladesh.
4  
Downgraded for serious imprecision: There were few deaths in adults in this trial: 31/2009 in treated and 14/2009 in controls.
188
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.17  
Is artesunate + pyronaridine a safe, effective alternative to other WHO-approved ACTs?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Artesunate + pyronaridine is not recommended for general use.
Artesunate + pyronaridine may be as effective 
as artemether + lumefantrine and artesunate 
+ mefloquine in adults and older children 
(moderate-quality evidence).
The current evidence for young children is 
insufficient to be confident that the drug is as 
effective as other recommended options.
Elevated results of liver 
function tests found four 
times more frequently 
with artesunate + 
pyronaridine than with 
the other antimalarial 
drugs (moderate-
quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Conditional
Remarks
 
In areas with multiple drug resistance where there are few alternatives, use of 
artesunate + pyronaridine may be considered. 
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Moderate
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group agreed that the data were promising, 
but they were unable to recommend this combination for general use at this 
time. Additional data are required on efficacy in children < 5 years and safety, 
especially with repeated dosing.
A
4
189
 Artesunate + pyronaridine versus artemether + lumefantrine for treating people with proven uncomplicated falciparum malaria
Patients or population: Adults and children with uncomplicated falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas in Africa and Asia 
Intervention: Artesunate + pyronaridine once daily for 3 days 
Comparison: Artemether + lumefantrine twice daily for 3 days 
Source: Bukirwa H, Unnikrishnan B, Kramer CV, Sinclair D, Nair S, Tharyan P. Artesunate plus pyronaridine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD006404. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006404.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artemether + lumefantrine
Artesunate + pyronaridine
Treatment failure 
on day 28
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.60  
(0.40 to 0.90)
1720 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Important
7 per 100
4 per 100 (3 to 6)
PCR-adjusted
RR 1.69  
(0.56 to 5.10)
1650 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
moderate1,2,3,5
Important
1 per 100
1 per 100 (0 to 4)
Treatment failure 
on day 42
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.85 (0.53 
to 1.36)
1691 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
moderate1,2,3,5
Important
17 per 100
15 per 100 (9 to 23)
PCR-adjusted
RR 1.53  
(0.73 to 3.19)
1472 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1,6,3,5
Critical
2 per 100
3 per 100 (1 to 6)
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
No serious risk of bias: Both studies were well conducted with low risk of bias.
2  
No serious inconsistency: The trend was towards benefit with artesunate + pyronaridine in both trials but reached statistical significance in only one.
3  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: The two trials were conducted in children aged 3 months–12 years in study sites in Africa and Asia. In both trials, only 152 children aged < 5 years received 
artesunate + pyronaridine, and only 115 children in total were randomized to artesunate + pyronaridine in Asia. Further, adequately powered studies in children in Africa and adults and children in 
Asia would be needed to generalize this result.
4  
No serious imprecision: The result is statistically significant and the meta-analysis is adequately powered; however, these multi-centred trials are underpowered to show equivalence at country level. 
Not downgraded.
5  
No serious imprecision: No substantial difference found between the two ACTs; however, these multi-centred trials are underpowered to show equivalence at country level. Not downgraded.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious inconsistency: Although statistical heterogeneity was low, PCR-adjusted treatment failure was > 5% in the one study with children aged < 5 years.
190
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Artesunate + pyronaridine versus artesunate + mefloquine for treating people with proven uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Patients or population: People with uncomplicated falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas in Africa and Asia 
Intervention: Artesunate + pyronaridine once daily for 3 days 
Comparison: Artesunate + mefloquine once daily for 3 days 
Source: Bukirwa H, Unnikrishnan B, Kramer CV, Sinclair D, Nair S, Tharyan P. Artesunate plus pyronaridine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD006404. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006404.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artesunate + mefloquine
Artesunate + pyronaridine
Treatment failure 
on day 28
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.35 
(0.17 to 0.73)
1200 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Important
4 per 100
2 per 100 (1 to 2)
PCR-adjusted
RR 0.38  
(0.14 to 1.02)
1187 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–3,5
Important
2 per 100
1 per 100 (0 to 2)
Treatment failure 
on day 42 
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.86  
(0.57 to 1.31)
1146 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,2,3,5
Important
8 per 100
7 per 100 (5 to 11)
PCR-adjusted
RR 1.64  
(0.89 to 3.00)
1116 (1 study)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1–3,5,6
Critical
4 per 1000
6 per 100 (3 to 11)
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
No serious risk of bias: This study was well conducted with low risk of bias.
2  
No serious inconsistency: Not applicable, as only one trial.
3  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Of the 1271 children and adults aged > 5 years enrolled in this study, 81.3% (1033) were enrolled and treated in study sites in Asia (Cambodia, India, 
Thailand, Viet Nam) and only 18.7% (237) in Africa (Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, United Republic of Tanzania). Further studies in African children are necessary to generalize this result.
4  
No serious imprecision: The result is statistically significant, and the meta-analysis is adequately powered; however, this multi-centred trial is underpowered to show equivalence at country level. 
Not downgraded.
5  
No serious imprecision: No clinically important differences found between ACTs; however, this multi-centred trial is underpowered to show equivalence at country level. Not downgraded.
6  
PCR-adjusted treatment failure with artesunate + pyronaridine was just > 5%.
A
4
191
 Hepatic toxicity of pyronaridine in comparison with other antimalarial drugs
Patients or population: People with uncomplicated falciparum malaria 
Settings: High- and low-transmission settings for P. falciparum and P. vivax malaria 
Intervention: Pyronaridine alone or with an artemisinin derivative 
Comparison: Another antimalarial drug 
Source: Bukirwa H, Unnikrishnan B, Kramer CV, Sinclair D, Nair S, Tharyan P. Artesunate plus pyronaridine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD006404. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006404.pub2.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Comparator 
antimalarial
Pyronaridine alone or with 
artesunate 
Elevated alanine 
aminotransaminase activity  
Grade 3, 4 toxicity
2 per 1000
10 per 1000 (3 to 30)
RR 4.17  
(1.38 to 12.61)
3523 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Important
Elevated aspartate 
aminotransferase activity 
Grade 3, 4 toxicity
2 per 1000
8 per 1000 (2 to 29)
RR 4.08 
(1.17 to 14.26)
3528 (4 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1–4
Important
Elevated alkaline 
phosphatase activity 
Grade 3, 4 toxicity
2 per 1000
1 per 1000 (0 to 5)
RR 0.62  
(0.15 to 2.51)
2606 (3 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,2,3,5
Important
Elevated bilirubin 
Grade 3, 4 toxicity
3 per 1000
6 per 1000 (2 to 19)
RR 1.92  
(0.59 to 6.24)
3067 (3 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1,2,3,6
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious risk of bias: The studies were well conducted, although the data analysis was not clearly independent of the drug manufacturer in three of the studies.
2  
No serious inconsistency: Statistical heterogeneity was low.
3  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Only 232 children aged < 5 years were included in these trials.
4  
No serious imprecision: The 95% CI is wide, and there are few events. Larger trials would be necessary for the group to have full confidence in this result, but it was not downgraded.
5  
No serious imprecision: The 95% CI is narrow and probably excludes clinically important differences.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The 95% CI is wide and includes no difference in clinically important effects.
192
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.18  
Is artemisinin + naphthoquine a safe, effective alternative to other WHO-approved ACTs?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
Artemisinin + naphthoquine is not recommended for general use.
The current evidence is insufficient to allow 
confidence in the estimates of benefit.
The current evidence 
is insufficient to allow 
confidence in the 
estimates of harm.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Very low
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group noted that the trials conducted to date 
involved evaluation of this drug in 1- and 2-day regimens, which do not meet the 
current WHO recommendation for 3-day regimens of ACTs. 
A
4
193
 Artemisinin + naphthoquine versus artemether + lumefantrine for treating people with proven uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Patients or population: Adults and children with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic settings 
Intervention: Artemisinin + naphthoquine; 1-day course 
Comparison: Artemether + lumefantrine twice daily for 3 days 
Source: Isba R, Zani B, Gathu M, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-naphthoquine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2015, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD011547. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011547
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Artemether 
+ lumefantrine
Artemisinin + naphthoquine
Treatment failure on 
day 28
PCR-unadjusted
RR 1.54  
(0.27 to 8.96)
297 (2 studies) 
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1–4
Important
1 per 100
2 per 100 (0 to 9)
PCR-adjusted
RR 3.25  
(0.13 to 78.69)
295 (2 studies)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1–4
Critical
0 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 0)
Fever clearance: 
fever on day 2
2 per 100
10 per 100 (1 to 76)
RR 5.90 
(0.73 to 47.60)
123 (1 study) 
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low5–7
Important
Parasite clearance: 
parasitaemia on 
day 2
2 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 6)
RR 0.15  
(0.01 to 2.92)
297 (2 studies) 
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1–3,8
Important
Gametocytaemia on 
day 7
2 per 100
3 per 100 (0 to 34)
RR 1.97  
(0.18 to 21.14)
123 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low5–7
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
No serious risk of bias: One study adequately concealed allocation and thus had a low risk of selection bias. In the other study, the process of randomization and allocation concealment was unclear.
2  
No serious inconsistency: Statistical heterogeneity was low.
3  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Only two studies, in Benin and Cote d’Ivoire, evaluated this comparison. Further studies in additional settings are required before this result can be 
generalized.
4  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: Demonstration of non-inferiority at 95% efficacy would require a sample size of 472. Both trials are significantly underpowered.
5  
No serious risk of bias: This study adequately concealed allocation and thus had a low risk of selection bias.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: Study in Cote d’Ivoire. Further studies in additional settings are required before this result can be generalized.
7  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: This trial was small and the result has a very wide 95% confidence interval, including appreciable benefit and harm.
8  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: The result has a very wide 95% confidence interval, including appreciable benefit and harm.
194
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Artemisinin + naphthoquine versus dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine for treating people with proven uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Patient or population: Adults and children with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
Settings: Malaria-endemic settings 
Intervention: Artemisinin + naphthoquine; 1-day course 
Comparison: Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine; 3-day course 
Source: Isba R, Zani B, Gathu M, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-naphthoquine for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2015, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD011547. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011547
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance of 
the outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Dihydroartemisinin 
+ piperaquine
Artemisinin 
+ naphthoquine
Treatment failure on 
day 28
PCR-unadjusted
Cannot 
be estimated
143 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,3
Important
0 per 100
0 per 100
PCR-adjusted
Cannot 
be estimated
143 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,3
Important
0 per 100
0 per 100
Treatment failure on 
day 42
PCR-unadjusted
RR 0.91 
(0.13 to 6.26)
143 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,3
Important
3 per 100
3 per 100 (0 to 19)
PCR-adjusted
RR 0.19 
(0.01 to 3.82)
141 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,3
Critical
3 per 100
0 per 100 (0 to 11)
Fever clearance: 
fever on day 2
0 per 100
0 per 100
Cannot 
be estimated
144 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,4
Important
Parasite clearance: 
parasitaemia on 
day 2
0 per 100
4 per 100 (0 to ?)
RR 6.29 
(0.33 to 119.69)
144 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,5
Important
Gametocytaemia: on 
day 7
8 per 100
11 per 100 (4 to 30)
RR 1.38  
(0.52 to 3.70)
144 (1 study)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,5
Important
Assumed risk is the mean risk of the control group across studies. The corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention 
(and its 95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio; PCR, polymerase chain reaction
1  
No serious risk of bias: Although the description of the randomization procedure is vague, this trial is probably at low risk of selection bias.
2  
Downgraded by 1 for serious indirectness: This comparison has been evaluated in only a single setting. Further studies in additional settings are required before this result can be generalized.
3  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: Demonstration of non-inferiority at 95% efficacy would require a sample size of 472. This trial is significantly underpowered.
4  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: This trial is small. No participants in either group had fever on day 2.
5  
Downgraded by 2 for very serious imprecision: The result has a very wide 95% confidence interval, including appreciable benefit and harm.
A
4
195
 A4.19  
Are three or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine during pregnancy more effective than two doses?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In malaria-endemic areas, give sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine to all pregnant women in 
their first or second pregnancy monthly from the start of the second trimester.
Three or more doses of sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine during pregnancy increase mean 
birth weight and reduce the number of low-
birth-weight infants to a greater extent than two 
doses (high-quality evidence).
No adverse effects have 
been reported.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group noted that effects were seen in women in 
their first and second pregnancy. Less information was available on women in 
their third or later pregnancy, but this information was consistent with benefit.
196
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Three or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine versus two doses to all pregnant women
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Three or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
Comparison: Two doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
Source: Kayentao K, Garner P, Maria van Eijk A, Naidoo I, Roper C, Mulokozi A, et al. Intermittent preventive therapy for malaria during pregnancy using 2 vs 3 or more doses 
of sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine and risk of low birth weight in Africa: systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2013;309:594–604.
Maternal outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
(2 doses)
Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine  
(≥ 3 doses)
Severe anaemia in 
3rd trimester
34 per 1000 
25 per 1000 (16 to 38)
RR 0.73 
(0.48 to 1.11)
2196 (6 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low1–4
Anaemia in 3rd trimester
509 per 1000
484 per 1000 (458 to 514)
RR 0.95  
(0.90 to 1.01)
2088 (7 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,5–7
Parasitaemia at delivery
92 per 1000
63 per 1000 (48 to 82)
RR 0.68 
(0.52 to 0.89)
2096 (7 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate1,8–10
The assumed risk is the median risk in the control group; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and its 
95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
No serious inconsistency: Statistical heterogeneity is low.
2  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: The strongest effect was seen in a trial at high risk of selection bias; removal of this trial removes the statistical significance. None of the three trials was 
blinded, and all had a high attrition rate.
3  
No serious indirectness: These three studies were conducted in Kenya (1996), Burkina Faso (2005) and Malawi (2005) in women in their first or second pregnancy.
4  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: These trials had inadequate power. To detect a 25% relative reduction in severe anaemia confidently would require a sample size of over 12 000.
5  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Two trials were at high risk of selection bias, three were unblinded and four had a high attrition rate.
6  
No serious indirectness: The four studies were conducted in Kenya (1996), Zambia (2004), Burkina Faso (2005) and Malawi (2005) in women in their first or second pregnancy.
7  
No serious imprecision: This meta-analysis has adequate power to detect an effect.
8  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Two of the three studies were at high risk of selection bias. All three had a high attrition rate.
9  
No serious inconsistency: A subgroup analysis suggests that the effect may be larger in women infected with HIV.
10  
No serious indirectness: These three trials were conducted in Kenya (1996), Zambia (2004) and Malawi (2005) in women in their first or second pregnancy. In two trials, the analysis was stratified by 
HIV status.
A
4
197
 Three or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine versus two doses: all pregnant women
Settings: Malaria-endemic areas 
Intervention: Three or more doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
Comparison: Two doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
Source: Kayentao K, Garner P, Maria van Eijk A, Naidoo I, Roper C, Mulokozi A, et al. Intermittent preventive therapy for malaria during pregnancy using 2 vs 3 or more doses 
of sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine and risk of low birth weight in Africa: systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2013;309:594–604.
Fetal outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI) 
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine  
(2 doses)
Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine  
(≥ 3 doses)
Miscarriage
0 per 1000
0 per 1000 (0 to 0)
RR 1.43  
(0.88 to 2.33)
2471 (6 studies)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1–4
Stillbirth
30 per 1000
34 per 1000 (24 to 46)
RR 1.14  
(0.85 to 1.55)
2676 (7 studies)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,3,5
Neonatal mortality
21 per 1000
18 per 1000 (12 to 28)
RR 0.88  
(0.57 to 1.35)
2405 (6 studies)
⊕⊝⊝⊝ 
Very low1,2,3,5
Preterm birth
122 per 1000
116 per 1000 (55 to 111)
RR 1.28  
(0.90 to 1.82)
2579 (7 studies)
⊕⊕⊝⊝ 
Low2,6–8
Low birth weight
167 per 1000
134 per 1000 (115 to 157)
RR 0.80 
(0.69 to 0.94)
2190 (7 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2,9–11
198
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Mean birth weight 
Mean birth weight in the control groups 
ranged from 2722 g  
to 3239 g.
Mean birth weight in the intervention 
groups was 56 g higher (29 to 83 
g higher).
2190 (7 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2,9–11
Placental 
parasitaemia 
63 per 1000
32 per 1000 (24 to 43)
RR 0.51  
(0.38to 0.68)
1436 (6 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2,9,11,12
Cord blood 
haemoglobin
–
–
–
–
–
The assumed risk is the median risk in the control groups; the corresponding risk (and its 95% CI) is calculated by applying the relative effect of the intervention (and its 
95% CI) to the assumed risk. CI, confidence interval; RR, risk ratio
1  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Two studies were at high risk of selection bias, and all three were unblinded and at high risk of attrition bias.
2  
No serious inconsistency: Statistical heterogeneity was low.
3  
No serious indirectness: The three studies were conducted in Kenya (1996), Malawi (2005) and Burkina Faso (2008) in women in their first or second pregnancy.
4  
Downgraded by 2 for serious imprecision: The trials had inadequate power to detect an effect. Confident detection of a 25% reduction in mortality would require a sample size of over 25 000.
5  
Downgraded by 2 for serious imprecision: The trials had inadequate power to detect an effect. Confident detection of a 25% reduction in mortality would require a sample size of over 14 000.
6  
Downgraded by 1 for serious risk of bias: Two of the four studies were at high risk of selection bias and three at high risk of attrition bias.
7  
No serious indirectness: These four studies were conducted in Kenya (1996), Zambia (2004), Malawi (2005) and Burkina Faso (2008) in women in their first or second pregnancy.
8  
Downgraded by 1 for serious imprecision: The 95% CI does not exclude what may be clinically important effects. Confident detection of a 25% reduction in pre-term birth would require a sample 
size of > 2500.
9  
No serious risk of bias. Two studies are at low risk of bias. Removal of the trials with high risk of bias did not influence the effect estimate.
10  
No serious indirectness: These studies were conducted in Kenya (1996), Zambia (2004), Malawi (2005 and 2006), Mali (2008) and Burkina Faso (2008) in women in their first or second pregnancy.
11  
No serious imprecision: The sample size is sufficiently large to detect a difference between the two drug regimens, and the result is statistically significant.
12  
No serious indirectness: These studies were conducted in Kenya (1996), Zambia (2004), Malawi (2005) and Mali (2008) in women in their first or second pregnancy.
A
4
199
 A4.20  
In areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission where SP is still effective, does intermittent treatment with SP alongside routine 
vaccination reduce malaria morbidity and mortality compared to no intervention?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission where SP is still effective, provide 
intermittent preventive treatment with SP to infants (< 12 months of age) (SP-IPTi) at 
the time of the second and third rounds of vaccination against diphtheria, tetanus and 
pertussis (DTP) and vaccination against measles.
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
This recommendation made in 2009 is included in the Malaria Treatment Guidelines 
to bring together all major recommendations about the use of anti-malarial drugs in 
malaria endemic areas. 
The recommendation is based on a pooled analysis of 6 randomised pacebo controlled 
studies on SP-IPTi conducted in areas of moderate to high transmission of malaria:
•  
SP-IPTi delivered through EPI provides an overall protection in the first year 
of life against clinical malaria [30.3% (95% CI: 19.8%–39.4%)], anemia [21.3% 
(95% CI: 8.3%–32.5%)], hospital admissions associated with malaria parasitemia 
[38.1% (95% CI 12.5%–56.2%)], and all-cause hospital admissions [22.9% (95% CI: 
10.0%–34.0%)]. SP-IPTi offers a personal protection against clinical malaria for a 
period of approximately 
35 days following the administration of each dose.
Aponte JJ, Schellenberg D, Egan A, et al. Efficacy and safety of intermittent preventive treatment 
with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for malaria in African infants: a pooled analysis of six randomised, 
placebo-controlled trials. Lancet. 2009 ;374:1533-42.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
Rationale for the recommendation
The recommendation was formulated at the fourth consultative meeting of 
the Technical Expert Group (TEG) of Preventive Chemotherapy, GMP, WHO, April 
2009 which reviewed all evidence available at the time. The evidence was not 
re-evaluated during this guideline process and therefore the quality of evidence 
has not been formally assessed.
200
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A4.21  
Does seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) reduce malaria morbidity and mortality to a greater extent than no intervention?
Balance of desirable and undesirable effects
Recommendation
Desirable
Undesirable
In areas with highly seasonal malaria transmission, provide SMC with monthly 
amodiaquine + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine for all children < 6 years during each 
transmission season.
SMC prevents up to three quarters of malaria 
episodes (high-quality evidence).
SMC prevents up to three quarters of severe 
malaria episodes (high-quality evidence).
SMC may cause a small reduction in mortality 
(moderate-quality evidence).
The current regimen 
of amodiaquine 
+ sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine causes 
vomiting in some children 
(high-quality evidence).
Strength of recommendation
For intervention
No  
recommendation
Against intervention
Strong
Conditional
Conditional
Strong
Strong
Remarks
 
The target areas for implementation are those where:
•  
malaria transmission and most clinical malaria cases occur during a short period of 
about 4 months; 
•  
the clinical attack rate of malaria is > 0.1 episode per child during the transmission 
season; and 
•  
amodiaquine + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine remains efficacious (> 90% efficacy).
SMC should not be given to children with severe current illness, who are already 
taking co-trimoxazole or with a known allergy to amodiaquine or sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine.
Overall quality of evidence for all critical outcomes
High
Moderate
Low
Very low
High
Rationale for the recommendation
The Guideline Development Group endorsed the previous recommendation for 
SMC made by the WHO Technical Expert Group on Preventive Chemotherapy 
in May 2011, subsequently reviewed and endorsed by the WHO Malaria Policy 
Committee, in January 2012. 
A
4
201
 Seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) versus placebo to reduce malaria morbidity and all-cause mortality
Patient or population: Children aged < 5 years 
Settings: Areas with seasonal transmission 
Intervention: Regular full treatment doses of antimalarial medicines (amodiaquine + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine, artesunate + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine or 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine alone) every 1–2 months during the malaria transmission season  
Comparison: Placebo 
Source: Meremikwu MM, Donegan S, Sinclair D, Esu E, Oringanje C. Intermittent preventive treatment for malaria in children living in areas with seasonal transmission. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003756. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003756.pub4.
Outcome
Illustrative comparative risks (95% CI)
Relative effect 
(95% CI)
No. of participants 
(studies)
Quality of 
the evidence 
(GRADE)
Importance 
of outcome 
to decision-making
Assumed risk
Corresponding risk
Placebo
SMC
Clinical malaria
2.5 episodes per child 
per year3
0.7 episodes per child per 
year  
(0.4 to 1.0)
Rate ratio 0.26  
(0.17 to 0.38)
9321 (6 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High1,2
Critical
Severe malaria
35 episodes per 1000 
children per year4
9 episodes per 1000 
children per year 
(4 to 27)
Rate ratio 0.27  
(0.1 to 0.76)
5964 (2 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊕ 
High2
Critical
Death from any cause
3 per 1000 per year
2 per 1000 per year 
(1 to 5)
Risk ratio 0.66  
(0.31 to 1.39)
9533 (6 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate5
Critical
Moderately 
severe anaemia
67 per 1000 per year
47 per 1000 per year 
(35 to 65)
Risk ratio 0.71  
(0.52 to 0.98)
8805 (5 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate6
Important
202
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Serious drug-related 
adverse events
–
–
–
9533 (6 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate7
Important
Non-serious 
adverse events
–
–
–
9533 (6 studies)
⊕⊕⊕⊝ 
Moderate8
Important
The assumed risk is based on the sum of events and participants in the control groups in the trials, unless stated otherwise in the footnotes. The corresponding risk 
(and its 95% CI) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). CI, confidence interval; SMC, seasonal 
malaria chemoprevention
1  
The trials were conducted in children aged < 5 years in Burkina Faso, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali (two) and Senegal. In three studies, amodiaquine + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine administered monthly, 
in two studies sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine was given every 2 months, and in one study sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine + artesunate was given monthly. Two studies, in which insecticide-treated nets 
were also distributed, showed that the benefits remained even when use of bednets was > 90%.
2  
There was no reason to downgrade for study limitations, inconsistency, indirectness or imprecision.
3  
The incidence of malaria in the control groups was 2.88 episodes per child per year in Burkina Faso, 2.4 in Mali and 2.25 in Senegal.
4  
The incidence of severe malaria in the control groups was 32 per 1000 children per year in Burkina Faso and 37 per 1000 children per year in Mali. 
5  
Downgraded by 1 for imprecision: There were very few deaths in these trials, and none of the trials had adequate power to detect an effect on mortality. Larger trials are necessary for this effect to 
be established confidently. A reduction in the number of deaths would be consistent with the high-quality evidence of a reduction in severe malaria.
6  
There was substantial heterogeneity among these five trials, and the trials in the Gambia and Ghana did not show an effect. Downgraded by 1 for inconsistency. There was no reason to downgrade 
for study limitations, directness or precision.
7  
No drug-related serious adverse events were reported. Downgraded by 1 for precision, as trials of this size have inadequate power to fully detect or exclude rare, serious adverse events.
8  
Downgraded by 1 for study limitations. All seven trials reported observed adverse events; however, the adequacy of the methods used to collect these data is unclear in some trials. The only adverse 
event found to be statistically more common with SMC was vomiting after amodiaquine + sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine.
A
4
203
  A
5
Annex 5 |  
Pharmacology of antimalarial drugs
A5.1 | AMODIAQUINE
Therapeutic indications
Amodiaquine in combination with artesunate is indicated for the treatment of 
uncomplicated P. falciparum or P. vivax malaria and is considered to be effective 
against P. ovale, P. knowlesi and P. malariae (1). It may also be used as follow-on 
treatment in severe malaria when the patient is well enough to take oral medication.
Amodiaquine plus sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine (SP) is given at full treatment 
doses at monthly intervals as seasonal malaria chemoprevention to young children 
(aged 3–59 months) in areas of seasonal, high-intensity malaria transmission. 
This combination is currently recommended in the Sahel region of sub-Saharan 
Africa in areas where malaria transmission is intense and where the majority (>60%) 
of clinical malaria cases occur during a short period (≤ 4 months) (2). 
Artesunate–amodiaquine should not be used for prophylaxis, as its accumulation 
increases the risks for hepatotoxicity and agranulocytosis (1).
Structure and mechanism of action
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass: 355.9
Amodiaquine is a Mannich base 
4-aminoquinoline that is similar in 
structure and mechanism of action 
to chloroquine. Amodiaquine is 
converted to its active metabolite 
desethylamodiaquine and is thought 
to act by accumulating inside the 
parasite food vacuole and interfering 
with 
haem 
detoxification. 
Amodiaquine is effective against 
some parasite strains that are resistant to chloroquine, although some cross-
resistance exists (1, 3). 
205
 Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters of amodiaquine is presented in Table A5.1. 
Table A5.1. Pharmacokinetic parameters reported for amodiaquine and its 
active metabolite desethylamodiaquine in studies of currently recommended 
dosages for treatment of uncomplicated malaria or seasonal malaria 
chemoprevention (range of mean or median values reported).
Parameter
Amodiaquine
Desethylamodiaquine
Cmax (ng/mL)
5.2–39.3
161–751
Tmax (h)
0.5–2.0
2.71-47.9
Elimination T1/2 (h)
3.3–12.4
90–240
Vd/f (L/kg)
311–1010
62.4–252
Cl/f (L/h per kg)
14–57.8
0.61–0.74
AUC0–infinity(ng.h/mL)
39.3–602
14700–40339
Amodiaquine is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and rapidly 
converted by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme CYP2C8 into desethylamodiaquine, 
which contributes nearly all the antimalarial effect. While amodiaquine is eliminated 
rapidly, desethylamodiaquine is eliminated more slowly, with a terminal half-life 
of 4–10 days (4–13).
Safety
Adverse events
Artesunate–amodiaquine is generally well tolerated but is associated with a higher 
incidence of gastrointestinal disturbances, including nausea and abdominal pain, 
than other ACTs (14, 15). Other commonly reported adverse events include cough, 
anorexia, insomnia, fatigue and weakness (4, 6, 16–18). Serious adverse events 
associated with amodiaquine are neutropenia and hepatotoxicity (19–22). While 
these effects were most often associated with prolonged use of amodiaquine 
(as prophylaxis), they have also been observed with short-course artesunate–
amodiaquine treatment. Less common events that have been reported include 
arrhythmia, bradycardia, vomiting, extrapyramidal effects and pruritus (14, 15, 
23, 24). Eye disorders, varying in type and severity have been reported, including 
transient accommodation disorders and corneal opacification, which regressed 
once treatment was stopped, and, very rarely, irreversible retinopathy (3). 
Amodiaquine + SP is generally well tolerated in children, and no serious adverse 
events have been reported (9, 25–28); however, a tendency to higher frequencies 
of vomiting, loss of appetite, fever and mild-to-moderate skin reactions have been 
reported after administration of amodiaquine + SP as compared with placebo. 
206
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Contraindications 
Amodiaquine should not be administered to patients with known hypersensitivity 
and should be avoided in patients with a history of hepatotoxicity, hepatic 
impairment, neutropenia or retinopathy. 
Cautions
Although seasonal malaria chemoprevention with amodiaquine + SP is generally 
effective in preventing malaria, breakthrough infections may occur. It is important 
that parents or guardians continue to use other malaria prevention measures (such 
as insecticide-treated bednets) and monitor their children; they should seek medical 
attention immediately in the event of febrile illness. Should malaria infection 
occur while the child is on amodiaquine + SP, the treatment chosen should not 
include either amodiaquine or SP. 
Cardiovascular effects have been reported during high-dose treatment with other 
4-aminoquinoline derivatives. There is no evidence, however, that an overdose of 
amodiaquine causes any of the life-threatening cardiovascular complications seen 
with overdose of chloroquine. Caution should nevertheless be exercised in treating 
patients who have recently taken another antimalarial drug with cardiovascular 
side-effects, such as quinine or mefloquine. 
Pragmatic dosing
Fixed dose artesunate + amodiaquine result in better treatment efficacy than loose 
tablets (29). Antimalarial dosing has often been based on age because access to 
formal health services or functioning weighing scales is often limited in malaria-
endemic countries. While age-based dosing is more practical, it carries a risk for 
potential under- or over-dosing of more patients. Large datasets of weight-for-age 
have been used to determine suitable age-based dosing for African children (30), 
which resulted in higher proportions of patients receiving therapeutic doses of 
artesunate and amodiaquine. To simplify dosage recommendations in other regions, 
anthropometric data should be collated for each malaria-endemic region and the 
data re-modelled accordingly. 
References
1.   
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Second edition. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2010.
2.   
Seasonal malaria chemoprevention with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine plus 
amodiaquine in children: a field guide. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013 (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/85726/1/9789241504737_
eng.pdf).
3.   
Sanofi-aventis. Artesunate Amodiaquine Winthrop. Gentilly; 2010 (http://
www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/research/en/data/sanofi/marketed_
products/Artesunate_and_Amodiquine.pdf).
A
5
207
 4.   
Adjei GO, Kristensen K, Goka BQ, Hoegberg LC, Alifrangis M, Rodrigues OP, et 
al. Effect of concomitant artesunate administration and cytochrome P4502C8 
polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics of amodiaquine in Ghanaian 
children with uncomplicated malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2008;52:4400–6. 
5.   
Mwesigwa J, Parikh S, McGee B, German P, Drysdale T, Kalyango JN, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of artemether–lumefantrine and artesunate–amodiaquine 
in children in Kampala, Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;54:52–9. 
6.   
Navaratnam V, Ramanathan S, Wahab MS, Siew Hua G, Mansor SM, Kiechel JR, 
et al. Tolerability and pharmacokinetics of non-fixed and fixed combinations 
of artesunate and amodiaquine in Malaysian healthy normal volunteers. Eur J 
Clin Pharmacol 2009;65:809–21. 
7.   
Rijken MJ, McGready R, Jullien V, Tarning J, Lindegardh N, Phyo AP, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of amodiaquine and desethylamodiaquine in pregnant 
and postpartum women with Plasmodium vivax malaria. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2011;55:4338–42. 
8.   
Winstanley PA, Simooya O, Kofi-Ekue JM, Walker O, Salako LA, Edwards G, et 
al. The disposition of amodiaquine in Zambians and Nigerians with malaria. 
Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990;29:695–701. 
9.   
Hietala SF, Bhattarai A, Msellem M, Roshammar D, Ali AS, Stromberg J, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of amodiaquine and desethylamodiaquine in 
pediatric patients with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. J Pharmacokinet 
Pharmacodyn 2007;34:669–86. 
10.  
Stepniewska K, Taylor W, Sirima SB, Ouedraogo EB, Ouedraogo A, Gansane 
A, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of artesunate and amodiaquine in 
African children. Malar J 2009;8:200. 
11.  
Jullien V, Ogutu B, Juma E, Carn G, Obonyo C, Kiechel JR. Population 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic considerations of amodiaquine 
and desethylamodiaquine in Kenyan adults with uncomplicated malaria 
receiving artesunate–amodiaquine combination therapy. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2010;54:2611–7. 
12.  
Tekete MM, Toure S, Fredericks A, Beavogui AH, Sangare CP, Evans A, et al. 
Effects of amodiaquine and artesunate on sulphadoxine–pyrimethamine 
pharmacokinetic parameters in children under five in Mali. Malar J 
2011;10:275. 
13.  
Hombhanje FW, Hwaihwanje I, Tsukahara T, Saruwatari J, Nakagawa M, 
Osawa H, et al. The disposition of oral amodiaquine in Papua New Guinean 
children with falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2005;59:298–301. 
14.  
Tarning J, Chotsiri P, Jullien V, Rijken MJ, Bergstrand M, Cammas M, et 
al. Population pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modeling of 
amodiaquine and desethylamodiaquine in women with Plasmodium 
vivax malaria during and after pregnancy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2012;56:5764–73. 
15.  
Brasseur P, Vaillant MT, Olliaro PL. Anti-malarial drug safety information 
obtained through routine monitoring in a rural district of south-western 
Senegal. Malar J 2012;11:402.
208
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 16.  
Bassi PU, Osakwe AI, Isah A, Suku C, Kalat M, Jalo I, et al. Safety of 
artemisinin-based combination therapies in Nigeria: a cohort event 
monitoring study. Drug Saf 2013. Epub 2013/04/18.
17.  
Sinou V, Malaika LT, Taudon N, Lwango R, Alegre SS, Bertaux L, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a new ACT formulation: 
artesunate/amodiaquine (TRIMALACT) following oral administration in 
African malaria patients. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2009;34:133–42. 
18.  
Pasaribu AP, Chokejindachai W, Sirivichayakul C, Tanomsing N, Chavez I, 
Tjitra E, et al. A randomized comparison of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine 
and artesunate–amodiaquine combined with primaquine for radical 
treatment of vivax malaria in Sumatera, Indonesia. J Infect Dis 2013. Epub 
2013/08/09.
19.  
Hatton CS, Peto TE, Bunch C, Pasvol G, Russell SJ, Singer CR, et al. Frequency 
of severe neutropenia associated with amodiaquine prophylaxis against 
malaria. Lancet 1986;i(8478):411–4. 
20.  
Adjei GO, Adabayeri VM, Annobil SH. Reversible binocular visual loss in 
temporal association with artesunate–amodiaquine treatment in a child on 
mefloquine chemoprophylaxis. Ghana Med J 2012;46:171–3. 
21.  
Gasasira AF, Kamya MR, Achan J, Mebrahtu T, Kalyango JN, Ruel T, et al. 
High risk of neutropenia in HIV-infected children following treatment with 
artesunate plus amodiaquine for uncomplicated malaria in Uganda. Clin 
Infect Dis 2008;46:985–91. 
22.  
Guevart E, Aguemon A. Deux hepatites fulminantes survenues au cours 
d’un traitement curatif par l’association artesunate–amodiaquine. [Two 
cases of fulminant hepatitis during curative treatment with an artesunate–
amodiaquine combination]. Med Mal Infect 2009;39:57–60. 
23.  
Adjei GO, Oduro-Boatey C, Rodrigues OP, Hoegberg LC, Alifrangis M, 
Kurtzhals JA, et al. Electrocardiographic study in Ghanaian children 
with uncomplicated malaria, treated with artesunate–amodiaquine or 
artemether–lumefantrine. Malar J 2012;11:420. 
24.  
McEwen J. Artesunate- and amodiaquine-associated extrapyramidal 
reactions: a series of 49 cases in VigiBase. Drug Saf 2012;35:667–75. 
25.  
Mutabingwa TK, Muze K, Ord R, Briceno M, Greenwood BM, Drakeley 
C, et al. Randomized trial of artesunate+amodiaquine, sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine+amodiaquine, chlorproguanal–dapsone and SP for malaria 
in pregnancy in Tanzania. PLoS One 2009;4:e5138. 
26.  
Dicko A, Diallo AI, Tembine I, Dicko Y, Dara N, Sidibe Y, et al. Intermittent 
preventive treatment of malaria provides substantial protection against 
malaria in children already protected by an insecticide-treated bednet 
in Mali: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. PLoS Med 
2011;8:e1000407. 
27.  
Konate AT, Yaro JB, Ouedraogo AZ, Diarra A, Gansane A, Soulama I, et 
al. Intermittent preventive treatment of malaria provides substantial 
protection against malaria in children already protected by an insecticide-
treated bednet in Burkina Faso: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. PLoS Med 2011;8:e1000408. 
A
5
209
 28.  
Sokhna C, Cisse B, Bâ EH, Milligan P, Hallett R, Sutherland C, et al. A trial of 
the efficacy, safety and impact on drug resistance of four drug regimens 
for seasonal intermittent preventive treatment for malaria in Senegalese 
children. PLoS One 2008;3:e1471. 
29.  
The WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN) artesunate - 
amodiaquine study group. The effect of dosing strategies in the therapeutic 
efficacy of artesunate-amodiaquine for uncomplicated malaria; a meta-
analysis of individual patient data. BMC Medicine 2015; 13:166
30.  
Taylor W, Terlouw DJ, Olliaro PL, White NJ, Brasseur P, ter Kuile FO. Use 
of weight-for-age-data to optimize tablet strength and dosing regimens 
for a new fixed-dose artesunate–amodiaquine combination for treating 
falciparum malaria. Bull World Health Organ 2006;84:956–64.
A5.2 | ARTEMETHER
Therapeutic indications
•  
Intramuscular artemether is an alternative for treatment of severe malaria 
when parenteral artesunate is not available. Although artemether was superior 
to quinine in the treatment of severe malaria in adults (but not in children), 
its absorption is unpredictable, which may affect treatment responses in the 
most severely ill patients. 
•  
Artemether is an alternative for pre-referral treatment of severe malaria in 
adults when parenteral artesunate is not available and in children when neither 
parenteral nor rectal artesunate is available. 
•  
Artemether is also used in a fixed-dose oral combination with lumefantrine 
(see A5.3) for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. falciparum, 
P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi parasites. 
Structure and mechanism of action
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass 298.4
 
Artemether is the methyl ether derivative of 
dihydroartemisinin. It is two- to threefold less 
active than dihydroartemisinin, its active 
metabolite. The ethers are metabolized to 
dihydroartemisinin to a lesser extent than 
artesunate. Like the other artemisinin 
derivatives, artemether has broad stage 
specificity against blood-stage parasites, 
from the ring stages through to early schizonts. 
It also reduces gametocyte carriage, limiting 
malaria transmission from the treated infection 
(1, 2).
210
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Pharmacokinetics
Table A5.2 shows the pharmacokinetic parameters of artemether when given by 
intramuscular injection for the treatment of severe malaria. The pharmacokinetics 
of oral artemether when given in the fixed-dose combination with lumefantrine 
for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria is shown in section A5.3. 
Table A5.2. pharmacokinetic parameters estimated for artemether and its active 
metabolite dihydroartemisinin in studies of currently recommended doses of 
intramuscular artemether for treatment of severe malaria (range of mean or 
median values reported)
Parameter
Artemether
Dihydroartemesinin
Cmax (ng/mL)
171–540
15–405
Tmax (h)
1.5–10.0
1.3–7.4
Elimination T1/2 (h)
5.7–7.0
5.1
AUC (µg.h/mL)
0.81–5.8
0.19–5.04
Vd (L/kg)
3.5–8.6
2.05
CL (L/h per kg)
0.44–1.38
7.16–8.99
Ka (/h)
0.031–0.044
–
Note that the estimates of Vd and Cl assume complete bioavailability.
Artemether is a water-insoluble, lipid-soluble compound and is therefore given 
either as an oil-based intramuscular injection or orally. It is absorbed slowly and 
erratically after intramuscular administration in severe malaria (Figure A5.2) (3, 
4). Artemether is approximately 95% bound to plasma proteins. It is converted, 
primarily by CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent by CYP2B6, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, 
into dihydroartemisinin. While dihydroartemisinin is responsible for most of the 
antimalarial action after oral administration, the concentrations of artemether 
parent compound predominate after intramuscular administration in severe 
falciparum malaria. Artemether also undergoes auto-induction but to a lesser 
extent than artemisinin. Both artemether and dihydroartemisinin are eliminated 
within 7 h of administration (3, 5–10).
A
5
211
 Figure A5.2. Individual concentration–time profiles for artemether after the 
first intramuscular dose of 3.2 mg/kg to 10 adult Vietnamese patients with 
severe falciparum malaria (2).
Safety
Adverse effects
Artemether is generally very well tolerated after both oral and intramuscular 
administration. It has similar side-effects to other artemisinin derivatives, 
including hypersensitivity reactions (risk estimate, 1 in 3000), mild gastrointestinal 
disturbance, dizziness, reticulocytopenia, neutropenia and elevated liver enzyme 
activity. Although no electrocardiographic abnormalities were found in most 
studies, bradycardia and very slight prolongation of the QT interval have been 
reported. While studies in experimental animals show neurotoxicity after parenteral 
artemether, clinical, neurophysiological and pathological studies in humans have 
not shown similar findings. 
Contraindications
Artemether is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to any 
artemisinin derivative.
Cautions
A marked increase in the concentration of artemether in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
patients with meningitis was observed, prompting researchers to advise caution 
in treating patients with signs of meningitis (2, 10, 11).
Patients with acute renal failure have higher maximum concentrations, higher 
exposure, a lower volume of distribution and a longer elimination half-life of 
artemether than people without renal failure (6). 
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
212
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 References
1.   
Golenser J, Waknine JH, Krugliak M, Hunt NH, Grau GE. Current perspectives 
on the mechanism of action of artemisinins. Int J Parasitol 2006;36:1427–41. 
2.   
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Second edition. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2010.
3.   
Hien TT, Davis TM, Chuong LV, Ilett KF, Sinh DX, Phu NH, et al. Comparative 
pharmacokinetics of intramuscular artesunate and artemether in 
patients with severe falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2004;48:4234–9. 
4.   
Murphy SA, Mberu E, Muhia D, English M, Crawley J, Waruiru C, et al. The 
disposition of intramuscular artemether in children with cerebral malaria; a 
preliminary study. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1997;91:331–4. 
5.   
Karbwang J, Na-Bangchang K, Congpuong K, Molunto P, Thanavibul A. 
Pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of oral and intramuscular artemether. 
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1997;52:307–10. 
6.   
Karbwang J, Na-Bangchang K, Tin T, Sukontason K, Rimchala W, Harinasuta 
T. Pharmacokinetics of intramuscular artemether in patients with severe 
falciparum malaria with or without acute renal failure. Br J Clin Pharmacol 
1998;45:597–600. 
7.   
Karunajeewa HA, Reeder J, Lorry K, Dabod E, Hamzah J, Page-Sharp M, et al. 
Artesunate suppositories versus intramuscular artemether for treatment 
of severe malaria in children in Papua New Guinea. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2006;50:968–74. 
8.   
Looareesuwan S, Oosterhuis B, Schilizzi BM, Sollie FA, Wilairatana P, 
Krudsood S, et al. Dose-finding and efficacy study for i.m. artemotil (beta-
arteether) and comparison with i.m. artemether in acute uncomplicated 
P. falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2002;53:492–500. 
9.   
Mithwani S, Aarons L, Kokwaro GO, Majid O, Muchohi S, Edwards G, et 
al. Population pharmacokinetics of artemether and dihydroartemisinin 
following single intramuscular dosing of artemether in African children with 
severe falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004;57:146–52. 
10.  
Silamut K, Newton PN, Teja-Isavadharm P, Suputtamongkol Y, Siriyanonda D, 
Rasameesoraj M, et al. Artemether bioavailability after oral or intramuscular 
administration in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2003;47:3795–8. 
11.  
Manning L, Laman M, Page-Sharp M, Salman S, Hwaiwhanje I, Morep 
N, et al. Meningeal inflammation increases artemether concentrations 
in cerebrospinal fluid in Papua New Guinean children treated with 
intramuscular artemether. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011;55:5027–33. 
12.  
Leonardi E, Gilvary G, White NJ, Nosten F. Severe allergic reactions to oral 
artesunate: a report of two cases. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2001;95:182–3.
A
5
213
 A5.3 | ARTEMETHER–LUMEFANTRINE
Therapeutic indications
•  
Artemether–lumefantrine is indicated for the treatment of uncomplicated 
P. falciparum or P. vivax malaria and is considered effective against P.ovale, 
P. knowlesi and P. malariae. 
•  
Artemether–lumefantrine may also be used as follow-on, but not initial, treatment 
in severe malaria when the patient is well enough to take oral medication.
•  
Artemether–lumefantrine is not indicated for malaria prophylaxis.
Structure and mechanism of action
For artemether: See A5.2
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass 528.9
 
Lumefantrine (benflumetol) is a 
fluorene derivative belonging to 
the aryl amino-alcohol group of 
antimalarials, which includes 
quinine, 
halofantrine 
and 
mefloquine (1). It is thought to work 
similarly to the other members of 
the group by preventing haem 
detoxification within the parasite 
food vacuole, thus causing 
accumulation of the toxic haem 
complex (2). Lumefantrine is not 
available as and has not been used 
as monotherapy, which should slow 
the selection and spread of 
resistance to this drug. 
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters of artemether–lumefantrine are presented in 
Table A5.3 (6–29). 
214
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Table A5.3. Pharmacokinetic parameters estimated for artemether, 
lumefantrine and their respective active metabolites, dihydroartemisinin 
and desbutyllumefantrine in studies of currently recommended doses of 
artemether– lumefantrine used for treatment of acute malaria (range of mean 
or median values reported).
Parameter
Artemether
Dihydroartemisinin
Lumefantrine
Desbutyl-
lumefantrine
Cmax (ng/mL)
5.2–190
26–205
4456–28 
300
19.3–89
Day 7 
concentration 
(ng/mL)
–
–
156–1310
4
Tmax (h)
0.5–2.13
0.8–3.0
2–66.3
8–62.7
Ka (/h)
–
–
0.06–0.82
–
AUC
40–385 
ng.h/mL
90–382 ng.h/mL
207–2730 
µg.h/mL
5.4 µg.h/mL
Elimination 
T1/2 (h)
0.86–5.16
1–2.3
32.7–275 
137–141
Cl/f (L/h per 
kg)
1.46–41.26
3.48–13.61
0.077–0.104
10.0
Vd/f (L/kg)
9.85–143.5
1.038–35.6
0.4–8.9
730–977
Artemether is more lipophilic than other artemisinin derivatives and is readily 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, reaching peak plasma concentrations 
within 2 h of oral administration. It is then converted, primarily by CYP3A4 and to 
a lesser extent by CYP2B6, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 enzymes, into dihydroartemisinin 
which is responsible for most of the antimalarial action. Artemether also undergoes 
auto-induction (3). Both artemether and dihydroartemisinin are eliminated rapidly.
Lumefantrine is highly lipophilic and is more readily absorbed when co-administered 
with fatty foods or milk (4, 5, 7). Its bioavailability and the time to reach maximum 
concentrations vary within and between individuals, primarily due to fat-dependent 
absorption. The absorption of lumefantrine is close to saturation at currently 
recommended doses, so increasing the dose does not result in a proportional 
increase in exposure (6, 11); similar non-linear relations between dose and 
bioavailability are well described for other highly lipophilic drugs. Lumefantrine 
exhibits high plasma protein binding (99.7%) and has an elimination half-life of ~3 
days. It is extensively metabolized in the liver, primarily by the CYP3A4 enzymes 
(2, 30). Its active metabolite is desbutyl-lumefantrine (31).
A
5
215
 Safety
Adverse events
Artemether–lumefantrine has a wide therapeutic index and is generally well 
tolerated, with reported side-effects such as nausea, dizziness and headache that 
are not easily distinguishable from symptoms of acute malaria (13, 28, 32–35). 
Artemether–lumefantrine does not significantly prolong the QTc interval (36).
Contraindications 
Artemether–lumefantrine should not to be administered to patients with known 
hypersensitivity to either artemether or lumefantrine.
Cautions
Artemether–lumefantrine has not been studied extensively in patients > 65 years 
or children weighing < 5 kg. so these patients should be monitored closely when 
taking this medication.
The manufacturer advises against administration to patients with congenital or 
clinical conditions resulting in QTc prolongation, a family history of congenital 
long QT syndrome or sudden death or those with electrolyte abnormalities such 
as hypokalaemia or hypomagnesaemia, which may affect cardiac conductivity, 
although there is no evidence for iatrogenic toxicity in these groups (37). 
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
Dosage recommendations
Formulations currently available: Dispersible or standard tablets containing 20 mg of 
artemether and 120 mg of lumefantrine in a fixed-dose combination formulation. 
The flavoured dispersible tablet paediatric formulation facilitates use in young 
children. 
Dose optimization: To evaluate the feasibility of dose optimization, a population 
model of the pharmacokinetics of lumefantrine was constructed at the Mahidol–
Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit from pooled concentration–time data 
for 1390 patients in four countries (Papua New Guinea, Thailand, Uganda, United 
Republic of Tanzania). Body weights from 8 to 70 kg were well represented. 
A saturation model was used to describe the dose-limited absorption. The current 
dose recommendations resulted in similar day-7 lumefantrine plasma concentrations 
in all non-pregnant patients, except for the smallest children (weighing 5–14 kg). 
Because of dose-limited absorption, however, it is uncertain whether increases in 
individual doses would result in predictably higher lumefantrine exposure in these 
young children. Extended or more frequent dosing regimens should be evaluated 
prospectively in this age group. 
216
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 References
1.   
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010. 
2.   
German PI, Aweeka FT. Clinical pharmacology of artemisinin-based 
combination therapies. Clin Pharmacokin 2008;47:91–102. 
3.   
White NJ, van Vugt M, Ezzet F. Clinical pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics and pharmacodynamics of artemether–lumefantrine. Clin 
Pharmacokin 1999;37:105–25. 
4.   
Ashley EA, Stepniewska K, Lindegardh N, Annerberg A, Kham A, Brockman 
A, et al. How much fat is necessary to optimize lumefantrine oral 
bioavailability? Trop Med Int Health 2007;12:195–200. 
5.   
Mwebaza N, Jerling M, Gustafsson LL, Obua C, Waako P, Mahindi M, et al. 
Comparable lumefantrine oral bioavailability when co-administered with oil-
fortified maize porridge or milk in healthy volunteers. Basic Clin Pharmacol 
Toxicol 2013;113:66–72. 
6.   
Ashley EA, Stepniewska K, Lindegardh N, McGready R, Annerberg A, 
Hutagalung R, et al. Pharmacokinetic study of artemether–lumefantrine 
given once daily for the treatment of uncomplicated multidrug-resistant 
falciparum malaria. Trop Med Int Health 2007;12:201–8. 
7.   
Borrmann S, Sallas WM, Machevo S, Gonzalez R, Bjorkman A, Martensson A, et 
al. The effect of food consumption on lumefantrine bioavailability in African 
children receiving artemether–lumefantrine crushed or dispersible tablets 
(Coartem) for acute uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Trop Med 
Int Health 2010;15:434–41. 
8.   
Checchi F, Piola P, Fogg C, Bajunirwe F, Biraro S, Grandesso F, et al. 
Supervised versus unsupervised antimalarial treatment with six-dose 
artemether–lumefantrine: pharmacokinetic and dosage-related findings from 
a clinical trial in Uganda. Malar J 2006;5:59. 
9.   
Djimde AA, Tekete M, Abdulla S, Lyimo J, Bassat Q, Mandomando I, et 
al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics of a new 
pediatric formulation of artemether–lumefantrine in African children with 
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2011;55:3994–9. 
10.  
Ezzet F, Mull R, Karbwang J. Population pharmacokinetics and therapeutic 
response of CGP 56697 (artemether + benflumetol) in malaria patients. Br J 
Clin Pharmacol 1998;46:553–61. 
11.  
Ezzet F, van Vugt M, Nosten F, Looareesuwan S, White NJ. Pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of lumefantrine (benflumetol) in acute falciparum 
malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:697–704. 
12.  
Hietala SF, Martensson A, Ngasala B, Dahlstrom S, Lindegardh N, 
Annerberg A, et al. Population pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
of artemether and lumefantrine during combination treatment in children 
with uncomplicated falciparum malaria in Tanzania. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2010;54:4780–8. 
13.  
Lefevre G, Looareesuwan S, Treeprasertsuk S, Krudsood S, Silachamroon 
U, Gathmann I, et al. A clinical and pharmacokinetic trial of six doses of 
artemether–lumefantrine for multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria in Thailand. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001;64:247–56.
A
5
217
 14.  
Minzi OM, Marealle IA, Shekalaghe S, Juma O, Ngaimisi E, Chemba M, et al. 
Comparison of bioavailability between the most available generic tablet 
formulation containing artemether and lumefantrine on the Tanzanian 
market and the innovator’s product. Malar J 2013;12:174. 
15.  
Na-Bangchang K, Karbwang J, Tasanor U, Thanavibul A, Farkad E, Mull R. 
Pharmacokinetics of benflumetol given as a fixed combination artemether–
benflumetol (CGP 56697) in Thai patients with uncomplicated falciparum 
malaria. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res 1999;19:41–6. 
16.  
Salman S, Page-Sharp M, Griffin S, Kose K, Siba PM, Ilett KF, et al. Population 
pharmacokinetics of artemether, lumefantrine, and their respective 
metabolites in Papua New Guinean children with uncomplicated malaria. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011;55:5306–13. 
17.  
Staehli Hodel EM, Csajka C, Ariey F, Guidi M, Kabanywanyi AM, Duong 
S, et al. Effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms in cytochrome 
P450 isoenzyme and N-acetyltransferase 2 genes on the metabolism 
of artemisinin-based combination therapies in malaria patients from 
Cambodia and Tanzania. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013;57:950–8. 
18.  
Staehli Hodel EM, Guidi M, Zanolari B, Mercier T, Duong S, Kabanywanyi 
AM, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of mefloquine, piperaquine and 
artemether–lumefantrine in Cambodian and Tanzanian malaria patients. 
Malar J 2013;12:235.
19.  
van Agtmael MA, Cheng-Qi S, Qing JX, Mull R, van Boxtel CJ. Multiple dose 
pharmacokinetics of artemether in Chinese patients with uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria. Int J Antimicrob Agents 1999;12:151–8.
20.  
Mwesigwa J, Parikh S, McGee B, German P, Drysdale T, Kalyango JN, et 
al. Pharmacokinetics of artemether–lumefantrine and artesunate–
amodiaquine in children in Kampala, Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2010;54:52–9. 
21.  
McGready R, Stepniewska K, Lindegardh N, Ashley EA, La Y, Singhasivanon 
P, et al. The pharmacokinetics of artemether and lumefantrine in pregnant 
women with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
2006;62:1021–31. 
22.  
McGready R, Tan SO, Ashley EA, Pimanpanarak M, Viladpai-Nguen J, 
Phaiphun L, et al. A randomised controlled trial of artemether–lumefantrine 
versus artesunate for uncomplicated plasmodium falciparum treatment in 
pregnancy. PLoS Med 2008;5:e253. 
23.  
Tarning J, Kloprogge F, Dhorda M, Jullien V, Nosten F, White NJ, et al. 
Pharmacokinetic properties of artemether, dihydroartemisinin, lumefantrine, 
and quinine in pregnant women with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria in Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013;57:5096–103. 
24.  
Tarning J, Kloprogge F, Piola P, Dhorda M, Muwanga S, Turyakira E, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of artemether and dihydroartemisinin in 
pregnant women with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in 
Uganda. Malar J 2012;11:293. 
25.  
Tarning J, McGready R, Lindegardh N, Ashley EA, Pimanpanarak M, 
Kamanikom B, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of lumefantrine in 
pregnant women treated with artemether–lumefantrine for uncomplicated 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2009;53:3837–46. 
218
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 26.  
Price RN, Uhlemann AC, van Vugt M, Brockman A, Hutagalung R, Nair S, et al. 
Molecular and pharmacological determinants of the therapeutic response 
to artemether–lumefantrine in multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:1570–7. 
27.  
Valecha N, Mohanty S, Srivastava P, Sharma S, Tyagi P, Bergqvist Y, et al. 
Efficacy of artemether–lumefantrine in area of high malaria endemicity in 
India and its correlation with blood concentration of lumefantrine. Am J 
Trop Med Hyg 2012;86:395–7. 
28.  
Hatz C, Soto J, Nothdurft HD, Zoller T, Weitzel T, Loutan L, et al. Treatment of 
acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria with artemether–lumefantrine in 
nonimmune populations: a safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetic study. Am J 
Trop Med Hyg 2008;78:241–7. 
29.  
Kloprogge F, Piola P, Dhorda M, Muwanga S, Turyakira E, Apinan S, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of lumefantrine in pregnant and nonpregnant 
women with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Uganda. CPT 
Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol 2013;13:e83.
30.  
Byakika-Kibwika P, Lamorde M, Mayanja-Kizza H, Merry C, Colebunders 
B, Van Geertruyden JP. Update on the efficacy, effectiveness and safety 
of artemether–lumefantrine combination therapy for treatment of 
uncomplicated malaria. Ther Clin Risk Manage 2010;6:11–20. 
31.  
Wong RP, Salman S, Ilett KF, Siba PM, Mueller I, Davis TM. Desbutyl–
lumefantrine is a metabolite of lumefantrine with potent in vitro 
antimalarial activity that may influence artemether–lumefantrine 
treatment outcome. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011;55:1194–8.
32.  
Ngasala BE, Malmberg M, Carlsson AM, Ferreira PE, Petzold MG, Blessborn D, 
et al. Efficacy and effectiveness of artemether–lumefantrine after initial and 
repeated treatment in children < 5 years of age with acute uncomplicated 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in rural Tanzania: a randomized trial. Clin 
Infect Dis 2011;52:873–82. 
33.  
Stohrer JM, Dittrich S, Thongpaseuth V, Vanisaveth V, Phetsouvanh R, 
Phompida S, et al. Therapeutic efficacy of artemether–lumefantrine and 
artesunate–mefloquine for treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria in Luang Namtha Province, Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic. Trop Med Int Health 2004;9:1175–83.
34.  
Ursing J, Kofoed PE, Rodrigues A, Blessborn D, Thoft-Nielsen R, Bjorkman 
A, et al. Similar efficacy and tolerability of double-dose chloroquine and 
artemether–lumefantrine for treatment of Plasmodium falciparum infection 
in Guinea-Bissau: a randomized trial. J Infect Dis 2011;203:109–16. 
35.  
Abdulla S, Sagara I, Borrmann S, D’Alessandro U, Gonzalez R, Hamel M, 
et al. Efficacy and safety of artemether–lumefantrine dispersible tablets 
compared with crushed commercial tablets in African infants and children 
with uncomplicated malaria: a randomised, single-blind, multicentre trial. 
Lancet 2008;372:1819–27. 
36.  
Bindschedler M, Lefevre G, Degen P, Sioufi A. Comparison of the cardiac 
effects of the antimalarials co-artemether and halofantrine in healthy 
participants. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2002;66:293–8. 
37.  
Novartis. Coartem product information. 2009.
A
5
219
 A5.4 | ARTESUNATE
Therapeutic indications
•  
Parenteral (intravenous or intramuscular) artesunate is indicated for the initial 
treatment of severe malaria.
• Rectal artesunate is indicated as pre-referral treatment for severe malaria.
•  
Artesunate–amodiaquine, artesunate–mefloquine or artesunate–SP are 
indicated for the treatment of acute uncomplicated P. falciparum, P. vivax, 
 
P. ovale, P. knowlesi or P. malariae malaria. 
Structure and mechanism of action
Artesunate is a hemisuccinate derivative of dihydroartemisinin, which is obtained 
by the reduction of artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxide (1). In vivo, 
artesunate is rapidly converted to its active metabolite dihydroartemisinin. 
The mechanism of action of the artemisinin derivatives is not well-defined but 
involves cation-mediated generation of reactive intermediates and reduction of 
the peroxide bridge.
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass: 384.4
Artesunate, like other artemisinin 
derivatives, kills all erythrocytic 
stages of malaria parasites, including 
the ring stages and early schizonts, 
as well as the gametocytes 
responsible 
for 
continuing 
transmission, although it has only 
partial activity against the mature 
stage V gametocytes. It is essentially 
inactive against extra-erythrocytic 
forms, sporozoites, liver schizonts 
and merozoites. Artesunate is more 
water-soluble than other artemisinins and therefore can be administered 
intravenously. It can also be given orally, rectally or by the intramuscular route. 
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters of intravenous, intramuscular, rectal and oral 
artesunate are presented in Table 5.4 (1–32). Artesunate is rapidly absorbed and 
biotransformed into its active metabolite dihydroartemisinin by plasma esterases, 
with a possible contribution from CYP2A6 enzymes. While dihydroartemisinin 
accounts for nearly all the antimalarial activity of oral artesunate, artesunate 
contributes more significantly to the antimalarial effect after intravenous 
administration. Peak concentrations of artesunate are reached within a few minutes 
of parenteral administration; thereafter, artesunate is rapidly eliminated. Plasma 
protein binding of dihydroartemisinin is approximately 93%. Dihydroartemisinin 
is metabolized in the gut and liver by glucuronidation and is excreted in the urine. 
220
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Table A5.4. Pharmacokinetic parameters of artesunate and its active metabolite, 
dihydroartemisinin (DHA), when given intravenously, intramuscularly or rectally 
for the treatment of severe malaria or orally for the treatment of uncomplicated 
malaria (range of mean or median values reported).
Intravenous
Intramuscular
Rectal
Oral
Artesunate DHA Artesunate DHA Artesunate DHA Artesunate DHA
Cmax  
(ng/mL)
1140–29 
644
340–
3007
660–2192
62.5–
1584
90–894
180–
1279
34–451
900–
2043
Tmax (min)
2
9–17.4
8
1.4–
40.5
42–54
12– 
138
30–84
54–120
AUC (µg.h/
mL)
505–2051
1107–
2559
855 
1496
692
2402–
2786
0.113– 
0.419
1.217–
3.745
Elimination 
T1/2 (min)
9–25.2
20.7–
95.4
11.5–48.2 
32– 
52.7
51
18– 
81
54
48–150
Cl/f (L/h per 
kg)
1.27–3.12
0.73–
2.16
2.7–4.26
1.08–
1.21
5.9
1.5–
2.64
0.61–15.4 
0.63–
1.66
Vd/f 
(L/kg)
0.08–0.24
0.75–
2.22
0.44–2.16
0.77–
1.79
2.06
0.6– 
2.8
0.63-3.35
1.45–
3.00
Safety
Pregnancy
In experimental animals, dose-dependent fetal toxicity was observed after 
administration of artesunate in the first trimester and was more likely to occur 
with increased duration of treatment (1). There is no evidence that artemisinin 
derivatives are teratogenic in humans, but experience is still limited. While the 
possible risk for teratogenicity limits the use of artemisinin derivatives in the 
treatment of uncomplicated malaria in women in the first trimester, treatment 
of severe malaria with artesunate is recommended as it is potentially life-saving 
for the mother. Artesunate has been successfully and safely administered in the 
second and third trimesters of pregnancy (1, 33).
Adverse events
Artesunate is generally well-tolerated and has a better safety profile than quinine 
in severe malaria (34–37). It has similar side-effects to other artemisinin derivatives, 
including hypersensitivity reactions (risk estimate, 1 in 3000), gastrointestinal 
disturbances, cough, rash, arthralgia, dizziness and delayed haemolysis. Clinically, 
the most significant effect is haemolysis, which has been reported up to weeks 
after treatment (38) (see section 7.4.1). Dose-dependent neutropenia was observed 
in Cambodia, where an oral dose of 6 mg/kg bw artesunate for 7 days resulted in 
significantly lower neutrophil counts than in those patients given 2 or 4 mg/kg 
bw (39). Other adverse effects observed in animal models, such as hepatotoxicity 
and neurotoxicity, have not been observed in clinical studies at therapeutic 
doses (40–42). Although there is a theoretical concern about bradycardia and QTc 
A
5
221
 prolongation associated with artemisinin derivatives, particularly at high doses, 
this has not been seen with artesunate (16).
Contraindications 
Artesunate is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to artesunate 
or artemisinin derivatives.
Cautions
As lower plasma concentrations of artesunate and dihydroartemisinin are reported 
in young children with severe anaemia, it is important to monitor their response 
to treatment closely.
While use of artesunate in patients with renal or hepatic impairment has not 
been studied extensively, the limited data available (and the known metabolism 
and excretion of drug) do not suggest that artesunate would be toxic to renally 
or hepatically impaired individuals. Nevertheless, caution is advised in treating 
these patients.
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
Dosage optimization
For the treatment of uncomplicated malaria, the target dose of artesunate remains 
4 mg/kg bw daily, with a daily dose range of 2–10 mg/kg bw. Children weighing 
< 25 kg with severe malaria had lower exposure to intravenous or intramuscular 
artesunate and its active metabolite dihydroartemisinin than older children 
and adults given the same dose of 2.4 mg/kg bw (9), which was attributed to 
an increased clearance rate in younger children. This may increase the risk for 
treatment failure, which can be fatal in severe malaria. The Mahidol–Oxford 
Tropical Medicine Research Unit performed nonlinear mixed-effects population 
pharmacokinetics modelling in order to inform WHO dosage recommendations for 
ensuring equivalent exposure to the drug for all target populations. These models 
confirmed that young children (< 25 kg/5 years) should receive a slightly higher 
dose of 3 mg/kg (see section 7.4.1), which is still within the therapeutic range 
prescribed by the manufacturer and does not raise safety concerns. 
222
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 References 
1.  Guilin Pharmaceuticals. Injectable Artesun Product Information. 2011.
2.   
Batty KT, Le AT, Ilett KF, Nguyen PT, Powell SM, Nguyen CH, et al. A 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of artesunate for vivax malaria. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 1998;59:823–7. 
3.   
Batty KT, Thu LT, Davis TM, Ilett KF, Mai TX, Hung NC, et al. A pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic study of intravenous vs oral artesunate in 
uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1998;45:123–9. 
4.   
Benakis A, Binh TQ, Keundjian A, Scheiwe MW. Pharmacokinetics/
pharmacodynamics findings after repeated administration of artesunate 
thermostable suppositories (Rectocaps) in Vietnamese patients with 
uncomplicated malaria. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokin 2006;31:41–5. 
5.   
Binh TQ, Ilett KF, Batty KT, Davis TM, Hung NC, Powell SM, et al. Oral 
bioavailability of dihydroartemisinin in Vietnamese volunteers and in 
patients with falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2001;51:541–6. 
6.   
Byakika-Kibwika P, Lamorde M, Mayito J, Nabukeera L, Mayanja-Kizza H, 
Katabira E, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of intravenous 
artesunate during severe malaria treatment in Ugandan adults. Malar J 
2012;11:132.
7.   
Davis TM, Phuong HL, Ilett KF, Hung NC, Batty KT, Phuong VD, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of intravenous artesunate in 
severe falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001;45:181–6. 
8.   
Halpaap B, Ndjave M, Paris M, Benakis A, Kremsner PG. Plasma levels of 
artesunate and dihydroartemisinin in children with Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria in Gabon after administration of 50-milligram artesunate 
suppositories. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1998;58:365–8. 
9.   
Hendriksen IC, Mtove G, Kent A, Gesase S, Reyburn H, Lemnge MM, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of intramuscular artesunate in African children 
with severe malaria: implications for a practical dosing regimen. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 2013;93:443–50. 
10.  
Hien TT, Davis TM, Chuong LV, Ilett KF, Sinh DX, Phu NH, et al. Comparative 
pharmacokinetics of intramuscular artesunate and artemether in 
patients with severe falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2004;48:4234–9. 
11.  
Ilett KF, Batty KT, Powell SM, Binh TQ, Thu Le TA, Phuong HL, et al. The 
pharmacokinetic properties of intramuscular artesunate and rectal 
dihydroartemisinin in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 2002;53:23–30.
12.  
Ittarat W, Looareesuwan S, Pootrakul P, Sumpunsirikul P, Vattanavibool 
P, Meshnick SR. Effects of alpha-thalassemia on pharmacokinetics 
of the antimalarial agent artesunate. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1998;42:2332–5.
13.  
Karunajeewa HA, Ilett KF, Dufall K, Kemiki A, Bockarie M, Alpers MP, et al. 
Disposition of artesunate and dihydroartemisinin after administration 
of artesunate suppositories in children from Papua New Guinea with 
uncomplicated malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004;48:2966–72. 
A
5
223
 14.  
Krishna S, Planche T, Agbenyega T, Woodrow C, Agranoff D, Bedu-Addo G, et 
al. Bioavailability and preliminary clinical efficacy of intrarectal artesunate 
in Ghanaian children with moderate malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2001;45:509–16. 
15.  
Li Q, Cantilena LR, Leary KJ, Saviolakis GA, Miller RS, Melendez V, et al. 
Pharmacokinetic profiles of artesunate after single intravenous doses at 0.5, 
1, 2, 4, and 8 mg/kg in healthy volunteers: a phase I study. Am J Trop Med 
Hyg 2009;81:615–21. 
16.  
Maude RJ, Plewes K, Faiz MA, Hanson J, Charunwatthana P, Lee SJ, et al. Does 
artesunate prolong the electrocardiograph QT interval in patients with 
severe malaria? Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009;80:126–32. 
17.  
Miller RS, Li Q, Cantilena LR, Leary KJ, Saviolakis GA, Melendez V, et al. 
Pharmacokinetic profiles of artesunate following multiple intravenous 
doses of 2, 4, and 8 mg/kg in healthy volunteers: phase 1b study. Malar J 
2012;11:255. 
18.  
Nealon C, Dzeing A, Muller-Romer U, Planche T, Sinou V, Kombila M, et al. 
Intramuscular bioavailability and clinical efficacy of artesunate in Gabonese 
children with severe malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002;46:3933–9. 
19.  
Newton PN, Barnes KI, Smith PJ, Evans AC, Chierakul W, Ruangveerayuth R, 
et al. The pharmacokinetics of intravenous artesunate in adults with severe 
falciparum malaria. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2006;62:1003–9. 
20.  
Pengsaa K, Sirivichayakul C, Na-Bangchang K, Thaiarporn I, Chaivisuth A, 
Wongsuwan A, et al. Life-saving rectal artesunate for complicated malaria 
in children. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 2005;36:597–601. 
21.  
Simpson JA, Agbenyega T, Barnes KI, Di Perri G, Folb P, Gomes M, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of artesunate and dihydroartemisinin 
following intra-rectal dosing of artesunate in malaria patients. PLoS Med 
2006;3:e444. 
22.  
Sirivichayakul C, Sabchareon A, Pengsaa K, Thaiarporn I, Chaivisuth 
A, Na-Bangchang K, et al. Comparative study of the effectiveness and 
pharmacokinetics of two rectal artesunate/oral mefloquine combination 
regimens for the treatment of uncomplicated childhood falciparum malaria. 
Ann Trop Paediatrics 2007;27:17–24. 
23.  
Chanthap L, Tsuyuoka R, Na-Bangchang K, Nivanna N, Suksom D, 
Sovannarith T, et al. Investigation of bioavailability, pharmacokinetics 
and safety of new pediatric formulations of artesunate and mefloquine. 
Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 2005;36:34–43. 
24.  
Davis TM, England M, Dunlop AM, Page-Sharp M, Cambon N, Keller TG, et al. 
Assessment of the effect of mefloquine on artesunate pharmacokinetics in 
healthy male volunteers. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2007;51:1099–101. 
25.  
Krudsood S, Looareesuwan S, Tangpukdee N, Wilairatana P, 
Phumratanaprapin W, Leowattana W, et al. New fixed-dose artesunate–
mefloquine formulation against multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum 
in adults: a comparative phase IIb safety and pharmacokinetic study with 
standard-dose nonfixed artesunate plus mefloquine. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2010;54(9):3730–7. 
224
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 26.  
Ramharter M, Kurth FM, Belard S, Bouyou-Akotet MK, Mamfoumbi 
MM, Agnandji ST, et al. Pharmacokinetics of two paediatric artesunate 
mefloquine drug formulations in the treatment of uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria in Gabon. J Antimicrob Chemother 2007;60:1091–6. 
27.  
Svensson US, Alin H, Karlsson MO, Bergqvist Y, Ashton M. Population 
parmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modelling of artemisinin and 
mefloquine enantiomers in patients with falciparum malaria. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 2002;58:339–51. 
28.  
Mwesigwa J, Parikh S, McGee B, German P, Drysdale T, Kalyango JN, et 
al. Pharmacokinetics of artemether–lumefantrine and artesunate–
amodiaquine in children in Kampala, Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2010;54:52–9. 
29.  
Navaratnam V, Ramanathan S, Wahab MS, Siew Hua G, Mansor SM, 
Kiechel JR, et al. Tolerability and pharmacokinetics of non-fixed and fixed 
combinations of artesunate and amodiaquine in Malaysian healthy normal 
volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2009;65:809–21. 
30.  
Stepniewska K, Taylor W, Sirima SB, Ouedraogo EB, Ouedraogo A, Gansane 
A, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of artesunate and amodiaquine in 
African children. Malar J 2009;8:200. 
31.  
Morris CA, Onyamboko MA, Capparelli E, Koch MA, Atibu J, Lokomba V, et 
al. Population pharmacokinetics of artesunate and dihydroartemisinin in 
pregnant and non-pregnant women with malaria. Malar J 2011;10:114. 
32.  
Onyamboko MA, Meshnick SR, Fleckenstein L, Koch MA, Atibu J, Lokomba 
V, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of artesunate and 
dihydroartemisinin following oral treatment in pregnant women with 
asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum infections in Kinshasa DRC. Malar J 
2011;10:49. 
33.  
Hess KM, Goad JA, Arguin PM. Intravenous artesunate for the treatment of 
severe malaria. Ann Pharmacother 2010;44:1250–8. 
34.  
Krudsood S, Wilairatana P, Vannaphan S, Treeprasertsuk S, Silachamroon U, 
Phomrattanaprapin W, et al. Clinical experience with intravenous quinine, 
intramuscular artemether and intravenous artesunate for the treatment 
of severe malaria in Thailand. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 
2003;34:54–61. 
35.  
Dondorp AM, Fanello CI, Hendriksen IC, Gomes E, Seni A, Chhaganlal KD, et 
al. Artesunate versus quinine in the treatment of severe falciparum malaria 
in African children (AQUAMAT): an open-label, randomised trial. Lancet 
2010;376:1647–57. 
36.  
Dondorp A, Nosten F, Stepniewska K, Day N, White N. Artesunate versus 
quinine for treatment of severe falciparum malaria: a randomised trial. 
Lancet 2005;366:717–25. 
37.  
Barnes KI, Mwenechanya J, Tembo M, McIlleron H, Folb PI, Ribeiro I, et al. 
Efficacy of rectal artesunate compared with parenteral quinine in initial 
treatment of moderately severe malaria in African children and adults: a 
randomised study. Lancet 2004;363:1598–605. 
A
5
225
 38.  
Rolling T, Wichmann D, Schmiedel S, Burchard GD, Kluge S, Cramer JP. 
Artesunate versus quinine in the treatment of severe imported malaria: 
comparative analysis of adverse events focussing on delayed haemolysis. 
Malar J 2013;12:241.
39.  
Bethell D, Se Y, Lon C, Socheat D, Saunders D, Teja-Isavadharm P, et al. 
Dose-dependent risk of neutropenia after 7-day courses of artesunate 
monotherapy in Cambodian patients with acute Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria. Clin Infect Dis 2010;51:e105–14. 
40.  
Hien TT, Turner GD, Mai NT, Phu NH, Bethell D, Blakemore WF, et al. 
Neuropathological assessment of artemether-treated severe malaria. Lancet 
2003;362:295–6. 
41.  
Kissinger E, Hien TT, Hung NT, Nam ND, Tuyen NL, Dinh BV, et al. Clinical 
and neurophysiological study of the effects of multiple doses of artemisinin 
on brain-stem function in Vietnamese patients. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2000;63:48–55. 
42.  
Nwanjo H, Oze G. Acute hepatotocixity following administration of 
artesunate in guinea pigs. Internet J Toxicol 2007;4(1).
A5.5 | ATOVAQUONE–PROGUANIL
Therapeutic indications
•  
The combination atovaquone–proguanil is indicated for the prophylaxis of 
malaria. 
•  
Atovaquone–proguanil may also be considered for the treatment of uncomplicated 
malaria in travellers outside malaria-endemic areas and for use in combination 
with artesunate and primaquine as an alternative treatment for uncomplicated 
malaria, where WHO recommmended treatments are not available or not effective. 
Structure and mechanism of action
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass: 366.8
Atovaquone is a hydroxynaphthoquinone 
with antimalarial activity against all stages 
of all Plasmodium species (1). It is an 
ubiquinone analogue that inhibits the 
transport of several parasite enzymes and 
interferes with the cytochrome electron 
transport system, resulting in the collapse 
of the mitochondrial membrane potential 
(1, 2). Atovaquone–proguanil is seldom used 
in endemic areas because of the propensity 
for emergence of high-grade resistance to 
atovaquone from single mutations in the 
cyt b gene (3).
226
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass: 253.7
Proguanil is a biguanide compound that is 
active against all stages of the malaria 
parasite life cycle. In vivo, it is converted 
into an active triazine metabolite, 
cycloguanil, which acts by inhibiting 
dihydrofolate reductase (2, 4). 
The combination of atovaquone and proguanil is synergistic, but it is the parent 
compound rather than the metabolite that synergizes, independently of its antifol 
metabolite, lowering the effective concentration at which atovaquone collapses 
the mitochondrial membrane potential (4). 
Pharmacokinetics
Table A5.5 summarizes the pharmacokinetic parameters of atovaquone–proguanil 
(5–13). Atovaquone is a highly lipophilic compound, and there is considerable 
inter-individual variation in its absorption. Atovaquone–proguanil should be taken 
at the same time each day with food or a milky drink, as atovaquone is generally 
poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract; the absolute oral bioavailability 
is approximately 23% when taken with food (14). In contrast, proguanil is readily 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, reaching peak concentrations within 
approximately 5 h of administration. Atovaquone is 99% bound to plasma proteins 
and has a long plasma half-life (~2–3 days) because of enterohepatic recycling. 
It is excreted almost exclusively in the faeces as unchanged drug (14). Proguanil 
is 75% protein bound and undergoes hepatic biotransformation via CYP2C19 (and 
possibly CYP3A4) into the antifolate metabolite cycloguanil (10, 14). Between 40 
and 60% of proguanil is excreted by the kidneys (14). The apparent clearance (Cl/f) 
of both atovaquone and proguanil is related to body weight (14). While most of 
the pharmacokinetics of proguanil and cycloguanil is comparable in adults and 
children, the elimination half-life of atovaquone is shorter in children (9, 14). 
The plasma concentrations of atovaquone and proguanil in women in the second 
and third trimesters of pregnancy are approximately half those of non-pregnant 
adults (with and without acute malaria) as a result of a greater Vd and increased 
oral clearance.
A
5
227
 Table A5.5. Pharmacokinetic parameters of atovaquone, proguanil and 
cycloguanil in studies of currently recommended doses for malaria prophylaxis 
or treatment (range of mean or median values reported).
Parameter
Atovaquone
Proguanil
Cycloguanil
Cmax (ng/mL)
634–13 270
560–751
37–67
Tmax (h)
5.1–5.7
4.4–5.2
6.4–6.9
Elimination T1/2 (h)
29–134
8.0–17.6
15.6–22.6
AUC
2.67–27.63 µg.days/mL
7.2–15.4 µg.h/mL
0.6–1.8 µg.h/mL
Cl/f (L/h per kg)
0.09–0.32
0.71–1.23
–
Vd/f (L/kg)
4.7–13
13.4–22.9
–
Safety
Pregnancy
Atovaquone–proguanil is regarded as safe in pregnancy, as no evidence of 
adverse effects associated with its use was found in studies in pregnant humans 
or experimental animals (2, 7, 8, 14).
Adverse effects
Generally atovaquone–proguanil is well tolerated. The side-effects of atovaquone–
proguanil are similar in children and adults (9, 14). The most common adverse 
effects reported are headache, cough and gastrointestinal disturbances (such as 
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea). Other adverse events occur 
rarely, such as dizziness and oral ulceration, and, very rarely, blood disorders 
including neutropenia and anaemia and skin reactions such as photosensitivity 
rash and erythema multiforme. Raised liver enzyme activities, hepatitis and hepatic 
failure have been reported. Allergic reactions including anaphylaxis, angioedema, 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome and vasculitis may rarely occur. Pancytopenia in 
patients with severe renal impairment treated with proguanil has been reported, 
probably because of drug accumulation (15).
Contraindications
Atovaquone–proguanil is contraindicated in patients with known serious 
hypersensitivity reactions to atovaquone or proguanil. It is also contraindicated 
as malaria prophylaxis in patients with severe renal impairment because of the 
high risk for pancytopenia.
228
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Caution
In the elderly, doses should be selected cautiously, taking into account the 
greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal or cardiac function, higher systemic 
exposure to cycloguanil and a greater frequency of concomitant disease or other 
drug therapy (14).
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14. The main concern is the approximate twofold reduction in 
plasma concentrations of both atovaquone and proguanil (7, 8), which could leave 
pregnant women more susceptible to malaria infection or at risk for treatment 
failure. Further clinical and dose-optimization studies in pregnancy are required. 
Additional strategies are strongly advised for pregnant women taking atovaquone–
proguanil for malaria prevention.
References
1. 
  
Baggish AL, Hill DR. Antiparasitic agent atovaquone. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2002;46:1163–73. 
2.   
Pudney M, Gutteridge W, Zeman A, Dickins M, Woolley JL. Atovaquone and 
proguanil hydrochloride: a review of nonclinical studies. J Travel Med 
1999;6(Suppl 1):S8–12. 
3.   
White NJ, Pukrittayakamee S, Hien TT, Faiz MA, Mokuolu OA, Dondorp AM. 
Malaria. Lancet 2013;383:723–35.
4.   
Srivastava IK, Vaidya AB. A mechanism for the synergistic antimalarial action 
of atovaquone and proguanil. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:1334–9. 
5.   
Deye GA, Miller RS, Miller L, Salas CJ, Tosh D, Macareo L, et al. Prolonged 
protection provided by a single dose of atovaquone–proguanil for the 
chemoprophylaxis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in a human challenge 
model. Clin Infect Dis 2012;54:232–9. 
6.   
Hussein Z, Eaves CJ, Hutchinson DB, Canfield CJ. Population pharmacokinetics 
of proguanil in patients with acute P. falciparum malaria after combined 
therapy with atovaquone. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1996;42:589–97. 
7.   
McGready R, Stepniewska K, Edstein MD, Cho T, Gilveray G, Looareesuwan S, 
et al. The pharmacokinetics of atovaquone and proguanil in pregnant women 
with acute falciparum malaria. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2003;59:545–52. 
8.   
Na-Bangchang K, Manyando C, Ruengweerayut R, Kioy D, Mulenga M, Miller 
GB, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of atovaquone and 
proguanil for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in third-
trimester pregnant women. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2005;61:573–82. 
9.   
Sabchareon A, Attanath P, Phanuaksook P, Chanthavanich P, Poonpanich 
Y, Mookmanee D, et al. Efficacy and pharmacokinetics of atovaquone and 
proguanil in children with multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1998;92:201–6. 
10.  
Thapar MM, Ashton M, Lindegardh N, Bergqvist Y, Nivelius S, Johansson I, et 
al. Time-dependent pharmacokinetics and drug metabolism of atovaquone 
A
5
229
 plus proguanil (Malarone) when taken as chemoprophylaxis. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 2002;58:19–27. 
11.  
Tommasi C, Bellagamba R, Tempestilli M, D’Avolio A, Gallo AL, Ivanovic J, 
et al. Marked increase in etravirine and saquinavir plasma concentrations 
during atovaquone/proguanil prophylaxis. Malar J 2011;10:141. 
12.  
van Luin M, Van der Ende ME, Richter C, Visser M, Faraj D, Van der Ven A, et 
al. Lower atovaquone/proguanil concentrations in patients taking efavirenz, 
lopinavir/ritonavir or atazanavir/ritonavir. AIDS (London) 2010;24:1223–6. 
13.  
van Vugt M, Edstein MD, Proux S, Lay K, Ooh M, Looareesuwan S, et al. 
Absence of an interaction between artesunate and atovaquone–proguanil. 
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1999;55:469–74. 
14.  
GlaxoSmithKline. Malarone tablets and paediatric tablets drug information. 
2013.
15.  
Jolink H, den Hartigh J, Visser LG, van Nieuwkoop C. Pancytopenia due to 
proguanil toxicity in a returning traveller with fever. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
2010;66:811–2. 
A5.6 | CHLOROQUINE 
Therapeutic indications
•  
Chloroquine is indicated for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria due to 
P. vivax, P. malariae, P. ovale and P. knowlesi (1).
•  
Chloroquine is no longer recommended for prophylaxis against P. falciparum 
(except in some parts of Central America) but may be used to prevent P. vivax 
infections. 
Structure and mechanism of action
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Chloroquine is a 4-aminoquinoline that 
inhibits intraparasitic haem detoxification 
(2); it may also interfere with the 
biosynthesis of nucleic acids. Chloroquine 
reaches high concentrations in the parasite’s 
food vacuole. Chloroquine resistance is 
associated with genetic mutations in 
genes encoding trans-membrane proteins 
of the parasite’s food vacuole (PfCRT and 
PfMDR) (3).
Molecular weight: 319.9
Pharmacokinetics 
Table A5.6 summarizes the pharmacokinetic properties of chloroquine (4–15). 
Chloroquine is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal 
230
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 tract after oral administration (16). Plasma protein binding is approximately 55%. 
Chloroquine is extensively distributed in body tissues and fluids, including the 
placenta and breast milk. It is metabolized in the liver by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 
enzymes, mainly to monodesethylchloroquine, which has similar antimalarial 
activity (17). The drug is eliminated slowly from the body , with ~55% eliminated 
via the kidneys. 
Table A5.6. Pharmacokinetic properties of chloroquine and desethylchloroquine 
in studies of currently recommended doses for malaria prophylaxis or 
treatment (range of mean or median values reported).
Parameter
Chloroquine
Desethylchloroquine
Cmax (ng/mL)
283–1430
89–220
Tmax (h)
2.7–6.9
–
AUC (µg.h/mL)
8.2–140
23.1–64.3
Elimination T1/2 (h)
108–291
175–290
Cl/f (L/h per kg)
0.23–0.80
0.1–0.16
Vd/f (L/kg)
31.8–262
12.6
Safety 
Pregnancy
At the doses used for treatment or prophylaxis of P. vixax, P. ovale or P. malaria, 
chlororoquine is considered safe in pregnancy (18, 19). The chloroquine concentrations 
achieved are reportedly lower during pregnancy, particularly in the second and 
third trimesters (11,21), although one studies showed no such difference (20). 
The response of pregnant patients to treatment should be monitored closely.
Adverse effects
Chloroquine is generally well tolerated at therapeutic doses. Large doses used for 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis are associated with a higher frequency of 
adverse events than the lower doses used in malaria. Pruritus is a common side-
effect and is more severe in dark-skinned individuals. Other less common side-
effects include headache, hepatitis, elevated liver enzyme, various skin eruptions 
and gastrointestinal disturbances, such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. Taking 
chloroquine with food helps to avoid gastrointestinal intolerance. Chloroquine 
causes slight widening of the QRS complex and QT intervals in electrocardiography 
but has not been associated with conduction disturbances or arrhythmia at 
therapeutic doses. More rarely, central nervous system toxicity, including convulsions 
and mental changes, may occur. Chronic use (> 5 years continuous use as prophylaxis) 
may lead to eye disorders, including keratopathy and retinopathy. Other uncommon 
effects include myopathy, reduced hearing, photosensitivity and hair loss. Blood 
disorders, such as aplastic anaemia, are extremely uncommon. 
A
5
231
 Acute overdosage is very dangerous, and death can occur within a few hours. 
The patient may progress from feeling dizzy and drowsy with headache and 
gastrointestinal upset, to sudden visual loss, convulsions, hypokalaemia, hypotension 
and cardiac arrhythmia. Overdosed patients require intensive care. 
Contraindications
Chloroquine is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to 
chloroquine or any aminoquinoline compounds.
Caution
Use with caution in patients with psoriasis, neurological (e.g. epilepsy), retinal, 
or gastrointestinal disorders, as chloroquine may exacerbate these underlying 
conditions. The drug should also be administered with caution to patients with 
retinal or visual impairment or hepatic impairment.
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
References 
1.   
Krafts K, Hempelmann E, Skorska-Stania A. From methylene blue to 
chloroquine: a brief review of the development of an antimalarial therapy. 
Parasitol Res 2012;111:1–6. 
2.   
Titus EO. Recent developments in the understanding of the pharmacokinetics 
and mechanism of action of chloroquine. Ther Drug Monit 1989;11:369–79.
3.   
Bray PG, Mungthin M, Ridley RG, Ward SA. Access to hematin: the basis of 
chloroquine resistance. Mol Pharmacol 1998;54:170–9. 
4.   
Bustos DG, Lazaro JE, Gay F, Pottier A, Laracas CJ, Traore B, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of sequential and simultaneous treatment with the 
combination chloroquine and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in acute 
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in the Philippines. Trop Med 
Int Health 2002;7:584–91. 
5.   
Bustos MD, Gay F, Diquet B, Thomare P, Warot D. The pharmacokinetics and 
electrocardiographic effects of chloroquine in healthy subjects. Trop Med 
Parasitol 1994;45:83–6.
6.   
Ette EI, Essien EE, Brown-Awala EE. Pharmacokinetics of chloroquine: saliva and 
plasma levels relationship. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokin 1986;11:275–81.
7.   
Krishna S, White NJ. Pharmacokinetics of quinine, chloroquine and 
amodiaquine. Clinical implications. Clin Pharmacokin 1996;30:263–99. 
8.   
Na-Bangchang K, Limpaibul L, Thanavibul A, Tan-Ariya P, Karbwang J. The 
pharmacokinetics of chloroquine in healthy Thai subjects and patients with 
Plasmodium vivax malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1994;38:278–81. 
9.   
Wetsteyn JC, De Vries PJ, Oosterhuis B, Van Boxtel CJ. The pharmacokinetics 
of three multiple dose regimens of chloroquine: implications for malaria 
chemoprophylaxis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1995;39:696–9. 
232
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 10.  
Karunajeewa HA, Ilett KF, Mueller I, Siba P, Law I, Page-Sharp M, et 
al. Pharmacokinetics and efficacy of piperaquine and chloroquine in 
Melanesian children with uncomplicated malaria. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2008;52:237–43.
11.  
Karunajeewa HA, Salman S, Mueller I, Baiwog F, Gomorrai S, Law I, et 
al. Pharmacokinetics of chloroquine and monodesethylchloroquine in 
pregnancy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;54:1186–92. 
12.  
Obua C, Hellgren U, Ntale M, Gustafsson LL, Ogwal-Okeng JW, Gordi T, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of chloroquine and sulfadoxine and treatment 
response in children with malaria: suggestions for an improved dose 
regimen. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2008;65:493–501. 
13.  
Okonkwo CA, Coker HA, Agomo PU, Ogunbanwo JA, Mafe AG, Agomo CO, et 
al. Effect of chlorpheniramine on the pharmacokinetics of and response to 
chloroquine of Nigerian children with falciparum malaria. Trans R Soc Trop 
Med Hyg 1999;93:306–11. 
14.  
Raina RK, Bano G, Amla V, Kapoor V, Gupta KL. The effect of aspirin, 
paracetamol and analgin on pharmacokinetics of chloroquine. Indian J 
Physiol Pharmacol 1993;37:229–31.
15.  
Salako LA, Walker O, Iyun AO. Pharmacokinetics of chloroquine in renal 
insufficiency. Afr J Med Med Sci 1984;13:177–82.
16.  
Ducharme J, Farinotti R. Clinical pharmacokinetics and metabolism 
of chloroquine. Focus on recent advancements. Clin Pharmacokin 
1996;31:257–74. 
17.  
Kim KA, Park JY, Lee JS, Lim S. Cytochrome P450 2C8 and CYP3A4/5 are 
involved in chloroquine metabolism in human liver microsomes. Arch 
Pharmacol Res 2003;26:631–7. 
18.  
McGready R, Thwai KL, Cho T, Samuel, Looareesuwan S, White NJ, et al. 
The effects of quinine and chloroquine antimalarial treatments in the first 
trimester of pregnancy. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2002;96:180–4. 
19.  
Levy M, Buskila D, Gladman DD, Urowitz MB, Koren G. Pregnancy outcome 
following first trimester exposure to chloroquine. Am J Perinatol 
1991;8:174–8. 
20.  
Lee SJ, McGready R, Fernandez C, Stepniewska K, Paw MK, Viladpai-nguen SJ, 
et al. Chloroquine pharmacokinetics in pregnant and nonpregnant women 
with vivax malaria. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2008;64:987–92. 
21.  
Massele AY, Kilewo C, Aden Abdi Y, Tomson G, Diwan VK, Ericsson O, et al. 
Chloroquine blood concentrations and malaria prophylaxis in Tanzanian 
women during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 1997;52:299–305.
A
5
233
 A5.7 | CLINDAMYCIN
Therapeutic indications
Clindamycin is used in combination with artesunate or quinine for severe or 
uncomplicated malaria. 
Structure and mechanism of action
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Clindamycin is a lincosamide 
antibiotic derived from lincomycin. 
Its mechanism of action involves 
inhibition of microbial protein 
synthesis by preferential binding 
to the 50S ribosomal subunit and 
interference with peptide chain 
initiation (1, 2). 
Molecular mass: 425.0
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters reported for clindamycin are summarized in 
Table A5.7. Clindamycin is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, with an oral 
bioavailability of approximately 90% (3). It is widely distributed in body fluids and 
tissues, including bone, but insignificant levels are reached in cerebrospinal fluid. 
Clindamycin also crosses the placenta and appears in breast milk (4). It is about 
90% bound to plasma proteins and accumulates in leukocytes, macrophages and 
bile (3). The half-life of clindamycin may be prolonged and clearance reduced in 
neonates and patients with renal impairment (5, 6). Clindamycin is metabolized by 
CYP3A4 enzymes in the liver into the active N-demethyl and sulfoxide metabolites 
and some inactive metabolites (7). About 10% of a dose is excreted in the urine as 
active drug or metabolites and about 4% in faeces; the remainder is excreted as 
inactive metabolites. Excretion is slow and takes place over many days. Although 
clearance is reduced slightly in patients with markedly reduced renal function, 
dose modification is not considered necessary (3). Clindamycin is not effectively 
removed from the body by dialysis. 
234
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Table A5.7. Pharmacokinetic parameters of clindamycin (range of mean or 
median values reported). 
Parameter
Clindamycin
Cmax (ng/mL)
2.5–14
Tmax (h)
0.75–3.0
AUC (µg.h/mL)
24.63–26.87
Elimination Telimination (h)
1.9–3.57
Cl/f (L/h)
10.0–26.52
Vd/f (L)
49.1–132.6
Ka
0.967
Safety
Studies of reproductive toxicity with clindamycin in experimental animals revealed 
no evidence of impaired fertility or harm to the fetus. Although data on its use 
during pregnancy in humans are limited, clindamycin is regarded as safe for use 
in pregnancy.
Adverse events
Clindamycin is generally well tolerated after oral administration. Its major 
disadvantage is its potential to cause antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, leading 
to overgrowth of Clostridium difficile and pseudomembranous colitis (3). Other 
adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain or cramps, rash or 
pruritis. High doses of clindamycin may cause a metallic taste in the mouth. 
Rarely, clindamycin therapy has been associated with anaphylaxis, blood dyscrasia 
(leukopenia, agranulocytosis, eosinophilia, thrombocytopenia), erythema multiforme, 
polyarthritis, jaundice, raised liver enzymes and hepatotoxicity. Some parenteral 
formulations contain benzyl alcohol, which may cause fatal “gasping syndrome” 
in neonates.
Contraindications 
Clindamycin is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to 
clindamycin or lincomycin.
Cautions
Clindamycin should be used with caution in patients with gastrointestinal diseases 
as they may be at greater risk for pseudomembranous colitis. Caution is also 
advised in administering clindamycin to severely ill elderly patients, who may be 
more likely than younger patients to develop diarrhoea. The longer elimination 
half-life of clindamycin in neonates means that its plasma concentration may be 
significantly higher than in older children (5, 6). For this reason, close monitoring 
A
5
235
 of organ function is required when clindamycin is administered to neonates, 
particularly if they were premature. Clearance of clindamycin is reduced in patients 
with moderate-to-severe liver disease, so dosage modification (increasing the 
interval between doses) may be needed. 
Greater bioavailability, higher serum protein binding, lower plasma drug clearance 
and a smaller steady-state volume of distribution have been found in patients with 
HIV/AIDS than in healthy volunteers (10, 13). Although the clinical significance of 
these findings has not yet been established, close monitoring of these patients is 
recommended (Drug interactions. See Table A5.14).
References 
1.   
Tenson T, Lovmar M, Ehrenberg M. The mechanism of action of macrolides, 
lincosamides and streptogramin B reveals the nascent peptide exit path in 
the ribosome. J Mol Biol 2003;330:1005–14. 
2.   
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Second edition. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2010.
3.   
Pfizer. Dalacin C product information. 2012.
4.   
Weinstein AJ, Gibbs RS, Gallagher M. Placental transfer of clindamycin and 
gentamicin in term pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1976;124:688–91. 
5.   
Bell MJ, Shackelford P, Smith R, Schroeder K. Pharmacokinetics of clindamycin 
phosphate in the first year of life. J Pediatrics 1984;105:482–6. 
6.   
Koren G, Zarfin Y, Maresky D, Spiro TE, MacLeod SM. Pharmacokinetics of 
intravenous clindamycin in newborn infants. Pediatric Pharmacol (New York) 
1986;5:287–92.
7.   
del Carmen Carrasco-Portugal M, Lujan M, Flores-Murrieta FJ. Evaluation of 
gender in the oral pharmacokinetics of clindamycin in humans. Biopharm 
Drug Dispos 2008;29:427–30. 
8.   
Bouazza N, Pestre V, Jullien V, Curis E, Urien S, Salmon D, et al. Population 
pharmacokinetics of clindamycin orally and intravenously administered in 
patients with osteomyelitis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2012;74:971–7. 
9.   
Flaherty JF, Rodondi LC, Guglielmo BJ, Fleishaker JC, Townsend RJ, 
Gambertoglio JG. Comparative pharmacokinetics and serum inhibitory activity 
of clindamycin in different dosing regimens. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1988;32:1825–9. 
10.  
Gatti G, Flaherty J, Bubp J, White J, Borin M, Gambertoglio J. Comparative 
study of bioavailabilities and pharmacokinetics of clindamycin in healthy 
volunteers and patients with AIDS. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1993;37:1137–43. 
11.  
Muller AE, Mouton JW, Oostvogel PM, Dorr PJ, Voskuyl RA, DeJongh J, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of clindamycin in pregnant women in the peripartum 
period. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;54:2175–81.
12.  
Ruangweerayut R, Looareesuwan S, Hutchinson D, Chauemung A, 
Banmairuroi V, Na-Bangchang K. Assessment of the pharmacokinetics and 
dynamics of two combination regimens of fosmidomycin–clindamycin in 
patients with acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Malar J 2008;7:225. 
13.  
Flaherty JF Jr, Gatti G, White J, Bubp J, Borin M, Gambertoglio JG. Protein 
236
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 binding of clindamycin in sera of patients with AIDS. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 1996;40:1134–8. 
A5.8 | DIHYDROARTEMISININ–PIPERAQUINE
Therapeutic indications
Dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine is indicated for the treatment of uncomplicated 
P. falciparum or P. vivax malaria (1) and is likely to be very effective in P. ovale, 
P. knowlesi and P. malariae malaria. It may also be used as follow-on treatment in 
severe malaria once the patient is well enough to take oral medication.
Structure and mechanism of action
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Dihydroartemisinin is a sesquiterpene peroxide and 
an active metabolite of artesunate and artemether 
(2, 3). The mechanism of action of the artemisinin 
derivatives is not known but involves cation-
mediated generation of reactive intermediates 
and reduction of the peroxide bridge.
Molecular mass: 284.4
Piperaquine is a bisquinoline compound of the 4-aminoquinoline group of 
antimalarial drugs that include chloroquine (2). Piperaquine is thought to act 
similarly to chloroquine, which accumulates inside the parasite food vacuole and 
inhibits parasite-mediated haem detoxification, causing accumulation of the toxic 
haem complex (4). 
Molecular mass: 535.5
 
Piperaquine is also effective against 
chloroquine-resistant malaria 
parasites (5, 6). In chloroquine 
resistance, mutations in the genes 
encoding trans-membrane parasite 
food vacuole proteins are thought 
to result in efflux of chloroquine, 
so that it cannot accumulate at its 
site of action (7). These mutated 
parasite membrane proteins are 
considered to be unable to efflux 
the bulky bisquinoline structure (4). 
A
5
237
 Pharmacokinetic parameters
Dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, 
with peak plasma concentrations reached within 1–3 h for dihydroartemisinin 
and 3–6 h for piperaquine. Piperaquine is extensively distributed throughout the 
body, with more than 99% bound to plasma proteins (3, 8–19).
Dihydroartemisinin has a smaller volume of distribution and plasma protein binding 
of 44–93%. Elimination of dihydroartemisinin is much more rapid (elimination 
half-life, about 1 h) than that of piperaquine (2–4 weeks) (3, 9, 10, 15).
Table A5.8. Pharmacokinetic parameters of dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine 
in studies of manufacturer-recommended dosages in patients treated for acute 
uncomplicated malaria (range of mean or median values reported). 
Parameter
Dihydroartemisinin
Piperaquine
Cmax (ng/mL)
366–698
71.6–730
Tmax (h)
0.97–2.8
1.48–5.7
AUC0–infinity
0.84–1.95 ng.h/mL
24.1–49.5 µg.h/mL
Day-7 concentration  
(ng/mL)
–
22.7–64
Ka (per h)
–
0.08
Vd/f (L/kg)
1.47–3.59
529–877
Cl/f (L/h per kg)
1.19–2.16
0.85–1.85
Elimination T1/2 
0.85–1.40 h
13.5–28 days
Safety
Adverse events
Overall, dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine was well tolerated in large randomized 
controlled trials. The adverse effects reported included nausea, diarrhoea and 
vomiting, as well as anorexia, anaemia, dizziness, headache, sleep disturbance 
and cough (2, 20–28). 
Although there was no evidence of cardiotoxicity in large randomized trials and 
extensive use of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine, piperaquine does prolong 
the QT interval on electrocardiography (reflecting ventricular repolarization) by 
approximately the same amount as chloroquine (but by less than quinine) (29, 30). 
In a study in healthy volunteers, dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine increased the QTc 
interval by 45.2, 35.5 and 21.0 ms in people who took each dose with a high (~1000 
kcal) or low (~400 kcal) fat/calorie meal and in fasting conditions, respectively; 
none had a QTc interval greater than 500 ms (2). Significant prolongation of the 
QTc interval may cause potentially life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmia, 
but there is no evidence that this has occurred with piperaquine, despite its 
extensive use. 
238
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Contraindications 
Dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine should not be administered to patients with 
known hypersensitivity to either dihydroartemisinin or piperaquine (2). It should 
not be used in patients with congenital QTc prolongation or who have a clinical 
condition or are on medication that results in QTc interval prolongation. 
Cautions
In view of the lack of evidence on the safety of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine 
in patients > 70 years of age, in infants weighing < 5 kg and in patients with renal 
or hepatic impairment, patients in these populations should be monitored closely 
when this combination is administered.
Drug interactions
See Table 5.14.
Dosage recommendations
The previous edition of the WHO Guidelines for the treatment of malaria recommended 
target oral doses of 2–10 mg/kg dihydroartemisinin and 16–26 mg/kg piperaquine 
to be taken daily for 3 days (1). The dosing schedule recommended by the 
manufacturers, however, results in some individuals at the upper end of the 
weight band receiving much lower doses of piperaquine and dihydroartemisinin 
than this target. Furthermore, the weight-adjusted dosage recommendation for 
dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine was the same for all age groups, even though 
their pharmacokinetic parameters do not scale linearly with weight (31). Children 
aged <5 years have higher body weight-adjusted oral clearance of piperaquine 
than other age groups (8,14,33) and therefore have lower exposure to piperaquine, 
placing them at increased risk for treatment failure. 
The WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network analysed pooled data from 
individual patients to determine the influence of dosing schedules on the clinical 
efficacy of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine (32). Twenty-four published and two 
unpublished studies (with a total of 7072 patients) were included in the analysis. 
After correction for reinfection by parasite genotyping, the Kaplan–Meier estimates 
of cure rates were high 97.7% (95% CI, 97.3%–98.1%) at day 42 and 97.2% (95% 
CI 96.7%–97.7%) at day 63. Overall, 28.6% (979/3429) of children aged 1–5 
years received a total dose of piperaquine < 48 mg/kg (the lower limit previously 
recommended by WHO), giving a risk that was 2.3–2.9-fold greater than that of 
other age groups. This sub-optimal dosing was associated with higher treatment 
failure rates at day 63 (94.4%; 95% CI, 92.6–96.2%; p < 0.001). After adjustment for 
confounding factors, the mg/kg bw dose of piperaquine was found to be a significant 
predictor of recrudescence, the risk increasing by 13% (95% CI, 5.0–21%) for every 
5-mg/kg bw decrease in dose (p = 0.002). In a multivariable model, increasing the 
target minimum total dose of piperaquine for children aged 1–5 years from 48 
mg/kg bw to 59 mg/kg bw was predicted to halve the risk for treatment failure 
and was needed to cure more than 95% of these young patients. The increased 
A
5
239
 exposure was not associated with gastrointestinal toxicity in the 10 studies in 
which this could be assessed. 
On the basis of the evidence of sub-optimal dosing of young children, the Mahidol–
Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit performed nonlinear mixed-effects 
population pharmacokinetics modelling in order to inform WHO dosage 
recommendations for ensuring equivalent piperaquine exposure for all target 
populations. Selection of the published models included for simulating the 
target exposure in adult patients (9, 11, 18) was based on use of an appropriate 
structural pharmacokinetic model, sufficient data collection and adequate predictive 
performance. Exposure to piperaquine was then simulated with the population 
pharmacokinetic estimates and between- and within-patient variation reported for 
each of the paediatric data sets available (unpublished data from the WorldWide 
Antimalarial Resistance Network, 8, 19). The results were reported as medians 
and interquartile ranges for day-7 concentrations. Peak concentrations for 1000 
patients were simulated for each body weight. Examples are shown in Figures 
A5.8.1 and A5.8.2. 
240
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Figure A5.8.1. Simulated maximum piperaquine concentrations based on the 
current recommendations of the manufacturer of Eurartesim®, the current 
revised WHO dosing recommendations and population pharmacokinetics 
reported by Tarning et al. (9). The broken horizontal black lines are the 
maximum 75th percentile expected after dosing with the manufacturer-
recommended dose regimen. 
A
5
241
 Figure A5.8.2 Simulated day-7 piperaquine capillary plasma concentrations 
based on the current recommendations of the manufacturer of Eurartesim® 
and the current revised WHO dosing recommendations, using population 
pharmacokinetic parameters reported by Tarning et al. (8). The solid horizontal 
black lines indicate a previously defined therapeutic day-7 concentration (13).
The revised WHO dosage recommendations selected ensure that the piperaquine 
exposure of young children (Cmax, day-7 concentration) is equivalent to that of 
older children and adults, while using as few weight bands as possible and 
minimizing the use of half-tablets. Equivalent exposure in all weight groups is 
achievable with increases in mg/kg bw dosage of up to 20% in those weighing 
<25kg or >80kg; Importantly, this is not predicted to result in higher maximum 
(Cmax) or day-7 concentrations of piperaquine than those already observed in adult 
patients given the doses currently recommmended by the manufacturer. Any further 
simplification of these recommendations will require a prospective study of the 
safety of slightly higher mg/kg doses. 
242
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 References
1. 
  
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Second edition. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2010.
2.   
European Medicines Agency. Eurartesim (dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine) 20 
mg/160 mg and 40 mg/320 mg film-coated tablets: EU summary of product 
characteristics. London (http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_
library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/001199/WC500118113.pdf). 
3.   
Keating GM. Dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine: a review of its use in 
the treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Drugs 
2012;72:937–61. 
4.   
Tarning J. Piperaquine bioanalysis, drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics. 
Göteborg: Göteborg University; 2007.
5.   
Briolant S, Henry M, Oeuvray C, Amalvict R, Baret E, Didillon E, et al. Absence 
of association between piperaquine in vitro responses and polymorphisms 
in the pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfmrp, and pfnhe genes in Plasmodium falciparum. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;54:3537–44. 
6.   
Basco LK, Ringwald P. In vitro activities of piperaquine and other 
4-aminoquinolines against clinical isolates of Plasmodium falciparum in 
Cameroon. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003;47:1391–4. 
7.   
Bray PG, Mungthin M, Ridley RG, Ward SA. Access to hematin: the basis of 
chloroquine resistance. Mol Pharmacol 1998;54:170–9. 
8.   
Tarning J, Zongo I, Some FA, Rouamba N, Parikh S, Rosenthal PJ, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of piperaquine in 
children with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Clin Pharmacol Ther 
2012;91:497–505. 
9.   
Tarning JR, Rijken MJ, McGready R, Phyo AP, Hanpithakpong W, Day NPJ, et 
al. Population pharmacokinetics of dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine in 
pregnant and non-pregnant women with uncomplicated malaria. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother 2012;56:1997–2007.
10.  
Nguyen DV, Nguyen QP, Nguyen ND, Le TT, Nguyen TD, Dinh DN, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics and ex vivo pharmacodynamic antimalarial activity of 
dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine in patients with uncomplicated falciparum 
malaria in Vietnam. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009;53:3534–7. 
11.  
Hoglund RM, Adam I, Hanpithakpong W, Ashton M, Lindegardh N, Day NP, 
et al. A population pharmacokinetic model of piperaquine in pregnant and 
non-pregnant women with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in 
Sudan. Malar J 2012;11:398. 
12.  
Tarning J, Ashley EA, Lindegardh N, Stepniewska K, Phaiphun L, Day NP, 
et al. Population pharmacokinetics of piperaquine after two different 
treatment regimens with dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine in patients with 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Thailand. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2008;52:1052–61. 
13.  
Price RN, Hasugian AR, Ratcliff A, Siswantoro H, Purba HL, Kenangalem E, et 
al. Clinical and pharmacological determinants of the therapeutic response 
to dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine for drug-resistant malaria. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother 2007;51:4090–7. 
A
5
243
 14.  
Hung TY, Davis TM, Ilett KF, Karunajeewa H, Hewitt S, Denis MB, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of piperaquine in adults and children 
with uncomplicated falciparum or vivax malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 
2004;57:253–62. 
15.  
Rijken MJ, McGready R, Phyo AP, Lindegardh N, Tarning J, Laochan N, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine in pregnant and 
nonpregnant women with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother 2011;55:5500–6. 
16.  
Adam I, Tarning J, Lindegardh N, Mahgoub H, McGready R, Nosten F. 
Pharmacokinetics of piperaquine in pregnant women in Sudan with 
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2012;87:35–40. 
17.  
Annerberg A, Lwin KM, Lindegardh N, Khrutsawadchai S, Ashley E, Day NP, et 
al. A small amount of fat does not affect piperaquine exposure in patients 
with malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011;55:3971–6. 
18.  
Tarning J, Lindegardh N, Lwin KM, Annerberg A, Kiricharoen L, Ashley 
E, et al. Population pharmacokinetic assessment of the effect of food 
on piperaquine bioavailability in patients with uncomplicated malaria. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014;58:2052–8.
19.  
Salman S, Page-Sharp M, Batty KT, Kose K, Griffin S, Siba PM, et al. 
Pharmacokinetic comparison of two piperaquine-containing artemisinin 
combination therapies in Papua New Guinean children with uncomplicated 
malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012;56:3288–97.
20.  
Denis MB, Davis TM, Hewitt S, Incardona S, Nimol K, Fandeur T, et al. Efficacy 
and safety of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine (Artekin) in Cambodian 
children and adults with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Clin Infect Dis 
2002;35:1469–76. 
21.  
Gargano N, Ubben D, Tommasini S, Bacchieri A, Corsi M, Bhattacharyya PC, 
et al. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine 
versus artesunate–mefloquine in uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria in India. Malar J 2012;11:233.
22.  
Janssens B, van Herp M, Goubert L, Chan S, Uong S, Nong S, et al. 
A randomized open study to assess the efficacy and tolerability of 
dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine for the treatment of uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria in Cambodia. Trop Med Int Health 2007;12:251–9.
23.  
Karema C, Fanello CI, van Overmeir C, van Geertruyden JP, van Doren W, 
Ngamije D, et al. Safety and efficacy of dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine 
(Artekin) for the treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria 
in Rwandan children. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2006;100:1105–11.
24.  
Mayxay M, Keomany S, Khanthavong M, Souvannasing P, Stepniewska K, 
Khomthilath T, et al. A phase III, randomized, non-inferiority trial to assess 
the efficacy and safety of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine in comparison 
with artesunate–mefloquine in patients with uncomplicated Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria in southern Laos. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:1221–9.
244
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 25.  
Menan H, Faye O, Same-Ekobo A, Oga AS, Faye B, Kiki Barro CP, et al. 
Comparative study of the efficacy and tolerability of dihydroartemisinin–
piperaquine–trimethoprim versus artemether–lumefantrine in the 
treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Cameroon, 
Ivory Coast and Senegal. Malar J 2011;10:185.
26.  
Nambozi M, Van Geertruyden JP, Hachizovu S, Chaponda M, Mukwamataba 
D, Mulenga M, et al. Safety and efficacy of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine 
versus artemether–lumefantrine in the treatment of uncomplicated 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Zambian children. Malar J 2011;10:50.
27.  
Tjitra E, Hasugian AR, Siswantoro H, Prasetyorini B, Ekowatiningsih R, 
Yusnita EA, et al. Efficacy and safety of artemisinin–naphthoquine versus 
dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine in adult patients with uncomplicated 
malaria: a multi-centre study in Indonesia. Malar J 2012;11:153.
28.  
Yavo W, Faye B, Kuete T, Djohan V, Oga SA, Kassi RR, et al. Multicentric 
assessment of the efficacy and tolerability of dihydroartemisinin–
piperaquine compared to artemether–lumefantrine in the treatment of 
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in sub-Saharan Africa.  
Malar J 2011;10:198.
29.  
Bassat Q, Mulenga M, Tinto H, Piola P, Borrmann S, Menendez C, et al. 
Dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine and artemether–lumefantrine for treating 
uncomplicated malaria in African children: a randomised, non-inferiority 
trial. PLoS One 2009;4:e7871. 
30.  
Valecha N, Phyo AP, Mayxay M, Newton PN, Krudsood S, Keomany S, et 
al. An open-label, randomised study of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine 
versus artesunate–mefloquine for falciparum malaria in Asia. PLoS One 
2010;5:e11880. 
31.  
Anderson BJ, Holford NH. Understanding dosing: children are small adults, 
neonates are immature children. Arch Dis Child 2013;98:737–44. 
32.  
The WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network DP Study Group. The effect 
of dosing regimens on the antimalarial efficacy of dihydroartemisinin–
piperaquine: a pooled analysis of individual patient data. PLoS Med 
2013;10:10.1371.
33.  
Sambol NC, Yan L, Creek DJ, McCormack SA, Arinaitwe E, Bigira V, et al. 
Population pharmacokinetics of piperaquine in young Ugandan children 
treated with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for uncomplicated malaria. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015 (in press).
A
5
245
 A5.9 | DOXYCYCLINE
Therapeutic indications 
Doxycycline is indicated for the prophylaxis of malaria. It is also used as co-
treatment with quinine or artesunate as follow-up treatment for severe malaria 
or in combination for uncomplicated falciparum malaria. 
Structure and mechanism of action
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
Doxycycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic 
synthetically derived from oxytetracycline, 
with uses similar to those of tetracycline. 
It is preferred to tetracycline because of its 
longer half-life, more reliable absorption and 
better safety profile in renal insufficiency. 
It is a slow-acting antimalarial drug that 
works by inhibiting protein synthesis 
through disruption of the normal function 
of the apicoplast in malaria parasites (1, 2). 
Molecular mass: 444.4
Pharmacokinetics 
The reported pharmacokinetic parameters of doxycycline are summarized in Table 
A5.9. Doxycycline is highly lipophilic and is rapidly and almost completely absorbed 
after oral administration. While the absorption of tetracyclines is known to be 
affected by the ingestion of food, that of doxycycline is not markedly changed. 
As milk significantly reduces absorption and the peak plasma concentrations of 
doxycycline, it should not be administered with milk or other dairy products.
Doxycycline is widely distributed in body fluids and tissues, including bone marrow, 
breast milk, liver and spleen, and it crosses the placenta. It is approximately 
90% bound to plasma proteins. Like other tetracycline compounds, it undergoes 
enterohepatic recirculation, which slows clearance. Excretion occurs primarily 
through chelation in the gastrointestinal tract and to a much lesser extent via 
renal elimination (3–22). The elimination half-life of doxycycline is not affected by 
impaired renal function, renal failure or haemodialysis. Therefore, dose adjustment 
is not warranted for patients with renal impairment. 
246
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Table A5.9. Pharmacokinetic parameters of doxycycline in studies of it’s use for 
prophylaxis or treatment of malaria (range of mean or median values reported). 
Parameter
Doxycycline
Cmax (µg/mL)
3.06–6.90
Tmax (h)
1.5–6.0
AUC (µg.h/mL)
39.0–108.4
Elimination T1/2 (h)
8.8–22.4
Cl/f (mL/h per kg)
29.5–112.0
Vd/f (L/kg)
0.75–1.83
Ka (per h)
0.26–1.03
In patients with malnutrition, doxycycline clearance is increased and total exposure 
to the drug is reduced; however, the plasma concentration remains within the 
therapeutic range (16). Therefore, dose adjustment is not warranted. 
Safety
Adverse effects
Doxycycline has side-effects similar to those of other tetracyclines (4). Gastrointestinal 
effects, such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea, are common, especially with higher 
doses, and are due to mucosal irritation. Oral doxycycline should be administered 
with food if gastrointestinal upset occurs. Dry mouth, glossitis, stomatitis, dysphagia 
and oesophageal ulceration have also been reported. The incidence of oesophageal 
irritation can be reduced by administration of doxycycline with a full glass of water. 
Tetracyclines, including doxycycline, discolour teeth and cause enamel hypoplasia 
in young children. Tetracyclines are deposited in deciduous and permanent teeth 
during their formation and in calcifying areas in bone and nails; they interfere 
with bone growth in fetuses and young infants.
Other reported side-effects are enterocolitis and inflammatory lesions in the 
ano-genital region, candidal vaginitis, skin reactions such as maculopapular and 
erythematous rashes, exfoliative dermatitis and photosensitivity. Patients should 
be warned to avoid excessive exposure to the sun while taking doxycycline.
Hypersensitivity reactions such as urticaria, angioneurotic oedema, anaphylaxis, 
anaphylactoid purpura, pericarditis and exacerbation of systemic lupus erythematosus 
may occur. Severe adverse effects are rare; they include benign intracranial 
hypertension in adults and haematological abnormalities such as haemolytic 
anaemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia and eosinophilia. Thrombophlebitis has 
been reported with prolonged intravenous administration.
A
5
247
 Contraindications
Doxycycline is contraindicated in individuals with known hypersensitivity to 
tetracyclines. It is also contraindicated in pregnancy and in children < 8 years (2, 
4, 23). Fatal liver necrosis has been reported with doxycycline use in pregnancy. 
In addition, doxycycline crosses the placenta and may cause discoloration of 
teeth and possible bone growth retardation in the fetus. Doxycycline use is not 
advocated for children < 8 years in whom the teeth are still developing because 
of the possibility of permanent tooth discoloration and bone growth retardation.
Caution
Doxycycline should be used with caution in patients with gastric or intestinal 
diseases such as colitis, who may be at greater risk for pseudomembranous colitis. 
Caution is advised in administering doxycycline to patients with established 
systemic lupus erythematosus, as it might worsen their condition. Drug interactions: 
See Table 5.14.
References 
1.   
Dahl EL, Shock JL, Shenai BR, Gut J, DeRisi JL, Rosenthal PJ. Tetracyclines 
specifically target the apicoplast of the malaria parasite Plasmodium 
falciparum. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006;50:3124–31. 
2.   
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Second edition. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2010.
3.   
Cunha BA, Sibley CM, Ristuccia AM. Doxycycline. Ther Drug Monit 
1982;4:115–35. 
4.   
Tan KR, Magill AJ, Parise ME, Arguin PM. Doxycycline for malaria 
chemoprophylaxis and treatment: report from the CDC expert meeting on 
malaria chemoprophylaxis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2011;84:517–31. 
5.   
Welling PG, Koch PA, Lau CC, Craig WA. Bioavailability of tetracycline and 
doxycycline in fasted and nonfasted subjects. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1977;11:462–9. 
6.   
Meyer FP, Specht H, Quednow B, Walther H. Influence of milk on the 
bioavailability of doxycycline—new aspects. Infection 1989;17:245–6. 
7.   
Beringer PM, Owens H, Nguyen A, Benitez D, Rao A, D’Argenio DZ. 
Pharmacokinetics of doxycycline in adults with cystic fibrosis. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother 2012;56:70–4. 
8.   
Binh VQ, Chinh NT, Thanh NX, Cuong BT, Quang NN, Dai B, et al. Sex affects 
the steady-state pharmacokinetics of primaquine but not doxycycline in 
healthy subjects. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009;81:747–53. 
9.   
Bocker R, Muhlberg W, Platt D, Estler CJ. Serum level, half-life and apparent 
volume of distribution of doxycycline in geriatric patients. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 1986;30:105–8. 
10.  
Couet W, Laroche R, Floch JJ, Istin B, Fourtillan JB, Sauniere JF. 
Pharmacokinetics of quinine and doxycycline in patients with acute 
248
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 falciparum malaria: a study in Africa. Ther Drug Monit 1991;13:496–501. 
11.  
Garraffo A, Dellamonica P, Fournier JP, Lapalus P, Bernard E. The effect of 
rifampicin on the pharmacokinetics of doxycycline. Infection 1988;16:297–8. 
12.  
Gschwend MH, Martin W, Erenmemisoglu A, Scherm M, Dilger C, Tamur U, et 
al. Pharmacokinetics and bioequivalence study of doxycycline capsules in 
healthy male subjects. Arzneimittelforschung 2007;57:347–51. 
13.  
Houin G, Brunner F, Nebout T, Cherfaoui M, Lagrue G, Tillement JP. 
The effects of chronic renal insufficiency on the pharmacokinetics of 
doxycycline in man. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1983;16:245–52. 
14.  
Nayak VK, Desai NK, Kshirsagar NA, Bhandarkar SD, Satoskar RS. Antipyrine 
and doxycycline pharmacokinetics in patients with thyroid disorders. J 
Postgrad Med 1991;37:5–8. 
15.  
Newton PN, Chaulet JF, Brockman A, Chierakul W, Dondorp A, 
Ruangveerayuth R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral doxycycline during 
combination treatment of severe falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2005;49:1622–5. 
16.  
Raghuram TC, Krishnaswamy K. Pharmacokinetics and plasma steady state 
levels of doxycycline in undernutrition. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1982;14:785–9. 
17.  
Saano V, Paronen P, Peura P. Bioavailability of doxycycline from dissolved 
doxycycline hydrochloride tablets—comparison to solid form hydrochloride 
tablets and dissolved monohydrate tablets. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 
Toxicol 1990;28:471–4. 
18.  
Saivin S, Houin G. Clinical pharmacokinetics of doxycycline and minocycline. 
Clin Pharmacokin 1988;15:355–66. 
19.  
Saux MC, Mosser J, Pontagnier H, Leng B. Pharmacokinetics of doxycycline 
polyphosphate after oral multiple dosing in humans. Eur J Drug Metab 
Pharmacokin 1982;7:123–30. 
20.  
Shmuklarsky MJ, Boudreau EF, Pang LW, Smith JI, Schneider I, Fleckenstein 
L, et al. Failure of doxycycline as a causal prophylactic agent against 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in healthy nonimmune volunteers. Ann 
Intern Med 1994;120:294–9. 
21.  
Venho VM, Salonen RO, Mattila MJ. Modification of the pharmacokinetics of 
doxycycline in man by ferrous sulphate or charcoal. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
1978;14:277–80. 
22.  
Whelton A, Schach von Wittenau M, Twomey TM, Walker WG, Bianchine JR. 
Doxycycline pharmacokinetics in the absence of renal function. Kidney Int 
1974;5:365–71. 
23.  
Wenk RE, Gebhardt FC, Bhagavan BS, Lustgarten JA, McCarthy EF. 
Tetracycline-associated fatty liver of pregnancy, including possible 
pregnancy risk after chronic dermatologic use of tetracycline. J Reprod Med 
1981;26:135–41. 
A
5
249
 A5.10 | MEFLOQUINE
Therapeutic indications
Mefloquine is indicated for the chemoprophylaxis of malaria caused by all 
species. In combination with artesunate, it is also recommended for treatment of 
uncomplicated malaria.
Structure and mechanism of action
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Molecular mass: 378.3
Mefloquine, a 4-methanolquinoline, is structurally 
related to quinine and belongs to the aryl amino-
alcohol group of drugs (1). Mefloquine has two 
racemic forms, erythro- and threo-, each composed 
of a pair of enantiomers, of which the racemic 
mixture of the erythro- enantiomers is the most 
active against malaria parasites (1). Its mechanism 
of action is not fully understood but is thought to 
involve inhibition of parasite-mediated haem 
detoxification, a common mechanism of action of 
quinoline antimalarials. A more recent proposal is 
that it inhibits endocytosis of the cytosol by the 
parasite (2). Mefloquine has approximately the same stage specificity of action as 
quinine, killing primarily the large ring and trophozoite asexual parasites. It has 
no significant pre-erythrocytic activity. 
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters of mefloquine used with artesunate for the 
treatment of uncomplicated malaria and for chemoprophylaxis in healthy subjects 
(3–23) are summarised in Table A5.10. 
250
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Table A5.10. Pharmacokinetic parameters of mefloquine in studies of currently 
recommended dosages when used for prophylaxis or treatment of acute 
malaria (range of mean or median values reported). 
Parameter
Prophylaxis
Treatment
Cmax (ng/mL)
722–2259
1000–3279
Tmax (h)
4.5–31
15–72
Elimination T1/2 (days)
1.03–19.1
8.1–15.2
AUC0–infinity (µg/mL.days)
15.6–48.0
12.8–63.6
Cl/f (L/h per kg)
0.016–0.095
0.016–0.174
Vd/f (L/kg)
1011–1460
7.87–31.8
Inter-individual differences in absorption result in different times to reach maximum 
concentrations. The pharmacokinetic parameters of mefloquine are altered in 
malaria: patients with malaria have higher plasma concentrations and eliminate 
mefloquine more rapidly than healthy volunteers, possibly because of interruption 
of entero-hepatic cycling (24). The pharmacokinitic parameters of mefloquine are 
also highly stereospecific (3–5). Mefloquine is extensively distributed in the body; 
it crosses the blood–brain-barrier and the placenta and is found in breast milk 
(21). It accumulates in erythrocytes, with an erythrocyte-to-plasma ratio of about 
2:1 (24). Approximately 98.2% of mefloquine is bound to protein. In the liver, it is 
metabolized by CYP3A4, largely to an inactive metabolite (24). Mefloquine has 
a long elimination half-life (≤ 3 weeks). Excretion occurs primarily via the bile 
and faeces as unchanged drug and metabolites, with a small proportion excreted 
unchanged in the urine.
While mefloquine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of dihydroartemisinin, 
concomitant administration of artesunate decreases the maximum concentration 
and increases the clearance rate and volume of distribution of mefloquine (6, 24). 
Delaying the dose of mefloquine to the second day of artesunate administration 
increases its estimated oral bioavailability substantially, probably as an indirect 
effect of rapid clinical improvement (10). Administration with food does not alter 
the kinetics of artesunate–mefloquine (10, 17).
The pharmacokinitic parameters of mefloquine are similar in children and adults 
(4, 23). Peak mefloquine concentrations in whole blood are lower during pregnancy 
than in non-pregnant individuals (8, 21). As the overall efficacy of the drug does 
not appear to be affected, however, dosage adjustment is not warranted for 
pregnant women.
A
5
251
 Safety
Adverse events
Although mefloquine is associated with higher incidences of central nervous system 
and gastrointestinal adverse effects than other ACTs, it is generally well tolerated 
when given in combination with artesunate for the treatment of uncomplicated 
malaria. Mefloquine has been associated with seizures, anxiety, irritability, dizziness, 
paranoia, suicidal ideation, depression, hallucinations and violence in patients 
treated for malaria and in people on long-term mefloquine prophylaxis (20, 24–31). 
Such neuropsychiatric adverse effects generally resolve after discontinuation of 
mefloquine. The estimated incidence of seizures, encephalopathy or psychotic 
reactions ranges from 1 in 10 000 healthy people receiving chemoprophylaxis, 
1 in 1000 malaria patients in Asia, 1 in 200 malaria patients in Africa to 1 in 20 
patients recovering from cerebral malaria. Mefloquine should therefore not be 
given to patients who have had cerebral malaria. Mefloquine prophylaxis should be 
avoided in travellers who require fine motor coordination or in whom sudden onset 
of dizziness or confusion may be hazardous, such as pilots and drivers. Travellers 
and their companions should be advised to monitor for adverse effects such as 
restlessness, anxiety, depression or confusion, and, if these occur, to discontinue 
mefloquine and seek medical attention. 
The most frequently reported adverse effect with treatment is vomiting or 
gastrointestinal disturbances, which tend to affect adherence and efficacy. Early 
vomiting was a predictor of treatment failure in patients given mefloquine for 
uncomplicated malaria (32). Mefloquine has been associated rarely with hepatitis, 
polyneuropathy, thrombocytopenia, pneumonia, skin rashes or irritation, sinus 
bradycardia and visual impairment (33–42). Adverse events appear to be associated 
with high concentrations of the (–)-enantiomer rather than of the drug overall 
and to be more frequent in women than men (20, 43).
Contraindications 
Mefloquine is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to mefloquine 
or related compounds (e.g. quinine and quinidine). It should not be prescribed 
for follow-up treatment after cerebral malaria or for prophylaxis in patients with 
active depression, a recent history of depression, generalized anxiety disorder, 
psychosis, schizophrenia or another major psychiatric disorder, or with epilepsy 
or a history of convulsions (24).
Caution
Given the lack of evidence on the safety of mefloquine in severe hepatic impairment, 
such patients should be monitored carefully because of a potential increase in the 
risk for adverse events. Clinical trials show no or only small, clinically insignificant 
alterations in the electrocardiogram after administration of mefloquine (39, 44); 
however, caution should be exrecised in administering mefloquine to patients 
with cardiac disease.
252
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 The teratogenic and embryotoxic effects of mefloquine observed in experimental 
animals and the high rate of spontaneous abortions seen in one small study of 
mefloquine prophylaxis in pregnant women (45) have raised concern about the 
safety of mefloquine in pregnancy. Large clinical studies have not, however, revealed 
such adverse outcomes, allaying concern that mefloquine might be associated 
with stillbirth (46–48). Prophylactic doses of mefloquine in the second and third 
trimesters of pregnancy also appear to be effective and are not associated with 
adverse maternal or fetal outcomes (49, 50). However, gastrointestinal side-effects, 
including nausea and vomiting, are more common in pregnant women treated 
with mefloquine than those treated with SP (29). 
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
Dose optimization
For the treatment of uncomplicated malaria in combination with artesunate, 
the recommended total dose of mefloquine is 25 mg/kg bw, which gives a higher 
cure rate than the previously recommended dose of 15 mg/kg bw. A pharmacokinetics 
model predicted that initial use of the lower (15-mg/kg bw) dose of mefloquine 
resulted in a greater likelihood of selecting resistant mutants than de novo use 
of the higher (25-mg/kg bw) dose (51). Giving mefloquine in two or three doses 
improves its tolerability and oral bioavailability. The fixed-dose combination of 
artesunate + mefloquine given daily for 3 days is preferred.
References
1.   
Dassonville-Klimpt A, Jonet A, Pillon M, Mullié C, Sonnet P. Mefloquine 
derivatives: synthesis, mechanisms of action, antimicrobial activities. In: 
Mendez-Vilas A, editor. Science against microbial pathogens: communicating 
current research and technological advances. Badajoz: Formatex Research 
Center; 2011:23–35.
2.   
Hoppe HC, van Schalkwyk DA, Wiehart UI, Meredith SA, Egan J, Weber BW. 
Antimalarial quinolines and artemisinin inhibit endocytosis in Plasmodium 
falciparum. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004;48:2370–8. 
3.   
Gimenez F, Pennie RA, Koren G, Crevoisier C, Wainer IW, Farinotti R. 
Stereoselective pharmacokinetics of mefloquine in healthy Caucasians after 
multiple doses. J Pharm Sci 1994;83:824–7. 
4.   
Bourahla A, Martin C, Gimenez F, Singhasivanon V, Attanath P, Sabchearon A, 
et al. Stereoselective pharmacokinetics of mefloquine in young children. Eur J 
Clin Pharmacol 1996;50:241–4.
5.   
Svensson US, Alin H, Karlsson MO, Bergqvist Y, Ashton M. Population 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modelling of artemisinin and 
mefloquine enantiomers in patients with falciparum malaria. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 2002;58:339–51. 
A
5
253
 6.   
Lefevre G, Bindschedler M, Ezzet F, Schaeffer N, Meyer I, Thomsen MS. 
Pharmacokinetic interaction trial between co-artemether and mefloquine. 
Eur J Pharm Sci 2000;10:141–51. 
7.   
Looareesuwan S, White NJ, Warrell DA, Forgo I, Dubach UG, Ranalder UB, et 
al. Studies of mefloquine bioavailability and kinetics using a stable isotope 
technique: a comparison of Thai patients with falciparum malaria and 
healthy Caucasian volunteers. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1987;24:37–42.
8.   
Nosten F, Karbwang J, White NJ, Honeymoon, Na Bangchang K, Bunnag D, 
et al. Mefloquine antimalarial prophylaxis in pregnancy: dose finding and 
pharmacokinetic study. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990;30:79–85. 
9.   
Crevoisier CA, Joseph I, Fischer M, Graf H. Influence of hemodialysis on 
plasma concentration–time profiles of mefloquine in two patients with end-
stage renal disease: a prophylactic drug monitoring study. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 1995;39:1892–5. 
10.  
Hellgren U, Berggren-Palme I, Bergqvist Y, Jerling M. Enantioselective 
pharmacokinetics of mefloquine during long-term intake of the 
prophylactic dose. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1997;44:119–24. 
11.  
Khaliq Y, Gallicano K, Tisdale C, Carignan G, Cooper C, McCarthy A. 
Pharmacokinetic interaction between mefloquine and ritonavir in healthy 
volunteers. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2001;51:591–600. 
12.  
Charles BG, Blomgren A, Nasveld PE, Kitchener SJ, Jensen A, Gregory RM, 
et al. Population pharmacokinetics of mefloquine in military personnel for 
prophylaxis against malaria infection during field deployment. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 2007;63:271–8. 
13.  
Bindschedler M, Lefevre G, Ezzet F, Schaeffer N, Meyer I, Thomsen MS. 
Cardiac effects of co-artemether (artemether/lumefantrine) and mefloquine 
given alone or in combination to healthy volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
2000;56:375–81. 
14.  
Karbwang J, Bangchang KN, Supapojana A, Bunnag D, Harinasuta T. 
Pharmacokinetics of prophylactic mefloquine in Thai healthy volunteers. 
Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 1991;22:68–71. 
15.  
Karbwang J, Na Bangchang K, Back DJ, Bunnag D. Effect of ampicillin 
on mefloquine pharmacokinetics in Thai males. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
1991;40:631–3. 
16.  
Karbwang J, Na Bangchang K, Back DJ, Bunnag D, Rooney W. Effect of 
tetracycline on mefloquine pharmacokinetics in Thai males. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 1992;43:567–9. 
17.  
Karbwang J, White NJ. Clinical pharmacokinetics of mefloquine. Clin 
Pharmacokin 1990;19:264–79. 
18.  
Kollaritsch H, Karbwang J, Wiedermann G, Mikolasek A, Na-Bangchang K, 
Wernsdorfer WH. Mefloquine concentration profiles during prophylactic 
dose regimens. Wien Klin Wochenschr 2000;112:441–7. 
19.  
Todd GD, Hopperus Buma AP, Green MD, Jaspers CA, Lobel HO. Comparison 
of whole blood and serum levels of mefloquine and its carboxylic acid 
metabolite. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1997;57:399–402. 
20.  
Schwartz E, Potasman I, Rotenberg M, Almog S, Sadetzki S. Serious adverse 
events of mefloquine in relation to blood level and gender. Am J Trop Med 
Hyg 2001;65:189–92. 
254
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 21.  
Na Bangchang K, Davis TM, Looareesuwan S, White NJ, Bunnag D, Karbwang 
J. Mefloquine pharmacokinetics in pregnant women with acute falciparum 
malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1994;88:321–3. 
22.  
Ashley EA, Stepniewska K, Lindegardh N, McGready R, Hutagalung R, Hae 
R, et al. Population pharmacokinetic assessment of a new regimen of 
mefloquine used in combination treatment of uncomplicated falciparum 
malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006;50:2281–5. 
23.  
Nosten F, ter Kuile F, Chongsuphajaisiddhi T, Na Bangchang K, Karbwang 
J, White NJ. Mefloquine pharmacokinetics and resistance in children with 
acute falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1991;31:556–9. 
24.  
Roche. Lariam product information.
25.  
Tine RC, Faye B, Sylla K, Ndiaye JL, Ndiaye M, Sow D, et al. Efficacy and 
tolerability of a new formulation of artesunate–mefloquine for the 
treatment of uncomplicated malaria in adult in Senegal: open randomized 
trial. Malar J 2012;11:416. 
26.  
van Riemsdijk MM, Sturkenboom MC, Pepplinkhuizen L, Stricker BH. 
Mefloquine increases the risk of serious psychiatric events during travel 
abroad: a nationwide case–control study in the Netherlands. J Clin 
Psychiatry 2005;66:199–204. 
27.  
Fuller SJ, Naraqi S, Gilessi G. Paranoid psychosis related to mefloquine 
antimalarial prophylaxis. Papua New Guinea Med J 2002;45:219–21. 
28.  
Bregani ER, Tien TV, Figini G. Mefloquine-induced grand mal seizure in 
tubercular meningitis. Panminerva Med 1998;40:345–6. 
29.  
Briand V, Bottero J, Noel H, Masse V, Cordel H, Guerra J, et al. Intermittent 
treatment for the prevention of malaria during pregnancy in Benin: 
a randomized, open-label equivalence trial comparing sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine with mefloquine. J Infect Dis 2009;200:991–1001. 
30.  
ter Kuile FO, Nosten F, Luxemburger C, Kyle D, Teja-Isavatharm P, Phaipun L, 
et al. Mefloquine treatment of acute falciparum malaria: a prospective study 
of non-serious adverse effects in 3673 patients. Bull World Health Organ 
1995;73:631–42. 
31.  
Gosling RD, Gesase S, Mosha JF, Carneiro I, Hashim R, Lemnge M, et 
al. Protective efficacy and safety of three antimalarial regimens for 
intermittent preventive treatment for malaria in infants: a randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2009;374:1521–32. 
32.  
ter Kuile FO, Luxemburger C, Nosten F, Thwai KL, Chongsuphajaisiddhi T, 
White NJ. Predictors of mefloquine treatment failure: a prospective study 
of 1590 patients with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Trans R Soc Trop 
Med Hyg 1995;89:660–4. 
33.  
Chester AC, Sandroni P. Case report: peripheral polyneuropathy and 
mefloquine prophylaxis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2011;85:1008–9. 
34.  
Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Rotelli C, Giacosa R, Parenti E, Cabassi A, et al. 
Thrombotic–thrombocytopenic purpura following malaria prophylaxis with 
mefloquine. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006;57:160–1. 
35.  
Gotsman I, Azaz-Livshits T, Fridlender Z, Muszkat M, Ben-Chetrit E. 
Mefloquine-induced acute hepatitis. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:1517–9. 
A
5
255
 36.  
Grieco A, Vecchio FM, Natale L, Gasbarrini G. Acute fatty liver after malaria 
prophylaxis with mefloquine. Lancet 1999;353:295–6. 
37.  
Jha S, Kumar R, Kumar R. Mefloquine toxicity presenting with 
polyneuropathy—a report of two cases in India. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
2006;100:594–6. 
38.  
Katsenos S, Psathakis K, Nikolopoulou MI, Constantopoulos SH. Mefloquine-
induced eosinophilic pneumonia. Pharmacotherapy 2007;27:1767–71. 
39.  
Laothavorn P, Karbwang J, Na Bangchang K, Bunnag D, Harinasuta T. 
Effect of mefloquine on electrocardiographic changes in uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria patients. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 
1992;23:51–4. 
40.  
Pace JL. Psoriasis triggered by mefloquine. Skinmed 2010;8:301–2. 
41.  
Soentjens P, Delanote M, Van Gompel A. Mefloquine-induced pneumonitis. J 
Travel Med 2006;13:172–4. 
42.  
Udry E, Bailly F, Dusmet M, Schnyder P, Lemoine R, Fitting JW. Pulmonary 
toxicity with mefloquine. Eur Resp J 2001;18:890–2. 
43.  
Fletcher A, Di Shepherd R. Use of (+)-mefloquine for the treatment of 
malaria. Patent no. WO 1998039003 AI, 6 March 1998.
44.  
Krudsood S, Looareesuwan S, Wilairatama P, Leowattana W, Tangpukdee N, 
Chalermrut K, et al. Effect of artesunate and mefloquine in combination 
on the Fridericia corrected QT intervals in Plasmodium falciparum infected 
adults from Thailand. Trop Med Int Health 2011;16:458–65.
45.  
Smoak BL, Writer JV, Keep LW, Cowan J, Chantelois JL. The effects of 
inadvertent exposure of mefloquine chemoprophylaxis on pregnancy 
outcomes and infants of US Army servicewomen. J Infect Dis 1997;176:831–3. 
46.  
Phillips-Howard PA, Steffen R, Kerr L, Vanhauwere B, Schildknecht J, Fuchs 
E, et al. Safety of mefloquine and other antimalarial agents in the first 
trimester of pregnancy. J Travel Med 1998;5:121–6. 
47.  
Vanhauwere B, Maradit H, Kerr L. Post-marketing surveillance of 
prophylactic mefloquine (Lariam) use in pregnancy. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1998;58:17–21. 
48.  
Steketee RW, Wirima JJ, Slutsker L, Khoromana CO, Heymann DL, Breman 
JG. Malaria treatment and prevention in pregnancy: indications for use and 
adverse events associated with use of chloroquine or mefloquine. Am J Trop 
Med Hyg 1996;55(Suppl 1):50–6. 
49.  
Nosten F, ter Kuile F, Maelankiri L, Chongsuphajaisiddhi T, Nopdonrattakoon 
L, Tangkitchot S, et al. Mefloquine prophylaxis prevents malaria during 
pregnancy: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Infect Dis 
1994;169:595–603. 
50.  
Adam I, Ali DA, Alwaseila A, Kheir MM, Elbashir MI. Mefloquine in the 
treatment of falciparum malaria during pregnancy in eastern Sudan. Saudi 
Med J 2004;25:1400–2.
51.  
Simpson JA, Watkins ER, Price RN, Aarons L, Kyle DE, White NJ. Mefloquine 
pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic models: implications for dosing and 
resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000;44:3414–24. 
256
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A5.11 | PRIMAQUINE
Therapeutic indications
Primaquine is indicated for radical cure of P. vivax or P. ovale malaria; for presumptive 
anti-relapse therapy (terminal prophylaxis) in people extensively exposed to P. vivax 
or P. ovale; to reduce onward transmission of P. falciparum malaria in programmes to 
eliminate P. falciparum malaria and in areas threatened by resistance of P. falciparum 
to artemisinins; and as an alternative for primary prophylaxis against all malaria 
species. 
Except in primary prophylaxis, primaquine is used in conjunction with an effective 
blood schizonticide: either ACT, or chloroquine for vivax or ovale malaria.
Structure and mechanism of action
Primaquine is an 8-aminoquinoline, which is highly active against the exoerythrocytic 
forms (hypnozoites) and the sexual stages of malaria parasites (gametocytes). It has 
weak activity against the asexual blood stages of P. vivax and has negligible activity 
against P. falciparum. Although P. falciparum gametocyte clearance takes days, 
gametocytes are sterilized within hours; therefore, the effect of primaquine on 
oocyst and sporozoite formation (and thus onward transmission of the treated 
infection) precedes its effect on gametocyte carriage (1). 
 
Hepatic metabolism of primaquine produces 
reactive intermediate metabolites that generate 
toxic intracellular oxidative species. The parent 
compound itself is relatively inactive. The precise 
mechanism of action of primaquine is not fully 
understood, but it is thought that the reactive 
intermediates disrupt the metabolic processes 
of plasmodial mitochondria and interfere with 
electron transport in the parasite (2, 3). There 
is no evidence for acquired resistance to its 
hypnozoitocidal or gametocytocidal activities.
Pharmacokinetics
Primaquine is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, reaching peak 
concentrations within 1–4 h, with a bioavailability of about 96% (4). Primaquine 
is biotransformed by two main routes: by monoamine oxidase to the predominant, 
but inactive, metabolite carboxyprimaquine, which is relatively slowly eliminated; 
and via CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 in the liver, which generate the reactive 
intermediates responsible for antimalarial effects and haemolytic toxicity (5–7). 
Genetic polymorphisms that decrease CYP2D6 enzyme activity reduce bioactivation 
of primaquine and may result in treatment failure. Primaquine is extensively 
distributed in the body. About 75% of primaquine in plasma is bound to proteins, 
CI
N
HN
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CI
N
N
OH
HN
CH3
CH3
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
Molecular mass: 259.4
A
5
257
 and high concentrations occur in erythrocytes. Primaquine crosses the placenta, 
but it is uncertain whether significant amounts occur in breast milk (8). 
Both primaquine and carboxyprimaquine are excreted mainly through the biliary 
tract and can be found in faeces within 24 h of administration (8). Primaquine is also 
excreted in the urine as unchanged drug. Conflicting results have been reported 
on the effects of gender on the disposition of primaquine, some studies reporting 
increased exposure and hence greater side-effects in women and others reporting 
no effect of gender (9–11). In view of the relatively small samples in each of these 
studies, the findings should be interpreted cautiously. The pharmacokinetics of a 
single oral dose of 15 mg did not appear to be altered in patients with severely 
impaired renal function and end-stage renal dysfunction (12).
The pharmacokinetic parameters of primaquine are summarized in Table A5.11 
(4, 7, 9–18).
Table A5.11. pharmacokinetic parameters of primaquine and carboxyprimaquine 
in studies in healthy volunteers and patients (range of mean or median values 
reported). 
Parameter
Primaquine
Carboxyprimaquine
Cmax (ng/mL)
65–295
343–2409
Tmax (h)
1.8–4.0
4–8
Elimination T (h)
3.5–8.0
15.7–16.9
AUC (ng.h/mL)
443–1978
3831–47 085
Cl/f (L/h per kg)
0.31–1.19
–
Vd/f (L/kg)
2.92–7.94
–
Safety
Adverse events
While primaquine is generally well tolerated, it may cause dose-related 
gastrointestinal discomfort, including abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting 
(19–22). Administration with food improves tolerability. Hypertension and cardiac 
arrhythmia have been reported rarely. The most important adverse effect is 
haemolysis in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, 
and the degree of haemolysis is proportional to the dose, duration of exposure, 
and degree of G6PD deficiency. Leukopenia, methaemoglobinaemia with cyanosis 
and granulocytopenia may also occur. Fortunately, primaquine is eliminated rapidly, 
so that haemolysis stops once the drug is stopped. Patients should discontinue 
primaquine if they pass red or black urine, or have symptomatic anaemia. 
258
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Contraindications 
Primaquine is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to primaquine 
or related compounds and in patients with severe G6PD deficiency or severe 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) methaemoglobin reductase deficiency. 
Primaquine crosses the placenta and may cause haemolysis in a G6PD-deficient 
fetus; it is therefore not recommended for use during pregnancy or during 
breastfeeding unless the G6PD status of the infant is known. Use of primaquine 
in infants < 6 months is not advised because of lack of data on its safety.
Caution
The different variants of G6PD deficiency are associated with significantly different 
risks for haemolysis. The African A– variant is at the less severe end of the spectrum 
of severity, and the Mediterranean variant (which predominates in southern Europe, 
the Middle East and Central Asia) is at the more severe end (23). Administration 
of a single dose of 0.25 mg base/kg bw as a gametocytocide is considered to 
confer no significant haemolytic risk in people with any of the variants; therefore, 
testing for GDPD deficiency is not required before this single dose administration. 
The regimens necessary for radical cure may, however, cause significant, occasionally 
life-threatening haemolyisis in G6PD-deficient patients; therefore, testing for G6PD 
deficiency is recommended before radical cure regimens. Unfortunately, testing is 
not widely available, so an individual decision on whether to prescribe radical a 
curative regimen depends on an assessment of the potential risks of haemolytic 
toxicity and the benefits of preventing relapse. This assessment must be based on 
knowledge of the prevalence and severity of G6PD deficiency in the patient’s ethnic 
group and the risks and impact of vivax relapse in the area. Caution is also advised 
in treating patients with systemic diseases associated with an increased risk for 
granulocytopenia, such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
Dose optimization
The dosages recommended for radical cure of P. vivax or P. ovale malaria, presumptive 
anti-relapse therapy (0.25 mg base/kg bw per day for 14 days for “temperate strain 
infections” and 0.50 mg base/kg bw per day for 14 days for tropical, frequently 
relapsing infections) and primary prophylaxis (0.5 mg/kg bw base up to maximum 
oral dose of 30 mg daily) remain unchanged. WHO now recommends a single, 
low dose (0.25 mg/kg bw) to reduce onward transmission of P. falciparum malaria in 
programmes to eliminate P. falciparum malaria and in areas threatened by resistance 
of P. falciparum to artemisinins (24). This lower dose is safer and was considered 
to be as effective in reducing transmissibility on the basis of the limited available 
A
5
259
 data from assessments of direct transmission blocking in mosquito feeding studies, 
which is considered therapeutically more relevant than gametocyte clearance (1, 
25–27). The feasibility of achieving this lower dosage in young children would be 
enhanced by the availability of a pre-qualified 3.75-mg primaquine tablet. 
References
1.   
Recht J, Ashley EA, White NJ. Safety of 8-aminoquinoline antimalarial 
medicines. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.who.int/
malaria/publications/atoz/9789241506977/en/).
2.   
Hill DR, Baird JK, Parise ME, Lewis LS, Ryan ET, Magill AJ. Primaquine: report 
from CDC expert meeting on malaria chemoprophylaxis I. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2006;75:402–15. 
3.   
Hiebsch RR, Raub TJ, Wattenberg BW. Primaquine blocks transport by 
inhibiting the formation of functional transport vesicles. Studies in a cell-
free assay of protein transport through the Golgi apparatus. J Biol Chem 
1991;266:20323–8. 
4.   
Mihaly GW, Ward SA, Edwards G, Nicholl DD, Orme ML, Breckenridge 
AM. Pharmacokinetics of primaquine in man. I. Studies of the absolute 
bioavailability and effects of dose size. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1985;19:745–50. 
5.   
Ganesan S, Tekwani BL, Sahu R, Tripathi LM, Walker LA. Cytochrome P(450)-
dependent toxic effects of primaquine on human erythrocytes. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 2009;241:14–22. 
6.   
Pybus BS, Marcsisin SR, Jin X, Deye G, Sousa JC, Li Q, et al. The metabolism 
of primaquine to its active metabolite is dependent on CYP 2D6. Malar J 
2013;12:212. 
7.   
Hanboonkunupakarn B, Ashley EA, Jittamala P, Tarning J, Pukrittayakamee S, 
Hanpithakpong W, et al. An open-label crossover study of primaquine and 
dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine pharmacokinetics in healthy adult Thai 
subjects. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014;58:7340–6.
8.   
Clark AM, Baker JK, McChesney JD. Excretion, distribution, and metabolism of 
primaquine in rats. J Pharm Sci 1984;73:502–6. 
9.   
Binh VQ, Chinh NT, Thanh NX, Cuong BT, Quang NN, Dai B, et al. Sex affects 
the steady-state pharmacokinetics of primaquine but not doxycycline in 
healthy subjects. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009;81:747–53. 
10.  
Cuong BT, Binh VQ, Dai B, Duy DN, Lovell CM, Rieckmann KH, et al. Does 
gender, food or grapefruit juice alter the pharmacokinetics of primaquine in 
healthy subjects? Br J Clin Pharmacol 2006;61:682–9. 
11.  
Elmes NJ, Bennett SM, Abdalla H, Carthew TL, Edstein MD. Lack of sex effect 
on the pharmacokinetics of primaquine. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2006;74:951–2. 
12.  
Kulkarni SP, Shah SR, Kadam PP, Sridharan K, Hase NK, Shetty PP, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of single-dose primaquine in patients with chronic kidney 
dysfunction. Indian J Pharmacol 2013;45:330–3.
13.  
Edwards G, McGrath CS, Ward SA, Supanaranond W, Pukrittayakamee S, 
Davis TM, et al. Interactions among primaquine, malaria infection and other 
antimalarials in Thai subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1993;35:193–8. 
260
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 14.  
Fletcher KA, Evans DA, Gilles HM, Greaves J, Bunnag D, Harinasuta T. 
Studies on the pharmacokinetics of primaquine. Bull World Health Organ 
1981;59:407–12. 
15.  
Kim YR, Kuh HJ, Kim MY, Kim YS, Chung WC, Kim SI, et al. Pharmacokinetics 
of primaquine and carboxyprimaquine in Korean patients with vivax 
malaria. Arch Pharm Res 2004;27:576–80. 
16.  
Ward SA, Mihaly GW, Edwards G, Looareesuwan S, Phillips RE, 
Chanthavanich P, et al. Pharmacokinetics of primaquine in man. II. 
Comparison of acute vs chronic dosage in Thai subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 
1985;19:751–5. 
17.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Tarning J, Jittamala P, Charunwatthana P, Lawpoolsri 
S, Lee SJ, et al. Pharmacokinetic interactions between primaquine and 
chloroquine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58:3354–9.
18.  
Moore BR, Salman S, Benjamin J, Page-Sharp M, Robinson LJ, Waita E, et 
al. Pharmacokinetic properties of single-dose primaquine in Papua New 
Guinean children: feasibility of abbreviated high-dose regimens for radical 
cure of vivax malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014;58:432–9.
19.  
Betuela I, Bassat Q, Kiniboro B, Robinson LJ, Rosanas-Urgell A, Stanisic D, et 
al. Tolerability and safety of primaquine in Papua New Guinean children 1 to 
10 years of age. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012;56:2146–9. 
20.  
Ebringer A, Heathcote G, Baker J, Waller M, Shanks GD, Edstein MD. 
Evaluation of the safety and tolerability of a short higher-dose primaquine 
regimen for presumptive anti-relapse therapy in healthy subjects. Trans R 
Soc Trop Med Hyg 2011;105:568–73. 
21.  
Silachamroon U, Krudsood S, Treeprasertsuk S, Wilairatana P, Chalearmrult 
K, Mint HY, et al. Clinical trial of oral artesunate with or without high-dose 
primaquine for the treatment of vivax malaria in Thailand. Am J Trop Med 
Hyg 2003;69:14–8. 
22.  
White NJ, Qiao LG, Qi G, Luzzatto L. Rationale for recommending a lower 
dose of primaquine as a Plasmodium falciparum gametocytocide in 
populations where G6PD deficiency is common. Malar J 2012;11:418. 
23.  
Howes RE, Battle KE, Satyagraha AW, Baird JK, Hay SI. G6PD deficiency: 
global distribution, genetic variants and primaquine therapy. Adv Parasitol 
2013;81:133–201. 
24.  
Single dose primaquine as a gametocytocide in Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria; updated WHO policy recommendation. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012 (http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/who_
pq_policy_recommendation/en/).
25.  
White NJ. Primaquine to prevent transmission of falciparum malaria. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2013;13:175–81. 
26.  
White NJ, Qiao LG, Qi G, Luzzatto L. Rationale for recommending a lower 
dose of primaquine as a Plasmodium falciparum gametocytocide in 
populations where G6PD deficiency is common. Malar J 2012;11:e418. 
27.  
Ashley EA, Recht J, White NJ. Primaquine; the risks and the benefits. Malar J 
2014;13:418.
A
5
261
 A5.12 | QUININE
Therapeutic indications
Parenteral quinine is indicated for the treatment of severe malaria. Oral quinine 
is used in the treatment of uncomplicated malaria, particularly in the first 
trimester of pregnancy, or as an alternative treatment when an effective ACT is 
not promptly available.
Structure and mechanism of action
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
Quinine is an alkaloid derived from the bark 
of the cinchona tree that belongs to the aryl 
amino alcohol group of drugs (1). It is one of 
four antimalarial cinchona alkaloids and is 
the L-stereoisomer of quinidine. Quinine kills 
large ring and trophozoite asexual parasites 
and is gametocytocidal against P. vivax, P. ovale 
and P. malariae but not P. falciparum malaria (2). 
The mechanism of action of quinine is not clearly 
understood, although it is thought to involve 
inhibition of parasite haem detoxification inside 
the food vacuole.
Molecular mass: 324.4
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters of quinine are presented in Table A5.12 (2–33). 
Quinine is rapidly absorbed after both oral and parenteral administration. It is widely 
distributed throughout the body and is detectable in cerebrospinal fluid, breast 
milk and the placenta (2). Quinine undergoes extensive hepatic biotransformation, 
predominantly via CYP3A4 enzymes as well as CYP2C9, CYP1A2 and CYP2D6, 
into several metabolites. Quinine is both a substrate and an inhibitor of CYP2D6. 
The initial metabolite, 3-hydroxyquinine, contributes approximately 10% of the 
antimalarial activity of the parent compound. Up to 20% of administered drug is 
excreted unchanged by the kidneys, and small amounts may appear in bile and 
saliva (34, 35). 
262
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Table A5.12. Pharmacokinetic parameters of quinine reported with currently 
recommended doses used for the treatment of patients with severe or 
uncomplicated malaria (range of mean or median values reported). 
Parameter
Quinine
Cmax (µg/mL)
5.27–17.9
AUC (µg.h/mL)
9.20–449
Tmax (h)
1.0–5.9
Elimination T (h)
3.21–26
Cl (mL/min per kg)
0.22–4.99
Vd (L/kg)
0.45–4.24
The pharmacokinetics of quinine is altered significantly by malaria infection (2–4). 
Both the apparent volume of distribution and systemic clearance are reduced in 
proportion to disease severity, resulting in higher plasma quinine levels in patients 
with severe malaria. As a result, quinine accumulates with standard maintenance 
dosing regimens (10 mg salt/kg bw every 8 h), unless the patient starts to recover. 
As a consequence, if there is no clinical recovery within 48 h, the dosage is reduced 
by one third (to 10 mg salt/kg bw every 12 h). In patients who are in acute renal 
failure, quinine clearance is determined by the overall disease severity and hepatic 
function. In addition, plasma-protein binding, mainly to the acute-phase protein 
α1-acid glycoprotein, increases from about 80% in healthy subjects to around 
90% in patients with malaria (36). 
The exposure of pregnant women to quinine was generally lower and elimination 
more rapid than that in non-pregnant patients (23, 28). The disposition of quinine 
changes with age, with slightly higher concentrations observed in children < 2 years 
(24). In children with protein energy malnutrition, clearance is significantly reduced, 
the elimination half-life is significantly longer but the maximum concentration 
significantly lower than in controls (20, 31, 32). Quinine pharmacokinetics, including 
total clearance normalized to ideal body weight, is not significantly altered in 
obese patients; thus, the maintenance dose of quinine in these patients should 
be based on ideal body weight rather than on total body weight (6, 33). Quinine 
clearance is significantly lower in elderly patients, posing a potential risk for drug 
accumulation and toxicity (26).
Safety
Adverse events
Because of its narrow therapeutic index, quinine has frequent adverse effects (2, 6, 
8, 28, 37). The side-effects commonly seen after administration of treatment doses 
are referred to as “cinchonism”. Mild forms are characterized by tinnitus, slight 
impairment of hearing, headache, nausea, dizziness, dysphoria and sometimes 
disturbed vision. Impairment of high tone hearing is usually concentration-
A
5
263
 dependent and reversible. More severe manifestations include vertigo, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, marked auditory loss and visual symptoms, including loss 
of vision. An important side-effect of quinine is hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, 
which is particularly common in young children, pregnant women and elderly 
patients. Quinine also causes prolongation of the QTc interval (typically by about 
10%), although cardiotoxic effects are much less frequent than those of quinidine. 
Hypotension and cardiac arrest may occur if the drug is given too rapidly (such 
as in an intravenous bolus); intravenous formulations should therefore be given 
by infusion not exceeding a rate of 5 mg/kg bw per hour. Venous thrombosis may 
occur after intravenous administration, while pain, necrosis and abscess formation 
may occur with acidic intramuscular injections. Hypersensitivity reactions to 
quinine have also been reported, including urticaria, bronchospasm, flushing of 
the skin, fever, antibody-mediated thrombocytopenia, haemolytic anaemia and 
haemolytic–uraemic syndrome. Hepatic injury and psychosis occur very rarely.
Quinine has been used as an abortifacient, but there is no evidence that it causes 
abortion, premature labour or fetal abnormalities (28, 34). Quinine therefore remains 
the drug of choice during the first trimester of pregnancy. It may also be used 
safely in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy, although poor compliance 
because of 7-day treatment course and low tolerability may compromise its efficacy, 
and there is a high rate of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia.
Overdosage of quinine may cause oculotoxicity, including blindness from direct 
retinal toxicity, and cardiotoxicity, and can be fatal (38). Cardiotoxic effects include 
conduction disturbances, angina and hypotension leading to cardiac arrest. 
Treatment is largely supportive, with particular attention to maintenance of blood 
pressure, glucose and renal function and to treating any arrhythmias.
Contraindications 
Quinine is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to quinine or 
any of the cinchona alkaloids.
Caution
Although caution should be exercised when administering quinine to patients 
who have heart rhythm disorders or heart disease, there is little evidence of 
cardiotoxicity in patients with malaria. Quinine metabolites may cause oxidative 
haemolysis in people with G6PD deficiency. Caution is also advised in treating 
patients with kidney or liver disease, as the drug may accumulate (10, 18, 19, 39–41).
Drug interactions
See Table A5.14.
264
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 References
1.   
Cinchona bark. http://historyofmalaria.com/2010/02/cinchona-bark/.
2.   
Achan, JT, Erhart A, Yeka A, Tibenderana JK, Baliraine FN, Rosenthal PJ, et al. 
Quinine, an old anti-malarial drug in a modern world: role in the treatment 
of malaria. Malar J 2011;10:144.
3.   
Supanaranond W, Davis TM, Pukrittayakamee S, Silamut K, Karbwang J, 
Molunto P, et al. Disposition of oral quinine in acute falciparum malaria. Eur J 
Clin Pharmacol 1991;40:49–52. 
4.   
Sowunmi A. Disposition of oral quinine in African patients suffering from 
acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria. East Afr Med J 1996;73:519–23. 
5.   
Babalola CP, Bolaji OO, Ogunbona FA, Sowunmi A, Walker O. 
Pharmacokinetics of quinine in African patients with acute falciparum 
malaria. Pharm World Sci 1998;20:118–22. 
6.   
Claessen FA, van Boxtel CJ, Perenboom RM, Tange RA, Wetsteijn JC, Kager 
PA. Quinine pharmacokinetics: ototoxic and cardiotoxic effects in healthy 
Caucasian subjects and in patients with falciparum malaria. Trop Med Int 
Health 1998;3:482–9. 
7.   
Davis TM, White NJ, Looareesuwan S, Silamut K, Warrell DA. Quinine 
pharmacokinetics in cerebral malaria: predicted plasma concentrations after 
rapid intravenous loading using a two-compartment model. Trans R Soc Trop 
Med Hyg 1988;82:542–7. 
8.   
Dyer JR, Davis TM, Giele C, Annus T, Garcia-Webb P, Robson J. The 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of quinine in the diabetic and non-
diabetic elderly. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1994;38:205–12. 
9.   
Hendriksen IC, Maiga D, Lemnge MM, Mtove G, Gesase S, Reyburn H, et 
al. Population pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of 
intramuscular quinine in Tanzanian children with severe falciparum malaria. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013;57:775–83. 
10.  
Karbwang J, Thanavibul A, Molunto P, Na Bangchang K. The 
pharmacokinetics of quinine in patients with hepatitis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 
1993;35:444–6. 
11.  
Krishna S, Nagaraja NV, Planche T, Agbenyega T, Bedo-Addo G, Ansong D, et 
al. Population pharmacokinetics of intramuscular quinine in children with 
severe malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001;45:1803–9. 
12.  
Krishna S, White NJ. Pharmacokinetics of quinine, chloroquine and 
amodiaquine. Clinical implications. Clin Pharmacokin 1996;30:263–99. 
13.  
Le Jouan M, Jullien V, Tetanye E, Tran A, Rey E, Treluyer JM, et al. Quinine 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in children with malaria caused 
by Plasmodium falciparum. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005;49:3658–62. 
14.  
Na-Bangchang K, Tan-Ariya P, Thanavibul A, Riengchainam S, Shrestha 
SB, Karbwang J. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions of 
mefloquine and quinine. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res 1999;19:73–82. 
15.  
Newton P, Keeratithakul D, Teja-Isavadharm P, Pukrittayakamee S, Kyle D, 
White N. Pharmacokinetics of quinine and 3-hydroxyquinine in severe 
falciparum malaria with acute renal failure. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
1999;93:69–72. 
A
5
265
 16.  
Nyunt MM, Lu Y, El-Gasim M, Parsons TL, Petty BG, Hendrix CW. Effects 
of ritonavir-boosted lopinavir on the pharmacokinetics of quinine. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:889–95. 
17.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Wanwimolruk S, Stepniewska K, Jantra A, Huyakorn 
S, Looareesuwan S, et al. Quinine pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic 
relationships in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2003;47:3458–63. 
18.  
Rimchala P, Karbwang J, Sukontason K, Banmairuroi V, Molunto P, Na-
Bangchang K. Pharmacokinetics of quinine in patients with chronic renal 
failure. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1996;49:497–501. 
19.  
Roy L, Bannon P, Villeneuve JP. Quinine pharmacokinetics in chronic 
haemodialysis patients. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2002;54:604–9. 
20.  
Salako LA, Sowunmi A, Akinbami FO. Pharmacokinetics of quinine in African 
children suffering from kwashiorkor. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1989;28:197–201. 
21.  
Soyinka JO, Onyeji CO, Omoruyi SI, Owolabi AR, Sarma PV, Cook JM. Effects 
of concurrent administration of nevirapine on the disposition of quinine in 
healthy volunteers. J Pharm Pharmacol 2009;61:439–43. 
22.  
Soyinka JO, Onyeji CO, Omoruyi SI, Owolabi AR, Sarma PV, Cook JM. 
Pharmacokinetic interactions between ritonavir and quinine in healthy 
volunteers following concurrent administration. Br J Clin Pharmacol 
2010;69:262–70. 
23.  
Tarning J, Kloprogge F, Dhorda M, Jullien V, Nosten F, White NJ, et 
al. Pharmacokinetic properties of artemether, dihydroartemisinin, 
lumefantrine, and quinine in pregnant women with uncomplicated 
plasmodium falciparum malaria in Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2013;57:5096–103. 
24.  
van Hensbroek MB, Kwiatkowski D, van den Berg B, Hoek FJ, van Boxtel CJ, 
Kager PA. Quinine pharmacokinetics in young children with severe malaria. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 1996;54:237–42. 
25.  
Waller D, Krishna S, Craddock C, Brewster D, Jammeh A, Kwiatkowski D, et 
al. The pharmacokinetic properties of intramuscular quinine in Gambian 
children with severe falciparum malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
1990;84:488–91. 
26.  
Wanwimolruk S, Chalcroft S, Coville PF, Campbell AJ. Pharmacokinetics 
of quinine in young and elderly subjects. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
1991;85:714–7. 
27.  
White NJ, Chanthavanich P, Krishna S, Bunch C, Silamut K. Quinine 
disposition kinetics. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1983;16:399–403. 
28.  
Phillips RE, Looareesuwan S, White NJ, Silamut K, Kietinun S, Warrell DA. 
Quinine pharmacokinetics and toxicity in pregnant and lactating women 
with falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1986;21:677–83. 
29.  
Wanwimolruk S, Kang W, Coville PF, Viriyayudhakorn S, Thitiarchakul S. 
Marked enhancement by rifampicin and lack of effect of isoniazid on the 
elimination of quinine in man. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1995;40:87–91. 
266
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 30.  
Couet W, Laroche R, Floch JJ, Istin B, Fourtillan JB, Sauniere JF. 
Pharmacokinetics of quinine and doxycycline in patients with acute 
falciparum malaria: a study in Africa. Ther Drug Monit 1991;13:496–501. 
31.  
Pussard E, Barennes H, Daouda H, Clavier F, Sani AM, Osse M, et al. Quinine 
disposition in globally malnourished children with cerebral malaria. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 1999;65:500–10. 
32.  
Treluyer JM, Roux A, Mugnier C, Flouvat B, Lagardere B. Metabolism of 
quinine in children with global malnutrition. Pediatr Res 1996;40:558–63. 
33.  
Viriyayudhakorn S, Thitiarchakul S, Nachaisit S, Ho PC, Wanwimolruk 
S. Pharmacokinetics of quinine in obesity. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
2000;94:425–8. 
34.  
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Second edition. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2010.
35.  
Zhao XJ, Ishizaki T. A further interaction study of quinine with clinically 
important drugs by human liver microsomes: determinations of inhibition 
constant (Ki) and type of inhibition. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokin 
1999;24:272–8. 
36.  
Wanwimolruk S, Denton JR. Plasma protein binding of quinine: binding to 
human serum albumin, alpha 1-acid glycoprotein and plasma from patients 
with malaria. J Pharm Pharmacol 1992;44:806–11. 
37.  
Karbwang J, Bangchang KN, Thanavibul A, Wattanakoon Y, Harinasuta T. 
Quinine toxicity when given with doxycycline and mefloquine. Southeast 
Asian J Trop Med Public Health 1994;25:397–400. 
38.  
Boland ME, Roper SM, Henry JA. Complications of quinine poisoning. Lancet 
1985;i(8425):384–5.
39.  
Auprayoon P, Sukontason K, Na-Bangchang K, Banmairuroi V, Molunto P, 
Karbwang J. Pharmacokinetics of quinine in chronic liver disease. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 1995;40:494–7. 
40.  
Jacobs F, Nicolaos G, Prieur S, Brivet F. Quinine dosage may not need to be 
reduced during continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration in severe anuric 
malaria. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:288–9. 
41.  
Liotier J, Richard D, Deteix P, Coudore F, Souweine B. Quinine clearance 
during continuous veno-venous high-volume hemofiltration. Intensive Care 
Med 2008;34:1925–6.
A
5
267
 A5.13 | SULFADOXINE–PYRIMETHAMINE
Therapeutic indications
Sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine (SP) is indicated in areas of moderate to high 
malaria transmission intensity for intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in 
pregnant women in their first and second pregnancy and in infants. SP is used in 
combination with amodiaquine for seasonal malaria chemoprevention in children 
in areas with highly seasonal malaria transmission, and, in the few areas in which 
it remains effective, SP can be used with artesunate for the treatment of acute 
uncomplicated malaria.
Structure and mechanism of action
S
O
O
O
O
H2N
N
H
N
N
CH3
CH3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
HO
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
H
HN
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
HO
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
H
H
C
OH
N
CI
CI
CI
H3C
H3C
O
N
H3C
CH3
NH2
HN
OH
O
O
CI
H
H
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CH3
CH3
H
N
H
N
H
N
NH
NH
CI
CI
CH3
CH3
O
O
S
H2N
NH2
HO
O
N
N
H3C
H2C
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
N
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
H
H
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
HO
HO
OH
O
O
CI
N
N
H
S
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H
H
Sulfadoxine is a sulfonamide 
antimicrobial, which acts by inhibiting 
the activity of dihydropteroate 
synthetase and thus synthesis of 
folic acid by bacteria and protozoa. 
Sulfadoxine is active predominantly 
against the later development stages 
of asexual parasites (1). 
Molecular mass: 310.3
CI
N
N
CH3
H2N
NH2
Pyrimethamine inhibits dihydrofolate reductase 
and thereby the synthesis of folic acid by protozoa. 
It is again active predominantly against the later 
development stages of asexual parasites (1).
Molecular mass: 248.7
Seasonal malaria chemoprevention (see section 11.3) with SP + amodiaquine should 
not be implemented in areas with high levels of resistance to SP or amodiaquine (2). 
Intermittent preventive treatment (see sections 11.1 and 11.2): In areas with moderate 
levels of resistance to SP, intermittent preventive treatment remains effective in 
both pregnant women and infants, but the effectiveness decreases with high levels 
of resistance (3–8). The greatest protection in pregnancy is achieved by use of 
insecticide-treated nets in combination with an effective regimen of intermittent 
preventive treatment (9, 10). Adequate, consistent use if nets and other preventive 
measures is particularly important in areas where resistance to SP and malaria 
transmission intensity are high. 
268
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Artesunate + SP should not be used for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria in 
areas with established SP resistance. Some studies have indicated an increase in 
gametocyte carriage at low levels of resistance, further compromising the useful 
therapeutic life of this antimalarial drug (11–13) 
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetic parameters of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine are presented 
in Table A5.13. Both sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine are readily absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration. Plasma protein binding is 
about 90% for both drugs. Sulfadoxine usually, but not always, has a longer 
elimination half-life than pyrimethamine. Pyrimethamine has a larger volume 
of distribution than sulfadoxine and is concentrated in kidneys, lungs, liver and 
spleen. Like sulfadoxine, pyrimethamine crosses the placental barrier and passes 
into breast milk. Sulfadoxine is metabolized mainly by the liver, undergoing varying 
degrees of acetylation, hydroxylation and glucuronidation. Pyrimethamine is also 
metabolized in the liver and, like sulfadoxine, is excreted mainly through the 
kidneys. The renal clearance of sulfadoxine is reported to vary with pH: a decrease 
in urinary pH from 7.5 to 5.5 decreased renal clearance by a factor of 2 (1, 14–25).
Table A5.13. pharmacokinetic parameters of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine 
in studies of currently recommended dosages for the treatment, seasonal 
chemoprevention or intermittent preventive treatment of malaria (range of 
mean or median values reported). 
Parameter
Sulfadoxine
Pyrimethamine
Cmax
57.9–217.8 µg/mL
86–860 ng/mL
Tmax (h)
3.7–63
2.4–41.1
Elimination T1/2
4.1–10.9 days
60–450 h
AUC
15.9–66.3 µg.h/mL
21 787–106 065 ng.h/mL
Vd
263–660 mL/kg
2.32–7.20 L/kg
Cl/f
13.9–71.1 mL/day per kg
335–1776 mL/h per kg
Day-7 concentration
30.9–84.2 µg/mL
56.8–143.1 ng/mL
The interaction between artesunate and SP has been investigated (24, 25). Although 
the volume of distribution of pyrimethamine increased slightly on co-administration 
with artesunate, this is unlikely to be clinically significant, as total exposure and 
concentrations up to day 7 were not affected (25). 
 
A
5
269
 Safety
Adverse events
At the recommended doses, SP is generally well tolerated. The adverse effects 
reported are mainly those associated with sulfonamides, including gastrointestinal 
disturbances, headache, dizziness and skin reactions such as photosensitivity, rash, 
pruritus, urticaria and slight hair loss (1, 26–29). Potentially fatal skin reactions, 
namely erythema multiforme, Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, may also occur (1). Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, megaloblastic 
anaemia, haemolytic anaemia (probably related to G6PD deficiency), crystalluria, 
haematuria, oliguria and hepatitis have also been reported. There have been 
isolated case reports of serum sickness, allergic pericarditis and pulmonary 
infiltrates resembling eosinophilic or allergic alveolitis. 
Contraindications 
SP, alone or in combination with amodiaquine or artesunate, is contraindicated in:
•  
individuals with known hypersensitivity to pyrimethamine, sulfonamides and 
related compounds;
• patients with documented megaloblastic anaemia due to folate deficiency; 
•  
premature or newborn infants in the first 2 months of life, because of the 
immaturity of their enzyme systems; and
•  
HIV-infected patients receiving cotrimoxazole prophylaxis against 
opportunistic infections.
Caution
If skin eruptions, cytopenia or a bacterial or fungal super-infection occurs, use of 
SP should be discontinued. Caution is advised in repeated administration of SP to 
patients with blood dyscrasias and those with renal or hepatic failure, in whom 
the drugs accumulate. 
Drug interactions
See Table 5.14.
Dose optimization
Dosing of antimalarial medicines has often been based on age, because access to 
formal health services or functioning weighing scales is often limited in malaria-
endemic countries. While age-based dosing is more practical, it could result in 
under- or over-dosing in more patients. The accuracy of age-based dosing of SP could 
be improved by collating data on weight-for-age for each malaria-endemic region, 
as has been done for sub-Saharan African children in relation to administration 
of artesunate + amodiaquine (30). 
270
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 References
1.   
Roche. Fansidar product information. 2005.
2.   
Seasonal malaria chemoprevention with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine plus 
amodiaquine in children: a field guide. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013 (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/85726/1/9789241504737_
eng.pdf).
3.   
Likwela JL, D’Alessandro U, Lokwa BL, Meuris S, Dramaix MW. Sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine resistance and intermittent preventive treatment during 
pregnancy: a retrospective analysis of birth weight data in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo (DRC). Trop Med Int Health 2012;17:322–9. 
4.   
Mockenhaupt FP, Bedu-Addo G, Eggelte TA, Hommerich L, Holmberg V, 
von Oertzen C, et al. Rapid increase in the prevalence of sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine resistance among Plasmodium falciparum isolated from 
pregnant women in Ghana. J Infect Dis 2008;198:1545–9. 
5.   
Moussiliou A, Sissinto-Savi De Tove Y, Doritchamou J, Luty AJ, Massougbodji 
A, Alifrangis M, et al. High rates of parasite recrudescence following 
intermittent preventive treatment with sulphadoxine–pyrimethamine during 
pregnancy in Benin. Malar J 2013;12:195. 
6.   
Gesase S, Gosling RD, Hashim R, Ord R, Naidoo I, Madebe R, et al. High 
resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to sulphadoxine/pyrimethamine in 
northern Tanzania and the emergence of dhps resistance mutation at codon 
581. PloS One 2009;4:e4569. 
7.   
Harrington WE, Mutabingwa TK, Kabyemela E, Fried M, Duffy PE. Intermittent 
treatment to prevent pregnancy malaria does not confer benefit in an area of 
widespread drug resistance. Clin Infect Dis 2011;53:224–30. 
8.   
Harrington WE, Mutabingwa TK, Muehlenbachs A, Sorensen B, Bolla MC, Fried 
M, et al. Competitive facilitation of drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria parasites in pregnant women who receive preventive treatment. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:9027–32. 
9.   
Feng G, Simpson JA, Chaluluka E, Molyneux ME, Rogerson SJ. Decreasing 
burden of malaria in pregnancy in Malawian women and its relationship to 
use of intermittent preventive therapy or bed nets. PloS One 2010;5:e12012. 
10.  
Menendez C, Bardaji A, Sigauque B, Romagosa C, Sanz S, Serra-Casas E, et al. 
A randomized placebo-controlled trial of intermittent preventive treatment 
in pregnant women in the context of insecticide treated nets delivered 
through the antenatal clinic. PLoS One 2008;3:e1934. 
11.  
Hogh B, Gamage-Mendis A, Butcher GA, Thompson R, Begtrup K, Mendis C, 
et al. The differing impact of chloroquine and pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine 
upon the infectivity of malaria species to the mosquito vector. Am J Trop 
Med Hyg 1998;58:176–82. 
12.  
Sowunmi A, Fateye BA, Adedeji AA, Fehintola FA, Bamgboye AE, Babalola 
CP, et al. Effects of antifolates—co-trimoxazole and pyrimethamine–
sulfadoxine—on gametocytes in children with acute, symptomatic, 
uncomplicated, Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 
2005;100:451–5. 
A
5
271
 13.  
Barnes KI, Little F, Mabuza A, Mngomezulu N, Govere J, Durrheim D, Roper 
C, Watkins B, White NJ. Increased gametocytemia after treatment: an 
early parasitological indicator of emerging sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
resistance in falciparum malaria. J Infect Dis 2008;197:1605–13.
14.  
Green MD, van Eijk AM, van Ter Kuile FO, Ayisi JG, Parise ME, Kager PA, et 
al. Pharmacokinetics of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in HIV-infected and 
uninfected pregnant women in western Kenya. J Infect Dis 2007;196:1403–8. 
15.  
Hellgren U, Kihamia CM, Bergqvist Y, Lebbad M, Premji Z, Rombo L. 
Standard and reduced doses of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine for treatment 
of Plasmodium falciparum in Tanzania, with determination of drug 
concentrations and susceptibility in vitro. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
1990;84:469–72. 
16.  
Karunajeewa HA, Salman S, Mueller I, Baiwog F, Gomorrai S, Law I, et al. 
Pharmacokinetic properties of sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in pregnant 
women. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009;53:4368–76. 
17.  
Minzi OM, Gupta A, Haule AF, Kagashe GA, Massele AY, Gustafsson LL. 
Lack of impact of artesunate on the disposition kinetics of sulfadoxine/
pyrimethamine when the two drugs are concomitantly administered. Eur J 
Clin Pharmacol 2007;63:457–62. 
18.  
Nyunt MM, Adam I, Kayentao K, van Dijk J, Thuma P, Mauff K, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine in intermittent 
preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy. Clin Pharmacol Ther 
2010;87:226–34. 
19.  
Tekete MM, Toure S, Fredericks A, Beavogui AH, Sangare CP, Evans A, et al. 
Effects of amodiaquine and artesunate on sulphadoxine–pyrimethamine 
pharmacokinetic parameters in children under five in Mali. Malar J 
2011;10:275. 
20.  
Watkins WM, Mberu EK, Winstanley PA, Plowe CV. The efficacy of 
antifolate antimalarial combinations in Africa: a predictive model based 
on pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic analyses. Parasitol Today 
1997;13:459–64. 
21.  
Weidekamm E, Plozza-Nottebrock H, Forgo I, Dubach UC. Plasma 
concentrations in pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine and evaluation of 
pharmacokinetic data by computerized curve fitting. Bull World Health 
Organ 1982;60:115–22. 
22.  
Winstanley PA, Watkins WM, Newton CR, Nevill C, Mberu E, Warn PA, et al. 
The disposition of oral and intramuscular pyrimethamine/sulphadoxine 
in Kenyan children with high parasitaemia but clinically non-severe 
falciparum malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1992;33:143–8. 
23.  
Barnes KI, Little F, Smith PJ, Evans A, Watkins WM, White NJ. Sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine pharmacokinetics in malaria: pediatric dosing implications. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2006;80:582–96.
24.  
Minzi OM, Gupta A, Haule AF, Kagashe GA, Massele AY, Gustafsson LL. 
Lack of impact of artesunate on the disposition kinetics of sulfadoxine/
pyrimethamine when the two drugs are concomitantly administered. Eur J 
Clin Pharmacol 2007;63:457–62. 
272
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 25.  
Tekete MM, Toure S, Fredericks A, Beavogui AH, Sangare CP, Evans A, et al. 
Effects of amodiaquine and artesunate on sulphadoxine–pyrimethamine 
pharmacokinetic parameters in children under five in Mali. Malar J 
2011;10:275. 
26.  
Peters PJ, Thigpen MC, Parise ME, Newman RD. Safety and toxicity of 
sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine: implications for malaria prevention in 
pregnancy using intermittent preventive treatment. Drug Saf 2007;30:481–
501. 
27.  
Luntamo M, Kulmala T, Mbewe B, Cheung YB, Maleta K, Ashorn P. Effect of 
repeated treatment of pregnant women with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
and azithromycin on preterm delivery in Malawi: a randomized controlled 
trial. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:1212–20. 
28.  
Maokola W, Chemba M, Hamisi Y, Mrisho M, Shirima K, Manzi F, et al. Safety 
of sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine for intermittent preventive treatment of 
malaria in infants: evidence from large-scale operational research in 
southern Tanzania. Int Health 2011;3:154–9. 
29.  
Mutabingwa TK, Muze K, Ord R, Briceno M, Greenwood BM, Drakeley C, et al. 
Randomized trial of artesunate+amodiaquine, sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine 
+ amodiaquine, chlorproguanal–dapsone and SP for malaria in pregnancy 
in Tanzania. PLoS One 2009;4:e5138. 
30.  
Taylor W, Terlouw DJ, Olliaro PL, White NJ, Brasseur P, ter Kuile FO. Use 
of weight-for-age data to optimize tablet strength and dosing regimens 
for a new fixed-dose artesunate–amodiaquine combination for treating 
falciparum malaria. Bull World Health Organ 2006;84:956–64.
A5.14 |  
DRUG INTERACTIONS REPORTED 
FOR CURRENTLY RECOMMENDED 
ANTIMALARIAL DRUGS 
Antimalarial drug
Demonstrated interactions
Potential interactions
Amodiaquine
Increased plasma concentration 
and elevated liver enzyme 
activities with efavirenz (1)
Decreased plasma concentration 
with nevirapine (2)
Increased risk for neutropenia 
with zidovudine-containing 
regimens and trimethoprim + 
sulfamethoxazole (3)
Increased risk for cardiac events 
with anti-arrythmic agents (4, 5)
Visual loss or disturbances with 
mefloquine (6)
Caution with inhibitors of 
CYP2C8 and CYP2A6a
May inhibit CYP2D6 and 
CYP2C9 (7)
A
5
273
 Antimalarial drug
Demonstrated interactions
Potential interactions
Artemether
Increased plasma concentration 
with ketoconazole (8) 
Decreased plasma 
concentration with darunavir 
+ ritonavir (9), lopinavir + 
ritonavir (10, 11), nevirapine 
(12, 13), efavirenz (12, 14), 
etravirine (9) and rifampicin 
(15) 
Caution with inhibitors and 
inducers of CYP3A4 (16, 17), 
although these will probably 
not have a large effect on 
antimalarial activity as the 
main effect is to change 
the ratio of artemether 
to dihydroartemisinin
Artesunate
Increased plasma concentration 
with nevirapine (18)
Atovaquone
Decreased plasma 
concentration with rifampin 
(19), rifabutin (19), efavirenz 
(20), lopinavir + ritonavir (20) 
and atazanavir + ritonavir (20)
Increased plasma 
concentrations of 
zidovudine (21)
Reduced plasma concentration 
with metoclopramidea 
and tetracyclinea
Increased plasma 
concentrations of etravirine (22), 
saquinavir (22) and warfarin (23) 
Chloroquine
Increased plasma concentration 
with paracetamol (24) 
Reduced metabolism and 
clearance with cimetidine (25) 
Reduced absorption with 
antacids and kaolin (26) 
Reduced bioavailability 
of ampicillin (27) and 
praziquantel (28); reduced 
therapeutic effect of 
thyroxine (29)
Increased plasma 
concentration of cyclosporine 
(30) 
Reduced plasma 
concentration of methotrexate 
(31) 
Reduced antibody response 
to primary immunization with 
intradermal human diploid-
cell rabies vaccine (32)
Increased convulsions with 
mefloquine (33)
Increased risk for acute 
dystonic reactions with 
metronidazole (34)
Antagonises effects of anti-
epileptics (35)
Clindamycin
Delayed absorption with 
aluminium salts and 
kaolin (36)
Prolongs effects of 
neuromuscular blocking 
agents, and may lead to 
respiratory depression (37)
Possible antagonism and cross-
resistance with macrolides (38) 
and chloramphenicol (39)
Antagonizes 
parasympathomimetics, 
such as neostigmine
274
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Antimalarial drug
Demonstrated interactions
Potential interactions
Dihydroartemisinin
Reduced plasma concentration 
when artesunate (40) or 
artemether (41) is given 
with ritonavir
May result in slight decrease in 
CYP1A2 activitya
Doxycycline
Decreased absorption 
with antacids, bismuth 
subsalicylate (42), proton 
pump inhibitors (43) and oral 
iron preparations (44) 
Enhanced metabolism by 
hepatic enzyme inducers such 
as antiepileptics (45-47) 
(carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
phenobarbital), rifampicin (48) 
and chronic alcohol use (49) 
May potentiate the effect of oral 
anticoagulants (50)
May reduce efficacy of oral 
contraceptives (51)
Lumefantrine
Increased plasma concentration 
with darunavir + ritonavir (9), 
lopinavir + ritonavir (11) and 
ketoconazole (8)
Decreased plasma 
concentration with mefloquine 
(17), rifampicin (15), efavirenz 
(12, 14) and etravirine (9) 
Prolongation of QTc interval 
with quinine (52)
Caution with strong CYP3A4 
inducers and drugs with cardiac 
effects that are metabolized by 
CYP2D6 (due to inhibition of 
CYP2D6 by lumefantrinea)
May reduce efficacy of 
hormonal contraceptivesa
Mefloquine
Increased plasma concentration 
with ketoconazole (53) and 
ampicillin (54)
Decreased plasma 
concentration and more 
rapid elimination with 
rifampicin (55)
Reduces plasma concentration 
of ritonavir (56) and 
anticonvulsantsa (Note: use 
in patients with epilepsy 
contraindicated) 
Increased risk for cardiac 
events with calcium channel 
blockers, digoxin, amiodarone, 
quinine, quinidine, quinolones 
and medicines that cause 
β-adrenergic blockadea
Potential reduced effectiveness 
of live typhoid vaccine (57, 58)
Potential increased plasma 
concentration with tetracycline 
(59) 
Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
with quinine or chloroquinea
A
5
275
 Antimalarial drug
Demonstrated interactions
Potential interactions
Piperaquine
None reported
Increased plasma concentration 
and potential increased toxicity 
with verapamil, indinavir, 
lopinavir + ritonavir, HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors (statins) 
and cyclosporina
In-vitro metabolism by CYP3A4 
increased (60) and thus 
reduced plasma concentration 
and potentially reduced 
effectiveness with barbiturates, 
chronic alcohol use, rifampicin, 
efavirenz, nevirapine, phenytoin 
or carbamazepinea
Increased risk for cardiac events 
with drugs that prolong the 
QTc intervala
Primaquine
Decreased plasma 
concentration of 
carboxyprimaquine with 
quinine (61) 
Increased plasma 
concentrations of primaquine 
and carboxyprimaquine 
with dihydroartemisinin–
piperaquine, artesunate–
pyronaridine and chloroquine 
(62, 63)
Adverse haematological effects 
with myelosuppressantsa
Strong CYP2D6 inhibitors or 
inducers are predicted to reduce 
efficacy (64)
Inhibits metabolism of 
alcohol, leading to alcohol 
accumulation (65)
Proguanil
Reduced plasma concentrations 
with efavirenz (20, 66), 
lopinavir + ritonavir (20) and 
atazanavir + ritonavir (20)
Reduced conversion of 
proguanil to cycloguanil by 
oestrogens (67)
May potentiate warfarin (68)
May reduce effectiveness of live 
typhoid vaccine (57)
Sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine
Reduced effectiveness with 
high doses >5mg of folic acid 
(69) 
Avoid concurrent 
trimethoprim or trimethoprim 
+ sulfamethoxazole due to 
increased risk for severe 
cutaneous reactions (70)
Additive haematological toxicity 
with myelosuppressants such as 
methotrexate, daunorubicin and 
cytarabine (71)
Hepatotoxicity with 
lorazepam (72)
Kaolin (73) may 
reduce absorption
May displace quinine, phenytoin 
and warfarin from plasma 
protein, possibly increasing 
toxicity(71) 
276
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Antimalarial drug
Demonstrated interactions
Potential interactions
Quinine
Increased plasma 
concentrations with cimetidine 
(74) and ketoconazole (75) 
Reduced plasma 
concentrations with 
nevirapine (76), rifampicin 
(77, 78) and ritonavir (79)
Increased plasma 
concentration of digoxin (80)
Omeprazole, nifedipine, 
troleandomycin and 
erythromycin may inhibit 
quinine metabolism, leading to 
its accumulation (81).
QTc interval may be prolonged 
with antiarrhythmic agents such 
as flecainide and amiodaronea
Ventricular arrhythmia may 
occur with antihistamines 
such as terfenadine and with 
antipsychotic drugs such 
as thioridazine.a
Major effects of likely clinical relevance are highlighted in bold.
a Information obtained from product package insert
A
5
277
 References
1.   
German P, Greenhouse B, Coates C, Dorsey G, Rosenthal PJ, Charlebois E, 
et al. Hepatotoxicity due to a drug interaction between amodiaquine plus 
artesunate and efavirenz. Clin Infect Dis 2007;44:889–91.
2.   
Scarsi KK, Fehintola FA, Ma Q, Aweeka FT, Darin KM, Morse GD, et al. 
Disposition of amodiaquine and desethylamodiaquine in HIV-infected 
Nigerian subjects on nevirapine-containing antiretroviral therapy. J 
Antimicrob Chemother 2014;69:1370–6.
3.   
Gasasira AF, Kamya MR, Achan J, Mebrahtu T, Kalyango JN, Ruel T, et al. 
High risk of neutropenia in HIV-infected children following treatment with 
artesunate plus amodiaquine for uncomplicated malaria in Uganda. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2008;46:985–91.
4.   
Ngouesse B, Basco LK, Ringwald P, Keundjian A, Blackett KN. Cardiac effects 
of amodiaquine and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in malaria-infected African 
patients. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001;65:711–6.
5.   
Adjei GO, Oduro-Boatey C, Rodrigues OP, Hoegberg LC, Alifrangis M, Kurtzhals 
JA, et al. Electrocardiographic study in Ghanaian children with uncomplicated 
malaria, treated with artesunate–amodiaquine or artemether–lumefantrine. 
Malar J 2012;11:420.
6.   
Adjei GO, Adabayeri VM, Annobil SH. Reversible binocular visual loss in 
temporal association with artesunate–amodiaquine treatment in a child on 
mefloquine chemoprophylaxis. Ghana Med J 2012;46:171–3.
7.   
Wennerholm A, Nordmark A, Pihlsgard M, Mahindi M, Bertilsson L, Gustafsson 
LL. Amodiaquine, its desethylated metabolite, or both, inhibit the metabolism 
of debrisoquine (CYP2D6) and losartan (CYP2C9) in vivo. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
2006;62:539–46.
8.   
Lefevre G, Carpenter P, Souppart C, Schmidli H, McClean M, Stypinski 
D. Pharmacokinetics and electrocardiographic pharmacodynamics of 
artemether–lumefantrine (Riamet) with concomitant administration of 
ketoconazole in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2002;54:485–92. 
9.   
Kakuda TN, DeMasi R, van Delft Y, Mohammed P. Pharmacokinetic interaction 
between etravirine or darunavir/ritonavir and artemether/lumefantrine in 
healthy volunteers: a two-panel, two-way, two-period, randomized trial. HIV 
Med 2013;14:421–9.
10.  
Byakika-Kibwika P, Lamorde M, Okaba-Kayom V, Mayanja-Kizza H, Katabira 
E, Hanpithakpong W, et al. Lopinavir/ritonavir significantly influences 
pharmacokinetic exposure of artemether/lumefantrine in HIV-infected 
Ugandan adults. J Antimicrob Chemother 2012;67:1217–23. 
11.  
German P, Parikh S, Lawrence J, Dorsey G, Rosenthal PJ, Havlir D, et al. 
Lopinavir/ritonavir affects pharmacokinetic exposure of artemether/
lumefantrine in HIV-uninfected healthy volunteers. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr 2009;51:424–9.
12.  
Byakika-Kibwika P, Lamorde M, Mayito J, Nabukeera L, Namakula R, 
Mayanja-Kizza H, et al. Significant pharmacokinetic interactions between 
artemether/lumefantrine and efavirenz or nevirapine in HIV-infected 
Ugandan adults. J Antimicrob Chemother 2012;67:2213–21. 
278
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 13.  
Kredo T, Mauff K, Van der Walt JS, Wiesner L, Maartens G, Cohen K, et al. 
Interaction between artemether–lumefantrine and nevirapine-based 
antiretroviral therapy in HIV-1-infected patients. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2011;55:5616–23. 
14.  
Huang L, Parikh S, Rosenthal PJ, Lizak P, Marzan F, Dorsey G, et al. 
Concomitant efavirenz reduces pharmacokinetic exposure to the 
antimalarial drug artemether–lumefantrine in healthy volunteers. J Acquir 
Immune Defic Syndr 2012;61:310–6. 
15.  
Lamorde M, Byakika-Kibwika P, Mayito J, Nabukeera L, Ryan M, 
Hanpithakpong W, et al. Lower artemether, dihydroartemisinin and 
lumefantrine concentrations during rifampicin-based tuberculosis 
treatment. AIDS 2013;27:961–5.
16.  
van Agtmael MA, Gupta V, van der Graaf CA, van Boxtel CJ. The effect of 
grapefruit juice on the time-dependent decline of artemether plasma levels 
in healthy subjects. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1999;66:408–14.
17.  
Lefevre G, Bindschedler M, Ezzet F, Schaeffer N, Meyer I, Thomsen MS. 
Pharmacokinetic interaction trial between co-artemether and mefloquine. 
Eur J Pharm Sci 2000;10:141–51.
18.  
Fehintola FA, Scarsi KK, Ma Q, Parikh S, Morse GD, Taiwo B, et al. 
Nevirapine-based antiretroviral therapy impacts artesunate and 
dihydroartemisinin disposition in HIV-infected Nigerian adults. AIDS Res 
Treat 2012;2012:703604. 
19.  
Sadler B, Caldwell P, Scott J, Rogers M, Blum M. Drug interaction between 
rifampin and atovaquone in HIV+ asymptomatic volunteers (Poster A34). In: 
35th Interscience Conference of Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 
Washington DC: American Society for Microbiology; 1995.
20.  
Van Luin M, Van der Ende ME, Richter C, Visser M, Faraj D, Van der Ven A, et 
al. Lower atovaquone/proguanil concentrations in patients taking efavirenz, 
lopinavir/ritonavir or atazanavir/ritonavir. AIDS 2010;24:1223–6.
21.  
Lee BL, Tauber MG, Sadler B, Goldstein D, Chambers HF. Atovaquone inhibits 
the glucuronidation and increases the plasma concentrations of zidovudine. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther 1996;59:14–21.
22.  
Tommasi C, Bellagamba R, Tempestilli M, D’Avolio A, Gallo AL, Ivanovic J, 
et al. Marked increase in etravirine and saquinavir plasma concentrations 
during atovaquone/proguanil prophylaxis. Malar J 2011;10:141. 
23.  
Hidalgo K, Lyles A, Dean SR. A potential interaction between warfarin and 
atovaquone. Ann Pharmacother 2011;45:e3.
24.  
Raina RK, Bano G, Amla V, Kapoor V, Gupta KL. The effect of aspirin, 
paracetamol and analgin on pharmacokinetics of chloroquine. Indian J 
Physiol Pharmacol 1993;37:229–31.
25.  
Ette EI, Brown-Awala EA, Essien EE. Chloroquine elimination in humans: 
effect of low-dose cimetidine. J Clin Pharmacol 1987;27:813–6.
26.  
McElnay JC, Mukhtar HA, D’Arcy PF, Temple DJ, Collier PS. The effect of 
magnesium trisilicate and kaolin on the in vivo absorption of chloroquine. J 
Trop Med Hyg 1982;85:159–63.
27.  
Ali HM. Reduced ampicillin bioavailability following oral coadministration 
with chloroquine. J Antimicrob Chemother 1985;15:781–4.
A
5
279
 28.  
Masimirembwa CM, Naik YS, Hasler JA. The effect of chloroquine on the 
pharmacokinetics and metabolism of praziquantel in rats and in humans. 
Biopharm Drug Dispos 1994;15:33–43.
29.  
Munera Y, Hugues FC, Le Jeunne C, Pays JF. Interaction of thyroxine sodium 
with antimalarial drugs. BMJ 1997;314:1593. 
30.  
Finielz P, Gendoo Z, Chuet C, Guiserix J. Interaction between cyclosporin and 
chloroquine. Nephron 1993;65:333.
31.  
Seideman P, Albertioni F, Beck O, Eksborg S, Peterson C. Chloroquine 
reduces the bioavailability of methotrexate in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. A possible mechanism of reduced hepatotoxicity. Arthritis Rheum 
1994;37:830–3.
32.  
Pappaioanou M, Fishbein DB, Dreesen DW, Schwartz IK, Campbell GH, 
Sumner JW, et al. Antibody response to preexposure human diploid-
cell rabies vaccine given concurrently with chloroquine. N Engl J Med 
1986;314:280–4.
33.  
Schiemann R, Coulaud JP, Bouchaud O. Seizures after antimalarial 
medication in previously healthy persons. J Travel Med 2000;7:155–6.
34.  
Achumba JI, Ette EI, Thomas WO, Essien EE. Chloroquine-induced acute 
dystonic reactions in the presence of metronidazole. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 
1988;22:308–10.
35.   
Schneider C, Adamcova M, Jick SS, Schlagenhauf P, Miller MK, Rhein HG, 
Meier CR. Antimalarial chemoprophylaxis and the risk of neuropsychiatric 
disorders. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2013;11(2):71-80.
36.  
Albert KS, DeSante KA, Welch RD, DiSanto AR. Pharmacokinetic evaluation 
of a drug interaction between kaolin–pectin and clindamycin. J Pharm Sci 
1978;67:1579–82.
37.  
Consensus conference. Newborn screening for sickle cell disease and other 
hemoglobinopathies. JAMA. 1987;258:1205–9.
38.  
  
Leclercq R. Mechanisms of Resistance to Macrolides and Lincosamides: 
Nature of the Resistance Elements and Their Clinical Implications. Clin 
Infect Dis. (2002) 34 (4): 482-492
39.   
Kester M, Karpa KD, Vrana KE. Elsevier’s Integrated Review Pharmacology 
2E (2011). ISBN 1455727032, 9781455727032
40.   
Morris CA, Lopez-Lazaro L, Jung D, Methaneethorn J, Duparc S, Borghini-
Fuhrer I, Pokorny R, Shin CS, Fleckenstein L. Drug-drug interaction analysis 
of pyronaridine/artesunate and ritonavir in healthy volunteers. Am J Trop 
Med Hyg. 2012;86(3):489-95. 
41.   
German P1, Parikh S, Lawrence J, Dorsey G, Rosenthal PJ, Havlir D, 
Charlebois E, Hanpithakpong W, Lindegardh N, Aweeka FT. Lopinavir/
ritonavir affects pharmacokinetic exposure of artemether/lumefantrine 
in HIV-uninfected healthy volunteers. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 
2009;51(4):424-9. 
42.  
Ericsson CD, Feldman S, Pickering LK, Cleary TG. Influence of subsalicylate 
bismuth on absorption of doxycycline. JAMA 1982;247:2266–7.
43.  
Grahnen A, Olsson B, Johansson G, Eckernas SA. Doxycycline carrageenate—
an improved formulation providing more reliable absorption and plasma 
concentrations at high gastric pH than doxycycline monohydrate. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 1994;46:143–6.
280
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 44.  
Neuvonen PJ, Gothoni G, Hackman R, Bjorksten K. Interference of iron with 
the absorption of tetracyclines in man. Br Med J 1970;iv(5734):532–4. 
45.  
Penttila O, Neuvonen PJ, Aho K, Lehtovaara R. Interaction between 
doxycycline and some antiepileptic drugs. Br Med J 1974;ii(5917):470–2. 
46.  
Neuvonen PJ, Penttila O. Interaction between doxycycline and barbiturates. 
Br Med J 1974;i(5907):535–6. 
47.  
Neuvonen PJ, Penttila O, Lehtovaara R, Aho K. Effect of antiepileptic drugs 
on the elimination of various tetracycline derivatives. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
1975;9:147–54.
48.  
Garraffo A, Dellamonica P, Fournier JP, Lapalus P, Bernard E. The effect of 
rifampicin on the pharmacokinetics of doxycycline. Infection 1988;16:297–8.
49.  
Neuvonen PJ, Penttila O, Roos M, Tirkkonen J. Effect of long-term alcohol 
consumption on the half-life of tetracycline and doxycycline in man. Int J 
Clin Pharmacol Biopharm 1976;14:303–7.
50.  
Westfall LK, Mintzer DL, Wiser TH. Potentiation of warfarin by tetracycline. 
Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:1620, 5.
51.  
Back DJ, Grimmer SF, Orme ML, Proudlove C, Mann RD, Breckenridge AM. 
Evaluation of Committee on Safety of Medicines yellow card reports on oral 
contraceptive–drug interactions with anticonvulsants and antibiotics. Br J 
Clin Pharmacol 1988;25:527–32.
52.  
Lefevre G, Carpenter P, Souppart C, Schmidli H, Martin JM, Lane A, et al. 
Interaction trial between artemether–lumefantrine (Riamet) and quinine in 
healthy subjects. J Clin Pharmacol 2002;42:1147–58.
53.  
Ridtitid W, Wongnawa M, Mahatthanatrakul W, Raungsri N, Sunbhanich M. 
Ketoconazole increases plasma concentrations of antimalarial mefloquine 
in healthy human volunteers. J Clin Pharm Ther 2005;30:285–90.
54.  
Karbwang J, Na Bangchang K, Back DJ, Bunnag D. Effect of ampicillin 
on mefloquine pharmacokinetics in Thai males. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
1991;40:631–3.
55.  
Ridtitid W, Wongnawa M, Mahatthanatrakul W, Chaipol P, Sunbhanich M. 
Effect of rifampin on plasma concentrations of mefloquine in healthy 
volunteers. J Pharm Pharmacol 2000;52:1265–9.
56.  
Khaliq Y, Gallicano K, Tisdale C, Carignan G, Cooper C, McCarthy A. 
Pharmacokinetic interaction between mefloquine and ritonavir in healthy 
volunteers. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2001;51:591–600.
57.  
Kollaritsch H, Que JU, Kunz C, Wiedermann G, Herzog C, Cryz SJ Jr. Safety 
and immunogenicity of live oral cholera and typhoid vaccines administered 
alone or in combination with antimalarial drugs, oral polio vaccine, or 
yellow fever vaccine. J Infect Dis 1997;175:871–5.
58.  
Horowitz H, Carbonaro CA. Inhibition of the Salmonella typhi oral vaccine 
strain, Ty21a, by mefloquine and chloroquine. J Infect Dis 1992;166:1462–4.
59.  
Karbwang J, Na Bangchang K, Back DJ, Bunnag D, Rooney W. Effect of 
tetracycline on mefloquine pharmacokinetics in Thai males. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 1992;43:567–9.
60.  
Lee TM, Huang L, Johnson MK, Lizak P, Kroetz D, Aweeka F, et al. In vitro 
metabolism of piperaquine is primarily mediated by CYP3A4. Xenobiotica 
2012;42:1088–95.
A
5
281
 61.  
Edwards G, Mcgrath CS, Ward SA, Supanaranond W, Yakamee SP, Davis 
TME, et al. Interactions among primaquine, malaria infection and other 
antimalarials in Thai subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1993;35:193–8.
62.  
Hanboonkunupakarn B, Ashley EA, Jittamala P, Tarning J, Pukrittayakamee S, 
Hanpithakpong W, et al. An open-label crossover study of primaquine and 
dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine pharmacokinetics in healthy adult Thai 
subjects. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014;58:7340–6.
63.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Tarning J, Jittamala P, Charunwatthana P, Lawpoolsri 
S, Lee SJ, et al. Pharmacokinetic interactions between primaquine and 
chloroquine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014;58:3354–9.
64.  
Bennett JW, Pybus BS, Yadava A, Tosh D, Sousa JC, McCarthy WF, et al. 
Primaquine failure and cytochrome P-450 2D6 in Plasmodium vivax malaria. 
N Engl J Med 2013;369:1381–2.
65.  
Li T, Magnes LJ. Inhibition of liver alcohol-dehydrogenase by primaquine 
and 8-amino-6-methoxyquinoline compounds. Biochem Pharmacol 
1972;21:17–25.
66.  
Soyinka JO, Onyeji CO. Alteration of pharmacokinetics of proguanil in 
healthy volunteers following concurrent administration of efavirenz. Eur J 
Pharm Sci 2010;39:213–8.
67.  
McGready R, Stepniewska K, Seaton E, Cho T, Cho D, Ginsberg A, et al. 
Pregnancy and use of oral contraceptives reduces the biotransformation of 
proguanil to cycloguanil. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2003;59:553–7.
68.  
Armstrong G, Beg MF, Scahill S. Warfarin potentiated by proguanil. Br Med J 
1991;303:789.
69.  
Ouma P, Parise ME, Hamel MJ, Ter Kuile FO, Otieno K, Ayisi JG, et al. A 
randomized controlled trial of folate supplementation when treating 
malaria in pregnancy with sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine. PLoS Clin Trials 
2006;1:e28. 
70.  
Gimnig JE, MacArthur JR, M’Bang’ombe M, Kramer MH, Chizani N, Stern 
RS, et al. Severe cutaneous reactions to sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine and 
trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole in Blantyre District, Malawi. Am J Trop Med 
Hyg 2006;74:738–43.
71.  
Baxter K, Prston CL. Stockley’s Drug Interactions, 10th Edition (2013), 
Pharmaceutical Press ISBN 978 0 85711 061 9
72.  
Klasco RK (Ed): DRUGDEX® System. Thomson Micromedex, Greenwood 
Village, Colorado
73.  
McElnay JC, Mukhtar HA, D’Arcy PF, Temple DJ. In vitro experiments on 
chloroquine and pyrimethamine absorption in the presence of antacid 
constituents or kaolin. J Trop Med Hyg 1982;85:153–8.
74.  
Wanwimolruk S, Sunbhanich M, Pongmarutai M, Patamasucon P. Effects 
of cimetidine and ranitidine on the pharmacokinetics of quinine. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 1986;22:346–50. 
75.  
Mirghani RA, Hellgren U, Bertilsson L, Gustafsson LL, Ericsson O. 
Metabolism and elimination of quinine in healthy volunteers. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 2003;59:423–7.
76.  
Soyinka JO, Onyeji CO, Omoruyi SI, Owolabi AR, Sarma PV, Cook JM. Effects 
of concurrent administration of nevirapine on the disposition of quinine in 
healthy volunteers. J Pharm Pharmacol 2009;61:439–43. 
282
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 77.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Prakongpan S, Wanwimolruk S, Clemens R, 
Looareesuwan S, White NJ. Adverse effect of rifampin on quinine efficacy 
in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2003;47:1509–13.
78.  
Wanwimolruk S, Wong SM, Zhang H, Coville PF, Walker RJ. Metabolism of 
quinine in man: identification of a major metabolite, and effects of smoking 
and rifampicin pretreatment. J Pharm Pharmacol 1995;47:957–63.
79.  
Nyunt MM, Lu Y, El-Gasim M, Parsons TL, Petty BG, Hendrix CW. Effects 
of ritonavir-boosted lopinavir on the pharmacokinetics of quinine. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:889–95.
80.  
Wandell M, Powell JR, Hager WD, Fenster PE, Graves PE, Conrad KA, et al. 
Effect of quinine on digoxin kinetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1980;28:425–30.
81.  
Zhao XJ, Ishizaki T. Metabolic interactions of selected antimalarial and non-
antimalarial drugs with the major pathway (3-hydroxylation) of quinine in 
human liver microsomes. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1997;44:505–11. 
A
5
283
  Annex 6 |  
Treatment of Plasmodium vivax, 
P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi 
infections
A6.1 | INTRODUCTION
Plasmodium vivax accounts for approximately half of all malaria cases outside 
Africa (1–3). It is prevalent in the Middle East, Asia, the Western Pacific and Central 
and South America. With the exception of the Horn, it is rarer in Africa, where 
there is a high prevalence of the Duffy-negative phenotype, particularly in West 
Africa, although cases are reported in both Mauritania and Mali (3). In most areas 
where P. vivax is prevalent, the malaria transmission rates are low (except on the 
island of New Guinea). Affected populations achieve only partial immunity to this 
parasite, and so people of all ages are at risk for P. vivax malaria (3). Where both 
P. falciparum and P. vivax are prevalent, the incidence rates of P. vivax tend to peak 
at a younger age than for P. falciparum. This is because each P. vivax inoculation 
may be followed by several relapses. The other human malaria parasite species, 
P. malariae and P. ovale (which is in fact two sympatric species), are less common. 
P. knowlesi, a simian parasite, causes occasional cases of malaria in or near forested 
areas of South-East Asia and the Indian subcontinent (4). In parts of the island of 
Borneo, P. knowlesi is the predominant cause of human malaria and an important 
cause of severe malaria. 
Of the six species of Plasmodium that affect humans, only P. vivax and the two 
species of P. ovale (5) form hypnozoites, which are dormant parasite stages in 
the liver that cause relapse weeks to years after the primary infection. P. vivax 
preferentially invades reticulocytes, and repeated illness causes chronic anaemia, 
which can be debilitating and sometimes life-threatening, particularly in young 
children (6). Recurrent vivax malaria is an important impediment to human and 
economic development in affected populations. In areas where P. falciparum and 
P. vivax co-exist, intensive malaria control often has a greater effect on P. falciparum, 
as P. vivax, is more resilient to interventions. 
Although P. vivax has been considered to be a benign form of malaria, it may 
sometimes cause severe disease (7). The major complication is anaemia in 
young children. In Papua province, Indonesia (7), and in Papua New Guinea (8), 
where malaria transmission is intense, P. vivax is an important cause of malaria 
morbidity and mortality, particularly in young infants and children. Occasionally, 
older patients develop vital organ involvement similar to that in severe and 
complicated P. falciparum malaria (9, 10). During pregnancy, infection with P. vivax, 
as with P. falciparum, increases the risk for abortion and reduces birth weight (11, 
12). In primigravidae, the reduction in birth weight is approximately two thirds 
that associated with P. falciparum. In one large series, this effect increased with 
successive pregnancies (11).
A
6
285
 P. knowlesi is a zoonosis that normally affects long- and pig-tailed macaque 
monkeys. It has a daily asexual cycle, resulting in a rapid replication rate and 
high parasitaemia. P. knowlesi may cause a fulminant disease similar to severe 
falciparum malaria (with the exception of coma, which does not occur) (13, 14). 
Co-infection with other species is common. 
A6.2 | DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of P. vivax, P. ovale, and P. malariae malaria is based on microscopy. 
P. knowlesi is frequently misdiagnosed under the microscope, as the young ring forms 
are similar to those of P. falciparum, the late trophozoites are similar to those of P. 
malariae, and parasite development is asynchronous. Rapid diagnostic tests based 
on immunochromatographic methods are available for the detection of P. vivax 
malaria; however, they are relatively insensitive for detecting P. malariae and P. ovale 
parasitaemia. Rapid diagnostic antigen tests for human Plasmodium species show 
poor sensitivity for P. knowlesi infections in humans with low parasitaemia (15). 
A6.3 | TREATMENT
The objectives of treatment of vivax malaria are twofold: to cure the acute blood 
stage infection and to clear hypnozoites from the liver to prevent future relapses. 
This is known as “radical cure”. 
A6.3.1 | TREATMENT OF P. VIVAX MALARIA
Blood-stage infection
P. vivax is highly sensitive to artemisinin derivatives, which clear parasitaemia 
and resolve symptoms very rapidly (16). Artemisinin-based combination therapy 
(ACT) is therefore rapidly effective (17–20). All the currently recommended ACT 
is all highly effective against P. vivax malaria, with the exception of artesunate + 
sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine in some areas (because of resistance to sulfadoxine–
pyrimethamine). Thus, ACTs may be used to treat the blood stage of all malarias. 
Chloroquine remains an effective treatment for vivax malaria in many areas, but in 
others susceptibility has declined. In Oceania and Indonesia, high-level resistance 
of P. vivax to chloroquine is prevalent (21). 
Tropical P. vivax usually relapses around 3 weeks after the start of treatment and 
thereafter at 3-week intervals. This is the pattern seen after treatment with quinine 
or an artemisinin derivative only (22), but, after treatment with chloroquine or 
other slowly eliminated antimalarial drugs, the first relapse is suppressed by the 
residual drug levels. As a result, the first relapse is delayed and typically presents 
5–6 weeks after the start of treatment. Chloroquine, piperaquine, and mefloquine 
286
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 reliably suppress this first relapse. The more rapidly eliminated amodiaquine and 
lumefantrine (in ACT) provide less relapse suppression, and therefore relapses occur 
earlier after these treatments. Whether the total number of relapses is reduced by 
slowly eliminated antimalarial drugs remains to be determined.
Prevention of relapse
The radical curative efficacy of primaquine varies geographically (23), although 
there is no evidence for acquired resistance. The frequent-relapsing tropical strains 
prevalent in South-East Asia and Oceania require a higher primaquine dose for 
radical cure than strains found elsewhere. Failure of standard primaquine therapy 
(15 mg daily for 14 days; 0.25 mg/kg bw per day; total dose, 3.5 mg base/kg bw) to 
prevent relapse has since been reported in Oceania, South-East Asia, the Americas 
and on occasion in other locations. Because adherence (and often drug quality) 
were not confirmed in most of these studies, all these reports may not represent 
failure of the 0.25-mg/kg bw per day primaquine regimen. A systematic review 
of 87 clinical trials of primaquine dosing and relapse in vivax malaria, with data 
for 59 735 patients enrolled in 156 treatment arms, conducted in 20 countries, 
was reported recently (24). The median rate of recurrence after a very low dose 
(total dose, ≤ 2.5 mg/kg bw) primaquine in 44 studies was 25% (range, 0–90%) at 
4–6 months, while that in 82 studies with a dose of > 2.5 to ≤ 5 mg/kg bw was 
6.7% (range, 0–59%). High-dose (> 5 mg/kg bw) primaquine regimens (assessed in 
28 treatment arms) were associated with a median recurrence rate of 0% (range, 
0–15%) at 1 month. In 18 studies with control arms, the effectiveness of a very 
low-dose regimen of primaquine was no different from that in patients who did 
not receive primaquine (odds ratio, 0.60; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.33–1.09, 
p = 0.09), whereas a significant benefit of the low-dose regimens was reported 
in 50% (6/12) of studies (overall odds ratio, 0.14; 95% CI, 0.06–0.35, p < 0.001). 
Two studies of a total of 171 patients showed much greater effectiveness of high-
dose primaquine than a control (odds ratio, 0.03; 95% CI, 0.01–0.13; p < 0.0001). 
Figure A6.1 illustrates these findings. 
A
6
287
 Figure A6.1. Forest plots showing effectiveness of different doses of primaquine 
in radical cure of vivax malaria. Very low dose = total dose, ≤ 2.5 mg/kg bw, 
low dose = > 2.5 to ≤ 5 mg/kg bw, high dose = > 5 mg/kg bw.
* Indian subcontinent; ^ USA (Korea); ^^ USA (Chesson); # Thailand; ## Indonesia: + Ethiopia.
 In addition there was a higher risk for relapse after standard primaquine therapy 
(equivalent to 15 mg daily) among people weighing > 70 kg. Thus, it is recommended 
that a higher dose regimen (0.5 mg base/kg bw; total, 7 mg/kg bw over 14 days) be 
given in South-East Asia and Oceania, where tropical frequent-relapse strains are 
prevalent. Elsewhere, where relapse rates are lower, the lower dose is effective and 
therefore recommended (0.25 mg base/kg bw; total, 3.5mg/kg bw over 14 days).
288
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Figure A6.2. Dose–response relations for the radical curative efficacy of 
primaquine in Thailand (22). P. vivax recurrence (presumed relapse) within 
28 days of regimens of artesunate and different durations of primaquine (30 
mg base per day) to adults is shown. The grey circle shows the recurrences 
in adults receiving artesunate and primaquine at 60 mg daily for 7 days. 
The blue-centred black diamond show the rates with primaquine alone. 
The difference between primaquine at 30 mg/day with and without artesunate 
reflects recrudescence (A; arrowed) and that between primaquine at 30 mg/
day with artesunate and primaquine at 60 mg/day presumably reflects relapses 
(B; arrowed).
Recurrence % (95%CI) within 28 days
 
Days of Primaquine 
  
0  
3  
6  
9  
12  
15  
20  
30  
10  
0  
40  
50  
A 
B 
An important question is whether the current 14-day primaquine regimen can be 
shortened. Seven-day regimens are used commonly in the Americas. Pukrittayakamee 
et al. (22) compared different durations of treatment for vivax malaria in Thailand 
and showed that a 30-mg adult dose given twice daily for 7 days (n = 43) was not 
inferior to the standard 14-day course of 30 mg/day once daily (n = 42) and was 
not associated with a greater incidence of adverse effects (Figure 6.2). Durand et 
al. (25) evaluated the efficacy of three primaquine regimes—0.5 mg/kg bw per day 
for 5 days (150 mg total), 0.5 mg/kg bw per day for 7 days (210 mg total) or 0.25 
mg/kg per day for 14 days (210 mg total)—to prevent P. vivax malaria relapses 
in Loreto, Peru. Each group consisted of 180 patients; 90% completed follow-up. 
The relapse rates were similar with the 7- and 14-day regimes (16/156 = 10.3% 
and 22/162 = 13.6%, p = 0.361) and higher in the 5-day group (48/169 = 28.4%, p < 
0.001 and p = 0.001, respectively). More information is needed on the tolerability, 
safety and efficacy of this approach. Primaquine is metabolized via cytochrome 
P450 mixed function oxidases (principally 2D6) to reactive intermediates, which 
mediate radical curative efficacy and haemolytic toxicity. Patients with loss-of-
function polymorphisms in CYP2D6 may not generate sufficient metabolites for 
efficacy and may have relapses despite full adherence to primaquine radical 
curative regimens.
A
6
289
 As primaquine also has weak but significant activity against blood-stage parasites 
(16), the radical cure regimen of chloroquine and primaquine for vivax malaria 
conforms to the definition of combination therapy. Combinations of chloroquine 
and primaquine may therefore mask low-level chloroquine resistance.
Assessment of resistance
As P. vivax cannot be cultured continuously in vitro, it is more difficult to determine 
its in-vitro sensitivity to antimalarial drugs (although short-term cultures do provide 
reliable results). In-vivo assessment of the therapeutic efficacy of drugs against 
P. vivax malaria is compounded by difficulties in distinguishing recrudescence due 
to drug-resistant infections from relapse. Recurrence occurring within 16 days of 
starting treatment for a primary infection is almost certainly recrudescence and 
thus represents therapeutic failure. A recurrence between days 17 and 28 may be 
either a recrudescence due to chloroquine-resistant parasites or a relapse; however, 
a relapse or a newly acquired infection should still be suppressed by residual 
chloroquine levels within 28 days. Beyond day 28, recurrences are increasingly 
likely to represent relapses or newly acquired infections (26). Recurrent vivax 
parasitaemia in the presence of chloroquine blood levels > 100 ng/mL is likely to 
represent resistance, whatever the origin of the recurrence.
A6.3.2 |  
TREATMENT OF SEVERE AND COMPLICATED 
VIVAX OR KNOWLESI MALARIA
P. vivax and P. knowlesi are very sensitive to artemisinin derivatives (14, 16). Prompt, 
effective management should be the same as for severe and complicated falciparum 
malaria (see section 7).
A6.3.3 |  
TREATMENT OF MALARIA CAUSED BY 
P. OVALE, P. MALARIAE AND P. KNOWLESI
Infections with P. ovale (both species), P. malariae and P. knowlesi are considered to be 
generally sensitive to chloroquine. A single study in Indonesia reported resistance 
of P. malariae to chloroquine (27). The recommended treatment for radical cure of 
P. ovale relapsing malaria is the same as that for P. vivax, i.e. ACT or chloroquine 
combined with primaquine (total dose, 3.5 mg base/kg bw). The high prevalence 
of G6PD deficiency in areas endemic for P. ovale indicates that caution should be 
exercised in use of primaquine, as stated below. P. malariae and P. knowlesi do not 
form hypnozoites and so do not require radical cure with primaquine.
290
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A6.3.4 | ADVERSE EFFECTS AND 
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Chloroquine is generally well tolerated. Common side-effects include mild dizziness, 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and itching, and dosing of primaquine is 
limited by abdominal discomfort at doses > 1 mg/kg bw. In general, primaquine 
is well tolerated at individual doses ≤ 0.5 mg base/kg bw if given with food. 
Some methaemoglobinaemia is common but is very seldom dangerous. The main 
adverse effect of primaquine is oxidant haemolysis, which can be severe, resulting 
in haemoglobinuria (“blackwater”) and severe anaemia. Although some red cell 
loss may occur in normal subjects, patients who are G6PD deficient are particularly 
vulnerable. 
Figure A6.3. Geographical distribution of G6PD deficiency genotypes (28).
A
6
291
 G6PD deficiency is very common, with a prevalence typically ranging from 3% 
to 35% in tropical areas (Figure A6.3). There are over 180 genetic G6PD variants, 
nearly all conferring an unstable enzyme, which degrades more rapidly than the 
normal variant. This renders older red cells vulnerable to oxidant damage (28). 
G6PD is X-linked; thus, males have only one G6PD allele (they are either normal 
or deficient hemizygotes), whereas females have two (so can be homozygous 
G6PD normal, homozygous G6PD deficient or heterozygous). Hemizygous males 
and homozygous females have full expression of G6PD deficiency: the level of 
G6PD activity in their mature red cells is nearly always 15% of normal or less. 
Heterozygous females usually have only partial deficiency, and they have been 
referred to as having “intermediate” deficiency, although, because X-inactivation 
is a random event that takes place early in embryonic life (termed Lyonization), 
the proportion of these two cell types is very variable. Thus, although the average 
ratio of G6PD-deficient to normal red cells is 50:50, some individuals may have a 
ratio of 70:30 or even more unequal ratios. The severity of oxidant haemolysis in 
heterozygous females therefore varies from that observed in hemizygous males 
(if the majority of their red cells are G6PD deficient) to very little haemolysis (if 
the majority of their red cells are G6PD normal). Importantly, if > 30% of their red 
cells are not G6PD deficient, heterozygous females will be identified as “normal” 
in current screening tests. 
At a population level, the overall fall in haemoglobin in heterozygous females will 
be, on average, one half of that seen in hemizygous male and homozygous females 
(29, 30). From a clinical standpoint, heterozygotes with > 80% G6PD normal red cells 
(i.e. < 20% G6PD-deficient red cells) are very unlikely to develop severe haemolytic 
anaemia. Except in severely deficient individuals, haemolysis typically starts after 
1 or 2 days of treatment (when all the remaining red cell oxidant defences have 
been exhausted). The extent of haemolysis with primaquine depends on the degree 
of G6PD deficiency and the primaquine dose. Two of the most prevalent G6PD 
variants represent the two ends of the severity spectrum, with the Mediterranean 
variant (the main variant found in Europe, West and Central Asia and northern 
India) being among the most severe and the African A– variant (found in sub-
Saharan Africa and in African-Americans) being among the mildest (Figure A6.4). 
There is also substantial variation in G6PD activity among individuals with the 
same genotype and even within the same individual over time. With less severe 
G6PD variants, primaquine-induced haemolysis typically becomes evident after 
1 or 2 days of exposure, when the oxidant defences of all the older erythrocytes 
have been depleted (29–31). If primaquine is continued in people with the African 
A– variant, haemolysis lessens and the haemoglobin concentration starts to rise 
again, despite further drug administration, as reticulocytes enter the circulation 
to replace the haemolysed cells. 
292
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Figure A6.4. Red cell survival and degree of anaemia following daily primaquine 
in different G6PD deficiency variants. On the left, red cell survival with different 
daily doses of primaquine given to adults with the African A– variant of G6PD 
deficiency. On the right, the average fractional fall in haemoglobin concentration 
by day 7 (time of the usual nadir) with daily primaquine dosing in people with 
four different G6PD deficiency variants.
0 
5 
 10  
 15 
20 
25 
70 
80 
60 
50 
90 
100
 
Red cell half-life (days) 
Red cells remaining (%) 
30mg
 
15mg
 
<15mg
 
45mg
 
Fractional fall in haemoglobin by day 7(%) 
 
20 
30 
10 
   0  
  40
African A-   Viangchan   Mahidol Mediterranean 
 
 
 
45
m
 
30
mg 
 
 
15
mg
15
mg
30
mg
These young red cells entering the circulation contain five times more G6PD 
than the oldest red cells and so are relatively resistant to the haemolytic effect. 
Further haemolysis does, however, occur with higher doses (31). In contrast, 
in the Mediterranean variant, haemolysis continues if primaquine is not stopped, 
and life-threatening anaemia may result. In six decades of primaquine use in 
approximately 200 million people, 14 deaths have been reported. If the estimate 
is confined to reports with known denominators, the estimated mortality rate is 
 
1 in 621 428. All but one death occurred subsequent to multiple dosing to prevent 
vivax malaria relapse (32, 33). 
A
6
293
 Figure A6.5. Haemolysis following different primaquine regimens in people with 
A- G6PD deficiency. Weekly administration ameliorates the anaemia by allowing 
haematological recovery after each dose.
To reduce the risk for haemolysis of individuals who have G6PD deficiency, 
an intermittent primaquine regimen of 0.75 mg base/kg bw weekly for 8 weeks 
can be given, under medical supervision. This regimen was safe and effective in 
people with the African A– genotype (34) (Figure A6.5). Although the regime has 
been recommended for some 50 years, relatively few studies have been conducted 
of its efficacy or safety. 
The risk for severe haemolysis is virtually confined to G6PD-deficient individuals, 
which is why testing is so important (33). In non-G6PD-deficient individuals, a high 
dose of primaquine (30 mg/day) has been shown to be safe and effective for both 
daily prophylaxis and radical treatment. Primaquine is not recommended during 
pregnancy or in infants < 6 months, as limited data are available on its safety in 
these groups. 
A6.4 | MONITORING THERAPEUTIC EFFICACY
The sensitivity of P. vivax to antimalarial drugs must be monitored in order to 
improve the treatment of vivax malaria, in particular in view of its emerging 
resistance to chloroquine. A modified version of the standard WHO in-vitro test for 
determining the antimalarial sensitivity of P. falciparum has been used successfully 
for assessing the sensitivity of P. vivax populations and for screening the efficacy of 
new antimalarial drugs (35–37). WHO recently introduced a revised protocol for in-
vivo monitoring of the therapeutic efficacy of chloroquine in P. vivax malaria, which 
includes measurement of blood chloroquine levels to assess exposure, and use 
of molecular markers (only available for the Pvdhfr gene). Better understanding 
of the molecular mechanisms underlying drug resistance in P. vivax is needed to 
improve monitoring of chloroquine resistance.
294
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A6.5 | REFERENCES
1.   
World malaria report 2013. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
2.   
Gething PW, Elyazar IR, Moyes CL, Smith DL, Battle KE, Guerra CA, et al. A long 
neglected world malaria map: Plasmodium vivax endemicity in 2010. PLoS 
Negl Trop Dis 2012;6:e1814.
3.   
Mendis K, Sine B, Marchesini P, Carter R. The neglected burden of Plasmodium 
vivax malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001;64:97–106.
4.   
Singh B, Sung LK, Matsusop A, Rahakrishnan A, Shamsul SS, Cox-Singh J, et al. 
A large focus of naturally acquired Plasmodium knowlesi infections in human 
beings. Lancet 2004;363:1017–24.
5.   
Sutherland CJ, Tanomsing N, Nolder D, Oguike M, Jennison C, Pukrittayakamee 
S, et al. Two nonrecombining sympatric forms of the human malaria parasite 
Plasmodium ovale occur globally. J Infect Dis 2010;201:1544–50.
6.   
Douglas NM, Lampah DA, Kenangalem E, Simpson JA, Poespoprodjo JR, 
Sugiarto P, et al. Major burden of severe anemia from non-falciparum malaria 
species in southern Papua: a hospital-based surveillance study. PLoS Med 
2013;10:e1001575. 
7.   
Poespoprodjo JR, Fobia W, Kenangalem E, Lampah DA, Hasanuddin A, Warikar 
N, et al. Vivax malaria: a major cause of morbidity in early infancy. Clin Infect 
Dis 2009;48:1704–12. 
8.   
Genton B, D’Acremont V, Rare L, Baea K, Reeder JC, Alpers MP, et al. 
Plasmodium vivax and mixed infections are associated with severe malaria 
in children: a prospective cohort study from Papua New Guinea. PLoS Med 
2008;5:e136.
9.   
Kochar DK, Das A, Kochar SK, Saxena V, Sirohi P, Garg S, et al. Severe 
Plasmodium vivax malaria: a report on serial cases from Bikaner in 
northwestern India. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009;80:194–8. 
10.  
Alexandre MA, Ferreira CO, Siqueira AM, Magalhães BL, Mourão MPG, 
Lacerda MV, et al. Severe Plasmodium vivax malaria, Brazilian Amazon. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2010;16:1611–4.
11.  
Nosten F, McGready R, Simpson JA, Thwai KL, Balkan S, Cho T, et al. Effects 
of Plasmodium vivax malaria in pregnancy. Lancet 1999;354:546–9.
12.  
McGready R, Lee SJ, Wiladphaingern J, Ashley EA, Rijken MJ, Boel M, et 
al. Adverse effects of falciparum and vivax malaria and the safety of 
antimalarial treatment in early pregnancy: a population-based study. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2012;12:388–96.
13.  
William T, Menon J, Rajahram G, Chan L, Ma G, Donaldson S, et al. Severe 
Plasmodium knowlesi malaria in a tertiary care hospital, Sabah, Malaysia. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17:1248–55. 
14.  
Barber BE, William T, Grigg MJ, Menon J, Auburn S, Marfurt J, et al. A 
prospective comparative study of knowlesi, falciparum, and vivax malaria 
in Sabah, Malaysia: high proportion with severe disease from Plasmodium 
knowlesi and Plasmodium vivax but no mortality with early referral and 
artesunate therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2013;56:383–97.
A
6
295
 15.  
Grigg MJ, William T, Barber BE, Parameswaran U, Bird E, Piera K, et al. 
Combining parasite lactate dehydrogenase-based and histidine-rich protein 
2-based rapid tests to improve specificity for diagnosis of malaria due to 
Plasmodium knowlesi and other Plasmodium species in Sabah, Malaysia. J 
Clin Microbiol 2014;52:2053–60.
16.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Chantra A, Simpson JA, Vanijanonta S, Clemens R, 
Looareesuwan S, et al. Therapeutic responses to different antimalarial drugs 
in vivax malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1680–5.
17.  
Valecha N, Srivastava B, Dubhashi NG, Rao BH, Kumar A, Ghosh SK, et al. 
Safety, efficacy and population pharmacokinetics of fixed-dose combination 
of artesunate–mefloquine in the treatment of acute uncomplicated 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in India. J Vector Borne Dis 2013;50:258–64.
18.  
Naing C, Racloz V, Whittaker MA, Aung K, Reid SA, Mak JW, et al. Efficacy and 
safety of dihydroartemisinin–piperaquine for treatment of Plasmodium 
vivax malaria in endemic countries: meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
studies. PLoS One 2013;8:e78819. 
19.  
Gogtay N, Kannan S, Thatte UM, Olliaro PL, Sinclair D. Artemisinin-based 
combination therapy for treating uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax malaria. 
Cochrane Database Systemat Rev 2013;10:CD008492.
20.  
Abdallah TM, Ali AA, Bakri M, Gasim GI, Musa IR, Adam I. Efficacy of 
artemether–lumefantrine as a treatment for uncomplicated Plasmodium 
vivax malaria in eastern Sudan. Malar J 2012;11:e404.
21.  
Baird JK. Resistance to therapies for infection by Plasmodium vivax. Clin 
Microbiol Rev 2009;22:508–34.
22.  
Pukrittayakamee S, Imwong M, Chotivanich K, Singhasivanon P, Day NP, 
White NJ. A comparison of two short-course primaquine regimens for the 
treatment and radical cure of Plasmodium vivax malaria in Thailand. Am J 
Trop Med Hyg 2010;82:542–7. 
23.  
Battle KE, Karhunen MS, Bhatt S, Gething PW, Howes RE, Golding N, et al. 
Geographical variation in Plasmodium vivax relapse. Malar J 2014;13:e144.
24.  
John GK, Douglas NM, von Seidlein L, Nosten F, Baird JK, White NJ, et 
al. Primaquine radical cure of Plasmodium vivax: a critical review of the 
literature. Malar J 2012;11:e280. 
25.  
Durand S, Cabezas C, Lescano AG, Galvez M, Gutierrez S, Arrospide N, et al. 
Efficacy of three different regimens of primaquine for the prevention of 
relapses of Plasmodium vivax malaria in the Amazon Basin of Peru. Am J 
Trop Med Hyg 2014;78:736–40. 
26.  
Baird JK, Leksana B, Masbar S, Fryauff DJ, Sutanihardja MA, Suradi, et 
al. Diagnosis of resistance to chloroquine by Plasmodium vivax: timing 
of recurrence and whole blood chloroquine levels. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1997;56:621–6.
27.  
Maguire JD, Sumawinata IW, Masbar S, Laksana B, Prodjodipuro P, Susanti 
I, et al. Chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium malariae in south Sumatra, 
Indonesia. Lancet 2002;360:58–60.
296
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 28.  
Howes RE, Dewi M, Piel FB, Monteiro WM, Battle KE, Messina JP, et al. Spatial 
distribution of G6PD deficiency variants across malaria-endemic regions. 
Malar J 2013;12:e418. 
29.  
Beutler E. The hemolytic effects of primaquine and related compounds. 
Blood 1959;14:103–39. 
30.  
Beutler E. G6PD deficiency. Blood 1994;84:3613–36. 
31.  
Kellermeyer RW, Tarlov AR, Brewer GJ, Carson PE, Alving AS. Hemolytic 
effect of therapeutic drugs. Clinical considerations of the primaquine-type 
hemolysis. J Am Med Assoc 1962;180:388–94. 
32.  
Recht J, Ashley EA, White NJ. A review of the safety of 8-aminoquinolines. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 
33.  
Ashley EA, Recht J, White NJ. Primaquine: the risks and the benefits. Malar J 
2014;13:418e.
34.  
Alving AS, Johnson CF, Tarlov AR, Brewer GJ, Kellermeyer RW, Carson PE. 
Mitigation of the haemolytic effect of primaquine and enhancement of its 
action against exoerythrocytic forms of the Chesson strain of Plasmodium 
vivax by intermittent regimens of drug administration: a preliminary report. 
Bull World Health Organ 1960;22:621–31. 
35.  
Chotivanich K, Silamut K, Udomsangpetch R, Stepniewska KA, 
Pukrittayakamee S, Looareesuwan S, et al. Ex-vivo short-term culture and 
developmental assessment of Plasmodium vivax. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 
2001;95:677–80.
36.  
Russell B, Chalfein F, Prasetyorini B, Kenangalem E, Piera K, Suwanarusk 
R, et al. Determinants of in vitro drug susceptibility testing of Plasmodium 
vivax. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008;52:1040–5. 
37.  
Russell BM, Udomsangpetch R, Rieckmann KH, Kotecka BM, Coleman RE, 
Sattabongkot J. Simple in vitro assay for determining the sensitivity of 
Plasmodium vivax isolates from fresh human blood to antimalarials in areas 
where P. vivax is endemic. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003;47:170–3. 
A
6
297
  Annex 7 |  
Resistance to antimalarial medicines 
A7.1 | INTRODUCTION
Resistance to antimalarial drugs is a major threat to the control and elimination of 
malaria. The greatest problem with antimalarial drug resistance is with Plasmodium 
falciparum. All geographical areas are affected, with the exception of Central 
America, and the worst affected is mainland South-East Asia, where parasites 
with reduced susceptibility to all the available antimalarial medicines are now 
prevalent. Resistance to chloroquine in P. falciparum has spread across most of the 
world and caused millions of deaths. Yet, chloroquine resistance appears to have 
arisen de novo and then spread on only a few occasions. In contrast, resistance to 
antifolate drugs and atovaquone arises frequently (e.g. antifolate resistance rose 
to high levels within 2 years of the initial deployment of proguanil in peninsular 
Malaya in 1947), and it can be induced readily in both P. falciparum and P. vivax 
(1). Against a background of chloroquine resistance, mefloquine resistance arose 
over a 6-year period on the north-west border of Thailand (2). Genetically encoded 
resistance to the artemisinin derivatives in P. falciparum has emerged recently 
in South-East Asia and is now affecting therapeutic responses to ACTs (3–5). 
Piperaquine resistance has begun to emerge in Cambodia. Resistance also occurs 
in P. vivax; high-level resistance to chloroquine is prevalent in Indonesia and Papua 
New Guinea, and lower levels of resistance have been reported in several other 
areas of Asia and the Americas (6). Antifol resistance is also common in P. vivax. 
There are very few reports of resistance in P. malariae or P. ovale (although there 
have also been very few studies).
Currently, there are no “bedside” tests for determining the susceptibility of malaria 
parasites to antimalarial medicines. Monitoring is therefore needed to determine 
geographical trends in susceptibility and the emergence and spread of drug 
resistance to guide treatment choices and planning. 
A7.2 | DEFINITION
Antimalarial drug resistance is defined as the ability of a parasite strain to survive or 
multiply despite the proper administration and absorption of an antimalarial drug 
at the recommended dose. Drug resistance to an antimalarial compound reflects 
a right-hand shift in the concentration–effect (dose–response) relation (Fig. A7.1). 
A
7
299
 Figure A7.1 The concentration–effect relationship.
Emax
 
Log Concentration 
Effect 
EC50 
Resistance
 
Resistance is a right-hand shift in the concentration–effect relation for a particular 
malaria parasite population. It may be a parallel shift (red) from the “normal” 
profile (green), or, in some circumstances, the slope changes or the maximum 
achievable effect (Emax) is reduced (blue). The effect measured in vivo is parasite 
killing (reflected by reduction in parasite density), and that in vitro is usually 
a measure of parasite development, such as schizont maturation or uptake of 
3H-hypoxanthine or some other labelled substrate. The concentration associated 
with half of the maximum effect is the EC50. In-vitro susceptibility tests usually 
report EC50 (termed IC50).
A7.2.1 | PHARMACOKINETICS
The pharmacokinetic properties of antimalarial drugs vary widely in different 
individuals, so that infective malaria parasites may encounter very different blood 
concentrations of antimalarial medicines in patients who receive similar mg/kg 
bw doses (Figure A7.2). Clinical characterization of resistance should therefore 
also include measurement of blood or plasma concentrations to distinguish true 
resistance from inadequate drug exposure. In the case of a prodrug (a drug that 
is not active in the ingested form and requires chemical conversion through 
metabolic processes to become pharmacologically active, such as proguanil), it is 
also necessary if possible to show adequate conversion to the active metabolite.
300
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 Figure A7.2 Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of antimalarial drugs.
   1012 
   1010 
    108 
    106 
    104 
    102 
      1 
Total parasites
 
Detection limit 
Weeks
 
Malaria parasites 
Drug levels
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
 
Shows the range of total numbers of parasites in the body (blue) and antimalarial 
drug concentrations in blood (red) that typically occur in adult patients after 
administration of a slowly eliminated antimalarial drug. When the drug is combined 
with an artemisinin derivative to form an ACT, the initial decrease in parasite 
numbers is much greater (section A7.4).
A7.2.2 | LEVELS OF RESISTANCE
The main consequence of antimalarial drug resistance is treatment failure. At low 
levels of resistance, there are no early treatment failures, but the proportion 
of patients with late recrudescence increases. As the level of resistance rises, 
recrudescence occurs earlier and earlier, until, with high-grade resistance, eventually 
parasitaemia fails to clear or, worse still, continues to increase (7). Slowing of 
parasite clearance is an indicator of increasing resistance. In artemisinin resistance, 
slow parasite clearance is the main manifestation of resistance (reflecting loss of 
susceptibility of the ring-stage parasites) (3). Increasing rates of gametocytaemia 
are another important manifestation, which may precede detectable increases in 
treatment failure rates (8). This is an important driver of the spread of antimalarial 
drug resistance.
A
7
301
 Antimalarial drug resistance is not the only cause of “treatment failure”, which is 
failure to clear malaria parasitaemia or to resolve clinical symptoms despite use 
of an antimalarial drug at correct doses. Incorrect dosing, incomplete adherence 
(compliance), poor drug quality, interactions with other drugs, compromised drug 
absorption, vomiting of the medicine, unusual pharmacokinetics or misdiagnosis 
of the disease are other causes. Treatment failure is dangerous for the patient 
and also for the community, as it increases malaria transmission and fuels the 
emergence and spread of antimalarial drug resistance. 
A7.3 |  
EMERGENCE AND SPREAD OF 
ANTIMALARIAL DRUG RESISTANCE
A7.3.1 | MOLECULAR BASIS
The genetic events that confer antimalarial drug resistance (without seriously 
damaging the parasites) are spontaneous and rare. They occur independently of 
the drug but are then selected by the drug, which kills sensitive parasites but not 
resistant ones. The resistance mechanisms that have been described to date are 
mutations or changes in the copy number of genes related either to the drug targets 
(e.g. Pfdhfr) or to the pumps (e.g. Pfmdr) that affect intraparasitic concentrations 
of the drug. A single genetic event may be all that is required to confer resistance, 
or multiple unlinked events may be necessary (epistasis). P. falciparum parasites 
in South-East Asia appear constitutionally to have an increased propensity to 
develop drug resistance. 
A7.3.2 | DEVELOPMENT OF RESISTANCE
The development of resistance can be considered in two parts: the initial rare 
genetic event, which produces the resistant mutant, and the subsequent selection 
process, in which the survival advantage in the presence of the antimalarial drug 
leads to preferential transmission of resistant mutants and, thus, to the spread of 
resistance. In the absence of the antimalarial drug, resistant mutants usually have 
a survival disadvantage. Provided the mutations have not gone to fixation (i.e. 
while wild-type parasites are still prevalent), this “fitness cost” of the resistance 
mechanism may result in a decrease in the prevalence of resistance once the 
selection pressure is removed. This happened in Malawi when chloroquine was 
withdrawn: susceptibility to chloroquine returned (9). Resistance to one drug may 
select for resistance to another when the mechanisms of resistance are similar 
(cross-resistance). There are many parallels with antibiotic resistance, particularly 
to anti-tuberculosis drugs, for which, as for malaria, transferable resistance genes 
are not involved in resistance (10, 11). In experimental models, resistance mutations 
can be selected without passage through the mosquito (i.e. during mitotic cell 
302
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 division) by exposing large numbers of malaria parasites (either in vitro, in animals 
or, as was done in the past, in volunteers) to sub-therapeutic drug concentrations 
(12). This allows growth of any spontaneously emerging resistant mutants while 
suppressing the majority drug-sensitive parasite population. The same factors 
underlie the selection of resistance in natural parasite populations. This explains 
why under-treatment of hyperparasitaemic individuals is such a potent source of 
resistance (13).
The factors that determine a propensity for antimalarial drug resistance to develop 
include (7, 14):
• the intrinsic frequency with which the genetic changes occur:
•  
the degree of resistance (the rightwards shift in the concentration–effect relation 
(Figure A7.1) conferred by the genetic change;
• the fitness cost of the resistance mechanism;
•  
the proportion of all transmissible infections that are exposed to the drug 
(selection pressure);
• the number of parasites exposed to the drug;
• the concentrations of drug to which these parasites are exposed; 
• the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the antimalarial drug(s);
•  
individual (dosing, duration, adherence) and community patterns of drug use 
(quality, availability, distribution);
• the immunity profile of the community and the individual; and
•  
the simultaneous presence of other antimalarial drugs or substances in the 
blood to which the parasite is not resistant.
The emergence of resistance reflects the product of the probability of de-novo 
emergence (a rare event) and of subsequent spread. Because de-novo resistance 
arises randomly among malaria parasites, non-immune patients infected with 
large numbers of parasites who receive inadequate treatment (because of poor 
drug quality, poor adherence, vomiting of an oral treatment, etc.) are such an 
important source of de-novo resistance (13). This underlines the importance of 
correct prescribing, good adherence to prescribed drug regimens and the provision 
of treatment regimens that are still highly effective in hyperparasitaemic patients. 
Immunity provides a powerful “brake” on the emergence of resistance by reducing 
the chances that resistant parasites can survive and spread. 
The spread of resistant mutant malaria parasites is facilitated by widespread use 
of drugs with long elimination phases. These provide a “selective filter”, allowing 
infection by the resistant parasites, while the residual antimalarial activity prevents 
infection by sensitive parasites (15). Slowly eliminated drugs, such as mefloquine 
(terminal elimination half-life (t½ẞ), 2–3 weeks), piperaquine (t½ẞ 4 weeks) and 
chloroquine (t½ẞ 1–2 months), persist in the blood and provide a selective filter 
for weeks or months after drug administration has ceased. 
A
7
303
 A7.3.3 |  
TRANSMISSION INTENSITY AND THE 
SELECTION AND SPREAD OF RESISTANCE
The recrudescence and subsequent transmission of an infection that has generated 
a de-novo resistant malaria parasite is essential for propagation of resistance (7, 
16). Epidemiological studies clearly implicate low-transmission settings, where 
patients often have little or no immunity, as the source of drug resistance. 
Resistance in P. falciparum to chloroquine, sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine, mefloquine, 
atovaquone and now artemisinins all originated in South-East Asia. Chloroquine 
and pyrimethamine resistance spread subsequently to Africa (17).
In low-transmission areas, although asymptomatic carriage is common in focal 
areas, a high proportion of malaria infections are symptomatic, and selection of 
drug resistance therefore takes place in the context of treatment. Large numbers 
of parasites (>108) in an individual usually encounter antimalarial drugs at 
concentrations that are maximally effective. But, in some patients, for the reasons 
mentioned earlier, the blood concentrations of antimalarial drugs are much lower 
and may select for resistance. Immunity considerably reduces the emergence of 
resistance (7). Host defence contributes a major anti-parasitic effect, and so any 
spontaneously generated drug-resistant mutant malaria parasite must contend 
not only with the concentrations of antimalarial drug present but also with host 
immunity (18). This kills parasites regardless of their antimalarial resistance and 
reduces the probability of parasite survival (independently of drugs) at all stages of 
the transmission cycle. For the blood-stage infection, immunity acts in a similar way 
to antimalarial drugs, both to eliminate the rare de-novo resistant mutants and to 
stop them from being transmitted (i.e. like combination therapy). It also improves 
cure rates with failing drugs (i.e. drugs falling to resistance), thereby reducing the 
relative transmission advantage of resistant parasites (18). Even if a resistant mutant 
parasite does survive the initial drug treatment and multiplies, the chance that 
this will result in sufficient gametocytes for transmission is reduced as a result 
of asexual stage immunity (which reduces the multiplication rate and lowers the 
density at which the infection is controlled) and transmission-blocking immunity. 
In high-transmission settings, individuals are commonly infected with many different 
parasite genotypes, which increases the possibility of out-breeding of multi-genic 
resistance mechanisms or competition in the feeding anopheline mosquito (19). 
In areas of high malaria transmission, people still receive antimalarial treatment 
throughout their lives (often inappropriately for other febrile infections), but these 
“treatments” are largely unrelated to the peaks of parasitaemia. This substantially 
reduces the probability of selecting resistant parasites.
304
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A7.3.4 |  
PHARMACOKINETICS OF ANTIMALARIAL 
DRUGS AND SELECTION OF RESISTANCE
Absorption and disposition
The probability of selecting a de-novo mutation depends on the degree of resistance 
that results from it. If a single mutation confers high-level resistance, selection 
occurs readily; however, resistance usually develops in a series of steps, the initial 
step being low-level resistance. If the range of blood concentrations achieved in 
a patient considerably exceeds the concentrations that result in 90% inhibition 
of multiplication (IC90 values) for the most resistant mutant (IC90
R), then resistance 
cannot be selected in the acute phase of treatment, as even the resistant mutants 
are prevented from multiplying. If, however, the peak concentrations are close to 
or below the IC90
R, resistance may be selected (20). Peak drug concentrations are 
determined mainly by absorption, distribution volume and dose. Several antimalarial 
drugs (notably lumefantrine, atovaquone and, to a lesser extent, mefloquine) 
are lipophilic, hydrophobic and variably absorbed (inter-individual variation in 
bioavailability of up to 20-fold); the distribution volumes also vary substantially 
among individuals. This results in considerable inter-individual variation in peak 
blood concentrations of the drugs (21). As a result, some patients may have very 
low levels despite receiving “correct dosing” (previous dosing recommendations for 
young children have often been too low); usually, however, under-dosing results 
from incorrect dosing. The main sources of under-dosing globally are incorrect 
self-medication, because of poor adherence to a correctly prescribed drug regimen, 
poor-quality drugs, uncontrolled drug availability and purchase of incorrect dose 
regimens, use of substandard drugs purchased in shops or markets, and incorrect 
administration at home (22). Quality-assured drugs, education, correct prescribing, 
optimized doses, good adherence and high-quality packaging and formulations 
therefore play major roles in preventing the emergence of antimalarial drug 
resistance. 
Drug elimination rates
In high-transmission settings, a person who takes an antimalarial drug for 
symptomatic malaria exposes not only the parasites that are causing that infection 
but also all the newly acquired infections that emerge from the liver during the 
drug’s elimination phase. The longer the terminal elimination half-life of the 
drug, the greater the exposure. Slow drug elimination is particularly relevant to 
the spread of resistance and is less important for de-novo selection (13, 15, 23). 
Some rapidly eliminated antimalarial drugs (e.g. the artemisinin derivatives) never 
present an intermediate concentration to infecting malaria parasites, because 
they are eliminated completely within the 2-day life cycle of the asexual parasite 
(20). Others (e.g. desethylamodiaquine, pyronaridine, mefloquine, piperaquine and 
A
7
305
 chloroquine) have elimination half-lives of weeks or months and thus present a 
lengthy selection opportunity. Obviously, the greater the degree of resistance (i.e. 
the higher the IC90
R relative to the IC90 for susceptible parasites, IC90
S), the wider 
is the window of selection opportunity (20). Selection occurs only during the 
terminal phase if prevalent parasites are inhibited by these low concentrations. 
As the prevalence and degree of resistance rise, these low concentrations become 
ineffective, and so selection no longer occurs during the terminal elimination 
phase. With the exception of the artemisinin derivatives, maximum antimalarial 
parasite reduction ratios (kill rates) do not usually exceed 1000-fold per cycle (24). 
Following hepatic schizogony, exposure of at least two asexual cycles (4 days) to 
therapeutic drug concentrations is required to eradicate the blood-stage parasites 
emerging from the liver (suppressive prophylaxis). As a result, rapidly eliminated 
drugs such as the artemisinin derivatives or quinine provide little or no selection 
during the elimination phase (20). 
A7.3.5 | SPREAD OF RESISTANCE
The spread of resistance is determined by the reproductive advantage conferred 
by the resistance mechanism. This results from the increased gametocyte carriage 
associated with resistance (both from the primary infection and from subsequent 
recrudescence), the “donors” and the selective pressure from residual concentrations 
of slowly eliminated antimalarial drug in potential recipients (15). 
Resistance encoded by multiple mutations at a single locus generally occurs in 
two overlapping phases: in phase 1, the drug is better tolerated by the parasites, 
but the therapeutic doses still usually clear the infection; in phase 2, clinical failures 
start to occur. As the second phase is very rapid, it is essential that surveillance 
programmes be in place and are capable of monitoring the change from the 
first to the second phase. Phase 1 may occur faster in areas of high transmission, 
but the subsequent phase is slower. Combination therapy significantly slows the 
rate of evolution of resistance, but surveillance is still vital to detect early signs 
of resistance.
306
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A7.4 |  
PREVENTION OF RESISTANCE BY USE OF 
COMBINATION THERAPY
The theory underlying combination treatment of tuberculosis, leprosy and HIV 
infection is well known; it also applies to malaria (7, 10, 11, 13, 21, 24). Combination 
therapy slows the emergence of resistance. If two drugs with different modes of 
action and, therefore, different resistance mechanisms are used in combination, 
the per-parasite probability of developing resistance to both drugs is the product 
of their individual per-parasite probabilities. The lower the de-novo per-parasite 
probability of developing resistance, the greater is the delay in the emergence 
of resistance.
The ideal pharmacokinetics for an antimalarial drug has been much debated. Rapid 
elimination ensures that the residual concentrations do not provide a selective 
filter for resistant parasites, but drugs with this property (if used alone) must be 
given for at least 7 days, and adherence to 7-day regimens is poor. In order for 
a combination to be effective in a 3-day regimen, the elimination half-life of at 
least one component must exceed 24 h. Artemisinin derivatives are particularly 
effective in combinations with other antimalarial drugs because of their high 
killing rates (parasite reduction rate, around 10 000-fold per cycle), lack of adverse 
effects and the absence of significant resistance outside South-East Asia (2). 
Combinations of artemisinin derivatives (which are eliminated very rapidly) given 
for 3 days with slowly eliminated drugs, such as lumefantrine, mefloquine and 
piperaquine, provide complete protection against the emergence of resistance 
to the artemisinin derivatives if adherence is good, but they do leave the slowly 
eliminated “tail” of the slowly eliminated partner unprotected (25). Resistance can 
arise in any parasite and could therefore arise within the residual parasites that 
have not yet been killed by the artemisinin derivative; however, the number of 
parasites exposed to the partner drug alone represents a tiny fraction (< 0.00001%) 
of those present in an acute symptomatic infection. Furthermore, these residual 
parasites “see” relatively high levels of the partner, and, even if susceptibility is 
reduced, these levels may be sufficient to eradicate the infection (Figure A7.3). 
The long tail of low concentrations does, however, provide a selective filter for 
resistant parasites acquired from elsewhere and therefore contributes to the 
spread of resistance once it has developed. On the north-west border of Thailand, 
an area of low transmission where mefloquine resistance had already developed, 
systematic deployment of the artesunate–mefloquine combination was effective 
in stopping resistance and also in reducing the incidence of malaria (2). In that 
location, the mefloquine–artesunate ACT remained highly effective for 15 years, 
before artemisinin resistance emerged and failure rates increased again. 
 
A
7
307
 Figure A7.3. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of ACTs.
   10 12 
   10 10 
    10 8 
    10 6 
    10 4 
    10 2 
      1 
Total parasites
 
0 
Weeks 
Parasitaemia detection limit 
A  
B  
B1 
Drug concentration 
m 
n 
p 
q 
4 
3 
2 
1 
3 day  ACT
 
The artesunate + mefloquine combination is shown as an example. If no artesunate 
is given, the number of parasites exposed to mefloquine alone is shown by the area 
of A; when the combination is administered for 3 days, the number of parasites 
exposed to mefloquine alone is shown by the area of B (100 million times fewer). 
Furthermore, mefloquine levels are higher (m to n) when confronting B than 
when confronting the same number of parasites (B1) if no artesunate is given (p 
to q). If a parasite containing a de-novo mefloquine-resistant mutation were to 
occur, it should still be susceptible to artesunate. Thus, the probability of selecting 
a resistant mutant is reduced by 100 million times, as only a maximum of 100 
000 parasites are exposed to mefloquine alone after the fourth day (i.e. in the 
third cycle), and any artesunate-resistant parasite selected by artesunate initially 
would be killed by the accompanying mefloquine. As a result, the combination is 
more effective, reduces transmission and prevents the emergence of resistance 
to both drugs.
308
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 A7.5 | MONITORING ANTIMALARIAL DRUG 
RESISTANCE
A7.5.1 | MONITORING METHODS
Clinical methods
The rapid spread of antimalarial drug resistance over the past few decades shows 
the importance of monitoring for proper management of clinical cases, early 
detection of changing patterns of resistance and indicating where national malaria 
treatment policies should be revised. Recommendations and methods for testing 
therapeutic efficacy in vivo are described in detail in WHO publications (26, 27). 
They involve assessing the outcome of treatment during a fixed period of follow-
up (≥ 28 days) to detect malaria recurrence, i.e. any reappearance of symptoms 
and signs of clinical malaria and/or parasites in the blood. When possible, this is 
accompanied by at least one measurement of the slowly eliminated partner 
antimalarial drug in blood or plasma (usually on day 7 as all patients must be 
seen on this day in therapeutic assessments). Methods have been developed for 
measuring the concentrations of several antimalarial drugs in dried blood spots 
on filter paper, which considerably facilitates field studies (28). In endemic areas, 
recrudescence can be distinguished from reinfection by molecular genotyping (27). 
Assessing resistance to artemisinins
Recrudescence rates are less informative in assessing resistance to artemisinins, 
as these drugs are given in combination. The key measure is the parasite clearance 
rate, which is measured from the log-linear decrease in parasite density, which 
occurs after a variable lag phase from the start of treatment (Figure A7.4). In-vivo 
methods for assessing artemisinin resistance require frequent measurement of 
parasite counts (at least three counts in the first 24 h) in patients with high enough 
parasite counts (at least 10 000/µL), from which parasite clearance rates are 
derived. The result is usually expressed as the parasite clearance half-life (PCt1/2) 
(29, 30). The PCt1/2 values of fully sensitive infections are usually < 3 h, whereas 
those of resistant infections are > 5 h, although there is some overlap. The levels 
of artemisinin and its derivatives are usually not measured, as these drugs are 
eliminated rapidly and their assessment requires immediate plasma separation, 
centrifugation and storage at –70 oC (28).
A
7
309
 Figure A7.4. Parasite clearance curves. After a variable lag phase, parasitaemia 
decreases log-linearly. The slope of the linear segment gives the parasite clearance 
rate, from which the parasite clearance half-life (PCt1/2) is derived. This is independent 
of the initial parasite density, whereas the parasite clearance time is strongly 
dependent on initial density. Artemisinin resistance (red profile) is associated with 
slowing of parasite clearance, typically to PCt1/2 > 5 h.
Laboratory methods
Other indirect methods to assess antimalarial resistance include in-vitro studies of 
parasite susceptibility to drugs in culture, studies of point mutations or duplications 
in parasite resistance genes with molecular methods and measurement of the 
concentrations of antimalarial drugs in blood. These provide valuable early 
warning signs of resistance. In-vitro tests for P. falciparum have been available 
for several decades, but there is still substantial variation in methods, analysis 
and performance between laboratories. In-vitro testing for P. vivax in fresh blood 
samples is still confined to research centres. In-vitro assessment of artemisinin 
resistance in P. falciparum requires testing for ring-stage susceptibility in special 
assays, as the results of conventional testing do not correlate well with parasite 
clearance rates (3). 
Understanding of the molecular basis of antimalarial drug resistance has increased 
considerably in recent years. In many cases, multiple genetic changes are involved, 
but genotyping of malaria parasites (usually from a filter paper blood spot) by 
polymerase chain reaction can be used operationally to identify the principle genetic 
correlate of resistance. Reduced susceptibility to sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine is 
predicted well as single nucleotide polymorphisms in the Pfdhfr and Pfdhps genes 
for P. falciparum and Pvdhfr genes, and detection of these mutations is valuable 
in determining resistance patterns. Polymorphisms in the chloroquine resistance 
transporter gene Pfcrt predict resistance to chloroquine and to a lesser extent 
amodiaquine, and polymorphisms in the cytochrome bc1 complex gene (cytbc1) 
predict resistance to atovaquone. Amplification of the wild-type Pfmdr1 gene is 
310
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 associated with resistance to mefloquine and to a lesser extent lumefantrine, 
whereas mutations in the gene are associated with resistance to chloroquine and 
amodiaquine. Artemisinin resistance is associated with mutations in the “propeller 
region” of the P. falciparum kelch protein gene on chromosome 13 (PfK13).
A7.5.2 | REPORTING OF TREATMENT FAILURES
Reports of treatment failure and decreased drug sensitivity have often provided 
an important first indication of more widespread resistance in an area. Although 
such evidence may be biased, it can be collected without much effort at peripheral 
health centres. Reports of treatment failure are particularly useful if accompanied by 
measurement of the level of the (slowly eliminated) antimalarial drug at the time of 
recurrent infection (to assess exposure) and storage of blood samples for molecular 
genotyping and, if possible, parasite culture. If such reports are standardized and 
registered, they can make a valuable contribution to national early-warning systems 
and facilitate cost-effective monitoring by national programmes (26). 
A7.6 | REFERENCES
1.   
Peters W. The prevention of antimalarial drug resistance. Pharmacol Ther 
1990;47:499–508. 
2.   
Nosten F, van Vugt M, Price R, Luxemberger C, Thway KL, Brockman A, et al. 
Effects of artesunate-mefloquine combination on incidence of Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria and mefloquine resistance in western Thailand;  
a prospective study. Lancet 2000;356:297–302.
3.   
Dondorp AM, Nosten F, Yi P, Das D, Phyo AP, Tarning J, et al. Artemisinin 
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum malaria. N Engl J Med 2009;361:455–67.
4.   
Ariey F, Witkowski B, Amaratunga C, Beghain J, Langlois AC, Khim N, et al. A 
molecular marker of artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria. 
Nature 2014;505:50–5.
5.   
Ashley EA, Dhorda M, Fairhurst RM, Amaratunga C, Lim P, Suon S, et al. Spread 
of artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum malaria. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:411–23.
6.   
Baird JK. Resistance to therapies for infection by Plasmodium vivax. Clin 
Microbiol Rev 2009;22:508–34.
7.   
White NJ. Antimalarial drug resistance. J Clin Invest 2004;113:1084–92.
8.   
Barnes KI, Little F, Mabuza A, Mngomezulu N, Govere J, Durrheim D, et al. 
Increased gametocytemia after treatment: an early parasitological indicator 
of emerging sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in falciparum malaria. J 
Infect Dis 2008;197:1605–13.
9.   
Frosch AE, Laufer MK, Mathanga DP, Takala-Harrison S, Skarbinski J, Claassen 
CW, et al. Return of widespread chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium falciparum 
to Malawi. J Infect Dis 2014;202:801–8.
10.  
Bonhoeffer S, Lipsitch M, Levin BR. Evaluating treatment protocols to 
prevent antibiotic resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:12106–11.
A
7
311
 11.  
Lipsitch M, Levin BR. The population dynamics of antimicrobial 
chemotherapy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997;41:363–73.
12.  
Martin DC, Arnold JD. The effect of parasite populations on the curative 
action of pyrimethamine. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1968;62:379–84.
13.  
White NJ, Pongtavornpinyo W, Maude RJ, Saralamba S, Aguas R, Stepniewska 
K, et al. Hyperparasitaemia and low dosing are an important source of anti-
malarial drug resistance. Malar J 2009;8:253e.
14.  
Peters W. Chemotherapy and drug resistance in malaria. 2nd edition. 
London: Academic Press; 1987.
15.  
Hastings IM, Watkins WM, White NJ. The evolution of drug-resistant malaria: 
the role of drug elimination half-life. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
2002;357:505–19.
16.  
Jeffery GM, Eyles DE. Infectivity to mosquitoes of Plasmodium falciparum as 
related to gametocyte density and duration of infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1955;4:781–9.
17.  
Roper C Pearce R, Nair S, Sharp B, Nosten F, Anderson T. Intercontinental 
spread of pyrimethamine-resistant malaria. Science 2004;305:1124.
18.  
Djimdé AA, Doumbo OK, Traore O, Guindo AB, Kayentao K, Diourte Y, et al. 
Clearance of drug-resistant parasites as a model for protective immunity in 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2003;69:558–63. 
19.  
Dye C, Williams BG. Multigenic drug resistance among inbred malaria 
parasites. Proc R Soc London Ser B Biol Sci 1997;264:61–7.
20.  
Stepniewska K, White NJ. The pharmacokinetic determinants of the window 
of selection for antimalarial drug resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2008;52:1589–96.
21.  
Barnes KN, Watkins WM, White NJ. Antimalarial dosing regimens and drug 
resistance. Trends Parasitol 2008;24:127–34.
22.  
Nayyar GM, Breman JG, Newton PN, Herrington J. Poor-quality antimalarial 
drugs in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Lancet Infect Dis 
2012;12:488–96.
23.  
Nzila AM, Mberu EK, Sibley CH, Monks SA, Winstanley PA, et al. Molecular 
evidence of greater selective pressure for drug resistance exerted by the 
long-acting antifolate pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine compared with the 
shorter-acting chlorproguanil/dapsone on Kenyan Plasmodium falciparum. J 
Infect Dis 2000;181:2023–8.
24.  
White NJ. Assessment of the pharmacodynamic properties of antimalarial 
drugs in vivo. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997;41:1413–22.
25.  
Nosten F, White NJ. Artemisinin-based combination treatment of falciparum 
malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;77(Suppl 6):181–92.
26.  
Methods for surveillance of antimalarial drug efficacy. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2009 (http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2009/9789241597531_eng.pdf).
27.  
Methods and techniques for clinical trials on antimalarial drug 
efficacy: genotyping to identify parasite populations. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2009 (http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2008/9789241596305_eng.pdf).
312
Guidelines for the treatment of malaria  3 R D E D I T I O N
 28.  
Methods and techniques for assessing exposure to antimalarial drugs in 
clinical field studies. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011 (http://apps.
who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44653/1/9789241502061_eng.pdf).
29.  
Flegg JA, Guerin PJ, White NJ, Stepniewska K. Standardizing the 
measurement of parasite clearance in falciparum malaria: the parasite 
clearance estimator. Malar J 2011;10:e339.
30.  
Flegg JA, Guérin PJ, Nosten F, Ashley EA, Phyo AP, Dondorp AM, et al. Optimal 
sampling designs for estimation of Plasmodium falciparum clearance rates 
in patients treated with artemisinin derivatives. Malar J 2013;12:e411. 
A
7
313
 Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria,  
3rd edition.
Global Malaria Programme
World Health Organization
20 avenue Appia
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
This document was printed in April 2015. 
Please consult the web site for any content updates 
(www.who.int/malaria).
ISBN 978 92 4 154912 7
