 Analysis of five chronic inflammatory diseases identifies 27 new 
associations and highlights disease-specific patterns at shared 
loci
David Ellinghaus1,49, Luke Jostins2, Sarah L Spain2, Adrian Cortes3,4, Jörn Bethune1, Buhm 
Han5, Yu Rang Park6, Soumya Raychaudhuri7,8,9, Jennie G Pouget10,11, Matthias Hübenthal1, 
Trine Folseraas12,13,14,15, Yunpeng Wang16, Tonu Esko17,18,19, Andres Metspalu17, Harm-Jan 
Westra7,8,9, Lude Franke20, Tune H Pers7,19,21,22, Rinse K Weersma23, Valerie Collij23, Mauro 
D'Amato24,25, Jonas Halfvarson26, Anders Boeck Jensen27, Wolfgang Lieb28,29, Franziska 
Degenhardt30,31, Andreas J Forstner30,31, Andrea Hofmann30,31, The International IBD Genetics 
Consortium (IIBDGC)32, International Genetics of Ankylosing Spondylitis Consortium (IGAS)32, 
International PSC Study Group (IPSCSG)32, Genetic Analysis of Psoriasis Consortium 
(GAPC)32, Psoriasis Association Genetics Extension (PAGE)32, Stefan Schreiber1,33, Ulrich 
Mrowietz34, Brian D Juran35, Konstantinos N Lazaridis35, Søren Brunak27, Anders M Dale36,37, 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to D.E. (; Email: d.ellinghaus@ikmb.uni-kiel.de)
49Present address: Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
50These authors jointly supervised this work.
32A full list of members and affiliations appears in the Supplementary Note.
Author contributions
D.E., L.J., S.L.S., A.C., J.B., B.H., Y.R.P., J.G.P., S.R., Y.W., E.T., H.-J.W., L.F., T.H.P., R.K.W., V.C., O.A., A.B.J., S.B., M.D.A., 
performed statistical and computational analyses. M.H. performed computational analyses. T.F., A.M, M.D'A., J.H., W.L., F.D., A.J.F., 
A.H., S.S., U.M., B.D.J., K.N.L., R.C.T., S.W., M.W., E.E., J.T.E., J.N.W.N.B., M.A.B., were involved in study subject recruitment 
and assembling phenotypic data. D.E. wrote draft of manuscript. D.E., D.P.M., T.H.K., J.C.B., M.P., M.A.B., A.F. conceived, designed 
and managed the study. All authors reviewed, edited and approved the final manuscript.
URLs
PopGen biobank, http://www.popgen.de
GWAS catalog, www.genome.gov/gwastudies
Immunobase, www.immunobase.org
Buhmbox, https://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/buhmbox/
GoShifter, https://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/goshifter/
DEPICT, http://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/depict/index.html
Trinculo, https://sourceforge.net/projects/trinculo/
ConsensusPathDB, http://cpdb.molgen.mpg.de/
Drugbank, www.drugbank.ca
PubMed, www.pubmed.gov
Europe Pubmed Central, http://europepmc.org
ClinicalTrials.gov, www.clinicaltrials.gov
Ensembl VEP, http://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html
1000 Genomes, ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/release/20130502
Fantom5, http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/
NIH Roadmap Epigenomics, http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org
Data access
Data access was granted by the management committees of the main disease consortia (The International IBD Genetics Consortium 
(IIBDGC), International Genetics of Ankylosing Spondylitis Consortium (IGAS), International PSC Study Group (IPSCSG), Genetic 
Analysis of Psoriasis Consortium (GAPC), Psoriasis Association Genetics Extension (PAGE). The genotype data is not freely 
accessible but access can obtained by submitting an application to the respective management committees, institutions or data owners.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2016 May ; 48(5): 510–518. doi:10.1038/ng.3528.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Richard C Trembath38, Stephan Weidinger34, Michael Weichenthal34, Eva Ellinghaus1, James T 
Elder39,40, Jonathan NWN Barker41, Ole A Andreassen42,43, Dermot P McGovern44,45, Tom H 
Karlsen12,13,14,15, Jeffrey C Barrett2, Miles Parkes46, Matthew A Brown47,48,50, and Andre 
Franke1,50
1 Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. 2 
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 
1HH, UK. 3 Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Division of Clinical Neurology, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. 4 Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. 5 Department of Convergence Medicine, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine & Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, 
Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea. 6 Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College 
of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea. 7 Program in Medical and 
Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 8 Divisions 
of Genetics and Rheumatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02446, USA. 9 
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02446, USA. 10 Campbell Family 
Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
11 Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 12 Norwegian PSC 
Research Center, Department of Transplantation Medicine, Division of Cancer Medicine, Surgery 
and Transplantation, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. 13 K.G. Jebsen 
Inflammation Research Centre, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 14 
Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Division of Cancer Medicine, Surgery and 
Transplantation, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. 15 Section of 
gastroenterology, Department of Transplantation Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway. 16 Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
17 Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 18 Division of Endocrinology, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Cambridge, 02141 Massachusetts, USA. 19 Center for Basic and 
Translational Obesity Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Cambridge, 02141 Massachusetts, 
USA. 20 University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. 21 Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Nørre Allé 20, 2200 København N, Denmark. 22 Department of Epidemiology 
Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark. 23 Department of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, University of Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, 
The Netherlands. 24 Department of Bioscience and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. 25 BioCruces Health Research Institute and Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 
Bilbao, Spain. 26 Department of Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro 
University, Örebro SE- 70182, Sweden. 27 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, 
Denmark. 28 Institute of Epidemiology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, 
Germany. 29 PopGen Biobank, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, Germany. 30 
Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 31 Department of Genomics, 
Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 33 Department of General Internal 
Medicine, UKSH Campus Kiel, Kiel 24105, Germany. 34 Department of Dermatology, University 
Hospital, Schleswig-Holstein, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany. 35 Center for Basic 
Research in Digestive Diseases, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. 36 Department of Radiology, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. 37 Department of Neurosciences, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. 38 Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
King's College London, London, UK. 39 Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA. 40 Ann Arbor Veterans Affairs Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 41 St. 
John's Institute of Dermatology, Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, King's College 
London, London, UK. 42 NORMENT - K.G. Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Institute of 
Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 43 Division of Mental Health and Addiction, 
Oslo University Hospital, Ulleval, Oslo, Norway. 44 F
. Widjaja Foundation Inflammatory Bowel and 
Immunobiology Research, Institute, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. 45 Medical Genetics 
Institute, Cedars-Sinai, Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. 46 Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease, Research Group, Addenbrooke's Hospital,University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
CB2 0QQ, UK. 47 University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 48 Institute of Health & Biomedical Innovation (IHBI), Faculty of 
Health, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
Abstract
We simultaneously investigated the genetic landscape of ankylosing spondylitis, Crohn's disease, 
psoriasis, primary sclerosing cholangitis and ulcerative colitis to investigate pleiotropy and the 
relationship between these clinically related diseases. Using high-density genotype data from more 
than 86,000 individuals of European-ancestry we identified 244 independent multi-disease signals 
including 27 novel genome-wide significant susceptibility loci and 3 unreported shared risk loci. 
Complex pleiotropy was supported when contrasting multi-disease signals with expression data 
sets from human, rat and mouse, and epigenetic and expressed enhancer profiles. The 
comorbidities among the five immune diseases were best explained by biological pleiotropy rather 
than heterogeneity (a subgroup of cases that is genetically identical to another disease, possibly 
due to diagnostic misclassification, molecular subtypes, or excessive comorbidity). In particular, 
the strong comorbidity between primary sclerosing cholangitis and inflammatory bowel disease is 
likely the result of a unique disease, which is genetically distinct from classical inflammatory 
bowel disease phenotypes.
Introduction
Genome-wide association studies have revealed overlap in the genetic susceptibility to 
human diseases that affect a range of tissues. This overlap is most notable in immune-
mediated diseases1,2 including the clinically related conditions ankylosing spondylitis (AS), 
Crohn's disease (CD), psoriasis (PS), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and ulcerative 
colitis (UC). Co-morbidity of these conditions in the same individual and increased risk of 
any of these conditions in family members have been extensively documented3,4. Recently a 
large-scale discovery-driven analysis of temporal disease progression patterns using data 
from an electronic health registry covering the whole population of Denmark revealed 
substantial population-wide co-morbidity5. This raises the possibility of a hidden molecular 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 taxonomy that differs from the traditional classification of disease by organ or system. 
Cross-disease genetic studies provide an opportunity to resolve overlapping associations into 
discrete pathways and explore details of apparently shared etiologies.
In this study, we combined Immunochip genotype data for 52,262 cases and 34,213 controls 
of European ancestry, the currently largest available genetic data sets in five clinically 
related seronegative immune-driven phenotypes (AS, CD, PS, PSC and UC) to explore the 
extent of sharing of genetic susceptibility loci. The aims of this cross-phenotype study were 
to: 1) identify subsets of the 5 phenotypes with shared genetic risk loci using a cross-
phenotype meta-analysis approach, 2) to identify additional susceptibility loci, 3) to 
investigate co-morbidity and pleiotropy amongst these phenotypes and 4) to improve the 
understanding of shared pathways and biological mechanisms common to subsets of the 
phenotypes studied.
Results
Cross-phenotype association analysis
We analyzed Immunochip genotype data of 52,262 cases from AS (8,726), CD (19,085), PS 
(6,530), PSC (3,408) and UC (14,413) and 34,213 healthy controls (Supplementary Table 
1) using variants with a minor allele frequency >0.1% to examine the shared and distinct 
genetic etiology between these diseases (see Methods). By utilizing Immunochip-only data, 
we were able to perform a uniform and central quality control of all batches, thus reducing 
potentially existing batch effects (see Methods). Next, we utilized a recently published 
subset-based meta-analysis approach (SBM)6 to exhaustively explore all subsets of disease 
combinations for the presence of association signals. The method identifies the best subset 
of non-null studies, while in parallel accounting for multiple testing and a fixed control 
group (see Methods). By performing primary SBM analyses, we identified 166 genome-
wide significant (PSBM<5×10−8) loci outside the major histocompatibility complex (MHC, 
chromosome 6 region at 25–34 Mb) (Supplementary Fig. 1). Three of these 166 loci 
(rs2042011 at MIR1208; rs2812378 at CCL21/FAM205A; rs1893592 at UBASH3A) have 
not been reported previously for any of the five diseases under study and thus are novel 
shared risk loci. SNP associations at UBASH3A (chr21q22.3) and CCL21 (9p13.3) have 
been reported previously for other autoimmune disorders7,8. These three novel loci would 
have been missed using single disease analyses alone. To avoid any loss of power, where 
variants are only associated with a single phenotype, we looked up single disease vs. control 
subsearches on any SNPs that achieved PSBM<5×10−7 in the primary analysis. Using this 
SBM-directed approach, we identified 27 novel genome-wide significant disease 
associations (Pdisease<5×10−8) including 17 novel genome-wide significant loci for AS, 6 
loci for CD, and 4 loci for PSC (Figure 1, Supplementary Table 2, Supplementary Fig. 2). 24 
out of these 27 associations were also genome-wide significant in the primary SBM analyses 
(PSBM<5×10−8) thus leading to a total of 169 non-MHC risk loci. In order to identify 
additional independent association signals within the 169 non-MHC risk loci, we performed 
a stepwise conditional SBM analysis following a recently published stepwise conditional 
SBM fine-mapping approach9 (see Methods). In total, we identified 244 independent 
association signals with 187 signals being shared by at least two diseases for the five 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diseases under study (Supplementary table 3; Supplementary Fig. 3, 4 and 5). We estimated 
the heritability explained by these 244 variants for each disease (Figure 2) and for all pair-
wise disease comparisons (Supplementary Fig. 6). The ten pair-wise comparisons of 
disease-associated alleles show diverse patterns of sharing with respect to size and direction 
of allelic effects and the number of unique associations (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Functional annotation of associated variants
We functionally annotated the 244 risk alleles from the 169 distinct loci (see Methods). For 
210 associations signals (86.1%) the lead variant was within 10 kb of a known gene and 34 
signals were classified as intergenic regions (>10 kb distant to a gene) (Supplementary 
Table 4). The analysis identified 16 coding variants (14 missense, 1 frameshift and 1 splice 
donor) in genes that were previously implicated in immune-mediated diseases 
(Supplementary Table 5). Eight of these variants (located in PTPN22, GPR35, MST1, 
CD6, two in NOD2, TYK2 and CARD9) have been associated before with one of the traits 
included in this study, and six (GCKR, two in IFIH1, SH2B3, SMAD3, TYK2) with another 
phenotype, either listed in the GWAS catalog10 or in Immunobase. Two of the genes 
carrying a coding variant (TLR4, PRKCQ) have previously been suggested as candidate loci, 
but robust association signals were lacking yet (Supplementary Table 5).
We further checked for variants in high LD (r2>0.8) with the identified variants using 1000 
Genomes haplotypes and found that in total 46 of the identified signals were highly 
correlated with 57 coding variants (48 missense, 2 stop_gain, 3 splice region variants, 1 
frameshift, 3 regulatory variants, Supplementary Table 5). We found that 40 of the 57 
coding variants, from 30 loci, had been described in previous GWAS or Immunochip studies 
involving one of the traits included in this study or another phenotype. Additionally, a 
further 9 variants have been mentioned as candidate variants in autoimmune disease 
publications. 8 coding variants (7 missense, 1 stop/gain, and all in high LD with our lead 
variants), located in EFNA1, FCGR2A, HSPA6, C7orf72, FAM118A, respectively, have not 
been described before in relation to any immune-mediated phenotype.
eQTL analysis in peripheral blood
Analyses of cis-eQTL microarray data from whole peripheral blood samples of an 
independent control cohort comprising 2,360 unrelated individuals11,12 (see Methods) 
identified cis-effects for 132 (PFDR<0.05; Supplementary Table 6) out of the 244 disease-
associated SNPs from Supplementary Table 3a. Five of these represent the best eQTL SNP 
and another five represent best secondary eQTL SNPs independent from the best eQTL 
SNPs at a given locus.
Pathway, cell type, and annotation enrichment analyses
We tested for enrichment between SNPs in associated loci and various types of genomic 
annotations using GoShifter13. We used 620 different annotations from the NIH Roadmap 
Epigenomics14 and Fantom515 projects to look for enrichment of histone modifications and 
expressed enhancers, respectively (Supplementary Table 7 and 8). Results from the SBM 
association analysis were separated into groups to include all 244 identified variants, 
variants shared amongst 3 or more phenotypes, and those associated with a phenotype 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Table 9). For the Roadmap enrichment analysis, using a threshold of 
P<10−3, the inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and PS phenotype subsets showed 
enrichment for H3K27ac modifications in CD3 primary cells and for H3K27ac in adipose 
tissue, respectively (Supplementary Table 10). The ‘all variant’ (n=244) analysis showed 
enrichment for H3K4me3 (for which the largest number of cell types were analyzed by the 
Roadmap consortium and which highlights transcribed promoters and TSS16) in HUES64 
cell line as undifferentiated cells, CD34+ cells (bone marrow cells) and Natural Killer Cells 
(CD56). The Fantom5 data analysis shows enrichment for enhancers expressed in T cells 
(CD and ‘all_variants’ group) and also Natural Killer cells for CD. However, only the latter 
(T cells, ‘all_variants’ group) met the significance threshold of 0.05/620=8.06×10−5 needed 
for Bonferroni correction.
To test which candidate genes from the associated loci (Supplementary table 3a) are highly 
expressed in which tissues and to define disease relationships at the expression level, we 
conducted pathway and tissue/cell type enrichment analyses using DEPICT17, with 77,840 
microarray expression profiles from human, rat and mouse and 209 tissue/cell type 
annotations18 (see Methods). Even when correcting for the biased Immunochip gene 
content, our DEPICT results confirmed that the genes from the 169 herein-reported non-
MHC genome-wide significant susceptibility loci show greatest relevance for the regulation 
of immune response pathways (Supplementary Fig. 7) and the hematopoietic system 
(Supplementary Fig. 8).
We further generated a protein-protein-interaction (PPI) network (111 gene nodes and 65 
edges, see Supplementary Fig. 9) based on five prioritized gene sets of AS, CD, PS, PSC 
and UC SNP sets, respectively (Supplementary Table 9), from DEPICT analyses and a 
reference PPI data from ConsensusPathDB19 (see Methods). We observed that 36 gene 
nodes from this PPI network were connected in one single large component 
(Supplementary Fig. 9). Then we evaluated the potential role of these genes for their 
“druggability” by linking genes within this core network to drugs using Drugbank (see 
Methods). Since the nature and effect of the interaction between the drug and the encoded 
protein is mostly unknown, e.g some drugs we identified have effects opposite to the what 
we aim for, we performed a manual literature search to assess which of the identified drugs 
show evidence or could potentially be promising for any of the diseases under study by 
using PubMed (last search July 1st 2015) and ClinicalTrials.gov. All drugs were selected 
based on evidence from phase I/II/III randomized clinical trials (RCTs) or published animal 
studies. Nine drug target genes overlap with the 36 genes from the core network (Figure 3). 
Although further investigations are necessary, we propose that target genes/drugs selected by 
this approach could represent promising candidates for novel drug discovery for treatment of 
AS, CD, PS, PSC and UC. For example, novel CCR2-antagonists such as MLN-1202, and 
CCR5-antagonists INCB9471 and AMD-070 are potential new drugs for treatment of AS, 
CD, PS, PSC and UC.
Bayesian multinomial regression for model selection
To compare different disease models for each of the 244 risk variants while accounting for 
the different sample sizes per diseases, we used Bayesian multinomial regression. The aim is 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to estimate the posterior probability (Probmodel) for each disease model conditional on the 
genotype and phenotype data that was observed (see Methods). A disease model is a set of 
diseases that a given locus is associated (i.e. has a non-zero log odds ratio) with, e.g. 
“associated with CD and UC, but not with AS, PS or PSC” is one disease model. There are a 
total of 32 possible disease models for the 5 phenotypes, which includes the null model 
(“not associated with any disease“). The Bayesian setting naturally handles the different 
uncertainties on the effect sizes for each disease due to their different sample sizes and 
powers.
We found 66 signals (59 non-MHC loci) with a best Probmodel≥60% including 14 Loci (with 
closest genes SH2B3, UBE2L3, TNP2, IL2RA, DNMT3B, CXCR2, CDKAL1, CARD9, 
MST1, ZMIZ1, ETS1) with Probmodel≥0.8 (Supplementary Table 3b) when assuming that 
each sharing model is given the same probability (uniform prior across all models, see 
Methods). However, because previous studies suggested that the structure of sharing of 
susceptibility is non-uniform2, we calculated posteriors for each model for each risk variant 
under six different priors and took a vote of the highest posterior models under each prior 
(see Methods). Then we counted how many priors voted for that model, and calculated the 
minimum, maximum and mean posterior (MeanProbmodel) for each risk variant 
(Supplementary Table 3c). Based on this consensus-finding process of merging results 
from six different priors, we identified 34 signals (31 non-MHC loci) with a best 
MeanProbmodel≥60% including 12 Loci (with closest genes SH2B3, IL2RA, IFIH1, NFKB1, 
TYK2) with Prob≥0.8 suggesting that we correctly identified the disease model (Table 1). 
Out of the 34 associations with MeanProbmodel≥0.6, 25 signals have 5 diseases involved, 6 
signals have four diseases and 3 signals are unique to a single disease. Some of these disease 
sets show different directions of effect (risk versus protective), heterogeneity of odds ratios 
(P<0.01), or both, for the diseases being involved (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 6).
Distinguishing pleiotropy from heterogeneity
Statistically significant temporal co-morbidity (disease A followed by disease B within a 5-
year time frame of disease A, or vice versa) amongst the five diseases studied was confirmed 
for 8 out of 10 possible pairs of diseases (P<0.05/823606=1.21×10−9) after screening 
823,606 directed pairs of diagnoses from an electronic health registry covering the whole 
population of Denmark5 (Supplementary Table 11, see Methods). Consistent with 
previous reports, we further observed high comorbidity rates among our patients 
(Supplementary Table 12), i.e. patients had more than one disease at the time of last 
diagnosis. This may occur due to pleiotropy (sharing of risk alleles between disease A and 
disease B) or heterogeneity (a subgroup of disease A cases has a higher loading of risk 
alleles for disease B). Heterogeneity can occur as the result of many different scenarios 
including diagnostic misclassifications, molecular subtypes, and excessive comorbidity. We 
evaluated whether pleiotropy or heterogeneity best explained the high comorbidity rates 
amongst the five diseases studied using BUHMBOX20 (see Methods). BUHMBOX detects 
heterogeneity by calculating the cross-locus correlation of disease B-associated loci among 
disease A cases; a non-zero correlation is indicative of heterogeneity20. We calculated the 
statistical power of BUHMBOX to detect various proportions of sample heterogeneity for all 
disease pairs (Online Methods). For 18 out of 20 pairs of diseases, we had >50% power to 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 detect 20% sample heterogeneity (Supplementary Table 13, Supplementary Figure 10). 
Since BUHMBOX has high power for these pairs, non-significant BUHMBOX results 
strongly suggest that the genetic risk score (GRS) association is likely due to pleiotropy 
rather than heterogeneity.
First, to quantify genetic sharing for each of the 20 possible pairs of five diseases, we used a 
GRS approach (see Methods). We calculated GRSs for disease B (using known risk alleles, 
weighted by effect size) for all individuals in the disease A sample, and tested the 
association of the GRSs with disease A status using logistic regression. The GRSs test for 
enrichment of disease B alleles in disease A cases, and are expected to be significant both in 
the presence of pleiotropy and heterogeneity. As expected, we observed highly significant 
associations between disease B GRSs and disease A status for almost every possible pair 
(Supplementary Table 14), which demonstrated strong sharing of risk alleles between the 
different immune-mediated diseases.
We then tested if this observed genetic sharing was due to true pleiotropy or heterogeneity 
using BUHMBOX20. In the setting of pleiotropy, pleiotropic disease B risk alleles are shared 
across all disease A cases, whereas in heterogeneity, only a subset of disease A cases share 
disease B risk alleles. This leads to cross-locus correlations between disease B-associated 
loci being positive in the presence of heterogeneity, but not in the case of pleiotropy. 
BUHMBOX calculates the cross-locus correlation between disease B-associated loci in 
disease A cases, and determines if they are significantly non-zero. We calculated cross-locus 
correlations for all 20 disease-pairs (see Methods). We did not observe significant inter-
locus correlations (Supplementary Table 14), despite high statistical power for many pairs 
(Supplementary Table 13 and Supplementary Fig. 10). Our findings suggest that the 
overall GRS association between the five immune diseases investigated is likely due to 
pleiotropy.
Immunochip-wide co-heritability analysis
In order to estimate Immunochip-wide pleiotropy (the genetic variation and covariation 
between pairs of diseases in liability that is tagged by SNPs represented on the 
Immunochip), we applied univariate and bivariate linear mixed model heritability 
methods21,22 (see Methods). The relationships between disorders are expressed as SNP-
based coheritabilities (Figure 4). When excluding SNPs from the MHC region, genetic 
correlation was highest between CD and UC (rG=0.78 ± 0.015 s.e., in concordance with 
previous estimates23), PSC and UC (rG=0.64 ± 0.027 s.e.), moderate (rG<0.5) between AS 
and CD (rG=0.49 ± 0.023 s.e.), AS and UC (rG=0.47 ± 0.026 s.e.), CD and PSC (rG=0.35 
± 0.030 s.e.), AS and PSC (rG=0.33 ± 0.035 s.e.), AS and PS (rG=0.28 ± 0.035 s.e.), CD and 
PS (rG=0.27 ± 0.029 s.e.), and low (rG<0.25) between PS and PSC (rG=0.18 ± 0.042 s.e.), 
and PS and UC (rG=0.16 ± 0.034 s.e.) (see Supplementary Fig. 11,12 and Supplementary 
Table 15). For correlation values including MHC variants see Supplementary Table 15. As 
a negative control, we conducted coheritability analyses between each immune-mediated 
disease under study and longevity, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder and 
schizophrenia Immunochip studies (Supplementary Fig. 13). No coheritability was 
observed with the non-immune-mediated diseases studied here.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
By combined assessments of Immunochip genotyping datasets from 52,262 patients with 
five closely associated conditions (AS, CD, PS, PSC and UC; all seronegative inflammatory 
diseases as per clinical definition) and 34,213 healthy controls we were able to delineate the 
genetic overlap between the conditions. A key outcome of the overlap analysis is that despite 
the profound pleiotropy, clear demarcations of the genetic risk for the individual conditions 
exist. Implicit to this, hence conflicting an existing paradigm where a causal relationship 
between IBD and the involved extra-intestinal conditions exists24,25, our modeling rather 
supports (a) the presence of shared pathophysiological pathways as the basis for the clinical 
co-occurrence and (b) the hypothesis that patients with concomitant syndromes are 
genetically distinct from patients without concomitant syndromes.
Our cross-disease association framework also enabled the identification of novel coding 
variants and known eQTLs. One newly identified missense variant for CD, rs4986790, is 
located at exon three of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), which is an important mediator of innate 
immunity. This SNP has been shown to modulate TLR4 effector functions either by 
interfering with the binding capacity of TLR4 with its ligands or by controlling the 
extracellular deposition of functional TLR426,27. Another newly identified missense SNP for 
CD, rs2236379, which has not been previously associated with other disease traits, is located 
at exon nine of PRKCQ encoding protein kinase C-theta (PKC-θ). PKC-θ is essential in the 
signaling cascades that lead to NFkB, AP-1 and NFAT activation28 and is also critical for 
stabilizing Th17 cell phenotype by selective suppression of the STAT4/IFN-c/T-bet axis at 
the onset of differentiation29. Furthermore, PKC-θ inhibition enhances Treg function and 
protects Treg from inactivation by TNF-α, restores activity of defective Treg from rheumatoid 
arthritis patients, and enhances protection of mice from inflammatory colitis30. We also 
found that one of the AS/UC secondary signals rs61802846 is in perfect LD (r2=1.0) with a 
stop-gain SNP rs9427397, resulting in a premature stop codon in FCGR2A. This appears to 
be distinct (r2=0.12) from the known IBD-associated missense variant in FCGR2A 
rs18012741,31. Among the 10 strongest eQTL SNPs (PFDR<0.05; Supplementary Table 6, 
Supplementary Fig. 4) are the intronic SNP rs3766606 (at PARK7 shared by PS (risk) and 
CD,UC (protective)), the intronic variant rs2910686 (at ERAP2 shared by AS,CD,UC (risk 
only)), the intronic SNP rs1893592 (at UBASH3A shared by PSC, UC (protective)), the 
missense SNP rs12720356 (at TYK2 shared by AS,CD,UC (risk) and PS (protective)), and 
the intronic variant rs679574 (at FUT2 shared by AS,CD,PS and PSC (risk only)).
Most “shared” loci exhibit complex patterns of multi-disease associations suggesting 
multiple types of pleiotropy32. Through subsequent Bayesian multinomial regression 
modeling, we identified 31 loci with 34 independent associations (Table 1) for which we 
determined a specific disease model constellation with high certainty 
(MeanProbmodel≥60%). For example, at 12q24.12 (Locus 119; SH2B3) the single lead-SNP 
rs3184504 (Prob=0.98) is associated with decreased risk of AS (ORAS=0.92) but increased 
risk of the other diseases (ORCD=1.06; ORPS=1.06; ORPSC=1.19; ORUC=1.05), and has 
been associated before with >10 other phenotypes in the GWAS catalog10, thus suggesting 
that 12q24.12 is a common risk locus with heterogenous effect sizes for multiple complex 
diseases.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In addition to contrasting the genetic landscape of AS, CD, PS, PSC and UC, we 
investigated comorbidity and pleiotropy amongst these phenotypes. GRS and cross-locus 
correlation analyses20 suggest that the increased comorbidity rates among our patients are 
due to biological pleiotropy rather than heterogeneity. In other words, an individual with a 
pleiotropic risk variant is more likely to acquire both diseases. Among all non-zero 
comorbid rate pairs, the pair of PSC and IBD is particularly noticeable for its high frequency 
of comorbidity (Supplementary Table 12). PSC patients suffer from a highly increased 
frequency (62-83%) of IBD33 (called PSC with concomitant IBD, or PSC-IBD, although 
IBD is most often classified as UC). Interestingly, despite the high prevalence of IBD in PSC 
the loci encoding IL23R and IL10 (both of which are strongly associated with CD and UC) 
did not show any evidence of association with PSC. However, we found that many PSC risk 
variants are shared with UC and have similar effects both in terms of magnitude and 
direction (Supplementary Fig. 6). It is unlikely that pleiotropy with UC accounts for the 
comorbid IBD seen in PSC on its own, given the exceedingly higher prevalence of IBD in 
PSC patients compared to the population prevalence of UC. We therefore questioned 
whether PSC-IBD is a unique disease distinct from UC, or whether PSC-IBD is the result of 
UC that is prevalent among PSC patients due to a causal relationship between the two 
diseases (i.e. UC causes subsequent development of PSC, or vice versa). If the PSC-IBD 
phenotype is the result of a causal relationship between UC and PSC, there would be a 
subgroup of PSC cases with a higher loading of UC risk alleles (or vice versa). We tested 
UC loci in PSC cases with BUHMBOX, and found no evidence of a UC-driven subgroup 
(Supplementary Table 14) despite high power (99.9% power given the hypothesis that 62% 
of PSC are affected by UC). We also tested PSC loci in UC cases with BUHMBOX 
(Supplementary Table 14); while the result was negative (P=0.48), the test was 
underpowered to detect subtle heterogeneity proportions. Although we cannot completely 
rule out a causal relationship between PSC and UC at this time, we expect that these 
findings will become clearer as additional PSC-associated loci are identified in future 
studies, improving power to detect heterogeneity. At present, our findings are most 
consistent with the hypothesis that PSC-IBD is a unique disease that shares some genetic 
factors with UC, but is distinct from classical IBD phenotypes4,34. This hypothesis is further 
supported by the observation that PSC-IBD shows significant clinical differences from 
classical IBD, and requires specialized management; compared to IBD, PSC-IBD has a 
higher rate of pancolitis with ileitis and rectal sparing, as well as a higher incidence of 
colorectal cancer34.
Our results from testing of enrichment between multi-disease signals and large-scale 
expression data sets, epigenetic and expressed enhancer profiles further reflect this excessive 
pleiotropy and mainly highlight perturbations in immune response pathways and blood cell 
tissues. However, we could not pinpoint which genomic features and which cells a variant 
influences. We hypothesize that larger gene expression data sets for the disease-relevant 
tissues and cell types from affected individuals should be generated to allow for high-
resolution and more eQTL studies since eQTLs are often cell-specific35. Further, the 
discovery of multiple further genetic associations increases the power of such analyses to 
define pathways and cell types involved in specific diseases.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In summary, we performed the largest systematic cross-disease genetic study for chronic 
immune-mediated diseases to-date. Using novel cross-phenotype analytic methodologies we 
identified 17 novel genome-wide significant susceptibility loci for AS, 6 loci for CD and 4 
loci for PSC, and 3 novel yet unreported risk loci for the diseases under study. With this, the 
number of known AS, IBD, and PSC risk loci increased to 48, 206, and 20, respectively. Due 
to lower coverage at unselected regions on Immunochip, imputed GWAS data would further 
increase statistical power to identify novel shared associations outside established risk loci in 
future studies. Future cross-disease studies of a wider range of phenotypes, in combination 
with more sophisticated fine-mapping studies on individual diseases and specific layers of 
multi-omics data sets are needed to provide another layer of information for a potential new 
disease classification based on molecular genetic profiles. While most cross-disease studies 
employ patient panels that were manually curated for single phenotypes and often rely on 
questionnaire data, future studies could employ even larger collections of hospitalized 
patients, for which exhaustive electronic medical patient records and array data exists. 
Moreover, longitudinal data from electronic health charts could pinpoint further 
comorbidities that should be included in a more systematic next-generation cross-disease 
approach.
Online Methods
Study subjects
All DNA samples included in the study (Supplementary Table 1) were genotyped using the 
Illumina Immunochip custom genotyping array40, a targeted high-density genotyping array 
with comprehensive coverage of 1000 Genomes Project SNPs41 within 186 autoimmune 
disease-associated loci. CD/UC case and control cohorts were collected from 15 countries 
across Europe, North America and Australia and have previously been described1. Initially, 
19,761 Crohn's disease cases, 14,833 ulcerative colitis cases and 28,999 controls of 
European ancestries from the International Inflammatory Bowel Disease Genetics 
Consortium (IIBDGC) were included in the study. Genotyping of the IIBDGC cohorts was 
performed in 31 different batches (34 batches before quality control) across 11 different 
genotyping centers. The initial AS case-control collection (2 main batches) consisted of 
10,417 cases and 12,338 controls of European ancestry and were described previously.36 All 
AS case genotyping was performed at one centre (University of Queensland Diamantina 
Institute, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia). 6,577 Psoriasis case and 
15,085 control samples (2 main batches) were collected from 13 countries across Europe 
and North America37. Recruitment of 3,789 PSC patients and 25,079 controls (2 main 
batches) was performed in 14 countries in Europe and North America.38 Since most control 
samples we shared between different disease consortia, we identified the set of non-
overlapping (unique) control samples (Supplementary Table 1). 2019 schizophrenia cases, 
1140 bipolar cases and 589 major depressive disorder cases were collected from different 
centers in Germany in the context of the MooDs consortium. All samples have been 
genotyped at the Life&Brain center in Bonn.
Written, informed consent was obtained from all study participants and the institutional 
ethical review committees of the participating centers approved all protocols.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Immunochip genotype calling and quality control
Initial genotype calling was performed with the Illumina GenomeStudio GenTrain 2.0 
software and the custom generated cluster file of Trynka et al. (based on an initial clustering 
of 2,000 UK samples and subsequent manual readjustment of cluster positions)40. Based on 
normalized intensity information, we removed samples detected as intensity outliers (>4 
s.d.). Based on initial genotype data, we further removed samples with <90% callrate using 
PLINK42. To identify ethnicity outliers (ie subjects of non-Europeans ancestry), we 
performed principal component analysis (PCA) with Eigenstrat43 and a set of 210 HapMap 
founder samples44 and projected Immunochip samples on the principal components axes on 
the basis of a set of 14,484 independent (minor allele frequency (MAF)>0.05) SNPs 
excluding X- and Y-chromosomes, SNPs in LD (leaving no pairs with r2>0.2), and 11 high-
LD regions as described by Price et al.45. OptiCall genotype recalling was performed with a 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium P-value threshold of 10−15 for each batch, Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium blanking disabled and a genotype call threshold of 0.7. Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium was calculated with conditioning on predicted (European) ancestry, and related 
individuals were removed from this calculation.
After genotype calling a unified quality control procedure was conducted across 40 
genotyping batches. We tested for significantly different allele frequencies of variants across 
the batches from a particular disease or the control group (with at most one batch being 
removed) with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 (Supplementary Fig. 14). 
Variants that had >2% missing data, a minor allele frequency <0.1% in either of the different 
disease sets or in controls, had different missing genotype rates in affected and unaffected 
individuals (PFisher<10−5) or deviated from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (with a false 
discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 10−5 in controls (a) across the entire collection with at 
most one batch being removed (Supplementary Fig. 15a) or (b) falling below in two single 
batches (Supplementary Fig. 15b) were excluded. Samples that had >2% missing data and 
overall increased/decreased heterozygosity rates were removed (Supplementary Fig. 16). 
For robust duplicate/relatedness testing (IBS/IBD estimation) and population structure 
analysis, we used a pruned subset of 14,484 independent SNPs (see text above). Pair-wise 
percentage IBD values were computed using PLINK. By definition, Z0: P(IBD=0), Z1: 
P(IBD=1), Z2: P(IBD=2), Z0+Z1+Z2=1, and PI_HAT: P(IBD=2) + 0.5 * P(IBD=1) 
(proportion IBD). One individual (the one showing greater missingness) from each pair with 
PI_HAT>0.1875 was removed.
To resolve within-Europe relationships and to test for population stratification, the remaining 
QCed 52,262 cases and 34,213 unique controls were tested using the PCA method, as 
implemented in FlashPCA46. PCA revealed no non-European ancestry outliers 
(Supplementary Fig. 17a-c). We computed Tracy-Widom statistics to evaluate the 
statistical significance of each principal component identified by PCA and identified the top 
seven axes of variation being significant at PTW<0.05 (Supplementary Table 16). 130,052 
QCed polymorphic variants with MAF>0.1% and 52,262 cases and 34,213 unique controls 
were available for analysis.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cross-phenotype association analysis
We conducted primary association analysis based on subsets (ASSET) methodology6. Even 
after adjusting for the large number of comparisons, the SBM method maintains similar 
type-I error rates as for standard meta-analysis. This method offers a substantial power 
increase (sometimes approaching between 100-500%6) compared to standard univariate 
meta-analysis approaches, where the (heterogeneous) effect of a specific SNP is not 
exclusively restricted to a single disease. Under the assumption that association signals from 
shared risk loci based on positional overlap are tagging same causal variant for different 
diseases, the (unconditioned) subset-based meta-analysis (SBM) approach improves power 
compared to standard fixed-effects meta-analysis methodology. For the situation that distinct 
variants within shared susceptibility region may confer independent effects for individual 
diseases, the conditional SBM approach is well suited to reveal these independent (often 
multi-disease) associations signals (see stepwise subset-based conditional logistic 
regression).
The subset-based meta-analysis is a generalized fixed-effects meta-analysis and explores all 
possible subsets of diseases (or a restricted disease set if specified) for the presence of true 
association signals, while adjusting for the multiple testing required and a fixed control 
group shared by all diseases. To control for potential population stratification, we adjusted 
association test statistics by means of principal component analysis (PCA) using the top 
seven axes of variation (Supplementary Table 16). Adjusted two-tailed PSBM values (risk 
versus protective) were obtained using the discrete local maxima (DLM) method estimating 
tail probabilities of the Z score test statistic that is maximized over a grid of neighboring 
subsets6,47. The maximum (in absolute value) of the subset-specific Z statistics is a 
conservative variable selector in the sense that for large samples, it will select only non-null 
studies, but it is not guaranteed to select all of the non-null studies6. The genomic inflation 
factor (λ) calculated using 1,820 “null”-SNPs (outside the MHC region) associated with 
reading and writing ability, psychosis and schizophrenia was 1.082 (λ1000 for an equivalent 
study of 1,000 cases and 1,000 controls=1.002), indicating minimal evidence of residual 
population stratification in the overall data set of 52,262 cases and 34,213 controls.
Where a particular SNP is only associated with a single disease, the standard meta-analysis 
methodology has slightly higher power than the subset-based approach. To avoid loss of 
statistical power in such settings, we looked up every SNP with PSBM<5×10−7 within and 
outside the 166 non-MHC susceptibility loci, to see if gws (Pdisease<5×10−8) was achieved in 
any of the five single disease vs. control subsearches. Univariate association statistics 
(restricted to a single disease data sets versus the fixed control group) were obtained using 
the same DLM method. The increased statistical power of the single association test 
(Pdisease) in comparison to original individual disease Immunochip analyses1,36-38,48 is likely 
due to the fact that the larger sample-sized Immunochip data here (except for AS) was used 
as a screening tool instead of using it as a replication data set after screening smaller sized 
GWAS discovery data sets. The large number of novel AS loci can largely be attributed to an 
approximately 2.5× increased size control cohort compared to the original AS Immunochip 
study (13,578 controls in the original study vs. 34,213 controls in the current study). After 
“subtracting” the novel trans-ancestry CD/UC loci from the inflammatory bowel disease 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (IBD) trans-ancestry study49, 27 of 35 new gws non-MHC risk loci remain for the five 
diseases under study. Using an alternative method we identified more pleiotropic loci shared 
between UC and CD (Supplementary table 17, see Conjunctional False Discovery Rate 
analysis below).
Stepwise subset-based conditional logistic regression
Single and multiple disease-associated (independent) lead-SNPs were selected through 
stepwise regression to condition away lead-SNPs one at a time until no associations remain 
following a recently published stepwise conditional SBM fine-mapping approach9. It is an 
effective method for separating independent signals and assumes that LD between the 
independent causal variants is low. Significance was defined by Bonferroni correction of the 
number of LD-independent marker on the Immunochip (0.05/37,377 = 1.34×10−6).
Cluster plot inspection
Immunochip intensity cluster plots of all genome-wide significant SNP markers 
(PSBM<5×10−7 and Pdisease<5×10−8; PSBM<5×10−8) from Supplementary Tables 2 and 3 
were manually inspected by three different persons using Evoker50 to ensure that they were 
well clustered.
Bayesian multinomial regression for model selection
To compare different disease models at each locus we used Bayesian multinomial 
regression. A disease model is a list of diseases that a given locus is associated (i.e. has a 
non-zero log odds ratio) with, e.g. “associated with CD and UC, but not with PS, AS or 
PSC” is one disease model, as is “associated with all diseases”. There are a total of 32 
possible disease models for the 5 phenotypes, which includes the null model (“not 
associated with any disease“). Our aim is to infer the posterior probability for each of these 
disease models, conditional on the genotype and phenotype data we have seen. We do this 
under a Bayesian setting, as it naturally handles the different uncertainties on the effect sizes 
for each disease due to their different sample sizes and powers. The methods we describe 
below are implemented in the open source Trinculo software package.
The Bayesian multinomial logistic regression software calculates a marginal likelihood for 
each model, integrating out uncertainty in the effect size, as
Where β is a vector of log-odds ratios for each disease. The likelihood Pr(D | M) is given by 
the multinomial logistic likelihood. The prior distribution on the effect sizes is given by β|M 
~ MVN(0,ΣM), where ΣM is the prior covariance matrix for model M. To enforce 
phenotypes that are not associated with the disease, we set ΣMij = 0 if either phenotype i or j 
is not associated with the locus. We use Newton's method to calculate the maximum a 
posteriori estimate (MAP) for the parameters, and calculate the marginal likelihood using a 
Laplace approximation around the MAP.
We calculate the posterior probability for each model as
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The method thus requires two priors: the model covariance matrices ΣM and the per-model 
priors Pr(M). We analyze each variant using six different sets of priors, two different forms 
of the covariance matrix prior and three different forms of the per-model prior. For the 
covariance prior we use a) a simple independent covariance matrix where ΣMii = 0.2 if 
phenotype i is included in the model, and all other ΣMij = 0 and b) an empirical covariance 
prior where a single covariance matrix  is learned by maximum likelihood assuming all 
loci are associated with all diseases (i.e. maximizing the product of the marginal likelihoods 
across all loci under the “associated with all phenotypes” model). For the per-model priors, 
we use a) a uniform prior across all models, b) a uniform prior across the number of 
phenotypes associated with the locus (so all models where there are the same number of 
associations sum to 1/6) with equal weight to each model with the same number of 
phenotypes and c) an empirical prior distribution on the number of phenotypes associated 
with the locus, inferred by maximum likelihood.
We calculated posteriors for each model for each risk variant under the six different priors. 
For each risk variant we then took a vote of the highest posterior models under each prior, 
such that we select whichever model was considered best by the largest number of priors. 
We also recorded how many priors voted for that model, and how much posterior each prior 
gives to the winning model.
If SNPs represent secondary independent association signals due to the results from stepwise 
conditional SBM analysis, then they were tested conditional on all other identified genome-
wide significant independent signals within the same locus. Within the Bayesian logistic 
regression, we included the genotype at the lead SNP (and further preceding independent 
signals) as a covariate in the model.
Disease correlation measure and temporal comorbidity
To determine significant temporal co-occurrences (disease-pairs) for the five inflammatory 
diseases under study, we screened an independent data set covering ICD10 diagnose codes 
from 6,631,920 people of the entire Danish population in the period from 1996 to 20145. We 
used relative risk (RR) to measure the strength of the correlation between a pair of diagnoses 
(diagnosis A followed by diagnosis B). RR estimates and associated P-values were 
calculated using a sampling approach as described in the original study5. In brief, given a 
pair, diagnosis A followed by diagnosis B, RR of a temporal association was calculated as 
the ratio of the observed number of patients who had A then B within 5 years and the 
number of randomly matched control patients would get B within 5 years from a matched 
discharge. Each matched control has same age (birth decade) and gender as the case and has 
a discharge of same type (inpatient, outpatient or emergency room) within the same 
calendar-week as the case's A diagnosis (from which the 5 years to develop B is started). 
The significance threshold of P=0.05/823606=1.21×10−9 was applied using Bonferroni 
correction for testing 823,606 directed pairs in the original study5.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Distinguishing pleiotropy and heterogeneity
We used BUHMBOX v0.38 (Breaking Up Heterogeneous Mixture Based On Cross-locus 
correlations)20 to evaluate whether the sharing of risk alleles observed across pairs of 
diseases (disease A and disease B) was driven by true pleiotropy where there is pervasive 
sharing of risk alleles between two diseases, or by heterogeneity where a subgroup of 
disease A cases has a higher loading of risk alleles for disease B. The BUHMBOX approach 
has been described in detail elsewhere20. Briefly, a genetic risk score (GRS) approach is 
used to detect significant sharing of risk loci between disease A and disease B. If such 
genetic sharing is detected using GRSs, the BUHMBOX test statistic – which identifies 
heterogeneity by calculating the cross-locus correlation of disease B-associated loci among 
disease A cases – is applied to verify whether these associations are due to heterogeneity 
(e.g. sample misdiagnosis, excessive comorbidity) as opposed to biological pleiotropy. In the 
setting of pleiotropy, pleiotropic disease B risk alleles are shared across all disease A cases, 
whereas in heterogeneity, only a subset of disease A cases share disease B risk alleles. This 
leads to cross-locus correlations between disease B-associated loci being positive in the 
presence of heterogeneity, but not in the case of pleiotropy. To strictly control for false 
positives, BUHMBOX uses LD-pruning, the top seven principal components from PCA, and 
delta-correlations between cases and controls.
First, to quantify pleiotropy for each of the 20 possible pairs of five diseases, we calculated 
GRSs using known independent risk loci for disease B for each case and control in the 
disease A sample (based on disease B risk alleles, weighted by effect size) and tested the 
association of these GRSs with disease A status using logistic regression adjusted for the top 
seven principal components from PCA. The GRS P-values therefore test for enrichment of 
disease B risk alleles in disease A, and are expected to be significant both in the presence of 
pleiotropy and heterogeneity. We obtained the list of known associated loci from the 
previous literature1,36-38 for AS, CD, PS, PSC and UC.
Next, we evaluated the presence of heterogeneity by applying BUHMBOX20 to each of the 
20 pairs of diseases. We estimated the statistical power of BUHMBOX to detect a certain 
proportion of sample heterogeneity by simulation (Supplementary Table 13, 
Supplementary Figure 10), using the effect sizes and allele frequencies of the disease B 
loci and randomly simulating the number of cases and controls in the disease A sample.
Functional annotation of associated variants
The variants identified in this study were annotated using the Ensembl variant effect 
predictor (VEP)51 (release-77) to determine genomic position annotations, including the 
closest gene, and functional consequences (using the most severe consequence due to 
SIFT52 and Polyphen53). The —assembly flag was set to GRCh37 and added the —pick flag 
to retrieve the most severe consequence for the variants. The UpDownDistance plugin was 
used to retrieve the nearest gene id within 10kb of the variant. TSS distance was retrieved 
using the TSSDistance plugin. We also included the —regulatory flag to annotate where a 
variant overlaps a regulatory feature. The DNA hypersensitivity sites (DHS) and promoter 
annotations were taken from 1KGP annotations54.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To determine whether any of the lead variants were in high LD (r2>0.8) with a functional 
variant, the 1000 genomes project v3 EUR haplotypes were used (1000 genomes Phase III 
20130502 release). Pairwise LD was calculated between the lead SNPs and all other SNPs 
within this dataset using Plinkv1.0955. Only variants that occurred in 1000 genome dataset 
were included in this analysis. The GWAS-catalog10 was used to identify whether any lead 
variants or variants in high LD (r2>0.8) with the lead variants had been previously reported 
in other GWAS studies. Immunobase and Europe Pubmed Central were also used to 
determine whether variants had been previously associated with an auto-immune phenotype.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank all patients with ankylosing spondylitis, Crohn's disease, primary sclerosing cholangitis, psoriasis and 
ulcerative colitis, their families, healthy control individuals and clinicians for their participation in this study. We 
thank Tanja Wesse, Tanja Henke, Sanaz Sedghpour Sabet, Rainer Vogler, Gunnar Jacobs, Ilona Urbach, Wolfgang 
Albrecht, Virpi Pelkonen, Kristian Holm, Hege Dahlen Sollid, Bente Woldseth, Jarl Andreas Anmarkrud and Liv 
Wenche Torbjørnsen for expert help. Dr. Felix Braun, Dr. Wolfgang Kreisel, Dr. Thomas Berg and Dr. Rainer 
Günther are acknowledged for contributing German PSC patients. Benedicte A. Lie and The Norwegian Bone 
Marrow Donor Registry at Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet in Oslo and the Nord-Trøndelag Health Study 
(HUNT) are acknowledged for sharing the healthy Norwegian controls. This work was supported by the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the framework of the e:Med research and funding 
concept (SysInflame grant 01ZX1306A). This project received infrastructure support from the DFG Excellence 
Cluster No. 306 “Inflammation at Interfaces” and the PopGen Biobank (Kiel, Germany). Andre Franke receives an 
endowment professorship by the Foundation for Experimental Medicine (Zuerich, Switzerland). EGCUT received 
targeted financing from Estonian Research Council grant IUT20-60, Center of Excellence in Genomics 
(EXCEGEN) and University of Tartu (SP1GVARENG). We acknowledge EGCUT technical personnel, especially 
Mr V. Soo and S. Smit. Data analyzes were carried out in part in the High Performance Computing Center of 
University of Tartu. We acknowledge support from the Department of Health via the NIHR comprehensive 
Biomedical Research Centre awards to Guy's and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust in partnership with King's 
College London and to Addenbrooke's Hospital in partnership with the University of Cambridge. The study was 
supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), within the context of the National 
Genome Research Network 2 (NGFN-2), the National Genome Research Network plus (NGFNplus), and the 
Integrated Genome Research Network (IG) MooDS (grant 01GS08144, grant 01GS08147). RKW is supported by a 
VIDI grant (016.136.308) from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). JH was supported by 
the Swedish Research Council (521-2011-2764). This work is supported in part by funding from the National 
Institutes of Health (1R01AR063759 (SR), 5U01GM092691-05 (SR), 1UH2AR067677-01 (SR), U19 AI111224-01 
(SR), 1R01DK084960-05 (KNL)) and the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation Grant #2013097. ABJ and SB 
acknowledge funding from the Novo Nordisk Foundation (grant NNF14CC0001) and the H2020 project 
MedBioinformatics (grant 634143). The study was supported by The Norwegian PSC Research Center . We thank 
Gosia Trynka for assistance in setting up GoShifter.
References
1. Jostins L, et al. Host-microbe interactions have shaped the genetic architecture of inflammatory 
bowel disease. Nature. 2012; 491:119–24. [PubMed: 23128233] 
2. Parkes M, Cortes A, van Heel DA, Brown MA. Genetic insights into common pathways and 
complex relationships among immune-mediated diseases. Nat Rev Genet. 2013; 14:661–73. 
[PubMed: 23917628] 
3. Najarian DJ, Gottlieb AB. Connections between psoriasis and Crohn's disease. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2003; 48:805–21. quiz 822-4. [PubMed: 12789169] 
4. Loftus EV Jr. et al. PSC-IBD: a unique form of inflammatory bowel disease associated with primary 
sclerosing cholangitis. Gut. 2005; 54:91–6. [PubMed: 15591511] 
5. Jensen AB, et al. Temporal disease trajectories condensed from population-wide registry data 
covering 6.2 million patients. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:4022. [PubMed: 24959948] 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6. Bhattacharjee S, et al. A subset-based approach improves power and interpretation for the combined 
analysis of genetic association studies of heterogeneous traits. Am J Hum Genet. 2012; 90:821–35. 
[PubMed: 22560090] 
7. Stahl EA, et al. Genome-wide association study meta-analysis identifies seven new rheumatoid 
arthritis risk loci. Nat Genet. 2010; 42:508–14. [PubMed: 20453842] 
8. Grant SF, et al. Follow-up analysis of genome-wide association data identifies novel loci for type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes. 2009; 58:290–5. [PubMed: 18840781] 
9. Wang Z, et al. Imputation and subset-based association analysis across different cancer types 
identifies multiple independent risk loci in the TERT-CLPTM1L region on chromosome 5p15.33. 
Hum Mol Genet. 2014; 23:6616–33. [PubMed: 25027329] 
10. Hindorff LA, et al. Potential etiologic and functional implications of genome-wide association loci 
for human diseases and traits. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:9362–7. [PubMed: 19474294] 
11. Fehrmann RS, et al. Trans-eQTLs reveal that independent genetic variants associated with a 
complex phenotype converge on intermediate genes, with a major role for the HLA. PLoS Genet. 
2011; 7:e1002197. [PubMed: 21829388] 
12. Nelis M, et al. Genetic structure of Europeans: a view from the North-East. PLoS One. 2009; 
4:e5472. [PubMed: 19424496] 
13. Trynka G, et al. Disentangling the Effects of Colocalizing Genomic Annotations to Functionally 
Prioritize Non-coding Variants within Complex-Trait Loci. Am J Hum Genet. 2015; 97:139–52. 
[PubMed: 26140449] 
14. Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium. et al. Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. 
Nature. 2015; 518:317–30. [PubMed: 25693563] 
15. Fantom Consortium. et al. A promoter-level mammalian expression atlas. Nature. 2014; 507:462–
70. [PubMed: 24670764] 
16. Ernst J, et al. Mapping and analysis of chromatin state dynamics in nine human cell types. Nature. 
2011; 473:43–9. [PubMed: 21441907] 
17. Pers TH, et al. Biological interpretation of genome-wide association studies using predicted gene 
functions. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:5890. [PubMed: 25597830] 
18. Fehrmann RS, et al. Gene expression analysis identifies global gene dosage sensitivity in cancer. 
Nat Genet. 2015; 47:115–25. [PubMed: 25581432] 
19. Kamburov A, et al. ConsensusPathDB: toward a more complete picture of cell biology. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2011; 39:D712–7. [PubMed: 21071422] 
20. Han B, et al. Using genotype data to distinguish pleiotropy from heterogeneity: deciphering 
coheritability in autoimmune and neuropsychiatric diseases. bioRxiv. 2015
21. Lee SH, Wray NR, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. Estimating missing heritability for disease from 
genome-wide association studies. Am J Hum Genet. 2011; 88:294–305. [PubMed: 21376301] 
22. Lee SH, Yang J, Goddard ME, Visscher PM, Wray NR. Estimation of pleiotropy between complex 
diseases using single-nucleotide polymorphism-derived genomic relationships and restricted 
maximum likelihood. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:2540–2. [PubMed: 22843982] 
23. Chen GB, et al. Estimation and partitioning of (co)heritability of inflammatory bowel disease from 
GWAS and immunochip data. Hum Mol Genet. 2014; 23:4710–20. [PubMed: 24728037] 
24. Grant AJ, Lalor PF, Salmi M, Jalkanen S, Adams DH. Homing of mucosal lymphocytes to the liver 
in the pathogenesis of hepatic complications of inflammatory bowel disease. Lancet. 2002; 
359:150–7. [PubMed: 11809275] 
25. Adams DH, Eksteen B. Aberrant homing of mucosal T cells and extra-intestinal manifestations of 
inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 6:244–51. [PubMed: 16498453] 
26. Apetoh L, et al. Toll-like receptor 4-dependent contribution of the immune system to anticancer 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Nat Med. 2007; 13:1050–9. [PubMed: 17704786] 
27. Prohinar P, Rallabhandi P, Weiss JP, Gioannini TL. Expression of functional D299G.T399I 
polymorphic variant of TLR4 depends more on coexpression of MD-2 than does wild-type TLR4. 
J Immunol. 2010; 184:4362–7. [PubMed: 20212095] 
28. Isakov N, Altman A. PKC-theta-mediated signal delivery from the TCR/CD28 surface receptors. 
Front Immunol. 2012; 3:273. [PubMed: 22936936] 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Wachowicz K, Baier G. Protein kinase Ctheta: the pleiotropic T-cell signalling intermediate. 
Biochem Soc Trans. 2014; 42:1512–8. [PubMed: 25399562] 
30. Zanin-Zhorov A, et al. Protein kinase C-theta mediates negative feedback on regulatory T cell 
function. Science. 2010; 328:372–6. [PubMed: 20339032] 
31. Anderson CA, et al. Meta-analysis identifies 29 additional ulcerative colitis risk loci, increasing the 
number of confirmed associations to 47. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:246–52. [PubMed: 21297633] 
32. Solovieff N, Cotsapas C, Lee PH, Purcell SM, Smoller JW. Pleiotropy in complex traits: challenges 
and strategies. Nat Rev Genet. 2013; 14:483–95. [PubMed: 23752797] 
33. Karlsen TH, Boberg KM. Update on primary sclerosing cholangitis. J Hepatol. 2013; 59:571–82. 
[PubMed: 23603668] 
34. de Vries AB, Janse M, Blokzijl H, Weersma RK. Distinctive inflammatory bowel disease 
phenotype in primary sclerosing cholangitis. World J Gastroenterol. 2015; 21:1956–71. [PubMed: 
25684965] 
35. Fairfax BP, et al. Genetics of gene expression in primary immune cells identifies cell type-specific 
master regulators and roles of HLA alleles. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:502–10. [PubMed: 22446964] 
36. International Genetics of Ankylosing Spondylitis Consortium. et al. Identification of multiple risk 
variants for ankylosing spondylitis through high-density genotyping of immune-related loci. Nat 
Genet. 2013; 45:730–8. [PubMed: 23749187] 
37. Tsoi LC, et al. Identification of 15 new psoriasis susceptibility loci highlights the role of innate 
immunity. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:1341–8. [PubMed: 23143594] 
38. Liu JZ, et al. Dense genotyping of immune-related disease regions identifies nine new risk loci for 
primary sclerosing cholangitis. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:670–5. [PubMed: 23603763] 
39. Goyette P, et al. High-density mapping of the MHC identifies a shared role for HLA-DRB1*01:03 
in inflammatory bowel diseases and heterozygous advantage in ulcerative colitis. Nat Genet. 2015; 
47:172–9. [PubMed: 25559196] 
40. Trynka G, et al. Dense genotyping identifies and localizes multiple common and rare variant 
association signals in celiac disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:1193–201. [PubMed: 22057235] 
41. Genomes Project C, et al. An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human genomes. 
Nature. 2012; 491:56–65. [PubMed: 23128226] 
42. Purcell S, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage 
analyses. Am J Hum Genet. 2007; 81:559–75. [PubMed: 17701901] 
43. Price AL, et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide 
association studies. Nat Genet. 2006; 38:904–9. [PubMed: 16862161] 
44. The International HapMap Consortium. A second generation human haplotype map of over 3.1 
million SNPs. Nature. 2007; 449:851–61. [PubMed: 17943122] 
45. Price AL, et al. Long-range LD can confound genome scans in admixed populations. Am J Hum 
Genet. 2008; 83:132–5. author reply 135-9. [PubMed: 18606306] 
46. Abraham G, Inouye M. Fast principal component analysis of large-scale genome-wide data. PLoS 
One. 2014; 9:e93766. [PubMed: 24718290] 
47. Taylor JEWKJGF. Maxima of discretely sampled random fields, with an application to ‘bubbles’. 
Biometrika. 2007; 94:1–18.
48. Tsoi LC, et al. Enhanced meta-analysis and replication studies identify five new psoriasis 
susceptibility loci. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7001. [PubMed: 25939698] 
49. Liu JZ, et al. Association analyses identify 38 susceptibility loci for inflammatory bowel disease 
and highlight shared genetic risk across populations. Nat Genet. 2015
50. Morris JA, Randall JC, Maller JB, Barrett JC. Evoker: a visualization tool for genotype intensity 
data. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:1786–7. [PubMed: 20507892] 
51. McLaren W, et al. Deriving the consequences of genomic variants with the Ensembl API and SNP 
Effect Predictor. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:2069–70. [PubMed: 20562413] 
52. Ng PC, Henikoff S. SIFT: predicting amino acid changes that affect protein function. Nucleic 
Acids Research. 2003; 31:3812–3814. [PubMed: 12824425] 
53. Adzhubei IA, et al. A method and server for predicting damaging missense mutations. Nature 
Methods. 2010; 7:248–249. [PubMed: 20354512] 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 54. Gusev A, et al. Partitioning heritability of regulatory and cell-type-specific variants across 11 
common diseases. Am J Hum Genet. 2014; 95:535–52. [PubMed: 25439723] 
55. Chang CC, et al. Second-generation PLINK: rising to the challenge of larger and richer datasets. 
Gigascience. 2015; 4:7. [PubMed: 25722852] 
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 27 novel genome-wide significant disease associations (Pdisease<5×10−8) for ankylosing 
spondylitis (AS), Crohn's disease (CD), psoriasis (PS), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and 
ulcerative colitis (UC)
Single disease analyses were performed only on SNPs that achieved PSBM<5×10−7 in the 
primary (unconditioned) cross-disease subset-based association meta-analysis (SBM) 
approach (see Main Text). We identified 17 novel genome-wide significant susceptibility 
loci for AS, 6 loci for CD and 4 loci for PSC (Supplementary table 2). Corresponding P-
values and ORs for each novel association are shown separately for each disease. With this, 
the number of known AS, IBD, and PSC risk loci increased to 48, 206, and 20, respectively. 
For 22 out of 27 gws associations, lead SNPs from the SBM approach (PSBM<5×10−8) and 
the single disease lookups (PSBM<5×10−7 and Pdisease<5×10−8) are identical, in five 
instances we have different lead SNPs between SBM and the single disease analyses 
(Supplementary table 2).
−log10 P-value: −log10 P-values (Pdisease) from Immunochip analysis (Supplementary 
Table 2) with regard to the physical location of markers; direction of triangle denotes 
direction of disease-individual effect; OR: odds ratio from the five single disease vs. control 
subsearches (OR(disease) in Supplementary Table 2). Large circles denote nominal 
significant disease-individual P-values (Pdisease<0.05); CAF cases/controls: case/control 
minor allele frequency; If available, the nearest gene within 10kb of the variant is depicted.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Heritability explained per risk variant from 244 independent multi-disease association 
signals identified through cross-disease subset-based association meta-analysis
(a) Cumulative fraction of explained variance in disease liability (heritability) for each 
disease (see Methods). The loci are ordered from largest to smallest individual contribution. 
In total, 7.38, 10.30, 5.72, 2.53, and 5.95 percent of the heritability of ankylosing spondylitis 
(AS), Crohn's disease (CD), psoriasis (PS), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and 
ulcerative colitis (UC), respectively, is explained by the 169 loci outside the extended MHC 
region (for a maximum of 244 independent signals from Supplementary Table 3a). When 
adding known risk alleles from the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)36-39 to the 169 
loci, the cumulative variance increases to 27.82, 10.88, 12.20, 5.48 and 7.66 percent for AS, 
CD, PS, PSC and UC, respectively.
(b) Example of a pair-wise comparison of heritability explained per risk variant between PS 
and UC. See Supplementary Figure 6 for all ten pair-wise comparisons. Even if disease-
associations account for approximately the same amount of variance explained in disease 
liability, e.g. as seen here for PS and UC, the pattern of sharing is complex in terms of size 
and direction of effect. Each box represents an independently associated SNP for the given 
disease. The size of each box is proportional to the amount of heritability for that variant. 
The colors of the boxes denote whether the difference in variance explained is due to 
different direction of effect (risk versus protective), significant heterogeneity of odds ratios 
(P<0.01) or both.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Identification of drug targeting genes from a core disease protein-protein interaction 
network
We evaluated the potential role of genes in drug discovery by linking genes from a core 
protein-protein-interaction (PPI) network (Supplementary Figure 9) to drugs using 
Drugbank (see Methods). All drugs were selected based on evidence from phase I/II/III 
randomized clinical trials (RCTs) or published animal studies. Nine drug target genes 
overlap with the genes from the core network. (a) Connections between biological genes 
from core PPI (red), and drugs (blue) used for treatment of AS, CD, PS, PSC and UC 
(yellow). (b) Connections between biological genes from core PPI (red), and drugs (blue) 
used for treatment of other inflammatory disease and traits (yellow).
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Estimation of Immunochip-wide pleiotropy (excluding the MHC region) between the 
five diseases under study
Proportion of genetic variance in liability (SNP-based heritability) and proportion of genetic 
covariance in liability between diseases (SNP-based coheritability) with 95% error bars (see 
Supplementary Table 15a; estimates including MHC SNPs see Supplementary Table 
15b). Disease-associated SNP markers from Supplementary Table 3a (at a maximum of 244 
independent signals from 169 non-MHC risk loci, see also Supplementary Figure 6) 
explain 42.2% of AS-, 79.63% of CD-, 39.6% of PS-, 29% of PSC- and 55% of UC-
Immunochip-wide SNP-heritability (excluding the MHC region) on the liability scale, 
respectively. As the Immunochip densely tags common variants but at the cost of losing 
genome-wide coverage, the estimated SNP-heritabilities are lower bounds for genome-wide 
SNP-heritabilities.
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 25
Table 1
Bayesian logistic regression analysis identified 31 loci with 34 independent associations for which we determined a specific disease model constellation 
with high certainty (MeanProbmodel≥0.6). A disease model is a list of diseases that a given locus is associated with (i.e. has a non-zero log odds ratio). 
Mean posterior probabilities (MeanProb) were calculated on a consensus-finding process of merging results from six different priors (Supplementary 
Table 3c, see Methods). Loci with very high certainty (MeanProbmodel≥0.8) for the best disease model are shown in bold type. Out of the 34 associations 
with MeanProbmodel≥0.6, 25 signals have 5 diseases involved, 6 signals have four diseases and 3 signals are unique to a single disease.
Locus
Signal
Chr
Locus_pos_L
Locus_pos_R
SNP
Nearby gene
OR(AS)
OR(CD)
OR(PS)
OR(PSC)
OR(UC)
Best model (VoteWinner)
VoteCount
MeanProb
119
1
12
111702182
113030487
rs3184504
SH2B3
0.915
1.062
1.055
1.189
1.047
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.978
130
1
16
11018622
11496579
rs367569
TNP2
0.947
0.906
0.893
0.920
0.929
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.963
166
1
22
21811991
22076405
rs2266961
UBE2L3
1.104
1.136
1.089
1.070
1.082
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.961
155
1
20
31201111
31588992
rs6058869
DNMT3B
1.091
1.060
1.071
1.062
1.060
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.953
91
1
10
6028491
6197536
rs61839660
IL2RA
1.079
1.198
1.152
0.719
1.022
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.943
8
1
1
67301096
67942593
rs80174646
IL23R
0.602
0.449
0.717
0.872
0.620
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.915
133
1
16
28289243
29025978
rs26528
IL27
1.126
1.152
1.049
1.076
1.082
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.91
39
1
2
241553993
241664801
rs3749171
GPR35
1.179
1.081
1.044
1.202
1.164
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.878
151
1
19
10364404
10625796
rs74956615
RAVER1
0.809
0.778
0.627
0.831
0.887
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.841
95
2
10
64284517
64759410
rs10761648
ZNF365
1.087
1.115
1.042
1.106
1.161
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.837
32
3
2
162960873
163358537
rs35667974
IFIH1
1.140
1.175
0.710
1.323
1.377
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.83
22
1
2
24684352
25594432
rs13407913
ADCY3
1.060
1.127
1.063
1.078
1.072
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.811
153
1
19
49092430
49278082
rs679574
FUT2
1.065
1.114
1.078
1.100
1.027
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.798
126
1
14
75698304
75749875
rs1569328
FOS
0.936
0.902
0.913
0.912
0.950
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.791
151
4
19
10364404
10625796
rs35074907
KEAP1
1.115
1.294
1.133
1.318
1.147
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.788
103
2
11
57887309
58457495
rs10750899
OR5B21
1.232
1.208
1.067
1.319
1.357
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.767
143
1
17
57487538
58119648
rs1292035
RPS6KB1
1.101
1.109
1.100
1.044
1.071
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.711
147
1
18
12516768
12926278
rs12968719
PTPN2
1.116
1.241
1.056
1.120
1.144
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.699
32
4
2
162960873
163358537
rs72871627
IFIH1
1.277
1.153
0.646
1.139
1.473
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.693
62
4
5
158496825
158948962
rs6556411
AC008697.1
0.913
0.913
1.092
0.951
0.907
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.681
52
1
5
38800374
39031577
rs395157
OSMR
0.961
0.911
0.949
0.917
0.921
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.678
48
1
4
103388565
104010837
rs3774937
NFKB1
1.120
0.992
1.041
1.167
1.107
PS_AS_UC_PSC
6
0.673
151
3
19
10364404
10625796
rs12720356
TYK2
1.085
1.083
0.775
0.897
1.101
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
4
0.673
8
4
1
67301096
67942593
rs183686347
IL23R
1.773
2.725
1.357
1.142
1.887
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.664
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Ellinghaus et al.
Page 26
Locus
Signal
Chr
Locus_pos_L
Locus_pos_R
SNP
Nearby gene
OR(AS)
OR(CD)
OR(PS)
OR(PSC)
OR(UC)
Best model (VoteWinner)
VoteCount
MeanProb
71
1
6
159322326
159545322
rs2451258
-
1.086
1.114
1.111
0.918
0.990
PS_AS_CD_PSC
4
0.658
151
2
19
10364404
10625796
rs35018800
TYK2
0.598
0.641
0.576
0.799
0.723
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.653
163
1
21
40413101
40483777
rs9977672
-
0.825
0.920
1.006
0.786
0.799
AS_CD_UC_PSC
4
0.652
165
1
21
45596207
45702354
rs4456788
AP001057.1
1.081
1.135
0.993
1.126
1.110
AS_CD_UC_PSC
4
0.652
11
1
1
152534954
152860452
rs6693105
LCE3B
0.994
0.998
0.799
1.006
1.006
PS
6
0.648
35
1
2
218877398
219266204
rs11676348
CXCR2
1.055
1.081
0.980
1.136
1.065
AS_CD_UC_PSC
4
0.638
160
1
20
62180117
62488635
rs6062496
TNFRSF6B
1.000
0.872
0.962
0.923
0.877
PS_CD_UC_PSC
6
0.628
110
1
11
114256749
114589971
rs661054
NXPE1
0.984
0.998
0.982
0.993
0.883
UC
6
0.614
4
3
1
20060965
20304744
rs4655215
RNF186
0.976
0.989
0.974
0.994
1.171
UC
6
0.603
32
1
2
162960873
163358537
rs2111485
FAP
1.030
1.054
0.852
1.074
1.082
PS_AS_CD_UC_PSC
5
0.6
Locus: number of locus defined by annotation of association boundaries (see Methods); Signal: number of independent signal (from conditional analysis) within a certain locus; Chr: chromosome; 
Locus_pos_l/Locus_pos_r: left/right association boundaries for locus (see Methods section). Genomic positions were retrieved from NCBI's dbSNP build v142 (genome build hg19); SNP: rs ID; Nearby 
gene: gene candidate nearest to the index SNP as long as a gene was with 10kb of the SNP; OR: single disease odds ratio: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS), Crohn's disease (CD), psoriasis (PS), primary 
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Best model (VoteWinner): disease model with highest posterior probability under six different priors (Supplementary Table 3c); VoteCount: we 
counted how many priors voted for that model, and calculated the mean posterior from six different priors; MeanProb: Mean posterior probability (MeanProbmodel) for the proposed model and risk variant 
of six different priors.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 14.
