 https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318768484
Autism
 
1 
–12
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1362361318768484
journals.sagepub.com/home/aut
Autism is a neurodevelopmental condition characterised by 
difficulties with social relating, social communication, flexi-
bility and sensory processing (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013).1 It occurs in approximately 1% of the 
population and persists across the lifespan (Brugha et al., 
2016). Autism is a dimensional condition, representing one 
end of a continuum of traits that extends throughout the gen-
eral population (Robinson et al., 2017). A realistic under-
standing of autism should not only focus on the difficulties 
arising from the condition but also must include consideration 
of the strengths of autistic people. For example, the majority 
of autistic people diagnosed according to current conventions 
have fluent language and an intelligence quotient (IQ) in the 
normal range (Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, 
2014; Loomes et al., 2017). Furthermore, many have capaci-
ties that stem directly from their autism (e.g. Howlin et al., 
2009; Meilleur et al., 2015; Soulières et al., 2011).
Despite their autism-related strengths, and the fact that 
many autistic people lead satisfying adult lives, under cur-
rent systems of care, people on the autism spectrum are at 
high risk of poor adult outcomes (Howlin and Moss, 2012). 
These include social isolation, educational and occupa-
tional under-attainment, difficulty establishing independ-
ent living, poor quality of life and increased risk of an 
early death (Brugha et al., 2016; Howlin and Moss, 2012; 
Van Heijst and Guerts, 2015; Schendel et al., 2016). In this 
study, we seek to investigate the link between autism and a 
different adult outcome, namely, homelessness. This has 
received very limited attention in the empirical literature to 
date and may well represent an important part of the pic-
ture of adult outcomes of autistic people.
Homelessness is an umbrella term which covers a range 
of different situations. It refers to rough sleepers, that is, 
The prevalence of autistic traits  
in a homeless population
Alasdair Churchard1*
, Morag Ryder1*, Andrew Greenhill2  
and William Mandy1
Abstract
Anecdotal evidence suggests that autistic people experience an elevated risk of homelessness, but systematic empirical 
research on this topic is lacking. As a step towards filling this gap in knowledge, we conducted a preliminary investigation 
of the prevalence of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.) autism symptoms in a group of long-term 
homeless people. The entire caseload (N 
= 
106) of a UK homeless outreach team was screened (excluding individuals born 
outside of the United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland) using an in-depth, semi-structured interview with keyworkers, based 
on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.) diagnostic criteria. This showed adequate inter-rater reliability, 
as well as evidence of criterion and construct validity. Of the sample, 13 people (12.3%, 95% confidence interval (7.0, 20.4)) 
screened positive, meeting Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.) autism criteria by keyworker report. 
A further nine people (8.5%, 95% confidence interval (4.5, 15.3)) were ‘marginal’, having autistic traits that were not quite 
sufficient to meet Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.) criteria. Those with elevated autistic traits, 
compared to those without, tended to be more socially isolated and less likely to use substances. This study has provided 
initial evidence that autistic traits are over-represented among homeless people and that autistic homeless people may show 
a distinct pattern of characteristics and needs. Further investigation is required to build upon these provisional findings.
Keywords
adults, autism, homelessness
1University College London, UK
2Kensington & Chelsea Learning Disability Service, UK
*Alasdair Churchard and Morag Ryder contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author:
Alasdair Churchard, Research Department of Clinical, Educational and 
Health Psychology, University College London, Gower Street, London 
WC1E 6BT, UK. 
Email: alasdair.churchard@gmail.com
768484 AUT0010.1177/1362361318768484AutismChurchard et al.
research-article2018
Original Article
 2 
Autism 00(0)
people who sleep or bed down in the open air, or in build-
ings or other places not intended for human habitation 
(Crisis, 2017). It also includes people who do sleep in a 
place designed for habitation, but who do not have any 
legal title to their accommodation or access to any private 
spaces for their social relations (Fazel et al., 2014). 
Homelessness both arises from and contributes to vulner-
ability: it has severe negative effects on physical and men-
tal health (Fazel et al., 2014). If autistic people are more 
likely to become homeless, it is important to document this 
so that a potential subset of the homeless population can be 
identified and appropriate resources extended to them. 
This would also help with the development of targeted 
measures to help prevent autistic people becoming home-
less in the first place.
This study aims to explore the relationship between 
autism and homelessness, by making an initial estimate of 
the prevalence of autistic traits in a homeless population. 
This work was initially motivated by anecdotal reports 
from autism clinicians and keyworkers in a homeless sup-
port service that rates of autism may be elevated in this 
population (e.g. Homeless Link, 2015). In line with this, 
there is indirect empirical evidence to support the idea that 
autism is a risk factor for homelessness. Autistic adults, 
compared to those without autism, experience elevated 
rates of mental health problems, greater difficulties attain-
ing independent living conditions, lower educational and 
occupational attainment, and a higher risk of social isola-
tion (e.g. Howlin and Moss, 2012; Magiati et al., 2014). 
All of these characteristics are known risk factors for 
homelessness (Fazel et al., 2008, 2014).
We know of no studies published in peer-reviewed jour-
nals testing directly whether autism predisposes people to 
homelessness. However, there are two studies in the ‘grey 
literature’ (i.e. not published in peer-reviewed academic 
journals) that support this idea. In one small-scale internal 
audit in a UK National Health Service setting, a psychia-
trist investigated the presence of autism in a group of 14 
homeless men with social difficulties (NHS Devon, 2011). 
Seven members of this preselected group were judged to 
have shown strong signs of autism, based on a non-stand-
ardised but thorough assessment involving interviews with 
12 of the 14 homeless individuals, interviews with work-
ers, and also reviewing case notes. In another study, the 
National Autistic Society in Wales surveyed 415 autistic 
adults and family members of people with autism. About 
12% of these autistic adults reported having been homeless 
at least once since leaving school (Evans, 2011). These 
findings are based on suboptimal methods of sampling and 
measurement and have not been subjected to peer review 
and so must be treated cautiously. Nevertheless, they sug-
gest the value of a more systematic investigation of the 
link between autism and homelessness.
The task of assessing rates of autism in a homeless pop-
ulation is difficult. Diagnosing autism in adults is in itself 
challenging (Lai and Baron-Cohen, 2015), and homeless-
ness complicates assessment further. The ideal process of 
assessing autism in adults involves combining the results 
from standardised self-report, direct observation and 
informant-report measures to gain a picture of current 
behaviour and developmental history (NICE, 2012). This 
intensive process requires a high degree of engagement 
from the person being assessed and from someone who 
knew them as a child. Difficulties with engagement are 
ubiquitous in work with homeless people (Kryda and 
Compton, 2009; Olivet et al., 2010) and gaining any kind 
of history can be extremely difficult in this group, as they 
have often lost contact with family and friends (Roll et al., 
1999). Other factors such as high rates of substance mis-
use, mental health problems, and a disjointed social envi-
ronment all also complicate the process of assessment 
(Fazel et al., 2014). Furthermore, there are no autism 
measures that have been validated for use with homeless 
people (Sappok et al., 2015).
Reflecting the challenges of assessing autism in home-
less people, our work has the following features. First, we 
directly acknowledge that we are unable to offer definitive 
diagnoses of autism in this study. Instead, we seek to derive 
an initial estimate of autistic traits, including those of suf-
ficient quality and quantity to be suggestive of a Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.; DSM-
5) diagnosis. Second, instead of using self-report and/or 
direct observation, we chose to measure autistic traits by 
informant report, with the informants being keyworkers in 
a homeless support service. These are staff members who 
work directly with homeless adults to help them make posi-
tive changes and also coordinate their contact with diverse 
services. In this role, keyworkers work with their homeless 
clients over a sustained period of time and generally know 
them well. Our decision to use informant report was in 
response to the likelihood that a large proportion of the 
homeless population we sampled would not engage with 
research. Those with autistic social communication diffi-
culties would likely be among the least likely to participate, 
which would introduce a bias into any estimate of preva-
lence. A similar informant-report approach was adopted by 
Fraser et al. (2012) with another hard-to-engage popula-
tion, when they estimated autism prevalence among 
patients in youth mental health services by interviewing 
their key clinicians. While we acknowledge that this 
approach does not offer a gold-standard autism assessment, 
it does allow us to investigate the full caseload of a home-
less service, thereby limiting sampling bias.
A third key feature of this study is that, given the lack of 
relevant measures validated for homeless people, we col-
lected data using an in-depth interview, structured accord-
ing to the DSM-5 description of autism spectrum disorder. 
Any measure should possess reliability and validity 
(Streiner et al., 2015). We assessed the inter-rater reliability 
by blind double-coding a random selection of interviews. 
 Churchard et al. 
3
Criterion validity is the extent to which a measure co-varies 
with another measure of the same construct. In this study, 
we administered the most appropriate extant autism meas-
ure for keyworker assessment of autistic traits, the Autism 
Spectrum Disorder in Adults Screening Questionnaire 
(ASDASQ; Nylander and Gillberg, 2001) and checked how 
this correlated with outcomes from our semi-structured 
DSM-5 interview.
Construct validity is the extent to which an instrument 
shows the pattern of association with other measures that 
would be predicted based on what we know about the con-
struct being measured (Barker and Pistrang, 2015). We 
made three a priori construct validity hypotheses. First, 
since autism is associated with higher risk of social isola-
tion (Gray et al., 2014), we predicted that if the interview 
possesses validity, those with high autism trait scores 
should show elevated levels of social isolation. Second, we 
predicted that high autism trait scores would be associated 
with lower levels of substance abuse in the homeless popu-
lation. This was based on reports from homelessness 
experts we consulted: compared to the non-autistic home-
less population, their autistic homeless clients are less 
likely to abuse substances. In support of this is the meta-
analytic finding that rates of drug dependence (24.4%, 
95% confidence interval (CI) (13.2, 35.6)) and alcohol 
dependence (37.9%, 95% CI (27.8, 48.0)) are very high in 
the general homeless population (Fazel et al., 2008). By 
contrast, such problems are much less common among 
autistic adults, as shown by a recent whole-population 
study that found 3.4% of their autistic participants had 
substance-use-related problems (Butwicka et al., 2017). 
Our third construct validity hypothesis concerned non-
autistic psychopathology. Mental health problems are very 
common among homeless people, and such difficulties 
could artificially inflate scores on any measure of autistic 
traits. For example, if a person is socially withdrawn due 
to psychosis or social anxiety, this could mistakenly be 
taken as a symptom of autistic social impairment. 
Therefore, we reasoned that if our instrument has construct 
validity, it will not be strongly associated with non-autistic 
mental health difficulties in the homeless population.
In summary, our overall aim is to derive an initial esti-
mate of the prevalence of autistic traits in a homeless pop-
ulation using informant reports. To this end, we sought to 
address the following questions:
1. Does the DSM-5 keyworker interview that we 
used to evaluate autistic traits show inter-rater 
reliability?
2. 
Does the DSM-5 interview show criterion validity, 
as indicated by agreement with another profes-
sional-report measure of autistic traits?
3. 
Does the DSM-5 keyworker interview show con-
struct validity, as indicated by those with higher 
autistic trait scores, compared to those with lower 
autistic trait scores, being more socially isolated, 
less likely to abuse substances, and having equiva-
lent levels of mental health difficulties?
4. 
What proportion of the caseload of a long-term 
homeless service has elevated levels of informant-
reported autistic traits, consistent with a DSM-5 
diagnosis of autism?
Methods
Procedure
The study was based in a homelessness outreach team in 
an urban area in the United Kingdom. In this team, each 
homeless person has a keyworker, a member of staff who 
coordinates their contact with services and works directly 
with them over a sustained period of time. At the start of 
this project, the research team provided an autism training 
workshop for the keyworkers to improve the quality of 
reporting, to reduce biases that could arise from variations 
in keyworkers’ autism knowledge and to engage the key-
workers in the project. This training workshop included a 
presentation and structured case discussion facilitated by 
the research team, and lasted two and a half hours. 
Subsequently, all keyworkers agreed to participate. This 
involved them completing a separate interview for each of 
their homeless clients. The only homeless clients who 
were not the focus of an interview were those born outside 
of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. We 
suspect that homelessness for those born outside the 
United Kingdom and Ireland, including refugees, is a dis-
tinct phenomenon, in terms of its causes and characteris-
tics (Fitzpatrick et al., 2012; Phillips, 2006).
This study received ethical approval from the University 
College London Research Ethics Committee, reference 
8359/001. All keyworkers were provided with an informa-
tion sheet and consent form. We followed procedures to 
protect the privacy and confidentiality of the homeless 
people who were the focus of the research interviews. The 
homeless people were not identifiable to the research team: 
we were not told names or any other identifying informa-
tion such as date of birth.
The joint first authors conducted the interviews. At the 
time of the research, they were clinical psychology trainees 
working as psychologists in the UK National Health 
Service and studying for their doctorate in clinical psychol-
ogy. This role involves extensive general training on assess-
ment, and they also received specialist training in autism 
from the third (A.G.) and fourth authors (W.M.) (both expe-
rienced in the diagnosis of autism), which included feed-
back on pilot interviews they had carried out.
Participants
Nine keyworkers took part in the study, of whom six were 
female. Keyworkers were aged between 36 and 57 years 
(average 
age = 42.6 years, 
standard 
deviation 
(SD) = 6.4 years). 
 4 
Autism 00(0)
The amount of time they had worked in homelessness ser-
vices 
ranged 
from 
6–26 years 
(average = 15.0 years, 
SD = 7.3 years). The amount of time they had worked in their 
current role ranged from 2.5 to 8 years, with the average 
being 3.8 (SD = 2.0) years. Keyworkers had, on average, 11.8 
(SD = 4.5) cases each. The amount of time clients had been 
known by their keyworkers ranged from 0–19 years, with the 
average being 2.9 (SD = 3.5) years. The majority of the sam-
ple (54.1%) was seen by keyworkers at a minimum of once 
a fortnight, 10.2% were seen monthly and contact was vari-
able or intermittent in 34.7% of cases.
Of the 137 homeless people on the caseload, 106 were 
born in the United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland and so 
were the focus of an interview. Of these, 91 (85.8%) were 
male. Their average age was 48.9 (SD = 12.7) years, and 
87.7% were White British. The average length of home-
lessness was 11.7 (SD = 8.5) years. The most common 
accommodation situations were as follows: 46 (43.4%) 
were street homeless, 20 (18.9%) were in a homeless hos-
tel, 10 (9.4%) were in independent accommodation (e.g. 
their own accommodation to which they had legal title), 10 
(9.4%) were in semi-independent accommodation (e.g. 
accommodation they had legal title to, but where a condi-
tion of having the accommodation was that they engaged 
with specified support) and 9 (8.5%) were in prison. The 
remaining 11 (10.4%) were either in emergency accom-
modation, with friends and family, had disappeared for 
more than 90 days, or had their accommodation situation 
listed as ‘other’. In total, 63 (59.4%) were known to use 
drugs and/or alcohol, and 34 (32.1%) had an officially 
diagnosed mental health condition, although a much higher 
number were suspected of having a mental health 
condition.
Measures
DSM-5-based semi-structured interview. We used keywork-
ers’ knowledge of their clients to identify those homeless 
individuals with observable traits of autism. To do this, we 
created a ‘DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the Homeless Inter-
view’, which we call the ‘DATHI’. This allowed us to 
gather in-depth information about the individual’s presen-
tation. The DATHI was developed through the following 
sequential process: (1) consultation with experts on home-
lessness, including those with experience of working with 
autistic homeless people; (2) going through the DSM-5 
criteria in detail and creating a draft interview; (3) consul-
tation on this draft with the local Adult Autism Special 
Interest Group, which comprises clinicians from several 
local adult autism assessment services; (4) piloting the 
measure with keyworkers from the homeless outreach 
team. At each stage, the interview was adapted based on 
feedback received.
The DATHI, which is presented in the online supple-
mentary materials for this article, was based on DSM-5 
criteria for autism spectrum disorder. It has separate sec-
tions for each of the seven criteria, with general questions 
followed by specific prompts. For example, a question 
about eye contact (part of DSM-5 criterion A2) was fol-
lowed by prompts about whether eye contact was absent, 
or whether the individual had a fixed gaze. Some questions 
were adapted to the homelessness context, based on the 
information gained from experts in the development phase. 
An example of this was that one prompt in the section 
based on DSM-5 criterion B2 asks about ritualised behav-
iour in relation to sleep sites. The focus here was on 
whether there were especially fixed patterns of sleep site 
selection, or if the person set up their sleep site in a ritual-
istic fashion.
The DATHI was scored by rating whether autism symp-
toms were present for each of the seven DSM-5 criteria. A 
range of scoring options were used to ensure that a crite-
rion was only classified as ‘Present’ if there was good evi-
dence that this was the case, as we expected that there 
would be a wide variety in presentations, and it would be 
difficult in some cases to decide whether or not a particular 
behaviour was a characteristic of autism. The other poten-
tial scoring options were as follows: ‘Possibly present’, 
‘Not present’, ‘Present but attributable to cause other than 
autism’ and ‘Insufficient information to classify’.
Scores on individual criteria were combined to make an 
estimated overall classification for each homeless person. 
There were four possible summary outcomes: (1) screened 
positive–high likelihood of DSM-5 autism; (2) marginal–
medium likelihood of DSM-5 autism; (3) screened 
 
negative–low likelihood of DSM-5 autism; (4) unclassified–
insufficient information. The rules to assign each of these 
summary outcomes are shown in Table 1.
ASDASQ. The ASDASQ is an informant-report autism 
screening measure, developed for mental health clinicians 
to rate autistic symptoms of their patients (Nylander and 
Gillberg, 2001). This asks questions about the person’s 
current presentation, with answers in a yes/no format. 
Potential scores range from 0 to 9, with higher scores indi-
cating a higher probability of being autistic. Given the 
prevalence of mental health conditions among homeless 
people (Fazel et al., 2008) and the fact that it is designed to 
be completed by professionals, we considered that the 
ASDASQ was the most suitable instrument to use in this 
study, in order to explore the criterion validity of the 
DATHI.
Additional information gathered to test construct valid-
ity. Information on mental health and substance use was 
gathered via a structured questionnaire completed by key-
workers drawing upon client’s notes. A score of 1 was 
given for mental health diagnoses if the homeless individ-
ual was known to have a formal diagnosis of a mental 
health condition. Substance use was coded separately 
 Churchard et al. 
5
where a score of 1 was given for the current use of any 
amount of alcohol or illegal drug. An additional semi-
structured interview was used with keyworkers to gather 
observable information about their clients’ social contacts. 
These qualitative data were then quantitatively coded 
using content analysis (Elo and Kyngäs, 2008), with 
respect to four main categories of relationships (partner, 
family, peer relationships or socially isolated). A code of 1 
was given for each category if there was evidence of a cur-
rent partner, any peer relationship including ‘drinking bud-
dies’ or acquaintances known through drug taking and any 
contact with any family including by text or phone. If a 
person scored 0 on all three categories, they were given a 
score of 1 in the totally isolated category. For this coding 
process, inter-rater reliability was calculated based on a 
second rater (A.C.) blind coding 20 interviews, which had 
originally been coded by M.R. This showed high level of 
agreement across the categories; partner (κ = 1, p < 0.0001, 
CI: 1, 2), peer relationships (κ = 0.9, p < 0.0001, CI: 0.72, 
1.62) and family contact: (κ = 0.73, p = 0.001, CI: 0.4, 
1.13). We also gathered information about whether any 
individuals had pre-existing diagnoses of either autism or 
intellectual disability.
Data analysis
Reliability checking and assigning final classification. After 
classifications were made by the primary researchers 
(A.C. and M.R.), the reliability of the DATHI was inves-
tigated. This was done by selecting all the ‘screened posi-
tive’ and ‘marginal’ cases (n = 22) and a random selection 
of cases that had ‘screened negative’ (n = 16). The deci-
sion to over-select positive and marginal cases, rather 
than take a random selection from all cases screened, was 
made to provide a more rigorous test of the reliability of 
the measure.
All written information collected in the assessment was 
shared with the raters who were blind to scores assigned in 
the DATHI and to the final classification. Reliability was 
checked for each of the seven DSM-5 criteria and for the 
overall classification made, using Fleiss’ kappa (Fleiss and 
Cohen, 1973). By convention, kappa values below 0.20 
indicate limited reliability, 0.41–0.60 indicate ‘moderate’ 
agreement, 0.61–0.80 indicate ‘substantial’ agreement and 
0.80–1 indicate ‘very strong’ agreement (Landis and Koch, 
1977). The reliability raters (A.G. and W.M.) are experi-
enced in assessing autism in adults in both clinical practice 
and research.
After reliability checking was complete, a consensus 
decision was made by the whole research team about clas-
sification for those cases where there was a disagreement 
between the original classification and that made by the 
reliability rater.
Examining criterion validity. In addition to generating an 
overall classification for each individual, classifications 
for individual DSM-5 criteria were converted into numer-
ical scores. If an item on the DATHI screened positive 
(classified as ‘Present’), then it was given a score of 2; if 
it screened marginal (classified as ‘Possibly present’), 
then it was given a score of 1; if it screened negative (clas-
sified as ‘Not present’, ‘Present but attributable to cause 
other than autism’ or ‘Insufficient information to clas-
sify’), then it was given a score of 0. These scores were 
then summed to provide an overall DATHI score, as well 
as subscale scores for DSM-5 Criterion A (social commu-
nication/social reciprocity) and Criterion B (restrictive, 
repetitive patterns of behaviour). Correlations between 
these DATHI scores and the ASDASQ were calculated to 
examine criterion validity.
Examining construct validity. The construct validity of the 
DATHI was examined by comparing those identified as 
having elevated autistic traits (i.e. people screening posi-
tive or marginal on the DATHI overall) with those without 
elevated autistic traits on the following variables reported 
by keyworkers: (1) substance misuse, (2) mental health 
diagnoses and (3) social connectedness. Group differences 
Table 1. Method for determining overall classification on the DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the Homeless Interview (DATHI).
Classification
Scoring criteria
Screened positive/present
Section A: 3 items 
= 
present OR at least 2 items 
= 
present AND 1 
item 
= 
possibly present
AND
Section B: At least 2 items 
= 
present OR 1 item 
= 
present AND at least 2 
items 
= 
possibly present
Screened marginal/possibly present
Section A: At least 3 items 
= 
possibly present
AND
Section B: At least 2 items 
= 
possibly present
Screened negative/not present
Does not meet criteria for ‘Present’ or ‘Possibly present’
Screened negative/insufficient information to classify
Client is so poorly known to services that any attempt to match their 
behaviour to criteria would be a guess (this same classification will be seen 
on individual items)
 6 
Autism 00(0)
for these categorical outcomes were expressed as odds 
ratios with 95% CIs.
All analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 
version 24. Fleiss’ kappa was calculated using a plug-in for 
SPSS downloaded from the IBM developerWorks website 
(IBM SPSS, 2015).
Results
Figure 1 shows the process of carrying out interviews and 
classification. It has details of total numbers screened, how 
many did not meet inclusion criteria and when reliability 
checks were carried out and final classifications made. 
Interviews with keyworkers took 20–60 min per case, as 
more complex cases required more follow-up questions on 
the DATHI.
Reliability of the DATHI
Inter-rater reliability coefficients are shown for each 
DSM-5 criterion on the DATHI in Table 2. According to 
widely used guidelines for interpreting kappa (Landis and 
Koch, 1977), inter-rater reliability for criterion A1 (socio-
emotional reciprocity) is in the ‘moderate’ range, while for 
the other six DATHI items, it is ‘substantial’. We also 
looked at inter-rater agreement for overall classification, in 
terms of whether or not the DATHI identified an individual 
as screening positive. Fleiss’ kappa was 0.69, 95% CI 
(0.37, 1.0), p < 0.001, indicating a substantial level of 
agreement between raters on this outcome (Landis and 
Koch, 1977).
Criterion validity of the DATHI. The overall score from the 
DATHI was significantly and substantially correlated with 
the ASDASQ (r = 0.81, p = 0.01). The ASDASQ was also 
significantly correlated with the DATHI scores for DSM-5 
Criterion A (social communication and social reciprocity, 
r = 0.71, p = 0.01) and for Criterion B (restrictive and repet-
itive behaviours, r = 0.81, p = 0.01).
Informant reported autistic traits in a homeless popula-
tion. Table 2 shows the proportion of homeless people 
Figure 1. Screening, reliability checking and classification process.
 Churchard et al. 
7
reported to show difficulties consistent with each DSM-5 
autism criterion. The full range of answer codes for DATHI 
items were used, but the ‘Attributable to other causes’ code 
was applied for only two homeless individuals where 
either use of alcohol or a psychotic episode led to a very 
brief and obvious shift in the individual’s presentation. 
Table 3 gives examples of keyworker observations that led 
to individuals scoring positive for specific DATHI items. 
In some instances, superficial details in this table have 
been altered to maintain the confidentiality of clients.
Item-level DATHI scores were used to make overall 
classifications according to the a priori algorithm described 
in Table 1. After the final classification, 13 of the 106 cases 
screened positive, showing sufficient keyworker-reported 
autistic symptoms to meet DSM-5 criteria. This equates to 
a prevalence in this population of 12.3% (95% CI 7.0, 
20.4). In total, 9 cases were identified as showing marginal 
evidence of DSM-5 autism, 72 as not showing any evi-
dence of autism and 12 as being insufficiently well known 
to services to be given a classification. Table 4 gives basic 
demographic details and length of homelessness for each 
classification. Supplementary Table S1 shows the profile 
of autistic symptoms on the DATHI for each individual 
who screened positive or marginal for autism traits.
Characteristics of high and low autism traits scorers – construct 
validity of the DATHI. As is shown in Table 5, in line with 
our construct validity predictions, homeless people who 
were identified by the DATHI as having elevated autistic 
traits (i.e. who screened positive or marginal) were more 
socially isolated than low trait scorers. They were less 
likely to have a reported substance abuse problem. Autistic 
traits on the DATHI were not associated with having a 
non-autistic mental health diagnosis. With regard to intel-
lectual disability (ID), four people out of the total sample 
were known to have ID diagnoses. One of these screened 
positive on the DATHI, and three screened negative. One 
individual was reported as having a pre-existing diagnosis 
of autism, and this person screened positive on the DATHI.
Discussion
We sought to investigate a possible link between autism 
and homelessness, by gathering initial evidence as to the 
prevalence of autistic traits in homeless people. We devel-
oped an interview to be administered to keyworkers, based 
on DSM-5 diagnostic criteria, and used this to screen the 
entire caseload of a homelessness service in a large English 
city. There was evidence in support of the reliability and 
validity of the DSM-5 interview we developed. According 
to reports of keyworkers, 12.3% of homeless people had a 
range of autistic traits consistent with meeting DSM-5 
diagnostic criteria. This is substantially higher than the 
general population autism prevalence of 1% (Brugha et al., 
2016). Rates of autism may therefore be raised in this 
homeless population, and further investigation is war-
ranted to understand links between autism and 
homelessness.
Reliability and validity of DATHI
To our knowledge, there is no prior research in peer-
reviewed journals on autism and homelessness. This likely, 
in part, reflects the considerable challenges of assessing 
autism in homeless adults. Many homeless people are 
reluctant to engage with professionals, reports from rela-
tives are often impossible to attain, presentations are com-
plicated by co-occurring difficulties (e.g. mental health 
problems, substance misuse) and no homeless-specific 
measurement instruments have been validated (Fazel et al., 
Table 2. Item scores and inter-rater reliability for the DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the Homeless Interview (DATHI).
Criterion
Average 
score (SD)
Percentage of cases in each classification
Fleiss’ kappa 
(95% CI)
Present
Possibly 
present
Not 
present
Attributable to 
other causes
Insufficient 
information
A1: social-emotional 
reciprocity
0.50 (0.78)
17.9
14.2
55.7
0.9
11.3
0.51 (0.30, 0.71)
A2: nonverbal 
communication
0.48 (0.73)
14.2
19.8
53.8
0.9
11.3
0.65 (0.44, 0.87)
A3: relationship
0.58 (0.79)
18.9
19.8
48.1
0
13.2
0.62 (0.40, 0.84)
B1: stereotyped/
repetitive behaviours
0.33 (0.66)
10.4
12.3
66.0
0
11.3
0.64 (0.42, 0.85)
B2: inflexibility
0.39 (0.68)
11.3
16.0
57.5
1.9
13.2
0.69 (0.47, 0.90)
B3: fixated interests
0.29 (0.65)
10.4
8.5
67.9
1.9
11.3
0.64 (0.43, 0.85)
B4: sensory 
differences
0.25 (0.59)
7.5
10.4
69.8
0
12.3
0.65 (0.44, 0.87)
SD: standard deviation; CI: confidence interval.
Average score computed according to following procedure: items coded as ‘Present’ given a score of 2; coded ‘Possibly present’ given a score of 1; 
coded ‘Not present’, ‘Present but attributable to cause other than autism’ or ‘Insufficient information to classify’ given a score of 0.
 8 
Autism 00(0)
Table 3. Examples of keyworkers’ responses scoring as present on the DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the Homeless Interview (DATHI).
Criterion
Examples of behaviours considered consistent with autistic traits
A1: deficits in social-
emotional reciprocity
Many pauses in conversation, would not say 
hello to someone they do not know.
Cannot say ‘how are you?’ as finds this 
insincere. One-sided conversations and 
does not respond to a smile.
Does not initiate social interaction 
and displays rigid smile when greeted. 
Gives tangential responses and speaks 
in stilted sentences.
A2: deficits in non-verbal 
communicative behaviours 
used for social interaction
Peculiar expression with eyes closed and 
mouth open, displays what appears to be a 
learnt smile.
No eye contact, blank facial expression, has 
to be told when interactions are finished as 
would not pick up on this otherwise.
Difficult to tell how they are feeling 
from their facial expression, does not 
use or pick up on body language.
A3: deficits in developing, 
maintaining, and 
understanding relationships
Acts the same in different contexts. 
Difficulties in social interaction led to leaving 
accommodation.
No friendships or interest displayed in 
making friends, acts the same to everyone 
they meet.
No interest shown in making friends, 
small talk. Often rude and aggressive 
in interactions.
B1: stereotyped or 
repetitive motor 
movements, use of objects 
or speech
Plays with cuffs and rubs legs all the time, 
moves papers repeatedly in and out of 
envelope. Seems like there is a rhythm to 
these behaviours.
Repeatedly moves arms in a very particular 
way. Speaks in an old-fashioned way, 
stereotyped old-fashioned way of saying 
goodbye.
Described as talking like a character 
from a 19th century novel. 
Consistently uses unusual name for 
people in authority.
B2: insistence on sameness, 
inflexible adherence to 
routines or ritualised 
patterns of verbal or non-
verbal behaviour
Room precisely ordered with similar items 
placed in rows, but extremely dirty.
Items organised in rows in room. Day 
follows precise routine of when they sleep, 
watch TV. Always take same route to shop 
and has rules about where shopping can be 
placed in flat.
Possessions organised very precisely 
on shopping trolley, would take this 
on same route each day. When trolley 
was stolen was devastated.
B3: highly restricted, fixated 
interests that are abnormal 
in intensity or focus
Talks a lot about food, very picky about foods, 
when shopping will stare at one product for a 
long time reading all ingredients.
Everything they buy has a particular animal 
on it. Likes one colour a great deal, painted 
their room an intense shade of this colour.
Makes lists of obscure musicians, has a 
large collection of broken electronics.
B4: hyper- or hypo-
reactivity to sensory input 
or unusual interests in 
sensory aspects of the 
environment
When fire alarm went off unexpectedly 
seemed like they would scream, always has 
curtains closed, burnt hand badly but seemed 
under-reactive to pain (waited 1 
week to seek 
treatment).
Sensitive to texture of clothing, checks 
before purchasing anything. Attracted by 
flashing light. Has TV on very loud, while in 
hospital would have TV screen very close 
to face.
Oversensitive to sound and light, does 
not like TV being left on when is in 
office with keyworker, refused own 
TV. Complains about noises others 
cannot hear.
 Churchard et al. 
9
2014; Kryda and Compton, 2009; Olivet et al., 2010; 
Sappok et al., 2015). To address some of these challenges, 
we collected data using a keyworker interview, which we 
call the ‘DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the Homeless Interview’ 
(DATHI). We chose to use an interview, rather than a ques-
tionnaire or direct observation tool, to allow for in-depth 
consideration of whether particular behaviours are indica-
tive of autism. For example, the back-and-forth discussion 
between interviewer and interviewee can help both parties 
reach a decision about whether an individual’s lack of eye 
contact is pervasive across situations, or only occurs when 
that person is under the influence of substances. Our adop-
tion of a keyworker interview also allowed us to screen an 
entire caseload of homeless people in one service, thus 
minimising sampling bias and increasing the generalisabil-
ity of our findings. This approach was made possible by the 
fact that in the service we based this study, it was the norm 
for keyworkers to have long-standing (mean = 2.9 years) 
relationships with their homeless clients.
Given that is was designed for this study, a crucial ques-
tion is whether the DATHI is reliable and valid. To inves-
tigate reliability, we measured agreement between blinded 
raters on a subsample of interviews. This was a stringent 
test of inter-rater reliability as we deliberately over-sam-
pled ‘marginal’ cases. For all but one of the DATHI’s items 
(each of which corresponds to a DSM-5 criterion for 
autism), inter-rater agreement was ‘substantial’, with the 
other item (A1 – ‘social-emotional reciprocity’) showing a 
‘moderate’ level of agreement. Furthermore, when we con-
sidered the instrument’s ability to distinguish between 
those who screened positive for autism and those who did 
not, inter-rater agreement was ‘substantial’ (κ = 0.69). 
These findings suggest that the DATHI has adequate 
reliability.
The case for the DATHI’s content validity is supported 
by the fact that it was closely based on DSM-5 diagnostic 
criteria for autism spectrum disorder. Its face validity was 
checked by receiving comments on drafts from homeless-
ness and autism experts and by piloting the interview with 
keyworkers. We have included a copy of the DATHI in 
supplementary materials for this article and also presented 
examples of behaviours coded in this study in Table 4, to 
allow readers to make up their own minds about content 
and face validity.
Initial evidence for criterion validity comes from the 
high levels of association with another professional-report 
measure of autism traits, the ASDASQ (Nylander and 
Gillberg, 2001). We acknowledge that this is not an espe-
cially strong test of criterion validity, as the ASDASQ is a 
screening measure and was designed for psychiatric popu-
lations, not homeless people. However, as our aim was to 
begin to develop an evidence base in this area, we 
Table 4. Demographic details and length of homelessness by classification on DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the Homeless Interview 
(DATHI).
DATHI classification
Gender
Mean age (SD)
Mean length of 
homelessness in years (SD)
Female
Male
Screened positive/present
2
11
53.5 (14.6)
11.8 (10.9)
Screened marginal/possibly present
0
9
50.4 (10.1)
17.8 (9.9)
Screened negative/not present
12
60
46.8 (12.4)
11.0 (8.1)
Screened negative/insufficient 
information to classify
1
11
55.9 (11.9)
11.4 (6.3)
SD: standard deviation.
Table 5. Comparison of the characteristics of cases with and without elevated autistic traits on the DSM-5 Autistic Traits in the 
Homeless Interview (DATHI).
Elevated autistic 
traits
No elevated 
autistic traits
Odds ratio Significance 95% CI 
 
n=22
n=72
Lower bound Upper bound
In a romantic relationship
3
18
0.47
0.271
0.13
1.79
Has at least one friend
11
57
0.26
0.010
0.10
0.72
In contact with at least one family member
4
37
0.21
0.010
0.06
0.68
Totally isolated
10
11
4.62
0.005
1.61
13.29
Diagnosed mental health condition
8
26
1.01
0.983
0.37
2.73
No current drug and/or alcohol use
10
16
2.92
0.037
1.07
7.98
CI: confidence interval
Elevated autistic traits defined as ‘screened positive’ or ‘marginal’ on the DATHI.
 10 
Autism 00(0)
considered that results from the ASDASQ would at least 
provide some information regarding the criterion validity 
of the DATHI.
One challenge to the DATHI, and any assessment of 
autism in homeless people, is the high level of mental 
health difficulties and substance abuse problems in this 
population. The risk is that behaviours, such as social 
withdrawal or atypical non-verbal behaviour, could be 
mistakenly labelled as autistic in nature, when really they 
reflect a mental health problem or the effects of substance 
misuse. Therefore, it is reassuring that in this study higher 
DATHI scores were not associated with higher rates of 
diagnosed mental health problems. Also, there was an 
inverse relationship between reported substance abuse and 
autistic traits. These findings support the construct validity 
of the DATHI. Also, our prediction that homeless people 
with higher DATHI scores would be especially socially 
isolated was supported by the data, and this provides fur-
ther evidence for the interview’s construct validity (Howlin 
and Moss, 2012).
Autistic traits and homeless people
Given the above initial evidence that the DATHI is an ade-
quate keyworker-report measure of autistic symptoms in 
the homeless, our findings that autistic difficulties are 
over-represented among homeless adults should be taken 
seriously. We believe they raise the following possibilities 
that are worthy of future investigation. First, autism is 
likely a risk factor for becoming homeless. Our findings 
hint at one mechanism that could underpin this, since we 
found that those homeless with autistic traits were more 
socially isolated. Perhaps, a lack of social capital makes 
people more vulnerable to becoming homeless in the face 
of other risk factors such as poverty and unemployment 
(e.g. Calsyn and Winter, 2002). Second, autistic homeless 
people may have a distinct profile of needs that impact on 
their daily life and chances of exiting homelessness. For 
example, sensory difficulties could make it hard for some-
one to live in a noisy hostel, and executive problems could 
make a transition to independent accommodation espe-
cially difficult.
Limitations
We have already discussed at length the challenges of 
assessing autism in homeless people and acknowledged 
that our findings are preliminary. Further validation of the 
DATHI will be valuable so that the instrument can be used 
in future investigations of autism and homelessness. This 
should involve testing the DATHI in the homeless popula-
tion against the criterion of clinically diagnosed autism, 
based on a multi-disciplinary assessment (NICE, 2012). 
Such work will lay the ground for a more precise estimate 
of the true prevalence of autism among homeless people 
and for studies that seek to identify the characteristics and 
needs of autistic homeless people.
There was a sizable group of homeless people in this 
study who were so poorly known to services that no data 
could be gathered about the presence of symptoms of 
autism. They received the classification ‘insufficient infor-
mation to classify’. These individuals in general actively 
avoided contact with keyworkers, and while this could 
have a wide variety of causes, it seems plausible that this 
would be the type of behaviour an autistic person might 
display. This may mean that our estimate of prevalence is 
too low.
With regard to the generalisability of our findings, we 
avoided sampling bias with respect to our target popula-
tion, which was all the United Kingdom and Republic of 
Ireland–born clients of a specific English homelessness 
service. Nevertheless, this target population is not per-
fectly representative of the general homeless population, 
since they come from a service for the long-term home-
less, who tend to have more complex presentations (Fazel 
et al., 2014). Future work should investigate autism in 
more diverse homeless populations.
Clinical implications and future directions. This study has 
provided initial evidence that rates autistic traits are raised 
in homeless populations. While this cannot be more than a 
tentative conclusion, this would be consistent with the 
well-evidenced poor outcomes for adults with ASC (How-
lin and Moss, 2012; Steinhausen et al., 2016). Lai and 
Baron-Cohen (2015) refer to a ‘lost generation’ of adults 
with ASC who did not receive a diagnosis because of lack 
of knowledge about the condition, and the individuals we 
have identified may be part of this group.
If autistic difficulties are common among homeless 
populations, then this has important implications. Many 
people are homeless in the United Kingdom; the most 
recent estimate is that there are almost 5000 rough sleepers 
at any one point (Ministry of Housing, Communities and 
Local Government, 2017), and there is a much larger group 
of people with no stable accommodation who are termed 
the ‘hidden homeless’ (Crisis, 2017). There may therefore 
be a considerable number of homeless autistic adults who 
are not having their needs met and who are in an extremely 
vulnerable position.
Some organisations have recently developed ways of 
supporting homeless autistic adults, and they have pro-
vided anecdotal evidence of success (e.g. Homeless Link, 
2015). These interventions have used expertise from the 
autism field to inform keyworking, and relatively straight-
forward adaptations have reportedly allowed the engage-
ment of adults who had previously refused support. It will 
be valuable to manualise and empirically test such inter-
ventions, to begin to build an evidence base for supporting 
autistic homeless people. Also, it will be important to 
research pathways into homelessness for autistic people, to 
 Churchard et al. 
11
understand the mechanisms of risk. This can then be used 
to design preventive strategies to help autistic adults avoid 
homelessness.
Acknowledgements
A.C. and M.R. contributed equally to the work. The authors 
thank all the workers at the homeless service, in which this pro-
ject was based for their support and enthusiasm, and for being so 
generous with their time and expertise.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of inter-
est with respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of 
this article: Drs A.C., M.R., A.G. and W.M. report no potential 
conflicts of interest.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: 
This work was partly supported by studentships to A.C. and M.R. 
from Health Education England (research completed as part of 
doctorate in clinical psychology).
Note
1. 
In this article, we use the term ‘autism’ as a direct syno-
nym for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (5th ed.; DSM-5) diagnostic entity of ‘autism 
spectrum disorder’ (ASD). We have chosen not to use the 
term ASD, as we do not accept the assumption it conveys, 
that autism is inherently a state of mental disorder.
ORCID iD
Alasdair Churchard 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9744-7209
References
American Psychiatric Association (2013) Diagnostic and statis-
tical manual of mental disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC: 
Author.
Barker C and Pistrang N (2015) Research Methods in Clinical 
Psychology: An Introduction for Students and Practitioners. 
London: John Wiley & Sons.
Brugha TS, Spiers N, Bankart J, et al. (2016) Epidemiology of 
autism in adults across age groups and ability levels. British 
Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science 
209(6): 498–503.
Butwicka A, Långström N, Larsson H, et al. (2017) Increased 
risk for substance use-related problems in autism spec-
trum disorders: a population-based cohort study. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders 47(1): 80–89.
Calsyn RJ and Winter JP (2002) Social support, psychiat-
ric symptoms, and housing: a causal analysis. Journal of 
Community Psychology 30(3): 247–259.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014) Prevalence 
of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years 
– autism and developmental disabilities monitoring net-
work, 11 sites, United States, 2010. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries 63(2): 1–21.
Crisis (2017) The Homelessness Monitor: England 2017. 
London: Crisis.
Elo S and Kyngäs H (2008) The qualitative content analysis pro-
cess. Journal of Advanced Nursing 62(1): 107–115.
Evans R (2011) The Life We Choose: Shaping Autism Services in 
Wales. Cardiff: National Autistic Society.
Fazel S, Geddes JR and Kushel M (2014) The health of homeless 
people in high-income countries: descriptive epidemiology, 
health consequences, and clinical and policy recommenda-
tions. The Lancet 384(9953): 1529–1540.
Fazel S, Khosla V, Doll H, et al. (2008) The prevalence of mental 
disorders among the homeless in western countries: system-
atic review and meta-regression analysis. PLoS Medicine 
5(12): e225.
Fitzpatrick S, Johnsen S and Bramley G (2012) Multiple 
Exclusion Homelessness amongst Migrants in the UK. 
European Journal of Homelessness 6(1): 31–58.
Fleiss JL and Cohen J (1973) The equivalence of weighted kappa 
and the intraclass correlation coefficient as measures of reli-
ability. Educational and Psychological Measurement 33(3): 
613–619.
Fraser R, Cotton S, Gentle E, et al. (2012) Non-expert clinicians’ 
detection of autistic traits among attenders of a youth mental 
health service. Early Intervention in Psychiatry 6(1): 83–86.
Gray KM, Keating CM, Taffe JR, et al. (2014) Adult outcomes 
in autism: community inclusion and living skills. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders 44(12): 3006–3015.
Homeless Link (2015) Autism and Homelessness: Briefing for 
Frontline Staff. London: Homeless Link.
Howlin P and Moss P (2012) Adults with autism spectrum disor-
ders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 57(5): 275–283.
Howlin P, Goode S, Hutton J, et al. (2009) Savant skills in 
autism: psychometric approaches and parental reports. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences 364(1522): 1359–1367.
IBM SPSS (2015) Stats Fleiss Kappa. IBM developerWorks. 
Available at: https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/commu-
nity/files/app#/file/48234a16-fb14-4bee-8c18-570319c57108 
(accessed 2 April 2018). 
Kryda AD and Compton MT (2009) Mistrust of outreach work-
ers and lack of confidence in available services among indi-
viduals who are chronically street homeless. Community 
Mental Health Journal 45(2): 144–150.
Lai MC and Baron-Cohen S (2015) Identifying the lost genera-
tion of adults with autism spectrum conditions. The Lancet 
Psychiatry 2(11): 1013–1027.
Landis JR and Koch GG (1977) The measurement of observer 
agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 33(1): 159–174.
Loomes R, Hull L and Mandy WPL (2017) What is the male-
to-female ratio in autism spectrum disorder? A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 56(6): 466–474.
Magiati I, Tay XW and Howlin P (2014) Cognitive, language, 
social and behavioural outcomes in adults with autism spec-
trum disorders: a systematic review of longitudinal follow-
up studies in adulthood. Clinical Psychology Review 34(1): 
73–86.
Meilleur AAS, Jelenic P and Mottron L (2015) Prevalence of 
clinically and empirically defined talents and strengths in 
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
45(5): 1354–1367.
 12 
Autism 00(0)
Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government (2017) 
Rough Sleeping Statistics Autumn 2017, England. London: 
Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government.
NHS Devon (2011) Homelessness Health Needs Assessment. 
Exeter: NHS Devon.
NICE (2012) Autism: Recognition, Referral, Diagnosis and 
Management of Adults on the Autism Spectrum (CG142). 
Available 
at: 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg142 
(accessed 14 June 2017).
Nylander L and Gillberg C (2001) Screening for autism spectrum 
disorders in adult psychiatric out-patients: a preliminary 
report. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 103(6): 428–434.
Olivet J, Bassuk E, Elstad E, et al. (2010) Outreach and engage-
ment in homeless services: a review of the literature. The 
Open Health Services and Policy Journal 3: 53–70.
Phillips D (2006) Moving towards integration: the housing of 
asylum seekers and refugees in Britain. Housing Studies 
21(4): 539–553.
Robinson E, St Pourcain B, Anttila V, et al. (2017) Genetic risk for 
autism spectrum disorders and neuropsychiatric variation in 
the general population. European Neuropsychopharmacology 
27: 279–280.
Roll CN, Toro PA and Ortola GL (1999) Characteristics and 
experiences of homeless adults: a comparison of single 
men, single women, and women with children. Journal of 
Community Psychology 27(2): 189–198.
Sappok T, Heinrich M and Underwood L (2015) Screening tools 
for autism spectrum disorders. Advances in Autism 1(1): 
12–29.
Schendel DE, Overgaard M, Christensen J, et al. (2016) 
Association of psychiatric and neurologic comorbidity 
with mortality among persons with autism spectrum dis-
order in a Danish population. JAMA Pediatrics 170(3): 
243–250.
Soulières I, Dawson M, Gernsbacher MA, et al. (2011) The level 
and nature of autistic intelligence II: what about Asperger 
syndrome? PloS One 6(9): e25372.
Steinhausen HC, Mohr Jensen C and Lauritsen MB (2016) A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of the long-term overall 
outcome of autism spectrum disorders in adolescence and 
adulthood. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 133(6): 445–
452.
Streiner DL, Norman GR and Cairney J (2015) Health 
Measurement Scales: A Practical Guide to Their 
Development and Use. 5th edn. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Van Heijst BF and Geurts HM (2015) Quality of life in autism 
across the lifespan: a meta-analysis. Autism 19(2): 158–167.
