 REVIEW ARTICLE
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials for the treatment of
cancer: where are we 150 years after the birth of Marie Curie?
Mareike K. Thompson1, Philip Poortmans2, Anthony J. Chalmers3, Corinne Faivre-Finn4, Emma Hall5, Robert A. Huddart6,
Yolande Lievens7, David Sebag-Montefiore8 and Charlotte E. Coles9
As we mark 150 years since the birth of Marie Curie, we reflect on the global advances made in radiation oncology and the current
status of radiation therapy (RT) research. Large-scale international RT clinical trials have been fundamental in driving evidence-
based change and have served to improve cancer management and to reduce side effects. Radiation therapy trials have also
improved practice by increasing quality assurance and consistency in treatment protocols across multiple centres. This review
summarises some of the key RT practice-changing clinical trials over the last two decades, in four common cancer sites for which RT
is a crucial component of curative treatment: breast, lung, urological and lower gastro-intestinal cancer. We highlight the global
inequality in access to RT, and the work of international organisations, such as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
European SocieTy for Radiotherapy and Oncology (ESTRO), and the United Kingdom National Cancer Research Institute Clinical and
Translational Radiotherapy Research Working Group (CTRad), that aim to improve access to RT and facilitate radiation research. We
discuss some emerging RT technologies including proton beam therapy and magnetic resonance linear accelerators and predict
likely future directions in clinical RT research.
British Journal of Cancer (2018) 119:389–407; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018-0201-z
INTRODUCTION
Born Maria Salomea Skłodowska on 7 November 1867 in Warsaw,
Poland, Marie Curie later went on to discover both polonium and
radium, and won two Nobel prizes for her work on radioactive
substances. Later, during the First World War, she set up a fleet of
mobile X-ray units, popularly called ‘the little Curies’, to enable
military doctors to locate and remove shrapnel from soldiers’
wounds at the front line. After the war, she was instrumental in
founding the Institut du Radium in Paris, which later became part
of the Institut Curie, now a world-leading oncology research
centre. To mark the 150th anniversary of her birth, we reflect on
the global advances made in radiation oncology, focussing on
radiation therapy (RT) practice-changing trials over the last two
decades. In addition, we discuss global inequalities in access to RT
and highlight possible future directions of clinical RT research.
RT IS A CRUCIAL AND COST-EFFECTIVE CANCER TREATMENT
Systemic therapy may mistakenly be considered the mainstay of
curative oncological treatment, perhaps due to its high profile in
the media. In fact, 40% of patients who are cured of cancer will
receive RT as part of their management, and around 50% of
cancer
patients
will
require
RT
at
some
point
during
their treatment in high as well as low and middle-income
countries.1–4 Despite representing a large proportion of cancer
treatment, RT accounts for only 5% of the national cancer budget
in both the UK and Sweden.3,5 By contrast, the European Union
average proportion of total oncology expenditure spent on cancer
drugs has increased from 12% in 2005 to 23% in 2014.6 In addition
to its curative potential, RT also has a key role in the palliation of
symptoms including pain, bleeding and nerve compression, as
well as in curative intent treatments.
RT comprises multiple different treatment modalities, including
external beam therapy (encompassing photons, electrons, protons
and other particles) and internal/surface treatment (brachytherapy
and radiopharmaceuticals). The most widely used modality is
megavoltage photon therapy, which is a form of high-energy
electromagnetic radiation produced by a linear accelerator.
Megavoltage photons have a range of tissue penetration, which
allows treatment of deeper internal body structures, such as pelvic
organs and lung tumours. Other forms of external beam therapy
are orthovoltage photons, which have shallower tissue penetra-
tion and are useful for treating skin and soft tissue; and electrons,
which also have a short range of tissue penetration but a different
dose distribution to orthovoltage photons, and are used mainly
for treating skin and superficial tumours. Proton beam therapy is
an emerging form of external beam therapy, which has a peak of
dose deposition at a sharply defined point (the ‘Bragg peak’) and
as such has potential for a much lower dose to nearby critical
organs.
Internal
RT
uses
very
short-range
radiation
from
www.nature.com/bjc
Received: 6 November 2017 Revised: 22 June 2018 Accepted: 22 June 2018
Published online: 31 July 2018
1Department of Oncology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK; 2Institut Curie, 75248 Paris, France; 3Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK; 4Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester; The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, UK; 5Clinical Trials
and Statistics Unit, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, London SM2 5NG, UK; 6Section of Radiotherapy and Imaging, The Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG, UK;
7Department of Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital and Ghent University, C. Heymanslaan, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; 8Radiotherapy Research Group, Leeds Institute of
Cancer and Pathology, University of Leeds; Leeds Cancer Centre, St James’s University Hospitals, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK and 9Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK
Correspondence: Charlotte E. Coles (colesc@doctors.org.uk)
© The Author(s) 2018
Published by Springer Nature on behalf of Cancer Research UK
 radioactive sources delivered inside the body. This can be solid
sources placed during a surgical procedure or on the body surface,
as in brachytherapy for prostate or cervical cancer. Alternatively,
unsealed sources may be used, for example radiopharmaceutical
injections, which are preferentially taken up by cancer tissues.
RT has dramatically improved both technologically and in terms
of clinical outcomes; less than two decades ago, RT was mostly
given as simple ‘fields’, which are square/rectangular beams, with
minimal imaging guidance. Now, it is increasingly common to
deliver highly targeted image-guided treatment with intensity
modulated RT (IMRT). This enables dose reduction to the
surrounding normal structures, thereby minimising toxicity, and
facilitates dose escalation to the tumour, thereby maximising
cancer control.7,8 Another new technique is stereotactic body RT
(SBRT), which allows the administration of very high doses of
precision radiation in a small number of treatments (fractions).9
This is currently used for some primary lung and brain tumours,
but also raises the tantalising question of whether patients with a
limited number of metastases (‘oligometastatic disease’) could
also be cured using this new technology, in combination with
systemic therapy. Finally, the mechanistic understanding of how
RT interacts with cancerous and normal tissue at a cellular and
molecular level is moving at a rapid pace; as a result, exciting
opportunities are now arising for investigating RT in combination
with novel drugs, such as immunotherapy and DNA damage
response inhibitors10,11 (Fig. 1).
RT practice has historically varied greatly across international
and national institutions, and even within individual centres. Over
recent years, a growing focus on evidence-based medicine has led
to an increasing number of RT clinical trials that aim to improve
patient outcomes by improving overall survival and local tumour
control, and/or reducing (often permanent) side effects. Second-
ary but important benefits of these practice-changing clinical trials
include improvements in RT quality and consistency across
multiple centres. This manuscript aims to highlight to a non-
specialist audience the results from a number of key clinical trials
in RT research. An international range of expert authors selected
trials for inclusion that have changed clinical practice by
influencing national or international guidelines. Selected trials
were published in the last 20 years in four common cancer types
where RT is a key component of curative intent treatment: breast,
lung, urological and lower gastrointestinal. The majority of the
included trials were large randomised phase 3 trials. Explanation
of some technical terms is included in Box 1 to assist the non-
specialist reader.
The collective effect of these clinical trials is that much of the
treatment of patients with RT is now based on prospective clinical
trial data of efficacy and toxicity rather than historical and
empirical practice. There remains, however, considerable progress
to be made in further improving outcomes for patients, by
ensuring that existing clinical trial evidence is translated into
global clinical practice, and by instigating further research into
novel technologies and drug–RT combinations.
BREAST RT PRACTICE-CHANGING TRIALS
The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative group has clearly
demonstrated, through their individual patient-data meta-ana-
lyses from randomised clinical trials (RCTs), that RT improves local
control and survival following breast-conserving surgery, or
following mastectomy for node-positive tumours.12,13 The RCTs
included in this meta-analysis generally span several decades, with
the earliest commencing in 1964 and all trials starting before 2000.
More recent practice-changing trials (Table 1) have investigated
the use of fewer treatments (hypofractionation), the role of
tumour bed boost, partial breast irradiation, and nodal irradiation.
Hypofractionation, boost and partial breast RT
Evidence from more than 7000 women treated and followed up
for
10
years
within
the
UK
START
and
Canadian
RCTs
demonstrated that shorter, hypofractionated courses of RT are
non-inferior to 5 weeks of ‘conventionally’ fractionated therapy
(25 fractions) for local tumour control. Furthermore, these
hypofractionated treatments cause not more (Canadian fractio-
nation schedule: 16 fractions of 2.66 Gy) or even fewer (UK
fractionation
schedule:
15
fractions
of
2.67 Gy)
late
side
effects14–16
than
the
conventional
regimens.
This
confers
important benefits, since late RT toxicity tends to be perma-
nent.17 In addition, fewer RT visits are more convenient for
patients and more cost-effective for healthcare providers.18–20
These results led to hypofractionation being adopted within
international guidelines from the American Society for Radiation
Oncology (ASTRO) and the UK National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE).21,22 While hypofractionation is now
standard practice in the UK and widely adopted in Canada,
uptake in the United States and Europe is patchy, despite the
convincing evidence. This is perceived to be a consequence of
professional and societal barriers to optimal care, together with
variations in treatment economics across different healthcare
systems and specifically reimbursement, which is still calculated
per fraction in many countries.23,24
The EORTC 22881-10882 study randomised patients to receive
either a boost dose to the tumour bed following whole-breast
irradiation, or whole-breast irradiation alone. This trial showed
improved local control in patients receiving the boost, although
this was at the cost of increased late side effects.25,26 After long-
term updates, which confirmed the results and enabled better
subgroup analyses, this trial led to international guidelines widely
recommending a boost for patients ‘at high risk of recurrence’
following breast conserving surgery, but advising that the boost
could be safely avoided for those at low/intermediate risk.21,22
The aim of partial irradiation is to focus RT on the region at
highest risk of recurrence, to maintain high rates of local tumour
control while minimising toxicity by virtue of a smaller irradiated
volume. Very promising results were demonstrated by the
Budapest and Florence partial breast RT trials, but the relatively
small numbers in these studies have been insufficient to change
practice internationally.27,28 Intra-operative partial breast RT has
also been investigated and is potentially very attractive to patients
if it means post-operative RT can be avoided. However, the ELIOT
trial using intra-operative electrons failed to show non-inferiority
with whole-breast RT; this may have been at least in part due to
patient selection due to inclusion of patients with higher risk of
recurrence.29 The TARGIT trial using photon intra-operative RT
reported non-inferiority with whole-breast RT, but non-standard
statistical analysis was used and median follow up was very short
at only 2 years 5 months.30,31 Two large randomised partial breast
RT trials have recently reported: IMPORT LOW and GEC-ESTRO.32,33
IMPORT LOW reported that partial breast RT, delivered over an
identical 3-week period to the control group, yielded non-
inferiority in local relapse rates while also reducing side effects.
These results have been published too recently to be labelled
‘practice changing’; however, the study marked an important step
in reducing late toxicity for a large population of low-risk patients.
IMPORT LOW also used a simple RT technique leveraging existing
radiotherapy equipment and standard RT techniques, with the
only difference being the reduced treatment volume. The GEC-
ESTRO trial, which used a brachytherapy approach for accelerated
partial breast irradiation, confirmed non-inferiority with whole-
breast RT. The results of four further phase 3 RCTs investigating
partial breast RT using different techniques will be published in
the next few years (NCT00103181, NCT00282035, NCT01247233,
NCT01803958).
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
390
1234567890();,:
 Nodal irradiation
Some breast cancer recurrences occur locoregionally and
therefore the local management of local lymph node groups is
an important consideration, especially in patients at higher risk
of recurrence. The AMAROS trial randomised patients to either
surgical dissection or axillary node RT, following positive
sentinel lymph node biopsy, and reported reduced rates of
lymphoedema in the RT arm with comparable loco-regional
tumour control rates. This important study provides patients
with more options after a positive sentinel lymph node biopsy,
and has led to a dramatic fall in axillary surgery in many
centres.34 More recently, there has been increasing interest in
the addition of internal mammary chain (IMC) nodal irradiation
to standard RT. Two large RCTs were published in 2015, both of
which showed an improvement in disease-free survival with the
addition of IMC irradiation.35,36 This was confirmed in a
population-based Danish study where patients with right-sided
breast cancer received IMC-RT, whereas left-sided patients did
not and received normal standard of care at the time.37 These
studies led to IMC irradiation being re-introduced in the 2016
ASCO post-mastectomy RT guidelines.38
Taken together, these practice-changing trials have facilitated
‘risk-adapted RT’, whereby breast RT approaches are offered
based on the individual’s broad risk of recurrence. These range
from partial breast RT in lower risk patients to IMC RT in high-risk
patients in order to optimise local tumour control while
minimising side effects. This demonstrates that RT for breast
cancer is no longer a ‘one size fits all’ strategy, although we are
still some way from delivering truly personalised breast RT.
Further research is needed to: reliably identify which group of
patients can avoid breast RT completely39; determine optimal
timing of RT with mastectomy and reconstruction40; determine
whether there is an advantage to deliver breast RT pre-
operatively and how to best combine RT with novel drugs in
higher risk patients.41
Antihypoxia
e.g. HIF-1-α, CA9, UPR
Alter
tumour
metabolism
Reduce resistance
mechanisms
Survival signalling
inhibitors
e.g. mTOR, PI3k,
NF-κB
Reduce DNA
repair
DDR inhibitors
e.g. PARP
, ATR, Chk1, DNA-PK
Resistant
population/
stem
cells
Increase
tumour cell
antigen
release
Increase
tumour
DNA
damage
Reduce
tumour
angiogenesis
Reduce
tumour cell
proliferation
Prevent repopulation
and replicative
immortality
Inhibit growth factor
signal transduction
e.g. EGFR or MAPK inhibitors
Inhibit
local invasion
and metastasis
Radiotherapy
Photons or
particles
Anti-invasives
e.g. kinase, chemokine,
integrin inhibitors
Modulate the
microenvironment
Antiangiogenic agents
e.g. VECF inhibitors
Deregulating cellular
energetics
Augment the
immune response
Immunotherapy
e.g. anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1
Metabolic inhibitors
e.g. MCT 1,
MCT 4 inhibitors
Fig. 1
RT has great potential to be combined with multiple classes of novel drugs. Reprinted from Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology.11
Box 1 Common radiotherapy terminology
Brachytherapy: The delivery of radioactive material very close to or within a
patient’s tumour to provide high doses of radiation at a short distance.
Brachytherapy is also known as sealed source therapy.
Electrons: Treatment using an electron beam, usually for skin tumours or
superficial tumours.
External beam therapy: All types of radiation therapy delivered from outside
the patient; includes photons, protons and electrons.
Fraction: Radiation therapy is typically split into multiple treatments, known as
fractions. These are often given daily over several weeks to enable a tumouricidal
dose to be given whilst allowing time for normal tissue recovery.
Hypofractionation: Treatment involving a decreased number of fractions of
increased fraction size (>2 Gy per fraction).
Hyperfractionation: Treatment involving an increased number of fractions of
reduced fraction size (<2 Gy per fraction).
Image-guided RT (IGRT): Any radiation therapy that includes imaging pre-
treatment or during delivery to improve the accuracy of radiotherapy.
Intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT): A precise form of radiation therapy
using multiple small fields to closely conform the dose of radiation to the tumour.
Molecular radiotherapy: The delivery of radiation to a cancer using radio-
pharmaceuticals which interact with molecular sites or receptors, for example
Radium-223.
Photons: High-energy X-ray treatment; comprises the majority of radiation
treatment.
Proton beam radiotherapy: Treatment using a proton beam.
Stereotactic ablative RT, stereotactic body RT (SABR, SBRT): Highly precise
irradiation of an extra-cranial lesion using a high dose of radiation in a small
number of fractions.
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
391
 Table 1.
Summary of breast cancer practice-defining RT clinical trials
Trial name (first author)
Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results and methods Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
Hypofractionation trials
Canadian hypofractionation
trial (Whelan)
Standard whole-breast RT 50 Gy in 25
fractions vs. hypofractionated 42.5 Gy in
16 fractions. Randomised 1234 patients.
Hypofractionated group non-inferior to
control.
15,131
NA
International: ASTRO.21
START-B (Agrawal)
50 Gy in 25 fractions over 5 weeks vs.
40 Gy in 15 fractions over 3 weeks.
Randomised 2215 patients.
40 Gy in 15 fractions non-inferior to 50 Gy
in 25 fractions in terms of locoregional
relapse. Significantly less late normal
tissue effects for 40 Gy in 15 fractions.
Standardisation of:- patient position-
target volumes- dose and fractionation-
prescription points- quality assurance.
16,132
133–144
International: ASTRO.21 UK: NICE.22 RCR
Breast consensus meeting.145
Effect of boost dose
EORTC 22881-10882 boost
vs. no boost (Bartelink)
Boost dose of 16 Gy to the primary
tumour bed after tumourectomy and
50 Gy whole-breast irradiation vs. no
additional boost. Randomised 2661
patients.
Improved local control with boost dose,
but no significant effect on survival.
Increased late normal tissue toxicity with
boost. Improved RT QA for boost
techniques. Validation of methodology for
cosmetic assessment of breast.
25,26,146
147–151
International: ESMO.152 UK: RCR
consensus statement.145
Partial breast irradiation
GEC-ESTRO APBI (Strnad)
Compared several different regimens of
accelerated partial breast irradiation
(APBI) using brachytherapy vs. whole-
breast RT 50 Gy in 15 fractions ± boost.
Randomised 1184 patients.
APBI using brachytherapy was non-
inferior to whole-breast RT.
32
NA
NA
IMPORT LOW (Coles)
Whole-breast radiotherapy (WBRT) 40 Gy
in 15 fractions vs. 40 Gy to the tumour
bed and 36 Gy to the rest of the breast OR
40 Gy to the tumour bed only.
Randomised 2018 patients.
PBI non-inferior to WBRT at 5 years in
terms of locoregional recurrence, with a
reduction in some late normal tissue
toxicity endpoints. Introduction of
forward planned intensity modulated RT.
BASO guidelines now recommend
placement of surgical clips to facilitate
accurate post-operative radiotherapy
planning.
33
153–157
International: Danish Breast Cancer
Group national guidelines.UK: RCR
consensus statement.145
Nodal irradiation
EORTC 10981-22023 –
AMAROS trial (Donker)
Surgical vs. radiation treatment of axilla
after positive sentinel lymph node biopsy.
Randomised 4823 patients.
Comparable local control results for both
treatments (under-powered), decreased
lymphoedema with RT. Improved RT QA
for axillary RT. Improved surgical QA for
SLNB.
34
158,159
UK: RCR consensus statement.145
Association of Breast Surgeons
consensus statement.160
EORTC 22922/10925 IMC
trial (Poortmans)
Whole-breast/thoracic-wall RT + regional
nodal irradiation vs. whole-breast/
thoracic-wall RT alone. Randomised 4004
patients.
Addition of regional nodal irradiation
improved disease-free survival. Improved
RT QA for IMC & medial supraclavicular
nodal RT.
35
161–165
International: ASCO.38
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
392
 LUNG RT PRACTICE-CHANGING TRIALS
In recent years we have seen many technological advances in the
field of lung radiotherapy. These include the integration of 4-
dimensional computed tomography (CT) and positron emission
tomography (PET) for planning; the improved target conformality
with the delivery of IMRT; SBRT; and the optimisation of image
guidance (Table 2).
Early-stage non-small cell lung cancer
A key change in lung RT has been the introduction of SBRT for
early-stage non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). This development
came after multiple studies investigated this highly targeted and
high-dose RT, which is delivered in just a few fractions. Treatment
outcomes are comparable with surgery, especially for patients
with
medical
co-morbidities.42–51
Evidence-based
guidelines,
mostly based on non-randomised phase II trials, distinguish
patients who can be treated safely with SBRT from those at risk
of excessive toxicity (especially those with centrally located
tumours). Patients at higher risk of toxicity should be treated
with a dose-adapted SBRT regimen, preferably within further
clinical trials to allow collection of high-quality prospective toxicity
data.52 Population-based studies have also demonstrated the
effectiveness of this technique for improving overall survival in a
non-selected elderly patient population.53,54
Locally advanced NSCLC
One of the main strategies for improving outcomes in patients
with locally advanced NSCLC is dose escalation, which has shown
encouraging results in phase I–II trials over the last two
decades.55–58 However, the outcome of the phase III Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 0617 trial was surprisingly
disappointing;59 dose escalation with concurrent chemoradiother-
apy to 74 Gy in 37 fractions led to worse survival, compared with
the standard of care (60 Gy in 30 fractions). The results of RTOG
0617 had a profound impact on usual clinical practice and future
clinical trials, establishing 60 Gy in 30 fractions as the new
benchmark for chemoradiotherapy in locally advanced NSCLC.
Importantly, it also provided prospective evidence supporting
IMRT for NSCLC, as a secondary analysis showed IMRT produced
lower rates of severe pneumonitis and resulted in lower cardiac
doses, compared with conventional RT.60
NSCLC and brain metastases
Avoidance of unnecessary treatment is important, especially for
patients requiring palliation. The QUARTZ trial examined the role
of whole-brain RT (WBRT) plus optimal supportive care in patients
with NSCLC and brain metastases. The trial found no improvement
in survival or quality adjusted life years with the addition of
WBRT.61 As a result, WBRT is usually not recommended for the
majority of patients; however, it may still be beneficial for some
patients with better prognosis, such as those with driver
mutations.
Small cell lung cancer
Very little progress was made for several decades in the systemic
treatment of both limited- and extensive-stage small cell lung
cancer (SCLC). Recently, advances in RT techniques, use of
prophylactic cranial irradiation for all stages of SCLC, and improved
combination
of
chemotherapy
with
RT
have
led
to
major
improvements in survival. The current standard of care for patients
with limited-stage SCLC is based on an RCT that compared once
daily with twice-daily RT delivered concurrently with chemotherapy,
which demonstrated superiority of twice-daily RT in terms of
survival.62 However, since the publication of this study in 1999, there
has been a lack of consensus regarding routine use of twice-daily RT,
despite its superiority, due to logistical issues and concerns
regarding toxicity (for example, one-third of the patients developed
≥grade 3 radiation oesophagitis). To help resolve this, the CONVERT
Table 1 continued
Trial name (first author)
Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results and methods Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
MA20 (Whelan)
Women with node-positive or high-risk
node-negative breast cancer: whole-
breast irradiation plus regional nodal
irradiation vs. whole-breast irradiation
alone. Randomised 1832 patients
Addition of regional nodal irradiation to
whole-breast irradiation did not improve
overall survival but reduced the rate of
breast-cancer recurrence.
36
NA
International: ASCO.38
DBCG -IMN (Thorsen)
Prospective population-based cohort
study. Patients with right-sided disease
were allocated to IMC RT, whereas
patients with left-sided disease were
allocated to no IMC RT (risk of radiation-
induced heart disease). Included 3089
patients.
IMC RT increased overall survival in
patients with early-stage node-positive
breast cancer.
37
166
NA
ASCO American Society of Clinical Oncology, ASTRO American Society for Radiation Oncology, BASO British Association of Surgical Oncology, ESMO European Society for Medical Oncology, NICE National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence, RCR Royal College of Radiologists
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
393
 Table 2.
Summary of lung cancer practice-defining RT clinical trials
Trial name (first author)
Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results and
methods
Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
Early-stage non-small cell lung cancer
Indiana SBRT
(Timmerman)
Phase 2 study of stereotactic body RT
(SBRT) for T1/2N0M0 NSCLC in patients
unfit for lobectomy.70 patients.
Excessive toxicity for central tumours;
practice changing in developing the ‘No
Fly’ zone avoiding central airways for
SBRT.
43,167
NA
International: ESMO.52
RTOG 0236 (Timmerman) Phase 2 multicentre study of SBRT for T1/
2N0M0 medically inoperable lung cancer.
55 patients.
High rates of local tumour control (>90%
at 3 years).
45
NA
International: ESMO.52 NCCN.168
Dutch population-based
SABR paper (Palma)
Population-based study investigating the
impact of introducing SBRT in 875
patients 75 years of age or older.
SBRT introduction was associated with a
decline in the proportion of untreated
elderly patients, and an improvement in
overall survival.
53
NA
International: ESMO.52 NCCN.168
SPACE (Nyman)
Phase 2. Randomised 102 patients with
stage I medically inoperable NSCLC to
receive SBRT to 66 Gy in three fractions
(1 week) or 3DCRT to 70 Gy (7 weeks).
First randomised study of SBRT
compared to conventional dose
fractionation. Better local control, similar
OS and less toxicity with SBRT.
169
NA
International: ESMO.52 NCCN.168
Locally advanced/metastatic non-small cell lung cancer
RTOG0617 (Bradley)
Phase 3, 2 × 2 factorial design.
Randomised 544 patients to 60 or 74 Gy
concurrently with carboplatin/paclitaxel,
with or without additional cetuximab.
74 Gy was no better than 60 Gy and
potentially harmful. Secondary analysis
provided evidence supporting the use of
IMRT in lung cancer.
59,60
NA
International: ESMO.52
QUARTZ (Mulvenna)
Phase 3. Randomised 538 NSCLC patients
with brain metastases to dexamethasone
and optimal supportive care with or
without whole-brain RT.
No significant difference in QUALYs
(primary endpoint), overall survival,
overall quality of life or dexamethasone
use between the two groups.
61
NA
International: ESMO.52
Limited-stage small cell lung cancer
Intergroup0096 (Turrisi)
Phase 3. Randomised 417 patients with
LS-SCLC to 4 cycles of chemotherapy
cisplatin-etoposide with either once (OD)
or twice-daily (BD) radiotherapy.
BD RT showed improved overall survival
at 2 and 5 years.
62
NA
International: ESMO.66 NCCN.170
PCI01 -EULINT1
(LePechoux)
Phase 3. Randomised 720 patients with
LS-SCLC and complete response after
chemotherapy and thoracic RT.
Randomised dose of prophylactic cranial
irradiation (PCI) to standard (25 Gy in 10#)
vs. higher dose (36 Gy in 18# or 36 Gy in
24# given BD).
No significant reduction in brain
metastases at 2 years with higher dose
PCI. 25 Gy in ten fractions to remain
standard-of-care. Standardisation of PCI
dose in limited-stage SCLC
internationally.
171
NA
International: ESMO.66
CONVERT (Faivre-Finn)
Phase 3. Randomised 547 patients with
LS-SCLC to twice-daily (45 Gy in 30
fractions) vs. once-daily (66 Gy in 33
fractions) concurrently with
chemotherapy.
OD RT did not result in a superior survival
compared to BD RT.
63
172–174
NA
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
394
 trial compared twice-daily RT (45 Gy in 30 fractions) to a higher RT
dose delivered once daily (66 Gy in 33 fractions), both given
concurrently with chemotherapy.63 Overall survival outcomes did
not differ between the two groups; however, the survival achieved
in both groups was higher and toxicity much lower (>50%
reduction) than previously reported.62 As this trial was designed to
show superiority of once-daily RT and was not powered to show
equivalence, the implication is that twice-daily RT should be
considered the standard of care.
In the extensive-stage setting, an EORTC trial demonstrated that
prophylactic cranial irradiation in patients who had responded to
chemotherapy reduced the incidence of brain metastases and
improved survival, compared with no subsequent treatment.64
Later, the CREST trial randomised extensive-stage SCLC patients to
receive either thoracic RT (30 Gy in ten fractions) and prophylactic
cranial irradiation, or to receive prophylactic cranial irradiation
alone. Although there was no difference in overall survival at 1
year, a pre-planned analysis revealed a significant improvement in
overall survival at 2 years, with a low rate of severe toxicities.65
Both of these trials were practice changing, and have led to new
recommendations in international guidelines.66
The studies discussed have demonstrated significant survival
improvements in both NSCLC and SCLC patients. Areas of unmet
research need include the evaluation of modern RT technologies
(such as SBRT and protons) in a wider population, and the
development of individualised treatment strategies.
UROLOGICAL RT PRACTICE-CHANGING TRIALS
Radiation-based therapy is used as an alternative to radical
prostatectomy for localised disease, producing equivalent survival
to surgery.67 It is also used as the key treatment modality for
locally advanced disease. The development of RT as a curative
treatment has been supported by technical refinement of RT,
including treatment delivery with reduced toxicity, dose escalation
and use of concomitant androgen deprivation therapy (ADT)
(Table 3).
Localised prostate cancer
RCTs have led to a significant improvement in the evidence base
supporting RT for localised prostate cancer over the last two
decades. Prior to this, clinical practice was largely based on non-
randomised studies. Recognition of the benefit for local control,
even in high-risk/locally advanced patients, has been of key
importance. The PR07 trial in locally advanced or ‘high risk’
localised node-negative prostate cancer provided evidence for a
clear survival benefit of RT in addition to ADT, and similar results
were reported by a Scandinavian trial.68,69 Non-randomised data
from the STAMPEDE RCT also showed significantly improved
survival with combined RT and ADT, compared with ADT alone, in
patients with both high-risk and node-positive prostate cancer.70
Furthermore, several randomised dose-escalation studies have
provided evidence to support an increased RT dose from 64–68 Gy
to 74–78 Gy.71–73 These dose escalation trials showed improve-
ments in biochemical progression-free survival, but not overall
survival. The addition of RT to ADT, and use of a higher dose range
74–78 Gy, are now routine practice in the UK. Recent data suggest
that additional benefit could be accrued through further dose
escalation using a brachytherapy boost in high-risk patients, at the
cost of increased toxicity.74
Based on the principle that prostate cancer may be more
sensitive to increases in daily dose per fraction than previously
thought, the CHHiP trial compared two hypofractionated regi-
mens (60 Gy in 20 fractions vs. 57 Gy in 19 fractions) to the
standard UK regimen at the time (74 Gy in 37 fractions), in men
with T1b–T3aN0M0 prostate cancer. The 5-year results demon-
strated that 60 Gy in 20 fractions was non-inferior to the standard
regimen in terms of biochemical or clinical failure, and was
Table 2 continued
Trial name (first author)
Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results and
methods
Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
Extensive-stage small cell lung cancer
EORTC prophylactic
cranial irradiation trial
(Slotman)
Phase 3. Randomised 286 patients to PCI
vs. no further treatment in patients with
extensive small cell lung cancer who had
responded to chemotherapy.
Significant improvement in median
overall survival with PCI, as well as a
lower cumulative risk of brain metastases
at 1 year.
64
175
International: ESMO.66 NCCN.170
CREST (Slotman)
Phase 3. Randomised 498 patients to
thoracic radiotherapy 30 Gy in ten
fractions vs. no thoracic radiotherapy, in
patients with extensive-stage small cell
lung cancer who had responded to
chemotherapy.
No significant difference in 1-year
survival (primary endpoint). Significant
improvement in overall survival at 2 years
with thoracic radiotherapy, with no
increase in severe (grade 3 or higher)
toxicity.
65,176
177,178
International: Survey of European centres:
81% now giving thoracic RT in ES-SCLC
compared to 25% previously.177 NCCN.170
ESMO European Society for Medical Oncology, NCCN National Comprehensive Cancer Network
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
395
 Table 3.
Summary of urological cancer practice-defining RT clinical trials
Trial name (first
author)
Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results and methods
Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
Prostate
PR-07 (Mason)
Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) alone
vs. ADT + RT in men with T3-4N0M0
prostate cancer, or T1-2 disease with PSA >
40 or PSA 20–40 with Gleason score 8–10.
Randomised 1205 patients.
Overall survival significantly improved by
the addition of RT.
69
NA
UK: NICE.179
SPCG-7
(Widmark)
ADT alone vs. ADT + RT. Randomised 875
patients.
Addition of RT improved overall survival and
prostate cancer specific mortality.
68
NA
UK: NICE.179
MRC RT-01
(Dearnaley)
Radical RT 64 Gy in 32 fractions vs. 74 Gy in
37 fractions. Randomised 843 patients.
Significantly improved biochemical
progression-free survival in the 74 Gy dose
group, but no improvement in overall
survival.
72,73
180
International: NCCN.181 UK: NICE.179
Dutch (Peeters)
78 Gy vs. 68 Gy in patients with T1-4
prostate cancer with PSA < 60. Randomised
669 patients.
Significantly improved biochemical
progression-free survival for 78 Gy but no
effect on overall survival. Higher rates of
acute and late GI and GU toxicity for 78 Gy
group.
71,182
NA
International: NCCN.181 UK: NICE.179
RTOG 0415
(Lee)
73.8 Gy in 41 fractions vs. a
hypofractionated regime 70 Gy in 28
fractions for men with low-risk prostate
cancer. Randomised 1092 patients.
Hypofractionated regime non-inferior to
conventional fractionation, but resulted in
significantly increased late grade 2/3 GI and
GU toxicity.
80
NA
NA
HYPRO
(Aluwini)
Hypofractionated RT of 64·6 Gy in 19
fractions, three fractions per week vs. 78 Gy
in 39 fractions, five fractions per week, in
men with intermediate-high-risk prostate
cancer. Randomised 804 patients.
Hypofractionated regime was not superior
to the conventionally fractionated regime in
terms of 5-year relapse-free survival, with
higher incidence of acute GI toxicity, late GI
and late GU toxicity.
79,183,184
NA
NA
CHHiP
(Dearnaley)
60 Gy in 20 fractions OR 57 Gy in 19
fractions) vs. standard dose 74 Gy in 37
fractions for radical treatment of T1-3aN0M0
prostate cancer with PSA < 30. Randomised
3216 patients.
60 Gy in 20 fractions over 4 weeks non-
inferior to conventionally fractionated
radiotherapy, with similar rates of toxicity.
Dose constraints designed for the CHHiP
trial adopted in other trials. Supported
implementation of IMRT for prostate cancer
treatment.
75,76
NA
International: AUA/ASTRO/SUO: guideline.185
German Society of Radiation Oncology
guideline.186 UK: RCR dose fractionation
guideline.77
PROFIT (Catton)
78 Gy in 39 fractions vs. hypofractionated RT
of 60 Gy in 20 fractions over 4 weeks, with
both arms receiving no ADT. Randomised
1206 men.
Non-inferior biochemical-clinical failure for
hypofractionation with no increase in grade
3 or higher late GI or GU toxicity.
81
NA
International: AUA/ASTRO/SUO: guideline.185
German Society of Radiation Oncology
guideline.186 UK: RCR dose fractionation
guideline.77
ALSYMPCA
(Parker)
Radium-223 vs. placebo in men with
castration-resistant prostate cancer and
bone metastases, given 4 weekly for a total
of 6 injections. Randomised 921 patients in
a 2:1 ratio.
Improved overall survival for radium-223,
with longer time to first symptomatic
skeletal related event and improved quality
of life scores in the radium group.
82,83,187
NA
International: ESMO.84 NCCN.181 UK: NICE.85
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
396
 associated with similar toxicity.75,76 As a result, this trial has
already changed practice in the majority of UK centres.77,78 The
RTOG 0415, HYPRO and PROFIT trials have also recently published
data supporting the use of moderate hypofractionation; it seems
likely that these trials together will lead to wider international use
of hypofractionation in low-intermediate-risk prostate cancer.79–81
Metastatic prostate cancer
The most common metastatic site in prostate cancer is bone.
Delivery of RT to multiple sites of bone disease can be achieved by
using bone-seeking radiopharmaceuticals. Beta-emitting radio-
isotopes such as strontium-89 have been used in the palliation of
bone pain for many years. More recently the alpha-emitting
radioisotope
radium-223,
given
as
a
course
of
6-monthly
injections, has been shown to be a key addition to the treatment
options for men with castration-resistant prostate cancer with
bone metastases. The ALSYMPCA trial clearly demonstrated an
improvement in overall survival, quality of life scores, and time to
first symptomatic skeletal-related event for radium-223, when
compared with placebo.82,83 This treatment has been rapidly
included in international guidelines and clinical practice, and
provides another important addition to treatment options for men
with castration-resistant prostate cancer.84,85
Muscle-invasive bladder cancer
RT has been used as an alternative bladder-preserving modality to
radical cystectomy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer, but has
been limited by the lower rate of complete response. To address
this issue, over the last two decades the addition of either
chemotherapy or radiation sensitisers to RT has been explored to
improve local control. The evidence for these two treatment
options has been has been provided by two randomised trials: the
BC2001 trial showed an improvement in locoregional disease-free
survival with the addition of 5-fluorouracil (5FU) and mitomycin C
to RT,86 and the BCON trial showed improved overall survival with
the addition of nicotinamide and carbogen (a gas mixture of 2%
carbon dioxide and 98% oxygen).87 The low recurrence rates
observed in these trials have led to growing acceptance that RT
with concomitant chemotherapy or radiation sensitisers is a valid
alternative to cystectomy for many patients, and led to NICE
recommending that either RT or surgery should be offered to
patients being treated with curative intent.88
LOWER GASTROINTESTINAL RT PRACTICE-CHANGING TRIALS
Radical surgical resection is the cornerstone of treatment for
localised rectal cancer; however, in the 1980s, radical surgery
alone resulted in unacceptably high rates of local recurrence.89
Significant improvements in surgical techniques, such as total
mesorectal excision (TME), resulted in lower local recurrence rates
and led to a range of phase III trials that tested the additional
benefit of pre-operative RT (Table 4).
Pre-operative RT in rectal cancer
Two
phase
III
international
trials
demonstrated
statistically
significant reductions in local recurrence when 25 Gy in five
fractions was given prior to TME, compared with TME alone.90,91
There was no difference in overall survival. These trials changed
the standard of care for patients with resectable rectal cancer, with
clinical adoption initially occurring in Northern Europe; however,
this
approach
is
now
globally
supported
by
international
guidelines.92
Investigating a different strategy, four phase III trials established
pre-operative concurrent chemoradiation as a standard of care
for
locally
advanced
rectal
cancer.
Two
of
these
trials
demonstrated that addition of concurrent 5FU and leucovorin to
RT (45 Gy in 25 fractions) significantly reduced local recurrence,
with no difference in overall survival.93,94 Two additional phase III
Table 3 continued
Trial name (first
author)
Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results and methods
Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
Bladder
BC2001 (James)
ChemoRT (5FU/mitomycin C) vs. RT alone;
patients also randomised to receive whole-
bladder or modified volume RT.
Randomised 360 patients.
Improved locoregional control of bladder
cancer with chemoRT, without a significant
increase in adverse events. Dose constraints
derived from BC2001 data used in IDEAL,
HYBRID and RAIDER studies.
86,188
189
UK: NICE.88
BCON (Hoskin)
RT alone vs. RT plus carbogen-nicotinamide
(CON) in locally advanced bladder cancer.
Randomised 333 patients.
Overall survival significantly improved with
the addition of CON.
87
NA
UK: NICE.88
AUA/ASTRO/SUO American Urological Association/American Society for Radiation Oncology/Society of Urologic Oncology, ESMO European Society for Medical Oncology, NCCN National Comprehensive Cancer
Network, NICE National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, RCR Royal College of Radiologists
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
397
 Table 4.
Summary of colorectal cancer practice-defining RT clinical trials
Trial name (first
author)
Tumour site Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results
Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
Short course hypofractionated radiotherapy trials in rectal cancer
Dutch TME Trial
(Kapiteijn)
Rectal
Pre-operative short course radiotherapy 25 Gy
in five fractions followed by total mesorectal
excision (TME) surgery vs. TME surgery alone.
Randomised 1861 patients.
Reduced local recurrence rates. No
difference in overall survival.
90,190
191–199
International: ESMO.92
NCCN.200 UK: NICE.97
MRC CR07
(Sebag-
Montefiore)
Rectal
Pre-operative short course radiotherapy 25 Gy
in five fractions followed by surgery vs. surgery
with highly selective post-operative
chemoradiotherapy 45 Gy in 25 fractions with
concurrent fluorouracil. Randomised 1350
patients.
Reduced local recurrence rates and
improved disease-free survival in the pre-
operative radiotherapy arm. No difference
in overall survival.
91
201,202
International: ESMO.92
NCCN.200 UK: NICE.97
Long-course radiotherapy ± concurrent chemotherapy trials rectal cancer
EORTC 22921
(Bosset)
Rectal
Pre-operative RT vs. pre-operative chemoRT vs.
pre-operative RT and post-operative
chemotherapy vs. pre-operative chemoRT and
post-operative chemotherapy in locally
advanced rectal cancer. Radiotherapy 45 Gy in
25 fractions. Concurrent chemotherapy 5FU
and leucovorin D1-5, 29–33. Randomised 1011
patients.
Reduced local recurrence when
concurrent 5FU/LV was added in the first
and fifth week of radiotherapy. No
difference in overall survival.
93
NA
International: ESMO.92
NCCN.200 UK: NICE.97
EORTC 9203
(Gerard)
Rectal
Pre-operative RT vs. pre-operative chemoRT.
Randomised 733 patients.
Reduced local recurrence when
concurrent 5FU/LV was added in the first
and fifth week of radiotherapy. No
difference in overall survival.
94
NA
International: ESMO.92
NCCN.200 UK: NICE.97
German Rectal
Cancer Trial
(Sauer)
Rectal
Pre-operative CRT (50.4 Gy) with post-operative
CRT (55.8 Gy) with concurrent 5FU infusion
weeks 1 and 5. Randomised 823 patients.
Reduced local recurrence, acute and late
toxicity with pre-op CRT. No difference in
overall survival.
95
NA
International: ESMO.92
NCCN.200 UK: NICE.97
NSABP R03 (Roh) Rectal
Pre-operative CRT (50.4 Gy) with post-operative
CRT (50.4 Gy) with concurrent 5FU LV D1-5,
29–33 in locally advanced rectal cancer.
Randomised 267 patients.
Improved disease-free survival in favour of
pre-op CRT.
96
NA
International: ESMO.92
NCCN.200 UK: NICE.97
Short-course hypofractionated vs. long-course concurrent chemoradiotherapy trials in rectal cancer
Polish trial
(Bujko)
Rectal
Pre-operative short course RT (25 Gy in five
fractions) with pre-op CRT (50.4 Gy) and 5FU LV
D1-5 and 29–33. Randomised 312 patients.
Comparable local recurrence overall
survival and toxicity for the two treatment
regimens.
99
NA
International: ESMO.92 UK:
NICE.97
TROG (Ngan)
Rectal
Pre-operative short course RT (25 Gy in five
fractions) with pre-op chemoRT (50.4 Gy) and
5FU LV D1-5 and 29–33. Randomised 312
patients.
Comparable local recurrence overall
survival and toxicity for the two treatment
regimens.
100
NA
International: ESMO.92 UK:
NICE.97
Concurrent and additional cisplatin in anal cancer
ACT-2 (James)
Anal
Fluorouracil with mitomycin (MMC/FU), to
fluorouracil with cisplatin, with or without
maintenance doses at weeks 11 and 14.
Randomised 940 patients.
No improvement in 3-year progression-
free survival or in complete response rates
by substituting mitomycin for cisplatin,
nor by adding maintenance therapy. ACT2
used a shrinking field two phase protocol
107,203
204,205
International: ESMO.104
NCCN.206
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
398
 trials demonstrated reduced local recurrence and toxicity when
pre-operative chemoradiation was used, compared with post-
operative chemoradiation95,96 and this approach is supported in
both resectable and locally advanced rectal cancer. The use of pre-
operative chemoradiation is now supported by international
guidelines.97,98
With these two overlapping standards of care, two further
phase III trials were performed that directly compared the two
approaches.99,100 These trials reported no significant difference in
local recurrence and survival, and as a result, both approaches are
supported by international guidelines. Chemoradiation is recom-
mended as the preferred option when the patient has locor-
egional disease with very close margins of surgical excision.
Anal cancer RT practice-changing trials
Three phase III trials performed in the 1980s resulted in a major
change in clinical practice.101–103 Prior to this, radical surgery was
performed that resulted in permanent colostomy. The trials
determined concurrent mitomycin C, fluorouracil and RT as the
standard of care, resulting in the avoidance of major surgery in the
majority of patients. Subsequently the UK ACT2 trial introduced a
continuous shrinking-field RT technique, using a lower total dose
(50.4 Gy) where initial wide field irradiation was immediately
followed by boost radiotherapy targeting areas of visible cancer.
This approach was adopted into European practice and supported
in European guidelines.104 Three phase III trials (ACT2, RTOG 9811
and ACCORD 03) demonstrated that additional chemotherapy
either before or after concurrent chemoradiation did not improve
cancer outcomes.105–107 Furthermore, in the RTOG 9811 trial, pre-
operative and concurrent cisplatin-5FU led to higher colostomy
rates and inferior disease-free survival rates. In addition, two small
phase II trials had a significant effect on clinical practice. The UK
EXTRA trial reported acceptable local control and toxicity using
concurrent capecitabine rather than 5FU,108 and the use of
concurrent capecitabine is now supported in international guide-
lines. The RTOG 0529 phase II trial109 reported an improvement in
acute toxicity and acceptable outcomes with IMRT, compared with
the RTOG 9811 trial, and IMRT is now widely used in anal cancer. It
is clear that practice-changing and practice-defining clinical trials
are feasible in this rare cancer.
THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL INEQUALITY IN ACCESS TO EVIDENCE-
BASED RT
Clinical trials have some perceived disadvantages. One such
shortcoming is the length of time taken to produce mature results,
which is often many years; aspects of management potentially
become out-dated by the time the trial is able to report results.
Another disadvantage concerns the selective populations that are
often treated within trials, which may not represent ‘real life’
patients; patients in trials are typically younger and fitter, have less
co-morbidities and are submitted to stricter follow-up schemes
than the general patient population.110 Both of these aspects can
limit uptake of trial results into clinical practice,111 and this may be
hampered further by infrastructural, organisational or financial
barriers, such as those observed for twice-daily RT in treating
limited-stage SCLC.
The European SocieTy for Radiotherapy and Oncology-Health
Economics in Radiation Oncology (ESTRO-HERO) project surveyed
European countries regarding the availability of RT facilities and
personnel, which are key issues for RT access (Fig. 2). The study
reported large variation across Europe in resource availability, and
showed a clear correlation with national income. It also high-
lighted serious gaps in RT provision and staffing that was more
pronounced in, although not limited to, countries in Southern and
Eastern Europe.112,113 Across 40 European countries, RT utilisation
was much lower than estimated; just under half were treating less
than 70% of patients requiring RT.114 Similarly, the Global Task
Table 4 continued
Trial name (first
author)
Tumour site Trial methodology
Practice-defining trial results
Publications of
trial results
Publications
related to trial
conduct
Evidence of practice change
and this become standard radiotherapy
practice in the UK.
RTOG 98-11
(Ajanani)
Anal
Neoadjuvant and concurrent cisplatin 5FU vs.
concurrent Mitomycin C and 5FU in patients
with anal cancer. Randomised 644 patients.
MMC 5FU CRT remains the standard of
care. Neoadjuvant and concurrent
cisplatin and 5FU resulted in inferior
outcomes disease-free and overall
survival.
105,207
208,209
International: ESMO.104
NCCN.206
ACCORD 03
(Peiffert)
Anal
Standard vs. high-dose boost and with or
without neoadjuvant cisplatin 5FU
chemotherapy. Randomised 307 patients.
Higher dose boost and neoadjuvant
chemotherapy did not improve cancer
outcomes.
106
NA
International: NCCN.206
Optimising chemoradiotherapy for anal cancer
EXTRA (Glynne-
Jones)
Anal
Single arm phase II trial of Mitomycin C
capecitabine and radiotherapy (50.4 Gy in 28 F).
Entered 31 patients.
Acceptable rates of acute toxicity and
radiotherapy compliance. Showed that
capecitabine can be used instead of 5U
with MMC and RT.
108
NA
International: ESMO.104
NCCN.206
RTOG 0529
(Kachnic)
Anal
Single arm phase II trial if IMRT (54 Gy in 28 F to
GTV and 42 Gy in 28 F to CTV) with Mitomycin
C and 5FU. Entered 63 patients.
Effective and well-tolerated treatment
regimen. Supported the introduction if
IMRT for a rare cancer.
109
NA
International: ESMO104
ESMO European Society for Medical Oncology, NCCN National Comprehensive Cancer Network, NICE National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
399
 Force on Radiotherapy in Cancer Care and Control (GTFRCC)
published a model of worldwide RT supply and demand based on
cancer incidence, number of RT machines available and evidence-
based guidelines for RT. At least 36 countries had no RT machines
at all, and there was a distinct correlation between national
income and availability of RT machines. Using available evidence
from world-wide clinical trials and guidelines, this report also
provided compelling evidence that investment in RT would save
many millions of life-years and also create positive economic
benefits4,115; even if a patient is no longer able to contribute to the
workforce, the intrinsic personal or societal value of a life-saving
intervention has been estimated to be 2.3 times the gross
domestic product per person in a given year.116 In order to
achieve the ultimate goal of equal access to radiotherapy
worldwide, the GTFRCC has set forward a number of ‘Calls to
Action’, including measurable targets for expansion of human
resources and RT capacity (both requiring sustainable financing),
aligning RT access with universal healthcare coverage and, last but
not least, systematically including radiotherapy expansion in
national cancer control planning.
RT treatment machines
a
b
d
c
Medical physicists and
dosimetrists
Mean:5.3
0–2
2–4
4–6
6–8
>8
0–5
5–10
10–15
15–20
>20
0–5
5–10
10–15
15–20
>20
0–15
15–30
30–45
45–60
>60
Median:5.3
Min:1.4
Max:9.5
Max:30.9
Min:2.5
Mean:12.8 Median:11.0
Mean:9.8
Median:9.8
Min:0.0
Max:21.9
Max:78.0
Min:4.9
Mean:36.9 Median:30.9
Radiation therapy technicians
and nurses
Radiation oncologists
Fig. 2
Megavoltage RT equipment and personnel per million inhabitants across Europe. Countries coloured grey indicate no available data.
Reprinted from ref. 130. Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
400
 How can the RT community tackle these issues?
Large-scale clinical trials have provided a solid rationale for
making changes in clinical practice to improve patient care;
adequate infrastructure and human resources are now needed
to enable the implementation of these changes globally.
International organisations are working to improve access to
RT and to encourage research. The International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has highlighted inequity in access to RT, and it
promotes the setting up and maintaining of RT services in low-
and middle-income countries through partnerships with centres
in high-income countries. ESTRO promotes evidence-based RT
and addresses the inequity of access to high-quality RT across
Europe. The newly established ESTRO Cancer Foundation aims
to raise awareness of RT benefits and to create a community of
supporters. Its first initiative is the Marie Curie Legacy Campaign
(www.150yearsmariecurie.org), which will educate the general
public about the life and work of this iconic scientist, and
highlight RT as a key component of cancer treatment (Fig. 3). In
addition,
the
UK
Clinical
and
Translational
Radiotherapy
Research Working Group (CTRad) facilitates the development
of new RT trials and raises awareness of the importance of RT
research to funding bodies. A particular success has been
through engagement with pharmaceutical companies to drive
forward research into RT and novel drug combinations.11 Both
ESTRO and CTRad are committed to tackling major challenges
for future RT trials and assisting stakeholders in developing
solutions (Table 5).
WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF RT RESEARCH?
Future RT research will focus on reducing treatment toxicity and
on further improving survival rates and management of locor-
egional relapse. This is likely to be increasingly driven by
biomarkers to assist in individualising RT treatment. There now
exist validated biomarkers for some cancer types, for example p16
positivity predicts better prognosis and response to chemoRT
treatment in head and neck cancer. However, for most cancer
types, biomarkers for response to RT treatment and toxicity are
not yet established, and this will be an important area of future
translational RT research. In this section, we discuss selected areas
of predicted future clinical RT research. As we look to further refine
RT, our trial designs will also need to evolve accordingly.
Reducing the toxicity of RT
RT-related toxicity may be reduced by avoiding unnecessary
treatment and by continued improvements in tumour targeting,
to reduce the ‘safety margin’ of normal tissue around the cancer.
Technological developments such as proton beam therapy and
the integration of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology
into RT are likely to be important areas of future research aiming
to improve tumour targeting.
Proton beam therapy has the potential to dramatically reduce
doses to nearby critical structures, because the physical properties
of the proton radiation beam are very different to photons. This is
especially important, for example, near the eye and parts of the
central nervous system. It also reduces the risks of ionising
radiation in paediatric patients, which can have devastating
effects on growth and development.117 Until now, proton beam
therapy has mainly been introduced in privately funded centres
rather than through comparative clinical trials, and thus the
evidence base for some tumour types is very limited. Small-scale
clinical trials and patient registries are now being established, and
it is hoped that the wider introduction of proton beam therapy on
a global scale will provide opportunities for larger international
clinical trials to demonstrate clinical benefit and assess the cost-
effectiveness of this new therapy for a broad range of tumour
types.
MRI allows for greater resolution of soft tissue than CT, which
means many tumours, such as abdominopelvic cancers, can be
identified more accurately, meaning smaller normal tissue margins
are needed. MRI is currently widely used to improve the accuracy
of radiological tumour staging and to guide the contouring of
structures for RT planning, prior to treatment. The current
challenge concerns how to accurately identify and monitor these
tumours
online
during
treatment.
Many
centres
have
the
capability to perform daily image guidance with repeat CT
scanning before each RT treatment, using the linear accelerator
itself; however, this is of limited use for accurately imaging soft
tissue, especially where there is considerable organ motion.
Recently, hybrid RT machines have been developed that combine
a linear accelerator with an MRI scanner (MR-linac) that is able to
perform a new generation of imaging before and during RT
delivery. This allows accurate localisation of the tumour pre-
treatment and supports the ability to adapt treatment daily if
required and to monitor the tumour and critical organ movement
during treatment.118,119 This, in the future, will allow ‘gating’; the
automatic switching on and off of the treatment beam according
to pre-set parameters, for example to allow for respiratory and
bowel motion. This may facilitate greatly improved image
guidance of RT delivery, minimising the dose to normal tissues
and enabling dose escalation to the tumour.
Assessment of these new technologies will be facilitated by the
recently published framework for evaluation of RT technology, R-
IDEAL,120 and by international clinical and research networks, for
example the European Particle Therapy Network (an ESTRO
taskforce) and the ATLANTIC MRL research consortium. Recently
funded clinical trials are increasingly including imaging, blood or
Fig. 3
Celebrating 150 years since the birth of Marie Curie.
Reproduced with permission from ACJC-Musée Curie
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
401
 tissue biomarkers, and we expect this will support a move towards
the increased personalisation of RT, for example identifying
which patients are likely to benefit from RT and tailoring the
dose or fractionation. Trial designs that encompass biomarker
discovery or prospective validation of predictive biomarkers will
maximise value for trial funders and research opportunities for
patients.121,122
Improving survival rates with RT
Improved survival rates are likely to occur through employing/
adopting RT in novel situations. There is growing interest in using
SBRT to deliver a much higher dose than traditionally given for
oligometastatic or oligoprogressive disease123; early trials have
shown
improvements
in
progression-free
survival
for
this
approach.124 Larger trials aiming to evaluate the role and benefit
of ‘radical’ high-dose RT in oligometastatic disease across disease
sites are currently underway in the UK (CORE) or in development
(ESTRO/EORTC OligoCare studies). SBRT and/or MR-guided RT may
also prove beneficial in cancers not traditionally amenable to RT,
such as renal and pancreatic cancers, due to the previous inability
to irradiate without including large normal tissue margins that
precluded the delivery of a tumouricidal dose.
Survival may also be improved through dose escalation via
improved image guidance (as previously discussed), and novel
drug combinations with RT. There is currently particular interest in
combining
RT
with
DNA
damage
response
inhibitors
and
immunotherapy. RT induces direct cell death by causing single-
and double-stranded DNA breaks. Double-stranded DNA breaks
are much more lethal to cells than single-strand breaks; however,
single-stranded DNA breaks are a more frequent consequence of
ionising radiation. DNA damage response inhibitors may therefore
act in a ‘synthetically lethal’ manner to selectively increase the
number of double-stranded DNA breaks in irradiated cells, with
minimal
effects
on
nearby
non-irradiated
cells.125
RT
also
promotes immune-mediated cell death through the increased
release of tumour antigens, the induction of inflammatory
cytokines, and the transient overexpression of cell surface
receptors.126 Together, these mechanisms facilitate effector T cell
killing of irradiated tumour cells and priming of antigen-
presenting cells to increase the adaptive immune response
against tumour cells elsewhere in the body, in non-irradiated
areas. There are multiple ongoing clinical trials of DNA damage
response inhibitors with RT127 and immunotherapy with RT.128,129
Efficient trial design in this field, through use of adaptive model-
based phase I dose-finding strategies, risk stratification, biomar-
kers and/or appropriate intermediate endpoints, and multi-arm
multi-stage studies will support more rapid evaluation of the most
promising drug–RT combinations.
CONCLUSION
Major steps have been made in developing new RT techniques
and regimens to optimise cancer outcomes, whilst simultaneously
minimising toxicity. These have been achieved through high-
quality clinical trials, involving collaboration across countries.
Particular successes have been the introduction of SBRT for
early-stage NSCLC especially for medically inoperable patients,
and the increasing use of hypofractionation in breast and prostate
cancer as this improves convenience for patients and cost-
effectiveness for healthcare providers, whilst maintaining excellent
cancer outcomes. Despite these achievements, and together with
the high cost-effectiveness of RT, access to evidence-based RT is
not available to everyone. Organisations such as the IAEA, ESTRO
and CTRad are making great progress in raising awareness of this
inequity and educating both health professionals and policy
makers. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Marie Curie’s birth,
we hope that international co-operation of the RT community will
facilitate high-quality evidenced-based RT for the millions of
people who require it, regardless of where they live.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the UK National Cancer Research Institute Clinical and
Translational Radiotherapy Research Working Group (CTRad) who initiated and
coordinated the development of this manuscript. Institut Curie made an agreement
with Paris Sciences and Lettres, research university, to install professorships entitled
‘Marie Curie’. The first ‘Marie Curie professor’ that will be installed is Philip Poortmans,
at the occasion of the 150th anniversary of her birth. The authors acknowledge
the contribution of Arta Leci, Project Manager, ESTRO Cancer Foundation, in
providing information on the Marie Curie Legacy Campaign. The authors acknowl-
edge the contribution of the association Curie et Joliot-Curie - Musée Curie for
providing Fig. 3.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Research support: CEC is supported by the Cambridge National Institute of Health
Research Biomedical Research Centre. RH and EH are supported by the Royal
Marsden/Institute of Cancer Research NIHR Biomedical Research Centre.
REFERENCES
1. Ringborg, U. et al. The Swedish Council on Technology Assessment in Health
Care (SBU) Systematic Overview of Radiotherapy for Cancer including a Pro-
spective Survey of Radiotherapy Practice in Sweden 2001*/ Summary and
Conclusions. Acta Oncol. 426, 357–365 (2003).
2. International Atomic Energy Agency. Planning National Radiotherapy Services: a
Practical Tool. (Vienna: IAEA Human Health Series Publications, 2010)
Table 5.
Challenges and solutions for future RT clinical trials
Key challenges for future RT trials
Limited academic funding
Limited pool of clinical academics/academic physicists
Competition with pharmaceutical company-funded trials
Slow accrual of academic RT trials
Lack of studies evaluating novel RT technologies
Little success in the field of drug–RT combination
Possible solutions
Academic groups to lobby funders and mentor the next generation of academics
Improve collaboration between academic groups to improve clinical trial efficiency
Improve collaboration with pharmaceutical industry
Improve methodology of combination studies/evaluation of new technologies to make them more efficient
Improve collaboration between pre-clinical and clinical researchers in the field of drug–RT combination
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
402
 3. Parker, T. Radiotherapy Services in England 2012 (London: Department of Health,
2012).
4. Atun, R. et al. Expanding global access to radiotherapy. Lancet Oncol. 16,
1153–1186 (2015).
5. Norlund, A., SBU Survey Group. Costs of radiotherapy. Acta Oncol. 42, 411–415
(2003).
6. Jönsson, B., Hofmarcher, T., Lindgren, P. & Wilking, N. The cost and burden of
cancer in the European Union 1995-2014. Eur. J. Cancer 66, 162–170 (2016).
7. Williams, M. V., Jamesy, N. D., Summersz, E. T., Barrettx, A. & Ashk, D. V. National
Survey of Radiotherapy Fractionation Practice in 2003. Clin. Oncol. 18, 3–14
(2006).
8. Society and College of Radiographers; Institute of Physics and Engineering in
Medicine; Royal College of Radiologists. Intensity Modulated Radiotherapy (IMRT)
in the UK: Current Access and Predictions of Future Access Rates (London/York:
Society and College of Radiographers; Institute of Physics and Engineering in
Medicine; Royal College of Radiologists, 2014).
9. Ahmad, S. S., Duke, S., Jena, R., Williams, M. V. & Burnet, N. G. Advances in
radiotherapy. BMJ 345, e7765 (2012).
10. Giaccia, A. J. Molecular radiobiology: the state of the art. J. Clin. Oncol. 32,
2871–2878 (2014).
11. Sharma, R. A. et al. Clinical development of new drug–radiotherapy combina-
tions. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 13, 627–642 (2016).
12. EBCTCG (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group), McGale, P. et al.
Effect of radiotherapy after mastectomy and axillary surgery on 10-year
recurrence and 20-year breast cancer mortality: meta-analysis of individual
patient data for 8135 women in 22 randomised trials. Lancet 383, 2127–2135
(2014).
13. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG), Darby, S. et al. Effect
of radiotherapy after breast-conserving surgery on 10-year recurrence and 15-
year breast cancer death: meta-analysis of individual patient data for 10,801
women in 17 randomised trials. Lancet 378, 1707–1716 (2011).
14. Owen, J. R. et al. Effect of radiotherapy fraction size on tumour control in
patients with early-stage breast cancer after local tumour excision: long-term
results of a randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 7, 467–471 (2006).
15. Whelan, T. J. et al. Long-Term results of hypofractionated radiation therapy for
breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 362, 513–520 (2010).
16. Haviland, J. S. et al. The UK Standardisation of Breast Radiotherapy (START) trials
of radiotherapy hypofractionation for treatment of early breast cancer: 10-year
follow-up results of two randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol. 14,
1086–1094 (2013).
17. Coles, C. E., Moody, A. M., Wilson, C. B. & Burnet, N. G. Reduction of radiotherapy-
induced late complications in early breast cancer: the role of intensity-
modulated radiation therapy and partial breast irradiation. Part II--Radiotherapy
strategies to reduce radiation-induced late effects. Clin. Oncol. 17, 98–110
(2005).
18. Suh, W. W., Pierce, L. J., Vicini, F. A. & Hayman, J. A. A cost comparison analysis of
partial versus whole-breast irradiation after breast-conserving surgery for early-
stage breast cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 62, 790–796 (2005).
19. Lievens, Y. Hypofractionated breast radiotherapy: financial and economic con-
sequences. Breast 19, 192–197 (2010).
20. Monten, C. & Lievens, Y. Adjuvant breast radiotherapy: how to trade-off cost and
effectiveness? Radiother. Oncol. 126, 132–138 (2018).
21. Smith, B. D. et al. Fractionation for whole breast irradiation: an American society
for radiation oncology (ASTRO) evidence-based guideline. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
Biol. Phys. 81, 59–68 (2011).
22. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Early and Locally Advanced
Breast Cancer: Diagnosis and Treatment (London: NICE, 2009).
23. Bekelman, J. E. et al. Uptake and costs of hypofractionated vs. conventional
whole breast irradiation after breast conserving surgery in the United States,
2008–2013. JAMA 312, 2542–2550 (2014).
24. Prades, J. et al. Understanding variations in the use of hypofractionated radio-
therapy and its specific indications for breast cancer: a mixed-methods study.
Radiother. Oncol. 123, 22–28 (2017).
25. Bartelink, H. et al. Impact of a higher radiation dose on local control and survival
in breast-conserving therapy of early breast cancer: 10-year results of the ran-
domized boost versus no boost EORTC 22881-10882 trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 25,
3259–3265 (2007).
26. Vrieling, C. et al. Prognostic factors for local control in breast cancer after long-
term follow-up in the EORTC boost vs no boost trial. JAMA Oncol. 3, 42 (2017).
27. Polgár, C. et al. Accelerated partial-breast irradiation using high-dose-rate
interstitial brachytherapy: 12-year update of a prospective clinical study.
Radiother. Oncol. 94, 274–279 (2010).
28. Livi, L. et al. Accelerated partial breast irradiation using intensity-modulated
radiotherapy versus whole breast irradiation: 5-year survival analysis of a phase
3 randomised controlled trial. Eur. J. Cancer 51, 451–463 (2015).
29. Veronesi, U. et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy versus external radiotherapy for
early breast cancer (ELIOT): a randomised controlled equivalence trial. Lancet
Oncol. 14, 1269–1277 (2013).
30. Vaidya, J. S. et al. Risk-adapted targeted intraoperative radiotherapy versus
whole-breast radiotherapy for breast cancer: 5-year results for local control
and overall survival from the TARGIT-A randomised trial. Lancet 383, 603–613
(2014).
31. Haviland, J. S., A’Hern, R., Bentzen, S. M., Whelan, T. & Bliss, J. M. Radiotherapy for
breast cancer, the TARGIT-A trial. Lancet 383, 1716–1717 (2014).
32. Strnad, V. et al. 5-year results of accelerated partial breast irradiation using sole
interstitial multicatheter brachytherapy versus whole-breast irradiation with
boost after breast-conserving surgery for low-risk invasive and in-situ carcinoma
of the female breast: a randomised, phase 3, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 387,
229–238 (2016).
33. Coles, C. E. et al. Partial-breast radiotherapy after breast conservation surgery for
patients with early breast cancer (UK IMPORT LOW trial): 5-year results from a
multicentre, randomised, controlled, phase 3, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 390,
1048–1060 (2017).
34. Donker, M. et al. Radiotherapy or surgery of the axilla after a positive sentinel
node in breast cancer (EORTC 10981-22023 AMAROS): a randomised, multi-
centre, open-label, phase 3 non-inferiority trial. Lancet Oncol. 15, 1303–1310
(2014).
35. Poortmans, P. M. et al. Internal mammary and medial supraclavicular irradiation
in breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 317–327 (2015).
36. Whelan, T. J. et al. Regional nodal irradiation in early-stage breast cancer. N. Engl.
J. Med. 373, 307–316 (2015).
37. Thorsen, L. B. J. et al. DBCG-IMN: a population-based cohort study on the effect
of internal mammary node irradiation in early node-positive breast cancer. J.
Clin. Oncol. 34, 314–320 (2016).
38. Recht, A. et al. Postmastectomy radiotherapy: an American Society of Clinical
Oncology, American Society for Radiation Oncology, and Society of Surgical
Oncology Focused Guideline update. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 4431–4442 (2016).
39. Bhattacharya, I. S., Kirby, A. M., Bliss, J. M. & Coles, C. E. Can interrogation of
tumour characteristics lead us to safely omit adjuvant radiotherapy in patients
with early breast cancer? Clin. Oncol. 30, 158–165 (2018).
40. Aristei, C. et al. The Assisi Think Tank Meeting and Survey of post MAstectomy
Radiation Therapy after breast reconstruction: the ATTM-SMART report. Eur. J.
Surg. Oncol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.2018.01.010 (2018).
41. Lightowlers, S. V. et al. Preoperative breast radiation therapy: indications and
perspectives. Eur. J. Cancer 82, 184–192 (2017).
42. Baumann, P. et al. Outcome in a prospective phase II trial of medically inop-
erable stage I non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with stereotactic body
radiotherapy. J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 3290–3296 (2009).
43. Fakiris, A. J. et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early-stage non-small-
cell lung carcinoma: four-year results of a prospective phase II study. Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 75, 677–682 (2009).
44. Ricardi, U. et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early stage non-small cell
lung cancer: results of a prospective trial. Lung Cancer 68, 72–77 (2010).
45. Timmerman, R. et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for inoperable early
stage lung cancer. JAMA 303, 1070 (2010).
46. Timmerman, R. D. et al. Long-term results of RTOG 0236: a Phase II Trial of
Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT) in the treatment of patients with
medically inoperable stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 90,
S30 (2014).
47. Videtic, G. M. M. et al. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy-based stereotactic body
radiotherapy for medically inoperable early-stage lung cancer: excellent local
control. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 77, 344–349 (2010).
48. Soldà, F. et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy (SABR) for the treatment of primary
non-small cell lung cancer; Systematic review and comparison with a surgical
cohort. Radiother. Oncol. 109, 1–7 (2013).
49. Nagata, Y. et al. Prospective trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for both
operable and inoperable T1N0M0 non-small cell lung cancer: Japan Clinical
Oncology Group Study JCOG0403. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 93, 989–996 (2015).
50. Cassidy, R. J. et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for early-stage non–small-cell
lung cancer in patients 80 years and older: a multi-center analysis. Clin. Lung
Cancer 18, 551–558.e6 (2017).
51. Sun, B. et al. 7-year follow-up after stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for patients
with stage I non-small cell lung cancer: results of a phase 2 clinical trial. Cancer
123, 3031–3039 (2017).
52. Postmus, P. E. et al. Early and locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC): ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-
up. Ann. Oncol. 28(Suppl. 4), iv1–iv21 (2017).
53. Palma, D. et al. Impact of introducing stereotactic lung radiotherapy for elderly
patients with stage I non–small-cell lung cancer: a population-based time-trend
analysis. J. Clin. Oncol. 28, 5153–5159 (2010).
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
403
 54. Dalwadi, S. M. et al. Practice patterns and outcomes in elderly stage I non-small-
cell lung cancer: a 2004 to 2012 SEER analysis. Clin. Lung Cancer 19, e269–e276
(2018).
55. Socinski, M. A. et al. Dose-escalating conformal thoracic radiation therapy with
induction and concurrent carboplatin/paclitaxel in unresectable stage IIIA/B
nonsmall cell lung carcinoma: a modified phase I/II trial. Cancer 92, 1213–1223
(2001).
56. Socinski, M. A. et al. Randomized phase II trial of Induction chemotherapy fol-
lowed by concurrent chemotherapy and dose-escalated thoracic conformal
radiotherapy (74 Gy) in stage III non–small-cell lung cancer: CALGB 30105. J. Clin.
Oncol. 26, 2457–2463 (2008).
57. Schild, S. E. et al. Results of a phase I trial of concurrent chemotherapy and
escalating doses of radiation for unresectable non–small-cell lung cancer. Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. 65, 1106–1111 (2006).
58. Bradley, J. D. et al. Primary analysis of the phase II component of a phase I/II
dose intensification study using three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy
and concurrent chemotherapy for patients with inoperable non–small-cell lung
cancer: RTOG 0117. J. Clin. Oncol. 28, 2475–2480 (2010).
59. Bradley, J. D. et al. Standard-dose versus high-dose conformal radiotherapy with
concurrent and consolidation carboplatin plus paclitaxel with or without
cetuximab for patients with stage IIIA or IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer (RTOG
0617): a randomised, two-by-two factorial phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 16,
187–199 (2015).
60. Chun, S. G. et al. Impact of intensity-modulated radiation therapy technique for
locally advanced non–small-cell lung cancer: a secondary analysis of the NRG
Oncology RTOG 0617 Randomized Clinical Trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 35, 56–62 (2017).
61. Mulvenna, P. et al. Dexamethasone and supportive care with or without whole
brain radiotherapy in treating patients with non-small cell lung cancer with
brain metastases unsuitable for resection or stereotactic radiotherapy (QUARTZ):
results from a phase 3, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet 388, 2004–2014
(2016).
62. Turrisi, A. T. et al. Twice-daily compared with once-daily thoracic radiotherapy in
limited small-cell lung cancer treated concurrently with cisplatin and etoposide.
N. Engl. J. Med. 340, 265–271 (1999).
63. Faivre-Finn,
C.
et al.
Concurrent
once-daily versus
twice-daily
chemor-
adiotherapy in patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer (CONVERT): an
open-label, phase 3, randomised, superiority trial. Lancet Oncol. 18, 1116–1125
(2017).
64. Slotman, B. et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in extensive small-cell lung
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 357, 664–672 (2007).
65. Slotman, B. J. et al. Use of thoracic radiotherapy for extensive stage small-cell
lung cancer: a phase 3 randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385, 36–42 (2015).
66. Früh, M. et al. Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC): ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines
for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann. Oncol. 24(S6), vi99–vi105 (2013).
67. Hamdy, F. C. et al. 10-Year outcomes after monitoring, surgery, or radiotherapy
for localized prostate cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 1415–1424 (2016).
68. Widmark, A. et al. Endocrine treatment, with or without radiotherapy, in locally
advanced prostate cancer (SPCG-7/SFUO-3): an open randomised phase III trial.
Lancet 373, 301–308 (2009).
69. Mason, M. D. et al. Final report of the intergroup randomized study of combined
androgen-deprivation therapy plus radiotherapy versus androgen-deprivation
therapy alone in locally advanced prostate cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 2143–2150
(2015).
70. James, N. D. et al. Failure-free survival and radiotherapy in patients with newly
diagnosed nonmetastatic prostate cancer: data from patients in the control arm
of the STAMPEDE Trial. JAMA Oncol. 2, 348–357 (2016).
71. Peeters, S. T. H. et al. Dose-response in radiotherapy for localized prostate
cancer: results of the Dutch multicenter randomized phase III trial comparing 68
Gy of radiotherapy with 78 Gy. J. Clin. Oncol. 24, 1990–1996 (2006).
72. Dearnaley, D. P. et al. Escalated-dose versus standard-dose conformal radio-
therapy in prostate cancer: first results from the MRC RT01 randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet Oncol. 8, 475–487 (2007).
73. Dearnaley, D. P. et al. Escalated-dose versus control-dose conformal radio-
therapy for prostate cancer: long-term results from the MRC RT01 randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 15, 464–473 (2014).
74. Morris, W. J. et al. Androgen Suppression Combined with Elective Nodal and
Dose Escalated Radiation Therapy (the ASCENDE-RT Trial): an analysis of survival
endpoints for a randomized trial comparing a low-dose-rate brachytherapy
boost to a dose-escalated external beam boost for high- and intermediate-risk
prostate cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 98, 275–285 (2017).
75. Wilkins, A. et al. Hypofractionated radiotherapy versus conventionally fractio-
nated radiotherapy for patients with intermediate-risk localised prostate cancer:
2-year patient-reported outcomes of the randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3
CHHiP trial. Lancet Oncol. 16, 1605–1616 (2015).
76. Dearnaley, D. et al. Conventional versus hypofractionated high-dose intensity-
modulated radiotherapy for prostate cancer: 5-year outcomes of the rando-
mised, non-inferiority, phase 3 CHHiP trial. Lancet Oncol. 17, 1047–1060 (2016).
77. The Royal College of Radiologists. Radiotherapy Dose- Fractionation (London:
Royal College of Radiologists, 2016).
78. NHS England Specialised Services Clinical Reference Group Radiotherapy. Clin-
ical Commissioning Policy: Hypofractionated External Beam Radiotherapy In The
Treatment Of Localised Prostate Cancer (Adults) (electronic format only: NHS
England, 2017).
79. Incrocci, L. et al. Hypofractionated versus conventionally fractionated radio-
therapy for patients with localised prostate cancer (HYPRO): final efficacy results
from a randomised, multicentre, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 17,
1061–1069 (2016).
80. Lee, W. R. et al. Randomized phase III noninferiority study comparing two
radiotherapy fractionation schedules in patients with low-risk prostate cancer. J.
Clin. Oncol. 34, 2325–2332 (2016).
81. Catton, C. N. et al. Randomized trial of a hypofractionated radiation regimen for
the treatment of localized prostate cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 35, 1884–1890 (2017).
82. Parker, C. et al. Alpha emitter radium-223 and survival in metastatic prostate
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 213–223 (2013).
83. Nilsson, S. et al. Patient-reported quality-of-life analysis of radium-223 dichloride
from the phase III ALSYMPCA study. Ann. Oncol. 27, 868–874 (2016).
84. Parker, C., Gillessen, S., Heidenreich, A. & Horwich, A. Cancer of the prostate:
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann.
Oncol. 26, v69–v77 (2015).
85. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Radium-223 Dichloride
For Treating Hormone-relapsed Prostate Cancer With Bone Metastases (TA412)
(London: NICE, 2016).
86. James, N. D. et al. Radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy in muscle-
invasive bladder cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 1477–1488 (2012).
87. Hoskin, P. J., Rojas, A. M., Bentzen, S. M., & Saunders, M. I. Radiotherapy with
concurrent carbogen and nicotinamide in bladder carcinoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 28,
4912–4918 (2010).
88. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Bladder Cancer: Diagnosis And
Management (London: NICE, 2015).
89. MacFarlane, J. K., Ryall, R. D. H. & Heald, R. J. Mesorectal excision for rectal
cancer. Lancet 341, 457–460 (1993).
90. Kapiteijn, E. et al. Preoperative radiotherapy combined with total mesorectal
excision for resectable rectal cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 345, 638–646 (2001).
91. Sebag-Montefiore, D. et al. Preoperative radiotherapy versus selective post-
operative chemoradiotherapy in patients with rectal cancer (MRC CR07
and NCIC-CTG C016): a multicentre, randomised trial. Lancet 373, 811–820
(2009).
92. Glynne-Jones, R. et al. Rectal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for
diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann. Oncol. 28(s4), iv22–iv40 (2017).
93. Bosset, J.-F. et al. Chemotherapy with preoperative radiotherapy in rectal cancer.
N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 1114–1123 (2006).
94. Gérard, J.-P. et al. Preoperative radiotherapy with or without concurrent fluor-
ouracil and leucovorin in T3-4 rectal cancers: results of FFCD 9203. J. Clin. Oncol.
24, 4620–4625 (2006).
95. Sauer, R. et al. Preoperative versus postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 351, 1731–1740 (2004).
96. Roh, M. S. et al. Preoperative multimodality therapy improves disease-free sur-
vival in patients with carcinoma of the rectum: NSABP R-03. J. Clin. Oncol. 27,
5124–5130 (2009).
97. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Colorectal Cancer: The Diag-
nosis And Management Of Colorectal Cancer (London: NICE, 2011).
98. Glimelius, B., Tiret, E., Cervantes, A. & Arnold, D. Rectal cancer: ESMO clinical
practice guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann. Oncol. 24(S6),
vi81–vi88 (2013).
99. Bujko, K. et al. Long-term results of a randomized trial comparing preoperative
short-course radiotherapy with preoperative conventionally fractionated che-
moradiation for rectal cancer. Br. J. Surg. 93, 1215–1223 (2006).
100. Ngan, S. Y. et al. Randomized trial of short-course radiotherapy versus long-
course chemoradiation comparing rates of local recurrence in patients with T3
rectal cancer: Trans-Tasman Radiation Oncology Group trial 01.04. J. Clin. Oncol.
30, 3827–3833 (2012).
101. Flam, M. et al. Role of mitomycin in combination with fluorouracil and radio-
therapy, and of salvage chemoradiation in the definitive nonsurgical treatment
of epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal: results of a phase III randomized
intergroup study. J. Clin. Oncol. 14, 2527–2539 (1996).
102. Bartelink, H. et al. Concomitant radiotherapy and chemotherapy is superior to
radiotherapy alone in the treatment of locally advanced anal cancer: results of a
phase III randomized trial of the European Organization for Research and
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
404
 Treatment of Cancer Radiotherapy and Gastrointestinal Cooperative Groups. J.
Clin. Oncol. 15, 2040–2049 (1997).
103. Northover, J. M. A. et al. Epidermoid anal cancer: results from the UKCCCR
randomised trial of radiotherapy alone versus radiotherapy, 5-fluorouracil, and
mitomycin. Lancet 348, 1049–1054 (1996).
104. Glynne-Jones, R. et al. Anal cancer: ESMO-ESSO-ESTRO clinical practice guide-
lines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann. Oncol. 25, 10–20 (2014).
105. Ajani, J. A. et al. Fluorouracil, mitomycin, and radiotherapy vs fluorouracil, cis-
platin, and radiotherapy for carcinoma of the anal canal: a randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA 299, 1914–1921 (2008).
106. Peiffert, D. et al. Induction chemotherapy and dose intensification of the
radiation boost in locally advanced anal canal carcinoma: final analysis of
the randomized UNICANCER ACCORD 03 trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 1941–1948
(2012).
107. James, R. D. et al. Mitomycin or cisplatin chemoradiation with or without
maintenance chemotherapy for treatment of squamous-cell carcinoma of the
anus (ACT II): a randomised, phase 3, open-label, 2 × 2 factorial trial. Lancet
Oncol. 14, 516–524 (2013).
108. Glynne-Jones, R. et al. EXTRA--a multicenter phase II study of chemoradiation
using a 5 day per week oral regimen of capecitabine and intravenous mito-
mycin C in anal cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 72, 119–126 (2008).
109. Kachnic, L. A. et al. RTOG 0529: a phase 2 evaluation of dose-painted intensity
modulated radiation therapy in combination with 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin-
C for the reduction of acute morbidity in carcinoma of the anal canal. Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 86, 27–33 (2013).
110. De Ruysscher, D. et al. Eligibility for concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy
of locally advanced lung cancer patients: a prospective, population-based study.
Ann. Oncol. 20, 98–102 (2009).
111. Lievens, Y. Access to innovative radiotherapy: how to make it happen from an
economic perspective? Acta Oncol. 56, 1353–1358 (2017).
112. Grau, C. et al. Radiotherapy equipment and departments in the European
countries: final results from the ESTRO-HERO survey. Radiother. Oncol. 112,
155–164 (2014).
113. Lievens, Y. et al. Radiotherapy staffing in the European countries: final results
from the ESTRO-HERO survey. Radiother. Oncol. 112, 178–186 (2014).
114. Borras, J. M. et al. The optimal utilization proportion of external beam radio-
therapy in European countries: an ESTRO-HERO analysis. Radiother. Oncol. 116,
38–44 (2015).
115. Yap, M. L., Zubizarreta, E., Bray, F., Ferlay, J. & Barton, M. Global access to
radiotherapy services: have we made progress during the past decade? J. Glob.
Oncol. 2, 207–215 (2016).
116. Jamison, D. T. et al. Global health 2035: a world converging within a generation.
Lancet 382, 1898–1955 (2013).
117. Schwartz, C. L. Long-term survivors of childhood cancer: the late effects of
therapy. Oncologist 4, 45–54 (1999).
118. McPartlin, A. J. et al. MRI-guided prostate adaptive radiotherapy - a systematic
review. Radiother. Oncol. 119, 371–380 (2016).
119. Henke, L. et al. Phase I trial of stereotactic MR-guided online adaptive radiation
therapy (SMART) for the treatment of oligometastatic or unresectable primary
malignancies of the abdomen. Radiother. Oncol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
radonc.2017.11.032 (2017).
120. Verkooijen, H. M. et al. R-IDEAL: a framework for systematic clinical evaluation of
technical innovations in radiation oncology. Front Oncol. 7, 59 (2017).
121. Bibault, J.-E. et al. Personalized radiation therapy and biomarker-driven
treatment strategies: a systematic review. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 32, 479–492
(2013).
122. Forker, L. J., Choudhury, A. & Kiltie, A. E. Biomarkers of tumour radiosensitivity
and predicting benefit from radiotherapy. Clin. Oncol. 27, 561–569 (2015).
123. Tree, A. C. et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for oligometastases. Lancet
Oncol. 14, 28–37 (2013).
124. Ost, P. et al. Surveillance or metastasis-directed therapy for oligometastatic
prostate cancer recurrence: a prospective, randomized, multicenter phase II trial.
J. Clin. Oncol. 36, 446–453 (2018).
125. Goldstein, M. & Kastan, M. B. The DNA damage response: implications for
tumor responses to radiation and chemotherapy. Annu. Rev. Med. 66, 129–143
(2015).
126. Van Limbergen, E. J. et al. Combining radiotherapy with immunotherapy: the
past, the present and the future. Br. J. Radiol. 90, 20170157 (2017).
127. Chalmers, A. J. Science in focus: combining radiotherapy with inhibitors of the
DNA damage response. Clin. Oncol. 28, 279–282 (2016).
128. Kang, J., Demaria, S. & Formenti, S. Current clinical trials testing the combination
of immunotherapy with radiotherapy. J. Immunother. Cancer 4, 51 (2016).
129. Marshall, R. et al. Immune checkpoint inhibitors in lung cancer - an unheralded
opportunity? Clin. Oncol. 29, 207–217 (2017).
130. Lievens, Y. et al. HERO (Health Economics in Radiation Oncology): a pan-
European project on radiotherapy resources and needs. Clin. Oncol. 27, 115–124
(2015).
131. Whelan, T. et al. Randomized trial of breast irradiation schedules after lum-
pectomy for women with lymph node-negative breast cancer. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 94, 1143–1150 (2002).
132. Agrawal, R. K. et al. The UK Standardisation of Breast Radiotherapy (START) Trial
B of radiotherapy hypofractionation for treatment of early breast cancer: a
randomised trial. Lancet 371, 1098–1107 (2008).
133. Venables, K., Winfield, E., Deighton, A., Aird, E. & Hoskin, P., START Trial Man-
agement Group STM. Breast radiotherapy phantom design for the START trial.
Br. J. Radiol. 73, 1313–1316 (2000).
134. Venables, K., Winfield, E., Deighton, A., Aird, E. & Hoskin, P., START Trial Man-
agement Group. The START trial-measurements in semi-anatomical breast and
chest wall phantoms. Phys. Med. Biol. 46, 1937–1948 (2001).
135. Venables, K., Winfield, E., Deighton, A., Aird, E. & Hoskin, P. A survey of radio-
therapy quality control practice in the United Kingdom for the START trial.
Radiother. Oncol. 60, 311–318 (2001).
136. Winfield, E., Deighton, A., Venables, K., Hoskin, P. J., & Aird, E. G. A. Survey of UK
breast radiotherapy techniques: background prior to the introduction of the
quality assurance programme for the START (standardisation of radiotherapy)
trial in breast cancer. Clin. Oncol. 14, 267–271 (2002).
137. Winfield, E. A., Deighton, A., Venables, K., Hoskin, P. J. & Aird, E. G. A. Survey of
tangential field planning and dose distribution in the UK: background to the
introduction of the quality assurance programme for the START trial in early
breast cancer. Br. J. Radiol. 76, 254–259 (2003).
138. Venables, K., Winfield, E. A., Aird, E. G. & Hoskin, P. J. Three-dimensional dis-
tribution of radiation within the breast: an intercomparison of departments
participating in the START trial of breast radiotherapy fractionation. Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. 55, 271–279 (2003).
139. Venables, K., Miles, E. A., Deighton, A., Aird, E. G. A. & Hoskin, P. J. Irradiation of
the heart during tangential breast treatment: a study within the START trial. Br. J.
Radiol. 77, 137–142 (2004).
140. Venables, K., Miles, E. A., Aird, E. G., & Hoskin, P. J. The use of in vivo thermo-
luminescent dosimeters in the quality assurance programme for the START
breast fractionation trial. Radiother. Oncol. 71, 303–310 (2004).
141. Venables, K., Miles, E. A., Hoskin, P. J. & Aird, E. G. A., START. Verification films: a
study of the daily and weekly reproducibility of breast patient set-up in the
START trial. Clin. Oncol. 17, 337–342 (2005).
142. Venables, K., Miles, E. A., Aird, E. G. A. & Hoskin, P. J. What is the optimum breast
plan: a study based on the START trial plans. Br. J. Radiol. 79, 734–739 (2006).
143. START Trialists’ Group, Bentzen, S. M. et al. The UK Standardisation of Breast
Radiotherapy (START) Trial A of radiotherapy hypofractionation for treatment of
early breast cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 9, 331–341 (2008).
144. Hopwood, P. et al. Comparison of patient-reported breast, arm, and shoulder
symptoms and body image after radiotherapy for early breast cancer: 5-year
follow-up in the randomised Standardisation of Breast Radiotherapy (START)
trials. Lancet Oncol. 11, 231–240 (2010).
145. Royal College of Radiologists. Postoperative Radiotherapy For Breast Cancer: UK
Consensus Statements (London: Royal College of Radiologists, 2016).
146. Poortmans, P. et al. The influence of the boost technique on local control in
breast conserving treatment in the EORTC “boost versus no boost” randomised
trial. Radiother. Oncol. 72, 25–33 (2004).
147. van Tienhoven, G., van Bree, N. A., Mijnheer, B. J. & Bartelink, H. Quality assur-
ance of the EORTC trial 22881/10882: “assessment of the role of the booster
dose in breast conserving therapy”: the Dummy Run. EORTC Radiotherapy
Cooperative Group. Radiother. Oncol. 22, 290–298 (1991).
148. van Tienhoven, G., Mijnheer, B. J., Bartelink, H. & González, D. G. Quality assur-
ance of the EORTC Trial 22881/10882: boost versus no boost in breast conser-
ving therapy. An overview. Strahlenther. Onkol. 173, 201–207 (1997).
149. Vrieling, C. et al. The influence of the boost in breast-conserving therapy on
cosmetic outcome in the EORTC boost versus no boost trial. EORTC Radio-
therapy and Breast Cancer Cooperative Groups. European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 45, 677–685
(1999).
150. Vrieling, C. et al. Validation of the methods of cosmetic assessment after breast-
conserving therapy in the EORTC “boost versus no boost” trial. EORTC Radio-
therapy and Breast Cancer Cooperative Groups. European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 45, 667–676
(1999).
151. Poortmans, P. M. P. et al. Quality assurance in the EORTC phase III randomised
“boost vs. no boost” trial for breast conserving therapy: comparison of the
results of two individual case reviews performed early and late during the
accrual period. Radiother. Oncol. 76, 278–284 (2005).
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
405
 152. Senkus, E. et al. Primary breast cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for
diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann. Oncol. 26, v8–v30 (2015).
153. Coles, C. & Yarnold, J., IMPORT Trials Management Group. The IMPORT trials are
launched (September 2006). Clin. Oncol. 18, 587–590 (2006).
154. Coles, C. E. et al. Titanium clip placement to allow accurate tumour bed loca-
lisation following breast conserving surgery – audit on behalf of the IMPORT
Trial Management Group. Eur. J. Surg. Oncol. 35, 578–582 (2009).
155. Harris, E. J., Donovan, E. M., Yarnold, J. R., Coles, C. E. & Evans, P. M. Characterization
of target volume changes during breast radiotherapy using implanted fiducial
markers and portal imaging. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 73, 958–966 (2009).
156. Coles, C. E. et al. Evaluation of implanted gold seeds for breast radiotherapy
planning and on treatment verification: a feasibility study on behalf of the
IMPORT trialists. Radiother. Oncol. 100, 276–281 (2011).
157. Harris, E. J. et al. A multicentre observational study evaluating image-guided
radiotherapy
for
more
accurate
partial-breast
intensity-modulated
radiotherapy: comparison with standard imaging technique. Effic. Mech. Eval. 1,
1–74 (2014).
158. Bourez, R. L. & Rutgers, E. J. The European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Breast Cancer Group: quality control of surgical
trials. Surg. Oncol. Clin. N. Am. 10, 807–819 (2001).
159. Hurkmans, C. W., Borger, J. H., Rutgers, E. J. T. & van Tienhoven, G., EORTC Breast
Cancer Cooperative Group, Radiotherapy Cooperative Group. Quality assurance
of axillary radiotherapy in the EORTC AMAROS trial 10981/22023: the dummy
run. Radiother. Oncol. 68, 233–240 (2003).
160. Association of Breast Surgery Trustees. Association of Breast Surgery Consensus
Statement Management of the Malignant Axilla in Early Breast Cancer (London:
Association of Breast Surgery, 2015).
161. Poortmans, P. M. et al. The potential impact of treatment variations on the
results of radiotherapy of the internal mammary lymph node chain: a quality-
assurance report on the dummy run of EORTC Phase III randomized trial 22922/
10925 in Stage I--III breast cancer(1). Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 49,
1399–1408 (2001).
162. Lievens, Y., Poortmans, P., Van & den Bogaert, W. A glance on quality assurance
in EORTC study 22922 evaluating techniques for internal mammary and medial
supraclavicular lymph node chain irradiation in breast cancer. Radiother. Oncol.
60, 257–265 (2001).
163. Poortmans, P. et al. Quality assurance of EORTC trial 22922/10925 investigating
the role of internal mammary--medial supraclavicular irradiation in stage I-
III breast cancer: the individual case review. Eur. J. Cancer 39, 2035–2042
(2003).
164. Poortmans, P. et al. Quality assurance in the EORTC randomized trial 22922/
10925 investigating the role of irradiation of the internal mammary and medial
supraclavicular lymph node chain works. Strahlenther. Onkol. 182, 576–582
(2006).
165. Musat, E. et al. Quality assurance in breast cancer: EORTC experiences in the
phase III trial on irradiation of the internal mammary nodes. Eur. J. Cancer 43,
718–724 (2007).
166. Thorsen, L. B. J., Thomsen, M. S., Overgaard, M., Overgaard, J. & Offersen, B. V.,
Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group Radiotherapy Committee. Quality
assurance of conventional non-CT-based internal mammary lymph node irra-
diation in a prospective Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group trial: The
DBCG-IMN study. Acta Oncol. 52, 1526–1534 (2013).
167. Timmerman, R. et al. Excessive toxicity when treating central tumors in a phase
II study of stereotactic body radiation therapy for medically inoperable early-
stage lung cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 24, 4833–4839 (2006).
168. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in
Oncology Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (electronic format only: National Com-
prehensive Cancer Network, 2017).
169. Nyman, J. et al. SPACE – a randomized study of SBRT vs conventional fractio-
nated radiotherapy in medically inoperable stage I NSCLC. Radiother. Oncol.
121, 1–8 (2016).
170. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in
Oncology Small Cell Lung Cancer (electronic format only: National Comprehen-
sive Cancer Network, 2018).
171. Le Péchoux, C. et al. Standard-dose versus higher-dose prophylactic cranial
irradiation (PCI) in patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer in complete
remission after chemotherapy and thoracic radiotherapy (PCI 99-01, EORTC
22003-08004, RTOG 0212, and IFCT 99-01): a randomised clinical trial. Lancet
Oncol. 10, 467–474 (2009).
172. Groom, N., Wilson, E., Lyn, E. & Faivre-Finn, C. Is pre-trial quality assurance
necessary? Experiences of the CONVERT Phase III randomized trial for good
performance status patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. Br. J.
Radiol. 87, 20130653 (2014).
173. Groom, N., Wilson, E. & Faivre-Finn, C. Effect of accurate heart delineation on
cardiac dose during the CONVERT trial. Br. J. Radiol. 90, 20170036 (2017).
174. Faivre-Finn, C. et al. Protocol for the CONVERT trial-Concurrent ONce-daily
VErsus twice-daily RadioTherapy: an international 2-arm randomised controlled
trial of concurrent chemoradiotherapy comparing twice-daily and once-daily
radiotherapy schedules in patients with limited stage small cell lung cancer (LS-
SCLC) and good performance status. BMJ Open. 6, e009849 (2016).
175. Slotman, B. J. et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in extensive disease small-cell
lung cancer: short-term health-related quality of life and patient reported
symptoms: results of an international Phase III randomized controlled trial by
the EORTC Radiation Oncology and Lung Cancer Groups. J. Clin. Oncol. 27,
78–84 (2009).
176. Slotman, B. What is the optimal radiotherapy schedule for limited stage small
cell lung cancer? Lung Cancer 105, 52–53 (2017).
177. Haslett, K. et al. Management of patients with extensive-stage small-cell lung
cancer: a European survey of practice. Radiother. Oncol. 119, S63–S64 (2016).
178. Patrice, G. I. et al. Cost-effectiveness of thoracic radiation therapy for extensive-
stage small cell lung cancer using evidence from the chest radiotherapy
extensive-stage small cell lung cancer trial (CREST). Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 100,
97–106 (2018).
179. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Prostate Cancer: Diagnosis And
Management. (London: NICE, 2014).
180. Seddon, B., Bidmead, M., Wilson, J., Khoo, V. & Dearnaley, D. Target volume
definition in conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer: quality assurance in
the MRC RT-01 trial. Radiother. Oncol. 56, 73–83 (2000).
181. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in
Oncology Prostate Cancer (electronic format only: National Comprehensive
Cancer Network, 2017).
182. Peeters, S. T. H. et al. Acute and late complications after radiotherapy for
prostate cancer: results of a multicenter randomized trial comparing 68 Gy to 78
Gy. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 61, 1019–1034 (2005).
183. Aluwini, S. et al. Hypofractionated versus conventionally fractionated radio-
therapy for patients with prostate cancer (HYPRO): acute toxicity results from a
randomised non-inferiority phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 16, 274–283 (2015).
184. Aluwini, S. et al. Hypofractionated versus conventionally fractionated radio-
therapy for patients with prostate cancer (HYPRO): late toxicity results from a
randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 17, 464–474 (2016).
185. American Urological Association. Clinically Localized Prostate Cancer: AUA/ASTRO/
SUO
Guideline.
http://www.auanet.org/guidelines/clinically-localized-prostate-
cancer-new-(aua/astro/suo-guideline-2017)#x6909. Accessed 3 Nov 2017.
186. Höcht, S. et al. Hypofractionated radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer.
Strahlenther. Onkol. 193, 1–12 (2017).
187. Sartor, O. et al. Effect of radium-223 dichloride on symptomatic skeletal events
in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and bone metastases:
results from a phase 3, double-blind, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 15,
738–746 (2014).
188. Huddart, R. A. et al. Randomized noninferiority trial of reduced high-dose
volume versus standard volume radiation therapy for muscle-invasive bladder
cancer: results of the BC2001 trial (CRUK/01/004). Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
87, 261–269 (2013).
189. McDonald, F. et al. Defining bowel dose volume constraints for bladder radio-
therapy treatment planning. Clin. Oncol. 27, 22–29 (2015).
190. van Gijn, W. et al. Preoperative radiotherapy combined with total mesorectal
excision for resectable rectal cancer: 12-year follow-up of the multicentre, ran-
domised controlled TME trial. Lancet Oncol. 12, 575–582 (2011).
191. Marijnen, C. A. M. et al. Acute side effects and complications after short-term
preoperative radiotherapy combined with total mesorectal excision in primary
rectal cancer: report of a multicenter randomized trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 20, 817–825
(2002).
192. Marijnen, C. A. M. et al. Impact of short-term preoperative radiotherapy on
health-related quality of life and sexual functioning in primary rectal cancer:
report of a multicenter randomized trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 23, 1847–1858 (2005).
193. Lange, M. M. et al. Urinary dysfunction after rectal cancer treatment is mainly
caused by surgery. Br. J. Surg. 95, 1020–1028 (2008).
194. Lange, M. M. et al. Risk factors for sexual dysfunction after rectal cancer treat-
ment. Eur. J. Cancer 45, 1578–1588 (2009).
195. Kusters, M. et al. Patterns of local recurrence in rectal cancer; a study of the
Dutch TME trial. Eur. J. Surg. Oncol. 36, 470–476 (2010).
196. Wiltink, L. M. et al. Health-related quality of life 14years after preoperative short-
term radiotherapy and total mesorectal excision for rectal cancer: report of a
multicenter randomised trial. Eur. J. Cancer 50, 2390–2398 (2014).
197. Wiltink, L. M. et al. No increased risk of second cancer after radiotherapy in
patients treated for rectal or endometrial cancer in the randomized TME,
PORTEC-1, and PORTEC-2 trials. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 1640–1646 (2015).
198. Chen, T. Y.-T. et al. Bowel function 14 years after preoperative short-course
radiotherapy and total mesorectal excision for rectal cancer: report of a multi-
center randomized trial. Clin. Colorectal Cancer 14, 106–114 (2015).
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
406
 199. Wiltink, L. M. et al. Long-term health-related quality of life in patients with rectal
cancer after preoperative short-course and long-course (chemo) radiotherapy.
Clin. Colorectal Cancer 15, e93–e99 (2016).
200. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in
Oncology Rectal Cancer (electronic format only: National Comprehensive Cancer
Network, 2016).
201. Quirke, P. et al. Effect of the plane of surgery achieved on local recurrence in
patients with operable rectal cancer: a prospective study using data from the
MRC CR07 and NCIC-CTG CO16 randomised clinical trial. Lancet 373, 821–828
(2009).
202. Stephens, R. J. et al. Impact of short-course preoperative radiotherapy for rectal
cancer on patients’ quality of life: data from the Medical Research Council CR07/
National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group C016 randomized
clinical trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 28, 4233–4239 (2010).
203. Glynne-Jones, R. et al. Best time to assess complete clinical response after che-
moradiotherapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the anus (ACT II): a post-hoc
analysis of randomised controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 18, 347–356 (2017).
204. Glynne-Jones, R. et al. Tumour- and treatment-related colostomy rates following
mitomycin C or cisplatin chemoradiation with or without maintenance che-
motherapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the anus in the ACT II trial. Ann.
Oncol. 25, 1616–1622 (2014).
205. Glynne-Jones, R., Adams, R., Lopes, A. & Meadows, H. Clinical endpoints in trials of
chemoradiation for patients with anal cancer. Lancet Oncol. 18, e218–e227 (2017).
206. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in
Oncology Anal Carcinoma (electronic format only: National Comprehensive
Cancer Network, 2017).
207. Gunderson, L. L. et al. Long-term update of US GI intergroup RTOG 98-11 Phase
III trial for anal carcinoma: Survival, relapse, and colostomy failure with con-
current chemoradiation involving fluorouracil/mitomycin versus fluorouracil/
cisplatin. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 4344–4351 (2012).
208. Gunderson, L. L. et al. Anal carcinoma: impact of tn category of disease on
survival, disease relapse, and colostomy failure in US Gastrointestinal Intergroup
RTOG 98-11 Phase 3 Trial. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 87, 638–645 (2013).
209. Ben-Josef, E. et al. Impact of overall treatment time on survival and local control in
patients with anal cancer: a pooled data analysis of radiation therapy oncology
group trials 87-04 and 98-11. J. Clin. Oncol. 28, 5061–5066 (2010).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
Practice-changing radiation therapy trials…
MK Thompson et al.
407
