 When procedures meet practice in
community pharmacies: qualitative
insights from pharmacists and
pharmacy support staff
Christian E L Thomas,1,2 Denham L Phipps,1,2 Darren M Ashcroft1,2
To cite: Thomas CEL,
Phipps DL, Ashcroft DM.
When procedures meet
practice in community
pharmacies: qualitative
insights from pharmacists
and pharmacy support staff.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-
010851
▸ Prepublication history for
this paper is available online.
To view these files please
visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2015-010851).
Received 17 December 2015
Revised 2 March 2016
Accepted 14 April 2016
1NIHR Greater Manchester
Primary Care Patient Safety
Translational Research
Centre, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK
2Manchester Pharmacy
School, University of
Manchester, Manchester
Academic Health Sciences
Centre (MAHSC), The
University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK
Correspondence to
Christian E L Thomas;
christian.thomas@
manchester.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Objectives: Our aim was to explore how members of
community pharmacy staff perceive and experience the
role of procedures within the workplace in community
pharmacies.
Setting: Community pharmacies in England and
Wales.
Participants: 24 community pharmacy staff including
pharmacists and pharmacy support staff were
interviewed regarding their view of procedures in
community pharmacy. Transcripts were analysed using
thematic analysis.
Results: 3 main themes were identified. According
to the ‘dissemination and creation of standard
operating procedures’ theme, community pharmacy
staff were required to follow a large amount of
procedures as part of their work. At times,
complying with all procedures was not possible.
According to the ‘complying with procedures’ theme,
there are several factors that influenced compliance
with procedures, including work demands, the high
workload and the social norm within the pharmacy.
Lack of staff, pressure to hit targets and poor
communication also affected how able staff felt to
follow procedures. The third theme ‘procedural
compliance versus using professional judgement’
highlighted tensions between the standardisation of
practice and the professional autonomy of
pharmacists. Pharmacists feared being unsupported
by their employer for working outside of procedures,
even when acting for patient benefit. Some support
staff believed that strictly following procedures
would keep patients and themselves safe. Dispensers
described following the guidance of the pharmacist
which sometimes meant working outside of
procedures, but occasionally felt unable to voice
concerns about not working to rule.
Conclusions: Organisational resilience in
community pharmacy was apparent and findings
from this study should help to inform policymakers
and practitioners regarding factors likely to influence
the implementation of procedures in community
pharmacy settings. Future research should focus on
exploring community pharmacy employees’
intentions and attitudes towards rule-breaking
behaviour and the impact this may have on patient
safety.
INTRODUCTION
A
commonly
encountered
strategy
for
improving patient safety is the standardisa-
tion of healthcare practice, often by develop-
ing
and
implementing
standardised
procedures (in the form of guidelines, proto-
cols
and
standard
operating
procedures
(SOPs)).1 In principle, procedures provide
assurance by holding healthcare staff to a
minimum standard of practice and control-
ling aspects of their work that may create
patient safety hazards.2 3 However, the imple-
mentation of procedures has had a more
limited effect on work practices than antici-
pated, with studies in hospitals,4
5 general
practices6
and
community
pharmacies7
finding
that
healthcare
staff
sometimes
deviate
from
formal
procedures
in
the
course of their work.
Such
findings
have
led
researchers
to
examine the relationship between procedures
and practice in healthcare. Reason et al8 and
Strengths and limitations of this study
▪ This is the first study to specifically explore in
depth opinions and experiences of working with
procedures in community pharmacies.
▪ Detailed insights were provided by community
pharmacists and support staff holding a range of
roles and levels of experience from a variety of
pharmacy settings.
▪ These qualitative findings highlight the import-
ance of organisational factors in shaping how
procedures are used in the context of community
pharmacies.
▪ These findings should help to inform policy-
makers and pharmacy teams on how to optimise
the implementation of procedures in practice.
▪ Future work is needed to further explore organ-
isational
resilience
in
community
pharmacy,
which
should
investigate
the
circumstances
under which staff purposefully bypass or deviate
from procedures and the potential impact this
may have on patient safety.
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
1
Open Access
Research
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 Dekker9 noted that strict adherence to inflexible proce-
dures can make a task inefficient, or even unachievable,
in practice. This is illustrated by the experience of one
operating department, which found that adherence to a
particular safety protocol interfered with the execution
of surgical tasks.10 Other studies have identified a diver-
gence between the nature of work assumed by formal
procedures and that encountered in everyday practice;
the latter being marked by varying and sometimes
complex task demands, variation in the material and
human resources available to achieve task goals, challen-
ging work environments and diverse expectations on the
part of staff members, patients, organisations and other
stakeholders with regard to how task goals are defined
and achieved.11–15
The relationship between procedures and practice can
be understood in terms of organisational ‘resilience’—
that is, the ability of an organisation or its members to
maintain effective and efficient work in the face of a
dynamic environment that is characterised by discontinu-
ities in care, hazards, trade-offs and multiple goals.16 17
According to the notion of resilience, staff may adapt
their work activity in order to achieve task goals under
the prevailing circumstances, thus creating a divergence
between ‘work as imagined’ (as represented by the
formal procedures) and ‘work as done’ (as represented
by actual practice at a given time or in a given loca-
tion).9 18 19 Hence, the effect of implementing proce-
dures is determined by the relationship between these
two aspects of work.
This
study
explores
the
use
of
procedures
in
England and Wales, and community pharmacy (CP)
staff (in addition to their traditional role of supplying
prescribed and non-prescription medicines) routinely
provide advice on the management of minor ailments
and the appropriate use of medicines, as well as con-
ducting medicines usage reviews.20–22 Since 2005,
pharmacies have been required to adopt standard
operating procedures (SOPs) for the storage, dispens-
ing and supply of medicines and the provision of med-
icines
advice
to
patients.23
24
A
CP
team
can
encompass a range of staff members including phar-
macists, registered and non-registered support staff,
medicine counter assistants and delivery drivers as
well as a range of trainees who are all expected to
abide by SOPs. However, evidence from studies of
non-prescription medication supply, in the UK and in
other countries, suggests that CP staff may not follow
procedures as consistently as expected.7 25 26 Given
the various demands and relationships that dictate the
work of CP staff,27 28 it is possible that the implemen-
tation of procedures in this setting is subject to inter-
play between formal expectations about how CPs
should operate and how they operate in practice.29
The aim of the current study is to explore the experi-
ence of CP staff in applying procedures to their every-
day work.
METHODS
Design and setting
For the study design, we used semistructured interviews
to collect qualitative data. The sampling frame for the
study was CP staff in England and Wales.
Sampling and recruitment
Participants were identified on a purposive basis, using
departmental contacts, professional networks and adver-
tisements on Twitter. One of the authors invited each of
these participants to opt in to an interview about the use
of procedures in their work via email. This recruitment
was followed up with snowball sampling, in which the
initial participants were asked to recommend other
members of the sampling frame for the researchers to
invite.30–32
Twenty-four participants (pharmacists (n=13), regis-
tered accuracy checking technician (ACT; n=1), regis-
tered technician (n=1), non-registered accuracy checking
assistants (n=3) and dispensing assistants (n=6)) agreed
to participate. These participants represented independ-
ent pharmacies (n=7), large pharmacy chains (n=9),
medium-sized pharmacy chains (n=2), small-sized phar-
macy chains (n=2), a supermarket (n=1) and locum/ses-
sional staff (n=3; 2 pharmacists, 1 dispenser) who worked
in a variety of pharmacy types. Participants worked in a
range of locations including a city centre (n=1), a suburb
(n=7), a town (n=10) and a village (n=2). Participants’
time since qualifying in their role ranged from 6 months
to 30 years. Participants’ total time working in CP (either
in their current role or in other roles) ranged from 2.5 to
35 years.
Data collection
Semistructured interviews were conducted, focusing on
the
participants’
opinions
of
procedures
they
are
expected to follow in their role. The topic guide was
developed from the literature on procedural compliance
in healthcare and the first author’s personal experience
as a CP employee. Questions included:
▸ How are you made aware of the procedures that you
need to follow during your work?
▸ How useful are procedures for helping you to do
your job?
▸ Do you feel that you are able to follow the procedures
at work?
▸ Are there certain times of the day, week, month or
year that you feel procedures are typically deviated
from or bypassed?
The topic guide was piloted with a member of CP
support staff before data collection began. Interviews
were conducted by the lead author between November
2014 and April 2015. Each interview was audio-recorded
and transcribed in full. Interviews were held in a private
place with only the participant and the interviewer
present. Each participant gave informed written consent
and
interviews
lasted
30–90 min.
Participants
were
2
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 recruited until data saturation was reached and no new
issues emerged during interviews.
Analysis
Transcripts were analysed using a thematic analysis with
a template method of organising qualitative data,33 and
NVivo V.10 (QSR International) was used to support
data analysis.34 A template of a priori thematic codes was
created based on previous literature on compliance and
views of procedures.35 The template was then independ-
ently applied to each transcript by the authors CELT and
DLP (the latter not being involved in the interviews),
who then discussed the coding and agreed on modifica-
tions to the template in order to represent the ideas
identified in the data. Once the next version of template
was agreed, it was refined through successive re-readings
of the transcripts until no new themes emerged. The
final template was then reviewed by DMA to ensure that
it provided adequate coverage of the data.
RESULTS
Three main themes were identified, namely, the influ-
ence of work demands, the influence staff role has on
how procedures are viewed and the dissemination and
enforcement of SOPs. All participants appreciated the
need for procedures in CP and agreed that the ultimate
aim of procedures was to guarantee patient safety.
Participants generally found SOPs useful for highlighting
the ‘ideal’ way to work from a patient safety point of view.
However, procedures were restrictive at times and could
not be followed constantly for many reasons. Three main
themes were identified: ‘the dissemination and creation
of SOPs’, ‘complying with procedures’ and ‘procedural
compliance versus using professional judgement’.
The dissemination and creation of SOPs
One of the main themes with regard to the use of proce-
dures as a whole in CP was how participants were made
aware of the SOPs. Overall issues included the large
amount of detailed procedures in CP
. Participants felt
complying with all procedures at all times was an unreal-
istic organisational aim given the complex setting and
the high workload. The findings highlighted a differ-
ence in work-as-done and work-as-imagined due to the
sometimes unrealistic expectations placed on CP staff, in
terms of the large number of detailed procedures that
resulted in difficulty for staff to learn and retain all of
the procedures provided.
Dissemination of SOPs
Most participants were provided with written SOPs that
they were expected to read on starting work in CP and
this was often viewed as a prerequisite to start dispens-
ing. Frequently participants mentioned an overload of
procedures
leading
to difficulty
in complying with
expected practice. A pharmacist (P13) noted that proce-
dures are ‘often left on a shelf and ignored’.
I couldn’t dream of recalling every step of every policy
and I don’t think the staff that work with me could
either…some might say that undermines the value of
having all the rules because there’s too many…but it’s
important that things are laid out.
(P1, Relief Pharmacist, Large Chain)
I think we often just read it, sign it and then you don’t
look at it again until you get told to…you never look any-
thing up…
(P3, Dispenser, Large Chain)
[Staff are] presented with this massive folder [of proce-
dures] and a lot of them are very repetitive…people will
lose their attention span after five minutes…it defeats the
point.
(P16, Locum Pharmacist)
I think the people who write the SOPs, they’ve never
actually worked in [a branch] either.
(P12, Dispenser, Large Chain)
Disseminating pharmacy-specific SOPs to locum/ses-
sional staff was noted as unrealistic, therefore making
SOPs available to refer to when needed was important.
The agency I’m with have a lot of the [company] specific
SOPs on their website…[So if] you’ve got a week in [a
particular company], and they’ve got something particu-
lar that they do…you can read through before you go.
(P19, Locum Dispenser)
I think you’d be hard pressed to find a locum that could
genuinely say, that if they walked into a pharmacy they’d
never walked into before, they’re going to spend an hour
scouring the SOPs [before they start any work]…you
can’t work that way.
(P16, Locum Pharmacist)
The creation of SOPs
With regard to the creation of SOPs, the level of input
from CP employees varied. A supermarket pharmacist
(P20)
noted
that
branch
pharmacists
are
heavily
involved in procedure development and that amend-
ments were available for branches if needed. Having
‘frontline’ pharmacy staff comment on SOPs was useful
for
aligning
work-as-imagined
and
work-as-done.
Participants from an independent pharmacy spoke of
the flexibility and control they had in creating and
updating SOPs. Participants from a large pharmacy
chain noted there was little flexibility and this could
result in procedures that were not always appropriate.
Sometimes you
can’t
follow
them
exactly…[they’re]
written for the whole of [the country] and each store…
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
3
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 do things slightly differently even though they’re all sup-
posed to be the same. They try but they can’t because
customers want different things and surgeries do things
differently…I think the company needs to recognise that
they need to be a bit more flexible…
(P9, Pharmacist, Large Chain)
Complying with procedures
A variety of factors affected compliance with procedures
in CP
. Participants from all roles emphasised the impact
that work demands, workload and the behavioural norm
within the team had on their ability to comply with pro-
cedures. Organisational factors were often attributed to
result in a difference between work-as-imagined in the
SOPs and the work-as-done by CP staff in practice.
Work demands
One of the main work demands that affected the ability
of CP staff to comply with procedures was work schedul-
ing, which was frequently mentioned by all staff types.
Particular pressure points included public holidays and
the beginning and end of the week. During these times,
participants found complying with procedures challen-
ging with some participants describing how working in
CP on a weekend could feel like a ‘different job
entirely’, mainly due to the closure of general practices
and other resources not being available out of hours.
Under these circumstances, pharmacists often resorted
to applying their professional judgement regarding
patient safety.
Easter weekend, the weekend before Christmas…the end
of the week, Friday as well is usually very busy…sticking
to the rules becomes less of a priority. [The job doesn’t]
become less of a priority, it’s how you’re doing the jobs…
[it] depends on how much experience you have…you
can [figure] out what you need to carry on doing by the
rule book and what you don’t.
(P10, Pharmacist, Large Chain)
Another crucial element that added to work demands
was staffing levels. Participants in all roles expressed how
following procedures were especially difficult with insuf-
ficient staff for their pharmacy.
Staffing and [lack of] time are probably the biggest things
that put extra pressure on what you’re doing, and maybe
lead to [some things] not quite going as they should do.
(P19, Dispenser, Large Chain)
Workload
Many participants spoke of regularly attempting to com-
plete several tasks at once to manage workload, leading
to occasional shortcuts. All participants mentioned the
volume of tasks they had to complete under time pres-
sure. Pharmacists also highlighted the need to achieve
service targets set by head office or area management
regarding professional services such as medicines usage
reviews21 and the new medicine service.22
…The number of items goes up every year, the time [you
have] to spend just doing those goes up and up and
more and more services come out at the same time.
[The challenge is] having time with the patient to do
everything you can for them, so [following the] rules
comes into that and it’s really hard [to manage].
(P15, Pharmacist, Large Chain)
The general thing [is] time…either you have too much
work or…your colleagues isn’t there…there’s always steps
in the SOPs which you cannot do, but still get the same
result at the end…
(P3, Dispenser, Large Chain)
Behavioural norms
Participants often spoke of the ‘the way we do things
around here’, which did not always coincide with
work-as-imagined in SOPs. Sessional pharmacists and
support staff felt under pressure to conform to local
practice, even if this was not outlined in procedures.
This resulted in differences between branches of the
same company, despite an apparent purpose of SOPs
being to standardise performance.
…most of the time you just end up shutting up that side
of you that’s saying… don’t do that, and [instead] you say
if that’s what [the regular pharmacist does] then I’ll just
do the same…you might be not 100 per cent sure of
what’s going on…because of the demand around you
[from the support staff]…you just get on with it.”
(P11, Locum Pharmacist)
It would be nice to get a bit more back-up from pharma-
cists [regarding following the procedures]…the [proce-
dures are] not just there for one person, they’re there
for everyone and it’s safer if everybody follows the [pro-
cedures] properly.
(P22,
Accuracy
Checking
Dispenser,
Independent
Pharmacy)
Procedural compliance versus using professional
judgement
There were varied opinions between participants about
the relative merits of standardised practice and the use of
professional judgement by CP staff. In our sample, the
variation in opinion was particularly noticeable when
comparing the views of the pharmacists with those of staff
in other roles. The pharmacists appreciated that proce-
dures were useful to an extent, and also felt that they
reserved the right to bypass or deviate from procedures if
they judged it necessary for the patient’s outcome.
There are scenarios where the patient’s health is at risk if
you follow them. So sometimes, you do have to make
4
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 your own decision on what is best for the patient’s care,
because that’s the most important thing to do as a
pharmacist.
(P4, Pharmacist, Large Chain)
If somebody’s on their way to dying and the doctor’s for-
gotten the Midazolam CD schedule three, and forgot to
put the quantity, where the figures all look clear and [the
prescriber says] ‘okay, we’re on visits, we’ll be over in an
hour to sign it’. Do I leave it an hour? The patient could
be dead in an hour.
(P6, Pharmacist, Independent)
However, some participants expressed concern that
acting outside of procedures exposed them to the risk of
disciplinary action or litigation.
I think if something’s gone wrong then I’d definitely go
back and have a look at the SOPs…[unless] you’re the
actual pharmacy manager there and you work there full-
time, you [don’t] have the time to take [SOPs] home [to
read]…
(P16, Locum Pharmacist)
I suppose people follow the bits they agree with and they
don’t follow the bits they don’t agree with. And being in
a big company, there’s not really a lot you can do about
the bits you don’t agree with. It’s not like they’re going to
change it, so you just have to take it upon yourself, which
then leaves you open to being uninsured if you don’t
follow them, so it’s a lose-lose situation really, but every-
body kind of does it.
(P9, Pharmacist, Large Chain)
There were some procedures that were considered
important enough that participants would adhere to
them even in unfavourable circumstances.
[Bypassing the procedure that states I should not work in
the pharmacy alone means I can] actually do things
properly. There are certain things that I would never be
happy cutting corners with. I want to do a full CD
balance every week. I’m not going to not do that. So if
that means doing overtime for free then I’m going to do
it…it’s protecting myself, it’s protecting my registration…
(P14, Store-Based Pharmacist, Large Chain)
Interestingly, newly qualified pharmacists seemed to
rely on SOPs as a guide to practice; however, more
experienced pharmacists noted that this was not a realis-
tic approach to professional practice.
When you newly qualify…you’ve literally swallowed up
the [Medicines, Ethics and Practice professional guide
for pharmacists] and you’re so into the laws that when it
comes to practise it’s quite shocking how much deviation
takes place in a pharmacy …I was extremely cautious and
very worried and I’d go home and I’d start thinking
about everything that had happened [at work]. But, then
eventually…you get used to it.
(P11, Locum Pharmacist)
I think [making a professional decision] scares some
pharmacists, some of them want it in black and white…
pharmacy can’t be black and white. But that’s why we are
professionals because we make those decisions. Anyone
can follow a process, a dispenser can follow a process…
the pharmacist has to make a professional decision.
(P20, Pharmacist, Supermarket)
At times pharmacists would face situations in which
there was no set guidance and professional judgement
was crucial.
There’s a balance…I think the trouble with our profes-
sion is that we want a rule for everything and that’s not
how a profession works…We shouldn’t anticipate that
there’s always going to be an SOP for everything.
(P13, Pharmacist, Medium-Sized Chain)
All participants allude to ‘professionalism’—for phar-
macists though, professionalism is about exercising pro-
fessional judgement, whereas for some support staff, it
was about following rules. For support staff, professional
judgement plays less of a part in their role—so following
procedures was seen as a way to ensure patient safety.
SOP’s are in place to make sure that we’re doing the
right thing… If we don’t do as we’re told when we’re dis-
pensing, then it’s a danger to the patient.
(P22, Non-Registered Accuracy Checker, Independent
Pharmacy)
I don’t want to be struck off…sticking within the rules,
makes sure that the patient’s safe. Go out of the rules
and the patient’s not safe, and neither’s your job.
(P24, Registered ACT, Independent Pharmacy)
Being registered with the GPhC has a huge influence on
the way that I feel, because I want to keep it…I value my
job and I do value the rules…because I’m registered, I
think it heightens my realisation that there are rules
because I am responsible for myself and my own
actions…
(P24, Registered ACT, Independent Pharmacy)
Notably, dispensers’ attitude towards procedures was
seen to be more flexible at times. Some felt procedures
were a ‘tick box exercise’ and did not necessarily shape
their work to a large extent. Although dispensers are
required to sign to say they have read and will abide by
SOPs, in certain circumstances, the instructions of the
responsible pharmacist were followed as an alternative.
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
5
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 Dispensers especially did not always feel that they are
able
to
question
the
decision
of
the
responsible
pharmacist.
[I do] what the pharmacist is telling me to do, because
they’re responsible for what goes on, so it’s their call.
(P18, Relief Dispenser, Large Chain)
DISCUSSION
The participants saw procedures in CP to be useful for
setting expectations of practice and for improving knowl-
edge, yet tensions were evident between the standardisa-
tion of practice and the scope of behaviour available to
pharmacy staff in completing their tasks. The need to
deviate from work-as-imagined when patient safety was at
risk was an important part of being a professional for phar-
macists. Dekker9 describes tension between procedures
and safety as a considerable practical problem. A successful
outcome for patient safety is not guaranteed from follow-
ing procedures but created from a diversity of responses
that allow staff to cope with their changing environment.15
Our findings expose elements of organisational resili-
ence in CP
. Participants relied on their ability to adjust,
dealing with standardised systems on the one hand and
with non-standardised situations on the other. This flexi-
bility is fundamental to working in CP
, as employees
create
changes
to
procedures
and
accommodate
changes in order to meet patient needs.36 The forma-
tion of rule-related behavioural intentions in CP could
be compared with the findings of Phipps and Parker,37
which found anaesthetists sometimes worked ‘in the
moment’ when deciding how to act in a given situation.
This process is most likely to occur in settings such as
CP
, as it involves a multidisciplinary team, time pressure,
emergency
situations,
shifting
goals,
organisational
norms and goals that may go against the employee’s
interests.15 38 Phipps and Parker37 note that these are
areas where procedural violations should be of ‘most
concern’. Evidence of procedural violations in CP is
limited,7 39 and further exploration of this topic is sug-
gested to assess potential risk to patient safety.
We found some variations in the views of participants
about procedures. Some of these variations might be
attributed
to
differences
in
role
and
responsibility
between participants. For example, pharmacists tended
to express similar attitudes to doctors and surgeons in
previously published studies that identified the need for
a degree of flexibility was required when working in
healthcare as oppose to the notion of ‘cookbook’
care.12 13 40 The pharmacists here appeared to invoke
the notion of professional autonomy with regard to fol-
lowing procedures, echoing previous research exploring
implementation of emergency hormonal contraception
services in community pharmacies.41 The attitudes of
registered support staff were similar to nursing staff, as
they approached patient safety by systematically following
procedures.42 43 In contrast, dispensers had a more flex-
ible approach, as the ultimate responsibility for their
actions was that of the responsible pharmacist at the
time.44 However, when following instructions that do not
benefit the patient, we identified difficulties of support
staff not feeling able to voice concerns.13 45–47 Failing to
communicate has been identified as a key threat to
patient safety.48 Therefore, a culture in which all CP
employees feel that they are able to discuss adherence to
or deviation from procedures needs to be encouraged.
Adherence to procedures may help manage risks to
patient safety in some circumstances; an overreliance on
procedures could be counterproductive. Efforts to align
work-as-imagined with work-as-done would be beneficial
for creating SOPs that are more reflective of practice
while providing an effective risk control. One method
for achieving this is to maintain a dialogue between
‘frontline’ staff and those responsible for creating SOPs
regarding the correspondence between the SOPs and
actual practice.
Study limitations
Though our study is the first to explore the experience
of CP staff in applying procedures to their everyday
work, it has some limitations. A limitation of this study is
that all members of a CP team were not invited to par-
ticipate. Healthcare counter staff were excluded as previ-
ous research has already focused on how procedures are
followed with over the counter (OTC) medicines,7 and
our aim was to focus on the dispensary due to the large
number of existing procedures relating to the safe
supply of prescribed medicines.
A limitation could also be the inclusion of senior phar-
macists (whose roles included setting and disseminating
SOPs) as their opinions may differ due to decreased
time practicing. However, it was thought that their
experience and knowledge of procedures in CP would
help to enrich our understanding. Therefore, future
work exploring the suggested differences in opinion of
CP staff on a larger scale would be beneficial with
regard to how employees are trained.
It should be noted that the topic guide would have
affected on the data collected, as will the use of a priori
themes. In an effort to account for this, semistructured
interviews were undertaken to provide participants with
the opportunity to discuss issues they believed to be
salient to the use of procedures in CP that may not have
been captured within the topic guide. To account for
any potential bias caused by the interviewer’s personal
experience of working in CP
, the data were triangulated
between all authors during data analysis.
Study implications
Theoretical implications
This study supports the use of organisational resilience
as a valuable concept for understanding how procedures
are viewed and used in CP
. The notion of resilience
helps to explain how CP staff attempt to manage
6
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 multiple goals, while coping with high workloads and
low staffing in an effort to ensure patient safety. It is
thought that the concept of organisational resilience
would be useful to further explore specific instances of
CP staff bypassing or deviating from procedures.
Implications for practice
The findings from this study have important implications
for pharmacy practice and policy, as they highlight the
role that organisational factors have on how procedures
are implemented in CP
. Factors such as pressure from
the organisation regarding achieving targets or setting
procedures that are difficult to follow when working out
of hours can create an environment where following
procedures and achieving required outputs is sometimes
felt to be unachievable. Furthermore, the fear of being
unsupported by an employer if procedures were not
complied with, even if it was for patient benefit, created
an additional pressure to pharmacists.
On the other hand, this study has shown that the use
of professional judgement is crucial when deciding
whether to comply with a procedure. A suggested impli-
cation for practice is the notion of an appropriate and
justified flexibility, allowing the responsible pharmacist
to make professional judgements with the support of
their employer in order to ensure patient safety. The
aim of this article is not to undermine the important
role that procedures play in CP
, but our results suggest
that there are times in which bypassing or deviating
from procedures may be required for patient safety.
Suggestions for future research
Future work is needed to investigate instances in which
CP staff deviate or bypass procedures and how organisa-
tional factors noted in this study may have contributed
to the decision to do so. In addition, based on this study,
further work exploring the attitudes of CP staff and
their intention to follow procedures on a larger scale
may have important implications for patient safety.
CONCLUSION
This study examines how procedures are viewed by staff
in community pharmacies and how this can affect pro-
fessional autonomy. The findings highlight the tension
between standardising practice and the need, at times,
for greater flexibility for pharmacists to decide on the
most appropriate course of action to manage risks to
patient safety. Evidence of organisational resilience in
CP practice was apparent and the findings should help
to inform policymakers and practitioners with regard to
the factors most likely to influence the implementation
of procedures in CP
. We suggest more work is needed in
practice to ‘realign’ work-as-imagined and work-as-done;
one suggestion is to improve communication between
staff on the ‘frontline’ and management to lessen the
gap between the two.19
Twitter Follow Christian Thomas at @meds_safety
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to all the study participants and
their organisations for taking part in this study. The authors also thank the
members of the public who offered their comments on the manuscript.
Contributors CELT, DLP and DMA conceived and designed the study. CELT
conducted the interviews. CELT, DLP and DMA analysed the data. CELT, DLP
and DMA wrote the paper.
Funding This publication/paper is independent research by the NIHR Greater
Manchester Primary Care Patient Safety Translational Research Centre. The
views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Disclaimer The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Competing interests CELT, DLP and DMA receive grants from the National
Institute of Health Research (NIHR).
Ethics approval Ethical approval was granted by the University of Manchester
ethics committee (Ref 14352).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement No additional data are available.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for
commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
Harrison S, Smith C. Trust and moral motivation: redundant
resources in health and social care? Policy Polit 2004;32:371–86.
2.
Berwick DM. Controlling variation in health care: a consultation from
Walter Shewhart. Med Care 1991;29:1212–25.
3.
Smith K. Standardization as a key to quality. Healthc Pap 2009;9:56.
4.
Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbarth S, et al. Effectiveness of a
hospital-wide programme to improve compliance with hand hygiene.
Lancet 2000;356:1307–12.
5.
Smith AF, Goodwin D, Mort M, et al. Adverse events in anaesthetic
practice: qualitative study of definition, discussion and reporting.
Br J Anaesth 2006;96:715–21.
6.
Walker AE, Grimshaw JM, Armstrong EM. Salient beliefs and
intentions to prescribe antibiotics for patients with a sore throat.
Br J Health Psychol 2001;6:347–60.
7.
Watson MC, Bond CM, Johnston M, et al. Using human error theory
to explore the supply of non-prescription medicines from community
pharmacies. BMJ Qual Saf 2006;15:244–50.
8.
Reason J, Parker D, Lawton R. Organizational controls and safety:
the varieties of rule-related behaviour. J Occup Organ Psychol
1998;71:289–304.
9.
Dekker S. Failure to adapt or adaptations that fail: contrasting
models on procedures and safety. Appl Ergon 2003;34:233–8.
10.
Dierks MM, Christian CK, Roth EM, et al. Healthcare safety: the
impact of disabling safety protocols. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern
Syst Hum 2004;34:693–8.
11.
Phipps DL, Parker D, Pals EJM, et al. Identifying violation-provoking
conditions in a healthcare setting. Ergonomics 2008;51:1625–42.
12.
McDonald R, Waring J, Harrison S, et al. Rules and guidelines in
clinical practice: a qualitative study in operating theatres of doctors’
and nurses’ views. Qual Saf Health Care 2005;14:290–4.
13.
Shah N, Castro-Sánchez E, Charani E, et al. Towards changing
healthcare workers’ behaviour: a qualitative study exploring
non-compliance through appraisals of infection prevention and
control practices. J Hosp Infect 2015;90:126–34.
14.
Carter EJ, Wyer P, Giglio J, et al. Environmental factors and their
association with emergency department hand hygiene compliance:
an observational study. BMJ Qual Saf 2015:1–7.
15.
Dekker S, Bergström J, Amer-Wåhlin I, et al. Complicated, complex,
and compliant: best practice in obstetrics. Cogn Technol Work
2013;15:189–95.
16.
Cook RI, Render M, Woods DD. Gaps: learning how practitioners
create safety. BMJ 2000;320:791–4.
17.
Jeffcott SA, Ibrahim JE, Cameron PA. Resilience in healthcare and
clinical handover. Qual Saf Health Care 2009;18:256–60.
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
7
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 18.
Hollnagel E, Woods DD, Leveson N. Resilience engineering:
concepts and precepts. Ashgate Publishing Ltd, 2007.
19.
Hollnagel E. Why is work-as-imagined different from
work-as-done. In: Wears RL, Hollnagel E, Braithwaite J, eds.
Resilience in everyday clinical work Farnham. UK: Ashgate,
2015:249–64.
20.
Bradley F, Schafheutle EI, Willis SC, et al. Changes to supervision in
community pharmacy: pharmacist and pharmacy support staff views.
Health Soc Care Community 2013;21:644–54.
21.
Blenkinsopp A, Bond C, Raynor DK. Medication reviews. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 2012;74:573–80.
22.
Lucas B, Blenkinsopp A. Community pharmacists’ experience and
perceptions of the New Medicines Service (NMS). Int J Pharm Pract
2015;23:399–406.
23.
Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee NE. Clinical
governance requirements for community pharmacy: NHS Employers,
2012:1–33.
24.
Royal Pharmaceutical Society. Developing and implementing
standard operating procedures for dispensing, 2007:1–13.
25.
Macešková B. Knowledge of patients about the OTC preparation as
the result of pharmacist–patient consultations. Ceska Slov Farm
2002;51:292–6.
26.
Emmerton L. Behavioural aspects surrounding medicine
purchases from pharmacies in Australia. J Pharm Pract
2008;6:158–64.
27.
Phipps DL, Noyce PR, Parker D, et al. Medication safety in
community pharmacy: a qualitative study of the sociotechnical
context. BMC Health Serv Res 2009;9:1.
28.
Phipps DL, Tam WV, Ashcroft DM. Intergrating data from the UK
national reporting and learning system with work domain analysis to
understand patient safety incidents in community pharmacy.
J Patient Saf 2014.
29.
Morecroft CW, Mackridge AJ, Stokes EC, et al. Emergency supply of
prescription-only medicines to patients by community pharmacists: a
mixed methods evaluation incorporating patient, pharmacist and GP
perspectives. BMJ Open 2015;5:e006934.
30.
Elvey R, Hassell K, Lewis P, et al. Patient-centred professionalism in
pharmacy: values and behaviours. J Health Organ Manag
2015;29:413–30.
31.
Jacobs S, Hassell K, Seston E, et al. Identifying and managing
performance concerns in community pharmacists in the UK.
J Health Serv Res Policy 2013;18:144–50.
32.
Jee S, Willis S, Pritchard MA, et al. The quality of pharmacy
technician education and training. A report to the
General Pharmaceutical Council. London & Manchester: The
General Pharmaceutical Council & University of Manchester,
2014.
33.
King N. Template analysis. In: Symon GC, ed. Qualitative methods
and analysis in organizational research: a practical guide. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998:118–34.
34.
Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N. Analysing qualitative data. BMJ
2000;320:114–16.
35.
King N. Doing template analysis. In: Symon GC, ed. Qualitative
organizational research: core methods and current challenges.
London: Sage, 2012:426–50.
36.
Nemeth CP, Cook RI, Woods DD. The messy details: insights from
the study of technical work in healthcare. IEEE Trans Syst Man
Cybern A 2004;34:689–92.
37.
Phipps DL, Parker D. A naturalistic decision-making perspective on
anaesthetists’ rule-related behaviour. Cogn Technol Work
2014;16:519–29.
38.
Orasanu J, Connolly T. The reinvention of decision making. Ablex
Publishing, 1993.
39.
Watson MC, Hart J, Johnston M, et al. Exploring the supply of
non-prescription medicines from community pharmacies in Scotland.
Pharm World Sci 2008;30:526–35.
40.
van Beuzekom M, Boer F, Akerboom S, et al. Perception of patient
safety differs by clinical area and discipline. Br J Anaesth
2013;110:107–14.
41.
Ceva E, Moratti S. Whose self-determination? Barriers to access to
emergency hormonal contraception in Italy. Kennedy Inst Ethics J
2013;23:139–67.
42.
Pittet D, Mourouga P, Perneger TV. Compliance with handwashing
in a teaching hospital. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:126–30.
43.
Duggan JM, Hensley S, Khuder S, et al. Inverse correlation between
level of professional education and rate of handwashing compliance in
a teaching hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2008;29:534–8.
44.
Irwin A, Weidmann AE. A mixed methods investigation into the use
of non-technical skills by community and hospital pharmacists.
Res Social Adm Pharm 2015;11:675–85.
45.
Erasmus V, Brouwer W, Van Beeck EF, et al. A qualitative
exploration of reasons for poor hand hygiene among hospital
workers: lack of positive role models and of convincing evidence that
hand hygiene prevents cross-infection. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2009;30:415–19.
46.
Robertson N, Baker R, Hearnshaw H. Changing the clinical
behaviour of doctors: a psychological framework. Qual Saf Health
Care 1996;5:51–4.
47.
Gurses AP, Seidl KL, Vaidya V, et al. Systems ambiguity and
guideline compliance: a qualitative study of how intensive care units
follow evidence-based guidelines to reduce healthcare-associated
infections. Qual Saf Health Care 2008;17:351–9.
48.
Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To err is human: building a
safer health system. National Academies Press, 2000.
8
Thomas CEL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010851. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010851 on 6 June 2016. Downloaded from 
