 Review
The Host Microbiome Regulates and Maintains
Human Health: A Primer and Perspective for
Non-Microbiologists
Sunil Thomas1, Jacques Izard2, Emily Walsh3, Kristen Batich4,5,6,
Pakawat Chongsathidkiet4,5,6, Gerard Clarke7, David A. Sela8,9,10,
Alexander J. Muller1, James M. Mullin1, Korin Albert11,12, John P. Gilligan1,
Katherine DiGuilio1, Rima Dilbarova1, Walker Alexander1, and George C. Prendergast1
Abstract
Humans consider themselves discrete autonomous organ-
isms, but recent research is rapidly strengthening the apprecia-
tion that associated microorganisms make essential contribu-
tions to human health and well being. Each person is inhabited
and also surrounded by his/her own signature microbial cloud.
A low diversity of microorganisms is associated with a plethora
of diseases, including allergy, diabetes, obesity, arthritis,
inflammatory bowel diseases, and even neuropsychiatric dis-
orders. Thus, an interaction of microorganisms with the host
immune system is required for a healthy body. Exposure to
microorganisms from the moment we are born and appropriate
microbiome assembly during childhood are essential for estab-
lishing an active immune system necessary to prevent disease
later in life. Exposure to microorganisms educates the immune
system, induces adaptive immunity, and initiates memory B
and T cells that are essential to combat various pathogens. The
correct microbial-based education of immune cells may be
critical in preventing the development of autoimmune diseases
and cancer. This review provides a broad overview of the
importance of the host microbiome and accumulating knowl-
edge of how it regulates and maintains a healthy human
system. Cancer Res; 77(8); 1783–812. �2017 AACR.
Role of the Microbiome in Maintaining
Host Health
At all stages of life, humans are associated with microorganisms
and their products. Humans coevolved with microbes in the
environment, and each body habitat has a unique set of micro-
organisms in its microbiota (1). The microbiome (term coined by
Joshua Lederberg) consists of the ecological community of com-
mensal, symbiotic, and pathogenic microorganisms that share
our body (2). The host organism together with its microbiome
constitutes the "holobiont" (Greek, holos, whole/entire), and the
totality of the genome is the "hologenome" (3, 4). Changes in the
holobiont may impact the complex signaling network, thereby
influencing the hologenome leading to health or disease.
The human body is estimated to be composed of 3 � 1013
eukaryotic cells and 3.9 � 1013 colonizing microorganisms, such
that host cells and microbiota are of nearly the same number in an
individual (5). The largest concentrations of microbes occupy the
gut, skin, and oral cavity. The microbiota of our system is well
tolerated by our immune system due to the coevolution of these
microorganisms over time. The overwhelming majority of gut
microbiota are Eubacteria. The collective genome, or metagenome,
of the enteric microbiota contains over 100 times the number of
genes in the human genome, and there are approximately 10-fold
more genes in each of our microbiomes than in each of us,
encoding the greatest source of potential antigens with which
the immune system must cope (6). The microbiome in humans
significantly enriches the metabolism of glycans, amino acids, and
xenobiotics. It is also responsible for the synthesis of vitamins,
isoprenoids, and other nutrients, making humans "superorgan-
isms" whose metabolism represents an amalgamation of micro-
bial and human attributes (7).
Each individual emits a distinct and personalized cloud of
microorganisms into his or her surroundings (8). The micro-
biome in humans is also not constant during lifespan, but rather
changes with age. Culture and location also have a profound
impact on the microbiome (9). Health status is yet another factor
1Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, Wynnewood, Pennsylvania. 2Depart-
ment of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska. 3Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity, Harvard
School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. 4Department of Neurosur-
gery, Duke Brain Tumor Immunotherapy Program, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina. 5Department of Surgery, Duke Brain Tumor
Immunotherapy Program, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina. 6Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina. 7Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioural Science, APC
Microbiome Institute University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. 8Department of
Food Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts. 9Depart-
ment of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.
10Center for Microbiome Research, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts. 11Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts. 12Department of Food
Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.
Note: The Editor-in-Chief of Cancer Research, George C. Prendergast, is an
author of this article. In keeping with the AACR's Editorial Policy, the article was
peer reviewed, and a member of the AACR's Publications Committee rendered
the decision concerning acceptability.
Corresponding Author: Sunil Thomas, Lankenau Institute for Medical Research,
100 E. Lancaster Ave., Wynnewood, PA 19096. Phone: 484-476-3507; Fax: 484-
476-2205; E-mail: thomass-02@mlhs.org; suntom2@gmail.com
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929
�2017 American Association for Cancer Research.
Cancer
Research
www.aacrjournals.org
1783
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 influencing the microbiome compositional status. In one study,
the growth dynamics of gut microbiota in health and disease have
been inferred from a single metagenomic sample (10). These
authors copy the number and ratio at origin and terminus to
detect the actively growing species in a microbiome. In this way,
they showed differences between virulent and avirulent strains,
population diurnal oscillations, and bacterial species predomi-
nant during disease and diet changes.
Diet is a particularly important factor in determining the
microbiota composition of the gut (11). Thus, vegans, vegetar-
ians, and omnivores have distinct microbiomes. Total counts of
Bacteroides spp., Bifidobacterium spp., Escherichia coli (E. coli), and
Enterobacteriaceae spp. were significantly lower in vegan samples
than in controls. In contrast, total counts of Klebsiella spp.,
Enterobacter spp., other Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus spp., Lac-
tobacillus spp., Citrobacter spp., and Clostridium spp. were similar
in people with different diets. Subjects on a vegetarian diet
ranked between vegans and omnivores. The total microbial
count did not differ between the dietary groups (12). Notably,
the microbiome of a person can be altered rapidly by changes in
dietary patterns. It has been demonstrated by David and col-
leagues (13) that short-term consumption of diets composed
entirely of animal or plant products can alter the microbial
community structure. An animal-based diet increased the
abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms, including Alistipes,
Bilophila, and Bacteroides and decreased the levels of Firmicutes
that metabolize dietary plant polysaccharides (Roseburia spp,
Eubacterium rectale, and Ruminococcus bromii). Thus, the gut micro-
biome rapidly responds to diet.
Microbiome Taxonomy and Its Future
The taxonomy of microbiomes reflects their complexity and the
challenges encountered in their understanding. Microbiomes
include species across all major kingdoms, including viruses as
well as Archaea, bacteria, and microbial eukaryotes. Our current
depth of knowledge is associated with different methods of
investigation, targeted surveys, and scope of studies conducted.
To date, the most comprehensively investigated phylogenic group
in health and disease has been bacteria.
Prokaryotes
List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature
(http://www.bacterio.net) includes two prokaryotic domains (or
empires), subdivided into 30 phyla in the domain Bacteria and
5 phyla in the domain Archaea. Together, these 35 phyla encom-
pass about 2,400 genera and 12,400 species (14). This list is based
on strict requirements, including the availability of reference
strains, and does not include all available reference strains depos-
ited in culture collections, including the ones for which genome
sequences are already available (15–17). The addition of whole-
genome phylogenetic analysis allows a refined positioning in
the phylogenetic hierarchy as new tools are being developed
(18–21). This approach brings some conflicts with the current
classification, as has happened when the 16S rRNA gene phylo-
genetic classification competed with the phenotypic classifica-
tion (22–24). In addition, the ability to target and obtain the
sequence of the genes used for phylogenetic classification (16S
rRNA, recA, rpoB, gyrB, etc.) using culture-independent methods
also adds to the known diversity. Specialized curated databases
that allow the propagation of this knowledge include SILVA,
Ribosomal Database Project, and the Human Oral Microbiome
Database (23, 25, 26). This culture-independent approach raised
to 46 the number of phyla (23). How much of this diversity is
in the human microbiome is unclear. However, it is already clear
that organisms known to be environmental are also associated
with health and that at least 30 prokaryotic phyla and 950 genera
are associated with the human microbiome (27, 28).
Microbial eukaryotes
The microbial eukaryotes are extremely diverse and do not fit
under a single keyword. Although accurate, the eukaryotic super-
groups defined by phylogenomics [Opisthokonta, Amoebozoa,
Excavata, Archaeplastida, and SAR (Stramenopiles þ Alveolates þ
Rhizaria)] are unfortunately uninformative compared with previ-
ous classification methods used in the literature. From the clinician
to the lay person, terms such as fungi, protists, parasites, protozoa,
and amoebae are much more familiar. In this area, current knowl-
edge is based mostly on their roles as causative agents of disease;
few studies have focused on healthy individuals or within a
defined illness in a restricted number of individuals (29–33). Until
recently, the focus on single disease agents also meant neglecting
the remainder of the eukaryotic microbiome (34, 35).
The human eukaryotic microbiome includes pathogens, com-
mensals, and beneficial organisms. Thefungi (Opisthokonta)har-
bor a wide diversity of organisms, with an overlap for the skin
with the local environment (35). The fungi include the Ascomy-
cota (Candida albicans), Basidiomycota (Cryptococcus neoformans),
Microsporida
(Encephalitozoon
intestinalis),
and
Zygomycota
(Rhizopus microsporus). As fungi are part of the environment and
human alimentation, it may be difficult to differentiate between
transient and commensal organisms without a longitudinal
study, unless a disease or an opportunistic infection occurs
(36, 37). The Acanthocephala, most closely related to the rotifers,
include
Macracanthorhynchus
hirudinaceus.
The
helminths
(Opisthokonta), which are classified as part of the animals,
include the cestodes (tapeworms, Taenia saginata), trematodes
(flukes, Schistosoma mansoni), and nematodes (roundworms,
Enterobius vermicularis). Although the majority of the helminths
cause illness in millions of people worldwide, a few helminth
species have been used in therapy (38, 39). The protozoa include
the Amoebozoa (Amoebozoa; amoeba: Entamoeba histolytica),
Metamonada (Excavata; flagellates: Giardia intestinalis), Paraba-
silia (Excavata; Dientamoeba fragilis), Ciliophora (SAR; ciliates:
Ballentidium coli), Apicomplexa (SAR; Cryptosporidium parvum),
and Stramenopile (SAR; Blastocystis hominis). These protozoa are
all medically important even though not all carriers are symp-
tomatic (30, 35). The Archaeplastida (including green and red
algae) can be present in the microbiome of the skin and digestive
tract. Additional sequences available through the sequencing of
targeted genes, including via metagenomics, have expanded this
knowledge and are maintained and curated in databases such as
SILVA (23). A current view of the tree of life, encompassing the
total diversity represented by sequenced genomes, was published
recently by Hug and colleagues (40).
Viruses
The gut microbiome includes bacteriophages that influence
the bacterial hosts. The bacteriophage in the human gut are of
three classes: a set of core bacteriophages shared among more
than half of the human population, a common set of bacter-
iophages found in 20% to 50% of individuals, and a set of
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1784
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 bacteriophages that are unique to a person. Healthy gut pha-
geome (aggregate of bacteriophage in the gut) is significantly
decreased in individuals with gastrointestinal diseases (41).
The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses in its
2014 release listed 104 families, 505 genera, and 3,186 species
of all known viruses (42). The human virome overlaps with
other animal viromes. These dsDNA, ssDNA, dsRNA, ssRNA�
ssRNAþ viruses, and dsDNA and ssRNA retroviruses can affect
any of the tissues within the body. Human protists (nonfungal
microbial eukaryotes) have their own viral challenges, which
are being uncovered within the human virome (43). Much
more is known about mycoviruses and their intracellular trans-
mission during cell division and sporogenesis, and it is recog-
nized that their life cycles generally lack an extracellular phase.
Most known mycoviruses have dsRNA genome, but an increas-
ing number of positive- or negative-strand ssRNA and ssDNA
viruses have been isolated and characterized (44). Most of the
archaeal viruses have been isolated from members of the
Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota with broader morphologic
characteristics than their bacterial counterpart (45). Little is
known of the impact of archaeal viruses on the human virome.
The dsDNA, ssDNA, dsRNA, and ssRNA bacteriophages have a
great impact on prokaryotic ecology through their ability to
modify population structure. A list of viral pathogens is main-
tained by the ViPR resource, whereas prophages are available at
PHAST (46, 47).
Future of taxonomy
An open challenge in taxonomy is to refine the classifications to
be more compatible with the emerging methods of molecular
biosurveillance and detection, requiring targets associated to an
outcome or being able to identify strains at multiple body-sites
across the domains of life (21, 48). This work is dependent on a
greater understanding of the true diversity in the population with
the direct sequencing of large sample sets and/or large cohorts,
such as the Human Microbiome Project, MetaHIT, BioMarks, and
future large-scale projects (49–51). New resources are now
attempting to bridge the different approaches and topics of
detection across domains, such as the Human Pan-Microbe
Community database (34). The ability to isolate and sequence
single cells offers the opportunity to deepen both our under-
standing of the genomic composition of taxonomic diversity, as
well to put this diversity in context of its environment, microbial
partners, biogeography, and host physiologic status both at the
local and systemic levels (52–54).
Beyond this time, taxonomy and the species level classification
focused on vertical transmission of conserved information to
descendant cells. The strain definition is associated with gene
composition and gene modification, including mutations and
antigenic variation following homologous DNA recombination,
CRISPR system (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats), gene transfer, mobile elements, epigenetics, etc. Moving
from targeted gene phylogeny to whole-genome comparison has
its own limitations that can be complemented by the inclusion of
other omics as once metabolic panels, protein, and DNA finger-
printing profiles were used. This polyphasic analysis allows
understanding genetic relatedness and phylogenic relationship
in the context of disease, reservoir, niche transmission within a
single individual, propagation within a population, and dissem-
ination among environments. An increasing number of gene
transfer events among domains is being documented as well as
across ecological niches (55–57). The genetic modification can
be due to increases in genetic content, but genetic loss also has
critical consequences in competitiveness or niche settlement
(58, 59). As no clear general phylogenetic definition of strain has
emerged in this era of genomics, efforts are to differentiate the
different isolates with markers not yet found in other genomes
and/or SNP (20, 21, 60, 61).
The Infant Microbiome and
Transgeneration Effects
Until recently, the placenta was considered a "sterile" intra-
uterine environment. Aagaard and colleagues (62) reported that
the placental microbiome is consistently different from other
parts of the body, including the skin and urogenital tract. Inter-
estingly, the placental microbiome is most similar to that of the
oral cavity. Thus, these authors suggested that microbes travel to
the placenta from the mouth via blood. The results reinforce data
that have suggested a link between periodontal disease in the
mother and the risk of preterm birth.
Infant-associated microbial communities initially possess
high concentrations of facultative anaerobes, such as E. coli
and Streptococcus spp., but these populations are replaced by
strict anaerobes coinciding with a reduction in oxygen tension
(63–65). In addition to environmental routes of inoculation,
the specific mode by which the infant is delivered is now known
to influence the early gut microbiome structure and trajectory.
Although there is emerging evidence that the fetus encounters
placental and amniotic bacteria in utero, it is clear that parturition
contributes to the infant's first major inoculation of colonizing
microbes (63, 66, 67). Microbial communities colonize external
surfaces of the infant immediately following birth. This includes
various microbial populations that are established and main-
tained along the gastrointestinal tract. The percentage of babies
delivered through cesarean section (C-section) has risen in many
countries. Although a number of C-section deliveries are per-
formed for obstetrical indications, a large proportion is not
medically indicated and may be due to maternal request and
may incur several risks for the child (68). Obstetricians in many
medical settings are paid more for cesarean delivery, and it is well
known that private hospitals and practitioners encourage cesarean
delivery (69). However, recent studies demonstrated that babies
born vaginally are healthier compared with babies born by
cesarean delivery. As such, infants delivered vaginally tend to
harbor microbiotas that are typically encountered in the female
reproductive tract, such as Lactobacillus. In contrast, cesarean
delivery is typically associated with Staphylococcus spp. and other
bacteria that are associated with the mother's skin and hospital
environment (65, 70, 71). Children delivered by C-section have
significantly increased risk of asthma, systemic connective tissue
disorders,
juvenile
arthritis,
inflammatory
bowel
disease,
immune deficiencies, leukemia (72), and Crohn disease (73).
Although there are some indications that infants born via C-sec-
tion may be more susceptible to colonization by Clostridium
difficile (C. difficile) or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(S. aureus), and may be at an increased risk for pathologies later in
life (71, 72), additional mechanistic studies are required to
conclude causal relationships in this regard.
The infant microbiome exhibits several shared attributes
regardless of birth method. In general, the infant microbiome is
often dominated by the genera Bifidobacterium, Bacteroidetes, and
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1785
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 members of clostridial taxa (74). In the seminal 2012 study
conducted by Yatsunenko and colleagues (9), gut microbiomes
were characterized from individuals located in three distinct
geographic locations (i.e., United States, rural Malawi, and rural
Venezuela). Regardless of the host's location, microbial popula-
tions converge toward an adult community by 3 years of age (9).
Furthermore, microbial community diversity increased as the host
aged across all populations (9). Infant microbiomes exhibit hall-
marks of functional redundancy, in that interindividual taxonom-
ic variation is common despite sharing a stable and uniform
metabolic potential (75). This functional redundancy during
neonatal development may contribute to metabolic, digestive,
and immune system homeostasis (74, 76). During infancy, the
impact of alterations in community assembly on function has
been linked to outcomes such as malnourishment, C. difficile–
associated diarrhea, and necrotizing enterocolitis (74, 76, 77).
Early-life microbiome disruption may potentially increase risk
for developing celiac disease, asthma, type I diabetes, and obesity
(70, 72, 78–81). These conditions could have long-term medical
implications that interact reciprocally with the gut microbiome.
Perturbations or durable disruptions of the infant microbiome
may proceed via several paths, with hospitalization and antibiotic
use considered to be primary causes. Preterm and term infants
who are hospitalized early in life are at a greater risk for nosoco-
mial C. difficile infection (74, 82). Thus, the hospital environment
is a reservoir for infectious agents that may be deleterious for
at-risk populations, such as preterm infants with underdevelop-
ed immunologic function. As antibiotics select for resistant and
resilient strains, indiscriminant usage of antimicrobials may
drive gut dysbiosis in certain instances. Several studies have
characterized the influence of antibiotic usage on restricting gut
microbiota diversity, potentially increasing susceptibility to
aggressive bacterial infections like C. difficile and vancomycin-
resistant Enterococcus bacteremia (82–84).
As it does in adults, diet exerts a strong influence on the
structural composition of infant-hosted microbiomes. Culture-
dependent and independent studies indicate that breastfed
infants often possess a significantly different and less diverse
gut microbiome relative to formula-fed infants (9, 64, 85–87).
Accordingly, human milk incorporates several bioactive com-
pounds important for infant nutrition, including lipids, pro-
teins, and lactose. In addition, several milk molecules enhance
immunologic and neurologic development (88–90). Escaping
digestion by host glycosyl hydrolases, soluble milk glycans are
transferred to the distal colon, where they are exposed to the gut
microbiota of the infant. Thus, these human milk oligosacchar-
ides (HMO) are available to guide the establishment and
function of the infant microbiome. HMOs are heterogeneous
carbohydrate polymers that are the third most abundant milk
component at several grams per liter (91). HMO structures
incorporate the monosaccharides
D-glucose,
D-galactose, N-
acetylglucosamine, L-fucose, and N-acetylneuraminic acid, with
more than 200 unique HMO isomers composed of these
components identified to date (91, 92).
Breastfeeding infants often display a microbiome enriched
for commensal Bifidobacteria that can utilize HMOs. Bifidobac-
teria are Gram-positive anaerobes of the phylum Actinobacteria,
which typically colonize infants and adults to a lesser degree
(93–95). Accordingly, Bifidobacterium longum (B. longum) subsp.
infantis is a major commensal of breastfed infants, with this
lineage possessing a large genomic cluster that enables HMO
utilization (95). That unique gene assemblage permits the cata-
bolism of specific small mass HMOs that other Bifidobacteria
cannot process. For example, in comparison with other Bifido-
bacteria, B. longum subsp. infantis flourishes in the presence of
milk that contains a1,2-fucosylated HMOs (96). An indivi-
dual's complement of HMO structures is somewhat dependent
on the mother's genotype and may vary by gestational age and
stage of lactation. The relative concentrations of a1,2-linked
fucosyl moieties depend on the fucosyltransferase 2 allele (96).
Women with a functional copy of this gene, termed secretors,
may confer certain health benefits to their infant such as a
decreased risk for diarrheal diseases (96–98). HMOs can
decrease the presence of gastrointestinal pathogens using two
primary mechanisms. HMOs themselves mimic pathogen-bind-
ing sites of receptors that decorate the surface of host cells
(99–101). Studies have documented this effect using Vibrio
cholerae, Streptococcus pnemoniae, and E. coli (102–104). In addi-
tion, high levels of Bifidobacteria are correlated with lower
incidence of potentially dangerous neonatal infections, poten-
tially due to competitive exclusion (105, 106). Gut microbiota
development during infancy can have long-lasting effects on the
individual's future health. Colonization of fucosyllactose-uti-
lizing Bifidobacteria is due to an ABC transporter that acts as a
key genetic factor for fucosyllactose utilization (107).
Human milk is generally accepted as the best nutrition for
newborns and has been shown to support the optimal growth and
development of infants (108). Human milk also provides bio-
active components that are important to optimize gut microbial
colonization, immune maturation, metabolic development, and
even cognitive development. Breast milk has a low buffering
capacity, which would make the gut more susceptible to a low-
ering of pH due to acid production from bacterial fermentation in
the colon. The fecal pH of the breastfed infant is between 5 and 6
dominated by Bifidobacteria, whereas formula-fed infants have a
fecal pH in the range of8 to 9. Theacetic acid in the gutof breastfed
infants is frequently present as an acetate buffer. This effect was
not observed in formula-fed infants. The lower pH in the gut is an
important factor in restricting the growth of Enterobacteria,
Clostridia, and the Bacteroides and favors the proliferation of
the acid-tolerant Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli (109). Human milk
also contains many antimicrobial factors, such as partially
digested or fermented peptides, milk-borne fatty acids, human
lactoferrin, lysozyme, and secretory IgA. These factors may
decrease the prevalence of pathogens in the gut's ecosystem in
infants. The broad range of nondigestible oligosaccharides spe-
cifically found in human milk but not in other mammals' milk
(108) is a major factor in the prevention of pathogen growth in the
gastrointestinal tract. Stunted infants fed poorly have low
amounts of sialylated HMOs in the gut. These oligosaccharides
are not used by the body, but rather used by the gut microbes.
Charbonneau and colleagues (110) colonized germ-free mice
with a consortium of bacterial strains cultured from the fecal
microbiota of a 6-month-old stunted infant and fed recipient
animals with normal diet with or without purified sialylated
bovine milk oligosaccharides (S-BMO). S-BMO produced a
microbiota-dependent body weight gain, indicating growth pro-
motion in the presence of gut microbiota. However, control
animals that were germ free did not increase body weight, dem-
onstrating some bacteria in the gut are involved in weight gain.
Infant formula is often based on bovine milk unless it is plant
derived. Fluid dairy milk contains oligosaccharides with a similar
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1786
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 structure to HMOs, which may suggest similar functionality
despite being incorporated at relatively low concentrations
(108, 111–113). At the moment, there are efforts to supplement
infant formula with oligosaccharides, although HMO structures
are difficult to synthesize and may not be commercially viable
(114). However, oligosaccharides from other sources may
increase bifidobacterial concentration as a preferred endpoint,
including galacto-oligosaccharides and fructo-oligosaccharides.
Use of oral probiotics by the mother during pregnancy is
thought to help the developing baby. Microbes in the placenta
or amniotic fluid affect fetal innate immune gene expression
during late pregnancy. Maternal probiotic supplementation sig-
nificantly modulated the expression of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-
related genes both in the placenta and in the fetal gut. Thus,
fetal and placental immune physiology may be modulated by
maternal dietary interventions, including using specific probiotics
(115, 116). It has also been shown that maternal probiotic
supplementation during pregnancy and breastfeeding reduces
the risk of eczema in the infant (116). Probiotic supplements
continue to impact infants in their early years. It has been shown
that infant formula supplemented with the probiotics Lactobacil-
lus rhamnosus (L. rhamnosus) GG and Bifidobacterium lactis Bb-12
offers a safe means of reducing the risk of early acute otitis media
and antibiotic use and the risk of recurrent respiratory infections
during the first year of life (117). Probiotics enhance gut-specific
IgA responses, which are frequently defective in children with
food allergy (118). Kainonen and colleagues (119) have demon-
strated that exclusive breastfeeding promotes an anti-inflamma-
tory cytokine milieu, which is maintained throughout infancy.
Such an immunologic environment limits hyperresponsiveness
and promotes tolerization, thereby prohibiting the onset of
allergic disease.
Infantile colic (excessive crying) is a common problem in
about 20% of healthy thriving infants in the first 3 months of
life (120). The risk factors associated with the development of
infantile colic include maternal smoking, increased maternal
age, and firstborn status. Infantile colic could also be related to
cow's milk protein allergy and atopy (121). Several studies have
demonstrated that administration of probiotics containing
Lactobacillus
reuteri
(L.
reuteri)
DSM
17938
significantly
improved colic symptoms by reducing crying and fussing times
in breastfed infants with colic (122, 123). Treatment of colic
with L. reuteri did not affect the global composition of the
microbiota. The decrease in colicky symptoms was linked to
changes in the microbiota, with a relative increased abundance
of the phyla Bacteroidetes and genus Bacteroides after treatment
with L. reuteri (124).
Microbiome and Aging
As humans age, the composition of the microbiome also
changes (9). Aging is accompanied by the onset of a myriad of
clinical changes, including a basal proinflammatory state
("inflamm-aging") that directly interfaces with the microbiota
of older adults and enhances their susceptibility to diseases
that accompany aging. Studies in older adults demonstrate
that the gut microbiota correlates with diet, basal level of
inflammation, and location of residence (e.g., community
dwelling,
long-term
care
settings;
refs.
125–127).
Links
between the microbiota and a variety of clinical problems
plaguing older adults have been made, including physical
frailty, C. difficile, colitis, vulvovaginal atrophy, colorectal
carcinoma, and atherosclerotic disease (128).
The most drastic change associated with the aging gut is a
change in the relative proportion of organisms, for example,
Firmicutes dominate in the young and Bacteroidetes in the elderly.
Reduction in the diversity of bacteria comprising subpopulations
is seen in individuals with high frailty, although living in a
community undermines this alteration (125, 129).
Aging-associated oxidative stress induces aggressive potential
and virulence factors of anaerobic bacteria, thereby causing mor-
phologic alterations of bacterial cells that could impact the host.
The microbiota may also influence host gene expression by
regulating miRNAs (130). Analysis of the network functions
revealed that differentially regulated miRNAs between infants
and adults and miRNAs that decreased during aging shared two
network functions: inflammatory disease and inflammatory
response. miRNAs promote aging by modulating their targets to
drive cell senescence and aging in different tissues or organs. There
is significant variation in the expression of miRNA during aging.
Genome-wide assessment of miRNA expression revealed that the
majority of miRNAs decreased with age (131, 132). Interestingly,
host-derived miRNAs may also influence the composition of the
gut microbiome (133).
It has been documented that calorie restriction can increase
the life span of model organisms (134). Notably, Zhang and
colleagues (135) demonstrated that calorie restriction enriches
bacterial phylotypes positively correlated with lifespan. Bacteria
of the genus Lactobacillus have been shown to increase in
animals on low-fat diet, and this environment reduces phylo-
types that are negatively correlated with lifespan. Caloric restric-
tion–induced changes in the gut microbiota occur concomi-
tantly with a significant reduction in serum levels of lipopoly-
saccharide (LPS)-binding protein, suggesting that animals
undergoing calorie restriction establish a structurally balanced
architecture of gut microbiota that exerts a health benefit
through the reduction of antigen load from the gut. Strikingly,
dietary changes can detectibly influence host environment in as
little as 24 hours, with longer term changes correlating with
novel enterotype clustering in the host (136).
Multiple studies in centenarians indicate extreme aging is
characterized by microbial changes deemed unique from other
age groups, with emphasis placed on organismal composition
and increased inflammatory effects (137, 138). Fecal sampling
by Rampelli and colleagues (138) revealed a distinctive func-
tional profile with a decrease in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)
production and saccharolytic potential but an increase in
proteolytic potential. A total of 116 microbial genes were
found to be correlated with aging, including those essential
to the metabolism of tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine,
valine, and lysine. Implications of such variability include
changes in well being, aging, and disease susceptibility. This
was accompanied by an increase in the occurrence of patho-
bionts, bacteria usually present in low numbers in adults.
Proinflammatory effects of the pathobionts are exaggerated by
a decrease in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (F. prausnitzii), a spe-
cies associated with anti-inflammatory influences (137).
The relationship between aging and the microbiome is not
strictly one-sided; it has been demonstrated that host aging can
actually be impacted by interspecies communication. Animal
fecundity, development time, and lifespan were all dependent
on the amount and type of bacteria they were fed. There are
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1787
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 multiple lines of evidence demonstrating the ability of micro-
bes to substantially change host physiology, as it pertains to
these parameters (139). Accordingly, manipulating the micro-
biome of older adults holds promise as an innovative strategy to
positively influence the development of comorbidities associated
with aging (128).
Rozsa and colleagues (140) recently proposed the "micro-
biome mutiny hypothesis," whereby some microorganisms of
the microbiome could switch to higher virulence (microbiome
mutiny) in old or seriously ill people, to optimize their trans-
mission under the conditions of increased background mortal-
ity. This proposed virulence shift might contribute to the death
of old or seriously ill people even in the absence of apparent
disease.
In the central nervous system (CNS), polyphenols present in
many edible plants exert anti-inflammatory effects (141) and
act on the brain in several ways. Like antioxidant vitamins,
dietary polyphenols contribute to the regulation of oxidative
stress and improve vascular health. Notably, intestinal micro-
biotas convert dietary polyphenols to phenolic acids, stimulat-
ing the proliferation of Bifidobacteria and decreasing the ratio of
Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes, relative to controls. Polyphenols also
stimulate SCFA production by bacteria (142). Wang and col-
leagues (143) recently reported that the microbiome can con-
vert grape-derived polyphenol to the phenolic acids, 3-hydro-
xybenzoic acid and 3-(30-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid, which
interfere with the assembly of b-amyloid peptides into neuro-
toxic b-amyloid aggregates that play key roles in the pathogen-
esis of Alzheimer disease. Thus, in the brain and other tissues,
many healthful effects of polyphenols may relate to their
conversion to various metabolic derivatives by the gut micro-
biome while aging.
Microorganisms and Immune Function
Through coevolution with their hosts, microbes exert a major
influence in shaping the development of the immune system,
putting it under selective pressure to develop the capability to
discern between invasive pathogens that it is imperative to control
and commensal resident microbes that are beneficial to tolerate
(144, 145). Many developmental aspects of the adaptive immune
system are influenced by the composition of bacterial coloniza-
tion of the gut. Thus, the mammalian immune system, which is
tasked with the duty of controlling microorganisms, is in turn
fundamentally shaped by microorganisms (146). For example, it
has been demonstrated that changes to the symbiotic microbiota
early in life, or the absence of it, can lead to exacerbated type II
immunity and allergies due to aberrant immune functionality.
The microbiota is a strong inducer of proinflammatory Th17 cells
and regulatory T cells (Treg) in the intestine. The microbiota-
induced Tregs express the nuclear hormone receptor RORgt and
differentiate along a pathway that also leads to Th17 cells. In the
absence of RORgtþ Tregs, Th2-driven defense against helminths is
more efficient, whereas Th2-associated pathology is exacerbated.
Thus, the microbiota regulate type II responses through the
induction of type III RORgtþ Tregs and Th17 cells, thereby
balancing immune responses at mucosal surfaces (147). Exercise
can also influence the immune system and how they modulate
microorganisms (148, 149). Intense exercise causes immunosup-
pression, whereas moderate-intensity exercise improves immune
function and potentially reduces risk and severity of respiratory
viral infection by increasing stress hormones, reduce excessive
local inflammation, and skew the immune response to a Th2
phenotype (148). Similarly, exercise can also influence bacterial
infections. Pape and colleagues (150) demonstrated a reduction
of bacterial infection in people with physical activity compared
with those that maintain a sedentary lifestyle.
Similar to adaptive immunity, the innate immunity is also
influenced by the microbiome. One example of this is neutrophil
aging. Aged neutrophils exhibit impaired migration and reduced
proinflammatory properties. Microbiota influence neutrophil
aging via TLR- and MyD88-mediated signaling pathways. Deple-
tion of the microbiota significantly reduces circulating numbers of
aged neutrophils and improves pathogenesis and inflammation-
related organ damage in models of sickle cell disease or endo-
toxin-induced septic shock. Thus, host microbiota may play a role
in regulating a disease-promoting neutrophil subset that pro-
motes tissue injury in various inflammatory diseases (151).
Although active immunity is essential to combat infection,
inadequate control over immune responsiveness due to the in-
ability to establish immune tolerance can also have dire con-
sequences, regardless of whether the response is directed against
a foreign pathogen or self. Meanwhile, one of the major benefits
of immune tolerance is the ability to maintain a commensal
microbiome consisting of a multitude of foreign microorgan-
isms. Thus, the mechanisms for establishing tolerance are a vital
aspect of the immunoregulatory framework. One crucial ele-
ment in instructing the immune system to be self-tolerant is the
education of thymus T cells during development. In the thymus,
self-reactive cells are either eliminated or differentiated into
tolerogenic Foxp3þ Tregs (152). Apart from the thymus, the
immune system is also educated in the gut, where it has been
shown that the interaction of T cells with commensal microbiota
results in the peripheral generation of Tregs rather than path-
ogenic effector cells. Failure of this tolerogenic process can
lead to the development of autoimmune diseases, including
colitis (152).
Microorganisms Encountered Early in Life
Prevent Autoimmunity and Allergy
The human microbiome is important for human health, behav-
ior, and disease, yet its function and dynamics during healthy and
disease states are not fully understood (153). It is also not fully
understood how the microbiome interacts with the host immu-
nity thereby preventing autoimmunity. The hygiene hypothesis
first put forward by Strachan (154) postulates that the lack of early
exposure to microorganisms (either beneficial or pathogenic)
would lead to poor development of the immune system. The
leading idea is that some microorganisms that coevolved with us
are able to protect against a large spectrum of immune-related
disorders (155). Although the hygiene hypothesis is not univer-
sally applicable, it offers some explanative power to interpret the
effects of microorganism exposure in early life on preventing
autoimmunity and allergy.
Children growing up on dairy farms are protected from allergy,
hay fever, and asthma (156, 157). Asthma is a chronic inflam-
matory disease triggered by acute inflammation of the bronchial
tube, leading to production of extra mucus. This can make
breathing difficult and trigger coughing, wheezing, and shortness
of breath. The number of asthma cases is increasing all over the
world, but the causes remain obscure. It has been hypothesized
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1788
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 that increased cleanliness, reduced family size, and subsequent
decreased microbial exposure could explain the increases in
global asthma prevalence (158). Evidence from bronchial brush-
ings implicates phyla present in healthy individuals with variation
present in disease conditions such as cystic fibrosis, chronic
obstructive airways disease, and asthma. The microbiome can
exacerbate the phenotypes seen in the condition, as well as explain
the variability in phenotypes observed (159). Many cytokines and
chemokines are involved in the pathophysiology of asthma. Th2
cytokines may play an important role in the pathophysiology
of asthma. The Th1 cells secrete IL2 and IFNg, whereas the
cytokines, IL4, IL5, IL9, and IL13 are derived from Th2 cells,
although they may also be derived from other cell types. The
distinction between Th1 and Th2 cells is not as distinct in humans
as in mice (160, 161). According to the hygiene hypothesis, the
lack of infection and exposure to environmental endotoxins may
alter the balance between Th1 and Th2 cells.
Although children on farms are much less likely to get
asthma, the underpinnings of protection are not clearly under-
stood. Early-life contact with livestock and their fodder and
consumption of unprocessed cow's milk have been identified as
the most effective protective exposures. Studies of the immu-
nobiology of farm living point to activation and modulation of
innate and adaptive immune responses by intense microbial
exposures (162). Schuijs and colleagues (157) demonstrated
that chronic exposure to low-dose endotoxin or farm dust
protects mice from developing house dust mite (HDM)-
induced asthma. Endotoxin reduced epithelial cell cytokines
that activate dendritic cells (DC), thus suppressing type II
immunity to HDM. Loss of the ubiquitin-modifying enzyme
A20 in lung epithelium abolished the protective effect. An SNP
in the gene encoding A20 has been associated with allergy and
asthma risk in children growing up on farms. Thus, the farming
environment protects from allergy by modifying the commu-
nication between barrier epithelial cells and DCs through A20
induction.
From delivery, the microbiome assembly might influence
asthma. Babies born via C-section, who experience an altered
trajectory of microbiome assembly, are more prone to asthma
than those born vaginally. Similarly, children treated with
antibiotics are also more prone to asthma attack (163). Lif
Holgerson and colleagues (164) analyzed the oral biofilm in
healthy 3-month-old infants born by C-section or delivered
vaginally. Among more than 300 bacterial taxa analyzed, Slackia
exigua was detected only in infants delivered by C-section.
Furthermore, significantly more bacterial taxa were detected in
the infants delivered vaginally (79 species/species clusters)
compared with infants delivered by C-section (54 species/spe-
cies clusters). Overall, the vaginally delivered infants had a
higher number of bacterial taxa. A higher prevalence of salivary
Streptococcus salivarius, Lactobacillus curvata, Lactobacillus salivar-
ius (L. salivarius), and Lactobacillus casei (L. casei) was detected in
infants delivered vaginally (165).
A longitudinal human study by Arrieta and colleagues (166)
reported that infants at risk of asthma have transient gut microbial
dysbiosis during the first 100 days of life. The authors collected
stool and urine samples from more than 300 babies at 3 months
and 1 year, as well as information on their health at 1, 3, and
5 years. Then, they analyzed levels of gut microbes in each stool
sample. Babies that had low or undetectable levels of four bac-
teria, Lachnospira, Veillonella, Faecalibacterium, and Rothia, at
3 months all went on to show early signs of asthma, wheezing
and skin allergies, at 1 year. The babies that did not develop
these symptoms invariably had high levels of the four microbes in
their 3-month stool samples. The authors also used the stool
samples from the asthma-prone 3 month olds to colonize the
guts of mice that had been raised in a bacteria-free environment.
The animals developed inflamed lungs indicative of asthma.
However, upon inoculating the four missing microbes to the
digestive tracts of these mice along with the feces, they no longer
had a heightened risk of developing asthma. The studies dem-
onstrated that certain bacterial species that are encountered early
in life could train the immune system to prevent asthma.
Microbial dysbiosis in early life can alter the trajectory of
immune development and provide the setting for allergic dis-
orders in later life (167). Dysbiosis may trigger autoimmune
diseases via inappropriate posttranslational modification of host
proteins (168). Endogenous and microbial enzymes have the
capacity of intestinal enzymatic neoantigen generation by post-
translational modification of host proteins. The hygiene hypoth-
esis stipulates that microbial exposure during early life induces
immunologic tolerance via immune stimulation and hence
reduces the risk of allergy development. Several common lifestyle
factors and household practices, such as dishwashing methods,
may increase microbial exposure. Hesselmar andcolleagues (169)
investigated whether lifestyle factors are associated with allergy
prevalence. The authors demonstrated that in families that used
hand dishwashing, allergic diseases in children are less common
than in children from families who use machine dishwashing. The
authors were of the opinion that a less efficient dishwashing
method may induce immune tolerance via increased microbial
exposure.
Autoimmunity is more prevalent in the population of some
northern European countries, such as Finland and Estonia, when
compared with Russia. It was found that Bacteroides species are less
abundant in Russians but dominate in Finnish and Estonian
infants. Their LPS exposures arose primarily from Bacteroides
rather than from E. coli, which is a potent innate immune
activator. The Bacteroides LPS was found to be structurally distinct
from E. coli LPS and inhibits innate immune signaling and
endotoxin tolerance. It was observed that unlike LPS from E. coli,
Bacteroides dorei LPS does not decrease incidence of autoimmune
diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice. Early colonization by immu-
nologically silencing microbiota may thus preclude aspects of
immune education (170).
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease in which
the immune system attacks the joints, leading to swollen and
painful joints. The mucosal surfaces are sites of rheumatoid
arthritis initiation. The common occurrence of periodontal dys-
biosis in rheumatoid arthritis suggests that oral pathogens may
trigger the production of disease-specific autoantibodies and
arthritis in susceptible individuals. Periodontitis is characterized
by the presence of citrullinated autoantigens that are primary
immune targets in rheumatoid arthritis. The citrullinome in
periodontitis is similar to the hypercitrullination observed in the
rheumatoid joint, implicating this mucosal site in rheumatoid
arthritis pathogenesis. Recent studies identified the periodontal
pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (A. actinomycetem-
comitans) as a bacterial trigger of autoimmunity in rheumatoid
arthritis by inducing hypercitrullination in host neutrophils. The
pore-forming toxin leukotoxin A secreted by A. actinomycetemco-
mitans triggers autoantigen citrullination in the rheumatoid
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1789
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 arthritis joint (171). Zhang and colleagues (172) reported altera-
tions in the gut, dental, or saliva microbiome that distinguished
patients with rheumatoid arthritis from healthy controls. Indivi-
duals with rheumatoid arthritis had low numbers of Haemophilus
spp., whereas L. salivarius was very high in these patients. It has
been reported in experiments in mice that inoculation with
Bifidobacterium adolescentis (B. adolescentis) exacerbated autoim-
mune arthritis. B. adolescentis is known to induce Th17 cells in the
intestine (173). Interestingly, the frequencies of Th17 cells and
levels of IL17 strongly correlated with systemic disease activity at
both the onset and the progression of rheumatoid arthritis (174).
Role of Microbiome in Obesity
Obesity results from an imbalance of food intake, basal metab-
olism, digestive tract microbial composition, and energy expen-
diture (175, 176). According to Turnbaugh and colleagues (177),
the gut microbiome should be considered as a set of genetic
factors that together with host genotype and lifestyle contribute to
the pathophysiology of obesity. It is observed that the intestinal
bacteria in obese humans and mice differ from those in lean
individuals. Obese mice microbiota was found to be rich in
Firmicutes compared with the lean mice microbiota, which was
abundant in Bacteroidetes (177). Strikingly, colonization of germ-
free mice with microbiota from obese mice was sufficient to cause
a significant increase in total body fat, as compared with coloni-
zation with microbiota from lean mice (177). The obese micro-
biome has an increased capacity to harvest energy from the diet,
thereby increasing weight gain in the host (177, 178). Coloniza-
tion of adult germ-free mice with a gut microbial community
harvested from conventionally raised mice increased body fat
within 10 to 14 days, despite an associated decrease in food
consumption. This change involves several linked mechanisms:
microbial fermentation of dietary polysaccharides that cannot be
digested by the host; subsequent intestinal absorption of mono-
saccharides and SCFA; their conversion to more complex lipids in
the liver; and microbial regulation of host genes that promote
deposition of the lipids in adipocytes (179).
Transfer of human microbiota to mice can phenocopy such
effects, as shown by Ridaura and colleagues (180). Cohabitation
of mice harboring an obese microbiota with mice containing the
lean microbiota prevented the development of increased body
mass and obesity-associated metabolic phenotypes in obese cage
mates. Rescue correlated with invasion of specific members of
Bacteroidetes from the lean microbiota into obese microbiota and
was diet dependent. The study confirmed that specific bacteria
along with diet could induce obesity.
Childhood obesity is considered one of the most serious
global health issues in our society. Obese children are more
likely to be obese in adulthood and are at greater risk of
premature death and adverse health outcomes in later life
(181). Administration of three or more courses of antibiotics
before children reach age 2 years is associated with an increased
risk of early childhood obesity (182). When given early in life,
antibiotics that disrupt microbiota composition, and conse-
quently the metabolic activity of the microbiota, can affect the
body mass of the host by either promoting weight gain or
stunting growth (183). The correlation of antibiotics to obesity
has been earlier shown in animal models (184).
Food is broken up into components that tend beneficial micro-
organisms. Bacterial fermentation of a diet rich in fibers leads to
the production of SCFA, which as noted above includes acetate,
propionate, and butyrate in the gut (185, 186). Interestingly,
butyrate promotes colonic health and helps prevent cancer
(185, 187, 188). The consumption of high fat and high calorie
foods negatively impacts the beneficial microbes, which are
believed in turn to promote obesity. Notably, obese people have
lower Bacteroidetes and more Firmicutes in their distal gut than lean
subjects, and the introduction of low fat and carbohydrate diets
increased the proportion of Bacteroidetes (175, 189).
Obesity is also known to impair cognition and produces
atrophy of brain regions associated with learning and memory.
In animal studies, it has been shown that, even before the onset
of diabetes or metabolic syndrome, early-stage obesity pro-
duced deficits on cognitive tasks that require the prefrontal
cortex. Impaired cognition was associated with synapse loss,
including reduced numbers of dendritic spines and expression
of synaptic proteins, as well as structural alterations in the
microglia. Thus, obesity must be considered as a contributing
factor to brain dysfunction mediated through the gut–brain
axis (190, 191).
It has been demonstrated recently that some bacterial species
are beneficial to the host by preventing obesity. In animal
models and humans, the abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila
(A. muciniphila) is decreased in obese and type II diabetic mice
(192), and use of the bacterium as a probiotic is beneficial to
the host. Interestingly, whole bacterium is not essential to
prevent obesity. Intake of the membrane protein of the bacte-
rium per se could be beneficial to the host. Amuc_1100, a
specific protein isolated from the outer membrane of A. muci-
niphila, interacts with TLR2, is stable at temperatures used for
pasteurization, improves the gut barrier, and recapitulates the
beneficial effects of the bacterium (193).
Metformin is a well-established drug in the management of
type II diabetes and obesity. Recent studies suggest that the
microorganisms are involved in mediating the beneficial effects
of metformin on glucose metabolism. Metformin shifts gut
microbiota composition through the enrichment of mucin-
degrading A. muciniphila as well as several SCFA-producing micro-
biota, including Butyrivibrio, Bifidobacterium bifidum, Megasphaera,
and Prevotella (194). Overall, there is substantial evidence of the
key role of microbiota in obesity and its adverse effects.
Microbiome and Cardiovascular Diseases
The gut microbes produce a large range of metabolites that
act not only in the gut, but also systemically, and this large pool
of known and unknown metabolites is not fully understood
(195). The metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) is the
first potentially direct link between the gut microbiota and
atherosclerotic heart disease. Trimethylamine is produced by
the gut microbiota from nutrients containing L-carnitine, cho-
line, and phosphatidylcholine and is subsequently oxidized by
hepatic flavin-containing monooxygenases to TMAO. TMAO
has been proposed to interfere with cholesterol transportation,
and TMAO precursors promote foam cell formation and ath-
erosclerosis in animal models, but not in the presence of
antibiotics to the drinking water, suggesting a microbiota-
dependent mechanism (195).
Hypertension is a risk factor for coronary heart disease, yet
whether gut microbiota dysbiosis is involved in the development
of hypertension remains largely unknown. In a recent study, it was
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1790
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 observed that the bacterial genus Prevotella and Klebsiella were
overrepresented in individuals with hypertension. Fecal trans-
plantation from hypertensive human donors to germ-free mice
increased blood pressure in animals, thereby demonstrating the
direct influence of gut microbiota on high blood pressure (196).
Beneficial microorganisms are known to protect against ath-
erosclerosis. The lack of gut microbiota in germ-free apolipopro-
tein E (ApoE)-null mice, an experimental model of human
atherosclerosis, was found to induce the development of athero-
sclerotic plaques even when animals were fed a standard low-
cholesterol diet. Colonization with normal human microbiota
prevented atherogenesis in germ-free ApoE-null mice fed a stan-
dard low-cholesterol diet but not a diet with high-cholesterol
content (197). The bacterial genera Eubacteria, Anaeroplasma,
Roseburia, Oscillospira, and Dehalobacteria appeared to be protec-
tive against atherosclerosis and showed significant negative cor-
relation with atherosclerotic plaque size and plasma adipocyte
fatty acid binding protein and cholesterol (198). A. muciniphila is
also beneficial to the heart. The bacteria attenuate atherosclerotic
lesions by ameliorating metabolic endotoxemia-induced inflam-
mation through restoration of the gut barrier (199).
Microbiome and Behavior
The exponential growth in our collective knowledge of the
human microbiome has seen the study of gut microorganisms
move beyond the traditional preserve of strictly microbiological
disciplines. As our appreciation of the structure and dynamics of
the gut microbiome has flourished, so too has our grasp of the
implications for host physiology in health and disease. Perhaps
one of the more surprising aspects of this host–microbe dialogue
is the complex interactions that manifest as alterations in brain
and behavior. Moreover, the bidirectional nature of this conver-
sation needs to be considered in the context that disruptions to
CNS function can be expressed distally as alterations in micro-
biome composition and function in the gastrointestinal tract.
These aspects of host–microbe dialogue are generally important
to medicine, due to the impact of behavioral states that widely
impact and/or reflect the operation and progression of pathogenic
processes and their treatment (e.g., the negative impact of depres-
sion on general therapeutic compliance).
These complex reciprocal interactions are facilitated by the
microbiome–gut–brain axis, which incorporates the gut micro-
biome as a critical node of the communication network encom-
passing the CNS, the neuroendocrine and neuroimmune systems,
the sympathetic and parasympathetic arms of the autonomic
nervous system, and the enteric nervous system (200). The focus
on the gut microbiome has proved to be a surprisingly fertile
ground, and the evidence garnered from a variety of preclinical
approaches has converged to illuminate how the gut microbiome
regulates multiple behaviors, physiologic readouts, and indeed
many fundamental aspects of brain function.
In this regard, surveys of microbiota-deficient germ-free ani-
mals have proved particularly informative. The use of these ani-
mals in general is not new, but their application to CNS-directed
queries has been a notable feature of recent research efforts
(201, 202). From a behavioral perspective, these animals display
a less anxious phenotype (203–206), and this atypical perfor-
mance can be normalized if the animals are colonized postwean-
ing (205). Remarkably, it has also been demonstrated using both
the germ-free paradigm and an antibiotic-induced microbiota
deficiency that anxiety-like behaviors can be transferred via
the gut microbiota by means of a fecal transplant (207, 208).
Germ-free animals also display alterations in social behaviors
(209, 210) and, insofar as it has been logistically possible to
address in detail in this paradigm, aspects of cognitive function
(211). Gut microbiota depletion using a cocktail of antibiotics
from early adolescence in mice replicates many of the behavioral
characteristics of germ-free mice, including reduced anxiety-like
behaviors and impaired cognitive performance (212).
Other approaches have both largely supported and extended
the behavioral picture painted by microbiota-deficient animals.
For example, administration of a probiotic L. rhamnosus strain
reduced anxiety and depression-related behaviors (213), while
alternative candidate probiotics, including a B. longum strain,
exerted a beneficial impact on cognitive processes (214). Prebio-
tics (e.g., fiber-rich foods that can influence the microbiome) can
also exert anxiolytic effects (215), while bacterial infection with an
enteric pathogen can impact both learning and memory (211)
and modulate pain behaviors (216).
Physiologically, germ-free animals also exhibit profound dif-
ferences with conventionally colonized controls. These differ-
ences include a defective immune system and exaggerated corti-
costerone outputs to acute stressors (205, 217, 218). The micro-
biome is also required for the development of microglia, cells that
defend the CNS. Microglia from germ-free mice had altered gene
expression that influenced its development (219).
An increased availability of tryptophan, the amino acid
precursor to neuroactives such as serotonin and kynurenine
pathway catabolites, as generated respectively by indoleamine
2, 3-dioxygenase (IDO1) or TPH, is one feature of the germ-free
state (205, 220, 221). Many aberrant physiologic features can
be rescued if the animals are colonized with a normal micro-
biota, especially if this intervention takes place during specific
time windows postweaning (205, 217). As is the case for
behavior, other microbiota manipulations, such as rendering
mice microbiota deficient or probiotic ingestion by rodents,
can also impact parameters such as corticosterone outputs or
tryptophan availability (212, 213, 222).
The reciprocal interaction between stress and the microbiome is
a particularly interesting facet of this bidirectional relationship. As
indicated above, the gut microbiota exert an influence on the
hypothalamic–pituitary adrenal axis, the main host stress
response system, and this can be captured by measuring cortisol
in humans or corticosterone in rodents (223). There are now
studies showing that the opposite is also true and that a variety of
stressful insults that are linked to psychopathology in adulthood
can alter the composition of the gut microbiome in animal
models. This is reflected in studies that have examined early-life
stress (224, 225), prenatal stress (226, 227), and psychosocial
stress (228–230). Interestingly, the gut microbiota seems neces-
sary for the expression of some of the pathologic behavioral
features induced by maternal separation (231), a well-validated
early-life stress-based model of gut–brain axis dysfunction (232).
In the clinical setting, maternal prenatal stress is also associated
with alterations in the infant gut microbiome (233). Another
example of such feedback loop is stress-related microbiome–gut–
brain axis dysfunction in irritable bowel syndrome (234).
Growing up, germ-free influence biological function such as
blood–brain barrier integrity (235), transcriptional regulation
(203, 236), neurogenesis (237) microglial function (238), and
myelination (239). Recently, it has been demonstrated that a
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1791
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 germ-free mouse model of Alzheimer disease displayed a marked
reduction of cerebral amyloid pathology and that colonization of
these mice with the gut microbiota of their conventionally col-
onized counterparts reinstated the amyloid pathology (240).
Although the behavioral implications of these altered amyloid
phenotypes requires elaboration, this intriguing study does pro-
vide support for the hypothesized role of the gut microbiota in
neurodegenerative disorders (241).
The mechanisms underpinning influence of the gut micro-
biome on brain and behavior are under investigation. The gut
microbiota is required for motor deficits, microglia activation,
and a-synuclein pathology. Colonization of microbiota from
Parkinson disease–affected patients enhances physical impair-
ments compared with microbiota transplants from healthy
human donors. Thus, the gut bacteria are involved in movement
disorders, and alterations in the human microbiome represent a
risk factor for Parkinson disease (242). Recently, the role of the
vagus nerve (the main neural communication highway between
the gut and the brain) has attracted much attention (243). It has
been demonstrated, for example, that the beneficial CNS impact
of a probiotic was abolished in vagotomized mice (213), while
the anxiety-like behaviors that emerge in a colitis model were
absent in previously vagotomized mice (207). The vagus nerve is
not the sole conduit linking the gut and the brain (244), and a
variety of alternatives have been considered. These include micro-
bial regulation of tryptophan metabolism (245), microbial meta-
bolites, such as SCFAs (246) or indoles derived from tryptophan
(247), neuropeptide production (248) as well as immunomo-
dulation (249). The important role of the gut microbiota in
maintaining intestinal barrier integrity also needs to be taken
into account (250, 251).
The landscape for manipulating the microbiome is broad and
increasingly financed (252). Considerations are being given to
priming interventions that promote assembly of the infant micro-
biome (65, 253, 254), sustain the gut microbiota in healthy aging
(125, 126), more radical options such as fecal microbiota trans-
plantation (255) as well as less controversial options such as
psychobiotics (256), exercise (257, 258), and diet-based manip-
ulations (259, 260). Indeed, a number of small studies using
healthy volunteers have now demonstrated that ingestion of
certain cocktails of probiotics, a fermented milk product with
probiotic or prebiotics, can impact on the CNS (261–264).
Autism spectrum disorders are complex neurobiological disorders
characterized by impairment in social interaction and commu-
nication and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of
behavior, interests, and activities. Autistic children suffer from
gastrointestinal disorders. Autistic children have less diverse
microbial population in the gut and significantly lower abun-
dances of the genera Prevotella, Coprococcus, and Veillonellaceae
involved in carbohydrate metabolism (265).
Future directions will likely see further elaboration of the role
of the gut microbiome in sleep (266) and circadian rhythms
(267–269). Our awareness of the interface between natural and
built environments, the gut microbiota, and human behavior is
also growing (270–272). Of course, a key caveat is to what
degree this promising but largely preclinical body of research
will effectively impact the clinical setting. Moving from mouse
to man, be it in the context of CNS-directed or gastrointestinal-
focused research, is of course complicated for stress-related
neuropsychiatric and other heterogeneous disorders associated
with the gut microbiome (273, 274). Of equal importance is the
necessity to address the issue of whether the correlations
that have been noted thus far between multiple disorders and
the gut microbiota alterations are in fact causal relationships.
Such obstacles are not insurmountable with due diligence
and the necessary multidisciplinary expertise required to ex-
ploit the considerable opportunities presented by host–microbe
interactions.
Beneficial Microorganisms Restrict the
Outgrowth of Pathogens in the Gut
The human microbiota encompasses all the microorganisms
that reside on the skin and in all other tissues and organs,
including the gastrointestinal tracts. Of these body sites, the
gastrointestinal tract is the most densely colonized organ. The
microbiome includes bacteria, fungi, and archaea (275). There are
approximately 1,000 species of microbes colonizing the gut, with
densities of 104 to 105 bacteria per millimeter of digestive effluent
in the proximal small intestine and 1011 bacteria per gram of
luminal content in the colon (276). The physicochemical condi-
tions in the gut influence the composition of the intestinal
microbiota (277). The gastrointestinal tract harbors many distinct
niches, each containing a different microbial ecosystem that varies
according to the location within the gastrointestinal tract. The
microbial density increases along the gastrointestinal tract with
101 to 104 microbial cells in the stomach and duodenum, 104 to
108 cells in the jejunum and ileum, to 1010 to 1012 cells per gram
in the colon and feces (277–279).
The majority of all microorganisms in the human digestive
tract are bacteria and belong to two phyla, the Bacteroidetes
and the Firmicutes (280). In addition, the other significant
phyla occupying the digestive tract include Proteobacteria, Acti-
nobacteria, Fusobacteria, Spirochaetes, Verrucomicrobia, and Lenti-
sphaerae (281, 282). The methanogens Methanobrevibacter
and Methanosphaera are the most dominant archaeal groups
(7, 283). The two common fungal phyla in the gut include
Ascomycota (which includes the genera Candida and Saccharo-
myces) and Basidiomycota (30, 284).
Intestinal microbiota play a central role in the metabolic,
nutritional, physiologic, and immunological processes of the
human body, processing indigestible dietary polysaccharides,
including resistant starch and dietary fibers, thereby leading to
the production of important nutrients, such as SCFAs, vitamins
(vitamin K, vitamin B12, folic acid), and certain amino acids that
humans are unable to synthesize themselves (279, 285, 286). The
plant polysaccharides in our diet are rich in xylan-, pectin-, and
arabinose-containing
carbohydrate
structures.
The
human
genome lacks most of the enzymes required for degrading these
glycans. Nevertheless, the distal gut microbiome provides us with
this capacity to process these polysaccharides. The human gut
microbiome is enriched for genes involved in glucose, galactose,
fructose, arabinose, mannose, and xylose, starch, and sucrose
metabolism. Our microbiome also has significantly enriched
metabolism of glycans, amino acids, and xenobiotics, methano-
genesis, and 2-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway–medi-
ated biosynthesis of vitamins and isoprenoids (7). The intestinal
microbiota also participates in the defense against pathogens by
mechanisms such as colonization resistance and production of
antimicrobial compounds. Furthermore, the intestinal micro-
biota is involved in the development, maturation, and mainte-
nance of the gastrointestinal sensory and motoric functions, the
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1792
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 intestinal barrier, and the mucosal immune system (279). The
microbiota of the intestine is also involved in promoting bone
formation as well as resorption, leading to skeletal growth.
Microbiota induces the hormone insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1), promoting bone growth and remodeling. When the
microbiota ferment fiber, SCFAs are produced, leading to induc-
tion of IGF-1 that promote bone growth (287).
The very high microbial content of the large intestine poses a
major challenge to the mucosal immune system, as it needs to
tolerate commensal microbiota and dietary antigens while main-
taining the ability to eliminate pathogens. Induction of colonic
Treg is crucial in fostering this immune homeostasis (288).
CD4þCD25þFOXP3þ Tregs are of two types: thymus-derived
Tregs (tTreg) and peripherally derived Tregs (pTreg). Although it
is difficult to distinguish these types phenotypically, both are
thought to have an essential role in immune regulation (288).
Although tTregs develop in the thymus, the major site for pTreg
development is the colon, resulting in a large population of
regulatory cells that have a distinct T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoire
and are critical for intestinal homeostasis (152). Notably, the
development of pTregs requires microbiota to be present in the
colon. Although the mechanism of induction of colonic pTregs is
not understood, several microbial components have been found
to enhance their expansion and function, including SCFAs and
polysaccharide A of Bacteroides fragilis (B. fragilis; ref. 288). Acetate,
propionate, and butyrate are the three main SCFAs, and butyrate
has been found to be the most potent inducer of colonic Tregs.
The newborn infant is colonized at birth with microbes from
the mother's vaginal and fecal microbiota as well as with other
environmental microbes encountered in the first days of life
(289). Themode of delivery influences the microbial composition
in man. An article by Penders and colleagues (93) demonstrated
that the important determinants of the gut microbiome compo-
sition in infants were the mode of delivery, type of infant feeding,
gestational age, infant hospitalization and antibiotic use in the
infant. Term infants born vaginally and exclusively breastfed had
the most "beneficial" gut microbiota (had the highest numbers of
Bifidobacteria and lowest numbers of C. difficile and E. coli). In
contrast, infants born through C-section had lower numbers of
Bifidobacteria and Bacteroides, and they were more often colonized
with C. difficile, as compared with vaginally born infants. Exclu-
sively formula-fed infants were more often colonized with E. coli,
C. difficile, Bacteroides, and Lactobacilli, as compared with breastfed
infants. Hospitalization and prematurity were associated with
higher prevalence and counts of C. difficile. Administration of
antibiotics to infants was associated with decreased numbers of
Bifidobacteria and Bacteroides. Infants with older siblings had
slightly higher numbers of Bifidobacteria, compared with infants
without siblings (93, 290).
C. difficile is an opportunistic, anaerobic Gram-positive, spore-
forming, toxin-producing bacillus that is transmitted among
humans through the fecal–oral route. Notably, the pathogen is
generally present in the human gut, but it does not cause any
disease under normal conditions. Abuse/misuse of antibiotics
destroys beneficial microbiota that enables the proliferation of C.
difficile, leading to pathogenic conditions. Ampicillin, amoxicil-
lin, cephalosporins, clindamycin, and fluoroquinolones are the
antibiotics most frequently associated with disease, but almost all
antibiotics have been associated with increased rates of oppor-
tunistic infection. C. difficile colonizes the large intestine and
releases the exotoxins TcdA and TcdB that cause colitis in suscep-
tible persons (291, 292). C. difficile has emerged as a major
enteric pathogen with worldwide distribution. In the United
States, C. difficile is the most frequently reported nosocomial
(i.e., hospital-acquired) pathogen. A recent surveillance study
identified 453,000 cases of C. difficile infection and 29,000
deaths associated with C. difficile infection; approximately, a
quarter of those infections were community acquired (293).
The antibiotics prescribed to control C. difficile include metro-
nidazole, vancomycin, fidaxomicin, or surgery in extreme cases of
infection (294). Fecal transplant is emerging as an alternative
strategy for treating recurrent C. difficile infections (295). Use of
probiotics (such as beneficial bacteria and yeast), which
help restore a healthy balance to the intestinal tract, is safe and
effective for preventing C. difficile–associated diarrhea (296).
Thus, beneficial microorganisms are essential to maintain the
human gut immune homeostasis, thereby preventing pathogenic
infections. Further contributing to such defenses, beneficial
microorganisms also modulate epithelial cell proliferation,
villus architecture, and angiogenesis within the intestine, along
with xenobiotic metabolism, bone mineral density, behavior,
and key metabolic functions (297, 298). Tipping the balance
favoring the expansion of enterobacteria is one of the causes of
several inflammatory bowel diseases. However, it is not known
how the favorable bacteria prevent dysbiosis. A recent study
demonstrated that microcins, the small proteins secreted by
several favorable bacteria could limit the expansion of competing
Enterobacteriaceae (299).
Microbiome Effects on Intestinal Barrier
Function and Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Mammals, including humans, support one of the most com-
plex microbial ecosystems. Although the immune system is
classically thought to have evolved to provide protection from
infection by microbial pathogens, animals peacefully coexist with
a vast and complex microbiota, which extensively interacts with
the immune system. It has recently been proposed that the total
information encoded by the mammalian genome is not sufficient
to carry out all functions that are required to maintain health and
that products of our microbiome are crucial for protection from
various diseases (300). It is possible that alterations in the
development or composition of the microbiota (dysbiosis) dis-
turb the partnership between the microbiota and the human
immune system, ultimately leading to altered immune responses
that may underlie various human inflammatory disorders (146).
In inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), the role and interplay of
the microbiome (301–303) with a gastrointestinal barrier com-
promise (304–306) has been the subject of extensive review
(307–311). Gastrointestinal barrier function is not governed
solely by the tight junctional complex, although this focus has
certainly attracted the greatest basic research interest. Tight junc-
tions form the continuous intercellular barrier around epithelial
cells, which are required to separate tissue spaces and regulate
selective movement of solutes across the epithelium (312). From
a wider perspective, gastrointestinal barrier function also may be
compromised by an impaired mucus layer over the epithelium [a
topic reviewed nicely by others recently (Chen and colleagues;
ref. 313)], as well as by cell death in the epithelium or an
epithelial–mesenchymal transition leading to impaired cell adhe-
sion/attachment (to other cells and substratum). Leak at the sites
of compromised tight junctions may be quite distinct in nature
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1793
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 from the leak at the sites of cell death (314). Likewise, the
remediation of leak is very different in these cases; repair of leak
from impaired tight junctions may be a purely transcription/
translation/phosphorylation–based process, whereas remedia-
tion of leak due to cell death/dedifferentiation/detachment could
also require a careful orchestration of cell motility and cell
replication. In these different cases, the microbiome may exert
control over very different processes. It is worth considering that
any given specific case of IBD likely involves gastrointestinal leak
from all of these causes, and therefore alleviation of such leak, and
the inflammatory cascades it gives rise to, is a quite complex task.
Further research is required to determine whether microbiome
may be better at repair of one type of leak than the other.
There is no doubt that IBD is in part driven by a breakdown or
compromise of the gastrointestinal epithelial barrier, and many
reviews on IBD have dealt with this feature as mentioned above.
There is some controversy concerning whether a compromise of
barrier function is the initial causation of the disease. The findings
that asymptomatic, first-degree relatives of IBD patients in fact
harbor molecular-level leak in their gastrointestinal tract mucosa
have traditionally been powerful evidence tilting the argument
toward causality (315, 316). The question of course that leaps to
the fore then is what induces the leak in the first place? The very
fact that a genetic element exists in IBD (e.g., in first-degree
relatives) indicates a role for genetics in the disease, but equally
obvious is that genetics is probably a necessary but insufficient
condition.
Studies focusing on this involvement of gastrointestinal micro-
biome in IBD take two forms: (i) whether the microbiome is
abnormal in IBD and possibly playing a role in etiology; (ii)
whether a microbiome modification can be designed as a ther-
apeutic option in the disease. The second possibility appears
achievable: Some of the best clinical evidence, on the basis of its
very applicability, is the success of "fecal transplant" procedures in
achieving therapeutic efficacy in IBD (317, 318). Prior to the
recent advent of these protocols, there was the use of butyrate
enemas to achieve therapeutic relief (286, 319, 320). The thera-
peutic efficacy of luminal administration of butyrate is cogent
testimony to the positive role played by the normal microbiome
in maintaining a functional epithelial barrier in the gastrointes-
tinal tract, as well as to the utility of targeting the microbiome as a
viable clinical approach to IBD. Butyrate is a significant metab-
olite of dietary fiber by the normal gastrointestinal microbiota
(321), with butyrate levels in the gastrointestinal lumen being the
highest in the body. Butyrate has been found in many recent
in vitro studies to be highly effective in inducing structural changes
to the epithelial tight junction complex, resulting in improved
epithelial barrier function (322, 323). A similar literature
also exists for the gastrointestinal microbiota metabolite, indole,
a product of tryptophan metabolism by commensal bacteria
(324, 325). In combination, the fecal transplant and butyrate
enema clinical studies, along with the in vitro studies of tight
junction modification and enhancement by butyrate and indole,
provide a very powerful argument of not only maintenance
and modification of the gastrointestinal barrier by the microbiota,
but also for targeting the microbiota as a viable, effective thera-
peutic strategy.
Better delineated proof of the ability of the microbiota
to both positively and negatively affect the gastrointestinal
barrier comes out of animal model and epithelial cell culture
studies. For example, the probiotic bacterium, L. casei, both
strengthened barrier function and decreased proinflammatory
cytokine content in BALB/c mice (326). In addition, such
treatment also modified the gastrointestinal microbiota overall.
The probiotic and commensal bacteria L. rhamnosus and
F. prausnitzii have also improved barrier function, as demon-
strated in studies with CACO-2 cell culture models and exper-
imentally induced colitis in C57BL/6 mice (327, 328). The
microbiome is also known to be involved in the wound healing
of the mucosa of the gut (329). In mice, it has been demon-
strated that mucosal injury leads to increase in the expression of
formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) and neutrophilic NADPH
oxidase (NOX2) that causes depletion of oxygen resulting in
the enrichment of anaerobic bacteria. The anaerobic, mucino-
philic gut symbiont, A. muciniphila, stimulated proliferation
and migration of enterocytes adjacent to the colonic wounds
mediated through FPR1 and intestinal epithelial cell–specific,
NOX1-dependent redox signaling, thereby leading to wound
healing of the mucosa. These findings highlight a very impor-
tant consideration in studies of the microbiota, barrier func-
tion, and IBD, namely that not only can microbiota affect
barrier function, but modification of barrier function (good
and bad) may well affect microbiota composition, a "research
road less traveled." This less investigated area is well illustrated
by the finding that anti-TNF immunologic medications, which
reduce proinflammatory cytokines and allow for barrier repair,
also result in changes in microbiota composition (330).
It is worth noting too that a factor as omnipresent as diet can
affect both barrier function and microbiota while also simul-
taneously affecting cytokine production. Administering a high-
fat "Western" diet to CEABAC10 mice induced deleterious
changes in gastrointestinal microbiota (e.g., increased content
of adherent-invasive E. coli), decreased mucus layer protection,
and led to gastrointestinal barrier compromise (331). Patho-
genic E. coli have been implicated in Crohn disease, in part due
to an ability to not produce cell death while inducing synthesis
of copious amounts of TNF (332). The dietary connection to an
altered microbiota in terms of pathogenic bacteria is also
apparent in the finding that vitamin D deficiency enables the
barrier-disruptive effects of pathogenic E. coli to be manifested
(333). Even more fascinating and less intuitive is an effect of the
environment at large on barrier function, microbiota, and
inflammatory status, as Kish and colleagues (334) show for
particulate air pollutants. It will be instructive to discover in
future research whether the principal actions of diet/nutrition/
environment are on microbiota directly and barrier function
indirectly, or vice versa.
As more and more studies reveal the intricate interplay between
gastrointestinal barrier function, gastrointestinal microbiota, and
degree of inflammation, it is worth considering that the effects of
microbiota on barrier function, and barrier function on micro-
biota, will in large degree derive from actions of protein kinases in
signaling pathway transduction systems. This has been recently
very well reviewed by Yang and Yan (335). One would caution
however against taking an aggressively reductionist approach in
dealing with the interplay of microbiota, barrier function, and
inflammation: The complexity of the gut microbiome in the
gastrointestinal tract, the complexity of the signaling pathways
known to regulate barrier function, and the complexity of cyto-
kine interactions all suggest strongly that one needs to tread
carefully in what may well be overly ambitious undertakings to
find and utilize specific molecular mechanisms involved in this
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1794
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 intricate relationship. A properly functioning gastrointestinal
mucosa is in essence a symphony scored by microbiota "strings,"
barrier function "woodwinds," and immune regulatory "brass."
To search for an all-pivotal kinase or phosphatase responsible for
gastrointestinal mucosal homeostasis may be analogous to trying
to claim a single flute or viola as the fulcrum of Beethoven's Ninth,
a fool's errand that ignores the extreme complexity and subtlety of
the gastrointestinal environment.
Because of the still singular importance of the studies showing
epithelial barrier compromise in asymptomatic first-degree rela-
tives of IBD patients to the field of IBD research, it will be very
interesting to observe the outcome of studies yet to be performed
on the microbiome of first-degree relatives of IBD patients. It is
likely that those results could be just as pivotal to the future
understanding of IBD as were the now long ago studies of May and
Hollander on barrier function and IBD (315, 316).
Increased risk of developing IBD may be due to improved
hygiene practices. Ramanan and colleagues (336) showed that
intestinal helminth infection, caused by parasitic worms, pro-
tects IBD-susceptible mice from developing the disease. The
infection of parasitic worms increased specific protective spe-
cies and limited other inflammatory members of the micro-
biota. People from helminth-endemic regions harbored a sim-
ilar protective microbiota, and their deworming led to an
increase in inflammatory Bacteroidales, as observed in the mice.
Thus, a changing microbial environment may shape suscepti-
bility to inflammatory disease.
Although we currently know at least a partial membership of
the human microbiome, we are yet to fully understand how
these microorganisms are contained in the intestine. Anatomy
of the colon by light microscope reveals a mucus layer, mucosa,
submucosa, gut-associated lymphoid follicle, and muscularis.
The intestinal/colonic mucus is an efficient system for protect-
ing the epithelium from bacteria by promoting their clearance
and separating them from the epithelial cells, thereby inhibit-
ing inflammation and infection (337). Colonic mucus is pro-
duced by the goblet cell. The main mucus component in the
intestine is MUC2 mucin, a large and heavily O-glycosylated
gel-forming mucin that forms enormous polymeric nets by C-
terminal dimerization and N-terminal trimerization. Upon
secretion from the goblet cells, the mucus expands rapidly
and builds a stratified dense layer that is attached to the
epithelium. Normal human sigmoid colon has an inner mucus
layer that is impenetrable to bacteria. At a distance far from the
epithelial surface, the inner mucus is transformed into a
soluble and less organized outer mucus layer that by proteo-
lytic expansion generates the preferred habitat for the com-
mensal microbes (338).
IBDs are characterized by aberrant innate and adaptive
immune responses to commensal luminal bacteria (339).
Ulcerative colitis is thought to be caused by some strains of
E. coli (340). In cell culture models, it has been shown that
ulcerative colitis-associated E. coli producing a-hemolysin can
cause rapid loss of tight junction integrity (341). The human
intestinal epithelium is formed by a single layer of epithelial
cells that separates the intestinal lumen from the underlying
lamina propria and the space between these cells is sealed by
the tight junction, which regulates the permeability of the
intestinal barrier (342). Tight junction complexes allow passive
absorption of small hydrophilic molecules (nutrients and
ions), but they restrict passage of large molecules and infectious
microbes. Ulcerative colitis is characterized by a leaky intestinal
barrier due in part to defective tight junction. Our group had
reported that attenuation of the Bin1 gene in a mouse model
would protect against experimental colitis (343). On the basis
of the study, we recently demonstrated that treatment of exper-
imental colitis with Bin1 mAb would support mucosal barrier
function by inducing the expression of tight junction proteins,
thereby protecting the integrity of the lymphoid follicle. The
therapy may be a novel strategy to treat ulcerative colitis and
possibly limit risks of colorectal cancer (344). Thus, lowering
Bin1 levels may be a strategy that would lead to enhanced tight
junction proteins that, in turn, protects against pathogenic
microorganisms crossing the epithelial cells.
Other strategies may be used by the epithelial cells to
protect against pathogenic microbes from entering the tissues.
Recently, while working on subconfluent CACO-2 cells (deriv-
ed from the intestine), we observed that EEA1 endosomes
(early endosome marker) were confined more toward the
periphery of CACO-2 cell monolayers. To confirm whether
these endosomes are present in the colon tissues, we stained
for EEA1 in mouse colonic tissues. We observed EEA1 endo-
somes in the peripheral mucosa as well as in the muscularis.
Insofar, as endosomes are traditionally thought to protect
against foreign bodies, including microorganisms, one might
speculate that early endosomes help protect against bacteria
crossing the mucus. Microbes that overcome this barrier to
cross the mucus layer might be destroyed within endosomes,
with further protection afforded by the endosomes lining the
muscularis (Fig. 1).
A
B
C
© 2017 American Association for Cancer Research
Figure 1.
Early endosomes localize mainly to the
periphery of colon mucosa and
muscularis. A, Peripheral localization
of EEA1 in a colony of human colonic
Caco-2 cells. Cells were stained with
the early endosomal marker EEA1
(green) and DAPI to visualize cell
nuclei (blue) and processed for
immunofluorescence microscopy. B,
Peripheral localization of EEA1 in
murine colon mucosa processed as
above. C, Peripheral localization of
EEA1 in murine colon muscularis
processed as above.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1795
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 Additional endosomal strategies may be used to protect
colonic tissues against the entry of pathogenic microbes. Endo-
somes are traditionally thought to protect colonic epithelial cell
layers against microorganisms, possibly helping eliminate bac-
teria that cross the mucus layer, a strategy that also may be
extended into the subordinate muscularis layer (Fig. 1). In
subconfluent human colonic cells, which form island-like col-
onies in monolayer culture, the early endosome marker EEA1
can be seen to preferentially localize to the colony periphery.
Similarly, in colon tissues, early endosomes display the same
localization with EEA1 staining in the periphery of the mucosa
and muscularis. Beclin1-dependent autophagy associated with
the endosome pathway also has been implicated in the bacte-
rial and viral pathogen elimination (345), which downregu-
lates Beclin1 to promote virulence and infection. Beclin1
associates with endosomes and regulates EEA1/early endosome
localization and late endosome formation (346). Upon TLR
signaling, Beclin1 rapidly translocates to the phagosome and
mediates efficient phagosome–lysosome fusion to ensure rapid
acidification and efficient destruction of the pathogen (345). In
human colonic cells, Beclin1 staining occurs throughout the
colon tissue at endosomes (Fig. 2), possibly helping direct
pathogenic cargo to lysosomes and thereby restricting micro-
biome ecology to the gut lumen.
IDO1 and the Microbiome–Host Interaction
As noted above, establishing and maintaining the symbiotic
mutualism that exists between the microbiome and its mamma-
lian host necessitates the engagement of mechanisms of acquired
immune tolerance, as these microorganisms represent the epito-
me of non-self. IDO1 is a metabolic enzyme that has gained
recognition as an important mediator of acquired immune tol-
erance. IDO1 catalyzes the rate-limiting first step in the degrada-
tion of the essential amino acid tryptophan, but is not involved in
maintaining tryptophan homeostasis, which instead is the role of
the distinct liver enzyme TDO2 (tryptophan dioxygenase;
ref. 347). The concept of IDO1 as an immune regulator emerged
from findings that tryptophan catabolism could suppress cyto-
toxic T-cell activation (348, 349). The demonstration that the IDO
pathway inhibitor 1-methyl-tryptophan (1MT) could elicit T-cell–
dependent rejection of allogeneic mouse concepti (350, 351)
established the physiologic relevance of tryptophan catabolism
as a mediator of acquired immune tolerance. Subsequent findings
linking attenuation of the tumor suppressor gene Bin1 to IDO1
dysregulation and tumoral immune escape (352) provided exper-
imental substantiation for the corollary proposition that tumor
cells might, by inducing IDO1, appropriate this mechanism of
protection for the "foreign" fetus to overcome immunosurveil-
lance. Within the complex inflammatory milieu of the tumor
microenvironment, IDO1 induction isnot necessarily restricted to
tumor cells, and nonmalignant stromal cells expressing IDO1 can
promote tumoral immune escape as well (353). In particular,
IDO1 induction in antigen-presenting cells (APC), such as DCs
and macrophages, has been implicated in promoting immune
tolerance by suppressing effector cytotoxic T lymphocytes, con-
verting na€
�ve T lymphocytes to FoxP3þ Treg cells and elevating the
suppressive activity of "natural" Tregs (354).
A great deal of attention is now focused on the therapeutic
potential of small-molecule inhibitors of IDO1 for treating
cancer patients (355), particularly in combination with cancer
chemotherapy or "immune checkpoint" antibodies (352, 356).
It is not yet clear how IDO1 may influence host interactions
with the microbiome, but there has been much attention to the
related topic of its role in the host response to infection by
various pathogens, which has been a topic of interest for a
number of years. Indeed, well prior to findings of its involve-
ment in immune modulation, it was noted that intraperitoneal
administration of bacterial LPS could induce IDO1 activity in
the lungs of mice by 30- to 50-fold (357). This initial indication
that IDO1 induction might be associated with the inflamma-
tory response to microbial infection was followed by reports of
pulmonary IDO1 induction in response to virus infection
(358) and IFNg (359).
As IFNg plays a major role in controlling a variety of infec-
tions, the finding that IDO1 is highly responsive to IFNg
spurred investigations addressing whether IDO1 might have
a downstream antimicrobial effector role. In 1984, Pfefferkorn
and colleagues reported that tryptophan degradation was
responsible for the IFNg-mediated restriction of the growth of
the obligate intracellular protozoan Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii)
in human fibroblasts (359). IFNg-mediated restriction of the
growth of the obligate, intracellular, Gram-negative bacterium
Chlamydophila psittaci was likewise linked to tryptophan depri-
vation (360). These studies focused attention on IFNg-elicited
tryptophan deprivation resulting from the induction of IDO1
as mediating the antiproliferative effect on these intracellu-
lar pathogens. This assessment, that IDO1 provides a beneficial
effect in combating infections, was complicated by additional
studies demonstrating the activation of genes for Chlamydia
A
B
C
© 2017 American Association for Cancer Research
Figure 2.
Late endosomes locate throughout
colon mucosa and muscularis. A,
Punctate cytosolic localization in a
colony of human colonic Caco-2 cells.
Cells were stained with Beclin1, an
autophagic regulator associated with
late endosomes (green), and DAPI to
visualize cell nuclei (blue) and
processed for immunofluorescence
microscopy. B, Cytosolic localization
of Beclin1 in murine colon mucosa
processed as above. C, Cytosolic
localization of Beclin1 in murine colon
muscularis processed as above.
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1796
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 persistence triggered by IDO1-mediated tryptophan depletion.
Because the bacterium is sensitive to the antibiotic treatment
only when it is metabolically active, IDO1 activity in this
context was detrimental to clearing infections, leading to the
suggestion that tryptophan supplementation might help over-
come antibiotic resistance (361). Furthermore, although the
effects of IDO1 on microorganisms were initially attributed to
depletion of tryptophan, evidence of microbial effects produced
by downstream tryptophan metabolites, from what is collec-
tively referred to as the kynurenine pathway, were also reported
(362, 363). In particular, 3-hydroxykynurenine was shown to
suppress the proliferation of S. aureus in vascular allografts
(364), and both 3-hydroxykynurenine and 3-hydroxyanthrani-
lic acid were found to contribute to controlling the replication
of Trypanosoma cruzi in mice (365). In a single report, treatment
with 1MT produced three different outcomes depending on the
nature of the infection, exacerbating T. gondii toxoplasmosis,
restraining L. major leishmaniasis, and having no apparent effect
on HSV-1 replication or latency (366). In aggregate, the impli-
cation from these studies of infectious pathogens is that the
overall impact of IDO1 activity, both in terms of tryptophan
depletion and the production of various metabolites, on the
diverse ecology of the commensal microbiome is likely to be
complex and contextual.
Perhaps even more consequential than the direct effects of
IDO1 activity on particular microbes are the effects that IDO1
can exert on the overall inflammatory environment. In accord
with its ability to elicit T-cell suppression, the general assumption
has been that IDO1 should act in an immunosuppressive manner
to limit the severity of inflammation. Data supporting this inter-
pretation have been reported in a mouse model of chronic
granulomatous disease in which defective IDO1 function in mice
lacking an essential component of NADPH oxidase, p47phox, was
implicated in the exaggerated inflammatory response to infection
with Aspergillus fumigatus (367). The more severe illness was
associated with higher numbers of IL17-producing gdT cells and
fewer IL10-producing abTregs, which could be reversed by the
provision of exogenous kynurenine. However, as with the effects
of tryptophan catabolism on microorganisms, the categorization
of IDO1 as strictly immunosuppressive may be an oversimplifi-
cation (368). In a mouse model of chemical carcinogenesis,
genetic loss of IDO1 did not exacerbate inflammation in response
to phorbol ester–elicited tumor promotion, as would be expected
if it were broadly immunosuppressive, but did result in a dra-
matically reduced incidence of premalignant lesions (369). Per-
haps even more strikingly, in a mouse model of rheumatoid
arthritis, 1MT treatment suppressed rather than exacerbated joint
inflammation (370), whereas in a contact hypersensitivity model,
genetic loss of IDO1 resulted in diminished ear swelling (371).
Why IDO1 has such varied effects on the inflammatory response
remains to be fully elucidated, but suggests that the outcome of
the interactions with the complex microbiome may be contextual
and difficult to predict.
The study in the rheumatoid arthritis model noted above also
highlights a particular complication with interpreting results of
the many studies that have relied on the use of the compound
1MT to inhibit IDO1 activity. Biochemical and pharmacologic
evaluation of this compound clearly indicates that it is not directly
inhibiting the enzyme at the dose ranges administered in vivo, and
it is able to signal as a mimetic for tryptophan sufficiency and
thereby interfere with activation of downstream response path-
ways (372). However, a tryptophan deficiency signal can be
provided by any of the enzymes that catalyze tryptophan degra-
dation (IDO1, IDO2, TDO2, as well as TPH, the latter of
which initiates an alternate pathway of tryptophan catabolism
to serotonin). Therefore, 1MT is not a valid tool to discriminate
which of these particular enzymes is involved. Indeed, in the
rheumatoid arthritis model, genetic analysis revealed that
the recently identified paralog IDO2, and not IDO1, is likely to
be responsible for the effect of 1MT on joint inflammation, as the
effect of 1MT administration was phenocopied in mice lacking
IDO2 but not IDO1 (370, 373). Studies using later generation,
direct enzyme inhibitors (355), coupled with studies in geneti-
cally modified animals (371, 374, 375) can overcome ambiguities
in data interpretation associated with 1MT treatment. Indeed, a
recent study of LPS responses utilizing the IDO1, IDO2, and Tdo2
gene deletion mouse strains provides confirmatory evidence that
these three genes have distinct, nonoverlapping roles in the host
immune response to this microbial signal (376).
Although the regional microbiome present at all barrier sur-
faces is likely to influence immunity locally, the microbiome of
the gastrointestinal tract is of particular interest because of the
broader role it has been found to play in shaping systemic
immune homeostasis (377). Correspondingly, current micro-
biome research is largely focused on the gastrointestinal tract,
where commensal microorganisms have been found to contribute
to host defense by limiting the growth of enteric pathogens and
producing symbiosis factors that control intestinal inflammation
and pathology (377). Evidence implicating IDO1 in this process
has come from a study of the protective capacity of L. salivarius,
which is abolished in mice lacking the gene encoding NOD2, an
intracellular pattern recognition molecule that regulates inflam-
matory pathways in response to detection of bacterial peptido-
glycans. In this model, IDO1 upregulation was found to correlate
with NOD2-dependent protection (378). The increased regula-
tory complexity imposed by the gut microbiome may help also
explain counterintuitive findings associated with IDO1 in this
tissue. In a dextran sodium sulfate/1,2-dimethylhydrazine–eli-
cited model of colon carcinogenesis, genetic loss of IDO1 resulted
in increased tumor frequency (379), unlike other organ systems in
which IDO1 loss has been associated with resistance to carcinoma
development (380, 381). This outcome is similar to the atypical
impact on tumor formation ascribed to Tregs in the gut, where
their presence appears to be protective against carcinogenesis
(382), despite evidence that Tregs are generally associated in
other organs with tumor promotion. It has been proposed
that the effect of immunosuppressive mechanisms on inflamma-
tory pathology of the gut may be quite different depending on
whether there is any initial involvement of tissue damage, as the
resulting microbial translocation produces a severe tumor-pro-
moting inflammation (383). Under these circumstances, damp-
ening the inflammatory response via immunosuppressive mecha-
nisms may provide a more consequential benefit that oversha-
dows any detrimental role in promoting immune escape. This
interpretation is consistent with the findings of two otherwise
apparently contradictory studies in colitis models, where IDO1
blockade resulted in augmented colitis induced by trinitroben-
zene sulfonic acid (384), but diminished colitis induced by
Citrobacter rodentium (385).
In conjunction with the complex immunoregulatory effects
attributed to IDO1 activity in the gut, tryptophan metabolites
produced by the microbiota affect mucosal reactivity. When
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1797
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 switching from sugar to tryptophan as an energy source, the highly
adaptive Lactobacilli in the gut expand and produce an aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligand, indole-3-aldehyde, that con-
tributes to AhR-dependent IL22 transcription. The resulting IL22-
dependent mucosal response promotes the survival of mixed
microbial communities, while providing colonization resistance
to the fungus Candida albicans and mucosal protection from
inflammation. This example of coevolutionary commensalism
through the microbiota–AhR axis represents yet another way in
which tryptophan catabolism appears to be involved in fine-
tuning host mucosal reactivity (386). As further investigations
into the physiologic and pathophysiologic interactions between
IDO1, the commensal microbiome and host immunity are con-
ducted, the indications from these early studies are that IDO1 is
likely to play an integral but contextual role at the interface
between homeostasis and dysbiosis.
Microbiome and Cancer
The interplay between microbes, cancer, and the immune
system is in no manner fully defined. However, accumulating
evidence argues provocatively that microbes exert a variety of
functions on host oncogenesis, tumor progression, and response
to immunotherapy. Thus, selectively manipulating the gut micro-
biome is a critical parameter to consider in the ongoing battle
against established cancers.
The metabolic potential of the gut microbiota is now regarded
as vital to the process of malignant transformation. Disruption of
the intimate relationship between the host and intestinal bacteria,
known as dysbiosis, can affect oncogenesis, tumor progression,
and response to cancer therapy. Dysbiosis can occur for several
reasons: (i) direct occupancy of unwanted, foreign microbes (as
discussed above) that outcompete friendly gut flora; (ii) a
response to immunosenescence with aging; and (iii) direct envi-
ronmental insults such as antibiotics and smoking (387). In the
setting of chronic autoimmune processes, such as Crohn's disease
and ulcerative colitis, the integrity of gut epithelial, myeloid, and
lymphoid components is disrupted (Fig. 3). These chronic insults
ultimately increase host's risk for neoplastic transformation
(388). Indeed, several factors that favor carcinogenesis similarly
recapitulate dysbiosis.
One well-studied model of the dysbiosis/cancer connection
is that of repeated intra-abdominal infections, the use of
antibiotics, or both leading to an increased incidence of
colorectal cancer (389). In several preclinical studies, inter-
ventions that abrogate or directly alter gut microbiome com-
position increase the incidence and progression of colorectal
carcinoma in both genetic and carcinogen-induced models of
tumorigenesis (390–392). Moreover, several byproducts of the
gut microbiota directly target intestinal epithelial cells and
either facilitate oncogenesis (as reported for hydrogen sulfide
and the B. fragilis toxin) or suppress tumorigenesis (in the case
of SCFAs; ref. 393). Intestinal microbes have been character-
ized to participate in more than just colorectal carcinogenesis.
Experimental models of gut flora also elucidate the develop-
ment of other extraintestinal cancers, such as hepatocellular
carcinoma (394, 395), presumably through systemically dis-
seminated metabolic networks. Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is
a Gram-negative bacterial pathogen that selectively colonizes
the gastric epithelium. It is postulated that half of the world's
population is infected with H. pylori, although colonization of
the pathogenic bacteria does not cause any symptoms in a
majority of the population. Nevertheless, long-term carriage of
H. pylori significantly increases the risk of developing diseases.
Among infected individuals, approximately 10% develop
peptic ulcer disease, 1% to 3% develop gastric adenocarcino-
ma, and <0.1% develop mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) lymphoma. However, at initial stages, gastric MALT
lymphoma can be cured completely by the eradication of
H. pylori with antibiotics (396).
Apart from antibiotics, probiotics may also inhibit tumori-
genesis and cancer progression. Konishi and colleagues (397)
reported that the culture supernatant of L. casei has tumor-
suppressive effect on colon cancer cells. The authors reported
that ferrichrome produced by L. casei is the molecule that
provides tumor protection and is exerted via the JNK signaling
pathway.
The etiology of breast cancer is still not understood, although
it is believed the disease is due to a combination of both genetic
and environmental factors. It is posited that environmental
factors influence breast cancer, as there is an increased incidence
of breast cancer among migrants and their descendants after
they move from a region of low breast cancer risk to a region of
high risk. Bacterial communities within the host could be one
such environmental factor that may influence breast cancer
development. Different bacterial profiles in breast tissue exist
between healthy women and those with breast cancer. Breast
cancer patients had higher levels of Bacillus, Enterobacteriaceae,
and Staphylococcus. E.coli and Staphylococcus epidermidis isolated
from breast cancer patients induced DNA double-stranded
breaks in HeLa cells. There was also a decrease in some lactic
acid bacteria, known for their beneficial health effects, including
anticarcinogenic properties (398). It has been demonstrated
that women who drink fermented milk products have a reduced
risk of breast cancer development (399). Oral administration of
Lactobacillus species has been shown to be protective in animal
models of breast cancer (400).
Case studies back to the 1700s have recounted the devel-
opment of bacterial infections in cancer patients that led to
remissions of their malignant disease. One of the pioneers in
this field, the U.S. surgeon William B. Coley, engaged in a
lifelong study of this phenomenon after the loss of his very
first patient in the late 1800s to a rapidly invasive sarcoma
(401). Searching the literature available, Coley discovered
records of another sarcoma patient with relentless sarcoma-
tous recurrences following surgical resection and an ultimate
wound
infection
(erysipelas)
with
Streptococcus
pyogenes
(S. pyogenes) and high fever. To his surprise, after each attack
of fever, the ulcer improved, the sarcoma shrank, and the
lesion ultimately regressed completely. Coley suspected that
in some manner, the infection had induced tumor regression
and began a series of trials to "cure" his cancer patients with
pathogen inoculation. He infected his next 10 patients, but
observed intrinsic variability in efficacy using this method
(402). Because of this unpredictability, he elected to create a
formulation containing two killed bacteria: S. pyogenes and
Serratia marcescens. Under the form of an inactivated vaccine,
he could simulate an infection (inflammation, chills, fever)
without the actual risks of a life-threatening disease. This
vaccine became known as ``Coley toxins.'' The relative success
with Coley's vaccine was by no means limited to sarcomas.
For decades, this vaccine form had been used by other
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1798
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 contemporaries for carcinomas, lymphomas, melanomas, and
myelomas (403, 404).
However, with the advent of radiotherapy and chemother-
apy, and the empowerment of the FDA in 1964 that restricted
clinical use of "Coley toxins," the use of microbial toxins in
oncology fell out of use. There were, however, rare instances in
which this line of thinking endured and eventually received
FDA approval. Perhaps the most prominent example is the use
of Bacillus Calmette–Guerin (BCG) for the treatment for super-
ficial bladder cancer (405). BCG is currently the only conven-
tional bacterial vaccine in use for direct tumor killing. Unlike
Coley toxins, BCG is not administered with the ultimate goal of
induced fever. But similar to Coley's methods, the vaccine is
applied directly to the tumor site with repeated courses fol-
lowing initial resection to prevent recurrence (406). After
intravesicular administration of this vaccine, a wide range of
cytokines become detectable in the urine, including IL1, IL2,
IL6, IL8, IL10, IL12, IL18, IFNg, IFNg-inducible protein-10,
macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and TNFa (407–409).
This inflammatory host response illustrates the point that
individual immunomodulating cytokines are partial compo-
nents of a much more complex immunologic response to infec-
tion, and correspondingly, tumor regression. Some insights
were gleaned from Coley toxins and other historical reports
on live or attenuated bacterial inoculations. One was that a
local inoculation produces only a local response. Thus, BCG
use is limited to superficial bladder cancer. The heat and
immune activation associated with local inflammation are
© 2017 American Association for Cancer Research
Intact
intestinal
epithelial
cells
Intestinal
lumen
IgG
IgA
B cell
IL1
IL6
PAMP and TLR
activation
Dendritic cell
(DC)
IL17A
IL17-F
Th17 cell
Th1 cell
IL1
IL6
IL23
IL12
Toll-like
receptor
(TLR)
Macrophage
Intestinal
lumen
Disrupted
intestinal
epithelial
cells
Intestinal
epithelial
dysplasia
and cancer
Lamina
propria
and
peripheral
blood
Lamina
propria
and
peripheral
blood
Dendritic cell
(DC)
BAFF
APRIL
B cell
IL10
TGFβ
TNFα
IFNγ
Regulatory
T cell (Treg)
Tolerant
immune
response
Decreased
inflammation
Dysregulated
immune
response
Increased
inflammation
Symbiosis
Dysbiosis
Figure 3.
Dysbiosis: an immunocompromised state characterized by pathobiont colonization that leads to hyperinflammation, dysplasia, and tumorigenesis. Symbiosis
(left): a symbiotic gut microbiota operates under a functional intestinal epithelial cell barrier, with steady-state proportions of mucus, pattern recognition
receptors, antimicrobial peptides, and secretory IgA, which in turn contain the microbiota in the intestinal lumen. Under tight control by intestinal epithelial
cells, the intestinal immune system within the gut lamina propria becomes largely tolerant to the resident commensals. Signaling cascades that occur
downstream of TLRs are used by intestinal epithelial cells to detect microbes through pattern recognition receptors. Upon LPS stimulation of TLRs, the MYD88
protein is recruited, activating the NF-kB pathway, leading to production of antimicrobial proteins and proinflammatory cytokines. In a symbiotic gut,
intestinal epithelial cells are desensitized by repeated exposure to LPS or are attenuated by LPS-mediated downregulation of the IL1 receptor–associated
kinase 1 (IRAK1), an activator of the NF-kB cascade. Exposure to LPS induces epithelial cells to secrete TGFb, B-cell–activating factor of the TNF family (BAFF),
and a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), all of which promote the development of tolerogenic responses to the microbiota. CD103þ DCs support
the development of Tregs to secrete IL10 and TGFb, and together, they stimulate the production of commensal-specific IgA. Dysbiosis (right):
increased intestinal exposure of diverse PAMPs, proinflammatory cytokines, apoptotic debris, and toxins leads to microbial dysbiosis and overgrowth of
"pathobionts," transformed symbiotic bacteria now under pathologic conditions. Pathobiont overgrowth leads to the loss of barrier integrity and a
breach in the intestinal epithelial cell barrier. Translocation of bacteria and bacterial components triggers the intestinal immune system through TLR
activation, resulting in potentially harmful effector T-cell responses set to clear invading bacteria. Ultimately, the secretion of IL1 and IL6 from intestinal
epithelial cells fuels a Th1 and Th17 response by DCs and macrophages and leads to higher levels of commensal-specific IgG by B cells.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1799
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 perceived to be a minimized febrile response, and correspond-
ingly, this local response is only effective in the immediate
region where it occurs (401). Since Coley's passing, the field of
tumor immunology has developed into a better founded and
more sophisticated specialty, with investigators not only
employing a variety of basic immunologic principles (e.g.,
antitumor cytokines, cytotoxic T cells, immunostimulatory
antibodies, cell-based vaccines) but pivotal insights into the
dominance of tumoral immune suppression in blunting the
effectiveness of any immunotherapy. Overcoming this histor-
ical source of failure in the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy is
empowering this field anew today.
There are more than a hundred chemotherapy drugs to treat
many types of cancers. However, it is not fully understood the
mechanism of some of these drugs. Cyclophosphamide is a
clinically important chemotherapeutic cancer drug that stimu-
lates antitumor immune responses. Viaud and colleagues (410)
demonstrated that cyclophosphamide alters the composition
of microbiota in the gut and induces the translocation of
several Gram-positive bacteria into mesenteric lymph nodes
and spleen. In the lymphoid organs, the Gram-positive bacteria
stimulated the generation of pathogenic Th17 (pTh17) cells
and memory Th1 immune responses. Germ-free tumor-bearing
mice or treated with antibiotics to kill Gram-positive bacteria
showed a reduction in T-cell responses, and their tumors were
resistant to cyclophosphamide. Adoptive transfer of pTh17 cells
restored the antitumor efficacy of cyclophosphamide. Overall,
the study suggested that the gut microbiota help shape the
anticancer immune response.
Turning the Tables: Using Engineered
Microbes to Attack Cancer
Over the past century, knowledge gained on how selective
microbes either facilitate the growth of cancer or alternatively act
as tumoricidal agentspermits us open access to utilize this double-
edged sword to our advantage. Such interventions have already
begun and span several modalities, including but not limited to
the use of helper peptide sequences from bacterial subunits,
bacterial toxin–fusion proteins, oncolytic viral vaccines, and, as
recent studies elucidate, leveraging the metabolism of host flora to
potentiate immune modulators.
Broadly defined, an immunotherapeutic is any modality that
manipulates the immune system for enhanced therapeutic out-
come. These include nonspecific activation of the immune system
with microbial components or cytokines, antigen-specific adop-
tive immunotherapy with antibodies orlymphocyte transfers, and
active immunotherapy by direct vaccination against tumor-spe-
cific proteins, or antigens. We traditionally regard vaccines as
educators for the na€
�ve immune system that are administered
prophylactically in anticipation of any infection. However, in the
setting of aggressive cancers, the use of cellular vaccines to mount
reactive immune responses is now being employed with prom-
ising results.
A variety of cancer vaccines are currently under investiga-
tion, but perhaps the most widely investigated to date are
(i) cellular vaccines composed of APC loaded with tumor
antigen (411–414) and (ii) peptide vaccines (415, 416). Pep-
tide vaccines are comprised of 8–25 amino acids that encom-
pass an epitope, a recognizable sequence coding for an antigen.
The transient nature and low magnitude of responses in many
cancer patients has elucidated that tumors themselves are
inherently proficient at downplaying immune responses as
well as escaping antigen recognition altogether. Thus, there is
an urgent need for improving vaccine immunogenicity and for
ensuring that cancer antigens are sufficiently immunogenic.
To enhance peptide vaccine immunogenicity, these small pep-
tides are often conjugated to a carrier protein, such as keyhole
limpet hemocyanin (417, 418) and tetanus toxoid (419, 420).
These helper proteins enable recognition by and activation
of the immune system with great potency and generate com-
plimentary bystander activation with cytokine release and
maturation of effector cell phenotype. Peptide vaccines are
appealing in cancer therapy because they are relatively easy to
manufacture and store, and they do not require laborious
preparations. Because of their "off-the-shelf" feature, repeated
boosting for enhanced immune activation also distinguishes
peptide cancer vaccines as an expandable modality (421).
Adoptive immunotherapy has also been utilized to eradicate
established tumors (422). This process involves ex vivo activa-
tion of autologous immune cells, isolated from either periph-
eral blood or intratumoral lymphocytes (423, 424), into lym-
phocyte-activated killer cells. Lymphocyte-activated killer cells
are generated by culturing autologous peripheral lymphocytes
with IL2, a vital growth cytokine for generating T cells and
natural killer (NK) cells. These killer cells are then returned to
the patient intratumorally or intravenously, where they become
activated by host APCs and exert their tumoricidal effects. Using
the knowledge we have gained from microbial components, NK
cells have been potentiated by leveraging the cytolytic capacity
of microbial diphtheria toxin. One study demonstrated that
haploidentical NK cells for relapsed and refractory acute mye-
loid leukemia could be augmented and improved with a
lymphodepletive platform using diphtheria toxin conjugated
to IL2. Using the immunotoxin IL2DT to deplete immunosup-
pressive Tregs, investigators appreciably improved rates of in
vivo NK-cell expansion (10% vs. 27%) and AML 28-day remis-
sion (53% vs. 21%; P ¼ 0.02) compared with the cohort
without IL2DT (425).
Oncolytic viruses represent another immunotherapy modal-
ity that has gained recent traction in the field of tumor immu-
nology. Use of these microbes was first based on early reports of
spontaneous cancer remissions coincident with natural infec-
tion or upon the use of live attenuated vaccines (426). Since
then, an improved understanding of the molecular basis for
viral host cell tropism, cytotoxicity, and cell type specificity has
opened up avenues for the very selective design of virally based
anticancer strategies. To be efficacious and safe, an oncolytic
virus must possess (i) an inherently low human pathogenic
potential (i.e., the orphan reovirus; ref. 427); (ii) a veterinary
pathogen with unknown human pathogenicity (i.e., vesicular
stomatitis virus; ref. 428); or (iii) a human pathogen geneti-
cally engineered to selectively kill cancerous cells without
collateral cytotoxicity in normal cells (i.e., herpes simplex
virus-1; ref. 429). One such group is utilizing a prototype
nonpathogenic poliovirus recombinant, known as PVSRIPO.
Poliovirus naturally targets the vast majority of ectodermal/
neuroectodermal
cancers
expressing
its
cellular
receptor,
CD155. Evidence from glioblastoma patients suggests that the
CD155 receptor is ectopically upregulated on tumor cells.
Preclinical studies have shown that treatment of glioma xeno-
grafts with intratumoral inoculation of PVS-RIPO produced
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1800
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 rampant tumor cell death, potent host-mediated inflammatory
reactions against infected tumors, and rapid tumor decline
(430, 431). The use of PVS-RIPO is now being evaluated in
the phase I setting for recurrent glioblastoma (432).
As multiple studies are being carried out yearly, investigators
continue to uncover key barriers to efficacy that further clarify
our strategies. As with any antigen-specific immune response,
several homeostatic mechanisms remain at play to prevent
rampant damage to the host or autoimmune toxicity. One of
the most exciting regulatory axes to be studied recently is that of
programmed death (PD)-1/PD ligand-1 (PD-L1). PD-1 is a
coinhibitory receptor that is inducibly expressed by T and B
cells upon activation. Antigen-specific T cells expressing the PD-
1 receptor will engage with either of its ligands, PD-L1 or PD-L2
expressed on APC, which elicits an inhibitory cascade and
subsequent inhibition of TCR-induced cytokine production
and proliferation (433). PDL-1 is expressed in several other
cell types, including tumor cells and some epithelial cells,
lymphoid cells, and myeloid cells (434). Another axis involved
in regulating self-recognition is that of cytotoxic T lymphocyte
antigen-4 (CTLA-4). Studies have demonstrated that tumor
cells stimulate CTLA-4, promoting a cascade of inhibitory
immune processes and ultimate T-cell inactivity against tumors
themselves (435, 436).
In cancer immunotherapy, mAbs against the immune check-
points CTLA-4, PD-1, and its ligand PD-L1 have demonstrated
© 2017 American Association for Cancer Research
Intestinal
epithelial
cells
Dendritic cell
(DC)
Anti-PD-L1
Anti-CTLA-4
Promotes
activation
of effector
T cells
Regulatory
T cell (Treg)
Induces
CD8+ T cell
responses for
antitumor efficacy
Increases DC activation via
increased MHC I and
MHC II expression
Promotes enrichment of resident
Bacteroides spp. in the gut
Suppresses
Treg
function
Engages
with flora
and T cells
IL12
receptor
IL12
CD4+ T cell
CD8+ T cell
Granzymes
and perforin
PD-1
PD-L1
T cell
receptor
MHC II-
peptide
complex
MHC I-
peptide
complex
CTLA-4
Macrophage
Tumor killing
Tumor
Promotes activation,
expansion, and function
of effector T cells
Interacts with resident Bifidobacterium spp.
via systemic mediators to augment DC activation
Figure 4.
Gut microbiome directs the efficacy of immune checkpoint therapy. Both anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-L1 therapies rely on gut microbiota for efficacy in
immune activation. Anti-PD-L1 therapy has been shown to rely on the preexistence of sufficient Bifidobacterium species, which are also thought to
augment responses via PD-L1 binding on APCs, such as DCs and macrophages. Subsequent ligation results in the prevention of suppressive signals to
PD-1–expressing T cells. Similarly, anti-CTLA-4 indirectly alters the intestinal flora and enriches the Bacteroides species, possibly by promoting
deterioration of the intestinal epithelial cell barrier via activation of local lymphocytes. These bacteria then promote the activation of DCs, which present
tumor antigens to prime and maintain antitumor T-cell responses. Anti-CTLA-4 holds additional activation functions, including (i) preventing CTLA-4
from blocking activation of the costimulatory molecule CD28 on T cells and (ii) blocking the immunosuppressive function of Tregs, which are required
in the deactivation of immune responses against tumors.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1801
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 high activity in melanoma and other tumors (437). Ipilimumab,
an anti-CTLA-4 antibody, was the first approved "immune check-
point inhibitor." Although the response rate with ipilimumab is
low (less than 20% of patients have objective responses), many of
those positive responses were associated with long-term survival
(438), with similar results in the first- and second-line settings.
Nivolumab and pembrolizumab, both anti-PD-1 inhibitors, have
now also been approved for the treatment of melanoma, with
response rates of up to 40% and a demonstrated survival advan-
tage in phase III trials (434).
Strikingly, recent findings in preclinical models of cancer
stress the importance of intact gut microbiota for effective
immune checkpoint blockade. One recent study found that
antitumor effects of CTLA-4 blockade depended on the pres-
ence of distinct Bacteroides species. In both mice and patients,
T-cell responses specific for B. thetaiotaomicron or B. fragilis were
associated with the efficacy of CTLA-4 blockade. Using antibi-
otic-treated as well as germ-free mice, tumors lacking these
strains did not respond to CTLA blockade. This deficiency was
rescued by B. fragilis gavage, by immunization with B. fragilis
polysaccharides, or by adoptive transfer of B. fragilis–specific
T cells. Ultimately, fecal microbial transplantation from hu-
mans to mice confirmed that treatment of melanoma patients
with antibodies against CTLA-4 favored the outgrowth of
B. fragilis with anticancer properties (439). A different preclin-
ical study similarly elucidated that mice treated with gut com-
mensals of Bifidobacterium displayed significantly improved
suppression of melanoma growth in comparison with non-
Bifidobacterium–treated counterparts. These observed differ-
ences in spontaneous antitumor immunity were eliminated
upon cohousing or after fecal transfer, eluding to the impor-
tance of shared bacterial colonization. Furthermore, adminis-
tration of the bacteria to Bifidobacterium-na€
�ve mice with estab-
lished melanoma significantly enhanced tumor-specific immu-
nity and response to anti-PD-L1 mAb therapy (440). Although
the mechanisms from both these studies are not fully under-
stood, they laid the foundation behind the requirement for an
intact microbiome to enact antitumor responses. One key
observation from both these studies was that they employed
subcutaneous tumor models, meaning that intestinal micro-
biota exerted antitumor immunity in a systemic fashion. Both
studies relied on the presence of CD8þ T cells. Second, both
demonstrate that altered DC activation was a responsible
intermediate event between the presence of gut microbiota
and provision of checkpoint inhibitors (Fig. 4).
Conclusions
It is humbling to consider how much biomedical research has
been conducted since the molecular biology revolution of the past
century without appreciation of the importance of microbiomes in
health and disease. Like all realms of biomedical investigation, the
field of cancer research can no longer ignore the "other half" of the
organism; it must become as familiar with the genetics, biology,
physiology, and immunologic effects of host microorganisms as
with the hosts themselves. In considering sources of experimental
irreproducibility in biomedical publications that have been sug-
gested recently to be disturbingly high, it seems likely that natural
variations in microbiome infections present in experimental mod-
els and vivariums at different sites will provide one more challenge
to the exquisitely difficult problem of how one defines a "molec-
ular mechanism" in disease. More focus on practical applications
(sought by most funding organizations) along with empirical
explorations once traditional to biology may offer two paths
forward, as, to paraphrase the pragmatic American philosopher
Charles S. Peirce, "You know something if you can do something."
How the current obsession with molecular mechanism will change
in the face of the challenge the microbiome poses to preclinical
research is unclear. Nevertheless, as the molecular biology revo-
lution continues to wash up on the shores of reductionism this
century, it will be impossible not to reembrace the roots of
traditional biological thought, where ecology, evolution, and a
focus on emergent principles in complex organisms can help
recenter the pursuit of new knowledge and its applications to
improve disease management and healthy lifespans.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
E. Walsh is a scientist at Seres Therapeutics. D.A. Sela has received speakers
bureau honoraria Artugen and Premier Medical Group and has ownership
interest (including patents) in a patent (2010/0113383 A1). G.C. Prendergast is
the Editor-in-Chief (Cancer Research) at AACR, reports receiving commercial
research grants from Janssen Pharmaceuticals, has ownership interest (includ-
ing patents) in Dynamis Pharmaceuticals, Man's Best Friend Therapeutics,
Meditope Biosciences Inc., and New Link Genetics Inc., and is a consultant/
advisory board member for Biogen Inc., Guidepoint Global LLC, Kyn Thera-
peutics Inc., New Link Genetics Inc., OrbiMed Advisors LLC, Ribonova Inc., and
Vitae Pharmaceuticals. No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed by the
other authors.
Disclaimer
The content of this review was neither influenced nor constrained by the
organizations that funded this work.
Grant Support
The laboratories of Jacques Izard are supported by the NIH grants
R01CA202704 and Nebraska Tobacco Settlement Biomedical Research Devel-
opment Funds. The APC Microbiome Institute is supported by Science Foun-
dation Ireland (SFI; grant number SFI/12/RC/2273) and has conducted studies
in collaboration with several companies including GSK, Pfizer, Wyeth, and
Mead Johnson. G.Clarke's contributionto this review was specificallysupported
by the Irish Health Service Executive (grant number HaPAI/2015/GC).
S. Thomas, A.J. Muller, J.M. Mullin, and G.C. Prendergast acknowledge support
from the Lankenau Medical Center Foundation, the Women's Board of Lanke-
nau Medical Center, and Main Line Health.
Received October 26, 2016; revised December 19, 2016; accepted December
21, 2016; published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017.
References
1. Costello EK, Lauber CL, Hamady M, Fierer N, Gordon JI, Knight R.
Bacterial community variation in human body habitats across space and
time. Science 2009;326:1694–7.
2. Lederberg J, McCray AT. 'Ome Sweet 'Omics—a genealogical treasury of
words. Scientist 2001;15:8.
3. Margulis L. Symbiogenesis and symbionticism. Symbiosis as a
source of evolutionary innovation: speciation and morphogenesis.
In:Margulis L, Fester R, editors. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1991.
p. 1–14.
4. Bordenstein SR, Theis KR. Host biology in light of the microbiome: ten
principles
of holobionts and
hologenomes. PLoS
Biol 2015;13:
e1002226.
5. Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Are we really vastly outnumbered? Revisiting
the ratio of bacterial to host cells in humans. Cell 2016;164:337–40.
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1802
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 6. Maynard CL, Elson CO, Hatton RD, Weaver CT. Reciprocal interactions
of the intestinal microbiota and immune system. Nature 2012;489:
231–41.
7. Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT, Eckburg PB, Turnbaugh PJ, Samuel BS, et al.
Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science
2006;312:1355–9.
8. Meadow JF, Altrichter AE, Bateman AC, Stenson J, Brown GZ, Green JL,
et al. Humans differ in their personal microbial cloud. PeerJ 2015;3:
e1258.
9. Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, Trehan I, Dominguez-Bello MG,
Contreras M, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and
geography. Nature 2012;486:222–7.
10. Korem T, Zeevi D, Suez J, Weinberger A, Avnit-Sagi T, Pompan-
Lotan M, et al. Growth dynamics of gut microbiota in health and
disease inferred from single metagenomic samples. Science 2015;
349:1101–6.
11. Graf D, Di Cagno R, Fak F, Flint HJ, Nyman M, Saarela M, et al.
Contribution of diet to the composition of the human gut microbiota.
Microbial Ecol Health Dis 2015;26:26164.
12. Zimmer J, Lange B, Frick JS, Sauer H, Zimmermann K, Schwiertz A, et al. A
vegan or vegetarian diet substantially alters the human colonic faecal
microbiota. Eur J Clin Nutr 2012;66:53–60.
13. David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Gootenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe
BE, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome.
Nature 2014;505:559–63.
14. Parte AC. LPSN–list of prokaryotic names with standing in nomenclature.
Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:D613–6.
15. Dewhirst FE, Chen T, Izard J, Paster BJ, Tanner AC, Yu WH, et al. The
human oral microbiome. J Bacteriol 2010;192:5002–17.
16. Nelson KE, Weinstock GM, Highlander SK, Worley KC, Creasy HH,
Wortman JR, et al. A catalog of reference genomes from the human
microbiome. Science 2010;328:994–9.
17. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. A framework for human micro-
biome research. Nature 2012;486:215–21.
18. Bouckaert R, Heled J, Kuhnert D, Vaughan T, Wu CH, Xie D, et al. BEAST 2:
a software platform for Bayesian evolutionary analysis. PLoS Comput Biol
2014;10:e1003537.
19. Huang K, Brady A, Mahurkar A, White O, Gevers D, Huttenhower C, et al.
MetaRef: a pan-genomic database for comparative and community
microbial genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:D617–24.
20. Kerepesi C, Banky D, Grolmusz V. AmphoraNet: the webserver imple-
mentation of the AMPHORA2 metagenomic workflow suite. Gene
2014;533:538–40.
21. Truong DT, Franzosa EA, Tickle TL, Scholz M, Weingart G, Pasolli E, et al.
MetaPhlAn2 for enhanced metagenomic taxonomic profiling. Nat Meth-
ods 2015;12:902–3.
22. Stackebrandt E. Forces shaping bacterial systematics. Microbe 2007;
2:283–8.
23. Yilmaz P, Parfrey LW, Yarza P, Gerken J, Pruesse E, Quast C, et al. The
SILVA and "All-species Living Tree Project (LTP)" taxonomic frameworks.
Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:D643–8.
24. Zuo G, Xu Z, Hao B. Phylogeny and taxonomy of archaea: a comparison of
the whole-genome-based CVTree approach with 16S rRNA sequence
analysis. Life 2015;5:949–68.
25. Chen T, Yu WH, Izard J, Baranova OV, Lakshmanan A, Dewhirst FE. The
Human Oral Microbiome Database: a web accessible resource for inves-
tigating oral microbe taxonomic and genomic information. Database
2010;2010:baq013.
26. Cole JR, Wang Q, Fish JA, Chai B, McGarrell DM, Sun Y, et al. Ribosomal
Database Project: data and tools for high throughput rRNA analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:D633–42.
27. Segata N, Haake SK, Mannon P, Lemon KP, Waldron L, Gevers D, et al.
Composition of the adult digestive tract bacterial microbiome based on
seven mouth surfaces, tonsils, throat and stool samples. Genome Biol
2012;13:R42.
28. Zhou Y, Gao H, Mihindukulasuriya KA, La Rosa PS, Wylie KM, Vishni-
vetskaya T, et al. Biogeography of the ecosystems of the healthy human
body. Genome Biol 2013;14:R1.
29. Agirbasli H, Ozcan SA, Gedikoglu G. Fecal fungal flora of pediatric healthy
volunteers and immunosuppressed patients. Mycopathologia 2005;159:
515–20.
30. Scanlan
PD,
Marchesi
JR.
Micro-eukaryotic
diversity
of
the
human distal gut microbiota: qualitative assessment using cul-
ture-dependent and -independent analysis of faeces. ISME J 2008;
2:1183–93.
31. Chen Y, Chen Z, Guo R, Chen N, Lu H, Huang S, et al. Correlation between
gastrointestinal fungi and varying degrees of chronic hepatitis B virus
infection. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2011;70:492–8.
32. Hamad I, Sokhna C, Raoult D, Bittar F. Molecular detection of eukaryotes
in a single human stool sample from Senegal. PLoS One 2012;7:e40888.
33. Gouba N, Raoult D, Drancourt M. Plant and fungal diversity in gut
microbiota as revealed by molecular and culture investigations. PLoS
One 2013;8:e59474.
34. Hamad I, Raoult D, Bittar F. Repertory of eukaryotes (eukaryome) in the
human gastrointestinal tract: taxonomy and detection methods. Parasite
Immunol 2016;38:12–36.
35. Parfrey LW, Walters WA, Lauber CL, Clemente JC, Berg-Lyons D, Teiling C,
et al. Communities of microbial eukaryotes in the mammalian gut within
the context of environmental eukaryotic diversity. Front Microbiol
2014;5:298.
36. Irlinger F, Layec S, Helinck S, Dugat-Bony E. Cheese rind microbial
communities: diversity, composition and origin. FEMS Microbiol Lett
2015;362:1–11.
37. Miceli MH, Diaz JA, Lee SA. Emerging opportunistic yeast infections.
Lancet Infect Dis 2011;11:142–51.
38. Summers RW, Elliott DE, Urban JFJr, Thompson RA, Weinstock JV.
Trichuris suis therapy for active ulcerative colitis: a randomized controlled
trial. Gastroenterology 2005;128:825–32.
39. Wammes LJ, Mpairwe H, Elliott AM, Yazdanbakhsh M. Helminth therapy
or elimination: epidemiological, immunological, and clinical considera-
tions. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:1150–62.
40. Hug LA, Baker BJ, Anantharaman K, Brown CT, Probst AJ, Castelle CJ, et al.
A new view of the tree of life. Nat Microbiol 2016;1:16048.
41. Manrique P, Bolduc B, Walk ST, van der Oost J, de Vos WM, Young MJ.
Healthy human gut phageome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016;113:
10400–5.
42. International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. The International
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses; 2015. Available from: http://
www.ictvonline.org.
43. Reteno DG, Benamar S, Khalil JB, Andreani J, Armstrong N, Klose T, et al.
Faustovirus, an asfarvirus-related new lineage of giant viruses infecting
amoebae. J Virol 2015;89:6585–94.
44. Ghabrial SA, Caston JR, Jiang D, Nibert ML, Suzuki N. 50-plus years of
fungal viruses. Virology 2015;479–80:356–68.
45. Snyder JC, Bolduc B, Young MJ. 40 years of archaeal virology: expanding
viral diversity. Virology 2015;479–80:369–78.
46. Pickett BE, Sadat EL, Zhang Y, Noronha JM, Squires RB, Hunt V, et al. ViPR:
an open bioinformatics database and analysis resource for virology
research. Nucleic Acids Res 2012;40:D593–8.
47. Zhou Y, Liang Y, Lynch KH, Dennis JJ, Wishart DS. PHAST: a fast phage
search tool. Nucleic Acids Res 2011;39:W347–52.
48. Gardy J, Loman NJ, Rambaut A. Real-time digital pathogen surveillance -
the time is now. Genome Biol 2015;16:155.
49. Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, Le Paslier D, Yamada T, Mende DR, et al.
Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 2011;473:174–80.
50. Consortium HMP. Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human
microbiome. Nature 2012;486:207–14.
51. Massana R, Gobet A, Audic S, Bass D, Bittner L, Boutte C, et al.
Marine protist diversity in European coastal waters and sediments as
revealed by high-throughput sequencing. Environ Microbiol 2015;
17:4035–49.
52. Beall CJ, Campbell AG, Dayeh DM, Griffen AL, Podar M, Leys EJ. Single
cell genomics of uncultured, health-associated Tannerella BU063 (Oral
Taxon 286) and comparison to the closely related pathogen Tannerella
forsythia. PLoS One 2014;9:e89398.
53. Mason OU, Hazen TC, Borglin S, Chain PS, Dubinsky EA, Fortney JL, et al.
Metagenome, metatranscriptome and single-cell sequencing reveal
microbial response to Deepwater Horizon oil spill. ISME J 2012;6:
1715–27.
54. Yoon HS, Price DC, Stepanauskas R, Rajah VD, Sieracki ME, Wilson WH,
et al. Single-cell genomics reveals organismal interactions in uncultivated
marine protists. Science 2011;332:714–7.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1803
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 55. Hehemann JH, Correc G, Barbeyron T, Helbert W, Czjzek M, Michel G.
Transfer of carbohydrate-active enzymes from marine bacteria to Japanese
gut microbiota. Nature 2010;464:908–12.
56. Manna S, Harman A. Horizontal gene transfer of a Chlamydial tRNA-
guanine transglycosylase gene to eukaryotic microbes. Mol Phyl Evol
2016;94(Pt A):392–6.
57. Smillie CS, Smith MB, Friedman J, Cordero OX, David LA, Alm EJ. Ecology
drives a global network of gene exchange connecting the human micro-
biome. Nature 2011;480:241–4.
58. Cisse OH, Pagni M, Hauser PM. Comparative genomics suggests that the
human pathogenic fungus Pneumocystis jirovecii acquired obligate biotro-
phy through gene loss. Genome Biol Evol 2014;6:1938–48.
59. Elias AF, Stewart PE, Grimm D, Caimano MJ, Eggers CH, Tilly K, et al.
Clonal polymorphism of Borrelia burgdorferi strain B31 MI: implications
for mutagenesis in an infectious strain background. Infect Immun
2002;70:2139–50.
60. Rawat A, Engelthaler DM, Driebe EM, Keim P, Foster JT. MetaGeniE:
characterizing human clinical samples using deep metagenomic sequenc-
ing. PLoS One 2014;9:e110915.
61. Schloissnig S, Arumugam M, Sunagawa S, Mitreva M, Tap J, Zhu A, et al.
Genomic variation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Nature
2013;493:45–50.
62. Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The
placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med 2014;6:237ra65.
63. Scholtens PA, Oozeer R, Martin R, Amor KB, Knol J. The early settlers:
intestinal microbiology in early life. Annu Rev Food Sci Technol 2012;
3:425–47.
64. Underwood MA, German JB, Lebrilla CB, Mills DA. Bifidobacterium longum
subspecies infantis: champion colonizer of the infant gut. Pediatr Res
2015;77:229–35.
65. Mueller NT, Bakacs E, Combellick J, Grigoryan Z, Dominguez-Bello MG.
The infant microbiome development: mom matters. Trends Mol Med
2015;21:109–17.
66. Braundmeier AG, Lenz KM, Inman KS, Chia N, Jeraldo P, Walther-
Antonio MR, et al. Individualized medicine and the microbiome in
reproductive tract. Front Physiol 2015;6:97.
67. Ardissone AN, de la Cruz DM, Davis-Richardson AG, Rechcigl KT, Li N,
Drew JC, et al. Meconium microbiome analysis identifies bacteria corre-
lated with premature birth. PLoS One 2014;9:e90784.
68. Neu J, Rushing J. Cesarean versus vaginal delivery: long-term infant
outcomes and the hygiene hypothesis. Clin Perinatol 2011;38:321–31.
69. Johnson EM, Rehavi MM. Physicians treating physicians: information and
incentives in childbirth. Am Econ J Econ Policy 2016;8:115–41.
70. Mueller NT, Whyatt R, Hoepner L, Oberfield S, Dominguez-Bello MG,
Widen EM, et al. Prenatal exposure to antibiotics, cesarean section and risk
of childhood obesity. Int J Obes 2015;39:665–70.
71. Dominguez-Bello MG, Costello EK, Contreras M, Magris M, Hidalgo G,
Fierer N, et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the
initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:11971–5.
72. Sevelsted A, Stokholm J, Bonnelykke K, Bisgaard H. Cesarean section and
chronic immune disorders. Pediatrics 2015;135:e92–8.
73. Malmborg P, Bahmanyar S, Grahnquist L, Hildebrand H, Montgomery S.
Cesarean section and the risk of pediatric Crohn's disease. Inflamm Bowel
Dis 2012;18:703–8.
74. Johnson CL, Versalovic J. The human microbiome and its potential
importance to pediatrics. Pediatrics 2012;129:950–60.
75. Kostic AD, Gevers D, Siljander H, Vatanen T, Hyotylainen T, Hamalainen
AM, et al. The dynamics of the human infant gut microbiome in devel-
opment and in progression toward type 1 diabetes. Cell Host Microbe
2015;17:260–73.
76. Murgas Torrazza R, Neu J. The developing intestinal microbiome and its
relationship to health and disease in the neonate. J Perinatol 2011;
31Suppl 1:S29–34.
77. Rousseau C, Levenez F, Fouqueray C, Dore J, Collignon A, Lepage P.
Clostridium difficile colonization in early infancy is accompanied by
changes in intestinal microbiota composition. J Clin Microbiol 2011;
49:858–65.
78. McLoughlin RM, Mills KH. Influence of gastrointestinal commensal
bacteria on the immune responses that mediate allergy and asthma.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:1097–107.
79. Ajslev TA, Andersen CS, Gamborg M, Sorensen TI, Jess T. Childhood
overweight after establishment of the gut microbiota: the role of delivery
mode, pre-pregnancy weight and early administration of antibiotics. Int J
Obes 2011;35:522–9.
80. Cheng J, Palva AM, de Vos WM, Satokari R. Contribution of the intestinal
microbiota to human health: from birth to 100 years of age. Curr Topics
Microbiol Immunol 2013;358:323–46.
81. Decker E, Hornef M, Stockinger S. Cesarean delivery is associated with
celiac disease but not inflammatory bowel disease in children. Gut
Microbes 2011;2:91–8.
82. Hunter PA, Dawson S, French GL, Goossens H, Hawkey PM, Kuijper EJ,
et al. Antimicrobial-resistant pathogens in animals and man: prescribing,
practices and policies. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010;65Suppl 1:i3–17.
83. Stewardson AJ, Huttner B, Harbarth S. At least it won't hurt: the personal
risks of antibiotic exposure. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2011;11:446–52.
84. Blaser MJ. Who are we? Indigenous microbes and the ecology of human
diseases. EMBO Rep 2006;7:956–60.
85. Schwartz S, Friedberg I, Ivanov IV, Davidson LA, Goldsby JS, Dahl DB,
et al. A metagenomic study of diet-dependent interaction between gut
microbiota and host in infants reveals differences in immune response.
Genome Biol 2012;13:r32.
86. Stark PL, Lee A. The microbial ecology of the large bowel of breast-fed and
formula-fed infants during the first year of life. J Med Microbiol 1982;
15:189–203.
87. Harmsen HJ, Wildeboer-Veloo AC, Raangs GC, Wagendorp AA, Klijn N,
Bindels JG, et al. Analysis of intestinal flora development in breast-fed and
formula-fed infants by using molecular identification and detection
methods. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2000;30:61–7.
88. Ballard O, Morrow AL. Human milk composition: nutrients and bioactive
factors. Pediatr Clin North Am 2013;60:49–74.
89. Eidelman AI. Breastfeeding and the use of human milk: an analysis of the
American Academy of Pediatrics 2012 Breastfeeding Policy Statement.
Breastfeeding Med 2012;7:323–4.
90. Isaacs EB, Fischl BR, Quinn BT, Chong WK, Gadian DG, Lucas A. Impact of
breast milk on intelligence quotient, brain size, and white matter devel-
opment. Pediatric research 2010;67:357–62.
91. Zivkovic AM, German JB, Lebrilla CB, Mills DA. Human milk glycobiome
and its impact on the infant gastrointestinal microbiota. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2011;108Suppl 1:4653–8.
92. Kunz C, Rudloff S, Baier W, Klein N, Strobel S. Oligosaccharides in human
milk: structural, functional, and metabolic aspects. Annu Rev Nutr 2000;
20:699–722.
93. Penders J, Thijs C, Vink C, Stelma FF, Snijders B, Kummeling I, et al.
Factors influencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early
infancy. Pediatrics 2006;118:511–21.
94. Sela DA. Bifidobacterial utilization of human milk oligosaccharides. Int J
Food Microbiol 2011;149:58–64.
95. Sela DA, Chapman J, Adeuya A, Kim JH, Chen F, Whitehead TR, et al. The
genome sequence of Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis reveals adap-
tations for milk utilization within the infant microbiome. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2008;105:18964–9.
96. Lewis ZT, Totten SM, Smilowitz JT, Popovic M, Parker E, Lemay DG, et al.
Maternal fucosyltransferase 2 status affects the gut bifidobacterial com-
munities of breastfed infants. Microbiome 2015;3:13.
97. Davidson B, Meinzen-Derr JK, Wagner CL, Newburg DS, Morrow AL.
Fucosylated oligosaccharides in human milk in relation to gestational age
and stage of lactation. Adv Exp Med Biol 2004;554:427–30.
98. Newburg DS, Ruiz-Palacios GM, Altaye M, Chaturvedi P, Meinzen-Derr J,
Guerrero Mde L, et al. Innate protection conferred by fucosylated oligo-
saccharides of human milk against diarrhea in breastfed infants. Glyco-
biology 2004;14:253–63.
99. Newburg DS, Ruiz-Palacios GM, Morrow AL. Human milk glycans protect
infants against enteric pathogens. Annu Rev Nutr 2005;25:37–58.
100. Newburg DS.Oligosaccharides in human milk and bacterial colonization.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2000;30Suppl 2:S8–17.
101. Morrow AL, Ruiz-Palacios GM, Jiang X, Newburg DS. Human-milk
glycans that inhibit pathogen binding protect breast-feeding infants
against infectious diarrhea. J Nutr 2005;135:1304–7.
102. Idota T, Kawakami H, Murakami Y, Sugawara M. Inhibition of cholera
toxin by human milk fractions and sialyllactose. Biosci Biotechnol
Biochem 1995;59:417–9.
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1804
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 103. Andersson B, Porras O, Hanson LA, Lagergard T, Svanborg-Eden C.
Inhibition of attachment of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus
influenzae by human milk and receptor oligosaccharides. J Infect Dis
1986;153:232–7.
104. Newburg DS, Pickering LK, McCluer RH, Cleary TG. Fucosylated oligo-
saccharides of human milk protect suckling mice from heat-stabile
enterotoxin of Escherichia coli. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1075–80.
105. Duijts L, Jaddoe VW, Hofman A, Moll HA. Prolonged and exclusive
breastfeeding reduces the risk of infectious diseases in infancy. Pediatrics
2010;126:e18–25.
106. Abt MC, Pamer EG. Commensal bacteria mediated defenses against
pathogens. Curr Opin Immunol 2014;29:16–22.
107. Matsuki T, Yahagi K, Mori H, Matsumoto H, Hara T, Tajima S, et al. A key
genetic factor for fucosyllactose utilization affects infant gut microbiota
development. Nat Commun 2016;7:11939.
108. Oozeer R, van Limpt K, Ludwig T, Ben Amor K, Martin R, Wind RD, et al.
Intestinal microbiology in early life: specific prebiotics can have similar
functionalities as human-milk oligosaccharides. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:
561s–71s.
109. Heavey PM RI. The gut microflora of the developing infant: microbiology
and metabolism. Microbial Ecol Health Dis 1999;11:75–83.
110. Charbonneau MR, O'Donnell D, Blanton LV, Totten SM, Davis JC, Barratt
MJ, et al. Sialylated milk oligosaccharides promote microbiota-depen-
dent growth in models of infant undernutrition. Cell 2016;164:859–71.
111. Zivkovic AM, Barile D. Bovine milk as a source of functional oligosac-
charides for improving human health. Adv Nutr 2011;2:284–9.
112. Tao N, DePeters EJ, Freeman S, German JB, Grimm R, Lebrilla CB. Bovine
milk glycome. J Dairy Sci 2008;91:3768–78.
113. Tao N, DePeters EJ, German JB, Grimm R, Lebrilla CB. Variations in
bovine milk oligosaccharides during early and middle lactation stages
analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography-chip/mass spec-
trometry. J Dairy Sci 2009;92:2991–3001.
114. Bode L. Human milk oligosaccharides: every baby needs a sugar mama.
Glycobiology 2012;22:1147–62.
115. Rautava S, Kalliomaki M, Isolauri E. Probiotics during pregnancy and
breast-feeding might confer immunomodulatory protection against atop-
ic disease in the infant. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;109:119–21.
116. Rautava S, Kainonen E, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Maternal probiotic
supplementation during pregnancy and breast-feeding reduces the risk
of eczema in the infant. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1355–60.
117. Rautava S, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Specific probiotics in reducing the risk
of acute infections in infancy–a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Br J Nutr 2009;101:1722–6.
118. Isolauri E, Rautava S, Salminen S. Probiotics in the development and
treatment of allergic disease. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2012;41:747–
62.
119. Kainonen E, Rautava S, Isolauri E. Immunologicalprogramming by breast
milk creates an anti-inflammatory cytokine milieu in breast-fed infants
compared to formula-fed infants. Br J Nutr 2013;109:1962–70.
120. Xu M, Wang J, Wang N, Sun F, Wang L, Liu XH. The efficacy and safety
of the probiotic bacterium Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 17938 for infantile
colic: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One
2015;10:e0141445.
121. Savino F. Focus on infantile colic. Acta Paediatr 2007;96:1259–64.
122. Sung V, Collett S, de Gooyer T, Hiscock H, Tang M, Wake M. Probiotics to
prevent or treat excessive infant crying: systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Pediatr 2013;167:1150–7.
123. Chau K, Lau E, Greenberg S, Jacobson S, Yazdani-Brojeni P, Verma N, et al.
Probiotics for infantile colic: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial investigating Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 17938. J Pediatr
2015;166:74–8.
124. Roos S, Dicksved J, Tarasco V, Locatelli E, Ricceri F, Grandin U, et al. 454
pyrosequencing analysis on faecal samples from a randomized DBPC trial
of colicky infants treated with Lactobacillus reuteriDSM 17938. PLoS One
2013;8:e56710.
125. Claesson MJ, Cusack S, O'Sullivan O, Greene-Diniz R, de Weerd H,
Flannery E, et al. Composition, variability, and temporal stability of the
intestinal microbiota of the elderly. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;
108Suppl 1:4586–91.
126. O'Toole PW, Jeffery IB. Gut microbiota and aging. Science 2015;350:
1214–5.
127. Jackson MA, Jeffery IB, Beaumont M, Bell JT, Clark AG, Ley RE, et al.
Signatures of early frailty in the gut microbiota. Genome Med 2016;8:8.
128. Zapata HJ, Quagliarello VJ. The microbiota and microbiome in aging:
potential implications in health and age-related diseases. J Am Geriatr Soc
2015;63:776–81.
129. Saraswati S, Sitaraman R. Aging and the human gut microbiota-from
correlation to causality. Front Microbiol 2014;5:764.
130. Patrignani P, Tacconelli S, Bruno A. Gut microbiota, host gene expression,
and aging. J Clin Gastroenterol 2014;48Suppl 1:S28–31.
131. Noren Hooten N, Abdelmohsen K, Gorospe M, Ejiogu N, Zonderman AB,
Evans MK. microRNA expression patterns reveal differential expression of
target genes with age. PLoS One 2010;5:e10724.
132. Lai CY, Wu YT, Yu SL, Yu YH, Lee SY, Liu CM, et al. Modulated expression
of human peripheral blood microRNAs from infancy to adulthood and its
role in aging. Aging Cell 2014;13:679–89.
133. Liu S, da Cunha AP, Rezende RM, Cialic R, Wei Z, Bry L, et al. The host
shapes the gut microbiota via fecal microRNA. Cell Host Microbe
2016;19:32–43.
134. Heilbronn LK, Ravussin E. Calorie restriction and aging: review of the
literature and implications for studies in humans. Am J Clin Nutr
2003;78:361–9.
135. Zhang C, Li S, Yang L, Huang P, Li W, Wang S, et al. Structural modulation
of gut microbiota in life-long calorie-restricted mice. Nat Commun
2013;4:2163.
136. Wu Z, Song L, Liu SQ, Huang D. A high throughput screening assay for
determination
of
chronological
lifespan
of
yeast.
Exp
Gerontol
2011;46:915–22.
137. Biagi E, Candela M, Fairweather-Tait S, Franceschi C, Brigidi P. Aging of
the human metaorganism: the microbial counterpart. Age 2012;34:
247–67.
138. Rampelli S, Candela M, Turroni S, Biagi E, Collino S, Franceschi C, et al.
Functional metagenomic profiling of intestinal microbiome in extreme
ageing. Aging 2013;5:902–12.
139. Heintz C, Mair W. You are what you host: microbiome modulation of the
aging process. Cell 2014;156:408–11.
140. Rozsa L, Apari P, Muller V. The microbiome mutiny hypothesis: can our
microbiome turn against us when we are old or seriously ill? Biol Direct
2015;10:3.
141. Caracciolo B, Xu W, Collins S, Fratiglioni L. Cognitive decline, dietary
factors and gut-brain interactions. Mech Ageing Dev 2014;136–7:59–69.
142. Parkar SG, Trower TM, Stevenson DE. Fecal microbial metabolism of
polyphenols and its effects on human gut microbiota. Anaerobe 2013;
23:12–9.
143. Wang D, Ho L, Faith J, Ono K, Janle EM, Lachcik PJ, et al. Role of intestinal
microbiota in the generation of polyphenol-derived phenolic acid medi-
ated attenuation of Alzheimer's disease beta-amyloid oligomerization.
Mol Nutr Food Res 2015;59:1025–40.
144. Raberg L, Sim D, Read AF. Disentangling genetic variation for resis-
tance and tolerance to infectious diseases in animals. Science 2007;
318:812–4.
145. Zelante T, Iannitti RG, Cunha C, De Luca A, Giovannini G, Pieraccini G,
et al. Tryptophan catabolites from microbiota engage aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and balance mucosal reactivity via interleukin-22. Immunity
2013;39:372–85.
146. Round JL, Mazmanian SK. The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune
responses during health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2009;9:313–23.
147. Ohnmacht C, Park JH, Cording S, Wing JB, Atarashi K, Obata Y, et al.
MUCOSAL IMMUNOLOGY. The microbiota regulates type 2 immunity
through RORgammat(þ) T cells. Science 2015;349:989–93.
148. Martin SA, Pence BD, Woods JA. Exercise and respiratory tract viral
infections. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2009;37:157–64.
149. Simpson RJ, Kunz H, Agha N, Graff R. Exercise and the regulation of
immune functions. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2015;135:355–80.
150. Pape K, Ryttergaard L, Rotevatn TA, Nielsen BJ, Torp-Pedersen C, Over-
gaard C, et al. Leisure-time physical activity and the risk of suspected
bacterial infections. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2016;48:1737–44.
151. Zhang D, Chen G, Manwani D, Mortha A, Xu C, Faith JJ, et al. Neutrophil
ageing is regulated by the microbiome. Nature 2015;525:528–32.
152. Lathrop SK, Bloom SM, Rao SM, Nutsch K, Lio CW, Santacruz N, et al.
Peripheral education of the immune system by colonic commensal
microbiota. Nature 2011;478:250–4.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1805
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 153. Integrative HMP (iHMP) Research Network Consortium. The Integrative
Human Microbiome Project: dynamic analysis of microbiome-host
omics profiles during periods of human health and disease. Cell Host
Microbe 2014;16:276–89.
154. Strachan DP. Hay fever, hygiene, and household size. BMJ 1989;
299:1259–60.
155. Okada H, Kuhn C, Feillet H, Bach JF. The `hygiene hypothesis' for
autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. Clin Exp Immunol 2010;
160:1–9.
156. Ege MJ, Mayer M, Normand AC, Genuneit J, Cookson WO, Braun-
Fahrlander C, et al. Exposure to environmental microorganisms and
childhood asthma. N Engl J Med 2011;364:701–9.
157. Schuijs MJ, Willart MA, Vergote K, Gras D, Deswarte K, Ege MJ, et al. Farm
dust and endotoxin protect against allergy through A20 induction in lung
epithelial cells. Science 2015;349:1106–10.
158. Brooks C, Pearce N, Douwes J. The hygiene hypothesis in allergy
and asthma: an update. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;
13:70–7.
159. Chotirmall SH, Burke CM. Aging and the microbiome: implications for
asthma in the elderly? Expert Rev Respir Med 2015;9:125–8.
160. Barnes PJ. Cytokine-directed therapies for asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2001;108(2 Suppl):S72–S76.
161. Barnes PJ. Immunology of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2008;8:183–92.
162. von Mutius E, Vercelli D. Farm living: effects on childhood asthma and
allergy. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:861–8.
163. Couzin-Frankel J. Bacteria and asthma: untangling the links. Science
2010;330:1168–9.
164. Lif Holgerson P, Harnevik L, Hernell O, Tanner AC, Johansson I. Mode
of birth delivery affects oral microbiota in infants. J Dent Res 2011;90:
1183–8.
165. Nelun Barfod M, Magnusson K, Lexner MO, Blomqvist S, Dahlen G,
Twetman S. Oral microflora in infants delivered vaginally and by caesar-
ean section. Int J Paediatr Dent 2011;21:401–6.
166. Arrieta MC, Stiemsma LT, Dimitriu PA, Thorson L, Russell S, Yurist-
Doutsch S, et al. Early infancy microbial and metabolic alterations affect
risk of childhood asthma. Sci Transl Med 2015;7:307ra152.
167. Marsland BJ, Salami O. Microbiome influences on allergy in mice and
humans. Curr Opin Immunol 2015;36:94–100.
168. Lerner A, Aminov R, Matthias T. Dysbiosis may trigger autoimmune
diseases via inappropriate post-translational modification of host pro-
teins. Front Microbiol 2016;7:84.
169. Hesselmar B, Hicke-Roberts A, Wennergren G. Allergy in children in hand
versus machine dishwashing. Pediatrics 2015;135:e590–7.
170. Vatanen T, Kostic AD, d'Hennezel E, Siljander H, Franzosa EA, Yassour M,
et al. Variation in microbiome LPS immunogenicity contributes to
autoimmunity in humans. Cell 2016;165:1551.
171. Konig MF, Abusleme L, Reinholdt J, Palmer RJ, Teles RP, Sampson K, et al.
Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans–induced
hypercitrullination
links periodontal infection to autoimmunity in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci
Transl Med 2016;8:369ra176.
172. Zhang X, Zhang D, Jia H. The oral and gut microbiomes are perturbed in
rheumatoid arthritis and partly normalized after treatment. Nat Med
2015;21:895–905.
173. Tan TG, Sefik E, Geva-Zatorsky N, Kua L, Naskar D, Teng F, et al.
Identifying species of symbiont bacteria from the human gut that,
alone, can induce intestinal Th17 cells in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2016;113:E8141–50.
174. Leipe J, Grunke M, Dechant C, Reindl C, Kerzendorf U, Schulze-Koops H,
et al. Role of Th17 cells in human autoimmune arthritis. Arthritis Rheum
2010;62:2876–85.
175. Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, Gordon JI. Microbial ecology: human gut
microbes associated with obesity. Nature 2006;444:1022–3.
176. Wang CY, Liao JK. A mouse model of diet-induced obesity and insulin
resistance. Methods Mol Biol 2012;821:421–33.
177. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER, Gordon JI.
An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature 2006;444:1027–31.
178. Kallus SJ, Brandt LJ. The intestinal microbiota and obesity. J Clin Gastro-
enterol 2012;46:16–24.
179. Backhed F, Ding H, Wang T, Hooper LV, Koh GY, Nagy A, et al. The gut
microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:15718–23.
180. Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Cheng J, Duncan AE, Kau AL, et al. Gut
microbiota from twins discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in
mice. Science 2013;341:1241214.
181. Koleva PT, Bridgman SL, Kozyrskyj AL. The infant gut microbiome:
evidence for obesity risk and dietary intervention. Nutrients 2015;7:
2237–60.
182. Scott FI, Horton DB, Mamtani R, Haynes K, Goldberg DS, Lee DY, et al.
Administration of antibiotics to children before age 2 years increases risk
for childhood obesity. Gastroenterology 2016;151:120–9.
183. Cox LM, Blaser MJ. Antibiotics in early life and obesity. Nat Rev Endo-
crinol 2015;11:182–90.
184. Cox LM, Yamanishi S, Sohn J, Alekseyenko AV, Leung JM, Cho I, et al.
Altering the intestinal microbiota during a critical developmental win-
dow has lasting metabolic consequences. Cell 2014;158:705–21.
185. McOrist AL, Miller RB, Bird AR, Keogh JB, Noakes M, Topping DL, et al.
Fecal butyrate levels vary widely among individuals but are usually
increased by a diet high in resistant starch. J Nutr 2011;141:883–9.
186. De Filippis F, Pellegrini N, Vannini L, Jeffery IB, La Storia A, Laghi L, et al.
High-level adherence to a Mediterranean diet beneficially impacts the gut
microbiota and associated metabolome. Gut 2015 Sep 28. [Epub ahead
of print].
187. Pryde SE, Duncan SH, Hold GL, Stewart CS, Flint HJ. The microbiology of
butyrate formation in the human colon. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2002;217:
133–9.
188. McIntyre A, Gibson PR, Young GP. Butyrate production from dietary fibre
and protection against large bowel cancer in a rat model. Gut 1993;34:
386–91.
189. Musso G, Gambino R, Cassader M. Obesity, diabetes, and gut microbiota:
the hygiene hypothesis expanded? Diabetes Care 2010;33:2277–84.
190. Bocarsly ME, Fasolino M, Kane GA, LaMarca EA, Kirschen GW, Karatsor-
eos IN, et al. Obesity diminishes synaptic markers, alters microglial
morphology, and impairs cognitive function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2015;112:15731–6.
191. Burokas A, Moloney RD, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Microbiota regulation of the
mammalian gut-brain axis. Adv Appl Microbiol 2015;91:1–62.
192. Everard A, Belzer C, Geurts L, Ouwerkerk JP, Druart C, Bindels LB, et al.
Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium
controls diet-induced obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:
9066–71.
193. Plovier H, Everard A, Druart C, Depommier C, Van Hul M, Geurts L, et al.
A purified membrane protein from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pas-
teurized bacterium improves metabolism in obese and diabetic mice. Nat
Med 2017;23:107–13.
194. de la Cuesta-Zuluaga J, Mueller NT, Corrales-Agudelo V, Velasquez-Mejia
EP, Carmona JA, Abad JM, et al. Metformin is associated with higher
relative abundance of mucin-degrading Akkermansia muciniphila and
several short-chain fatty acid-producing microbiota in the gut. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:54–62.
195. Troseid M.Gut microbiota and acute coronarysyndromes:ready for use in
the emergency room? Eur Heart J 2017 Feb 4. [Epub ahead of print].
196. Li J, Zhao F, Wang Y, Chen J, Tao J, Tian G, et al. Gut microbiota dysbiosis
contributes to the development of hypertension. Microbiome 2017;5:14.
197. Stepankova R, Tonar Z, Bartova J, Nedorost L, Rossman P, Poledne R, et al.
Absence of microbiota (germ-free conditions) accelerates the atheroscle-
rosis in ApoE-deficient mice fed standard low cholesterol diet. J Ather-
oscler Thromb 2010;17:796–804.
198. Chan YK, Brar MS, Kirjavainen PV, Chen Y, Peng J, Li D, et al. High fat diet
induced atherosclerosis is accompanied with low colonic bacterial diver-
sity and altered abundances that correlates with plaque size, plasma A-
FABP and cholesterol: a pilot study of high fat diet and its intervention
with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) or telmisartan in ApoE-/- mice.
BMC Microbiol 2016;16:264.
199. Li J, Lin S, Vanhoutte PM, Woo CW, Xu A. Akkermansia muciniphila
protects against atherosclerosis by preventing metabolic endotoxemia-
induced inflammation in Apoe-/- mice. Circulation 2016;133:2434–46.
200. Grenham S, Clarke G, Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Brain-gut-microbe commu-
nication in health and disease. Front Physiol 2011;2:94.
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1806
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 201. Kirk RG."Life in a germ-free world": isolating life from the laboratory
animal to the bubble boy. Bull Hist Med 2012;86:237–75.
202. Williams SC. Gnotobiotics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:1661.
203. Diaz Heijtz R, Wang S, Anuar F, Qian Y, Bjorkholm B, Samuelsson A, et al.
Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and behavior. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:3047–52.
204. Neufeld KM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Reduced anxiety-like
behavior and central neurochemical change in germ-free mice. Neuro-
gastroenterol Motil 2011;23:255–64.
205. Clarke G, Grenham S, Scully P, Fitzgerald P, Moloney RD, Shanahan F,
et al. The microbiome-gut-brain axis during early life regulates the
hippocampal serotonergic system in a sex-dependent manner. Mol Psy-
chiatry 2013;18:666–73.
206. Crumeyrolle-Arias M, Jaglin M, Bruneau A, Vancassel S, Cardona A, Dauge
V, et al. Absence of the gut microbiota enhances anxiety-like behavior and
neuroendocrine response to acute stress in rats. Psychoneuroendocrinol-
ogy 2014;42:207–17.
207. Bercik P, Denou E, Collins J, Jackson W, Lu J, Jury J, et al. The intestinal
microbiota affect central levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor and
behavior in mice. Gastroenterology 2011;141:599–609.
208. Bruce-Keller AJ, Salbaum JM, Luo M, Blanchard Et, Taylor CM, Welsh DA,
et al. Obese-type gut microbiota induce neurobehavioral changes in the
absence of obesity. Biol Psychiatry 2015;77:607–15.
209. Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Microbiota is
essential for social development in
the mouse.
Mol Psychiatry
2014;19:146–8.
210. Arentsen T, Raith H, Qian Y, Forssberg H, Diaz Heijtz R. Host microbiota
modulates development of social preference in mice. Microbial Ecol
Health Dis 2015;26:29719.
211. Gareau MG, Wine E, Rodrigues DM, Cho JH, Whary MT, Philpott DJ, et al.
Bacterial infection causes stress-induced memory dysfunction in mice.
Gut 2011;60:307–17.
212. Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Traplin A, O'Sullivan O, Crispie F, Moloney RD,
et al. Gut microbiota depletion from early adolescence in mice: implica-
tions for brain and behaviour. Brain Behav Immun 2015;48:165–73.
213. Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, Escaravage E, Savignac HM, Dinan TG,
et al. Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behavior and
central GABA receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:16050–5.
214. Savignac HM, Tramullas M, Kiely B, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Bifidobacteria
modulate cognitive processes in an anxious mouse strain. Behav Brain Res
2015;287:59–72.
215. Savignac HM, Couch Y, Stratford M, Bannerman DM, Tzortzis G, Anthony
DC, et al. Prebiotic administration normalizes lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-
induced anxiety and cortical 5-HT2A receptor and IL1-beta levels in male
mice. Brain Behav Immun 2016;52:120–31.
216. Verdu EF, Bercik P, Verma-Gandhu M, Huang XX, Blennerhassett P,
Jackson W, et al. Specific probiotic therapy attenuates antibiotic induced
visceral hypersensitivity in mice. Gut 2006;55:182–90.
217. Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu XN, et al.
Postnatal microbial colonization programs the hypothalamic-pitu-
itary-adrenal system for stress response in mice. J Physiol 2004;558
(Pt 1):263–75.
218. O'Hara AM, Shanahan F. The gut flora as a forgotten organ. EMBO Rep
2006;7:688–93.
219. Matcovitch-Natan O, Winter DR, Giladi A, Vargas Aguilar S, Spinrad A,
Sarrazin S, et al. Microglia development follows a stepwise program to
regulate brain homeostasis. Science 2016;353:aad8670.
220. Wikoff WR, Anfora AT, Liu J, Schultz PG, Lesley SA, Peters EC, et al.
Metabolomics analysis reveals large effects of gut microflora on
mammalian blood metabolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:
3698–703.
221. Mardinoglu A, Shoaie S, Bergentall M, Ghaffari P, Zhang C, Larsson E,
et al. The gut microbiota modulates host amino acid and glutathione
metabolism in mice. Mol Syst Biol 2015;11:834.
222. Desbonnet L, Garrett L, Clarke G, Bienenstock J, Dinan TG. The probiotic
Bifidobacteria infantis: an assessment of potential antidepressant proper-
ties in the rat. J Psychiatr Res 2008;43:164–74.
223. Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Regulation of the stress response by the gut micro-
biota: implications for psychoneuroendocrinology. Psychoneuroendo-
crinology 2012;37:1369–78.
224. Bailey MT, Coe CL. Maternal separation disrupts the integrity of the
intestinal microflora in infant rhesus monkeys. Dev Psychobiol 1999;35:
146–55.
225. O'Mahony SM, Marchesi JR, Scully P, Codling C, Ceolho AM, Quigley EM,
et al. Early life stress alters behavior, immunity, and microbiota in rats:
implications for irritable bowel syndrome and psychiatric illnesses. Biol
Psychiatry 2009;65:263–7.
226. Golubeva AV, Crampton S, Desbonnet L, Edge D, O'Sullivan O, Lomas-
ney KW, et al. Prenatal stress-induced alterations in major physiological
systems correlate with gut microbiota composition in adulthood. Psy-
choneuroendocrinology 2015;60:58–74.
227. Jasarevic E, Howerton CL, Howard CD, Bale TL. Alterations in the
vaginal microbiome by maternal stress are associated with metabolic
reprogramming of the offspring gut and brain. Endocrinology 2015;
156:3265–76.
228. Bailey MT, Dowd SE, Galley JD, Hufnagle AR, Allen RG, Lyte M. Exposure
to a social stressor alters the structure of the intestinal microbiota:
implications for stressor-induced immunomodulation. Brain Behav
Immun 2011;25:397–407.
229. Galley JD, Nelson MC, Yu Z, Dowd SE, Walter J, Kumar PS, et al. Exposure
to a social stressor disrupts the community structure of the colonic
mucosa-associated microbiota. BMC Microbiol 2014;14:189.
230. Bharwani A, Mian MF, Foster JA, Surette MG, Bienenstock J, Forsythe P.
Structural & functional consequences of chronic psychosocial stress on
the microbiome & host. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2016;63:217–27.
231. De Palma G, Blennerhassett P, Lu J, Deng Y, Park AJ, Green W, et al.
Microbiota and host determinants of behavioural phenotype in mater-
nally separated mice. Nat Commun 2015;6:7735.
232. O'Mahony SM, Hyland NP, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Maternal separation as
a model of brain-gut axis dysfunction. Psychopharmacology 2011;214:
71–88.
233. Zijlmans MA, Korpela K, Riksen-Walraven JM, de Vos WM, de Weerth C.
Maternal prenatal stress is associated with the infant intestinal micro-
biota. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015;53:233–45.
234. Kennedy PJ, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Clarke G. Irritable bowel syndrome: a
microbiome-gut-brain axis disorder? World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:
14105–25.
235. Braniste V, Al-Asmakh M, Kowal C, Anuar F, Abbaspour A, Toth M, et al.
The gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice.
Sci Transl Med 2014;6:263ra158.
236. Stilling RM, Ryan FJ, Hoban AE, Shanahan F, Clarke G, Claesson MJ, et al.
Microbes & neurodevelopment–Absence of microbiota during early life
increases activity-related transcriptional pathways in the amygdala. Brain
Behav Immun 2015;50:209–20.
237. Ogbonnaya ES, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF, O'Leary OF.
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is regulated by the microbiome. Biol
Psychiatry 2015;78:e7–9.
238. Erny D, Hrabe de Angelis AL, Jaitin D, Wieghofer P, Staszewski O, David E,
et al. Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of
microglia in the CNS. Nat Neurosci 2015;18:965–77.
239. Hoban AE, Stilling RM, Ryan FJ, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Claesson MJ, et al.
Regulation of prefrontal cortex myelination by the microbiota. Transl
Psychiatry 2016;6:e774.
240. Harach T, Marungruang N, Dutilleul N, Cheatham V, Mc Coy KD, Neher
JJ, et al. Reduction of Alzheimer's disease beta-amyloid pathology in the
absence of gut microbiota. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University;2015. Available
from: https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02273.
241. Friedland RP. Mechanisms of molecular mimicry involving the micro-
biota in neurodegeneration. J Alzheimers Dis 2015;45:349–62.
242. Sampson TR, Debelius JW, Thron T, Janssen S, Shastri GG, Ilhan ZE, et al.
Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a
model of Parkinson's disease. Cell 2016;167:1469–80.e12.
243. Forsythe P, Bienenstock J, Kunze WA. Vagal pathways for microbiome-
brain-gut axis communication. Adv Exp Med Biol 2014;817:115–33.
244. Bercik P, Verdu EF, Foster JA, Macri J, Potter M, Huang X, et al. Chronic
gastrointestinal inflammation induces anxiety-like behavior and alters
central nervous system biochemistry in mice. Gastroenterology 2010;
139:2102–12.
245. O'Mahony SM, Clarke G, Borre YE, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Serotonin,
tryptophan metabolism and the brain-gut-microbiome axis. Behav Brain
Res 2015;277:32–48.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1807
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 246. De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Goncalves D, Vinera J, Zitoun C,
Duchampt A, et al. Microbiota-generated metabolites promote metabolic
benefits via gut-brain neural circuits. Cell 2014;156:84–96.
247. Yano JM, Yu K, Donaldson GP, Shastri GG, Ann P, Ma L, et al. Indigenous
bacteria from the gut microbiota regulate host serotonin biosynthesis.
Cell 2015;161:264–76.
248. Holzer P, Farzi A. Neuropeptides and the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Adv
Exp Med Biol 2014;817:195–219.
249. El Aidy S, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Gut microbiota: the conductor in the
orchestra
of
immune-neuroendocrine
communication.
Clin
Ther
2015;37:954–67.
250. Kelly JR, Kennedy PJ, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Clarke G, Hyland NP. Breaking
down the barriers: the gut microbiome, intestinal permeability and stress-
related psychiatric disorders. Front Cell Neurosci 2015;9:392.
251. Quigley EM. Leaky gut - concept or clinical entity? Curr Opin Gastro-
enterol 2016;32:74–9.
252. Garber K. Drugging the gut microbiome. Nat Biotechnol 2015;33:
228–31.
253. Borre YE, O'Keeffe GW, Clarke G, Stanton C, Dinan TG, Cryan JF.
Microbiota and neurodevelopmental windows: implications for brain
disorders. Trends Mol Med 2014;20:509–18.
254. Clarke G, O'Mahony SM, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Priming for health: gut
microbiota acquired in early life regulates physiology, brain and behav-
iour. Acta Paediatr 2014;103:812–9.
255. Kelly CR, Kahn S, Kashyap P, Laine L, Rubin D, Atreja A, et al. Update on
fecal microbiota transplantation 2015: indications, methodologies,
mechanisms, and outlook. Gastroenterology 2015;149:223–37.
256. Dinan TG, Stanton C, Cryan JF. Psychobiotics: a novel class of psycho-
tropic. Biol Psychiatry 2013;74:720–6.
257. Clarke SF, Murphy EF, O'Sullivan O, Lucey AJ, Humphreys M, Hogan A,
et al. Exercise and associated dietary extremes impact on gut microbial
diversity. Gut 2014;63:1913–20.
258. O'Sullivan O, Cronin O, Clarke SF, Murphy EF, Molloy MG, Shanahan F,
et al. Exercise and the microbiota. Gut Microbes 2015;6:131–6.
259. Dash S, Clarke G, Berk M, Jacka FN. The gut microbiome and diet in
psychiatry: focus on depression. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2015;28:1–6.
260. Luna RA, Foster JA. Gut brain axis: diet microbiota interactions and
implications for modulation of anxiety and depression. Curr Opin
Biotechnol 2015;32:35–41.
261. Messaoudi M, Lalonde R, Violle N, Javelot H, Desor D, Nejdi A, et al.
Assessment of psychotropic-like properties of a probiotic formulation
(Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum R0175) in rats
and human subjects. Br J Nutr 2011;105:755–64.
262. Tillisch K, Labus J, Kilpatrick L, Jiang Z, Stains J, Ebrat B, et al. Consump-
tion of fermented milk product with probiotic modulates brain activity.
Gastroenterology 2013;144:1394–401.
263. Schmidt K, Cowen PJ, Harmer CJ, Tzortzis G, Errington S, Burnet PW.
Prebiotic intake reduces the waking cortisol response and alters emo-
tional bias in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology 2015;232:
1793–801.
264. Steenbergen L, Sellaro R, van Hemert S, Bosch JA, Colzato LS. A random-
ized controlled trial to test the effect of multispecies probiotics on
cognitive reactivity to sad mood. Brain Behavior Immun 2015;48:
258–64.
265. Kang DW, Park JG, Ilhan ZE, Wallstrom G, Labaer J, Adams JB, et al.
Reduced incidence of Prevotella and other fermenters in intestinal micro-
flora of autistic children. PLoS One 2013;8:e68322.
266. Opp MR, Krueger JM. Sleep and immunity: a growing field with clinical
impact. Brain Behav Immun 2015;47:1–3.
267. Thaiss CA, Zeevi D, Levy M, Zilberman-Schapira G, Suez J, Tengeler AC,
et al. Transkingdom control of microbiota diurnal oscillations promotes
metabolic homeostasis. Cell 2014;159:514–29.
268. Voigt RM, Forsyth CB, Green SJ, Mutlu E, Engen P, Vitaterna MH, et al.
Circadian disorganization alters intestinal microbiota. PLoS One 2014;9:
e97500.
269. Forsyth CB, Voigt RM, Burgess HJ, Swanson GR, Keshavarzian A. Circa-
dian rhythms, alcohol and gut interactions. Alcohol 2015;49:389–98.
270. Rook GA. Regulation of the immune system by biodiversity from the
natural environment: an ecosystem service essential to health. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:18360–7.
271. Hoisington AJ, Brenner LA, Kinney KA, Postolache TT, Lowry CA. The
microbiome of the built environment and mental health. Microbiome
2015;3:60.
272. Logan AC. Dysbiotic drift: mental health, environmental grey space, and
microbiota. J Physiol Anthropol 2015;34:23.
273. Slattery DA, Cryan JF. The ups and downs of modelling mood disorders in
rodents. ILAR J 2014;55:297–309.
274. Nguyen TL, Vieira-Silva S, Liston A, Raes J. How informative is the mouse
for human gut microbiota research? Dis Models Mech 2015;8:1–16.
275. Savage DC. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract. Annu Rev
Microbiol 1977;31:107–33.
276. Walter J, Ley R. The human gut microbiome: ecology and recent evolu-
tionary changes. Annu Rev Microbiol 2011;65:411–29.
277. Booijink CC, Zoetendal EG, Kleerebezem M, de Vos WM. Microbial
communities in the human small intestine: coupling diversity to meta-
genomics. Future Microbiol 2007;2:285–95.
278. Dethlefsen L, Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Relman DA. Assembly of the human
intestinal microbiota. Trends Ecol Evol 2006;21:517–23.
279. Gerritsen J, Smidt H, Rijkers GT, de Vos WM. Intestinal microbiota in
human health and disease: the impact of probiotics. Genes Nutr
2011;6:209–40.
280. Mariat D, Firmesse O, Levenez F, Guimaraes V, Sokol H, Dore J, et al. The
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human microbiota changes with age.
BMC Microbiol 2009;9:123.
281. Rajilic-Stojanovic M, Smidt H, de Vos WM. Diversity of the human
gastrointestinal tract microbiota revisited. Environ Microbiol 2007;9:
2125–36.
282. Zoetendal EG, Rajilic-Stojanovic M, de Vos WM. High-throughput diver-
sity and functionality analysis of the gastrointestinal tract microbiota. Gut
2008;57:1605–15.
283. Mihajlovski A, Alric M, Brugere JF. A putative new order of methanogenic
Archaea inhabiting the human gut, as revealed by molecular analyses of
the mcrA gene. Res Microbiol 2008;159:516–21.
284. Ott SJ, Kuhbacher T, Musfeldt M, Rosenstiel P, Hellmig S, Rehman A, et al.
Fungi and inflammatory bowel diseases: alterations of composition and
diversity. Scand J Gastroenterol 2008;43:831–41.
285. Backhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Host-bacterial
mutualism in the human intestine. Science 2005;307:1915–20.
286. Hamer HM, Jonkers DM, Bast A, Vanhoutvin SA, Fischer MA, Kodde A,
et al. Butyrate modulates oxidative stress in the colonic mucosa of healthy
humans. Clin Nutr 2009;28:88–93.
287. Yan J, Herzog JW, Tsang K, Brennan CA, Bower MA, Garrett WS, et al. Gut
microbiota induce IGF-1 and promote bone formation and growth. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016;113:E7554–E63.
288. Hoeppli RE, Wu D, Cook L, Levings MK. The environment of regulatory T
cell biology: cytokines, metabolites, and the microbiome. Front Immunol
2015;6:61.
289. Karlsson F, Tremaroli V, Nielsen J, Backhed F. Assessing the human gut
microbiota in metabolic diseases. Diabetes 2013;62:3341–9.
290. Ly NP, Litonjua A, Gold DR, Celedon JC. Gut microbiota, probiotics, and
vitamin D: interrelated exposures influencing allergy, asthma, and
obesity? J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:1087–94.
291. Voth DE, Ballard JD. Clostridium difficile toxins: mechanism of action and
role in disease. Clin Microbiol Rev 2005;18:247–63.
292. Leffler DA, Lamont JT. Clostridium difficile Infection. N Engl J Med
2015;373:287–8.
293. Lessa FC, Winston LG, McDonald LC. Burden of Clostridium difficile
infection in the United States. N Engl J Med 2015;372:2369–70.
294. Cornely OA, Nathwani D, Ivanescu C, Odufowora-Sita O, Retsa P,
Odeyemi IA. Clinical efficacy of fidaxomicin compared with vancomycin
and metronidazole in Clostridium difficile infections: a meta-analysis and
indirect treatment comparison. J Antimicrobial Chemother 2014;69:
2892–900.
295. Burke KE, Lamont JT. Fecal transplantation for recurrent Clostridium
difficile infection in older adults: a review. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:
1394–8.
296. Goldenberg JZ, Ma SS, Saxton JD, Martzen MR, Vandvik PO, Thorlund K,
et al. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium difficile-associated
diarrhea in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;5:
Cd006095.
Thomas et al.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1808
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 297. Tremaroli V, Backhed F. Functional interactions between the gut micro-
biota and host metabolism. Nature 2012;489:242–9.
298. Sommer F, Backhed F. The gut microbiota–masters of host development
and physiology. Nat Rev Microbiol 2013;11:227–38.
299. Sassone-Corsi M, Nuccio SP, Liu H, Hernandez D, Vu CT, Takahashi AA,
et al. Microcins mediate competition among Enterobacteriaceae in the
inflamed gut. Nature 2016;540:280–3.
300. Zaneveld J, Turnbaugh PJ, Lozupone C, Ley RE, Hamady M, Gordon JI,
et al. Host-bacterial coevolution and the search for new drug targets. Curr
Opin Chem Biol 2008;12:109–14.
301. Bejaoui M, Sokol H, Marteau P. Targeting the microbiome in inflamma-
tory bowel disease: critical evaluation of current concepts and moving to
new horizons. Dig Dis 2015;33Suppl 1:105–12.
302. Ohkusa T, Koido S. Intestinal microbiota and ulcerative colitis. J Infect
Chemother 2015;21:761–8.
303. Serban DE. Microbiota in inflammatory bowel disease pathogenesis and
therapy: is it all about diet? Nutr Clin Practice 2015;30:760–79.
304. Klag T, Stange EF, Wehkamp J. Defective antibacterial barrier in inflam-
matory bowel disease. Dig Dis 2013;31:310–6.
305. Atreya R, Neurath MF. IBD pathogenesis in 2014: molecular pathways
controlling barrier function in IBD. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
2015;12:67–8.
306. Lee SH.Intestinal permeability regulation by tight junction: implication
on inflammatory bowel diseases. Intestinal Res 2015;13:11–8.
307. Chichlowski M, Hale LP. Bacterial-mucosal interactions in inflammatory
bowel disease: an alliance gone bad. Am J Physiol Gastrointestinal Liver
Physiol 2008;295:G1139–49.
308. Michielan A, D'Inca R. Intestinal permeability in inflammatory bowel
disease: pathogenesis, clinical evaluation, and therapy of leaky gut.
Mediators Inflamm 2015;2015:628157.
309. Tang Y, Forsyth CB, Keshavarzian A. New molecular insights into inflam-
matory bowel disease-induced diarrhea. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepa-
tol 2011;5:615–25.
310. Coskun M. Intestinal epithelium in inflammatory bowel disease. Front
Med 2014;1:24.
311. Merga Y, Campbell BJ, Rhodes JM. Mucosal barrier, bacteria and inflam-
matory bowel disease: possibilities for therapy. Dig Dis 2014;32:475–83.
312. Anderson JM, Van Itallie CM. Physiology and function of the tight
junction. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2009;1:a002584.
313. Chen SJ, Liu XW, Liu JP, Yang XY, Lu FG. Ulcerative colitis as a poly-
microbial infection characterized by sustained broken mucus barrier.
World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:9468–75.
314. DiGuilio KM, Mercogliano CM, Born J, Ferraro B, To J, Mixson B, et al.
Sieving characteristics of cytokine- and peroxide-induced epithelial bar-
rier leak: Inhibition by berberine. World J Gastrointest Pathophysiol
2016;7:223–34.
315. Hollander D, Vadheim CM, Brettholz E, Petersen GM, Delahunty T, Rotter
JI. Increased intestinal permeability in patients with Crohn's disease
and their relatives. A possible etiologic factor. Ann Intern Med 1986;
105:883–5.
316. May GR, Sutherland LR, Meddings JB. Is small intestinal permeability
really increased in relatives of patients with Crohn's disease? Gastroen-
terology 1993;104:1627–32.
317. Wei Y, Zhu W, Gong J, Guo D, Gu L, Li N, et al. Fecal microbiota
transplantation improves the quality of life in patients with inflammatory
bowel disease. Gastroenterol Res Pract 2015;2015:517597.
318. Moayyedi P, Surette MG, Kim PT, Libertucci J, Wolfe M, Onischi C, et al.
Fecal microbiota transplantation induces remission in patients with
active ulcerative colitis in a randomized controlled trial. Gastroenterology
2015;149:102–9.
319. Luhrs H, Gerke T, Muller JG, Melcher R, Schauber J, Boxberge F, et al.
Butyrate inhibits NF-kappaB activation in lamina propria macrophages of
patients with ulcerative colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol 2002;37:458–66.
320. Scheppach W, Sommer H, Kirchner T, Paganelli GM, Bartram P, Christl S,
et al. Effect of butyrate enemas on the colonic mucosa in distal ulcerative
colitis. Gastroenterology 1992;103:51–6.
321. Cummings JH. Short chain fatty acids in the human colon. Gut
1981;22:763–79.
322. Valenzano MC, DiGuilio K, Mercado J, Teter M, To J, Ferraro B, et al.
Remodeling of tight junctions and enhancement of barrier integrity of the
CACO-2 intestinal epithelial cell layer by micronutrients. PLoS One
2015;10:e0133926.
323. Peng L, Li ZR, Green RS, Holzman IR, Lin J. Butyrate enhances the
intestinal barrier by facilitating tight junction assembly via activation of
AMP-activated protein kinase in Caco-2 cell monolayers. J Nutr 2009;
139:1619–25.
324. Bansal T, Alaniz RC, Wood TK, Jayaraman A. The bacterial signal indole
increases epithelial-cell tight-junction resistance and attenuates indica-
tors of inflammation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:228–33.
325. Shimada Y, Kinoshita M, Harada K, Mizutani M, Masahata K, Kayama H,
et al. Commensal bacteria-dependent indole production enhances epi-
thelial barrier function in the colon. PLoS One 2013;8:e80604.
326. Zakostelska Z, Kverka M, Klimesova K, Rossmann P, Mrazek J, Kopecny J,
et al. Lysate of probiotic Lactobacillus casei DN-114 001 ameliorates colitis
by strengthening the gut barrier function and changing the gut micro-
environment. PLoS One 2011;6:e27961.
327. Laval L, Martin R, Natividad JN, Chain F, Miquel S, Desclee de Maredsous
C, et al. Lactobacillus rhamnosus CNCM I-3690 and the commensal
bacterium Faecalibacterium prausnitzii A2–165 exhibit similar protective
effects to induced barrier hyper-permeability in mice. Gut Microbes
2015;6:1–9.
328. Carlsson AH, Yakymenko O, Olivier I, Hakansson F, Postma E, Keita AV,
et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii supernatant improves intestinal barrier
function in mice DSS colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol 2013;48:1136–44.
329. Alam A, Leoni G, Quiros M, Wu H, Desai C, Nishio H. The microenvi-
ronment of injured murine gut elicits a local pro-restitutive microbiota.
Nat Microbiol 2016;1:15021.
330. Busquets D, Mas-de-Xaxars T, Lopez-Siles M, Martinez-Medina M, Bahi A,
Sabat M, et al. Anti-tumour necrosis factor treatment with adalimumab
induces changes in the microbiota of Crohn's Disease. J Crohn's Colitis
2015;9:899–906.
331. Martinez-Medina M, Denizot J, Dreux N, Robin F, Billard E, Bonnet R,
et al. Western diet induces dysbiosis with increased E coli in CEABAC10
mice, alters host barrier function favouring AIEC colonisation. Gut
2014;63:116–24.
332. Darfeuille-Michaud A. Adherent-invasive Escherichia coli: a putative new
E. coli pathotype associated with Crohn's disease. Int J Med Microbiol
2002;292:185–93.
333. Assa A, Vong L, Pinnell LJ, Rautava J, Avitzur N, Johnson-Henry KC, et al.
Vitamin D deficiency predisposes to adherent-invasive Escherichia coli-
induced barrier dysfunction and experimental colonic injury. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 2015;21:297–306.
334. Kish L, Hotte N, Kaplan GG, Vincent R, Tso R, Ganzle M, et al. Environ-
mental particulate matter induces murine intestinal inflammatory
responses and alters the gut microbiome. PLoS One 2013;8:e62220.
335. Yang L, Yan Y. Protein kinases are potential targets to treat inflammatory
bowel disease. World J Gastrointest Pharmacol Ther 2014;5:209–17.
336. Ramanan D, Bowcutt R, Lee SC, Tang MS, Kurtz ZD, Ding Y, et al.
Helminth infection promotes colonization resistance via type 2 immu-
nity. Science 2016;352:608–12.
337. Hansson GC. Role of mucus layers in gut infection and inflammation.
Curr Opin Microbiol 2012;15:57–62.
338. Johansson ME, Sjovall H, Hansson GC. The gastrointestinal mucus
system in health and disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;10:
352–61.
339. Ciorba MA, Bettonville EE, McDonald KG, Metz R, Prendergast GC,
Newberry RD, et al. Induction of IDO-1 by immunostimulatory DNA
limits severity of experimental colitis. J Immunol 2010;184:3907–16.
340. Campieri M, Gionchetti P. Bacteria as the cause of ulcerative colitis. Gut
2001;48:132–5.
341. Mirsepasi-Lauridsen HC, Du Z, Struve C, Charbon G, Karczewski J,
Krogfelt KA, et al. Secretion of alpha-hemolysin by escherichia coli
disrupts tight junctions in ulcerative colitis patients. Clin Transl Gastro-
enterol 2016;7:e149.
342. Ulluwishewa D, Anderson RC, McNabb WC, Moughan PJ, Wells JM, Roy
NC. Regulation of tight junction permeability by intestinal bacteria and
dietary components. J Nutr 2011;141:769–76.
343. Chang MY, Boulden J, Valenzano MC, Soler AP, Muller AJ, Mullin JM,
et al. Bin1 attenuation suppresses experimental colitis by enforcing
intestinal barrier function. Dig Dis Sci 2012;57:1813–21.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1809
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 344. Thomas S, Mercado JM, DuHadaway J, DiGuilio K, Mullin JM, Prender-
gast GC. Novel colitis immunotherapy targets Bin1 and improves colon
cell barrier function. Dig Dis Sci 2016;61:423–32.
345. Wirawan E, Lippens S, Vanden Berghe T, Romagnoli A, Fimia GM,
Piacentini M, et al. Beclin1: a role in membrane dynamics and beyond.
Autophagy 2012;8:6–17.
346. McKnight NC, Zhong Y, Wold MS, Gong S, Phillips GR, Dou Z, et al.
Beclin 1 is required for neuron viability and regulates endosome
pathways via the UVRAG-VPS34 complex. PLoS Genet 2014;10:
e1004626.
347. Hayaishi O, Ryotaro Y, Takikawa O, Yasui H. Indoleamine-dioxygenase—
a possible biological function. In: Progress in Tryptophan and Serotonin
Research. Berlin: Walter De Gruyter and Co.; 1984. p. 33–42.
348. Mellor AL, Munn DH. Tryptophan catabolism and T-cell tolerance:
immunosuppression by starvation? Immunol Today 1999;20:469–73.
349. Munn DH, Shafizadeh E, Attwood JT, Bondarev I, Pashine A, Mellor AL.
Inhibition of T cell proliferation by macrophage tryptophan catabolism. J
Exp Med 1999;189:1363–72.
350. Munn DH, Zhou M, Attwood JT, Bondarev I, Conway SJ, Marshall B, et al.
Prevention of allogeneic fetal rejection by tryptophan catabolism. Science
1998;281:1191–3.
351. Mellor AL, Sivakumar J, Chandler P, Smith K, Molina H, Mao D, et al.
Prevention of T cell-driven complement activation and inflammation
by tryptophan catabolism during pregnancy. Nat Immunol 2001;
2:64–8.
352. Muller AJ, DuHadaway JB, Donover PS, Sutanto-Ward E, Prendergast GC.
Inhibition of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, an immunoregulatory target
of the cancer suppression gene Bin1, potentiates cancer chemotherapy.
Nat Med 2005;11:312–9.
353. Munn DH, Sharma MD, Hou D, Baban B, Lee JR, Antonia SJ, et al.
Expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase by plasmacytoid dendritic
cells in tumor-draining lymph nodes. J Clin Invest 2004;114:280–90.
354. Munn DH, Mellor AL. Indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase and metabolic
control of immune responses. Trends Immunol 2013;34:137–43.
355. Prendergast GC, Smith C, Thomas S, Mandik-Nayak L, Laury-Kleintop L,
Metz R, et al. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase pathways of pathogenic
inflammation and immune escape in cancer. Cancer Immunol Immun-
other 2014;63:721–35.
356. Holmgaard RB, Zamarin D, Munn DH, Wolchok JD, Allison JP.
Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase is a critical resistance mechanism in
antitumor T cell immunotherapy targeting CTLA-4. J Exp Med 2013;
210:1389–402.
357. Yoshida R, Hayaishi O. Induction of pulmonary indoleamine 2,3-dioxy-
genase by intraperitoneal injection of bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1978;75:3998–4000.
358. Yoshida R, Urade Y, Tokuda M, Hayaishi O. Induction of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase in mouse lung during virus infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1979;76:4084–6.
359. Pfefferkorn ER. Interferon gamma blocks the growth of Toxoplasma gondii
in human fibroblasts by inducing the host cells to degrade tryptophan.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:908–12.
360. Byrne GI, Lehmann LK, Landry GJ. Induction of tryptophan catabolism
is the mechanism for gamma-interferon-mediated inhibition of intra-
cellular Chlamydia psittaci replication in T24 cells. Infect Immun
1986;53:347–51.
361. Beatty WL, Belanger TA, Desai AA, Morrison RP, Byrne GI. Tryptophan
depletion as a mechanism of gamma interferon-mediated chlamydial
persistence. Infect Immun 1994;62:3705–11.
362. Bozza S, Fallarino F, Pitzurra L, Zelante T, Montagnoli C, Bellocchio S,
et al. A crucial role for tryptophan catabolism at the host/Candida
albicans interface. J Immunol 2005;174:2910–8.
363. Silva NM, Rodrigues CV, Santoro MM, Reis LF, Alvarez-Leite JI,
Gazzinelli RT. Expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, tryptophan
degradation, and kynurenine formation during in vivo infection with
Toxoplasma gondii: induction by endogenous gamma interferon and
requirement of interferon regulatory factor 1. Infect Immun 2002;70:
859–68.
364. Saito A, Motomura N, Kakimi K, Narui K, Noguchi N, Sasatsu M, et al.
Vascular allografts are resistant to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus through indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in a murine model. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2008;136:159–67.
365. Knubel CP, Martinez FF, Fretes RE, Diaz Lujan C, Theumer MG, Cervi L,
et al. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxigenase (IDO) is critical for host resistance
against Trypanosoma cruzi. FASEB J 2010;24:2689–701.
366. Divanovic S, Sawtell NM, Trompette A, Warning JI, Dias A, Cooper AM,
et al. Opposing biological functions of tryptophan catabolizing enzymes
during intracellular infection. J Infect Dis 2012;205:152–61.
367. Romani L, Fallarino F, De Luca A, Montagnoli C, D'Angelo C, Zelante T,
et al. Defective tryptophan catabolism underlies inflammation in mouse
chronic granulomatous disease. Nature 2008;451:211–5.
368. Muller AJ, Mandik-Nayak L, Prendergast GC. Beyond immunosuppres-
sion: reconsidering indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase as a pathogenic ele-
ment of chronic inflammation. Immunotherapy 2010;2:293–7.
369. Muller AJ, Sharma MD, Chandler PR, Duhadaway JB, Everhart ME,
Johnson BAIII, et al. Chronic inflammation that facilitates tumor pro-
gression creates local immune suppression by inducing indoleamine 2,3
dioxygenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:17073–8.
370. Scott GN, DuHadaway J, Pigott E, Ridge N, Prendergast GC, Muller AJ,
et al. The immunoregulatory enzyme IDO paradoxically drives B cell-
mediated autoimmunity. J Immunol 2009;182:7509–17.
371. Metz R, Smith C, DuHadaway JB, Chandler P, Baban B, Merlo LM,
et al. IDO2 is critical for IDO1-mediated T-cell regulation and
exerts a non-redundant function in inflammation. Int Immunol
2014;26:357–67.
372. Metz R, Rust S, Duhadaway JB, Mautino MR, Munn DH, Vahanian NN,
et al. IDO inhibits a tryptophan sufficiency signal that stimulates mTOR: A
novel
IDO
effector
pathway
targeted
by
D-1-methyl-tryptophan.
Oncoimmunology 2012;1:1460–8.
373. Merlo LM, Pigott E, DuHadaway JB, Grabler S, Metz R, Prendergast GC,
et al. IDO2 is a critical mediator of autoantibody production and
inflammatory pathogenesis in a mouse model of autoimmune arthritis.
J Immunol 2014;192:2082–90.
374. Baban B, Chandler P, McCool D, Marshall B, Munn DH, Mellor AL.
Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase expression is restricted to fetal trophoblast
giant cells during murine gestation and is maternal genome specific. J
Reprod Immunol 2004;61:67–77.
375. Kanai M, Funakoshi H, Takahashi H, Hayakawa T, Mizuno S, Matsumoto
K, et al. Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase is a key modulator of physiological
neurogenesis and anxiety-related behavior in mice. Mol Brain 2009;2:8.
376. Bessede A, Gargaro M, Pallotta MT, Matino D, Servillo G, Brunacci C, et al.
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor control of a disease tolerance defence pathway.
Nature 2014;511:184–90.
377. Dzutsev A, Goldszmid RS, Viaud S, Zitvogel L, Trinchieri G. The role of the
microbiota in inflammation, carcinogenesis, and cancer therapy. Eur J
Immunol 2015;45:17–31.
378. Macho Fernandez E, Valenti V, Rockel C, Hermann C, Pot B, Boneca IG,
et al. Anti-inflammatory capacity of selected lactobacilli in experimental
colitis is driven by NOD2-mediated recognition of a specific peptidogly-
can-derived muropeptide. Gut 2011;60:1050–9.
379. Chang MY, Smith C, DuHadaway JB, Pyle JR, Boulden J, Soler AP, et al.
Cardiac and gastrointestinal liabilities caused by deficiency in the
immune modulatory enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Cancer Biol
Ther 2011;12:1050–8.
380. Muller AJ, DuHadaway JB, Chang MY, Ramalingam A, Sutanto-Ward E,
Boulden J, et al. Non-hematopoietic expression of IDO is integrally
required for inflammatory tumor promotion. Cancer Immunol Immun-
other 2010;59:1655–63.
381. Smith C, Chang MY, Parker KH, Beury DW, DuHadaway JB, Flick HE, et al.
IDO is a nodal pathogenic driver of lung cancer and metastasis devel-
opment. Cancer Discov 2012;2:722–35.
382. Erdman SE, Rao VP, Poutahidis T, Ihrig MM, Ge Z, Feng Y, et al. CD4(þ)
CD25(þ) regulatory lymphocytes require interleukin 10 to interrupt
colon carcinogenesis in mice. Cancer Res 2003;63:6042–50.
383. Saleh M, Trinchieri G. Innate immune mechanisms of colitis and colitis-
associated colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;11:9–20.
384. Gurtner GJ, Newberry RD, Schloemann SR, McDonald KG, Stenson WF.
Inhibition of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase augments trinitrobenzene
sulfonic acid colitis in mice. Gastroenterology 2003;125:1762–73.
385. Harrington L, Srikanth CV, Antony R, Rhee SJ, Mellor AL, Shi HN, et al.
Deficiency of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase enhances commensal-
induced antibody responses and protects against Citrobacter rodentium-
induced colitis. Infect Immun 2008;76:3045–53.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1810
Thomas et al.
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 386. Zelante T, Iannitti RG, Fallarino F, Gargaro M, De Luca A, Moretti S, et al.
Tryptophan feeding of the IDO1-AhR axis in host-microbial symbiosis.
Frontiers Immunol 2014;5:640.
387. Zitvogel L, Galluzzi L, Viaud S, Vetizou M, Daillere R, Merad M, et al.
Cancer and the gut microbiota: an unexpected link. Sci Transl Med
2015;7:271ps1.
388. Kamada N, Seo SU, Chen GY, Nunez G. Role of the gut microbiota
in immunity and inflammatory disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2013;13:
321–35.
389. Wang JL, Chang CH, Lin JW, Wu LC, Chuang LM, Lai MS. Infection,
antibiotic therapy and risk of colorectal cancer: a nationwide nested case-
control study in patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int J Cancer
2014;135:956–67.
390. Bonnet M, Buc E, Sauvanet P, Darcha C, Dubois D, Pereira B, et al.
Colonization of the human gut by E. coli and colorectal cancer risk. Clin
Cancer Res 2014;20:859–67.
391. Arthur JC, Perez-Chanona E, Muhlbauer M, Tomkovich S, Uronis JM, Fan
TJ, et al. Intestinal inflammation targets cancer-inducing activity of the
microbiota. Science 2012;338:120–3.
392. Zhan Y, Chen PJ, Sadler WD, Wang F, Poe S, Nunez G, et al. Gut
microbiota protects against gastrointestinal tumorigenesis caused by
epithelial injury. Cancer Res 2013;73:7199–210.
393. Louis P, Hold GL, Flint HJ. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and
colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Microbiol 2014;12:661–72.
394. Yoshimoto S, Loo TM, Atarashi K, Kanda H, Sato S, Oyadomari S, et al.
Obesity-induced gut microbial metabolite promotes liver cancer through
senescence secretome. Nature 2013;499:97–101.
395. Dapito DH, Mencin A, Gwak GY, Pradere JP, Jang MK, Mederacke I, et al.
Promotion of hepatocellular carcinoma by the intestinal microbiota and
TLR4. Cancer Cell 2012;21:504–16.
396. Wroblewski LE, Peek RMJr, Wilson KT. Helicobacter pylori and gastric
cancer: factors that modulate disease risk. Clin Microbiol Rev 2010;23:
713–39.
397. Konishi H, Fujiya M, Tanaka H, Ueno N, Moriichi K, Sasajima J, et al.
Probiotic-derived ferrichrome inhibits colon cancer progression via JNK-
mediated apoptosis. Nat Commun 2016;7:12365.
398. Urbaniak C, Gloor GB, Brackstone M, Scott L, Tangney M, Reid G. The
microbiota of breast tissue and its association with breast cancer. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2016;82:5039–48.
399. van't Veer P, Dekker JM, Lamers JW, Kok FJ, Schouten EG, Brants
HA, et al. Consumption of fermented milk products and breast
cancer: a case-control study in The Netherlands. Cancer Res 1989;
49:4020–3.
400. de Moreno de LeBlanc A, Matar C, Theriault C, Perdigon G. Effects of milk
fermented by Lactobacillus helveticus R389 on immune cells associated
to mammary glands in normal and a breast cancer model. Immunobiol-
ogy 2005;210:349–58.
401. Hoption Cann SA, van Netten JP, van Netten C. Dr William Coley and
tumour regression: a place in history or in the future. Postgraduate Med J
2003;79:672–80.
402. Coley W. The treatment of malignant tumors by repeated innocula-
tions of erysipelas: with a report of ten original cases. Am J Med Sci
1893;10:487–511.
403. Nauts HC, Fowler GA, Bogatko FH. A review of the influence of
bacterial infection and of bacterial products (Coley's toxins) on
malignant tumors in man; a critical analysis of 30 inoperable cases
treated by Coley's mixed toxins, in which diagnosis was confirmed by
microscopic examination selected for special study. Acta Med Scand
Suppl 1953;276:1–103.
404. Hoption Cann SA, van Netten JP, van Netten C, Glover DW. Spontaneous
regression: a hidden treasure buried in time. Med Hypotheses 2002;
58:115–9.
405. Bassi P. BCG (Bacillus of Calmette Guerin) therapy of high-risk superficial
bladder cancer. Surg Oncol 2002;11:77–83.
406. Bohle A, Jocham D, Bock PR. Intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin versus
mitomycin C for superficial bladder cancer: a formal meta-analysis of
comparative studies on recurrence and toxicity. J Urol 2003;169:90–5.
407. Bohle A, Nowc C, Ulmer AJ, Musehold J, Gerdes J, Hofstetter AG, et al.
Elevations of cytokines interleukin-1, interleukin-2 and tumor necrosis
factor in the urine of patients after intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin
immunotherapy. J Urol 1990;144:59–64.
408. Fleischmann JD, Toossi Z, Ellner JJ, Wentworth DB, Ratliff TL,
Imbembo AL. Urinary interleukins in patients receiving intravesical
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin therapy for superficial bladder cancer. Can-
cer 1989;64:1447–54.
409. Taniguchi K, Koga S, Nishikido M, Yamashita S, Sakuragi T, Kanetake H,
et al. Systemic immune response after intravesical instillation of bacille
Calmette-Guerin (BCG) for superficial bladder cancer. Clin Exp Immunol
1999;115:131–5.
410. Viaud S, Saccheri F, Mignot G, Yamazaki T, Daillere R, Hannani D, et al.
The intestinal microbiota modulates the anticancer immune effects of
cyclophosphamide. Science 2013;342:971–6.
411. Liau LM, Black KL, Prins RM, Sykes SN, DiPatre PL, Cloughesy TF, et al.
Treatment of intracranial gliomas with bone marrow-derived dendritic
cells pulsed with tumor antigens. J Neurosurg 1999;90:1115–24.
412. Liau LM, Black KL, Martin NA, Sykes SN, Bronstein JM, Jouben-Steele L,
et al. Treatment of a patient by vaccination with autologous dendritic cells
pulsed with allogeneic major histocompatibility complex class I-matched
tumor peptides. Case Report. Neurosurg Focus 2000;9:e8.
413. Brossart P. Dendritic cells in vaccination therapies of malignant diseases.
Transfus Apher Sci 2002;27:183–6.
414. So-Rosillo R, Small EJ. Sipuleucel-T (APC8015) for prostate cancer. Expert
Rev Anticancer Ther 2006;6:1163–7.
415. Speiser DE, Lienard D, Pittet MJ, Batard P, Rimoldi D, Guillaume P, et al.
In vivo activation of melanoma-specific CD8(þ) T cells by endogenous
tumor antigen and peptide vaccines. A comparison to virus-specific T
cells. Eur J Immunol 2002;32:731–41.
416. Sampson JH, Archer GE, Mitchell DA, Heimberger AB, Herndon JEII,
Lally-Goss D, et al. An epidermal growth factor receptor variant III-
targeted vaccine is safe and immunogenic in patients with glioblastoma
multiforme. Mol Cancer Ther 2009;8:2773–9.
417. Heimberger AB, Sampson JH. The PEPvIII-KLH (CDX-110) vaccine
in glioblastoma multiforme patients. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2009;9:
1087–98.
418. Ragupathi G, Cappello S, Yi SS, Canter D, Spassova M, Bornmann WG,
et al. Comparison of antibody titers after immunization with monovalent
or tetravalent KLH conjugate vaccines. Vaccine 2002;20:1030–8.
419. Slingluff CLJr, Yamshchikov G, Neese P, Galavotti H, Eastham S, Engel-
hard VH, et al. Phase I trial of a melanoma vaccine with gp100(280–288)
peptide and tetanus helper peptide in adjuvant: immunologic and clinical
outcomes. Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:3012–24.
420. La Rosa C, Wang Z, Brewer JC, Lacey SF, Villacres MC, Sharan R, et al.
Preclinical development of an adjuvant-free peptide vaccine with activity
against CMV pp65 in HLA transgenic mice. Blood 2002;100:3681–9.
421. Purcell AW, McCluskey J, Rossjohn J. More than one reason to rethink the
use of peptides in vaccine design. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2007;6:404–14.
422. Alexander RB, Rosenberg SA. Adoptively transferred tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes can cure established metastatic tumor in mice and persist
long-term in vivo as functional memory T lymphocytes. J Immunother
1991;10:389–97.
423. Bartels CJ, Rosenberg SA, Yang JC. Adoptive cellular immunotherapy of
cancer in mice using allogeneic T-cells. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:67–73.
424. Barth RJJr, Bock SN, Mule JJ, Rosenberg SA. Unique murine tumor-
associated antigens identified by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immu-
nol 1990;144:1531–7.
425. Bachanova V, Cooley S, Defor TE, Verneris MR, Zhang B, McKenna DH,
et al. Clearance of acute myeloid leukemia by haploidentical natural killer
cells is improved using IL-2 diphtheria toxin fusion protein. Blood
2014;123:3855–63.
426. Bluming AZ, Ziegler JL. Regression of Burkitt's lymphoma in association
with measles infection. Lancet 1971;2:105–6.
427. Coffey MC, Strong JE, Forsyth PA, Lee PW. Reovirus therapy of tumors
with activated Ras pathway. Science 1998;282:1332–4.
428. Stojdl DF, Lichty B, Knowles S, Marius R, Atkins H, Sonenberg N, et al.
Exploiting tumor-specific defects in the interferon pathway with a pre-
viously unknown oncolytic virus. Nat Med 2000;6:821–5.
429. Martuza RL, Malick A, Markert JM, Ruffner KL, Coen DM. Experimental
therapy of human glioma by means of a genetically engineered virus
mutant. Science 1991;252:854–6.
430. Gromeier M, Lachmann S, Rosenfeld MR, Gutin PH, Wimmer E. Inter-
generic poliovirus recombinants for the treatment of malignant glioma.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:6803–8.
Host Microbiome in Human Health
www.aacrjournals.org
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
1811
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 431. Dobrikova EY, Broadt T, Poiley-Nelson J, Yang X, Soman G, Giardina S,
et al. Recombinant oncolytic poliovirus eliminates glioma in vivo
without genetic adaptation to a pathogenic phenotype. Mol Ther
2008;16:1865–72.
432. Brown MC, Dobrikova EY, Dobrikov MI, Walton RW, Gemberling SL,
Nair SK, et al. Oncolytic polio virotherapy of cancer. Cancer 2014;120:
3277–86.
433. Hobo W, Maas F, Adisty N, de Witte T, Schaap N, van der Voort R, et al.
siRNA silencing of PD-L1 and PD-L2 on dendritic cells augments expan-
sion and function of minor histocompatibility antigen-specific CD8þ T
cells. Blood 2010;116:4501–11.
434. Marquez-Rodas I, Cerezuela P, Soria A, Berrocal A, Riso A, Gonzalez-Cao
M, et al. Immune checkpoint inhibitors: therapeutic advances in mela-
noma. Ann Transl Med 2015;3:267.
435. Agarwala SS. Novel immunotherapies as potential therapeutic partners
for traditional or targeted agents: cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4
blockade in advanced melanoma. Melanoma Res 2010;20:1–10.
436. Ansell SM, Hurvitz SA, Koenig PA, LaPlant BR, Kabat BF, Fernando D, et al.
Phase I study of ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody, in
patients with relapsed and refractory B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:6446–53.
437. Wolchok JD, Kluger H, Callahan MK, Postow MA, Rizvi NA, Lesokhin AM,
et al. Nivolumab plus ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. N Engl J Med
2013;369:122–33.
438. Robert C, Thomas L, Bondarenko I, O'Day S, Weber J, Garbe C, et al.
Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously untreated metastatic mela-
noma. N Engl J Med 2011;364:2517–26.
439. Vetizou M, Pitt JM, Daillere R, Lepage P, Waldschmitt N, Flament C, et al.
Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut micro-
biota. Science 2015;350:1079–84.
440. Sivan A, Corrales L, Hubert N, Williams JB, Aquino-Michaels K,
Earley ZM, et al. Commensal Bifidobacterium promotes antitumor
immunity and facilitates anti-PD-L1 efficacy. Science 2015;350:
1084–9.
Cancer Res; 77(8) April 15, 2017
Cancer Research
1812
Thomas et al.
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
 2017;77:1783-1812. Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017.
Cancer Res 
  
Sunil Thomas, Jacques Izard, Emily Walsh, et al. 
  
Primer and Perspective for Non-Microbiologists
The Host Microbiome Regulates and Maintains Human Health: A
  
Updated version
  
 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929
doi:
Access the most recent version of this article at:
  
  
  
  
  
Cited articles
  
 
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/77/8/1783.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 434 articles, 107 of which you can access for free at:
  
  
  
E-mail alerts
 related to this article or journal.
Sign up to receive free email-alerts
  
Subscriptions
Reprints and 
  
.
pubs@aacr.org
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
  
Permissions
  
Rightslink site. 
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's (CCC)
.
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/77/8/1783
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
on June 2, 2019. © 2017 American Association for Cancer Research. 
cancerres.aacrjournals.org 
Downloaded from 
Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2017; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
