 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
154 
MMWR / February 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On February 12, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
Zika virus, a mosquito-borne flavivirus, spread to the 
Region of the Americas (Americas) in mid-2015, and appears 
to be related to congenital microcephaly and Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (1,2). On February 1, 2016, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) declared the occurrence of micro-
cephaly cases in association with Zika virus infection to be 
a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.* On 
December 31, 2015, Puerto Rico Department of Health 
(PRDH) reported the first locally acquired (index) case of Zika 
virus disease in a jurisdiction of the United States in a patient 
from southeastern Puerto Rico. During November 23, 2015–
January 28, 2016, passive and enhanced surveillance for Zika 
virus disease identified 30 laboratory-confirmed cases. Most 
(93%) patients resided in eastern Puerto Rico or the San Juan 
metropolitan area. The most frequently reported signs and 
symptoms were rash (77%), myalgia (77%), arthralgia (73%), 
and fever (73%). Three (10%) patients were hospitalized. One 
case occurred in a patient hospitalized for Guillain-Barré syn-
drome, and one occurred in a pregnant woman. Because the 
most common mosquito vector of Zika virus, Aedes aegypti, 
is present throughout Puerto Rico, Zika virus is expected to 
continue to spread across the island. The public health response 
in Puerto Rico is being coordinated by PRDH with assistance 
from CDC. Clinicians in Puerto Rico should report all cases 
of microcephaly, Guillain-Barré syndrome, and suspected Zika 
virus disease to PRDH. Other adverse reproductive outcomes, 
including fetal demise associated with Zika virus infection, 
should be reported to PRDH. To avoid infection with Zika 
virus, residents of and visitors to Puerto Rico, particularly 
pregnant women, should strictly follow steps to avoid mosquito 
bites, including wearing pants and long-sleeved shirts, using 
permethrin-treated clothing and gear, using an Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent, and ensur-
ing that windows and doors have intact screens.
In November 2015, PRDH, with assistance from CDC, 
initiated surveillance for Zika virus disease in Puerto Rico by 
modifying the existing Passive Dengue Surveillance System (3) 
to include suspected Zika virus disease. Patients in whom a 
clinician suspected Zika virus disease were reported by sending 
a serum specimen with a modified dengue case investigation 
form.† In January 2016, PRDH initiated enhanced surveil-
lance for Zika virus disease by performing Zika virus testing on 
specimens submitted during November 2015–January 2016 
that had tested negative for dengue or chikungunya.
Specimens collected within 7 days of illness onset were tested 
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
with updated primers to detect Zika virus RNA. Specimens 
collected ≥4 days after illness onset were tested by immuno-
globulin M (IgM) capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) to detect serologic evidence of recent Zika virus 
infection. Laboratory-confirmed Zika virus disease cases were 
defined as detection of either Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR, or 
anti-Zika virus IgM antibody by ELISA with a simultaneous 
negative anti-dengue virus IgM antibody test.
Epidemiology and Laboratory Investigations
During November 23, 2015–January 28, 2016, a total of 
155 suspected Zika virus disease cases were identified in Puerto 
Rico, including 82 reported through passive surveillance, and 
73 specimens tested through the enhanced surveillance pro-
tocol. Overall, 30 (19%) cases had laboratory confirmation 
of Zika virus disease. Among these cases, one (3%) patient 
had reported illness onset in November 2015 (the index 
patient), eight (27%) in December 2015, and 21 (70%) in 
January 2016. One patient with illness onset in late December 
reported travel to the Dominican Republic within 14 days of 
illness onset.
After identification of the index case, two cases were detected 
during the first 2 weeks of December; six cases per week were 
reported during the 2nd and 3rd weeks of 2016 (Figure 1). 
Patients resided in municipalities throughout eastern Puerto 
Rico and the San Juan metropolitan area, and one each resided 
in Ponce and Guánica (Figure 2). The most frequently reported 
symptoms were rash, myalgia, arthralgia, and fever (Table). 
Fever, rash, arthralgia, and conjunctivitis were reported in 
seven (23%) patients. Coinfection with influenza B virus 
was reported in one patient. Three (10%) patients were 
hospitalized: the index patient, one patient with Guillain-Barré 
Local Transmission of Zika Virus — Puerto Rico,  
November 23, 2015–January 28, 2016
Dana L. Thomas, MD1,2; Tyler M. Sharp, PhD3; Jomil Torres, MS1; Paige A. Armstrong, MD4; Jorge Munoz-Jordan, PhD3; Kyle R. Ryff, MPH1; 
Alma Martinez-Quiñones, MPH5; José Arias-Berríos, MD6; Marrielle Mayshack1,7; Glenn J. Garayalde, MD8; Sonia Saavedra, MD, PhD8; 
Carlos A. Luciano, MD6; Miguel Valencia-Prado5; Steve Waterman, MD3; Brenda Rivera-García, DVM1
* http://www.cdc.gov/zika. 
† http://www.cdc.gov/dengue/resources/denguecasereports/dcif_english.pdf. 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / February 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
155
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
syndrome, and another patient who was hospitalized because 
of thrombocytopenia and clinical suspicion of dengue.
Index case. The first case of Zika virus disease identified in 
Puerto Rico occurred in a man aged 80 years from southeast-
ern Puerto Rico with multiple chronic medical conditions, 
who reported onset of symptoms on November 23, 2015. 
Eight days after illness onset, he was evaluated in a hospital 
emergency department for progressive weakness after several 
days of watery, nonbloody diarrhea, recent episodes of falling, 
shoulder pain, chills, malaise, and abdominal pain. He did 
not report myalgia, headache, or retro-orbital pain. He was 
febrile, tachycardic, tachypneic, and hypotensive, with bilateral 
erythematous sclera. Laboratory results revealed leukocytosis 
with a predominance of neutrophils; hemoconcentration; 
thrombocytopenia; elevated serum transaminases, blood urea 
nitrogen, and creatinine; hyponatremia; and hypoglycemia. He 
received a diagnosis of sepsis, was admitted to the intensive care 
unit for fluid resuscitation and monitoring, and was treated 
with broad spectrum antibiotics. Diagnostic considerations 
included leptospirosis and dengue. He experienced respiratory 
decompensation requiring intubation and 5 days of mechani-
cal ventilation. He was hospitalized for 2 weeks, during which 
time he underwent an extensive evaluation. Blood and stool 
cultures were negative, as were serologic tests for human immu-
nodeficiency virus, Leptospira, and Strongyloides. Schistosoma 
immunoglobulin G titers were elevated, for which praziquantel 
was administered. On December 2, serum was collected for 
dengue and chikungunya diagnostic testing, and was positive 
for anti-dengue virus IgM, negative for anti-chikungunya 
virus IgM, and negative for detection of dengue virus and 
chikungunya virus RNA. Because a hospital-based enhanced 
surveillance protocol was in place for detection of Zika virus, 
the same serum specimen was tested for Zika virus infection 
by RT-PCR with a positive result. Confirmatory molecular 
diagnostic testing was performed at CDC. Detection of anti-
dengue virus IgM antibody likely was a result of cross-reactive 
anti-Zika virus IgM antibody. Although no pathogen other 
than Zika virus was identified, the patient’s clinical course 
suggests that he also had an occult bacterial infection.
Selected Additional Patients’ Characteristics
Case A. On January 13, 2016, a man aged 37 years developed 
a rash, which resolved over the next 2 days; the next day, he 
noted paresthesias in his hands and feet, followed by progres-
sive weakness in bulbar and limb muscles and uncontrolled 
fluctuating hypertension consistent with dysautonomia. On 
medical evaluation he had bilateral facial weakness, weakness 
in the upper and lower limbs, and areflexia, and was hospital-
ized for ascending paralysis. Cerebrospinal fluid protein was 
elevated, and electrodiagnostic studies showed evidence of 
a demyelinating polyneuropathy, consistent with the acute 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy variant of 
Guillain-Barré syndrome. The patient responded to treat-
ment with intravenous immunoglobulin. A serum specimen 
collected 15 days after illness onset, and before administration 
of intravenous immunoglobulin, was positive for anti-Zika 
virus IgM antibody, negative for anti-dengue IgM antibody, 
and negative for Zika, dengue, and chikungunya virus RNA 
by RT-PCR. A urine specimen collected 19 days after illness 
onset was also negative for Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR. This is 
the only patient in Puerto Rico with Guillain-Barré syndrome 
and confirmed Zika virus disease identified to date.
Case B. On January 22, 2016, RT-PCR–confirmed Zika 
virus disease was diagnosed in a woman in her first trimester 
of pregnancy; she had sought care because of a 2-day history 
of nonfebrile eye, body, and joint pain; petechial rash; con-
junctivitis; and nausea. Her obstetrician provided counseling 
regarding risks to her fetus and recommended clinical follow-
up, according to CDC interim guidelines (4).
Public Health Response
The public health response has focused on educating clini-
cians and the public, establishing laboratory capacity, improv-
ing epidemiologic capacity for detecting and monitoring all 
laboratory-confirmed cases of Zika virus disease in pregnant 
women, and reducing risk for infection to women who are 
pregnant. Community cleanup campaigns are being organized 
throughout the island to remove standing water from contain-
ers where Aedes aegypti mosquitos might breed. Additional 
approaches to effective and sustainable mosquito control are 
being considered.
No cases of microcephaly potentially associated with Zika 
virus infection have been reported to PRDH. Because micro-
cephaly was not previously captured through routine surveil-
lance, retrospective medical record review of live births during 
2013–2015 will be conducted to define the baseline annual 
incidence of congenital microcephaly among live births, as 
defined by head circumference below the third percentile for 
sex and gestational age (5). The Puerto Rico Birth Defects 
Surveillance and Prevention System (BDSPS) case definition 
has been modified to capture microcephaly cases not associated 
with another major birth defect of the central nervous system. 
Clinicians in Puerto Rico have been advised to report all cases 
of congenital microcephaly to the BDSPS. PRDH, with 
assistance from CDC, will maintain a registry of all pregnant 
women with laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection, who 
will be followed throughout their pregnancy.
Guillain-Barré syndrome is not a reportable condition in the 
United States, including Puerto Rico. In conjunction with neu-
rologists in Puerto Rico,  a Guillain-Barré syndrome surveillance 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
156 
MMWR / February 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
system is being established to identify cases of clinically diag-
nosed Guillain-Barré syndrome. After identification of a case of 
clinically confirmed Guillain-Barré syndrome, testing for arboviral 
and other infections will be performed. Cases of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome will be further investigated to define the association 
between Zika virus infection and Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Because of reports of detection of Zika virus RNA in saliva 
and urine (6,7), as well as reports of sexual transmission of 
Zika virus (8,9), patients with laboratory-confirmed Zika virus 
infection will be followed to determine the persistence of Zika 
virus RNA, as well as the presence of infectious virus in saliva, 
urine, and semen.
Discussion
In May 2015, WHO reported the first local transmission 
of Zika virus in the Americas in Brazil (10). As of February 3, 
2016, local transmission of Zika virus has been reported in 
26 countries and territories in the Caribbean and South and 
Central America.§
The cases described in this report are the first documented 
local transmission of Zika virus in a jurisdiction of the 
United States. Aedes aegypti, the most common mosquito 
vector of Zika virus worldwide, is present throughout Puerto 
Rico. Therefore, Zika virus is expected to continue to spread 
throughout the territory, and the 3.5 million residents of Puerto 
Rico, including approximately 43,000 pregnant women per 
year, are at risk for Zika virus infection.
Approximately 80% of Zika virus infections are asymptom-
atic (11). The most common symptoms reported by patients 
in Puerto Rico with laboratory-confirmed Zika virus disease 
were rash, body and joint pain, and fever. Approximately 25% 
of patients reported all of the signs and symptoms most com-
monly associated with Zika virus disease: fever, rash, arthralgia, 
and conjunctivitis (11). This suggests a variable clinical presen-
tation in patients with Zika virus disease. Whether these signs 
and symptoms are reflective of all persons with symptomatic 
Zika virus infection, or represent patients with more severe 
disease, is unknown, as these patients had all sought medi-
cal care. This bias might be reflected in the observed rate of 
patient hospitalization, which was higher than expected on the 
FIGURE 1. Zika virus disease cases* (N = 30), by week of onset of patient’s illness — Puerto Rico, November 23, 2015–January 28, 2016
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
No. of cases
Epidemiologic week and year
2016
2015
* All cases laboratory-confirmed, Dengue Branch, CDC.
§ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/index.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / February 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
157
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
basis of previous reports (11). Because symptomatic persons 
with less severe Zika virus disease might not have sought care, 
the cases reported here might underestimate the incidence of 
symptomatic Zika virus infection in Puerto Rico.
Clinicians in Puerto Rico should report all patients with 
fever, joint pain, rash, or conjunctivitis to PRDH as a suspected 
case of Zika virus disease if another etiology has not been identi-
fied. All patients with suspected dengue, chikungunya, or Zika 
virus disease from whom a specimen has been collected during 
the first 6 days of illness will be tested by PRDH with an assay 
currently under development at CDC that simultaneously 
tests for Zika, chikungunya, and dengue virus RNA. Because 
of possible complications associated with dengue, including 
increased vascular permeability that might lead to shock and 
hemorrhage, patients with suspected Zika, dengue, or chikun-
gunya should be managed as dengue patients¶ until another 
diagnosis is established. Clinicians in Puerto Rico should also 
be aware of currently ongoing influenza virus transmission at 
epidemic levels,** and consider influenza in the differential 
diagnosis when evaluating patients with acute febrile illness. 
Current case counts of laboratory-confirmed Zika virus disease 
cases are available online.††
Currently, no medication or vaccine is available to treat or 
prevent Zika virus disease. To prevent infection, persons resid-
ing in affected areas or traveling to areas of active Zika virus 
transmission should strictly follow steps to avoid mosquito 
bites. Men who reside in or have traveled to an area of active 
Zika virus transmission who have a pregnant partner should 
abstain from sexual activity or consistently and correctly use 
condoms during sex, and men who reside in or have traveled 
to an area of active Zika virus transmission who are concerned 
about sexual transmission of Zika virus might consider abstain-
ing from sexual activity or using condoms consistently and cor-
rectly during sex.§§ Mosquito-bite prevention includes using 
air conditioning or window and door screens when indoors, 
wearing long sleeves and pants, using permethrin-treated cloth-
ing and gear, and using insect repellents. When used according 
to the product label, EPA-registered insect repellents are safe 
for pregnant women.¶¶ Residents of Puerto Rico should cover, 
empty, or discard water containers that might serve as mosquito 
breeding sites (e.g., tires, plastic containers, and water cisterns). 
PRDH, CDC, and other partner organizations are urgently 
implementing broader plans for mosquito control and reduc-
tion of risk for Zika virus infection among pregnant women.
FIGURE 2. Municipality of residence of persons with Zika virus disease*,† — Puerto Rico, November 23, 2015–January 28, 2016§
Number of confrmed cases (n = 30)
3
2
1
None
4
Culebra
Vieques
Ceiba 
Fajardo
Fajardo
Luquillo 
Río
Grande 
Loíza 
Naguabo 
Humacao 
Humacao 
Yabucoa 
Maunabo
Maunabo
Patillas 
San
Lorenzo 
Las
Piedras 
Las
Piedras 
Juncos
Canóvanas 
Carolina 
San
Juan 
San
Juan 
Arroyo 
Arroyo 
Guayama
Cataño 
Trujillo
Alto
Trujillo
Alto
Gurabo 
Caguas
Ceiba 
Luquillo 
Río
Grande 
Naguabo 
Juncos
Gurabo 
Caguas
Cayey 
Salinas
Aibonito
Cidra 
Aguas
Buenas
Guaynabo 
Bayamón
Bayamón
Toa
Baja 
Toa Alta
Dorado
Dorado
Vega
Alta
Vega
Alta
Vega
Baja
Naranjito
Naranjito
Comerío
Barranquitas
Barranquitas
Coamo
Corozal
Santa
Isabel
Juana
Díaz
 Villalba 
Orocovis 
Morovis
Manatí 
Florida 
Barceloneta
Arecibo 
Jayuya
Ponce
Ponce
Peñuelas 
Peñuelas 
Guayanilla
Guayanilla
Yauco 
Adjuntas
Utuado
Lares
Camuy
Hatillo
Hatillo
Quebradillas
Isabela
Aguadilla
Aguada
Rincón
Añasco
San
Sebastián
Las Marías
Maricao
Lajas 
San
Germán
Sabana
Grande
Sabana
Grande
Cabo
Rojo
Hormigueros
Mayagüez
Guánica
Guánica
Moca
Ciales
* All cases laboratory-confirmed, Dengue Branch, CDC.
† Total number of cases = 30; 1 case not shown because location unknown; 1 case in Juncos was travel-associated.
§ Data current as of February 11, 2016.
 ¶ Dengue clinical case management online training course (http://www.cdc.
gov/dengue/training/cme.html).
 
** http://www.salud.gov.pr/Estadisticas-Registros-y-Publicaciones/Pages/
Influenza.aspx.
 
†† http://www.salud.gov.pr/Estadisticas-Registros-y-Publicaciones/Pages/
Informe-Arboviral.aspx.
 
§§ http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6505e1er.htm?s_
cid=mm6505e1.htm_w.
 
¶¶ http://www.cdc.gov/Features/stopmosquitoes/index.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
158 
MMWR / February 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 1Office of Epidemiology, Puerto Rico Department of Health; 2Division of State 
Laboratory Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, 
CDC; 3Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 4Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 
5Puerto Rico Birth Defects Surveillance and Prevention System, Puerto Rico 
Department of Health; 6Department of Neurology, University of Puerto Rico 
School of Medicine; 7Office for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial Support, 
CDC; 8Veterans’ Affairs Caribbean Healthcare System.
Corresponding author: Dana Thomas, Zika@salud.gov.pr, 787-265-2929.
References
 1. Pan American Health Organization. Epidemiological alert: neurological 
syndrome, congenital malformations, and Zika virus infection. 
Implications for public health in the Americas. Washington, DC: World 
Health Organization, Pan American Health Organization; 2015. http://
www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_downl
oad&Itemid=&gid=32405&lang=en.
 2. European Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. Zika virus 
epidemic in the Americas: potential association with microcephaly and 
Guillain-Barré syndrome. Stockholm, Sweden: European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control; 2015. http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/
publications/Publications/zika-virus-rapid-risk-assessment-8-
february-2016.pdf. 
 3. Noyd DH, Sharp TM. Recent advances in dengue: relevance to Puerto 
Rico. P R Health Sci J 2015;34:65–70.
 4. Petersen EE, Staples JE, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Interim guidelines 
for pregnant women during a Zika virus outbreak—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:30–3. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6502e1.
 5. Staples JE, Dziuban EJ, Fischer M, et al. Interim guidelines for the 
evaluation and testing of infants with possible congenital Zika virus 
infection—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:63–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6503e3.
 6. Musso D, Roche C, Nhan TX, Robin E, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau VM. 
Detection of Zika virus in saliva. J Clin Virol 2015;68:53–5. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2015.04.021.
 7. Gourinat AC, O’Connor O, Calvez E, Goarant C, Dupont-Rouzeyrol 
M. Detection of Zika virus in urine. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:84–6. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2101.140894.
 8. Foy BD, Kobylinski KC, Foy JLC, et al. Probable non-vector-borne 
transmission of Zika virus, Colorado, USA. Emerg Infect Dis 
2011;17:880–2. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1705.101939.
 9. Musso D, Roche C, Robin E, Nhan T, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau VM. 
Potential sexual transmission of Zika virus. Emerg Infect Dis 
2015;21:359–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2102.141363.
 
10. Zanluca C, de Melo VC, Mosimann AL, Dos Santos GI, Dos Santos 
CN, Luz K. First report of autochthonous transmission of Zika virus in 
Brazil. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2015;110:569–72. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1590/0074-02760150192.
 
11. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap 
Island, Federated States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med 2009;360:2536–43. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0805715.
TABLE. Demographic characteristics, clinical course, and signs and 
symptoms in 30 patients with Zika virus disease identified by the 
Puerto Rico Department of Health — Puerto Rico, November 23, 
2015–January 28, 2016
Characteristic
Patients
Age/Illness onset 
(range)
No. (%)
Median age (yrs)
40 (10–80)
Median time from illness onset to 
specimen collection (days)
3 (0–15)
History of recent travel*
1 (3)
Female
18 (60)
Pregnant
1 (3)
Hospitalized
3 (10)
Signs and symptoms†
Rash
23 (77)
Myalgia
23 (77)
Arthralgia
22 (73)
Fever
22 (73)
Eye pain
20 (67)
Chills
20 (67)
Headache
19 (63)
Sore throat
12 (40)
Petechiae
10 (33)
Conjunctivitis
8 (27)
Diarrhea
7 (23)
Nausea/Vomiting
5 (17)
* Travel outside of Puerto Rico and the United States in the 14 days before 
illness onset.
† Signs and symptoms were reported by the patients’ clinician.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Zika virus emerged in the Region of the Americas in mid-2015, 
and since then outbreaks have occurred in multiple South 
American and Caribbean countries and territories. Zika virus 
infection appears to be related to increased risk for fetal 
microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome.
What is added by this report?
The first locally acquired case of Zika virus disease in Puerto Rico 
was identified in early December 2015. During the subsequent 
months, 29 additional laboratory-confirmed cases have been 
detected, including in one pregnant woman and in a man with 
Guillain-Barré syndrome.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Clinicians in Puerto Rico and other clinicians evaluating patients 
with recent travel to Puerto Rico should report all cases of 
suspected Zika virus disease to public health authorities. 
Residents of and visitors to Puerto Rico should strictly follow 
steps to avoid mosquito bites including using air conditioning 
or window and door screens when indoors, wearing long 
sleeves and pants, using permethrin-treated clothing and gear, 
and using insect repellents. When used according to the 
product label, Environmental Protection Agency-registered 
insect repellents are safe for pregnant women.
