  
 
 
 
 
Thom, G. and Lean, M. (2017) Is there an optimal diet for weight 
management and metabolic health? Gastroenterology, 152(7), pp. 1739-
1751.(doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2017.01.056)  
 
This is the author’s final accepted version. 
 
There may be differences between this version and the published version. 
You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from 
it. 
 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/137779/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposited on: 17 March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk33640 
 Accepted Manuscript
"Is there an optimal diet for weight management and metabolic health?”
Mr George Thom, Professor Mike Lean
PII:
S0016-5085(17)30158-0
DOI:
10.1053/j.gastro.2017.01.056
Reference:
YGAST 60985
To appear in:
Gastroenterology
Accepted Date: 17 January 2017
Please cite this article as: Thom G, Lean M, "Is there an optimal diet for weight management and
metabolic health?”, Gastroenterology (2017), doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2017.01.056.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Invited 2017 14th Issue: Obesity 
 
 
"Is there an optimal diet for weight management and metabolic health?” 
 
 
Authors 
Mr. George Thom 
Email: George.thom@glasgow.ac.uk 
University of Glasgow, Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, New 
Lister building, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, G31 2ER 
 
Professor Mike Lean (corresponding author) 
Email: Mike.Lean@glasgow.ac.uk  
University of Glasgow, Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, New 
Lister building, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, G31 2ER 
 
Competing interests 
ML and GT have received funding from Cambridge Weight Plan and Counterweight Ltd for 
conference attendance and other departmental research, outside the submitted work. ML 
also acts as a consultant to Counterweight Ltd. 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Abstract  
Individuals can lose body weight and improve health status on a wide range of energy 
(calorie) restricted dietary interventions. In this paper, we have reviewed the effectiveness 
of the most commonly utilized diets, including low-fat, low-carbohydrate and 
Mediterranean approaches in addition to commercial slimming programmes, meal 
replacements and newly-popularized intermittent fasting diets. We also consider the role of 
artificial sweeteners in weight management. Low-fat diets tend to improve LDL-cholesterol 
most, whilst lower-carbohydrate diets may preferentially improve triglycerides and HDL-
cholesterol, however differences between diets are marginal. Weight loss improves almost 
all obesity related co-morbidities and metabolic markers, regardless of the macronutrient 
composition of the diet, but individuals do vary in preferences and ability to adhere to 
different diets. Optimizing adherence is the most important factor for weight loss success, 
and this is enhanced by regular professional contact and supportive behavioral change 
programs. Maintaining weight losses in the long-term remains the biggest challenge, 
and is undermined by an ‘obesogenic’ environment and biological adaptations that 
accompany weight loss. 
 
Key words: obesity, diet, weight-loss, type 2 diabetes, sweeteners 
 
Introduction 
Few areas of nutritional science have divided opinion as much as the controversies 
around the optimal diet for successful weight management and good health. Obesity rates 
are at an all-time high, with over two thirds of adults classified as overweight (BMI>25 
kg/m2) or obese (BMI>30 kg/m2) in most of the Western world.  The epidemic of obesity is 
considered the biggest global public health problem of this generation. It is well 
established that obesity shortens life span and carries a heavy secondary chronic disease 
burden. It is an important risk factor for several major causes of preventable death and 
pathology, including type 2 diabetes (T2DM), hypertension, cardiovascular disease, 
arthritis, several cancers, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, sleep apnea, gallbladder 
disease and depression, as well as a host of troublesome and expensive symptoms, 
including breathlessness, oedema and indigestion. Obesity is thus responsible for most of 
the total costs to be met by healthcare providers or insurers. Clinically important 
consequences of obesity can be considerably improved with as little as 5-10% body 
weight loss, which is achievable by many methods, but this rarely satisfies the wishes of 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
patients (1). Remission of conditions such as sleep apnea and T2DM typically require 15-
20kg weight loss (2, 3), which is also more acceptable to people living with obesity. 
 
Debates regarding the optimal diet have ensued between scholars, which at times has 
descended to statements of belief more akin to religions than to scientific arguments 
based on evidence. Are carbohydrates inherently fattening? Does excess saturated fat 
lead to heart disease? Will fasting help you live longer? What about gluten? At the time of 
writing, an internet search using the term “diet for weight loss” returns nearly 51 million 
results and a similar search on Amazon yields more than 31 thousand books on the topic. 
This proliferation of dietary (mis)information is driven primarily by a multi-billion dollar fad-
diet industry, and commercial diet providers. The US weight loss market was said to be 
worth $60 billion in 2014 (4). Few options are evidence based, and this volume of 
competing unregulated information highlights how easily individuals seeking to lose weight 
could be misled. Mark Twain once said “be careful of reading health books, you may die of 
a misprint”. Even scientists, inadvertently or otherwise, can end up promoting dietary 
practices that lack a solid evidence base. 
 
Broadly speaking, body weight status depends on a complex inter-play between three 
powerful forces – the environment in which we live, our genes, and our behaviors, 
obligatory or chosen in relation to eating and exercise. Genetics cannot be changed, but 
epigenetics can. Although modifying the food environment would be most effective in 
terms of prevention, it is unlikely to occur soon, therefore dietary intervention remains the 
cornerstone of management. Much is known about strategies for weight loss, but much is 
still to be learned about optimal approach for weight loss maintenance. This paper reviews 
the key evidence-based dietary interventions for weight loss and maintenance with 
reference to macronutrient composition, and impact on metabolic health. Pharmaceutical 
and surgical interventions are not discussed here, but both still ultimately depend on 
improving diet.  
 
Calorie restriction for weight loss 
Assuming that most people cannot maintain physical activity outputs of athletes, 
overweight and obese people must consume more calories than thinner people to avoid 
weight loss, and weight loss can (realistically) only be achieved with reduced energy 
consumption. The properties of the three main macronutrients - carbohydrates, protein and 
fat are listed in table 1 (5). Whether a diet is targeted towards reducing fat or carbohydrate, 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
or increasing protein, for weight loss to occur an energy deficit must be established. This 
‘energy in / energy out’ model of obesity hinges on the first law of thermodynamics, that 
energy can neither be created or destroyed.  Therefore all calories entering the body must 
be oxidized as fuel or stored as adipose tissue. Weight gain occurs when energy intake 
exceeds energy expenditure, and energy balance and weight stability is achieved when 
these two factors are matched over time. In theory, energy restriction sounds simple, 
however, there are complex and tightly regulated processes with interacting environmental 
and (epi-)genetic factors, and secondary homeostatic endocrine (6) and behavioral 
responses which oppose weight loss. Consequently, maintenance of lost weight and 
achieving a state of energy balance, following a period of deliberate energy restriction 
presents a formidable challenge.  
 
Some authors present a simplistic argument that insulin regulates fat accumulation and 
weight gain, whilst hyperinsulinemia, characteristic of obesity, reduces mobilization of fatty 
acids by inhibiting hormone sensitive lipase (7, 8). This argument neglects the imperative 
of energy restriction. Others report a ‘metabolic advantage’ for low carbohydrate diets 
(LCD), suggesting that calorie for calorie, restriction of carbohydrate leads to greater fat 
loss by virtue of increased thermogenesis, in addition to altered metabolism (9). The 
theory is that to lose body fat, carbohydrate as a primary driver of insulin secretion, must 
be restricted, so as insulin secretion falls, fatty acids are mobilized and weight loss 
ensues. Although plausible, this interpretation is overly simplistic. Studies have 
conclusively demonstrated that in weight management terms caloric restriction below 
metabolic requirements is fundamental for weight loss.  
 
This principle was validated by numerous inpatient feeding studies, where energy intake 
was tightly controlled and energy expenditure calculated using gold standard techniques. 
For instance, data collected over 80 years ago by Keeton and Bone (1935) under 
metabolic ward conditions in 9 obese subjects demonstrated no increase in energy 
expenditure on an energy restricted, higher protein diet (90g/day) when compared with a 
lower protein diet (13g/day), followed in crossover fashion (10). Weight loss was 
comparable between the diets and commensurate with caloric restriction (~45% below 
basal requirements). Werner et al (1955) compared an isocaloric, HCD (287g/day) with a 
LCD (52g/day) in 6 inpatient subjects who each experienced similar results (11). 
Continuing this theme, Olesen and Quaade reported identical weight losses of 4.1kg when 
subjects followed LCDs (32% protein/50% fat/18% carbohydrate) and HCDs (32% 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
protein/18% fat/50% carbohydrate) for 21 days each in a crossover-design study whereby 
energy intake was held constant at 1000 kcals/day (12). Further evidence was reported by 
Golay and colleagues (1996) who admitted 43 obese subjects each to receive a 1000 
kcal/day diet, but were randomly allocated either to a relatively high (115g/day) or low 
(37g/day) carbohydrate diet. Weight losses were 7.5kg and 8.9kg respectively, which were 
not significantly different (13). A slightly higher weight loss with a LCD can be explained 
entirely by the accompanied glycogen depletion and water loss which occur with marked 
carbohydrate restriction. The body can store approximately 500g of glycogen (~100g in 
liver, 400g in muscle), and each gram of glycogen is stored with ~ 3g water. When 
carbohydrate is severely restricted, glycogen stores are utilized to maintain blood glucose. 
During the first 1-2 weeks of a low-carbohydrate diet, it is quite possible that an additional 
2kg is lost consequent to glycogen and water loss (14, 15). The principle that calorie 
restriction is the ‘sine qua non’ for weight loss has also been well documented in detailed 
metabolic ward studies elsewhere (16-20).  
 
In a more recent study, Hall et al (2015) enrolled 19 participants (mean BMI 35.9) who 
each undertook an isocaloric (1918kcals/day) restricted carbohydrate (RC) (20.9% 
protein/50.1% fat/29% carbohydrate) and restricted fat (RF) (21.1% protein/7.7% fat/71.2% 
carbohydrate) diet for 6 days at a time (21). The RC diet resulted in a 22% reduction in 
insulin secretion and increased fat oxidation, but reduced energy expenditure and fat loss 
was observed when compared with the RF diet, which despite no impact on insulin levels 
and fat oxidation, resulted in 463g body fat loss compared to 245g body fat loss on the RC 
diet. Although the RC diet used in this study is higher in carbohydrate than most LCDs (i.e. 
Atkins diet) a subsequent study by the same research group (22) reported similar results 
using a 4-week ketogenic diet (15% protein, 80% fat, 5% carbohydrate), with insulin 
secretion again significantly reduced (by 47%) but not associated with greater fat loss. The 
low-carbohydrate, high protein, Atkins’ Diet was once marketed as magic: “the high calorie 
way to stay thin forever” (23), but these findings demonstrate that when calories are held 
constant no ‘metabolic advantage’ for LCD’s exists. Repeated meta-analyses have shown 
convincingly that longer term weight losses and metabolic improvements occur 
independent of macronutrient composition of the diet, and greater energy restriction, 
results in greater weight loss regardless of whether restrictions are mainly from protein, 
carbohydrate or fat (24, 25).  
 
Interpreting findings from dietary studies 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Studying weight changes and metabolic outcomes of free-living individuals puts to the test 
the acceptability of diets under ‘real life’ circumstances, rather than during inpatient 
feeding studies where dietary compliance is enforced. The findings of each study must be 
interpreted in this context. In addition, understanding the key ingredients of a successful 
intervention is further complicated as most weight loss programmes are multicomponent 
and aligned with behavioral therapy and recommendations for increasing physical activity. 
In addition, studies comparing dietary approaches tend to be of relatively short duration 
i.e. 6-24 months which is not long enough to evaluate long term health effects; confounded 
by an objective to lose weight (rather than maintain) and tested on free-living individuals 
which means researchers do not know what people are actually eating. Dietary 
assessment methods (i.e. food frequency questionnaires, dietary recall) are notoriously 
unreliable as overweight people tend to under-report dietary intake, either intentionally or 
otherwise (26-28). This uncertainty means demonstrating a causal relationship between 
dietary intake and health outcomes is complicated and this continues to limit scientific 
advancement in nutrition and obesity. 
 
What is known about diet, weight management and longevity? 
From a diet, nutrition and health perspective, maintaining a healthy body weight (usually 
BMI 18.5-25 kg/m2) is vital (29, 30). Large-scale epidemiological studies have generally 
demonstrated that all-cause mortality increases in linear fashion as overweight and obesity 
increases (30). On average, median survival is reduced by 2-4 years in those maintaining 
a BMI of 30-35 kg/m2, and by 8-10 years at a BMI of 40-45 kg/m2 (29). This reduced life 
expectancy is largely due to cardiovascular disease and some cancers, and further 
reduced when type 2 diabetes is present (31).  Some studies, notably the now historic 
Rotterdam Study have found no reduction in life expectancy, possibly because recruitment 
was of relatively old subjects (32) 
 
Low-fat and low-carbohydrate diets 
Dietary management of obesity has traditionally been based upon an energy restricted, 
portion controlled diet that is low in fat, and relatively high in starchy carbohydrates. This is 
logical given that gram-for-gram, fat is the most energy-dense macronutrient and is known 
to have a weak effect on hunger and satiety, whereas carbohydrate is more filling and has 
the lowest energy density (Table 1). Studies have shown that people eat a consistent 
weight of food on a daily basis, therefore substituting lower energy dense foods (e.g. 
vegetables) for higher energy dense foods can significantly reduce energy intake (>350 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
kcals/day) and promote satiety without vastly altering overall volume of food consumed 
(33). Nonetheless, the rise in obesity throughout the 1980’s and ’90’s has led some 
authors to point the finger of blame directly at dietary guidelines and in particular, low-fat, 
high-carbohydrate diets (34) apparently favouring carbohydrate restriction. Clearly, if 
energy restricted diets were followed, then rates of obesity would not be a concern. 
Adherence is a separate issue, but energy intake on a population level remains too high, 
not through any knowledge deficiency, but due to substantial changes in food pricing, 
availability and marketing (James, 2008). This has created an ‘obesogenic’ environment 
where people are constantly bombarded with opportunities to eat, and specifically high-
sugar, high-fat snacks which humans never met during our evolution as a species. In a 
busy world, with the breakdown of home cooking, we have become reliant on energy 
dense processed meals and a regular meal pattern has given way to ‘grazing’ throughout 
the day on high calorie snack foods leading to ‘passive’ overconsumption, and consequent 
increases in obesity.  
 
Low-fat diets (LFDs) have set the standard in weight management. Two landmark studies, 
The Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study (FDPS) and The Diabetes Prevention Program 
(DPP) demonstrated that modest weight loss using a LFD and calorie restriction in 
conjunction with a lifestyle intervention could significantly reduce the incidence of type 2 
diabetes (T2DM) in a population with pre-diabetes (36, 37). The DPP enrolled >3000 
subjects (mean BMI 34.0 kg/m2) and randomly assigned them to receive a lifestyle 
programme, metformin (850mg twice daily) or placebo, with the goals of 7% weight loss 
and at least 150 minutes of physical activity.  50% of those in the lifestyle arm of the study 
achieved their weight loss goal at the end of 24 weeks, and progression to T2DM was 
reduced by 58% in this group as a whole. Subjects were instructed to become “fat 
detectives” by reducing total fat intake to 25% of calories (based on US Food Guide 
Pyramid) and assigned an individually tailored fat goal, given in grams of fat, based on 
their weight and calorie needs. The lifestyle programme consisted of 16 sessions over 24 
weeks on an individual basis with a “lifestyle coach”, most of whom were Registered 
Dietitians. Mean weight changes were -5.6kg, -2.1kg and -0.1kg for the lifestyle, metformin 
and placebo groups respectively. Metformin only reduced incidence of T2DM by 31%, 
underlining the dominant role that weight management plays in maintaining a non-diabetic 
state.  The FDPS demonstrated similar outcomes, with improvements in weight, glucose, 
insulin, lipids and blood pressure. Incidence of T2DM was reduced by 58% in the lifestyle 
intervention group, just as it was in the DPP. Study visits were less frequent in the FDPS, 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
just seven sessions with a nutritionist over the one-year period. Detailed advice was given 
on the goals of the programme, which was to lose 5% body weight or more, and to reduce 
total intake of fat to <30% of total energy consumed and <10% from saturated fat. Given 
that both interventions were delivered with a wrap-around lifestyle programme, it is difficult 
to quantify the exact contribution of the diet to weight loss. Subjects may have been highly 
motivated and adhered with a variety of diets. However, these data do suggest that the 
LFD approach is acceptable and effective, and demonstrates categorical benefits both in 
terms of weight management and metabolic outcomes. 
 
Although a LFD has been the mainstay of dietetic advice for decades, LCDs were first 
popularized as far back as 1863 when William Banting published “A letter on corpulence 
addressed to the public”, describing his 46Ib weight loss with a LCD following a lifelong 
struggle with obesity (38).  Systematic reviews and meta-analyses comparing LFDs with 
LCDs have typically reported better weight loss outcomes at 6 months with LCD’s, which 
may be related to glycogen depletion (22) but this difference disappears at 12 months (24, 
39, 40). Hession’s review (40) found a relatively high drop-out rate, common in weight-loss 
trials. Some are unable to undergo the deprivations of energy restriction, regardless of the 
macronutrient content. The LCD outperformed the LFD by 4kg at 6 months, but by 12 
months this margin had shrunk to just over 1kg, suggesting no significant differences. 
Weight losses ranged between 2-9kg in both groups at 12 months. The LFD groups 
tended to be structured with an energy deficit of ~500kcal/day. Of the thirteen studies, 
eleven used a carbohydrate restriction of 20-60g/day in the LCD groups, without implicit 
instruction to limit energy intake.  The low-carbohydrate ‘Atkins’ diet utilized in these 
studies encouraged ad-libitum eating on proteins and fats. Marginally improved weight loss 
outcomes imply greater energy restriction, which leads us to speculate on the exact 
mechanism since dieters are not advised to restrict calories per se. It likely confers 
favorable alterations in appetite and satiety, with protein the most satiating of 
macronutrients (41). Advice to abstain from a whole food group, and specifically, hyper-
palatable refined carbohydrate and fat containing foods which stimulate food reward 
pathways in the hypothalamus and make it near impossible to ‘stop at one’ will also play a 
pivotal role in reducing energy intake. There is no standardized definition of a “low-
carbohydrate” diet, but < 50g/day has become the convention (42). 
 
Comparisons of cardiovascular risk factors at 12 months are reasonable given that weight 
losses were similar. With regards to LDL-cholesterol, there was benefit from a LFD, 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
weighted mean difference (WMD) 0.37 mmol/l, while LCD diets brought small 
improvements in HDL-cholesterol, triglycerides, systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood 
pressure. Similar results have been reported elsewhere (43). Differences between the two 
groups were small, and beneficial improvements in health were evident in both groups and 
likely weight loss dependent. It is not clear whether the differences were due to 
carbohydrate restriction, increased protein intake, lower fat intakes or calorie restriction.  
 
A RCT by Foster et al (2010) reported important findings which could realistically be 
transferred into clinical practice (44). In a two-year trial, the study utilized an evidence 
based behavioral lifestyle program (45), which focused on changing attitudes as well as 
dietary and activity behaviors. Participants met as a group (8-12 people) on a weekly basis 
for twenty weeks, then on a monthly basis up to two years. The study was conducted by 
some of the most foremost authors in obesity and compared a LFD (1200-1800kcals) with 
a LCD (Atkins) in terms of weight loss and metabolic outcomes, in patients with a mean 
BMI of 36.1 kg/m2. The study was large, with over 300 participants. Mean weight losses 
were clinically significant in both groups at year one (11% body weight) and year two (7% 
body weight) telling us that under the right conditions, and with intensive behavioral 
treatment, both dietary approaches are equally effective. However, drop-outs were 16%, 
26% and 42% at 6, 12 and 24 months.  
 
The near-identical weight loss outcomes achieved at one and two years with both dietary 
approaches offers an important opportunity to evaluate the contribution made to metabolic 
change by the varying macronutrient content of the two diets. The striking difference is in 
HDL-cholesterol which was substantially improved in the LCD group throughout the study. 
Otherwise, there was little difference between the groups at 2 years, and some of the 
benefits had regressed, presumably due to weight regain, restoration of energy balance 
and relaxed dietary adherence. The LCD group experienced significantly greater 
improvements in triglycerides in the first year of the study, but this was not maintained. 
Unfavorable changes in LDL-cholesterol were witnessed in the early stages of the LCD, as 
reported in other studies, but again this was not sustained and may again be related to 
reduced dietary adherence. Lower saturated fat and omega-3 fatty acids help reduce LDL-
cholesterol, which should reduce cardiovascular events (46). Therefore, structuring the 
diet to emphasize vegetable or lean meat protein sources remains prudent. It appears that 
both approaches are safe and effective in achieving modest and clinically significant 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
weight loss. However, sustained adherence generally reduces over time and even with 
ongoing intervention, a degree of weight regain is common. 
 
Mediterranean Diet 
There is no one, singular template for a Mediterranean diet. It is best described as a ‘style’ 
of eating, which varies between countries but retains the same core principles (Table 2). A 
traditional Mediterranean style diet (MSD) is generally considered to be moderate fat, with 
approximately 35-45% of energy coming from total fat (47), although this does vary and 
energy restricted approaches may be lower. Fat intake comes primarily from mono 
(MUFA) and poly-unsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), with small amounts from saturated fat. 
This pattern of eating has long been associated with a reduced incidence of 
cardiovascular disease. Epidemiological data coming from the Seven Countries Study (48) 
was the first study to identify that rates of cardiovascular disease were lower in 
Mediterranean countries, primarily in poorer, rural locations, giving rise to the hypothesis 
that the diet provided protective benefits. Further evidence was provided by the Lyon Diet 
Heart Study. After a first myocardial infarction (MI), 605 patients were randomly assigned 
to a MSD (<35% fat, <10% saturated fat) enriched with alpha-linolenic acid in the form of 
an olive oil based margarine provided free of charge to subjects, or to a control group, who 
were advised by their physician on a typical Western diet as recommended by the 
American Heart Association (49). Nearly four years later, the intervention group had 
experienced 65% reduction in coronary heart disease mortality, and 56% reduction in all-
cause mortality (50). Importantly for comparison purposes, weight between the two groups 
remained similar, so cardio-protective benefits were not confounded by changes in body 
weight.  
 
In an era of effective lipid-lowering drugs, some physicians neglect to offer simple but 
effective dietary advice, which should be the starting point for patients at cardio-metabolic 
risk. Importantly, primary prevention of cardiovascular disease has now been 
demonstrated in patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease. In another large-scale 
study (n=7447) individuals at high cardiovascular risk (but no established disease) were 
randomized to a MSD supplemented with olive oil, a MSD supplemented with nuts, or a 
LFD (51). Follow-up at nearly 5 years showed that in both MSD groups, incidence of MI, 
stroke and cardiovascular death was reduced by around 30%. The one unanswered 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
question with both of these primary and secondary prevention studies is the role the MSD 
plays on its own, independent of additional supplementation. 
 
The health benefits of a Mediterranean style eating pattern have long been established, 
but little has been documented in a weight loss context, until recently. A systematic review 
conducted by Mancini et al (2016) included data from 5 RCTs (n=998) and reported that a 
MSD compared favorably to LFDs, and similar to LCDs (52). Weight losses at 12 months 
ranged between 4-10kg in the MSD groups.  Those following a MSD had no benefit in 
LDL-cholesterol but greater improvement in triglycerides, and also glycaemic control (in 
those with T2DM), probably related to increased consumption of mono-unsaturated fats 
improving insulin sensitivity (53). Given the health benefits and compatibility with weight 
loss, an energy-restricted MSD appears a good choice for patients at high risk of 
cardiovascular disease.  
 
Intermittent energy restriction / fasting diets 
Intermittent energy restriction (IER) diets involve alternating periods of partial ‘fasting’ and 
‘feeding’.  On certain days, eating is severely restricted, this is then followed by days when 
‘normal’ eating resumes. Fasting of one sort or another, has been around for thousands of 
years, and is often used as a religious practice i.e. Lent, Ramadan. We all ‘fast’ to some 
extent; between the last meal of the day and breakfast the following day (~10-12 hours). 
Conventional dieting relies on the principle of continuous energy restriction (CER) i.e. 
every day. As a weight loss strategy, intermittent diets have been popularized on the basis 
that individuals can experience all of these benefits by dieting only two days per week. The 
energy deficit on ‘fast’ days is far greater than when applying CER, but this may be more 
acceptable than having to restrict intake every day. There are many variations (Table 2), 
the most popular methods are intermittent fasting (IF) and alternate day fasting (ADF) 
although time restricted feeding (TRF) is also starting to receive more attention in the 
dietary literature. These approaches don’t involve true fasting: IF and ADF tend to restrict 
intake to 500-600 calories. TRF promotes eating all food within a set window of time i.e. 
10am-6pm. This may result in reduced calorie intake, especially in people who usually 
consume a lot of calories in the evening. IF and ADF can involve taking nutritionally-
complete low-energy formula diet products, but more commonly energy intake is restricted 
by keeping to small portion controlled meals on 2-4 days of the week. On the remaining 
days, advice is to eat to the point of satiety, but not beyond. Individuals do not appear to 
engage in compensatory eating on ‘non-fast’ days (54, 55) and both appear equally 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
effective for weight loss. The intuitive appeal of IER is that a “feast and famine” pattern of 
eating may match that of our ‘hunter-gatherer’ ancestors, so we are well adapted for it. 
 
Intermittent energy restriction vs. Continuous energy restriction 
Relative to other dietary interventions, research into the effectiveness of IER is in its 
infancy. The principle for it providing health benefit independent of body weight loss is that 
regularly inducing a mild stressor such as fasting increases resistance against a number of 
degenerative age-related problems. Promising findings in animal studies has led to 
enthusiasm that fasting may extend lifespan, improve health and counteract a wide range 
of disease processes involved in T2DM, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and neurological 
disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s (56). However, there are no studies of IER 
diets in humans which have reported on major health events, focus has instead been on 
surrogate markers, so it is still uncertain whether the benefits of fasting seen in rodents 
can translate across to humans (57).  
 
Few long-term studies have evaluated the effectiveness of IER diets. A recent meta-
analysis (n=981) conducted by Headland et al (2016) included studies of at least 6-months 
duration, and a variety of IER protocols (58). They found no difference in weight loss 
outcomes between the IER and CER interventions. Average drop-out rates were 31%, 
similar between the groups. Improvements in lipid profiles and glucose homeostasis were 
also similar. Alhamdan et al, (2016) compared shorter studies of ADF lasting for 8-12 
weeks with a very-low-calorie diet (VLCD; <800 kcals/day) lasting 4 weeks, presumably 
with similar overall energy restriction (59). Pooled weight loss was 4.3kg with ADF and 
6.28kg with VLCD although preservation of fat-free mass was more relatively favorable 
with ADF (0.72kg vs. 2.24kg). This finding has also been reported elsewhere (60). The 
same author found that IER and CER diets equally effective for weight loss, of ~5-8% body 
weight across 8-12 weeks with both diets (60). Thus, IER is not superior to CER, but offers 
an alternative to conventional dieting approaches. 
There is a complex relationship governing what and how much we eat, however it is 
primarily regulated by key hormones interacting between the brain, the gut and our fat 
cells. A large body of evidence exists to suggest that weight loss leads to adaptive 
changes in some endocrine factors that have unfavorable effects on appetite and satiety 
(6) and also reductions in both resting and non-resting energy expenditure (61, 62) greater 
than what would predicted for the changes in fat mass and fat free mass. This is indicative 
of compensatory mechanisms opposing reduced body weight and dietary strategies that 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
support long term weight loss maintenance are clearly needed. It would seem plausible 
that the unfavourable physiological changes synonymous with energy restriction and 
weight loss could be offset by intermittently raising energy intake to meet weight 
maintenance energy requirements, rather than a continuous and ongoing energy 
restriction. However, a systematic review of clinical trials was unable to find any evidence 
that IER reduced adaptive responses when compared with CER (63).  
Future trials are awaited. Most studies to date have used relatively small samples with 
short duration follow-up. Longer randomized design trials are needed. Focusing 
particularly on maintenance of initially lost weight, metabolic health outcomes and overall 
safety. IER is a novel approach towards energy restriction, and offers an alternative to 
conventional ‘daily dieting’ but the optimal intermittent ‘fasting’ regime for health and 
acceptability needs to be clarified.   
 
Commercial diets, meal replacements and very-low-calorie-diets 
Commercial weight-loss programmes (Table 2) have become increasingly popular and 
there is now some published evidence documenting their effectiveness. In a UK based 
RCT comparing outcomes of 4 commercial programmes (Weight Watchers, Rosemary 
Conley, Atkins diet and Slim-Fast) over a 6-month period, clinically significant weight loss 
was documented for all diets (64). Of 300 people enrolled into the study, 83 (28%) 
dropped out, without differences in dropout between the diet groups. In an intention to 
treat (ITT) analysis, average weight loss was 5.9kg, or 8kg in completers. The spread and 
range of weight losses for each diet is nicely presented in figure 1, and illustrates the vast 
differences in dietary adherence and the somewhat misleading nature of only reporting 
mean weight loss outcomes in weight loss trials. This is an important point to remember. A 
minority are able to lose >20kg, whilst some actually gain weight using the same diet. This 
study did not have adequate numbers or power to exclude differences between the diets, 
which made its purpose and design rather questionable. It was to some extent a stunt, as 
part of a televised series on dieting, probably intended to find no differences between the 
diets, which may have influenced participant motivation.  Only 15 subjects were filmed, 
and excluding their data made no difference to the overall statistical outcomes. 
 
Other RCTs have documented that commercial weight management programmes 
provided better weight loss outcomes and cost effectiveness than the existing primary care 
based alternatives (65, 66). In these studies, containing patients who were either 
overweight or had obesity, mean weight losses whilst attending Weight Watchers were 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
between 4-5kg. 31% lost >5% body weight at one year (66) and were 3-times more likely 
to achieve this target than those attending NHS based weight management programmes 
(65). Drop out was between 30-40% in the two studies, and highest in primary care, 
although the format of commercial interventions was for weekly contact which in itself may 
have positively impacted on outcome success and facilitated greater engagement. The 
fact that the intervention has obvious cash-value, and the control group was simply offered 
more of what they had already tried in primary care, made this a weak study design. 
 
Commercial programmes were previously non-evidence-based so not valued alongside 
medical weight management interventions, but there is a role for such approaches. In a 
recent systematic review undertaken by Vakil et al, 2016 (67), head-to-head comparisons 
were made between a number of commercial weight management programmes including 
Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig, Nutrisystem, Atkins and Slim-Fast and the authors 
concluded that there was little evidence to endorse one approach over the other. There 
were no significant differences in mean weight change, waist circumference or blood 
pressure readings.  
 
A valuable addition to the literature on commercial diets was the large-scale network meta-
analysis conducted by Johnston et al (2014). It examined data from 48 RCTs (n=7286), 
looking at LFDs, LCDs and ‘moderate macronutrients’ (70). Median weight was 94.1kg and 
BMI 33.7 kg/m2. Diets were as follows: Ornish and Rosemary Conley (LFDs); Atkins, 
South Beach and Zone (LCDs); Biggest Loser, Jenny Craig (both incorporate meal 
replacements), Nutrisystem (meal delivery service), Volumetrics, and Weight Watchers 
were all described as moderate macronutrients. Weight losses were highest at 6 and 12 
months with LFDs and LCDs, but differences between all approaches were small and 
considerable benefit was evident with all diets. At 12 months, when compared to not a ‘no 
diet’ control group, weight losses ranged between 5.7kg-7.27kg, and underlines again that 
there is little difference in weight loss outcomes between diets that typically aim to reduce 
intake gently. 
 
Meal replacements offer a more structured approach towards portion control and have 
been used in high profile clinical trials, including Look AHEAD (68) - the largest ever 
lifestyle study which enrolled >5000 individuals with T2DM to evaluate the impact of 
intentional weight loss on cardio-vascular morbidity and mortality. Subjects were randomly 
assigned to a control arm, or intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI). In the ILI group, 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
recommendations during months 0-4 were to replace two meals and one snack with 
shakes and a meal bar. From months 5-12, participants were advised to replace one meal 
and one snack per day with a meal replacement and dietary recommendations were 
structured around low-fat principles. Meal replacements were provided free of charge. 
Mean weight loss was greater in the intervention group than standard care (8.6% vs. 0.7% 
body weight) at the end of year 1. The study was halted at year 8, at which point 50% of 
individuals were maintaining a >5% weight loss, and 27% had lost >10% body weight. 
Although there was no difference between the groups in terms of cardiovascular 
outcomes, this was potentially due to the improved level of care T2DM patients receive 
from a cardio-protective perspective, and the fact that with a mean duration of T2DM of 
8years, many already had at least subclinical vascular disease. Nonetheless, the ILI did 
experience improvements in sleep apnea, depression, mobility and urinary incontinence. 
In the first-year participants were seen either in a group, or individually 3-4 times per 
month as part of a comprehensive behavioral lifestyle programme. Although hunger may 
be a problem for some, meal replacements tend to outperform calorie controlled diet plans 
as there is less margin for error and reduced decision making required. A simplistic 
approach often works best, especially in people who lack cooking skills. A meta-analysis 
(69) reported similar outcomes from seven studies, with mean weight losses of 8.6 and 
6.7kg (9.6% and 7.5% body weight) at 6 and 12 months respectively (Figure 2).  
 
Diets using modest energy restrictions, as discussed extensively in this paper, yield 
modest weight loss outcomes in the region of 5-10% of total body weight. This will prevent 
progression to conditions such as T2DM as evidenced by the DPP study and improve 
many markers of metabolic health, but is less likely to reverse disease once established.  
However, patients themselves are dissatisfied with 5-10% weight loss. The conventional 
teaching was that slow, and steady weight reduction is more likely to be maintained in the 
long term. However, there is now strong evidence that the opposite is true (71, 72).  Data 
from Look AHEAD show that rapid early weight loss is the strongest predictor of long-term 
success (71). Indeed, high quality evidence from meta-analyses clearly demonstrates that 
very-low-calorie-diets (VLCDs; 450-800 kcals), with larger energy deficits (1000-2000 
kcals) than standard diets achieve superior weight loss and more importantly, 
maintenance in comparison to all other dietary interventions (Figure 2). Data taken from 11 
studies showed marked weight reduction at 6-12 months (69) with mean losses of 17.9kg 
(16%) and 10.9kg (10%) respectively. Meaningful weight losses are still evident as far out 
as 5 years (73). The problem has been a failure to incorporate, or even define, appropriate 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
weight maintenance programmes following the initial weight loss phase. Importantly, that 
appears to be changing, with weight losses achieved with formula diet programmes now 
better maintained in the long term, with published data with a structured maintenance 
programme documenting >10% weight loss for four years (74). Several components of 
effective maintenance programmes have now been identified, including continuing 
professional contact, increased physical activity, ongoing use of meal replacements, use of 
anti-obesity medications and optional ‘rescue plans’ incorporating short periods back on 
the formula diet in the event of weight regain.   
 
There is also good evidence now emerging that a micronutrient replete Total Diet 
Replacement (TDR) programme provide similar mean weight loss outcomes to VLCDs but 
at a higher energy prescription e.g. 800-1000 kcals/day. All conventional foods are still 
withdrawn and replaced by a liquid formula diet, but adherence is better, preservation of 
lean body mass is more favorable, known side effects are less pronounced and nutritional 
status can be improved (74, 75). A study conducted within routine NHS primary care, in 91 
adults with BMI >40 kg/m2 found that an 810 kcal/day TDR resulted in a mean loss of 
about 17kg in 12 weeks (76). In sharp contrast to routine care outcomes, at 12 months, on 
an ITT analysis 30(33%) of the 91 patients, 40% of those with known weights, remained 
>15kg below baseline following a structured food reintroduction and a long-term weight 
maintenance programme. There was 33% drop-out over that period, comparable with 
other weight management studies. These findings are important given that resolution of 
co-morbidities such as T2DM, the biggest concern with regards to increasing obesity, and 
the increasing numbers of patients with BMI >40, require maintained weight losses of this 
magnitude, justifying more aggressive approaches than conventional dietary methods 
within routine healthcare.  
The role of non-nutritive sweeteners in weight management 
The food industry developed sweeteners to allow us to have our metaphorical cake and 
eat it. Humans have over the last 2-3 generations developed a preference for very sweet 
tasting food and drinks and in response to demand to help people to reduce sugar intake, 
sweeteners came into the food supply to maintain palatability but without adding additional 
calories (77). To reduce energy density and energy consumption, it seems logical to 
substitute sugar-sweetened-beverages (SSBs) with low or zero calorie drinks. However, 
their role in helping people to manage their weight effectively is controversial and has 
been widely debated. Indeed, there is evidence that artificially sweetened beverages 
(ASBs) are associated with weight gain in the same way as sugar (78).   
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
While reverse causality is playing a part, there is a plausible argument, supported by 
animal evidence that artificial sweeteners are so much sweeter than sugar, that their 
consumption disrupts appetite regulation, leading to increased cravings for sweet foods 
and eating more calories, rather than less. There have also been sensationalist claims 
linking sweeteners to cancer, and other worrying health conditions, but the evidence does 
not support this and their safety has been reviewed extensively and approved by 
regulatory bodies (79).  
 
Some support for their role in successful weight management comes from the National 
Weight Control Registry (http://nwcr.ws/default.htm), a self-selected group (>10,000) of 
weight loss masters who must have lost a minimum of 13.6kg (30Ibs) and kept it off for at 
least one year, although most have lost more than double this amount and maintained it 
for over 5 years. Their habits have been studied extensively, and although this is only one 
associated finding, few (10%) regularly drink SSBs, however >50% report regular 
consumption of ASBs as a way to control energy intake (80).  
 
In a recent meta-analysis, Rogers et al (2016) concluded that, although there was 
uncertainty in the evidence, on balance ASBs, taken in place of sugar, had small beneficial 
effects on energy intake and body weight (81). If patients cannot do without their 
carbonated soft drinks, and are wondering whether it is safe and helpful to swap SSBs for 
low calorie, artificially sweetened alternatives, then the answer certainly seems to be yes. 
Having said that the differences in weight are much less than would be expected from the 
reduction in calories from cutting out sugar.  It does appear possible that the normalization 
of very sweet drinks, at a level of sweetness far beyond what humans ever met during 
evolution may have altered palates to encourage consumption of the highly sweetened, 
high-fat, high-calorie snacks that commercial marketing has made ubiquitously available 
and even ‘expected’, between meals. People who do not consume sweetened carbonated 
beverages find the level of sweetness in these snack-foods unpleasant. It seems that 
global shifts in food culture has played a large part in increasing consumption of sweet, 
high-fat snacks leading to weight gain, just as occurs when experimental animals are given 
sweetened drinks and foods (79). This hypothesis needs prospective research. 
 
Conclusion 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Human beings prefer things to be simple, and therefore there is a desire to pinpoint the 
one best diet that solves everything. Unfortunately, things are rarely that straightforward. 
There is no optimal macronutrient distribution for weight management, no “one size fits all” 
strategy that will suit everyone. We are told the era of personalized nutrition is drawing 
closer, and there may at some point be a time when we can make recommendations 
based on genotype, however if this does materialize, that will not detract from the 
challenges of achieving dietary adherence. We have highlighted a number of evidence 
based methods to achieve clinically significant weight loss, but there appears to be little 
weight loss advantage or difference in metabolic health outcomes between dietary 
approaches and improvements in health are relative to degree of weight loss. Caloric 
restriction is the fundamental premise of every successful weight loss strategy, whether 
that is achieved by lowering fat, carbohydrate, fasting or using meal replacements. 
Everything is relative, and the best diet ultimately, is the one you can stick to long enough 
to achieve the weight loss goals that you desire. Given the seriousness of the increasing 
rates of obesity, it seems wise that we do not limit our options and take an individualized 
approach. Studies predominantly present outcomes as averages, but this hides the fact 
that in every study, there is a minority who achieve an excellent response, so no strategy 
that we have profiled should be ruled out. Although over and underfeeding studies have 
demonstrated variable responses to the same energy prescription, the principle reason 
underpinning the success or failure of a dietary attempt will always be compliance. The 
key to improving this is not just the choice of diet, a whole host of factors influence the 
process of change. Practitioners must ask themselves not what the best diet is, but how 
they may optimize patient adherence to the plan. Healthcare staff seeing patients for 
weight management advice should possess advanced communication skills. Working 
collaboratively with the patient to agree together on the best way forward (rather than 
telling them what to do) will go a long way to achieving the best weight loss outcome.  
 
References 
1. Foster GD, Wadden TA, Phelan S. et al. Obese patients’ perceptions of treatment outcomes and the 
factors that influence them. Archives of Internal Medicine 2001;161(17): 2133–2139.  
2. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of obesity. SIGN guideline no115. Edinburgh: 
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, 2010.  
3. Lean M. VLED and formula LED in the management of type 2 diabetes: defining the clinical need and 
research requirements. Clinical Obesity 2011;1:41-49. 
 
4. The U.S. Weight Loss Market: 2015 Status Report & Forecast. Marketdata Enterprises Inc, 2015. 
 
5. Lean MEJ. Clinical handbook of weight management (second edition). London: Martin Dunitz Ltd, 2003.  
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
6. Sumithran P, Prendergast LA, Delbridge E, et al. Long-term persistence of hormonal adaptions to weight 
loss. N Engl J Med 2011; 365(17):1597-1604.  
 
7. Taubes, G. Why we get fat and what to do about it. New York: Anchor Books, 2011. 
 
8. Taubes G. The science of obesity: what do we really know about what makes us fat? An essay by Gary 
Taubes. BMJ. 2013;346:f1050. 
 
9. Feinman RD, Fine EJ. Thermodynamics and metabolic advantage of weight loss diets. Metab Syndr Relat 
Disord. 2003 Sep;1(3):209-19. 
 
10. Keeton RW, Bone DD. Diets low in calories containing varying amounts of protein. Arch Intern Med 
1935;55:262-270 
 
11. Werner SC. Comparison between weight reduction on a high-calorie, highfat diet and on an isocaloric 
regimen high in carbohydrate. N Engl J Med. 1955 Apr 21;252(16):661-5. 
 
 
  
12. Olesen ES, Quaade F. Fatty foods and obesity. Lancet. 1960 May 14;1(7133):1048-51. 
 
  
13. Golay A, Allaz AF, Morel Y, et al. Similar weight loss with low- or high-carbohydrate diets. Am J Clin Nutr. 
1996 Feb;63(2):174-8. 
 
14. Lean MEJ, Lara J. Is Atkins dead (again)? Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2004 Apr;14(2):61-5. 
 
15. Adam-Perrot A, Clifton P, Brouns F. Low-carbohydrate diets: nutritional and physiological aspects. Obes 
Rev. 2006 Feb;7(1):49-58.  
 
16. Kinsell LW, Gunning B, Michaels GD, et al. Calories do count Metabolism. 1964;13:195-204. 
 
17. Bortz WM, Wroldson A, Morris P, Issekutz B Jr. Fat, carbohydrate, salt, and weight loss. Am J Clin Nutr. 
1967 Oct;20(10):1104-12. 
 
18. Bogardus C, LaGrange BM, Horton ES, et al. Comparison of carbohydrate-containing and carbohydrate-
restricted hypocaloric diets in the treatment of obesity. Endurance and metabolic fuel homeostasis during 
strenuous exercise. J Clin Invest. 1981 Aug;68(2):399-404. 
 
19. Vazquez JA, Adibi SA. Protein sparing during treatment of obesity: ketogenic versus nonketogenic very 
low calorie diet. Metabolism. 1992;41(4):406-14. 
 
 
  
20. Vazquez JA, Kazi U, Madani N. Protein metabolism during weight reduction with very-low-energy diets: 
evaluation of the independent effects of protein and carbohydrate on protein sparing. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995 
Jul;62(1):93-103. 
 
21. Hall KD, Bemis T, Brychta R, et al. Calorie for Calorie, Dietary Fat Restriction Results in More Body Fat 
Loss than Carbohydrate Restriction in People with Obesity. Cell Metab. 2015 Sep 1;22(3):427-36. 
 
22. Hall KD, Chen KY, Guo J, et al. Energy expenditure and body composition changes after an isocaloric 
ketogenic diet in overweight and obese men. Am J Clin Nutr. 2016 Aug;104(2):324-33. 
 
  
23. Atkins, RC. Dr. Atkins' diet revolution: the high calorie way to stay thin forever. New York: D McKay Co, 
1972. 
 
24. Nordmann AJ, Nordmann A, Briel M, et al. Effects of low-carbohydrate vs low-fat diets on weight loss 
and cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med 
2006;166(3):285-93 
 
25. Naude CE, Schoonees A, Senekal M, et al. Low carbohydrate versus isoenergetic balanced diets for 
reducing weight and cardiovascular risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 
2014;9(7):e100652. 
 
26. Lara JJ, Scott JA, Lean MEJ. Intentional mis-reporting of food consumption and its relationship with body 
mass index and psychological scores in women. J Hum Nutr Diet 2004;17(3):209-18 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
27. Macdiarmid J, Blundell J. Assessing dietary intake: Who, what and why of under-reporting. Nutr Res 
Rev. 1998 Dec;11(2):231-53. 
 
28. Lichtman SW, Pisarska K, Berman, ER, et al. Discrepancy between self-reported and actual caloric 
intake and exercise in obese subjects. N Engl J Med 1992;327(27):1893-1898.  
 
29. The Prospective Studies Collaboration. Body-mass index and cause-specific mortality in 900 000 adults: 
collaborative analyses of 57 prospective studies. Lancet 2009;373:1083-1096.   
 
30. Global BMI Mortality Collaboration. Body-mass index and all-cause mortality: individual-participant-data 
meta-analysis of 239 prospective studies in four continents. Lancet. 2016 Aug 20;388(10046):776-86. 
 
31. Lean MEJ, Powrie JK, Anderson AS, et al. Obesity, weight loss and prognosis in type 2 diabetes. Diabet 
Med 1990;7(3):228-33. 
 
32. Walter S, Kunst A, Mackenbach J, et al. Mortality and disability: the effect of overweight and obesity. Int J 
Obes (Lond) 2009;33(12):1410-8. 
 
33. Blatt AD, Roe LS, Rolls BJ. Hidden vegetables: an effective strategy to reduce energy intake and 
increase vegetable intake in adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93(4):756-63. 
 
34. Ludwig DS. Lowering the Bar on the Low-Fat Diet. JAMA. 2016 Sep 28. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.15473. 
 
35. James, WPT. The epidemiology of obesity: the size of the problem. J Int Med 2008;263:336-352. 
 
36. Tuomilehto J, Lindstrom J, Eriksson J, et al. Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by changes in lifestyle 
among subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl J Med 2001; 344:1343-1350. 
 
37. Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) Research Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with 
lifestyle intervention or Metformin. N Engl J Med 2002;346:393–403. 
 
38. Banting W. A letter on corpulence addressed to the public. London: Harrison and Sons, 1863. 
 
39. Pirozzo S, Summerbell C, Cameron C, et al. Advice on low-fat diets for obesity. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews 2002; Issue 2: Art. No.: CD003640. 
 
40. Hession M, Rolland C, Kulkarni U, et al. Systematic review of randomized controlled trials of low-
carbohydrate diets in the management of obesity and its co-morbidities. Obesity Reviews 2009;10:36-50.   
 
41. Foreyt JP, Salas-Salvado J, Caballero B, et al. Weight-reducing diets: are there any differences? Nutr 
Rev 2009;67(suppl. 1):S99-S101.   
 
42. Bray G. Low-carbohydrate diets in realities of weight loss. JAMA 2003; 289(14):1853-1855. 
 
43. Hu T, Mills KT, Yao L, et al. Effects of low-carbohydrate diets versus low-fat diets on metabolic risk 
factors: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Am J Epidemiol. 2012;176 Suppl 7:S44-54. 
 
44. Foster GD, Wyatt HR, Hill JO, et al. Weight and metabolic outcomes after 2 years on a low-carbohydrate 
versus low-fat diet:a randomised control trial. Ann Intern Med 2010;153(3):147-157. 
 
45. Brownell, K. The LEARN program for weight management (tenth edition). Texas: American Health 
Publishing Company, 2004. 
 
46. Hooper L, Martin N, Abdelhamid A, et al. Reduction in saturated fat intake for cardiovascular disease. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(6):CD011737. 
 
47. Makris A, Foster GD. Dietary approaches to the treatment of obesity. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 
2011;34(4):813-27. 
 
48. Keys A. Seven Countries: a multivariate analysis of death and coronary heart disease. London: Harvard 
University Press, 1980. 
 
49. de Lorgeril M, Renaud S, Mamelle N, et al. Mediterranean alpha-linolenic acid-rich diet in secondary 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
prevention of coronary heart disease. Lancet. 1994;343(8911):1454-9 
 
50. de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL, et al. Mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the rate of 
cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction: final report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study. 
Circulation. 1999;99(6):779-85. 
 
51. Estruch R, Ros E, Martínez-González MA, et al. Mediterranean diet for primary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2013 Aug 15;369(7):676-7.  
 
52. Mancini JG, Filion KB, Atallah R, et al. Systematic Review of the Mediterranean Diet for Long-Term 
Weight Loss. Am J Med. 2016;129(4):407-415. 
 
53. Shai, I, Schwarzfuchs, D, Henkin, Y, et al. Weight loss with a low-carbohydrate, Mediterranean or low-fat 
diet. N Engl J Med 2008;359(3);229-241.  
 
54. Klempel MC, Bhutani S, Fitzgibbon M, et al. Dietary and physical activity adaptations to alternate day 
modified fasting: implications for optimal weight loss. Nutr J 2010;9:35.  
 
55. Varady KA, Bhutani S, Klempel MC, et al. Alternate day fasting for weight loss in normal weight and 
overweight subjects: a randomized controlled trial. Nutr J. 2013;12(1):146. 
 
56. Mattson MP, Longo VD, Harvie M. Impact of intermittent fasting on health and disease processes. 
Ageing Res Rev. 2016;pii:S1568-1637(16)30251-3.  
 
57. Horne BD, Muhlestein JB, Anderson JL. Health effects of intermittent fasting: hormesis or harm? A 
systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;102(2):464-70. 
 
58. Headland M, Clifton PM, Carter S, et al. Weight-Loss Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis of Intermittent Energy Restriction Trials Lasting a Minimum of 6 Months. Nutrients. 2016 Jun 8;8(6). 
pii: E354. doi: 10.3390/nu8060354. 
 
59. Alhamdan BA, Garcia-Alvarez A, Alzahrnai AH, et al. Alternate-day versus daily energy restriction diets: 
which is more effective for weight loss? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Sci Pract. 
2016;2(3):293-302. 
 
60. Varady KA. Intermittent versus daily calorie restriction: which diet regimen is more effective for weight 
loss? Obes Rev. 2011 Jul;12(7):e593-601.  
 
61. Leibel RL, Rosenbaum M, Hirsch J. Changes in energy expenditure resulting from altered body weight.  
N Engl J Med 1995;332(10):621-8. 
 
62. Rosenbaum M, Hirsch J, Gallagher DA, et al. Long-term persistence of adaptive thermogenesis in 
subjects who have maintained a reduced body weight. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88(4):906-12. 
 
63. Seimon RV, Roekenes JA, Zibellini J, et al. Do intermittent diets provide physiological benefits over 
continuous diets for weight loss? A systematic review of clinical trials. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 15;418 
Pt 2:153-72.  
 
64. Truby H, Baic, S, DeLooy, A, et al. Randomised controlled trial of four commercial weight loss 
programmes in the UK: initial findings from the BBC “diet trials”. BMJ 2006; 332:1309-1315. 
 
65. Jebb SA, Ahern AL, Olson AD, et al. Primary care referral to a commercial provider for weight loss 
treatment versus standard care: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011;379(9801):1485-1492. 
 
66. Jolly K, Lewis A, Beach J, et al. Comparison of range of commercial or primary care led weight reduction 
programmes with minimal intervention control for weight loss in obesity: lighten up randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ;343:439-455. 
 
67. Vakil RM, Doshi RS, Mehta AK, et al. Direct comparisons of commercial weight-loss programs on weight, 
waist circumference, and blood pressure: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. 2016;16:460.  
 
68. Look AHEAD Research Group. Eight-year weight losses with an intensive lifestyle intervention: The Look 
AHEAD Study. Obesity 2014;22(1):5-13. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
69. Franz MJ, Vanwormer JJ, Crain LA, et al. Weight-loss outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of weight-loss clinical trials with a minimum 1-year follow-up. J Am Diet Assoc 2007;107:1755-1767.  
 
70. Johnston BC, Kanters S, Bandayrel K, et al. Comparison of weight loss among named diet programs in 
overweight and obese adults: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2014 Sep 3;312(9):923-33. 
 
71. Unick JL. Neiberg RH. Hogan PE. et al. Weight change in the first 2 months of a lifestyle intervention 
predicts weight changes 8 years later. Obesity 2015; 23(7):1353-1356 
 
72. Nackers LM, Ross KM, Perri MG. The association between rate of initial weight loss and long-term 
success in obesity treatment: does slow and steady win the race? Int J Behav Med 2010 Sep;17(3):161-7.  
 
73. Anderson JW, Konz EC, Frederich RC, Wood CL. Long-term weight-loss maintenance: a meta-analysis 
of US studies. Am J Clin Nutr. 2001;74(5):579-84. 
 
74. Christensen P, Bliddal H, Bartels EM et al. Long-term intervention with weight loss in patients with 
concomitant obesity and knee osteoarthritis: the LIGHT study - a randomised clinical trial. T5: S25.54 
Obesity Reviews 2014; 15 (S2):152 
 
75. Christensen P, Bliddal H, Riecke BF, et al. Comparison of a low-energy diet and a very low-energy diet in 
sedentary obese individuals: a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. Clin Obes. 2011;1(1):31-40. 
 
76. Lean M, Brosnahan N, McLoone P, et al. Feasibility and indicative results from a 12-month low-energy 
liquid diet treatment and maintenance programme for severe obesity. Br J Gen Pract 2013;63(607):115-24. 
 
77. Hill JO. What do you say when your patients ask whether low-calorie sweeteners help with weight 
management? Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;100(3):739-40.  
 
78. Fowler SP. Low-calorie sweetener use and energy balance: Results from experimental studies in 
animals, and large-scale prospective studies in humans.  Physiol Behav 2016;164(Pt B):517-23. 
 
79. Lean ME, Hankey CR. Aspartame and its effects on health. BMJ. 2004;329(7469):755-6. 
 
80. Catenacci VA, Pan Z, Thomas JG, et al. Low/no calorie sweetened beverage consumption in the 
National Weight Control Registry. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2014;22(10):2244-51. 
 
81. Rogers PJ, Hogenkamp PS, de Graaf C, et al. Does low-energy sweetener consumption affect energy 
intake and body weight? A systematic review, including meta-analyses, of the evidence from human and 
animal studies. Int J Obes (Lond). 2016;40(3):381-94. 
 
 
Tables and Figures 
 
Table 1: Characteristics of the main macronutrients fat, protein and carbohydrate.  
Alcohol (7kcal/g) is inappropriate as a contributor to a weight-management diet. 
Reprinted with permission (5) 
Characteristics of macronutrients  
 
Fat  
Protein 
Carbohydrate 
Ability to bring eating to an end 
Low 
High 
Intermediate 
Ability to suppress hunger 
Low 
High 
High 
Contribution to daily energy intake 
High 
Low 
High 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Characteristics of macronutrients  
Energy density 
High 
Low 
Low 
Storage capacity in the body 
High 
None 
Low 
Metabolic pathway to transfer excess intake to another 
compartment 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Autoregulation (ability to stimulate own oxidation on 
intake) 
Poor 
Good 
Good 
Calories per gram 
9 
4 
3.75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Popular diets at a glance 
Popular dietary approaches for weight management 
Type/ 
examples 
General dietary 
principles 
Foods eaten / avoided 
Other comments 
Low-fat diet: 
based on 
Eatwell guide, 
MyPlate, DASH, 
Volumetrics 
Carbohydrate - 50-60% 
Protein - 15% 
Fat - 25-35% 
Saturated fat <10% 
 
- Balanced diet, typically 
500-1000 kcals/day below 
metabolic requirements 
 
- Advice can be tailored & 
structured into a food 
exchange eating plan 
 
- Limit foods high in saturated fat, 
trans fats, sugars, salt e.g. highly 
processed foods 
- Emphases on choosing low 
energy dense foods such as 
starchy carbohydrates, 
(especially high-fibre wholegrain 
varieties) and fruit & vegetables.  
- Energy density should be 
reduced by opting for lean 
proteins & low-fat dairy products 
whilst keeping foods high in fat 
and sugar (chocolate, biscuits, 
crisps, oils, spreads) to smallest 
part of diet. 
- Generally considered most 
appropriate diet for achieving 
& maintaining good health 
- Recommended by government 
and major health organizations 
such as United States 
Department of Agriculture, 
Public Health England, 
American Heart Association, 
British Heart Foundation, 
American Diabetes 
Association, Diabetes UK 
- Slower rate of weight loss may 
dishearten some dieters 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Popular dietary approaches for weight management 
Commercial 
diets e.g. 
Weight 
Watchers (WW) 
- Energy restricted diet to 
achieve 0.5-1.0kg/week 
weight loss 
- Recommendations 
mirror those for low-fat 
diets (above) 
- In WW individuals guided toward 
healthy, low energy choices by 
points based system 
- A daily points allowance is 
calculated for each individual 
- Points values are assigned to all 
foods which is calculated in 
relation to nutrient and energy 
density 
- Most fruit and vegetables “free” 
- High fibre carbohydrates, lean 
proteins, legumes, all have low 
points values 
- Commercial diets shown to be 
at least as effective as primary 
care led programmes 
- Weight Watchers is market 
leader & most extensively 
researched 
- Weekly group support 
meetings held within local 
communities, usually led by 
successful slimmer 
- Web-based support also 
available 
Low-
carbohydrate 
diet e.g. Atkins 
- Intake of calories, 
protein and fat not 
limited per se 
- Carbohydrate allowance 
varies but popular 
approaches recommend 
20-60g per day during 
weight loss 
- Focus on eating high protein 
foods such as meat, fish, poultry, 
eggs, cheese, nuts 
- Choose low-carbohydrate 
vegetables e.g. salad greens, 
brocolli, asparagus. 
- Limit fruit intake, opt for berries, 
melon, grapefruit 
- Liberal use of fats such as 
butter, mayonnaise, oils 
- Starchy carbohydrate foods 
should be avoided e.g. bread, 
rice, pasta, potatoes, oats 
- Dairy foods also strictly limited  
- No place for refined 
carbohydrate containing foods 
such as biscuits, chocolate, 
desserts 
- Concerns over increased 
saturated fat intake but diet is 
safe & effective up to 12 
months (at least) 
- Risk of nutritional deficiency 
without supplementation. 
- Restricted nature of diet may 
limit long term implementation 
- Beneficial impact on appetite 
due to ketosis & satiating 
effects of higher protein intake 
- Simple to follow with a clear 
structure of what foods are 
permitted & restricted 
- No suggestion to count 
calories may appeal to dieters 
Mediterranean 
style diet 
- Moderate fat diet, rich in 
mono & poly unsaturated 
fat (MUFA & PUFA), & low 
in saturated fat 
 
- There is no single dietary pattern 
as subtle differences exists 
between countries but emphasis 
is mainly on plant based foods 
including fruit, vegetables, 
wholegrains, legumes, & nuts 
- Olive oil main source of fat  
- Lean fish, seafood & poultry 
recommended in moderate 
amounts with red meat to be 
limited 
- Moderate consumption of wine 
with meals, if preferred 
- Reasonable evidence base 
demonstrating protection 
against coronary heart 
disease, & improvement in 
cardiovascular risk factors 
- Comparable weight loss 
outcomes when compared to 
low-fat & low-carbohydrate 
diets 
Intermittent 
energy 
restriction (IER) 
diets e.g. 
intermittent 
fasting (IF), 
alternate day 
fasting (ADF), & 
time restricted 
feeding (TRF) 
- IF: 2 days per week eat 
500 kcal/day (women) 
or 600 kcal/day (men) & 
eat healthily 5 days per 
week  
- ADF: 3-4 days/week eat 
500-600 kcals/day & on 
other days eat healthily 
- TRF: food consumption 
restricted to certain 
hours of the day i.e. 4-8 
hour windows of time 
- Low energy density foods on 
‘fasting’ days  
- Follow general healthy eating 
principles on other days of the 
week i.e. low fat diet, maintaining 
energy balance 
- Novel approach towards 
achieving calorie restriction 
- IER approaches may be easier 
and more acceptable to dieters 
than continuous daily energy 
restriction 
- Helps dieters learn to deal with 
feelings of hunger, an 
important skill in achieving and 
maintaining weight loss 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Popular dietary approaches for weight management 
Meal 
replacements 
e.g. Slimfast, 
Cambridge Diet, 
Optifast  
- Partial meal 
replacement diet 
(PMRD): 1200-1400 
kcal diet. Meal 
replacements tend to 
provide 2/3’s of vitamin 
and mineral 
requirements. 
- Total Diet Replacement 
(TDR): ~ 800 kcal 
nutritionally replete diet, 
typically supplemented 
with fibre 
- Very-low-calorie diets 
(VLCD): >450-<800 
kcal/day 
- PMRD: 1200-1400 kcal diet 
which replaces 2 meals per day 
(usually breakfast and lunch) 
with a shake or bar (~200-250 
kcals each) and have a healthy 
balanced meal based on low-fat 
principles (~600 kcals). 2 low-
calorie snacks (~100 kcal) may 
also be taken between meals 
(ideally fruit) 
- TDR: All meals replaced with 
shakes, soups or meal bars, 
typically for a time-limited period 
e.g. 12 weeks 
- VLCD: similar to TDR but 
provide fewer calories 
- Offer simple and structured 
approach to reducing energy 
intake  
- TDR & VLCD’s facilitate larger 
energy deficits than 
conventional approaches  
- Greater rate of weight loss 
may facilitate adherence and 
retention  
- Potential to achieve 15-20kg 
weight loss in compliant 
individuals, greater than 
conventional weight reduction 
diets 
- Reduces day-to-day decision 
making around food choice 
and may help break 
problematic eating behaviours 
- VLCD’s should only be done 
under medical supervision 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Weight loss outcomes at 6 months for participants who completed the  
BBC diet trials study. Reprinted with permission (64) 
 
 
Figure 2: Average weight loss of subjects completing a minimum 1-year weight-
management intervention based on review of 80 studies (n=26,455; 18,199 
completers [69%]). Reprinted with permission (data from sibutramine has been 
removed) (69) 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
