 REVIEW
Basic science for the clinician
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis:
emerging insights from computational modelling
Vikas Thondapu1,2, Christos V. Bourantas3, Nicolas Foin4,5, Ik-Kyung Jang6,
Patrick W. Serruys7, and Peter Barlis1,2*
1Melbourne Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry & Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Melbourne
School of Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 3University College London Hospitals, National Health Service Foundation Trust, London, UK; 4National Heart
Centre, Singapore, Singapore; 5Duke-National University Singapore Medical School, Singapore; 6Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA; and 7National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK
Received 26 September 2015; revised 7 November 2015; accepted 27 November 2015;
Coronary plaque rupture is the most common cause of vessel thrombosis and acute coronary syndrome. The accurate early detection of plaques
prone to rupture may allow prospective, preventative treatment; however, current diagnostic methods remain inadequate to detect these lesions.
Established imaging features indicating vulnerability do not confer adequate specificity for symptomatic rupture. Similarly, even though experimen-
tal and computational studies have underscored the importance of endothelial shear stress in progressive atherosclerosis, the ability of shear stress
to predict plaque progression remains incremental. This review examines recent advances in image-based computational modelling that have elu-
cidated possible mechanisms of plaque progression and rupture, and potentially novel features of plaques most prone to symptomatic rupture.
With further study and clinical validation, these markers and techniques may improve the specificity of future culprit plaque detection.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Keywords
Atherosclerosis † Coronary artery disease † Shear stress † Computational modelling † Plaque rupture
Introduction
While a number of advances have helped improve our understand-
ing of atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease remains the most
common cause of death and a leading cause of chronic disease
worldwide.1 This is largely due to silent atherosclerotic plaque pro-
gression leading to sudden rupture, occlusive thrombosis, and acute
coronary syndrome. The earlier identification and treatment of pla-
ques prone to catastrophic rupture is therefore an ideal approach to
decrease cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The ability to reli-
ably detect these lesions currently remains limited, but is likely to
improve with advances in plaque characterization.
According to current evidence, atherosclerosis is a highly complex
disease marked by cycles of progressive endothelial insult, arterial
inflammation, altered haemodynamics, and vascular remodelling,
leading to plaque formation, progression, and rupture. While
Virchow postulated the role of blood flow and stagnation in vascular
thrombosis over a century ago, the idea that haemodynamic forces
influence atherogenesis was introduced nearly 50 years ago.2 At
that time, Caro, Fitz-Gerald, and Schroter had several key insights
regarding endothelial shear stress (ESS): (i) atheromas develop in
areas of low ESS even before the appearance of gross changes; (ii)
up to a certain threshold, high ESS seems to protect against atheroma
formation; (iii) endothelial injury occurs beyond this high ESS thresh-
old; (iv) the high ESS induced by exercise may fall into the athero-
protective range; (v) intimal accumulation of lipid and other athero-
genic material may be related to ESS.2 Although some debate
persisted about the precise roles of high and low ESS, the following
decades were marked by insightful experiments supported by in-
creasingly realistic computational fluid dynamic (CFD) methods.3–5
A large body of evidence now suggests that ESS is a key instigator
of endothelial injury,6–9 explaining why plaques often localize to char-
acteristic areas such as the outer wall of bifurcations and inner arterial
curvatures.2 A deeper understanding of this relationship has facilitated
the earlier identification of potentially high-risk plaques.8,9
As many plaques undergo progressive atherosclerotic changes,
they become increasingly vulnerable to rupture.10,11 Many advanced
plaques display morphological characteristics indicating their vulner-
ability: thin overlying fibrous caps, large lipid cores with necrotic
features, and potentially signs of inflammation, neo-angiogenesis,
and intra-plaque haemorrhage.11–13 These lesions, termed thin-cap
fibroatheromas (TCFAs), are most often responsible for acute
* Corresponding author. Tel: +61 3 9928 6370, Fax: +61 3 9928 6372, Email: pbarlis@unimelb.edu.au
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. & The Author 2016. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehv689
European Heart Journal (2017) 38, 81–92
online publish-ahead-of-print 22 February 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 coronary syndrome and can be identified by intravascular imaging
techniques such as intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) and optical co-
herence tomography (OCT). However, the fact remains that most
TCFAs do not seem to cause symptomatic rupture.10 This paradox
is beginning to be unravelled with detailed investigation of the rela-
tionship between vascular tissue stress and acute plaque rupture.
Several clinical studies utilizing computational analyses have sug-
gested novel markers of vulnerability and present additional tools
that may further improve the identification of high-risk lesions.14–20
In this review, we examine the role of biomechanical stress in
plaque evolution and rupture, with emphasis on the contribution
and implications of image-based computational modelling on the
prospective identification of high-risk coronary lesions.
Biomechanical stresses and their
computational analysis
Pulsatile blood flow generates mechanical stresses in vascular tissue
that directly and indirectly modulate vessel biology. Decades of re-
search have brought increasing awareness of these stresses and the
role they play in atherosclerotic plaque physiology and pathology.
Rapid advances in medical imaging and computational methods
have also allowed increasingly realistic in vivo estimation of these
forces and other clinically significant measures, providing fundamen-
tally and clinically relevant insights into plaque evolution. For in-
stance, the recent FDA approval and clinical implementation of
fractional flow reserve derived from computed tomography to non-
invasively detect physiologically significant coronary lesions illus-
trates the feasibility and potential impact of computational meth-
ods.21 Significant theoretical, practical, and regulatory barriers
remain, but with further work patient-specific computational vascu-
lar stress analyses may be similarly poised to impact clinical practice.
Axial, circumferential, and shear
stress
Broadly speaking, blood flow generates axial, circumferential, and
shear stress in blood vessels that, in combination, contribute to
the overall strain distribution within vascular tissue (Figure 1). Axial
stress arises from longitudinal stretching of vessels exposed to cyc-
lical blood flow and cardiac motion. Historically, axial stress has
been difficult to measure experimentally in vivo, leading to relatively
poor characterization of its contribution to atherosclerosis com-
pared with shear and circumferential stress.22 Recent evidence sug-
gests axial stress plays a role in vascular homeostasis and minimizing
overall tissue stress in normal arteries.22,23 However, flow obstruc-
tions generate pressure gradients across lesions with a resulting
increase in axial stress and overall plaque strain that may contribute
to rupture24–26 (Figure 1A).
Circumferential stress arises from hydrostatic pressure exerting
outward radial force on vessels. Arteries expand, distend, and recoil
with cyclical variation in blood pressure, thereby generating stress
within the vessel wall. The distribution of this stress depends on
the mechanical properties and layered arrangement of the vessel
wall components.27,28 In healthy arteries, circumferential stress is
evenly distributed around the vessel wall.29 In atherosclerotic
arteries, considerable changes in the mechanical properties of
underlying tissues result in heterogeneous stress distributions as
strain is offloaded from weak regions to stronger ones15,30 – 32
(Figure 1B). As a result, plaque shoulders generally exhibit high strain
and are most often the site of plaque rupture.14,15,33
Endothelial shear stress is a measure of tangential frictional force
exerted by blood flow at the vessel wall and is proportional to fluid
viscosity and velocity. Blood viscosity is often approximated as a
constant related to haematocrit, but blood actually exhibits variable
shear-dependent viscosity. The biological significance of shear-
thinning and other complex rheological behaviours has not yet
been elucidated, but may have clinical implications in coronary arter-
ies subject to complicated flow patterns (discussed later). Similarly,
blood velocity is directly proportional to flow and inversely propor-
tional to vessel diameter as described by Poiseuilles’s law. Due to
pulsatile flow, dynamic variation in coronary perfusion, complex
vessel geometry, and flow obstructions, blood velocity changes
magnitude and direction (Figure 1C). These changes in fluid velocity
can result in areas of abnormally high and low ESS in addition to
turbulence and flow reversal. Early atherosclerotic plaques form
in these regions as a result of flow-induced endothelial injury and
arterial inflammation.6,7,34
Computational solid and fluid
mechanics
Fundamentally, computational methods are based on the idea that
tissue stresses induced by solid and fluid motion can be accurately de-
scribed by physical principles and mathematical equations. Computa-
tional fluid dynamics involves reconstruction of a three-dimensional
arterial model from medical imaging, specifying boundary conditions,
and making certain simplifying assumptions regarding the nature of
blood and vessel mechanics. Subsequent solution of the Navier-
Stokes equations governing fluid mass and flow allows extrapolation
of parameters such as fluid velocity, pressure, and ESS in patient-
specific models. Similarly, finite element analysis (FEA) is based on
the solution of partial differential equations that describe the me-
chanics of solid bodies. By prescribing tissue geometry and elastic
mechanical properties, it is possible to map various internal tissue
stresses. In principle, the combination of CFD and FEA methods al-
lows the simultaneous analysis of solid and fluid domains, termed
fluid–structure interaction (FSI) analysis. Such image-based computa-
tional analyses are becoming increasingly relevant and insightful given
the variety of information made available by emerging coronary
imaging and diagnostic modalities.
Shear stress and plaque
progression
Low endothelial shear stress and
early atheroma
Although several orders of magnitude smaller than circumferential
stress, the vascular endothelium responds dynamically to alterations
in shear stress. Mechanotransduction of ESS through endothelial cell
transmembrane proteins subsequently affects intracellular enzyme
V. Thondapu et al.
82
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 activity, gene transcription, protein and micro-RNA synthesis, and
release of bioactive mediators.7,35 – 39 These processes regulate
endothelial cell structure and function, influence the surrounding
cellular environment, and shift the balance between inhibition and
promotion of atherosclerotic processes (Figure 2).
In healthy arteries exposed to physiologic or high ESS (15–
70 dynes/cm2), endothelial structure and integrity remain intact,
cells exist in elongated fusiform arrangement parallel to the direc-
tion of flow, and there is little cell turnover.40 –42 Physiologic ESS
also causes expression of vasodilators,43 fibrinolytics,44 and antiox-
idants,45 in addition to reduced expression of leukocyte adhesion
molecules,46 inflammatory mediators,47 vasoconstrictors,48,49 and
paracrine growth factors.6,50 The result is a largely athero-
protective molecular environment.
Upon exposure to low ESS (,10 dynes/cm2), endothelial cells
become misaligned,51,52 cell–cell junctions are disrupted,53–55 and
the endothelium becomes permeable to circulating lipids and in-
flammatory mediators.56 – 58 Through mechanotransduction, low
ESS decreases production of vasodilators,39,59,60 fibrinolytics,44
and antioxidants.45 Conversely, low ESS also increases expression
of cell adhesion molecules,36,61,62 growth factors,63 vasoconstrictors,48,49
oxidative species,64,65 proteolytic enzymes,66 and acute inflamma-
tory mediators.47
The resulting endothelial dysfunction and acute inflammation may
establish self-sustaining injury between endothelial, inflammatory, and
smooth muscle cells (SMCs). In the setting of systemic risk factors, the
complex interplay of these processes results in chronic inflammation,
extracellular tissue degradation, endothelial proliferation, and apop-
tosis;67 – 69 intimal lipid accumulation70,71 and oxidation;7 platelet
aggregation and thrombosis;72 plaque neovascularization and intra-
plaque haemorrhage11,12 (Figure 3A and B). Over time, these pro-
cesses contribute to plaque growth, arterial remodelling, and further
altered ESS distribution.
Endothelial shear stress and vascular
remodelling
Adaptive remodelling
In normal vessels, arterial remodelling may be a compensatory mech-
anism to restore physiologic ESS by narrowing or enlarging the vessel
diameter, respectively.73 Areas exposed to low ESS normally under-
go fibroblast and vascular smooth muscle-mediated growth of
fibrous tissue resulting in vessel narrowing, or constrictive
Figure 1 Pulsatile blood flow generates biomechanical stress (indicated by varying intensity of red shading) in normal and atherosclerotic vas-
cular tissues that influence physiologic and pathologic processes. Regions of high stress are also associated with plaque rupture. (A) Axial stress
arises from longitudinal stretching of tethered blood vessels. Normal arteries demonstrate minimal, homeostatic levels of axial stress over the
cardiac cycle. In atherosclerotic arteries with flow obstructions, axial stress may become concentrated at proximal or distal lesion segments vary-
ing with the cardiac cycle. (B) Circumferential stress arises from radial expansion and recoil over the cardiac cycle. In normal arteries, circumfer-
ential stress is evenly distributed around the vessel wall due to generally homogenous tissue composition. Atherosclerotic tissue changes generate
regions of high strain, most notably at plaque shoulders. (C) Shear stress arises from the frictional force of blood flowing against the vessel wall.
Endothelial shear stress variations occur naturally as a result of arterial tapering, curvature, and bifurcations; however, normal arteries generally
adapt (remodel) to maintain physiologic levels of shear stress (15–70 dynes/cm2). In atherosclerotic arteries with obstructive lesions, proximal
plaque regions are exposed to high endothelial shear stress and distal segments to low endothelial shear stress.
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
83
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 remodelling, which may return ESS to physiologic levels.74 Alterna-
tively, areas exposed to high ESS tend to undergo expansive remod-
elling, in which controlled metalloproteinase and cathepsin-mediated
breakdown of the internal elastic lamina facilitates outward vessel
growth to enlarge the lumen and decrease ESS.74 These findings
are corroborated by IVUS-based CFD studies showing that early
non-obstructive lesions exposed to low ESS subsequently develop
plaque progression characterized by outward vessel remodelling,
preserved lumen radius, and an increase in ESS.3,8,9,75–77 In contrast,
areas exposed to high ESS at baseline show lumen and vessel enlarge-
ment with reduction in plaque thickness and ESS.3,8,9,75–77
Pathologic remodelling
Whereas healthy arteries undergo adaptive remodelling to restore
physiologic ESS, atherosclerotic arteries exposed to low ESS may
demonstrate uncontrolled inflammation and matrix degradation
leading to concurrent vessel and plaque enlargement, further
reducing low ESS and augmenting endothelial dysfunction
(Figure 3A).78,79 This response may be an attempt to maintain the lu-
men during early plaque growth, but may also facilitate a vicious cy-
cle of self-sustaining endothelial injury leading to progressive plaque
enlargement, expansive remodelling, and progressively worsening
flow dynamics. Once the limit of expansive remodelling is reached,
however, further plaque growth encroaches into the lumen. This
results in increased ESS over the proximal lesion and persistently
low ESS distally, which may coincide with the development of vul-
nerable features such as necrotic lipid core and thin fibrous caps.4,80
High endothelial shear stress
and advanced atheroma
Whereas higher ESS values are generally considered athero-
protective in healthy arteries, in the setting of an obstructive plaque
these same processes may promote further vulnerable changes
leading to TCFA morphology and plaque destabilization76,80
Figure 2 Vascular reaction to abnormally low and high endothelial shear stress is partially determined by the presence of systemic atheroscler-
otic risk factors. In healthy arteries, vessels undergo adaptive remodelling to restore endothelial shear stress to physiologic levels (15–70 dynes/
cm2). In the presence of atherosclerotic risk factors, low and high endothelial shear stress induce several forms of endothelial dysfunction (indi-
cated by blue and red-shaded boxes, respectively) that lead to chronic inflammation and plaque progression. These atherosclerotic changes may
positively feedback to cause endothelial, inflammatory, and smooth muscle cell dysfunction in addition to worsening flow disturbance (green ar-
rows). Continued plaque growth and development of vulnerable features increases risk for plaque rupture, which may be symptomatic or sub-
clinical, partially depending on the presence of blood stagnation and platelet activation. Subclinical rupture followed by fibrotic healing may cause
plaque enlargement, which contributes to further disturbances in endothelial shear stress.
V. Thondapu et al.
84
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 (Figure 3B). High ESS-mediated plaque destabilization may occur
through shifts in nitric oxide production resulting in proteolytic deg-
radation of fibrous caps. By altering the expression of nitric oxide
synthase isozymes in endothelium, SMCs, and macrophages, high
ESS ultimately inhibits extracellular matrix synthesis by SMCs,81 in-
creases Fas-mediated SMC apoptosis,82 and upregulates macro-
phage synthesis of metalloproteinases.83 High ESS also increases
endothelial production of plasmin and urokinase, potent activators
of metalloproteinases.84 The loss of matrix-producing SMCs and
increased proteolytic matrix degradation destabilizes the fibrous
cap structure.84–86 Additionally, in vitro studies show matrix vesicles
generated by apoptotic SMCs may form microcalcifications in both
early and late atheromas,87 and may play a significant role in plaque
rupture initiation.
Post-mortem histopathology shows a striking preponderance of
macrophages88,89 and absence of SMCs in ruptured plaques90,91 sug-
gesting their active roles in regulating plaque stability. Intravascular
ultrasound-palpography, an intravascular technique measuring radial
plaque deformation during the cardiac cycle, demonstrates that high
strain values correspond to softer, more distensible plaque regions
containing fewer SMCs and higher lipid and macrophage content
than low strain regions.92 Combined palpography and CFD studies
Figure 3 (A) Arterial bifurcations are marked by well-defined flow disturbances including low endothelial shear stress at the outer walls and high
endothelial shear stress at the carina (inset; red and blue shading of endothelial cells in main figure). Low endothelial shear stress induces endo-
thelial dysfunction including production of inflammatory cell adhesion molecules, cytokines, oxidative species, increased lipid uptake, endothelial
permeability, and blood stagnation (blue shaded boxes). These processes result in chronic arterial inflammation, lipid accumulation and oxidation,
intimal proliferation and apoptosis, and extracellular matrix and internal elastic lamina degradation, which contribute to the development and
progression of lipid plaques, expansive arterial remodelling, and persistent endothelial shear stress disturbances. Due to expansive arterial remod-
elling, early atheroma may not be accompanied by luminal obstruction (ESS, endothelial shear stress). (B) Advanced atheromas often cause luminal
obstruction with subsequent alteration in endothelial shear stress distribution over the plaque (indicated by red and blue shading of endothelial
cells). Proximal plaque regions exposed to high endothelial shear stress undergo smooth muscle cell apoptosis, macrophage activation, and in-
creased activity of matrix-degrading MMPs leading to fibrous cap and extracellular matrix degradation, plaque and fibrous cap calcification, endo-
thelial disruption and platelet activation (red-shaded boxes). Distal segments of advanced plaques are exposed to flow stagnation and low
endothelial shear stress, which may increase risk for thrombosis in addition to progressive atherosclerotic changes. As a result, advanced plaques
often demonstrate features associated with high risk of rupture including thin fibrous caps, large necrotic lipid core, inflammation,
neo-angiogenesis, intraplaque haemorrhage, and endothelial disruption with or without thrombosis (ESS, endothelial shear stress; SMC, smooth
muscle cell; MMP, metalloproteinase).
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
85
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 show that higher strain regions are exposed to high ESS at the
proximal and lateral plaque shoulders80 and that prolonged expos-
ure to high ESS results in progressive rise in strain.93 Other IVUS-
based CFD studies demonstrate that plaques exposed to high ESS
undergo regression of fibrous and fibrofatty components and har-
bour more necrotic core, dense calcium, and other indicators of
vulnerability.9,76
Endothelial shear stress and detection
of future culprit lesions
The landmark Providing Regional Observations to Study Predic-
tors of Events in Coronary Tree (PROSPECT) study demonstrated
that although most adverse clinical outcomes arise from TCFAs,
only a small fraction (4.9%) of TCFAs progress to cause clinical
events over 3 years.10 In addition to IVUS-detected TCFA morph-
ology, both large plaque burden (.70%) and small minimal lumen
area (,4 mm2) are also independent predictors of progressive le-
sions; however, even in combination these features do not confer
high specificity in detecting future culprit lesions.10 Thus, while
these morphological characteristics are key features of vulnerable
plaques, additional markers are needed to identify plaques pro-
gressing to clinical relevance.
Given the relationship between ESS and plaque progression, the
predictive capacity of local ESS distribution has been examined as
an additional clinically relevant marker of high-risk plaque. The
Prediction of Progression of Coronary Artery Disease and Clinical
Outcomes Using Vascular Profiling of Endothelial Shear Stress and
Arterial Plaque Characteristics (PREDICTION) study, an IVUS-
based CFD analysis of 506 Japanese patients, showed that a large
plaque burden and low ESS at baseline were independently asso-
ciated with an interval increase in plaque burden, a decrease in
lumen area, and could predict lesions progressing to require per-
cutaneous clinical intervention during the 6- to 10-month follow-
up period.8 Importantly, most of these interventions (n ¼ 39/53,
74%) occurred in asymptomatic patients treated for significant
angiographic progression of stenosis during follow-up vascular
profiling; therefore, the precise predictive capacity of ESS to detect
lesions progressing to clinical events remains unclear.
Whereas PREDICTION demonstrated that low ESS may incre-
mentally improve detection of plaques that progress angiographi-
cally, CFD analyses of ruptured plaques demonstrate the potential
role of high ESS in future culprit plaque detection. An IVUS-based
CFD study of ruptured culprit plaques in 20 patients with acute
coronary syndrome demonstrated a strong correlation between
focal elevation in ESS and the site of plaque rupture (k ¼ 0.79).94
A more recent OCT-based CFD analysis demonstrated similar re-
sults.95 Although spatial co-localization is not mechanistic evidence
of causality, these studies suggest that identifying focal areas of high
ESS over atheroma harbouring other advanced morphologic
Figure 3 Continued.
V. Thondapu et al.
86
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 features may improve detection of plaques prior to symptomatic
rupture. Additional large, prospective, image-based CFD studies
evaluating the morphology, composition, and natural history of
atheroma will be critical.
Despite the intriguing and often convincing evidence correlating
ESS with progressive atherosclerosis, the fact remains that ESS as it
is currently determined does not contribute high enough specifi-
city to accurately predict clinically significant progression or vul-
nerable transformation of individual plaques. Notwithstanding a
possibly fundamental limitation of ESS as a predictive marker,
this may be due to a combination of suboptimal imaging, limited
3D reconstruction techniques, and necessary assumptions in
CFD methodology.
Ongoing advances in image-based
computational fluid dynamic
Imaging and three-dimensional
reconstruction
Although IVUS and angiography-based CFD has provided consider-
able insight into ESS and atherosclerosis, these modalities lack ad-
equate resolution to image fine details of lumen and plaque
morphology. Given the high resolution of OCT (10–15 mm), the
development of OCT-angiography fusion-based CFD95 – 97 may
provide further insight into the relationship between ESS and plaque
evolution. Optical coherence tomography-based three-dimensional
Figure 4 (A) Angiogram of right coronary artery. Optical coherence tomography pullback begins at asterisk. (B) Fusion of 3D-quantitative
coronary angiography and optical coherence tomography to reconstruct main branch of the right coronary artery. Side branches reconstructed
from 3D-quantitative coronary angiography serve as landmarks to correct for longitudinal and rotational mismatch between quantitative coronary
angiography and optical coherence tomography images. (C) Completed reconstruction of coronary tree. (D) Computational fluid dynamics
simulation of flow velocity in the region of stenosis. (E) Endothelial shear stress distribution in the region of stenosis. (from Li et al.99).
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
87
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 reconstructions have recently been validated against IVUS and quan-
titative coronary angiography-based models for ESS calculations.98
Additional methodological improvements correcting for length
and rotational mismatch between angiography and OCT images
have allowed incorporation of side branches reconstructed from
quantitative coronary angiography to generate patient-specific cor-
onary trees suitable for CFD analysis99 (Figure 4).
Complementary intravascular techniques such as near infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS) have also significantly broadened the spec-
trum of information available on plaque composition. Although
NIRS cannot be used directly for image-based CFD, the informa-
tion it provides can be combined with invasive and non-invasive
imaging to reconstruct 3D computational models suitable for
CFD analysis. For instance, a hybrid NIRS-IVUS and multislice
CT-based reconstruction has been used to map ESS in an in vivo
human coronary artery,100 illustrating the potential of hybrid and
multi-modality imaging to serve as the basis for future CFD and
FEA analyses.
Other modelling strategies include reconstruction of longer cor-
onary segments with multiple bifurcations to better understand the
role of downstream lesions and side branch geometry on upstream
and main branch flow. Investigators from our group have recently
examined ESS distribution in a population-based phantom model
of three successive bifurcation lesions101 (Figure 5). This work has
implicated downstream lesions in generating significant flow recircu-
lation and potentiating exposure to low ESS in upstream regions, a
potentially pathologic flow pattern that would not be detected by
CFD simulations of solitary lesions or bifurcations. Such modelling
of multiple successive lesions may improve the accuracy and speci-
ficity of ESS to detect high-risk plaques.
Computational fluid dynamic
methodology
Computational fluid dynamic simulations have become more realis-
tic due to advances in methodology afforded by continued increases
in computational power. Although pulsatile flow simulations utilizing
patient-specific reconstructions and boundary conditions are
already routine, most CFD simulations still assume rigid, static
vessels. Given natural vessel elasticity and cardiac motion, however,
the effects and relevance of arterial compliance, vessel bending,
and cardiac contraction are also being actively investigated using
FEA and FSI methods.102,103 Other ongoing improvements are likely
to include techniques to measure and incorporate additional
Figure 5 (A) Computational fluid dynamic simulation in a population-based phantom model with three serial bifurcation lesions showing endo-
thelial shear stress distribution. (B and C) (Magnified view of area bounded by dashed line in A). Severe stenosis of the second bifurcation
contributes to significant flow recirculation and exposure to low endothelial shear stress (inset panels, right) in the upstream vessel segment
between the first and second bifurcations over the cardiac cycle. Computational fluid dynamic modelling of multiple diseased bifurcations
illustrates the effect of downstream stenoses on upstream vessel regions.101
V. Thondapu et al.
88
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 patient-specific boundary conditions such as microvascular resist-
ance and collateral flow, and improved understanding and modelling
of whole blood rheology.
More rigorous interpretation of CFD data generated through
existing methods may be another way to improve the predictive
capacity of computational analyses. For instance, techniques such
as cross-sectional sector analysis may significantly enhance the
spatial resolution of ESS distribution in regions of complex
flow.104 Another alternative is the use of complementary haemo-
dynamic parameters such as oscillatory shear index,34,105 relative
residence time,105 wall shear stress gradient,92 stress phase an-
gle,48,86,106 and LDL accumulation algorithms.107,108 These mea-
sures have also shown early potential in their predictive capacity,
but their clinical applicability and relevance remain experimentally
unconfirmed.
As a modelling technique, CFD also relies on simplifying assump-
tions such as specifying blood as a Newtonian fluid with constant
viscosity. Due to its solid and liquid phases, however, blood exhibits
non-Newtonian properties such as shear-thinning, the apparent
thinning of blood at high shear rates. While the Newtonian assump-
tion is generally acceptable in healthy segments of larger arteries, it
may not be as accurate in the setting of complex flow patterns
arising near diseased bifurcations and distal to stenoses.109 A
hypothesis-generating CFD simulation comparing the Newtonian
and non-Newtonian models of blood rheology demonstrates simi-
larity in the overall distribution of flow disturbances between the
two models; however, pockets of flow recirculation are more
focused in the non-Newtonian model (Figure 6). While this model
requires further computational and clinical validation, these obser-
vations have been reflected by previous studies.109–112 The clinical
relevance and necessity of modelling non-Newtonian behaviour re-
main debated, but this preliminary work suggests that incorporating
shear-thinning behaviour in some circumstances may improve the
specificity of ESS. Of note, this model may also be relevant in the
study of platelet activation and thrombosis, the mechanisms of
which rely on the formation of a shear-dependent plasma-rich cell-
free layer near the arterial wall as a result of non-Newtonian
rheology.113
Even with inevitable improvements in imaging and CFD methods,
given the complexity of atherosclerosis it is possible that ESS has a
fundamentally limited capacity to specifically predict future culprit
lesions. Another approach to elucidate new markers of future cul-
prit lesions has been to examine the mechanisms of plaque rupture
in order to identify features unique to such plaques.
Figure 6 (A) Pulsatile computational fluid dynamic simulation incorporating shear-thinning behaviour in a population-based phantom model
with three serial bifurcation lesions. (B) The Newtonian model assuming constant blood viscosity illustrates regions of flow recirculation and
turbulence in the proximity of each bifurcation (white asterisks). (C) The non-Newtonian model demonstrates that regions of recirculation
and turbulence are more focused than in the Newtonian model (red asterisks).
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
89
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Tissue stress and plaque rupture
Once a plaque has developed vulnerable features due to a com-
bination of systemic factors and local haemodynamics, the chance
of cap rupture hinges on the balance between disruptive mechanical
forces and plaque stability.14,15,89,114 Stability of the plaque, its
ultimate tensile strength, depends on the widely varying biomechan-
ical properties of its component tissues: the fibrous cap, lipid core,
cellular components, calcifications, and layers of the vessel
wall15,28,29,32,114,115 (Figure 7). Great differences in the material
properties of adjacent tissues generate stress concentrations, or
weak points, within the atherosclerotic plaque and vessel wall.
Disruptive forces may arise from an acute rise in blood pressure,
which elevates both shear stress and circumferential strain, but
may also exacerbate axial plaque deformation induced by the in-
creased pressure gradient across a stenosis.25,26,116 The overall
average estimated plaque rupture threshold is �300 kPa, but the
actual value associated with rupture may be considerably higher.15
In short, the precise site and circumstance of plaque rupture may
be defined by where and when the heterogeneous distribution of
tensile strength is overcome by the heterogeneous distribution of
haemodynamic forces within the vessel over the cardiac cycle.
The intuitive nature of this concept belies the actual complexity of
plaque rupture in vivo, as illustrated by several observations. First,
not all ruptures are acutely symptomatic. In fact, asymptomatic pla-
que rupture and fibrotic healing appear to be a relatively common
occurrence contributing to silent plaque progression.33,117,118 Simi-
larly, although TCFAs are most commonly responsible for symp-
tomatic plaque rupture, most TCFAs do not lead to symptomatic
rupture.10 Morphologic characteristics such as thin fibrous caps,
large lipid cores, plaque burden, remodelling, and thrombus are as-
sociated with symptomatic plaque rupture117 but these late features
cannot completely explain the incomplete penetration of symptom-
atic rupture in TCFAs. Second, plaque rupture occurring at rest
localizes to the estimated site of maximum tissue stress only
�60% of the time15 and most often correlates with rupture at the
proximal plaque shoulder.14,33,80,119 That nearly 40% of plaque rup-
ture at rest occurs in midcap regions of high but sub-maximal stress
implies tensile strength is not homogeneously distributed through
the fibrous cap. Third, physical exertion tends to shift the plaque
rupture site from the shoulder to the midcap. Approximately 75%
of exertion-related plaque rupture is characterized by midcap rup-
ture, where shear stress is predicted to be highest.119 This observa-
tion has at least two implications: (i) the relative contribution of
Figure 7 Virtual histology- intravascular ultrasound demonstrates lesions consistent with thin-cap fibroatheroma in two different patients (A
and C). Finite element analysis demonstrates that these two identically classified plaques manifest considerable differences in plaque stress (B and
D), suggesting that these patients may have different risk for plaque rupture (from Teng et al.20).
V. Thondapu et al.
90
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 shear and circumferential stress to plaque rupture changes with
exertion such that high ESS may become the predominant destabil-
izing force; (ii) the shoulder and midcap regions may have different
susceptibility to shear and circumferential stress due to underlying
tissue heterogeneity. These observations confirm that additional
factors must account for the wide variety in presentation and
morphology of plaque rupture. The elucidation of these factors
may identify novel markers of plaque vulnerability, presenting
another possible approach to earlier and more specific detection
of future culprit lesions.
Novel markers of plaque
vulnerability
Microcalcification
Microcalcifications as small as 1 mm are apparent in histologic speci-
mens of even early atheroma, becoming larger and more numerous
as disease progresses.87 Recent computational FEA studies based on
ex vivo micro-computed tomography demonstrate that fibrous cap
microcalcifications between 5 and 65 mm can amplify plaque tensile
stress by up to 5-fold depending on their clustering, spatial orienta-
tion, degree of curvature, and length:diameter aspect ratio.16 –18,120
Further analysis suggests that such microcalcifications may act as a
nidus for plaque rupture initiation.121 These ex vivo studies represent
an important step forward in understanding the mechanics of plaque
rupture, but accurate in vivo imaging and computational studies will
be necessary to first make a definitive link between microcalcifica-
tions and plaque rupture, and then to detect microcalcifications in
a clinical setting. Currently, clinically available imaging modalities
cannot reliably identify microcalcifications ,65 mm, but two tech-
niques in development have demonstrated potential.
Micro-OCT, an invasive modality with a resolution of 1–2 mm,
has been able to image both fibrous cap microcalcifications and
cholesterol crystals.122 This technology is currently limited to
ex vivo application but its further development may lead to in vivo
imaging of individual microcalcifications. Another emerging tech-
nique is positron emission tomography and X-ray computed
tomography (PET-CT) utilizing 18F-sodium fluoride (18F-NaF) tra-
cer. Early evidence suggests this non-invasive modality may be
able to identify areas of active vascular microcalcification with high
specificity.123–125 Larger prospective studies will be critical in deter-
mining the clinical significance and role of 18F-NaF PET-CT in early
and specific detection of vulnerable plaques.
Cholesterol crystallization
As a primary component of lipid-rich plaques, free cholesterol may
reach concentrations high enough to crystallize. In vitro and post-
mortem histopathologic studies demonstrate an association be-
tween cholesterol crystals and inflammation,126 puncture of fibrous
membranes,127 increased plaque size, disruption, and thrombus,128
and coronary plaque rupture.11,129,130 While recent in vivo studies
have associated cholesterol crystals with obstructive coronary
lesions and other advanced morphologic features in patients with
stable coronary disease,131 – 133 cholesterol crystals have not been
causally linked to clinical events. Serial OCT-based CFD and FSI
studies may be used to examine whether cholesterol crystallization
within the intact fibrous cap contributes to increased ESS, intra-
plaque and fibrous cap stress, and rupture in a process that may
be analogous to the mechanism whereby acute intra-plaque haem-
orrhage is proposed to precipitate rupture.134
Axial plaque deformation
The increased shear and circumferential tissue stress that accompany
a rise in blood pressure are most commonly thought to trigger
disruption of vulnerable plaques.26,119,135 However, fluid dynamic
principles suggest axial plaque deformation as another potential
source of acute strain. As described by the Bernoulli principle, a
flow obstruction generates a negative pressure gradient that in-
creases with higher proximal pressure and worsening stenosis. Large
negative pressures distally may lead to plaque deformation and in-
creased axial tensile stress. Plaque deformation has been observed
by ultrasound in symptomatic carotid plaques136 and has been pre-
viously suggested as a contributor to coronary plaque rupture,24–26
but it remains unclear whether axial deformation occurs in non-
obstructive and asymptomatic coronary plaques to be a detectable,
early, and clinically relevant marker of future vulnerable plaques.
Plaque geometry
Lesion geometry also influences ESS distribution and the pressure
gradient across a stenosis. Steep outlet geometry, for instance, is
predicted to create a larger zone of distal flow recirculation, increas-
ing both distal exposure to low ESS and the negative pressure gra-
dient across the lesion compared with a shallow outlet geometry. In
theory, steep outlet geometry may increase proximal tissue stress
and the risk of fibrous cap disruption. A previous study has demon-
strated geometric features such as plaque symmetry and steep out-
flow angle measured by quantitative coronary angiography are
independently associated with risk for acute myocardial infarction
within 12 months.137 A combination of stenosis symmetry index
and maximal outflow angle .68% and 278
8
8
8
8, respectively, identify
intermediate lesions (40–70% diameter of stenosis) that become
culprit lesions within 3 years with a sensitivity, specificity, positive
and negative predictive values of 33, 85, 49, and 76%, respectively.137
The mechanism for this observation remains unclear, but it may be
related to multi-faceted exacerbation of hemodynamic disturbances
and tissue stresses in the setting of propensity for thrombosis. Given
the availability of high-resolution intracoronary imaging and compu-
tational methods, plaque geometry deserves reconsideration. If
corroborated, plaque geometric features may add to the specificity
of detecting vulnerable plaques that will become clinically relevant.
Limitations of computational modelling
Computational modelling of vascular shear and tissue stress in the
research setting has undoubtedly advanced our understanding of
atherosclerosis, but large long-term prospective studies will be ne-
cessary to establish prognostic relevance, clinical benefit, practical-
ity, and cost-effectiveness. Several hurdles remain if these methods
are to impact the clinical realm.
First, at the current stage computational modelling is not a trivial
point-and-click endeavour. Accurate modelling requires the expert-
ise of trained engineers to reconstruct models from medical im-
aging, run theoretically validated simulations, extract and present
the clinically relevant data. Although the development of
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
91
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 sophisticated automated workflows is expected to improve the ac-
cessibility of these methods in the research setting, considerable ad-
vances will be needed before routine clinical implementation.
Second, computational modelling is currently hindered by process-
ing and computational times that often preclude clinically actionable
real-time information, but this appears to be changing with contin-
ued increases in computational power and availability. The study of
Kelly-Arnold et al. for instance, is particularly notable in that it re-
quired �1 h of computational time.18 These two limitations relate
to the third: although developments in computational methodology
will continue to improve the realism of simulations as previously dis-
cussed, the incremental utility of these advances must be carefully
weighed against computational expense. Critically, does increased
complexity improve the prognostic accuracy and clinical relevance
of modelling, or does it unrealistically increase the computing
power, time, and expertise required? An optimal balance must be
maintained to achieve clinical applicability of computational meth-
ods. Fourth, perhaps the greatest limitation of computational mod-
elling to detect future culprit lesions is its current reliance on
invasive imaging. Despite significantly superior resolution, invasive
imaging carries procedural risk and economic cost. Additionally, in-
vasive imaging is only applicable to patients undergoing angiography
for highly suspected or known coronary disease—at best, second-
ary prevention. Although non-invasive coronary CT-based CFD is
already used for non-invasive measurement of FFR, the ability of
coronary CT, 18F-NaF PET-CT, and other non-invasive modalities
to detect early markers of future culprit lesions remains unclear. Im-
proved non-invasive plaque imaging and computational character-
ization will be necessary for truly pre-emptive detection and
primary prevention of clinically significant vulnerable plaque
rupture.
Conclusions
Along with experimental and clinical studies, advances in computa-
tional methods and coronary imaging have contributed to a deeper
understanding of plaque initiation, evolution, and rupture. While
several sensitive morphologic and haemodynamic characteristics
of vulnerable plaques have been identified, these features remain
non-specific for lesions progressing to clinical relevance. Novel mar-
kers of plaque vulnerability will be necessary to prospectively iden-
tify those patients at highest risk for cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality. High-resolution image-based computational stress ana-
lyses will likely play a significant role in identifying both currently
known and novel markers, thereby improving detection of future
culprit lesions.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Dr Eric Poon and Prof Andrew Ooi for
their assistance with the computational simulations presented in
this review, and Mr Darrel Yee for assistance with figures.
Funding
This work has been partially supported by the Australian Research
Council through ARC Linkage Project LP120100233. This research
was also supported by the Victorian Life Sciences Computation Initiative
(VLSCI grant number VR0210) on its Peak Computing Facility at the
University of Melbourne, an initiative of the Victorian Government,
Australia.
Conflict of interest: none declared.
References
1. Global Atlas on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention and Control, Mendis S, Puska
P, Norrving B, editors. Geneva: World Health Organization. 2011.
2. Caro CG, Fitz-Gerald JM, Schroter RC. Arterial wall shear and distribution of
early atheroma in man. Nature 1969;223:1159–1161.
3. Stone PH, Coskun AU, Kinlay S, Clark ME, Sonka M, Wahle A, Ilegbusi OJ,
Yeghiazarians Y, Popma JJ, Orav J, Kuntz RE, Feldman CL. Effect of endothelial
shear stress on the progression of coronary artery disease, vascular remodeling,
and in-stent restenosis in humans: in vivo 6-month follow-up study. Circulation
2003;108:438–444.
4. Wentzel JJ, Schuurbiers JC, Gonzalo Lopez N, Gijsen FJ, van der Giessen AG,
Groen HC, Dijkstra J, Garcia-Garcia HM, Serruys PW. In vivo assessment of
the relationship between shear stress and necrotic core in early and advanced
coronary artery disease. EuroIntervention 2013;9:989–995. Discussion 995.
5. Vergallo R, Papafaklis MI, Yonetsu T, Bourantas CV, Andreou I, Wang Z,
Fujimoto JG, McNulty I, Lee H, Biasucci LM, Crea F, Feldman CL, Michalis LK,
Stone PH, Jang IK. Endothelial shear stress and coronary plaque characteristics
in humans: combined frequency-domain optical coherence tomography and com-
putational fluid dynamics study. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2014;7:905–911.
6. Malek AM, Alper SL, Izumo S. Hemodynamic shear stress and its role in athero-
sclerosis. JAMA 1999;282:2035–2042.
7. Gimbrone MA, Topper JN, Nagel T, Anderson KR, Garcia-Cardena G. Endothelial
dysfunction, hemodynamic forces, and atherogenesis. Ann NY Acad Sci 2000;902:
230–240.
8. Stone PH, Saito S, Takahashi S, Makita Y, Nakamura S, Kawasaki T, Takahashi A,
Katsuki T, Na a, S, Namiki A, Hirohata A, Matsumura T, Yamazaki S, Yokoi H,
Tanaka S, Otsuji S, Yoshimachi F, Honye J, Harwood D, Reitman M,
Coskun AU, Papafaklis MI, Feldman CL. Prediction of progression of coronary ar-
tery disease and clinical outcomes using vascular profiling of endothelial shear
stress and arterial plaque characteristics: the PREDICTION study. Circulation
2012;126:172–181.
9. Corban MT, Eshtehardi P, Suo J, McDaniel MC, Timmins LH, Rassoul-Arzrumly E,
Maynard C, Mekonnen G, King S, 3rd, Quyyumi AA, Giddens DP, Samady H.
Combination of plaque burden, wall shear stress, and plaque phenotype has incre-
mental value for prediction of coronary atherosclerotic plaque progression and
vulnerability. Atherosclerosis 2014;232:271–276.
10. Stone GW, Maehara A, Lansky A, de Bruyne D, Cristea E, Mintz GS, Mehran R,
McPherson J, Farhat N, Marso SP, Parise H, Templin B, White R, Zhang Z,
Serruys PW. A prospective natural-history study of coronary atherosclerosis.
NEJM 2011;364:226–235.
11. Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, Finn AV, Gold HK, Tulenko TN, Wrenn SP,
Narula J. Atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerability to rupture: angio-
genesis as a source of intraplaque hemorrhage. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2005;
25:2054–2061.
12. Finn AV, Nakano M, Narula J, Kolodgie FD, Virmani R. Concept of vulnerable/un-
stable plaque. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2010;30:1282–1292.
13. Narula J, Nakano M, Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Petersen R, Newcomb R, Malik S,
Fuster V, Finn AV. Histopathologic characteristics of atherosclerotic coronary dis-
ease and implications of the findings for the invasive and noninvasive detection of
vulnerable plaques. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61:1041–1051.
14. Richardson PD, Davies MJ, Born GVR. Influence of plaque configuration and stress
distribution on fissuring of coronary atherosclerotic plaques. Lancet,
1989:941–944.
15. Cheng GC et al. Distribution of circumferential stress in ruptured and stable ath-
erosclerotic lesions: a structural analysis with histopathological correlation. Circu-
lation 1993;87:1179–1187.
16. Vengrenyuk Y, Carlier S, Xanthos S, Cardoso L, Ganatos P, Virmani R, Einav S,
Gilchrist L, Weinbaum S. A hypothesis for vulnerable plaque rupture due to
stress-induced debonding around cellular microcalcifications in thin fibrous
caps. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:14678–14683.
17. Maldonado N, Kelly-Arnold A, Vengrenyuk Y, Laudier D, Fallon JT, Virmani R,
Cardoso L, Weinbaum S. A mechanistic analysis of the role of microcalcifications
in atherosclerotic plaque stability: potential implications for plaque rupture. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2012;303:H619–H628.
18. Kelly-Arnold A, Maldonado N, Laudier D, Aikawa E, Cardoso L, Weinbaum S. Re-
vised microcalcification hypothesis for fibrous cap rupture in human coronary ar-
teries. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2013;110:10741–10746.
V. Thondapu et al.
92
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 19. Tang D, Kamm RD, Yang C, Zheng J, Canton G, Bach R, Huang X, Hatsukami TS,
Zhu J, Ma G, Maehara A, Mintz GS, Yuan C. Image-based modeling for better un-
derstanding and assessment of atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerabil-
ity: data, modeling, validation, uncertainty and predictions. J Biomech 2014;47:
834–846.
20. Teng Z. Coronary plaque structural stress is associated with plaque composition
and subtype and higher in acute coronary syndrome the BEACON I (Biomechan-
ical Evaluation of Atheromatous Coronary Arteries) study. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging
2014;7:461–470.
21. Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, Seneviratne S, Ko BS, Ito H, Jensen JM, Mauri L, De
Bruyne B, Bezerra H, Osawa K, Marwan M, Naber C, Erglis A, Park SJ,
Christiansen EH, Kaltoft A, Lassen JF, Botker HE, Achenbach S, Group NXTTS.
Diagnostic performance of noninvasive fractional flow reserve derived from cor-
onary computed tomography angiography in suspected coronary artery disease:
the NXT trial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next
Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:1145–1155.
22. Humphrey JD, Eberth JF, Dye WW, Gleason RL. Fundamental role of axial
stress in compensatory adaptations by arteries. J Biomech 2009;42:1–8.
23. Bellini C, Ferruzzi J, Roccabianca S, Di Martino ES, Humphrey JD. A microstructu-
rally motivated model of arterial wall mechanics with mechanobiological implica-
tions. Ann Biomed Eng 2014;42:488–502.
24. Li ZY, Taviani V, Tang T, Sadat U, Young V, Patterson A, Graves M, Gillard JH. The
mechanical triggers of plaque rupture: shear stress vs pressure gradient. Br J Radiol
2009;82:S39–S45.
25. Doriot P. Estimation of the supplementary axial wall stress generated at peak flow
by an arterial stenosis. Phys Med Biol 2003;48:127–138.
26. Slager CJ, Wentzel JJ, Gijsen FJ, Thury A, van der Wal AC, Schaar JA,
Serruys PW. The role of shear stress in the destabilization of vulnerable plaques
and related therapeutic implications. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med 2005;2:
456–464.
27. Holzapfel GA, Sommer G, Gasser CT, Regitnig P. Determination of layer-specific
mechanical properties of human coronary arteries with nonatherosclerotic in-
timal thickening and related constitutive modeling. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2005;289:H2048–H2058.
28. Holzapfel GA, Sommer G, Regitnig P. Anisotropic mechanical properties of tissue
components in human atherosclerotic plaques. J Biomech Eng 2004;126:657.
29. Ohayon J, Dubreuil O, Tracqui P, Le Floc’h S, Rioufol G, Chalabreysse L,
Thivolet F, Pettigrew RI, Finet G. Influence of residual stress/strain on the bio-
mechanical stability of vulnerable coronary plaques: potential impact for evaluat-
ing the risk of plaque rupture. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2007;293:
H1987–H1996.
30. Loree HM, Kamm RD, Stringfellow RG, Lee RT. Effects of fibrous cap thickness on
peak circumferential stress in model atherosclerotic vessels. Circ Res 1992;71:
850–858.
31. Akyildiz AC, Speelman L, van Brummelen H, Gutierrez MA, Virmani R, van der
Lugt A, van der Steen AF, Wentzel JJ, Gijsen FJ. Effects of intima stiffness and
plaque morphology on peak cap stress. Biomed Eng Online 2011;10:25.
32. Akyildiz AC, Speelman L, Gijsen FJ. Mechanical properties of human atheroscler-
otic intima tissue. J Biomech 2014;47:773–783.
33. Maehara A, Mintz GS, Bui AB, Walter OR, Castagna MT, Canos D, Pichard AD,
Satler LF, Waksman R, Suddath WO, Laird JR, Kent KM, Weissman NJ. Morpho-
logic and angiographic features of coronary plaque rupture detected by intravas-
cular ultrasound. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;40:904–910.
34. Ku DN, Zarins CK, Glagov S. Pulsatile flow and atherosclerosis in the human
carotid bifurcation. Positive correlation between plaque location and low oscillat-
ing shear stress. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1985;5:293–302.
35. Cunningham KS, Gotlieb AI. The role of shear stress in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis. Lab Invest 2005;85:9–23.
36. Zhou J, Wang KC, Wu W, Subramaniam S, Shyy JY, Chiu JY, Chiu JJ, Li JY,
Chien S. MicroRNA-21 targets peroxisome proliferators- activated receptor-a
in an autoregulatory loop to modulate flow-induced endothelial inflammation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:10355–10360.
37. Garcia-Cardena G, Comander J, Anderson KR, Blackman BR, Gimbrone MA Jr.
Biomechanical activation of vascular endothelium as a determinant of its function-
al phenotype. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:4478–4485.
38. Son DJ, Kumar S, Takabe W, Kim CW, Ni CW, Alberts-Grill N, Jang IH, Kim S,
Kim W, Won Kang S, Baker AH, Woong Seo J, Ferrara KW, Jo H. The atypical
mechanosensitive microRNA-712 derived from pre-ribosomal RNA induces
endothelial inflammation and atherosclerosis. Nat Commun 2013;4:3000.
39. Wu W et al. Flow-dependent regulation of Kruppel-like factor 2 is mediated by
microRNA-92a. Circulation 2011;124:633–641.
40. Goldfinger LE, Tzima E, Stockton R, Kiosses WB, Kinbara K, Tkachenko E,
Gutierrez E, Groisman A, Nguyen P, Chien S, Ginsberg MH. Localized alpha4 in-
tegrin phosphorylation directs shear stress-induced endothelial cell alignment.
Circ Res 2008;103:177–185.
41. Dewey CFJ, Bussolari SR, Gimbrone MA, Davies PF. The dynamic response of vas-
cular endothelial cells to fluid shear stress. J Biomech Engineering 1981;103:177–185.
42. Lin K, Hsu PP, Chen BP, Yuan S, Usami S, Shyy JY, Li YS, Chien S. Molecular mech-
anism of endothelial growth arrest by laminar shear stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2000;97:9385–9389.
43. Jin ZG, Ueba H, Tanimoto T, Lungu AO, Frame MD, Berk BC. Ligand-independent
activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 by fluid shear stress
regulates activation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Circ Res 2003;93:
354–363.
44. Papadaki M, Ruef J, Nguyen KT, Li F, Patterson C, Eskin SG, McIntire LV, Runge MS.
Differential regulation of protease activated receptor-1 and tissue plasminogen
activator expression by shear stress in vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ Res
1998;83:1027–1034.
45. Inoue N, Ramasamy S, Fukai T, Nerem RM, Harrison DG. Shear stress modulates
expression of Cu/Zn Superoxide Dismutase in Human Aortic Endothelial Cells.
Circ Res 1996;79:32–37.
46. Gongol B, Marin T, Peng I-C, Woo B, Martin M, King S, Sun W, Johnson DA,
Chien S, Shyy JY. AMPKa2 exerts its anti-inflammatory effects through PARP-1
and Bcl-6. PNAS 2013;110:3161–3166.
47. Fang Y, Shi C, Manduchi E, Civelek M, Davies PF. MicroRNA-10a regulation of
proinflammatory phenotype in athero-susceptible endothelium in vivo and in vi-
tro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:13450–13455.
48. Qiu Y, Tarbell JM. Interaction between wall shear stress and circumferential strain
affects endothelial cell biochemical production. J Vasc Res 2000;37:147–157.
49. Ziegler T, Bouzourene K, Harrison VJ, Brunner HR, Hayoz D. Influence of oscil-
latory and unidirectional flow environments on the expression of endothelin and
nitric oxide synthase in cultured endothelial cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
1998;18:686–692.
50. Chatzizisis YS, Coskun AU, Jonas M, Edelman ER, Feldman CL, Stone PH. Role of
endothelial shear stress in the natural history of coronary atherosclerosis and vas-
cular remodeling: molecular, cellular, and vascular behavior. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;
49:2379–2393.
51. Malek AM, Izumo S. Mechanism of endothelial cell shape change and cytoskeletal
remodeling in response to fluid shear stress. J Cell Science 1996;109:713–726.
52. Melchior B, Frangos JA. Shear-induced endothelial cell-cell junction inclination.
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2010;299:C621–C629.
53. DePaola N, Davies PF, Pritchard WF, Florez L, Harbeck N, Polacek DC. Spatial
and temporal regulation of gap junction connexin43 in vascular endothelial cells
exposed to controlled disturbed flows in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:
3154–3159.
54. Pfenniger A, Wong C, Sutter E, Cuhlmann S, Dunoyer-Geindre S, Mach F,
Horrevoets AJ, Evans PC, Krams R, Kwak BR. Shear stress modulates the expres-
sion of the atheroprotective protein Cx37 in endothelial cells. J Mol Cell Cardiol
2012;53:299–309.
55. Miao H, Hu YL, Shiu YT, Yuan S, Zhao Y, Kaunas R, Wang Y, Jin G, Usami S,
Chien S. Effects of flow patterns on the localization and expression of VE-cadherin
at vascular endothelial cell junctions: in vivo and in vitro investigations. J Vasc Res
2005;42:77–89.
56. Staughton TJ, Lever MJ, Weinberg PD. Effect of altered flow on the pattern of per-
meability around rabbit aortic branches. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2001;281:
H53-H59.
57. Cancel LM, Tarbell JM. The role of apoptosis in LDL transport through cultured
endothelial cell monolayers. Atherosclerosis 2010;208:335–341.
58. Kang H, Cancel LM, Tarbell JM. Effect of shear stress on water and LDL transport
through cultured endothelial cell monolayers. Atherosclerosis 2014;233:682–690.
59. Chen Z, Peng I-C, Cui X, Li Y-S, Chien S, Shyy JY. Shear stress, SIRT1, and vascular
homeostasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:10268–10273.
60. Young A, Wu W, Sun W, Benjamin Larman H, Wang N, Li YS, Shyy JY, Chien S,
Garcia-Cardena G. Flow activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in vascular
endothelium leads to Kruppel-like factor 2 expression. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 2009;29:1902–1908.
61. Sucosky P, Balachandran K, Elhammali A, Jo H, Yoganathan AP. Altered shear
stress stimulates upregulation of endothelial VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 in a BMP-4-
and TGF-beta1-dependent pathway. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2009;29:
254–260.
62. Suo J, Ferrara DE, Sorescu D, Guldberg RE, Taylor WR, Giddens DP. Hemo-
dynamic shear stresses in mouse aortas: implications for atherogenesis. Arterios-
cler Thromb Vasc Biol 2007;27:346–351.
63. Conklin BS, Zhong DS, Zhao W, Lin PH, Chen C. Shear stress regulates occlu-
din and VEGF expression in porcine arterial endothelial cells. J Surg Res 2002;
102:13–21.
64. Hwang J, Saha A, Boo YC, Sorescu GP, McNally JS, Holland SM, Dikalov S,
Giddens DP, Griendling KK, Harrison DG, Jo H. Oscillatory shear stress stimu-
lates endothelial production of O2- from p47phox-dependent NAD(P)H oxi-
dases, leading to monocyte adhesion. J Biol Chem 2003;278:47291–8.
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
92a
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 65. Sorescu GP, Song H, Tressel SL, Hwang J, Dikalov S, Smith DA, Boyd NL,
Platt MO, Lassegue B, Griendling KK, Jo H. Bone morphogenic protein 4 pro-
duced in endothelial cells by oscillatory shear stress induces monocyte adhesion
by stimulating reactive oxygen species production from a nox1-based NADPH
oxidase. Circ Res 2004;95:773–779.
66. Gambillara V, Montorzi G, Haziza-Pigeon C, Stergiopulos N, Silacci P. Arterial wall
response to ex vivo exposure to oscillatory shear stress. J Vasc Res 2005;42:
535–544.
67. Zhou J, Lee PL, Lee CI, Wei SY, Lim SH, Lin TE, Chien S, Chiu JJ. BMP receptor-
integrin interaction mediates responses of vascular endothelial Smad1/5 and pro-
liferation to disturbed flow. J Thromb Haemost 2013;11:741–755.
68. Zhou J, Lee PL, Tsai CS, Lee CI, Yang TL, Chuang HS, Lin WW, Lin TE, Lim SH,
Wei SY, Chen YL, Chien S, Chiu JJ. Force-specific activation of Smad1/5 regulates
vascular endothelial cell cycle progression in response to disturbed flow. PNAS
2012;109:7770–7775.
69. Davies PF, Remuzzi A, Gordon EJ, Dewey CFJ, Gimbrone MA. Turbulent fluid
shear stress induces vascular endothelial turnover in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1986;83:2114–2117.
70. Ding Z, Liu S, Wang X, Deng X, Fan Y, Sun C, Wang Y, Mehta JL. Hemodynamic
shear stress via ROS modulates PCSK9 expression in human vascular endothelial
and smooth muscle cells and along the mouse aorta. Antioxid Redox Signal 2015;22:
760–771.
71. Chien S. Molecular and mechanical bases of focal lipid accumulation in arterial
wall. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2003;83:131–151.
72. Westein E, van der Meer AD, Kuijpers MJE, Frimat J, van den Berg A,
Heemskerk JWM. Atherosclerotic geometries exacerbate pathological thrombus
formation poststenosis in a von Willebrand factor-dependent manner. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2013;110:1357–1362.
73. Zarins CK, Zatina MA, Giddens DP, Ku DN, Glagov S. Shear stress regulation of
artery lumen diameter in experimental atherogenesis. J Vasc Surg 1987;5:
413–420.
74. Burke AP, Kolodgie FD, Farb A, Weber D, Virmani R. Morphological predictors of
arterial remodeling in coronary atherosclerosis. Circulation 2002;105:297–303.
75. Eshtehardi P, McDaniel MC, Suo J, Dhawan SS, Timmins LH, Binongo JN, Golub LJ,
Corban MT, Finn AV, Oshinski JN, Quyyumi AA, Giddens DP, Samady H. Associ-
ation of coronary wall shear stress with atherosclerotic plaque burden, compos-
ition, and distribution in patients with coronary artery disease. J Am Heart Assoc
2012;1:e002543.
76. Samady H, Eshtehardi P, McDaniel MC, Suo J, Dhawan SS, Maynard C,
Timmins LH, Quyyumi AA, Giddens DP. Coronary artery wall shear stress is as-
sociated with progression and transformation of atherosclerotic plaque and ar-
terial remodeling in patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation 2011;124:
779–788.
77. Stone PH, Coskun AU, Kinlay S, Popma JJ, Sonka M, Wahle A, Yeghiazarians Y,
Maynard C, Kuntz RE, Feldman CL. Regions of low endothelial shear stress are
the sites where coronary plaque progresses and vascular remodelling occurs in
humans: an in vivo serial study. Eur Heart J 2007;28:705–710.
78. Chatzizisis YS, Baker AB, Sukhova GK, Koskinas KC, Papafaklis MI, Beigel R,
Jonas M, Coskun AU, Stone BV, Maynard C, Shi GP, Libby P, Feldman CL,
Edelman ER, Stone PH. Augmented expression and activity of extracellular
matrix-degrading enzymes in regions of low endothelial shear stress colocalize
with coronary atheromata with thin fibrous caps in pigs. Circulation 2011;123:
621–630.
79. Chatzizisis YS, Jonas M, Coskun AU, Beigel R, Stone BV, Maynard C, Gerrity RG,
Daley W, Rogers C, Edelman ER, Feldman CL, Stone PH. Prediction of the
localization of high-risk coronary atherosclerotic plaques on the basis of low
endothelial shear stress: an intravascular ultrasound and histopathology natural
history study. Circulation 2008;117:993–1002.
80. Gijsen FJH, Wentzel JJ, Thury A, Mastik F, Schaar JA, Schuurbiers JCH, Slager CJ,
van der Giessen W, de Feyter PJ, van der Steen AFW, Serruys PW. Strain distri-
bution over plaques in human coronary arteries relates to shear stress. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 2008;295:H1608-H1614.
81. Kolpakov V, Gordon D, Kulik TJ. Nitric oxide generating compounds inhibit total
protein and collagen synthesis in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circulation
Research 1995;76:305–309.
82. Boyle JJ. Human macrophage-induced vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis
requires NO enhancement of Fas/Fas-L interactions. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 2002;22:1624–1630.
83. Death AK, Martell S, Yue DK, Jessup W, Celemajer DS. Nitroglycerin upregu-
lates matrix metalloproteinase expression by human macrophages. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2002;39:1943–1950.
84. Kenagy RD, Fischer JW, Davies MG, Berceli SA, Hawkins SM, Wight TN,
Clowes AW. Increased plasmin and serine proteinase activity during flow-induced
intimal atrophy in baboon PTFE grafts. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2002;22:
400–404.
85. Moreno PR, Falk E, Palacios IF, Newell JB, Fuster V, Fallon JT. Macrophage infiltra-
tion in acute coronary syndromes: implications for plaque rupture. Circulation
1994;90:775–778.
86. Dancu MB, Berardi DE, Vanden Heuvel JP, Tarbell JM. Asynchronous shear stress
and
circumferential
strain
reduces
endothelial
NO
synthase
and
cyclooxygenase-2 but induces endothelin-1 gene expression in endothelial cells.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2004;24:2088–2094.
87. Roijers RB, Debernardi N, Cleutjens JP, Schurgers LJ, Mutsaers PH, van der
Vusse GJ. Microcalcifications in early intimal lesions of atherosclerotic human cor-
onary arteries. Am J Pathol 2011;178:2879–2887.
88. Galis ZS, Sukhova GK, Lark MW, Libby P. Increased expression of matrix metal-
loproteinases and matrix degrading activity in vulnerable regions of human ath-
erosclerotic plaques. J Clin Invest 1994;94:2493–2503.
89. Lendon CL, Davies MJ, Born GVR, Richardson PD. Atherosclerotic plaque caps
are locally weakened when macrophages density is increased. Atherosclerosis
1991;87:87–90.
90. van der Wal AC, Becker AE, van der Loos CM, Das PK. Site of intimal rupture of
erosion of thombosed coronary atherosclerotic plaques is characterized by an in-
flammatory process irrespective of the dominant plaque morphology. Circulation
1994;89:36–44.
91. Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, Farb A, Gold HK, Yuan J, Narula J, Finn AV, Virmani R. The
thin-cap fibroatheroma: a type of vulnerable plaque: The major precursor lesion
to acute coronary syndromes. Curr Opin Cardiol 2001;16:285–292.
92. Schaar JA, De Korte CL, Mastik F, Strijder C, Pasterkamp G, Boersma E,
Serruys PW, Van Der Steen AF. Characterizing vulnerable plaque features with
intravascular elastography. Circulation 2003;108:2636–2641.
93. Gijsen FJH, Mastik F, Schaar JA, Schuurbiers JCH, van der Giessen W, de
Feyter PJ, Serruys PW, van der Steen AFW, Wentzel JJ. High shear stress
induces a strain increase in human coronary plaques over a 6-month period.
EuroIntervention 2011;7:121–127.
94. Fukumoto Y, Hiro T, Fujii T, Hashimoto G, Fujimura T, Yamada J, Okamura T,
Matsuzaki M. Localized elevation of shear stress is related to coronary plaque rup-
ture: a 3-dimensional intravascular ultrasound study with in-vivo color mapping of
shear stress distribution. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:645–650.
95. Bourantas CV, Papafaklis MI, Naka KK, Tsakanikas VD, Lysitsas DN, Alamgir FM,
Fotiadis DI, Michalis LK. Fusion of optical coherence tomography and coronary
angiography – in vivo assessment of shear stress in plaque rupture. Int J Cardiol
2012;155:e24–e26.
96. Papafaklis MI, Bourantas CV, Yonetsu T, Vergallo R, Kotsia A, Nakatani S,
Lakkas LS, Athanasiou LS, Naka KK, Fotiadis DI, Feldman CL, Stone PH,
Serruys PW, Jang I, Michalis LK. Anatomically correct three-dimensional coronary
artery reconstruction using frequency domain optical coherence tomographic
and angiographic data: head-to-head comparison with intravascular ultrasound
for endothelial shear stress assessment in humans. EuroIntervention, 2015;11:
407–415.
97. Tu S, Holm NR, Christiansen EH, Reiber JH. First presentation of 3-dimensional
reconstruction and centerline-guided assessment of coronary bifurcation by fu-
sion of X-ray angiography and optical coherence tomography. JACC Cardiovasc In-
terv 2012;5:884–885.
98. Toutouzas K, Chatzizisis YS, Riga M, Giannopoulos A, Antoniadis AP, Tu S,
Fujino Y, Mitsouras D, Doulaverakis C, Tsampoulatidis I, Koutkias VG, Bouki K,
Li Y, Chouvarda I, Cheimariotis G, Maglaveras N, Kompatsiaris I, Nakamura S,
Reiber JH, Rybicki F, Karvounis H, Stefanadis C, Tousoulis D, Giannoglou GD. Ac-
curate and reproducible reconstruction of coronary arteries and endothelial
shear stress calculation using 3D OCT: comparative study to 3D IVUS and 3D
QCA. Atherosclerosis 2015;240:510–519.
99. Li Y, Gutierrez-Chico JL, Holm NR, Yang W, Hebsgaard L, Christiansen EH,
Maeng M, Lassen JF, Yan F, Reiber JH, Tu S. Impact of side branch modeling on
computation of endothelial shear stress in coronary artery disease: coronary
tree reconstruction by fusion of 3D angiography and OCT. J Am College Cardiol
2015;66:125–135.
100. Wentzel JJ, van der Giessen AG, Garg S, Schultz C, Mastik F, Gijsen FJ,
Serruys PW, van der Steen AF, Regar E. In vivo 3D distribution of lipid-core
plaque in human coronary artery as assessed by fusion of near infrared
spectroscopy-intravascular ultrasound and multislice computed tomography
scan. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2010;3:e6–e7.
101. Barlis P, Poon EKW, Thondapu V, Grundeken MJ, Tu S, Hayat U, Ooi AS, Moore S,
Tenekecioglu E, Wykrzykowska JJ, Serruys PW. Reversal of flow between serial
bifurcation lesions: insights from computational fluid dynamic analysis in a
population-based phantom model. EuroIntervention 2015;11:e1–3.
102. Ohayon J, Gharib AM, Garcia A, Heroux J, Yazdani SK, Malve M, Tracqui P,
Martinez MA, Doblare M, Finet G, Pettigrew RI. Is arterial wall-strain stiffening
an additional process responsible for atherosclerosis in coronary bifurcations?:
an in vivo study based on dynamic CT and MRI. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2011;301:H1097–H1106.
V. Thondapu et al.
92b
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
 103. Yang C, Bach RG, Zheng J, Ei Naqa I, Woodard PK, Teng Z, Billiar K, Tang D. In
vivo IVUS-based 3-D fluid–structure interaction models with cyclic bending and
anisotropic vessel properties for human atherosclerotic coronary plaque mech-
anical analysis. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2009;56:2420–2428.
104. Timmins LH, Molony DS, Eshtehardi P, McDaniel MC, Oshinski JN, Samady H,
Giddens DP. Focal association between wall shear stress and clinical coronary ar-
tery disease progression. Ann Biomed Eng 2015;43:94–106.
105. Rikhtegar F, Knight JA, Olgac U, Saur SC, Poulikakos D, Marshall W Jr., Cattin PC,
Alkadhi H, Kurtcuoglu V. Choosing the optimal wall shear parameter for the pre-
diction of plaque location-A patient-specific computational study in human left
coronary arteries. Atherosclerosis 2012;221:432–437.
106. Torii R, Wood NB, Hadjiloizou N, Dowsey AW, Wright AR, Hughes AD,
Davies J, Francis DP, Mayet J, Yang G, Thom SAM, Xu XY. Stress phase angle
depicts differences in coronary artery hemodynamics due to changes in flow
and geometry after percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol 2009;296:H765-H776.
107. Olgac U, Poulikakos D, Saur SC, Alkadhi H, Kurtcuoglu V. Patient-specific three-
dimensional simulation of LDL accumulation in a human left coronary artery in its
healthy and atherosclerotic states. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2009;296:
H1969–H1982.
108. Soulis JV, Fytanidis DK, Papaioannou VC, Giannoglou GD. Oscillating shear index,
wall shear stress and low density lipoprotein accumulation in human RCAs, In: 3rd
Micro and Nano Flows Conference. Thessaloniki, Greece, 2011.
109. Bodna
´r T, Sequeira A, Prosi M. On the shear-thinning and viscoelastic effects of
blood flow under various flow rates. Appl Math Comput 2011;217:5055–5067.
110. Chen J, Lu XY. Numerical investigation of the non-Newtonian pulsatile blood flow
in a bifurcation model with a non-planar branch. J Biomech 2006;39:818–832.
111. Gijsen FJH, van de Vosse FN, Janssen JD. The influence of the non-Newtonian
properties of blood on the flow in large arteries: steady flow in a carotid bifurca-
tion model. J Biomech 1999;32:601–608.
112. Nandakumar N, Sahu KC, Anand M. Pulsatile flow of a shear-thinning model for
blood through a two-dimensional stenosed channel. Eur J Mech B/Fluids 2015;49:
29–35.
113. Casa LD, Deaton DH, Ku DN. Role of high shear rate in thrombosis. J Vasc Surg
2015;61:1068–1080.
114. Loree HM, Grodzinsky AJ, Park SY, Gibson LJ, Lee RT. Static circumferential tan-
gential modulus of human atherosclerotic tissue. J Biomechanics 1994;27:195–204.
115. Ebenstein DM, Coughlin D, Chapman J, Li C, Pruitt LA. Nanomechanical proper-
ties of calcification, fibrous tissue, and hematoma from atherosclerotic plaques.
J Biomed Mater Res A 2009;91:1028–1037.
116. Gijsen F, van der Giessen A, van der Steen A, Wentzel J. Shear stress and advanced
atherosclerosis in human coronary arteries. Journal of Biomechanics 2013;46:
240–247.
117. Fujii K, Kobayashi Y, Mintz GS, Takebayashi H, Dangas G, Moussa I, Mehran R,
Lansky AJ, Kreps E, Collins M, Colombo A, Stone GW, Leon MB, Moses JW.
Intravascular ultrasound assessment of ulcerated ruptured plaques: a compari-
son of culprit and nonculprit lesions of patients with acute coronary syndromes
and lesions in patients without acute coronary syndromes. Circulation 2003;108:
2473–2478.
118. Burke AP, Kolodgie FD, Farb A, Weber DK, Malcom GT, Smialek JE, Virmani R.
Healed plaque ruptures and sudden coronary death evidence that subclinical rup-
ture has a role in plaque progression. Circulation 2001;103:934–940.
119. Burke AP, Farb A, Malcom GT, Liang Y, Smialek JE, Virmani R. Plaque rupture and
sudden death related to exertion in men with coronary artery disease. JAMA 1999;
281:921–926.
120. Rambhia SH, Liang X, Xenos M, Alemu Y, Maldonado N, Kelly A, Chakraborti S,
Weinbaum S, Cardoso L, Einav S, Bluestein D. Microcalcifications increase coron-
ary vulnerable plaque rupture potential: a patient-based micro-CT fluid-structure
interaction study. Ann Biomed Eng 2012;40:1443–1454.
121. Maldonado N, Kelly-Arnold A, Cardoso L, Weinbaum S. The explosive growth of
small voids in vulnerable cap rupture; cavitation and interfacial debonding.
J Biomech 2013;46:396–401.
122. Liu L, Gardecki JA, Nadkarni SK, Toussaint JD, Yagi Y, Bouma BE, Tearney GJ. Im-
aging the subcellular structure of human coronary atherosclerosis using micro-
optical coherence tomography. Nat Med 2011;17:1010–1014.
123. Dweck MR, Chow MW, Joshi NV, Williams MC, Jones C, Fletcher AM,
Richardson H, White A, McKillop G, van Beek EJ, Boon NA, Rudd JH,
Newby DE. Coronary arterial 18F-sodium fluoride uptake: a novel marker of pla-
que biology. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59:1539–1548.
124. Irkle A, Vesey AT, Lewis DY, Skepper JN, Bird JL, Dweck MR, Joshi FR,
Gallagher FA, Warburton EA, Bennett MR, Brindle KM, Newby DE, Rudd JH,
Davenport AP. Identifying active vascular microcalcification by (18)F-sodium
fluoride positron emission tomography. Nat Commun 2015;6:7495.
125. Joshi NV, Vesey AT, Williams MC, Shah ASV, Calvert PA, Craighead FHM,
Yeoh SE, Wallace W, Salter D, Fletcher AM, van Beek EJR, Flapan AD,
Uren NG, Behan MWH, Cruden NLM, Mills NL, Fox KAA, Rudd JHF,
Dweck MR, Newby DE. 18F-Fluoride positron emission tomography for identifi-
cation of ruptured and high-risk coronary atherosclerotic plaques: a prospective
clinical trial. The Lancet 2014;383:705–713.
126. Duewell P, Kono H, Rayner KJ, Sirois CM, Vladimer G, Bauernfeind FG, Abela GS,
Franchi L, Nunez G, Schnurr M, Espevik T, Lien E, Fitzgerald KA, Rock KL,
Moore KJ, Wright SD, Hornung V, Latz E. NLRP3 inflammasomes are required
for atherogenesis and activated by cholesterol crystals. Nature 2010;464:
1357–1361.
127. Abela GS, Aziz K. Cholesterol crystals rupture biological membranes and human
plaques during acute cardiovascular events—a novel insight into plaque rupture
by scanning electron microscopy. Scanning 2006;28:1–10.
128. Abela GS, Aziz K, Vedre A, Pathak DR, Talbott JD, Dejong J. Effect of cholesterol
crystals on plaques and intima in arteries of patients with acute coronary and cere-
brovascular syndromes. Am J Cardiol 2009;103:959–968.
129. Virmani R, Burke AP, Farb A, Kolodgie FD. Pathology of the vulnerable plaque.
J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47(8 Suppl.):C13–C18.
130. Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, Farb A, Schwartz SM. Lessons from sudden
coronary death: a comprehensive morphological classification scheme for athero-
sclerotic lesions. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2000;20:1262–1275.
131. Tian J, Dauerman H, Toma C, Samady H, Itoh T, Kuramitsu S, Domei T, Jia H,
Vergallo R, Soeda T, Hu S, Minami Y, Lee H, Yu B, Jang IK. Prevalence and char-
acteristics of TCFA and degree of coronary artery stenosis: an OCT, IVUS, and
angiographic study. J Am College Cardiol 2014;64:672–680.
132. Nakamura S, Inami S, Murai K, Takano M, Takano H, Asai K, Yasutake M,
Shimizu W, Mizuno K. Relationship between cholesterol crystals and culprit le-
sion characteristics in patients with stable coronary artery disease: an optical co-
herence tomography study. Clin Res Cardiol 2014;103:1015–1021.
133. Kataoka Y., Puri R, Hammadah M, Duggal B, Uno K, Kapadia SR, Tuzcu EM,
Nissen SE, Nicholls SJ. Cholesterol crystals associate with coronary plaque vul-
nerability in vivo. JACC 2015;65:630–632.
134. Kolodgie FD, Gold HK, Burke AP, Fowler DR, Kruth HS, Weber D, Farb A,
Guerrero LJ, Hayase M, Kutys R, Narula J, Finn AV, Virmani R. Intraplaque hem-
orrhage and progression of coronary atheroma. NEJM 2003;349:2316–2325.
135. Gertz SD, Roberts WC. Hemodynamic shear force in rupture of coronary arterial
atherosclerotic plaques. Am J Cardiol 1990;66:1368–1372.
136. Meairs S, Hennerici M. Four-dimensional ultrasonographic characterization of pla-
que surface motion in patients with symptomatic and asymptomatic carotid artery
stenosis. Stroke 1999;30:1807–1813.
137. Ledru F, Theroux P, Lesperance J, Laurier J, Ducimetiere P, Guermonprez J,
Diebold B, Blanchard D. Geometric features of coronary artery lesions favoring
acute occlusion and myocardial infarction: a quantitative angiographic study. J Am
Coll Cardiol 1999;33:1353–1361.
Biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis
92c
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/38/2/81/2965185 by guest on 03 June 2019
