 Perspective
See corresponding editorial on page XXX.
Whole dairy matrix or single nutrients in assessment of health
effects: current evidence and knowledge gaps1,2
Tanja Kongerslev Thorning,3 Hanne Christine Bertram,5 Jean-Philippe Bonjour,6 Lisette de Groot,7
Didier Dupont,8 Emma Feeney,9 Richard Ipsen,4 Jean Michel Lecerf,10 Alan Mackie,11 Michelle C McKinley,12
Marie-Caroline Michalski,13,14 Didier R´
emond,15 Ulf Ris´
erus,16 Sabita S Soedamah-Muthu,17 Tine Tholstrup,3
Connie Weaver,18 Arne Astrup,3* and Ian Givens19
Departments of 3Nutrition, Exercise and Sports and 4Food Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 5Department of Food Science, Aarhus
University, Aarslev, Denmark; 6Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland; 7Human Nutrition,
Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands; 8Science and Technology of Milk and Eggs, French National Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA),
Rennes, France; 9Food for Health Ireland, Science Center South, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 10Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France; 11School
of Food Science and Nutrition, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom; 12School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Science, Queen’s University
Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom; 13Universit´
e de Lyon, Cardiovasculaire M´
etabolisme Diab´
etologie et Nutrition (CarMeN) Laboratory, INRA Unit´
e Mixte de
Recherche (UMR) 1397, Universit´
e Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Institut National de la Sant´
e et de la Recherche M´
edicale (INSERM), U1060, Institut National des
Sciences Appliqu´
ees de Lyon (INSA-Lyon), Institut Multidisciplinaire de Biochimie des Lipides (IMBI), Villeurbanne, France; 14Centre de Recherche en
Nutrition Humaine Rho
ˆne-Alpes (CRNH-RA), Centre Europ´
een pour la Nutrition et la Sant´
e (CENS), Oullins, France; 15INRA, Universit´
e d’Auvergne, UMR
1019, Unit´
e de Nutrition Humaine (UNH), Clermont-Ferrand, France; 16Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden; 17Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, Netherlands; 18Nutrition Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana; and 19Institute for Food, Nutrition and Health, University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom
ABSTRACT
Foods consist of a large number of different nutrients that are contained
in a complex structure. The nature of the food structure and the nutrients
therein (i.e., the food matrix) will determine the nutrient digestion and
absorption, thereby altering the overall nutritional properties of the food.
Thus, the food matrix may exhibit a different relation with health indi-
cators compared to single nutrients studied in isolation. The evidence
for a dairy matrix effect was presented and discussed by an expert panel
at a closed workshop, and the following consensus was reached: 1)
Current evidence does not support a positive association between intake
of dairy products and risk of cardiovascular disease (i.e., stroke and
coronary heart disease) and type 2 diabetes. In contrast, fermented dairy
products, such as cheese and yogurt, generally show inverse associa-
tions. 2) Intervention studies have indicated that the metabolic effects of
whole dairy may be different than those of single dairy constituents
when considering the effects on body weight, cardiometabolic disease
risk, and bone health. 3) Different dairy products seem to be distinctly
linked to health effects and disease risk markers. 4) Different dairy
structures and common processing methods may enhance interactions
between nutrients in the dairy matrix, which may modify the metabolic
effects of dairy consumption. 5) In conclusion, the nutritional values of
dairy products should not be considered equivalent to their nutrient
contents but, rather, be considered on the basis of the biofunctionality
of the nutrients within dairy food structures. 6) Further research on the
health effects of whole dairy foods is warranted alongside the more
traditional approach of studying the health effects of single nutrients.
Future diet assessments and recommendations should carefully consider
the evidence of the effects of whole foods alongside the evidence of
the effects of individual nutrients. Current knowledge gaps and recom-
mendations for priorities in future research on dairy were identified
and presented.
Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:1033–45.
Keywords:
bioavailability, blood lipids, calcium, dairy nutrients,
dairy protein, dairy structure, fermented dairy, MFGM, phosphorous,
whole dairy
INTRODUCTION
The nutritional evaluation of the relation between diet and
health has traditionally focused on individual food constituents
such as proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and micronutrients sepa-
rately. This reductionist approach (1), which links one nutrient to
one health effect, may partly explain some of the discrepancies
between a food’s predicted health effect on the basis of its nu-
trient content and its actual health effect when consumed as a
whole food. A diet does not consist of single nutrients but of
1 This article was based on the presentations and discussions from an
expert workshop in Gentofte, Denmark, 28–29 September 2016.
2 Supported by the Groupement Europ´
een d’Int´
ere
ˆt E
´conomique (GEIE)
European Milk Forum, France (unrestricted grant to the University of Copenhagen
to arrange an expert workshop).
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ast@nexs.ku.dk.
Received December 20, 2016. Accepted for publication March 6, 2017.
First published online April 12, 2017; doi: 10.3945/ajcn.116.151548.
Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:1033–45. Printed in USA. � 2017 American Society for Nutrition
1033
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 whole foods, either alone or alongside many other foods as part
of a meal. Foods have complex structures both physically and
nutritionally, which affect digestion and absorption and may
generate interactions within the food matrix, thereby altering the
bioactive properties of nutrients in ways that are not predictable
from the nutrition-label information.
Studies have shown that the food matrix can modify the
nutritional properties of a food (2, 3). Plant-based foods contain
cellular structures that need to be broken down before the en-
capsulated nutrients and bioactive compounds can be released
and absorbed. This breakdown may be achieved by processing
(e.g., industrial processing and cooking) and by oral mastication, but
despite this, the bioavailability of nutrients may be limited in some
foods (3, 4). An example is almonds, for which the food matrix
attenuates postprandial lipemia after consumption (3). A slower re-
lease rate of nutrients from naturally encapsulated systems was shown
to increase satiety after consumption (5). This paradigm may also
apply to other foods such as dairy products (6, 7). Dairy products are
major sources of high-quality protein and calcium, and their nutri-
tional value has been well recognized (8). However, dairy products are
also a major contributor to the saturated fat in the diet and have thus
been targeted as one of the main dietary causes of cardiovascular
disease (CVD)20 because saturated fat increases LDL cholesterol (9).
The majority of current dietary guidelines have included dairy
products as part of a healthy diet but have recommended the con-
sumption of low-fat or fat-free versions to reduce intake of saturated
fat (the US population goal is to reduce saturated fat intake to ,10%
of total energy intake) (10). However, it has been questioned whether
the current dietary recommendations on dairy consumption have
taken full account of the effects of whole foods or if they have relied
on extrapolations of health effects of single nutrients that are con-
tained in dairy. A difficulty in many epidemiologic studies that have
examined dairy intake in relation to health has been the broad cat-
egorization of dairy foods. Some studies have referred to dairy as
one homogenous food group, whereas other studies have attempted
to divide dairy foods into low-fat dairy and high-fat dairy. However,
these terms lack a universal standard definition and can lead to dairy
products being differentially categorized by different researchers. In
addition, these terms do not take into account the different dairy food
matrices (i.e., the sum of dairy nutrients within the specific dairy
food structure). Because of differences in dairy matrices between
various types of dairy products, these foods may have distinct effects
on health. Hence, a focus on the dairy matrix rather than on dairy
nutrients would allow for the investigation of the health effects of
dairy products on the basis of how they are actually consumed by the
population.
AIM AND METHODS
The current paper was based on presentations, discussions, and
conclusions from a workshop on the dairy matrix. The closed
consensus workshop of invited scientists was arranged by the
co-chairs AA and IG and was held at Bernstorff Slot, Gentofte,
Denmark, 28–29 September 2016. The workshop program and
speakers were selected by the co-chairs. A total of 19 experts
were initially identified to represent different scientific areas
within the dairy matrix. The 19 scientists were invited to the
workshop, but 5 scientists declined to participate, and 2 of the 5
scientists suggested replacements for their participation. Hence,
18 scientists consented to participate in the workshop, and 10 of
these individuals were invited to present research on the dairy
matrix within their scientific areas of expertise. Each presentation
was allocated a discussant scientist who was asked to chal-
lenge the content of the presentation to achieve a balanced
view of the evidence. The overall aim of the workshop was to
exploit the synergy between various scientific areas to reach a
more-comprehensive understanding of the dairy matrix as well
as to identify gaps in the existing knowledge and currently
missing evidence. Before the workshop, speakers were asked to
write an abstract on the basis of 3–5 key publications within
their area of research that have contributed knowledge about
the dairy matrix. A total of 42 background publications were
chosen from the literature, and the data and viewpoints from
these publications, including additional literature, were pre-
sented at the workshop. Each presentation was challenged by
an extensive discussion that was held in plenum. The workshop
was rounded off with group sessions that aimed to identify gaps in
the existing knowledge (Table 1), and subsequently, the discus-
sion from these sessions were presented and discussed in a plenary
session. The outcome of the workshop is presented in this scoping
review, which should act as a primer for future research. All
workshop participants were from higher-education institutions or
research institutes; hence, no industrial representatives or sponsors
participated in the workshop or contributed to the scientific paper.
EVIDENCE OF A DAIRY MATRIX EFFECT: SUMMARY
OF CONSENSUS AND CONCLUSIONS FROM THE
WORKSHOP
The major dairy components that have been shown to affect
human health are fat, protein (whey and casein), minerals (calcium,
magnesium, and phosphate), sodium, and the components of the
milk fat globule membrane (MFGM) (i.e., the biological mem-
brane that surrounds the lipid droplets in milk). Dairy products are
heterogeneous in terms of the contents of these components as well
as their physical structures (Table 2). Although cheese has a high
fat content, its composition is more similar to that of yogurt and
milk than to that of butter because of protein, mineral, and MFGM
contents. High-fat dairy products, with the exception of butter, are
specifically rich in the MFGM (11). Yogurt and cheese are both
fermented dairy products that contain bacteria with a potential
ability to produce bioactive peptides and short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs). However, compared with yogurt and milk, cheese has
higher contents of calcium, protein (mostly casein with only small
amounts of whey protein), fat, and sodium. Moreover, the structure
of cheese is more solid, whereas yogurt has a gel structure, and
milk has a liquid structure. For cheese, there are numerous methods
of production and ripening, and these methods influence the
structure and the extent of protein and fat degradation. In general,
for fermented dairy products, the bacterial culture used as well as
the types and amounts of ingredients such as stabilizers, texturizers,
and flavors are also highly variable. Because of differences in the
compositions and structures of different dairy foods, it is plausible
that intakes of these foods have different effects on health and even
more so when compared with intake of a single nutrient (i.e., a
20 Abbreviations used: BMD, bone mineral density; CHD, coronary heart
disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; MFGM, milk fat globule membrane;
SCFA, short-chain fatty acid; T2D, type 2 diabetes.
1034
THORNING ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 dietary supplement). This concept was explored at the workshop,
and the evidence is summarized in the scoping review that follows,
which was structured according to the categories of experimental
designs and the area of health or disease.
Evidence from meta-analyses on observational studies on
dairy products and disease risk
The majority of observational studies on dairy products and
disease risk have either focused on dairy components such as
calcium, fat, and protein or on dairy products either as a ho-
mogenous food group or according to high or low fat contents.
However, disregarding the differences in the composition and
food matrix between various types of dairy products may have
blurred the analyses and may have led to a misinterpretation of
the true associations. The number of observational studies that
have focused on dairy products as whole foods is currently
increasing, and some of these studies have, in recent years,
been pooled in a number of meta-analyses with different
endpoints. The results of the meta-analyses on dairy product
TABLE 1
Identified gaps in the existing knowledge and future research questions1
Epidemiology
How should high-fat and low-fat dairy foods be defined? Does it make sense to pool low-fat and high-fat dairy products when considering the differences in
active components and structures between various types of dairy products?
Epidemiologic studies should recognize that milk, yogurt, cheese, butter, and cream are each unique (in other ways apart from their fat contents) and, hence,
should be studied accordingly.
Heterogeneity in observational studies needs to be thoroughly addressed in the analysis of future studies (e.g., via stratification). Intake amounts, types, and
fortification practices vary between nations, sexes, and age groups, and genetic variation may also exist.
Analysis that is based on observational data from which certain foods are substituted with others is a new but promising approach. More studies that use
such an analysis are warranted to determine the optimal diet composition for disease prevention. However, analyses of the substitution of dairy fat with
other fats should be supplemented by analyses in which different types of dairy foods are replaced by other relevant foods (e.g., the replacement of cheese
for plant oil is not a realistic dietary choice from a food perspective).
To what extent is intake of dairy products a marker of overall healthier or unhealthier diets and lifestyles?
What are the facilitators and barriers to dairy product consumption in different age groups?
Bone health
Protein requirements in children are extrapolated from nitrogen-balance studies in adults. Should bone-outcome measures be used to set protein
requirements in children?
Is the amino acid composition of protein important to bone health? Is there an optimal amino acid composition for bone remodeling?
Does fermentation of dairy products have an impact on bone, and if so, what are the mechanisms?
Protein functionality
More data are needed on protein-ileal digestibility of dairy products as well as of other protein sources.
Is there an optimal protein source for the elderly, and does it differ from that of a younger population?
How can the anabolic protein threshold consistently be achieved in the elderly? Is a certain intake of protein in each meal required for optimal muscle-
protein synthesis? Should protein recommendations for the elderly be increased because of a higher anabolic threshold?
Proteins are essential for growth, but some amino acids can also act as signals and stimulate the production of other compounds such as IGF-1. It is still
unknown whether the endocrine functions of proteins are affected by the dairy matrix.
It is uncertain whether identified bioactive peptides from dairy can be absorbed intact into the blood and whether these peptides have a sufficiently long half-
life to exert metabolic effects.
Quantitative data on bioactive peptide release during digestion are lacking.
Do dairy protein or dairy processing types cause different effects on the gut-microbiota composition and activity?
Fat functionality
Does it matter whether the membrane of the MFGM is disrupted, or is the presence of phospholipids the determinant for the metabolic effect of the MFGM?
Could a potential difference be explained by the intrinsic proteins and enzymes of the MFGM?
Could the MFGM be involved in the metabolic programming of infants?
What is the metabolic importance of the milk-fat globule structure (homogenized compared with nonhomogenized milk-fat)?
RCTs in humans confirming the suggested specific effect of fermented dairy on insulin sensitivity remain to be conducted.
What is the impact on health of a liquid and solid state of dairy fat (e.g., melted cheese compared with solid cheese)?
What is the precise role of calcium in reduced fat digestion? Fecal calcium–fatty acid soaps need to be chemically confirmed.
What is the role of dairy as bile acid sequestrants? Is phosphate responsible for the increased bile acid excretion, and is there a dose response effect?
Studies with free-living designs have often shown lower effect sizes than have studies with highly controlled designs. It has to be clarified whether the
effects of the various mechanisms have a magnitude to impose an effect in the whole diet setting.
What is the role of fat in different dairy matrices on the regulation of nonlipid cardiometabolic risk markers (e.g., inflammation and oxidative stress)?
Can metabolomic and lipidomic approaches be used to explain the unknown metabolic pathways of action of various dairy matrices?
Digestion kinetics
The structure that a food adopts in the stomach is essential to understand its digestion behavior. Research has not been sufficiently conducted on the gastric
residence time and postprandial responses to different dairy matrices.
The postprandial kinetics after cheese intake may likely depend on the coagulation method used during cheese processing. It should be investigated whether
cheese that is produced solely via acidification (e.g., cream cheese) or rennet (most cheeses) affects the digestion kinetics and appetite differently. Also, it
should be investigated whether the postprandial kinetics differ after intake of soft and hard cheese or after intake of cheeses that are produced with
different ripening methods.
More research is needed on the effects of dairy processing (e.g., UHT and cooking) on digestion kinetics.
1 MFGM, milk fat globule membrane; RCT, randomized controlled trial; UHT, ultrahigh temperature.
IMPORTANCE OF THE DAIRY MATRIX
1035
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 intake and risks of CVD, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes
(T2D) were as follows.
Intake of dairy products and risk of CVD
In a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies by Qin et al.
(16), total dairy consumption was inversely associated with
overall risks of CVD (RR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.81, 0.96) and stroke
(RR: 0.87; 95% CI: 0.77, 0.99). For the specific dairy products,
only cheese intake was inversely associated with risk of stroke
(RR: 0.91; 95% CI: 0.84, 0.98) and risk of coronary heart disease
(CHD) (RR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.71, 1.00). However, the meta-analysis
was limited by broad categories of dairy and outcome variables,
and in addition, no dose-response analyses were conducted.
Nevertheless, the findings were supported by a recent meta-
analysis in which total dairy intake was associated with lower
risk of stroke (RR: 0.91; 95% CI: 0.83, 0.99), and cheese intake
was associated with lower risks of CHD (RR: 0.82; 95% CI: 0.72,
0.93) and stroke (RR: 0.87; 95% CI: 0.77, 0.99) (17). Nevertheless,
the dose-response analyses did not support an inverse dose-
response relation between the dairy variables and CHD or
stroke after adjustment for within-study covariance. In the most-
recent meta-analysis of dairy intake and stroke, which included 18
cohort studies with 8–26 y of follow-up and a total of 762,414
individuals and 29,943 stroke events, total dairy intake was not
associated with stroke risk (18). For specific dairy products, a
daily 200-g increment in milk intake was associated with a 7%
lower risk of stroke (RR: 0.93; 95% CI: 0.88, 0.98; P = 0.004)
with considerable heterogeneity (I2 = 86). RRs were 0.82
(95% CI: 0.75, 0.90) in East Asian countries and 0.98 (95% CI:
0.95, 1.01) in Western countries (median intakes: 38 and 266 g/d,
respectively) with less, but still considerable, heterogeneity within
the continents. On the basis of a limited number of studies, high-
fat milk, but not low-fat milk, was directly associated with stroke
risk. In contrast, cheese intake was marginally inversely associ-
ated with stroke risk (per 40 g/d: RR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.94, 1.01),
which was consistent with previous findings. No association was
shown for yogurt, but total intake of fermented dairy products
(combining $2 of the following products: cheese, yogurt, and
sour milk) tended to be associated with a 9% (RR: 0.91; 95% CI:
0.82, 1.01) lower risk of stroke per 200 g/d with no indications
of a nonlinear association. A beneficial effect of cheese intake
was further supported by another meta-analysis of prospective
cohort studies in which cheese intake was inversely associated
with total CVD (RR: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.82, 0.99), CHD (RR: 0.86;
95% CI: 0.77, 0.96), and stroke (RR: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.84, 0.97)
(19). The inverse association between cheese intake and stroke
was of particular interest because of the high sodium content of
cheese. Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis suggested that butter
consumption was not significantly associated with CVD, CHD, or
stroke despite the high content of SFAs (20).
Intake of dairy products and risk of hypertension
The most-recent meta-analysis to assess the relation between
dairy intake and hypertension included 9 prospective cohort studies
with a total of 57,256 individuals and 15,367 incident hypertension
cases (21). Linear inverse associations were shown between intake
of total dairy, low-fat dairy, and milk and incident hypertension.
Intake of low-fat dairy was associated with 4% lower risk of
hypertension (RR: 0.96; 95% CI: 0.93, 0.99) per 200 g/d, whereas
high-fat dairy intake was not associated with hypertension (per
200 g/d: RR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.95, 1.03). A significant inverse linear
association was shown between milk intake and incident hyper-
tension with a pooled RR for total milk intake per 200 mL of 0.96
(95% CI: 0.93, 0.99). No associations were shown between total
intake of fermented dairy, cheese, or yogurt and risk of hyper-
tension. Thus, specifically low-fat dairy products and milk, in
particular, seem to be linked to lower risk of hypertension.
Intake of dairy products and risk of T2D
The most recent meta-analysis on dairy intake and T2D in-
cluded 22 cohort studies with a total of 579,832 individuals and
43,118 T2D cases (22). Total dairy intake was inversely associated
with T2D risk (per 200-g/d increment: RR: 0.97; 95% CI: 0.95,
1.00; P = 0.04) with a suggestive but similarly linear inverse
association for intake of low-fat dairy (per 200 g/d: RR: 0.96;
TABLE 2
Bioactive components and supramolecular structures in different dairy products1
Calcium,
mg/100 g
Phosphorus,
mg/100 g
MFGM,2
mg/100 g
Protein,3
g/100 g, type
Fermented
Fat structure4
Protein network
Cheese5 (25% fat)
659
510
150
23.2, Casein
Yes
MFG/aggregates/free fat
Solid/viscoelastic
Milk (skimmed,
0.5% fat)
124
97
15
3.5, Whey/casein
No
Tiny native MFG/potential MFGM
fragments
Liquid
Milk (whole,
3.5% fat)
116
93
35
3.4, Whey/casein
No
Native MFG or homogenized milk
fat droplets/potential MFGM fragments
Liquid
Yogurt (1.5% fat)
136
99
15
4.1, Whey/casein
Yes
Native MFG or homogenized milk fat
droplets/potential MFGM fragments
Gel/viscoelastic
Cream (38% fat)
67
57
200
2, —
No
Native MFG or homogenized milk fat
droplets/potential MFGM fragments
Liquid
Butter
15
24
—
,1, —
No/yes6
Continuous fat phase (water-in-oil
emulsion)/MFGM-residue traces
—
1 All values are approximate amounts. MFG, milk-fat globule; MFGM, milk-fat globule membrane.
2 General estimation on the basis of Dewettinck et al. (11) and Conway et al. (12).
3 According to food-composition tables from The Technical University of Denmark (13).
4 General estimation on the basis of Michalski (14) and Michalski et al. (15) and references therein.
5 Semihard Danbo type, as a point example among many different cheese types.
6 Depends on the production method used. With indirect biological acidification, starter culture is added to the butter after churning.
1036
THORNING ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 95% CI: 0.92, 1.00; P = 0.072). The inverse association was
strongest for populations .60 y old (per 200 g/d: RR: 0.84;
95% CI: 0.77, 0.93). When analyzed according to the type of
dairy products, a nonlinear, strong inverse association was shown
between yogurt intake and T2D (at 80 compared with 0 g/d:
RR: 0.86; 95% CI, 0.83, 0.90; P , 0.001). At higher yogurt
intakes, a leveling off in the risk association was evident. In ad-
dition, low-fat fermented dairy was not associated with T2D risk,
but when high-fat fermented dairy was included, a significant
12% lower risk was shown with intake of 40 g/d, above which
there was no further reduction in the RR of T2D. Intakes of
cheese, cream, total milk, low-fat milk, high-fat milk, and total
high-fat dairy were not shown to be associated with T2D risk.
Furthermore, butter has been suggested to be inversely associated
with the incidence of T2D (RR: 0.96; 95% CI: 0.93, 0.99;
P = 0.021) (20). In summary, the dairy products yogurt and butter
as well as the group of high-fat fermented dairy products seem to
be inversely associated with T2D.
Considerations for future observational studies on dairy and
cardiometabolic risk
Because observational studies have only recently started to
examine associations for different types of dairy products, the
analyses of individual dairy products in the presented meta-
analyses were based on a low number of studies. Specifically,
data on yogurt and cheese intake from observational studies have
been limited, which was likely due to a previous focus on milk
intake. However, the latter still warrants further investigation
considering recent findings from 2 Swedish cohorts that reported
that high total milk intake was associated with higher mortality
(23). On the basis of the current literature, it can be recommended
that future epidemiologic studies should provide more extensive
details about the types of dairy products, including fat contents,
as well as details within the specific dairy group (e.g., cheese and
yogurt types). In addition, because amounts and types of dairy
products that are consumed vary across countries and continents,
there was heterogeneity in several of the presented meta-analyses.
Future studies should address differences in intakes across con-
tinents (e.g., with the use of stratification in the statistical analyses).
The advantages of observational studies are that they generally
represent large populations, examine long-term associations
with disease events, and assess real-life exposure before the
occurrence of the outcome. However, a disadvantage is that
confounding cannot be eliminated in observational studies, and
therefore, evidence for causality is generally weak. The asso-
ciations between dairy intake and disease risk could potentially
be influenced by residual confounding. For instance, the overall
diet quality may differ between dairy and nondairy consumers,
and different types of dairy may cluster within different dietary
patterns. Only a few epidemiologic studies have investigated
how dairy intake affects diet quality. One study showed that
intake of low-fat dairy products clusters within a healthy type
dietary pattern, whereas the opposite effect seems to apply for
intake of high-fat dairy products (24). Furthermore, another
study showed that yogurt consumption was associated with an
improved diet quality including a higher consumption of fruit
and vegetables, whole grains, and dairy products (25). Never-
theless, the effects of different types of dairy products on diet
quality may very likely be population specific.
Observational studies have supported distinct relations be-
tween intakes of specific types of dairy foods and risks of CVD,
hypertension, and T2D but have not provided evidence of cau-
sality; hence, randomized controlled trials have to be considered.
In the following sections, studies are presented that compared
whole dairy products with dairy constituents or with other dairy
products with or without matching dairy constituents.
Intervention studies that compared dairy products to dairy
constituents (supplements)
One way of investigating whether there is a specific effect of
the dairy matrix on health is to examine intervention studies that
have compared a whole dairy food with an isolated nutrient of
interest from that food, to explore if there is a difference in the
outcome with the whole food than with the isolated nutrient. The
results from intervention studies that fit this criterion were as
follows.
Effect of whole dairy foods compared with effect of dairy
constituents on body weight and body composition
Two studies investigated if a whole dairy food had a different
effect on body weight and body composition relative to calcium or
milk protein. The first study in overweight and obese premenopausal
women compared the effects of cow milk (3 servings/d), soy
milk fortified with calcium (3 servings/d), a calcium-carbonate
supplement (800 mg/d), and a control diet (no addition) on body
weight and waist and hip circumferences (26). All groups
consumed an energy-deficit diet (500 kcal/d) for a period of
8 wk. The greatest reductions in body weight, BMI, and body fat
were in the cow-milk group. Weight loss in the cow-milk group
was significantly greater than that in the control or soy-milk
group (weight loss: 5.8%, 4.3%, and 3.8%, respectively) but
not relative to the effect of the calcium supplement (4.8%
weight loss). These results suggest that there is a dairy matrix
effect for the calcium and protein that are contained in milk.
Another study compared 12 wk of intake of skimmed milk,
casein, or whey protein with water intake (0.5 L/d) on body
composition and leptin concentrations in overweight adoles-
cents (27). Compared with water, skimmed milk and milk
proteins increased lean mass, fat mass, and leptin concentra-
tions, thereby indicating a dairy protein effect rather than a dairy
matrix effect.
Effect of whole dairy foods compared with effect of dairy
constituents on markers of CVD risk
The effect of whole dairy compared with that of dairy con-
stituents on cardiovascular outcomes has also been investigated
in a number of studies. Previously, it was suggested that calcium
supplements were associated with increased risks of CVD events
and mortality (28), and hence, it was assumed that calcium-rich
foods, such as dairy, would exhibit the same association. However,
an acute increase in calcium intake from dairy products (milk and
low-fat yogurt) was shown to attenuate postprandial lipemia,
whereas supplementary calcium-carbonate intake did not exert a
similar effect (29). Another acute study investigated the effect
of a calcium supplement (500 mg) compared with that of a meal
with a calcium supplement, a dairy product meal, or a calcium-
fortified juice on serum calcium and phosphate over a period of
6 h after consumption in a randomized crossover manner (30).
IMPORTANCE OF THE DAIRY MATRIX
1037
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 The elevation in serum ionized and total calcium concentrations
was delayed when the supplement was consumed with a meal
but was most delayed after the dairy product meal, thereby
indicating a dairy matrix effect. The authors speculated that the
rapid increase in serum calcium with the calcium supplement
may partly explain the contrasting cardiovascular effects of
calcium supplements and calcium in dairy foods. The different
responses to calcium that has been consumed as a supplement or
as a dairy product may be due to differences in the chemical
forms of calcium [inorganic calcium carbonate or citrate in
supplements compared with organic calcium phosphate (hy-
droxyapatite) in dairy products] or to interactions between
calcium and other components in the dairy matrix.
The effect of whole dairy foods on blood pressure may also
differ from that of a calcium supplement. One study of an older
date investigated the effect of 6-wk intake of milk (1180 mg Ca,
1650 mg K, and 110 mg Mg) compared with that of a mineral-
reduced milk (95 mg Ca, 580 mg K, and 10 mg Mg) in an
otherwise low-calcium diet (,500 mg/d) on blood pressure (31).
The mean systolic blood pressure change with intake of milk
(24.1%) was significantly greater than that with intake of the
mineral-reduced milk (21.3%). This result indicated a small
hypotensive effect of milk intake, which was at least partly
explained by the mineral content of milk. More recently, a ran-
domized, double-blind, crossover study investigated the blood
pressure–lowering effect of Grana Padano cheese (30 g/d) com-
pared with that of a placebo (which consisted of flavored bread
mixed with fats and salts in concentrations that were equal to those
of the Grana Padano cheese) in a 2-mo crossover study in mildly
hypertensive subjects (32). Intake of Grana Padano cheese resulted
in a significant decrease in systolic blood pressure and diastolic
blood pressure compared with the effect of placebo intake.
Therefore, SFAs and salt may have a lower impact on blood
pressure when these are present in the cheese matrix, or other
components in the cheese matrix (e.g. bioactive peptides) may
counteract the effects of SFAs and salt.
Effect of whole dairy foods compared with effect of dairy
constituents on bone health
The importance of the dairy matrix on bone health has been
studied in 2 trials that compared whole dairy products with dairy
nutrients. Fermented dairy products may have a distinct positive
effect on the mineral and bone balance because, in addition to the
supply of calcium, phosphorus, and protein, fermented dairy
products also contain probiotic bacteria. These bacteria may alter
the gut microbiota and enhance the capacity to translocate cal-
cium across the intestinal epithelium (33). A 2-y randomized
controlled trial examined the effects of calcium supplements,
calcium plus vitamin D supplements, or a dairy product (cheese)
on bone mass accrual and body composition in 10- to 12-y-old girls
with low habitual calcium intake (34). The cheese supplemen-
tation resulted in a higher percentage change in the cortical
thickness of the tibia than did the placebo, calcium supple-
mentation, or calcium plus vitamin D supplementation. A per-
protocol analysis showed that cheese supplementation resulted
in a higher whole-body bone mineral density (BMD) in subjects
with .50% compliance. Thus, cheese had a superior effect on
bone mass accrual compared with that of calcium or calcium
plus vitamin D supplementation. Another randomized controlled
trial investigated the effect of dairy products or a calcium sup-
plement, both of which provided 1200 mg Ca/d, on markers of
bone metabolism and BMD relative to the effects in a control
group (35). After 12 mo, compared with the calcium-supplement
group and the control group, the dairy group had greater im-
provements in pelvic and spinal densities and total BMD. Both
trials supported a dairy matrix effect on bone health.
Partial conclusion on dairy products compared with dairy
constituents (supplements)
To date, studies that have examined the effect of whole dairy
foods compared with that of single dairy constituents with focus
on body weight, CVD risk, or bone health have provided indi-
cations that whole dairy products have a more-beneficial effect on
health than do single dairy constituents. This indication supports
the concept that dairy products should not be considered equal
to a few nutrients but as a function of the total nutrient content
within the specific dairy structure. This proposition is worthy of
investigation in future trials.
Intervention studies comparing effects of different dairy
products on blood lipids while controlling for dietary
factors
Different types of dairy products may affect risk markers of
disease differently, and this difference could potentially be
explained by the additive effects of the active components that are
contained in dairy products. A comparison of intake of one type
of dairy product with intake of specific dairy components to
resemble the composition of another dairy product was inves-
tigated in 2 studies.
Tholstrup et al. (36) compared cheese, milk, and butter in
whole diets, all of which were balanced for the amount of fat
(from cheese, milk, and butter) and for the contents of protein
(80% casein and 20% whey protein) and lactose but not of
calcium. No significant differences in blood lipids were shown
between cheese and milk. However, despite the addition of
lactose and milk protein to the butter diet, butter caused sig-
nificantly higher LDL-cholesterol concentrations and borderline-
higher total cholesterol concentrations than cheese did, whereas
the effect of milk was intermediate and was not significantly
different from that of cheese and butter. Likewise, another study
compared cheese intake with intakes of butter and casein and
showed a lower total cholesterol concentration and a borderline-
lower LDL-cholesterol concentration after the cheese diet than
after the butter and casein diet (37). These studies suggested that
protein and lactose were not the determinants of the difference
between cheese and butter on blood lipids.
Intervention studies comparing effects of different dairy
products on blood lipids without controlling for dietary
factors
Different types of dairy products as whole foods have also been
compared in a number of intervention studies that have illustrated
the effects of these foods in the actual forms that they are
consumed by the population.
Several studies with free-living or highly controlled full-diet
designs have shown that intake of cheese resulted in lower
LDL cholesterol than did intake of butter (2, 38, 39). These
1038
THORNING ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 findings were substantiated in a recent meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials (40) (Figure 1). The trials suggested
that fat that is consumed in isolation (butter) has a different
effect than fat that is delivered in the cheese matrix and, thus,
provided support of a dairy matrix effect. One of the intervention
studies also proposed that cheese did not increase LDL-cholesterol
concentrations as compared with a habitual diet with a lower
saturated fat content (2). One of the intervention studies, in ad-
dition to butter and cheese, also included a milk comparison (38).
In the study, cheese and milk were consumed in amounts that
provided similar amounts of fat, protein, and calcium. Compared
with the butter-control diet, in which protein and fat, but not
calcium, were balanced with the amounts in the cheese and milk
diets, both cheese and milk attenuated the increase in LDL
cholesterol compared with the effect of butter. This result pro-
vided support of an effect of dairy calcium on the LDL-cholesterol
response, whereas fermentation did not seem to be involved be-
cause cheese is fermented but milk is not. It may be important
that the fat and calcium are embedded in the same food matrix
and that a similar effect cannot be achieved by simply adding
calcium to a diet with butter. A study in pigs showed that
regular-fat cheese has an HDL-cholesterol–increasing effect
compared with that of butter, whereas this effect was not
shown with a reduced-fat cheese plus butter that matched the
milk-fat content of the regular-fat cheese (41). A tendency
toward increased HDL cholesterol from intake of regular-fat
cheese but not reduced-fat cheese compared with a carbohy-
drate control, was also shown in a larger study in humans (42).
However, there was no difference in the LDL-cholesterol
concentration after intakes of the regular-fat cheese and
reduced-fat cheese despite higher saturated fat intake with the
consumption of the regular-fat cheese, which suggested that
there is an effect of the cheese matrix on the saturated fat in the
regular-fat cheese.
The effect of cheese and full-fat yogurt supplementation on
blood lipids was also compared in a large, parallel, multi-
center study (43). Despite slightly higher energy and cal-
cium intakes from yogurt consumption than from cheese
consumption, the 2 dairy products did not affect the blood
lipid profile differently.
Furthermore, one study compared the effect of 2 wk of intake
of buttermilk (rich in MFGM) or of larger intake of skimmed milk
(providing a similar amount of fat as in the buttermilk) with that
of intake of butter (low in MFGM) on the blood lipid response
(44). Although only a few details were given, the authors reported
that a smaller intake of buttermilk was equally efficient as was
a larger intake of skimmed milk in lowering total cholesterol,
whereas butter intake increased total cholesterol. A more recent
study investigated 12 wk of intake of traditionally produced
buttermilk (rich in MFGM) compared with that of skimmed
milk (low in MFGM) in diets that were supplemented with or
without lutein-enriched egg yolk. Egg-yolk consumption sig-
nificantly increased total-cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol
concentrations. Buttermilk consumption did not prevent the
total- and LDL-cholesterol–raising effects of egg-yolk con-
sumption compared with the effects of skimmed-milk con-
sumption although there was a tendency toward lower total
cholesterol (45). In the 2 studies presented, calcium, which is
present in both buttermilk and skimmed milk, may have at-
tenuated the blood lipid response after consumption, whereas
this effect would not have applied to butter consumption.
Hence, the dairy matrix may determine the impact size of the
MFGM content. Nevertheless, the studies suggested a potential
role of the MFGM in the regulation of the blood cholesterol
balance.
How dairy matrix components interfere with the assumed
effect of saturated fat on lipid metabolism
Calcium, phosphorus, MFGM, and starter cultures (in the
fermented dairy types) are all dairy constituents that have been
suggested to contribute to the modification of the blood lipid
response to SFA intake. The blood lipid response is presumably
attenuated by decreasing intestinal fat absorption and bile-acid
recycling, the modulation of the gut microbiota, or the alteration
of gene expression.
FIGURE 1
Forest plot from a meta-analysis of intervention studies comparing the effects of cheese consumption with those of butter consumption on plasma
LDL-cholesterol concentrations. Data shown include author names, year of publication, RRs (95% CIs), and weights to the overall meta-analysis. Study-specific RRs
(95% CIs) are represented as shaded squares. Areas of the squares illustrate the weighting within the overall meta-analysis. The diamond represents the pooled RR
(95% CI). I2 indicates the percentage of heterogeneity that was due to between-study variation. Reprinted from reference 40 with permission.
IMPORTANCE OF THE DAIRY MATRIX
1039
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Lowering of fat digestibility by dairy constituents
A reduced intestinal absorption of fat from dairy products that
are rich in calcium, phosphorus, and the MFGM (such as cheese)
has been shown by the increased fat excretion in feces (38, 46–48)
and a reduced plasma chylomicron triglyceride concentration in
the postprandial state (29). However, differences within the dairy
matrix may influence the level of fat and energy absorbed by the
gut. A study showed higher fecal energy excretion in pigs that
were fed a diet with regular-fat cheese than a diet with butter,
whereas a diet with reduced-fat cheese and butter caused a non-
significant intermediate response (41). Furthermore, a study in
humans that examined equally high intakes of reduced-fat cheese
and regular-fat cheese showed no difference in body weights
between groups after 3 mo of intake despite higher energy intake
with the consumption of regular-fat cheese (42). The results of
these studies suggest that there is an enhanced fecal fat excretion
with intake of regular-fat cheese, thereby providing support of a
dairy matrix effect.
Lowering of fat digestibility by calcium and phosphate. Two
mechanisms for calcium have been suggested that underlie a
reduced intestinal fat absorption after dairy intake. The first
mechanism is the precipitation of calcium and free fatty acids as
largely insoluble calcium–fatty acid soaps. The second mech-
anism is the precipitation of calcium and phosphate in insol-
uble amorphous calcium phosphate, which adsorbs bile acids
and possibly also fatty acids to the surface and, hence, in-
creases fecal bile acid and fat excretion (49–52). In vitro and
in vivo, saponification was suggested to have increased with an
increasing fatty acid saturation and chain length (49, 53).
However, a study showed significantly higher fecal excretions
of all fatty acid groups (SFAs, MUFAs, and PUFAs) in humans
who consumed a high-calcium diet (with low-fat dairy) than a
low-calcium diet (54). Also, when fecal excretions of fatty
acids were expressed as percentages of intake, the difference
between diets was greater for MUFAs than for SFAs. The fecal
excretion of fatty acids probably depends on the location of the
fatty acids on the glycerol backbone because fatty acids in the
sn-1 and sn-3 positions are released by lipase (55) and are,
therefore, more susceptible to binding by calcium than are fatty
acids in the sn-2 position. The increase in fecal fat excretion by
dairy calcium has been shown in several (38, 47, 54, 56–58)
but not all (2, 59) studies. A study by Weaver et al. (59) showed
that the change in fecal calcium excretion (by dairy products
or a supplement) predicted the change in fecal fat excretion as
the fraction of intake. However, this mechanism was not found
to affect the energy balance. Energy balance was previously
proposed to be influenced by the excretion of calcium–fatty
acid soaps mostly in infants (15).
The methods that were used for the extraction of fat have
varied between studies and may have resulted in a more or less
absolute fat extraction from the feces samples. Also, it is im-
portant that fecal fat excretion is expressed as an absolute
amount (grams per day) instead of as a concentration in feces
because the volume of feces varies within and between subjects.
In addition, studies that have chemically characterized the
chemical form of fecal calcium have been few and of older
dates. Hence, there is a need for new in vivo studies with a
chemical characterization of calcium–fatty acid soaps and
amorphous calcium-phosphate compounds that preferably focus
on the ratios at which fat, calcium, and phosphate appear in
whole dairy foods.
Lowering of cholesterol absorption by the MFGM. A study in
mice proposed a mechanism whereby the MFGM reduces in-
testinal cholesterol absorption after dairy intake on the basis of
the inhibition of cholesterol micellar solubility (60). It was shown
in vitro that, in the presence of buttermilk, the micellar solubility
of cholesterol was reduced probably because of the presence of
sphingomyelin in buttermilk MFGM fragments (61). Because
sphingomyelin is not completely hydrolyzed in the human
small intestine, such sphingomyelin-cholesterol complexes
suggest a potential ability of the MFGM to limit cholesterol
absorption (62); however, such an effect was not confirmed in a
study in humans that measured surrogate markers of intestinal fat
absorption (63).
Link between fat digestibility and blood lipid response
There has been evidence of a connection between increased
fecal fat excretion and an attenuated blood lipid response after
intake of dairy products that are rich in calcium, phosphate, and
the MFGM. An intervention study in humans showed a strong
correlation between fecal fat excretion and changes in total
cholesterol and LDL cholesterol after intakes of diets with cheese
or milk or butter (Figure 2) (38). Also, a crossover study in hu-
mans that examined 4 full diets with combinations of low calcium
or high calcium and low fat or high fat showed that the response in
LDL cholesterol and HDL cholesterol depended on the saturated
fat content of the diet, and only the LDL-cholesterol response was
attenuated by simultaneous high dietary calcium intake (64). Be-
cause the Phosphorus contents of the diets in the study were also
high in the high-calcium diets and low in the low-calcium diets,
Phosphorus may have contributed to the attenuation of LDL
cholesterol. Calcium phosphate was previously shown to increase
fecal bile-acid excretion and reduce LDL cholesterol (65). These
effects were presumably due to decreased enterohepatic bile-acid
circulation and the consequently increased hepatic de novo bile
acids synthesis from its precursor cholesterol, which may have led
to an upregulation of hepatic LDL-receptor expression and an
increased clearance of LDL cholesterol from the circulation.
Hence, amorphous calcium phosphate may influence blood lipids
through fecal bile-acid excretion.
FIGURE 2
Correlations (95% CIs) between changes in LDL choles-
terol and fecal fat excretion during the butter-control (black), milk (open),
and cheese (gray) periods (R2 = 0.163, P = 0.002) (n = 15). LDL-c, LDL
cholesterol. Reprinted from reference 38 with permission.
1040
THORNING ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Regulation of blood lipid response by MFGM and milk
phospholipids
It is still unclear whether the MFGM (intact around the native
milk-fat globules or as free released fragments) affects the fecal
fat excretion in humans. Some studies have suggested that the
MFGM could in fact reduce or prevent the increase in fasting total
cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides, usually suspected
to be caused by SFA intake (63, 66, 67). In one study, a
buttermilk-powder formulation (rich in MFGM fragments) sig-
nificantly reduced fasting total cholesterol and triglycerides
compared with the effect of a placebo powder formulation,
whereas the reduction in LDL cholesterol was only borderline
significant and strongest in subjects with high baseline LDL-
cholesterol concentrations (63). The changes in concentrations
of LDL cholesterol and triglycerides were not correlated, which
suggested that there are different metabolic pathways of regu-
lation. In addition, the buttermilk formula was shown to increase
the plasma lathosterol concentration, which is a surrogate marker
of endogenous cholesterol synthesis. In another randomized
isoenergetic study, 8 wk of intake of whipping cream (rich in the
intact MFGM) did not raise plasma cholesterol in overweight
adults compared with the effect of intake of butter oil (emulsified
fat depleted of MFGM), which markedly raised the LDL cho-
lesterol (66). Moreover, whipping cream intake differentially
regulated 19 genes, and most of the changes in gene expression
were correlated with changes in blood lipids. The effects of intake
of formulated drinks enriched with milk phospholipids as MFGM
concentrates from buttermilk compared with other phospholipid
sources on blood lipids have also been investigated in 2 studies. A
parallel study tested a drink that was formulated from a buttermilk
concentrate, thereby enriched in sphingolipids (25% of MFGM
polar lipids in cow milk) compared with a drink that was for-
mulated with skimmed milk and enriched with egg-phospholipid
and butter oil (67). No significant difference in blood lipids was
shown between groups. Another study included 2 trials that in-
vestigated intake of milk-phospholipids (2 g) compared with intake
of milk fat and soya phospholipids on lipid metabolism and other
risk factors for CVD (68). In the first trial, subjects consumed milk
that was enriched with either 2 g milk phospholipids from a
buttermilk concentrate or 2 g milk fat for 8 wk. In the second trial,
subjects consumed milk that was enriched with either 3 g milk
phospholipids from the same buttermilk concentrate or 2.8 g soya
phospholipids for 7 wk. The milk phospholipids did not affect
plasma lipids, the insulin sensitivity, or inflammatory markers in the
2 trials. In summary, on the basis of these few studies, the effects of
formulated drinks that are enriched with the MFGM via a but-
termilk concentrate appeared to be less pronounced than the effects
of the intact MFGM that are provided by buttermilk, cream, or
cheese, which supports a stronger effect of whole dairy (i.e., the
dairy matrix compared with its isolated or reformulated constitu-
ents). The mechanisms that are induced by the MFGM are unclear
and deserve further investigation but might be associated with a
decrease in intestinal cholesterol absorption or the regulation of the
expression of genes.
Regulation of blood lipid response by dairy matrix
fermentation
Intake of fermented dairy products has been shown to have a
beneficial effect on blood lipid concentrations. This effect may be
due to fermented dairy products favoring a gut microbiota with a
specific production of SCFA (69). SCFAs are rapidly absorbed by
the colon and metabolized in the liver, and an altered production
ratio of SCFAs may influence the blood lipid balance because the
serum acetate:propionate ratio has been associated with serum
total- and LDL-cholesterol concentrations (70–72). A meta-
bolomics investigation of a study that compared milk, cheese, and
butter intakes showed that both cheese and milk intake increased
concentrations of fecal SCFAs (73). Specifically, cheese intake
increased fecal butyrate, propionate, and malonate concentra-
tions and decreased fecal acetate and glycerol concentrations.
Furthermore, there were significant correlations between fecal
propionate and butyrate concentrations and LDL-cholesterol
concentrations. This outcome indicated that dairy consumption,
and especially cheese intake, increases fecal SCFA concentrations
or alters the production ratio of these SCFAs, and this effect is
likely a result of the modification of the gut microbiota. Low- and
high-fat fermented dairy may not have similar impacts on the gut
microbiota. A previous study in pigs pointed toward distinct
effects of reduced-fat cheese and regular-fat cheese on gut
microbiota in diets with equal milk fat (41). Regular-fat cheese
caused a lower Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio, and com-
pared with a butter control, the changes in the relative abun-
dance of more bacterial genera were shown after intake of
regular-fat cheese (e.g., a higher abundance of Lactobacillus
and Oscillibacter).
Studies comparing similar dairy products with different
structures or textures on digestion and absorption kinetics,
appetite sensations, and muscle-protein synthesis
In addition to the nutrient matrix, the physical structures and
textures of dairy products could influence the health effects of
different types of dairy foods. Only a few studies have compared
different structures or textures of dairy products in relation to
absorption kinetics and appetite. One study investigated the ef-
fects of a semisolid yogurt (378 g), drinkable yogurt (378 g),
dairy beverage (400 mL), and fruit drink (400 mL), which were
matched for palatability and energy contents, on subjective ap-
petite sensations (74). Compared with the dairy beverage and
fruit drink, the semisolid and liquid yogurts resulted in reduced
hunger and increased feelings of fullness. However, subsequent
food intake did not differ after intakes of the beverages. Another
study, which compared 2 isoenergetic meals with a liquid structure
or a semisolid structure, showed a longer gastric emptying time
and a prolonged satiety response after the semi-solid meal (grated
cheese and low-fat yogurt) (6). These studies suggested that there
is a prolonged satiety response after intake of a semisolid dairy
matrix and yogurt than a liquid dairy matrix.
Acid and rennet gels of dairy products with identical nutrient
compositions have been shown to exhibit major differences in the
protein-digestion kinetics and amino-acid bioavailability in pigs
(75). A rennet gel that was produced with heat-treated milk
showed a prolonged residence time in the stomach compared with
that of an acid gel or a stirred acid gel. Also, the rennet gel
caused a slower release of milk proteins in the duodenum. A
delayed gastric emptying was also seen after intake of yogurt
than after intake of milk (76), and yogurt was shown to lower
and prolong the jejunal release of protein (77). Furthermore,
different dairy matrix structures were shown to affect the
IMPORTANCE OF THE DAIRY MATRIX
1041
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 number of identified peptides released with rennet gels inducing
2 and 3 times fewer peptides than induced by milk and acid gels,
respectively (78). This result is consistent with the delayed
protein-digestion kinetics and amino-acid absorption that has
been observed with rennet gels.
The dairy proteins casein and whey are present in different
ratios and amounts in dairy foods (Table 2), and these proteins
were shown to cause a distinct postprandial release of peptides.
Medium-size peptides (750–1050 kDa) were released during 6 h
after casein ingestion, whereas larger peptides (1050–1800 kDa)
were released during the first 3 h after whey-protein ingestion
(79). In the jejunum, twice as many peptides were detected and
sequenced after casein ingestion than after whey-protein inges-
tion, and accordingly, b casein was shown to be the most
important precursor of peptides. An acute study in humans in
which the protein ratio in the yogurt matrix was manipulated
toward a higher whey protein content decreased subsequent ad
libitum energy intake compared with the effect of yogurt with
lower whey and a higher casein content (80). Also, a study in a
murine model revealed a lower body-weight gain for mice that
were fed whey protein compared with casein (81). Metab-
olomics studies in both animals and humans have suggested
that this outcome is a result of whey protein affecting endog-
enous metabolism through the Krebs cycle (81, 82). Therefore,
the balance between casein and whey proteins in dairy prod-
ucts may be important for their overall effects on body weight
through mechanisms that involved appetite regulation and
endogenous energy metabolism. A high protein-digestion rate
is necessary in the elderly to induce protein metabolism
and prevent age-related sarcopenia because of an age-related
higher threshold for the inducement of an anabolic stimulus by
plasma amino acids (83). The anabolic threshold is lower in
younger adults, and therefore, protein kinetics may be less im-
portant in this population group with the exception of elite athletes
who have higher substrate requirements. Even small differences in
the protein-digestion rate may be sufficient to affect postpran-
dial protein metabolism (84). For dairy products, pasteurization
(728C for 20 s) does not seem to affect the protein-digestion rate,
whereas an ultrahigh-temperature treatment (1408C for 5 s) in-
creased the digestion rate (85). The latter effect can probably be
explained by heat-induced interactions with whey protein (mainly
b lactoglobulin) with the subsequent partial dissociation of the
casein micelles.
Homogenization strongly modifies the structure of milk-fat
globules, and therefore, the metabolic impact of the consump-
tion of homogenized dairy products has been questioned (86). To
our knowledge, the effect of homogenization on lipid-absorption
kinetics has not yet been investigated in humans but was in-
vestigated in vitro with the use of nutrient-matched formulae, one
of which was based on raw milk and one of which was based on
homogenized milk (87). An increased postprandial release of free
fatty acids during in vitro gastric digestion was observed with the
homogenized formula. This was explained as being due to the
homogenized formula having a smaller lipid-particle size with an
increased relative surface area, which made the lipids more
accessible for lipases. Finally, differences in the fat-droplet in-
terface composition was also suggested to affect the digestion
kinetics of differently processed milks (88).
In summary, the microstructures and macrostructures of
the dairy matrix may influence the metabolic response after
consumption. Therefore, different dairy matrix structures should
be taken into consideration, in addition to the content of
bioactive components, when evaluating the nutritional prop-
erties of whole dairy foods. Because different dairy structures
may provide a better fit for the dietary needs of individual
population groups, this assessment should be further inves-
tigated and included when re-evaluating current dietary
guidelines. For instance, elite athletes and the elderly may be
given the advantage of a high and efficient nutrient-release rate,
whereas obese or diabetic persons may benefit from a lower
nutrient-release rate.
How the matrix of fermented dairy may affect insulin
sensitivity
It has been suggested that different protein sources (i.e., dairy,
meat, fish, egg, and plants) are differently associated with risk of
T2D (89). Of dairy products, yogurt and cheese, in particular, are
associated with lower risk of T2D (18, 90). This association
suggests that, in addition to the protein and mineral contents,
other bioactive factors in fermented dairy products may influence
T2D risk. Ripened dairy products contain branched-chain amino
acids and milk-derived peptides. Aside from the antihypertensive
effect of milk-derived peptides, these may also be involved in the
regulation of insulinemia and the stimulation of the satiety re-
sponse (91). Bioactive peptides or amino acids that are produced
during cheese ripening were recently shown to improve insulin
sensitivity and reduce circulating free fatty acids in pigs (56). In
humans, postprandial increments in branched chain amino acids
from whey (i.e. leucine, valine, and isoleucine) were shown to be
correlated with the postprandial insulin response, and insulin
responses were shown to be correlated with glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide concentrations (92). Furthermore, a
crossover study showed that 6 mo of intake of 4 daily servings of
low-fat milk and yogurt, compared with a 6-mo low-dairy control
period, reduced fasting plasma insulin by 9% and reduced insulin
resistance by 11% in overweight and obese adults (93).
Finally, the stimulation of a beneficial gut microbiota, after
intake of probiotics, has been suggested to modulate gut function
through the regulation of the immune system (94). This stimu-
lation has also been discussed to facilitate weight loss or weight
maintenance associated with insulin sensitivity. Because of a low
number of studies in humans in this field, more research on
fermented dairy products and glucose homeostasis is needed.
In conclusion, evidence to date indicates that the dairy matrix has
specific beneficial effects on health because the metabolic effects of
whole dairy on body weight, cardiometabolic disease risk, and bone
health differ from those of single dairy constituents. Also, different
dairy product types seem to be distinctly linked to various health
effects and disease risk markers. In addition, different processing
methods and dairy structures can enhance interactions in the dairy
matrix, thereby modifying the metabolic effects of dairy con-
sumption. Therefore, the nutritional value of dairy products should
be considered as the biofunctionality of the sum of nutrients within
dairy matrix structures. Hence, there is a need for further research
on the health effects of whole dairy foods alongside the more-
traditional approach of studying the health effects of single nu-
trients. Such research would help to support dietary guidelines that
consider the effect of whole foods on health rather than only fo-
cusing on a few individual nutrients within a food.
1042
THORNING ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 The authors’ responsibilities were as follows—AA and IG: designed the
research; TKT: wrote the manuscript; IG: had primary responsibility for the
final content of the manuscript; and all authors: supplied valuable knowledge
and scientific consultation throughout the manuscript preparation and read
and approved the final content of the manuscript. The study sponsor had no
influence on the meeting program or the selection of speakers, was not
present at the meeting, and was not involved in the production of the manuscript.
HCB has received research funding from Arla Foods and the Danish Dairy
Research Foundation. J-PB is a clinical research consultant for Yoplait France-
General Mills USA and is a member of The Scientific Committee of Candia,
France. DD has received funding from Lactalis. EF has received honoraria and
speaking honorariums from the National Dairy Council in Ireland, and her
research position at University College Dublin is funded by Food For Health
Ireland, which receives a portion of its funding from partners within the Irish
dairy industry. RI has received funding as a principal investigator or partici-
pant from the Danish Research Foundation for a number of projects over the
past 25 y, and he has also collaborated extensively with the Danish dairy and
ingredient industry on projects that were funded partially by public funds and
partially from the industry. JML is President of the scientific advisory boards
of the F´
ed´
eration Industries Charcuteries Traiteur and the Groupe de R´
eflexion
Ob´
esit´
e Surpoids and is a member of the scientific advisory boards of the
Groupe d’Expert en Micro Nutrition Oculaire, the Agence pour la Recherche
et l’Information en Fruits et L´
egumes, and the European Natural Soy and
Plant Based Foods Manufacturers Association. JML is a member of the
Observatoire French Dairy Interbranch Sector (CNIEL) des habitudes
alimentaires, acts as an expert for Lactalis, Yoplait, and Danone, and has
received funding for conferences for the European Milk Forum. AM has re-
ceived funding from Arla Foods, United Kingdom, Unilever PLC, Dairy
Australia, Teagasc – The Agriculture and Food Development Authority,
Ireland, and the United Kingdom Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council and is on the editorial board of Food Research Interna-
tional. MCM has received speaking honoraria from the Dairy Council for
Northern Ireland and the European Milk Forum. M-CM has received research
funding from the National Institute for Agricultural Research, the National
Research Agency (coordinator of project VALOBAB ANR-11-ALID-007-01
to study the valorisation of milk polar lipids from buttermilk), the French-
speaking Society for Diabetes, the Institut Carnot Lipids for Industry, Safety
and Health, the French Society for Nutrition, and the Institut Benjamin
Delessert (public, academic, or not-for-profit organizations) as well as the
CNIEL, Sodiaal-Candia R&D, and Nutricia Research. M-CM acts as a con-
sultant for a number of different food companies and in the dairy sector and is a
member of the scientific committee of the Fats and Oils Institute. UR has
received funding from a governmental grant (Tv¨
arLivs, 2012 to 2014, “role
of MFGM in dairy foods”) from the Swedish Research Council Formas that
was also co-funded by several food companies including Ska
˚nemejerier AB,
Semper AB, Arla Foods Amba, and Dairy Sweden. SSS-M has received un-
restricted grants from several sponsors (i.e., from the Dutch Dairy Association
for a meta-analysis on dairy and stroke and from the Global Dairy Platform,
the Dairy Research Institute, and Dairy Australia for a meta-analysis on dairy
products and all-cause mortality and a meta-analysis on the effects of cheese on
lipids). SSS-M received an international prize (i.e., The Wiebe Visser Interna-
tional Dairy Nutrition Prize from the Dutch Dairy Association’s Utrecht
Group). The sponsors had no role in design and conduct of the study, data
collection and analysis, interpretation of the data, decision to publish, or prep-
aration of any of the manuscripts of SSS-M. TT has received unrestricted
grants from the Danish Dairy Board, Denmark, and the Dairy Research Insti-
tute, Rosemont, Illinois. CW has received funding from Tate & Lyle and the
Alliance of Potato Research and Education, is an advisory board member of
the Pharmavite and International Life Science Institute, receives an honorarium
from Tate & Lyle, and is on the editorial board of Nutrition Research Reviews.
AA has received research funding from Arla Foods, Denmark, the Danish
Dairy Research Foundation, the Global Dairy Platform, and the Danish Agri-
culture & Food Council. AA has served as a member of advisory boards (of
the Dutch Beer Knowledge Institute, Netherlands; IKEA, Sweden; Lucozade
Ribena Suntory Ltd., United Kingdom; McCain Foods Ltd., United States;
McDonald’s, United States; and Weight Watchers, United States), a consultant
(for the Nestl´
e Research Center, Switzerland, and Nongfu Spring Water,
China), an expert witness (for Lantbrukarnas Riksfo
¨rbund Mjo
¨lk, Stockholm
2015), a speaker (at LRF Mjo
¨lk, Gothenberg, 2016; the Global Dairy
Platform, Berlin, 2015; the Dairy Council United Kingdom, Glasgow and
Cardiff, 2015; the European Milk Forum, dairy councils of the Republic of
Ireland and Northern Ireland, Dublin and Belfast, 2014; and the European
Milk Forum, Paris, 2014), and as an editorial board member (associate
editor of The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and board member
of the Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism & Annual Review of Nutrition).
AA has been a recipient of expenses or modest honoraria (,$2000) for
lectures that were given at meetings that were supported by corporate
sponsors. AA has cooperated with the Universities of Copenhagen and
Wageningen on a Global Dairy Platform–funded meta-analysis on dairy
products and cardiometabolic disease, and has received recent or current
dairy and health research funding from the United Kingdom Biotechnology
and Biological Sciences Research Council, United Kingdom Medical Re-
search Council, Dairy Council, Agriculture and Horticulture Development
Board, The Barham Foundation Trust, and various companies. IG has
served in the following capacities: member of the British Nutrition Foun-
dation scientific advisory committee; member of the advisory committee
of the UK Food Standards Agency; member of the scientific advisory panel
of the University College Dublin Institute of Food and Health; consultant
to the scientific panel of the Estonian Biocompetance Centre of Healthy
Dairy Products; member of the panel on dairy, health, and lipids of the
International Chair on Cardiometabolic Risk; member of the International
Expert Movement to Improve Dietary Fat Quality; member of the research
assessment panel of IBERS, University of Aberystwyth; member of the
discussion panel on obesity of the European Healthy Lifestyle Alliance;
member of the International Expert Movement to Improve Dietary Fat
Quality; and consultant to the Dairy Council on Fats in Dairy Products
and Cardiometabolic Disease. The remaining authors reported no con-
flicts of interest related to the study.
REFERENCES
1. Fardet A, Rock E. Toward a new philosophy of preventive nutrition:
from a reductionist to a holistic paradigm to improve nutritional rec-
ommendations. Adv Nutr 2014;5:430–46.
2. Hjerpsted J, Leedo E, Tholstrup T. Cheese intake in large amounts
lowers LDL-cholesterol concentrations compared with butter intake of
equal fat content. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1479–84.
3. Grundy MM, Grassby T, Mandalari G, Waldron KW, Butterworth PJ,
Berry SE, Ellis PR. Effect of mastication on lipid bioaccessibility of
almonds in a randomized human study and its implications for diges-
tion kinetics, metabolizable energy, and postprandial lipemia. Am J
Clin Nutr 2015;101:25–33.
4. Tydeman EA, Parker ML, Faulks RM, Cross KL, Fillery-Travis A,
Gidley MJ, Rich GT, Waldron KW. Effect of carrot (Daucus carota)
microstructure on carotene bioaccessibility in the upper gastrointestinal
tract. 2. In vivo digestions. J Agric Food Chem 2010;58:9855–60.
5. Hull S, Re R, Chambers L, Echaniz A, Wickham MSJ. A mid-
morning snack of almonds generates satiety and appropriate ad-
justment of subsequent food intake in healthy women. Eur J Nutr
2015;54:803–10.
6. Mackie AR, Rafiee H, Malcolm P, Salt L, van Aken G. Specific food
structures supress appetite through reduced gastric emptying rate. Am J
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2013;304:G1038–43.
7. Vors C, Pineau G, Gabert L, Drai J, Louche-P´
elissier C, Defoort C,
Lairon D, D´
esage M, Danthine S, Lambert-Porcheron S, et al. Mod-
ulating absorption and postprandial handling of dietary fatty acids by
structuring fat in the meal: a randomized crossover clinical trial. Am J
Clin Nutr 2013;97:23–36.
8. Drewnowski A, Fulgoni V 3rd. Nutrient profiling of foods: creating a
nutrient-rich food index. Nutr Rev 2008;66:23–39.
9. Feeney EL, Nugent AP, Mc Nulty B, Walton J, Flynn A, Gibney ER.
An overview of the contribution of dairy and cheese intakes to nutrient
intakes in the Irish diet: results from the National Adult Nutrition
Survey. Br J Nutr 2016;115:709–17.
10. Millen BE, Abrams S, Adams-Campbell L, Anderson CA, Brenna JT,
Campbell WW, Clinton S, Hu F, Nelson M, Neuhouser ML, et al. The
2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee scientific report: de-
velopment and major conclusions. Adv Nutr 2016;7:438–44.
IMPORTANCE OF THE DAIRY MATRIX
1043
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 11. Dewettinck K, Rombaut R, Thienpont N, Le TT, Messens K, Van
Camp J. Nutritional and technological aspects of milk fat globule
membrane material. Int Dairy J 2008;18:436–57.
12. Conway V, Gauthier S, Pouilot Y. Buttermilk: much more than a source
of milk phospholipids. Anim Front 2014;4:44–51.
13. Frida food data [Internet]. Version 1. Lyngby, Denmark: The National
Food Institute – Technical University of Denmark; 2015 [cited 2017
Feb 8]. Available from: http://frida.fooddata.dk/.
14. Michalski MC. Specific molecular and colloidal structures of milk fat
affecting lipolysis, absorption and postprandial lipemia. Eur J Lipid Sci
Technol 2009;111:413–31.
15. Michalski MC, Genot C, Gayet C, Lopez C, Fine F, Joffre F,
Vendeuvre JL, Bouvier J, Chardigny JM, Raynal-Ljutovac K, et al.
Multiscale structures of lipids in foods as parameters affecting fatty acid
bioavailability and lipid metabolism. Prog Lipid Res 2013;52:354–73.
16. Qin LQ, Xu JY, Han SF, Zhang ZL, Zhao YY, Szeto IM. Dairy con-
sumption and risk of cardiovascular disease: an updated meta-analysis
of prospective cohort studies. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2015;24:90–100.
17. Alexander DD, Bylsma LC, Vargas AJ, Cohen SS, Doucette A,
Mohamed M, Irvin SR, Miller PE, Watson H, Fryzek JP. Dairy con-
sumption and CVD: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Nutr
2016;115:737–50.
18. de Goede J, Soedamah-Muthu SS, Pan A, Gijsbers L, Geleijnse JM.
Dairy consumption and risk of stroke: a systematic review and updated
dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. J Am Heart
Assoc 2016;5:1–22.
19. Chen GC, Wang Y, Tong X, Szeto IM, Smit G, Li ZN, Qin LQ. Cheese
consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis of
prospective studies. Eur J Nutr 2016 Aug 12 (Epub ahead of print;
DOI: 10.1007/s00394-016-1292-z).
20. Pimpin L, Wu JHY, Haskelberg H, Del Gobbo L, Mozaffarian D. Is
butter back? A systematic review and meta-analysis of butter con-
sumption and risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and total mor-
tality. PLoS One 2016;11:e0158118.
21. Soedamah-Muthu SS, Verberne LD, Ding EL, Engberink MF, Geleijnse JM.
Dairy consumption and incidence of hypertension: a dose-response meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies. Hypertension 2012;60:1131–7.
22. Gijsbers L, Ding EL, Malik VS, de Goede J, Geleijnse JM, Soedamah-
Muthu SS. Consumption of dairy foods and diabetes incidence: a dose-
response meta-analysis of observational studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;
103:1111–24.
23. Michae
¨lsson
K,
Wolk
A,
Langenskio
¨ld
S,
Basu
S,
Warensjo
¨
Lemming E, Melhus H, Byberg L. Milk intake and risk of mortality
and fractures in women and men: cohort studies. BMJ 2014;349:g6015.
24. Mursu J, Steffen LM, Meyer KA, Duprez D, Jacobs DR Jr. Diet quality
indexes and mortality in postmenopausal women: the Iowa Women’s
Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:444–53.
25. Panahi S, Tremblay A. The potential role of yogurt in weight manage-
ment and prevention of type 2 diabetes. J Am Coll Nutr 2016;711–31.
26. Faghih S, Abadi AR, Hedayati M, Kimiagar SM. Comparison of the
effects of cows’ milk, fortified soy milk, and calcium supplement on
weight and fat loss in premenopausal overweight and obese women.
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2011;21:499–503.
27. Larnkjaer A, Arnberg K, Michaelsen KF, Jensen SM, Molgaard C.
Effect of increased intake of skimmed milk, casein, whey or water on
body composition and leptin in overweight adolescents: a randomized
trial. Pediatric obesity 2015;10:461–7.
28. Bolland MJ, Avenell A, Baron JA, Grey A, MacLennan GS, Gamble GD,
Reid IR. Effect of calcium supplements on risk of myocardial infarction
and cardiovascular events: meta-analysis. BMJ 2010;341:c3691.
29. Lorenzen JK, Nielsen S, Holst JJ, Tetens I, Rehfeld JF, Astrup A. Effect
of dairy calcium or supplementary calcium intake on postprandial fat
metabolism, appetite, and subsequent energy intake. Am J Clin Nutr
2007;85:678–87.
30. Bristow SM, Gamble GD, Stewart A, Kalluru R, Horne AM, Reid IR.
Acute effects of calcium citrate with or without a meal, calcium-fortified
juice and a dairy product meal on serum calcium and phosphate:
a randomised cross-over trial. Br J Nutr 2015;113:1585–94.
31. Van Beresteijn EC, van Schaik M, Schaafsma G. Milk: does it affect blood
pressure? A controlled intervention study. J Intern Med 1990;228:477–82.
32. Crippa G, Zabzuni D, Bravi E, Rossi F. Os 04-04 antihypertensive effect of
milk-derivative tripeptides. randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study on the effects of grana padano cheese dop in hypertensive patients. J
Hypertens 2016;34(Suppl 1 - ISH 2016 Abstract Book):e55–6.
33. McCabe L, Britton RA, Parameswaran N. Prebiotic and probiotic
regulation of bone health: role of the intestine and its microbiome. Curr
Osteoporos Rep 2015;13:363–71.
34. Cheng S, Lyytikainen A, Kroger H, Lamberg-Allardt C, Alen M,
Koistinen A, Wang QJ, Suuriniemi M, Suominen H, Mahonen A, et al.
Effects of calcium, dairy product, and vitamin D supplementation on
bone mass accrual and body composition in 10-12-y-old girls: a 2-y
randomized trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:1115–26.
35. Manios Y, Moschonis G, Trovas G, Lyritis GP. Changes in biochemical
indexes of bone metabolism and bone mineral density after a 12-mo
dietary intervention program: the Postmenopausal Health Study. Am J
Clin Nutr 2007;86:781–9.
36. Tholstrup T, Hoy CE, Andersen LN, Christensen RD, Sandstrom B.
Does fat in milk, butter and cheese affect blood lipids and cholesterol
differently? J Am Coll Nutr 2004;23:169–76.
37. Biong AS, Muller H, Seljeflot I, Veierod MB, Pedersen JI. A com-
parison of the effects of cheese and butter on serum lipids, haemostatic
variables and homocysteine. Br J Nutr 2004;92:791–7.
38. Soerensen KV, Thorning TK, Astrup A, Kristensen M, Lorenzen JK.
Effect of dairy calcium from cheese and milk on fecal fat excretion, blood
lipids, and appetite in young men. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;99:984–91.
39. Nestel PJ, Chronopulos A, Cehun M. Dairy fat in cheese raises LDL
cholesterol less than that in butter in mildly hypercholesterolaemic
subjects. Eur J Clin Nutr 2005;59:1059–63.
40. de Goede J, Geleijnse JM, Ding EL, Soedamah-Muthu SS. Effect of
cheese consumption on blood lipids: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutr Rev 2015;73:259–75.
41. Thorning TK, Raben A, Bendsen NT, Jørgensen HH, Kiilerich P, Ardo
¨ Y,
Lorenzen JK, Kristiansen K, Astrup A. Importance of the fat content
within the cheese-matrix for blood lipid profile, faecal fat excretion, and
gut microbiome in growing pigs. Int Dairy J 2016;61:67–75.
42. Raziani F, Tholstrup T, Kristensen MD, Svanegaard ML, Ritz C,
Astrup A, Raben A. High intake of regular-fat cheese compared with
reduced-fat cheese does not affect LDL cholesterol or risk markers of
the metabolic syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr
2016;104:973–81.
43. Schlienger JL, Paillard F, Lecerf JM, Romon M, Bonhomme C,
Schmitt B, Donazzolo Y, Defoort C, Mallmann C, Le Ruyet P, et al.
Effect on blood lipids of two daily servings of Camembert cheese. An
intervention trial in mildly hypercholesterolemic subjects. Int J Food
Sci Nutr 2014;65:1013–8.
44. Howard AN, Marks J. Effect of milk products on serum-cholesterol.
Lancet 1979;2:957.
45. Severins N, Mensink RP, Plat J. Effects of lutein-enriched egg yolk in
buttermilk or skimmed milk on serum lipids & lipoproteins of mildly
hypercholesterolemic subjects. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2015;25:
210–7.
46. Thorning TK, Raziani F, Bendsen NT, Astrup A, Tholstrup T, Raben A.
Diets with high-fat cheese, high-fat meat, or carbohydrate on cardio-
vascular risk markers in overweight postmenopausal women: a random-
ized crossover trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:573–81.
47. Christensen R, Lorenzen JK, Svith CR, Bartels EM, Melanson EL,
Saris WH, Tremblay A, Astrup A. Effect of calcium from dairy and
dietary supplements on faecal fat excretion: a meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2009;10:475–86.
48. Jacobsen R, Lorenzen JK, Toubro S, Krog-Mikkelsen I, Astrup A.
Effect of short-term high dietary calcium intake on 24-h energy ex-
penditure, fat oxidation, and fecal fat excretion. Int J Obes (Lond)
2005;29:292–301.
49. Jenkins TC, Palmquist DL. Effect of added fat and calcium on in vitro
formation of insoluble calcium fatty acid soaps and cell wall digestibility.
J Anim Sci 1982;55:957.
50. Van der Meer R, De Vries HT. Differential binding of glycine- and
taurine-conjugated bile acids to insoluble calcium phosphate. Biochem
J 1985;229:265–8.
51. Van der Meer R, Termont DS, De Vries HT. Differential effects of
calcium ions and calcium phosphate on cytotoxicity of bile acids. Am J
Physiol 1991;260:G142–7.
52. Govers MJ, Termont DS, Van Aken GA, Van der Meer R. Character-
ization of the adsorption of conjugated and unconjugated bile acids to
insoluble, amorphous calcium phosphate. J Lipid Res 1994;35:741–8.
53. Gacs G, Barltrop D. Significance of Ca-soap formation for calcium
absorption in the rat. Gut 1977;18:64–8.
1044
THORNING ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
 54. Bendsen NT, Hother AL, Jensen SK, Lorenzen JK, Astrup A. Effect of
dairy calcium on fecal fat excretion: a randomized crossover trial. Int J
Obes (Lond) 2008;32:1816–24.
55. Mu H, Hoy CE. The digestion of dietary triacylglycerols. Prog Lipid
Res 2004;43:105–33.
56. Thorning TK, Bendsen NT, Jensen SK, Ardo
¨ Y, Tholstrup T, Astrup A,
Raben A. Cheddar cheese ripening affects plasma nonesterified fatty
acid and serum insulin concentrations in growing pigs. J Nutr 2015;
145:1453–8.
57. Lorenzen JK, Jensen SK, Astrup A. Milk minerals modify the effect of
fat intake on serum lipid profile: results from an animal and a human
short-term study. Br J Nutr 2014;111:1412–20.
58. Buchowski MS, Aslam M, Dossett C, Dorminy C, Choi L, Acra S. Effect
of dairy and non-dairy calcium on fecal fat excretion in lactose digester
and maldigester obese adults. Int J Obes (Lond) 2010;34:127–35.
59. Weaver CM, Campbell WW, Teegarden D, Craig BA, Martin BR,
Singh R, Braun MM, Apolzan JW, Hannon TS, Schoeller DA, et al.
Calcium, dairy products, and energy balance in overweight adoles-
cents: a controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1163–70.
60. Chung RW, Kamili A, Tandy S, Weir JM, Gaire R, Wong G, Meikle PJ,
Cohn JS, Rye KA. Dietary Sphingomyelin lowers hepatic lipid levels
and inhibits intestinal cholesterol absorption in high-fat-fed mice.
PLoS One 2013;8:e55949.
61. Conway V, Gauthier S, Pouliot Y. Effect of cream pasteurization,
microfiltration and enzymatic proteolysis on in vitro cholesterol-lowering
activity of buttermilk solids. Dairy Sci Technol 2010;90:449–60.
62. Eckhardt ER, Wang DQ, Donovan JM, Carey MC. Dietary sphingomyelin
suppresses intestinal cholesterol absorption by decreasing thermodynamic
activity of cholesterol monomers. Gastroenterology 2002;122:948–56.
63. Conway V, Couture P, Richard C, Gauthier SF, Pouliot Y, Lamarche B.
Impact of buttermilk consumption on plasma lipids and surrogate
markers of cholesterol homeostasis in men and women. Nutri Metab
Cardiovasc Dis 2013;23:1255–62.
64. Lorenzen JK, Astrup A. Dairy calcium intake modifies responsiveness
of fat metabolism and blood lipids to a high-fat diet. Br J Nutr 2011;
105:1823–31.
65. Ditscheid B, Keller S, Jahreis G. Cholesterol metabolism is affected by
calcium phosphate supplementation in humans. J Nutr 2005;135:1678–82.
66. Rosqvist F, Smedman A, Lindmark-Mansson H, Paulsson M, Petrus P,
Straniero S, Rudling M, Dahlman I, Riserus U. Potential role of milk
fat globule membrane in modulating plasma lipoproteins, gene ex-
pression, and cholesterol metabolism in humans: a randomized study.
Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:20–30.
67. Ohlsson L, Burling H, Nilsson A. Long term effects on human plasma
lipoproteins of a formulation enriched in butter milk polar lipid. Lipids
Health Dis 2009;8:44.
68. Weiland A, Bub A, Barth SW, Schrezenmeir J, Pfeuffer M. Effects of
dietary milk- and soya-phospholipids on lipid-parameters and other risk
indicators for cardiovascular diseases in overweight or obese men - two
double-blind, randomised, controlled, clinical trials. J Nutr Sci 2016;5:e21.
69. St-Onge MP, Farnworth ER, Jones PJ. Consumption of fermented and
nonfermented dairy products: effects on cholesterol concentrations and
metabolism. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:674–81.
70. Wolever TM, Spadafora P, Eshuis H. Interaction between colonic ac-
etate and propionate in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;53:681–7.
71. Wolever TM, Spadafora PJ, Cunnane SC, Pencharz PB. Propionate
inhibits incorporation of colonic [1,2-13C]acetate into plasma lipids in
humans. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;61:1241–7.
72. Wolever TM, Fernandes J, Rao AV. Serum acetate:propionate ratio is re-
lated to serum cholesterol in men but not women. J Nutr 1996;126:2790–7.
73. Zheng H, Yde CC, Clausen MR, Kristensen M, Lorenzen J, Astrup A,
Bertram HC. Metabolomics investigation to shed light on cheese as a possible
piece in the French paradox puzzle. J Agric Food Chem 2015;63:2830–9.
74. Tsuchiya A, Almiron-Roig E, Lluch A, Guyonnet D, Drewnowski A.
Higher satiety ratings following yogurt consumption relative to fruit
drink or dairy fruit drink. J Am Diet Assoc 2006;106:550–7.
75. Barb´
e F, M´
enard O, Le Gouar Y, Buffie
`re C, Famelart M-H, Laroche B,
Le Feunteun S, R´
emond D, Dupont D. Acid and rennet gels exhibit
strong differences in the kinetics of milk protein digestion and amino
acid bioavailability. Food Chem 2014;143:1–8.
76. Gaudichon C, Laurent C, Mah´
e S, Marks L, Tom´
e D, Krempf M. Rate
of [15N]leucine incorporation and determination of nitrogenous frac-
tions from gastro-jejunal secretion in fasting humans. Reprod Nutr Dev
1994;34:349–59.
77. Gaudichon C, Mah´
e S, Roos N, Benamouzig R, Luengo C, Huneau JF,
Sick H, Bouley C, Rautureau J, Tome D. Exogenous and endogenous
nitrogen flow rates and level of protein hydrolysis in the human jejunum
after [15N]milk and [15N]yoghurt ingestion. Br J Nutr 1995;74:251–60.
78. Barb´
e F, Le Feunteun S, R´
emond D, M´
enard O, Jardin J, Henry G,
Laroche B, Dupont D. Tracking the in vivo release of bioactive
peptides in the gut during digestion: mass spectrometry peptidomic
characterization of effluents collected in the gut of dairy matrix fed
mini-pigs. Food Res Int 2014;63:147–56.
79. Boutrou R, Gaudichon C, Dupont D, Jardin J, Airinei G, Marsset-
Baglieri A, Benamouzig R, Tome D, Leonil J. Sequential release of
milk protein-derived bioactive peptides in the jejunum in healthy hu-
mans. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;97:1314–23.
80. Doyon CY, Tremblay A, Rioux LE, Rheaume C, Cianflone K,
Poursharifi P, Turgeon SL. Acute effects of protein composition and
fibre enrichment of yogurt consumed as snacks on appetite sensations
and subsequent ad libitum energy intake in healthy men. Appl Physiol
Nutr Metab 2015;40:980–9.
81. Lillefosse HH, Clausen MR, Yde CC, Ditlev DB, Zhang X, Du Z-Y,
Bertram HC, Madsen L, Kristiansen K, Liaset B. Urinary loss of tri-
carboxylic acid cycle intermediates as revealed by metabolomics
studies: an underlying mechanism to reduce lipid accretion by whey
protein ingestion? J Proteome Res 2014;13:2560–70.
82. Zheng
H,
Yde
CC,
Dalsgaard
TK,
Arnberg
K,
Mølgaard
C,
Michaelsen KF, Larnkjær A, Bertram HC. Nuclear magnetic resonance-
based metabolomics reveals that dairy protein fractions affect urinary
urea excretion differently in overweight adolescents. Eur Food Res
Technol 2015;240:489–97.
83. Dardevet D, R´
emond D, Peyron M-A, Papet I, Savary-Auzeloux I,
Mosoni L. Muscle wasting and resistance of muscle anabolism: the
anabolic threshold concept for adapted nutritional strategies during
sarcopenia. ScientificWorldJournal 2012;2012:269531.
84. R´
emond D, Machebeuf M, Yven C, Buffie
`re C, Mioche L, Mosoni L,
Patureau Mirand P. Postprandial whole-body protein metabolism
after a meat meal is influenced by chewing efficiency in elderly sub-
jects. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:1286–92.
85. Lacroix M, Bon C, Bos C, L´
eonil J, Benamouzig R, Luengo C,
Fauquant J, Tom´
e D, Gaudichon C. Ultra high temperature treatment,
but not pasteurization, affects the postprandial kinetics of milk proteins
in humans. J Nutr 2008;138:2342–7.
86. Michalski M-C, Januel C. Does homogenization affect the human
health properties of cow’s milk? Trends Food Sci Technol 2006;17:
423–37.
87. Bourlieu C, M´
enard O, De La Chevasnerie A, Sams L, Rousseau F,
Madec M-N, Robert B, Deglaire A, Pezennec S, Bouhallab S, et al. The
structure of infant formulas impacts their lipolysis, proteolysis and
disintegration during in vitro gastric digestion. Food Chem 2015;182:
224–35.
88. Bourlieu C, Michalski M-C. Structure-function relationship of
the milk fat globule. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2015;18:
118–27.
89. Comerford KB, Pasin G. Emerging evidence for the importance of
dietary protein source on glucoregulatory markers and type 2 diabetes:
different effects of dairy, meat, fish, egg, and plant protein foods.
Nutrients 2016;8:446.
90. Aune D, Norat T, Romundstad P, Vatten LJ. Dairy products and the risk
of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and dose-response meta-
analysis of cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:1066–83.
91. Ricci-Cabello I, Herrera MO, Artacho R. Possible role of milk-derived
bioactive peptides in the treatment and prevention of metabolic syn-
drome. Nutr Rev 2012;70:241–55.
92. Nilsson M, Stenberg M, Frid AH, Holst JJ, Bjorck IM. Glycemia and
insulinemia in healthy subjects after lactose-equivalent meals of milk
and other food proteins: the role of plasma amino acids and incretins.
Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1246–53.
93. Rideout TC, Marinangeli CP, Martin H, Browne RW, Rempel CB.
Consumption of low-fat dairy foods for 6 months improves insulin
resistance without adversely affecting lipids or bodyweight in
healthy adults: a randomized free-living cross-over study. Nutr J
2013;12:56.
94. Maynard CL, Elson CO, Hatton RD, Weaver CT. Reciprocal in-
teractions of the intestinal microbiota and immune system. Nature
2012;489:231–41.
IMPORTANCE OF THE DAIRY MATRIX
1045
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/105/5/1033/4569873 by guest on 02 June 2019
