 Evaluating Strategies For Reducing Health Disparities By 
Addressing The Social Determinants Of Health
Rachel L. J. Thornton1, Crystal M. Glover2, Crystal W. Cené3, Deborah C. Glik4, Jeffrey A. 
Henderson5, and David R. Williams6,*
1Assistant professor in the Division of General Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Department 
of Pediatrics, at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, in Baltimore, Maryland 2Assistant 
professor and BMO Harris Bank Health Disparities Research Fellow at the Rush University 
Medical School, in Chicago, Illinois 3Associate professor in the Division of General Medicine and 
Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, at the Chapel Hill School of Medicine, University 
of North Carolina 4Professor of community health sciences at the UCLA Fielding School of Public 
Health, University of California, Los Angeles 5President and CEO of the Black Hills Center for 
American Indian Health, in Rapid City, South Dakota 6Florence and Laura Norman Professor of 
Public Health in the Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences at the Harvard T. H. Chan 
School of Public Health, in Boston, Massachusetts, and a professor in the Department of African 
and African American Studies at Harvard University, in Cambridge, Massachusetts
Abstract
Research reveals that the opportunities for healthy choices in homes, neighborhoods, schools, and 
workplaces can have decisive impacts on health. This article reviews scientific evidence from 
promising interventions focused on the social determinants of health, and describes ways in which 
they can improve population health and reduce health disparities. We show that there is sufficient 
evidence to support policy interventions targeted at education and early childhood; urban planning 
and community development; housing; income enhancements and supplements; and employment. 
When available, cost-effectiveness evaluations show that these interventions lead to long-term 
societal savings; however, more routine attention to cost considerations is needed for these 
interventions. We also discuss challenges to implementation, including the need for long-term 
financing in order to scale-up effective interventions for implementation at the local, state, or 
national level. Although we know enough to act, questions remain about how to optimally scale-up 
these interventions and maximize their benefits for the most vulnerable populations.
Despite improvements in medical care and in disease prevention, health disparities persist 
and may be increasing for chronic conditions such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, and 
cancer.1, 2 African Americans and other economically disadvantaged racial and ethnic 
minorities, and populations of all races with low socioeconomic status, experience large 
disparities in health. The conditions in which people live, learn, work, play, and worship can 
impact health and produce disparities. Social determinants that negatively impact health and 
*Corresponding author: dwilliam@hsph.harvard.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 August 01; 35(8): 1416–1423. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1357.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 wellbeing include poverty; lack of access to quality education or employment; unhealthy 
housing; unfavorable work and neighborhood conditions; exposure to neighborhood 
violence; and the clustering of disadvantage in particular groups of people and in particular 
places.3 Exposure to disadvantage can have deleterious neurodevelopmental and biological 
consequences beginning in childhood that accumulate and produce disease.4 Yet, current 
intervention strategies to reduce health disparities do not typically take a “life-course 
perspective” and tend to be disease-specific, often targeting individual and health systems 
factors without addressing social determinants.
Interventions targeting individual-level factors include improving health and lifestyle 
behaviors; reducing sociocontextual barriers, such as access to adequate food and 
employment resources or support for issues such as domestic violence5; and delivering 
health programs that are culturally and linguistically tailored to specific individuals or 
groups6. Health system interventions that address discrimination, access to care, and quality 
of care are also important (see the article by Tanjala Purnell and colleagues in this issue).(7) 
However, these approaches are not sufficient to address social determinants such as 
neighborhood conditions or poverty, which are also fundamental drivers of persistent health 
disparities.3, 8 For example, if one’s neighborhood is unsafe even during daylight hours and 
an individual lacks the resources to move to a safer neighborhood, interventions targeting 
outdoor physical activity are unlikely to be effective.3 As Thomas Frieden’s 5-tiered Health 
Impact Pyramid suggests, the greatest health impact likely will come from interventions that 
address socioeconomic factors that drive health disparities across multiple conditions.(9)
This article provides an overview of scientific evidence regarding promising interventions 
addressing social determinants that can improve population health and reduce disparities. 
The studies included in this article were identified by a working group of investigators from 
multiple institutions and disciplines who were supported by the NIH-funded Centers for 
Population Health and Health Disparities (CPHHD). These centers, located at ten 
institutions across the country, were established to better understand and address disparities 
associated with cancer and cardiovascular disease. The studies summarized in this article 
provide major and representative findings regarding the social determinants that are likely to 
impact health and health disparities. Some of the studies are well known, but the class of 
interventions discussed are traditionally viewed as outside the purview of health policy 
research. Most of the CPHHD sites did not test interventions involving social determinants 
that focus on social structures and policies. We argue that interventions focused on upstream 
social determinants such as social structures and policies including education and early 
childhood, urban planning and community development, housing, income enhancements and 
supplements, and employment, which show promise for achieving enduring improvements 
in population-level health disparities and should be a central focus of health policy 
development, implementation, and future research. Though the interventions we discuss in 
this article have a single social determinant as their primary target, the interventions are 
likely to have ripple effects across other social determinants. For example, an affordable 
housing intervention that moves families into lower poverty neighborhoods is likely to 
improve access to better educational opportunities and neighborhood conditions, as well.
Thornton et al.
Page 2
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surveying The Evidence On Social Determinant-Focused Interventions
Education and Early Childhood
Improving access to high-quality education likely improves health.(10) Additionally, there is 
strong and consistent empirical evidence that early childhood interventions, such as 
structured early childhood education and parental support programs, have positive health 
impacts on children and parents, show promise for addressing economic disadvantage and 
health disparities, and produce significant return on investment.(11, 12) These programs can 
impact health and reduce disparities by strengthening families, improving economic 
outcomes, enhancing educational achievement, and acting to interrupt or prevent deleterious 
neurodevelopmental and biological consequences of disadvantage.4 Because of their 
potential to improve outcomes for both parents and children, and to produce ongoing health 
and socioeconomic benefits over time, early childhood interventions can produce a sizeable 
return on investment. As such, there is a growing consensus that adopting a life course 
perspective, meaning focusing on how experiences early in life can impact health over a 
lifetime and even across generations, is one of the most important strategies to improve the 
nation’s health and is critical to reducing and eliminating population-level health 
disparities.3, 11
The Perry Pre-school Project, a two-year program in which African-American 3- and 4-year-
olds from a disadvantaged community in Michigan were randomized to intervention or 
control groups, was designed to improve educational outcomes and reduce the risk of school 
failure. While the intervention was not designed to assess health impact, it did find that 
people receiving the intervention had higher rates of safety belt use and engaged in fewer 
risky health behaviors, such as smoking and illicit substance use in adulthood.(13) Striking 
findings related to socioeconomic outcomes suggest the likelihood of improved health as 
adults, as well. At age 40, those receiving the early childhood intervention had higher 
education, income and health insurance coverage and lower rates of violent crime, 
incarceration, welfare receipt and out of wedlock births. (14)
In the Carolina Abecedarian Project, a longitudinal study in North Carolina, economically 
disadvantaged, mainly African-American, children ages birth to 5 years were randomly 
assigned to an early childhood intervention group or a control group.(15) The intervention 
consisted of cognitive and social stimulation including supervised play, daily structured 
academic instruction, and weekly home visits from teachers. At age 21, the intervention 
group had fewer symptoms of depression, lower marijuana use, a more active lifestyle, and 
significant educational and vocational benefits compared to the control group.(16, 17) By 
their mid-30’s, individuals in the intervention group had a lower body mass index and fewer 
risk factors for cardiovascular and metabolic disease.(15) Return-on-investment estimates 
from these and other early childhood education programs range from returns of $3-$17 per 
dollar invested.(12)
Another initiative, the Nurse-Family Partnership, an early childhood home visitation 
program targeting low-income first-time mothers, yielded an estimated $18,054 return per 
family over the long-term (18), largely from reductions in crime, violence, child abuse and 
other high-risk behaviors. These estimates of total benefits combine estimates of benefits 
Thornton et al.
Page 3
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 directly experienced by participants (such as improved long-term academic performance and 
reductions in child abuse and neglect) with estimates of total benefits to taxpayers and others 
in society (for instance via lower crime rates among participants, which would produce 
reductions in costs to the criminal justice system).
Studies of the federally funded Head Start program, on the other hand, are not as promising, 
and show no consistent evidence of positive health impacts.(19) This may be because of 
variability in implementation across sites and lack of adherence to a set curriculum. A study 
of Head Start in Michigan, however, did find that participants had decreased obesity rates 
compared to non-participating children.(20) Other early childhood and education 
interventions have shown improvements in the educational outcomes of disadvantaged 
children following receipt of interventions such as home visitation or coordinated intensive 
educational supports, which likely translates into increasing socioeconomic status and, thus, 
is likely associated with better health outcomes in adulthood. But many promising 
educational interventions have not been assessed for their impacts on health.(21) For 
example, the schools in the Harlem Children’s Zone initiative, which combines rigorous 
education at a Promise Academy charter school with access to multiple community services 
for children living in a 97-block area in Harlem, eliminated the black-white academic 
achievement gap in math over the 4 years from enrollment in middle school to the 
completion of ninth grade.(22) Similarly the racial academic achievement gap in math and 
English Language Arts observed at enrollment in elementary school was eliminated by the 
third grade.(22)
Urban Planning and Community Development
Citing persistent disparities in cardiovascular disease and obesity, the National Prevention 
Strategy released by the National Prevention, Health Promotion and Public Health Council 
in June 2011 emphasized the importance of healthy community environments.(23) Studies 
have found that changes in nutrition, physical activity, and safety within communities can be 
achieved through urban planning and community development, which may also improve 
health behaviors.(24)
While both urban planning and community development have the potential to change the 
physical landscape of communities, community development is participatory and 
community-engaged while urban planning is policy-driven. As the paper in this issue by Beti 
Thompson and colleagues discuss in detail, community-engaged strategies are potentially 
promising for ameliorating disparities.(25) For example, a CPHHD community development 
project in East Los Angeles, where 94 percent of residents are Mexican-American, involved 
retailers, community organizations, leaders, and high schools in the transformation of corner 
stores into “healthy stores.”(26) Additionally, research from the Healthy Food Financing 
Initiative in Philadelphia suggests that policies and programs addressing access to healthy 
foods can increase awareness of viable options among residents.(27) While increasing 
availability and awareness is insufficient by itself, when accompanied by skill-building 
programs that improve food shopping behaviors and nutritional knowledge of consumers; 
stocking policies at stores (including where to place products in order to make purchase of 
Thornton et al.
Page 4
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 healthy items the default choice); and price adjustments (such as taxes on unhealthy foods or 
subsidies for healthy foods), such interventions may change behavior.(27)
Urban planning and community development can also encourage physical activity. Project 
U-Turn in Michigan sought to increase cycling throughout the target region. It also sought to 
increase active transport to school (such as walking or cycling) and included a Safe Routes 
to School Program. The project was associated with an increased proportion of children 
walking to school and an estimated 63 percent increase in active transportation citywide.(28)
In addition, interventions addressing distribution and density of alcohol outlets in low-
income communities can impact substance abuse related morbidity, crime, and 
neighborhood safety.(29) The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Community 
Guide(30) touts interventions targeting alcohol outlet density as evidenced-based approaches 
for reducing alcohol use, abuse, and related morbidity. Observational studies provide 
compelling evidence that decreasing the density of and proximity to alcohol outlets can 
reduce risk of violent crime(31), as well. This has implications for reducing health 
disparities, as alcohol outlets are often over-concentrated in low-income minority 
communities.(29) Such evidence has informed urban planning and policy efforts in some 
communities,(32) but rigorous evaluations of urban planning policy reforms aimed at curbing 
overconcentration of alcohol outlets in disadvantaged communities are needed.
Housing
Housing quality and safety are known to impact health.(33,34) For example, lead abatement 
and indoor air quality improvement interventions have reduced childhood lead poisoning 
and asthma morbidity, respectively.(35,36) Though not originally designed to evaluate health 
outcomes, housing mobility programs that are intended to increase low-income families’ 
access to economic opportunity and safer neighborhoods have also demonstrated potential 
health impacts.
Among them is the Yonkers Scattered-Site Public Housing Program, which randomized low-
income residents to newly constructed low-income housing in middle-income 
neighborhoods or to continued residence in poorer neighborhoods. Moving to middle-
income neighborhoods was associated with better self-reported health and decreased 
substance use, increased rates of employment, and decreased exposure to neighborhood 
violence.(37) One of the most rigorous housing mobility evaluations in the United States, the 
Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Project, also showed significant 
health impacts. The demonstration project is the only randomized controlled trial of the 
federally funded housing voucher program, and included participants in multiple cities who 
were randomized to one of three conditions: receipt of a housing voucher to move to a low-
poverty neighborhood (experimental group), receipt of a housing voucher for use anywhere, 
or continued residence in public housing (control group). Randomization to the experimental 
group was associated, more than a decade later, with decreased risk of extreme obesity and 
diabetes and increased physical activity, and improved mental health and wellbeing, for the 
study population.(38,39)
Thornton et al.
Page 5
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Income Supplements
In this country, examples of income enhancements and supplements include means-tested 
programs such as the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and 
Children (WIC); tax credits such as the Earned Income Tax Credit for low-income families; 
and universal programs such as Supplemental Security Income for the elderly and persons 
with disabilities (SSI). Most evidence assessing the impact of such programs on health 
comes from natural experiments.(8) WIC has been associated with reduced rates of low birth 
weight, and these effects appear stronger for women with lower versus higher education 
levels.(40) The Earned Income Tax Credit has been associated with reductions in low birth 
weight and maternal smoking.(41) The same research suggests that some Earned Income Tax 
Credit-associated health benefits, such as improved birth outcomes, may be greater for 
blacks than whites. The initiation of the SSI program was associated with decreased 
mortality for the elderly and larger declines in mortality over time as benefit levels 
increased.(42)
Another type of income supplement that has been studied is conditional cash transfers, a 
cash benefit that is contingent upon certain behaviors by eligible beneficiaries. While less 
studied in high-income countries, research in low- and middle-income countries suggests 
that conditional cash transfers may be effective in increasing preventive health care 
utilization and improving nutrition, health behaviors, and birth outcomes, as well.(43) 
Conditional cash transfers may be most effective in reducing disparities when they are 
structured to have maximum impact for those with lower baseline incomes. For example, the 
amount of cash transfer could increase based on the level of economic disadvantage of 
beneficiaries such that for the same behaviors, the poorest beneficiaries receive the largest 
cash amount.(44) The Five Plus Nuts and Beans pragmatic randomized controlled trial 
conducted at the Johns Hopkins CPHHD Center suggests that pairing conditional cash 
transfers for use on groceries with nutritional counseling among African Americans with 
controlled hypertension is associated with increased fruit and vegetable consumption and 
improved dietary patterns.(45)
The Great Smoky Mountain Study examined the impact of income supplements to American 
Indians resulting from casino revenue. These supplements were associated with improved 
mental health outcomes in adolescence that persisted through early adulthood, increased 
education and reduced criminal offenses among American Indian youth and the elimination 
of the racial disparity on both of these outcomes.(46,47)
Employment interventions
Employment can have positive and negative impacts on health via effects on resources, 
chronic stress, and political power.(48) There is limited population-level research examining 
health impacts of employment interventions. Research of the effects of Civil Rights policies, 
including equal access to employment and access to medical care, and enforcement of voting 
rights, indicates that the employment and income gains that resulted led to increases in life 
expectancy between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s that were larger for blacks than 
whites, and greater for black women than black men.(49) Research examining employment 
interventions for specific vulnerable groups, including low socioeconomic status women and 
Thornton et al.
Page 6
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 people with severe mental illness, also suggests that employment interventions could be 
effective in reducing health disparities in these populations.(50, 51) For people with severe 
mental illness, employment improves quality of life, finances, and social support.(51) 
Participation in Supported Employment, an evidence-based practice assisting people with 
severe mental illness to obtain and maintain employment, is associated with improved 
employment outcomes.(52) In one study among women receiving financial support from the 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program, public health nursing case management 
was associated with increased entrance into the workforce, increased preventive health care 
utilization, and improved depression.(50)
Discussion
Health disparities have significant economic impacts, and reducing and eliminating 
disparities is a moral imperative that is also advantageous to the US economy. Eliminating 
disparities in morbidity and mortality for people with less than a college education would 
have an estimated economic value of $1.02 trillion.(53) Furthermore, research suggests that 
eliminating racial and ethnic disparities would reduce medical care costs by $230 billion and 
indirect costs of excess morbidity and mortality by more than $1 trillion over three years.(54)
As we have shown, there is sufficient evidence to support policy interventions that focus on 
the social determinants of health, including interventions targeted at education and early 
childhood, urban planning and community development, housing, income enhancements and 
supplements, and employment. In particular, early childhood interventions have 
demonstrated consistent effectiveness at improving long-term health outcomes for 
disadvantaged children and families, are associated with accrued health-related benefits into 
adulthood, and are cost effective.(12) Yet some scholars and public health practitioners 
continue to raise opposition to strategies that prioritize intervening in early childhood. The 
arguments against such a focus often center on the fact that the prevalence of costly diseases 
is much higher among adults than children. While there remains a need for secondary 
prevention and treatment efforts for populations that are manifesting disparities in morbidity 
and mortality, intervening in early childhood is the most economical way to interrupt the 
cascade of events that puts children at increased risk of poor health outcomes in childhood 
and adulthood.
The studies described also have several limitations. First, most of the interventions discussed 
were not designed a priori to assess health impacts, or health disparities per se. Second, 
several of the studies were natural experiments that did not randomize participants to 
intervention or control groups, meaning that systematic differences between intervention 
recipients and historic controls may exist, and effects of secular trends may not have been 
measured. Finally, given the long lag-time between the intervention and measurement of 
health outcomes (particularly for early childhood studies), it is possible that other 
unmeasured factors that differentiate intervention and control groups are responsible for 
observed outcomes. Nevertheless, many interventions described – particularly in the early 
childhood and housing domains and those using long-term follow-up and randomization – 
represent high-quality scientific evidence of the health impacts of social determinants 
interventions that are far removed from traditional health policy.
Thornton et al.
Page 7
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Efforts should focus on scaling-up these interventions for implementation at the regional, 
state, and national level. Effective implementation will likely require government investment 
and social welfare reforms, such as universal access to high quality early childhood 
education programs, access to affordable housing that is commensurate with demand, and 
efforts to increase housing mobility that are coupled with effective strategies for revitalizing 
neighborhoods. Many obstacles remain, including lack of political will and access to long-
term financing for these interventions, and threats to maintaining the high quality of 
interventions when scaling-up (for instance, insuring that early childhood education 
programs maintain their rigor and standardization when broadly disseminated). Future 
efforts to eliminate health disparities must pay particular attention to effectively funding and 
sustaining such programs, perhaps through innovative funding avenues such as public-
private partnerships, social impact bonds (an innovative funding mechanism whereby 
government agencies fund investments in social programs that achieve desirable societal 
outcomes by leveraging savings generated from program successes to spur private sector 
investment), or tax reform. For example, 2006 legislation approved by voters in Denver, 
Colorado, sets aside a portion of sales tax revenue to fund the Denver Preschool Program; 
and voters in San Antonio, TX approved a sales tax increase to fund “Pre-Kindergarten for 
San Antonio,” which offers high-quality full-day preschool for all 4 year-olds.(55)
While more research alone is insufficient to achieve success, there is a critical need to invest 
in future research designed a priori to evaluate the potential of social determinant-related 
interventions to improve health outcomes and reduce health disparities. This includes 
research designed to understand and minimize unanticipated negative consequences of 
interventions. This issue may be particularly important for optimizing housing and income 
supplement interventions because both have been associated with unanticipated negative 
health impacts. For example, the income supplements received in the Great Smoky 
Mountain Study were also associated with increased accidental deaths and substance use in 
the specific months that households received payments,(56) and in increased adolescent 
obesity among teens in low-income families.(57) Similarly, in a sub-analysis of the Moving 
to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Project, assignment to the experimental 
group was associated with increased mental health problems among boys.(58) Future efforts 
to evaluate the health impacts of housing mobility programs should also assess their impacts 
on residential stability, social networks, access to services, and exposure to new stressors 
associated with moving.(59,60)
Further, housing mobility interventions by themselves are an untenable stand-alone strategy 
for addressing health disparities since they do not eliminate the threats to health that remain 
for those unable to move. It also is not feasible to move all poor households. Research 
evaluating the health impacts of neighborhood transformation and revitalization initiatives is 
also needed. Furthermore, understanding the impacts of social determinant-focused 
interventions on health cannot come solely from randomized controlled trials. While 
randomized controlled trials may be the gold standard for research, these are not the only 
source of generating valuable scientific information. In the real-world, policy-makers should 
act on the basis of the best available data. Thus, natural experiments and demonstration 
projects are also critical.(61)
Thornton et al.
Page 8
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The complex interplay of individual-, family-, and community-level factors impacting health 
that has resulted in persistent health disparities cannot be reversed with short-term 
investments. Social determinant-related interventions designed to create structural changes 
must be coordinated with long-term efforts to change social and cultural norms, build on 
existing community strengths, and change the opportunity costs associated with healthy 
behaviors to make the healthy choice the default choice. In order for such interventions to 
have sustained, intergenerational positive health impacts, they must be coupled with 
attention to social marketing, behavioral economics, social services, and other supports.
Quantifying cost savings more globally – that is, including savings accrued later in life and 
from non-health sources – is also critical and raises important questions about how to 
reallocate savings accrued in the health care sector that result from investments in other 
sectors, such as education, housing, employment, taxation or income enhancements, and 
community development and urban planning. Individual program cost-effectiveness studies, 
although valuable, are insufficient to quantify the economic impact of social determinants 
interventions, which may have life-long ripple effects across multiple domains. Instead, 
long-term modeling studies are needed and must address indirect and opportunity costs, and 
account for indirect effects of upward social mobility on health.
We must also use existing research to “connect-the-dots” between interventions in multiple 
domains, identify opportunities to increase positive and minimize potential negative health 
impacts of social determinant-related interventions using logic models.(61) Such studies 
should investigate how the same intervention may have differential impacts on children at 
different ages or on populations from different racial/ethnic or socioeconomic status groups. 
Future research should also identify how best to deliver social determinant-related 
interventions so as to achieve overall population health improvement and also reduce health 
disparities.(62) For example, a community development intervention that improves physical 
activity for all community residents could actually widen disparities if increases in physical 
activity are greater for advantaged versus disadvantaged groups.
Conclusion
Traditional health care sector-focused interventions are insufficient as a primary strategy to 
address population-level health disparities. Future research, policy, and implementation 
efforts should concentrate more on interventions targeting upstream social determinants of 
health, focusing in particular on interventions targeting children and families. Efforts should 
focus on scaling-up proven interventions in the fields of early childhood and education, 
housing, urban planning and community development, employment, and income 
enhancements. They should also focus on strengthening the evidence base through future 
research and efforts to more comprehensively understand the economic impact of 
widespread implementation of social determinants-targeted interventions.
Acknowledgments
Rachel Thornton was supported by a grant from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (Grant No. K23 
HL121250-01A1). The authors were supported by the following Centers for Population Health and Health 
Disparities grants from the National Cancer Institute and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Beti 
Thornton et al.
Page 9
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Thompson, principal investigator (PI), Understanding and preventing breast cancer disparities in Latinas (Grant No. 
P50CA148143-01); David R. Williams, PI, Lung Cancer Disparities Center: jointly addressing race and 
socioeconomic status (Grant No. P50CA148596-01); Lisa A. Cooper, PI, Johns Hopkins Center to Eliminate 
Cardiovascular Health Disparities (Grant No. P50HL105187-01); Katherine L. Tucker, PI, Boston Puerto Rican 
Health Study-CVD risk factors (Grant No. P50HL105185-01); Electra D. Paskett, PI, Reducing cervical cancer in 
Appalachia (Grant No. P50CA105632-06); Lynda H. Powell, PI, Rush Center for Urban Health Equity (Grant No. 
P50HL105189-01); Alexander N. Ortega, PI, Family and neighborhood interventions to reduce heart disease risk in 
East Los Angeles (Grant No. P50HL105188-01); Richard Warnecke, PI, University of Illinois at Chicago Center for 
Population Health and Health Disparities (Grant No. P50CA106743-06); Alice S. Ammerman and Cam Patterson, 
PI, Center for Reduced CVD Disparities: genes, clinics, and communities (Grant No. P50HL105184-01); and Dedra 
S. Buchwald, PI, Center for Native Population Health Disparities (Grant No. P50CA148110-01).
Notes
1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the 
United States, 2011–2012. JAMA. 2014; 311:806–14. [PubMed: 24570244] 
2. Petrelli NJ, Winer EP, Brahmer J, Dubey S, Smith S, Thomas C, et al. Clinical cancer advances 
2009: Major research advances in cancer treatment, prevention, and screening–a report from the 
american society of clinical oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:6052–69. [PubMed: 19901123] 
3. Braveman P, Egerter S, Williams DR. The social determinants of health: Coming of age. Annu Rev 
Public Health. 2011; 32:381–98. [PubMed: 21091195] 
4. Shonkoff JP, Boyce WT, McEwen BS. Neuroscience, molecular biology, and the childhood roots of 
health disparities: Building a new framework for health promotion and disease prevention. JAMA. 
2009; 301:2252–9. [PubMed: 19491187] 
5. Haas JS, Linder JA, Park ER, Gonzalez I, Rigotti NA, Klinger EV, et al. Proactive tobacco cessation 
outreach to smokers of low socioeconomic status: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014; 
175:218–26.
6. Ohrig E, Geiss HC, Haas BM, Schwandt P. The Prevention Education Program (PEP) Nuremberg: 
Design and baseline data of a family oriented intervention study. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 
2001; 25:S89–S92. [PubMed: 11466597] 
7. [COPYEDITORS: Reference to Tanjala Purnell’s paper in this issue goes here.]
8. Williams DR, Mohammed SA. Racism and health II: A needed research agenda for effective 
interventions. The Am Behavioral Scientist. 2013; 57:1200–26.
9. Frieden TR. A framework for public health action: The health impact pyramid. Am J Public Health. 
2010; 100:590–5. [PubMed: 20167880] 
10. Cohen AK, Syme SL. Education: A missed opportunity for public health intervention. Am J Public 
Health. 2013; 103:997–1001. [PubMed: 23597373] 
11. Heckman JJ. Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children. Science. 
2006; 312:1900–2. [PubMed: 16809525] 
12. Karoly, LA., Kilburn, MR., Cannon, JS. Early childhood interventions: Proven results, future 
promise. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2005. 
13. Muennig P, Schweinhart L, Montie J, Neidell M. Effects of a prekindergarten educational 
intervention on adult health: 37-year follow-up results of a randomized controlled trial. Am J 
Public Health. 2009; 99:1431–7. [PubMed: 19542034] 
14. Schweinhart, LJ., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, WS., Belfield, CR., Nores, M. Lifetime effects: 
The High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press; 2005. 
15. Campbell F, Conti G, Heckman JJ, Moon SH, Pinto R, Pungello E, et al. Early childhood 
investments substantially boost adult health. Science. 2014; 343:1478–85. [PubMed: 24675955] 
16. Campbell FA, Pungello EP, Burchinal M, Kainz K, Pan Y, Wasik BH, et al. Adult outcomes as a 
function of an early childhood educational program: An Abecedarian project follow-up. Dev 
Psychol. 2012; 48:1033–43. [PubMed: 22250997] 
17. Muennig P, Robertson D, Johnson G, Campbell F, Pungello EP, Neidell M. The effect of an early 
education program on adult health: The Carolina Abecedarian project randomized controlled trial. 
Am J Public Health. 2011; 101:512–6. [PubMed: 21233425] 
Thornton et al.
Page 10
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 18. Lee, S., Aos, S., Miller, M. Evidence-based programs to prevent children from entering and 
remaining in the child welfare system: Benefits and costs for Washington. Olympia, WA: 
Washington State Institute for Public Policy; 2008. Contract No.: 08-07-3901
19. Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., Shapiro, G., Broene, P., et al. Head Start impact study. Final 
report. Administration for Children & Families; 2009. 
20. Lumeng JC, Kaciroti N, Sturza J, Krusky AM, Miller AL, Peterson KE, et al. Changes in body 
mass index associated with Head Start participation. Pediatrics. 2015; 135:e449–56. [PubMed: 
25583912] 
21. Cullen JB, Levitt SD, Robertson E, Sadoff S. What can be done to improve struggling high 
schools. J Econ Perspect. 2013; 27(2):133–52.
22. Dobbie W, Fryer RG. Are high-quality schools enough to increase achievement among the poor? 
Evidence from the Harlem children’s zone. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 
2011; 3(3):158–87.
23. Council, NP., editor. National prevention strategy. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General; 
2011. 
24. Fenton M. Community design and policies for free-range children: Creating environments that 
support routine physical activity. Childhood Obesity. 2012; 8:44–51. [PubMed: 22799480] 
25. [COPYEDITORS: Reference to Beti Thompson’s paper in this issue goes here.]
26. Ortega AN, Albert SL, Sharif MZ, Langellier BA, Garcia RE, Glik DC, et al. Proyecto 
mercadofresco: A multi-level, community-engaged corner store intervention in east Los Angeles 
and Boyle Heights. J Community Health. 2014; 40(2):347–56.
27. Cummins S, Flint E, Matthews SA. New neighborhood grocery store increased awareness of food 
access but did not alter dietary habits or obesity. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014; 33:283–91. 
[PubMed: 24493772] 
28. TenBrink DS, McMunn R, Panken S. Project U-Turn: Increasing active transportation in Jackson, 
Michigan. Am J Prev Med. 2009; 37:S329–35. [PubMed: 19944932] 
29. Laveist TA, Wallace JM Jr. Health risk and inequitable distribution of liquor stores in African 
American neighborhood. Soc Sci Med. 2000; 51:613–7. [PubMed: 10868674] 
30. The Guide to Community Preventive Services. The community guide - summary - excessive 
alcohol consumption: Regulation of alcohol outlet density 2007. Available from: http://
www.thecommunityguide.org/alcohol/outletdensity.html
31. Yu Q, Scribner R, Carlin B, Theall K, Simonsen N, Ghosh-Dastidar B, et al. Multilevel spatio-
temporal dual changepoint models for relating alcohol outlet destruction and changes in 
neighbourhood rates of assaultive violence. Geospatial Health. 2008; 2:161–72. [PubMed: 
18686265] 
32. Thornton RLJ, Greiner A, Fichtenberg CM, Feingold BJ, Ellen JM, Jennings JM. Achieving a 
healthy zoning policy in Baltimore: Results of a health impact assessment of the transform 
Baltimore zoning code rewrite. Public Health Rep. 2013; 128(Supplement 3):87–103. [PubMed: 
24179284] 
33. Bostic RW, Thornton RLJ, Rudd EC, Sternthal MJ. Health in all policies : The role of the US 
department of housing and urban development and present and future challenges. Health Aff 
(Millwood). 2012; 31:2130–7. [PubMed: 22914341] 
34. Krieger J, Higgins DL. Housing and health: Time again for public health action. Am J Public 
Health. 2002; 92:758–68. [PubMed: 11988443] 
35. Meyer, Pa, McGeehin, Ma, Falk, H. A global approach to childhood lead poisoning prevention. 
International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health. 2003; 206:363–9. [PubMed: 
12971691] 
36. Krieger JW, Song L, Takaro TK, Stout J. Asthma and the home environment of low-income urban 
children: Preliminary findings from the Seattle-King County healthy homes project. Journal of 
urban health : bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine. 2000; 77:50–67. [PubMed: 
10741842] 
37. Fauth RC, Leventhal T, Brooks-Gunn J. Short-term effects of moving from public housing in poor 
to middle-class neighborhoods on low-income, minority adults’ outcomes. Soc Sci Med. 2004; 
59:2271–84. [PubMed: 15450703] 
Thornton et al.
Page 11
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 38. Ludwig J, Sanbonmatsu L, Gennetian L, Adam E, Duncan GJ, Katz LF, et al. Neighborhoods, 
obesity, and diabetes–a randomized social experiment. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:1509–19. 
[PubMed: 22010917] 
39. Ludwig J, Duncan GJ, Gennetian LA, Katz LF, Kessler RC, Kling JR, et al. Neighborhood effects 
on the long-term well-being of low-income adults. Science. 2012; 337(6101):1505–10. [PubMed: 
22997331] 
40. Hoynes H, Page M, Stevens AH. Can targeted transfers improve birth outcomes? J Public Econ. 
2011; 95:813–27.
41. Hoynes H, Miller D, Simon D. Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant health. American 
Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 2015; 7:172–211.
42. Arno PS, House JS, Viola D, Schechter C. Social security and mortality: The role of income 
support policies and population health in the United States. J Public Health Policy. 2011; 32:234–
50. [PubMed: 21326333] 
43. Ranganathan M, Lagarde M. Promoting healthy behaviours and improving health outcomes in low 
and middle income countries: A review of the impact of conditional cash transfer programmes. 
Prev Med. 2012; 55(Suppl):S95–S105. [PubMed: 22178043] 
44. Barham T. A healthier start: The effect of conditional cash transfers on neonatal and infant 
mortality in rural Mexico. J Dev Econ. 2011; 94:74–85.
45. Miller ER, Cooper LA, Carson KA, Wang N-Y, Appel LJ, Gayles D, et al. A dietary intervention in 
urban African Americans: Results of the “five plus nuts and beans” randomized trial. Am J Prev 
Med. 2015
46. Costello EJ, Erkanli A, Copeland W, Angold A. Association of family income supplements in 
adolescence with development of psychiatric and substance use disorders in adulthood among an 
American Indian population. JAMA. 2010; 303(19):1954–60. [PubMed: 20483972] 
47. Akee RKQ, Copeland WE, Keeler G, Angold A, Costello EJ. Parents’ incomes and children’s 
outcomes: A quasi-experiment using transfer payments from casino profits. American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics. 2010; 2(1):86–115. [PubMed: 20582231] 
48. Tsui EK. Sectoral job training as an intervention to improve health equity. Am J Public Health. 
2010; 100(Suppl):S88–94. [PubMed: 20147666] 
49. Kaplan, GA., Ranjit, N., Burgard, S. Lifting gates–lengthening lives: Did civil rights policies 
improve the health of african-american woman in the 1960s and 1970s?. In: Schoeni, RF.House, 
JS.Kaplan, GA., Pollack, H., editors. Making americans healthier: Social and economic policy as 
health policy. New York: Russell Sage Foundation Publications; 2008. p. 145-69.
50. Kneipp SM, Kairalla JA, Sheely AL. A randomized controlled trial to improve health among 
women receiving welfare in the US: The relationship between employment outcomes and the 
economic recession. Soc Sci Med. 2013; 80:130–40. [PubMed: 22963921] 
51. Luciano A, Bond GR, Drake RE. Does employment alter the course and outcome of schizophrenia 
and other severe mental illnesses? A systematic review of longitudinal research. Schizophr Res. 
2014; 159:312–21. [PubMed: 25278105] 
52. Mueser KT, Bond GR, Essock SM, Clark RE, Carpenter-Song E, Drake RE, et al. The effects of 
supported employment in latino consumers with severe mental illness. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2014; 
37:113–22. [PubMed: 24912060] 
53. Schoeni RF, Dow WH, Miller WD, Pamuk ER. The economic value of improving the health of 
disadvantaged americans. Am J Prev Med. 2011; 40(1, Supplement 1):S67–S72. [PubMed: 
21146781] 
54. LaVeist TA, Gaskin DJ, Richard P. Estimating the economic burden of racial health inequalities in 
the United States. Int J Health Serv. 2011; 41(2):231–8. Epub 2011/05/14. [PubMed: 21563622] 
55. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Commission to Build a Healthier America. Time to act: 
Investing in the health of our children and communities. 2014. 
56. Bruckner TA, Brown RA, Margerison-Zilko C. Positive income shocks and accidental deaths 
among Cherokee Indians: A natural experiment. Int J Epidemiol. 2011; 40:1083–90. [PubMed: 
21527447] 
57. Akee, RKQ., Simeonova, E., Copeland, W., Angold, A., Costello, JE. Does more money make you 
fat? The effects of quasi-experimental income transfers on adolescent and young adult obesity. 
Thornton et al.
Page 12
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Institute for the Study of Labor. , editor. Bonn, Germany: 2010. p. 1-49.IZA Discussion Paper 
Series
58. Kessler RC, Duncan GJ, Gennetian La, Katz LF, Kling JR, Sampson Na, et al. Associations of 
housing mobility interventions for children in high-poverty neighborhoods with subsequent mental 
disorders during adolescence. JAMA. 2014; 311:937–48. [PubMed: 24595778] 
59. Darrah J, DeLuca S. “Living here has changed my whole perspective”: How escaping inner-city 
poverty shapes neighborhood and housing choice. J Policy Anal Manage. 2014; 33(2):350–84.
60. Rosenblatt P, DeLuca S. “We don’t live outside, we live in here”: Neighborhood and residential 
mobility decisions among low-income families. City & Community. 2012; 11:254–84.
61. Braveman PA, Egerter SA, Woolf SH, Marks JS. When do we know enough to recommend action 
on the social determinants of health? Am J Prev Med. 2011; 40:S58–66. [PubMed: 21146780] 
62. Frohlich KL, Potvin L. Transcending the known in public health practice: The inequality paradox: 
The population approach and vulnerable populations 353. Am J Public Health. 2008; 98:216–21. 
[PubMed: 18172133] 
Thornton et al.
Page 13
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
