               
City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: Hawkes, C., Thow, A. M., Jones, A., Ali, I. & Labonte, R. (2017). Nutrition 
Labelling is a Trade Policy Issue: Lessons From an Analysis of Specific Trade Concerns at 
the World Trade Organization. Health Promotion International, doi: 10.1093/heapro/daw109 
This is the accepted version of the paper. 
This version of the publication may differ from the final published 
version. 
Permanent repository link:  http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/16070/
Link to published version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapro/daw109
Copyright and reuse: City Research Online aims to make research 
outputs of City, University of London available to a wider audience. 
Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or copyright 
holders. URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and 
linked to.
City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/            publications@city.ac.uk
City Research Online
  
 
1 
Nutrition Labelling is a Trade Policy Issue: Lessons From an Analysis of Specific 
Trade Concerns at the World Trade Organization 
 
Anne Marie Thow, Corinna Hawkes, Alexandra Jones, Iqra Ali, Ronald Labonte 
 
Health Promotion International (In Press) 
 
Summary 
Interpretive nutrition labels provide simplified nutrient-specific text and/or symbols on 
the front of pre-packaged foods, to encourage and enable consumers to make healthier 
choices. This type of labelling has been proposed as part of a comprehensive policy 
response to the global epidemic of non-communicable diseases. However, regulation of 
nutrition labelling falls under the remit of not just the health sector but also trade. 
Specific Trade Concerns have been raised at the World Trade Organization’s Technical 
Barriers to Trade Committee regarding interpretive nutrition labelling initiatives in 
Thailand, Chile, Indonesia, Peru and Ecuador. This paper presents an analysis of the 
discussions of these concerns. Although nutrition labelling was identified as a legitimate 
policy objective, queries were raised regarding the justification of the specific labelling 
measures proposed, and the scientific evidence for effectiveness of such measures. 
Concerns were also raised regarding the consistency of the measures with international 
standards. Drawing on policy learning theory, we identified four lessons for public 
health policy makers, including: strategic framing of nutrition labelling policy 
objectives; pro-active policy engagement between trade and health to identify potential 
trade issues; identifying ways to minimise potential ‘practical’ trade concerns; and 
engagement with the Codex Alimentarius Commission to develop international 
  
 
2 
guidance on interpretative labelling. This analysis indicates that while there is potential 
for trade sector concerns to stifle innovation in nutrition labelling policy, care in how 
interpretive nutrition labelling measures are crafted in light of trade commitments can 
minimize such a risk and help ensure that trade policy is coherent with nutrition action. 
 
Key words: 
Nutrition labelling, trade policy, policy coherence 
 
 
  
 
3 
Introduction 
The global epidemic of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) is associated with 
devastating personal, social, health care and economic costs. In the Political Declaration 
on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases adopted at the landmark 
High-Level Meeting of the United Nations General Assembly in 2011, States 
acknowledged the global burden and threat of NCDs. In particular, that NCDs constitute 
‘one of the major challenges for development in the twenty-first century, which 
undermines social and economic development throughout the world’ and are ‘a threat 
to the economies of many Member States’ (United Nations General Assembly 2011). The 
World Economic Forum estimates that the economic costs of NCDs due to lost 
productivity and direct medical costs in low- and middle-income countries over the next 
two decades could surpass US$7trillion (Bloom et al. 2011). There is thus a pressing 
need to address the common risk factors for NCDs, which must include comprehensive 
policy action to improve diets and nutrition (WHO 2013).  
 
The World Health Organization’s Global Action Plan for Prevention and Control of NCDs 
recommends a range of policy options for promoting healthy diets to Member States. 
These include: “Promote nutrition labelling, according to but not limited to, 
international standards… for all pre-packaged foods ...”, in conjunction with a range of 
other policy actions including taxes and subsidies, advertising restrictions and nutrition 
education (WHO 2013). In this context, nutrition labelling refers to information found 
on the labels of prepackaged foods. 
 
What is interpretive nutrition labelling? 
  
 
4 
Interpretive front-of-pack labels provide simplified ”interpretations” of information on 
key nutrients in relation to health, to encourage and enable consumers to make 
healthier choices (Wartella et al. 2012, p9). Such labels can include nutrient-specific text 
and/or symbols, a summary indicator of the healthfulness of a food, or situate a food 
within a food group (and associated recommendations for consumption). Examples 
include “traffic light” labels, healthy choice logos, and Daily Intake Guides. An 
interpretive approach to labeling contrasts with the common presentation of detailed 
nutrient content information in back-of-pack “Nutrition Information Panels”. An 
increasing number of governments and food businesses are using these interpretive 
labels to communicate nutrition information to consumers (European Food Information 
Council 2014).  
 
Evidence from systematic reviews and recent studies indicates that interpretive front-
of-pack labelling approaches are more effective for communicating nutrition 
information, than listing nutrient content on the back of food packages. Interpretive 
front-of-pack labels can increase awareness of nutrition/health among consumers and 
their motivation to choose healthier products, with simple, ‘low density’ and coloured 
labels being most effective (Figure 1) (Campos et al. 2011, Graham et al. 2012, van 
Herpen et al. 2012, Bialkova et al. 2013, Hersey et al. 2013, Van Kleef and Dagevosb 
2014, Siegrist et al. 2015, Volkova and Ni Mhurchu 2015). Such labelling also increases 
the likelihood that consumers make healthier food choices (Campos, Doxey et al. 2011, 
Hersey, Wohlgenant et al. 2013, Babio et al. 2014, Maubach et al. 2014, Van Kleef and 
Dagevosb 2014, Volkova and Ni Mhurchu 2015). There is some evidence that 
interpretive front-of-pack labels can also stimulate reformulation of less healthy food 
products (Vyth et al. 2010). 
  
 
5 
 
 
Figure 1: Logic model for the effect of interpretive front-of-pack labelling on health 
 
Nutrition labelling as a trade policy issue 
Regulation of nutrition labelling falls under the remit of not just the health sector but 
also trade. Because food is traded across borders, food labels also cross borders, yet 
labeling requirements may differ between countries. Nutrition labelling requirements 
may thus create ‘technical barriers’ to the free movement of packaged foods across 
borders. As such they fall under the remit of World Trade Organization (WTO) 
agreements, the most relevant being the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to 
Trade (the "TBT Agreement"). (Although the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
Measures is usually considered the agreement covering food, it is more focussed on 
ensuring that food safety regulations do not unnecessarily impede trade. Food labelling 
measures are more likely to fall under rules in the TBT Agreement because they set 
requirements on the characteristics of the goods themselves.) 
 
“Technical regulations” refer to mandatory requirements regarding the characteristics 
of goods, including labels. The TBT Agreement addresses the preparation, adoption and 
application of technical regulations affecting trade in all goods (WTO 1994). An 
important aim of the TBT Agreement is to minimise the use of policy measures, and 
 
Increase consumer awareness 
of nutrition/health when 
shopping 
Increase consumer 
understanding and interpretation 
of nutrition information 
Improve healthfulness of 
purchasing/consumption 
behaviour 
Creating a healthier food 
environment through stimulating 
reformulation of food products 
  
 
6 
particularly technical regulations, that are “disguised restrictions on international 
trade” (WTO 1994). Under the TBT Agreement, technical regulations that pursue a 
“legitimate policy objective” (including protection of human health) are permitted, but 
should: avoid discrimination between imported and domestically produced goods; not 
be unnecessarily trade-restrictive; and be based on relevant international standards 
when appropriate and effective (Box 1).  The international standard most likely to be 
relevant is the “Codex Alimentarius”; harmonised international food standards to 
protect consumer health and promote fair practices in food trade (see Box 2).  
 
The TBT Agreement recognises that each WTO Member has the basic right to protect 
human health and in doing so to choose its own level of protection from health risks. 
However, from a trade perspective it is important that the exercise of this right does not 
unnecessarily restrict trade. The TBT Committee provides a forum for WTO members to 
find out more about the scope and implementation of each other’s regulations in light of 
the obligations imposed by the TBT Agreement. WTO Members can use the Committee 
to raise “Specific Trade Concerns” regarding laws, regulations or procedures of other 
countries that may affect their trade. The vast majority of concerns do not escalate to 
formal disputes, rather, the work of the Committee helps to defuse potential trade 
frictions (WTO 2015b). 
 
In this paper, we analyse the substance of Specific Trade Concerns regarding 
interpretive nutrition labelling that have been raised in the TBT Committee. The aim of 
our analysis is to identify opportunities for stronger policy making for interpretive 
nutrition labelling. 
 
  
 
7 
 
Box 1: Summary of key commitments within the Agreement on TBT, relevant to 
Specific Trade Concerns on interpretive nutrition labelling 
 
Preamble: no country should be prevented from taking measures necessary for the 
protection of human health 
Article 2.1: Technical regulations shall treat “like products” the same, both imported 
and domestically produced 
Article 2.2: Technical regulations should not create unnecessary obstacles to trade (not 
be more trade restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate objective), taking account 
of the risks non-fulfilment would create 
Article 2.4: Members should use relevant international standards as the basis for 
technical regulations 
Article 2.5: If a measure may have a significant effect on trade, members shall explain 
the justification for the measure at the request of another member. However, if a 
measure is designed to achieve a legitimate objective and is based on international 
standards, it shall be rebuttably presumed not to create an unnecessary barrier to trade.  
Article 2.9: If a measure is not in accordance with international standards (or no 
relevant standard exists), members shall notify other members, provide information, 
and allow time for comment 
Article 2.12: Members shall allow a reasonable time between publication and entry into 
force of the measure, to allow for implementation 
 
Source: Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, WTO (WTO 1994) 
 
  
 
8 
 
Method 
We identified Specific Trade Concerns regarding interpretive nutrition labelling through 
searching the WTO database Documents Online and the TBT database using the key 
words “nutrition”, “health” and “label” (for all years), and direct query to the WTO TBT 
Committee secretariat. We then searched the WTO database using the country name 
and the item number to extract all relevant meeting minutes related to each Specific 
Trade Concern. The searches were conducted between October 2014 and May 2015. We 
entered the full text of meeting minutes regarding each Specific Trade Concern into 
NVivo 10, and coded these by meeting date and country name. 
 
We analysed the text of the discussion relating to these Specific Trade Concerns 
according to the articles of the TBT Agreement (see Box 1). Themes were identified 
based on pre-determined codes. The research team collaboratively developed a 
codebook that identified key phrases relating to policy design, process and 
implementation against each Article of the TBT agreement, informed by issues raised in 
previous legal disputes regarding TBT. For example, the codes related to Article 2.2 
were: unnecessary obstacles to trade; risk assessment; legitimate objective; alternatives; 
ineffective and not achieving the objective; and more trade restrictive than necessary. 
Codes related to Article 2.9 were: implementation timeframes; implementation logistics; 
and implementation query. 
 
Three authors independently coded all text, and the lead author made final decisions on 
coding. We compared the coded data across countries, and synthesized the findings 
based on the key issues discussed in the TBT Committee.  
  
 
9 
 
As one key aim of our analysis was to inform future policy making – including in other 
jurisdictions – we considered theories of policy learning in identifying lessons from our 
findings. In particular, we drew on Hall’s ‘social learning’ perspective, which emphases 
the need to consider the framing of policy problems, and the relationships between 
policy goals and instruments, to enable learning by policy makers (Hall 1993). We thus 
focused our discussion on how interpretive nutrition labelling was – and could be – 
framed as a policy solution, in order to reduce tensions between trade commitments 
and nutrition goals, how the policy ‘problem’ addressed by labelling could be framed, 
how nutrition labelling as a policy instrument could be more specifically linked to policy 
goals and objectives, and broader issues of policy coherence between trade and 
nutrition. 
 
Results 
We identified five Specific Trade Concerns regarding interpretive nutrition labelling 
raised in the WTO’s TBT Committee.  Concerns were first raised at the meeting of March 
2007 regarding Thailand’s proposed front of pack labelling for snack foods. New 
Specific Trade Concerns were first raised in 2013 regarding Chile, Peru and Indonesia, 
and in 2014 regarding Ecuador. Five meeting minutes contained discussion relevant to 
Thailand (M42-46); seven relevant to Chile (M59-65); six relevant to Peru (M60-65); six 
relevant to Indonesia (M60-65); and four relevant to Ecuador (M62-65).  
 
All the measures subject to Specific Trade Concerns included mandatory requirements 
for front-of-pack text and images, targeting nutrients relevant to the prevention of 
  
 
10 
NCDs. We present summaries of each measure below, based on information presented 
in the TBT meeting discussions. 
 
Summary of labelling measures subject to Specific Trade Concerns 
Thailand 
In 2007, concerns were raised regarding the government of Thailand’s 2006 proposal 
for a mandatory front-of-pack warning label (“Children Should Take Less”) and traffic-
light-like presentation of nutrition information for five categories of snack foods 
commonly consumed by children (WTO 2007c). This was part of a comprehensive 
policy approach to reducing malnutrition in children. Implementation was postponed in 
2008, and in 2013 Thailand implemented an alternative measure including a warning 
label (“consume small amount and exercise for healthy condition”) and mandatory 
Guideline Daily Amounts labelling for certain categories of processed foods, after which 
there have been no further concerns raised in the TBT Committee (WTO 2013a). 
 
Chile 
In 2013, concerns were raised in the TBT committee regarding the government of 
Chile’s proposed mandatory nutrition information requirement to prevent obesity and 
NCDs through provision of improved nutrition information, as an addition to existing 
nutrition promotion strategies (WTO 2014b). This applied to certain categories of 
processed foods, in the form of an octagonal "STOP sign" covering 20% of the package, 
but was amended in 2014 to hexagonal labels for foods exceeding thresholds for 
saturated fats, sodium, sugar or calories (WTO 2014b). The regulation was developed in 
a consultative process, and was based on health data showing rising rates of child 
obesity and related NCDs.  
  
 
11 
 
Indonesia 
In 2013, concerns were raised in the TBT committee regarding the government of 
Indonesia’s proposed mandatory labelling (including warning labels) for sugar, fat and 
sodium content on processed and fast foods, to better inform consumers about nutrition 
and prevent NCDs (WTO 2013c). The labelling requirements were based on the Balance 
Nutrition Guidelines and related 2008 WHO recommendations, as well as data from a 
2014 nutrition survey conducted by the Ministry of Health (WTO 2015a). 
 
Peru 
In 2013, concerns were raised in the TBT committee regarding the government of 
Peru’s proposed mandatory interpretive label for processed foods (including a warning 
label), part of the “Act to Promote Healthy Eating Among Children and Adolescents”. 
The objective of the measure was to reduce obesity and NCDs, although details of the 
measure were still being finalised at the time of the March 2015 meeting of the TBT 
Committee (WTO 2015a). The measure was part of a comprehensive policy approach to 
preventing NCDs.  
 
Ecuador 
In 2014, concerns were raised in the TBT Committee regarding the government of 
Ecuador’s proposed mandatory graphic labelling (“traffic light labelling”) for content of 
salt, sugar and fat (WTO 2014c). The regulations aim to combat Ecuador’s rising rates of 
obesity, cardiovascular disease and diabetes, identified in a survey conducted by the 
Ministry of Health in 2012, by addressing the lack of information on food labels (WTO 
2014c). The measure was part of a comprehensive policy package to improve nutrition 
  
 
12 
and prevent NCDs, and based on indicator 3.3.1 of the Pan American Health 
Organization's Plan of Action, as well as a systematic review of scientific evidence on 
interpretive labelling (WTO 2015a). 
 
Analysis of discussions and concerns raised 
Notably, in all Specific Trade Concerns regarding nutrition labelling, members raising 
concerns identified the objectives pursued by the countries proposing mandatory 
interpretive nutrition labelling as shared, legitimate objectives (Article 2.2, see Box 1).  
These legitimate objectives were articulated during meetings as: “providing consumers 
with sufficient information about the food which they consume and reducing non-
communicable diseases”; “provide consumers with information so as to make 
appropriate dietary choices and reduce the risk of diet-related NCDs”; “empower 
consumers to make an informed choice in order to foster effective competition and 
consumer welfare” (WTO 2014d); and other similar wordings.  There were also no 
allegations of national discrimination (Article 2.1) regarding these mandatory 
interpretive nutrition labelling initiatives.  
 
However, members raised concerns about the interpretative labelling measures for the 
following reasons. 
 
Need for justification of the measures 
Under the commitments in the TBT Agreement, WTO members can request justification 
for another member’s measure if it may have a significant effect on trade (Article 2.5). 
Justification should specifically address issues in Articles 2.2 and 2.3, including: the 
necessity of the measure, in relation to its effect on trade; its effectiveness in achieving 
  
 
13 
the objective pursued; its proportionality to the risk involved; and whether there are 
alternatives that could achieve the policy goal, with less impact on trade (see Box 1). 
However, this requirement for justification is lessened if the measure is based on a 
relevant international standard and is designed to achieve a legitimate objective (Article 
2.5; see Box 1).  
 
More trade restrictive than necessary 
 Members stated that all interpretive labelling measures are likely to have a significant 
effect on trade (Article 2.2, Article 2.6). The effect on trade is largely due to the 
mandatory nature of the labelling, and that each system was unique to the 
implementing country: exporters in other countries would need to comply with a novel 
system of food labelling for only one of their export markets (WTO 2013b, WTO 2014a). 
In some cases concerns were also raised about further barriers to trade resulting from 
the implementation requirements of the measures, such as the ‘multiplicity of 
documents’ required to prove conformity with the regulations (WTO 2013c, WTO 
2015a). 
 
All members raising concerns indicated that all the proposed measures were likely to be 
more trade restrictive than necessary; placing unnecessary burdens on producers, 
exporters or consumers (Article 2.2). The TBT Agreement gives members the right to 
determine the level of protection (e.g. of public health) they deem appropriate when 
pursuing legitimate objectives. However, this ‘necessity test’ indicates that there should 
be a degree of proportionality between a measure’s trade restrictiveness and the risk 
that the measure seeks to mitigate. 
 
  
 
14 
In the discussions relating to all interpretive labelling measures, members suggested 
that there was insufficient evidence for effectiveness that would ‘necessitate’ the 
significant impact on trade anticipated (see following section for further details on 
evidence). For example, comments such as “the Peruvian measure might be more trade 
restrictive than necessary to achieve the stated legitimate objective of reducing obesity 
in order to fight noncommunicable diseases. In this context, it [is] absolutely essential to 
know the scientific basis of the measure” (WTO 2013c). 
 
In all Specific Trade Concerns, concerns regarding trade restrictiveness were also linked 
directly to lack of consistency of the measures with international standards. For 
example, comments such as “[Chile’s] regulatory proposals ...deviate from international 
standards, may not have a scientific basis and would likely be more trade-restrictive 
than necessary” (WTO 2013c). Trade restrictiveness was also linked to the potential 
availability of alternative measures; for example, “Indonesia could consider less trade 
restrictive alternative measures that could also achieve its consumer health 
objective”(WTO 2014c), “questions as to whether the [Thai] measure was necessary in 
light of potential alternatives”(WTO 2009), and “[Ecuador’s] system of colour coded 
charts may ... not constitute the least restrictive alternative necessary to fulfil the 
desired legitimate objective” (WTO 2014a). 
 
Members raising concerns also indicated two practical issues that potentially made the 
measures more trade restrictive than necessary. The first related to specific policy 
settings, such as detailed and prescriptive requirements for the placement and size of 
the interpretive label (particularly in relation to small packages) (WTO 2013c, WTO 
2015a). One issue raised repeatedly is whether stickers could be used for the labelling – 
  
 
15 
this was identified as a strategy that would make it simpler for industry to comply and 
make the measure less trade restrictive (WTO 2013c). A second issue was the 
requirement, in some cases, such as Chile, to label a large range of foods. 
 
Scientific evidence for effectiveness of the measure in achieving the objective 
Regarding the justification for all the measures, queries were raised regarding the 
evidence for their effectiveness in achieving the (legitimate) policy objective of 
improving diets and preventing NCDs (Article 2.2) (WTO 2013b, WTO 2015a). A 
repeated query was the need for information regarding the scientific basis for nutrient 
thresholds, on which the labelling was based. For example, queries such as “what 
scientific evidence was behind [Ecuador’s] categories for levels of concentration of 
nutritional components?” (WTO 2015a). 
 
Information was also requested regarding the selection of target foods and food 
categories. For example, “[no] clear understanding of the criteria used to add or remove 
foods to or from Thailand's list of applicable foods, and the reasons why some 
categories had been included and others not” (WTO 2007b). This was linked to 
concerns that the measures selectively applied to packaged foods or only certain snack 
foods.  For example, “...questioned the scientific merit of the proposed [Thai] regulation 
and argued that it discriminated against snack foods”(WTO 2008). Similarly, another 
member queried why Chile’s proposed regulation did not apply to meals sold in fast 
food chains, or products such as sausage, hamburger, cheese and chocolate (WTO 
2014c).  
 
  
 
16 
Concerns about effectiveness were in many cases linked to whether the measures were 
proportional to the policy objective pursued. In particular, comments that the use of 
expressions such as “high in”, warning labels, and symbols such as “stop signs” may 
have the effect of creating consumer fear or mislead consumers through “demonising” 
foods required to have “negative” labels showing high amounts of nutrients associated 
with NCD risk (WTO 2014c).  
 
The potential for less trade restrictive alternative measures to achieve the policy 
objectives 
The necessity of a measure is linked to the availability of less trade restrictive 
alternatives. If a less trade restrictive alternative measure would equally fulfil the policy 
objective and is reasonably available, that measure would be preferable from the 
perspective of international trade law. 
 
In the context of concerns regarding interpretive nutrition labelling, almost all members 
raising concerns queried the availability of alternative measures. For example, 
comments such as “had [Ecuador] considered alternative, less restrictive measures that 
would encourage the consumer to ... make the appropriate choice?” (WTO 2014b), or 
“had [Indonesia] considered less trade restrictive alternatives to pursue its objective?” 
(WTO 2014b). 
 
Members raising concerns also identified potential alternative measures to achieve the 
policy objective. Specific alternatives to interpretive labelling identified in the text 
(particularly in 2014 and 2015 meetings) included voluntary approaches being 
undertaken by Australia, the EU and Switzerland (WTO 2014a, WTO 2015a).  This 
  
 
17 
suggests that a key concern regarding trade restrictiveness is the mandatory nature of 
the measures. 
 
Another alternative proposed was the use of current Codex Alimentarius Guidelines as 
the basis for labelling. For example, “using the Codex Nutrient Reference Values for 
labelling purposes for sodium and saturated fat, which provided another means for 
consumers to identify foods "low" and "high" in nutrients of concern and the Codex 
"low" claims, "no added sugars" claims, and other conditions for health claims” (WTO 
2014b). In four instances, education campaigns were identified as potential alternative 
policy measures (WTO 2013c, WTO 2014c, WTO 2014d). 
 
Consistency with international standards 
Harmonization of technical regulations helps to facilitate international trade. For this 
reason, the TBT Agreement strongly encourages members to use “relevant” 
international standards, guides or recommendations “as a basis” for their regulations 
and standards (Article 2.4). This incentive is strengthened by Article 2.5’s conferral of a 
presumption that a measure does not create an unnecessary obstacle to international 
trade if it is prepared in accordance with relevant international standards. At the same 
time, the Agreement also recognizes that harmonization on the basis of international 
standards may not be desirable in all contexts due to divergent national preferences 
and circumstances.  
 
All the interpretive nutrition labelling measures were subject to concerns regarding 
their deviation from the Codex Alimentarius Guidelines (see Box 2). One common 
concern was that interpretive labelling was inconsistent with the Codex Guideline 
  
 
18 
stating that the nutrient declaration "should not lead consumers to believe that there is 
exact quantitative knowledge of what individuals should eat in order to maintain health, 
but rather to convey an understanding of the quantity of nutrients contained in the 
product" (Codex Alimentarius Committee 2013).  
 
In addition, members noted that the current Codex Guidelines do not identify criteria 
for labelling foods as “high in” calories, salt, fat or sugar (WTO 2013c, WTO 2014b). For 
example, comments such as “No nutrient thresholds have been established by the Codex 
for the nutrients targeted by the Peruvian legislation” (WTO 2013c). 
 
Other potentially relevant standards identified by the members raising concerns  
included WHO's dietary guidelines (WTO 2013c, WTO 2014d), the WHO "Global Action 
Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases 2013-2020" (WTO 
2014a), and recommendations by the World Health Organization/Pan American Health 
Organization (WHO/PAHO) (WTO 2015a). Two members indicated none of the current 
international standards were relevant to interpretive nutrition labelling (WTO 2014d, 
WTO 2015a). 
 
 
Box 2: What are the potentially relevant standards? Key points of Codex 
Alimentarius Commission guidance relevant to nutrition labelling 
 
The main standards setting body with respect to food safety is the Codex Alimentarius 
Commission (‘Codex’), established by the World Health Organization and United 
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. Codex has developed two standards specific 
  
 
19 
to nutrition labelling: the Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling and the General Standard 
for Labelling of Prepackaged Food 
 
Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling(Codex Alimentarius Commisssion 2013): 
Information should be supplied only for nutrients considered important, and ‘…should 
not lead consumers to believe that there is exact quantitative knowledge of what 
individuals should eat in order to maintain health, but rather to convey an 
understanding of the quantity of nutrients contained in the product.’ 
 
Supplementary nutrition information “…is intended to increase the consumer’s 
understanding of the nutritional value of their food and to assist in interpreting the 
nutrient declaration. There are a number of ways of presenting such information ...” And 
“…should be accompanied by consumer education programmes to increase consumer 
understanding and use of the information.”...  
 
General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Food(Codex Alimentarius 
Commisssion 2010): 
Labels and labelling on prepackaged food should not present food in such a way that is 
“false, misleading or deceptive, or is likely to create an erroneous impression.”   
 
Potentially relevant reference points for labelling regarding nutrients: 
- Nutrient reference values (NRVs) for NCDs (sodium and saturated fat)  
- The Guidelines for Use of Nutrition and Health Claims regarding: sodium and saturated 
fats (section 6.3.1), “light” (section 6.5) and sugars and sodium/salt (sections 7.1 and 
7.2). 
  
 
20 
 
Lack of time for comment 
The apparent lack of consistency between the measures and existing international 
standards means that they are subject to Article 2.9 of the TBT Agreement. This Article 
addresses processes for notification to the WTO, including allowing time for comment 
on draft regulations (see Box 1). These provisions relate to transparency as a 
fundamental pillar of the TBT Agreement, and are a key element of ‘good regulatory 
practice’.  
 
Members repeatedly raised concerns regarding the measures proposed by Chile, 
Ecuador, Indonesia and Peru related to the lack of formal notification of proposed 
measures and/or amendments, the amount of time allowed for comment by other 
members, and relatively short timeframes for implementation (WTO 2013b, WTO 
2013c, WTO 2014c, WTO 2014d, WTO 2014a, WTO 2014b, WTO 2015a). Even where 
timelines for implementation exceeded that prescribed by Article 2.9 of the TBT 
Agreement (for example, Chile allowed one year), this was argued to be insufficient in 
comparison to that allowed for other labelling interventions, such as the voluntary 
scheme implemented by the EU (3 year implementation timeframe). 
 
  
 
21 
Discussion 
This analysis of Specific Trade Concerns raised in the TBT Committee over the past 
decade – and particularly since 2013 – underscores the need to consider public health 
nutrition labeling interventions also as trade policy interventions. Nutrition labelling for 
public health purposes has been consistently identified in discussions in the WTO TBT 
Committee as a legitimate policy objective. However, queries have been raised 
regarding the justification of the specific labelling measures proposed, and the scientific 
evidence for effectiveness of such measures. Concerns have also been raised regarding 
the consistency of the measures with international standards. 
 
Our analysis should also be considered in the light of the political economy of trade. 
WTO disputes regarding trade and tobacco have indicated that concerns regarding 
compliance with WTO Agreements are also influenced by economic and political 
interests. For example, in the case of plain packaging of tobacco, formal disputes were 
raised regarding WTO compliance, even though legal analyses indicated that the 
legislation was formally compliant with global trade law (Mitchell 2010, Jarman 2013). 
Other observers have noted the use of trade and investment disputes to undermine 
and/or stall tobacco control legislation (Lencucha and Drope 2015). This has significant 
relevance to nutrition, where the processed food industry is a significant political actor 
and has been seen to lobby effectively against mandatory labelling (Mandle et al. 2015). 
In addition – and unlike tobacco – there is no international convention or specific 
standard regarding nutrition labelling for NCD prevention. In this context, there is thus 
an imbalance between the strong global policy norms regarding trade (economic 
interests) and weak global policy norms regarding nutrition policy. 
 
  
 
22 
Theories of policy learning can help to reframe policy challenges as opportunities, by 
highlighting considerations relevant to other jurisdictions or other times (Rose 1993). 
Hall’s theory of social learning highlights key issues influencing learning as framing, the 
context in which policy makers work, and the importance of policy design (Hall 1993). 
We identified four lessons for public health policy makers that arise from this analysis 
of discussions in the TBT Committee: to frame the policy objectives strategically, in 
relation to the necessity of the measure; to strengthen policy processes in ways that 
pro-actively identify potential trade issues; and to minimise (where possible) potential 
trade restrictiveness, or what was referred to in the TBT Committee discussions as 
‘practical’ concerns; and to engage with the Codex Alimentarius Commission processes 
to develop international guidance on interpretative labelling.  
 
First, strategic framing of the policy objectives to align clearly with the policy settings 
can assist in demonstrating the necessity of the measure. Although the ‘legitimate 
objective’ of protecting human health should be invoked, it is essential that the objective 
of the measure is defined in relation to how the measure will address the specific 
problem, because the policy objective defines the evidence required to establish 
necessity. For example, if a mandatory nutrition labelling measure is stated to pursue an 
objective of providing consumers with nutrition information in a more understandable 
format, then a challenging member would need to show there are less trade restrictive 
alternatives that would equally fulfil this aim. Previous disputes highlight the high 
threshold applied to this test. Where an alternative means of achieving the objective 
entails greater ‘risks’ that the objective will not be fulfilled, this will not be considered a 
valid alternative, even if it were less trade restrictive (WTO 2011). In contrast, where a 
measure is framed as pursuing a broader objective of reducing the burden of obesity or 
  
 
23 
NCDs, this opens potential scope for a complainant to propose a wider variety of 
measures that may achieve this aim.   
 
This suggests that objectives need to be framed in relation to the first point of impact of 
the measure, which is usually provision of understandable information (Figure 1). 
Evidence to justify the measure would then focus on: best available current advice on 
healthy consumption levels (either a country’s own daily recommended levels, or some 
internationally accepted advice), clarity and accuracy of messaging (regarding the need 
for ‘interpretive’ labelling), and understanding by consumers with limited literacy 
(again the need for ‘interpretive’ labelling). It will also be important to explicitly cite the 
precautionary principle in response to queries regarding ‘science’ and ‘scientific 
justification’ for these novel and innovative policy measures that have little ‘in situ’ 
evidence for their effect. It would also be ideal to include plans for evaluation to 
contribute to the state of knowledge regarding effectiveness of interpretive labelling. 
 
In relation to this, it is also important that interpretive labelling measures be framed as 
part of a comprehensive policy response to nutrition-related chronic disease alongside 
components such as education programs, minimizing the opportunity to suggest these 
are available as ‘less trade restrictive alternatives.’ It is notable that in previous 
disputes, an alternative measure has not been considered ‘reasonably available’ where 
it is more properly considered part of a suite of complementary measures intended to 
act in concert with the mandatory interpretive nutrition labelling requirements at stake 
(WTO 2007a). 
 
  
 
24 
Second, the findings suggested benefits of pro-active engagement with trade policy 
makers at early stages of policy design. In particular, this would help to identify 
appropriate points and avenues for notification and practical issues of WTO compliance, 
such as allowing sufficient time for notification and implementation. It may also help to 
identify any easily resolvable trade concerns before a draft is notified. 
 
Third, the findings highlighted opportunities to reduce trade restrictiveness without 
compromising on core public health elements of label design. For example, it may be 
possible to make implementation less burdensome through the use of stickers and 
graduated implementation timeframes. Early consideration of the practicalities of 
implementation, such as the issue related to package size identified in the discussion, 
may also reduce trade-restrictiveness. Although the voluntary nature of the measures 
cited as alternatives from Australia, Switzerland and the EU means that they may not be 
directly comparable to these mandatory measures, there is potential to draw on other 
features of their design. For example, in Australia, the high level policy statement which 
guided development of a front-of-pack labelling system establish at the outset that such 
a system is not a stand-alone strategy, but fits within the context of broader health 
strategies, including explicit recognition of its role in supporting the Australian Dietary 
Guidelines and its consistency with existing Nutrient Reference Values. Eight aims of the 
scheme are outlined, drawing on evidence of its potential impact on both consumer 
understanding and improving the food environment through driving reformulation 
(Australia New Zealand Food Regulation Ministerial Council).  
 
Fourth, one of the key issues raised by the discussions in the TBT Committee is whether 
‘relevant’ international standards currently exist. As described, Codex Alimentarius 
  
 
25 
leaves room for interpretive labelling but doesn’t provide guidance regarding details. 
Codex establishes ‘minimum standards’ for food safety – providing a ‘floor’ for 
governments to draw on in ensuring food safety, while allowing for differing levels of 
protection and innovation to meet emerging challenges (Cosbey 2000). In contrast, the 
emphasis on harmonisation and minimising trade restrictiveness in the TBT Agreement 
suggests the need for specific guidance for measures. Previous disputes have arisen in 
situations such as this, where scientific evidence suggests that a measure stronger than 
existing international standards is advisable to protect human health based on the 
precautionary principle (Turvey and Mojduszka 2005). This tension is reflected in the 
apparent confusion evident in the TBT discussions about whether a relevant standard 
exists. This suggests a need for development of international guidance regarding 
evidence and use of interpretive nutrition labelling. Ideally, this would be explicitly 
framed as a baseline (rather than a ceiling), which would enable it to serve as a 
reference point for national action, while enabling innovation. 
 
The requests for justification regarding interpretive nutrition labelling measures in the 
TBT Committee raise the question of whether trade sector concerns might stifle 
innovation in nutrition labelling policy. Regulatory chill in public health stemming from 
trade concerns, a situation in which governments hesitate to implement new policies or 
legislation, has been well documented (Tienhaara 2011). Voluntary approaches to 
labelling were repeatedly identified as an ‘alternative’ to these mandatory interpretive 
labelling measures discussed in the TBT Committee. This suggests that a specific area 
where regulatory chill may be likely to result is in the adoption of voluntary rather than 
mandatory approaches to interpretive nutrition labelling. This potential for regulatory 
chill would only be enhanced by the preference of the food industry for voluntary 
  
 
26 
approaches (Mandle, Tugendhaft et al. 2015). However, strong rationales for mandatory 
approaches remain. For example, voluntary approaches may have limited long term 
effectiveness, due to disincentives to participate resulting from costs accruing to only 
compliant companies (in the form of implementation costs and perhaps market share) 
(Roe et al. 2014).  
 
Overall, however, this analysis of discussions in the TBT Committee indicates that there 
is significant policy space at the international level for innovation in interpretive 
nutrition labelling policy, and has highlighted opportunities to strengthen nutrition 
labelling measures at both the international and national level. This policy space may 
not preclude a dispute or a ‘chill’, since the behaviours of corporations and governments 
are not fully predictable; but care in how interpretive nutrition labelling measures are 
crafted in light of trade concerns can minimize such a risk and help ensure that trade 
policy is coherent with nutrition action (Hawkes 2015). 
 
 
References 
Australia New Zealand Food Regulation Ministerial Council "Front of Pack Labelling 
Policy Statement, 23 October 2009." 
Babio, N., P. Vicent, L. López, A. Benito, J. Basulto and J. Salas-Salvadó (2014). 
"Adolescents’ ability to select healthy food using two different front-of-pack food labels: 
a cross-over study." Public Health Nutrition 17(06): 1403-1409. 
Bialkova, S., K. G. Grunert and H. van Trijp (2013). "Standing out in the crowd: The effect 
of information clutter on consumer attention for front-of-pack nutrition labels." Food 
Policy 41(0): 65-74. 
Bloom, D. E., E. T. Cafiero, E. Jané-Llopis, S. Abrahams-Gessel, L. R. Bloom, S. Fathima, A. 
B. Feigl, T. Gaziano, M. Mowafi, A. Pandya, K. Prettner, L. Rosenberg, B. Seligman, A. Z. 
Stein and C. Weinstein (2011). The Global Economic Burden of Noncommunicable 
Diseases. Geneva, World Economic Forum. 
Campos, S., J. Doxey and D. Hammond (2011). "Nutrition labels on pre-packaged foods: a 
systematic review." Public Health Nutrition 14(08): 1496-1506. 
  
 
27 
Codex Alimentarius Commisssion (2010). General Standard for the Labelling of 
Prepackaged Foods. Rome, United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. 
Codex Alimentarius Commisssion (2013). Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling. Rome, 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. 
Codex Alimentarius Committee (2013). Guidelines on nutrition labelling (CAC/GL 2-
1985). Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization. 
Cosbey, A. (2000). A Forced Evolution? The Codex Alimentarius Commission, Scientific 
Uncertainty and the Precautionary Principle. Winnipeg, Canada, International Institute 
for Sustainable Development. 
European Food Information Council (2014) "Global Update on Nutrition Labelling ". 
Graham, D. J., J. L. Orquin and V. H. M. Visschers (2012). "Eye tracking and nutrition label 
use: A review of the literature and recommendations for label enhancement." Food 
Policy 37(4): 378-382. 
Hall, P. (1993). "Policy Paradigms, Social Learning, and the State: The Case of Economic 
Policymaking in Britain." Comparative Politics 25(3): 275-296. 
Hawkes, C. (2015). Enhancing Coherence between Trade Policy and Nutrition Action: 
Implementing the Framework for Action of the Second International Conference on 
Nutrition, United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition. 
Hersey, J. C., K. C. Wohlgenant, J. E. Arsenault, K. M. Kosa and M. K. Muth (2013). "Effects 
of front-of-package and shelf nutrition labeling systems on consumers." Nutrition 
Reviews 71(1): 1-14. 
Jarman, H. (2013). "Attack on Australia: Tobacco industry challenges to plain 
packaging." Journal of Public Health Policy 34(3): 375-387. 
Lencucha, R. and J. Drope (2015). "Plain packaging: an opportunity for improved 
international policy coherence?" Health Promotion International 30(2): 281-290. 
Mandle, J., A. Tugendhaft, J. Michalow and K. Hofman (2015). "Nutrition labelling: a 
review of research on consumer and industry response in the global South." Global 
Health Action 8: 10.3402/gha.v3408.25912. 
Maubach, N., J. Hoek and D. Mather (2014). "Interpretive front-of-pack nutrition labels. 
Comparing competing recommendations." Appetite 82(0): 67-77. 
Mitchell, A. D. (2010). "Australia's move to the plain packaging of cigarettes and its WTO 
compatibility." Asian Journal of WTO and International Health Law and Policy 5(2). 
Roe, B. E., M. F. Teisl and C. R. Deans (2014). "The Economics of Voluntary Versus 
Mandatory Labels." Annual Review of Resource Economics 6(1): 407-427. 
Rose, R. (1993). Lesson-drawing in public policy: a guide to learning across time and 
space. Chatham, New Jersey, Chatham House Publishers, Inc. 
Siegrist, M., R. Leins-Hess and C. Keller (2015). "Which front-of-pack nutrition label is 
the most efficient one? The results of an eye-tracker study." Food Quality and 
Preference 39: 183-190. 
Tienhaara, K. (2011). Regulatory Chill and the Threat of Arbitration: A View from 
Political Science. Evolution in Investment Treaty Law and Arbitration. C. B. a. K. Miles. 
Cambridge UK, Cambridge University Press: 606-627. 
Turvey, C. G. and E. M. Mojduszka (2005). "The Precautionary Principle and the law of 
unintended consequences." Food Policy 30(2): 145-161. 
United Nations General Assembly (2011). Political declaration of the High-level Meeting 
of the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases. 
New York, United Nations. 
  
 
28 
van Herpen, E., E. Seiss and H. C. M. van Trijp (2012). "The role of familiarity in front-of-
pack label evaluation and use: A comparison between the United Kingdom and The 
Netherlands." Food Quality and Preference 26(1): 22-34. 
Van Kleef, E. and H. Dagevosb (2014). "The Growing Role of Front-of-Pack Nutrition 
Profile Labeling: A Consumer Perspective on Key Issues and Controversies." Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 55(3): 291-303. 
Volkova, E. and C. Ni Mhurchu (2015). "The Influence of Nutrition Labeling and Point-of-
Purchase Information on Food Behaviours." Current Obesity Reports 4(1): 19-29. 
Vyth, E., I. Steenhuis, A. Roodenburg, J. Brug and J. Seidell (2010). "Front-of-pack 
nutrition label stimulates healthier product development: a quantitative analysis." 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 7(1): 65. 
Wartella, E. A., A. H. Lichtenstein, A. Yaktine, R. Nathan and Committee on Examination 
of Front-of-Package Nutrition Rating Systems and Symbols (Phase II) (2012). Front-of-
Package Nutrition Rating Systems and Symbols: Promoting Healthier Choices. 
Washington DC, Institute of Medicine. 
WHO (2013). Follow-up to the Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the 
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases. 
SIXTY-SIXTH WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY WHA66.10 Agenda item 13.1, 13.2, 27 May 
2013. Annex: Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable 
diseases 2013-2020. Geneva, World Health Organization. 
WTO (1994). Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade. Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2007a). Appellate Body Report, Brazil – Measures Affecting Imports of Retreaded 
Tyres. Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
WTO (2007b). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the Meeting of 21 
March 2007 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/41). Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2007c). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 21 
March 2007; (vi) 
Thailand – Labelling Requirement for Snack Foods 
(G/TBT/THA/215). Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
WTO (2008). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the Meeting of 9 
November 2007 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/43) Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2009). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the Meeting of 5 - 6 
November 2008 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/46). Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2011). United States – Measures concerning the importation, marketing and sale 
of tuna and tuna products. Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
WTO (2013a). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Addendum Revision - 
Thailand – Labelling Requirement for Snack Foods 2 April 2013 
(G/TBT/N/THA/215/Rev.1). Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
WTO (2013b). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 6 - 
7 March 2013 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/59). Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2013c). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 17, 
19 and 20 June 2013 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/60). Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
  
 
29 
WTO (2014a). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 5-6 
November 2014 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/64) Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2014b). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 18 
June 2014 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/63) Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
WTO (2014c). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 19 
- 20 March 2014 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/62) Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2014d). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 30 
- 31 October 2013 - Chairperson: Mr. Jingo Kikukawa - Note by the Secretariat 
(G/TBT/M/61). Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
WTO (2015a). Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade - Minutes of the meeting of 18-
19 March 2015 - Note by the Secretariat (G/TBT/M/65) Geneva, World Trade 
Organization. 
WTO (2015b). Technical Barriers to Trade: Reducing trade friction from standards and 
regulations. Geneva, World Trade Organization. 
 
 
