 V A S C U L AR B I O L O G Y
2017 © The Authors,
some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science.
Leukotriene B4 antagonism ameliorates
experimental lymphedema
Wen Tian,1,2* Stanley G. Rockson,2*† Xinguo Jiang,1,2* Jeanna Kim,2* Adrian Begaye,2
Eric M. Shuffle,1,2 Allen B. Tu,1,2 Matthew Cribb,3 Zhanna Nepiyushchikh,3 Abdullah H. Feroze,2
Roham T. Zamanian,2 Gundeep S. Dhillon,2 Norbert F. Voelkel,4 Marc Peters-Golden,5
Jan Kitajewski,6 J. Brandon Dixon,3 Mark R. Nicolls1,2*†
Acquired lymphedema is a cancer sequela and a global health problem currently lacking pharmacologic therapy. We
have previously demonstrated that ketoprofen, an anti-inflammatory agent with dual 5-lipoxygenase and cyclo-
oxygenase inhibitory properties, effectively reverses histopathology in experimental lymphedema. We show that
the therapeutic benefit of ketoprofen is specifically attributable to its inhibition of the 5-lipoxygenase metabolite leu-
kotriene B4 (LTB4). LTB4 antagonism reversed edema, improved lymphatic function, and restored lymphatic
architecture in the murine tail model of lymphedema. In vitro, LTB4 was functionally bimodal: Lower LTB4 concentra-
tions promoted human lymphatic endothelial cell sprouting and growth, but higher concentrations inhibited lym-
phangiogenesis and induced apoptosis. During lymphedema progression, lymphatic fluid LTB4 concentrations rose
from initial prolymphangiogenic concentrations into an antilymphangiogenic range. LTB4 biosynthesis was similarly
elevated in lymphedema patients. Low concentrations of LTB4 stimulated, whereas high concentrations of LTB4
inhibited, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 and Notch pathways in cultured human lymphatic endo-
thelial cells. Lymphatic-specific Notch1−/− mice were refractory to the beneficial effects of LTB4 antagonism, suggest-
ing that LTB4 suppression of Notch signaling is an important mechanism in disease maintenance. In summary, we
found that LTB4 was harmful to lymphatic repair at the concentrations observed in established disease. Our findings
suggest that LTB4 is a promising drug target for the treatment of acquired lymphedema.
INTRODUCTION
Lymphedema is a state of vascular functional insufficiency in which de-
creased lymphatic clearance of interstitial fluid leads to edema forma-
tion and progressive, debilitating architectural alterations of the skin
and supporting tissues (1). Primary lymphedema occurs infrequently
on an idiopathic or heritable basis [for example, Milroy’s disease, due
to a missense inactivating mutation of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 3 (Vegfr3)]. Secondary lymphedema, by distinction, is
the result of acquired damage to the lymphatic vasculature, such as
occurs after lymph node resection and radiotherapy in cancer patients
or after parasitic infection (2). Acquired lymphedema affects 15 to 50%
of cancersurvivors, and lymphatic filariasiswithlymphedema afflicts an
estimated 90 million individuals globally (2).
Lymphedema is characterized by the nonresolving accumulation of
protein-rich interstitial fluid, the presence of a significant inflammatory
cell infiltrate, and dysregulated regional immune responses. Subsequent
adipose tissue deposition and fibrosis promote progressive anatomic
distortion and loss of function in the affected areas (2). Current treat-
ments, including physiotherapy and the use of compression garments,
only transiently decrease edema and do not substantially prevent the
tissue destruction that may accompany the more advanced stages of dis-
ease; pharmacotherapeutic options remain extremely limited and large-
ly ineffective (3). We previously demonstrated that ketoprofen, a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) typically used as a pain
reliever, reversed the edema and structural alterations of experimental
lymphedema; this preclinical study led to a randomized, blinded, placebo-
controlledclinicaltrialthatteststhisagentinhumandisease(NCT02257970),
which is now fully enrolled and awaiting completion (4). Unfortunately,
ketoprofen has gastrointestinal, cardiac, nervous system, renal, and he-
patic toxicities, which potentially limit its long-term use, and safer, more
targeted therapies will be necessary for amelioration and stabilization of
this chronic disease.
The mechanism by which ketoprofen ameliorates lymphedema is
unknown (5–7). Ketoprofen, an NSAID inhibitor of cyclooxygenase
(COX), has a relatively unique pharmacology within its class, insofar
as it also inhibits 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) (5–7). 5-LO oxygenates arachi-
donic acid to yield an unstable intermediate, leukotriene A4 (LTA4).
LTA4 is quickly converted by LTA4 hydrolase (LTA4H) to LTB4 or, al-
ternatively, by LTC4 synthase (LTC4S) to the cysteinyl leukotrienes
(cysLTs) (LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4) (8). The dual inhibitory property
of ketoprofen implies that the efficacy of ketoprofen in experimental
lymphedema might be mediated by its capacity to inhibit either or both
of these two pathways of arachidonic acid metabolism.
The murine model of subacute, acquired lymphedema closely simu-
lates the volume responses, histopathology, immune trafficking, and
lymphoscintigraphic characteristics of acquired human lymphedema
(9), and the cutaneous inflammatory responses observed in mouse tail
lymphedema replicate those of acquired lymphedema in humans (10).
Using this model along with the studies that adopted human lymphatic
endothelialcell(HLEC)culture,wefoundthatalthoughlowerLTB4con-
centrations promoted lymphatic sprouting and growth in vitro, higher
concentrations inhibited lymphangiogenesis and induced apoptosis of
HLECs. After lymphatic ablation, lymph LTB4 concentrations were ini-
tially in the prolymphangiogenic range but rose, over subsequent days,
into an antilymphangiogenic range. Low concentrations of LTB4 stimu-
lated, whereas higher concentrations observed in lymphedema state
inhibited, VEGFR3 and Notch pathways in LECs. Lymphatic-specific
1VAPalo AltoHealth CareSystem, PaloAlto, CA 94304, USA. 2StanfordUniversity School
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 3Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30332, USA. 4Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284, USA. 5Univer-
sity of Michigan Health Systems, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 6University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: rockson@stanford.edu (S.G.R.); mnicolls@stanford.
edu (M.R.N.)
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
1 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Notch1−/−mice didnot benefitfromLTB4 antagonism, consistent witha
critical role for LTB4 suppression of Notch signaling as a mechanism of
disease propagation.
RESULTS
Ketoprofen efficacy in a preclinical model of lymphedema
can be attributed to its inhibition of LTB4
Whereas sham surgery (sham), which involves tail skin incision only,
does not cause tail lymphedema, lymphatic ablation surgery (lymphatic
surgery) leads to progressive tail swelling and associated structural al-
terations (Fig. 1, A and B, and fig. S1). Lymphedema in this model is
characterized by a disease progression phase during the first 2 weeks
with minimal resolution over the subsequent weeks (Fig. 1B). To help
determine whether ketoprofen’s therapeutic effects in lymphedema de-
pended on its ability to inhibit COX and/or 5-LO pathways of arachid-
onate metabolism, we used pharmacologic agents that block COX
(ibuprofen), 5-LO (zileuton), CysLT1 (montelukast), LTA4H (bestatin),
andtheLTB4receptorBLT1(Ly293111andlentiviralshLtb4r1)(Fig.1C).
Although ibuprofen and montelukast were ineffective, therapies that de-
creased the biosynthesisof LTB4(ketoprofen,zileuton,andbestatin)orits
signaling via the high-affinity receptor BLT1 (Ly293111 and shLtb4r1)
effectively reversed tail edema, dermal/epidermal thickening, and lym-
phatic dilation (Fig. 1, D to M, and fig. S2). These results demonstrate
that the efficacy of ketoprofen for the treatment of lymphedema is likely
attributable to its inhibitory effects on LTB4 signaling.
LTB4 antagonism leads to improved tail anatomy, better
lymphatic clearance, diminished tissue inflammation, and
improved blood vessel integrity
To evaluate the effects of LTB4 antagonism on mouse tail lymphatic
anatomy and function, we compared bestatin-treated groups with both
saline-treated lymphatic ablation surgery controls and sham surgery
controls. Relative to saline-treated animals, bestatin therapy conferred
a relatively thinner dermis and epidermis while better preserving the
epidermal/dermal junction (Fig. 2A). Fluorescence microlymphangi-
ography of mice with red fluorescence tied to the expression of the
LEC marker Prox1 (Prox1-Cre-ERT2-tdTomato mice) revealed dilated
and poorly draining lymphatics in the diseased reporter mice, which
were effectively restored by bestatin treatment (Fig. 2B). We further
quantified the lymphatic function using a novel technology integrating
a NIR imaging system with a controlled pressure cuff to modulate
lymph flow (11, 12). In the bestatin-treated mice, NIR identified lymph
flow successfully passed beyond the surgical wound and filled the
proximal lymphatic collectors, whereas minimal NIR transportation
was seen in the saline-treated lymphedema animals (Fig. 2, C and D,
and movies S1 to S3). Extravasation of Evans Blue dye proximal to the
wound indicated increased permeability of the lymphatics in the saline-
treated group, which was attenuated by bestatin therapy (Fig. 2E). These
results corroborate the microlymphangiography data and support the
restorative effects of bestatin therapy after injury. Bestatin treatment
also resulted in diminished macrophage and neutrophil infiltration
within the tail skin evaluated 24 days after lymphatic ablation (fig. S3,
A and B). Bestatin treatment reduced the concentrations of interleukin-6
(IL-6), IL-4, IL-13, and IL-17A similar to control values but significantly
elevated IL-10 above saline-treated mice with lymphedema (fig. S3C).
Macrophage depletion with clodronate, despite delaying lymphedema,
was not sufficient to reverse the disease at day 24 (fig. S4). Consistent with
the documented protective effects of bestatin on vascular endothelium
(13), microvascular leakage was also attenuated by treatment of this drug
(fig. S5).
LTB4 exhibits concentration-dependent effects on HLEC
lymphangiogenesis and survival
Because the effects of LTB4 on the structure and function of lymphatic
circulation have not been previously investigated, we assessed how this
eicosanoid affected HLECs in several in vitro and in vivo lymphangio-
genesis assays. LTB4 exhibited bimodal effects on network formation,
fibrin gel sprouting, and three-dimensional (3D) spheroid sprouting as-
says (Fig. 3, A to E). Lower LTB4 concentrations in the 1 to 10 nM range
were prolymphangiogenic with enhanced network length after 12 hours
(Fig. 3B), and more and longer lymphatic protrusions in the fibrin gel
and spheroid assays were observed after 3 days of culture (Fig. 3, C to E).
Higher LTB4 concentrations in the 200 to 400 nM range were antilym-
phangiogenic and induced HLEC death, which can readily be seen in the
fibrin gel and spheroid assays (Fig. 3A). The deleterious effects of HLECs
cultured under the 200 to 400 nM LTB4 conditions directly contrast with
the prolymphangiogenic effects of VEGF-C in parallel lymphangiogen-
esis assays (Fig. 3, F to I). Additionally, the antilymphangiogenic actions
of 400 nM LTB4 could be reversed by blocking LTB4 signaling, using the
BLT1 antagonist U75302 or shLtb4r1 (Fig. 3, F to I, and fig. S6, A and B).
By distinction, 400 nM LTC4 did not affect lymphangiogenesis, whereas
the COX1/2 metabolite prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) promoted lymphangio-
genesis (fig. S6, C to E). To determine the in vivo effects of high LTB4
concentration, we used a Matrigel plug assay, using HLECs in severe
combinedimmunodeficient(SCID)mice.Here,400nMLTB4attenuated
lymphatic vessel formation in vivo, whereas blocking LTB4 signaling re-
stored lymphatic vessel growth (Fig. 3J and fig. S6F). To further test
whether LTB4 also exerted a bimodal functionality for HLEC survival,
we conducted a triplex assay to gauge HLEC viability, cytotoxicity, and
apoptosis and found enhanced viability in the 2 to 10 nM range of LTB4
and increased cytotoxicity/apoptosis in the 200 to 400 nM range (Fig.
3K). Increased HLEC apoptosis at concentrations of 200 to 400 nM
LTB4 was confirmed by Western blot analysis of cleaved caspase 3 (Fig.
3L). However, although the evidence clearly indicates prolymphangio-
genic effects of LTB4 in the 2 to 10 nM range, it is unclear whether such
low concentrations of LTB4 directly cause LEC proliferation. Because the
lymphatic system is characterized by distinct endothelial-cellular junc-
tions to facilitate fluid, macromolecule, and cell transport, we evaluated
the expression of various junctional proteins after 400 nM LTB4 treat-
ment. Immunofluorescence staining for VE-cadherin revealed that this
highconcentrationofLTB4damagedHLECadherensjunctions(fig.S7A).
Similarly, mRNA transcripts of gap junctional proteins connexin 37, 43,
and 47 were reduced in the LTB4-treated cells (fig. S7B). Cumulatively,
these results suggest that LTB4 exhibits divergent actions that promote
lymphangiogenesis at lower concentrations but impede lymphatic growth
and function at higher concentrations.
LTB4 production is elevated in preclinical and
clinical lymphedema
To assess the kinetics of LTB4 production in lymphedema, we measured
LTB4 in the mouse tail lymphatics over time (Fig. 4A). During the first
3daysafterlymphatic ablation,LTB4concentrationswere withinthepro-
lymphangiogenic range, as defined in Fig. 3. Notably, as disease pro-
gressed and intensified, LTB4 rose into a range congruent with
antilymphangiogenic concentrations. Serum LTB4 concentrations
were also elevated in the diseased mice (Fig. 4B). This trend was
matched by a corresponding increase in Ltb4r1 tissue expression
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
2 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (Fig. 4C). 5-LO expression was prominent in macrophages and neutro-
phils in the lymphedematous mouse tail skin (Fig. 4D and fig. S3B).
Adult patients with a spectrum of acquired and primary lymphedema
were assessed, including those with upper and lower extremity edema,
both related and unrelated to a cancer diagnosis. Increased LTB4 con-
centrations were detected in the serum of these patients, and augmented
activation of 5-LO in local immune infiltrates was observed (Fig. 4, E
and F, and fig. S8). Prox1-Cre-ERT2-tdTomato reporter mice demon-
strated increased lymphatic endothelial LTA4H and decreased COX2
and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1) tissue expres-
sion (fig. S9, A to C), whereas bestatin treatment restored the expression
of these enzymes. Serum PGE2 concentrations were decreased both in
lymphedema mice and in patients (fig. S9D and table S1). These find-
ings suggest that lymphedema pathology is associated with an imbal-
anced eicosanoid metabolism: activated LTB4 biosynthesis but
diminished PGE2 production.
Blocking LTB4 during the early lymphangiogenesis period
abrogates the therapeutic effect of LTB4 antagonism
It has been previously established that after lymphatic ablation, lym-
phangiogenesis occurs during the first 3 days after surgery; the degree
to which this occurs may serve to limit the extent of lymphedema de-
velopment (14). This early lymphangiogenic response corresponds to
the time interval in which the amount of LTB4 in lymphatic fluid is
Fig. 1. Ketoprofen efficacy in a pre-
clinical model of lymphedema can be
attributed to its inhibition of LTB4.
(A) Mouse tail model of acquired lymph-
edema was surgically induced in the tails
of female C57BL/6J mice through thermal
ablation of lymphatic trunks (lymphatic sur-
gery). Skin incision alone was performed in
the sham surgery group (sham). (B) Natural
progression of mouse tail model of lymph-
edema. Tail volume at each measurement
time point was calculated as D volume
from day 0. Cartoon representations of
the cross-sectional view of lymphedematous tails were created to illustrate lymphedema progression. Mice without surgery (control) or sham groups were compared to the
categories subjected to lymphatic surgery; n = 8. (C) Overview of the eicosanoid pathway. Therapies, targeting different eicosanoid pathways, tested in the study were marked in
blue. (D to J) Serial tail volume measurements at each time point over 24 days. Treatments targeting both 5-LO and COX1/2 (ketoprofen, n = 15) (D), 5-LO (zileuton, n = 10) (F),
LTA4H (bestatin, n = 14) (H), BLT1 (Ly293111, n = 10) (I), or Ltb4r1 (local administering of lentiviral shLtb4r1, n = 6) (J) were compared with ibuprofen (inhibits COX1/2, n = 13) (E)
and montelukast (antagonizes CysLT, n = 10) (G) therapies. All therapies started on postsurgical day 3. Cartoon representations in red demonstrate the cross-sectional view of
the lymphedematous tails in the saline-treated groups; cartoon in blue illustrates the eicosanoid inhibitor–treated animals after lymphatic ablation. Quantification of dermal
(K) and epidermal (L) skin thickness and lymphatic area (M) in the day 24 mouse tail skin for (D) to (J); n = 5. In (B) and (D) to (M), data are presented as means and SEM; ns, not
significant, Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
3 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 2. Bestatin treatment improves tail anatomy and restores lymphatic function. (A) Representative histology of mouse tail harvested on day 24 comparing samples from
sham surgery control (sham) and animals treated with saline or bestatin after lymphatic ablation surgery (lymphatic surgery). Yellow arrowheads point at lymphatic dilation.
Cutaneous dimension is indicated by yellow arrows. Scale bar, 200 mm; n = 6. (B) Fluorescence dextran microlymphangiography in the Prox1-Cre-ERT2-tdTomato mouse tail.
Lymphatics are genetically marked by tdTomato (red) and outlined with a white dashed line. Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–dextran is shown in green. FITC-dextran not taken
up by lymphatics is indicated by a white asterisk. Scale bar, 100 mm; n = 5. (C) Representative still photographs from movies S2 and S3 captured by a near-infrared (NIR) imaging
system with a controlled pressure cuff. The collecting lymphatic function was tracked by imaging the transportation of a NIR dye in the vessels. Collecting lymphatics and the
surgical wound are marked. Direction of lymph flow from the distal to the proximal part of the mouse tail is indicated. Scale bar, 500 mm; n = 3. (D) Trafficking ability of collecting
lymphatics as quantified by the rate of NIR packet movement; n = 3; data are presented as means and SEM, Mann-Whitney test. (E) Representative images showing extravasation
of Evans Blue dye from the lymphatics distal to the wound in the saline-treated mouse tail after lymphatic surgery; n = 3.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
4 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 within the prolymphangiogenic range (Figs. 3 and 4A). Thus, the ef-
fects that congenital absence of 5-LO or BLT1 would have in this model
remain to be established. To address thisquestion, we examined lymph-
edema in Alox5−/− and Ltb4r1−/− mice (mice with a global gene deletion
of 5-LO or BLT1). Both experimental groups developed tail edema and
skin lesions after lymphatic and sham surgery (Fig. 5, A and B, and fig.
S10, A and B). Therefore, we hypothesized that LTB4 signaling played
an important functional role in the initial lymphangiogenesis period
and that blocking LTB4 during this phase was potentially deleterious,
in contrast to the therapeutic effects of antagonizing LTB4 3 days after
lymphatic ablation. This notion is consistent with the recent observa-
tion that blocking LTB4 with bestatin on day 1 after wounding results in
significantly larger skin lesions (15, 16). To confirm a prolymphangio-
genic function of LTB4 in the initial lymphangiogenesis period, local
shLtb4r1 lentiviral injection, bestatin, and Ly293111 therapies were
administered to the wild-type (WT) mice before sham and lymphatic
surgery. None of these strategies for antagonizing LTB4 before the initial
lymphangiogenesis period helped to resolve lymphatic injury (Fig. 5, C
to E, and fig. S10, C to E), with dermal thickness and lymphatic dilation
remaining unimproved 24 days after surgery (Fig. 5, F and G). Figure
5H and fig. S10F illustrate the marked differences in clinical outcomes
based on the timing of when LTB4 signaling is abrogated (that is, before
or after the initial lymphangiogenesis period). Additionally, once LTB4
concentrations climbed into the antilymphangiogenic range, blockade
of LTB4 synthesis (started on day 3, day 9, or day 14) was therapeutic
(fig. S10G).
To mechanistically explore why LTB4 antagonism was not protec-
tive before the initial lymphangiogenesis period, we evaluated the ex-
pression of 168 pertinent lymphangiogenic and angiogenic genes in
Alox5−/− mice 1, 2, and 3 days after sham or lymphatic surgery and
found significant down-regulation of key lymphangiogenic and angio-
genic genes in both surgery groups (table S2). On the basis of the tran-
scriptomic evidence of defective lymphangiogenesis in Alox5−/− mice,
we studied how LTB4 antagonism affected mouse tail lymphangiogenic
gene expression before and after the initial lymphangiogenesis period.
In mice subjected to LTB4 antagonism before the initial lymphangio-
genesis period (Alox5−/− mice and WT mice with shLtb4r1 pretx),
key lymphangiogenic genes were down-regulated (Fig. 5I, decreased av-
erage fold change is highlighted in red). In mice in which LTB4 antag-
onism with bestatin and shLtb4r1 was started on day 3, these same
genes were up-regulated (Fig. 5I, increased fold change is highlighted
in green). Collectively, these data imply an important temporal aspect
Fig. 3. LTB4 exhibits concentration-dependent
effects on HLEC lymphangiogenesis and surviv-
al. (A) Representative images of HLEC network for-
mation, fibrin gel sprouting, and 3D spheroid
sprouting assays. HLECs were treated with various
concentrations of LTB4: 5.0 to 10 nM LTB4 has pro-
lymphangiogenic activity, and 200 to 400 nM is the
antilymphangiogenic concentration. Scale bars, 100
or 25 mm, as indicated; n = 5. (B to E) Quantitative
analysis of (A). (F to I) Quantitative analysis of HLECs subjected to VEGF-C (50 ng/ml) and
400 nM LTB4 with or without 10 mM U75302 (a BLT1 inhibitor) or lentiviral shLtb4r1 in
network formation, migration, wound healing, and fibrin gel sprouting assays in fig. S6B.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA) transduction particles targeting turbo green fluores-
cent protein (shGFP) were used as controls; n = 5. (J) Quantification of Matrigel plug assay
in fig. S6F. Growth factor–reduced Matrigel containing HLECs pretreated with VEGF-C
(50 ng/ml) and 400 nM LTB4 with or without 10 mM U75302 was injected subcutaneously
into SCID mice. Lymphangiogenesis in vivo was determined as percentage of lymphatic
vascular area; n = 5. (K) Analysis of HLEC viability, apoptosis, and cytotoxicity 24 hours
after LTB4 culture; n = 6. (L) Western blotting of cleaved caspase 3 in HLECs; n = 3. In (B) to
(J) and (L), data are presented as means and SEM; comparisons with the control groups were made using Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post
hoc analyses. In (K), mean fluorescence readings are shown.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
5 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of LTB4 signaling, underscoring the beneficial role of lower con-
centrations LTB4 during the early phase of lymphatic growth. By
contrast, when LTB4 concentrations markedly rise during the
evolution of the experimental disease, the influence of LTB4
shifts toward a deleterious role.
LTB4 exerts concentration-dependent effects on
VEGFR3 and Notch signaling
Because the bimodal effects of LTB4 on lymphangiogenesis have
not been previously reported, we next investigated the pathways
putatively altered by LTB4 in HLECs. We evaluated two key
pathways implicated in lymphangiogenesis: VEGFR3 and
Notch (17). At low concentrations (5 to 10 nM), LTB4 increased
the mRNA and protein expression and phosphorylation of
VEGFR3 and VEGFR2. By contrast, high concentrations of
LTB4 (200 to 400 nM) inhibited these parameters (Fig. 6, A to
C, and fig. S11). Injection of adenovirus-overexpressing 5-LO
(Ad5-LO) to the WT mouse tail resulted in impaired lymphatic
drainage, excessive lymphatic sprouting, and microvascular
leakage that were commonly associated with nonproductive
lymphangiogenesis in lymphedema (fig. S12). These results col-
lectively demonstrate that, similar to its effects on lymphangio-
genesis itself, LTB4 exerts bimodal actions on lymphatic
VEGFR3 and VEGFR2 signaling. We then examined whether
LTB4 exerted a similar concentration-dependent regulation of
the Notch pathway using a CSLx6 reporter assay (18) and
showed diminished luciferase activity only at higher LTB4 con-
centrations (200 to400 nM) (Fig.6D). LTB4 inhibitionofNotch
signaling was abrogated by pretreatment of BLT1 shRNA and
was reversed by the addition of Dll4 (a Notch ligand), indicating
that LTB4 inhibited Notch signaling specifically through the
BLT1 receptor (Fig. 6E). Western blot analysis of Dll4 and
Notch intracellular domain (NICD) corroborated the luciferase
assay results (fig. S13A). PCR measurements of Notch target
genes EFNB2, Hes1, and Hey1 were also consistent with the re-
porter assay findings (Fig. 6, F to H). Because Notch signaling is
strongly associated with the endothelial stalk cell phenotype
(19–23) and assessment of the nuclear localization of NICD is
an established approach fordetermining the activation of Notch,
NICD and filopodia histology of HLECs was evaluated. Both
DAPT (an inhibitor of canonical Notch pathway) and LTB4
(200 nM) treatment resulted in increased filopodia and de-
creased nuclear-localized NICD, suggesting a down-regulation
of Notch activity (fig. S13B). shLtb4r1- and Dll4-treated HLECs
repealed the LTB4-mediated, Notch inhibition–associated tip
cell phenotype and instead displayed a unified stalk cell shape
with enhanced NICD nuclear localization (fig. S13B). These
in vitro data collectively demonstrate that LTB4 promoted
VEGFR3at low concentrations (5 to10 nM) and inhibited both
VEGFR3 and Notch signaling at high concentrations (200 to
400 nM).
Bimodal effects of LTB4 on lymphangiogenesis are
regulated by VEGFR3 and Notch signaling
We next investigated the role of VEGFR3 andNotchsignaling in
the bimodal effects of LTB4 on lymphangiogenesis and HLEC
survival. At a concentration of 5 nM, which increased VEGFR3
expression and activation (Fig. 6, A and B), LTB4 promoted
HLEC sprouting; blocking BLT1 with shLtb4r1 or blocking
Fig. 4. LTB4 production is elevated in preclinical and clinical lymphedema. (A) LTB4 con-
centrations in the lymph fluid, measuredby liquidchromatography–tandem massspectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) over time as mouse tail lymphedema developed; n = 6. (B) Mouse serum LTB4 con-
centrations, measured by LC-MS/MS. Blood serum was collected on postsurgical day 24; n = 6.
(C) Transcripts of Ltb4r1 and Ltb4r2 in the tail skin, measured by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR); n = 5. (D) Quantification of 5-LO–positive
macrophages in the mouse tail skin in fig. S3B; n = 5. (E) LTB4 concentrations in the blood serum
of healthy controls (n = 21) and lymphedema (n = 18) patients, measured by LC-MS/MS.
Demographic data are shown in table S1. (F) Quantification of 5-LO–expressing macrophages
in patient skin samples in fig. S8; n = 5. For (A), (B), and (E), data are presented in box-and-
whiskers plots showing minimal to maximal values and all data points; for (C), (D), and (F), data
are presented as means and SEM; comparisons with day 0 samples in (A) and (C) were made
using Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses;
comparisons as indicated in (B), (D), (E), and (F) used the Mann-Whitney test.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
6 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 VEGFR3 with the kinase inhibitor Maz51 neutralized its prolymphangio-
genic effects (Fig. 7, A to D). At a concentration of 200 nM, which
inhibited VEGFR3 expression and phosphorylation (Fig. 6, A and B),
LTB4 blocked HLEC sprouting; inhibiting BLT1 or adding VEGF-C neu-
tralized its antilymphangiogenic effects (Fig. 7, A to D). Recombinant Dll4
rescued HLEC Notch signaling from 200 nM LTB4 treatment (Fig. 6, E to
J), but it did not completely restore HLEC sprouting, suggesting that
LTB4-mediated inhibition of VEGFR3 is likely a more important determi-
nant of its antilymphangiogenic activity than its inhibition of the Notch
pathway (Fig. 7, A to D). Because VEGFR3 and Notch are both essential
for HLEC survival (18, 24), we next evaluated the role of each pathway on
LTB4-mediated cell prosurvival effects noted at lower LTB4 concentra-
tions as well as on LTB4-mediated injury seen at higher concentrations.
InhibitingBLT1(viashLtb4r1)orVEGFR3(viaMaz51)reversedthepro-
proliferative response induced by 5 nM LTB4 (Fig. 7E). Dll4, VEGF-C,
and shLtb4r1 prevented 200 nM LTB4–induced HLEC apoptosis. These
resultssuggestthatLTB4regulateslymphangiogenesisandHLECsurvival
through differential regulation of VEGFR3 and Notch pathways.
Fig. 5. Blocking LTB4 during initial lymphangiogenesis period abrogates the therapeutic benefit of LTB4 antagonism. (A to E) Serial tail volume measurements of
conditions with LTB4 antagonism before initial lymphangiogenesis period: Alox5−/− mice (n = 25) (A), Ltb4r1−/− mice (n = 10) (B), WT mice treated with shLtb4r1 lentivirus on
day(−7) (shLtb4r1 pretx, n = 8) (C), and WT animals treated with bestatin started on day 0 (bestatin pretx, n = 6) (D) or with Ly293111 started on day 0 (Ly293111 pretx, n = 6) (E).
(F and G) Quantification of dermal thickness (F) and lymphatic area (G) in the day 24 tail skin for (A) to (E); n = 5. (H) Quantitations of tail volume on postsurgical day 24 for various
groups. (I) Relative mRNA expression of key lymphangiogenic factors in the mouse tail skin harvested on day 24 were measured by qRT-PCR. Results were normalized to the saline-
treated group. Green indicates an increased average fold change; red indicates a decreased fold change; n = 5. For (A)to (G), data arepresented as means and SEM; for (H), dataare
presented in box-and-whiskers plots showing minimal to maximal values and all data points; comparisons with the saline-treated groups were made by Kruskal-Wallis test
followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
7 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Loss of Notch signaling in LECs abrogates the effectiveness
of LTB4 antagonism in experimental lymphedema
It has already been demonstrated that lymphatic-specific Vegfr3 muta-
tions promote preclinical lymphedema generation (25), but LEC-specific
Notch1 deficiency has not been previously investigated in lymphedema.
Given the established important role of Notch signaling in lymphatic
function (26–30), we generated Prox1-specific Notch1-deficient mice
(Notch1LECKO) and evaluated whether blocking LTB4 would be effective
in reversing postsurgical lymphedema (fig. S14). Without surgery,
Notch1LECKO mice had dilated lymphatics compared to WT litter-
mates (Fig. 8A), as shown in previous studies (26, 27, 30). With lym-
phatic abrogation, Notch1LECKO mice developed lymphedema
accompanied by hypersprouting and enlarged, dysfunctional lym-
phatic vessels that were unable to take up FITC-dextran (Fig. 8A).
Blocking LTB4 synthesis with bestatin did not result in an improve-
ment in the lymphatic architecture or restore the drainage function-
ality in the Notch1LECKO mice as compared with WT mice (Fig. 8A).
The lymphedema generated in Notch1LECKO mice was refractory to
bestatin therapy (Fig. 8, B to D). Tran-
scripts of Vegfr3 were decreased in the
Notch1LECKO mice as compared with
controls (Fig. 8E), confirming that VEGFR3
is a direct target of the Notch pathway (18).
Blocking LTB4 production increased expres-
sion of lymphangiogenic factors Vegfr3,
Nrp2, and EFNB2 in the WT group but
not in the transgenic mice (Fig. 8, E to G).
We then profiled NICD and EphrinB2
(protein of EFNB2) expression in the lym-
phatics of the Notch1LECKO mice. NICD
and EphrinB2 were decreased in the WT
mice with lymphedema, indicating a defec-
tiveNotchpathwayassociatedwithpatholog-
ical changes in the lymphatics (fig. S15A).
Immunofluorescence staining of these
two proteins demonstrated weak intensity
in the Notch1LECKO mice due to the Notch1
genetic deletion in the LEC. Bestatin did not
restore NICD or EphrinB2 expression in
Notch1LECKO mice, in contrast to the WT
mice (fig. S15, A and B). Because lymphatic
Notch pathway is essential to the integri-
ty of functional vessels (26, 27), we next
examined the mural smooth muscle cov-
erage of collecting/precollecting lympha-
tics. Mural coverage of lymphatic vessels,
illustrated by the a-smooth muscle actin
staining, wasnot restored by bestatin therapy
in Notch1LECKO mice as it was in WT mice
(fig. S15, A and B). Bestatin limited tail
skin inflammation but did not prevent the
enhanced microvascular permeability of
Notch1LECKO mice (fig. S16). Furthermore,
treatment of DAPT along with bestatin ab-
rogated the therapeutic benefit of bestatin
in WT mice with lymphedema (fig. S17).
Collectively, these in vivo findings demon-
stratethat Notchsignalingin LECisrequired
forLTB4blockadetorestorelymphatichealth
in acquired lymphedema.
DISCUSSION
Lymphedema is a common, serious, and
progressive disease that lacks pharmaco-
logic therapies. Ketoprofen is currently
being evaluated clinically as a new therapy
for this condition. However, given the
Fig. 6. LTB4 exerts concentration-dependent effects on VEGFR3 and Notch signaling. (A) qRT-PCR analysis measured
the relative transcripts of Vegfr3 in HLECs after the treatment of LTB4; n = 5. (B) Western blots detecting phospho-VEGFR3
and total VEGFR3 in HLECs; n = 3. (C) qRT-PCR analysis measured the relative transcription of Vegfr2 in HLECs after the
treatment of LTB4; n = 5. (D) Luciferase activity of HLECs cotransfected with Notch reporter plasmid pG13-11-CSL and pRL-
SV40; n = 5. Luciferase activity (E) or relative transcript expression of EFNB2, Hes1, and Hey1 in HLECs (F to H) was subjected
to the treatment of recombinant Dll4 (50 mg/ml; Notch ligand), 25 mM DAPT (Notch inhibitor), 200 nM LTB4, 200 nM LTB4 +
shLtb4r1, or 200 nM LTB4 + Dll4 (50 mg/ml); n = 5. All data are presented as means and SEM; comparisons with the control
groups were made using Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
8 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 potential toxicities of this NSAID, in the current set of investigations, we
sought to elucidate the therapeutic mechanism of action of ketoprofen, to
identify a more narrowly targeted and safer treatment approach to
lymphedema. Here, we first determined that the efficacy of ketoprofen
is attributable to the blockade of LTB4 biosynthesis and that more tar-
geted LTB4 antagonism was sufficient to effectively reverse edema and
restore lymphatic function. Next, we discovered that LTB4 has differen-
tial, concentration-dependent effects on lymphatic function and on
signaling pathways relevant to lymphedema pathogenesis. LTB4 concen-
trations were increased in both murine experimental and human clinical
lymphedema, and at antilymphangiogenic concentrations, LTB4
inhibited VEGFR3 and Notch signaling pathways in cultured HLECs.
Furthermore, the efficacy of LTB4 blockade in ameliorating lymphedema
required activated lymphatic Notch signaling. These studies provide new
biological insights and suggest a new approach for lymphedema treat-
ment. Consequently, a clinical trial of bestatin (Ubenimex) for the treat-
ment of secondary lymphedema was initiated in 2016 (NCT02700529;
ULTRA Trial, Eiger BioPharmaceuticals).
Here, bestatin was as effective as ketoprofen and with significantly
less adverse effects. In Japan, bestatin has a 35-year history of safety and
high tolerability as a chemotherapy adjuvant for leukemia. Its choice as
a therapeutic agent may also be favored through its more selective
action against LTB4 biosynthesis. By contrast, ketoprofen is a dual func-
tional inhibitor of both the 5-LO and COX pathways. Blocking COX
may have counterproductive effects in lymphedematreatment of cancer
survivors because PGE2, a COX metabolite, actually promotes tumor
lymphangiogenesis (31, 32). Accordingly, in our study, ibuprofen,
which selectively blocks COX1/2, was ineffective for treating lymphede-
ma; this result suggests that a 5-LO metabolite is responsible for keto-
profen’s therapeutic properties, and subsequent interrogation strongly
implicates LTB4 as the most important drug target. The failure of the
two other anti-inflammatory agents, ibuprofen and montelukast, sug-
gested that there was a specific role for LTB4 in lymphedema patho-
genesis beyond its role as a leukocyte attractant.
Our group recently reported that LTB4 induces pulmonary artery en-
dothelial cell apoptosis in a concentration-dependent manner with
potential importance in the vascular remodeling observed in pulmonary
arterial hypertension (13); blocking LTB4 limited the number and activa-
tion of infiltrating macrophages, reduced endothelial injury, and reopened
occluded vessels. Similarly, in the current study, bestatin limited macro-
phageinflammationanddecreasedtailmicrovascularpermeability.Future
studies will pursue how LTB4 antagonism may alter the phenotype of
Fig. 7. Bimodal effects of LTB4 on lymphangiogenesis are regulated by VEGFR3 and Notch signaling. (A to D) Representative fibrin gel and 3D spheroid sprouting assay
images (A and B) and quantification of bimodal effects of LTB4 on HLEC lymphangiogenesis through regulation of VEGFR3 and Notch signaling (C and D). HLECs were treated with
VEGF-C (50 ng/ml), recombinant Dll4 (50 mg/ml), 25 mM DAPT, 5 nM LTB4, 5 nM LTB4 + shLtb4r1, 5 nM LTB4 + 5 mM MAZ 51(VEGFR3 inhibitor), 200 nM LTB4, 200 nM LTB4 + shLtb4r1,
200 nM LTB4 + Dll4 (50 mg/ml), 200 nM LTB4 + VEGF-C (50 ng/ml), or 200 nM LTB4 + Dll4 (50 mg/ml) + VEGF-C (50 ng/ml. Scale bar, 25 mm. Data are presented as means and SEM; n =
5; comparisons with the control group were made using Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses. (E) HLEC viability, apoptosis, and
cytotoxicity. Mean fluorescence readings are presented; n = 3.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
9 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 macrophages and better delineate CD68+ populations, which can in-
clude epidermal dendritic cells. Given that there has been no previous
evaluation of LTB4 on the lymphatic circulation, we conducted a
concentration-dependent study of LTB4 in several lymphangiogenesis
assays. We discovered that LTB4 had both beneficial and harmful
concentration-dependent effects on LECs. The effects of LTB4 on che-
motaxis and cell growthare similarly concentration-dependent (33–36).
LTB4 exerts its peak chemoattractant effects on monocytes and neutro-
phils at the same concentration at which it promoted lymphangiogen-
esis in the current investigation (~10 nM), with a notable falloff in
potency at lower and higher concentrations (33, 34). In atherosclerosis,
LTB4 promotes smooth muscle cell chemotaxis at 10 to 100 nM, with
reduced effects noted below 10 and above 100 nM (35). Likewise, LTB4
enhances proliferation of colon cancer cells at 10 to 100 nM but not at
0.1 or 1000 nM (36). Here, LTB4 at higher concentrations did not mere-
ly lose the prolymphangiogenic action observed at low concentrations
but actually gained a deleterious antilymphangiogenic action. We spec-
ulate that an important function of LTB4 in the 10 nM range is to pro-
mote angiogenesis/lymphangiogenesis in the initial wound-healing
period. The recruitment of angiogenic/lymphangiogenic macrophages
is a key component of the wound repair response in this mouse tail
model of lymphedema (37), and the absence of macrophages alone re-
sulted in poor preclinical outcome; this may contribute to the poor early
wound healing observed in bestatin-treated mice (18). We suggest that
lymphedema develops when an ongoing invasion and accumulation of
inflammatory cells generate an environment where concentrations of
LTB4 progressively exceed the prolymphangiogenic range and assume
a countervailing deleterious role. LTB4 not only has direct effects on the
lymphatics and microvasculature but clearly promotes inflammation in
the affected lymphatic bed; blocking LTB4 biosynthesis skews the im-
mune response toward an anti-inflammatory response characterized by
increased IL-10 production. However, our data suggest that the benefi-
cial properties of LTB4 antagonism in treating lymphedema extend to
actually restoring the lymphatic architecture and function. Because oth-
eranti-inflammatory agents, suchasibuprofen and asoluble form of the
tumor necrosis factor–a receptor, also limit microvascular permeability
without resolving lymphedema, it is unlikely that blocking inflamma-
tion alone is sufficient to reverse disease (4, 38, 39).
Knockout mice (Alox5−/− and Ltb4r1−/−) and WT animals pre-
treated withLTB4 antagonists were not protected from the development
of lymphedema. Our data suggest that in the first few days after surgery,
low concentrations of LTB4 are important in promoting early lymphatic
repair, and thus, attempts to antagonize its action are biologically dele-
terious. However, when tissue LTB4 concentrations increase into the
Fig. 8. Loss of Notch signaling in LECs abrogates effectiveness of LTB4 antagonism in experimental lymphedema. (A) Representative histology and fluorescence micro-
lymphangiography of mouse tails of the lymphatic endothelial cell-specific, Notch1-deficient (Notch1LECKO) mice after sham or lymphatic ablation surgery. Lymphatic dilation is
indicated by yellow arrow. Lymphatics are marked by tdTomato and outlined with a white dashed line. FITC-dextran is shown in green. FITC-dextran not taken up by lymphatics is
indicated by a white asterisk. White arrowheads point at vessel hypersprouting. Scale bars, 300 or 100 mm, as indicated; n = 5. (B) Day 24 tail volume measurements of Notch1LECKO
mice subjected to lymphatic ablation surgery, treated with saline (n = 7) or bestatin (n = 7), compared with sham controls (n = 7). Quantification of dermal skin thickness (C) and
lymphatic dilation (D) of WT or Notch1LECKO mice in (B); n = 5. (E to G) Relative whole-tail gene transcripts of Vegfr3 (E), NRP2 (F), and EFNB2 (G) of WT or Notch1LECKO mice in (B); n = 5.
For (B), dataare presentedin box-and-whiskers plots showingminimalto maximal values andall data points; for (C)to(G), dataare presentedasmeans andSEM; Kruskal-Wallistest
followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
10 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 antilymphangiogenic range during evolution of experimental lymph-
edema, the benefits conferred by LTB4 are superseded by injury-
inducing properties. Intervening at this point with an LTB4 antagonist
can then elicit marked beneficial therapeutic effects, with reversal of
lymphedema pathology.
To explain why the 10 nM range LTB4 was prolymphangiogenic and
the ≥200 nM LTB4 was antilymphangiogenic, we investigated two
signaling pathways essential for lymphatic growth: VEGFR3 and Notch.
VEGF-C–mediated signaling through VEGFR3 is the major molecular
determinant of postnatal lymphangiogenesis and LEC survival. As an
example, missense mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of VEGFR3
are recognized to be responsible for ~70% of cases of autosomal dom-
inant congenital lymphedema (40, 41). Additionally, the therapeutic,
lymphangiogenic potential of VEGF-C has been explored in various ex-
perimental lymphedema models (25, 42–44). Our data indicate that
LTB4 exhibits a dose-dependent regulation of VEGFR3 in HLECs. In
the 10 nM range, LTB4 increased VEGFR3 mRNA and protein expres-
sion, sprouting lymphangiogenesis and LEC survival. Conversely, in the
≥200 nM range, LTB4 significantly inhibited lymphangiogenesis and
induced LEC apoptosis through down-regulation of VEGFR3; blocking
LTB4 signaling, through receptor antagonism, restored VEGFR3 ex-
pression and normalized LEC sprouting and viability. Furthermore, in ex-
perimental lymphedema, blocking LTB4 production withbestatin increased
tissue Vegfr3 transcript and promoted physiological lymphatic repair.
The mechanisms through which LTB4 regulates VEGFR3 signaling
are still unknown. As shown in the current study, blocking LTB4 during
the prolymphangiogenic phase leads to reduction in Nrp1/2 transcripts
[VEGF-C co-receptors that regulate VEGFR3 activation (17, 45, 46)],
whereas antagonizing LTB4 during the antilymphangiogenic phase
results in increased Nrp1/2 transcripts. These data suggest that LTB4
could potentially mediate VEGFR3 signaling through regulation of
neuropilin. Additionally, 200 nM of LTB4 is an agonist of peroxisome
proliferator–activated receptor g (PPARg) (47–49), a nuclear receptor
triggering signaling pathways that inhibit angiogenesis and induce
endothelial cell apoptosis, at least partially through its suppression of
VEGFR2 and VEGFR3 signaling (50). Therefore, it is plausible that at
these toxic concentrations, LTB4 inhibits VEGFR3 expression in LECs
through modulation of PPARg.
Although signaling via VEGF-C/VEGFR3 is perhaps the most cen-
tral pathway for lymphangiogenesis, a defined role for Notch signaling
in lymphatic growth has recently emerged (23, 26–30). Notch signaling
directly induces VEGFR3 by binding and transactivating the VEGFR3
promoter and thereby promotes endothelial cell survival and morpho-
logical changes in response to VEGF-C (18). EphrinB2, a Notch target
protein, induces the internalization of VEGFR3, thus promoting lym-
phangiogenesis and LEC growth (51), whereas Hey1 and Hes1 suppress
VEGFR3 expression and restrain angiogenesis (22, 52). In blood vascu-
lar endothelial cells, Notch alters the balance of VEGFR2 and VEGFR3
to facilitate productive angiogenesis and participates in the cell fate de-
termination steps (19–21, 23). Within LECs, Notch modulates VEGFR3
expression (18, 53), restrains lymphatic sprouting (23), suppresses
cellular proliferation, and promotes LEC survival (26, 27). Notch also
has been observed to participate in both developmental and postnatal
lymphangiogenesis in vivo, wherein reduced Notch activity is associated
with defective lymphatic valves (26, 27), immature gut–associated
lymphoid tissue (28), decreased lymphatic density (sprouting and tip
cell morphology) (30), compromised mural cell coverage (27), and re-
duced continuous regeneration of lacteals (small intestinal lymphatic
capillaries) (29). Collectively, these findings indicate an essential role
for Notch in developmental and postnatal generation and maintenance
of lymphatic vascular structure; they also suggest a potential function of
Notch in the reparative responses to lymphatic injury. We demon-
strated here that LTB4, at pathological concentrations, inhibited HLEC
Notch signaling in vitro. In lymphedema, decreased Notch activity was
associated with elevated LTB4 production. Pharmacologic blockade of
LTB4 production in mice normalized the tissue expression of NICD and
EphrinB2. This mechanism is further supported by our observation that
loss of Notch1 activity in Prox1-positive LECs in mice abrogated the
effectiveness of LTB4 antagonism. We documented reduced Vegfr3
transcripts in the Notch1LECKO mice. LTB4 antagonism restored Vegfr3
expression in the WT lymphedema mice but not in the Notch1LECKO
mice. These observations support the speculation that LTB4 inhibits
HLEC VEGFR3 expression through down-regulation of Notch
signaling. Notch signaling also plays a fundamental role in cell fate de-
termination (54, 55). However, in the current study, we were unable to
determine whether high concentrations of LTB4 alter the maintenance
of lymphatic identity. Together, our study identifies a novel mechanism
through which LTB4 regulates LEC function, at least in part, by mod-
ulating Notch signaling and, thus, the concept that Notch pathway is
required for the restoration of a normal lymphatic circulation through
LTB4 antagonism. Whether the VEGFR3 and Notch effects of LTB4 are
dependent or independent events will require further investigation.
Several limitations of the current study should be considered. The
tail model of acquired lymphedema likely does not replicate all features
of the acquired clinical disease because human pathology typically
evolves after lymph node excision that accompanies the traumatic dis-
ruption of the vascular channels. The biological concepts elucidated
here can be further investigated in alternate disease models, such as
the mouse mastectomy model (44). Another potential limitation of this
study is a possibly incomplete view of LTB4 action in vivo, and it is cer-
tainly possible that some findings attributed to the blockade of LTB4
may involve other pathways. For example, prolymphangiogenic PGE2
biosynthesis is up-regulated after LTB4 blockade, and this provides an
additional explanation for disease resolution. Arguing against this pos-
sibility, however, is that PGE2 also induces highly permeable lymphatics
and blood vessels, findings not observed with LTB4 blockade (56, 57).
Our initial focus has been on the most well-understood actions of ke-
toprofen in arachidonic acid metabolism, but the possibility remains
that simultaneous blockade of 5-LO and COX1/2 pathways may also in-
duce protective anti-inflammatory eicosanoids, such as lipoxin A4 or the
generation of regulatory T cells (58, 59). We documented that bestatin
changed the cytokine profile in the Notch1LECKO differently as compared
to the WT littermates. Because Notch is an important regulator of im-
mune cell differentiation and activation and because Notch inhibition
markedly affects T helper cell 1 (TH1), TH2, and TH17 responses
(60–63), it can be challenging to explain the differences between groups,
and in vivo gene knockout studies can helpdelineate how Notch suppres-
sion specifically contributes to lymphedema-associated inflammation.
In summary, we reported a novel function for LTB4in the pathogenesis
of lymphedema, documented that LTB4 exhibited concentration-
dependent effects on HLEC function and survival, and demonstrated that
LTB4 antagonism was an effective treatment in the murine tail model of
acquired lymphedema. LTB4 antagonism may thus represent a promising
approachinadiseasethat iscurrentlyin needofmedicaltherapies.There is
a significant unmet medical need for pharmacologic interventions for this
common, serious, and life-altering disease. Enhanced mechanistic insights
into the ways in which unchecked inflammation contributes to lymphatic
pathology should facilitate new therapeutic discoveries.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
11 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The sample size of various animal experiments and human tests was
determined using a power and sample size calculator (https://www.
statisticalsolutions.net/pssZtest_calc.php) to power a study over 80%
(b ≤ 0.20). Exclusion criteria were preestablished on the basis of the
years of observation while optimizing the animal protocol. Briefly, mice
were excluded for analysis if any of the following occurs after surgery:
(i) self-inflicted mutilation or severe abrasion on the skin, (ii) severe
infection, (iii) loss of blood supply in the tail, and (iv) failure to exceed
a 10 to 15% growth in edema by day 3 if no drug was given for lymph-
edema mice. Animals were randomly allocated to experimental groups
and processed using Excel random number generator. Histological
analysis and tail volume measurements and quantification were done
blindly. Primary data are in the Supplementary Materials (table S3).
Human samples
All studies were approved by the Stanford University Institutional Re-
view Board (protocol #7781). Adult patients with a spectrum of
acquired and primary lymphedema were assessed in this study, includ-
ing those with upper and lower extremity edema, both related and un-
related to a cancer diagnosis. Healthy sex- and age-matched control
samples were also used for experiments herein.
Animals
All animal studies were approved by the Administrative Panel on Lab-
oratory Animal Care at Stanford University (APLAC 27376).
Surgical induction of experimental lymphatic
vascular insufficiency
Acquired lymphedema was surgically induced in the tails of female
C57BL/6J mice through the thermal ablation of lymphatic trunks (lym-
phatic surgery), using a protocol that has been previously developed and
optimized (4, 10). Briefly, a full-thickness circumferential incision of the
skin was made 16 mm distal to the base of the mouse tail under anes-
thesia. Lymphatic trunks were ablated through controlled, limited cau-
tery application under a surgical microscope. For surgical controls
(sham surgery and sham), the skin incision alone was performed with-
out lymphatic cautery. All small-molecule drugs were administered
through daily intraperitoneal injection. The dosing regimen for each in-
dividual drug was as follows: ketoprofen, 5 mg/kg; zileuton, 60 mg/kg;
ibuprofen, 5 mg/kg; bestatin, 4 mg/kg; Ly293111, 1 mg/kg; montelukast,
20 mg/kg; and DAPT, 30 mg/kg.
Tail volume quantitation
Tail volume measurements at each designated time were quantified by
observers blinded to the treatment status of the subjects. Tail volumes
were calculated through a digital photographic technique pre-
operatively, and postoperatively (days 3, 9, 14, 20, and 24), using an
Olympus D-520 Zoom digital camera at super high–quality resolution
at a fixed distance from the subject (37 cm), as previously described
(4, 10). Tail volumes were derived from the measurement of the tail
diameter using the truncated cone approximation (64).
Analysis of lymphatic drainage
Lymphatic drainage was analyzed by fluorescence microlymphan-
giography. Briefly, FITC (0.5 mg/ml)–labeled dextran (molecular
weight, 2,000,000; Sigma) was injected intradermally into the tip
of the mouse tail at a constant pressure. Fluorescence images of
the whole-mount samples were captured using Zeiss 710 confocal
microscopy.
Determination of collecting lymphatic transportation
function with NIR imaging system
Detailed procedures were described previously (11, 12). Briefly, the ef-
fective lymphatic transportation function is characterized using a NIR
lymphatic imaging system integrated with a controlled pressure cuff to
modulate lymph flow. The collecting lymphatic function was tracked
throughout the procedure by imaging the transportation of a NIR tracer
injectedintradermally,IRDye 800CWNHS ester, at thetipof the mouse
tail. A gradual clearance of the lymph flow within the proximal collect-
ing lymphatic occurred when the pressure cuff was inflated (flow clear-
ance phase). NIR labeled lymph flow could then travel beyond the
surgical wound through the collecting lymphatic duct because the pres-
sure cuff was sufficiently deflated (flow restoration phase). Trafficking
ability of collecting lymphatics in the mouse tail was quantified as the
rate of NIR fluorescence movement, calculated using customized algo-
rithms written in MATLAB.
Assessment of lymphatic leakiness
Anesthetized adult mice were injected with a total of 50 ml of 1.0% Evans
Blue under skin about 1 cm from the tip of the tail. Skin was gently
removed to make windows for the lymphatics on the proximal and dis-
tal side of the ligation. Colored by dye, lymphatic vessels were located
from the caudal vein and carefully dissected for imaging.
Statistics
GraphPad Prism version 5.0c was used for statistical analysis. Differ-
ences between two groups at a single time point were compared using
Mann-Whitney test. For comparisons between multiple experimental
groups at a single time point, Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s
multiple comparisons test for post hoc analyses were used. Pearson cor-
relation test was used to calculate linear regression. All analyses were
considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/389/eaal3920/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Mouse tail model of acquired lymphedema.
Fig. S2. Analysis of mouse tail edema and LTB4 and BLT1 expression after LTB4 antagonism
started on postoperative day 3.
Fig. S3. Bestatin treatment reduces inflammation.
Fig. S4. Macrophage depletion does not resolve mouse tail lymphedema.
Fig. S5. Bestatin treatment reduces microvascular permeability in mouse tail lymphedema.
Fig. S6. LTB4 inhibits in vivo and in vitro HLEC lymphangiogenesis.
Fig. S7. LTB4 (400 nM) damages HLEC junctions and reduces connexin mRNA transcript.
Fig. S8. 5-LO expression in neutrophils and macrophages is increased in human lymphedema.
Fig. S9. Increased LTB4 and decreased PGE2 signaling in mouse tail lymphedema.
Fig. S10. LTB4 antagonism before initial lymphangiogenesis period is not therapeutic.
Fig. S11. LTB4 exerts concentration-dependent effects on HLEC VEGFR2 signaling.
Fig. S12. Overexpressing 5-LO interferences lymphatic drainage and promotes microvascular
leakage in mouse tail.
Fig. S13. LTB4 (200 nM) inhibits Notch signaling in HLECs.
Fig. S14. Confirmation of the generation of Prox1-specific, Notch1-deficient (Notch1LECKO)
mice.
Fig. S15. Bestatin does not rescue Notch signaling or limit lymphatic dilation in Notch1LECKO
mice.
Fig. S16. Effects of bestatin on inflammation and microvascular permeability in Notch1LECKO
mice.
Fig. S17. Bestatin does not rescue tail lymphedema in mice treated with DAPT.
Table S1. Demographics of healthy controls and lymphedema patients—LTB4 and PGE2
analysis.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
12 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Table S2. Summary of lymphangiogenesis and angiogenesis microarray results.
Table S3. Primary data.
Movie S1. NIR imaging of collecting lymphatics in the healthy control mouse.
Movie S2. NIR imaging of collecting lymphatics in the bestatin-treated mouse after lymphatic
ablation surgery.
Movie S3. NIR imaging of collecting lymphatics in the saline-treated mouse after lymphatic
ablation surgery.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. E. D. Paskett, J. A. Dean, J. M. Oliveri, J. P. Harrop, Cancer-related lymphedema risk factors,
diagnosis, treatment, and impact: A review. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 3726–3733 (2012).
2. S. G. Rockson, Update on the biology and treatment of lymphedema. Curr. Treat. Options
Cardiovasc. Med. 14, 184–192 (2012).
3. S. G. Rockson, Diagnosis and management of lymphatic vascular disease. J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 52, 799–806 (2008).
4. K. Nakamura, K. Radhakrishnan, Y. M. Wong, S. G. Rockson, Anti-inflammatory
pharmacotherapy with ketoprofen ameliorates experimental lymphatic vascular
insufficiency in mice. PLOS ONE 4, e8380 (2009).
5. J. L. Ambrus Jr., S. Haneiwich, L. Chesky, P. McFarland, R. J. Engler, Improved in vitro
antigen-specific antibody synthesis in two patients with common variable
immunodeficiency taking an oral cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibitor
(ketoprofen). J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 88, 775–783 (1991).
6. W. Dawson, J. R. Boot, J. Harvey, J. R. Walker, The pharmacology of benoxaprofen with
particular to effects on lipoxygenase product formation. Eur. J. Rheumatol. Inflamm. 5,
61–68 (1982).
7. Z. Rajić, D. Hadjipavlou-Litina, E. Pontiki, M. Kralj, L. Šuman, B. Zorc, The novel ketoprofen
amides—Synthesis and biological evaluation as antioxidants, lipoxygenase inhibitors and
cytostatic agents. Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 75, 641–652 (2010).
8. M. Peters-Golden, W. R. Henderson Jr., Leukotrienes. N. Engl. J. Med. 357, 1841–1854
(2007).
9. M. Schneider, A. Ny, C. Ruiz de Almodovar, P. Carmeliet, A new mouse model to study
acquired lymphedema. PLOS Med. 3, e264 (2006).
10. R. Tabibiazar, L. Cheung, J. Han, J. Swanson, A. Beilhack, A. An, S. S. Dadras, N. Rockson,
S. Joshi, R. Wagner, S. G. Rockson, Inflammatory manifestations of experimental
lymphatic insufficiency. PLOS Med. 3, e254 (2006).
11. T. S. Nelson, R. E. Akin, M. J. Weiler, T. Kassis, J. A. Kornuta, J. B. Dixon, Minimally invasive
method for determining the effective lymphatic pumping pressure in rats using near-
infrared imaging. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 306, R281–R290 (2014).
12. M. Weiler, J. B. Dixon, Differential transport function of lymphatic vessels in the rat tail
model and the long-term effects of Indocyanine Green as assessed with near-infrared
imaging. Front. Physiol. 4, 215 (2013).
13. W. Tian, X. Jiang, R. Tamosiuniene, Y. K. Sung, J. Qian, G. Dhillon, L. Gera, L. Farkas,
M. Rabinovitch, R. T. Zamanian, M. Inayathullah, M. Fridlib, J. Rajadas, M. Peters-Golden,
N. F. Voelkel, M. R. Nicolls, Blocking macrophage leukotriene B4 prevents endothelial
injury and reverses pulmonary hypertension. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 200ra117 (2013).
14. J. M. Rutkowski, K. C. Boardman, M. A. Swartz, Characterization of lymphangiogenesis in a
model of adult skin regeneration. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 291, H1402–H1410 (2006).
15. T. Lämmermann, P. V. Afonso, B. R. Angermann, J. M. Wang, W. Kastenmüller, C. A. Parent,
R. N. Germain, Neutrophil swarms require LTB4 and integrins at sites of cell death in vivo.
Nature 498, 371–375 (2013).
16. M. K. Oyoshi, R. He, Y. Li, S. Mondal, J. Yoon, R. Afshar, M. Chen, D. M. Lee, H. R. Luo,
A. D. Luster, J. S. Cho, L. S. Miller, A. Larson, G. F. Murphy, R. S. Geha, Leukotriene B4-
driven neutrophil recruitment to the skin is essential for allergic skin inflammation.
Immunity 37, 747–758 (2012).
17. W. Zheng, A. Aspelund, K. Alitalo, Lymphangiogenic factors, mechanisms, and
applications. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 878–887 (2014).
18. C. J. Shawber, Y. Funahashi, E. Francisco, M. Vorontchikhina, Y. Kitamura, S. A. Stowell,
V. Borisenko, N. Feirt, S. Podgrabinska, K. Shiraishi, K. Chawengsaksophak, J. Rossant,
D. Accili, M. Skobe, J. Kitajewski, Notch alters VEGF responsiveness in human and murine
endothelial cells by direct regulation of VEGFR-3 expression. J. Clin. Invest. 117,
3369–3382 (2007).
19. I. Noguera-Troise, C. Daly, N. J. Papadopoulos, S. Coetzee, P. Boland, N. W. Gale, H. C. Lin,
G. D. Yancopoulos, G. Thurston, Blockade of Dll4 inhibits tumour growth by promoting
non-productive angiogenesis. Nature 444, 1032–1037 (2006).
20. A. F. Siekmann, N. D. Lawson, Notch signalling limits angiogenic cell behaviour in
developing zebrafish arteries. Nature 445, 781–784 (2007).
21. M. Hellström, L.-K. Phng, J. J. Hofmann, E. Wallgard, L. Coultas, P. Lindblom, J. Alva,
A.-K. Nilsson, L. Karlsson, N. Gaiano, K. Yoon, J. Rossant, M. L. Iruela-Arispe, M. Kalén,
H. Gerhardt, C. Betsholtz, Dll4 signalling through Notch1 regulates formation of tip cells
during angiogenesis. Nature 445, 776–780 (2007).
22. T. Tammela, G. Zarkada, E. Wallgard, A. Murtomäki, S. Suchting, M. Wirzenius, M. Waltari,
M. Hellström, T. Schomber, R. Peltonen, C. Freitas, A. Duarte, H. Isoniemi, P. Laakkonen,
G. Christofori, S. Ylä-Herttuala, M. Shibuya, B. Pytowski, A. Eichmann, C. Betsholtz,
K. Alitalo, Blocking VEGFR-3 suppresses angiogenic sprouting and vascular network
formation. Nature 454, 656–660 (2008).
23. W. Zheng, T. Tammela, M. Yamamoto, A. Anisimov, T. Holopainen, S. Kaijalainen,
T. Karpanen, K. Lehti, S. Ylä-Herttuala, K. Alitalo, Notch restricts lymphatic vessel sprouting
induced by vascular endothelial growth factor. Blood 118, 1154–1162 (2011).
24. T. Mäkinen, T. Veikkola, S. Mustjoki, T. Karpanen, B. Catimel, E. C. Nice, L. Wise, A. Mercer,
H. Kowalski, D. Kerjaschki, S. A. Stacker, M. G. Achen, K. Alitalo, Isolated lymphatic
endothelial cells transduce growth, survival and migratory signals via the VEGF-C/D
receptor VEGFR-3. EMBO J. 20, 4762–4773 (2001).
25. M. J. Karkkainen, A. Saaristo, L. Jussila, K. A. Karila, E. C. Lawrence, K. Pajusola, H. Bueler,
A. Eichmann, R. Kauppinen, M. I. Kettunen, S. Ylä-Herttuala, D. N. Finegold, R. E. Ferrell,
K. Alitalo, A model for gene therapy of human hereditary lymphedema. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 98, 12677–12682 (2001).
26. A. Murtomaki, M. K. Uh, C. Kitajewski, J. Zhao, T. Nagasaki, C. J. Shawber, J. Kitajewski,
Notch signaling functions in lymphatic valve formation. Development 141, 2446–2451
(2014).
27. A. Murtomaki, M. K. Uh, Y. K. Choi, C. Kitajewski, V. Borisenko, J. Kitajewski, C. J. Shawber,
Notch1 functions as a negative regulator of lymphatic endothelial cell differentiation in
the venous endothelium. Development 140, 2365–2376 (2013).
28. Y. Obata, S. Kimura, G. Nakato, K. Iizuka, Y. Miyagawa, Y. Nakamura, Y. Furusawa,
M. Sugiyama, K. Suzuki, M. Ebisawa, Y. Fujimura, H. Yoshida, T. Iwanaga, K. Hase, H. Ohno,
Epithelial–stromal interaction via Notch signaling is essential for the full maturation of
gut-associated lymphoid tissues. EMBO Rep. 15, 1297–1304 (2014).
29. J. Bernier-Latmani, C. Cisarovsky, C. S. Demir, M. Bruand, M. Jaquet, S. Davanture,
S. Ragusa, S. Siegert, O. Dormond, R. Benedito, F. Radtke, S. A. Luther, T. V. Petrova, DLL4
promotes continuous adult intestinal lacteal regeneration and dietary fat transport.
J. Clin. Invest. 125, 4572–4586 (2015).
30. A. Fatima, A. Culver, F. Culver, T. Liu, W. H. Dietz, B. R. Thomson, A.-K. Hadjantonakis,
S. E. Quaggin, T. Kume, Murine Notch1 is required for lymphatic vascular morphogenesis
during development. Dev. Dyn. 243, 957–964 (2014).
31. T. R. Lyons, V. F. Borges, C. B. Betts, Q. Guo, P. Kapoor, H. A. Martinson, S. Jindal, P. Schedin,
Cyclooxygenase-2–dependent lymphangiogenesis promotes nodal metastasis of
postpartum breast cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 3901–3912 (2014).
32. F. Ogawa, H. Amano, K. Eshima, Y. Ito, Y. Matsui, K. Hosono, H. Kitasato, A. Iyoda,
K. Iwabuchi, Y. Kumagai, Y. Satoh, S. Narumiya, M. Majima, Prostanoid induces
premetastatic niche in regional lymph nodes. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 4882–4894 (2014).
33. T. Ternowitz, T. Herlin, K. Fogh, Human monocyte and polymorphonuclear leukocyte
chemotactic and chemokinetic responses to leukotriene B4 and FMLP. Acta. Pathol.
Microbiol. Immunol. Scand. C 95, 47–54 (1987).
34. M. A. Shirley, C. T. Reidhead, R. C. Murphy, Chemotactic LTB4 metabolites produced by
hepatocytes in the presence of ethanol. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 185, 604–610
(1992).
35. E. A. Heller, E. Liu, A. M. Tager, S. Sinha, J. D. Roberts, S. L. Koehn, P. Libby, E. R. Aikawa,
J. Q. Chen, P. Huang, M. W. Freeman, K. J. Moore, A. D. Luster, R. E. Gerszten, Inhibition of
atherogenesis in BLT1-deficient mice reveals a role for LTB4 and BLT1 in smooth muscle
cell recruitment. Circulation 112, 578–586 (2005).
36. C. Bortuzzo, R. Hanif, K. Kashfi, L. Staiano-Coico, S. J. Shiff, B. Rigas, The effect of
leukotrienes B and selected HETEs on the proliferation of colon cancer cells.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1300, 240–246 (1996).
37. S. Ghanta, D. A. Cuzzone, J. S. Torrisi, N. J. Albano, W. J. Joseph, I. L. Savetsky,
J. C. Gardenier, D. Chang, J. C. Zampell, B. J. Mehrara, Regulation of inflammation and
fibrosis by macrophages in lymphedema. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 308,
H1065–H1077 (2015).
38. S. Hofmann, H. Grasberger, P. Jung, M. Bidlingmaier, J. Vlotides, O. E. Janssen, R. Landgraf,
The tumour necrosis factor-alpha induced vascular permeability is associated with a
reduction of VE-cadherin expression. Eur. J. Med. Res. 7, 171–176 (2002).
39. L.-T. Huang, C.-H. Lin, H.-C. Chou, C.-M. Chen, Ibuprofen protects ventilator-induced lung
injury by downregulating Rho-kinase activity in rats. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014, 749097
(2014).
40. M. J. Karkkainen, R. E. Ferrell, E. C. Lawrence, M. A. Kimak, K. L. Levinson, M. A. McTigue,
K. Alitalo, D. N. Finegold, Missense mutations interfere with VEGFR-3 signalling in primary
lymphoedema. Nat. Genet. 25, 153–159 (2000).
41. A. Irrthum, M. J. Karkkainen, K. Devriendt, K. Alitalo, M. Vikkula, Congenital hereditary
lymphedema caused by a mutation that inactivates VEGFR3 tyrosine kinase. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 67, 295–301 (2000).
42. Y.-s. Yoon, T. Murayama, E. Gravereaux, T. Tkebuchava, M. Silver, C. Curry, A. Wecker,
R. Kirchmair, C. S. Hu, M. Kearney, A. Ashare, D. G. Jackson, H. Kubo, J. M. Isner,
D. W. Losordo, VEGF-C gene therapy augments postnatal lymphangiogenesis and
ameliorates secondary lymphedema. J. Clin. Invest. 111, 717–725 (2003).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
13 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 43. A. Szuba, M. Skobe, M. J. Karkkainen, W. S. Shin, D. P. Beynet, N. B. Rockson, N. Dakhil,
S. Spilman, M. L. Goris, H. W. Strauss, T. Quertermous, K. Alitalo, S. G. Rockson, Therapeutic
lymphangiogenesis with human recombinant VEGF-C. FASEB J. 16, 1985–1987 (2002).
44. T. Tammela, A. Saaristo, T. Holopainen, J. Lyytikka, A. Kotronen, M. Pitkonen,
U. Abo-Ramadan, S. Ylä-Herttuala, T. V. Petrova, K. Alitalo, Therapeutic differentiation
and maturation of lymphatic vessels after lymph node dissection and transplantation.
Nat. Med. 13, 1458–1466 (2007).
45. Y. Xu, L. Yuan, J. Mak, L. Pardanaud, M. Caunt, I. Kasman, B. Larrivée, R. Del Toro,
S. Suchting, A. Medvinsky, J. Silva, J. Yang, J.-L. Thomas, A. W. Koch, K. Alitalo,
A. Eichmann, A. Bagri, Neuropilin-2 mediates VEGF-C–induced lymphatic sprouting
together with VEGFR3. J. Cell Biol. 188, 115–130 (2010).
46. M. W. Parker, A. D. Linkugel, H. L. Goel, T. Wu, A. M. Mercurio, C. W. Vander Kooi, Structural
basis for VEGF-C binding to neuropilin-2 and sequestration by a soluble splice form.
Structure 23, 677–687 (2015).
47. V. R. Narala, R. K. Adapala, M. V. Suresh, T. G. Brock, M. Peters-Golden, R. C. Reddy,
Leukotriene B4 is a physiologically relevant endogenous peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor-a agonist. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 22067–22074 (2010).
48. J. Fiedler, F. R. Simon, M. Iwahashi, R. C. Murphy, Effect of peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor a activation on leukotriene B4 metabolism in isolated rat hepatocytes.
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 299, 691–697 (2001).
49. T. Yokomizo, T. Izumi, K. Chang, Y. Takuwa, T. Shimizu, A G-protein-coupled receptor for
leukotriene B4 that mediates chemotaxis. Nature 387, 620–624 (1997).
50. R. Grau, M. D. Díaz-Muñoz, C. Cacheiro-Llaguno, M. Fresno, M. A. Iniguez, Role of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha in the control of cyclooxygenase 2 and
vascular endothelial growth factor: Involvement in tumor growth. PPAR Res. 2008,
352437 (2008).
51. Y. Wang, M. Nakayama, M. E. Pitulescu, T. S. Schmidt, M. L. Bochenek, A. Sakakibara,
S. Adams, A. Davy, U. Deutsch, U. Lüthi, A. Barberis, L. E. Benjamin, T. Mäkinen,
C. D. Nobes, R. H. Adams, Ephrin-B2 controls VEGF-induced angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis. Nature 465, 483–486 (2010).
52. T. Tammela, G. Zarkada, H. Nurmi, L. Jakobsson, K. Heinolainen, D. Tvorogov, W. Zheng,
C. A. Franco, A. Murtomaki, E. Aranda, N. Miura, S. Ylä-Herttuala, M. Fruttiger, T. Mäkinen,
A. Eichmann, J. W. Pollard, H. Gerhardt, K. Alitalo, VEGFR-3 controls tip to stalk
conversion at vessel fusion sites by reinforcing Notch signalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 13,
1202–1213 (2011).
53. R. Benedito, S. F. Rocha, M. Woeste, M. Zamykal, F. Radtke, O. Casanovas, A. Duarte,
B. Pytowski, R. H. Adams, Notch-dependent VEGFR3 upregulation allows angiogenesis
without VEGF–VEGFR2 signalling. Nature 484, 110–114 (2012).
54. E. Zacharioudaki, B. E. Housden, G. Garinis, R. Stojnic, C. Delidakis, S. J. Bray, Genes
implicated in stem cell identity and temporal programme are directly targeted by Notch
in neuroblast tumours. Development 143, 219–231 (2016).
55. M. Khacho, A. Clark, D. S. Svoboda, J. Azzi, J. G. MacLaurin, C. Meghaizel, H. Sesaki,
D. C. Lagace, M. Germain, M.-E. Harper, D. S. Park, R. S. Slack, Mitochondrial dynamics
impacts stem cell identity and fate decisions by regulating a nuclear transcriptional
program. Cell Stem Cell 19, 232–247 (2016).
56. K. Omori, T. Kida, M. Hori, H. Ozaki, T. Murata, Multiple roles of the PGE2-EP receptor signal
in vascular permeability. Br. J. Pharmacol. 171, 4879–4889 (2014).
57. K. Morimoto, N. Shirata, Y. Taketomi, S. Tsuchiya, E. Segi-Nishida, T. Inazumi,
K. Kabashima, S. Tanaka, M. Murakami, S. Narumiya, Y. Sugimoto, Prostaglandin E2–EP3
signaling induces inflammatory swelling by mast cell activation. J. Immunol. 192,
1130–1137 (2014).
58. K. Atarashi, T. Mori, R. Yoshiki, K. Kabashima, H. Kuma, Y. Tokura, Skin application of
ketoprofen systemically suppresses contact hypersensitivity by inducing CD4+ CD25+
regulatory T cells. J. Dermatol. Sci. 53, 216–221 (2009).
59. E. Gousopoulos, S. T. Proulx, S. B. Bachmann, J. Scholl, D. Dionyssiou, E. Demiri, C. Halin,
L. C. Dieterich, M. Detmar, Regulatory T cell transfer ameliorates lymphedema and
promotes lymphatic vessel function. JCI Insight 1, e89081 (2016).
60. H. Xu, J. Zhu, S. Smith, J. Foldi, B. Zhao, A. Y. Chung, H. Outtz, J. Kitajewski, C. Shi, S. Weber,
P. Saftig, Y. Li, K. Ozato, C. P. Blobel, L. B. Ivashkiv, X. Hu, Notch–RBP-J signaling regulates
the transcription factor IRF8 to promote inflammatory macrophage polarization.
Nat. Immunol. 13, 642–650 (2012).
61. X. Hu, A. Y. Chung, I. Wu, J. Foldi, J. Chen, J. D. Ji, T. Tateya, Y. J. Kang, J. Han, M. Gessler,
R. Kageyama, L. B. Ivashkiv, Integrated regulation of Toll-like receptor responses by Notch
and interferon-g pathways. Immunity 29, 691–703 (2008).
62. F. Radtke, H. R. MacDonald, F. Tacchini-Cottier, Regulation of innate and adaptive
immunity by Notch. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 427–437 (2013).
63. K. Piggott, J. Deng, K. Warrington, B. Younge, J. T. Kubo, M. Desai, J. J. Goronzy,
C. M. Weyand, Blocking the NOTCH pathway inhibits vascular inflammation in large-
vessel vasculitis. Circulation 123, 309–318 (2011).
64. J. Sitzia, Volume measurement in lymphoedema treatment: Examination of formulae.
Eur. J. Cancer Care 4, 11–16 (1995).
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge G. C. Oliver, C. Kuo, and T. Reyes for providing
the Prox1-Cre-ERT2 mice. Funding: This research was funded by Stanford Startup funds and
Endowed Chair funds (M.R.N.). Author contributions: W.T., S.G.R., X.J., and J.K. designed
research studies, conducted experiments, acquired and analyzed data, and wrote the
manuscript. A.B., E.M.S. and A.B.T. conducted experiments, acquired data, and helped write the
manuscript. M.C., Z.N., and A.H.F. conducted experiments and acquired and analyzed data.
R.T.Z., N.F.V., and M.P.-G. helped write the manuscript. G.S.D. helped analyze data and write the
manuscript. J.K. designed research studies, provided reagents, and helped write the
manuscript. J.B.D. designed research studies. M.R.N. designed research studies, analyzed data,
provided funding, and wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: W.T., S.G.R., X.J., J.K., and
M.R.N. are inventors on a patent (pending; PCT/US2016/022132) licensed by Eiger
BioPharmaceuticals from Stanford University/VA Palo Alto Health Care System that covers
LTB4 inhibition to prevent and treat human lymphedema. W.T. and M.R.N. have equity interest
in Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, which develops drugs targeting LTB4 for the treatment of
secondary lymphedema. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 11 November 2016
Resubmitted 22 November 2016
Accepted 4 April 2017
Published 10 May 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3920
Citation: W. Tian, S. G. Rockson, X. Jiang, J. Kim, A. Begaye, E. M. Shuffle, A. B. Tu, M. Cribb,
Z. Nepiyushchikh, A. H. Feroze, R. T. Zamanian, G. S. Dhillon, N. F. Voelkel, M. Peters-Golden,
J. Kitajewski, J. B. Dixon, M. R. Nicolls, Leukotriene B4 antagonism ameliorates
experimental lymphedema. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Tian et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3920 (2017)
10 May 2017
14 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
  antagonism ameliorates experimental lymphedema
4
Leukotriene B
Peters-Golden, Jan Kitajewski, J. Brandon Dixon and Mark R. Nicolls
Zhanna Nepiyushchikh, Abdullah H. Feroze, Roham T. Zamanian, Gundeep S. Dhillon, Norbert F. Voelkel, Marc 
Wen Tian, Stanley G. Rockson, Xinguo Jiang, Jeanna Kim, Adrian Begaye, Eric M. Shuffle, Allen B. Tu, Matthew Cribb,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3920
, eaal3920.
9
Sci Transl Med 
lymphedema patients may be just around the corner.
 is already underway, indicating that relief for
4
mice. A clinical trial testing a compound that antagonizes LTB
 ameliorated clinical symptoms in the
4
lymphatic endothelial cell function and growth. Accordingly, blocking LTB
counterproductive to lymphatic repair in a mouse lymphatic surgery model, likely due to its various effects on 
 was elevated in patient serum and was
4
) plays in acquired lymphedema. LTB
4
 (LTB
4
leukotriene B
. examined the role that
et al
after surgery or cancer treatment. To validate a potential therapeutic target, Tian 
There are currently no targeted treatments for lymphedema, the painful swelling of limbs that can occur
Lightening the burden of lymphedema
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/389/eaal3920
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/05/08/9.389.eaal3920.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/362/6411/140.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/11/544/eaao5390.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/361/6402/599.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/424/eaam7964.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/10/499/eaal2987.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/10/499/eaam8429.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/335/335ra55.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/342/342ra80.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/389/eaal3920#BIBL
This article cites 64 articles, 16 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
