 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=zqhw20
International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health
and Well-being
ISSN: (Print) 1748-2631 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/zqhw20
Non-diagnostic based approaches to helping
children who could be labelled ADHD and their
families
Sami Timimi
To cite this article: Sami Timimi (2017) Non-diagnostic based approaches to helping children who
could be labelled ADHD and their families, International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health
and Well-being, 12:sup1, 1298270, DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2017.1298270
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17482631.2017.1298270
© 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as
Taylor & Francis Group
Published online: 22 May 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1724
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 
 Non-diagnostic based approaches to helping children who could be labelled
ADHD and their families
Sami Timimi
Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK
ABSTRACT
Mental health services are not always good for you. There are some troubling facts to
confront such as the increase in the use of diagnostic based approaches and psychotropic
medications for children and young people being associated with poorer rather than better
outcomes. In this article I will outline some of the evidence around outcome as a result of
treatment for young people diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
and for those who are prescribed long-term stimulants. I will then discuss clinical approaches
that move beyond a focus on symptom management that diagnostic paradigms encourage.
This includes clinical models that take account of the diversity of contextual and relational
issues that young patients present with and the possibility afforded of engaging in more
positive and hopeful therapeutic approaches such as the Relational Awareness Programme
(RAP).
ARTICLE HISTORY
Accepted 17 February 2017
KEYWORDS
ADHD; diagnosis; labelling;
treatment; critique
Mental health services aren’t always good for you.
Although over-diagnosis and unnecessary care is recog-
nized
as
a
growing
problem
across
medicine
(Macdonald & Loder, 2015), prognosis for most condi-
tions dealt with by the rest of medicine has improved,
often reflecting genuine technical advances, no such
progress has been seen in the prognosis of those who
use real-world mental health services in Western nations.
Lambert (2010) concluded that 75% of people entering
community mental health centres in the USA are either
not responding to treatment, or deteriorating whilst in
care. Hansen and colleagues (2002) reported a picture of
routine clinical care in US mental health services in which
only 20% of patients improved. In Britain, the Centre for
Social Justice (2012) found that only 15% of people
referred to a National Health Service mental health treat-
ment project were achieving “recovery” by the time they
left. In Australia, despite massive investment in mental
health services in the past two decades, no correspond-
ing improvement in the adult mental health of the
population has been found (Jorm & Reavley, 2012).
A similar picture of poor outcomes in real-world
child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS)
is also found. Weisz and colleagues (1995) reported
that the overall effect size of change for those attend-
ing community CAMHS, compared to those who were
not, was close to zero, a finding replicated in further
studies (Weiss, Catron, & Harris, 1999, 2000). Jörg and
colleagues (2012) also found that, across a variety of
measures, those who continuously attended commu-
nity CAMHS had higher levels of self-rated distress/
problems when compared to a matched community
sample with similar levels of initial distress/problems,
but who did not to access CAMHS. Kazdin (2004)
reported that 40–60% of youth who begin treatment
drop out against advice. Warren and colleagues (2009,
2010) found a deterioration rate of 24% amongst
children in public CAMHS settings.
Whitaker (2010) has documented a tripling of the
number of people categorized as disabled mentally ill
in the USA over the past two decades. Similarly, the
numbers of youth in America categorized as having a
disability because of a mental condition leapt from
around 16,000 in 1987 to 560,000 in 2007. Mental dis-
orders have also become the most common reason for
receiving benefits in the UK, with the number of clai-
mants rising by 103% from 1995 to 2014. Claimants with
other conditions fell by 35% (Viola & Moncrieff, 2016).
Of particular concern is the increase in the rate of
ADHD diagnosis and stimulant prescription to young
people. In the USA it is estimated that 11% of children
aged between 4 and 17 have been diagnosed with ADHD
and between half and two-thirds of these are then pre-
scribed stimulants (Sharpe, 2014). In the UK prescribing of
stimulants rose from about 6000 prescriptions a year in
1994 to over 1 million by 2013; a staggering 17,000% rise
in two decades (Timimi, 2015).
ADHD is a fact of culture, not a fact of nature
It requires little intellectual effort to reach the inescap-
able conclusion that the concept and definition of
CONTACT Sami Timimi
stimimi@talk21.com
Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Lincoln University, UK
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING, 2017
VOL. 12, 1298270
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482631.2017.1298270
© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
 ADHD is replete with problems around reliability and
validity. For example, diagnostic guidelines note that
ADHD behaviours may be minimal or absent in a
number of settings such as when the person is
under close supervision, a novel setting, or engaged
in especially interesting (to them) activities (Whitely,
2015). Even if a genetic basis for certain behavioural
characteristics were found (and we are a long way
from that) we still have to run the “so what” test
and ask why such behaviours should be treated as
disorders rather than differences. Deciding where to
draw the line between what we consider part of the
“ordinary” spectrum of behaviours and what we
decide is “pathological” is more dependent on cul-
tural than scientific processes. I have previously
argued (Timimi, 2005; Timimi & Leo, 2009) that the
rapid expansion in the use of culturally constructed
diagnoses like ADHD, together with giving children
powerful stimulant medications to control their beha-
viour, is more a damning indictment of the position of
children in neo-liberal cultures, than an indication of
scientific progress. The continuing absence of biolo-
gical support, together with the avoidance of engage-
ment with questions of validity, leads me to believe
that this assertion remains relevant.
In psychiatry (apart from some forms of dementia
and a few other known organically based condi-
tions), there is no such thing as diagnosis. In med-
icine diagnosis is the process of determining which
disease or condition explains a person’s symptoms
and signs. Diagnosis therefore points to causal pro-
cesses. Making an accurate diagnosis is a technical
skill that enables effective matching of treatment to
address a specific pathological process. Pseudo-
diagnoses like ADHD cannot explain behaviours as
there are only “symptoms” that are descriptions (not
explanations) of behaviours. Even using the word
“symptom” may be problematic, as in medicine
“symptoms” usually refers to patients’ suffering/
experience as a result of an underlying disease
process and is therefore associated in our minds
with a medical procedure leading to an explanation
for the “symptom”. Consider the following example:
If I were to ask the question “what is ADHD?” then
it is not possible for me to answer that question by
reference
to
a
particular
known
pathological
abnormality.
Instead
I
will
have
to
provide
a
description, such as ADHD is the presence of the
behaviours of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and poor
attention (plus a few extra qualifiers such as age
of onset). Contrast this with asking the question
“what is diabetes?” If I were to answer this question
in the same manner by just describing symptoms
such as needing to urinate excessively, thirst and
fatigue, I could be in deep trouble as a medical
practitioner as there are plenty of other conditions
that may initially present with these symptoms and
diabetes itself may not present with these symp-
toms in a recognizable way. In order to answer the
question “what is diabetes?” I have to refer to its
pathology involving abnormalities of sugar metabo-
lism. I would then get independent (to my subjec-
tive opinion) empirical data to support or otherwise
my hypothesis about what may be “causing” the
patient’s described experiences (such as testing
the urine and/or blood for levels of glucose). In
the
rest
of
medicine
therefore,
my
diagnosis
explains and has some causal connection with the
behaviours/symptoms that are described. Diagnosis
in that context sits in a “technical” explanatory
framework. In psychiatry what we are calling diag-
nosis (such as ADHD) will only describe but is
unable to explain.
The problem of using a classification like ADHD to
explain an observed set of behaviours (i.e. as a diag-
nosis) can be illustrated by asking another set of
questions. If I was to ask “why” a particular child
cannot concentrate, is hyperactive and shows impul-
sivity and I were to answer that these behaviours are
caused by ADHD, then a legitimate question to ask is
“how do you know that they are caused by ADHD?”
The only answer I can give to that question is that I
know it’s ADHD because the child is presenting with
hyperactivity, impulsivity and poor attention. In other
words if we try to use a classification that can only
describe in order to explain, we end up with what
philosophically is known as a “tautology”. It is trou-
bling when doctors use a diagnosis like ADHD to
explain and cannot see this problem of tautological
circularity. Furthermore, the idea that a diagnosis like
ADHD “explains” behaviours, risks undermining our
ability to attend to a whole host of other real-life
factors that may have an important role to play in
the development of ADHD behaviours in some chil-
dren; from lack of sleep to witnessing domestic vio-
lence, from being the youngest in the classroom to
struggling to keep up with the academic demands of
school and so on.
This means that in psychiatry we are mostly work-
ing with a system for classification that is descriptive,
but not diagnostic. As a classification it can have its
uses such as recognizing and validating people’s
struggles, as well as administrative and communica-
tion functions; but only if such a system of classifica-
tion can be shown to have other advantages (such as
with clinical outcomes).
As ADHD is not a medical diagnosis, but a descriptive
classification, we have no empirical method for defining
“caseness”. The definition of what qualifies as a case is
thus arbitrary and depends on the standards employed
by the diagnoser, influenced by whatever the prevailing
ideology concerning diagnosis they have been exposed
to. As a result we cannot eliminate wide variation in
“diagnostic” practice or come to any valid conclusion
2
S. TIMIMI
 about what percentage of the population could be
considered as “over” or “under” diagnosed.
As ADHD is not a medical diagnosis it is not sur-
prising that there has been a failure to find any spe-
cific and/or characteristic biological abnormality such
as characteristic neuroanatomical, genetic or neuro-
transmitter abnormalities (Campo et al., 2013; Timimi
& Timimi, 2015; Whitely, 2015).
Does the concept of ADHD help improve
clinical outcomes?
The evidence on outcomes in mental health in general
finds that the process of matching treatment models to
a diagnosis results in virtually no clinically significant
impact on outcomes (Timimi, Tetley, Burgoine, &
Walker, 2013), a finding that extends to ADHD (Miller,
Wampold, & Varhely, 2008). Instead of specific factors
associated with specific therapeutic modalities, it
seems “common factors” (factors that all therapeutic
endeavours have in common) are the biggest contri-
butors to variance in outcome from treatment. With
regards to what “common factors” are particularly
influential in the likelihood of a positive outcome (or
not), it seems that it is factors outside of therapy (such
as socio-economic status, patient expectation, the
availability of social support, etc.) that have the largest
impact on outcomes and recovery rates. Within treat-
ment, the factor that has the greatest impact on out-
comes is the therapeutic alliance (as rated by the
patient), with matching treatment model to diagnosis
having
an
insignificant
impact
(Duncan,
Miller,
Wampold, & Hubble, 2010; Wampold, 2001). This rela-
tionship between the alliance and outcome seems
remarkably robust across treatment modalities and
clinical presentations (Castonguay & Beutler, 2005).
Furthermore, many of the “technologies” (such as spe-
cific psychotherapy models) have been developed in a
Western cultural context and researched in predomi-
nantly Western societies, raising questions about their
suitability when working with communities who do
not share similar beliefs and practices.
Most of the controversy in ADHD treatments
revolves around the use of stimulant medication.
The evidence does not favour the continual increases
in stimulant prescribing that has been occurring in
most Western societies. Reviews of pharmacotherapy
studies note the inadequate reporting of drug trial
methodology, publication bias, limited reliability of
results, inadequate data regarding adverse events,
and lack of evidence of long term benefit (e.g.
Storebø et al., 2015). The most commonly cited refer-
ence in support of using stimulant medication is the
American multi-modal treatment of ADHD (MTA)
study, which concluded, in a 14-month randomized
controlled trial, that patients receiving medication
had better outcomes compared to those who did
not (MTA Cooperative Group, 1999). The MTA study
compared outcomes from four treatment groups:
medication (stimulants) only, behaviour therapy only,
combined medication and behaviour therapy, and
routine community care. The authors concluded that
after 14 months of treatment, there was more reduc-
tion of ADHD symptoms in the medication only and
combined treatment groups than the behavioural
therapy only group, who in turn were better than
the routine community care group. However, two
thirds of the routine community care group were
also on the same medication as the medication arm
of
the
study,
yet
had
the
poorest
outcomes.
Furthermore, the behavioural treatment arm con-
sisted of an intensive course that was completed dur-
ing the 14 months, so that by the time of the 14-
month evaluation, the families receiving the beha-
vioural therapy intervention had completed it up to
9 months before the assessments, whilst the medica-
tion arm included appointments right up to 14
months. These two points raise the distinct possibility
of placebo being the reason for better outcomes in
the medication and combined treatment arms at 14
months (Pelham, 1999).
Follow-up at 3 years of the MTA study patients
(now at ages 10–13 years with a mean age of 11.9
years), could not find support for continuing super-
iority of medication regardless of initial severity
(Jensen et al., 2007). Additionally, those who used
more medication during the 3 years were more likely
to experience a deterioration in ADHD symptoms, had
higher rates of delinquency, and were significantly
shorter (by an average of 4 cm) and lighter (by 3 kg)
than those who had not taken medication (Molina
et al., 2007; Swanson et al., 2007). Naturalistic long
term (3 years or more after starting treatment) follow-
up studies have failed to demonstrate that long term
use of stimulants is associated with any improved
outcomes when you compare children diagnosed
with ADHD who regularly take stimulants to those
who do not. Where there are differences between
the two groups (of those who take stimulants long
term and those who do not) it is often found that it is
the children on stimulants who have worse outcomes
than those who have not taken them (regardless of
initial severity) (e.g. Currie, Stabile, & Jones, 2013;
Government of Western Australia, Department of
Health, 2010; Langley et al., 2010; Riddle et al., 2012).
Treating ADHD as a social construct
Diagnoses like ADHD have become popularized, in
most Western countries, where the public have had
exposure to the discourse of ADHD as a biological
disorder to be treated with effective medications
(Timimi & Timimi, 2015). As a result, our social con-
struction of what is “normal” for children and for their
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
3
 parents has, for a few decades now, become nar-
rowed. This greater problematization of children and
their behaviour means that we are increasingly train-
ing all of us (parents, teachers, doctors, etc.) to focus
our energies on “what is wrong”. Because our current
definitions construct problems through lists of (nega-
tive) behaviours (e.g. “doesn’t do as told”, “doesn’t sit
still”, etc.) what often goes missing in our evaluations
are the emotional state and the more positive aspects
of the child’s behaviour and/or intentions. What can
then happen in treatment is a focus on techniques to
control behaviour—in other words focusing on redu-
cing the amount of “symptoms”—leaving behind an
understanding of children at the emotional level, of
their connection to the people and contexts around
them, and of their resilience, competencies and
strengths. Understanding that ADHD is a social con-
struct provides a non-pathologizing starting point for
helping children and their families.
Our ideas about treatment are just as socially con-
structed as diagnoses. The “common factors” evi-
dence-based literature demonstrates that specific
techniques are not as important as contextual factors
and the human relationship in therapy. The technical
aspect of care (matching treatment to diagnosis) has
little impact on outcomes, whereas relational and
contextual aspects of care are crucial (Bracken et al.,
2012; Dunacn et al., 2010). Below are a few ideas that I
and colleagues use and that start from a “social con-
struction” assumption and use a context and relation-
ship rich perspective. Whilst they may be viewed as
“technical” (in that they have theory and technique),
they employ the flexibility afforded by not focusing
on matching treatment to any diagnosis, but trying
techniques that may engage a particular young per-
son or family. If people don’t respond positively we
have open discussions about what other ideas might
be worth trying.
Relational Awareness Programme (RAP)
The RAP approach was inspired by the work of
Howard Glasser (see for example, Glasser & Easley,
2007)
who
developed
the
“Nurtured
Heart
Approach” (NHA), which is a non-diagnostic, skills
based approach, for parents of “intense” children
who may present with challenging behaviours. RAP
is an extension of the NHA approach, incorporating
ideas from systemic and family therapy, and has also
been developed into a parent group workshop pro-
gramme and an e-learning format that supports it.
The approach involves prioritizing building relation-
ships over controlling behaviour (or symptoms). One
of the problems with focusing on controlling of beha-
viour is that attempts to control behaviour can lead to
further strain in the relationship, in a reinforcing nega-
tive cycle, where the more you try to control
behaviour, the worse the relationship becomes, and
the more the young person feels alienated or ostra-
cized, the more they may demonstrate further aggra-
vating behaviours. By focusing on relationships to
start with we hope to build a better foundation for
some mutual appreciation, before thinking about
using boundaries and consequences.
We use the idea of “Emotion WARS” to help par-
ents understand how this emotional dynamic may
function. We are aware we are offering parents a
framework to think about relationships, rather than a
“truth” and this is regularly explained to participants
in the group to allow for participants’ own knowl-
edges, skills, insights, and creativity to be shared and
reinforced:
“W” is for wrongs
The first assumption is that we are programmed to
notice more what’s going wrong than what’s going
right. Our evolutionary survival was related to our
ability to scan our environment for signs of danger
and respond to these. As this is an instinctual aspect,
it means that the more stressed we feel, the more
likely we are to activate this instinct to try to fix
immediately any perceived problem. Becoming pre-
occupied with what is going wrong means that what-
ever the cause of increased stress becomes irrelevant
compared to the actual experience of stress. So
whether it’s difficult finances, problems in marital
relationship, the stress of school regularly ringing up,
and so on, once we experience increased stress, we
are more likely to end up focusing on what’s wrong,
including with our children.
“A” is for attachment
The next basic assumption is that children are born as
essentially “emotion seeking” creatures. Attachments
are created through our emotional relationships and
what we seek is emotional energy from those we are
attached to. In an infant’s world, there is no such
thing as good or bad emotion. For the infant and
growing child there is an instinctual drive towards
seeking emotion so that any emotion (be that affec-
tion or anger) that comes back to them from a care-
giver is experienced as rewarding in some way.
Seeking emotional energy is a better way of describ-
ing what children do than seeking attention.
“R” is for relationships
Relationship dynamics are then built up through
these emotional energy ties that family members
have to each other and over time this becomes a
dynamic between any group of people who spend
extended lengths of time together.
4
S. TIMIMI
 “S” is for scripts
Over time we each develop roles within any group
and these roles tend not to be ones that we have
consciously chosen but rather the emotional, rela-
tional dynamic “settling” into a certain recogniz-
able pattern that everybody in the group (often
unconsciously) recognizes. For example, it is a well-
known phenomenon that if you have a partner,
one of you will end up being the one preoccupied
with tidying up, another one may be preoccupied
with sorting out the bills or getting children ready
in the morning, and so on. Many then find that
even if you want the roles to change, it doesn’t
feel “right” when you do. So, for example, if you
are the one who is concerned about keeping the
house tidy and you yearn for your partner to also
do this, when they do it, somehow they never
seem to be able to do it in the “right” way and
so you have to re-do it to what you consider to be
the correct standard. This is a bit like each family
member having a “script” that they follow which
identifies their role and should any member come
along with a new script that changes their usual
role, it throws everybody else out because it
doesn’t seem “natural”. There is thus a powerful
and usually unrecognized emotional force from
other members pushing anybody who goes “off
script” back towards the script that everybody
recognizes. So if a child occupies the role of say
“the
troublemaker”,
family
members
will
often
assume that this child is in some way involved
whenever trouble is happening.
Changing the emotional dynamic
The concept of “Emotion WARS” then forms the
background starting point in moving toward chan-
ging the emotional dynamics in the “relationship
script” by helping parents, teachers and others in
caring roles focus on relationship building by mov-
ing away from emotional energy reinforcing nega-
tives and toward reinforcing positives. They then
learn skills for dealing with issues such as rules,
consequences, and their own emotional resilience.
For our RAP group workshop model we have used
a
programme
consisting
of
four
2½-h
groups
spread out over 2 months between the first and
last groups. We have developed an e-learning plat-
form which contains all the resources, including the
PowerPoint
slides,
narrations,
exercises
and
detailed advice on setting up and running the
group to enable other practitioners to develop
and run groups in their locality. Parents and carers
of children with “challenging” behaviour (regardless
of diagnosis) are invited. In November 2014 we
conducted an evaluation of the outcomes from
these groups, as we had outcome data from using
the Outcome Rating Scale (ORS, Miller, Duncan,
Brown, Sparks, & Claud, 2003) through asking the
group participants to complete this scale at the
start of each group. The ORS is filled in by the
parent/carer according to their perception of how
they think their child is feeling and functioning at
home and out of home (such as with school and
friendships).
We found that 80% of those who attended more
than one workshop (57 out of 71; nine attended one
session only and therefore were not included in this
outcome
figure),
rated
a
clinically
significant
improvement and/or rated their child as being in
the
clinically
non-significant
range,
by the
last
group. These figures should of course be viewed
with caution as this was not part of a research
project and therefore there was no control group.
However, they offer some promise as many atten-
dees reported going for multiple other interventions
with their children prior to trying this group and the
findings compare favourably with the real world
setting outcomes found in the research quoted ear-
lier. One of the most common feedback comments
from participants who attended with a successful
outcome is that what changed most for them was
their “attitude” to their child; which became more
understanding and co-operative.
Other helpful ideas
RAP is a relationally based intervention. In some senses
this mirrors what the evidence discussed earlier in this
article finds, which is that therapy essentially takes place
in the negotiated space of meanings that makes up the
alliance. Therefore, I believe, we should be careful not to
become too reliant on one set of ideas or method. What
matches the rhythms of significance and meaning for
each family may be different. As a result it’s useful to
have a whole variety of ideas to draw from. Thus, possi-
ble therapeutic strategies are as numerous as there are
people and families wanting help. As the ADHD label is
unable to offer much more than a vague description,
the specifics of each case differ; meaning that finding
helpful therapeutic strategies may similarly differ
depending on the family (for a fuller discussion of this
please see Timimi, 2005, 2009; Timimi et al., 2013). The
following ideas may prove helpful for some:
Diet and nutrition
Try eliminating potential irritants (such as artificial
additives), adding a daily multi-vitamin and mineral
supplement and an EPA rich essential fatty acid, and
balance the diet by removing excess sugars and dairy
products.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
5
 Fresh air and exercise
Enable your children to get plenty of opportunities for
exercise (particularly outdoors) including chances for
unstructured and unsupervised active play.
Clear and consistent consequences
Notice your child’s strengths and support and encou-
rage these in a positive direction. Use clear and con-
sistent consequences for unwanted behaviour and
work hard to stick to these and not give in (stay
firm, keep calm). Try not to get drawn into arguments,
which often feed negativity to everyone.
Regular positive family time
Find opportunities to do things together as a family
on a regular basis. Like all relationships we have to
continue “working” on our relationships with our chil-
dren (year after year after year after …).
Communication and understanding
Talk to each other, but more importantly listen to
each other (not the same thing). Try and understand
your child’s point of view and help them understand
yours. Create regular opportunities for you to com-
municate, listen and try and understand what’s on
each of your minds.
The following “pitfalls”, leading to therapeutic stra-
tegies failing, are also worth keeping in mind:
Giving up too quickly
With some interventions, unwanted behaviours can
get worse before they start to improve, resulting in
parents giving up on the strategy prematurely.
Becoming hopeless following a setback
Setbacks are an inevitable part of any recovery process.
Hopelessness can creep in and with it a sense of failure
and a loss of confidence in the ability to bring about
lasting change. When the inevitable setback occurs,
remember it’s very common and don’t give up at this
point.
Unrealistic expectations
If we have unrealistic expectations of our children,
then we will feel disappointed with them no matter
what changes.
Inconsistency
Children are often clever enough to spot opportu-
nities that arise from inconsistencies in order to
further their own desires, for example, by playing
one parent off another.
Unresolved difficulties between parents
This is where issues such as inconsistency can become
a potentially serious obstacle to progress. In a situa-
tion where the parental couple have separated, it is
vital for parents to put any continuing animosity
towards one another to one side and keep the child
out of any arguments.
Unresolved issues from a parent’s own childhood
For example, if a parent had an unhappy relationship
with their own parents resulting in them feeling hate
or fear towards that parent, they may act with their
own children in a way that is designed to avoid this
happening to them, resulting in trouble enforcing
boundaries with their own children.
The anger-guilt-reparation cycle
In this “drama” a parent becomes infuriated with the
child’s behaviour, imposes some sort of punishment
(anger), they then calm down and feel that their
punishment was unduly harsh (guilt), as a result they
try to repair some of the damage they feel they have
done and so may give some sort of treat or comfort to
their child (reparation). The child may learn that any
consequences
imposed
may
be
withdrawn
and,
indeed, may be followed by some sort of reward.
Creation of a “safe zone”
We are exposed to constant messages telling us how
dangerous the outside world is, particularly for chil-
dren. The subsequent desire to protect our children
from the perceived dangers of the world may hamper
children’s capacity to develop the resilience they may
need to cope in later life.
Fear of change
This can be a change in any member of the family (see
above about family scripts). Change usually causes a
certain amount of anxiety and fear of the unknown, not
just for the individual but also other family members.
Lack of support
As the old African saying reminds us “it takes a village
to raise a child”. Raising children demands a lot from
6
S. TIMIMI
 parents both physically and mentally, and given the
pressures they face, they need trusted partners,
friends and other family members to provide emo-
tional and practical support.
Lack of time
Another feature of modern life is how busy and time
stretched we are. With so many things to do and such
little time to do them we may feel stressed and this
often impacts on children.
Unresolved trauma
Everybody reacts differently to trauma (be this abuse,
loss of a parent, being assaulted, involved in a serious
accident, etc.). For some, trauma may lead them to
feel preoccupied, constantly worrying about their
safety and the safety of others and they may present
with poor concentration, as things like school work
will be of limited importance to them. Others may
have developed the psychological defence of “being
on the go”; by constantly doing things it keeps their
minds away from thinking about what has happened
and what may happen in the future.
Conclusion
ADHD is a cultural construct. It is often argued that
the use of categorical constructs like ADHD enables
the study of aetiology, treatment and prognosis.
Evidence
outlined
above
demonstrates
that
far
from enabling any advancement of knowledge or
clinical practice, it has created an illusion of progress
and resulted in exposure of possibly millions of
children and young people to unnecessary and
potentially harmful medications. It has spurred on
liberal use of stimulant medication, despite the lack
of evidence for improved long term outcomes
resulting from this. ADHD is an example of the
“MacDonaldization”
of
children’s
mental
health
where marketing and commodification of our anxi-
eties about failure (as parents, teachers and indivi-
duals) has triumphed over science and good ethics
(Timimi, 2017). The concept is well past its use-by
date and should be discarded. Plenty of alternative
therapeutic strategies exist and I have provided a
brief description of some in this article. Sadly or
gladly (depending on your perspective), in the real
world children’s behaviour does not emerge out of
predictable algorithms that enable us to accurately
identify separate features caused by genes, parents,
teachers etc., which then allows us to choose the
“correct” treatment. Personally, I think it’s wonderful
that the uniqueness of the children and families I
see in practice challenges me to take the time to
understand their specific worries, health problems,
goals, dreams and talents, in a way that makes
formulaic guidelines seem, not only redundant, but
a hindrance to enacting the standards of good med-
ical practice expected of us. If child psychiatry has
anything to teach the rest of medicine, it is surely
this—that for many presentations there is no short
cut to understanding the whole person through
their unique histories and context—good outcomes
often depend on this.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
References
Bracken, P., Thomas, P., Timimi, S., Asen, E., Behr, G., Beuster,
C., … Yeomans, D. (2012). Psychiatry beyond the current
paradigm. British Journal of Psychiatry, 201, 430–434.
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.112.109447
Campo, N., Fryer, T. D., Hong, Y. T., Smith, R., Brichard, L.,
Acosta-Cabronero, J., … Muller, U. (2013). A positron
emission tomography study of nigro-striatal dopaminer-
gic mechanisms underlying attention: Implications for
ADHD
and
its
treatment.
Brain,
136,
3252–3270.
doi:10.1093/brain/awt263
Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (2005). Common and
unique principles of therapeutic change: What do we
know and what do we need to know? In L. G.
Castonguay & L. E. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic
change that work (pp. 353–370). New York. NY: Oxford
University Press.
Centre for Social Justice. (2012). Completing the revolution:
Commissioning effective talking therapies. Retrieved July
24, 2016, from http://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/
UserStorage/pdf/Pdf%20reports/TalkingTherapiesPaper.pdf
Currie, J., Stabile, M., & Jones, L. E. (2013). Do stimulant
medications improve educational and behavioral outcomes
for children with ADHD? (NBER Working Paper No. 19105).
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duncan, B., Miller, S., Wampold, B., & Hubble, M. (2010). The
heart and soul of change (2nd ed.). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Glasser, H., & Easley, J. (2007). Transforming the difficult child:
The nurtured heart approach. Bath: Worth Publishing.
Government of Western Australia, Department of Health.
(2010). RAINE ADHD study: Long-term outcomes associated
with stimulant medication in the treatment of ADHD in
children. Perth: Department of Health.
Hansen, N., Lambert, M., & Forman, E. (2002). The psy-
chotherapy dose-effect and its implications for treatment
delivery services. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
9, 329–343.
Jensen, P., Arnold, L., Swanson, J., Hinshaw, S., Gibbons, R.,
Marcus, S., … Wigal, T. (2007). 3-year follow-up of the
NIMH MTA study. Journal of the American Academy of
Child
and
Adolescent
Psychiatry,
46,
989–1002.
doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3180686d48
Jörg, F., Ormel, J., Reijneveld, S. A., Jansen, D. E., Verhulst,
F. C., & Oldehinkel, A. J. (2012). Puzzling findings in study-
ing the outcome of “real world” adolescent mental health
services: The TRAILS study. Public Library of Science, 7,
e44704.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
7
 Jorm, A. F., & Reavley, N. J. (2012). Changes in psychological
distress in Australian adults between 1995 and 2011.
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 46,
352–356. doi:10.1177/0004867411428017
Kazdin, A. E. (2004). Psychotherapy for children and adoles-
cents. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s hand-
book of psychotherapy and behavior change (5th ed., pp.
543–589). New York, NY: Wiley.
Lambert, M. J. (2010). Prevention of treatment failure: The use
of measuring, monitoring, and feedback in clinical practice.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Langley, K., Fowler, T., Ford, T., Thapar, A. K., Van den Bree,
M., Harold, G., … Thapar, A. (2010). Adolescent clinical
outcomes for young people with attention-deficit hyper-
activity disorder. British Journal Psychiatry, 196, 235–240.
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.109.066274
Macdonald, H., & Loder, E. (2015). Too much medicine: The
challenge of finding common ground. British Medical
Journal, 350, h1163. doi:10.1136/bmj.h1163
Miller, S., Duncan, B., Brown, J., Sparks, J., & Claud, D. (2003).
The outcome rating scale: A preliminary study of reliabil-
ity, validity, and feasibility of a brief visual analogue
measure. Journal of Brief Therapy, 2, 91–100.
Miller, S., Wampold, B., & Varhely, K. (2008). Direct compar-
isons of treatment modalities for youth disorders: A
meta-analysis.
Psychotherapy
Research,
18,
5–14.
doi:10.1080/10503300701472131
Molina, B., Flory, K., Hinshaw, S., Swanson, J., Arnold, L.,
Gibbons, R., … Wigal, T. (2007). Delinquent behavior
and emerging substance use in the MTA at 36 months:
Prevalence, course, and treatment effects. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46,
1028–1040. doi:10.1097/chi.0b013e3180686d96
MTA Cooperative Group. (1999). A 14-month randomized
clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56,
1073–1086.
Pelham, W. E. (1999). The NIMH multimodal treatment study
for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: Just say yes to
drugs alone? Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 981–990.
doi:10.1177/070674379904401004
Riddle, M. A., Yershova, K., Lazzaretto, D., Paykina, N.,
Yenokyan, G., Greenhill, L., … Posner, K. (2012). The
Preschool
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder
Treatment Study (PATS) 6-year follow-up. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 52,
264–278. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2012.12.007
Sharpe, K. (2014). The smart-pill oversell. Nature, 506,
146–148. doi:10.1038/506146a
Storebø, O., Krogh, H., Ramstad, E., Moreira-Maia, C., Holmskov,
M., Skoog, M., … Gluud, C. (2015). Methylphenidate for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and ado-
lescents: Cochrane systematic review with meta-analyses
and trial sequential analyses of randomised clinical trials.
British Medical Journal, 351, h5203.
Swanson, J., Hinshaw, S., Arnold, L., Gibbons, R., Marcus, S.,
Hur, K., … Wigal, T. (2007). Secondary evaluations of MTA
36-month outcomes: Propensity score and growth mix-
ture model analyses. Journal of the American Academy of
Child
and
Adolescent
Psychiatry,
46,
1003–1014.
doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3180686d63
Timimi, S. (2005). Naughty boys: Anti-social behaviour, ADHD
and the role of culture. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Timimi, S. (2009). A straight talking introduction to children’s
mental health problems. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Timimi, S. (2015). Children’s mental health: Time to stop
using
psychiatric
diagnosis.
European
Journal
of
Psychotherapy & Counselling, 17, 342–358. doi:10.1080/
13642537.2015.1094500
Timimi, S. (2017). Critical cultural theory. In B. Cohen (Ed.),
Handbook of critical theory and mental health. Aldershot:
Ashgate.
Timimi, S., & Leo, J. (Eds.). (2009). Rethinking ADHD: From
brain to culture. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Timimi, S., Tetley, D., Burgoine, W., & Walker, G. (2013).
Outcome
Orientated
Child
and
Adolescent
Mental
Health Services (OO-CAMHS): A whole service model.
Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 18, 169–184.
doi:10.1177/1359104512444118
Timimi, S., & Timimi, L. (2015). The social construction of
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). In M.
O’Reilly (Ed.), The Palgrave handbook of child mental
health (pp. 139–157). Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Viola, S., & Moncrieff, J. (2016). Claims for sickness and
disability benefits owing to mental disorders in the UK:
Trends from 1995 to 2014. British Journal of Psychiatry
Open, 2, 18–24. doi:10.1192/bjpo.bp.115.002246
Wampold, B. E. (2001). The great psychotherapy debate:
Models, methods, and findings. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Warren, J. S., Nelson, P. L., & Burlingame, G. M. (2009).
Identifying youth at risk for treatment failure in outpati-
ent community mental health services. Journal of Child
and Family Studies, 18, 690–701. doi:10.1007/s10826-009-
9275-9
Warren, J. S., Nelson, P. L., Mondragon, S. A., Baldwin, S. A., &
Burlingame, G. M. (2010). Youth psychotherapy change
trajectories and outcomes in usual care: Community men-
tal health versus managed care settings. Journal of
Consulting
and
Clinical
Psychology,
78,
144–155.
doi:10.1037/a0018544
Weiss, B., Catron, T., & Harris, V. (1999). The effectiveness of
traditional child psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical
Psychology,
67,
82–94.
doi:10.1037/0022-
006X.67.1.82
Weiss, B., Catron, T., & Harris, V. (2000). A 2-year follow-up of
the effectiveness of traditional child psychotherapy.
Journal
of
Consulting
and
Clinical
Psychology,
68,
1094–1101. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.68.6.1094
Weisz, J. R., Donenberg, G. R., & Weiss, B. (1995). Bridging the
gap between laboratory and clinic in child and adoles-
cent psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 63, 688–701. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.63.5.688
Whitaker, R. (2010). Anatomy of an epidemic. New York, NY:
Crown.
Whitely, M. (2015). Attention deficit hyperactive disorder
diagnosis continues to fail the reliability and validity
tests. Australia and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
49, 497–498. doi:10.1177/0004867415579921
8
S. TIMIMI
