 REVIEW ARTICLE
Assessing the Role of Muscle Protein Breakdown in Response
to Nutrition and Exercise in Humans
Kevin D. Tipton1
• D. Lee Hamilton1 • Iain J. Gallagher1
Published online: 24 January 2018
� The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Abstract Muscle protein breakdown (MPB) is an impor-
tant metabolic component of muscle remodeling, adapta-
tion to training, and increasing muscle mass. Degradation
of muscle proteins occurs via the integration of three main
systems—autophagy and the calpain and ubiquitin-protea-
some systems. These systems do not operate indepen-
dently,
and
the
regulation
is
complex.
Complete
degradation of a protein requires some combination of the
systems. Determination of MPB in humans is technically
challenging, leading to a relative dearth of information.
Available information on the dynamic response of MPB
primarily
comes
from
stable
isotopic
methods
with
expression and activity measures providing complementary
information.
It
seems
clear
that
resistance
exercise
increases MPB, but not as much as the increase in muscle
protein synthesis. Both hyperaminoacidemia and hyperin-
sulinemia inhibit the post-exercise response of MPB.
Available data do not allow a comprehensive examination
of the mechanisms behind these responses. Practical
nutrition recommendations for interventions to suppress
MPB following exercise are often made. However, it is
likely that some degree of increased MPB following
exercise is an important component for optimal remodel-
ing. At this time, it is not possible to determine the impact
of nutrition on any individual muscle protein. Thus, until
we can develop and employ better methods to elucidate the
role of MPB following exercise and the response to
nutrition, recommendations to optimize post exercise
nutrition should focus on the response of muscle protein
synthesis. The aim of this review is to provide a compre-
hensive examination of the state of knowledge, including
methodological considerations, of the response of MPB to
exercise and nutrition in humans.
1 Introduction
Skeletal muscle is a crucially important tissue for human
health and well-being [1]. The importance of muscle for
locomotion and strength is obvious. However, skeletal
muscle also is the largest metabolically active tissue in the
body. It is also the largest site for glucose disposal and acts
as a fuel reserve for other organs during pathophysiological
situations, including fasting. Thus, skeletal muscle is crit-
ical, not only for athletic performance, but for healthy daily
living and aging. Understanding the regulation of gain or
loss of muscle mass is therefore an important consideration
for exercise and nutrition scientists.
Muscle proteins are constantly turning over, i.e., broken
down (or degraded) and synthesized. The balance between
the rates of synthesis and degradation of muscle protein
pools, i.e., net muscle protein balance (NBAL), determines
the amount of that protein in muscle. In particular, changes
in the amount of muscle myofibrillar proteins lead to
changes in muscle mass. Moreover, in addition to or
instead of, modulating muscle mass, changes in muscle
protein synthesis (MPS) and muscle protein breakdown
(MPB) also may be crucial for repair and remodeling of
muscle proteins following exercise [2]. So, the regulation
of these processes is critical for optimal adaptation of
muscle in terms of size. Thus, exercise and nutrition
interventions that influence rates of MPS and MPB, and
& Kevin D. Tipton
k.d.tipton@stir.ac.uk
1
Physiology, Exercise and Nutrition Research Group, Faculty
of Health Sciences and Sport, University of Stirling, Stirling,
Scotland
123
Sports Med (2018) 48 (Suppl 1):S53–S64
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-017-0845-5
 ultimately NBAL, have received increasing attention in the
last two to three decades [2–5].
The influence of exercise and nutrition on the regulation
of MPS is understood far better than MPB [2–5]. There are
a number of reasons for this discrepancy. The study of
MPB, particularly in humans, is technically much more
difficult than MPS [6]. Furthermore, changes in MPS in
response to exercise and nutrition have a much greater
influence on NBAL than do changes in MPB [7, 8]. Also,
the resolution of measuring MPS on a protein level is more
readily accomplished than for MPB. Thus, the bulk of the
studies attempting to contribute to our understanding of
changes in muscle mass and in response to nutrition and
exercise have focused on examining MPS [6]. Neverthe-
less, it is important to delineate the role of MPB for
remodeling and repair of skeletal muscle in response to
exercise and how nutrition influences these processes. This
information contributes to our overall understanding of the
metabolic processes behind muscle gains, losses, and repair
and remodeling of muscle tissue leading to muscle adap-
tation. In this review, we will examine our current under-
standing of the process of MPB and how it responds to
nutrition and exercise interventions and its role in changing
skeletal muscle mass and adaptation. Thus, we will focus
our discussion on data from studies in humans following
exercise.
2 Systems of Muscle Protein Breakdown
There are three main systems that contribute to the cata-
bolic component of muscle turnover; the ubiquitin-protea-
somal pathway (UPP), autophagy, and the calpain Ca2?-
dependent cysteine proteases. The best known of these
processes is the UPP, which centers around the 26 kDa
proteasome that degrades proteins tagged with the 8.5 kDa
protein ubiquitin [9]. The UPP is central to protein
degradation across all cell types and plays a fundamental
role in normal physiology. E1 enzymes first activate
ubiquitin. These enzymes capture ubiquitin and an ATP-
Mg2? complex, and catalyse the acylation of the ubiquitin
C-terminus and subsequent thioesterification, releasing
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) in the process [10].
Ubiquitin is transferred to an E2 ubiquitin conjugating
enzyme via transthioesterification [11]. Finally the acti-
vated ubiquitin is canonically transferred via an E3 ubiq-
uitin ligase to a lysine group on a target protein [9]. The
addition of four ubiquitin molecules to the target protein is
the canonical signal for transfer of that protein to the
26 kDa proteasome for degradation, but other non-canon-
ical ubiquitination patterns have also been reported [12].
E3 ligases, e.g., muscle specific ring finger protein 1
(MuRF1) and atrogin1, have been the focus of much work
after they were found to be elevated in several models of
skeletal muscle atrophy [13, 14].
The
UPP
alone
cannot
degrade
intact
myofibrils
[15, 16]. Thus, there is a requirement for involvement of
one or both of the other protein catabolic pathways,
depending on the physiological situation. In terms of
degrading sarcomeric proteins, it is believed that the cal-
pain system (further described below) is required to break
up sarcomeres into their component parts through the
proteolytic activity of the calpains [17]. Much as the UPP
and calpain systems are intricately linked to drive the
destruction of specific proteins, so too is the autophagy
pathway linked to the UPP [18]. Generally, the autophagy
system involves the initial generation of an autophagosome
surrounding bulk intracellular components or protein
complexes. These components targeted for destruction
could be intracellular organelles, damaged proteins or other
target proteins (usually membrane bound proteins). The
autophagosome then fuses with lysosomes leading to the
degradation
of
the
autophagosome
contents.
Several
stressors activate autophagy in skeletal muscle, including
reactive oxygen species generation and starvation.
The first step in the prototypical autophagy process is
the formation of a nascent membrane structure, the pha-
gophore. The origin of the membrane—whether endoso-
mal, trans-Golgi, nuclear membrane or de novo synthesis—
is unclear. After the maturation of the autophagosome there
is a fusion with lysosomes generating an autolysosome.
Finally, activation of lysosomal proteases leads to the
degradation of autolysosome contents and the recycling of
amino acids. Thus, this system, in combination with the
UPP, degrades proteins important for exercise performance
and adaptation other than myofibrillar proteins, such as
membrane bound proteins, e.g., transporters, ion channels,
and receptors [19].
Calpains are non-lysosomal Ca2?-dependent cysteine
proteases. Candidate targets for calpain activity in muscle
include myofibrillar, cytoskeletal, and sarcolemmal pro-
teins. There are three calpains expressed in skeletal muscle;
calpain-1, calpain-2 (the ubiquitous calpains), and the
muscle-specific calpain-3 [20]. Whereas calpain-1 and 2
require autolysation and heterodimerization with calpain-4,
calpain-3 requires autolytic cleavage for activity but not
dimerization to calpain-4. Once activated, calpain-1 and
calpain-2 are referred to as l- or m-calpains, respectively,
due to their reliance on micro- or millimolar concentrations
of Ca2? for activation. The requirement for millimolar
Ca2? levels for activation makes it difficult to discern a
physiological role for m-calpain
in skeletal muscle.
Approximately 70% of l-calpain is thought to be freely
available in the cytoplasm of skeletal muscle. Upon a rise
in [Ca2?], calpain-1 dimerizes with calpain-4 and binds to
target proteins. Further sustained increases in [Ca2?] are
S54
K. D. Tipton et al.
123
 required for activation to l-calpain and the dissociation
between target binding and activation is thought to be a
mechanism to prevent inappropriate calpain driven prote-
olysis [21]. The ubiquitous calpains also are regulated by
calpastatin. This regulation requires the heterodimeric form
of the calpains and the presence of calcium [22]. Unlike
calpain-1, calpain-3 is thought to be mostly bound to
myofibrillar proteins, and in particular to titin [23]. The
importance of calpain-3 in skeletal muscle homeostasis is
underlined by the fact that lack of calpain-3 leads to limb-
girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A with sufferers becoming
wheelchair-bound from early adulthood onwards [24].
It is clear that the three main protein degradation sys-
tems work simultaneously to contribute to the overall
response of MPB in response to exercise and nutrition.
Whereas mechanistic data are lacking from human studies,
data from animal models suggest that the UPP and calpain
systems play a much larger role than autophagy [17].
However, the autophagy system seems to be particularly
important for degradation of receptor proteins at the
membrane [19]. Given their importance in control of ana-
bolic processes, control of receptor protein degradation
plays an important role in muscle remodeling. Assessing
markers of these pathways offers important mechanistic
information leading to greater understanding of the role of
MPB in muscle remodeling in response to exercise and
nutrition.
3 Methods for Measuring Muscle Protein
Breakdown (MPB)
Methods to assess the response of MPB to exercise and
nutrition interventions in humans can be divided broadly
into dynamic and static measurements. Measurements of
the dynamic response of MPB are based primarily, albeit
not entirely, on stable isotopic tracer methods. Static
measurements stem primarily from assessing changes in
molecular signals in muscle biopsy samples. All methods
have their strengths and limitations. These considerations
must be balanced with the level of invasiveness required
for each method when choosing how best to assess the
response of MPB. It is important to understand the
strengths and limitations of methods used to measure MPB
for optimal interpretation of the available data. We attempt
to delineate these considerations for the methods discussed
below.
3.1 Dynamic Measures of MPB
Stable isotopic tracer methods provide a powerful tool to
determine metabolic responses to various perturbations,
including nutrition and exercise. Arteriovenous (AV) blood
sampling in combination with infusion of stable isotopi-
cally labeled amino acids has been used to assess MPS and
MPB in vivo in humans [25]. This two-pool (arterial and
venous amino acid pools) model allows calculation of the
uptake and release of an amino acid that is not metabolized
in muscle (such as phenylalanine) across the limb [26, 27].
The uptake and release are assumed to be due directly to
MPS and MPB, respectively. For release of phenylalanine
from the leg to represent MPB, it must be assumed that
outward amino acid transport from the muscle into the
venous pool is equivalent to MPB and both processes are in
steady state [26, 27]. So, MPB may be underestimated by
the amount of amino acids that appear in the muscle
intracellular pool that are reutilized for MPS and not
transported out into the venous blood [28, 29]. Also, both
physiological and isotopic steady-states are necessary for
this model to offer robust results [26, 27, 30]. However, in
many nutrition and exercise studies, physiological steady
state is not possible. For example, when a bolus ingestion
of amino acids or protein is a necessary component of the
study design, transient expansion of the intracellular amino
acid pool followed by amino acid efflux into the venous
blood pool will result [31]. This transient expansion must
be accounted for when calculating MPB. Thus, measure-
ment of MPB in these situations is less reliable. Therefore,
this two-pool model for estimation of MPB may be reliable
and useful in certain situations, e.g., studies in which
physiological and isotopic steady states are possible.
However, the limitations must be considered carefully,
particularly in studies involving bolus ingestion of a source
of amino acids following exercise.
An important limitation of the two-pool AV balance
model that must be considered is that it underestimates the
true rate of MPB depending on the rate of amino acid
transport, as well as the reutilization of intracellular amino
acids for MPS. Thus, more recently an AV model was
developed to determine the actual rate of appearance of
amino acids into the intracellular pool from MPB [28, 29].
This three-pool (arterial, venous, and muscle intracellular)
model provides a closer approximation of the true rate of
MPB. In addition to the arterial and venous blood samples,
the isotopic enrichment of intracellular amino acid tracers
is determined from muscle biopsy samples. As with the
two-pool model, both physiological and isotopic steady
state are assumed with this three-pool model [28, 29].
Thus, the three-pool model is a refinement of the two-pool
AV model, but limitations remain.
The AV balance models have been used to provide
important information about muscle metabolism following
exercise, including MPB. Yet, the limitations inherent with
these models require careful consideration when inter-
preting results. The most commonly used limbs are the leg
and forearm. Since samples are taken from venous blood
Human Muscle Protein Breakdown Following Exercise and Nutrition
S55
123
 draining an entire limb (the femoral vein drains the entire
leg, not just the muscle tissue) calculation of MPB includes
contributions from non-muscle tissues (e.g., skin, bone
etc.). Biolo et al. [29] determined that muscle accounts for
85–90% of the metabolism of the leg at rest [3, 7]. The
contribution of non-muscle tissue is likely more for the
forearm [3]. Given that exercise increases the metabolism
of the muscle with little impact on other tissues, it is a
reasonable assumption that measurements made using
these AV models following exercise represent changes in
muscle metabolism [3, 7]. Moreover, MPS calculated as
the fractional synthetic rate (FSR)—a method that mea-
sures metabolism only in muscle tissue—is highly corre-
lated with MPS determined by the three-pool AV model [7]
suggesting that muscle metabolism is the primary con-
tributor to the results. Another obvious consideration is the
invasive nature of sampling from an artery and vein that
drains an entire limb. Whereas any artery may be sampled,
an appropriate vein must be sampled, e.g., femoral vein for
leg AV balance. Catheterization of an artery and a deep
forearm or femoral vein obviously must be performed with
great care and under appropriate clinical conditions and
ethical considerations. Thus, utilization of these models is
limited mostly to clinical facilities making these methods
largely unavailable for studies in healthy volunteers—both
athletes and other exercisers.
Other stable isotopic tracer models have been developed
to assess MPB in vivo in humans when arterial catheriza-
tion may not be feasible [32]. The principle behind these
methods is that the appearance of unlabeled amino acids
from MPB will dilute the tracer enrichment in the muscle
intracellular pool, but not arterial blood pool [33]. So, the
relationship of the enrichment in the muscle intracellular
fluid and arterialized blood can be used to calculate frac-
tional breakdown rate (FBR), i.e., MPB [32]. An advantage
to this model is that MPS can be simultaneously deter-
mined and NBAL calculated. FBR can be determined
simultaneously with FSR by infusing two isotopes and
sampling muscle tissue and arterial or arterialized venous
blood [32, 34, 35]. Whereas arterial catherization is not
necessary, two or more muscle biopsies are required. More
recently, a pulse-bolus version for determination of FBR
was developed in the Wolfe laboratory [36]. This method
requires fewer biopsies and does not require an infusion of
amino acids. Physiological steady state is a crucial com-
ponent of these models to determine FBR. Without this
steady state, such as occurs with ingestion of a source of
amino acids, the relationship between MPB and amino acid
transport is variable [37] and the model breaks down
leading to unreliable results. Thus, it is not possible to
determine MPB following exercise with ingestion of pro-
tein or amino acids using these models. Recently, a tech-
nique was developed to address this shortcoming [37], but
to date it has never been validated in humans. So, to our
knowledge, it is possible to measure MPB in response to an
infusion or constant ingestion of steady doses of protein or
amino acids with AV balance methods. However, assessing
the response of MPB to a bolus ingestion of a source of
amino acids remains problematic. These limitations have
led to the dearth of available data on MPB in humans.
Both AV balance and FBR methods to assess MPB are
limited to degradation rates of mixed muscle proteins, i.e.,
all proteins in the muscle. There is no resolution of
breakdown on the individual protein level or even protein
subfraction, e.g., myofibrillar versus mitochondrial pro-
teins. Measuring rates of synthesis of protein subfractions
has
become
quite
common
over
the
past
decade
[2, 5, 38, 39]. However, measuring breakdown rates of
these protein subfractions is difficult. One approach that
attempts
to
address
this
limitation
is
to
measure
3-methylhistidine (3MH), which is a post-translationally
methylated histidine found in myofibrillar proteins. 3MH is
used as a marker of myofibrillar MPB because it cannot be
further metabolized nor can it be reutilized for MPS. Many
studies have measured urinary 3MH as a marker of whole
body myofibrillar protein breakdown. But, of course, 3MH
is found in tissues other than skeletal muscle, e.g., cardiac
and smooth muscle, so increased urinary 3MH does not
represent only skeletal MPB. Moreover, studies measuring
3MH must ensure that participants consume a meat free
diet. More recently, AV balance of 3MH has been used to
determine MPB, but this method has been used sparingly
and only in clinical studies [40]. Interstitial 3MH recently
has been measured after exercise and inactivity using
microdialysis [41–43]. However, in addition to the above
limitations, it must be assumed that increased 3MH in the
interstitial fluid appears as a result of increased MPB. This
method has been criticized [44] and the sensitivity of the
measurement seems to be insufficient to detect changes in
MPB following many forms of exercise [43]. Thus, the
efficacy of using this method to assess myofibrillar MPB
following exercise in humans is uncertain, particularly
given the intricacies of muscle microdialysis techniques.
More recently, attempts have been made to investigate
breakdown of individual proteins in muscle. One method
involves measurement of decay of isotopic enrichment of
individual proteins [45, 46]. However, this method has yet
to be used in a study involving exercise and nutrition.
Moreover, this method measures MPB only over the course
of at least several days and as much as 2–3 weeks. Thus,
the rates of MPB calculated would not be comparable to
acute measurements of MPS. Whereas the time frame of
MPB measurement may be applicable to what can be
generated with deuterated water methods for assessing
MPS [47, 48], the two methods may not be used simulta-
neously and NBAL cannot be determined. So, the utility of
S56
K. D. Tipton et al.
123
 this method for assessing breakdown of individual proteins
[45] seems to be fairly limited.
Another method recently has been developed to deter-
mine breakdown of individual proteins in muscle using
proteomic analysis. Breakdown rate of each protein is
calculated from the measurement of the synthesis of each
protein using stable isotopic tracers combined with changes
in abundance of the protein. This method has been reported
in fish [49] and, more recently, in humans following
exercise during low carbohydrate, high fat feeding [50].
Since determination of MPB is indirect, there are limita-
tions that must be considered. Breakdown rates of some
proteins have been reported to be negative due to a number
of factors [50]. Thus, whereas this method offers a way to
acquire some important information about the response of
MPB to exercise and nutrition, appropriate caution should
be applied with interpretation of the results.
In summary, there are a number of methods that have
been used to determine the dynamic response of MPB to
exercise and nutrition. Most of these methods utilize
stable isotopic tracer techniques to assess MPB and the
various limitations of the available methods make mea-
surement of MPB much more difficult than MPS. Thus,
there is much less information on the response of MPB to
exercise and nutrition available. Nevertheless, important
mechanistic information may be gleaned from these
studies.
3.2 Molecular Pathways of MPB
Information about the response of MPB in humans also
may be gleaned from measurements of changes in the
response of molecular signaling of MPB pathways. These
measures are made from muscle samples taken at a given,
individual time point. Thus, these assessments of MPB
pathways in response to exercise are mainly generated
through examination of ribonucleic acid (RNA) or protein
levels or indices of protein signaling/activation responses
(phosphorylation, autolysation, etc). The development of
the polymerase chain (PCR) methodology and subse-
quently quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) led to an
explosion of studies using these techniques to assess gene
expression [51]. Whilst qRT-PCR takes a gene by gene
approach, global scale technologies such as microarrays
[52] and more recently RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) [53]
also are available to quantify the transcriptional response of
muscle to exercise. The sensitivity of these molecular
biology methods means that great care should be taken
with sample preparation to prevent contamination with
exogenous RNA that can confound findings. This sensi-
tivity also means that very small amounts of tissue are
required. RNA levels can be assessed alongside other
parameters (e.g., protein levels, enzyme activity) in the
same tissue sample. Human exercise studies most com-
monly measure changes in messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression of E3 ligases, e.g., MuRF1 and atrogin1, to
suggest changes in MPB with various interventions [6].
A major weakness of any assessment of RNA levels is
that these do not always reflect physiological changes in
muscle metabolism or mass [54]. For example, Reitelseder
et al. [55] reported no change in MPB rates measured with
stable isotopic tracer methods, but MuRF1 expression was
increased
following
exercise.
Additionally,
calpain-3
mRNA levels were reduced 24 h after eccentric exercise
[56], whilst calpain-3 autolysis, and presumably activity
level, was increased after eccentric exercise at the same
time point [57]. Thus, increased mRNA expression does
not always point to increased activity of a pathway. Fur-
thermore, the quantification of RNA levels by qRT-PCR is
usually relative and so the absolute level of RNA species
examined is usually unknown. Finally, the response of
mRNA expression of multiple proteins may be variable
[55, 58–60] making interpretation of these results prob-
lematic. These variable responses may suggest different
functional properties of the proteins. Nonetheless, these
limitations must be carefully considered when results using
these methods are appraised.
When using qRT-PCR, levels of the target RNA are
usually compared to a normalizer RNA, which should not
change across conditions. Other normalization methods
also are available [61]. The unchanging nature of this
normalizer RNA often is not examined explicitly and the
choice of reference gene to use as a normalizer is often
accepted without critical evaluation [62]. Studies have
examined suitable panels of reference genes to use for
qRT-PCR in skeletal muscle [63] and tools have been
developed to help researchers select suitable normalizer
genes for a qRT-PCR experiment [64]. Partly in response
to low reproducibility rates, guidelines for adequate
reporting of qRT-PCR studies were published [65]. Along
with
several
other
excellent
recommendations
these
guidelines include the explicit checking of normalizer
RNA expression stability and level. Indeed, it is probably
optimal to use more than one normalizer RNA and
appropriate normalization methods [66, 67]. Nonetheless
for interpretation of studies of MPB or atrophy that use
qRT-PCR the reader should be aware that uncritical use of
‘stock’ normalizing RNA species is still widespread.
Studies examining the expression of ‘usual’ normalizer
RNAs for qRT-PCR are rare but Sunderland et al. [68]
reported that the expression of several usual normalizer
RNAs can be influenced by both subject age and time after
exercise.
Microarrays [52] and RNA-Seq [53] both give a global
overview of transcription and this information can be used
to examine enriched pathways and processes or to identify
Human Muscle Protein Breakdown Following Exercise and Nutrition
S57
123
 potential markers for high or low responders. The advan-
tage of these technologies is the broad coverage of tran-
scriptional activity for the RNA species of interest.
Microarrays and RNA-Seq also can be adapted to give
information on the epigenetic state of DNA (i.e., methy-
lation, acetylation, etc.). Microarray and RNA-Seq are both
very sensitive to contamination and as with qRT-PCR, care
must be taken in sample preparation. However, whilst
functional events at the protein level cannot be directly
inferred, the global nature of the profiling does mean that
the biological context of the tissue can be inferred. The
global methods can return large numbers (possibly thou-
sands) of genes or other entities that vary with the condi-
tion of interest and making sense of these lists is
challenging. The most widely adopted approach is one of
enrichment or category analysis [69]. Enrichment analysis
takes a list of identified genes and uses statistical testing to
ask if any pre-curated biological process, function or
pathway is enriched in that list and, if so, in which direction
the genes change with the condition. The prototypical
example of this technique is gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) [70]. Various curated repositories provide infor-
mation on whether genes belong to biological processes or
pathways [71–73]. One caveat with enrichment analysis is
that the information in these resources is constantly
changing as new findings come to light.
4 Response of MPB to Exercise and Nutrition
4.1 Exercise
Exercise is a powerful mediator of MPB. Generally, it is
thought that resistance exercise increases MPB [6]. In the
first study to assess MPB using dynamic, stable isotopic
tracer methods we demonstrated that mixed protein MPB
was increased following resistance exercise in untrained
volunteers [7]. The increase in MPB was less than the
increase in MPS, so NBAL was increased. However,
NBAL did not reach net positive balance during these
measurements in the fasted state [1]. These MPB results
generated using AV balance methodology were replicated
subsequently using another stable isotopic method. The
FBR of mixed muscle proteins was increased following
resistance exercise in untrained individuals, but less than
FSR leading to improved, but still negative NBAL [34].
Interestingly, FBR was increased for 24 h following exer-
cise whereas FSR remained elevated for 48 h. Recently,
FBR also was reported to be unchanged by resistance
exercise 48 h prior during an energy deficit [74]. Thus, it
seems clear that, at least with a sufficient stimulus, resis-
tance
exercise
stimulates
increased
mixed
MPB
in
untrained volunteers.
Broad support for the notion that MPB is increased
following resistance exercise comes from studies measur-
ing molecular markers. Studies consistently report that
muscle specific ubiquitin ligase MuRF1 mRNA expression
was increased in the first few hours after resistance exercise
in untrained individuals [55, 60, 75–79]. However, mRNA
expression of atrogin1, another E3-ligase,
reportedly
decreased [60, 75, 80] or remained unchanged [75, 81]
following resistance exercise. Recently, Hector et al. [74]
reported that a number of molecular markers of MPB were
unchanged 48 h following resistance exercise during
energy deficit conditions. These divergent responses sug-
gest the roles of these ligases may vary. Alternately, the
response of the two ligases may be dependent on fiber type
[12, 77]. It is important to note that these measures come
from only a single time point, so they represent a ‘snap-
shot’ of the response. Moreover, increases in mRNA do not
always lead to increased protein levels, not to mention
physiological activity. Changes in mRNA expression are
often not associated with dynamic measures of MPB [55].
Thus, given that the preponderance of the available data
shows that expression of at least some components of the
ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway
increase,
overall
these
results are consistent with the dynamic measurements
indicating that MPB increases in response to resistance
exercise.
Training status seems to impact the response of MPB to
resistance exercise. Using a cross-sectional comparison, we
demonstrated that mixed muscle FBR was increased fol-
lowing resistance exercise in untrained individuals [35].
However, the same exercise bout (i.e., same relative
exercise intensity) resulted in little, if any, increase in FBR
in resistance-trained individuals. Moreover, there was no
difference in resting FBR between trained and untrained
individuals [35]. Subsequently, FBR was measured using a
longitudinal study design before and after 8 weeks of
training [82]. Resting FBR was greater following than
before training. Moreover, resistance exercise increased
FBR prior to training, but not after training. It should be
noted that FBR was measured following exercise at the
same absolute exercise intensity and during constant
feeding in this study [82]. So, it is difficult to compare
these results directly to the previous results [35]. On the
other hand, taken together these results from different
studies under varying physiological conditions support the
notion that training reduces the response of MPB to
resistance exercise. Stefanetti et al. [76] showed reduced
MuRF1 expression with resistance exercise following
10 weeks of resistance training. This response contradicts
that demonstrated in untrained individuals [55, 60, 75–79].
It is generally assumed that the response of global MPB to
resistance exercise reflects the degradation of myofibrillar
proteins.
S58
K. D. Tipton et al.
123
 There have been attempts to refine the measurement of
MPB to the breakdown of the myofibrillar protein fraction.
Since 3MH is found only in myofibrillar proteins, mea-
surement of 3MH in the muscle interstitial fluid using
microdialysis techniques has been used to assess myofib-
rillar protein degradation. These studies report no change in
interstitial 3MH following resistance exercise [41, 43].
Similarly, intense endurance exercise did not result in
increased interstitial 3MH [42]. These results [42, 43, 83]
may be interpreted to suggest that myofibrillar breakdown
is not a major contributor to the increase in mixed MPB
due to intense exercise [7, 34, 35]. However, one study
demonstrated that interstitial 3MH increased in response to
electrical stimulation, but not intense eccentric contractions
[43], similar to that previously shown to increase mixed
MPB [7, 34, 35]. This discrepancy suggests that measure-
ment of interstitial 3MH likely is not sensitive enough to
detect changes in myofibrillar protein breakdown following
resistance exercise [43]. Moreover, the use and validity of
this methodology has been criticized and the results ques-
tioned [44]. Thus, whereas it is intuitively satisfying to
believe that degradation of myofibrillar proteins provides a
major proportion of overall MPB following exercise, the
precise contribution of this protein fraction to overall MPB
after exercise remains to be fully elucidated.
There is even less known about the dynamic response of
MPB to endurance exercise compared to resistance exer-
cise. Early reports of increased 3MH excretion suggest that
myofibrillar MPB is increased by endurance exercise [84].
More recently, AV balance measurements showed that
MPB was increased at 10 min, but not 60 or 180 min,
following 45 min of walking on a treadmill [85]. A recent
study showed no change in FBR following 45 min of
running at 65% VO2peak [86], but the determination of MPB
may have been confounded by the fact that it was measured
in the vastus lateralis muscle in trained volunteers.
Molecular indicators of MPB have been reported to
increase
in
response
to
endurance
exercise
[59, 76, 80, 87–89]. Thus, the consensus seems to be that
resistance exercise stimulates an increase in MPB, but it is
not clear what the response is following endurance exer-
cise. Clearly, more studies need to focus on the response of
MPB, particularly the dynamic physiological response, to
exercise of various types.
4.2 Combination of Nutrition and Exercise
The role of MPB in the response of NBAL following
resistance exercise and nutrition is somewhat controversial
[2, 90]. Whereas the response of MPS to protein nutrition
and exercise has been studied extensively [2–5], there are
methodological
difficulties
that
make
measuring
the
response of MPB to exercise and nutrition problematic.
The available information comes primarily from AV bal-
ance studies. Biolo et al. [8] infused amino acids system-
ically following a resistance exercise bout and used the
three-pool AV balance model to assess muscle protein
metabolism.
MPS
was
increased
during
hyper-
aminoacidemia following exercise, but there was no
increase in MPB compared to resting, fasted levels. Simi-
larly, the combined ingestion of essential amino acids and
carbohydrate
prevented
exercise-induced
MPB
[91].
Unfortunately, the available, albeit limited, molecular data
do not shed much light on these responses. Branched-chain
amino acids (BCAA) [9, 92], intact protein [55, 81] and
essential amino acids [91] seem to have no impact on
MuRF1 expression. However, there is one report of
reduced atrogin1 expression with post exercise BCAA
ingestion [75]. It may be that the response of UPP
expression is influenced by the dose of protein ingestion.
Areta et al. [58] reported increased MuRF1 expression
following exercise with ingestion of 10 and 20 g of whey
protein. However, ingestion of 40 g prevented the increase
in mRNA levels. Unfortunately, it is unclear how these
changes in mRNA levels relate to changes in MPB rates
[54]. Nevertheless, it seems that hyperaminoacidemia,
possibly
mediated
primarily
by
BCAA,
inhibits
the
increase in MPB following exercise.
As with hyperaminoacidemia, hyperinsulinemia inhibits
the increase in MPB following resistance exercise [91, 93].
However, no increase in MPS has been reported in
response
to
hyperinsulinemia
following
exercise
[91, 94, 95]. Thus, improved NBAL with carbohydrate
ingestion
following
resistance
exercise
stems
almost
entirely from inhibited MPB. However, it should be noted
that no determination of the proteins involved has ever
been made. It is clear that increased synthesis of myofib-
rillar proteins results from resistance exercise, alone and
with ingestion of amino acids [39]. Nevertheless, there is
no
evidence
that
myofibrillar
protein
breakdown
is
increased with resistance exercise [41, 43] or that hyper-
insulinemia impacts any particular protein or protein
fraction [96]. Thus, the changes in synthesis and break-
down due to exercise in combination with hyperinsuline-
mia and hyperaminoacidemia may impact completely
different proteins. Consequently, the mathematical calcu-
lation of NBAL may not offer much important information.
At this point, there is no way to determine the physiolog-
ical relevance of this calculation in terms of the response to
insulin and amino acids.
The response of MPB to exercise also has been inves-
tigated during periods of reduced energy intake resulting in
an energy deficit. A 20% energy deficit in healthy, physi-
cally
active
young
males
and
females
resulted
in
an * 60% decrease in MPB assessed by FBR [86]. Most
molecular markers, e.g., mean chymotrypsin-like activity,
Human Muscle Protein Breakdown Following Exercise and Nutrition
S59
123
 expression of atrogin-1, of MPB were unaltered by energy
deficit, but caspase-3 activity was * 11% greater than
during energy balance. Alternatively, Hector et al. [74]
reported that 40% energy deficit did not alter MPB (FBR)
in young, overweight males. Further, no change in
molecular markers of MPB was reported. The reason for
the differences in these results is not certain, but may be
related to the participant characteristics [74]. Nevertheless,
there was no response of MPB to exercise, 45 min of
running [86], or 48 h after resistance exercise [74], during
energy deficit in either study. As with other nutrition and
exercise situations, the paucity of studies on this topic limit
a firm conclusion about the role of MPB during energy
deficit at this juncture.
This response of MPB to nutrition and exercise may be
explained by the physiological relationship of MPS and
MPB. Resistance exercise increases MPS [7, 34, 35], likely
mediated by the mammalian target of rapamycin 1
(mTORC1) signaling pathway [38, 97]. Thus, there is
increased demand for intracellular free amino acids to
supply substrate for the increased rate of MPS. Without an
exogenous source of amino acids, amino acid availability
for MPS is limited and MPB is increased to supply the
amino acids [3]. The fact that MPS and MPB are highly
correlated when measured following exercise in the post-
absorptive state [3, 7, 34, 35] supports this notion. How-
ever, when amino acid availability is increased by a source
of exogenous amino acids, there is no need for MPB to
increase to
supply
amino
acids for
increased
MPS
[3, 7, 34, 35].
5 Future Directions
It seems clear that our understanding of the response of
MPB to exercise and nutrition is incomplete. There are
promising new techniques to assess the dynamic response
of MPB [37, 45] that need to be validated in various
Fig. 1 Methods of assessing skeletal muscle protein breakdown
(MPB). Skeletal muscle proteins are broken down by a combination
of the three main protein breakdown systems. These breakdown
systems do not work in isolation but rather work together to remodel
skeletal muscle. (1) The calpain proteases disassemble myofibrils into
smaller component parts, (2) the ubiquitin-proteasome system
degrades these component into individual amino acids, and can label
proteins (membrane receptors, channels and transporters) for destruc-
tion by the third system, (3) the autophagy-lysosome system, which
predominantly breaks down membrane based proteins. Dynamic MPB
measures use labelled amino-acid tracers (such as phenylalanine
stable-isotopes) and provide a dynamic view of whole MPB.
3-Methylhistidine is a unique metabolite of myofibrillar protein
breakdown and its appearance in blood and urine can be assumed to
have come from the processes of myofibrillar protein breakdown.
Skeletal muscle is the body’s largest depot of myofibrillar protein so
changes in plasma/urinary/interstitial 3-methylhistidine are believed
reflective of skeletal MPB. Other static markers of protein breakdown
include the assessment of the messenger RNA (mRNA)/protein
expression/activity/localization of components of the breakdown
machinery. Markers are available to estimate changes in the activity
of each of the three breakdown systems. L-Phe l-phenylalanine, AV
arterio-venous, MuRF muscle ring finger protein, FKHR forkhead
transcription factor
S60
K. D. Tipton et al.
123
 physiological situations, including post exercise with
nutrient ingestion. Simultaneous measurements of MPB
rates using dynamic, stable isotopic tracer methods and
static markers of MPB pathways may provide important
mechanistic data to enhance our understanding. However,
it must be stressed that the individual components of the
machinery responsible for driving MPB do not work in
isolation. Rather, each component is linked and changes in
one component in isolation may or may not be responsible
for driving a change in overall MPB as assessed by
dynamic measures (Fig. 1). That said, the additional
information that may be gleaned from studies combining
these techniques in an integrated manner may add a great
deal to our understanding of the contribution of the various
components of the MPB machinery to changes in muscle
mass, as well as muscle remodeling and adaptations to
training.
6 Conclusions
MPB is a critical aspect of the response of muscle meta-
bolism to an exercise bout, as well as adaptations to
training. Changes in the amount of any particular protein
ultimately result from the balance between the rate of
synthesis and breakdown of that protein over any given
time. We know that nutrition can suppress MPB following
exercise [8, 91, 93]. As such, recommendations for nutri-
tional interventions that inhibit MPB often are made. It is
assumed that suppression of MPB following resistance
exercise will contribute to increased NBAL and thus
increased muscle mass [3, 4]. That assumption would be
true if all of the inhibition was of intact, undamaged
myofibrillar proteins. However, at least some of the mea-
sured global MPB resulting from exercise likely represents
degradation of damaged proteins and/or proteins with rapid
turnover. Degradation of these proteins likely is an
important part of the adaptive process for remodeling and
reconditioning muscle proteins. Thus, nutrition interven-
tions resulting in inhibition of degradation of unnecessary
or damaged proteins may actually impair adaptation to
exercise training.
We simply do not know enough about the response of
various individual proteins to exercise of various types.
Moreover, we know next to nothing about how various
nutrition interventions impact the degradation of particular
proteins. Therefore, it may be a mistake to attempt to limit
MPB with nutritional interventions following exercise.
Finally, the changes in MPS are much greater than in MPB
following exercise [5, 8, 34]. Taken together, at least until
we accumulate more information on the role of degradation
of
various
proteins
in
muscle
remodeling,
nutrition
recommendations to enhance training adaptations most
likely should focus primarily on the response of MPS.
Nevertheless, information on the response of MPB to
exercise and nutrition provides critical information toward
our understanding of muscle metabolism and exercise, as
well as the influence of exercise variables and nutrition on
training adaptations. This information may be useful, not
only to athletes and other exercisers, but also overall
metabolic health and mortality. Unfortunately, at least in
humans in vivo, the technical difficulties of measuring
MPB limit our current understanding of these processes.
New methods for assessing MPB in various situations,
including for example bolus ingestion of proteins following
exercise, will be critical for evaluating the importance of
changes in MPB, as well as the precise contributions of
these mechanisms to muscle metabolism.
Acknowledgements This article was published in a supplement
supported by the Gatorade Sports Science Institute (GSSI). The
supplement was guest edited by Lawrence L. Spriet who attended a
meeting of the GSSI expert panel in October 2016 and received
honoraria from the GSSI for his participation in the meeting and the
writing of a manuscript. He received no honoraria for guest editing
the supplement. Dr. Spriet selected peer reviewers for each paper and
managed the process, except for his own paper. Kevin Tipton also
attended the meeting of the GSSI expert panel in October 2016 and
received an honorarium from the GSSI, a division of PepsiCo, Inc. for
his meeting participation and the writing of this manuscript. The
views expressed in this manuscript are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the position or policy of PepsiCo, Inc.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
References
1. Wolfe RR. The underappreciated role of muscle in health and
disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;84:475–82.
2. Witard OC, Wardle SL, Macnaughton LS, et al. Protein consid-
erations for optimising skeletal muscle mass in healthy young and
older adults. Nutrients. 2016;8:181.
3. Tipton KD, Wolfe RR. Exercise-induced changes in protein
metabolism. Acta Physiol Scand. 1998;162:377–87.
4. Tipton KD, Wolfe RR. Protein and amino acids for athletes.
J Sports Sci. 2004;22:65–79.
5. Morton RW, McGlory C, Phillips SM. Nutritional interventions
to augment resistance training-induced skeletal muscle hyper-
trophy. Front Physiol. 2015;6:245.
6. Pasiakos SM, Carbone JW. Assessment of skeletal muscle pro-
teolysis and the regulatory response to nutrition and exercise.
IUBMB Life. 2014;66:478–84.
7. Biolo G, Maggi SP, Williams BD, et al. Increased rates of muscle
protein-turnover and amino-acid-transport after resistance exer-
cise in humans. Am J Physiol. 1995;268:E514–20.
Human Muscle Protein Breakdown Following Exercise and Nutrition
S61
123
 8. Biolo G, Tipton KD, Klein S, et al. An abundant supply of amino
acids enhances the metabolic effect of exercise on muscle pro-
tein. Am J Physiol. 1997;273:E122–9.
9. Murton A, Constantin D, Greenhaff P. The involvement of the
ubiquitin proteasome system in human skeletal muscle remod-
elling and atrophy. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008;1782:730–43.
10. Tokgoz Z, Bohnsack RN, Haas AL. Pleiotropic effects of
ATP�Mg2? binding in the catalytic cycle of ubiquitin-activating
enzyme. J Biol Chem. 2006;281:14729–37.
11. Lee I, Schindelin H. Structural insights into E1-catalyzed ubiq-
uitin activation and transfer to conjugating enzymes. Cell.
2008;134:268–78.
12. Kravtsova-Ivantsiv Y, Ciechanover A. Non-canonical ubiquitin-
based
signals
for
proteasomal
degradation.
J
Cell
Sci.
2012;125:539–48.
13. Bodine SC, Latres E, Baumhueter S, et al. Identification of
ubiquitin ligases required for skeletal muscle atrophy. Science.
2001;294:1704–8.
14. Lecker SH, Jagoe RT, Gilbert A, et al. Multiple types of skeletal
muscle atrophy involve a common program of changes in gene
expression. FASEB J. 2004;18:39–51.
15. Solomon V, Goldberg AL. Importance of the ATP-ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway in the degradation of soluble and myofib-
rillar
proteins
in
rabbit
muscle
extracts.
J
Biol
Chem.
1996;271:26690–7.
16. Du J, Wang X, Miereles C, et al. Activation of caspase-3 is an
initial step triggering accelerated muscle proteolysis in catabolic
conditions. J Clin Invest. 2004;113:115–23.
17. Jackman RW, Kandarian SC. The molecular basis of skeletal
muscle atrophy. Am J Physiol. 2004;287:C834–43.
18. Tanida I, Waguri S. Measurement of autophagy in cells and tis-
sues. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;648:193–214.
19. Mayer RJ. The meteoric rise of regulated intracellular proteoly-
sis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2000;1:145–8.
20. Sorimachi H, Imajoh-Ohmi S, Emori Y, et al. Molecular cloning
of a novel mammalian calcium-dependent protease distinct from
both m- and mu-types. Specific expression of the mRNA in
skeletal muscle. J Biol Chem. 1989;264:20106–11.
21. Murphy RM, Verburg E, Lamb GD. Ca2? activation of diffusible
and bound pools of mu-calpain in rat skeletal muscle. J Physiol.
2006;576:595–612.
22. Dargelos E, Poussard S, Brule C, et al. Calcium-dependent pro-
teolytic system and muscle dysfunctions: a possible role of cal-
pains in sarcopenia. Biochimie. 2008;90:359–68.
23. Murphy RM, Lamb GD. Endogenous calpain-3 activation is
primarily governed by small increases in resting cytoplasmic
[Ca2?]
and
is
not
dependent
on
stretch.
J
Biol
Chem.
2009;284:7811–9.
24. Saenz A, Leturcq F, Cobo AM, et al. LGMD2A: genotype-phe-
notype correlations based on a large mutational survey on the
calpain 3 gene. Brain. 2005;128:732–42.
25. Wolfe RR, Chinkes DL, Wolfe RR. Isotope tracers in metabolic
research: principles and practice of kinetic analysis. 2nd ed.
Hoboken: Wiley-Liss; 2005.
26. Thompson GN, Pacy PJ, Merritt H, et al. Rapid measurement of
whole body and forearm protein turnover using a [2H5]pheny-
lalanine model. Am J Physiol. 1989;256:E631–9.
27. Thompson GN, Pacy PJ, Ford GC, et al. Practical considerations
in the use of stable isotope labelled compounds as tracers in
clinical studies. Biomed Environ Mass Spectrom. 1989;18:321–7.
28. Biolo G, Chinkes D, Zhang XJ, et al. A new model to determine
in vivo the relationship between amino acid transmembrane
transport and protein kinetics in muscle. J Parenter Enteral Nutr.
1992;16:305–15.
29. Biolo G, Gastaldelli A, Zhang XJ, et al. Protein synthesis and
breakdown in skin and muscle: a leg model of amino acid
kinetics. Am J Physiol. 1994;267:E467–74.
30. Katsanos CS, Chinkes DL, Sheffield-Moore M, et al. Method for
the determination of the arteriovenous muscle protein balance
during non-steady state blood and muscle amino acid concen-
trations. Am J Physiol. 2005;289:E1064–70.
31. Tipton KD, Rasmussen BB, Miller SL, et al. Timing of amino
acid-carbohydrate ingestion alters anabolic response of muscle to
resistance exercise. Am J Physiol. 2001;281:E197–206.
32. Zhang XJ, Chinkes DL, Sakurai Y, et al. An isotopic method for
measurement of muscle protein fractional breakdown rate in vivo.
Am J Physiol. 1996;270:E759–67.
33. Chinkes DL. Methods for measuring tissue protein breakdown
rate in vivo. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2005;8:534–7.
34. Phillips SM, Tipton KD, Aarsland A, et al. Mixed muscle protein
synthesis and breakdown after resistance exercise in humans. Am
J Physiol. 1997;273:E99–107.
35. Phillips SM, Tipton KD, Ferrando AA, et al. Resistance training
reduces the acute exercise-induced increase in muscle protein
turnover. Am J Physiol. 1999;276:E118–24.
36. Zhang XJ, Chinkes DL, Wolfe RR. Measurement of muscle
protein fractional synthesis and breakdown rates from a pulse
tracer injection. Am J Physiol. 2002;283:E753–64.
37. Tuvdendorj D, Chinkes DL, Herndon DN, et al. A novel
stable isotope tracer method to measure muscle protein fractional
breakdown rate during a physiological non-steady state condition.
Am J Physiol. 2013;304:E623–30.
38. McGlory C, Devries MC, Phillips SM. Skeletal muscle and
resistance exercise training; the role of protein synthesis in
recovery and remodelling. J Appl Physiol. 2016;122:541–8.
39. Witard OC, Jackman SR, Breen L, et al. Myofibrillar muscle
protein synthesis rates subsequent to a meal in response to
increasing doses of whey protein at rest and after resistance
exercise. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99:86–95.
40. Vesali RF, Klaude M, Thunblad L, et al. Contractile protein
breakdown in human leg skeletal muscle as estimated by [2H3]-
3-methylhistidine: a new method. Metabolism. 2004;53:1076–80.
41. Trappe T, Williams R, Carrithers J, et al. Influence of age and
resistance exercise on human skeletal muscle proteolysis: a
microdialysis approach. J Physiol. 2004;554:803–13.
42. Haus JM, Miller BF, Carroll CC, et al. The effect of strenuous
aerobic exercise on skeletal muscle myofibrillar proteolysis in
humans. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2007;17:260–6.
43. Hansen M, Trappe T, Crameri RM, et al. Myofibrillar proteolysis
in response to voluntary or electrically stimulated muscle con-
tractions in humans. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2009;19:75–82.
44. Rennie MJ, Phillips S, Smith K. Reliability of results and inter-
pretation of measures of 3-methylhistidine in muscle interstitium
as
marker
of
muscle
proteolysis.
J
Appl
Physiol.
2008;105:1380–1 (author reply 2–3).
45. Holm L, O’Rourke B, Ebenstein D, et al. Determination of steady
state protein breakdown rate in vivo by the disappearance of
protein-bound tracer-labeled amino acids: a method applicable in
humans. Am J Physiol. 2013;304:E895–907.
46. Holm L, Kjaer M. Measuring protein breakdown rate in indi-
vidual proteins in vivo. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care.
2010;13:526–31.
47. Wilkinson DJ, Atherton PJ, Phillips BE, et al. Application of
deuterium oxide (D2O) to metabolic research: just D2O it?
Depends just how you D2O it! Am J Physiol. 2015;308:E847.
48. Wilkinson DJ, Cegielski J, Phillips BE, et al. Internal comparison
between deuterium oxide (D2O) and L-[ring-13C6] phenylalanine
for acute measurement of muscle protein synthesis in humans.
Physiol Rep. 2015;3:e12433.
S62
K. D. Tipton et al.
123
 49. Doherty MK, Brownridge P, Owen MA, et al. A proteomics
strategy for determining the synthesis and degradation rates of
individual proteins in fish. J Proteom. 2012;75:4471–7.
50. Camera DM, Burniston JG, Pogson MA, et al. Dynamic proteome
profiling of individual proteins in human skeletal muscle after a
high-fat diet and resistance exercise. FASEB J. 2017. (E-pub
ahead of print. PMID: 28855275).
51. VanGuilder HD, Vrana KE, Freeman WM. Twenty-five years of
quantitative PCR for gene expression analysis. Biotechniques.
2008;44:619–26.
52. Virtanen C, Takahashi M. Muscling in on microarrays. Appl
Physiol Nutr Metab. 2008;33:124–9.
53. Metzker ML. Sequencing technologies—the next generation. Nat
Rev Genet. 2010;11:31–46.
54. Atherton PJ, Greenhaff PL, Phillips SM, et al. Control of skeletal
muscle atrophy in response to disuse: clinical/preclinical con-
tentions
and
fallacies
of
evidence.
Am
J
Physiol.
2016;311:e594–604.
55. Reitelseder S, Agergaard J, Doessing S, et al. Positive muscle
protein net balance and differential regulation of atrogene
expression after resistance exercise and milk protein supple-
mentation. Eur J Nutr. 2014;53:321–33.
56. Feasson L, Stockholm D, Freyssenet D, et al. Molecular adap-
tations of neuromuscular disease-associated proteins in response
to eccentric exercise in human skeletal muscle. J Physiol.
2002;543:297–306.
57. Murphy RM, Goodman CA, McKenna MJ, et al. Calpain-3 is
autolyzed and hence activated in human skeletal muscle 24 h
following a single bout of eccentric exercise. J Appl Physiol.
2007;103:926–31.
58. Areta JL, Burke LM, Ross ML, et al. Timing and distribution of
protein ingestion during prolonged recovery from resistance
exercise
alters
myofibrillar
protein
synthesis.
J
Physiol.
2013;591:2319–31.
59. Coffey VG, Shield A, Canny BJ, et al. Interaction of contractile
activity and training history on mRNA abundance in skeletal
muscle from trained athletes. Am J Physiol. 2006;290:E849–55.
60. Nedergaard A, Vissing K, Overgaard K, et al. Expression patterns
of atrogenic and ubiquitin proteasome component genes with
exercise: effect of different loading patterns and repeated exercise
bouts. J Appl Physiol. 2007;103:1513–22.
61. Huggett J, Dheda K, Bustin S, et al. Real-time RT-PCR nor-
malisation;
strategies
and
considerations.
Genes
Immun.
2005;6:279–84.
62. Chapman JR, Waldenstrom J. With reference to reference genes:
a systematic review of endogenous controls in gene expression
studies. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0141853.
63. Thomas KC, Zheng XF, Garces Suarez F, et al. Evidence based
selection of commonly used RT-qPCR reference genes for the
analysis of mouse skeletal muscle. PLoS One. 2014;9:e88653.
64. Hruz T, Wyss M, Docquier M, et al. RefGenes: identification of
reliable and condition specific reference genes for RT-qPCR data
normalization. BMC Genomics. 2011;12:156.
65. Bustin SA, Benes V, Garson JA, et al. The MIQE guidelines:
minimum information for publication of quantitative real-time
PCR experiments. Clin Chem. 2009;55:611–22.
66. Pfaffl MW, Tichopad A, Prgomet C, et al. Determination of
stable housekeeping genes, differentially regulated target genes
and sample integrity: BestKeeper–Excel-based tool using pair-
wise correlations. Biotechnol Lett. 2004;26:509–15.
67. Vandesompele J, De Preter K, Pattyn F, et al. Accurate normal-
ization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR data by geometric
averaging of multiple internal control genes. Genome Biol.
2002;18:3.
68. Sunderland KL, Roberts MD, Dalbo VJ, et al. Aging and
sequential resistance exercise bout effects on housekeeping gene
messenger RNA expression in human skeletal muscle. J Strength
Cond Res. 2013;27:1–7.
69. Curtis RK, Oresic M, Vidal-Puig A. Pathways to the analysis of
microarray data. Trends Biotechnol. 2005;23:429–35.
70. Subramanian A, Kuehn H, Gould J, et al. GSEA-P: a desktop
application for Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. Bioinformatics.
2007;23:3251–3.
71. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, et al. Gene ontology: tool for
the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat
Genet. 2000;25:25–9.
72. Croft D, O’Kelly G, Wu G, et al. Reactome: a database of
reactions, pathways and biological processes. Nucleic Acids Res.
2011;39:D691–7.
73. Kanehisa M. A database for post-genome analysis. Trends Genet.
1997;13:375–6.
74. Hector AJ, McGlory C, Damas F, et al. Pronounced energy
restriction with elevated protein intake results in no change in
proteolysis and reductions in skeletal muscle protein synthesis
that are mitigated by resistance exercise. FASEB J. 2017. (E-pub
ahead of print. PMID: 28899879).
75. Borgenvik M, Apro W, Blomstrand E. Intake of branched-chain
amino acids influences the levels of MAFbx mRNA and MuRF-1
total protein in resting and exercising human muscle. Am J
Physiol. 2012;302:E510–21.
76. Louis E, Raue U, Yang Y, et al. Time course of proteolytic,
cytokine, and myostatin gene expression after acute exercise in
human skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol. 2007;103:1744–51.
77. Yang Y, Jemiolo B, Trappe S. Proteolytic mRNA expression in
response to acute resistance exercise in human single skeletal
muscle fibers. J Appl Physiol. 2006;101:1442–50.
78. Stefanetti RJ, Lamon S, Rahbek SK, et al. Influence of divergent
exercise contraction mode and whey protein supplementation on
atrogin-1, MuRF1, and FOXO1/3A in human skeletal muscle.
J Appl Physiol. 2014;116:1491–502.
79. Mascher H, Tannerstedt J, Brink-Elfegoun T, et al. Repeated
resistance exercise training induces different changes in mRNA
expression of MAFbx and MuRF-1 in human skeletal muscle.
Am J Physiol. 2008;294:E43–51.
80. Stefanetti RJ, Lamon S, Wallace M, et al. Regulation of ubiquitin
proteasome pathway molecular markers in response to endurance
and
resistance
exercise
and
training.
Pflugers
Arch.
2015;467:1523–37.
81. Dalbo VJ, Roberts MD, Hassell S, et al. Effects of pre-exercise
feeding on serum hormone concentrations and biomarkers of
myostatin and ubiquitin proteasome pathway activity. Eur J Nutr.
2013;52:477–87.
82. Phillips SM, Parise G, Roy BD, et al. Resistance-training-induced
adaptations in skeletal muscle protein turnover in the fed state.
Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2002;80:1045–53.
83. Trappe TA, Raue U, Tesch PA. Human soleus muscle protein
synthesis following resistance exercise. Acta Physiol Scand.
2004;182:189–96.
84. Carraro F, Stuart CA, Hartl WH, et al. Effect of exercise and
recovery on muscle protein synthesis in human subjects. Am J
Physiol. 1990;259:E470–6.
85. Sheffield-Moore M, Yeckel CW, Volpi E, et al. Postexercise
protein metabolism in older and younger men following moder-
ate-intensity aerobic exercise. Am J Physiol. 2004;287:E513–22.
86. Carbone JW, Pasiakos SM, Vislocky LM, et al. Effects of short-
term energy deficit on muscle protein breakdown and intramus-
cular proteolysis in normal-weight young adults. Appl Physiol
Nutr Metab. 2014;39:960–8.
87. Kim HJ, Jamart C, Deldicque L, et al. Endoplasmic reticulum
stress markers and ubiquitin-proteasome pathway activity in
response to a 200-km run. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:18–25.
Human Muscle Protein Breakdown Following Exercise and Nutrition
S63
123
 88. Pasiakos SM, McClung HL, McClung JP, et al. Molecular
responses to moderate endurance exercise in skeletal muscle. Int J
Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2010;20:282–90.
89. Jamart C, Francaux M, Millet GY, et al. Modulation of autophagy
and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways during ultra-endurance run-
ning. J Appl Physiol. 2012;112:1529–37.
90. Deutz NE, Wolfe RR. Is there a maximal anabolic response to
protein intake with a meal? Clin Nutr. 2013;32:309–13.
91. Glynn EL, Fry CS, Drummond MJ, et al. Muscle protein break-
down has a minor role in the protein anabolic response to
essential amino acid and carbohydrate intake following resistance
exercise. Am J Physiol. 2010;299:R533–40.
92. Dickinson JM, Reidy PT, Gundermann DM, et al. The impact of
post exercise essential amino acid ingestion on the ubiquitin
proteasome and autophagosomal-lysosomal systems in skeletal
muscle of older men. J Appl Physiol. 2017;122:620–30.
93. Biolo G, Williams BD, Fleming RY, et al. Insulin action on
muscle protein kinetics and amino acid transport during recovery
after resistance exercise. Diabetes. 1999;48:949–57.
94. Koopman R, Beelen M, Stellingwerff T, et al. Coingestion of
carbohydrate with protein does not further augment postexercise
muscle protein synthesis. Am J Physiol. 2007;293:E833–42.
95. Staples AW, Burd NA, West DW, et al. Carbohydrate does not
augment exercise-induced protein accretion versus protein alone.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:1154–61.
96. Abdulla H, Smith K, Atherton PJ, et al. Role of insulin in the
regulation of human skeletal muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia.
2016;59:44–55.
97. McGlory C, Phillips SM. Assessing the regulation of skeletal
muscle plasticity in response to protein ingestion and resistance
exercise: recent developments. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care.
2014;17:412–7.
S64
K. D. Tipton et al.
123
