 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Histopathology of removed indwelling pleural catheters from patients
with malignant pleural diseases
CLAIRE L. TOBIN,1* RAJESH THOMAS,1,2* SIAW MING CHAI,3 AMANDA SEGAL3 AND Y. C. GARY LEE1,2
1Respiratory Department, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 2University of Western Australia & Institute for Respiratory Research, and
3Department of Anatomical Pathology Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre, Perth, Western Australia 6009, Australia
ABSTRACT
Background and objective:
Indwelling pleural catheters
(IPC), used for management of malignant pleural
effusions, are often left in situ for a long duration. This
study reports for the first time the histological findings
of IPCs removed from patients with underlying pleural
malignancy.
Methods:
Forty-one IPCs (in situ for median 126days,
interquartile range 43–226) that were removed over a
54-month period from a single centre were examined.
Results:
Mesothelioma (n = 18) was the predominant
underlying
malignancy
followed
by
breast,
tubo-
ovarian and lung carcinomas. The catheter tubing was
fully intact macroscopically in all IPCs. There was no
evidence of direct tumour invasion or cancer cell growth
on the catheter surfaces in none of the 29 IPCs that were
histologically examined. Malignant cells were seen
within organizing fibrinous tissues in the lumen of 11
IPCs (27%). A foreign body giant cell reaction was pre-
sent at the cuff site in all the 29 IPC in which the sub-
cutaneous cuff was examined. Acute (n = 10) and/or
chronic inflammatory changes were seen in the luminal
contents in all 41 IPCs.
Conclusion:
Our study provides reassuring evidence
that the IPC material does not support direct tumour
growth or invasion even in the setting of high mesothe-
lioma prevalence.
Key words: cytology, histology, mesothelioma, pleural disease.
Abbreviations: HPF, high-powered field; IPCs, Indwelling pleural
catheter.
INTRODUCTION
Indwelling pleural catheter (IPC) is now frequently
used worldwide for management of malignant pleural
effusions1.
These
flexible
silicone
catheters
are
tunnelled
subcutaneously
and
allow
ambulatory,
patient-directed drainage of the pleural space for the
patients’ remaining lifespan2. The IPC can be removed
in 40–50% of patients when fluid formation ceases or
spontaneous pleurodesis occurs, and rarely in cases
of uncontrolled IPC-related pleural infection or cathe-
ter malfunction2–4.
Indwelling pleural catheter is often placed in situ
for many months, or longer, until fluid evacuation is
no longer necessary. The interaction of the IPC, as a
device, with the local pleural malignant environment
has never been studied. In particular, little is known
about whether the catheter surface supports or pro-
motes tumour growth and/or local inflammation and
whether cancers can invade the catheter material. This
study provides the first histological analysis of removed
IPC from patients with underlying pleural malignancy.
METHODS
Forty-one IPCs (Rocket, UK) were removed over a
54-month period from February 2011 and examined
by a specialist pleural pathologist (S.M.C. or A.S.). Pa-
tient demographics, the underlying tumour type,
timing and duration of IPC placement and reason for
IPC removal were recorded. The Sir Charles Gairdner
Group Human Research Ethics Committee approved
the study (2009-104 and 2012-005).
In the first 12 cases, only catheter contents (obtained
by washing out all cellular debris inside the IPC lumen)
were examined. In the subsequent 29 cases, IPCs were
examined in their entirety for (i) the presence of malig-
nant or inflammatory cells within the catheter lumen
SUMMARY AT A GLANCE
We report for the first time the histological findings
of indwelling pleural catheters removed from pa-
tients with underlying pleural malignancies. Analy-
ses showed cancer cells in the luminal contents
in some cases but no evidence of direct tumour
invasion or growth on the catheter surfaces, even
in a high mesothelioma prevalence setting.
Correspondence: Y. C. Gary Lee, Institute for Respiratory Health
and University of Western Australia, 533, QQ Blk, QE II Med Ctr,
Perth, WA 6009, Australia. Email: gary.lee@uwa.edu.au
*C.L.T. and R.T. contributed equally to this study.
Received 28 October 2015; invited to revise 24 November 2015;
revised 15 December 2015; accepted 24 December 2015 (Associate
Editor: Ioannis Kalomenidis).
© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology
Respirology (2016) 21, 939–942
doi: 10.1111/resp.12777
bs_bs_banner
 or at the subcutaneous cuff site and (ii) whether
the catheter tubing was intact or had been invaded
by tumour. In the latter cases, the whole catheter, in-
cluding the cuff, was initially inspected for macro-
scopic
defects.
Representative
sections
of
the
catheter (Fig. 1) with its luminal contents and any
identified defects were then sampled; the remaining
material within the lumen was also removed for histo-
logical examination. Transverse sections of the cuff
were taken. Up to five histology blocks were obtained
for each case. The samples were formalin fixed and
paraffin embedded. Representative 4-μm sections
were cut from each block and stained with HE for mi-
croscopic analysis. Malignant cells, if present, were
further
characterized
by
immuno-histochemistry.
The maximum number of inflammatory cells in one
high-powered field within the area of densest inflam-
mation and the predominant inflammatory cell type
were documented.
RESULTS
Patient demographics
Of the 41 patients who underwent IPC removal, meso-
thelioma was the predominant underlying malignancy
(n=18), followed by breast (n=9), tubo-ovarian (n=5)
and lung (n=4) carcinomas. The IPC had been in situ
for a median of 126 days (interquartile range 43–226)
before removal. The reasons for IPC removal included
cessation of fluid formation/spontaneous pleurodesis
(n=39), persistent bacteria empyema (n=1) and fun-
gal infection (n=1). No patient received prophylactic
tract radiotherapy in line with standard practice at
our institution, and none had catheter tract metastases
prior to IPC removal.
Macroscopic examination
In 40 cases, the IPC was removed intact; in the remain-
ing patient, the catheter fractured during removal and
only the extra-pleural portion of catheter could be
studied. No macroscopic tumour invasion or breach
of the catheter was seen in any of the IPCs studied. Tis-
sue materials were commonly found within the lumen
of the IPCs and frequently occluded some/all of the
fenestrations (Fig. 2).
Histopathological analysis
Organized fibrin clots were found within the lumen
of all IPCs, often occluding the entire lumen, and
accounted for the tissue material observed macro-
scopically. The catheter tubing was fully intact micro-
scopically in all 29 IPCs examined histologically, with
no evidence of direct tumour invasion.
No cancer cells were found directly attached to, or
growing on, the internal lumen of the 29 IPCs studied.
However, organizing fibrinous tissue in the lumen that
may provide a matrix for the cancer cells to anchor
upon was noted. Colonies of malignant cells, including
mesothelioma (n=7) (Fig. 3a), tubo-ovarian (n=3)
(Fig. 3b) and lung carcinomas (n=1), were seen located
within the lumen of 11 of the 41 IPCs (27%). In a patient
with fungal lung parenchymal and pleural infection,
fungal elements were found in the luminal fibrinous
tissue (Fig. 3c).
A foreign body giant cell reaction was present at the
cuff site in all the 29 IPCs in which the subcutaneous
cuff was examined (Fig. 4). Atypical mesothelial cell
proliferation was seen within the tissue adherent to
the cuff in one case only, in a patient who had underly-
ing mesothelioma but no evidence of concurrent tu-
mour cells within the catheter lumen.
The cellular composition of the luminal contents
showed inflammatory changes in all 41 IPCs studied.
Acute inflammation (either alone or on a background
Figure 1
Transverse section of catheter (arrowhead) with its luminal
contents (arrow) (HE stain; original magnification, ×4).
Figure 2
Macroscopic appearance of a long thick segment of
fibrinous material after it was extracted from within the indwelling
pleural catheter (IPC) lumen following IPC removal. Arrowheads
show where the fibrin regularly projects out through the IPC
fenestrations.
940
C L. Tobin et al.
Respirology (2016) 21, 939–942
© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology
 of chronic inflammation) was found in 10 IPCs (24%)
(Fig. 3d) and were neutrophil predominant in eight
cases. The maximum number of inflammatory cells
per high-powered field (HPF) in each case was re-
corded and showed 316 (median, range 60 to over
500) cells/HPF. Inflammation characterized by lym-
phocytic predominance was observed in 30 cases; the
highest density of inflammatory cells in each patient
was 50/HPF (median, range 2 to 300).
DISCUSSION
This study reports for the first time the histological
findings of IPCs placed in patients with pleural malig-
nancy. It is reassuring that no direct tumour growth
on the IPC surface or invasion of the IPC material,
either macroscopically or histologically, was seen in
this cohort. However, cancer cells and inflammatory
changes were common within the organizing fibrinous
tissue in the catheter lumen.
There are no previous published studies examining
the histopathological characteristics of IPCs placed in
patients. The catheters frequently remain in situ for
long periods of time within the pleural cavity, and
directly adjacent to, or in close proximity of, pleural
cancers. The effects of the tumour on the catheter,
and vice versa, have not been investigated. This is the
first attempt to look for any direct physical effect of
tumours on the IPC.
Our data showed no evidence that pleural cancers
interrupt or invade the IPC material itself. Among all
the 29 IPCs that were removed and histologically
examined, the IPC tubing was intact and there were
no microscopic suggestions of tumour breaching the
catheter surface. Malignant cells were present within
the organizing fibrin in the lumen of the IPC in some
(27%) cases even though the malignant cells did not
invade the catheter material. Our findings show that
cancer cells from malignant effusions can be trapped
within these ‘fibrin clots’, which in turn provide a
matrix for cancer cell to anchor. The clinical relevance
of this finding is uncertain.
Western Australia has the world’s highest incidence
in malignant pleural mesothelioma5 and explains the
high percentage of mesothelioma patients in our co-
hort. Mesothelioma is notorious for its predilection to
invade pleural puncture sites, and needle tract metas-
tases are recognized complications even after one-off
pleural interventions6. IPC represents a constant risk,
as it remains in situ. This is in addition to the fact that
patients with mesothelioma have a significantly longer
median survival, and therefore, the IPC can remain
in situ for longer (median 126days in this cohort),
compared with those with metastatic carcinomas7. As
a result IPCs in mesothelioma patients presented a
higher risk (approximating 14%) of catheter tract
Figure 3
Representative photomicrograph
of organizing fibrinous tissue of the catheter
lumen associated with (a)—a deposit of
epithelioid
malignant
mesothelioma
(HE
stain; original magnification, ×20) (b)—
ovarian
carcinoma
with
psammoma
bodies (HE stain; original magnification,
×20) (c)—fungi hyphae within areas of
acute
inflammation
(HE
stain;
original
magnification, ×40) (d)—acute inflammation
(HE stain; original magnification, ×20).
Figure 4
Transverse section of catheter cuff (arrowhead) with
surrounding inflammation (arrow) (HE stain; original magnification, ×2).
Histopathology of removed IPC
941
© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology
Respirology (2016) 21, 939–942
 metastases in our recent published series8. It is not
known whether tumour invading the catheter tract will
also invade the catheter tubing. In this study we found
no catheter invasion in any of the removed IPCs de-
spite the high mesothelioma prevalence. This provides
further reassurance about the safety of IPC against
tumour invasion.
The luminal contents of the IPCs showed varying
degrees of inflammation in all cases. The majority
of removed catheters showed evidence of mild to
moderate chronic lymphocytic inflammation. A small
number (n= 4) of patients showed acute inflammatory
cells only; three of them were known to have had re-
cent or past pleural infection including one with fungal
infection (Fig. 3c). It is intriguing that significant num-
bers of neutrophils were found several weeks after suc-
cessful treatment of the infection. In the fourth patient,
Staph lugdunensis was cultured in the pleural fluid of
the patient previously, but there were no clinical signs
of pleural infection (and was therefore not treated).
Our results provide for the first time reassuring evi-
dence that there were no tumour cell growth on the
IPC material or tumour interruption of the IPC in our
cohort with its high mesothelioma prevalence.
Disclosure statement
Y.C.G.L. has served on the advisory boards of CareFusion and
Sequana Medical. He leads the AMPLE-2 trial for which Rocket Medi-
cal provides the drainage equipment without charge and an unre-
stricted education grant. He is a National Health & Medical Research
Council (NH&MRC) Career Development Fellow and receives re-
search project grant funding from the NH&MRC, New South Wales
Dust Disease Board, Sir Charles Gairdner Research Advisory Commit-
tee, Westcare and the Cancer Council of Western Australia. R.T. has
received research scholarship support from NH&MRC, WA Cancer &
Palliative Care Network and Institute for Respiratory Health, Australia.
REFERENCES
1 Lee YC, Fysh ET. Indwelling pleural catheter: changing the para-
digm of malignant effusion management. J. Thorac. Oncol. 2011;
6: 655–7.
2 Fysh ET, Waterer GW, Kendall PA, Bremmer PR, Dina S, Geelhoed E,
McCarney K, Morey S, Millward M, Musk AW et al. Indwelling pleu-
ral catheters reduce inpatient days over pleurodesis for malignant
pleural effusion. Chest 2012; 142: 394–400.
3 Davies HE, Mishra EK, Kahan BC, Wrightson JM, Stanton AE, Guhan
A, McCarney K, Morey S, MIllward M, Musk AW et al. Effect of an
indwelling pleural catheter vs chest tube and talc pleurodesis for
relieving dyspnea in patients with malignant pleural effusion: the
TIME2 randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2012; 307: 2383–9.
4 Tremblay A, Michaud G. Single-center experience with 250 tunnelled
pleural catheter insertions for malignant pleural effusion. Chest 2006;
129: 362–8.
5 Musk AW, de Klerk NH. Epidemiology of malignant mesothelioma
in Australia. Lung Cancer 2004; 45(Suppl 1): S21–3.
6 Bydder S, Phillips M, Joseph DJ, Cameron F, Spry NA, DeMelker Y,
Musk AW. A randomised trial of single-dose radiotherapy to prevent
procedure tract metastasis by malignant mesothelioma. Br. J.
Cancer 2004; 91: 9–10.
7 Management of malignant pleural effusions. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 2000; 162: 1987–2001.
8 Thomas R, Budgeon CA, Kuok YJ, Read C, Fysh ET, Bydder S, Lee
YCG. Catheter tract metastasis associated with indwelling pleural
catheters. Chest 2014; 146: 557—62.
942
C L. Tobin et al.
Respirology (2016) 21, 939–942
© 2016 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology
