 Togias et al.  
Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
DOI 10.1186/s13223-016-0175-4
POSITION ARTICLE AND GUIDELINES
Addendum guidelines for the 
prevention of peanut allergy in the United 
States: report of the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases-sponsored expert panel
Alkis Togias1, Susan F. Cooper1*, Maria L. Acebal2, Amal Assa’ad3, James R. Baker4, Lisa A. Beck5, Julie Block6, 
Carol Byrd‑Bredbenner7, Edmond S. Chan8, Lawrence F. Eichenfield9, David M. Fleischer10, George J. Fuchs III11, 
Glenn T. Furuta12, Matthew J. Greenhawt10, Ruchi S. Gupta13, Michele Habich14, Stacie M. Jones15, Kari Keaton16, 
Antonella Muraro17, Marshall Plaut1, Lanny J. Rosenwasser18, Daniel Rotrosen1, Hugh A. Sampson19, 
Lynda C. Schneider20, Scott H. Sicherer21, Robert Sidbury22, Jonathan Spergel23, David R. Stukus24, 
Carina Venter25 and Joshua A. Boyce26
Abstract 
Background: Food allergy is an important public health problem because it affects children and adults, can be 
severe and even life‑threatening, and may be increasing in prevalence. Beginning in 2008, the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, working with other organizations and advocacy groups, led the development of the 
first clinical guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food allergy. A recent landmark clinical trial and other 
emerging data suggest that peanut allergy can be prevented through introduction of peanut‑containing foods 
beginning in infancy.
Objectives: Prompted by these findings, along with 25 professional organizations, federal agencies, and patient 
advocacy groups, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases facilitated development of addendum 
guidelines to specifically address the prevention of peanut allergy.
Results: The addendum provides 3 separate guidelines for infants at various risk levels for the development of 
peanut allergy and is intended for use by a wide variety of health care providers. Topics addressed include the defini‑
tion of risk categories, appropriate use of testing (specific IgE measurement, skin prick tests, and oral food chal‑
lenges), and the timing and approaches for introduction of peanut‑containing foods in the health care provider’s 
office or at home. The addendum guidelines provide the background, rationale, and strength of evidence for each 
recommendation.
Conclusions: Guidelines have been developed for early introduction of peanut‑containing foods into the diets of 
infants at various risk levels for peanut allergy.
Keywords: Food, Peanut, Allergy, Prevention, Guidelines
© The Author(s) 2017. The article is a work of the United States Government; Title 17 U.S.C 105 provides that copyright protection 
is not available for any work of the United States government in the United States. Additionally, this is an open access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdo‑
main/zero/1.0), which permits worldwide unrestricteduse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium for any lawful purpose.
Open Access
Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology
*Correspondence:  coopersu@niaid.nih.gov 
1 The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 
USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
 Page 2 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Background
Peanut allergy is a growing public health problem. In 
1999, peanut allergy was estimated to affect 0.4% of chil-
dren and 0.7% of adults in the United States [1], and by 
2010, peanut allergy prevalence had increased to approxi-
mately 2% among children in a national survey [2], with 
similar results reported in a regional cohort [3]. Peanut 
allergy is the leading cause of death related to food-
induced anaphylaxis in the United States [4, 5], and 
although overall mortality is low, the fear of life-threat-
ening anaphylactic reactions contributes significantly to 
the medical and psychosocial burden of disease. In the 
majority of patients, peanut allergy begins early in life 
and persists as a lifelong problem. Therefore, cost-effec-
tive measures to prevent peanut allergy would have a 
high effect in terms of improving public health, reducing 
personal suffering, and decreasing health care use and 
costs.
The “Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
food allergy in the United States” [6] were published in 
December 2010 by an expert panel and a Coordinating 
Committee convened by the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). These guidelines did 
not offer strategies for the prevention of food allergy and 
particularly peanut allergy because of a lack of definitive 
studies at the time. The guidelines indicated that “insuf-
ficient evidence exists for delaying introduction of solid 
foods, including potentially allergenic foods, beyond 
4–6 months of age, even in infants at risk of developing 
allergic disease.
” This statement differed from previous 
clinical practice guidelines in the United Kingdom [7] 
and United States, [8] which recommended the exclusion 
of allergenic foods from the diets of infants at high risk 
for allergy and is consistent with more recent recommen-
dations regarding primary allergy prevention [9–12].
In February 2015, the New England Journal of Medi-
cine published the results of the Learning Early about 
Peanut Allergy (LEAP) trial [13]. This trial was based on 
a prior observation [14] that the prevalence of peanut 
allergy was tenfold higher among Jewish children in the 
United Kingdom compared with Israeli children of simi-
lar ancestry. In Israel, peanut-containing foods are usually 
introduced in the diet when infants are approximately 
7 months of age and consumed in substantial amounts, 
whereas in the United Kingdom children do not typi-
cally consume any peanut-containing foods during their 
first year of life. The LEAP trial randomized 640 children 
between 4 and 11 months of age with severe eczema, egg 
allergy, or both to consume or avoid peanut-containing 
foods until 60 months of age, at which time a peanut oral 
food challenge (OFC) was conducted to determine the 
prevalence of peanut allergy. LEAP trial participants were 
stratified at study entry into 2 separate study cohorts 
on the basis of pre-existing sensitization to peanut, as 
determined by means of skin prick testing: one cohort 
consisted of infants with no measureable skin test wheal 
to peanut (negative skin test response) and the other 
consisted of those with measurable wheal responses 
(1–4 mm in diameter). Infants with a 5 mm wheal diam-
eter or greater were not randomized because the majority 
of infants at this level of sensitization were presumed to 
be allergic to peanut. Among the 530 participants in the 
intention-to-treat population with negative baseline skin 
test response to peanut, the prevalence of peanut allergy 
at 60 months of age was 13.7% in the peanut avoid-
ance group and 1.9% in the peanut consumption group 
(P < .001; an 86.1% relative reduction in the prevalence of 
peanut allergy). Among the 98 participants with a meas-
urable peanut skin test response at entry, the prevalence 
of peanut allergy was 35.3% in the avoidance group and 
10.6% in the consumption group (P = .004; a 70% relative 
reduction in the prevalence of peanut allergy).
The LEAP trial was the first randomized trial to study 
early allergen introduction as a preventive strategy. 
Because of the size of the observed effect and the large 
number of study participants, its outcome received wide 
publicity in both the medical community and the press. 
This raised the need to operationalize the LEAP find-
ings by developing clinical recommendations focusing 
on peanut allergy prevention. To achieve this goal and its 
wide implementation, the NIAID invited the members of 
the 2010 Guidelines Coordinating Committee and other 
stakeholder organizations to develop this addendum on 
peanut allergy prevention to the 2010 “Guidelines for the 
diagnosis and management of food allergy in the United 
States.
” Twenty-six stakeholder organizations partici-
pated in this 2015–2016 Coordinating Committee. Of 
note, unrelated to this effort, a consensus statement on 
behalf of 9 international professional societies regarding 
the implications and implementation of the LEAP trial 
findings was published as well [15].
Additional evidence on early introduction of aller-
genic foods comes from the LEAP-On study [16], which 
demonstrated the durability of oral tolerance to peanut 
achieved in the LEAP trial and the enquiring about tol-
erance study [17], which assessed the potential benefits 
of early introduction of 6 allergenic foods in a non–high-
risk cohort.
Development of the 2017 addendum to the 2010 
“Guidelines for the diagnosis and management 
of food allergy”
The process to develop the 2017 addendum closely fol-
lowed that used in the 2010 guidelines [6].
 Page 3 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Coordinating committee
The NIAID established a Coordinating Committee (CC), 
the members of which are listed in Appendix A, to over-
see the development of the addendum; review drafts of 
the addendum for accuracy, practicality, clarity, and broad 
utility of the recommendations in clinical practice; review 
and approve the final addendum; and disseminate the 
addendum. The CC members represented 26 professional 
organizations, advocacy groups, and federal agencies.
Expert panel
The CC convened an expert panel (EP) in June 2015 that 
was chaired by Joshua Boyce, MD. The 26 panel mem-
bers, listed in Appendix B, were specialists from a vari-
ety of relevant clinical, scientific, and public health areas. 
Panel members were nominated by the CC organizations, 
and the composition of the panel received unanimous 
approval by the CC member organizations.
The charge to the EP was to use the literature review 
prepared by the NIAID (see the next section) in conjunc-
tion with consensus expert opinion and EP-identified 
supplementary documents to (1) develop evidence-based 
recommendations for the early introduction of dietary 
peanut to prevent peanut allergy; (2) agree on principles 
for grading the evidence; (3) achieve consensus while 
allowing ample opportunity for consideration of diver-
gent opinions; (4) determine whether the recommenda-
tions could extend beyond peanut to other food allergens; 
and (5) keep patient and societal interests at the fore-
front. The new recommendations are intended to supple-
ment and modify guidelines 37 to 40 in Section 5.3.4 of 
the 2010 guidelines: “Prevention of food allergy.
”
Literature review
NIAID staff conducted a literature search of PubMed 
limited to the years 2010 (January) to 2016 (June). Using 
the following specific search terms ([food allergy or milk 
allergy or egg allergy or peanut allergy] OR [eczema or 
atopic dermatitis] AND prevention), PubMed returned 
more than 1500 articles. NIAID staff reviewed 1506 
abstracts and assessed each for relevance to the topic 
of food allergy prevention with an emphasis on peanut 
allergy. Sixty-four publications (original research articles, 
editorials/letters, and systematic reviews) were deemed 
relevant and placed into 2 tiers: tier 1 contained 18 items 
considered highly relevant to the early introduction of 
peanut or other allergenic foods (see Appendix C), and 
tier 2 contained 46 items on related topics, such as food 
allergy or eczema prevention.
Assessing the quality of the body of evidence
For each of the 18 tier 1 references, the EP assessed 
quality by using the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) 
approach [18]. GRADE provides a comprehensive and 
transparent methodology to develop recommenda-
tions for the diagnosis, treatment, and management of 
patients. In assessing the body of evidence of a group of 
relevant articles or of a single article, GRADE consid-
ers study design and other factors, such as the precision, 
consistency, and directness of the data. By using this 
approach, GRADE then provides a categorical assess-
ment of the contribution of individual publications and 
the overall quality and strength of the body of evidence.
Each publication was assigned a grade according to the 
following criteria [19, 20]:
  
•
High: further research is very unlikely to have an 
effect on the quality of the body of evidence, and 
therefore the confidence in the recommendation is 
high and unlikely to change.
  
•
Moderate: further research is likely to have an effect 
on the quality of the body of evidence and may 
change the recommendation.
  
•
Low: further research is very likely to have an impor-
tant effect on the body of evidence and is likely to 
change the recommendation.
A GRADE designation of “low” for the quality of evi-
dence does not imply that an article is not factually 
correct or lacks scientific merit. For example, a well-
designed and executed single-site study of a treatment in 
a small cohort of highly selected subjects may still yield 
an overall GRADE rating of “low.
” This is because such a 
study is characterized as providing “sparse” data, and the 
patient population may not be representative of the at-
risk population. Each of these factors reduces the level of 
evidence from “high,
” which is the initial designation for 
evidence from randomized controlled trials. It is worth 
emphasizing that these 2 limitations are not of the study 
per se but of the body of evidence.
Preparation of the draft addendum
The draft version of the addendum, prepared by the 
NIAID, contained 3 new guidelines and was reviewed, 
modified, and endorsed by the EP members. The EP-
approved document was forwarded to the CC members 
for review.
Public comment period, addendum revision, and final 
approval
Concurrent with CC member review, the draft adden-
dum was posted to the NIAID Web site in March 2016 
for a period of 45 days to allow for public review and 
comment. One hundred four comments were received. 
All comments were reviewed by the EP and the CC, and 
 Page 4 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
some contributed to the final revision of the addendum. 
The final addendum was reviewed and approved by the 
EP and the CC.
Dissemination of the addendum guidelines
The final addendum is published herein and available 
through the Internet.
Defining the strength of each clinical guideline
The EP has used the verb “recommends” or “suggests” for 
each clinical recommendation.
These words convey the strength of the recommenda-
tion, defined as follows:
  
•
Recommend is used when the EP strongly recom-
mended for or against a particular course of action.
  
•
Suggest is used when the EP weakly recommended 
for or against a particular course of action.
Addendum guidelines
Table 1 provides a summary of the 3 addendum guide-
lines to be used as a quick reference.
The EP came to consensus on the following 3 defini-
tions used throughout the addendum guidelines.
  
•
Severe eczema is defined as persistent or frequently 
recurring eczema with typical morphology and dis-
tribution assessed as severe by a health care pro-
vider and requiring frequent need for prescrip-
tion-strength topical corticosteroids, calcineurin 
inhibitors, or other anti-inflammatory agents despite 
appropriate use of emollients.
  
•
Egg allergy is defined as a history of an allergic reac-
tion to egg and a skin prick test (SPT) wheal diameter 
of 3 mm or greater with egg white extract, or a posi-
tive oral egg food challenge result.
  
•
A specialist is defined as a health care provider with 
the training and experience to (1) perform and inter-
pret SPTs and OFCs and (2) know and manage their 
risks. Such persons must have appropriate medica-
tions and equipment on site.
Addendum guideline 1
The EP recommends that infants with severe eczema, egg 
allergy, or both have introduction of age-appropriate pea-
nut-containing food as early as 4–6 months of age to reduce 
the risk of peanut allergy. Other solid foods should be intro-
duced before peanut-containing foods to show that the 
infant is developmentally ready. The EP recommends that 
evaluation with peanut-specific IgE (peanut sIgE) measure-
ment, SPTs, or both be strongly considered before introduc-
tion of peanut to determine if peanut should be introduced 
and, if so, the preferred method of introduction. To mini-
mize a delay in peanut introduction for children who may 
test negative, testing for peanut sIgE may be the preferred 
initial approach in certain health care settings, such as fam-
ily medicine, paediatrics, or dermatology practices, in which 
skin prick testing is not routine. Alternatively, referral for 
assessment by a specialist may be an option if desired by the 
health care provider and when available in a timely manner.
Figure 1 provides recommended approaches for evalu-
ation of children with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both 
before peanut introduction.
A peanut sIgE level of less than 0.35 kUA/L has strong 
negative predictive value for the diagnosis of peanut 
allergy [21]. Therefore, peanut sIgE testing may help in 
certain health care settings (eg, family medicine, paedi-
atric, or dermatology practices, where skin prick testing 
is not routine) to reduce unnecessary referrals of children 
with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both and to minimize 
a delay in peanut introduction for children who may have 
negative test results. However, the EP emphasizes that 
a peanut sIgE level of 0.35 kUA/L or greater lacks ade-
quate positive predictive value for the diagnosis of pea-
nut allergy, and an infant with a value of 0.35 kUA/L or 
greater should be referred to a specialist.
Thus, peanut sIgE testing can place an infant into one 
of 2 categories (Fig. 1):
  
•
sIgE Category A: If the peanut sIgE level is less than 
0.35 kUA/L (ImmunoCAP), the EP recommends that 
peanut should be introduced in the diet soon thereaf-
ter, with a cumulative first dose of approximately 2 g 
Table 1 Summary of addendum guidelines 1, 2, and 3
Addendum 
guideline
Infant criteria
Recommendations
Earliest age of peanut introduction
1
Severe eczema, egg 
allergy, or both
Strongly consider evaluation by sIgE measurement 
and/or SPT and, if necessary, an OFC. Based on test 
results, introduce peanut‑containing foods
4–6 months
2
Mild‑to‑moderate 
eczema
Introduce peanut‑containing foods
Around 6 months
3
No eczema or any  
food allergy
Introduce peanut‑containing foods
Age appropriate and in accordance with family 
preferences and cultural practices
 Page 5 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
of peanut protein given in this feeding. This can be 
given as a feeding at home (Appendix D), consider-
ing the low likelihood of a severe allergic reaction. If 
the caregiver or health care provider has concerns, a 
supervised feeding can be offered at the health care 
provider’s office (Appendix E).
  
•
sIgE Category B: If the peanut sIgE level is 0.35 
kUA/L or greater (ImmunoCAP), the EP recom-
mends that the child be referred to a specialist for 
further consultation and possible skin prick testing.
The EP does not recommend food allergen panel test-
ing or the addition of sIgE testing for foods other than 
peanut because of their poor positive predictive value, 
which could lead to misinterpretation, overdiagnosis of 
food allergy, and unnecessary dietary restrictions [6].
SPTs with peanut extract can place an infant in one of 3 
categories (Fig. 1):
  
•
SPT Category A: If an SPT to peanut extract pro-
duces a wheal diameter of 2 mm or less above saline 
control, the EP recommends that peanut be intro-
duced in the diet soon after testing, with a cumula-
tive first dose of approximately 2 g of peanut pro-
tein given in this feeding. This can be given at home 
(Appendix D), considering the low likelihood of 
a severe allergic reaction. If the caregiver or health 
care provider has concerns, a supervised feeding can 
be offered at the health care provider’s office (Appen-
dix E).
  
•
SPT Category B: If an SPT to peanut extract pro-
duces a wheal diameter of 3 to 7 mm greater than 
Fig. 1 Recommended approaches for evaluation of children with severe eczema and/or egg allergy before peanut introduction
 Page 6 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
that elicited by the saline control, the EP suggests 
that a supervised peanut feeding or a graded OFC 
be undertaken at a specialist’s office or a special-
ized facility (see Appendices E and G, respectively). 
Infants in this category can be sensitized without 
being allergic to peanut and might benefit from early 
peanut consumption. If the supervised peanut feed-
ing or graded OFC yields no reaction, the EP recom-
mends that peanut should be added to the child’s 
diet. If the supervised peanut feeding or the graded 
OFC results in an allergic reaction, the EP recom-
mends that the child should strictly avoid dietary 
peanut and the family should be counselled regarding 
food allergy management.
  
•
SPT Category C: If an SPT produces a wheal diam-
eter 8 mm or greater than that elicited by the saline 
control, the likelihood of peanut allergy is high. Chil-
dren in this category should continue to be evaluated 
and managed by a specialist [21–23].
Box 1 Important considerations for skin prick testing
SPT reagents, testing devices, and methodology can differ significantly 
among health care providers in the United States or elsewhere.22 The 
EP recommends that specialists adjust their SPT categorization criteria 
according to their own training and experience.
Health care providers conducting OFCs in infants with 3 mm or greater 
SPT responses should be aware that the probability of a positive chal‑
lenge response increases with wheal size. These data come from the 
HealthNuts Study in children 12 to 18 months of age; of note, the sever‑
ity of these reactions was relatively mild [21, 23].
How much dietary peanut protein to introduce
If the decision is made to introduce dietary peanut based 
on the recommendations of addendum guideline 1, the 
total amount of peanut protein to be regularly consumed 
per week should be approximately 6 to 7 g over 3 or more 
feedings (see Appendix F). In the LEAP trial, at evalua-
tions conducted at 12 and 30 months of age, 75% of chil-
dren in the peanut consumption group reported eating at 
least this amount of peanut, based on analysis of a 3-day 
food diary recorded just before the evaluation.
Rationale
Infants with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both are at 
high risk for the development of peanut allergy. Signifi-
cant evidence on this group is available from the infants 
who participated in the LEAP trial or were screened for 
the LEAP trial but were not enrolled because of a large 
SPT response (>4 mm). At 60 months of age, approxi-
mately 23% of peanut avoiders and those infants not 
enrolled had food allergy [24].
Balance of benefits and harms
In the LEAP trial, among the 530 participants in the 
intention-to-treat population with negative baseline SPT 
responses to peanut, 13.7% of the avoidance group and 
1.9% of the consumption group had peanut allergy at 
60 months of age (P < .001; a 12.6% absolute risk reduc-
tion and an 86.1% relative risk reduction in the preva-
lence of peanut allergy, resulting in a number needed 
to treat of 8.5 [number of infants needed to have early 
introduction of peanut to prevent peanut allergy in one 
child]). Among the 98 participants with positive peanut 
SPT responses at entry, 35.3% of the avoidance group and 
10.6% of the consumption group had peanut allergy at 
60 months of age (P = .004; a 24.7% absolute risk reduc-
tion and a 70% relative risk reduction in the prevalence 
of peanut allergy, resulting in a number needed to treat 
of 4).
The LEAP-on study [24] demonstrated that the ben-
efits achieved in the LEAP trial persisted when LEAP 
trial peanut consumers subsequently avoided peanut for 
1 year from 60 to 72 months of age. This indicates that 
the oral tolerance achieved in the LEAP trial was durable.
The LEAP trial did not include infants with SPT wheals 
greater than 4 mm, and therefore no data are available on 
the potential effectiveness of peanut consumption in pre-
venting peanut allergy in this group. However, EP mem-
bers believe it is possible that some of these infants may 
benefit from early introduction of peanut provided that 
they tolerate oral peanut.
As shown in Fig. 1, the EP recommends that infants 
with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both, with peanut sIgE 
levels of less than 0.35 kUA/L or with a peanut SPT wheal 
of 2 mm or less have dietary peanut introduced as early 
as 4–6 months of age without a need for further evalua-
tion. This recommendation is supported by expert opin-
ion and analysis of the LEAP population findings. In the 
LEAP trial, infants consuming peanut in this post hoc 
defined category had a relative risk reduction of 79% of 
having peanut allergy at 60 months of age compared with 
infants who avoided peanut.
In the LEAP trial, at study entry, all infants randomly 
assigned to the consuming group had a baseline peanut 
OFC. Of the 272 infants with no wheal induced by peanut 
SPT and who received a baseline oral peanut challenge, 
only 1 had a reaction presenting as an erythematous urti-
carial rash that was graded as a “moderate” adverse event 
and was treated successfully with chlorpheniramine. 
Among the 29 infants with a wheal diameter of 1–2 mm 
who received a baseline oral peanut challenge, 2 had 
reactions, which also presented with mild symptoms not 
requiring treatment with epinephrine. Therefore, for the 
SPT Category A children, the risk of a severe reaction to 
peanut at first introduction is low, and introduction of 
peanut at home is an option. However, it is understand-
able that some caregivers of infants with severe eczema, 
egg allergy, or both may be uncomfortable introducing 
 Page 7 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
dietary peanut at home. In such cases the health care 
provider should offer the option of a supervised feeding 
of a peanut-containing food in the office.
The rate of positive peanut OFC results at baseline for 
infants with a 3–4 mm wheal diameter (4/17 infants) 
was higher than in infants with 0 to 2 mm wheal diam-
eters (3/301 infants), but the elicited symptoms were 
mild. Infants with larger wheal diameters (>4 mm) were 
not included in the LEAP trial, and therefore no safety 
data are available from this group. However, based on 
the Australian HealthNuts study, which conducted pea-
nut OFCs in a large number of older (12–18 months 
old) children from the general Australian population, 
the rate of reactions to peanut is expected to be substan-
tially higher with increasing SPT wheal diameter [21, 23]. 
In the HealthNuts study [23] an SPT wheal diameter of 
8 mm or greater had a 95% positive predictive value for 
peanut allergy (positive oral peanut challenge result). 
Therefore, the EP recommends that for SPT Category 
B infants (3–7 mm SPT wheal diameter), a supervised 
feeding or a graded peanut OFC should be conducted 
in a specialist’s office or a specialized facility (Appendix 
G). SPT Category C infants are considered high risk for 
established allergy to peanut and should not receive pea-
nut-containing foods in their diet, unless such foods are 
recommended by a specialist after further evaluation.
Quality of evidence: moderate
The designation of the quality of evidence as “moder-
ate” (as opposed to “high”) is based on the fact that this 
recommendation derives primarily from a single rand-
omized, open-label study: the LEAP trial. However, it 
should be noted that the assessment of the LEAP trial’s 
primary outcome was based on a double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled OFC. Furthermore, confidence in this 
recommendation is bolstered by the large effect size dem-
onstrated in the LEAP trial and prior epidemiologic data 
that peanut allergy is relatively infrequent in Israel, where 
early childhood consumption of peanut is common.
Contribution of expert opinion
Significant.
Additional comments
1. Breast-feeding recommendations: the EP recognizes 
that early introduction of peanut may seem to depart 
from recommendations for exclusive breast-feeding 
through 6 months of age [25, 26]. However, it should 
be noted that data from the nutrition analysis of the 
LEAP cohort [27] indicate that introduction of pea-
nut did not affect the duration or frequency of breast-
feeding and did not influence growth or nutrition.
2. Age of peanut introduction: for children with severe 
eczema, egg allergy, or both, the EP recommends that 
introduction of solid foods begins at 4–6 months of 
age, starting with solid food other than peanut, so 
that the child can demonstrate the ability to consume 
solid food without evidence of nonspecific signs and 
symptoms that could be confused with IgE-mediated 
food allergy. However, it is important to note that 
infants in the LEAP trial were enrolled between 4 
and 11 months of age and benefitted from peanut 
consumption regardless of age at entry. Therefore, if 
the 4- to 6-month time window is missed for any rea-
son, including developmental delay, infants may still 
benefit from early peanut introduction. On the other 
hand, older age at screening is associated with larger 
wheal diameters induced by peanut SPT and hence a 
higher likelihood of established peanut allergy [28].
 
A practical consideration for applying this guideline 
at 4–6 months of age is that infants visit their health 
care provider for well-child evaluations and infant 
immunizations at this time. This provides a fortui-
tous opportunity for eczema evaluation, caregiver 
reporting of egg allergy, and, if needed, referral to a 
specialist for peanut allergy evaluation before dietary 
introduction of peanut.
3. Considerations for family members with established 
peanut allergy: the EP recognizes that many infants 
eligible for early peanut introduction under this 
guideline will have older siblings or caregivers with 
established peanut allergy. The EP recommends that 
in this situation caregivers discuss with their health 
care providers the overall benefit (reduced risk of 
peanut allergy in the infant) versus risk (potential for 
further sensitization and accidental exposure of the 
family member to peanut) of adding peanut to the 
infant’s diet.
4. Children identified as allergic to peanut: for children 
who have been identified as allergic to peanut, the 
EP recommends strict peanut avoidance. This may 
include those children in SPT Category B who fail 
the supervised peanut feeding or the OFC, or those 
children in SPT Category C who, on further evalu-
ation by a specialist, are confirmed as being allergic 
to peanut. These children should be under long-term 
management by a specialist.
Addendum guideline 2
The EP suggests that infants with mild-to-moderate 
eczema should have introduction of age-appropri-
ate peanut-containing food around 6 months of age, 
in accordance with family preferences and cultural 
practices, to reduce the risk of peanut allergy. Other 
 Page 8 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
solid foods should be introduced before peanut-
containing foods to show that the infant is develop-
mentally ready. The EP recommends that infants in 
this category may have dietary peanut introduced at 
home without an in-office evaluation. However, the 
EP recognizes that some caregivers and health care 
providers may desire an in-office supervised feeding, 
evaluation, or both.
Rationale
The LEAP trial did not target infants with mild or moder-
ate eczema. The EP considered the potential risk/benefit 
ratio of early dietary peanut introduction in infants with 
mild-to-moderate eczema and concluded that the indi-
vidual and societal benefits of introducing peanut in this 
population would be significant. The EP has no reason to 
believe that the mechanisms of protection of early dietary 
peanut differ in infants with mild-to-moderate eczema 
from those that lead to protection in infants at higher risk 
of peanut allergy.
Balance of benefits and harms
The LEAP trial included only infants with severe eczema 
or egg allergy based on careful medical history. There-
fore, some infants who participated in the LEAP trial 
based on the presence of egg allergy had atopic derma-
titis severity scores (SCORAD scores [29]) at screening 
that would have placed them in the moderate or mild 
eczema category. The EP considered the outcomes of 
these children and concluded that infants with mild-to-
moderate eczema would likely benefit from early peanut 
introduction.
Quality of evidence
Low.
The quality of evidence is low because this recommen-
dation is based on extrapolation of data from a single 
study.
Contribution of expert opinion
Significant.
Additional comment
Additional support for early introduction of peanut in 
infants who do not have severe eczema comes from the 
Enquiring About Tolerance study [17], which enrolled 
infants from the general population at 3 months of age 
and sequentially introduced 6 allergenic foods begin-
ning at the time of enrolment. These children were not 
intentionally selected based on increased risk of food 
allergy or atopy. Although the intention-to-treat group 
did not show benefit, most likely because of relatively 
poor compliance with feeding recommendations, the 
children in the per-protocol group who had peanut 
introduced early in infancy showed a significant reduc-
tion in peanut sensitization and peanut allergy at age 
3 years. This study also provides support for guideline 
3 below.
Addendum guideline 3
The EP suggests that infants without eczema or any food 
allergy have age-appropriate peanut-containing foods 
freely introduced in the diet together with other solid 
foods and in accordance with family preferences and cul-
tural practices.
Rationale
No evidence exists for restricting allergenic foods in 
infants without known risks for food allergy. The proba-
bility for development of peanut allergy in such children 
is very low. However, approximately 14% of all children 
with peanut allergy at age 12–18 months in the Health-
Nuts Study lacked known risk factors for food allergy 
[16]. Consequently, because such children constitute a 
significant majority of any birth cohort, they contribute 
substantially to the overall societal burden of peanut 
allergy. The EP finds no evidence to suggest that mecha-
nisms of oral tolerance induction would differ in these 
infants from the immunologic mechanisms that are pro-
tective in infants at higher risk of peanut allergy. Thus, 
the early introduction of dietary peanut in children 
without risk factors for peanut allergy is generally antici-
pated to be safe and to contribute modestly to an overall 
reduction in the prevalence of peanut allergy. Further-
more, in countries such as Israel, where peanut products 
are a popular component of the diet and where they are 
introduced early in life, the prevalence of peanut allergy 
is low [14].
Balance of benefits and harms
The EP acknowledges that any analysis of benefit and 
harm in this population relies primarily on expert opin-
ion and is subject to current differences in regional/
societal rates of peanut consumption and peanut sen-
sitization. In countries where peanut products are not 
widely consumed by adults, early dietary introduction 
of peanut could lead to an increase in sensitization and 
allergic manifestations. Hence the EP cautions that this 
guideline be implemented in the context of societal 
routines/norms.
Quality of evidence
Low.
Contribution of expert opinion
Significant.
 Page 9 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Box 2 Clinical implications
These guidelines will help health care providers with early introduction 
of peanut‑containing foods in infants at various risk levels for peanut 
allergy. Early introduction of peanut will result in the prevention of 
peanut allergy in a large number of infants.
Abbreviations
CC: Coordinating Committee; EP: expert panel; GRADE: Grading of Recom‑
mendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; LEAP: Learning Early 
about Peanut Allergy; NIAID: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases; OFC: oral food challenge; sIgE: specific IgE; SPT: skin prick test.
Authors’ contributions
AT, DR and SC wrote the document based on the EP deliberations, and the 
EP authors reviewed, edited, and approved the submitted version. All authors 
read and approved the final manuscript.
Author details
1 The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 
USA. 2 The Board of Directors, Food Allergy Research & Education, McLean, 
VA, USA. 3 The Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 4 Food 
Allergy Research & Education, McLean and the Division of Allergy and Clini‑
cal Immunology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
5 The Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
New York, USA. 6 The National Eczema Association, San Rafael, CA, USA. 7 The 
Department of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers University, NB, Canada. 8 The 
Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, BC Children’s 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 9 The Depart‑
ments of Dermatology and Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego 
School of Medicine, Rady Children’s Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA. 10 The Sec‑
tion of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital 
Colorado, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. 
11 The Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Kentucky Children’s 
Hospital, Lexington, KY, USA. 12 The Digestive Health Institute, Children’s 
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA. 13 The Division of Academic General 
Pediatrics and Primary Care, Department of Pediatrics, The Ann and Robert 
H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. 14 Northwestern Medicine, Central 
DuPage Hospital, Winfield, IL, USA. 15 The Division of Allergy and Immunol‑
ogy, Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
Arkansas Children’s Hospital, Little Rock, AR, USA. 16 Metro DC Food Allergy 
Support Group, Rockville, MD, USA. 17 The Food Allergy Referral Centre, 
Department of Women and Child Health, Padua University Hospital, Padua, 
Italy. 18 University of Missouri‑Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, 
USA. 19 The Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 20 The Division of Pediatric Allergy 
and Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA. 
21 The Division of Allergy and Immunology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA. 22 The Department of Pediatrics, Division of Dermatology, Seattle 
Children’s Hospital, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, 
USA. 23 The Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 24 The Department of Pediatrics, Sec‑
tion of Allergy and Immunology, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Ohio State 
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA. 25 The Division of Allergy 
and Immunology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, 
OH, USA. 26 The Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Competing interests
A. Assa’ad received travel support from the American College of Allergy, 
Asthma & Immunology (ACAAI); was an elected member of the Board of 
Directors for the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology 
(AAAAI) from March 2012 to March 2016; has consultant arrangements with 
Aimmune; is employed by Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center; has 
received grants from DBV Technologies, Aimmune, Stanford Foundation, TEVA 
Pharmaceuticals, GlaxoSmithKline, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Astellas, and Food Allergy Research & Education (FARE); and has received 
payment for lectures from the ACAAI. C. Byrd‑Bredbenner and G. J. Fuchs III 
have received travel support from the NIH/National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Disease (NIAID). E. S. Chan has received travel support from the 
NIAID, has received grants from DBV Technologies, and has received payment 
for lectures from Pfizer, Sanofi, Mead Johnson, and Nestle. D. M. Fleischer has 
received travel support from the NIAID; is a board member for the National 
Peanut Board, the FAACT Medical Advisory Board, and the FARE Medical 
Advisory Board; has consultant arrangements with Adamis Pharmaceuticals 
Corporation, INSYS Therapeutics, DBV Technologies, Aimmune Therapeutics, 
Intrommune Therapeutics, and Kaleo Pharma; is employed by University Physi‑
cians; has received grants from Monsanto Company, Nestle Nutrition Institute, 
DBV Technologies, and Aimmune Therapeutics; has received payment for 
lectures from Nestle Nutrition Institute; and has received royalties from UpTo‑
Date. M. J. Greenhawt has received a grant from the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (1K08HS024599‑01, Career Development Award); has 
received travel support from the NIAID and the Joint Taskforce on Allergy 
Practice Parameters; has a board membership with the National Peanut Board; 
has consultant arrangements with Adamis Pharmaceuticals, the Canadian 
Transportation Agency, Nutricia, Nestle/Gerber, Aimmune, Kaleo Pharmaceuti‑
cal, and Monsanto; is an Associate Editor for the Annals of Allergy, Asthma, 
and Immunology; has received payment for lectures from the ACAAI, Reach 
MD, Thermo Fisher Scientific, the California Society for Allergy and Immunol‑
ogy, the Allergy and Asthma Network, the New England Society for Allergy, 
UCLA/Harbor Heiner Lectureship, Medscape, the Western Michigan School of 
Medicine, the Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, and the 
Pennsylvania Society for Allergy and Immunology. R. S. Gupta has consultant 
arrangements with BEFORE Brands and DBV Technologies; has received grants 
from the NIH, FARE, and Mylan LLC; has received payment for lectures from 
Grand Rounds; and has received royalties from Createspace Independent 
Publishing Platform. S. M. Jones is on the Research Advisory Board for FARE; is 
on the Scientific Advisory Board for Aimmune; has consultant arrangements 
with Stallergenes; has received grants from the NIH/NIAID (Consortium of 
Food Allergy Research and Immune Tolerance Network–IMPACT Trial), FARE, 
Aimmune Technologies, DBV Technologies, and the National Peanut Board; 
has received payment for lectures from the Kansas City Allergy Society, Mercy 
Children’s Hospital, Riley Children’s Hospital, Southwester Medical School–Chil‑
dren’s Medical Center, the European Academy of Allergy & Clinical Immunol‑
ogy, the New York Allergy & Asthma Society, the University of Iowa Paul M. 
Seebohm Lectureship in Allergy, and the Iowa Society of Allergy, Asthma, and 
Immunology. A. Muraro has consultant arrangements with Meda, Novartis, 
and Menarini; is employed by Padua University Hospital; and has received 
payment for lectures from Meda and Menarini. L. J. Rosenwasser is a board 
member for the World Allergy Organization. H. A. Sampson has consultant 
arrangements with Allertein Therapeutics, Genentech/Roche, Sanofi, Stal‑
lergenes, Danone, and Merck; is employed part time as Chief Scientific Officer 
for DBV Technologies; has received grants from the NIAID and the Immune 
Tolerance Network; has received royalties from UpToDate and Elsevier; has 
been offered stock options in DBV Technologies; and is chairman of PhARF 
Award Selection Committee for Thermo Fisher. L. C. Schneider is on the Medi‑
cal Advisory Board for FARE, has received a grant from DBV Technologies, and 
has received stock/stock options in Antera Therapeutics. S. H. Sicherer has 
received grants from the NIAID, FARE, and HAL Allergy; has received royalties 
from UpToDate; and is serving as Associate Editor for the Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology: In Practice. R. Sidbury has received travel support 
from the NIH and the Hawaii Dermatology Seminar, has consultant arrange‑
ments with Anacor, has provided expert witness testimony on behalf of Roche 
in Accutane–inflammatory bowel disease cases, has received a grant from 
Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Partnership, has received payment for lectures 
from the Taiwanese Dermatological Society, and has received royalties from 
UpToDate. J. Spergel has consultant arrangements with DBV Technologies and 
Danone; has received grants from DBV Technologies, Aimmune Therapeutics, 
and the NIH; has received payment for lectures for Dartmouth College, the 
ACAAI, and the Florida Allergy Society; and has received stock/stock options 
in DBV Technologies. D. R. Stukus has received payment for lectures from the 
ACAAI. C. Venter has consultant arrangements with Danone and Nestle, has 
received payment for lectures from Mead Johnson, and has received travel 
 Page 10 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
support from Thermo Fisher. The rest of the authors declare that they have no 
relevant competing interests.
Declarations
Published on behalf of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunol‑
ogy; American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; Canadian Society 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology; Society for Pediatric Dermatology; World 
Allergy Organization; and Society of Pediatric Nurses.
Copublished in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology; Annals of 
Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology; World 
Allergy Organization Journal; Pediatric Dermatology; and the Journal of Pediatric 
Nursing.
Appendix A: Coordinating Committee member 
organizations and representatives
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
http://www.eatright.org/
Alison Steiber, PhD, RD
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics 
(AANMA)
http://www.allergyasthmanetwork.org/main/
Tonya A. Winders, MBA
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunol-
ogy (AAAAI)
https://www.aaaai.org/home.aspx
Hugh A. Sampson, MD
David Fleischer, MD
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP)
http://www.aafp.org/home.html
Jason Matuszak, MD
American Academy of Dermatology (AAD)
https://www.aad.org/
Lawrence F. Eichenfield, MD, FAAD
Jon Hanifin, MD
American Academy of Emergency Medicine (AAEM)
http://www.aaem.org/
Joseph P. Wood, MD, JD
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
https://www.aap.org
Scott H. Sicherer, MD, FAAP
American Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA)
https://www.aapa.org/
Gabriel Ortiz, MPAS, PA-C, DFAAPA
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunol-
ogy (ACAAI)
http://acaai.org/
Amal Assa’ad, MD
American College of Gastroenterology (ACG)
http://gi.org/
Steven J. Czinn, MD, FACG
American Partnership for Eosinophilic Disorders 
(APFED)
http://apfed.org/
Wendy Book, MD
American Society for Nutrition (ASN)
http://www.nutrition.org/
George J. Fuchs III, MD
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA)
http://www.aafa.org/
Meryl Bloomrosen, MBA, MBI
David R. Stukus, MD
Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
(CSACI)
http://www.csaci.ca/
Edmond Chan, MD, FRCPC
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child 
Health & Human Development (NICHD)
https://www.nichd.nih.gov
Gilman Grave, MD
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunol-
ogy (EAACI)
http://www.eaaci.org/
Antonella Muraro, MD, PhD
Food Allergy Research & Education (FARE)
https://www.foodallergy.org/
James R. Baker, MD
Mary Jane Marchisotto
National Eczema Association (NEA)
http://nationaleczema.org/
Julie Block
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
Janet M. de Jesus, MS, RD
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID)
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/
Daniel Rotrosen, MD
Alkis Togias, MD
Marshall Plaut, MD
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases (NIAMS)
http://www.niams.nih.gov/
Ricardo Cibotti, PhD
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kid-
ney Diseases (NIDDK)
www.niddk.nih.gov
Frank Hamilton, MD, MPH
Margaret A. McDowell, PhD, MPH, RD (retired)
Rachel Fisher, MS, MPH, RD
North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterol-
ogy, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN)
http://www.naspghan.org/
Glenn Furuta, MD
Society of Pediatric Nurses (SPN)
http://www.pedsnurses.org/
Michele Habich, DNP, APN/CNS, CPN
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
http://www.usda.gov/
 Page 11 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Soheila J. Maleki, PhD
World Allergy Organization (WAO)
http://www.worldallergy.org/
Lanny J. Rosenwasser, MD
Appendix B. Expert Panel, June 2015
Chair
Joshua A. Boyce, MD
Professor of Medicine and Pediatrics
Harvard Medical School
Director, Inflammation and Allergic Disease Research 
Section
Director, Jeff and Penny Vinik Center for Allergic Disease 
Research
Specialty: Allergy/pediatric pulmonology
Panelists
Maria Acebal, JD
Board of Directors, Food Allergy Research & Education
Member of NIAID Advisory Council
Former CEO of Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network
Specialty: Advocacy
Amal Assa’ad, MD
Professor, University of Cincinnati Department of 
Pediatrics
Director, FARE Center of Excellence in Food Allergy
Director of Clinical Services, Division of Allergy and 
Immunology
Associate Director, Division of Allergy and Immunology
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
James R. Baker, Jr, MD
CEO and Chief Medical Officer
Food Allergy Research & Education, McLean VA
Founding Director, Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center, 
University of Michigan
Professor of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology
University of Michigan Health System
Specialty: Allergy/advocacy/education
Lisa A. Beck, MD
Professor, Department of Dermatology
University of Rochester Medical Center
School of Medicine and Dentistry
Specialty: Dermatology
Julie Block
President and CEO
National Eczema Association
Specialty: Advocacy/education
Carol Byrd-Bredbenner, PhD, RD, FAND
Professor of Nutrition/Extension Specialist
Rutgers University, School of Environmental and Biologi-
cal Sciences
Specialty: Nutrition/health communication/behavioral 
science
Edmond S. Chan, MD, FRCPC
Clinical Associate Professor
Head, Division of Allergy and Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
BC Children’s Hospital
University of British Columbia
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Lawrence F. Eichenfield, MD
Professor of Pediatrics and Dermatology
Chief, Pediatric and Adolescent Dermatology
Rady Children’s Hospital, San Diego
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine
Specialty: Dermatology/pediatrics
David M. Fleischer, MD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics
University of Colorado School of Medicine
Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
George J. Fuchs III, MD
Professor of Pediatrics
University of Kentucky College of Medicine
Chief, Gastroenterology, Nutrition & Hepatology
Kentucky Children’s Hospital
Specialty: Gastroenterology/pediatrics
Glenn T. Furuta, MD
Professor of Pediatrics
Director, Gastrointestinal Eosinophilic Diseases Program
University of Colorado School of Medicine
Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO
Specialty: Gastroenterology/pediatrics
Matthew J. Greenhawt, MD, MBA, MSc
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Allergy Section
University of Colorado School of Medicine
Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Ruchi Gupta, MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine
Director, Food Allergy Outcomes Research Program
Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago
Northwestern Medicine, Northwestern University
Specialty: Pediatrics
Michele Habich, DNP, APN/CNS, CPN
Advanced Practice Nurse
Northwestern Medicine, Central DuPage Hospital
Specialty: Nursing/pediatrics/education
Stacie M. Jones, MD
Professor of Pediatrics
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
Chief, Allergy and Immunology
 Page 12 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Arkansas Children’s Hospital
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Kari Keaton
Facilitator, Metro DC Food Allergy Support Group
Specialty: Advocacy/education
Antonella Muraro, MD, PhD
President of European Academy of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology (EAACI)
Professor of Allergy and Pediatric Allergy
Head of the Veneto Region Food Allergy Centre of Excel-
lence for Research and Treatment
University Hospital of Padua, Italy
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Lanny J. Rosenwasser, MD
Immediate Past President, World Allergy Organization
Professor of Medicine
University of Missouri-Kansas City-School of Medicine
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Hugh A. Sampson, MD
Professor of Pediatrics, Allergy and Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Director, Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Lynda C. Schneider, MD
Professor of Pediatrics
Harvard Medical School
Director, Allergy Program
Boston Children’s Hospital
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Scott H. Sicherer, MD
Professor Pediatrics, Allergy and Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Division Chief, Pediatric Allergy and Immunology
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Robert Sidbury, MD, MPH
Professor
Department of Pediatrics
Chief, Division of Dermatology
Seattle Children’s Hospital
University of Washington School of Medicine
Specialty: Dermatology/pediatrics
Jonathan Spergel, MD, PhD
Stuart Starr Professor of Pediatrics
Chief, Allergy Section
Director, Center for Pediatric Eosinophilic Disorders
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
David R. Stukus, MD
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Section of Allergy/Immunology
Nationwide Children’s Hospital
Columbus
Specialty: Allergy/pediatrics
Carina Venter, PhD, RD
Allergy Specialist, Dietitian
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
Specialty: Allergy/dietitian/pediatrics
Appendix C: Tier 1 references
  
–
Feeney M, Du Toit G, Roberts R, Sayre PH, Lawson 
K, Bahnson HT, et al. Impact of peanut consumption 
in the LEAP study: feasibility, growth and nutrition. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;138:1108-18.
  
–
Koplin JJ, Peters RL, Dharmage SC, Gurrin L, Tang 
MLK, Ponsonby AL, et al. Understanding the feasi-
bility and implications of implementing early peanut 
introduction for prevention of peanut allergy. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2016;138:1131-41.e2.
  
–
Perkin MR, Logan K, Tseng A, Raji B, Ayis S, Pea-
cock J, et al. Randomized trial of introduction of 
allergenic foods in breast-fed infants. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1733-43.
  
–
Du Toit G, Sayre PH, Roberts G, Sever ML, Lawson 
K, Bahnson HT, et al. Effect of avoidance on peanut 
allergy after early peanut consumption. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1435-43.
  
–
Chang YS, Trivedi MK, Jha A, Lin YF, Dimaano L, 
García-Romero MT. Synbiotics for prevention and 
treatment of atopic dermatitis: a meta-analysis of ran-
domized clinical trials. JAMA Pediatr 2016;170:236-
42.
  
–
O’Connor C, Kelleher M, O’B Hourihane J. Calculat-
ing the effect of populationlevel implementation of the 
Learning Early About Peanut Allergy (LEAP) proto-
col to prevent peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2016;137:1263-4.e2.
  
–
Grimshaw KE, Bryant T, Oliver EM, Martin J, Maskell 
J, Kemp T, et al. Incidence and risk factors for food 
hypersensitivity in UK infants: results from a birth 
cohort study. Clin Transl Allergy 2016;6:1.
  
–
Rabinovitch N, Shah D, Lanser BJ. Look before you 
LEAP: risk of anaphylaxis in high-risk infants with 
early introduction of peanut. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2015;136:822.
  
–
Peters RL, Allen KJ, Dharmage SC, Lodge CJ, Koplin 
JJ, Ponsonby AL, et al. Differential factors associated 
with challenge-proven food allergy phenotypes in a 
population cohort of infants: a latent class analysis. 
Clin Exp Allergy 2015;45:953-63.
  
–
Peters RL, Allen KJ, Dharmage SC, Koplin JJ, Dang T, 
Tilbrook KP, et al. Natural history of peanut allergy 
and predictors of resolution in the first 4 years of life: a 
population-based assessment. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2015;135:1257-66.e2.
 Page 13 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
  
–
Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Bahnson HT, Radu-
lovic S, Santos AF, et al. Randomized trial of peanut 
consumption in infants at risk for peanut allergy. N 
Engl J Med 2015;372:803-13.
  
–
Martin PE, Eckert JK, Koplin JJ, Lowe AJ, Gurrin LC, 
Dharmage SC, et al. Which infants with eczema are at 
risk of food allergy? Results from a population-based 
cohort. Clin Exp Allergy 2015;45:255-64.
  
–
Grimshaw KE, Maskell J, Oliver EM, Morris RC, Foote 
KD, Mills EN, et al. Introduction of complementary 
foods and the relationship to food allergy. Pediatrics 
2013;132:e1529-38.
  
–
Palmer DJ, Metcalfe J, Makrides M, Gold MS, Quinn 
P, West CE, et al. Early regular egg exposure in infants 
with eczema: a randomized controlled trial. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2013;132:387-92.e1.
  
–
Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Plaut M, Bahnson 
HT, Mitchell H, et al. Identifying infants at high risk 
of peanut allergy: the Learning Early About Peanut 
Allergy (LEAP) screening study. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2013;131:135-43, e1-12.
  
–
Joseph CL, Ownby DR, Havstad SL, Woodcroft KJ, 
Wegienka G, MacKechnie H, et al. Early complemen-
tary feeding and risk of food sensitization in a birth 
cohort. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:1203-10.e5.
  
–
Koplin JJ, Osborne NJ, Wake M, Martin PE, Gurrin 
LC, Robinson MN, et al. Can early introduction of 
egg prevent egg allergy in infants? A population-based 
study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:807-13.
  
–
Katz Y, Rajuan N, Goldberg MR, Eisenberg E, Heyman 
E, Cohen A, et al. Early exposure to cow’s milk protein 
is protective against IgE-mediated cow’s milk protein 
allergy. J. Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:77-82.e1.
Appendix D. Instructions for home feeding 
of peanut protein for infants at low risk of an 
allergic reaction to peanut
These instructions for home feeding of peanut protein 
are provided by your doctor. You should discuss any 
questions that you have with your doctor before start-
ing. These instructions are meant for feeding infants who 
have severe eczema or egg allergy and were allergy tested 
(blood test, skin test, or both) with results that your doc-
tor considers safe for you to introduce peanut protein at 
home (low risk of allergy).
General instructions
1. Feed your infant only when he or she is healthy; do 
not do the feeding if he or she has a cold, vomiting, 
diarrhea, or other illness.
2. Give the first peanut feeding at home and not at a day 
care facility or restaurant.
3. Make sure at least 1 adult will be able to focus all of 
his or her attention on the infant, without distrac-
tions from other children or household activities.
4. Make sure that you will be able to spend at least 2 h 
with your infant after the feeding to watch for any 
signs of an allergic reaction.
Feeding your infant
1. Prepare a full portion of one of the peanut-containing 
foods from the recipe options below.
2. Offer your infant a small part of the peanut serving 
on the tip of a spoon.
3. Wait 10 min.
4. If there is no allergic reaction after this small taste, 
then slowly give the remainder of the peanut-con-
taining food at the infant’s usual eating speed.
What are symptoms of an allergic reaction? What should I 
look for?
  
•
Mild symptoms can include:
 
–
a new rash
or
 
–
a few hives around the mouth or face
  
•
More severe symptoms can include any of the follow-
ing alone or in combination:
 
–
lip swelling
  
–
vomiting
  
–
widespread hives (welts) over the body
  
–
face or tongue swelling
  
–
any difficulty breathing
  
–
wheeze
  
–
repetitive coughing
  
–
change in skin color (pale, blue)
 
–
sudden tiredness/lethargy/seeming limp
If you have any concerns about your infant’s response 
to peanut, seek immediate medical attention/call 911.
Four recipe options, each containing approximately 2 g 
of peanut protein
Note: Teaspoons and tablespoons are US measures (5 and 
15 mL for a level teaspoon or tablespoon, respectively).
Option 1: Bamba (Osem, Israel), 21 pieces (approxi-
mately 2 g of peanut protein)
Note: Bamba is named because it was the product used 
in the LEAP trial and therefore has proven efficacy and 
safety. Other peanut puff products with similar peanut 
protein content can be substituted.
 Page 14 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
a. For infants less than 7 months of age, soften the 
Bamba with 4 to 6 teaspoons of water.
b. For older infants who can manage dissolvable tex-
tures, unmodified Bamba can be fed. If dissolvable 
textures are not yet part of the infant’s diet, softened 
Bamba should be provided.
Option 2: Thinned smooth peanut butter, 2 teaspoons 
(9–10 g of peanut butter; approximately 2 g of peanut 
protein)
a. Measure 2 teaspoons of peanut butter and slowly add 
2 to 3 teaspoons of hot water.
b. Stir until peanut butter is dissolved, thinned, and well 
blended.
c. Let cool.
d. Increase water amount if necessary (or add previ-
ously tolerated infant cereal) to achieve consistency 
comfortable for the infant.
Option 3: Smooth peanut butter puree, 2 teaspoons 
(9–10 g of peanut butter; approximately 2 g of peanut 
protein)
a. Measure 2 teaspoons of peanut butter.
b. Add 2 to 3 tablespoons of previously tolerated pureed 
fruit or vegetables to peanut butter. You can increase 
or reduce volume of puree to achieve desired consist-
ency.
Option 4: Peanut flour and peanut butter powder, 2 tea-
spoons (4 g of peanut flour or 4 g of peanut butter pow-
der; approximately 2 g of peanut protein)
Note: Peanut flour and peanut butter powder are 2 dis-
tinct products that can be interchanged because they 
have, on average, a similar peanut protein content.
a. Measure 2 teaspoons of peanut flour or peanut but-
ter powder.
b. Add approximately 2 tablespoons (6–7 teaspoons) of 
pureed tolerated fruit or vegetables to flour or pow-
der. You can increase or reduce the volume of puree 
to achieve desired consistency.
Appendix E. For health care providers: In‑office 
supervised feeding protocol using 2 g of peanut 
protein
General instructions
1. These recommendations are reserved for an infant 
defined in guideline 1 as one with severe eczema, egg 
allergy, or both and with negative or minimally reac-
tive (1 to 2 mm) SPT responses and/or peanut sIgE 
levels of less than 0.35 kUA/L. They also may apply 
to the infant with a 3 to 7 mm SPT response if the 
specialist health care provider decides to conduct 
a supervised feeding in the office (as opposed to a 
graded OFC in a specialized facility [see Fig. 1]).
 
These recommendations can also be followed for 
infants with mild-to-moderate eczema, as defined in 
guideline 2, when caregivers and health care provid-
ers may desire an in-office supervised feeding.
2. Proceed only if the infant shows no evidence of any 
concomitant illness, such as an upper respiratory 
tract infection.
a. 
Start with a small portion of the initial peanut 
serving, such as the tip of a teaspoon of peanut 
butter puree/softened Bamba.
b. 
Wait 10 minutes; if there is no sign of reac-
tion after this small portion is given, continue 
gradually feeding the remaining serving of pea-
nut-containing food (see options below) at the 
infant’s typical feeding pace.
c. 
Observe the infant for 30 minutes after 2 g of 
peanut protein ingestion for signs/symptoms of 
an allergic reaction.
Four recipe options, each containing approximately 2 g 
of peanut protein
Note: Teaspoons and tablespoons are US meas-
ures (5 and 15 mL for a level teaspoon or tablespoon, 
respectively).
Option 1: Bamba (Osem, Israel), 21 pieces (approxi-
mately 2 g of peanut protein)
Note: Bamba is named because it was the product used 
in the LEAP trial and therefore has known peanut pro-
tein content and proven efficacy and safety. Other peanut 
puffs products with similar peanut protein content can 
be substituted for Bamba.
a. For infants less than 7 months of age, soften the 
Bamba with 4 to 6 teaspoons of water.
b. For older infants who can manage dissolvable tex-
tures, unmodified Bamba can be fed. If dissolvable 
textures are not yet part of the infant’s diet, softened 
Bamba should be provided.
Option 2: Thinned smooth peanut butter, 2 teaspoons 
(9–10 g of peanut butter; approximately 2 g of peanut 
protein)
a. Measure 2 teaspoons of peanut butter and slowly add 
2 to 3 teaspoons hot water.
b. Stir until peanut butter is dissolved and thinned and 
well blended.
c. Let cool.
 Page 15 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
d. Increase water amount if necessary (or add previ-
ously tolerated infant cereal) to achieve consistency 
comfortable for the infant.
Option 3: Smooth peanut butter puree, 2 teaspoons 
(9–10 g of peanut butter; approximately 2 g of peanut 
protein)
a. Measure 2 teaspoons of peanut butter.
b. Add 2 to 3 tablespoons of previously tolerated pureed 
fruit or vegetables to peanut butter. You can increase 
or reduce volume of puree to achieve desired consist-
ency.
Option 4: Peanut flour and peanut butter powder, 2 tea-
spoons (4 g of peanut flour or 4 g of peanut butter pow-
der; approximately 2 g of peanut protein)
Note: Peanut flour and peanut butter powder are 2 dis-
tinct products that can be interchanged because they 
have, on average, a similar peanut protein content.
a. Measure 2 teaspoons of peanut flour or peanut but-
ter powder.
b. Add approximately 2 tablespoons (6–7 teaspoons) of 
pureed tolerated fruit or vegetables to flour or pow-
der. You can increase or reduce the volume of puree 
to achieve desired consistency.
Appendix F. Peanut protein in peanut‑containing 
foods
If the decision is made to introduce dietary peanut to 
the infant’s diet, the total amount of peanut protein to be 
regularly consumed per week should be approximately 6 
to 7 g over 3 or more feedings. In the LEAP trial, at evalu-
ations conducted at 12 and 24 months of age, 75% of chil-
dren in the peanut consumption group reported eating at 
least this amount of peanut.
Be aware of choking risks
  
•
Whole nuts should not be given to children less than 
5 years of age.
  
•
Peanut butter directly from a spoon or in lumps/dol-
lops should not be given to children less than 4 years 
of age.
If, after a week or more eating peanut, your infant or 
child displays mild allergic symptoms within 2 h of eating 
peanut, you should contact your health care provider.
Typical peanut-containing foods, their peanut pro-
tein content, and feeding tips for infants are provided 
in Table 2, and their nutritional content is found in 
Table 3.
Appendix G. Graded OFC protocol
From “Conducting an oral food challenge to peanut in an 
infant: a work group report” [30].
General instructions
1. A graded OFC should be performed only by a spe-
cialist with the training and experience to (1) per-
form and interpret skin prick testing and OFCs and 
(2) know and manage their risks. Such persons must 
have appropriate medications and equipment on site. 
2. Four peanut preparations are provided:
a. 
Option 1: Smooth peanut butter mixed with 
either a previously tolerated pureed fruit or veg-
etable.
b. 
Option 2: Smooth peanut butter dissolved care-
fully with hot water and cooled.
c. 
Option 3: Peanut flour mixed with either a previ-
ously tolerated pureed fruit or vegetable. Peanut 
butter powder can be used instead of the peanut 
flour.
d. 
Option 4: Bamba peanut snack dissolved in 
hot water and cooled or even as a solid (ie, as a 
stick).
 
Note: Bamba (Osem, Israel) is named because 
it was the product used in the LEAP trial and 
therefore has known peanut protein content and 
proven efficacy and safety. Other peanut puff
 
products with similar peanut protein content 
can be substituted for Bamba.
3. The peanut protein content of the graded OFC pro-
tocol is identical for all peanut preparations provided 
below, except that the volume of food ingested per 
dose is different. The protocol consists of 5 incre-
mental doses, given 15 to 20 min apart, with a cumu-
lative peanut protein total of approximately 4 g per 
the 3.9 g total in the LEAP trial.
4. Refer to Table 4 and direct parents to discontinue 
specific medications for the prescribed amount of 
time before the graded OFC. Note that certain medi-
cations are allowed.
Be prepared in case of a severe reaction (see Table 5)
Note: Teaspoons and tablespoons are US measures (5 and 
15 mL for a level teaspoon or tablespoon, respectively).
Protocol instructions for options 1, 2, and 3 (see Tables 6, 
7, and 8)
1. Measure peanut butter, peanut flour, or peanut butter 
powder for dose 1.
2. Prepare the first dose:
 Page 16 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Table 2 Typical peanut‑containing foods, their peanut protein content, and feeding tips for infants
Bamba (Osem, Israel) is named because it was the product used in the LEAP trial and therefore has known peanut protein content and proven efficacy and safety. Other peanut puff products with similar peanut protein 
content can be substituted for Bamba
Teaspoons and tablespoons are US measures (5 and 15 mL for a level teaspoon or tablespoon, respectively)
Bamba
Peanut butter
Peanuts
Peanut flour or peanut butter 
powder
Amount containing approximately 2 g 
of peanut protein
17 g
or
% of a 28‑g (1‑oz) bag
or
21 sticks
9–10 g
or
2 teaspoons
8 g
or
~10 whole peanuts (2½ teaspoons of 
grounded peanuts)
4 g
or
2 teaspoons
Typical serving size
1 bag (28 g)
Spread on a slice of bread or toast (16 g) 2½ teaspoons of ground peanuts (8 g)
No typical serving size
Peanut protein per typical serving
3.2 g
3.4 g
2.1 g
No typical serving size
Feeding tips
For a smooth texture, mix with warm 
water (then let cool) or breast milk or 
infant formula and mash well
Pureed or mashed fruit or vegetables 
can be added
Older children can be offered sticks of 
Bamba
For a smooth texture, mix with warm 
water (then let cool) or breast milk or 
infant formula
For older children, mix with pureed or 
mashed fruit or vegetables or any 
suitable family foods, such as yogurt 
or mashed potatoes
Use blender to create a powder or 
paste
2‑2½ teaspoons of ground peanuts can 
be added to a portion of yogurt or 
pureed fruit or savory meal
Mix with yogurt or apple sauce
 Page 17 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
a. 
If using option 1, add previously tolerated 
pureed fruit or vegetable to measured dose 1 
peanut butter and stir until well blended. You 
can increase or reduce volume of puree to 
achieve desired consistency. Note: Increasing 
the volume may increase the difficulty of getting 
through the entire protocol with a young baby.
b. 
If using option 2, slowly add hot water to meas-
ured dose 1 peanut butter and stir until peanut 
butter is dissolved, thinned, and well blended. 
Let the mixture cool. You can increase water vol-
ume (or add previously tolerated infant cereal) 
to achieve desired consistency.
c. 
If using option 3, add previously tolerated 
pureed fruit or vegetable to measured dose 1 
peanut flour or peanut butter powder and stir 
until well blended. You can increase or reduce 
volume of puree to achieve desired consistency. 
Note: Increasing the volume may increase the 
difficulty of getting through entire protocol with 
a young baby.
3. Label dose 1.
4. Repeat steps 1 to 3 for the remaining doses 2 through 
5, labeling each dose appropriately and before pro-
ceeding to the preparation of the next dose.
Table 3 Nutritional content of peanut‑containing foods
a The nutritional content of peanut puff products (other than Bamba) can be obtained from their manufacturers
Per approximately 2 g of peanut 
protein
Bambaa (17 g)
Peanut butter (10 g)
Peanuts (8 g)
Peanut butter powder (4 g)
Peanut flour (4 g)
kcal
93
59
45
15
13
Sugar (g)
0.4
0.65
0.38
0.4
0.33
Salt (mg)
68
48
1
31
7
Fat (g)
6.1
4.95
3.94
0.49
0.02
Table 4 Medication 
discontinuation 
considerations 
before OFC
Medications to be discontinued
Last dose before OFC
Cetirizine
5 days
Cyproheptadine
10 days
Diphenhydramine
3 days
Fexofenadine
3 days
Loratadine
7 days
Short‑acting bronchodilator (eg, albuterol)
8 h
Medications that can be continued
 Antihistamine eye drops
 Inhaled/intranasal corticosteroids
 Topical (cutaneous) steroids
 Topical (cutaneous) pimecrolimus, tacrolimus
Table 5 Emergency medications for a severe reaction during an office‑based infant OFC
IM, intramuscular; MDI, metered-dose inhaler
Medication
Dose
First‑line treatment
Epinephrine (1:1000 concentration)
0.01 mg/kg IM in the mid‑outer thigh in health care settings
or
0.15 mg of autoinjector IM in the mid‑outer thigh in community settings
Epinephrine doses may need to be repeated every 5‑15 min
Adjunctive treat‑
ment
Albuterol nebulization
0.15 mg/kg every 20 min × 3 doses (minimum of 2.5 mg per dose) over 
5‑15 min
Albuterol MDI inhalation
2 puffs, 90 μg per puff, with face mask
Oxygen
8‑10 L/min through a face mask
Diphenhydramine
1.25 mg/kg administered orally
Cetirizine
2.5 mg administered orally
Normal saline (0.9% isotonic solution) or lactated 
ringers
20 ml/kg per dose administered over 5 min intravenously
Steroids
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg administered orally
or
Solu‑Medrol 1 mg/kg administered intravenously
 Page 18 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
Table 6 Option 1: Measures for smooth peanut butter puree
a Amounts (volume) of peanut butter measured as teaspoons are approximate measures to keep the dosing as practical as possible
b Peanut protein content is calculated on the average amount of protein for a range of butters using “Report: 16167, USDA Commodity, Peanut Butter, smooth,” from 
the USDA Nutrition Database (http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/foods)
c Three teaspoons = 1 tablespoon
Dose
Peanut butter volumea
Equivalent weight of peanut butter (g 
[peanut protein content in grams])b
Pureed fruit or vegetable volume
Total volume
1
1/8 teaspoon
0.67 (0.15)
1/2 teaspoon
5/8 teaspoon
2
1/4 teaspoon
1.33 (0.29)
3/4 teaspoon
1 teaspoons
3
1/2 teaspoon
2.67 (0.59)
1 teaspoons
1 1/2 teaspoons
4
1 teaspoon
5.33 (1.17)
2 teaspoons
3 teaspoonsc
5
1 1/2 teaspoons
8 (1.6)
4 teaspoons
5 1/2 teaspoons
Total protein: 3.96 g
Table 7 Option 2: Measures for smooth thinned peanut butter
a Amounts (volume) of peanut butter measured as teaspoons are approximate measures to keep the dosing as practical as possible
b Peanut protein content is calculated on the average amount of protein for a range of butters using “Report: 16167, USDA Commodity, Peanut Butter, smooth,” from 
the USDA Nutrition Database (http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/foods)
c Three teaspoons = 1 tablespoon
Dose
Peanut butter 
volumea
Equivalent weight peanut butter (g 
[peanut protein content in grams])b
Volume of hot water
Total volume
1
1/8 teaspoon
0.67 (0.15)
1/8 teaspoon
1/4 teaspoon
2
1/4 teaspoon
1.33 (0.29)
1/4 teaspoon
1/2 teaspoon
3
1/2 teaspoon
2.67 (0.59)
1/2 teaspoon
1 teaspoon
4
1 teaspoon
5.33 (1.17)
1 teaspoon
2 teaspoons
5
1 1/2 teaspoons
8 (1.76)
1 1/2 teaspoons
3 teaspoonsc
Total protein: 3.96 g
Table 8 Option 3: Measures for peanut flour or peanut butter powder
a Amounts (volume) of peanut flour or peanut butter powder measured as teaspoons are approximate measures to keep the dosing as practical as possible
b Information regarding peanut powder and flour reflects averages obtained from the producers. Most brands of peanut flour/peanut butter powder are 
approximately 50% peanut protein by weight. However, weight can vary based on the fat content and also the brand chosen. Therefore a weight measurement can be 
more accurate than household measurements
c Three teaspoons = 1 tablespoon
d Six teaspoons = 2 tablespoons
Dose
Peanut flour or peanut 
butter powder volumea
Equivalent weight peanut flour or 
peanut butter powderb (g [peanut 
protein content in grams])
Pureed fruit or vegetable volume
Total volume
1
1/8 teaspoon
0.25 (0.13)
1/2 teaspoon
3/4 teaspoon
2
1/4 teaspoon
0.5 (0.25)
1 teaspoon
1 1/4 tea‑
spoons
3
1/2 teaspoon
1.0 (0.5)
2 teaspoons
2 1/2 tea‑
spoons
4
1 teaspoon
2.0 (1.0)
3 teaspoonsc
4 teaspoons
5
2 teaspoons
4.0 (2.0)
6 teaspoonsd
8 teaspoons
Total protein: 3.88 g
 Page 19 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
5. Feed dose 1 to infant and observe for symptoms of 
reactivity for 15 to 20 min.
6. If no symptoms appear, repeat with dose 2 and 
observe for 15 to 20 min.
7. Continue in this manner with doses 3, 4, and 5.
  Protocol instructions for option 4 (see Table 9)
1. Count Bamba sticks for dose 1.
2. Prepare the first dose by slowly adding hot water to 
measured Bamba and stirring until Bamba is dis-
solved, thinned, well blended, and cooled. You can 
increase water volume to achieve desired consist-
ency. Note: Increasing the volume may increase the 
difficulty of getting through the entire protocol with a 
young baby.
3. Label dose 1.
4. Repeat steps 1 to 3 for the remaining doses 2 through 
5, labeling each dose appropriately and before pro-
ceeding to the preparation of the next dose.
5. Feed dose 1 to the infant and observe for symptoms 
of reactivity for 15 to 20 min.
6. If no symptoms appear, repeat with dose 2 and 
observe for 15 to 20 min.
7. Continue in this manner with doses 3, 4, and 5.
Received: 8 December 2016   Accepted: 13 December 2016
References
 1. 
Sicherer SH, Muñoz‑Furlong A, Burks AW, Sampson HA. Prevalence of 
peanut and tree nut allergy in the US determined by a random digit dial 
telephone survey. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;103:559–62.
 2. 
Gupta RS, Springston EE, Warrier MR, Smith B, Kumar R, Pongracic J, et al. 
The prevalence, severity, and distribution of childhood food allergy in the 
United States. Pediatrics. 2011;128:e9–17.
 3. 
Bunyavanich S, Rifas‑Shiman SL, Platts‑Mills TA, Workman L, Sordillo JE, 
Gillman MW, et al. Peanut allergy prevalence among school‑age children 
in a US cohort not selected for any disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2014;134:753–5.
 4. 
Bock SA, Muñoz‑Furlong A, Sampson HA. Fatalities due to anaphylactic 
reactions to foods. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;107:191–3.
 5. 
Bock SA, Muñoz‑Furlong A, Sampson HA. Further fatalities caused by 
anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001–2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2007;119:1016–8.
 6. 
Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food allergy in the 
United States: report of the NIAID‑sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2010;126(suppl):S1–58.
 7. 
Committee on toxicity of chemicals in food, consumer products and the 
environment. Peanut allergy. 1998. http://cot.food.gov.uk/sites/default/ 
files/cot/cotstatement200807peanut.pdf. Accessed July 2015.
 8. 
American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on nutrition. Hypoallergenic 
infant formulas. Pediatrics. 2000;106:346–9.
 9. 
Greer FR, Sicherer SH, Burks AW. American Academy of Pediatrics Com‑
mittee on Nutrition; American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Allergy 
and Immunology. Effects of early nutritional interventions on the devel‑
opment of atopic disease in infants and children: the role of maternal 
dietary restriction, breastfeeding, timing of introduction of solid foods, 
and hydrolyzed formulas. Pediatrics. 2008;121:183–91.
 10. Chan ES, Cummings C. Canadian Paediatric Society, Community Pae‑
diatrics Committee and Allergy Section. Dietary exposures and allergy 
prevention in high‑risk infants: a joint statement with the Canadian 
Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. Paediatr Child Health. 
2013;18:545–54.
 11. Fleischer DM, Spergel JM, Assa’ad AH, Pongracic JA. Primary prevention of 
allergic disease through nutritional interventions. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
Pract. 2013;1:29–36.
 12. Muraro A, Halken S, Arshad SH, Beyer K, Dubois AE, Du Toit G, et al. EAACI 
food allergy and anaphylaxis guidelines. Primary prevention of food 
allergy. Allergy. 2014;69:590–601.
 13. Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Bahnson HT, Radulovic S, Santos AF, et al. 
Randomized trial of peanut consumption in infants at risk for peanut 
allergy. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:803–13.
 14. Du Toit G, Katz Y, Sasieni P, Mesher D, Maleki SJ, Fisher HR, et al. Early 
consumption of peanuts in infancy is associated with a low prevalence of 
peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;122:984–91.
 15. Fleischer DM, Sicherer S, Greenhawt M, Campbell D, Chan E, Muraro 
A, et al. Consensus communication on early peanut introduction and 
prevention of peanut allergy in high‑risk infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2015;136:258–61.
 16. Du Toit G, Sayre PH, Roberts G, Sever ML, Lawson K, Bahnson HT, et al. 
Effect of avoidance on peanut allergy after early peanut consumption. N 
Engl J Med. 2016;374:1435–43.
 17. Perkin MR, Logan K, Tseng A, Raji B, Ayis S, Peacock J, et al. Randomized 
trial of introduction of allergenic foods in breast‑fed infants. N Engl J Med. 
2016;374:1733–43.
 18. GRADE working group [Internet 2000‑present]. http://www.gradework‑
inggroup.org. Accessed July 2015.
Table 9 Option 4: Bamba peanut snack (Osem, Israel)
Other peanut puffs products with equivalent peanut protein content can be substituted for Bamba
a The amount of Bamba sticks is an approximate measure looking at a range of Bamba products. Bamba snacks from different parts of the world have a varied peanut 
protein content [30]. The peanut protein content of Bamba was calculated according to the publication by Du Toit et al. [13]
Dose
Bamba, no. of sticks
Equivalent weight (peanut protein 
content [g])a
Volume of hot water (approximate, will 
need to be adjusted for each child)
Approximate 
final volume
1
1 stick
0.81 (0.1)
½ teaspoon
¾ teaspoons
2
3 sticks
2.43 (0.3)
1 teaspoon
1½ teaspoons
3
5 sticks
4.05 (0.5)
1½ teaspoons
2¼ teaspoons
4
10 sticks
8.1 (1.0)
3 teaspoons
4 teaspoons
5
21 sticks
17.01 (2.0)
6 teaspoons
7½ teaspoons
Total protein: 3.9 g
 Page 20 of 20
Togias et al. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol  (2017) 13:1 
•  We accept pre-submission inquiries 
•  Our selector tool helps you to find the most relevant journal
•  We provide round the clock customer support 
•  Convenient online submission
•  Thorough peer review
•  Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services 
•  Maximum visibility for your research
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central 
and we will help you at every step:
 19. Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, Brozek J, Glasziou P, Jaeschke R, Vist GE, 
et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations for 
diagnostic tests and strategies. BMJ. 2008;336:1106–10.
 20. Brozek JL, Akl EA, Alonso‑Coello P, Lang D, Jaeschke R, Williams JW, et al. 
Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations in clinical 
practice guidelines. Part 1 of 3. An overview of the GRADE approach and 
grading quality of evidence about interventions. Allergy. 2009;64:669–77.
 21. Koplin JJ, Peters RL, Dharmage SC, Gurrin L, Tang MLK, Ponsonby AL, 
et al. Understanding the feasibility and implications of implementing 
early peanut introduction for prevention of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2016;138(1131–41):e2.
 22. Tversky JR, Chelladurai Y, McGready J, Hamilton RG. Performance and pain 
tolerability of current diagnostic allergy skin prick test devices. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol Pract. 2015;3:888–93.
 23. Peters RL, Allen KJ, Dharmage SC, Tang ML, Koplin JJ, Ponsonby AL, et al. 
Skin prick test responses and allergen‑specific IgE levels as predictors 
of peanut, egg, and sesame allergy in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2013;132:874–80.
 24. Du Toit G, Tsakok T, Lack S, Lack G. Prevention of food allergy. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2016;137:998–1010.
 25. American Academy of Pediatrics. Breastfeeding and the use of human 
milk. Policy statement. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e827–41.
 26. The World Health Organization’s infant feeding recommendation. http://
www.who.int/nutrition/topics/infantfeeding_recommendation/ en/
index.html. Accessed 1 May 2016.
 27. Feeney M, Du Toit G, Roberts R, Sayre PH, Lawson K, Bahnson HT, et al. 
Impact of peanut consumption in the LEAP study: feasibility, growth and 
nutrition. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;138:1108–18.
 28. Du Toit G, Roberts G, Sayre PH, Plaut M, Bahnson HT, et al. Identify‑
ing infants at high risk of peanut allergy: the Learning Early About 
Peanut Allergy (LEAP) screening study. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2013;131(135–43):e1–12.
 29. Consensus Report of the European Task Force on Atopic Dermatitis. 
Severity scoring of atopic dermatitis: the SCORAD index. Dermatology. 
1993;186:23–31.
 30. Bird JA, Groetch M, Allen KJ, Bock SA, Leonard A, Nowak‑Wegrzyn AH, 
et al. Conducting an oral food challenge to peanut in an infant: a work 
group report. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2016 [In press].
