 Surgery for Cancer: A Trigger for Metastases
Samer Tohme, MD, Richard L Simmons, MD, and Allan Tsung, MD*
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA
Abstract
Surgery is a crucial intervention and provides a chance of cure for patients with cancer. The 
perioperative period is characterized by an increased risk for accelerated growth of 
micrometastatic disease and increased formation of new metastatic foci. The true impact for 
cancer patients remains unclear. This review summarizes the often fragmentary clinical and 
experimental evidence supporting the role of surgery and inflammation as potential triggers for 
disease recurrence. Surgery induces increased shedding of cancer cells into the circulation, 
suppresses anti-tumor immunity allowing circulating cells to survive, upregulates adhesion 
molecules in target organs, recruits immune cells capable of entrapping tumor cells and induces 
changes in the target tissue and in the cancer cells themselves to enhance migration and invasion to 
establish at the target site. Surgical trauma induces local and systemic inflammatory responses that 
can also contribute to the accelerated growth of residual and micrometastatic disease. Furthermore, 
we address the role of perioperative factors including anesthesia, transfusions, hypothermia, and 
postoperative complications as probable deleterious factors contributing to early recurrence. 
Through the admittedly limited understanding of these processes, we will attempt to provide 
suggestions for potential new therapeutic approaches to target the protumorigenic perioperative 
window and ultimately improve long term oncologic outcomes.
More than a quarter of people worldwide will ultimately be affected by cancer (1) and 
surgical removal remains a mainstay in the cure and control of most solid cancers. Although 
surgical excision of primary or even metastatic tumors can save or extend life, it has long 
been acknowledged that the surgical insult itself may precipitate or accelerate tumor 
recurrence. The notion that tumor removal may enhance tumor recurrence was cautioned at 
the turn of the 20th century by Paget and Halsted, who found that patients who underwent 
resection of their cancer did not survive as long as those managed expectantly (2). Such 
reports had generally been dismissed as anecdotal until more recent evidence demonstrated 
that the surgical operation may generate a permissive environment for tumor growth. Several 
groups have recently revived the idea that addressing the mechanisms involved in the 
protumorigenic perioperative period may provide insight into ways to improve cancer 
outcomes (3, 4).
Trauma and inflammation have long been associated with enhanced tumor growth after 
being first described by Virchow (4). The propensity of circulating tumor cells in 
*Corresponding author: Allan Tsung M.D., Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of 
Pittsburgh, 3471 Fifth Avenue, Suite 300, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, (tel) 412-692-2001, (facsimile) 412-692-2002, tsunga@upmc.edu. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Res. 2017 April 01; 77(7): 1548–1552. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-1536.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experimental animals to metastasize to sites of physical or chemical injury was repeatedly 
shown by mid-20th century investigators (5). The innate immune system is activated both 
systemically and locally as a result of tissue trauma precipitating a complex multifaceted 
inflammatory response. Of course, such inflammation is fundamental to the elimination of 
potential pathogens and tissue healing, but these local and systemic inflammatory alterations 
seem to provide fertile soil for both capture of circulating tumor cells and their subsequent 
growth. It has been demonstrated in animal models that sites of injury are a preferential area 
for tumor growth and that surgical trauma enhances loco-regional metastases (5). Several 
experimental trials clearly demonstrate that tumor removal is followed by accelerated tumor 
growth both locally and at distant sites (4, 6). Moreover, we recently demonstrated that liver 
metastatic burden is significantly increased after surgical stress where surgery induced both 
formation of new metastatic foci as well as locoregional acceleration of tumor growth (7).
Despite overwhelming evidence from experimental studies, clinical studies have not been as 
persuasive, and the concept is still subject to debate and the true impact it has on cancer 
patients remains unclear. Much reliance has been placed on anecdotal evidence describing 
the acceleration of growth of peritoneal metastatic deposits after laparotomy (8). In addition, 
some studies suggested that open oncological resections were associated with shorter disease 
free survival compared to minimally invasive resections, a concept that is strongly 
corroborated by experimental data (8). Again, the findings that different operative 
approaches influence the oncological outcomes is strong evidence that the tissue trauma 
inflicted during tumor removal can influence the subsequent growth of residual neoplastic 
disease.
In this review, we will briefly summarize the growing evidence that support the concept that 
surgery to eliminate the cancer can actually serve to increase the establishment of new 
metastases and accelerate growth of residual and micrometastatic disease. In addition, we 
will review the perioperative factors that may enhance postoperative tumor growth and the 
therapeutic implications that might be useful in counteracting this phenomenon (Figure 1).
Surgery induces the formation of new metastatic disease
In order for a cancer cell to successfully metastasize to a distant organ, a complex cascade of 
events need to occur (9). A cancer cell must reach the circulation, survive the host defensive 
mechanisms, get entrapped at a regional or distant site, and finally invade and prosper within 
the new metastatic site. Patients with a primary cancer routinely have circulating tumor cells. 
But metastasis in general is an inefficient process and the majority of cancer cells reaching 
the circulation are quickly destroyed (9). However, all tissue trauma, including the sterile 
dissection carried out by surgeons, elicits a cascade of local and systemic cellular and 
humoral inflammation which has the potential to capture the cancer cell and support its 
survival and metastatic growth.
The unavoidable damage to the patients’ tissues during excision and manipulation of the 
tumor being resected and its vasculature have been shown to result in shedding of tumor 
cells into the blood and lymphatic circulation (10). Handling of the tumor can result in at 
least a tenfold rise in circulating tumor cells (11). Furthermore, the level of circulating 
Tohme et al.
Page 2
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cancer cells before and during surgery have been shown to be a strong predictor of 
recurrence (12). In addition to the dissemination of circulating cells, several postoperative 
changes help the cancer cells survive in the circulation and increase the likelihood for distant 
implantation. Macrophages and natural killer (NK) cells play a critical role in the 
elimination of circulating cancer cells and the prevention of metastases formation (13, 14). 
In experimental models, the increase in tumor growth after surgery was accompanied by 
diminished NK cytotoxicity and impairment of macrophage function which was proportional 
to the extent and magnitude of surgery (13, 14).
Additionally, a number of studies support the hypothesis that the acute inflammatory 
response to surgery favors the capture of tumor cells in foreign locations. For example, pro-
inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF-α can stimulate the adhesion of the viable 
circulating cancer cells (6). Surgery induces changes in mesothelial cells in the peritoneal 
cavity that causes them to retract and detach thereby exposing the underlying extracellular 
matrix with which cancer cell can interact (15). Indeed, inhibiting the tumor cell-ECM 
interactions by blocking α2 integrins significantly decreased the surgical induced 
acceleration of liver metastases in mice (16).
The neutrophil influx that follows surgical trauma seems to further promote tumor capture 
and growth (7). Neutrophils react to injured tissue by forming neutrophil extracellular traps 
(NETs) consisting of extracellular extrusion of web-like DNA that can ensnare circulating 
tumor cells. In addition to their mechanical function, the DNA strands are studded with a 
variety of proinflammatory molecules which are crucial to the capture of tumor cells and 
augmented growth of metastases in surgically manipulated livers (7). The inhibition of NETs 
after surgery powerfully inhibit the previously observed accelerated development of new 
metastatic disease. In humans undergoing resection of hepatic colorectal metastases, the 
greater the serum evidence of NET formation the higher the risk of recurrence (7). Thus both 
experimental and clinical evidence provides support for the idea that the environment 
generated after tumor removal can affect long-term cancer-related outcomes.
The liver is peculiarly susceptible to metastases from primary gastrointestinal solid tumors. 
Among the many potential reasons is that surgical trauma can impair the integrity of liver 
endothelial cells with reduced expression of tight junction proteins to facilitate cancer cell 
migration into the liver parenchyma (6). In addition, the catecholamine and prostaglandins 
released and the NETs formed in response to the surgical trauma can promote the metastatic 
potential of the adhered circulating cancer cells by increasing tumor cell migration and 
invasion into the distant organ (3, 7). Surgical trauma thus synchronizes the increased 
numbers of circulating cancer cells, the suppressed anti-tumor immunity, and the pro-
metastatic environment of the targeted organs within the hepatic gastrointestinal watershed.
Surgery promotes the growth of micrometastatic and residual disease
Metastatic cancer cells may leave the primary tumor early during its development and form 
clinically undetectable micrometastases at distant sites. These islands of clinically 
undetectable micrometastases can remain in a dormant equilibrium between cellular 
proliferation and apoptosis (17). The local and systemic inflammatory events associated with 
Tohme et al.
Page 3
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 surgical trauma can unpredictably unleash their potential for growth (17). In addition to the 
soluble factors which facilitate distant tumor growth after surgery, the removal of the 
primary tumor itself can release the inhibitory control exerted by primary tumors which act 
keep the growth of dormant metastases in check. This ability of the primary tumor to retard 
the growth of metastatic foci is known as concomitant tumor resistance and the topic has 
been reviewed comprehensively by Ruggiero (18). Primary tumors secrete both 
proangiogenic factors and inhibitors of angiogenesis. In the microenvironment of the 
primary tumor, the inducers overcome the effects of the inhibitors because the new vessels 
essential for progressive tumor growth are present. However, when shed into the circulation, 
levels of the more labile inducers fall off rapidly, whereas levels of the more stable inhibitors 
create a systemic antiangiogenic environment that prevents small distant micrometastases 
from inducing neovascularization and growing. As a result, these micrometastases remain 
small and dormant. Upon removal of the primary tumor, inhibitor levels fall and the 
previously dormant metastases expand with renewed vigor. Thus, tumor extirpation can 
result in turning on the angiogenic switch resulting in decrease in the systemic levels of 
antiangiogenic factors such as angiostatin, endostatin and thrombospondin (3). Thus the 
reduced expression of antiangiogenic factors, added to the surgery-induced increases in the 
levels of growth factors and of proangiogenic compounds, might enable undetectable 
dormant micrometastatic disease to undergo the angiogenic switch and quickly grow (3, 7, 
18).
Surgery may also prompt immune escape by triggering postoperative downregulation of the 
adaptive immune response. For example, the overall level of circulating dendritic cells (DC), 
essential for immune surveillance, decrease following tumor removal. Experimental data 
have shown that supplementing tumor bearing mice with dendritic cell vaccine significantly 
attenuates the effect of surgery on the growth of existing tumor (8). Moreover, surgery 
induces impaired T helper 1 (Th1) functions in humans (19). Impairment of Th1 responses, 
normally an essential step in specific cellular immunity and proliferation of cytotoxic T 
cells, might hamper antitumor cytotoxicity as well. Surgery induced immunosuppression 
persists for weeks and is longer after laparotomy compared to laparoscopy (20). 
Furthermore, surgery induces neutrophil recruitment and NET formation at the site of injury 
that can persist for weeks and induce growth of residual disease by activating Stat3 and 
NFκB pathways (7). Thus the perioperative period may represent an immunological gap 
during which the extracellular milieu is more permissive to residual tumor growth.
Perioperative factors affecting cancer recurrence
In addition to the previously mentioned changes directly related to surgical treatment, there 
are countless perioperative variables that can alter the oncological outcomes. These include 
anesthetic management, blood transfusion, hypothermia, and the evolution of postoperative 
complications. Experimental data have shown that anesthetic agents can directly influence 
the tumor micro-environment and growth (3). Similarly, the use of opioids to control pain 
have been shown in animals and humans to activate stress responses, suppress cell mediated 
immunity, increase angiogenesis, and promote the progression of metastatic disease (3). 
Evidence from clinical observational studies suggests that both general anesthesia and 
Tohme et al.
Page 4
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 opioid analgesics increase recurrence rates (3) and if confirmed by more rigorous trials, 
might encourage changes in anesthetic and pain management.
Blood transfusions are often required in the perioperative period. It has been repeatedly 
shown that transfusion is independently associated with a significant increase in mortality in 
several types of cancer (3). Transfusion of blood products can cause immunosuppression, 
increase in prostaglandin production and suppression of NK cell activity (3). These negative 
effects are magnified when more units are transfused, the use of whole blood rather than 
packed red blood cells, and with the transfusion of units subjected to longer storage (3).
Despite efforts to maintain body temperature during prolonged operations, systemic 
hypothermia is commonly encountered and even a few degrees of perioperative hypothermia 
can have immunosuppressive consequences (21). Hypothermia can also cause abnormalities 
in the platelet function and in the coagulation cascade and thus may potentially increase the 
requirements for blood transfusion (22). In rodent models, hypothermia causes significant 
increase in tumor growth and is also associated with suppressed NK function and increased 
susceptibility to developing new metastatic disease.
Postsurgical infections in patients with cancer have been associated with adverse oncologic 
outcomes independent of the morbidity associated with the infectious insult (23). This 
phenomenon has been observed across a broad range of malignancies, including lung, 
esophageal, breast, ovarian, and colorectal cancer; severe postoperative infectious 
complications, are significantly associated with an increased rate of death from metastatic 
disease (24). In mice models, sepsis is a strong stimulus for formation of NETs that promote 
early adhesion of tumor cells to distant organ sites and facilitate metastatic disease 
progression (25). Furthermore, invasive postoperative infections and translocation of 
bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract into systemic circulation can reduce cancer cell 
apoptosis and enhance resistance to chemotherapeutic agents (8). LPS is also proangiogenic 
and a potent proinflammatory mediator that could contribute to tumor growth (26).
Perioperative Therapeutic Options
There is a wealth of clinical and experimental data supporting the concept that tumor growth 
may accelerate in the immediate perioperative period, potentially offering a window of 
opportunity in which to alter oncological outcomes. The administration of chemotherapy 
immediately postoperatively has been previously studied. A single short dose of 
cyclophosphamide or anthracycline-based agents administered during the postoperative 
period significantly enhanced long term survival in breast cancer (8, 27). However, 
immediate postoperative chemotherapy has been virtually abandoned for fear of its adverse 
impact on infection control and wound healing. In addition, similar to surgery-induced 
tumor progression, chemotherapy and other cancer-directed treatments themselves can 
induce a cascade of host events to support tumor growth and spread. The above issue has 
been comprehensively reviewed by Ebos et al (28).
Aside from perioperative chemotherapy, little study has been devoted to favorably altering 
the subsequent course of occult metastatic cancer in the perioperative period. 
Tohme et al.
Page 5
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neuroendocrine mediators are significantly elevated as a response to surgery and can 
directly stimulate prometastatic capacities of cancer cells and suppress cell mediated 
immunity (3). Reversing the neuroendocrine responses to surgical trauma has promise. 
Blocking the rise of catecholamines and prostaglandins in the perioperative period using 
betablockers or COX inhibitors may prove beneficial. There are a few randomized controlled 
trials and retrospective cohort studies that have studied the impact of perioperative treatment 
with COX inhibitors or beta blockers but the results are inconclusive (3, 29).
Several immunomodulatory approaches performed in animals and/or humans have shown 
promise to ameliorate the surgery-induced immunosuppression and restore antitumor 
cytotoxicity in the perioperative period. These include administration of interferon γ, IL-2, 
granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and the transfer of 
interleukin 1-generated lymphokine-activated killer cells (6). Tumor vaccine such as 
dendritic-cell vaccines are also currently being investigates as a potential strategy during this 
period (30). By providing an adequate adaptive immunity against the circulating tumors and 
micrometastatic disease, these strategies might overcome surgery-induced 
immunosuppression and potentially improve outcomes. Another promising approach derives 
from experimental studies that show that blocking the innate immune response notably 
neutrophils from forming NETs by administering DNAse can decrease metastases 
formation, presumably by decreasing entrapment of circulating cancer cells at metastatic 
sites (7, 25). This is supported by human data showing that increased NET formation in the 
immediate postoperative period is associated with a significant increase in cancer recurrence 
(7). Thus, the use of DNAse to inhibit NETs is another promising approach for potential 
clinical application perioperatively and clinical trials are warranted.
The local and systemic inflammatory response to tissue injury seems to underlie many 
aspects of the protumorigenic outcome for potentially curative surgical resections. 
Inflammation reflects a coordinated response of chemokines, cytokines, and inflammatory 
cells which has received much study. Less studied is the resolution of inflammation which is 
an active equally complex process. Specific mediators of importance in the resolution of 
inflammation have recently been discovered, and could conceivably prove useful during the 
perioperative period in the relative absence of microbial pathogens (31). Among the 
mediators are specialized lipid molecules such as lipoxins, resolvins, protectins and 
maresins; proteins and peptides in the annexin A1 family; prostaglandin E2 and activators of 
the Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR) family of nuclear hormone receptors 
(31). Together, with independent and overlapping mechanisms, these pro-resolution 
mediators act to downregulate proinflammatory agents derived from platelets, neutrophils 
and macrophages leading to a phenotypic switch toward return to a homeostatic normalcy. 
Pharmacological manipulation of these pro-resolution mechanisms may well prove useful in 
the reverse the pro-metastatic tendencies in the perioperative period.
As for modulating perioperative clinical factors, in view of the available experimental and 
clinical evidence detailed above, it may be more advantageous to use regional anesthesia and 
non-opioid analgesics when performing oncologic resections. Similarly, the reduction of 
blood transfusions, avoiding whole blood transfusions, using units with shorter shelf life, 
and maintaining normothermia during surgery and the immediate postoperative period may 
Tohme et al.
Page 6
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prevent the associated immunosuppression that may adversely affect oncologic outcomes. 
Interestingly, incorporating the increasingly implemented Enhanced Recovery after Surgery 
(ERAS) pathways when feasible may provide oncologic benefits as many of the guidelines 
of ERAS overlap with the principles mentioned above (32). ERAS pathways have also been 
shown to significantly decrease postoperative complications and thus has the potential, 
although remains unstudied, to improve long term oncologic outcomes.
Concluding remarks
Metastasis is a common cause of morbidity and mortality in cancer patients. Both 
experimental and clinical evidence lend support to the idea that surgery which is intended to 
be a curative option to remove and reduce tumor mass, can paradoxically also augment 
development of metastases. If one can address those factors in the peri-operative period 
which act to foster capture and promotion of metastases, the immediate postoperative period 
might become a unique window to control residual malignant cells.
Acknowledgments
Source of Funding: ST was supported by the National Institutes of Health (T32CA113263). The content is solely 
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of 
Health.
REFERENCES
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics. 2015. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015 
Jan-Feb;65(1):5–29. [PubMed: 25559415] 
2. Halsted WS. I. The Results of Radical Operations for the Cure of Carcinoma of the Breast. Annals 
of surgery. 1907 Jul; 46(1):1–19. [PubMed: 17861990] 
3. Horowitz M, Neeman E, Sharon E, Ben-Eliyahu S. Exploiting the critical perioperative period to 
improve long-term cancer outcomes. Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2015 Apr; 12(4):213–226.
4. Demicheli R, Retsky MW, Hrushesky WJ, Baum M, Gukas ID. The effects of surgery on tumor 
growth: a century of investigations. Annals of oncology : official journal of the European Society 
for Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2008 Nov; 19(11):1821–1828.
5. Murthy SM, Goldschmidt RA, Rao LN, Ammirati M, Buchmann T, Scanlon EF. The influence of 
surgical trauma on experimental metastasis. Cancer. 1989 Nov 15; 64(10):2035–2044. [PubMed: 
2804892] 
6. van der Bij GJ, Oosterling SJ, Beelen RH, Meijer S, Coffey JC, van Egmond M. The perioperative 
period is an underutilized window of therapeutic opportunity in patients with colorectal cancer. 
Annals of surgery. 2009 May; 249(5):727–734. [PubMed: 19387333] 
7. Tohme S, Yazdani HO, Al-Khafaji AB, Chidi AP, Lougharn P, Mowen K, et al. Neutrophil 
Extracellular Traps Promote the Development and Progression of Liver Metastases after Surgical 
Stress. Cancer research. 2016 Jan 12.
8. Coffey JC, Smith MJ, Wang JH, Bouchier-Hayes D, Cotter TG, Redmond HP. Cancer surgery: risks 
and opportunities. BioEssays : news and reviews in molecular, cellular and developmental biology. 
2006 Apr; 28(4):433–437.
9. Chambers AF, Groom AC, MacDonald IC. Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic 
sites. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002 Aug; 2(8):563–572. [PubMed: 12154349] 
10. Yamaguchi K, Takagi Y, Aoki S, Futamura M, Saji S. Significant detection of circulating cancer 
cells in the blood by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction during colorectal cancer 
resection. Annals of surgery. 2000 Jul; 232(1):58–65. [PubMed: 10862196] 
Tohme et al.
Page 7
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11. Liotta LA, Kleinerman J, Saidel GM. Quantitative relationships of intravascular tumor cells, tumor 
vessels, and pulmonary metastases following tumor implantation. Cancer research. 1974 May; 
34(5):997–1004. [PubMed: 4841969] 
12. Koch M, Kienle P, Hinz U, Antolovic D, Schmidt J, Herfarth C, et al. Detection of hematogenous 
tumor cell dissemination predicts tumor relapse in patients undergoing surgical resection of 
colorectal liver metastases. Annals of surgery. 2005 Feb; 241(2):199–205. [PubMed: 15650626] 
13. Rushfeldt C, Sveinbjornsson B, Seljelid R, Smedsrod B. Early events of hepatic metastasis 
formation in mice: role of Kupffer and NK-cells in natural and interferon-gamma-stimulated 
defense. The Journal of surgical research. 1999 Apr; 82(2):209–215. [PubMed: 10090831] 
14. Oosterling SJ, van der Bij GJ, Meijer GA, Tuk CW, van Garderen E, van Rooijen N, et al. 
Macrophages direct tumour histology and clinical outcome in a colon cancer model. The Journal 
of pathology. 2005 Oct; 207(2):147–155. [PubMed: 16104052] 
15. Oosterling SJ, van der Bij GJ, Bogels M, ten Raa S, Post JA, Meijer GA, et al. Anti-beta1 integrin 
antibody reduces surgery-induced adhesion of colon carcinoma cells to traumatized peritoneal 
surfaces. Annals of surgery. 2008 Jan; 247(1):85–94. [PubMed: 18156927] 
16. van der Bij GJ, Oosterling SJ, Bogels M, Bhoelan F, Fluitsma DM, Beelen RH, et al. Blocking 
alpha2 integrins on rat CC531s colon carcinoma cells prevents operation-induced augmentation of 
liver metastases outgrowth. Hepatology. 2008 Feb; 47(2):532–543. [PubMed: 18098323] 
17. Michelson S, Leith JT. Dormancy, regression, and recurrence: towards a unifying theory of tumor 
growth control. Journal of theoretical biology. 1994 Aug 21; 169(4):327–338. [PubMed: 7967626] 
18. Chiarella P, Bruzzo J, Meiss RP, Ruggiero RA. Concomitant tumor resistance. Cancer letters. 2012 
Nov 28; 324(2):133–141. [PubMed: 22634498] 
19. Berguer R, Bravo N, Bowyer M, Egan C, Knolmayer T, Ferrick D. Major surgery suppresses 
maximal production of helper T-cell type 1 cytokines without potentiating the release of helper T-
cell type 2 cytokines. Archives of surgery. 1999 May; 134(5):540–544. [PubMed: 10323427] 
20. Da Costa ML, Redmond P, Bouchier-Hayes DJ. The effect of laparotomy and laparoscopy on the 
establishment of spontaneous tumor metastases. Surgery. 1998 Sep; 124(3):516–525. [PubMed: 
9736904] 
21. Kurz A, Sessler DI, Lenhardt R. Perioperative normothermia to reduce the incidence of surgical-
wound infection and shorten hospitalization. Study of Wound Infection and Temperature Group. 
The New England journal of medicine. 1996 May 9; 334(19):1209–1215. [PubMed: 8606715] 
22. Frank SM, Higgins MS, Breslow MJ, Fleisher LA, Gorman RB, Sitzmann JV, et al. The 
catecholamine, cortisol, and hemodynamic responses to mild perioperative hypothermia. A 
randomized clinical trial. Anesthesiology. 1995 Jan; 82(1):83–93. [PubMed: 7832339] 
23. Ohtsuka T, Kitajima Y, Takahashi T, Sato S, Miyoshi A, Kohya N, et al. Infectious complications 
after gastric cancer surgery accelerate a rapid hepatic recurrence. Hepato-gastroenterology. 2009 
Sep-Oct;56(94–95):1277–1280. [PubMed: 19950777] 
24. Colotta F, Allavena P, Sica A, Garlanda C, Mantovani A. Cancer-related inflammation, the seventh 
hallmark of cancer: links to genetic instability. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jul; 30(7):1073–1081. 
[PubMed: 19468060] 
25. Cools-Lartigue J, Spicer J, McDonald B, Gowing S, Chow S, Giannias B, et al. Neutrophil 
extracellular traps sequester circulating tumor cells and promote metastasis. The Journal of clinical 
investigation. 2013 Jul 1.
26. Mattsby-Baltzer I, Jakobsson A, Sorbo J, Norrby K. Endotoxin is angiogenic. International journal 
of experimental pathology. 1994 Jun; 75(3):191–196. [PubMed: 7522030] 
27. van der Hage JA, van de Velde CJ, Julien JP, Floiras JL, Delozier T, Vandervelden C, et al. 
Improved survival after one course of perioperative chemotherapy in early breast cancer patients. 
long-term results from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 
Trial 10854. European journal of cancer. 2001 Nov; 37(17):2184–2193. [PubMed: 11677105] 
28. Ebos JM. Prodding the Beast: Assessing the Impact of Treatment-Induced Metastasis. Cancer 
research. 2015 Sep 1;75(17):3427–3435. [PubMed: 26229121] 
29. Neeman E, Zmora O, Ben-Eliyahu S. A new approach to reducing postsurgical cancer recurrence: 
perioperative targeting of catecholamines and prostaglandins. Clinical cancer research : an official 
Tohme et al.
Page 8
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2012 Sep 15; 18(18):4895–4902. 
[PubMed: 22753587] 
30. Mosolits S, Ullenhag G, Mellstedt H. Therapeutic vaccination in patients with gastrointestinal 
malignancies. A review of immunological and clinical results. Annals of oncology : official journal 
of the European Society for Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2005 Jun; 16(6):847–862.
31. Headland SE, Norling LV. The resolution of inflammation: Principles and challenges. Seminars in 
immunology. 2015 May; 27(3):149–160. [PubMed: 25911383] 
32. Varadhan KK, Lobo DN, Ljungqvist O. Enhanced recovery after surgery: the future of improving 
surgical care. Critical care clinics. 2010 Jul; 26(3):527–547. x. [PubMed: 20643305] 
Tohme et al.
Page 9
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Effects of tumor removal on promotion of metastases. These effects include accelerated 
growth of micrometastases and establishment of new metastatic foci. Surgery increases 
tumor cell dissemination, increased circulating tumor cells’ survival by enhancing immune 
evasion, enhanced entrapment at metastatic site and increased invasion and migration 
capabilities to establish new metastatic foci. Surgery can also induce changes in the 
environment of micrometastatic disease to enhance its growth. Multiple therapeutic 
approaches illustrated in this diagram can be considered to target the protumorigenic 
inflammatory changes in the perioperative period.
Tohme et al.
Page 10
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
