 1
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Identification of depression 
subtypes and relevant brain regions 
using a data-driven approach
Tomoki Tokuda1, Junichiro Yoshimoto1,3, Yu Shimizu1, Go Okada2, Masahiro Takamura  
2, 
Yasumasa Okamoto2, Shigeto Yamawaki2 & Kenji Doya  
1
It is well known that depressive disorder is heterogeneous, yet little is known about its 
neurophysiological subtypes. In the present study, we identified neurophysiological subtypes of 
depression related to specific neural substrates. We performed cluster analysis for 134 subjects (67 
depressive subjects and 67 controls) using a high-dimensional dataset consisting of resting state 
functional connectivity measured by functional MRI, clinical questionnaire scores, and various 
biomarkers. Applying a newly developed, multiple co-clustering method to this dataset, we identified 
three subtypes of depression that are characterized by functional connectivity between the right 
Angular Gyrus (AG) and other brain areas in default mode networks, and Child Abuse Trauma Scale 
(CATS) scores. These subtypes are also related to Selective Serotonin-Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) 
treatment outcomes, which implies that we may be able to predict effectiveness of treatment based on 
AG-related functional connectivity and CATS.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common, but serious disorder, characterized by severe symptoms that affect 
how one feels, thinks, and manages daily activities1. It is estimated that 17% of all people experience MDD at one 
point or another during their lifetimes2. Despite its prevalence, however, clinical diagnosis is rather limited, and is 
based on highly subjective criteria. Current diagnostic practice relies on clinical questionnaires in which patients 
reply to questions on a wide range of depression-related items listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disease (DSM)3. Although DSM provides a coherent framework for diagnosis, it remains subjective due 
to its dependence on patient responses. In addition to subjectiveness, diagnosis involves time-consuming inter-
views, which require both professional medical expertise and close cooperation of a patient4.
To improve diagnostic objectivity, much attention has recently been paid to potential biomarkers for depres-
sion. In particular, a number of studies have focused on neural activities in the brain, measured as functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signals5–7. Typically, relevant brain areas for depression are identified in a 
supervised manner, i.e., using labels of control/depression that are subsequently evaluated for diagnosis of depres-
sion in a test dataset. In this framework, the binary label of control/depression plays a key role in identification 
of these brain areas.
A more challenging problem in MDD is the identification of its subtypes. It is well known that MDD is het-
erogenous in such characteristics as clinical presentation, progression, treatment response, genetics, and neu-
robiology8. This heterogeneity hampers progress in identifying the cause of MDD and its effective treatment9. 
To overcome this problem, several studies have been conducted to identify subtypes of MDD in a data-driven 
manner, relying on clinical questionnaires10,11. However, the results of these studies either conflict or they simply 
identify clusters related to depression severity, which does not provide conclusive evidence for subtypes of depres-
sive symptoms8. Furthermore, these studies are based on clinical questionnaires without taking into account 
biological substrates.
Recently, resting state fMRI, in which a subject does not explicitly perform any task, has increasingly gained 
attention for MDD prediction12,13. Further, several studies using resting state fMRI have shed light on MDD sub-
types in terms of treatment resistance14. Treatment-resistant depression (TRD) is defined as depression in which 
1Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, 1919-1 Tancha, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan. 
2Department of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 734-
8553, Japan. 3Graduate School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, 
Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192, Japan. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.T. (email: 
tomoki.tokuda@oist.jp)
Received: 25 February 2018
Accepted: 10 September 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
clinically meaningful improvement was not observed following the use of two different antidepressants15. These 
studies approached the question of MDD subtypes in a supervised manner (systematic review paper)16. Given 
binary labels of MDD status (TRD or non-TRD), they identified relevant brain areas in which large differences 
in resting state fMRI images are observed between TRD and non-TRD. It is reported that functional connectivity 
(FC) increased in the subgenus cingulate and the thalamus17, while it decreased in the cerebellum, the precuneus 
and the inferior parietal lobule for TRD patients18. However, some of these results may not be consistent: FC in 
the right angular gyrus is higher for TRD than non-TRD19, while the opposite is reported18.
Methodologically, it is more useful to identify MDD subtypes in an unsupervised manner (cluster analysis), 
because the unsupervised approach can reveal underlying heterogenous subtypes without prior knowledge of sub-
types, leading to a better understanding of MDD. However, due to lack of an appropriate statistical method, cur-
rent research on clustering of subjects based on fMRI data remains limited to the case of binary clustering (MDD, 
healthy) focused on specific brain areas20. It is challenging to directly apply cluster analysis to high-dimensional 
data, such as whole volume neuroimaging data, because of features possibly irrelevant to a clustering solution 
that may distort clustering results21. To alleviate such a problem, Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is often 
used for dimensional reduction22. Likewise, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) has recently been used23. In 
CCA, a weighted linear combination of features (functional connectivity) is identified to maximize a correlation 
with another linear combination of clinical indicators that capture phenomenological aspects of depression. In 
both PCA- and CCA-based approaches, resulting linear combinations of features are subsequently used for fur-
ther cluster analysis of subjects. However, these approaches may fail to capture underlying cluster structures in 
high-dimensional data. In such datasets, multiple clustering structures often exist, i.e., different subsets of features 
are relevant for different clusters. For instance, in a given sample of subjects, we may find a cluster structure of 
subjects depending on age (together with other features), and this cluster structure might be related to the status 
of Alzheimer’s disease because this disease is strongly related to aging. Likewise, in the same sample, we may find 
another cluster structure of subjects depending on sex, which might be related to the status of Thyroid disease 
because women suffer from this disease more often than men. Nonetheless, PCA or CCA does not identify such 
multiple view structures of clusters24. In the CCA approach23, hierarchical cluster analysis is carried out using the 
first and second principal components, yielding a single cluster solution. Hence, only a dominant cluster structure 
is captured, while non-dominant cluster structures may be overlooked. However, useful subtypes of depression 
may be related to a specific subset of brain areas that are not captured by PCA or CCA. Importantly, appropriate 
feature selection not only captures relevant features, but also eliminates irrelevant features (e.g., sex) that are not 
related to depression. This enhances quality of clustering and also facilitates interpretations of clustering results in 
terms of selected features. Nonetheless, it is still a challenge to identify correspondence between subtype solutions 
and relevant brain areas.
In the present paper, we address this question by directly modeling cluster structures in high-dimensional 
data. The key idea is to explicitly model multiple cluster solutions that optimally partition features. This has 
the effect of analyzing only features relevant to a particular cluster solution, while irrelevant features are used 
for other cluster solutions. We use a recently proposed clustering method for high-dimensional data that yields 
clustering solutions for optimally selected features25. We apply this method to a combination of several dataset 
modalities, such as FC data in resting state fMRI, clinical questionnaires, and gene expression data.
In this study, to allow for flexible cluster structures with possible overlaps of patients and controls, we include 
both types of subjects for clustering. The inclusion of both types of subjects enriches interpretations of subject 
clusters. Further, from the statistical point of view, it is advantageous to ensure larger sample size. As regards 
patients, to minimize the effect of antidepressants, we focus on patients who were either untreated or were treated 
with a single drug at insufficient dose and duration. Due to the variety of data modalities, the resulting concate-
nated dataset includes numerical, categorical and integer features, with or without missing entries. Furthermore, 
the dataset is high-dimensional with the number of dimensions being larger than 2000. From results of cluster 
analysis, possible subtypes may be related to functional connectivity, child abuse trauma, and initial depression 
severity. Using these subtypes, the combination of angular-gyrus-related functional connectivity and child abuse 
trauma is useful for predictions on remission of depression by Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) 
treatment.
Data
Our data comprise several modalities, such as FC data in resting state fMRI, clinical questionnaires, and bio-
logical data. For simultaneous analysis of all datasets, we concatenated them into a single data matrix (subjects 
are common to the sub-datasets). Prior to collecting these data, this study was approved by the Research Ethics 
Committee at the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, as well as the Research Ethics Committee of 
Hiroshima University (permission nr.172). All research was performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines 
and regulations. Informed written consent was obtained from all participants in the study (approved by both 
institutions). In the following subsections, more detailed descriptions of our datasets are provided.
Subjects. 
Sixty-seven patients aged 26–63 (average 40.43 ± 9.75 (s.d.), 34 males and 33 females) with MDD 
were recruited by the Psychiatry Department of Hiroshima University and collaborating medical institutions, 
based on the Mini International Neuropsychiatric interview26, which enables medical doctors to identify psychi-
atric disorders according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition3. Their 
scores of Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)27 ranged from 16 to 53 with average 32.10 ± 9.05 (s.d.) while those of 
the Japanese version of the national adult reading test (JART)28, which was used to estimate intelligence quotient 
(IQ), ranged from 87.6 to 125.7 (average 110.0 ± 9.6 (s.d.)). These demographic and clinical characteristics are 
summarized in Table 1. These patients were either untreated or treated with a single antidepressant at insufficient 
dose and duration. Additional inclusion criteria were age between 25 and 80 and written informed consent. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
Exclusion criteria entailed current or past manic episodes; psychotic episodes; alcohol dependence or/and abuse; 
substance dependence or/and abuse; antisocial personality disorder. As a control group, 67 subjects aged 20–66 
(average 36.58 ± 12.03 (s.d.), 30 males and 37 females) with no history of mental or neurological disease were 
recruited using advertisements in local newspapers. All control subjects underwent the same self-assessment and 
examination that was administered to the MDD group. Control subjects also undertook the Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric interview by experienced psychiatrists and psychologists, to ensure that they did not have any 
previous or current psychiatric disorder according to DSM-IV criteria. For control subjects, BDI scores ranged 
from 0 to 42 (average 7.35 ± 7.18 (s.d.)) while JART scores ranged from 84.7 to 126.5 (average 111.8 ± 8.5 (s.d.)). 
Here, too, all subjects gave written informed consent. To compare demographic and clinical characteristics 
between depressive and control subjects (Table 1), the results of p-value suggest that for sex and IQ the difference 
between two groups is not significant (p-values are 0.48 and 0.21, respectively), whereas for age and BDI the 
difference is significant (p-values are 0.014 and 2.2 ×
 10−
21, respectively). Both depressive and control subjects 
underwent MRI acquisition with a GE scanner. Note that fMRI image data for depressive subjects were obtained 
within two weeks after the onset of treatment with SSRI.
Functional MRI data. 
fMRI measurements were performed at Hiroshima University on a 3T GE Signa 
HDx scanner with GE-EPI (TR = 2 s, 150 volumes = 5 min scan, TE = 27 ms, FA = 90°, matrix size 64 ×
 64 ×
 32, 
voxel size 4 ×
 4 ×
 4 mm, no gap, interleaved). We discarded initial five volumes of the scanned data. Structural 
T1 images were acquired after the fMRI experiments for correction of head position changes in the subsequent 
analysis (IRP FSPGR, TR = 6.824 ms, TE = 1.9 ms, FA = 20°, FOV = 256 mm, matrix size 256 ×
 256 ×
 180, voxel 
size 1 ×
 1 ×
 1 mm). For scanning of fMRI, the following common settings and instructions were used. In the scan 
room with dimmed lights, subjects were asked not to think of nor to sleep, but keep looking at a cross mark in 
the center of the monitor screen. For the pre-processing of the fMRI data, images were realigned, normalized 
and smoothed (FWHM = 8 mm) using SPM8 (Statistical Parametric Mapping 8)29. They were band-pass filtered 
(0.009–0.1 Hz) and de-trended.
Using these fMRI measurements, functional connectivity between regions of interest (ROIs) were evaluated. 
In the present study, we used a common definition of functional connectivity: correlation coefficient of average 
time series of BOLD fMRI signals between ROIs30. For ROIs, we used recently suggested ROIs based on intrinsic 
connectivity networks31, which presumably reflect network structures in the brain. These template ROIs were 
adopted to our data as follows. First, the ROI template was resampled and the center shifted so that the matrix size 
matched the size of the acquired data and the resting state fMRI image centers coincided (both ROI template as 
well as resting state fMRI images are normalized to the standard brain). Second, these voxel time series indicated 
as belonging to the same area by the template were averaged and the correlation coefficient between these average 
time series was evaluated.
These ROIs consist of 90 brain regions across 14 intrinsic connectivity networks, from a data-driven approach 
over several subjects by means of Independent Component Analysis. These intrinsic connectivity networks are as 
follows (digits in parentheses denote the number of ROIs): Anterior Salience (7), Auditory (3), Basal Ganglia (5), 
Dorsal Default Mode (9), Language (7), Left Executive Control (6), Precuneus (4), Posterior Salience (12), Right 
Executive Control (6), Ventral Default Mode (10), Visuospatial (11), Primary Visual (2), Higher Visual (2), and 
Sensorimotor (6). Specifications of ROIs in the present study were based on publicly available nifti files32. Note 
that in the present paper the numbering that follows these network names exactly match those in these nifti files. 
In this framework, we selected 78 ROIs, excluding cerebellum-related ROIs, because reliable images were not 
available for these regions. This resulted in 2701 features (78 ×
 77/2) for functional connectivity in the present 
study.
Clinical questionnaire data. 
Clinical questionnaire data comprise several types of scores that measure 
depression severity (e.g., Beck Depression Inventory), personality (e.g., NEO personality Inventory), and life 
experiences (e.g., Child Abuse Trauma Scale). In particular, Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and Hamilton 
Rating Scale of Depression (HRSD) are important indicators for measuring the severity of depression focus-
ing on its several symptoms8. Hence, we also include question items about these indicators in our dataset 
(Supplementary Table S2 for the whole list of features).
The same clinical questionnaires were administered to both depressive and control subjects. Importantly, for 
depressive subjects, these were administered before the onset of SSRI treatment. Moreover, some indices, such as 
BDI and HRSD, were again administered six weeks and six months after the treatment (these features are denoted 
MDD
Control
P-value for the 
difference
Number of subjects
67
67
NA
Sex (male/female)
34/33
30/37
0.48
Age (mean, s.d.)
40.43 (9.75)
36.58 (12.03)
0.014*
BDI (mean, s.d.)
32.10 (9.05)
7.35 (7.18)
2.2 ×
 10−
21***
IQ (mean, s.d.)
110.0 (9.6)
111.8 (8.5)
0.21
Table 1. Demographic and clinical characteristics of subjects. P-value is evaluated for the difference between 
MDD and Heathy Control for each characteristic. For sex, we performed the χ
-square test, whereas for Age, 
BDI scores and IQ, we performed the two-sided U-test (Wilcoxon-Mann-Whiteny test). Asterisks denote level 
of significance of p-values: ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
with endings of 6w and 6m in Supplementary Table S2). We expected that inclusion of repeated measurements in 
these scores would provide useful information on treatment effect.
Biological data. 
Beside functional connectivity factors, we included several biological elements: sex, age, 
Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF), Cortisol, Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), and DNA 
Methylation. Specifically, SNPs are for genes relevant to BDNF and serotonin receptors. DNA Methylation is 
for CpG sites of BDNF receptor genes trkb and for serotonin receptor gene htr2c. Regarding BDNF and cortisol, 
measurements after six weeks are also included.
Pre-processing of data. 
For functional connectivity data, we standardized each feature using mean and 
standard deviation of the control group, with the effect that we set the baseline to the average values of control 
subjects. For the remainder of numerical features, we standardized each feature using its mean and standard 
deviation, based on all subjects (ignoring missing entries). In contrast, for categorical and integer type of features, 
we did not carry out pre-processing. Note that we left missing entries as they were, because our clustering method 
can handle them without explicit substitutions.
Clustering Method
To conduct cluster analysis, we used a novel method for multiple co-clustering, which we recently developed for 
purposes of the present study (Supplementary Multiple co-clustering method)25. The MATLAB source code for 
this method is publicly available33. Here, the terminology of co-clustering denotes clustering of both subjects and 
features. The basic assumption of this method is that different subject cluster solutions may be associated with 
a specific set of features. Here, we refer to a way of looking at subject clusters (depending on relevant features) 
as a ‘view’
. Since the number of combinations of features is exponential in nature, many views are theoretically 
possible. However, we aim to identify only those that are probabilistically optimal under the non-overlapping 
constraint of feature selection (i.e., features are partitioned into these views). Our clustering method is based 
on nonparametric Bayesian statistics34, which yield multiple views of co-clustering solutions in which each 
co-clustering solution provides both feature- and subject-clusters. Specifically, by this method an input is a data 
matrix while an output is view structures (Fig. 1a,b). The key idea of the method is to optimally partition a data 
matrix into three folds. First, it partitions features into several views, which works as feature selection for different 
subject cluster solutions. Second, it further partitions features within a view, which bundles similar features. This 
feature partition in a view is helpful for avoiding the problem of over-fitting in the case of high-dimensional data, 
and also for interpreting relevant features. Third, it partitions subjects in each view, which yields several subject 
cluster solutions. These three phases of partitioning are carried out simultaneously, which yields optimal cluster 
solutions. In short, this method yields optimal subject cluster solutions by simultaneously selecting correspond-
ing sets of relevant features. Nonetheless, cluster solutions yielded by this method may differ, depending on the 
initial configuration of the phase partitioning. Hence, in order to prevent local optima, as a conventional practice, 
we apply this method a number of times with different initial configurations, and choose the best clustering solu-
tion in terms of data fitting.
Figure 1. Illustration of the multiple co-clustering method for Input and Output. Panel (a) for an input data 
matrix and panel (b) for an outcome of the method, which partitions the data matrix into two co-clustering 
views. The x-axis denotes the feature index while the y-axis denotes the subject index. In panel (b), subjects and 
features are sorted by their corresponding cluster memberships. Bold lines distinguish between different subject 
clusters or different feature clusters, while dashed lines distinguish between different subjects or different 
features. Note that subjects are common across different views, while a particular feature shows up in a view just 
once because of (exclusive) partition of features among different views.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
For application to a real dataset, this clustering method has several advantages. First, the number of views, the 
number of feature clusters, and the number of subject clusters are all automatically inferred based on Dirichlet 
process35. Hence, it is computationally quite efficient. Second, this method can deal with different types of features 
by pre-specifying possible types of the underlying distribution in a cluster block, i.e., Gaussian, categorical and 
Poisson. We refer to these types as numerical, categorical, and integer hereafter. Third, it handles missing values in 
a natural manner in the framework of Bayesian inferences. These characteristics for clustering are specific to this 
method, which is perfectly suited for analysis of our dataset. Note that a non-Gaussian distribution in numerical 
features such as a log-normal distribution can be fitted by this method in form of several clusters36. This flexibility 
in fitting a non-Gaussian distribution is advantageous because it wides applicability of the method. Nonetheless, 
it requires some care for interpreting cluster results whether obtained clustering results represent the underlying 
cluster structure.
To apply this clustering method to our data, it is required to pre-specify feature types. For our data, functional 
connectivity and various psychiatric scores are considered as numerical features (i.e., Gaussian distribution is 
assumed in each cluster block). In contrast, sex and SNPs are considered categorical. With regard to items BDI 
and HRSD, these are ordinal categorical data. If we considered these as numerical, we would very poorly fit a 
Gaussian distribution to the data. Hence, we simply considered these items as categorical. This does not jeopard-
ize interpretation of the solutions. Further, the number of depression episodes and repetitions are integers (see 
Supplementary Table S2 for more details). As a result, our data consists of 2832 numerical features, 114 categorical 
features, and 2 integer features.
Regarding prior distributions, we consider non-informative priors, setting hyperparameters as follows (we use 
the notation in the cited paper)25: For stick-breaking process, α
1 = α
2 = β
 = 1 in Beta(·|1, α
1), Beta(·|1, α
2), and 
Beta(·|1, β
), respectively; for variances of numerical features, γ
0 = 1/100 and σ = 1/100
0
2
 in 
γ
γ
σ
⋅|
Ga(
/2,
/2)
0
0 0
2
; for 
means of numerical features, μ
0 = 0 and λ
0 = 1/100 in 
μ
λ
⋅|
−
s
Gauss(
, (
) )
v g k
0
0
, ,
1 ; for categorical features, ρ
0 = 1 for 
ρ
⋅|
Dirichlet(
)
0 ; for integer features, α
0 = β
0 = 1 in Ga(·|α
0, β
0). With this setting of priors, we performed the 
method for 1000 initial configurations of clustering, and selected the model that maximized likelihood of cluster-
ing solutions. A single run for one initial configuration took about 0.16 hrs, which amounted to 1000 ×
 0.16 = 160 
hrs to complete all computations. We also examined sensitivity of the clustering results to the setting of hyperpa-
rameters, which suggested that the results are not sensitive to a small perturbation of our setting of hyperparam-
eters (Supplementary Sensitivity Analysis).
Results
The multiple co-clustering method yielded 15 views in which there was large variation in the number of features, 
and the number of subject and feature clusters (Supplementary Table S3; views are sorted in descending order 
of the number of features). The number of subject clusters ranged from 3 to 9, while the number of feature clus-
ters ranged from 1 to 11 for numerical features, from 1 to 3 for categorical features, and 1 for integer features in 
case that these types of features may be included in a view. Visual inspection of these views (Fig. 2) shows that 
the distributions in numerical feature clusters are similar for each subject cluster within a view, except for view 
10 (several different features clusters are clearly visible). Further, view memberships of features are displayed in 
Supplementary Fig. S1 for FC features and in Table 2 for non-FC features. With respect to relationships between 
views, we focused on the first principal component of numerical features for each view. The first principal com-
ponent is a weighted linear combination of features that explains most of the variability of features, representing 
the underlying trend of the data. To compare underlying trends of views, we evaluated Pearson’s correlation 
coefficient between the first principal components of relevant FC features in each view (Fig. 3a). First principal 
components are highly correlated between different views, except for view 10, in which the first principal compo-
nent seems to be independent of those in most of the remaining views (correlated only with views 6, 7, 8 and 12 at 
significant level 0.05). Note that here we relied on PCA rather than CCA, because CCA focuses on maximum cor-
relation with specific combinations of features while our interest is to evaluate correlations of underlying trends.
Next, we analyzed subject clusters. Our intent was to find meaningful subtypes of depression. Accordingly, 
we focused on relevance of cluster memberships to depression and separability between subject clusters. First, 
we evaluated relevance of subject cluster solutions for depression (Fig. 3b). In terms of the concordance between 
cluster memberships, the label of control/depression, and the proportion of depression related features for 
selected features, view 10 is the most useful for control/depression labels. Here we defined depression related 
features as follows: for numerical features BAS, BDI, BIS, GAF, PHQ9, HRSD, JART, PANASP, PANASN, SHAPS, 
STAI, N, E, O, A, and C; for categorical features drug, Melancholic, Recurrent, Response, Remission, BDI items, 
HRSD items, SNPs, and MINIs. In short, these features represent the current status of the psychiatric condition 
of a subject. In Supplementary Table S2, these features are shown with asterisks *. We did not include FC features 
for this definition.
Second, we evaluated separability of subject clusters of depressive subjects in FC feature clusters by means of 
Cohen’s d (Fig. 3c)37, which is commonly used to measure effect size of differences of two distributions. Here, we 
follow the criterion of effect size37: 0.2 small; 0.5 medium; 0.8 large. Using this criterion, subject clusters of depres-
sive subjects in view 10 were well separated, while those in views 4, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13 and 14 were modestly so, and 
the remainder of the views were slightly separated. These results suggest that view 10 is specific in two regards: 
relevance for control/depression and large separability of depressive clusters in terms of FC.
Further, we analyzed view 10 more in detail. This view consists of five subject clusters, which match the 
label of control/depression well: Two clusters for control subjects (subject clusters C1, C2) and three clusters 
for depressive subjects (subject clusters D1, D2, D3) (Fig. 4a). View 10 contained several non-FC features that 
discriminate well among subject clusters (features in bold in Table 2). Further, the view had a high proportion 
of depression-related features (60%), including 39 numerical features and 19 categorical features, but none of 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
the integer features. Since the categorical features do not clearly distinguish between subject clusters (Fig. 4b), 
we focus only on numerical features in this view for further analysis. Numerical features are clustered into five 
feature clusters F1-5. We characterize each feature cluster based on characteristics of their member features 
(Supplementary Table S4). Since this view is closely related to the label of control/depression, it is consistent that 
the view has feature clusters (namely, F3 and F5) that are related to the initial status of depression. However, it 
is noteworthy that the view also contains a feature cluster that is related to the after-treatment status of depres-
sion (namely, F1). Furthermore, features related to CATS (Child Abuse Trauma Scale) are included in the same 
feature cluster F1. These results suggest that the subject clusters D1, D2 and D3 for depressive subjects may 
be related to after-treatment status of depression, which might be further related to stress experiences during 
childhood. Lastly, feature clusters F2 and F4 are related to specific functional connectivity in fMRI image data, 
which suggests a possible association between the subject clusters and neural substrates (Supplementary Fig. S1). 
In this view, the majority of these functional connections are, on average, higher for depressed patients than for 
controls, while the remainder of views, except for view 11, has more connectivity that is higher for controls than 
for depressed patients. Further, this connectivity network in view 10 forms the topology of a star with the cen-
tral hub, which is also observed in other views. The relevant brain areas for the functional connectivity of view 
10 are Dorsal DMN.02 (hub), Dorsal DMN.04, Dorsal DMN.06, Ventral DMN.01, Ventral DMN.05, Ventral 
DMN.09, LECN.01, Precuneus.01, Dorsal DMN.01, Dorsal DMN.03, Ventral DMN.07, RECN.02, and RECN.04, 
where DMN denotes Default Mode Network; RECN Right Executive Control network; LECN Left Executive 
Control network (Supplementary Fig. S2). Based on Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL), the hub of this 
network is identified as the right angular gyrus (AG) while the remainder of brain areas are ACC (Anterior 
Cingulate Cortex). R.L, Angular.L, Calcarine.R.L, Occip.Mid.L, Frontal.Med.Orb.R.L., Frontal.Mid.R.L, Frontal.
Mid.Orb.L, Frontal.Sup.R.L, Frontal.Sup.Medial.R.L, PCC (Posterior Cingulate Cortex). R.L, Precuneus.L, and 
Ventral PCC.R.L (Supplementary Table S5). The star topology structure of this network is visualized in Fig. 5, 
which shows the key role of AG in relevant default mode networks.
Figure 2. Visualization of all views (view 1–15). The horizontal axis denotes features while the vertical axis 
denotes subjects. Depressive subjects are indicated by a hyphen while features directly related to diagnose of 
depression, namely, BDI and HRSD are indicated by a vertical bar. Note that when adjacent subjects or features 
are indicated by hyphens, these hyphens appear to be merged in a panel. Subject clusters are sorted in ascending 
order of proportions of depressive subjects from top to bottom. Further, in each subject cluster, control subjects 
are first displayed. Feature clusters are sorted in order of numerical, categorical and integer types from left to right 
(separated by thick bold lines). In each type of features, feature clusters are further sorted in descending order of 
cluster size. Within this sortation, the order of subjects or features is arbitrary. Grey color denotes a missing entry.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
In the cluster analysis of view 10, it is important to note that view 10 contains after-six-week scores such as 
BDI. Since view 10 also includes other features that are available before onset of treatment, this raises the possi-
bility of prediction of treatment outcome prior to treatment. In this regard, we explore several important impli-
cations drawn from the results of cluster analysis. First, subject clusters can be represented by a small number of 
relevant features. Since in our clustering method each feature cluster consists of similar (i.e., highly correlated) 
features, a feature cluster can be represented by a reduced number of these features. It turns out that a subject 
cluster solution in a view can be represented by a small number of features associated with each feature cluster. 
View 10 (Fig. 4a) is represented by CATS scores (associated to feature cluster F1), the first principal scores of 
angular-gyrus related FC (associated to F2; we simply refer to it ‘
AG related FC score’), and BDI (associated to F3). 
These features can indeed explain the resultant subject cluster membership properly (Fig. 6a). Here, we do not 
consider features in F4 and F5, because these features are strongly correlated with those in F2 and F3, respectively. 
Based on distributions of these scores in each subject cluster (Fig. 6b–e), we can characterize subject clusters as 
follows: subject cluster D1 by high CATS, high FC, low BDI and high BDI6w; subject cluster D2 by low CATS, 
moderate FC, low BDI and low BDI6w; subject cluster D3 by high CATS, low FC, high BDI and low BDI6w 
(Supplementary Table S6), where we also include the after-six-week BDI (BDI6w) score associated with F1. This 
characterization provides a basis for predicting remission of SSRI treatment that is measured by the after-six-week 
View ID
Feature types
Numerical
Categorical
Integer
View 1
BIS_6w, Cortisol_6w
HRSD_t1_(7, 10, 11), HRSD_t2_(7)
None
View 2
BDNF_6w
BDI_t2_(1–4, 7, 10, 12–16, 18–20),
None
HRSD_t2_(5, 10, 11, 13)
View 3
PANAS_N_6w
Remission, BDI_t2(9),
None
HRSD_t1_(9, 19–21),
HRSD_t2_(4, 6, 8, 12, 16–18, 21), SNPS (3, 4)
View 4
None
Sex, Recurrent, Response,
None
BDI_t1_(1–7, 8, 9–10, 11–15, 16, 18–20, 21),
BDI_t2_(5, 6, 8, 11, 17, 21),
HRSD_t1_(1–6, 8, 12, 14, 18), HRSD_t2_(4),
SNPS7, MINI (1, 3),
View 5
None
None
None
View 6
age, JART, age of first depression,
drug
None
Days of current episode, HRSD17,
HRSD21, GAF_6w, SHAPS_6w,
PANAS_P_6w, BAS_6w, O, A, C,
Rep, BDNF, Cortisol
View 7
None
None
None
View 8
None
BDI_t1_(17), HRSD_t2_(15)
None
View 9
None
None
None
View 10
BDI, BDI_6w, BDI_6m,
HRSD_t2_(9, 19, 20),
None
PHQ-9, PHQ-9_6w, PHQ-9_6m,
MINI (2, 4–11, 12, 13–16)
HRSD17_6w, HRSD21_6w,
GAF, SHAPS, PANAS_P,
PANAS_N, STAI, STAI_6w,
CATS:(total, N, P, E),
LES:(total, P, N), BIS,
BAS, N, E
View 11
None
None
None
View 12
None
Melancholic, HRSD_t1_(15),
Episode,
SNPS (1, 2, 6)
RecNum
View 13
None
None
None
View 14
None
None
None
View 15
None
None
None
Table 2. Members of non-FC features in a view. Features in bold denote significant features that discriminate 
among subject clusters, which is evaluated by means of Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) for numerical features 
while for categorical and integer features by means of χ
2-test for crosstable relationship. We set the level of 
significance to 0.05 with Bonferroni correction within each type of features. To avoid clustering, numerical 
features related to gene expressions are omitted. For simplicity, multiple features such as A1, A2, A3, and A5 are 
abbreviated as A (1–3, 5).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
BDI score, because for subject cluster D1, the after-six-week BDI score is high; hence, a subject in D1 is unlikely 
to remit while a subject in D2 or D3 is likely to remit.
Finally, we investigate the remainder of views. We have identified non-FC features that discriminate between 
subject clusters based on a statistical test for individual features (features in bold in Table 2). From these results, 
significant correspondences between non-FC features and brain areas are found in view 4, view 8, and view 12 
(Supplementary Table S7). Note that significant correspondence is also observed in view 10). These correspond-
ences help us to interpret these views. First, view 4 includes depression items related to BDI, MINI1, and MINI3, 
while it also includes FC-features in which the three dominant brain areas are Language.02 (Temporal.Mid.L, in 
AAL), Ventral DMN.04 (Occipital.Mid.L), and Language.05 (Frontal.Inf.Orb.R) with 25, 22, and 21 connectivity, 
respectively. Second, view 8 includes features BDI_t1_17 and HRDS_t2_15. These items in clinical questionnaires 
are related to fatigue and hypochondriasis, respectively. The dominant brain area is Dorsal DMN.02 (Angular 
gyrus.R). Third, view 12 includes Episode and RecNum, which are related to the extent of repetitions of MDD. 
The dominant brain areas are Language.04 (Temporal.Mid.L), Dorsal DMN.01 (Cingulum.Ant, Frontal.Sup.
Medial), and RECN.04 (Frontal.Sup.Medial).
We have so far analyzed subject cluster solutions one by one. One may wonder if it is possible to integrate 
all these cluster solutions, yielding a single cluster solution, which may exhibit distinct demographic, clini-
cal and end-phenotypic characteristics. One possible way of such analysis is to carry out hierarchical cluster-
ing, using Hamming distance defined as the percentage of views in which subject cluster memberships differ 
(Supplementary Fig. S3). However, in the present study, we were not able to characterize the yielded clusters in a 
meaningful manner. Possibly, by integrating cluster solutions, useful information on cluster solutions might be 
lost.
Discussion
The results of the cluster analysis suggest three subtypes of depressive subjects, D1, D2, and D3 in view 10. The 
number of subject clusters in question is three; hence, two binary features may be sufficient for classification. 
In the scatter plot of subjects in D1, D2, and D3 (Fig. 7a), AG-related FC scores discriminate between subjects 
in D3 and other subjects. On the other hand, CATS scores do not discriminate a single class by itself, but they 
discriminate between subjects in D1 and D2, once subjects in D3 are sorted out. This observation motivated us 
to consider a classifier that consists of the following steps. First, we classify subjects into either D3 or non-D3 
Figure 3. Analysis of feature/subject clusters. Panel (a) Pearson’s correlation coefficients between first principal 
components of FC features in views. Panel (b): Agreement between the subject cluster and the label of control/
depression in blue. The agreement is measured in terms of adjusted Rand Index52: zero for no agreement 
(chance level); one for complete agreement. Also, the proportion of depression-related features (i.e., clinical 
questionnaire) for selected features is displayed in yellow. Panel (c): Average Cohen’s d for FC feature clusters in 
each view. For each feature cluster, we sorted estimated means in Gaussian component, and evaluated Cohen’s d, 
i.e., 
μ
μ
σ
σ
=
−
+
d
(
)/ (
)/2
2
1
2
2
1
2
, between neighboring means μ
1 and μ
2 (μ
1 < μ
2). Finally, we took the average 
of all Cohen’s d within a view. In this analysis, we conditioned feature clusters that had more than three FC 
features, while subject clusters that had more than three depressive subjects. Red bold lines denote levels of 
separability37 while dashed lines denote boundaries between these levels. Note that for view 15, no FC feature is 
included; hence, we omitted this view from the analysis in Panels (a) and (c).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
Figure 4. Visualization of view 10. For numerical features in Panel (a) and categorical features in Panel (b). The 
horizontal axis denotes features while the vertical axis denotes subjects. Depressive subjects are indicated by 
hyphens. Both subjects and features are sorted in the order of the subject- and feature-cluster indices. Subject 
clusters are named C1, C2, D1, D2, and D3 from top to bottom, while for numerical feature clusters, F1, F2, 
F3, F4, F5 from left to right. Subjects within a subject cluster are sorted in the order of control and depressive 
subjects. The color in a cell denotes the corresponding value of the data matrix indicated in the color bar where 
the missing entries are in gray.
Figure 5. Structure of functional connectivity in feature clusters F2 (in bold line) and F4 (in dashed line). Color 
corresponds to intrinsic connectivity networks. Relevant brain areas for network nodes are based on Automated 
Anatomical Labeling (AAL). DMN denotes default mode network; RECN right executive control network; 
LECN left executive control network.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
based on AG-related FC scores. A subject with low scores in AG-related FC is classified into D3, otherwise into 
non-D3. Subsequently, the non-D3 subjects are classified into either D1 or D2 based on CATS scores: A subject 
with low scores in CATS is classified into D2, otherwise into D1. This procedure of classification is summarized 
in Fig. 7b. Since these subject clusters correspond to degrees of remission of SSRI treatment as well, this classifier 
leads to predictions of whether SSRI treatment may be effective, prior to the onset of treatment. We can interpret 
this classification as follows. For subjects in D2 and D3, SSRI treatment may be appropriate (low after-six-week 
BDI scores, Supplementary Table S6), while for those in D1 SSRI treatment may not be a good option (high 
after-six-week BDI scores). Note that we do not take initial BDI scores into account in this classifier. Interestingly, 
the initial BDI score is not a good indicator for predictions of after-six-week BDI scores in this classification 
(Fig. 6d,e). For instance, for subjects in D3, the initial BDI scores are high, while after-six-week BDI scores are 
low, suggesting that despite having severe depression, they are likely to remit. It is notable that such a non-trivial 
case can be captured in our classifier based on AG-related FC score and CATS score.
Next, we interpreted implications of this classifier. For the relationship between CATS and remission, our 
finding is consistent with the meta analysis of previous studies38, which clearly suggests that experiences of child 
abuse trauma have a negative impact on treatment of depression. The contribution of our study in this regard is 
that we were able to identify among a huge number of possible associations this specific association in an unsu-
pervised manner without prior knowledge of feature selection. As for the medical causal relationship, recent 
studies suggest that treatment-resistant depression may be linked to release of pre-inflammatory cytokines, which 
can be caused by childhood adversity39,40. However, in our research framework, biomarkers of inflammation 
were not included, which prevents us from confirming this point. Concerning the key role of the angular gyrus 
Figure 6. Characterization of D1, D2 and D3. Panel (a): Results of prediction of subject cluster memberships 
via the leave-one-out cross validation. The y-axis denotes the proportion of correct predictions of subject cluster 
membership: true cluster memberships are those of view 10, while predicted cluster memberships are those 
yielded based on finite mixture models via a leave-one-out cross validation. We carried out the leave-one-out 
cross validation as follows. First, we remove a particular depression subject from the data. Second, using the 
reduced data, we re-estimate parameters in Gaussian mixture models for specific predictors. For this parameter 
estimation, we use subject cluster memberships on D1, D2 and D3. Third, based on the obtained Gaussian 
mixture model, we estimate a cluster membership of the removed subject, which enables us to evaluate whether 
the model can correctly predict the cluster membership of the removed subject. Lastly, we repeat these steps for 
all depressive subjects, evaluating a proportion of correct predictions on cluster memberships of the depression 
subjects. For predictors (i.e., selected features for mixture models) in the x-axis, we started with CATS, 
subsequently adding functional connectivity in feature clusters F2 and F4, BDI and the remainder of features in 
view 10. Panels (b)–(e): Boxplots for each subject cluster in view 10. Panel (b) for CATS scores; Panel (c) for the 
first principal scores for FC features in feature cluster F2; Panel (d) for BDI scores; Panel (e) for after-six-week 
BDI scores.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
(AG) in predicting remission, our finding is consistent with the results of a t-test on differences between TRD 
and non-TRD18,19. Unfortunately, these two previous studies are contradictory because the former study suggests 
that a higher FC is associated with TRD, while the latter study found that a lower FC is associated with TRD. Our 
result supports the former study. Moreover, recent studies have revealed that AG is related to several functions, 
such as semantic processing, default mode network, number processing, attention and spatial cognition, and 
memory retrieval41. Such multiple functions of AG are consistent with an fMRI study42, which suggests that 
AG is one of the major connecting hubs, together with the occipital and ventral-medial parietal. Nonetheless, 
these results of previous studies do not adequately explain the possible association between AG and remission 
of depression implied in our study. Further research is required for clarification of this point, which may provide 
useful insights into possible treatment of depressive patients by means of neurofeedback.
Lastly, we provide possible interpretations for views 4, 8, and 12 in which significant correspondences 
between non-FC features and brain areas have been found. We base our interpretations on previous studies of 
relevant brain areas. First, for view 4, the relevance of the identified brains areas, temporal, occipital, and frontal 
orbital cortex, to depression is suggested in terms of cell communication43, concentration of γ
-Aminobutyric 
acid (GABA)44, and volume45, respectively. Also taking into account that this view includes depression-related 
features that discriminate subject clusters, we interpret this to mean that view 4 represents subject clusters of 
different levels of depressive symptoms (note that view 4 is related to depression in terms of subject clusters in 
Fig. 3b). Second, we have found that view 8 is characterized by non-FC features related to fatigue and FC features 
of angular gyrus. In previous studies, it is reported that the angular gyrus modulates α
 rhythm46, which is related 
to fatigue47. Hence, we interpret that to mean that view 8 represents subject clusters related to fatigue. Third, view 
12 includes repetitions of depression as non-FC features while temporal, anterior cingulum cortex, and frontal 
cortex are viewed as FC features. It is reported that neuroplastic change occurs during depressive episodes in 
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and anterior cingulum48, which matches our results. 
Hence, we believe that view 12 represents subject clusters related to the duration of episodes of depression.
Finally, we discuss limitations of the present study. First, we did not include the cerebellum because the image 
on this brain region was not reliably obtained. However, several resting state fMRI studies suggest that the cere-
bellum plays a key role in depression49–51. Second, from a statistical point of view, the sample size in our study is 
rather small. To generalize the results of the present study, further research is required with much larger sample 
size, which might be possible to be obtained by combining samples from different studies. Lastly, we should 
mention that our data had a significant difference in age between depressive and control subjects (Table 1) unlike 
usual case-control studies on psychiatric disorders. In fact, the bias could correlate with a risk and/or a severity of 
depression to some degree, as the feature ‘age’ was assigned to the same view as several clinical scores of depres-
sion symptoms in our clustering result (view 6 in Table 2). However, this view was independent of that containing 
AG-related FC score and CATS score (view 10 in Table 2), suggesting that the age bias has little influence on our 
main results.
Data Availability
Due to potentially identifying information, the data for this study are ethically restricted by the Ethical Commit-
tee for Epidemiology of Hiroshima University, Japan. Interested, qualified researchers may request the data by 
contacting Dr. Shoji Karatsu (kasumi-kenkyu@office.hiroshimau.ac.jp).
Figure 7. Classification of D1, D2 and D3. Panel (a): Distribution of subjects in D1, D2, and D3 for AG-related 
FC and CATS scores. The dashed line denotes a possible threshold of AG-related FC score to discriminate 
between subjects in D3 and other subjects, while the dot-dashed line denotes a possible threshold of CATS score 
to discriminate between subjects in D1 and D2, provided that subjects in D3 have already been sorted out. Panel 
(b): Classifier of subjects based on AG-related FC (AG-FC) score and CATS score. Blue circles denote classifier’s 
relevant features, while red ones denote resultant subject clusters. ‘Responsive’ or ‘Resistant’ signs denote 
whether SSRI treatment may work or not based on after-six-week BDI scores. This classifier is established based 
on Panel (a).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
References
 1. National Institute of Mental Health. Health information: Depression, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.
shtml.
 2. Andrade, L. et al. The epidemiology of major depressive episodes: results from the international consortium of psychiatric 
epidemiology (ICPE) surveys. Int. J. Methods Psychiatr. Res. 12, 3–21 (2003).
 3.  American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) (American Psychiatric Pub, 
2013).
 4. Shimizu, Y. et al. Toward probabilistic diagnosis and understanding of depression based on functional MRI data analysis with 
logistic group LASSO. PLoS One 10, e0123524, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123524 (2015).
 5. Lord, A., Horn, D., Breakspear, M. & Walter, M. Changes in community structure of resting state functional connectivity in unipolar 
depression. PLoS One 7, e41282, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0041282 (2012).
 6. MacQueen, G. M. Abnormal hippocampal activation in patients with extensive history of major depression: an fMRI study. J. 
Psychiatry & Neurosci. 37, 28–36 (2012).
 7. Orrù, G., Pettersson-Yeo, W., Marquand, A. F., Sartori, G. & Mechelli, A. Using support vector machine to identify imaging 
biomarkers of neurological and psychiatric disease: a critical review. Neurosci. & Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1140–1152 (2012).
 8. Van Loo, H. M., De Jonge, P., Romeijn, J.-W., Kessler, R. C. & Schoevers, R. A. Data-driven subtypes of major depressive disorder: a 
systematic review. BMC Medicine 10, 156, https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-10-156 (2012).
 9. de Vos, S., Wardenaar, K. J., Bos, E. H., Wit, E. C. & de Jonge, P. Decomposing the heterogeneity of depression at the person-, 
symptom-, and time-level: latent variable models versus multimode principal component analysis. BMC. Med. Res. Methodol. 15, 88, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-015-0080-4 (2015).
 
10. Hybels, C. F., Blazer, D. G., Pieper, C. F., Landerman, L. R. & Steffens, D. C. Profiles of depressive symptoms in older adults diagnosed 
with major depression: latent cluster analysis. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 17, 387–396 (2009).
 
11. Lamers, F. et al. Identifying depressive subtypes in a large cohort study: results from the netherlands study of depression and anxiety 
(NESDA). The J. Clin. Psychiatry 71, 1–478 (2010).
 
12. Craddock, R. C., Holtzheimer, P. E., Hu, X. P. & Mayberg, H. S. Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity. 
Magn. Reson. Medicine 62, 1619–1628 (2009).
 
13. Zeng, L.-L. et al. Identifying major depression using whole-brain functional connectivity: a multivariate pattern analysis. Brain 135, 
1498–1507 (2012).
 
14. Yamamura, T. et al. Association of thalamic hyperactivity with treatment-resistant depression and poor response in early treatment 
for major depression: a resting-state fMRI study using fractional amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations. Transl. Psychiatry 6, e754, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2016.18 (2016).
 
15. European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products. Guideline on clinical investigation of medicinal products in the 
treatment of depression, http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2012/10/WC500133437.
pdf (2013).
 
16. Dichter, G. S., Gibbs, D. & Smoski, M. J. A systematic review of relations between resting-state functional-MRI and treatment 
response in major depressive disorder. J. Affect Disord. 172, 8–17 (2015).
 
17. Greicius, M. D. et al. Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual 
cingulate cortex and thalamus. Biol. Psychiatry 62, 429–437 (2007).
 
18. Guo, W. et al. Abnormal resting-state cerebellar–cerebral functional connectivity in treatment-resistant depression and treatment 
sensitive depression. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biol. Psychiatry 44, 51–57 (2013).
 
19. Ma, C. et al. Resting-state functional connectivity bias of middle temporal gyrus and caudate with altered gray matter volume in 
major depression. PLoS One 7, e45263, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0045263 (2012).
 
20. Zeng, L.-L., Shen, H., Liu, L. & Hu, D. Unsupervised classification of major depression using functional connectivity MRI. Hum. 
Brain. Mapp. 35, 1630–1641 (2014).
 
21. Agrawal, R., Gehrke, J., Gunopulos, D. & Raghavan, P. Automatic subspace clustering of high dimensional data for data mining 
applications, vol. 27 (ACM, 1998).
 
22. Clementz, B. A. et al. Identification of distinct psychosis biotypes using brain-based biomarkers. Am. J. Psychiatry 173, 373–384 
(2015).
 
23. Drysdale, A. T. et al. Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of depression. Nat. Medicine. 23, 
28–38 (2017).
 
24. Kriegel, H.-P., Kröger, P. & Zimek, A. Clustering high-dimensional data: A survey on subspace clustering, pattern-based clustering, 
and correlation clustering. ACM Transactions on Knowl. Discov. from Data (TKDD) 3, 1, https://doi.org/10.1145/1497577.149757 
(2009).
 
25. Tokuda, T. et al. Multiple co-clustering based on nonparametric mixture models with heterogeneous marginal distributions. PLoS 
One 12, e0186566, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186566 (2017).
 
26. Fossati, P. et al. Qualitative analysis of verbal fluency in depression. Psychiatry Res. 117, 17–24 (2003).
 
27. Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R. & Ranieri, W. F. Comparison of beck depression inventories-IA and-II in psychiatric outpatients. J. 
Pers. Assess. 67, 588–597 (1996).
 
28. Matsuoka, K., Uno, M., Kasai, K., Koyama, K. & Kim, Y. Estimation of premorbid IQ in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease using 
Japanese ideographic script (Kanji) compound words: Japanese version of National Adult Reading Test. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 
60, 332–339 (2006).
 
29. Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging. Statistical Parametric Mapping, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/.
 
30. Van Den Heuvel, M. P. & Pol, H. E. H. Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity. Eur. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 20, 519–534 (2010).
 
31. Shirer, W., Ryali, S., Rykhlevskaia, E., Menon, V. & Greicius, M. Decoding subject-driven cognitive states with whole-brain 
connectivity patterns. Cereb. Cortex 22, 158–165 (2012).
 
32. Neuropsychiatric Disorders Lab at Stanford University. Functional ROIs, http://findlab.stanford.edu/functional_ROIs.html.
 
33. Tokuda, T. & Yoshimoto, J. Multiple co-clustering based on nonparametric mixture models (Github), https://github.com/
tomokitokuda/Multiple-Co-clustering (2018).
 
34. Escobar, M. D. & West, M. Bayesian density estimation and inference using mixtures. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 90, 577–588 (1995).
 
35. Ferguson, T. S. A Bayesian analysis of some nonparametric problems. The Annals Stat. 1, 209–230 (1973).
 
36. McLachlan, G. & Peel, D. Finite Mixture Models (John Wiley & Sons, 2004).
 
37. Cohen, J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (second edition) (Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, 1988).
 
38. Nanni, V., Uher, R. & Danese, A. Childhood maltreatment predicts unfavorable course of illness and treatment outcome in 
depression: a meta-analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 169, 141–151 (2012).
 
39. Dantzer, R., O’Connor, J. C., Freund, G. G., Johnson, R. W. & Kelley, K. W. From inflammation to sickness and depression: when the 
immune system subjugates the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 46–56 (2008).
 
40. Miller, G. E. & Cole, S. W. Clustering of depression and inflammation in adolescents previously exposed to childhood adversity. Biol. 
Psychiatry 72, 34–40 (2012).
 
41. Seghier, M. L. The angular gyrus multiple functions and multiple subdivisions. Neurosci. 19, 43–61 (2013).
 
42. Tomasi, D. & Volkow, N. D. Functional connectivity hubs in the human brain. Neuroimage 57, 908–917 (2011).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific REPORts |  (2018) 8:14082  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z
 
43. Aston, C., Jiang, L. & Sokolov, B. Transcriptional profiling reveals evidence for signaling and oligodendroglial abnormalities in the 
temporal cortex from patients with major depressive disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 10, 309 (2005).
 
44. Sanacora, G. et al. Subtype-specific alterations of γ
-aminobutyric acid and glutamatein patients with major depression. Arch. Gen. 
Psychiatry 61, 705–713 (2004).
 
45. Lai, T.-J., Payne, M. E., Byrum, C. E., Steffens, D. C. & Krishnan, K. R. R. Reduction of orbital frontal cortex volume in geriatric 
depression. Biol. Psychiatry 48, 971–975 (2000).
 
46. Capotosto, P., Babiloni, C., Romani, G. L. & Corbetta, M. Resting-state modulation of alpha rhythms by interference with angular 
gyrus activity. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 26, 107–119 (2014).
 
47. Craig, A., Tran, Y., Wijesuriya, N. & Nguyen, H. Regional brain wave activity changes associated with fatigue. Psychophysiology 49, 
574–582 (2012).
 
48. Frodl, T. S. et al. Depression-related variation in brain morphology over 3 years: effects of stress? Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 65, 1156–1165 
(2008).
 
49. Alalade, E., Denny, K., Potter, G., Steffens, D. & Wang, L. Altered cerebellar-cerebral functional connectivity in geriatric depression. 
PLoS One 6, e20035, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020035 (2011).
 
50. Liu, L. et al. Altered cerebellar functional connectivity with intrinsic connectivity networks in adults with major depressive disorder. 
PLoS One 7, e39516, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0039516 (2012).
 
51. Ma, Q., Zeng, L.-L., Shen, H., Liu, L. & Hu, D. Altered cerebellar–cerebral resting-state functional connectivity reliably identifies 
major depressive disorder. Brain Res. 1495, 86–94 (2013).
 
52. Hubert, L. & Arabie, P. Comparing partitions. J. Classif. 2, 193–218 (1985).
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Strategic Research Program for Brain Sciences from Japan Agency for Medical 
Research and development, AMED. We would like to thank Dr. Steven D. Aird at Okinawa Institute of Science 
and Technology Graduate University for his proof-reading of this article.
Author Contributions
T.T., J.Y., Y.S. and K.D. carried out statistical analysis and gave interpretations. G.O., M.T., Y.O. and S.Y. designed a 
study, collected data and pre-processed functional MRI data. Y.S. evaluated functional connectivity in fMRI data, 
adopting template ROIs to our data. T.T. wrote the main manuscript text and prepared the figures.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32521-z.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
