 Providing chronic pain management in the “Fifth Vital Sign” Era: 
Historical and treatment perspectives on a modern-day medical 
dilemma
D. Andrew Tompkinsa,*, J. Greg Hobelmanna, and Peggy Comptonb
aDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
bDepartment of Family and Community Health, University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, 
Philadelphia PA, USA
Abstract
Background—Over 100 million Americans are living with chronic pain, and pain is the most 
common reason that patients seek medical attention. Despite the prevalence of pain, the practice of 
pain management and the scientific discipline of pain research are relatively new fields compared 
to the rest of medicine – contributing to a twenty-first century dilemma for health care providers 
asked to relieve suffering in the “Fifth Vital Sign” era.
Methods—This manuscript provides a narrative review of the basic mechanisms of chronic pain 
and history of chronic pain management in the United States – including the various regulatory, 
health system and provider factors that contributed to the decline of multidisciplinary pain 
treatment in favor of the predominant opioid treatment strategy seen today. Multiple non-opioid 
pain treatment strategies are then outlined. The manuscript concludes with three key questions to 
help guide future research at the intersection of pain and addiction.
Conclusions—The assessment and treatment of chronic pain will continue to be one of the most 
common functions of a health care provider. To move beyond an over reliance on opioid 
medications, the addiction and pain research communities must unite with chronic pain patients to 
increase the evidence base supporting non-opioid analgesic strategies.
Keywords
Opioids; Chronic pain; Chronic pain management; Multidisciplinary pain treatment; John J. 
Bonica
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
*Corresponding author. Behavioral Pharmacology Research Unit, 5510 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. 
Conflict of interest
JGH and PC have no conflicts of interest relevant to the contents of this manuscript.
Contributions
DAT conceived of the topic for the manuscript. DAT, JGH and PC contributed to writing the first draft and substantial editing of the 
manuscript. All authors have approved the final article.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017 April 01; 173(Suppl 1): S11–S21. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.12.002.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1. Introduction
Although pain is one of the most common human experiences, the scientific discipline of 
pain research and the medical subspecialty of pain management are relatively new fields. 
Prior to the 1800s, pain was largely viewed as an existential experience and accepted as a 
consequence of aging (Meldrum, 2003), but the twentieth century saw the medicalization of 
pain management with a growth in the knowledge of pain pathophysiology and in the variety 
of pain treatment strategies. This paper will focus on chronic pain, as this is an emerging 
field with high public health importance, and will provide (1) a review of the etiology of 
chronic pain, (2) an overview of the history of chronic pain management – including reasons 
behind the dramatic rise in opioids for the treatment of most chronic pain disorders, (3) an 
overview of non-opioid analgesic treatment strategies, and (4) guidance for future pain 
research needs.
To ensure consistency throughout this paper, it is important to first define chronic pain. Pain 
is “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue 
damage, or described in terms of such damage” (International Association for the Study of 
Pain, 1986). In this definition, pain is understood not just as a function of neuronal activity, 
but highlights the importance of higher-level cognitive processes that help interpret and 
define the pain experience for individuals. Pain is understood as an inherently subjective 
experience that does not require identifiable tissue damage to be clinically significant. 
Chronic pain is defined as pain that has lasted beyond the normal healing time for a given 
injury, operationalized as pain lasting >3 months (International Association for the Study of 
Pain, 1986). For treatment purposes, chronic pain is further divided as associated with or not 
associated with a terminal illness (usually cancer).
2. The epidemic of chronic pain in the United States
2.1. Differences between acute and chronic pain
A comprehensive review of the pain signaling pathway is beyond the scope of this review, 
but readers can reference reviews by Clark and Treisman (2004) and Leknes and Tracey 
(2008) for more information. Acute pain has a clear evolutionary and life-sustaining purpose 
– to bring attention to the occurrence of actual or potential tissue damage and to motivate the 
organism to remove itself from the cause of pain. Nociceptors are peripheral neurons whose 
main purpose is to detect painful stimuli, and can be stimulated by extremes in temperature 
(heat or cold), pressure, and/or chemicals most often released in the inflammatory response 
(Clark and Treisman, 2004). For example, only when a temperature stimulus reaches a 
physiologically determined point (usually 43 °C in healthy individuals) does a cutaneous 
heat nociceptor fire an action potential to indicate pain (Walk and Poliak-Tunis, 2016). 
Nociceptors transmit action potentials to the spinal cord or brainstem, and then to the 
cerebral cortex and thalamus. Direct injury to nerves through trauma, surgery, or chronic 
illnesses like diabetes mellitus or alcohol use disorder can also result in pain through 
spontaneous nociceptor transmission without painful stimuli, enhanced pain facilitation or 
pathologic neuroplasticity (Costigan et al., 2009).
Tompkins et al.
Page 2
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The rate of nociceptor firing (interpreted as pain intensity) can be influenced by the level of 
painful stimulus but also by peripheral and central sensitization. Peripherally, nociceptors 
can be changed via inflammatory mediators or repeated stimulation to fire at a lower 
intensity of stimuli that would not normally be painful (e.g., temperatures below 43 °C) 
(Petho and Reeh, 2012). Centrally, second-order neurons that transmit nociceptor input to 
the cortex and thalamus can also be sensitized to increase rate of firing by direct injury or 
ongoing inflammation (Cheng, 2010; Stemkowski and Smith, 2012). Lastly, neurons that 
originate from the periaqueductal gray and rostroventral medulla can amplify or decrease 
pain signaling (Ossipov et al., 2014).
Acute pain resolves after tissue healing in most individuals. However, certain persons 
progress from acute to chronic pain, known as pain chronification. Although the processes 
underlying chronification are not yet well understood, central nervous system changes to 
pain facilitation and inhibition (such as those mentioned above) are thought to play a role 
(Ossipov et al., 2014).
The rates of pain chronification vary based upon the type of acute pain (e.g., low back, post-
surgical, diabetic neuropathy) (Ossipov et al., 2014). However, the most consistent 
predictors of chronification across most types of acute pain are social and psychological 
factors. For example, Chou and Shekelle (Chou and Shekelle, 2010) found that maladaptive 
pain coping behaviors and co-occurring psychiatric illnesses were two of the strongest 
baseline predictors of chronic back pain. Pain catastrophizing, a validated set of negative 
emotional/cognitive processes involving pessimism, perceptions of helplessness, and 
magnification of pain-related symptoms, is associated with pain chronification after surgery 
(Edwards et al., 2009; Theunissen et al., 2012). Once developed, chronic pain may be 
considered a separate disease process that will need tailored interventions other than repair 
of the original injury to improve function. In that cure is rarely possible, a chronic disease 
approach is helpful in conceptualizing care of patients with chronic pain.
2.2. The prevalence of chronic pain
Approximately 100 million adults in the United States are affected by chronic pain at any 
given time, with chronic low back pain and headaches the most commonly diagnosed 
conditions (Gaskin and Richard, 2012). There are known demographic factors that 
predispose a person to develop chronic pain. For instance, women are more likely to report 
chronic pain than men (34.3% vs. 26.7% in a nationally representative sample in the US) 
(Johannes et al., 2010). In addition, the prevalence of chronic pain increases with age 
(Rustoen et al., 2005; Tsang et al., 2008; Shmagel et al., 2016). Persons with lower annual 
household income have greater odds of reporting chronic pain compared to persons with 
higher annual income (Shmagel et al., 2016). Lastly, persons with mental illness 
(McWilliams et al., 2003) have greater odds of chronic pain compared to the general 
population without these disorders. Irrespective of these differences in chronic pain 
prevalence, the total health care costs for chronic pain treatment are estimated to range 
between $560 to 635 billion per year in the United States, eclipsing the annual costs of heart 
disease, diabetes and cancer (Gaskin and Richard, 2012).
Tompkins et al.
Page 3
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. A history of chronic pain management: follow the money
3.1. The beginning: multidisciplinary in nature
John J. Bonica, an anesthesiogist, is widely considered to be the father of modern pain 
management. He was trained in an era of the “specificity theory of pain” that stated pain 
resulted from an identifiable injury. According to this perspective, correction of that injury 
(through surgery or rehabilitation) or blockade of the nociceptors in that area (“regional 
anesthesia”) should provide complete pain relief. Dissatisfied with the results of his own 
management of chronic pain in soldiers using regional anesthesia during WWII, John 
Bonica began consulting with clinicians from different disciplines (e.g., neurology, 
psychiatry, and orthopedics) on difficult patients to improve analgesic response and 
functional outcomes. As he noticed an improvement in pain relief and function in this 
consultation practice, he developed the first multidisciplinary pain clinic based upon these 
experiences at Tacoma General Hospital in the 1950s. This clinic attempted to increase the 
efficiency of consultative practice and decrease patient burden by co-locating all staff 
members in the same space. He transferred the clinic to the University of Washington in 
Seattle in the 1960s (Benedetti and Chapman, 2005) when he became chair of the 
Department of Anesthesia. Dr. Bonica’s original clinic had inpatient and outpatient 
components.
The subsequent addition of operant conditioning methods from the psychologist Wilbert 
Fordyce allowed the clinic to provide marked improvements in patient self-management of 
pain (Fordyce et al., 1973). These methods included rewarding patient behaviors associated 
with improvement through positive staff feedback (e.g., improved exercise tolerance, 
increases in work and social activities) and extinction of “pain behaviors” (e.g., verbal or 
facial pain complaints, reliance on medications for pain management, and stopping exercise 
to sit) by administering medication on a schedule (as opposed to whenever a patient reported 
increased pain) and providing rest only after exercise regimens are completed (as opposed to 
when pain increases).
Over time, the pain community came together to provide guidelines to what constitutes a 
multidisciplinary pain treatment program. First, the clinic should be staffed with clinicians 
trained in pain management from various disciplines: at least two physicians, a pain 
psychologist, a physical therapist, and additional health care providers as needed to address 
unique patient populations served in the clinic (e.g., occupational therapist with knowledge 
about return to work evaluations) (Gatchel et al., 2014). Second, there should be regular 
meetings with all staff members present to discuss ongoing patient care issues. Third, 
assessment and treatment options should be comprehensive and include (at a minimum): 
physical exam, medication management, biopsychosocial evaluation, cognitive behavioral 
treatment for chronic pain, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and ability to refer to 
specialists not offered by the team. Fourth, the clinic team should be co-located in the same 
space and share a common philosophy of pain rehabilitation.
Due to improvement in overall patient functioning, reductions in health care expenditures 
and an increase in rate of patients returned to employment, the multidisciplinary pain clinic 
was deemed a success (Flor et al., 1992; Kamper et al., 2015). In these published meta-
Tompkins et al.
Page 4
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analyses, multidisciplinary pain clinics were compared to single discipline treatment (e.g., 
physical therapy, medication management), usual medical care, and/or no treatment. 
Impressively, treatment gains remained evident for up to 13 years (Roberts et al., 1993; 
Patrick et al., 2004). Analyses of patient outcomes revealed that it wasn’t any single 
component of the clinic treatment that led to improvements in pain outcomes, but rather an 
effect of the concerted biopsychosocial team approach (Linssen and Spinhoven, 1992; 
Schatman, 2010). Subsequently, the number of pain clinics and accredited pain fellowship 
programs flourished, most of which used opioid therapy sparingly due to concerns of 
addiction and poor outcomes (Meldrum, 2003). These early clinics were multidisciplinary 
using similar methods to Bonica’s original model, or clinics focused on a single pain 
syndrome (e.g., migraine headaches) or single treatment modality (e.g., providing nerve 
blockade or physical therapy) (Bonica, 1990).
3.2. The peculiar fall of multidisciplinary pain clinics: money matters
Several economic factors have been attributed to a decrease in the number of 
multidisciplinary pain clinics since the 1990s and an increase in the single modality, 
interventional and opioid-focused clinics. First, market forces emerged to reduce 
reimbursement rates for multidisciplinary clinics. Use of the American Medical 
Association’s current procedural terminology (CPT) codes became necessary for 
reimbursement of most health services in the early 1980s. As CPT codes were originally 
designed to be used in medical charting to describe an intervention (e.g., an appendectomy), 
these codes inherently emphasized fee-for-service model of health care delivery, and ran 
counter to the multidisciplinary pain clinic model of providing a package of services – all of 
which were necessary for optimal patient outcomes. Unless individual clinics contracted 
with payers (e.g., worker’s compensation carriers, insurance carriers) to provide bundled 
services for enrollees, clinics had to bill for each service separately. Denials of claims 
became commonplace and threatened clinic solvency due to lengthy appeals processes.
The growth of managed care in the late 1980s and early 1990s led to “carving out” specific 
services in the multidisciplinary pain clinic, e.g., physical therapy would not be reimbursable 
if performed by therapists in the multidisciplinary pain clinic but needed to be performed by 
an alternate clinic across town. Subsequent studies showed worse pain treatment and 
decreased overall cost savings outcomes with this approach (Gatchel et al., 2001; Robbins et 
al., 2003). For example, patients at one multidisciplinary pain treatment center who were 
required by insurance companies to attend off-site physical therapy had no significant 
improvements in overall pain level, pain related disability, or physical/mental functioning, 
compared to similar contemporaneous patients completing the full multidisciplinary 
treatment program on-site who achieved significant improvements in all of those realms.
Second, the academic medical centers that housed and often subsidized many of the 
multidisciplinary pain clinics became increasingly concerned with profits. Finite clinic space 
began to be allocated to programs with the highest profit margins (e.g., plastic surgery, 
orthopedics, or cardiology), at the expense of multidisciplinary pain treatment programs, 
which brought in significantly less revenue after the advent of managed care (Schatman, 
2010).
Tompkins et al.
Page 5
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Third, as pain fellowship physician training programs developed, they came to be recognized 
as a subspecialty under anesthesiology, thus training and accreditation bodies placed more 
emphasis on proficiency in procedure-based care (e.g., nerve blocks, ablations, and 
insertions of spinal cord stimulators – please see below) than being a member of a 
multidisciplinary care team. This is reflected by the training curriculums and certifying 
examinations (Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, 2016). As a result, 
increasing numbers of pain fellowship graduates were prepared for and sought employment 
performing procedures in often highly lucrative modality specific pain clinics. As a result of 
all these forces, many of the multidisciplinary pain treatment clinics established in the 1970s 
and 80 s closed due to financial concerns – leaving the majority of chronic pain care in the 
hands of primary care providers and modality specific chronic pain treatment clinics.
3.3. Pain as the “Fifth Vital Sign”
Since the passage of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914, physicians and patients alike had 
been afraid of developing addiction if placed on morphine or other opioids (Meldrum, 
2003). Therefore, opioids were used sparingly in the treatment of chronic pain; in addition to 
addiction, concerns of tolerance limiting analgesic efficacy contraindicated their use for 
treating chronic pain. However, there was increased recognition that many terminal patients 
lived out their last days in agonizing pain. Specialists in palliative care, such as Kathleen 
Foley and her fellow, Russell Portenoy, at Memorial Sloan Kettering recognized the relief 
that opioids brought to dying cancer patients through extensive clinical experience in the 
1970s and 80 s (Foley, 1985; Portenoy and Foley, 1986). Concurrently, the World Health 
Organization developed cancer pain treatment guidelines that included opioids for the first 
time and recognized the treatment of pain as a universal right (World Health Organization, 
1986; Lohman et al., 2010).
Shortly thereafter, the American Pain Society (APS) initiated an influential campaign, “Pain, 
The Fifth Vital Sign,” to raise awareness among health professionals of pain assessment and 
management. Although opioids were described as just one possible treatment option, the 
initiative did advocate a change in philosophy around use of opioids for chronic pain. 
Opioids were promoted as a way to improve quality at end of life. The Veteran’s Health 
Administration (VHA), the largest government run health-care system in the US, adopted 
pain as the 5th vital sign initiative in 1999–giving strong credibility to the campaign 
(Mularski et al., 2006).
By the late 1990s, it was generally accepted that all patients are entitled to the assessment 
and treatment of pain, resulting in influential regulatory bodies such as the Joint 
Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) mandating pain 
assessment and treatment of all patients in accredited health care settings by 2001 in order to 
receive federal health care dollars (Manchikanti et al., 2010a,b; Ahmedani et al., 2014). The 
Federation of State Medical Boards made a clear statement in 1998 that physicians would 
not receive excessive regulatory scrutiny if prescribing notable amounts of opioids – a fear 
that had previously reduced the willingness of physicians to prescribe opioids for chronic 
pain (Joranson et al., 2002). The Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) in 2001 also agreed to 
follow a “balanced policy” in examining prescribing practices that would encourage use of 
Tompkins et al.
Page 6
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 opioids to relieve pain and reduce oversight of physicians that had high rates of opioid 
prescribing.
Although the APS campaign led to increases in pain research, education, and an important 
focus on pain relief, there have been unintended consequences resulting in an overreliance 
on opioids to treat chronic non-malignant pain. Health care providers accredited by the 
JCAHO were mandated to implement adequate pain assessment and treatment methods for 
all patients in a relatively short period of time (2 years). Although specific analgesic 
treatments (non-pharmacologic and pharmacologic) were left up to the individual physician 
or provider, these health care facilities developed policies that liberalized the use of opioids 
in an attempt to meet JCAHO standards. In addition, as patient satisfaction (including pain 
relief) became an increasingly valued health care outcome, clinicians in these facilities were 
further encouraged to use opioids to control pain quickly and as completely as possible. 
Although higher opioid use remains a theoretical risk of rewarding patient satisfaction scores 
(Zgierska et al., 2012), a national study showed health care facilities that have highest 
patient satisfaction scores reported greater expenditures on prescription drugs then those 
with lowest satisfaction scores (Fenton et al., 2012).
During the 1990s and early 2000s, provider and patient fears of addiction to prescribed 
opioids were minimized due to an overemphasis on the findings of two small retrospective 
studies which suggested that patients rarely develop opioid use disorder when opioids were 
prescribed for the treatment of pain (Porter and Jick, 1980; Portenoy and Foley, 1986). The 
first was a letter that suggested very low (0.03%) addiction rates in hospitalized patients 
provided doses of opioids for acute, non-recurrent pain (Porter and Jick, 1980). The second 
reported on 38 patients from one practice prescribed opioids for chronic non-malignant pain 
(Portenoy and Foley, 1986), and showed only 2 patients (5.3%), both with history of 
substance use disorder, developed management problems (dose escalation and diversion, 
respectively). These reports became heavily cited in peer-reviewed and non-peer reviewed 
literature (Fig. 1); the reports were also incorporated into training of new physicians, nurses, 
dentists and other health care providers. However, these early claims of low addiction risk 
when generalized to chronic pain management were based upon insufficient evidence as 
history has shown.
3.4. Opioid prescribing skyrockets
Related to the historical shifts outlined above, the treatment of chronic non-cancer pain 
became a new and growing indication for an opioid prescription. Most famously, Purdue 
Pharmaceuticals introduced Oxycontin® (oxycodone extended release) in 1996, which was 
marketed aggressively with FDA-approved labeling to claim that iatrogenic addiction was 
“very rare” and “delayed absorption of OxyContin was believed to reduce the abuse liability 
of the drug” (Van Zee, 2009). This resulted in an exponential increase in the number of 
Oxycontin prescriptions from 670,000 in 1997 to about 6.2 million in 2002, when the label 
was changed to drop the above language. Despite the change in label and a lawsuit judgment 
for over $630 million for continuing to claim falsely that OxyContin was less addictive than 
other opioids, US sales of Oxycontin continued to be close to 6.5 million prescriptions 
annually until August 2010 when a reformulated “abuse deterrent” Oxycontin was brought 
Tompkins et al.
Page 7
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to market (Hwang et al., 2015). As with Oxycontin, prescriptions for all opioids increased 
dramatically throughout the late 1990s and 2000s. Opioid prescriptions were frequently 
written by practitioners without specialty training (including dentists), and in a few rare 
cases, by providers who focused on writing opioid prescriptions for profit.
3.5. Does chronic opioid therapy improve treatment outcomes?
At present, there is no conclusive answer to the above question. A systematic review was 
completed in preparation for the 2016 CDC guidelines on the use of opioids for the 
treatment of chronic non-malignant pain in primary care. The review inclusion criteria 
specified studies of opioid analgesic effectiveness must have >12 months of follow-up and 
be compared to a non-opioid control, but studies of opioid harms could be uncontrolled and 
have any length of follow-up. As a result, no controlled studies on opioid effectiveness met 
inclusion criteria but 19 studies (mostly uncontrolled studies using claims databases) were 
included that examined harms. The review concluded that there were no well-controlled 
long-term studies indicating that opioid treatment for pain beyond twelve weeks effectively 
relieves pain or improves function (Chou et al., 2015). These clinical trials focused mainly 
on pain relief and did not typically report on other pain related outcomes, including quality 
of life, reduction in disability, or return to work. In contrast, there are multiple reports in the 
peer-reviewed literature from single-arm observational studies, open label designs and case 
reports that include hundreds of individuals maintained on chronic opioid therapy (>12 
months) for a variety of pain diagnoses that saw sustained improvement in pain levels (Zenz 
et al., 1992; Milligan et al., 2001; Allan et al., 2005; Chao, 2005; McIlwain and Ahdieh, 
2005; Portenoy et al., 2007). Thus, despite the lack of controlled long-term studies >12 
weeks, there is clinical consensus from pain management practitioners that some patients do 
well on chronic opioids (Chou et al., 2009). Given the discrepancy between systematic 
reviews of controlled studies and clinical consensus, there is no clear answer on whether 
chronic opioid therapy can improve pain level, pain-related disability, or quality of life in 
patients. In addition, it is important to include in a balanced perspective that chronic opioid 
therapy is associated with overdose death, development of substance use disorder, fractures, 
and sexual dysfunction (Chou et al., 2015).
4. Effective pain management strategies: beyond prescription opioids
An unfortunate consequence of the recent focus on prescription opioids to treat chronic pain 
has been a lack of research on, and clinical attention to the efficacy of a wide variety of non-
opioid chronic pain management strategies. The primary goals of chronic pain management 
are discovering a cause, alleviating suffering, and restoring function. Biologic, 
psychological, and social factors all play a role in the perception and chronification of pain 
and each should be assessed and managed as needed. As previously reviewed, strong 
consensus supported by meta-analytic reviews affirms that a multidisciplinary rehabilitation 
approach to the treatment of chronic pain is more effective compared to single modality/
single practitioner treatment options (Flor et al., 1992; Kamper et al., 2015; Semrau et al., 
2015) However, this treatment option is not widely available. Therefore, the following 
section outlines various treatment approaches to better assist the reader in understanding the 
wide array of other chronic pain treatment options. Included are opioid and non-opioid 
Tompkins et al.
Page 8
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pharmacotherapies, physical therapy, psychological and behavioral therapies, 
complementary and alternative medicine strategies, peripheral procedures, spinal 
procedures, and surgery (Table 1). As with opioid clinical trials, controlled trials of non-
opioid analgesic strategies are typically short (< 12 weeks) and so long-term effectiveness 
data for chronic pain using these strategies is limited (Tayeb et al., 2016).
4.1. Non-opioid pharmacotherapies
There are numerous medications used to treat chronic non-malignant pain that target the 
mechanisms of peripheral and central sensitization, the proposed mechanisms contributing 
to pain chronification, e.g., sodium and calcium channel upregulation, spinal 
hyperexcitability, descending modulation and loss of inhibitory interneurons. Aspirin, 
acetaminophen, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS; e.g., ibuprofen or 
naproxen) are the first choice in the pharmacological management of acute pain (Blondell et 
al., 2013), but can also be useful in the management of mild to moderate chronic pain as 
single agents or as a component of multimodal pain control in severe chronic pain (Enthoven 
et al., 2016). NSAIDs are more effective in the treatment of chronic musculoskeletal pain 
(e.g., osteoarthritis, chronic non-specific low back pain) compared to neuropathic pain. In 
addition, naproxen has been FDA approved for pain associated with ankylosing spondylitis, 
an inflammatory autoimmune disorder that causes the vertebrae of the spine to fuse together. 
Significant side effects of NSAIDs include bleeding, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and renal 
failure. Long-term use is not recommended unless under the care of a physician or other 
prescriber.
Antidepressants and anticonvulsants are frequently used in the treatment of chronic 
neuropathic pain (McCleane, 2008; Attal and Bouhassira, 2015; Finnerup et al., 2015). The 
analgesic effects of antidepressants are thought to be independent of their antidepressant 
effects, as persons without current major depressive disorder receive significant analgesic 
benefit (Lynch and Watson, 2006). Duloxetine is the only antidepressant to have FDA 
approval for the treatment of chronic pain (diabetic peripheral neuropathy, fibromyalgia, and 
chronic musculoskeletal pain), although antidepressants with dual serotonin and 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibition are used off-label to provide pain relief (Table 1). 
Prescribers should watch for the development of new suicidal thoughts, hyponatremia, 
serotonin syndrome, and hepatitis/liver failure while using anti-depressants, and patients 
should be counseled that pain relief often occurs slowly over time (usually 4–6 weeks after 
reaching an effective dose). Anticonvulsants reduce pain by inhibiting excessive neuronal 
firing, including nociceptors. First and second generation anticonvulsants (e.g., gabapentin 
and pregabalin) are FDA approved for the treatment of a variety of neuropathic conditions 
including diabetic neuropathy, trigeminal neuralgia, and post-herpetic neuralgia (Lynch and 
Watson, 2006). As with anti-depressants, patients should be counseled that pain relief may 
take 4–6 weeks to occur and monitored for the development of new-onset suicidal ideation, 
sedation leading to falls, hypoglycemia, and acute renal insufficiency (Table 1). There is also 
increasing evidence that patients may misuse or abuse gabapentin (Chiappini and Schifano, 
2016; Smith et al., 2016).
Tompkins et al.
Page 9
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4.2. Physical therapy (PT)
Reductions in pain related to medications and invasive procedures can enable patients to 
fully participate with PT, which has an important role in pain relief and restoration of 
function in chronic pain patients (Krismer et al., 2007). PT should strongly be considered for 
the management of chronic pain to gradually increase flexibility and strength, for example in 
knee osteoarthritis where there is demonstrated benefit (Fransen et al., 2015). A referral 
from a physiatrist, primary care physician or nurse practitioner is often required before 
initiating PT. Although initially therapist-directed, PT can become self-directed over time. A 
course of PT usually requires an intake assessment and 8–12 PT sessions over the course of 
4–6 weeks. Techniques include stretching exercises, manipulations, hot or cold applications, 
traction, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), and massage. Risks of PT 
include myocardial infarction leading to sudden death, as well as worsening pain (especially 
at beginning of treatment).
4.3. Psychological and behavioral therapies
Many psychological and behavioral therapies have been used in the treatment of pain and its 
associated disability and distress – irrespective of the presence or absence of mental illness 
(Eccleston et al., 2009). Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is an effective approach based 
on the theory that beliefs, attitudes, and expectations affect emotional and behavioral 
reactions to life experiences, including pain. Patients are taught to be active participants in 
the management of their pain with the goals of increasing activity, independence, and 
resourcefulness. Persons with high levels of pain catastrophizing may especially benefit 
from psychological and behavioral therapies (Smeets et al., 2006). CBT usually requires 12 
weeks of treatment to see maximum benefit, with hour-long weekly individual sessions with 
a therapist and homework to be completed outside of sessions. A referral is often needed, 
and the availability of pain-informed CBT therapists is a problem for many patients. 
Unfortunately, a systematic review found that pain relief that occurred after CBT does not 
persist long-term (Williams et al., 2012).
A recent randomized clinical trial has also shown the promise of mindfulness based stress 
reduction (MBSR) as a treatment for chronic pain (Cherkin et al., 2016). MBSR is usually 
provided in group sessions lasting 2 h weekly for up to 8 weeks. Patients are also asked to 
practice MBSR techniques at home in between sessions. Pain relief tends to be short-term 
but improvements in physical functioning have been maintained up to 26 weeks of follow-up 
(Cherkin et al., 2016). MBSR therapists do not require masters or doctoral level training in 
counseling/psychology. However, specialized training is required, and insurance does not 
typically cover MBSR.
4.4. Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)
Increasingly, patients are turning to pain interventions that are not commonly taught in 
medical training and are less often covered by insurance payers. CAM treatments include 
acupuncture, manipulation, vitamins and supplements (fish oil, capsaicin, glucosamine), 
yoga, music therapy, biofeedback, and hypnosis. Other than acupuncture and spinal 
manipulation, these strategies have been less rigorously studied in clinical trials and little is 
known about the long-term benefits or harms (Murthy et al., 2015). Acupuncture is a part of 
Tompkins et al.
Page 10
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 traditional Chinese Medicine that involves the stimulation of specific parts of the body 
through the use of needles. Acupuncture has been used for pain management for two 
thousand years in China. Recently, electrical currents have been added to further stimulate 
the needles in electroacupuncture, although manual acupuncture without electrical current is 
the most commonly used method. The exact analgesic mechanism for acupuncture is not 
known, although growing evidence points towards acupuncture needles stimulating 
mechanoreceptors, which triggers a release of endorphins and increased activity of the 
descending inhibitory pain pathways (Leung, 2012). Although acupuncture has been used to 
treat a wide variety of pain syndromes (e.g., osteoarthritis, chronic pelvic pain, fibromyalgia, 
chronic low back pain), systematic reviews revealed mostly short-term benefits. In patients 
with osteoarthritis, acupuncture can improve physical functioning that is maintained over 
follow-up but does not provide significantly greater pain relief compared to sham 
acupuncture in long-term follow-up (Lin et al., 2016). In addition, no long-term follow up 
studies have demonstrated that acupuncture provides greater pain relief for chronic neck 
pain or chronic nonspecific low back pain compared to sham acupuncture but short-term 
pain relief is superior comparing active to sham acupuncture (Yuan et al., 2015; Trinh et al., 
2016). Acupuncture is superior to sham acupuncture for reducing pain from chronic 
prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome, although long-term follow-up studies are lacking. 
(Liu et al., 2016).
Spinal manipulation are treatments that “use high velocity/low amplitude to move a joint 
that is exhibiting somatic dysfunction through its restrictive barrier” (Ruddock et al., 2016). 
Typically, chiropractors perform spinal manipulations although doctors of osteopathic 
medicine are also trained in these treatments. There is no consensus on the exact procedure 
for spinal manipulation, and insurance does not often cover them. In a recent meta-analysis 
of sham controlled RCTs, there was evidence that spinal manipulation improved pain ratings 
post-treatment and in 1 month follow-up compared to sham in patients with chronic non-
specific low back pain (Ruddock et al., 2016). However, there have been no well-controlled 
long-term follow-up studies to demonstrate if these improvements are lasting. In addition, 
adverse events are not always reported in RCTs of spinal manipulation, so weighing risks 
versus benefits is challenging (Gorrell et al., 2016).
4.5. Invasive pain management interventions: peripheral procedures, spinal procedures, 
and surgery
Invasive treatments that are used for the management of chronic pain include injections of 
local anesthetics and steroids, peripheral procedures, electrical stimulation, and surgery 
(Manchikanti et al., 2010a,b), which are typically provided by anesthesiologists, 
neurosurgeons, physiatrists, and other physicians trained in pain medicine (Table 1). The 
growth of interventional pain medicine (as described in Section 3) has shown dramatic 
growth in utilization of invasive pain management interventions. (Manchikanti et al., 2012), 
although, as described below, evidence of efficacy is often lacking.
Peripheral procedures include trigger point injections and intraarticular injections. Trigger 
point injections involve dry needling into the muscle tissue to induce a localized twitch 
response and subsequent ending of contracture (Gerwin et al., 2004). A recent systematic 
Tompkins et al.
Page 11
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 review showed that dry needling decreases pain immediately post-treatment compared to 
sham, and may result in pain relief lasting 3–6 months (Boyles et al., 2015). Injection of 
lidocaine or corticosteroid is also performed in some trigger point injections, although 
medication injection is not thought to improve upon dry needling (Cummings and White, 
2001; Boyles et al., 2015). For arthritic pain related to cartilage loss, intra-articular 
injections are performed with either a corticosteroid to reduce inflammation or sodium 
hyaluronate to form a viscoelastic solution that serves as a protective buffer between joints. 
Despite the lack of evidence from systematic reviews (Arrich et al., 2005; Machado et al., 
2013; Juni et al., 2015; Witteveen et al., 2015; McCabe et al., 2016), intraarticular injections 
continue to be performed (often repeatedly) in at least a third of Medicare patients with knee 
osteoarthritis (Koenig et al., 2016).
Spinal procedures are intended to interrupt the pain signaling pathway and include epidural 
injection of anesthetic (nerve blocks) +/− steroids, radiofrequency denervation, and insertion 
of spinal cord stimulators. Systematic reviews have not shown significant benefit of epidural 
steroid injections over standard treatment in chronic low back pain from any cause (Staal et 
al., 2009). Nerve blocks (involving epidural injections of lidocaine without steroids), 
however, do provide significant pain relief for lumbar radicular pain or pain from spinal 
stenosis compared to steroid injections (Manchikanti et al., 2016). Radiofrequency ablation 
uses electrical heat to produce a lesion in a pain-transmitting nerve, thereby blocking pain 
transmission and providing pain relief (Shealy, 1975). Systematic reviews have not 
demonstrated significant long-term pain relief with ablation compared to sham treatments, 
but may provide short-term pain relief for facet joint related pain (Maas et al., 2015). 
Electrical stimulation of the spinal cord occurs through an implanted device using low 
voltage electrical impulses to block pain transmission (Song et al., 2014), consistent with the 
gate control theory of pain (Melzack and Wall, 1965). Although pain relief can be significant 
in patients with few other options, there is a relatively high complication rate from this 
procedure (35% in a recent retrospective study (Hayek et al., 2015)) and ongoing device 
management is required.
Surgical interventions are usually reserved for patients that have failed to respond to more 
conservative measures or when there would be irreversible neurological damage without 
emergent surgical intervention (e.g., disc herniation, spinal stenosis) (Deyo et al., 2004). 
Scar tissue and adhesions can worsen the pain over time, and re-injury can occur (Chan and 
Peng, 2011). Therefore, a lengthy recovery time is recommended to ensure re-injury does 
not occur.
5. The provider’s dilemma: how to best treat chronic pain
A health care provider must often make clinical decisions based upon insufficient evidence, 
despite the call to evidence-based practice exclusively. In the case of chronic pain treatment, 
there are risks and benefits associated with each treatment option but little long-term (>12 
months) follow-up data. In addition, patients must consider, the practicalities of time 
required for each treatment, whether or not insurance covers the particular modality, and 
whether there are available providers who are licensed and taking new patients in the area. 
The importance of effectively treating pain is underscored by the increased odds of suicide, 
Tompkins et al.
Page 12
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 major depressive disorder, substance use and substance use disorders seen in chronic pain 
patients compared to persons without chronic pain (Barry et al., 2013; Gerrits et al., 2014; 
Hassett et al., 2014; Alford et al., 2016). In addition, there is evidence that untreated pain 
can also lead to relapse in patients with prior history of substance use disorders (Weiss et al., 
2014).
In the face of moral, ethical, legal and regulatory pressures to relieve suffering, writing a 
prescription, especially for opioids, has become the quickest and least expensive (to the 
patient) option in the US health care system for individuals seeking traditional medical 
treatment for chronic pain. Any physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant can 
prescribe opioids as long as he or she has the appropriate DEA and state practice license 
(exact guidelines differ between each state), and prescription opioids are almost universally 
covered by insurance. However, guidelines from various professional societies and 
governmental agencies provide conflicting recommendations on the use of opioids for 
chronic non-cancer pain (Chou et al., 2009; Dowell et al., 2016), so the provider is left with 
a difficult decision of whether or not to prescribe them.
If opioids are no longer the preferred chronic pain management strategy and there is a lack 
of multidisciplinary pain treatment centers, the primary care provider must overcome many 
hurdles to develop a multimodal treatment approach for each patient. Physical, 
psychological and behavioral therapies can be burdensome to the patient, requiring frequent 
(usually weekly or more) visits, as well as individual practice using techniques/exercise 
away from the clinic. Although usually covered by insurance, these often have higher out-of-
pocket expenses compared to prescription opioids, and limits on number of yearly visits – 
especially with psychological interventions. Pain relief usually takes time to manifest with 
PT, psychological and behavioral therapies, unlike immediate relief as after prescription 
opioid administration. Experience of the practitioner can vary, such that not every therapist 
is trained in pain or participates with an individual’s insurance plan. Other system barriers 
include need of referral, availability of licensed providers (including health behaviorists), 
time off from work, lack of childcare, and availability of transportation. In addition, patients 
may be hesitant to agree to psychological interventions due to perceived stigma or religious/
cultural biases (Jimenez et al., 2013).
Lastly, although single modality pain treatment centers are very frequent, there are 
geographic variations with rural areas having fewer practitioners. Additionally, practitioners 
may not have the expertise to perform the more complex procedures, such as insertion of 
spinal cord stimulator. These procedures also require insurance prior-authorization, and 
spinal cord stimulator insertion requires a psychological evaluation prior to procedure. In the 
current US health care system and with a limited evidence base, there are no easy solutions 
for providers to effectively treat chronic pain patients using a multimodal approach.
6. Future directions
As the use of opioids for the treatment of chronic pain undergoes increasing scrutiny, the 
next generation of pain treatment strategies is needed to take their place. It is doubtful, 
however, if the approximately 5–8 million individuals currently prescribed opioids for 
Tompkins et al.
Page 13
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chronic pain are going to suddenly stop or taper easily (Reuben et al., 2015). Although calls 
for responsible opioid prescribing will grow, there will certainly be opioid prescribing at 
high levels for years to come. In addition, then, to the existing data showing efficacy for 
multidisciplinary pain treatment approaches absent opioid pharmacotherapy, there is a new 
set of questions that will need to be answered to inform pain treatment of the future.
1.
What is the safety and efficacy of opioid medications used for the treatment 
of chronic non-cancer pain for periods >1 year? Data on longer-term 
outcomes from studies on the efficacy and risks of opioid therapy for chronic 
non-malignant pain are lacking. It is important to understand the conditions 
under which long-term benefits of pain relief might be observed and how the 
pain relief may change over time. It is also important to understand whether the 
risks of chronic exposure, especially addiction and physical dependence, are 
modulated by any long-term benefits of pain relief. An understanding of patient 
pain syndrome and medication-specific risk factors for both good and poor 
outcomes is also needed. It would be very helpful to enroll both persons with and 
without substance use disorders into future long-term studies.
2.
What are the system specific needs and barriers for the utility of non-opioid 
therapies for the treatment of chronic pain? Noted throughout this review is 
that access to potentially effective non-medication interventions is often limited 
by current models of health service reimbursement. New research strategies such 
as comparative efficacy and factorial design trials could provide useful guidance 
on the best and most cost-effective approaches to pain management in 
individuals with different characteristics and types of chronic pain. Funding for 
these studies should come from government and industry partnerships.
3.
What is the role of opioid pharmacotherapy in combination with non-opioid 
therapies in chronic pain management? If research shows that long-term use 
of opioids is useful at least for some types of pain patients, then this approach 
will need to be examined in interaction with other non-opioid therapies to 
determine optimal combination strategies.
This is an ambitious research agenda. However, given the debilitating effects of chronic 
pain, the numbers of individuals involved and the cost to society, it would appear to be a 
timely and useful undertaking. Clinicians continue to have an ethical and legal obligation to 
assess and treat pain. Therefore, research is urgently needed to increase the evidence base of 
chronic pain management so that we can begin the post-“opioid-opioid-opioid” era in pain 
management while improving outcomes and functionality for patients.
Acknowledgments
DAT has received medication supplies from Indivior, Inc. (formerly Reckitt-Benckiser Pharmaceuticals) for an 
investigator-initiated research protocol; consulted with Astra-Zeneca and Theravance; and is site principal 
investigator for a multisite clinical trial funded by Alkermes.
Role of funding source
Tompkins et al.
Page 14
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Salary support for DAT while preparing this manuscript was provided by NIDA (K23 DA029609). Although not 
playing a role in the preparation of this manuscript, a percentage of salary support for PC is provided by NIDA 
(U01 DA029580).
References
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). [Downloaded October 5 2016] 
ACGME Program Requirements for Graduate Medical Education in Pain Medicine 
(Anesthesiology, Neurology, Or Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation). 2016. Available at https://
www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/ProgramRequirements/530_pain_medicine_2016_1-YR.pdf
Ahmedani BK, Peterson EL, Wells KE, Lanfear DE, Williams LK. Policies and events affecting 
prescription opioid use for non-cancer pain among an insured patient population. Pain Physician. 
2014; 17:205–216. [PubMed: 24850102] 
Alford DP, German JS, Samet JH, Cheng DM, Lloyd-Travaglini CA, Saitz R. Primary care patients 
with drug use report chronic pain and self-medicate with alcohol and other drugs. J. Gen. Intern. 
Med. 2016; 31:486–491. [PubMed: 26809204] 
Allan L, Richarz U, Simpson K, Slappendel R. Transdermal fentanyl versus sustained release oral 
morphine in strong-opioid naive patients with chronic low back pain. Spine. 2005; 30:2484–2490. 
[PubMed: 16284584] 
Arrich J, Piribauer F, Mad P, Schmid D, Klaushofer K, Mullner M. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid for 
the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2005; 
172:1039–1043. [PubMed: 15824412] 
Attal N, Bouhassira D. Pharmacotherapy of neuropathic pain: which drugs, which treatment 
algorithms? Pain. 2015; 156(Suppl. 1):S104–14. [PubMed: 25789426] 
Barry DT, Pilver CE, Hoff RA, Potenza MN. Pain interference and incident mood, anxiety, and 
substance-use disorders: findings from a representative sample of men and women in the general 
population. J. Psychiatr. Res. 2013; 47:1658–1664. [PubMed: 23992771] 
Benedetti C, Chapman CR. John J. Bonica. A biography. Minerva Anestesiol. 2005; 71:391–396. 
[PubMed: 16012409] 
Blondell RD, Azadfard M, Wisniewski AM. Pharmacologic therapy for acute pain. Am. Fam. 
Physician. 2013; 87:766–772. [PubMed: 23939498] 
Bonica JJ. Evolution and current status of pain programs. J. Pain Symptom Manage. 1990; 5:368–374. 
[PubMed: 1702822] 
Boyles R, Fowler R, Ramsey D, Burrows E. Effectiveness of trigger point dry needling for multiple 
body regions: a systematic review. J. Man. Manip. Ther. 2015; 23:276–293. [PubMed: 26955257] 
Chan CW, Peng P. Failed back surgery syndrome. Pain Med. 2011; 12:577–606. [PubMed: 21463472] 
Chao J. Retrospective analysis of Kadian (morphine sulfate sustained-release capsules) in patients with 
chronic, nonmalignant pain. Pain Med. 2005; 6:262–265. [PubMed: 15972090] 
Cheng HT. Spinal cord mechanisms of chronic pain and clinical implications. Curr. Pain Headache 
Rep. 2010; 14:213–220. [PubMed: 20461476] 
Cherkin DC, Sherman KJ, Balderson BH, Cook AJ, Anderson ML, Hawkes RJ, Hansen KE, Turner 
JA. Effect of mindfulness-based stress reduction vs. cognitive behavioral therapy or usual care on 
back pain and functional limitations in adults with chronic low back pain: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA. 2016; 315:1240–1249. [PubMed: 27002445] 
Chiappini S, Schifano F. A decade of gabapentinoid misuse: an analysis of the european medicines 
agency’s ‘Suspected adverse drug reactions’ database. CNS Drugs. 2016; 30:647–654. [PubMed: 
27312320] 
Chou R, Shekelle P. Will this patient develop persistent disabling low back pain? JAMA. 2010; 
303:1295–1302. [PubMed: 20371789] 
Chou R, Fanciullo GJ, Fine PG, Adler JA, Ballantyne JC, Davies P, Donovan MI, Fishbain DA, Foley 
KM, Fudin J, Gilson AM, Kelter A, Mauskop A, O’Connor PG, Passik SD, Pasternak GW, 
Portenoy RK, Rich BA, Roberts RG, Todd KH, Miaskowski C. American Pain Society-American 
Academy of Pain Medicine Opioids Guidelines Panel. Clinical guidelines for the use of chronic 
opioid therapy in chronic noncancer pain. J. Pain. 2009; 10:113–130. [PubMed: 19187889] 
Tompkins et al.
Page 15
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Chou R, Turner JA, Devine EB, Hansen RN, Sullivan SD, Blazina I, Dana T, Bougatsos C, Deyo RA. 
The effectiveness and risks of long-term opioid therapy for chronic pain: a systematic review for a 
National Institutes of Health Pathways to Prevention Workshop. Ann. Intern. Med. 2015; 162:276–
286. [PubMed: 25581257] 
Clark MR, Treisman GJ. Neurobiology of pain. Adv. Psychosom. Med. 2004; 25:78–88. [PubMed: 
15248368] 
Costigan M, Scholz J, Woolf CJ. Neuropathic pain: a maladaptive response of the nervous system to 
damage. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2009; 32:1–32. [PubMed: 19400724] 
Cummings TM, White AR. Needling therapies in the management of myofascial trigger point pain: a 
systematic review. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2001; 82:986–992. [PubMed: 11441390] 
Deyo RA, Nachemson A, Mirza SK. Spinal-fusion surgery – the case for restraint. N. Engl. J. Med. 
2004; 350:722–726. [PubMed: 14960750] 
Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic pain – United 
States, 2016. JAMA. 2016; 315:1624–1645. [PubMed: 26977696] 
Eccleston C, Williams AC, Morley S. Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain 
(excluding headache) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2009; 2:CD007407.
Edwards RR, Haythornthwaite JA, Smith MT, Klick B, Katz JN. Catastrophizing and depressive 
symptoms as prospective predictors of outcomes following total knee replacement. Pain Res. 
Manage. 2009; 14:307–311.
Enthoven WT, Roelofs PD, Deyo RA, van Tulder MW, Koes BW. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs for chronic low back pain. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2016; 2:CD012087. [PubMed: 
26863524] 
Fenton JJ, Jerant AF, Bertakis KD, Franks P. The cost of satisfaction A national study of patient 
satisfaction, health care utilization, expenditures, and mortality. Arch. Int. Med. 2012; 172:405–
411. [PubMed: 22331982] 
Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, McNicol E, Baron R, Dworkin RH, Gilron I, Haanpaa M, 
Hansson P, Jensen TS, Kamerman PR, Lund K, Moore A, Raja SN, Rice AS, Rowbotham M, Sena 
E, Siddall P, Smith BH, Wallace M. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol. 2015; 14:162–173. [PubMed: 25575710] 
Flor H, Fydrich T, Turk DC. Efficacy of multidisciplinary pain treatment centers: a meta-analytic 
review. Pain. 1992; 49:221–230. [PubMed: 1535122] 
Foley KM. The treatment of cancer pain. N. Engl. J. Med. 1985; 313:84–95. [PubMed: 2582259] 
Fordyce WE, Fowler RS Jr, Lehmann JF, Delateur BJ, Sand PL, Trieschmann RB. Operant 
conditioning in the treatment of chronic pain. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 1973; 54:399–408. 
[PubMed: 4729785] 
Fransen M, McConnell S, Harmer AR, Van der Esch M, Simic M, Bennell KL. Exercise for 
osteoarthritis of the knee: a Cochrane systematic review. Br. J. Sports Med. 2015; 49:1554–1557. 
[PubMed: 26405113] 
Gaskin DJ, Richard P. The economic costs of pain in the United States. J. Pain. 2012; 13:715–724. 
[PubMed: 22607834] 
Gatchel RJ, Noe CE, Garaj NM, Vakharia AS, Polatin PB, Dreschner M, Pulliam C. Treatment carve-
out practices: their effect on managing pain at an interdisciplinary pain center. J. Work. Comp. 
2001; 10:50–63.
Gatchel RJ, McGeary DD, McGeary CA, Lippe B. Interdisciplinary chronic pain management: past, 
present, and future. Am. Psychol. 2014; 69:119–130. [PubMed: 24547798] 
Gerrits MM, van Oppen P, van Marwijk HW, Penninx BW, van der Horst HE. Pain and the onset of 
depressive and anxiety disorders. Pain. 2014; 155:53–59. [PubMed: 24012953] 
Gerwin RD, Dommerholt J, Shah JP. An expansion of Simons’ integrated hypothesis of trigger point 
formation. Curr. Pain Headache Rep. 2004; 8:468–475. [PubMed: 15509461] 
Gorrell LM, Engel RM, Brown B, Lystad RP. The reporting of adverse events following spinal 
manipulation in randomized clinical trials-a systematic review. Spine J. 2016; 16:1143–1151. 
[PubMed: 27241208] 
Hassett AL, Aquino JK, Ilgen MA. The risk of suicide mortality in chronic pain patients. Curr. Pain 
Headache Rep. 2014; 18:436. [PubMed: 24952608] 
Tompkins et al.
Page 16
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hayek SM, Veizi E, Hanes M. Treatment-limiting complications of percutaneous spinal cord 
stimulator implants: a review of eight years of experience from an academic center database. 
Neuromodulation. 2015; 18:603–608. [PubMed: 26053499] 
Hwang CS, Chang HY, Alexander GC. Impact of abuse-deterrent OxyContin on prescription opioid 
utilization. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 2015; 24:197–204. [PubMed: 25393216] 
International Association for the Study of Pain. Classification of chronic pain. Descriptions of chronic 
pain syndromes and definitions of pain terms. Prepared by the International Association for the 
Study of Pain, Subcommittee on Taxonomy. Pain. 1986:S1–226. [PubMed: 3461421] 
Jimenez DE, Bartels SJ, Cardenas V, Alegria M. Stigmatizing attitudes toward mental illness among 
racial/ethnic older adults in primary care. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry. 2013; 28:1061–1068. 
[PubMed: 23361866] 
Johannes CB, Le TK, Zhou X, Johnston JA, Dworkin RH. The prevalence of chronic pain in United 
States adults: results of an Internet-based survey. J. Pain. 2010; 11:1230–1239. [PubMed: 
20797916] 
Joranson DE, Gilson AM, Dahl JL, Haddox JD. Pain management, controlled substances, and state 
medical board policy: a decade of change. J. Pain Symptom Manage. 2002; 23:138–147. [PubMed: 
11844634] 
Juni P, Hari R, Rutjes AW, Fischer R, Silletta MG, Reichenbach S, da Costa BR. Intra-articular 
corticosteroid for knee osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2015; 10:CD005328.
Kamper SJ, Apeldoorn AT, Chiarotto A, Smeets RJ, Ostelo RW, Guzman J, van Tulder MW. 
Multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation for chronic low back pain: cochrane systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015; 350:h444. [PubMed: 25694111] 
Koenig KM, Ong KL, Lau EC, Vail TP, Berry DJ, Rubash HE, Kurtz S, Bozic KJ. The use of 
hyaluronic acid and corticosteroid injections among Medicare patients with knee osteoarthritis. J. 
Arthroplasty. 2016; 31:351–355. [PubMed: 26421601] 
Krismer M, van Tulder M. Low Back Pain Group of the Bone and Joint Health Strategies for Europe 
Project. Strategies for prevention and management of musculoskeletal conditions. Low back pain 
(non-specific). Best Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol. 2007; 21:77–91. [PubMed: 17350545] 
Leknes S, Tracey I. A common neurobiology for pain and pleasure. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2008; 9:314–
320. [PubMed: 18354400] 
Leung L. Neurophysiological basis of acupuncture-induced analgesia—An updated review. J. 
Acupunct. Meridian Stud. 2012; 5:261–270. [PubMed: 23265077] 
Lin X, Huang K, Zhu G, Huang Z, Qin A, Fan S. The effects of acupuncture on chronic knee pain due 
to osteoarthritis: a meta-analysis. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 2016; 98:1578–1585. [PubMed: 
27655986] 
Linssen AC, Spinhoven P. Multimodal treatment programmes for chronic pain: a quantitative analysis 
of existing research data. J. Psychosom. Res. 1992; 36:275–286. [PubMed: 1532985] 
Liu BP, Wang YT, Chen SD. Effect of acupuncture on clinical symptoms and laboratory indicators for 
chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. Urol. 
Nephrol. 2016; 48:1977–1991. [PubMed: 27590134] 
Lohman D, Schleifer R, Amon JJ. Access to pain treatment as a human right. BMC Med. 2010; 8:8. 
[PubMed: 20089155] 
Lynch ME, Watson CP. The pharmacotherapy of chronic pain. A review. Pain Res. Manag. 2006; 
11:11–38. [PubMed: 16511612] 
Maas ET, Ostelo RW, Niemisto L, Jousimaa J, Hurri H, Malmivaara A, van Tulder MW. 
Radiofrequency denervation for chronic low back pain. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2015; 
10:CD008572.
Machado E, Bonotto D, Cunali PA. Intra-articular injections with corticosteroids and sodium 
hyaluronate for treating temporomandibular joint disorders: a systematic review. Dental Press J. 
Orthod. 2013; 18:128–133.
Manchikanti L, Datta S, Gupta S, Munglani R, Bryce DA, Ward SP, Benyamin RM, Sharma ML, Helm 
S 2nd, Fellows B, Hirsch JA. A critical review of the American Pain Society clinical practice 
guidelines for interventional techniques: part 2: Therapeutic interventions. Pain Physician. 2010a; 
13:E215–64. [PubMed: 20648212] 
Tompkins et al.
Page 17
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Manchikanti L, Fellows B, Ailinani H, Pampati V. Therapeutic use, abuse, and nonmedical use of 
opioids: a ten-year perspective. Pain Physician. 2010b; 13:401–435. [PubMed: 20859312] 
Manchikanti L, Falco FJ, Singh V, Pampati V, Parr AT, Benyamin RM, Fellows B, Hirsch JA. 
Utilization of interventional techniques in managing chronic pain in the Medicare population: 
analysis of growth patterns from 2000 to 2011. Pain Physician. 2012; 15:E969–82. [PubMed: 
23159982] 
Manchikanti L, Knezevic NN, Boswell MV, Kaye AD, Hirsch JA. Epidural injections for lumbar 
radiculopathy and spinal stenosis: a comparative systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 
Physician. 2016; 19:E365–410. [PubMed: 27008296] 
McCabe PS, Maricar N, Parkes MJ, Felson DT, O’Neill TW. The efficacy of intra-articular steroids in 
hip osteoarthritis: a systematic review. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016; 24:1509–1517. [PubMed: 
27143362] 
McCleane G. Antidepressants as analgesics. CNS Drugs. 2008; 22:139–156. [PubMed: 18193925] 
McIlwain H, Ahdieh H. Safety, tolerability, and effectiveness of oxymorphone extended release for 
moderate to severe osteoarthritis pain: a one-year study. Am. J. Ther. 2005; 12:106–112. [PubMed: 
15767827] 
McWilliams LA, Cox BJ, Enns MW. Mood and anxiety disorders associated with chronic pain: an 
examination in a nationally representative sample. Pain. 2003; 106:127–133. [PubMed: 14581119] 
Meldrum ML. A capsule history of pain management. JAMA. 2003; 290:2470–2475. [PubMed: 
14612484] 
Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new theory. Science. 1965; 150:971–979. [PubMed: 
5320816] 
Milligan K, Lanteri-Minet M, Borchert K, Helmers H, Donald R, Kress HG, Adriaensen H, Moulin D, 
Jarvimaki V, Haazen L. Evaluation of long-term efficacy and safety of transdermal fentanyl in the 
treatment of chronic noncancer pain. J. Pain. 2001; 2:197–204. [PubMed: 14622817] 
Mularski RA, White-Chu F, Overbay D, Miller L, Asch SM, Ganzini L. Measuring pain as the 5th vital 
sign does not improve quality of pain management. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 2006; 21:607–612. 
[PubMed: 16808744] 
Murthy V, Sibbritt DW, Adams J. An integrative review of complementary and alternative medicine 
use for back pain A focus on prevalence, reasons for use, influential factors, self-perceived 
effectiveness, and communication. Spine J. 2015; 15:1870–1883. [PubMed: 25962340] 
Ossipov MH, Morimura K, Porreca F. Descending pain modulation and chronification of pain. Curr. 
Opin. Support. Palliat. Care. 2014; 8:143–151. [PubMed: 24752199] 
Patrick LE, Altmaier EM, Found EM. Long-term outcomes in multidisciplinary treatment of chronic 
low back pain: results of a 13-year follow-up. Spine. 2004; 29:850–855. [PubMed: 15082983] 
Petho G, Reeh PW. Sensory and signaling mechanisms of bradykinin eicosanoids, platelet-activating 
factor, and nitric oxide in peripheral nociceptors. Physiol. Rev. 2012; 92:1699–1775. [PubMed: 
23073630] 
Portenoy RK, Foley KM. Chronic use of opioid analgesics in non-malignant pain: report of 38 cases. 
Pain. 1986; 25:171–186. [PubMed: 2873550] 
Portenoy RK, Farrar JT, Backonja MM, Cleeland CS, Yang K, Friedman M, Colucci SV, Richards P. 
Long-term use of controlled-release oxycodone for noncancer pain: results of a 3-year registry 
study. Clin. J. Pain. 2007; 23:287–299. [PubMed: 17449988] 
Porter J, Jick H. Addiction rare in patients treated with narcotics. N. Engl. J. Med. 1980; 302:123.
Reuben DB, Alvanzo AA, Ashikaga T, Bogat GA, Callahan CM, Ruffing V, Steffens DC. National 
Institutes of Health Pathways to Prevention Workshop: the role of opioids in the treatment of 
chronic pain. Ann. Intern. Med. 2015; 162:295–300. [PubMed: 25581341] 
Robbins H, Gatchel RJ, Noe C, Gajraj N, Polatin P, Deschner M, Vakharia A, Adams L. A prospective 
one-year outcome study of interdisciplinary chronic pain management: compromising its efficacy 
by managed care policies. Anesth. Analg. 2003; 97:156–162. [PubMed: 12818959] 
Roberts AH, Sternbach RA, Polich J. Behavioral management of chronic pain and excess disability: 
long-term follow-up of an outpatient program. Clin. J. Pain. 1993; 9:41–48. [PubMed: 8477139] 
Tompkins et al.
Page 18
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ruddock JK, Sallis H, Ness A, Perry RE. Spinal manipulation vs. sham manipulation for nonspecific 
low back pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Chiropr. Med. 2016; 15:165–183. 
[PubMed: 27660593] 
Rustoen T, Wahl AK, Hanestad BR, Lerdal A, Paul S, Miaskowski C. Age and the experience of 
chronic pain Differences in health and quality of life among younger, middle-aged, and older 
adults. Clin. J. Pain. 2005; 21:513–523. [PubMed: 16215337] 
Schatman, ME. Interdisciplinary chronic pain management: perspectives on history, current status, and 
future viability. In: Fishman, SM.Ballantyne, J., Rathmell, J., editors. Bonica’s Management of 
Pain. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; Baltimore, MD: 2010. p. 1523-1532.
Semrau J, Hentschke C, Buchmann J, Meng K, Vogel H, Faller H, Bork H, Pfeifer K. Long-term 
effects of interprofessional biopsychosocial rehabilitation for adults with chronic non-specific low 
back pain: a multicentre, quasi-experimental study. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0118609. [PubMed: 
25768735] 
Shealy CN. Percutaneous radiofrequency denervation of spinal facets. Treatment for chronic back pain 
and sciatica. J. Neurosurg. 1975; 43:448–451. [PubMed: 125787] 
Shmagel A, Foley R, Ibrahim H. Epidemiology of chronic low back pain in US adults: national health 
and nutrition examination survey 2009–2010. Arthritis Care Res. 2016; 68:1688–1694.
Smeets RJEM, Vlaeyen JWS, Kester ADM, Knottnerus JA. Reduction of pain catastrophizing 
mediates the outcome of both physical and cognitive-behavioral treatment in chronic low back 
pain. J. Pain. 2006; 7:261–271. [PubMed: 16618470] 
Smith RV, Havens JR, Walsh SL. Gabapentin misuse, abuse and diversion: a systematic review. 
Addiction. 2016; 111:1160–1174. [PubMed: 27265421] 
Song JJ, Popescu A, Bell RL. Present and potential use of spinal cord stimulation to control chronic 
pain. Pain Physician. 2014; 17:235–246. [PubMed: 24850105] 
Staal JB, de Bie RA, de Vet HC, Hildebrandt J, Nelemans P. Injection therapy for subacute and chronic 
low back pain: an updated Cochrane review. Spine. 2009; 34:49–59. [PubMed: 19127161] 
Stemkowski PL, Smith PA. Sensory neurons, ion channels, inflammation and the onset of neuropathic 
pain. Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 2012; 39:416–435. [PubMed: 22728849] 
Tayeb BO, Barreiro AE, Bradshaw YS, Chui KK, Carr DB. Durations of opioid, nonopioid drug, and 
behavioral clinical trials for chronic pain: adequate or inadequate? Pain Med. 2016; 17:2036–2046. 
[PubMed: 27880651] 
Theunissen M, Peters ML, Bruce J, Gramke HF, Marcus MA. Preoperative anxiety and 
catastrophizing: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the association with chronic postsurgical 
pain. Clin. J. Pain. 2012; 28:819–841. [PubMed: 22760489] 
Trinh K, Graham N, Irnich D, Cameron ID, Forget M. Acupuncture for neck disorders. Cochrane 
Database Syst. Rev. 2016; 5:CD004870.
Tsang A, Von Korff M, Lee S, Alonso J, Karam E, Angermeyer MC, Borges GL, Bromet EJ, 
Demytteneare K, de Girolamo G, de Graaf R, Gureje O, Lepine JP, Haro JM, Levinson D, Oakley 
Browne MA, Posada-Villa J, Seedat S, Watanabe M. Common chronic pain conditions in 
developed and developing countries: gender and age differences and comorbidity with depression-
anxiety disorders. J. Pain. 2008; 9:883–891. [PubMed: 18602869] 
Van Zee A. The promotion and marketing of Oxycontin Commercial triumph, public health tragedy. 
Am. J. Public Health. 2009; 99:221–227. [PubMed: 18799767] 
Walk D, Poliak-Tunis M. Chronic pain management An overview of taxonomy, conditions commonly 
encountered, and assessment. Med. Clin. North Am. 2016; 100:1–16. [PubMed: 26614715] 
Weiss RD, Potter JS, Griffin ML, McHugh RK, Haller D, Jacobs P, Gardin J 2nd, Fischer D, Rosen 
KD. Reasons for opioid use among patients with dependence on prescription opioids: the role of 
chronic pain. J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 2014; 47:140–145. [PubMed: 24814051] 
Williams AC, Eccleston C, Morley S. Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain 
(excluding headache) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2012; 11:CD007407. [PubMed: 
23152245] 
Witteveen AG, Hofstad CJ, Kerkhoffs GM. Hyaluronic acid and other conservative treatment options 
for osteoarthritis of the ankle. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2015; 10:CD010643.
World Health Organization (WHO). Cancer Pain Relief. WHO; Geneva: 1986. 
Tompkins et al.
Page 19
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Yuan QL, Guo TM, Liu L, Sun F, Zhang YG. Traditional Chinese medicine for neck pain and low back 
pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0117146. [PubMed: 
25710765] 
Zenz M, Strumpf M, Tryba M. Long-term oral opioid therapy in patients with chronic nonmalignant 
pain. J. Pain Symptom Manage. 1992; 7:69–77. [PubMed: 1573287] 
Zgierska A, Miller M, Rabago D. Patient satisfaction, prescription drug abuse, and potential 
unintended consequences. JAMA. 2012; 307:1377–1378. [PubMed: 22474199] 
Tompkins et al.
Page 20
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. 
Cumulative citations of two influential articles on the “low risk” of addiction with opioid 
use. A letter published in 1980 by Porter and Jick that dealt with opioids for acute pain as 
well as a report by Portenoy and Foley in 1986 on 38 cases of persons treated with opioids 
for chronic non-malignant pain were used hundreds of times as evidence to demonstrate that 
opioids had low risk for addiction. Cumulative citations for each article were obtained from 
Google Scholar.
Tompkins et al.
Page 21
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tompkins et al.
Page 22
Table 1
Common non-opioid chronic pain management strategies.
Strategy
Examples
Usual Dose Range
FDA Approved 
Chronic
Pain Indications
Significant Side Effects
Notes
Multidisciplinary pain treatment
Johns Hopkins Hospital Pain 
Treatment Program
3–4 weeks of 
intensive 5–7 days/
week attendance at 
clinic
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Has been 
shown to improve any 
type of chronic pain, 
especially with no 
identifiable cause or 
where other approaches 
have failed.
None
Patient should 
be willing to 
decrease/stop 
opioid 
medications. 
Insurance 
coverage may 
not be available 
or require 
significant prior 
authorization 
process.
Non-opioid medications
NSAID
aspirin
325 to 650 mg 
every 4 h (Max 4 g/
day)
Disorders of joint of 
spine, generalized pain, 
headaches, OA, RA
Bleeding, gastric ulcer, 
tinnitus, bronchospasm, 
and Reye’s syndrome
Should not take 
OTC aspirin for 
more than 10 
days at a time 
without 
instruction 
from physician.
ibuprofen
200 to 800 mg 
every 4–6 h (Max 
3.2 g/day)
Generalized pain, 
headaches, OA, RA
Congestive heart failure, 
myocardial infarction, 
stroke, Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, and hearing 
loss
Should not take 
OTC ibuprofen 
for more than 
10 days at a 
time without 
instruction 
from physician.
naproxen
250 to 500 mg 
every 12 h (Max 1 
g/day)
Ankylosing spondylitis, 
bursitis, generalized 
pain, OA, RA
Congestive heart failure, 
myocardial infarction, 
stroke, Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, bleeding, and 
renal failure
OTC naproxen 
can be taken for 
6 months 
without 
instruction 
from physician.
Anti-depressants
duloxetine
30 to 60 mg daily
Diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy, 
fibromyalgia, chronic 
musculoskeletal pain
May be fatal in overdose, 
suicidal ideation, 
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, myocardial 
infarction, liver failure, 
and serotonin syndrome
Cannot be 
stopped 
suddenly or 
may have 
withdrawal 
syndrome. Pain 
relief may take 
4–6 weeks after 
achieving an 
effective dose.
venlafaxine
75 to 225 mg daily
None.
Hyponatremia, bleeding, 
hepatitis, seizure, 
RCTs have 
demonstrated 
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tompkins et al.
Page 23
Strategy
Examples
Usual Dose Range
FDA Approved 
Chronic
Pain Indications
Significant Side Effects
Notes
suicidal thoughts, and 
serotonin syndrome
efficacy for 
neuropathic 
pain and 
prophylaxis of 
migraine/
tension type 
headaches. Pain 
relief may take 
4–6 weeks after 
achieving an 
effective dose.
nortriptyline
50 to 100 mg daily
None.
Sudden cardiac death, 
SIADH, hepatic failure, 
stroke, suicidal thoughts, 
dizziness, and falls
Dosing should 
be guided by 
plasma blood 
level. RCTs 
have shown 
efficacy for 
neuropathic 
pain. Pain relief 
may take 4–6 
weeks after 
achieving an 
effective dose.
Anti-epileptic drugs
gabapentin
300 to 600 mg 
every 8 h
Post-herpetic neuralgia
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, 
hypoglycemia, sedation, 
suicidal thoughts, 
dizziness, and falls. 
Misuse and/or abuse of 
gabapentin has also been 
reported.
RCTs have also 
shown efficacy 
for diabetic 
peripheral 
neuropathy, and 
fibromyalgia. 
Pain relief may 
take 4–6 weeks 
after achieving 
an effective 
dose.
pregabalin
75 to 150 mg every 
12 h (Max 450 mg/
day)
Diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy, 
fibromyalgia, 
neuropathic pain from a 
spinal cord injury, post-
herpetic neuralgia
Jaundice, suicidal 
thoughts, and acute renal 
insufficiency
Pain relief may 
take 4–6 weeks 
after achieving 
an effective 
dose.
Physical therapy (PT)
Exercise therapy
8–12 PT sessions 
over 4–6 weeks
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Used to treat 
back and neck pain, 
arthritis, fibromyalgia
Worsening pain, new 
injury, myocardial 
infarction, and sudden 
death
Referral is 
needed. Patient 
needs to 
practice skills 
at home. 
Exercises are 
widely variable 
by therapists.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tompkins et al.
Page 24
Strategy
Examples
Usual Dose Range
FDA Approved 
Chronic
Pain Indications
Significant Side Effects
Notes
Psychological therapies
CBT
Weekly hour-long 
individual sessions 
for 12 weeks
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Used for all 
types of pain.
None
Referral may be 
needed. 
Patients need to 
complete 
homework. 
Pain relief is 
only short-term. 
Not all 
therapists 
trained in pain 
CBT.
MBSR
Weekly 2-h long 
group sessions for 8 
weeks
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Used for all 
types of pain.
None
Optional 6-h 
retreat. 
Instructors for 
MBSR are not 
widely 
available. Pain 
improvement is 
short-term but 
can improve 
physical 
functioning for 
up to 26 weeks.
CAM
Acupuncture
6–12 weekly 
sessions over 6–12 
weeks
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Used to treat 
OA, chronic pelvic 
pain, chronic prostatitis, 
chronic neck pain, 
chronic back pain
Nerve injury causing 
worse pain and infection
Not always 
covered by 
insurance or 
available; no 
widely 
accepted 
protocol of 
acupuncture 
delivery; most 
studies 
performed 
outside USA
Peripheral procedures
Trigger point injections
Lidocaine, corticosteroid, or “dry 
needling”
Single injection by 
physician. May be 
repeated.
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Used to treat 
chronic neck pain, 
headaches, iliac crest 
syndrome, and 
myofascial pain.
Nerve injury causing 
worse pain, infection, 
pneumothorax, seizure, 
and local tissue necrosis
Need to palpate 
location of 
maximum 
tenderness. Few 
long-term 
studies. Should 
be done with 
PT.
Intra-articular Injection
Sodium hyaluronate, corticosteroid
Single Injection by 
physician. May be 
repeated.
Not subject to FDA 
approval. Used to treat 
OA, RA, hip arthritis, 
low back pain, shoulder 
pain, TMJ, de 
Quervain’s 
tenosynovitis
Nerve injury causing 
worse pain and infection
1–2 office 
visits. No clear 
evidence that 
these injections 
provide greater 
pain relief 
compared to 
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tompkins et al.
Page 25
Strategy
Examples
Usual Dose Range
FDA Approved 
Chronic
Pain Indications
Significant Side Effects
Notes
sham 
procedures.
Spinal procedures
Epidural steroid injection
Corticosteroid +/− local anesthetic 
(see nerve block for examples)
1–3 injections 
separated by at least 
a month (no more 
than 3 injections in 
12 months)
None.
Infection, bleeding, 
vertebral fracture (after 
multiple injections), 
paralysis, stroke, loss of 
vision and death.
Best results use 
fluoroscopic 
guidance. 
Multiple 
different 
procedures to 
enter epidural 
space. No clear 
evidence that 
these injections 
provide greater 
pain relief 
compared to 
sham 
procedures.
Nerve block
0.25%-0.5% bupivacaine, 2% 
lignocaine, or 1% lidocaine
One diagnostic 
block and then 
second long-term 
nerve block (3–6 
months pain relief).
Chronic radiculopathy, 
cancer- related, facet 
join degeneration
Nerve injury causing 
worse pain, infection, 
paralysis, and seizure
Outpatient 
surgical 
procedure. May 
repeat every 6–
12 months as 
needed
Radiofrequency denervation
1–2 diagnostic 
nerve blocks 
followed by 
fluoroscopic guided 
destruction of nerve
Facet joint pain, low 
back pain with disc 
herniation, sacroiliac 
pain.
Nerve injury causing 
worse pain, infection, 
and paralysis
Outpatient 
surgery. May be 
repeated. 
Systematic 
reviews of trials 
have not shown 
significant 
benefit over 
sham.
Spinal cord stimulator
Insertion of 
temporary 
stimulator to 
determine efficacy 
and then insertion 
of permanent device
Chronic intractable pain 
of the trunk and/or 
limbs, pain associated 
with failed back surgery 
syndrome, complex 
regional pain syndrome
Nerve injury causing 
worse pain, infection, 
and paralysis
Pre-op 
psychological 
evaluation, at 
least two 
outpatient 
surgery visits, 
regular follow-
up. Revisions 
may be 
necessary.
Surgery
Discectomy, spinal fusion
Back pain with nerve 
injury (e.g. disc 
herniation), spinal 
stenosis,
Failed back surgery 
syndrome, death, 
paralysis, and infection
Pre-op 
evaluation, 
surgery, +/− 
post-op hospital 
stay, usually 6 
weeks off work, 
at least 3 month 
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tompkins et al.
Page 26
Strategy
Examples
Usual Dose Range
FDA Approved 
Chronic
Pain Indications
Significant Side Effects
Notes
healing time, +/
− PT
NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; FDA = Food and Drug Administration; OTC = over the counter; CAM = complementary and alternative medicine; RCT = randomized clinical trials; CBT 
= cognitive behavioral therapy; MBSR = mindfulness based stress reduction; OA = osteoarthritis; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; SIADH = syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion. These 
strategies are not mutually exclusive and can be combined as directed by a health care provider. Unfortunately, little information is known about the comparative effectiveness of these strategies.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
