 Sep • Oct 2016
438
Toresdahl and Asif
[ Primary Care ]
Z
ika virus is an arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) that is a 
single-stranded positive RNA flavivirus. It was named for 
the forest where it was initially identified in rhesus 
monkeys in Uganda in 1947. The first reported cases in humans 
were in 1952, although no outbreaks of Zika virus occurred 
until recently.8,15,23
The first outbreaks of Zika virus occurred in 2007 in Yap State, 
Federated States of Micronesia and 2010 in Cambodia.9,15 
Subsequently in 2013-2014, an outbreak occurred in French 
Polynesia, which later spread to surrounding Pacific Islands, 
including New Caledonia, the Cook Islands, Easter Island, 
Vanuatu, and Solomon Islands.9,16,21 An estimated 28,000 cases 
were reported in French Polynesia, representing 11% of the 
population.5,9 The infection is also associated with Guillain-
Barré syndrome, which increased 20-fold during this particular 
outbreak.23
Zika virus may have been brought to Brazil during the 2014 
FIFA World Cup. Although no Pacific Island teams competed in 
World Cup, foreign spectators from French Polynesia and the 
Pacific Islands may have traveled to Brazil during an acute 
infection with or without symptoms.34 Additionally, shortly after 
the World Cup, the Va’a World Sprint Championship canoe race 
was held in Rio de Janeiro, where Pacific Island teams 
competed and could have contributed to the spread of Zika 
virus.34
The first identified cases of Zika virus in Brazil were in March 
2015, when a cohort of patients in Bahia, Brazil with symptoms 
of an acute viral illness were tested for various viruses by serum 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); 29% 
were found to have Zika virus and 13% found to have 
chikungunya. The strain of Zika virus was later determined to 
be nearly identical to that found in French Polynesia and the 
Pacific Islands.8 Since then, the virus has spread throughout 
South America and the Caribbean. By December 2015, Brazil’s 
Ministry of Health estimated 440,000 to 1,500,000 cases of Zika 
virus infection.19
Apart from Brazil, the Zika virus has been detected in more 
than 34 countries. While mosquito-borne transmission of the 
Zika virus has not occurred in the continental United States 
during the 2015-2016 outbreak, the first case of sexually 
transmitted infection was reported in Texas in February 2016.13
Overview Of Zika virus
Transmission
Zika virus is primarily transmitted to humans by the bite of an 
infected mosquito. Several species of mosquitos have been 
identified as carriers of the virus, including an Aedes species 
mosquito that is endemic in the tropics and subtropics 
(Figure 1).23 Additional methods of transmission include sexual 
intercourse, perinatal, in utero, and potentially, blood 
transfusion.5,17 A case report of a semen sample positive by 
RT-PCR 2 months after the onset of febrile illness suggests 
prolonged potential for sexual transmission, although the 
659060 SPHXXX10.1177/1941738116659060T
oresdahl and AsifSports Health
research-article2016
Update on Zika Virus: Considerations  
for the Traveling Athlete
Brett G. Toresdahl, MD,*† and Irfan M. Asif, MD‡
As public health experts work to contain the outbreak of Zika virus in South America and minimize the devastating 
prenatal complications, the international sports community prepares for the 2016 Summer Olympic and Paralympic 
Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Athletes have publicly expressed concern regarding the health risks of competition in 
Zika-endemic areas.33 Ensuring the safety of the athletes during training and competition is the primary role of the team 
physician. Special consideration is needed for sports teams preparing for travel to areas affected by Zika virus.
Keywords: Zika virus; infectious disease; travel medicine; Olympic athletes; Paralympic athletes
From †Primary Care Sports Medicine Service, Department of Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, New York, and ‡Department of Family Medicine, Greenville 
Health System, University of South Carolina Greenville School of Medicine, Greenville, South Carolina 
*Address correspondence to Brett G. Toresdahl, MD, Hospital for Special Surgery, 535 East 70th Street, New York, NY 10021 (email: toresdahlb@hss.edu).
The authors report no potential conflicts of interest in the development and publication of this article.
DOI: 10.1177/1941738116659060
© 2016 The Author(s)
 SPORTS HEALTH
vol. 8 • no. 5
439
duration of infectivity for this mode of transmission is 
unknown.3
Symptoms
Approximately 20% of people who are infected with Zika virus 
develop symptoms.24 The incubation period between mosquito 
bite and onset of clinical manifestation is typically 2 to 14 days. 
In French Polynesia, where asymptomatic blood donors were 
screened, 3% of donors had an acute Zika virus infection.22 For 
those who do experience symptoms, they are typically mild and 
include rash, arthralgias, conjunctival injection, fatigue, malaise, 
retro-orbital pain, paresthesia, headache, myalgia, and 
lymphadenopathy (Table 1).7,8 The rash is often pruritic, 
descending, and macular or maculopapular. Symptoms can last 
for 1 to 7 days.8,24
Differential Diagnosis
Zika virus infection can present with symptoms similar to 
dengue and chikungunya, which are also transmitted by 
mosquitos and have overlapping regions where the viruses are 
endemic. Since clinical features of Zika virus are unable to be 
fully differentiated from dengue and chikungunya, serologic 
testing is needed in suspected cases.8 However, features 
suggestive but not diagnostic of Zika virus include a febrile 
illness with maculopapular rash in combination with 
conjunctival injection and/or lymphadenopathy.7 Additional 
considerations in the differential diagnosis include adenovirus, 
enterovirus, group A streptococcus, leptospirosis, malaria, 
measles, rubella, parvovirus, and rickettsia.19
Diagnosis
During the initial 3 to 14 days of symptoms, Zika virus can be 
detected by RT-PCR of either blood or urine.18 In a study of 72 
RT-PCR pregnant women, 47% were positive by both blood and 
urine, 36% by blood only, and 17% by urine only.7 RT-PCR is 
unable to rule out a Zika virus infection once viremia has 
resolved, which can occur within 1 week. After the first week of 
symptoms, virus-specific IgM and neutralizing antibodies are 
Figure 1. Mosquito vectors for Zika virus: (a) Aedes aegypti 
and (b) Aedes albopictus. Image (a) from Paul Howell, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and image 
(b) from James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 
Table 1. Zika virus symptoms and relative prevalence
Symptom
Prevalence, %7,8
Rash
86-100
Arthralgias
64
Conjunctival injection
58
Fatigue, malaise
49
Retro-orbital pain
49
Paresthesia
47
Headache
43-53
Myalgias
41-57
Lymphadenopathy
40
Nausea
38
Edema
36
Photophobia
31
Diarrhea
31
Fever
28-43
Respiratory
19
Anorexia
13
Bleeding, petechial, or enanthema
13
Abdominal
6
Dizziness
6
 Sep • Oct 2016
Toresdahl and Asif
440
needed to detect evidence of the infection.25 Results of 
laboratory tests when performed in the United States may take 
up to 2 weeks to be available. If Zika virus infection is 
diagnosed, local health officials must be notified.24
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for Zika virus. In most cases, the 
infection is self-limited and symptoms resolve within 1 week 
without intervention. Symptomatic management involves rest, 
hydration, and use of acetaminophen. Until dengue fever is 
ruled out, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and 
aspirin should be avoided given the risk of hemorrhage.24
Neonatal Complications
In 2015, the first signs of a potential adverse effect of the Zika 
virus disease during pregnancy were discovered when an 
increased prevalence of microcephaly was identified in areas of 
Brazil affected by Zika virus. The virus was later detected in 
amniotic fluid of confirmed cases of neonatal 
microcephaly.14,29,32 Zika virus has since been implicated in 
cases of severe fetal neurologic abnormalities when the 
infection occurs in a pregnant woman. One study reported that 
29% of pregnancies affected by Zika virus infection were found 
to have sonographic abnormalities, including intrauterine 
growth restriction, microcephaly, and fetal death.7 Initially, 
Brazil’s Ministry of Health announced that more than 4000 cases 
of microcephaly had been reported since the outbreak began, 
but the cases are being investigated for accuracy of diagnosis 
and association with Zika virus.6 Given these potential risks, the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has advised 
pregnant women to postpone travel to affected countries.11 
El Salvador, which has also been affected by the Zika virus, 
recently recommended that women wait until 2018 to become 
pregnant—a recommendation not supported by the World 
Health Organization.1
Guillain-Barré Syndrome
While the majority of Zika virus infections present with an 
influenza-like illness and cutaneous rash, there have been 
atypical cases that have been associated with subsequent 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). The first case of GBS that 
occurred immediately after Zika virus infection was reported in 
French Polynesia during coepidemics of Zika virus and dengue 
fever in late 2013.28 A direct causal relationship has not yet been 
definitively established. However, there seem to be an increased 
number of GBS cases appearing in conjunction with the spread 
of Zika virus in countries across the world, and several patients 
with GBS in these countries were confirmed by laboratory tests 
to have Zika infection.10
GBS is a disease classically described as having ascending 
motor weakness and paralysis. If the ascending disease process 
reaches motor nerves to the diaphragm, a ventilator is needed 
for supportive therapy. Paralysis or muscle weakness can last 
days or weeks, but most patients recover appropriately.
implicatiOns fOr athletes
Although many who are affected with Zika virus have mild or 
no symptoms, acute symptoms can interfere with an athlete’s 
ability to train and compete. Symptoms of Zika virus that are 
common and also have the potential of preventing an athlete 
from participating in sport include arthralgia/myalgia, fatigue, 
headache, and gastrointestinal symptoms. As the duration of 
symptoms is often only a few days, athletes affected by Zika 
virus may be able to return to sport as quickly as symptoms 
resolve. Attempting to train and compete while experiencing 
acute symptoms may negatively affect the immune system and 
prolong symptoms.
Olympic and Paralympic athletes may be more concerned 
about the neonatal complications than the self-limited 
symptoms of the infection. As nearly all are of childbearing age, 
Zika virus has the potential to directly affect female athletes and 
indirectly affect female partners of male athletes regardless of 
whether the partner travels to Brazil. At least 18 female athletes 
have competed in the modern Olympics while pregnant.30 One 
of the more publicized pregnancies was Kerri Walsh, who won 
the gold medal in beach volleyball in London 2012 when she 
was 5 weeks pregnant. The majority of athletes who have been 
known to have competed in the Olympics while pregnant were 
in the first trimester, a time when the risks associated with 
maternal-fetal transmission are potentially most significant.30
Exacerbating the risk of Zika virus in Olympic athletes is the 
potential for non–vector-borne transmission through sexual 
intercourse. The prevalence of sexual activity among Olympic 
athletes was illustrated by reports of in excess of 100,000 
condoms being dispensed to athletes in the Olympic Village in 
a single week.12 Despite the prevalence of barrier contraception, 
unintended pregnancy is a concern and would be at risk for 
Zika-related complications. Development of acute symptoms as 
a result of sexual transmission of the Zika virus is possible and 
could affect an athlete’s ability to compete.
Among the anticipated 5000 female athletes who will qualify 
to participate in the 2016 Summer Olympics, there will likely be 
athletes who become pregnant prior to the Games.20 These 
athletes will face a challenging decision whether to compete 
though risk being infected with Zika virus or elect to forgo 
competing in the Olympics. For some female athletes, the 2016 
Olympics and Paralympics may be their only opportunity to 
compete as an Olympian. Historically, there have been female 
athletes who have competed during the second and third 
trimesters.
The team physician may be consulted regarding the decision 
to compete. Although team physicians routinely provide 
return-to-play recommendations that involve considering the 
negative health risks to the athlete, not often are team 
physicians faced with guiding athletes through the ethical 
challenges of risk to a fetus. Both the United States Olympic 
Committee (USOC) and the Australian Olympic Council have 
instructed female athletes of childbearing age to carefully 
consider the risks.2,4 The USOC also formed an Infectious 
 SPORTS HEALTH
vol. 8 • no. 5
441
Disease Advisory Group to provide additional guidance for the 
United States athletes.31
preventiOn Of Zika virus infectiOn  
in athletes
Currently, there is no vaccine to prevent the Zika virus. To 
prevent a Zika virus infection while traveling to regions of the 
world with known disease, certain precautions must be 
followed. Regions above 6500 feet (2000 m) are excluded from 
travel precautions, since the mosquitos that transmit Zika virus 
are rare in these locations and the risk for mosquito-borne 
transmission of Zika virus is minimal.11
Vector-Borne Transmission
The mainstay for the prevention of a Zika infection is to avoid 
mosquito bites. The mosquitos that spread Zika mostly bite 
during the day, but precautions should still occur at night. 
Athletes and other team members should avoid potential 
mosquito breeding sites when possible. Mosquito larvae breed 
in standing water, so it is prudent to avoid standing water that 
could be encountered in flower pots, tires, buckets, bottles, jars, 
and other similar containers.26 Athletes who train and compete 
in venues outside of the urban areas, such as marathon runners 
and cyclists, have increased risk of exposure to mosquitos. 
These athletes must take extra care to follow recommendations 
for insect repellant and clothing treatment.
If an athlete or health care team member is infected with Zika 
virus, avoiding mosquito bites during the infection is still 
important to prevent possible transmission to others. General 
precautions that the athlete health care team should advise and 
follow are:
•
•
Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants
•
•
Stay in places with air conditioning or that use window and 
door screens to keep mosquitoes outside26
•
•
Sleep under a mosquito bed net
•
•
Use Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)–registered 
insect repellents, which have been proven safe and effective, 
even for pregnant and breast-feeding women
|
|
Follow the product label instructions closely and reapply 
as directed
|
|
Do not spray repellent on the skin under clothing to 
prevent overapplication as this increases the chance for 
skin irritation
|
|
If you are also using sunscreen, apply sunscreen before 
applying insect repellent
•
•
Treat clothing and gear with permethrin or advise others to 
purchase permethrin-treated items since a mosquito can bite 
through thin clothing
|
|
Clothing treated with permethrin may be protective after 
multiple washings, but read product information to learn 
how long the protection may last
|
|
If clothing items are self-treated, follow the product 
instructions carefully
|
|
Be extremely cautious and do not use permethrin 
products directly on the skin
The active ingredients most commonly found in insect 
repellents are DEET, Picaridan, Bayrepel, Icaridin, oil of lemon 
eucalyptus (OLE), para-menthan-diol (PMD), and IR353. 
Examples of safe and commonly used insect repellents to prevent 
Zika include the following: Off!, Cutter, Sawyer, Ultrathon, Skin 
So Soft Bug Guard Plus, Autan (outside the United States), Repel, 
Skin So Soft Bug Guard Plus Expedition, and SkinSmart.26
Non–Vector-Borne Transmission
The Zika virus can be spread during sex (vaginal, oral, or anal) 
by a man infected with Zika virus to partners through semen. 
Current evidence suggests that Zika virus can be spread when a 
man has symptoms, before developing symptoms, or even after 
symptoms subside. There are currently no known cases of 
women infected with Zika virus spreading the disease to her 
partners, and it is unknown whether other body fluids (eg, 
saliva or vaginal fluid) can transmit the disease from one person 
to another. While Zika virus blood testing is recommended for 
people who have been exposed to Zika virus through sex or 
who develop symptoms, semen analysis for Zika virus is not 
currently recommended because there is a limited 
understanding on how to interpret the results. Zika virus, 
however, can remain in semen longer than blood.
Based on current CDC recommendations:
1. Male athletes who have been diagnosed with Zika virus or 
had symptoms of Zika virus should consider using condoms 
or not having sex for at least 6 months after symptoms 
begin. This includes male athletes who live in and traveled 
to areas affected by Zika virus.
2. Male athletes who have traveled to an area with Zika virus 
but did not develop symptoms of Zika virus should consider 
using condoms or not having sex for at least 8 weeks after 
their return.
3. Couples who include a male athlete who lives in an area 
with Zika virus but have not developed symptoms should 
consider using condoms or not having sex while Zika virus 
is present in the region.
Based on current knowledge, Zika virus infection in a woman 
who is not pregnant would not pose a risk for birth defects for 
future pregnancies after the virus is cleared from the blood. 
Additionally, based on information gathered from similar 
infections, once a person has been infected with Zika virus, he 
or she is likely to be protected from a future Zika infection.27
Other mOsquitO-BOrne Diseases 
affecting athletes
Zika virus must be distinguished from other viral diseases such 
as chikungunya and dengue, which can have more severe 
presentations.
 Sep • Oct 2016
Toresdahl and Asif
442
Chikungunya
Chikungunya and Zika viruses cause very similar signs and 
symptoms and are also both transmitted by the same mosquito 
vector. However, chikungunya usually presents with a high 
fever and extremely intense joint pain affecting the hands, feet, 
knees, and back. Because of these symptoms, chikungunya can 
be disabling, with patients bending over and unable to walk or 
perform simple physical tasks. Another differentiating factor is 
that, unlike Zika infection, chikungunya is typically not 
associated with conjunctivitis.
Dengue
Dengue and Zika virus infections are also similar and 
transmitted by the same mosquito vector. Differentiating features 
for a dengue infection include a high fever, severe muscle pain, 
and headache. There could also be associated hemorrhagic 
manifestations. Similar to chikungunya and unlike a Zika 
infection, dengue is typically not associated with conjunctivitis.
cOnclusiOn
Athlete health care team members should be cautious of 
potential Zika virus infection while traveling to Zika-endemic 
areas. While typical symptoms are mild and include acute low-
grade fever, macupapular rash, and nonpurulent conjunctivitis, 
severe complications can occur such as Guillain-Barré 
syndrome, fetal loss, and congenital microcephaly. However, 
once the virus is cleared from the blood, future pregnancies are 
not believed to be at risk of being affected. Zika virus is 
typically transmitted via a bite from the Aedes mosquito, which 
usually bites during the daytime and breeds in standing water, 
but sexual transmission from male partners to others also 
occurs. There is no vaccine against the disease. Prevention 
measures currently include personal preventative measures to 
prevent mosquito bites, measures to control mosquito breeding 
sites, and abstinence or barrier protection (eg, condoms) during 
sexual activity. Management of the disease is supportive and 
symptomatic. Traveling health care team members should 
review updated information from the CDC, Pan American 
Health Organization (PAHO), and the European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) prior to leaving for 
competition.
resOurces fOr the traveling 
physician
PAHO: www.paho.org/zika
CDC: cdc.gov/zika
ECDC: http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/healthtopics/
zika_virus_infection
references
 1. Ahmed A. El Salvador’s advice on Zika virus: don’t have babies. The New York 
Times. January 25, 2016. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 2. AOC warns pregnant Olympic team members about dangers of Zika virus ahead 
of Rio 2016. http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-27/aoc-warns-pregnant-
olympic-team-members-about-zika-virus/7117934. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 3. Atkinson L, Olander EK, French DP. Acceptability of a weight management 
intervention for pregnant and postpartum women with BMI ≥30 kg/m2: a 
qualitative evaluation of an individualized, home-based service. Matern Child 
Health J. 2016;20:88-96.
 4. Bases D, Schneyer J. Exclusive: U.S. athletes should consider skipping Rio if 
fear Zika—officials. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-zika-usa-olympics-
exlusive-idUSKCN0VH0BJ. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 5. Besnard M, Lastere S, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau V, Musso D. Evidence of perinatal 
transmission of Zika virus, French Polynesia, December 2013 and February 2014. 
Euro Surveill. 2014;19(13).
 6. Brasil Ministério da Saúde. Microcefalia: 4.268 casos suspeitos continuam em 
investigação. http://portalsaude.saude.gov.br/index.php/cidadao/principal/
agencia-saude/22649-microcefalia-4-268-casos-suspeitos-continuam-em-
investigacao. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 7. Brasil P, Pereira JP Jr, Raja Gabaglia C, et al. Zika virus infection in pregnant 
women in Rio de Janeiro—preliminary report [published online March 4, 2016]. 
N Engl J Med. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1602412.
 8. Campos GS, Bandeira AC, Sardi SI. Zika virus outbreak, Bahia, Brazil. Emerg 
Infect Dis. 2015;21:1885-1886.
 9. Cao-Lormeau VM, Roche C, Teissier A, et al. Zika virus, French polynesia, South 
Pacific, 2013. Emerg Infect Dis. 2014;20:1085-1086.
 10. CBS/AP. Paralysis syndrome rises along with Zika cases. http://www.cbsnews 
.com/news/guillain-barre-syndrome-paralysis-rises-along-with-zika-cases/. 
Accessed April 4, 2016.
 11. Cetron M. Revision to CDC’s Zika travel notices: minimal likelihood for 
mosquito-borne Zika virus transmission at elevations above 2,000 meters. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:267-268.
 12. Clarke J. Who will win the sex Olympics? http://www.forbes.com/sites/
johnclarke/2012/07/16/who-will-win-the-sex-olympics/#708aa4f518c6. Accessed 
April 4, 2016.
 13. Dallas County Health and Human Services. DCHHS reports first Zika virus case 
in Dallas County acquired through sexual transmission. http://www.dallascounty 
.org/department/hhs/press/documents/PR2-2-16DCHHSReportsFirstCaseofZika 
VirusThroughSexualTransmission.pdf. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 14. de Oliveira WK, Cortez-Escalante J, De Oliveira WT, et al. Increase in reported 
prevalence of microcephaly in infants born to women living in areas with 
confirmed Zika virus transmission during the first trimester of pregnancy—Brazil, 
2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:242-247.
 15. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap Island, 
Federated States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2536-2543.
 16. Dupont-Rouzeyrol M, O’Connor O, Calvez E, et al. Co-infection with Zika 
and dengue viruses in 2 patients, New Caledonia, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis. 
2015;21:381-382.
 17. Foy BD, Kobylinski KC, Chilson Foy JL, et al. Probable non-vector-borne 
transmission of Zika virus, Colorado, USA. Emerg Infect Dis. 2011;17:880-882.
 18. Gourinat AC, O’Connor O, Calvez E, Goarant C, Dupont-Rouzeyrol M. Detection 
of Zika virus in urine. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015;21:84-86.
 19. Hennessey M, Fischer M, Staples JE. Zika virus spreads to new areas—region of 
the Americas, May 2015–January 2016. Am J Transplant. 2016;16:1031-1034.
 20. How many countries and athletes are participating in the Olympic Games Rio 
2016? http://registration.olympic.org/en/faq/detail/id/98. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 21. Musso D, Cao-Lormeau VM, Gubler DJ. Zika virus: following the path of dengue 
and chikungunya? Lancet. 2015;386:243-244.
 22. Musso D, Nhan T, Robin E, et al. Potential for Zika virus transmission through 
blood transfusion demonstrated during an outbreak in French Polynesia, 
November 2013 to February 2014. Euro Surveill. 2014;19(14).
 23. Musso D, Nilles EJ, Cao-Lormeau VM. Rapid spread of emerging Zika virus in the 
Pacific area. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014;20:O595-O596.
 24. National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases DoV-BD. Zika 
virus: clinical evaluation & disease. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/
clinicalevaluation.html. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 25. National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases DoV-BD. Zika 
virus: diagnostic testing. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/diagnostic.html. 
Accessed April 4, 2016.
 26. National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases DoV-BD. Zika 
virus: prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/prevention/index.html. Accessed 
April 4, 2016.
 27. National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases DoV-BD. Zika 
virus: Zika and pregnancy. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/pregnancy/question-
answers.html. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 SPORTS HEALTH
vol. 8 • no. 5
443
 28. Oehler E, Watrin L, Larre P, et al. Zika virus infection complicated by Guillain-Barre 
syndrome—case report, French Polynesia, December 2013. Euro Surveill. 2014;19(9).
 29. Petersen EE, Staples JE, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Interim guidelines for pregnant 
women during a Zika virus outbreak—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2016;65:30-33.
 30. SR/Olympics. Olympians who competed while pregnant. http://www.sports-
reference.com/olympics/friv/lists.cgi?id=77. Accessed April 4, 2016.
 31. U.S. Olympic Committee Creates Infectious Disease Advisory Group [press 
release]. 2016.
 32. Ventura CV, Maia M, Ventura BV, et al. Ophthalmological findings in infants 
with microcephaly and presumable intra-uterus Zika virus infection. Arq Bras 
Oftalmol. 2016;79:1-3.
 33. Wahl G. Solo: as of now, I wouldn’t go to Olympics over Zika. http://www.
si.com/planet-futbol/2016/02/09/hope-solo-olympics-zika-virus-brazil. Accessed 
April 4, 2016.
 34. Zanluca C, Melo VC, Mosimann AL, Santos GI, Santos CN, Luz K. First report 
of autochthonous transmission of Zika virus in Brazil. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 
2015;110:569-572.
For reprints and permission queries, please visit SAGE’s Web site at http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav.
