 RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
CANCER
The linker histone H1.0 generates
epigenetic and functional
intratumor heterogeneity
Cristina Morales Torres,* Alva Biran,* Matthew J. Burney, Harshil Patel,
Tristan Henser-Brownhill, Ayelet-Hashahar Shapira Cohen, Yilong Li,
Rotem Ben-Hamo, Emma Nye, Bradley Spencer-Dene, Probir Chakravarty, Sol Efroni,
Nik Matthews, Tom Misteli, Eran Meshorer, Paola Scaffidi†
INTRODUCTION: Cancer arises from clonal
expansion of a single cell. Yet, most human
cancers are characterized by extensive intra-
tumor heterogeneity and comprise various sub-
populations of cells with distinct phenotypes
and biological properties. Intratumor hetero-
geneity poses major challenges in understanding
cancers, managing patients, and designing ef-
fective treatment strategies. Functional heter-
ogeneity within individual tumors is partly due
to the presence of genetically distinct subclonal
cell populations. Furthermore, interactions
between cancer cells and the tumor micro-
environment can alter the phenotype of cancer
cells via nongenetic mechanisms. The combi-
nation of cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic changes
occurring during tumor growth generates func-
tionally distinct subsets of cells that differen-
tially contribute to tumor maintenance.
RATIONALE: In many cancers, phenotypic
and functional heterogeneity can be mapped
to distinct differentiation states, suggesting
that cellular hierarchies established during
tumor growth may affect the long-term prolif-
erative potential of cancer cells. To shed light
on the mechanisms responsible for the genera-
tion of these hierarchies, we searched for epi-
genetic mechanisms that determine which
cancer cells can preserve unlimited prolifera-
tive potential, and thus the ability to drive long-
term tumor growth, and which cells lose this
ability through a differentiation process.
RESULTS: We found that, in several cancer
types, individual tumors exhibit high hetero-
geneity of the major chromatin protein linker
histone H1.0, showing strongly reduced H1.0
levels in cells characterized by long-term self-
renewal ability and tumorigenic potential and
higher levels in nontumorigenic cells. Com-
bined analysis of pan-cancer patient data sets
and experimental alteration of the H1F0 locus
in tumor cells revealed that heterogeneous H1.0
expression patterns are partly due to differential
methylation of an enhancer region that dynam-
ically modulates H1.0 expression within tumors.
Using a controlled system to model functional
intratumor heterogeneity, we showed that main-
tenanceofcelltumorigenic
potentialrequired silencing
of H1.0 to avoid loss of un-
limited proliferative capac-
ity through differentiation.
Mechanistically, absence of
H1.0 led to destabilization
of nucleosome-DNA interactions in AT-rich ge-
nomic regions and coordinated derepression of
large sets of neighboring genes, resulting in ac-
tivation of transcriptional programs that support
cancercellself-renewal.Geneexpressionchanges
induced by H1.0 loss were reversible, and epi-
genetic states restricting cell proliferative po-
tentialwerereestablisheduponH1.0 reexpression.
In multiple cancer types, in agreement with the
observed inhibition of cancer cell self-renewal
by H1.0, patients expressing overall strongly
reduced levels of H1.0 showed a significantly
worse outcome than patients expressing higher
H1.0 levels.
CONCLUSION: Intratumor heterogeneity has
emerged as a general feature of cancer, but
the molecular features underlying functionally
diverse cellular phenotypes have been elusive.
Our results uncover epigenetic determinants of
tumor-maintaining cells and identify an inte-
gralcomponentofchromatinasan
important regulator of cell differ-
entiation states within tumors.
We propose that only cells insen-
sitive to extracellular differentia-
tion cues, capable of permanently
silencing H1.0, can act as self-
renewing tumor-maintaining cells
and that such a mechanism sup-
ports maintenance of several types
of cancer. Our results suggest
that intervention aimed at re-
storing high levels of H1.0 in all
cancer cells may enhance the dif-
ferentiation process that natural-
ly occurs during tumor growth
and may be beneficial for ther-
apeutic purposes.▪
RESEARCH
1514
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
The list of author affiliations is available in the
full article online.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: paola.scaffidi@
crick.ac.uk
Cite this article as C. Morales Torres et al.,
Science 353, aaf1644 (2016). DOI: 10.1126/
science.aaf1644
GC-rich domains
GC-rich domains
AT-rich domains
AT-rich domains
H1.0
H1.0
Oncogenic
effectors
Oncogenic
effectors
Self-renewal
genes
Self-renewal
genes
Maintenance
of long-term
proliferative
potential
Self-renewal
Differentiation
Inhibition
of long-term
proliferative
potential
Epigenetic heterogeneity within tumors. In many cancer types, self-renewing and differentiated epigenetic
states coexist in individual tumors. (Left) Image of a breast cancer section showing heterogeneous levels of the
linker histone H1.0 (red). (Right) Schematic depiction of the chromatin status of cancer cells in which H1.0 is
down-regulated (blue) or expressed at high levels (red).
ON OUR WEBSITE
◥
Read the full article
at http:/
/dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aaf1644
..................................................
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
CANCER
The linker histone H1.0 generates
epigenetic and functional
intratumor heterogeneity
Cristina Morales Torres,1* Alva Biran,2* Matthew J. Burney,1 Harshil Patel,3
Tristan Henser-Brownhill,1 Ayelet-Hashahar Shapira Cohen,2 Yilong Li,4
Rotem Ben-Hamo,5 Emma Nye,6 Bradley Spencer-Dene,6 Probir Chakravarty,3
Sol Efroni,5 Nik Matthews,7 Tom Misteli,8 Eran Meshorer,2 Paola Scaffidi1,9†
Tumors comprise functionally diverse subpopulations of cells with distinct proliferative
potential. Here, we show that dynamic epigenetic states defined by the linker histone H1.0
determine which cells within a tumor can sustain the long-term cancer growth. Numerous
cancer types exhibit high inter- and intratumor heterogeneity of H1.0, with H1.0 levels
correlating with tumor differentiation status, patient survival, and, at the single-cell level, cancer
stem cell markers. Silencing of H1.0 promotes maintenance of self-renewing cells by
inducing derepression of megabase-sized gene domains harboring downstream effectors of
oncogenic pathways. Self-renewing epigenetic states are not stable, and reexpression of H1.0
in subsets of tumor cells establishes transcriptional programs that restrict cancer cells’
long-term proliferative potential and drive their differentiation. Our results uncover epigenetic
determinants of tumor-maintaining cells.
C
ancer is a clonal disease originating from
a single cell. Yet, most human cancers are
characterized by extensive intratumor het-
erogeneity and comprise various sub-
populations of cells with distinct phenotypes
and biological properties (1, 2). Intratumor het-
erogeneity poses major challenges in understand-
ing cancers, managing patients, and designing
effective treatment strategies. Functional heter-
ogeneity within individual tumors is partly due
to intercellular genetic variation, which results in
the generation of genetically distinct subclonal
cell populations (3, 4). Furthermore, tumors have
complex architecture, differing regionally in vessel
content, stroma, host infiltrates, and other fea-
tures that can alter the phenotype of genetically
identical cells (5).
In many cancers, phenotypic and functional
heterogeneity can be mapped to distinct differ-
entiation states (5–7), suggesting that epigenetic
changes occurring during tumor growth may
establish cellular hierarchies within the neoplastic
mass, thereby affecting the long-term proliferative
potential of cancer cells. In line with this notion,
individual tumors have been shown to contain
distinct subpopulations of undifferentiated, self-
renewing cells and more differentiated cells, which
only have limited proliferative ability (8, 9). Re-
gardless of their cell of origin, cancer cells en-
dowed with unlimited proliferative potential can
be identified by their ability to propagate the dis-
ease whentransplanted into immunocompromised
mice and are referred to as tumor-propagating
cells (TPCs) or cancer stem cells (CSCs) (9). The
mechanisms through which epigenetic changes
occurring during tumor growth establish differ-
entiation hierarchies and contribute to functional
heterogeneity within individual tumors are largely
unknown.
We have previously shown that hierarchically
organizedhumanprimarytumorscontainingfunc-
tionally distinct subsets of cancer cells can be
generated in a controlled manner using de novo
transformed cells. Expression of humantelomerase
(hTERT) and oncogenic HRASV12 and concom-
itant inhibition of p53 and pRB by SV40 T antigens
confer tumorigenic potential to various cell types
(10–12). We have shown that, upon experimental
transformation of primary dermal fibroblasts, a
subpopulation of cells marked by the CSC marker
SSEA1 (13, 14) acquire uncontrolled long-term
proliferative potential and multipotency (15).
Thus, when injected into mice, SSEA1+ cells form
hierarchically organized tumors in which a small
subset of self-renewing SSEA1+ cells maintain
tumor growth while generating SSEA1– differ-
entiated progeny with only limited prolifera-
tive capacity (15). The functional differences
that distinguish SSEA1+ and SSEA1– tumor cells—
undifferentiatedphenotype,long-termself-renewal
ability, and high tumorigenic potential versus
differentiated phenotype, limited proliferative
potential, and low tumorigenicity—are general
features associated with differentiation hier-
archies in many cancer types, regardless of the
tissue of origin.
Taking advantage of our ability to generate
hierarchically organized human tumors in a con-
trolled manner, here we identify an epigenetic
mechanism that establishes intratumor func-
tional heterogeneity. We report that reversible
silencing of the linker histone H1.0 (16) affects
the differentiation state of cancer cells and con-
tributes to defining which cells within a tumor
can maintain long-term self-renewal potential
and drive tumor growth. H1.0 is one of multiple
H1 variants. Unlike replication-dependent H1
variants, which are mainly expressed in prolifer-
ating cells, H1.0 is expressed in both dividing and
nondividing cells (16). H1.0 levels are low in
pluripotent cells but accumulate in somatic
cells, replacing replication-dependent H1 variants
(17). Here, we demonstrate a critical role for
histone H1.0 in inhibiting tumor maintenance.
Results
Heterogeneous levels of H1.0 in
individual tumors
We have previously used an engineered system
to model functional intratumor heterogeneity of
human tumors (see above) (15). In this system, we
have shown by gene expression analysis that self-
renewing tumor cells, which are marked by the
surface antigen SSEA1 (SSEA1+ cells), are molec-
ularly distinct from their SSEA1– differentiated
progeny (fig. S1A) (15). Among the differentially
expressed genes, H1F0, which encodes histone H1.0,
showed consistent down-regulation in SSEA1+ cells
compared with SSEA1– cells in multiple tumors
(Fig. 1A and fig. S1B). Other H1 variants were
either expressed at very low levels in all tumor cells
(HISTH1A,HISTH1B,HISTH1C,HISTH1D,HISTH1T,
H1Foo, H1FNT, and H1FX) or expressed at com-
parable levels in SSEA1+ and SSEA1– cells (HISTH1E)
(fig. S1B). Analysis of protein levels by quanti-
tative immunofluorescence microscopy of sorted
tumor cells and tumor sections confirmed low
levels of H1.0 in self-renewing SSEA1+ cells (Fig.
1, B and C, and fig. S1C). In contrast, SSEA1– cells
expressed heterogeneous, but overall higher, levels
of H1.0 (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S1C), similarly to
hTERT-immortalized,nontransformedfibroblasts,
from which SSEA1+ cells were originally derived
(Fig. 1, B and C). As a control, comparable levels
of H1.4 (HIST1H1E gene product) were detected
in SSEA1+ and SSEA1– cells (Fig. 1B and fig. S1D).
Low abundance of H1.0 in SSEA1+ cells was fur-
ther confirmed in unsorted tumor cells by imaging
flow cytometry, which showed a mutually exclusive
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aaf1644-1
1Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute,
Lincoln’s Inn Fields Laboratory, London WC2A 3LY, UK.
2Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life Sciences, and The
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences (ELSC), The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus,
Givat Ram, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. 3Bioinformatics, The
Francis Crick Institute, Lincoln’s Inn Fields Laboratory, London
WC2A 3LY, UK. 4Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton
CB101SA, UK. 5The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life
Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.
6Experimental Histopathology, The Francis Crick Institute,
Lincoln’s Inn Fields Laboratory, London WC2A 3LY, UK.
7Advanced Sequencing, The Francis Crick Institute, Lincoln’s Inn
Fields Laboratory, London WC2A 3LY, UK. 8National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. 9UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London
WC1E 6DD, UK.
*These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding
author. Email: paola.scaffidi@crick.ac.uk
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 aaf1644-2
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 1. Intratumor heterogeneity of H1.0 levels. (A) qRT-PCR analysis of
H1F0 mRNA levels in SSEA1+ and SSEA1– cells isolated from five tumors in-
duced by in vitro–transformed fibroblasts (15).Values indicate average ± SEM
of three technical replicates. (B and C) Quantitative immunodetection of H1.0
and H1.4 (red) by immunofluorescence microscopy in the indicated sorted tumor
cells and telomerase-immortalized parental cells (hTERT). Scale bar, 20 mm.
**P < 0.01 (Student’s t test). 37 < N < 60. (D and E) Quantitative immuno-
detection of H1.0 by imaging flow cytometry in unsorted tumor cells. SSEA1+,
self-renewing cells; CD166low, highly differentiated cells; 7′AAD, nuclei; live/
dead+, dead cells; H2Kd+, host mouse cells excluded from analysis. Scale bar,
10 mm. (E) Scatter plot of H1.0 and SSEA1 levels in individual cells. (Fand G) Quan-
titative immunodetection of H1.0 and SSEA1 in GBM samples by immuno-
fluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 10 mm. (G) Quantification of H1.0 levels in
three normal (N1 to N3) and four tumor (T
um1 to T
um4) samples. *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01 (Student’s t test). 15 < N < 910. (H) Quantification of H1F0 mRNA
levels in cells from three GBM samples by RNA-seq. CSC, cells grown as
neurospheres; FCS, cells differentiated in vitro by FCS addition; T
umor, whole
tumor population. (I to K) Quantitative immunodetection of H1.0 and ITGA6 in
breast cancer samples by immunofluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 10 mm.
Quantification of H1.0 levels in two normal breast tissues (N) and tumor samples
of different histological grade. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, compared with N2 (Student’s
t test). (J) 38 < N < 134. (K) Quantification of H1.0 levels in two normal breast
tissues (N1 and N2) and five tumor samples (T
um 1 to 5). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01
(Student’s t test). 7 < N < 131, except ITGA6+ T
um 4, for which N = 2.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 relationship between H1.0 and SSEA1 (Fig. 1, D
and E). H1.0 levels negatively correlated with the
presence of the mitotic marker phopho-H3S28 in
tumors, confirming an association between H1.0
levels and cell proliferative potential (fig. S2).
We next examinedH1.0 levelsinclinical samples
from cancer patients. Glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) is an aggressive brain cancer character-
ized by highly undifferentiated cells. SSEA1 is
an established GBM stem cell marker that en-
riches for tumor-propagating cells (13, 14). Single-
cell analysis of normal brain and GBM tissue
sections by quantitative immunofluorescence
microscopy showed overall reduced levels of H1.0,
but not H1.4, in cancer samples (Fig. 1, F and G,
and fig. S3A). However, whereas the SSEA1– cell
population was heterogeneous and included cells
expressing H1.0 at comparable levels as normal
brain cells (H1F0high cells), SSEA1+ cells con-
sistently exhibitedlow levels of the protein(H1F0low
cells) (P < 0.01) (Fig. 1, F and G, and fig. S3A).
Analysis of single-cell RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq)
data sets from primary GBMs (2) confirmed these
results, because self-renewing GBM cells isolated
from multiple tumors (CSCs) showed ~10 times
lower average levels of H1F0 compared with the
whole tumor cell population and ~4 times lower
levels compared with cells cultured under differ-
entiating conditions (FCS) (Fig. 1H). Although
the average H1F0 levels were variable across GBM
samples, the range of H1F0 levels in individual
cells was similar in all analyzed tumors (fig. S3B),
indicating that bulk measurements of the heter-
ogeneous GBM populations mainly reflected the
relative abundance of H1F0high and H1F0low cells
within each population. Furthermore, analysis of
gene expression data sets from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) showed significantly higher bulk
levels of H1F0 in lower-grade glioma (LGG) com-
pared with grade 4 GBM (P < 0.001) (fig. S3C),
suggesting that more aggressive brain tumors
contain more H1F0low cells than well- and mod-
erately differentiated tumors.
Intratumor heterogeneity of H1.0 levels was
also observed in other types of cancer. In breast
cancer (BRCA), the abundance of H1.0low cells
correlated with histopathological grade, being
lower in well-differentiated cancers (grade I) and
higher in moderately (grade II) and poorly (grade
III) differentiated tumors (Fig. 1J and fig. S3D).
Levels of H1.0 were particularly low (P < 0.01) in
cells expressing ITGA6, a surface antigen marking
breast CSCs (18), which has been shown to have
prognostic value as a single parameter (19) (Fig. 1,
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aaf1644-3
Fig. 2. Dynamic methylation of an enhancer element regulates H1F0 ex-
pression in cancer. (A) Representation of the H1F0 regions probed by bisulfite
sequencing analysis (arrows indicate PCR-amplified regions) and 450 K In-
finium arrays. (B) Bisulfite sequencing analysis comparing the H1F0 CGI shore
methylation status in the indicated subsets of sorted tumor cells. Lines repre-
sent individual sequenced molecules. White and black circles represent un-
methylated and methylated CpGs, respectively.The percentage of methylation
of selected CpGs is indicated. **P < 0.001 [two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)].
(C) qRT-PCRof SSEA1+ tumorcells treated with 5-Aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-Aza) or
with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as a control. Values represent average ± SEM
from three technical replicates.T
wo independent experiments gave similar results.
*P < 0.05 **P < 0.01, compared with DMSO (one-way ANOVA and Tukey
Kramer test). (D) Luciferase reporter assay. Normalized luciferase activity com-
paring the transactivation potential of two negative control DNA fragments
(Neg. 1 and 2) (21, 43) and the H1F0 CGI shore. Values are average ± SEM
from three experiments. **P < 0.01 (Student’s t test). (E) qRT-PCR com-
paring H1F0 expression levels in cells expressing H1F0-targeting sgRNAs and
Cas9 fused to either wild-type (WT) or a catalytically dead (ANV) DNMT3A.
Values are average ± SEM from three biological replicates. *P < 0.05 (Student’s
t test). (F) Normalized luciferase activity comparing the transactivation potential
of untreated (NT) or in vitro methylated (Meth) H1F0 CGI shore and a negative
control fragment (Neg. 1).Values areaverage ± SEM from five biological replicates.
**P < 0.01 (Student’s t test). (G) Analysis of H1F0 methylation in TCGA samples.
PatientsaresortedbasedonH1F0expressionlevels(RSEM),andthecorresponding
DNA methylation levels are visualized as a heat map. Each row corresponds to a
patient, and the number of patients for each cohort is indicated. P values of the
Spearman’s rankcorrelation between H1F0 mRNA levels and methylation of CpG 7
and 8 are indicated (see fig. S6). Expression levels are normalized across tissues.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 I and K). As a control, H1.4 was not affected in
BRCA samples (fig. S3D). Similarly, analysis of
samples from patients affected by stomach, pros-
tate, uterus, and ovary cancer revealed hetero-
geneous H1.0 levels in tumor sections, whereas
homogeneous high levels were detected in the
corresponding normal tissues (fig. S4A). A panel
of 20 cell lines from 10 cancer types also showed
overall reduced levels of H1.0 (fig. S4, B and C). In
culture, H1.0 levels were sensitive to extracellular
signaling, as assessed by treatment of cells with
various ligands previously implicated in mediating
interactions between cancer cells and the tumor
microenvironment. Out of 16 proteins tested, in-
cluding cytokines, activators or inhibitors of stem
cell–related pathways, and growth factors, 9 in-
creased H1.0 levels whereas 2 further lowered
them (P < 0.05) (fig. S4D). This observation sug-
gests that heterogeneous H1.0 expression patterns
within tumors may be the result of differential
exposure of cancer cells to extracellular cues.
Taken together, these results indicate that sev-
eral cancer types exhibit highly heterogeneous
expression patterns of H1.0 within individual
tumors and that cells characterized by an un-
differentiated phenotype and expressing func-
tionally validated CSC markers contain particularly
low levels of H1.0.
Dynamic H1F0 methylation in tumors
Aberrant DNA-methylation patterns contribute
to gene down-regulation in cancer (8). H1F0 is
unmethylated and highly expressed in most adult
tissues (figs. S3, A and D, and S4A) (17) (Fig. 2A
and fig. S5A). To assess whether DNA methyla-
tion affects H1F0 levels within tumors, we per-
formed bisulfite sequencing analysis of the H1F0
locus, comparing self-renewing SSEA1+ cells with
the most differentiated tumor cells, characterized
by the absence of SSEA1 and reduced levels of
the surface antigen CD166 (SSEA1–/CD166low) (15)
(see Fig. 3D). We examined a region spanning
~1.1 Kb around the transcriptional start site (TSS)
(from –263 to +858), including a CpG island (CGI)
(Fig. 2A). The CGI in the H1F0 promoter was not
methylated in either subset (fig. S5B), but a dif-
ferentially methylated region was identified in the
adjacentCGIshore(20)(Fig.2A).SSEA1+/CD166high
cells showed considerable methylation in multiple
consecutive CpGs (26 to 94%; average, 50%),
whereas significantly reduced methylation (0
to 37%; average, 18%) was detected in differ-
entiated SSEA1–/CD166low cells (P <0.001) (Fig.
2B). Treatment of isolated SSEA1+ tumor cells
with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-
2′-deoxycytidine resulted in demethylation of
the CGI shore and a progressive increase of H1F0
mRNA with similar kinetics, whereas H1FX, as
a control, remained constant (Fig. 2C and fig.
S5, C and D; also see methods). Chromatin im-
munoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed high levels of
H3K27ac in the CGI shore, suggesting the pre-
sence of an enhancer element (21) (fig. S5, E and
F). In agreement, the H1F0 CGI shore showed
transactivating potential in reporter assays (Fig.
2D), and its deletion by clustered regularly inter-
spaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)–Cas9–
mediated genome editing resulted in decreased
levels of endogenous H1F0 mRNA (fig. S5, G and
H). Furthermore, targeted methylation of the en-
hancer region by CRISPR-Cas9-DNMT3A (22)
(~65% methylation) induced a ~45% reduction
in H1F0 mRNA levels (Fig. 2E and fig. S5I), and
in vitro–methylated reporter constructs showed
a similar reduction in luciferase assays (Fig. 2F
and fig. S5J). We conclude that differential methy-
lation of an enhancer controlling H1F0 expression
induces H1F0 silencing in self-renewing tumor cells.
We then analyzed expression and methylation
data sets from various cancer types generated by
TCGA. For each cancer type, correlation between
H1F0 mRNA levels measured by RNA-seq and
H1F0 methylation assessed by 450 K Infinium
microarrays was examined. Similar to what we ob-
served in tumors induced by in vitro–transformed
cells, the H1F0 promoter (450 K probes 1 to 4) was
not methylated in most patients (Fig. 2, A and G,
and fig. S6), whereas a downstream region cen-
tered on the CGI shore (450 K probes 5 to 10)
showed variable degrees of methylation, which
inversely correlated with H1F0 mRNA levels (Fig.
2, A and G, and fig. S6). Out of the 27 analyzed
types of cancer, 26 showed a significant inverse
correlation between H1F0 mRNA levels and DNA
methylation (P-value range: P < 2.2 × 10–16 to P =
0.009) (Fig. 2G and fig. S6). Remarkably, the
location of the methylated region within H1F0
was the same in all cancers, with the CGI shore
(probes 7 and 8) showing the highest correlation
with expression levels. In several cohorts, patients
characterized by high H1F0 methylation showed
a significantly higher proportion of aggressive
tumors, such as triple-negative breast cancers
and high-grade glioma, kidney cancer, and stom-
ach adenocarcinoma (P-value range: P < 0.0001 to
P = 0.016) (table S1). Bisulfite sequencing analysis
of multiple cell lines from various cancer types
confirmed methylation of the H1F0 CGI shore in
clinically derived samples expressing low H1.0
levels (figs. S5K and S4, B and C). We conclude
thatmethylationoftheH1F0CGIshoreisassociated
with silencing of H1F0 in a large variety of cancers.
Chromatin-mediated inhibition of cancer
cell self-renewal
To investigate whether changes in H1.0 levels
play a functional role in generating functional
heterogeneity within tumors, we assessed whether
restoring high levels of H1.0 in self-renewing
SSEA1+ cells during tumor growth or, conversely,
inhibiting reexpression of the protein in their dif-
ferentiated progeny affects tumor organization
and cancer cell long-term proliferative potential.
To do so, we introduced into in vitro–transformed
cells lentiviral constructs expressing either H1.0
cDNA or short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) targeting
H1F0 (shH1.0) under a doxycycline (Dox)–inducible
promoter. Induction of H1.0 cDNA in vitro resulted
in a ~4-fold increase in H1F0 mRNA (fig. S7A),
whereas expression of two distinct shRNAs re-
duced mRNA levels by ~80% (fig. S7, B to E),
leaving other H1 variants unaffected (fig. S7, F
and G). Cell lines expressing H1.4 cDNA or an
H1.4-targeting shRNA were also generated as
controls (fig. S7, A and B). Neither forced expres-
sion nor knockdown of H1.0 or H1.4 affected cell
viability, but cells expressing exogenous H1.0
showed decreased proliferation rates in vitro (fig.
S8, A and B). Although the overall population of
H1.0-expressing cells did not undergo immediate
cell-cycle arrest and most cells were positive for
the proliferation marker Ki67 early upon H1.0
expression, the fraction of Ki67-negative cells in-
creased over time (P = 0.014) (fig. S8, C and D),
similarly to what is observed upon cell differen-
tiation (23, 24), suggesting that constitutive ex-
pression of H1.0 impairs cell long-term proliferative
potential. In agreement, cells expressing high levels
of exogenous H1.0 were negatively selected over
time in favor of those expressing lower levels (fig.
S8E). Progressive negative selection of Ki67–/
H1.0high cells over passages hindered detection
of complete arrest of the whole-cell population.
To determine whether changes in H1.0 levels
within established tumors affect tumor organiza-
tion, cells containing, but not expressing, inducible
H1.0 cDNA or H1.0-targeting shRNAs were in-
jected into NOD.Cg-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG)
mice to induce tumor formation. About 4 weeks
after injection, when palpable tumors appear, con-
stitutive expression or knockdown of H1.0 was
induced and sustained for ~4 weeks while tumors
grew (Fig. 3A). Although analysis of control tumors
expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) showed efficient in vivo induction of the
Dox-responsive construct (five out of five fluo-
rescent tumors) (fig. S8F), when H1.0 was ex-
pressed, only 4 out of 11 induced tumors showed
higher H1F0 mRNA levels compared with the
uninduced tumors (Fig. 3, B and C). This was
not due to inefficient Dox delivery to the tumors,
because dissociated tumor cells also failed to
induce H1.0 in vitro (fig. S8, G and H), and sug-
gested that cells expressing constitutively high
levels of H1.0 were negatively selected during
tumor growth, similarly to what we observed
in vitro. As a control, treatment of tumors with
Dox for only 3 days resulted in detectable expres-
sion of exogenous H1.0 in four out of four tumors
(Fig. 3B and supplementary text). In contrast,
when H1.0 knockdown was induced, no negative
selection was observed and all Dox-treated tumors
contained high percentages of cells expressing
H1.0-targeting shRNAs (9/9) (fig. S8I). Thus, con-
stitutively high levels of H1.0 appear to inhibit
the long-term proliferative potential of cells
within tumors.
To directly assess whether modulation of H1.0
levels affects tumor organization, we first mea-
sured the relative abundance of cells expressing
markers of an undifferentiated (SSEA1+/CD166high)
or a differentiated (SSEA1–/CD166low) phenotype
(15) in uninduced and induced tumors (Fig. 3D).
Constitutive expression of H1.0 resulted in a sig-
nificant decrease in the fraction of undifferentiated
tumor cells (P = 0.039) and a concomitant increase
in differentiated cells (P = 0.005) in the tumors
showing increased H1F0 levels (Fig. 3E). Further-
more, the percentage of self-renewing tumor cells,
as measured by clonogenic assays in vitro, was
~2-fold lower in induced tumors (P = 0.045) (Fig.
aaf1644-4
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aaf1644-5
Fig. 3. H1.0 inhibits
cancer cell self-
renewal and drives
differentiation.
(A) Protocol used to
modulate H1.0 levels in
established tumors.
(B) Quantification of
in vivo induction efficiency
of H1.0 cDNA by qRT-
PCR. Every number indi-
cates a tumor, either
uninduced (NT) or
induced (DOX) for either
4 weeks or 3 days.
T
umors shown in (C) are
marked by stars. P value
from Student’s t test
(C). Immunodetection
of H1.0 in the indicated
tumors analyzed by qRT-
PCR in (B) (stars). Scale
bar, 50 mm. (D) Flow
cytometry analysis of
one uninduced and one
induced tumor gener-
ated by cells containing
Dox-responsive H1.0
cDNA constructs.The
gates used to measure
the fraction of undif-
ferentiated (SSEA1+/
CD166high) or differenti-
ated (SSEA1–/CD166low)
cells are indicated.
(E and G) Quantification
of the indicated subsets
of cells by fluorescence-
activated cell sorting
(undifferentiated and
differentiated cells) or by
soft agar assay
(in vitro self-renewing
cells) in tumors gener-
ated by cells containing
the indicated con-
structs. Red line, mean
value. P value from
Student’s t test.
(F) Representative
images of clonogenic
soft agar assay.
(H) Limiting dilution
transplantation assay
for secondary tumor
formation using cells
from uninduced or
induced primary tumors
containing the indicated
constructs. See also
table S2 and supple-
mentary text. (I) Growth of secondary tumors induced by 5000 cells from
uninduced or induced primary tumors containing the indicated constructs.
T
umor volume values represent mean ± SEM from four tumors each.The value
indicated by a dagger corresponds to two tumors, due to earlier culling of other
animals bearing large tumors. P value from Student’s t test based on the last
time point. (J and K) Growth of secondary tumors induced by 1 million (K) or
2 million (J) cells from the indicated breast cancer cell lines containing the
indicated constructs.Tumor volume values represent mean ± SEM from five
tumors. Significance of the differences between uninduced and induced H1.0
cDNA or shH1.0 at the last time point is indicated (Student’s t test). Differences
between induced and uninduced control tumors (contr.),which express T
urboRFP
and the mir30 cassette from empty pTRIPZ, are not significant.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 3, E and F). As a control, expression of H1.4 had no
significant effect on tumor organization (fig. S9A).
Conversely, when knockdown of H1.0 was in-
duced to prevent its accumulation in differ-
entiated cells, the percentage of undifferentiated
tumor cells significantly increased (P = 0.005),
the fraction of differentiated cells decreased (P =
0.007), and tumors contained ~2-fold more self-
renewing cells (P = 0.044) (Fig. 3G fig. S9D, and
supplementary text). In agreement, tumors ex-
pressing constitutive H1.0 showed a lower frac-
tion of mitotic cells, whereas tumors in which
H1.0 had been knocked down had a higher mitotic
index (fig. S9, B and C). Limiting dilution trans-
plantation assays for secondary tumor formation
confirmed the altered self-renewal ability of cancer
cells in vivo, showing a lower frequency of tumor-
igenic cells in primary tumors constitutively ex-
pressing H1.0 and a higher frequency in tumors
where H1.0 had been knocked down (Fig. 3H,
supplementary text, and table S2). In line with
the notion that even moderate changes in the
fraction of self-renewing cancer cells strongly
affect long-term tumor growth (18, 25, 26) (sup-
plementary text), transplantation of cells from
primary tumors constitutively expressing H1.0
resulted in significantly delayed appearance of
secondary tumors compared with control tumors
(P < 0.01), whereas faster growth was observed
upon transplantation of shH1.0-expressing cells
(P < 0.01) (Fig. 3I). Orthotropic transplantation
assays using multiple breast cancer cell lines con-
firmed these results. Forced expression of H1.0
cDNA in MDA-MB-231 or HCC1954 cells specif-
icallyimpairedtumorgrowth,whereasknockdown
of the endogenous protein in MDA-MB-231 or
HCC-1569 cells resulted in more aggressive tumors
(Fig. 3, J and K). Furthermore, analysis of Dox-
induced tumors showed partial negative selection
of H10high cells, confirming the negative impact
of H1.0 on cell long-term proliferative potential
(fig. S8, J and K). We conclude that H1.0 silencing
is required for the ability of cancer cells to self-
renew and that its reexpression in subsets of cells
during tumor growth contributes to driving their
differentiation and restricting their proliferative
potential.
Derepression of adenine-thymine (AT)–rich
genes sustains cancer cell self-renewal
To understand how H1.0 affects cancer cell self-
renewal, we employed two inducible shRNAs to
knock down H1.0 in transformed cultured cells
and compared the transcriptional profiles of three
cellular states by RNA-seq: uninduced cells ex-
pressing H1.0 (NT); cells induced with Dox for
14 days, which down-regulated H1.0 similarly to
self-renewing SSEA1+ tumor cells (DOX); and cells
washed out of Dox for 4 days, which began to
reexpress H1.0 and mimicked differentiated SSEA1–
tumor cells (washDOX). Comparison between NT
and DOX samples detected 860 differentially ex-
pressed genes (DEGs) [false discovery rate (FDR)
< 0.05] upon H1.0 knockdown by both shRNAs
(475 up-regulated and 385 down-regulated) (table
S3 and fig. S10, A to C). The extent of gene ex-
pressionchanges was moderate, with only 25 genes
aaf1644-6
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 4. Activation of transcriptional programs supporting oncogenic self-renewal via up-regulation
of large gene domains. (A) Venn diagrams showing the percentage of genes up-regulated (Up) or
down-regulated (Down) in SSEA1+ cells compared with SSEA1– cells that are affected by H1.0 knockdown
(see also table S4).The significance of the overlap is indicated (hypergeometric test). (B) Oncogenic gene
signatures positively correlating with DOX samples. NES, normalized enrichment score; NOM P-val,
nominal P value. Blue, stem cell–related gene signatures. (C) GSEA plots of positional gene sets positively
(CHR4Q21) or negatively (CHR19P13) correlating with DOX samples. (D and E) Smoothed log2 fold change of
gene expression between DOX and NT (D) or washDOX and DOX samples (E) (shH1.0-1) along the human
genome. Similar plots were obtained with shH1.0-2. Numbers indicate the chromosomes delimited with
vertical lines. Only expressed genes (TPM > 0) are plotted. Blue, up-regulated domains; red, down-
regulated domains. (F) Distribution of GC content in RefSeq genes (all) and in the subsets of up-regulated
(Up) or down-regulated (Down) DEGs. P value from Student’s t test.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 showing >2-fold changes (table S3), but differences
were highly consistent and reversible upon H1.0
reexpression (fig. S10, C and D). Quantitative re-
verse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-
PCR) analysis confirmed differential expression
of genes detected by RNA-seq and showed that
H1.0-sensitive genes did not respond to H1.4 knock-
down (fig. S10E).
To identify H1.0-sensitive genes important for
cancer cell self-renewal, we compared the iden-
tified DEGs with a gene signature (132 genes) de-
fined by comparing self-renewing SSEA1+ and
differentiated SSEA1– cells from multiple tumors
(table S4) (15). About 30% of genes expressed at
higher levels in SSEA1+ cells underwent up-
regulation upon H1.0 knockdown (P < 10 × 10–14),
whereas 10% of genes down-regulated in SSEA1+
cells showed lower levels in cells lacking H1.0 (P =
1.5 × 10–5), indicating that a significant fraction
of genes defining the subset of self-renewing
tumor cells, particularly those up-regulated, are
regulated by H1.0 (Fig. 4A). Gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) confirmed that genes up-regulated
upon H1.0 knockdown were particularly relevant
for cancer cell self-renewal ability (Fig. 4B). Several
oncogenic gene signatures were enriched in the
subset of up-regulated genes, including signatures
related to the activation of the oncoproteins KRAS,
EGFR, and RAF1 or to the inactivation of the tumor
suppressor PTEN (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, gene sig-
natures important for stem cell maintenance, such
as those related to the Polycomb complex compo-
nents EZH2, EED, BMI1, and SUZ12 (27), were also
enriched among up-regulated genes (Fig. 4B). Based
on GSEA, down-regulated genes did not seem to
substantially contribute to the self-renewing pheno-
type. Thus, loss of H1.0 results in activation of
downstream effectors of multiple oncogenic and
self-renewal cellular pathways. Interestingly, these
genes are not randomly distributed in the genome
but are enriched in AT-rich regions (fig. S11A).
GSEA also revealed linear proximity of H1.0-
sensitive genes along chromosomes. Of 296 po-
sitional gene sets, corresponding to genes located
in individual chromosomal cytogenetic subbands,
75 were enriched inDOXsamples, usingeitherH1.0-
targeting shRNA, indicating overall up-regulation
of genes located in those bands upon H1.0 knock-
down. Conversely, 37 bands negatively correlated
with the DOX samples, indicating overall gene
down-regulation (Fig. 4C; fig. S11, B and C; and
table S5). In agreement, analysis of the distribution
of gene expression fold changes between NT and
DOX samples (see methods) showed that domains
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aaf1644-7
Fig. 5. Destabilization of nucleosome-DNA interactions in AT-rich regions
in the absence of H1.0. (A) Average peak density profiles of H3K4me3 and
H3K27me3 centered on H1.0 binding sites. (B) Correlation between H1.0 peak
density and DNA GC content.The best-fit line of the experimental values for GC
content > 0.4, the correlation coefficient R, and statistical accuracy of the fit are
indicated. (C) H1.0 peak density along chromosome 3.The approximate location
of cytogenetic bands, up-regulated (Up) or down-regulated (Down) positional
gene sets identified by GSEA, and the corresponding DNA GC content are
shown. (D to Fand H) Comparison between genes up-regulated (Up) or down-
regulated (Down) in response to H1.0 knockdown,with respect to the indicated
features. Smoothed average density profile of H1.0 peaks (F) and FAIRE peaks
(H) show enrichment of H1.0 and increased FAIRE signal (decreased nucleosome
occupancy) upon H1.0 knockdown around the TSS of up-regulated genes.
RefSeq genes (All) are shown as reference. P value from paired t test, with
Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment for (F) and (H). (G) Heat map showing tag
density of H1.0 ChIP-seq around the TSS of genes up-regulated upon H1.0
knockdown. Each line represents a gene. (I) Relative abundance of the in-
dicated types of FAIRE peaks in GC-rich and AT-rich domains. Nucleosome
occupancy corresponding to the different types of FAIRE peaks is schematized
next to the legend. Black line, DNA; gray circles, nucleosomes. Results from
shH1.0-1 are shown. Similar results were obtained with shH1.0-2. P value from
Fisher’s exact test for constitutive peaks. (J) Average DNA GC content cen-
tered on FAIRE peaks that appear or disappear upon H1.0 knockdown. See also
fig. S14D. P value from paired t test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment. Gray
area, 95% confidence interval of the best fit after smoothing. (K) Number of
up-regulated or down-regulated H1.0-sensitive genes showing altered acety-
lated or methylated H3K27 at TSS upon H1.0 knockdown. Differences are not
significant (n.s., Fisher’s exact test).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of up-regulatedgenesalternatedwithdown-regulated
regions along chromosomes (Fig. 4D). The differ-
entially expressed domains contained up to 365
genes over several megabases (average genes per
domain = 30) (fig. S11E). A similar profile was
observed 24 hours after Dox induction, when H1.0
levels began to decrease, indicating that transcrip-
tional changes occur rapidly upon H1.0 loss (fig.
S11, F and G). Reexpression of H1.0 in washDOX
samples, mimicking what happens in differentiated
tumor cells, restored transcriptional profiles similar
to those detected in uninduced NT samples (Fig.
4E and fig. S11, F and G), indicating that gene
expression changes induced by H1.0 silencing
are reversible.
Up-regulated domains were enriched in AT-
rich chromosomes, such as chromosome 4 (chr.4),
chr.5, and chr.18 [average guanine-cytosine (GC)
content <0.40], whereas down-regulated domains
mainly localized in GC-rich chromosomes such as
chr.17, chr.19, and chr.22 (average GC content
>0.45) (28) (Fig. 4D). In agreement, individual
up-regulated genes had significantly lower GC
content compared with all Reference Sequence
(RefSeq) genes (median %GC: 0.40 versus 0.45,
P < 10 × 10–16) or down-regulated genes (median
%GC: 0.40 versus 0.53, P < 10 × 10–16) (Fig. 4F),
even though the two groups of H1.0-sensitive genes
contained a similar proportion of CGI-containing
genes (fig. S11D). We conclude that cells lacking
H1.0 undergo genome-wide changes in gene ex-
pression, affecting large gene domains in a co-
ordinated manner. In particular, up-regulation
of sets of neighboring AT-rich genes mediating
oncogenic cellular responses and stem cell main-
tenance contributes to the activation and main-
tenance of transcriptional programs that support
uncontrolled self-renewal. These effects are re-
versible, and reexpression of H1.0 reestablishes
gene expression profiles that restrict cell tumor-
igenic potential.
Destabilized nucleosome-DNA
interactions in self-renewing cancer cells
To map genomic regions bound by H1.0 before
its down-regulation in self-renewing tumor cells,
we performed ChIP-seq analysis of transformed
cultured cells. About 120,000 H1.0 peaks were
consistently detected in two biological replicates
(fig. S12, A to C, and table S6), using an H1.0-
specific antibody (fig. S7, C to E). ChIP-qPCR con-
firmed accurate detection of H1.0 peaks (fig. S12E).
H1.0 binding sites positively correlated with the
histone mark H3K27me3 (Fig. 5A and fig. S12, B
and D). No significant correlation was observed
between H1.0 binding profiles and maps of topo-
logical associating domains (TADs) (29) (fig. S12D).
H1.0 binding sites were enriched in GC-rich chro-
mosomes and at GC-rich genes (fig. S12, F and G),
and H1.0 peak density showed a tight linear re-
lationship with GC content in regions with >40%
GC (R = 0.86) (Fig. 5B), indicating that GC con-
tent is a major determinant of H1.0 binding sites.
Megabase-scale density plots of H1.0 binding sites
along chromosomes allowed visualization of the
correlation between H1.0 occupancy, GC content,
and cytogenetic bands (Fig. 5C and fig. S13A). In
line with the notion that nucleosomes are overall
enriched in GC-rich genomic regions, H1.0 oc-
cupancy also correlated with nucleosome den-
sity (30, 31) (fig. S12H). We conclude that large-
scale H1.0 binding profiles are mainly determined
by DNA sequence, which affects the broad dis-
tribution of nucleosomes. Of note, AT-rich regions
characterized by low H1.0 peak density contain
the self-renewal–related genes up-regulated upon
H1.0 knockdown (Fig. 5C and fig. S13A).
To gain insights into how H1.0 loss results in
up-regulation of AT-rich self-renewal–related
genes, we examined H1.0 occupancy around their
TSSs. Although up-regulated genes were bound
by H1.0 at overall low density (Fig. 5, D and E),
similar to the pattern observed at other AT-rich
regions, H1.0 binding sites were highly enriched
around the TSS (Fig. 5, F and G and fig. S12, J to L).
In contrast, all RefSeq genes and genes down-
regulated upon H1.0 knockdown showed an aver-
age depletion of H1.0 binding sites around the
TSS (Fig. 5F and fig. S12, J to L). Similar patterns,
with enhanced differences, were observed when
analyzing the positional gene sets identified as
up-regulated by GSEA (fig. S13, B to D). Together
with the notion that AT-rich regions may be ther-
modynamically unstable when wrapped around
nucleosomes (32, 33), this observation suggests
that H1.0 may repress the AT-rich, self-renewal–
related genes by stabilizing nucleosomes at their
promoters. To test this possibility, we assessed
changes in genome-wide nucleosome occupancy
induced by H1.0 loss by formaldehyde-assisted
isolation of regulatory elements-sequencing (FAIRE-
seq) (34), which allows detection of nucleosome-
depleted regions irrespectively of DNA GC content
(35, 36) (fig. S14A). Up-regulated genes specifically
showed increased FAIRE signal around the TSS
upon H1.0 knockdown using two independent
H1.0-targeting shRNAs, indicating decreased nu-
cleosome occupancy (Fig. 5H and figs. S13E and
S14, B and C). Similar patterns were observed at
distal regulatory regions of H1.0-sensitive genes,
identified by comparing an H3K27ac map with
an atlas of human enhancers (21) (see methods
and fig. S14, F and G). As a control, knockdown of
H1.4, which was depleted at H1.0-sensitive genes
(fig. S12I), only induced minimal changes in pro-
moter nucleosome occupancy (fig. S14H), which
did not translate into changes in gene expression
(fig. S10E). Nucleosome remodeling in the absence
of H1.0 did not correlate with increased occupancy
of other nucleosome-binding architectural proteins,
such as HMGA1, HMGN2, and PARP1 (fig. S15).
In agreement with H1.0 distribution, genome-
wide analysis of differential FAIRE peaks indi-
cated that altered nucleosome occupancy in the
absence of H1.0 depends on GC content, both at a
global and local scale. In GC-rich domains [aver-
age GC content per 500 base pairs (bp) >0.45],
most detected nucleosome-depleted regions were
stable and unaffected by H1.0 knockdown (con-
stitutive FAIRE peaks, table S6), and only ~25%
either appeared or disappeared as a consequence
of altered nucleosome occupancy (Fig. 5I). In
contrast, in AT-rich domains (average GC content
per 500 bp <0.45), ~50% of detected nucleosome-
depleted regions showed altered nucleosome
occupancy, indicatingthat nucleosome-DNAinter-
actions in AT-rich regions become particularly
unstable in the absence of H1.0 (Fig. 5I). Further-
more, nucleosome-depleted regions appeared in
DNA regions with local minimal GC content,
whereas they disappeared from regions of local
maximal GC content, suggesting that nucleosomes
forced to occupy regions with higher AT content,
in the absence of H1.0 moved to locations with
higher GC content (Fig. 5J and fig. S14D).
Mapping of H3K27ac and H3K27me3 by ChIP-
seq indicated that altered nucleosome occupancy
induced by H1.0 loss was uncoupled from changes
in histone modifications. Most appearing or dis-
appearing FAIRE peaks were located within non-
acetylated chromatin (fig. S14E), suggesting that
alterations in nucleosome occupancy were not a
consequence of transcription. Furthermore, up-
regulated self-renewal–related genes did not show
significant differences in H3K27ac and H3K27me3
at their promoters upon H1.0 knockdown com-
pared with down-regulated genes (P > 0.05) (Fig.
5K), indicating that changes in gene expression
were a direct consequence of altered nucleosome
occupancy. Taken together, these results suggest
that loss of H1.0 destabilizes nucleosome-DNA in-
teractionsinAT-richgenomicregionsandincreases
accessibility to regulatory elements important
for cellular self-renewal.
Low H1F0 levels predict negative patient
outcome in multiple cancer types
To assess the clinical relevance of H1.0 alter-
ations, we examined whether H1F0 levels stratify
cancer patients. Kaplan-Meier and multivariate
analysis of three GBM data sets showed a sig-
nificant correlation between low H1F0 levels and
negative patient outcome (P < 0.05) (Fig. 6A and
fig. S16C), revealing a prognostic value for H1F0.
Low H1F0 levels also predicted poor patient prog-
nosis in three BRCA data sets (Fig. 6B). Impor-
tantly, H1F0 correlated with BRCA patient survival
independently of estrogen receptor (ER), proges-
teronereceptor(PR),erb-b2receptortyrosinekinase
2 (Her2) and lymph node status and effectively
stratifiedpatientstypicallyassociatedwithnegative
outcome (ER- or PR-negative and lymph node–
positive patients) (P < 0.05) (fig. S16, A and C).
Furthermore, H1F0 expression showed no sig-
nificant association with breast cancer subtype,
which strongly affects patient outcome (fig. S16B).
Analysis of 17 other types of cancers using TCGA
data sets showed a significant correlation between
low H1F0 levels and poor patient prognosis also
in melanoma (SKMC), liver cancer (LIHC), kidney
cancer (KIRP), and low-grade glioma (LGG), in-
dependently of other clinically relevant features
(Fig. 6C and fig. S16C). As controls, other H1 var-
iants either did not stratify patients or correlated
with patient survival in an opposite manner com-
pared with H1F0 (fig. S17). Thus, alterations in H1.0
levels are clinically relevant in multiple cancer types.
Discussion
Heterogeneityamongcancercellswithinindividual
tumors has emerged as a general feature of cancer,
aaf1644-8
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with critical implications for cancer diagnosis and
treatment (4, 9). Increasing evidence points to the
existence of both genetic and nongenetic sources
of intratumor heterogeneity (4, 5, 14, 37, 38), but
the molecular features underlying functionally
diverse cellular phenotypes have been elusive.
Cell-to-cell signaling pathways, such as Wnt,
Tgfb, and Notch pathways, have been shown to
play critical roles in driving functional heteroge-
neity within tumors (38), but very little is known
about the downstream, cell-intrinsic mechanisms
that translate signaling into differential cell func-
tion. Here, we show that distinct epigenetic states,
determined by an integral component of chro-
matin, define cellular subpopulations that differ-
entially contribute to tumor maintenance. The
observation that experimental modulation of
epigenetic states affects the balance between self-
renewing and differentiated cancer cells dem-
onstrates that chromatin-based mechanisms me-
diating differentiation programs play a key role
in specifying tumor organization and affecting
tumor maintenance. In line with the notion that
epigenetic mechanisms acting during tumor
growth may be dominant over genetic alterations
that initiate the disease (37, 39), we show that
subsets of cells that stably silence H1.0 preserve
their ability to proliferate indefinitely, whereas
cells that reexpress the protein and, as a con-
sequence, repress oncogenic gene networks acquire
a differentiated phenotype characterized by limited
proliferative potential. Reversible changes in H1.0
levels may be due to interactions of cancer cells
with the tumor microenvironment (38). In line
with this notion, H1.0 expression responds to a
variety of extracellular cues, many of which are
associated with cellular differentiation (40, 41) (fig.
S4D). It is likely that, at least in the early stages
of tumor development, cancer cells may be ex-
posed to differentiation stimuli that support
normal tissue homeostasis, and subsets of cells
may respond to such stimuli, changing their epi-
genetic landscape, partly through H1.0 and losing
self-renewal potential. Thus, H1.0 may act as a
downstream effector of extracellular signaling
inhibiting cancer cell self-renewal.
Our results suggest that numerous cancer types
may share similar epigenetic heterogeneity. Nu-
merous solid tumors show heterogeneity of H1.0,
and a regulatory region within the H1F0 gene
shows variable degrees of DNA methylation in
26 types of cancers, correlating with H1F0 expres-
sion levels. Furthermore, low H1F0 levels are in-
dependent predictors of poor patient outcome
in six prevalent cancer types. Importantly, the
molecular mechanism through which H1.0 restricts
cell proliferative potential is largely dependent
on DNA sequence and GC content, suggesting
that changes in H1.0 levels may have similar
consequences in various cell types. We show
that silencing of H1F0 supports cancer cell self-
renewal by inducing simultaneous derepression
of downstream effectors of oncogenic and stem
cell–related pathways located in AT-rich genomic
regions. AT-rich regions are known to poorly
incorporate into nucleosomes, partly because
of their inherent relative rigidity and difficulty
to bend around the core histone particle (30–33).
Thus, it is conceivable that AT-rich regions may
be particularly dependent on the linker histone
to stabilize nucleosome positioning at unfavorable
sequences, especially when nucleosomes are
forced to occupy promoters of genes that must
be repressed. Indeed, we find lower nucleosome
occupancyatAT-richgenepromotersintheabsence
of H1.0, correlating with enhanced transcription.
In conclusion, our results uncover epigenetic
determinants of tumor-maintaining cells and
identify an integral component of chromatin as
an important regulator of cell differentiation states
within tumors. We propose that only cells in-
sensitive to extracellular differentiation cues,
capable of permanently silencing H1.0, can act
as self-renewing tumor-maintaining cells and
that such a mechanism supports maintenance
of several types of cancer. Our results suggest
that intervention aimed at restoring high levels
of H1.0 in all cancer cells may enhance the dif-
ferentiation process that naturally occurs during
tumor growth and may be beneficial for ther-
apeutic purposes.
Materials and methods summary
Cell lines and constructs
Growth conditions of all cell lines used in the
study are listed in table S7. Inducible cell lines
were generated by introducing lentiviral constructs
(original or modified pTRIPZ, Open Biosystems)
expressing specific cDNAs or shRNAs, or control
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aaf1644-9
Fig. 6. Low H1F0 levels correlate with low patient survival in multiple cancer types. (A to C) Kaplan-
Meier analysis of the indicated data sets showing significant correlation between H1F0 levels and patient
survival. P value from log-rank test. Multivariate analysis is shown in fig. S16.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 plasmids into in vitro–transformed fibroblasts
(15) or breast cancer cells lines. All cancer cell
lineswere sourcedfromthe Crick Institute common
repository, authenticated by STR profiling, and
tested for mycoplasma. Cell proliferation rate
was measured using the 96 Aqueous One Solution
kit (Promega). For details on cell lines generation,
see the supplementary materials (SM).
Patient samples
Normal brain and GBM (grade 4 astrocytoma)
tissue sectionswereobtainedfromtheWhittington
tissue bank (UCL license number: 12055, three
normal and four tumors) and from US Biomax
(tissue microarray GL806b). All other tissue sec-
tions were obtained from US Biomax (tissue micro-
arrays: BR1053b, BCN962). Single-cell RNA-seq
data of GMB tumors was downloaded from GEO
series GSE57872 (2). DNA methylation and sur-
vival analysis were performed using TCGA data sets.
For details on patients used in the study, see SM.
Protein immunodetection
Western blot analysis, flow cytometric analysis,
cell sorting, and immunofluorescence microscopy
of cultured or sorted tumor cells were performed
as previously described (15) using anti-H1.0
(Millipore, raised in mouse, clone 3H9, 1:300,
originally produced in M. Bustin’s laboratory) (42)
and other antibodies detailed in SM. Recombi-
nant proteins were purchased from Peprotech.
Quantification of the fluorescent signal was per-
formed using Metamorph software or with HCS
Studio Cell Analysis Software. For details about
staining procedures, see SM.
Tumorigenicity assays
Tumor formation in NSG mice, tumor dissocia-
tion, limiting dilution transplantation assays, soft
agar assays and proliferation assays were per-
formed as previously described (15). For experi-
ments requiring in vivo modulation of H1 variants
in established tumors, cells infected with inducible
constructs were injected intradermally into NSG
mice (2000 transformed cells and 100,000 hTERT-
fibroblasts as carrier cells) in the uninduced state
to induce tumor formation (10 injections per con-
dition).Whentumorsfirstbecamepalpable,typical-
ly after 4 weeks, doxycycline treatment (2mg/ml
Dox in drinking water supplemented with 1%
sucrose, changed every 2 to 3 days) was started
and sustained for about a month until tumors
were collected and analyzed as detailed in SM.
Animal studies were conducted in agreement with
the approved NCI animal protocol LRBGE-007 and
the Crick project license PPL 70/8167.
DNA methylation analysis
For bisulfite sequencing analysis, genomic DNA
was treated for bisulfite conversion using EZ DNA
Methylation-Direct Kit (Zymo research) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Three regions
of H1F0 (CGI_1, CGI_2, and CGIshore) were am-
plified by PCR (primer sequences in table S8)
from bisulfite-treated DNA and cloned into pCR
2.1 Topo vector. 15 to 20 colonies were sequenced
for each region. For 5-Aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-Aza)
treatment, SSEA1+ cells isolated from a tumor
were treated with 5nM 5-Aza (Sigma) or DMSO
as a control (Fisher Chemical) for up to 14 days.
Higher concentrations of 5-Aza were toxic to
the SSEA1+ cells. For analysis of TCGA samples,
gene expression (Illumina HiSeq RNA-seq) and
DNA methylation (Illumina 450K Infinium anal-
ysis) data sets from individual cancers down-
loaded from the UCSC Cancer browser https://
genome-cancer.ucsc.edu were analyzed as detailed
in SM.
CGI shore functional assays
Luciferase assays were performed using the
Nano-Glo Dual-Luciferase reporter assay system
(Promega) comparing the H1F0 CGI shore and
two previously published DNA fragments showing
no transactivation potential (21, 43). Deletion
of the endogenous H1F0 CGI shore was carried
out by CRISPR-Cas9–mediated genome editing
using two sgRNAs flanking the CGI shore (table
S8). Clones with homozygous deletions of the
H1F0 CGI shore were analyzed by qRT-PCR using
primers located downstream of the deletion. For
heterozygous clones, allele-specific primers prob-
ing either the deleted or the full-length mRNA
were used (table S8). To induce targeted meth-
ylation of the endogenous H1F0 CGI shore, cells
weretransientlytransfectedwithplasmidsencoding
either WT or ANV mutant Cas9-DNMT3A (22)
and a pool of four sgRNAs targeting H1F0 CGI
shore (table S8). For details on luciferase assays
and CRISPR-mediated alterations of the H1F0
CGI shore, see SM.
RNA-seq analysis and GSEA
RNA libraries prepared using TruSeq Stranded
Total RNA-Seq Library Prep (Illumina) were se-
quenced on a HiSEq. 2500 sequencer (table S6).
Differentially expressed genes were defined as
those showing statistically significant differences
(FDR <0.05) using both H1.0-targeting shRNAs.
Genome-wide expression plots were generated
using similar methods to those described in (44).
Deviation from random distribution was calcu-
lated on raw, unsmoothed data by performing a
Monte Carlo simulation in which genes where
randomly shuffled along chromosomes (1000
iterations). GSEA was performed using GSEA soft-
ware (version 2.1.0, Broad Institute). FPKM values
for NT and DOX samples were provided to the
algorithm and tested for enrichment of oncogenic
signatures from the MSigDB or custom-made
positional gene sets generated based on RefSeq
genes and cytogenetic sub-bands coordinates
downloaded from the UCSC genome browser.
For details on RNA-seq analysis, GSEA, and val-
idation by qRT-PCR, see SM.
ChIP-seq analysis
ChIP was performed on in vitro-transformed
fibroblasts using an anti-H1.0 antibody (Millipore,
05-629, originally generated in M. Bustin’s labo-
ratory) (42), and other antibodies detailed in SM.
Multiplexed libraries were sequenced on a HiSEq.
2500 using either 50-bp single end or101-bp paired-
read runs (table S6). Peak detection for H1.0 was
performed with a custom-made algorithm as
detailed in SM.
FAIRE-seq analysis
Cells were processed and analyzed as previously
described (45). FAIRE peaks were called using
MACS-2.0.10 in paired-end mode using broad
settings with a bandwidth of 300 bp, normalizing
each sample to its own background as described
(45). The top 100,000 peaks (based on adjusted P
value) were selected for each replicate, and those
common to both (with a 20% reciprocal overlap)
were selected for downstream analysis. Differen-
tial FAIRE peaks analysis was performed using
DiffReps (46). For details on FAIRE-seq analysis,
see SM.
Survival analysis
Survival analysis was performed on all TCGA
data sets containing more than 200 patients.
Patients were ranked based on H1F0 expression,
and the top and bottom tertile were compared
with respect to vital status by Kaplan-Meier anal-
ysis. Log-rank test was used to assess statistical
significance of the differences between patient
groups. Additional data sets for GBM and BRCA
were analyzed as validation. Multivariate analy-
sis and chi-square tests were performed to assess
the relationship between H1.0 and other clinically
relevant features. For details on the survival
analysis, see SM.
Statistical analysis
Unless otherwise stated in figure legends, data
are presented either as individual samples or as
mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of
multiple replicates, with N indicated in the figure
legend. In box plots, the boundary of the box
closest to zero indicates the 25th percentile, a
line within the box marks the median, and the
boundary of the box farthest from zero indicates
the 75th percentile. Whiskers (error bars) above
and below the box indicate the 95th and 5th
percentiles. Outliers are plotted as dots. The stat-
istical test used for each comparison, whether
adjustment for multiple corrections was per-
formed, and the P value are indicated in the
corresponding figure legends.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
G. H. Heppner, Tumor heterogeneity. Cancer Res. 44,
2259–2265 (1984). pmid: 6372991
2.
A. P. Patel et al., Single-cell RNA-seq highlights intratumoral
heterogeneity in primary glioblastoma. Science 344,
1396–1401 (2014). doi: 10.1126/science.1254257;
pmid: 24925914
3.
P. C. Nowell, The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations.
Science 194, 23–28 (1976). doi: 10.1126/science.959840;
pmid: 959840
4.
R. A. Burrell, N. McGranahan, J. Bartek, C. Swanton, The
causes and consequences of genetic heterogeneity in cancer
evolution. Nature 501, 338–345 (2013). doi: 10.1038/
nature12625; pmid: 24048066
5.
A. Marusyk, V. Almendro, K. Polyak, Intra-tumour
heterogeneity: A looking glass for cancer? Nat. Rev. Cancer 12,
323–334 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nrc3261; pmid: 22513401
6.
K. Illmensee, B. Mintz, Totipotency and normal differentiation
of single teratocarcinoma cells cloned by injection into
blastocysts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 73, 549–553 (1976).
doi: 10.1073/pnas.73.2.549; pmid: 1061157
aaf1644-10
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 7.
F. Barabé, J. A. Kennedy, K. J. Hope, J. E. Dick, Modeling the
initiation and progression of human acute leukemia in mice.
Science 316, 600–604 (2007). doi: 10.1126/science.1139851;
pmid: 17463288
8.
H. Easwaran, H. C. Tsai, S. B. Baylin, Cancer epigenetics:
Tumor heterogeneity, plasticity of stem-like states, and drug
resistance. Mol. Cell 54, 716–727 (2014). doi: 10.1016/
j.molcel.2014.05.015; pmid: 24905005
9.
A. Kreso, J. E. Dick, Evolution of the cancer stem cell model.
Cell Stem Cell 14, 275–291 (2014). doi: 10.1016/
j.stem.2014.02.006; pmid: 24607403
10. W. C. Hahn et al., Creation of human tumour cells with defined
genetic elements. Nature 400, 464–468 (1999). doi: 10.1038/
22780; pmid: 10440377
11. B. Elenbaas et al., Human breast cancer cells generated by
oncogenic transformation of primary mammary epithelial cells.
Genes Dev. 15, 50–65 (2001). doi: 10.1101/gad.828901;
pmid: 11156605
12. J. N. Rich et al., A genetically tractable model of human glioma
formation. Cancer Res. 61, 3556–3560 (2001). pmid: 11325817
13. M. J. Son, K. Woolard, D. H. Nam, J. Lee, H. A. Fine, SSEA-1 is
an enrichment marker for tumor-initiating cells in human
glioblastoma. Cell Stem Cell 4, 440–452 (2009). doi: 10.1016/
j.stem.2009.03.003; pmid: 19427293
14. M. L. Suvà et al., Reconstructing and reprogramming the
tumor-propagating potential of glioblastoma stem-like cells.
Cell 157, 580–594 (2014). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.030;
pmid: 24726434
15. P. Scaffidi, T. Misteli, In vitro generation of human cells with
cancer stem cell properties. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 1051–1061
(2011). doi: 10.1038/ncb2308; pmid: 21857669
16. A. Izzo, K. Kamieniarz, R. Schneider, The histone H1 family:
Specific members, specific functions? Biol. Chem. 389,
333–343 (2008). doi: 10.1515/BC.2008.037; pmid: 18208346
17. D. Doenecke, A. Alonso, Organization and expression of the
developmentally regulated H1(o) histone gene in vertebrates.
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 40, 395–401 (1996). pmid: 8735954
18. S. Pece et al., Biological and molecular heterogeneity of breast
cancers correlates with their cancer stem cell content. Cell
140, 62–73 (2010). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.007;
pmid: 20074520
19. H. R. Ali et al., Cancer stem cell markers in breast cancer:
Pathological, clinical and prognostic significance. BCR 13, R118
(2011). doi: 10.1186/bcr3061; pmid: 22112299
20. R. A. Irizarry et al., The human colon cancer methylome shows
similar hypo- and hypermethylation at conserved tissue-
specific CpG island shores. Nat. Genet. 41, 178–186 (2009).
doi: 10.1038/ng.298; pmid: 19151715
21. R. Andersson et al.FANTOM Consortium, An atlas of active
enhancers across human cell types and tissues. Nature 507,
455–461 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nature12787; pmid: 24670763
22. A. Vojta et al., Repurposing the CRISPR-Cas9 system for
targeted DNA methylation. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 5615–5628
(2016). doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw159; pmid: 26969735
23. E. Järvinen, A. Angers-Loustau, A. M. Osiceanu, K. Wartiovaara,
Timing of the cell cycle exit of differentiating hippocampal
neural stem cells. Int. J. Stem Cells 3, 46–53 (2010).
doi: 10.15283/ijsc.2010.3.1.46; pmid: 24855540
24. M. Snir et al., Assessment of the ultrastructural and
proliferative properties of human embryonic stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 285,
H2355–H2363 (2003). doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00020.2003;
pmid: 14613910
25. S. Prost et al., Erosion of the chronic myeloid leukaemia stem
cell pool by PPARg agonists. Nature 525, 380–383 (2015).
doi: 10.1038/nature15248; pmid: 26331539
26. Y. Wang et al., The long noncoding RNA lncTCF7 promotes self-
renewal of human liver cancer stem cells through activation of
Wnt signaling. Cell Stem Cell 16, 413–425 (2015). doi: 10.1016/
j.stem.2015.03.003; pmid: 25842979
27. L. Aloia, B. Di Stefano, L. Di Croce, Polycomb complexes in
stem cells and embryonic development. Development 140,
2525–2534 (2013). doi: 10.1242/dev.091553; pmid: 23715546
28. M. Costantini, O. Clay, F. Auletta, G. Bernardi, An isochore map
of human chromosomes. Genome Res. 16, 536–541 (2006).
doi: 10.1101/gr.4910606; pmid: 16597586
29. J. R. Dixon et al., Topological domains in mammalian genomes
identified by analysis of chromatin interactions. Nature 485,
376–380 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nature11082; pmid: 22495300
30. A. Valouev et al., Determinants of nucleosome organization in
primary human cells. Nature 474, 516–520 (2011).
doi: 10.1038/nature10002; pmid: 21602827
31. D. Tillo, T. R. Hughes, G+C content dominates intrinsic
nucleosome occupancy. BMC Bioinformatics 10, 442 (2009).
doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-442; pmid: 20028554
32. J. D. Anderson, J. Widom, Poly(dA-dT) promoter elements
increase the equilibrium accessibility of nucleosomal DNA
target sites. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 3830–3839 (2001).
doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.11.3830-3839.2001; pmid: 11340174
33. A. E. Vinogradov, Bendable genes of warm-blooded
vertebrates. Mol. Biol. Evol. 18, 2195–2200 (2001).
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a003766; pmid: 11719569
34. G. J. Hogan, C. K. Lee, J. D. Lieb, Cell cycle-specified
fluctuation of nucleosome occupancy at gene promoters. PLOS
Genet. 2, e158 (2006). doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020158;
pmid: 17002501
35. H. Koohy, T. A. Down, T. J. Hubbard, Chromatin accessibility
data sets show bias due to sequence specificity of the DNase I
enzyme. PLOS ONE 8, e69853 (2013). doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0069853; pmid: 23922824
36. C. Dingwall, G. P. Lomonossoff, R. A. Laskey, High sequence
specificity of micrococcal nuclease. Nucleic Acids Res. 9,
2659–2674 (1981). doi: 10.1093/nar/9.12.2659;
pmid: 6269057
37. P. Dalerba et al., Single-cell dissection of transcriptional
heterogeneity in human colon tumors. Nat. Biotechnol. 29,
1120–1127 (2011). doi: 10.1038/nbt.2038; pmid: 22081019
38. K. Kise, Y. Kinugasa-Katayama, N. Takakura, Tumor
microenvironment for cancer stem cells. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.
99 (Pt B), 197–205 (2016). doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2015.08.005;
pmid: 26362921
39. M. Shipitsin et al., Molecular definition of breast tumor
heterogeneity. Cancer Cell 11, 259–273 (2007). doi: 10.1016/
j.ccr.2007.01.013; pmid: 17349583
40. A. Alonso, B. Breuer, H. Bouterfa, D. Doenecke, Early increase
in histone H1(0) mRNA during differentiation of F9 cells to
parietal endoderm. EMBO J. 7, 3003–3008 (1988).
pmid: 2846273
41. J. M. Terme et al., Histone H1 variants are differentially
expressed and incorporated into chromatin during
differentiation and reprogramming to pluripotency. J. Biol.
Chem. 286, 35347–35357 (2011). doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M111.281923; pmid: 21852237
42. E. Mendelson, M. Bustin, Monoclonal antibodies against
distinct determinants of histone H5 bind to chromatin.
Biochemistry 23, 3459–3466 (1984). doi: 10.1021/
bi00310a012; pmid: 6205690
43. A. Rada-Iglesias et al., A unique chromatin signature
uncovers early developmental enhancers in humans. Nature
470, 279–283 (2011). doi: 10.1038/nature09692;
pmid: 21160473
44. A. Letourneau et al., Domains of genome-wide gene expression
dysregulation in Down’s syndrome. Nature 508, 345–350
(2014). doi: 10.1038/nature13200; pmid: 24740065
45. J. M. Simon, P. G. Giresi, I. J. Davis, J. D. Lieb, Using
formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements
(FAIRE) to isolate active regulatory DNA. Nat. Protoc. 7,
256–267 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nprot.2011.444;
pmid: 22262007
46. L. Shen et al., diffReps: Detecting differential chromatin
modification sites from ChIP-seq data with biological
replicates. PLOS ONE 8, e65598 (2013). doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0065598; pmid: 23762400
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank M. Salton and D. Donato for assistance; D. Bonnet and
M. Bustin for sharing mice and reagents; I. Malanchi for help with
transplantation assays; M. Becker, P. Van Loo, and I. Varela for useful
discussions; and the Crick core facilities for technical support. pdCas9-
DNMT3A-EGFP and pdCas9-DNMT3A-EGFP (ANV) plasmids are
available from Addgene under a material transfer agreement with
V. Zoldos. The results published here are in part based upon data
generated by The Cancer Genome Atlas pilot project established by the
National Cancer Institute and the National Human Genome Research
Institute. This work was supported by the Francis Crick Institute, which
receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK (FC001152), the
UK Medical Research Council (FC001152), and the Wellcome Trust
(FC001152), the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NCI,
Center for Cancer Research, the Israel Science Foundation (ISF 1252/
12, 657/12), and the European Research Council (ERC-281781).
Accompanying data sets are available through GEO (GSE65520,
GSE66169, GSE73600, and GSE73580). Author contributions are
in the supplementary text.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/aaf1644/suppl/DC1
Materials and Methods
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S17
Tables S1 to S8
References (47–50)
28 December 2015; accepted 30 August 2016
10.1126/science.aaf1644
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aaf1644-11
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 The linker histone H1.0 generates epigenetic and functional intratumor heterogeneity
Misteli, Eran Meshorer and Paola Scaffidi
Cohen, Yilong Li, Rotem Ben-Hamo, Emma Nye, Bradley Spencer-Dene, Probir Chakravarty, Sol Efroni, Nik Matthews, Tom 
Cristina Morales Torres, Alva Biran, Matthew J. Burney, Harshil Patel, Tristan Henser-Brownhill, Ayelet-Hashahar Shapira
DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf1644
 (6307), aaf1644.
353
Science 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/aaf1644
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/09/28/353.6307.aaf1644.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/9/440/ra79.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/6/273/pe15.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/aaf1644#BIBL
This article cites 50 articles, 11 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
