 e30
D
epression occurs in approximately one third of stroke 
survivors at any one time1 and is associated with 
poor functional outcomes2 and higher mortality.3 Although 
poststroke depression (PSD) is one of the most common 
complications after stroke, few guidelines exist regarding 
assessment, treatment, and prevention of PSD. This sci-
entific statement summarizes published evidence on the 
causes, predisposing factors, epidemiology, screening, 
treatment, and prevention of PSD; illuminates gaps in the 
literature; and provides management implications for clini-
cal practice.
Methods
Writing group members were nominated by the committee 
chair on the basis of their previous work in relevant topic 
areas and were approved by the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council’s Scientific Statement Oversight Committee 
and the American Heart Association’s Manuscript Oversight 
Abstract—Poststroke depression (PSD) is common, affecting approximately one third of stroke survivors at any one 
 
time after stroke. Individuals with PSD are at a higher risk for suboptimal recovery, recurrent vascular events, poor quality 
of life, and mortality. Although PSD is prevalent, uncertainty remains regarding predisposing risk factors and optimal 
strategies for prevention and treatment. This is the first scientific statement from the American Heart Association on the 
topic of PSD. Members of the writing group were appointed by the American Heart Association Stroke Council’s Scientific 
Statements Oversight Committee and the American Heart Association’s Manuscript Oversight Committee. Members 
were assigned topics relevant to their areas of expertise and reviewed appropriate literature, references to published 
clinical and epidemiology studies, clinical and public health guidelines, authoritative statements, and expert opinion. 
 
This multispecialty statement provides a comprehensive review of the current evidence and gaps in current knowledge 
 
of the epidemiology, pathophysiology, outcomes, management, and prevention of PSD, and provides implications for 
clinical practice.   
(Stroke. 2017;48:e30-e43. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000113.)
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements ◼ depression ◼ management ◼ prevention & control  
◼ screening ◼ stroke ◼ treatment
Poststroke Depression
A Scientific Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the American 
Heart Association/American Stroke Association
The American Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this statement as an educational 
tool for neurologists.
Amytis Towfighi, MD, Chair; Bruce Ovbiagele, MD, MSc, MAS, FAHA, Vice Chair;  
Nada El Husseini, MD, MHSc; Maree L. Hackett, PhD; Ricardo E. Jorge, MD;  
Brett M. Kissela, MD, MS, FAHA; Pamela H. Mitchell, PhD, RN, FAHA;  
Lesli E. Skolarus, MD; Mary A. Whooley, MD; Linda S. Williams, MD, FAHA; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; and 
Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship 
or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on June 1, 2016, and the American Heart 
Association Executive Committee on July 20, 2016. A copy of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search 
for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Towfighi A, Ovbiagele B, El Husseini N, Hackett ML, Jorge RE, Kissela 
BM, Mitchell PH, Skolarus LE, Whooley MA, Williams LS; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing; and Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Poststroke depression: a scientific statement for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2017;48:e30–e43. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000113. 
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express 
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000113
AHA/ASA Scientific Statement
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e31
Committee. Multiple disciplines were represented, includ-
ing neurology, psychiatry, psychology, neurorehabilitation, 
primary care, epidemiology, biostatistics, and nursing. The 
writing group met by telephone to determine subcategories to 
evaluate. These included 9 sections that covered the following: 
incidence, prevalence, and natural history; pathophysiology; 
predictors; functional outcomes; quality of life (QOL); health-
care use; mortality; screening; and management and preven-
tion. Each subcategory was led by a primary author, with 1 
to 3 additional coauthors. Full searches of PubMed, Ovid 
MEDLINE, Ovid Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
Ovid Central Register of Controlled Trials databases, Internet 
Stroke Center/Clinical Trials Registry (http://www.strokecen-
ter.org/trials/), and National Guideline Clearinghouse (http://
guideline.gov/) ​
were conducted of all English-language 
articles on human subjects, published through February of 
2015. The evidence was organized within the context of the 
American Heart Association Framework. Drafts of summa-
ries and suggestions/considerations for clinical practice were 
circulated to the entire writing group for feedback. Sections 
were revised and merged by the Chair. The resulting draft was 
reviewed and edited by the Vice-Chair, and the entire com-
mittee was asked to approve the final draft. Changes to the 
document were made by the Chair and Vice-Chair in response 
to peer review, and the document was again sent to the entire 
writing group for suggested changes and approval. A sum-
mary of findings is available in the Table.
Incidence, Prevalence, and  
Natural History of PSD
Depression is common after stroke, affecting approximately 
one third of stroke survivors at any one time after stroke (com-
pared with 5%–13% of adults without stroke), with a cumula-
tive incidence of 55%.4–6 Hackett et al performed a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of 51 studies conducted before June 
2004 and revealed a pooled frequency estimate of PSD of 
33% (95% confidence interval [CI], 29%–36%).7 All studies 
included ischemic stroke, most included intracerebral hemor-
rhage, and the majority excluded subarachnoid hemorrhage and 
transient ischemic attack. Valid methods were used to ascertain 
depression in these studies. The primary end point was the pro-
portion of patients who met the diagnostic category of depres-
sion, which included the following: (1) depressive disorder, 
depressive symptoms, or psychological distress, as defined by 
scores above a cut point for abnormality on a standard scale; (2) 
major depression, or minor depression (or dysthymia) accord-
ing to the third, fourth, and fifth editions of the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or other standard 
diagnostic criteria using structured or semistructured psychi-
atric interviews. Ayerbe et al’s subsequent systematic review 
and meta-analysis of 43 cohorts published before August 2011 
(n=20 293) revealed a similar pooled frequency of PSD of 29% 
(95% CI, 25%–32%).8 The frequency remained fairly constant 
for the first year after stroke and diminished slightly thereafter 
(28%; 95% CI, 23%–34% within 1 month of stroke; 31%; 95% 
CI, 24%–39% at 1–6 months; 33%; 95% CI, 23%–43% at 6 
months to 1 year; and 25%; 95% CI, 19%–32% beyond 1 year). 
Only 5 studies in Ayerbe et al’s systematic review reported 
other measures of natural history of PSD: incidence in year 
1 ranged from 10% to 15% (2 studies); cumulative incidence 
ranged from 39% to 52% (3 studies with follow-up periods 
between 1 and 5 years); and 15% to 50% of patients with PSD 
within 3 months of stroke recovered 1 year later. All longi-
tudinal studies revealed a dynamic natural history, with new 
cases and recovery of depression occurring over time.8 Little 
is known about whether the natural course of PSD differs in 
those with a history of depression before stroke.
Hackett et al updated their systematic review and meta-
analysis in 20141 to include all published observational studies 
with prospective consecutive recruitment of stroke patients and 
assessment of depression or depressive symptoms at prespeci-
fied time points (until May of 2013; 61 studies; n=25 488; 29 
cohorts were also in Ayerbe et al’s review). Their study revealed 
similar results, with depression present in 33% (95% CI, 26%–
39%) at 1 year after stroke, with a decline beyond 1 year: 25% 
(95% CI, 16%–33%) up to 5 years, and 23% (95% CI, 14%–
31%) at 5 years.1 Prevalence of PSD was lower beyond 1 year: 
Subgroup analyses revealed a pooled prevalence estimate of 
31% (95% CI, 27%–35%) for the 48 studies (n=23 654) includ-
ing individuals with a history of depression; 34% (95% CI, 
29%–39%) for the 25 studies (n=19 218) including individuals 
with aphasia; and 33% (95% CI, 28%–38%) for the 25 studies 
(n=5658) of people with first-ever stroke.1
In Hackett’s and Ayerbe’s meta-analyses, the prevalence 
rates did not differ significantly over time during the first year 
after stroke (within 1 month from stroke, 1–6 months, or 6–12 
months) or by setting (hospital, rehabilitation, or popula-
tion based). The studies included in Hackett’s and Ayerbe’s 
reviews were heterogeneous in nature, using a variety of 
methods to diagnose depression and different thresholds for 
the same scale. The hospital- and rehabilitation-based stud-
ies had numerous exclusion criteria (such as excluding those 
with a history of depression), thus limiting their generalizabil-
ity. Statistical quality and presentation of methods and results 
were poor in many studies, and important covariates (such 
as history of depression) were not included in multivariable 
models in most studies. Few of the multivariable models were 
likely to be stable as the ratio of events per variable in the 
model met or surpassed the recommended minimum.
In summary, approximately one third develop PSD at 
some point after stroke. The frequency is highest in the first 
year, at nearly 1 in 3 stroke survivors, and declines thereafter.
Pathophysiology of PSD
The pathophysiology of PSD is poorly understood. The cause 
of PSD is likely multifactorial—with biological and psy-
chosocial components—and may vary depending on timing 
after event. An understanding of the pathophysiology of PSD 
may aid in its management; for example, PSD resulting from 
biological causes could potentially respond better to pharma-
cological therapy, whereas PSD resulting from psychosocial 
causes could possibly respond more favorably to psychother-
apy and social support interventions.
Studies have revealed an association between PSD and 
poststroke cognitive and functional deficits, indirectly sug-
gesting that PSD may be a psychological reaction to these 
deficits.9,10 In addition, numerous psychosocial risk factors for 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 e32  Stroke  February 2017
PSD are also risk factors for depression without stroke, such 
as past psychiatric history, premorbid neurotic personality 
traits, and social isolation.11,12
In contrast, evidence suggests that PSD has underlying bio-
logical causes and is not merely a psychological response to 
new disability or a life-threatening event. First, 1 study showed 
that depression was more common after stroke than other physi-
cal illnesses with similar levels of physical disability13; however, 
other studies have not corroborated these findings.14,15 Second, 
PSD has been observed in individuals with anosognosia.16 
Third, late-onset depression has been associated with white 
matter disease and small silent infarcts.12,17,18 Fourth, poststroke 
depressive-like symptoms have been noted in several animal 
models.19,20 Last, depression has been reported after transient 
ischemic attack and minor stroke (National Institutes of Health 
Stroke Scale score ≤5 at discharge).21,22
Proposed biological factors contributing to PSD include 
lesion 
location, 
genetic 
susceptibility, 
inflammation, 
Table.  Summary of Findings
Topic
Summary of Findings
Epidemiology
Approximately one third of stroke survivors develop PSD at some point after stroke. The frequency is highest in the 
first year, at nearly 1 in 3 stroke survivors, and declines thereafter.
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of PSD is complex and likely involves a combination of biological and psychosocial factors. 
Further research is needed to develop a better understanding of PSD pathophysiology with an aim to develop 
targeted interventions for prevention and treatment.
Predictors
A multitude of studies have evaluated predictors of PSD, but because of differences in inclusion and exclusion 
criteria, statistical methods, and inadequate sample sizes for multivariate analyses, generalizability is limited. The 
most consistent predictors of PSD have been physical disability, stroke severity, history of depression, and cognitive 
impairment. Further studies are needed to develop a better understanding of predictors of PSD.
PSD and functional outcomes
PSD is associated with poorer functional outcomes after stroke. Treatment with fluoxetine was associated with lower 
PSD occurrence rates and improvement in motor recovery in 1 RCT. Further research is needed to assess the effect 
of PSD on outcomes and to develop optimal strategies to counteract these effects.
PSD and QOL
A few studies suggest that PSD adversely affects QOL. Further research is needed to further elucidate the 
independent effect of PSD on QOL and to determine how to improve QOL in individuals with or at risk for PSD.
PSD and healthcare use
A few studies have shown an association between PSD and healthcare use. Further studies are needed to evaluate 
the effect of treatment of PSD on subsequent healthcare use.
PSD and mortality
PSD is associated with higher mortality after stroke.
Screening
Twenty-four studies (n=2907 participants) showed that the CES-D, HDRS, and PHQ-9 had high sensitivity  
for detecting PSD; however, the studies had several limitations, including generalizability. Systematic 
screening for PSD with the 9-item PHQ-9 is pragmatic, has high sensitivity for detecting PSD, and may improve 
outcomes, provided that processes are in place to assure accurate diagnosis, timely and effective treatment, 
and follow-up. Further research is needed to determine whether screening for PSD—in conjunction with 
collaborative care to ensure timely intervention, treatment, and follow-up—improves outcomes in diverse 
populations of stroke survivors.
Management: pharmacotherapy
Twelve trials (n=1121) suggest that antidepressant medications may be effective in treating PSD; further research is 
needed to determine optimal timing, threshold, and medications for treatment.
Management: neuromodulation
Further studies are needed to determine the efficacy of neuromodulation on treating PSD.
Management: psychosocial interventions
Seven trials (n=775) suggest that brief psychosocial interventions may be useful and effective in treatment of PSD. 
Whether antidepressant medication is a necessary or beneficial adjuvant cannot be established from these trials 
because of a lack of placebo controls.
Management: stroke liaison workers
Fifteen trials (n=2743) have not revealed a beneficial effect from stroke liaison workers on PSD; however, the trials 
included individuals without a diagnosis of PSD. Further studies are needed to determine the effect of liaison worker 
on those with established PSD.
Management: information provision
Seven trials (n=720) suggest that information provision provides a small benefit in depression scores; however, the 
clinical significance of this improvement is unclear.
Management: self-management
Few studies have assessed the effectiveness of self-management strategies on PSD; further studies are needed to 
determine whether these strategies are beneficial.
Prevention: pharmacotherapy
Eight trials (n=776) suggest that pharmacological treatment may be effective in preventing PSD; however, further 
studies are needed in more representative samples of stroke survivors, and additional study is required to determine 
the optimal timing and duration of treatment.
Prevention: psychosocial interventions
Five trials (n= 1078) suggest that psychosocial therapies may prevent the development of PSD; however, the studies 
are not generalizable to all stroke survivors, given their narrow inclusion and exclusion criteria. Further research with 
more rigorous methods is needed to assess the effect of psychotherapy on prevention of PSD.
CES-D indicates Center of Epidemiological Studies-Depression Scale; HDRS, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; PHQ, Patient Health Questionnaire; PSD, poststroke 
depression; QOL, quality of life; and RCT, randomized controlled trial.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e33
neurogenesis in response to ischemia, alterations in neurotrophic 
factors, disruption of cortico-striato-pallido-thalamic-cortical 
projections, and alterations in serotonergic, noradrenergic, and 
dopaminergic pathways, leading to changes in amine levels.19 
The hypothesis that lesion location was associated with PSD 
gained popularity in the 1970s when Robinson et al reported 
associations between laterality of experimentally induced 
stroke, brain catecholamine concentrations, and activity in rats 
and subsequently between left hemispheric (particularly fron-
tal) strokes and PSD in humans.23,24 Numerous cohort studies 
subsequently investigated the association between lesion loca-
tion and PSD; a meta-analysis of 35 cohorts published before 
August of 199925 and a subsequent systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 43 cohorts published before January of 2014 
(n=5507)26 found no association between PSD and lesion loca-
tion. Subgroup analyses stratified by time since stroke onset 
to assessment for PSD showed that between 1 and 6 months 
after stroke, right hemispheric strokes were associated with 
lower odds of PSD (odds ratio [OR]=0.79; 95% CI, 0.66–
0.93).26 In contrast, a meta-analysis of 52 studies published 
before July 2003 (n=3668) found a weak relationship between 
PSD and right hemispheric lesions (overall weighted mean 
effect size=−0.0801; 95% CI, −0.146;−0.014; P=0.014). The 
authors of this meta-analysis appropriately indicated that the 
effect size was small and may not have practical significance. 
When they only included high-quality studies, there was no 
relationship between PSD and lesion location.27 The various 
systematic reviews used slightly different selection criteria 
for the included studies and distinct statistical methods for the 
meta-analysis. All 3 systematic reviews identified limitations 
to the analyses because of multiple sources of heterogeneity 
such as varying time intervals between stroke and depression 
assessment, different depression scales, exclusion of patients 
with aphasia, and heterogeneous methods of reporting results. 
Studies assessing genetic associations with PSD have been 
limited and small. Higher serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) 
promoter methylation status in the presence of the SLC6A4 
linked promoter region (5-HTTLPR) s/s genotype was asso-
ciated with PSD at 2 weeks and 1 year after stroke, as well 
as worsening of depressive symptoms over the first year after 
stroke (n=286 stroke subjects).28 In that same cohort, a higher 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor methylation status and the 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor val66met polymorphism 
were independently associated with prevalent PSD (n=286 
stroke subjects).29 Alleles associated with reduced anti-inflam-
matory cytokine function such as the interleukin-4 + 33C/C and 
the interleukin-10 -1082A/A genotypes have also been asso-
ciated with PSD (n=276 stroke subjects).30 Proinflammatory 
cytokines may play a role in PSD by inducing alterations of the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis and decreasing serotonin 
synthesis.31 Studies have alluded to a direct involvement of the 
serotonergic system, regardless of the degree of disability and 
lesion location.32,33
A meta-analysis of the most studied biological markers 
of PSD (cerebral blood flow, cortisol levels, inflammatory 
marker levels, brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels, and 
brain volume/atrophy) including studies through June of 
2012 (33 studies; n=1893 participants) showed associations 
between PSD and high postdexamethasone cortisol levels 
(OR, 3.28; 95% CI, 1.28–8.39), lower serum brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor levels (standardized mean difference, 
−0.52; 95% CI, −0.84 to −0.21), smaller amygdala volumes 
(standardized mean difference, −0.45; 95% CI, −0.89 to 
−0.02), and overall brain perfusion reduction (standardized 
mean difference, −0.35; 95% CI, −0.64 to −0.06). There 
were no significant associations between PSD and inflam-
matory markers such as C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, 
interleukin-18, or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (7 stud-
ies; inflammation assessed within a mean of 35 days after 
stroke); however, the studies included individuals with tran-
sient ischemic attack and silent stroke and apathy (without 
diagnosis of depression), potentially obscuring the results. 
Despite the aforementioned weaknesses and additional limi-
tations (relatively small number of studies, different scales 
to assess depression), this meta-analysis suggested that cere-
bral perfusion reduction, higher cortisol levels and low lev-
els of neurotrophic factors, and amygdala volume reduction 
may be promising biological markers for PSD.34
In summary, the pathophysiology of PSD is complex and 
likely involves a combination of biological and psychosocial 
factors. Further research is needed to develop a better under-
standing of PSD pathophysiology with an aim to develop tar-
geted interventions for prevention and treatment.
Predictors of PSD
Three independent systematic reviews of observational 
studies without corresponding meta-analyses (Hackett 
et al: 20 cohorts, n=17 93435; Kutlubaev et al: 23 cohorts, 
n=18 3742,35; De Ryck et al: 24 cohorts, n=14 64236; Ayerbe 
et al: 10 cohorts, n=16 0458) have identified consistent pre-
dictors of depression after stroke. There were few overlap-
ping cohorts in the reviews reflecting the different inclusion 
and exclusion criteria set by the review authors. The data 
indicated that physical disability, stroke severity, depres-
sion before stroke, and cognitive impairment consistently 
had a positive association with the development of PSD. 
Other factors that have been identified as predictors include 
a lack of family and social support after stroke36 and anxiety 
after stroke.8 Older age, female sex, diabetes mellitus, stroke 
subtype, education level, living alone, and previous stroke 
have not shown a consistent association with the subsequent 
development of depression.2 People with transient ischemic 
attacks and those with obvious speech disturbances or com-
munication difficulties (eg, aphasia, confusion, or dementia), 
impaired consciousness, severe cognitive decline or sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage were excluded from most studies lim-
iting our ability to generalize these findings. The statistical 
methods in most of the studies included in these systematic 
reviews were poor, and most of the samples were too small 
for multivariate analyses.
In summary, a multitude of studies have evaluated pre-
dictors of PSD, but because of differences in inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, statistical methods, and inadequate sample 
sizes for multivariate analyses, generalizability is limited. The 
most consistent predictors of PSD have been physical dis-
ability, stroke severity, history of depression, and cognitive 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 e34  Stroke  February 2017
impairment. Further studies are needed to develop a better 
understanding of predictors of PSD.
Association Between PSD and  
Functional Outcomes
PSD might conceivably influence functional outcome by 
limiting participation in rehabilitation, directly decreasing 
physical, social, and cognitive function, or perhaps affecting 
the biological process of neuroplasticity.37,38 A systematic 
review of 14 studies before May of 2013 with 4498 par-
ticipants assessing the association between PSD and stroke 
outcome (4 population-based studies [n=2800], 5 hospital-
based [n=800], and 5 rehabilitation-based [n=898]) revealed 
that PSD had a consistent adverse effect on outcomes. In 6 
of 8 studies, depression was associated with poor functional 
outcomes (3 of 5 with multivariable analyses); the other 2 
studies found no association between PSD and functional 
improvement.2 A lifetime history of depression and active 
depression affected functional outcome at 3 and 12 months 
in 1 cohort study.39
A randomized controlled trial (RCT) comparing fluox-
etine to placebo within 5 to 10 days after stroke showed 
lower PSD occurrence rates and significant improvement 
in motor function in the fluoxetine group.40 Even after sta-
tistically controlling for the reduction in depression, motor 
improvement was improved in the fluoxetine group. This 
finding raises the question of whether depression prevents 
motor recovery (and this negative effect is reversed by treat-
ment), or whether there may be some effect of fluoxetine 
or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in general 
on neuroplasticity and motor recovery. Indeed, other studies 
have shown that SSRI use after stroke generally improves 
motor recovery.41–45 The factors influencing whether PSD 
worsens outcome, and methods to counteract these effects, 
require further exploration.
In summary, PSD is associated with poorer functional 
outcomes after stroke. Treatment with fluoxetine was asso-
ciated with lower PSD occurrence rates and improvement in 
motor recovery in 1 RCT. Further research is needed to assess 
the effect of PSD on outcomes and to develop optimal strate-
gies to counteract these effects.
Association Between PSD and QOL
To date, the association between PSD and poststroke QOL 
has not been explored in a systematic review or meta-anal-
ysis. Individual studies have found that poststroke depres-
sive symptoms are associated with reduced poststroke QOL 
as measured by the Short-Form General Health Survey,46,47 
EuroQoL questionnaire48 and Assessment of Quality of 
Life.49 Poststroke mood change is 1 of the factors with the 
greatest effect on poststroke QOL.47,50 Stroke survivors’ 
cognitive and language impairments may necessitate proxy 
responses for self-reported outcomes. Proxies tend to report 
worse QOL scores than do stroke survivors themselves.51 
These differences make it necessary to carefully examine 
the composition of outcomes, cohorts, and use of proxies to 
look for potential biases in studies exploring the association 
of PSD and QOL.
In summary, a few studies suggest that PSD adversely 
affects QOL. Further research is needed to elucidate the 
independent effect of PSD on QOL and to determine how to 
improve QOL in individuals with or at risk for PSD.
Effect of PSD on Healthcare Use
To date, no systematic review has assessed the association 
between PSD and healthcare use; however, individual studies 
have shown that PSD is associated with higher rates of health-
care use after stroke, including inpatient healthcare use and 
total healthcare use. In 2 large Veterans Health Administration 
cohorts in the United States, those with PSD had longer 
lengths of stay52 and higher outpatient and inpatient use in the 
12 months after stroke.52,53 In addition to PSD, other mental 
health diagnoses after stroke have also been associated with 
increased healthcare use.53,54
Although the relationship between PSD and subsequent 
healthcare use is established, few studies, and none specifi-
cally in stroke patients, have assessed whether treatment of 
depression is associated with a decrease in healthcare use. 
Addressing this question is complex, given that healthcare 
use and depression treatment are understandably confounded. 
One study among patients aged 65 years and older with prior 
thromboembolic events (including some with stroke) found 
that antidepressant use was not associated with an increase 
or decrease in healthcare use,55 but no large, high-quality 
studies of the relationship between depression treatment and 
subsequent healthcare use in patients with PSD have been 
published.
In summary, a few studies have shown an association between 
PSD and healthcare use. Further studies are needed to evaluate 
the effect of treatment of PSD on subsequent healthcare use.
Association Between PSD and Mortality
PSD has been associated with higher mortality rates after 
stroke. A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies 
published before November of 2012 (13 studies; 59 598 
individuals with stroke: 6052 with PSD and 53 546 from 
comparison groups) revealed a pooled OR of 1.22 (95% CI, 
1.02–1.47) and pooled hazard ratio (HR) of 1.52 (95% CI, 
1.02–2.26) for increased/early mortality at follow-up for 
individuals with PSD.3 Ayerbe et al’s 2013 meta-analysis 
found an association between PSD and mortality in 2 out 
of 3 studies that investigated this association.8 A subsequent 
study of stroke survivors followed in the South London 
Stroke Register revealed that individuals with PSD had a 
greater risk of mortality (HR, 1.41; 95% CI, 1.13–1.77).56 
The association between PSD and mortality was strongest in 
individuals <65 years of age. Adjustment for comorbidities, 
smoking, alcohol use, SSRI use, social support, and adher-
ence with medications did not change these associations. 
Individuals who started SSRIs after stroke had higher risk 
of mortality, independently of PSD at 3 months (HR, 1.72; 
95% CI, 1.34–2.20).57 This study should be interpreted with 
caution because numerous models were used to describe the 
association between depression and mortality, and the only 
common factors between these models were age, sex, eth-
nicity, and stroke severity. The relationship between SSRIs 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e35
and mortality requires a rigorous analysis of the interactions 
with other key variables such as depression, disability, and 
comorbid medical conditions.
In summary, PSD is associated with higher mortality after 
stroke.
Screening for PSD
Stroke patients present unique challenges to identifying 
depression. Stroke-related neurological symptoms such as 
aprosodic speech, abulia, or flat affect may hinder healthcare 
practitioners’ identification of PSD,75 whereas aphasia may 
lead to undiagnosed and inadequate treatment of depression. 
A high index of suspicion by all members of the interdisciplin-
ary treatment team is therefore necessary to accurately recog-
nize depression. Clues of PSD can be subtle, such as refusal to 
participate in therapy. Patients can experience emotional labil-
ity or a pseudobulbar affect after a stroke, often prompting the 
team to erroneously diagnose a patient with PSD. Emotional 
lability can be frustrating for the patient and family; however, 
symptoms typically decline over time and do not require treat-
ment for depression.75
Screening is useful for prevalent conditions that can be 
effectively treated but not readily detected without screen-
ing. Three key factors are important to consider when deter-
mining whether screening is useful for PSD: (1) the validity 
and reliability of screening tools to detect PSD; (2) whether 
treatment of PSD improves depressive symptoms, QOL, func-
tional outcomes, and mortality; and (3) whether PSD screen-
ing improves outcomes. In this section, we address the first 
and third points. The second point will be addressed in the 
following section on management.
Screening Tools for PSD
The optimal screening tool for PSD remains unclear. Meader 
et al conducted a meta-analysis to determine which screening 
tools were most accurate for detecting PSD.58 They included 
studies through November of 2012 (24 studies; n=2907 par-
ticipants). Limitations included significant heterogeneity 
between studies, narrow inclusion and exclusion criteria, not 
reporting stroke type (ischemic vs hemorrhagic), inadequate 
reporting of blinding of assessments, not reporting predefined 
cutoffs, rarely comparing multiple tools in the same popula-
tion, not assessing scales in different languages, race/ethnic 
groups, and cultures, and lack of information concerning 
dropout. Overall, the 20-item Center of Epidemiological 
Studies-Depression Scale (CES-D) (sensitivity: 0.75; 95% 
CI, 0.60–0.85; specificity: 0.88; 95% CI, 0.71–0.95), 21-item 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) (sensitivity: 0.84; 
95% CI, 0.75–0.90; specificity: 0.83; 95% CI, 0.72–0.90), 
and 9-item Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) (sensitiv-
ity: 0.86; 95% CI, 0.70–0.94; specificity: 0.79; 95% CI, 0.60–
0.90) appeared to be the optimal measures for screening. 
Although CES-D and HDRS had high sensitivity, they may 
not be feasible in a busy clinical practice, and PHQ-9 may be 
more pragmatic. PHQ-2 performed poorly (sensitivity 0.79; 
95% CI, 0.55–0.92; specificity 0.76; 95% CI, 0.62–0.85). 
It is important to note, however, that there are 2 versions of 
the PHQ-2. The yes/no version, developed in 1997, which 
has excellent sensitivity for diagnosing major depression in 
the general population,59 screens positive if 1 or both of the 
2 core symptoms (depressed mood and anhedonia) is pres-
ent. The multiple-choice version, developed in 2003, has a 
6-point scale and the cut point for a positive screen varies by 
population (≥2 or ≥3). The 3 studies of PHQ-2 in the Meader 
meta-analysis60–62 used the multiple choice version.58 Further 
studies are needed to determine the sensitivity and specificity 
of the yes/no PHQ-2 in individuals with stroke; however, in 
an analysis of 1024 participants with coronary heart disease 
enrolled in the Heart and Soul Study, of which 147 (14%) 
had a history of stroke, the yes/no PHQ-2 had sensitivity of 
0.90 (95% CI, 0.86–0.94) and specificity of 0.69 (95% CI, 
0.66–0.73).63
Another factor to consider is the timing of screening for 
PSD. The optimal screening tool may vary by time since 
stroke and the optimal time to screen is unknown. Meader et 
al performed subgroup analyses by time frame after stroke and 
found that 6 scales had sufficient data for meta-analysis in the 
acute (eg, hospital setting and within 6 months of stroke) set-
ting: Geriatric Depression Scale 15 (GDS 15), Montgomery 
Asberg Depression Rating Scale, HDRS, Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale (HADS-Total and HADS-D), and Beck 
Depression Inventory. The HDRS had the highest sensitivity 
and positive predictive value, while HADS-Total was most 
specific. There were 4 scales where meta-analysis was pos-
sible in postacute (receiving outpatient or inpatient rehabilita-
tion treatment) settings: HDRS, CES-D, HADS-D, and Beck 
Depression Inventory. CES-D had the highest positive predic-
tive value and the highest utility for screening, followed by 
the HDRS.58 One must also take into account the feasibility of 
depression screening.
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 24 studies (n=2907 participants) showed that the 
CES-D, HDRS, and PHQ-9 had high sensitivity for detecting 
PSD; however, the studies had several limitations, including 
generalizability.
Effects of Screening for PSD on Outcomes
The controversy surrounding routine screening for PSD lies 
in the third question: does screening for PSD improve out-
comes? In the primary care setting, initial RCTs found little 
if any benefit from screening for depression64–67; although 
screening improved recognition and treatment, it did not 
improve depressive symptoms or outcomes. Subsequent 
RCTs showed that depression screening in combination 
with a collaborative care intervention—a multiprofessional 
approach to patient care involving a structured patient man-
agement plan and interventions, scheduled patient follow-ups, 
and enhanced interprofessional communication—improved 
outcomes.68 Collaborative care for depression can include a 
variety of interventions from the simple (telephone calls to 
encourage medication compliance) to the complex (intensive 
follow-up including structured complex psychosocial inter-
ventions). Studies that are based in primary care have shown 
that essential elements of collaborative care programs are the 
use of evidence-based protocols for treatment, structured col-
laboration between primary care providers and mental health 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 e36  Stroke  February 2017
specialists, active monitoring of adherence to treatment 
and of outcomes, and (in some cases) structured programs 
of psychotherapy delivered in primary care.69 In nonstroke 
populations, collaborative care programs have resulted in 
improved control of depression70 and comorbid illness68 in a 
cost-effective manner.71 On the basis of this evidence, the US 
Preventive Services Task Force recommends routine screen-
ing for depression in primary care settings where adequate 
systems are in place to ensure accurate diagnosis, effective 
treatment, and appropriate follow-up.72
The studies of PSD screening combined with collabora-
tive care in populations with stroke are scarce and small. The 
AIM (Activate-Initiate-Monitor) RCT (N=188) used a care 
management strategy (n=89 at 12 weeks) in which nurse care 
managers supervised by study physicians used psychoeduca-
tional sessions to Activate survivors and families to understand 
depression and accept treatment, Initiate antidepressant treat-
ment, and Monitor treatment with scripted bimonthly telephone 
calls. The control condition (n=93 at 12 weeks) was usual care 
with the same number of telephone sessions that focused only 
on recognition and monitoring of stroke symptoms and risks. 
Remission (HDRS<8) was achieved in 39% vs 23% (P=0.01) 
favoring the intervention group. Reduction of depression symp-
toms (HDRS<8 or a 50% reduction in scores from baseline) 
was achieved in 51% versus 30% (P=0.005), favoring the inter-
vention group.73 Although another study (n=652) revealed that 
implementation of clinical improvement teams increased the 
diagnosis and provision of treatment for PSD, the presence or 
absence of depression was not measured as an outcome.74
Other facts to consider are costs associated with screen-
ing, the yield of systematic screening (ie, will it identify 
more cases than would be identified without routine screen-
ing), and whether treatment of depression in those who 
may have been missed without screening (ie, milder cases) 
is effective. Although multiple guidelines recommend rou-
tine screening for depression in poststroke patients,75–79 it 
is important to note that the guidelines were not developed 
on the basis of RCT evidence showing that PSD screening 
improves outcomes.
Implication for Clinical Practice
Systematic screening for PSD may improve outcomes, pro-
vided that processes are in place to assure accurate diagno-
sis, timely and effective treatment, and follow-up. Further 
research is needed to determine whether screening for PSD—
in conjunction with collaborative care to ensure timely inter-
vention, treatment, and follow-up—improves outcomes in 
diverse populations of stroke survivors.
Depression in Caregivers
Caregivers are also at particular risk for depression and declin-
ing health. Depression rates of stroke caregivers may even 
exceed that of stroke patients.80 Risk factors include older 
age of caregiver, stroke severity, and spouse compared with 
next of kin. Caregivers who experience strain associated with 
caring for a disabled elderly person are at increased risk of 
mortality themselves.81 The members of the stroke care team 
should also be cognizant of the caregiver and offer mental 
health support when there is suspicion for depression or mal-
adaptive behavior.
Management and Prevention of PSD
Management: Pharmacotherapy to Treat PSD
Few RCTs have examined the efficacy of antidepressants to 
treat PSD. These RCTs were heterogeneous, typically had 
small sample sizes, often were of short duration, and varied 
in critical aspects of their design including characteristics of 
the study population, method for screening and diagnosing 
PSD, and operational definitions of primary and secondary 
outcomes. Rather than relying on a structured psychiatric inter-
view and established diagnostic criteria, many pharmacother-
apy trials defined PSD with an arbitrary cutoff score on a scale 
measuring the severity of depressive symptoms. Furthermore, 
the RCT that enrolled the greatest number of patients with 
PSD to date (n=285) did not use a rigorous operational diag-
nosis of depression to ascertain cases.82 Most trials excluded 
individuals with aphasia, cognitive impairment and psychi-
atric comorbidity, limiting their generalizability. In addition, 
patients with PSD were enrolled at different times after an 
index stroke, although clinical correlates of depression vary 
with time, affecting the probability of response. Treatment 
objectives have been vague; few of the RCTs provided a clear 
definition of what they considered remission or response and 
consequently failed to report their respective rates.
A meta-analysis by Hackett et al83 tried to overcome these 
shortfalls while reviewing 12 RCTs of the efficacy of antide-
pressant medication to treat PSD (n=1121). Given the limi-
tations described above, the authors were mostly restricted 
to providing a narrative review of the available evidence. 
Nonetheless, the data suggested a beneficial effect of antide-
pressants on remission (pooled OR for meeting criteria for 
depression: 0.47; 95% CI, 0.22–0.98) and response, measured 
as a >50% reduction in mood scores (pooled OR, 0.22; 95% 
CI, 0.09–0.52). Adverse events were more frequent among 
those subjects who received the active medication compared 
with those who received placebo. These included central ner-
vous system side effects (OR, 1.96; 95% CI, 1.19–3.24), gas-
trointestinal side effects (OR, 2.37; 95% CI, 1.38–4.06) and 
other side effects (OR, 1.51; 95% CI, 0.91–2.34). There were 
insufficient trials of each of the antidepressants to conduct 
meta-analyses by antidepressant. Since the aforementioned 
systematic review, there have been no new publications of 
double-blinded, placebo-controlled trials examining the effi-
cacy of pharmacological agents to treat PSD, with the excep-
tion of a trial of nefiracetam that proved to be equivalent to 
placebo in treating PSD.84
The available evidence on the efficacy of psychostimu-
lants is mostly limited to case reports and open label trials. 
Methylphenidate may be useful in inpatient settings or when 
promptness of response is required. A small RCT (n=21) of 
its efficacy was conducted in the late 1990s in stroke rehabili-
tation settings. When compared to placebo, methylphenidate 
significantly reduced the severity of depressive symptoms and 
was associated with improved motor recovery.85 Stimulants 
have been used to augment partial responses to SSRIs, espe-
cially in the presence of residual cognitive impairments or 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e37
fatigue; however, given their cardiovascular side effects and 
potential for inducing reversible vasoconstriction syndrome, 
larger, adequately powered RCTs, with long-term follow-up 
are needed to determine whether they are effective in improv-
ing outcomes after stroke.
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 12 trials (n=1121) suggested that antidepressant 
medications may be effective in treating PSD; further research 
is needed to determine optimal timing, threshold, and medica-
tions for treatment.
Management: Neuromodulation
Preliminary evidence (n=92 patients) from a small RCT sug-
gested that noninvasive brain stimulation techniques such as 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation might be effective 
among depressed stroke patients who do not respond to a trial 
with antidepressants.86
There are no RCTs of electroconvulsive therapy in stroke 
survivors with PSD; however, electroconvulsive therapy has 
been used as a last resort to treat refractory PSD.83 Treatment 
should be started at the lowest effective energy levels, using 
pulsatile currents, increased spacing of treatments (2–5 days 
between treatments), and fewer treatments in an entire course 
(ie, 4–6). Nondominant unilateral electroconvulsive therapy is 
the preferred technique.
In summary, further studies are needed to determine the 
efficacy of neuromodulation on treating PSD.
Management: Psychosocial Interventions  
to Treat PSD
A Cochrane review and meta-analysis first published in 2004 
and updated in 2008 (3 trials including 445 participants) indi-
cated a paucity of well-designed trials of psychosocial inter-
ventions for the treatment of PSD with no evidence of benefit 
of psychotherapy (cognitive behavioral therapy, motivational 
interviewing, a supportive psychological intervention) over 
control conditions for treating PSD. Several ongoing trials 
were identified in that review,83 4 of which have been pub-
lished since 2007. Three of these individual trials indicated 
a benefit of brief psychosocial therapies for established PSD 
and for prevention.
Two RCTs included people with ischemic stroke screened 
for depressive symptoms within 1 to 4 months after stroke. The 
diagnosis of major or minor depression was confirmed with a 
structured clinical interview consistent with the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition crite-
ria87,88 or the Stroke Aphasic Depression Questionnaire 10-item 
hospital version (cutoff ≥6) or the visual analogue sad item 
(cutoff ≥50) completed by a nurse, relative, or caregiver.89 The 
primary outcome of depression was measured using HDRS at 
9 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year87,88 in 2 trials by outcome asses-
sors masked to the participant’s study group and uninvolved 
in the treatment, and at 3 and 6 months after randomization 
using the Stroke Aphasic Depression Questionnaire 21-item 
hospital version completed by a relative or caregiver.89
In the Living Well With Stroke Study (N=101),87 ischemic 
stroke survivors were randomized to a brief psychosocial inter-
vention (n=48), which comprised 9 sessions of counseling by 
psychosocial nurse practitioners about behavioral observation, 
information about adapting to stroke and mood, and problem 
solving, versus usual care (n=53) including follow-up with their 
own provider and informational literature from the American 
Stroke Association. Antidepressants were recommended by the 
participants’ providers for both groups. Remission or greater 
reduction in depression symptoms was achieved more often 
in the intervention group than usual care at all time points 
(9 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year). Remission (HDRS ≤9) was 
47% versus 19% (P=0.001) at 9 weeks and 48% versus 27% 
(P=0.031) at 1 year, both favoring intervention.87
A second Living Well With Stroke Study (N=100) 
included participants with ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, 
had a shortened intervention (6 sessions), and compared in-
person versus telephone delivery versus usual care. HDRS 
scores were reduced by 42% (telephone) and 40% (in person) 
immediately after intervention compared with 30% for usual 
care. Although this difference favored the intervention, it was 
not significant. By 12 months after intervention, there was 
no significant difference among the 3 conditions, with all 3 
groups achieving a 40% reduction in scores.88
The findings of the Living Well With Stroke Study RCTs 
were supported by a much smaller, multifaceted intervention, 
conducted during rehabilitation.90 Twenty-four patients with 
ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke in a rehabilitation hospital 
were randomly assigned to receive 12 weekly sessions of eco-
system-focused therapy (n=12), which emphasized a family-
focused, problem-solving identification of valued activities 
and coordination of therapies. The comparison group (n=12) 
had 12 weekly sessions focused on education about stroke and 
depression and reviewed written materials. Participants were 
included in the trial based on the PHQ-9, with depression 
diagnosis confirmed by Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, 4th Edition criteria and depression severity 
measured by HDRS scores. At week 12, 66.7% of the ecosys-
tem focused therapy participants had achieved remission of 
depression (HDRS<10), which was significantly greater than 
the 16.7% achieving remission in the control group.90
The CALM trial (Communication and Low Mood) 
(N=105)89 randomized stroke survivors with aphasia to receive 
up to 20 1-hour sessions of behavioral therapy over 3 months 
(n=51), delivered by an assistant psychologist supervised 
by a clinical psychologist and supported by an intervention 
manual developed from studies of cognitive behavioral ther-
apy or usual care (n=54). Mean Stroke Aphasic Depression 
Questionnaire scores decreased from baseline to 6 months by 
6 points in the intervention group compared with an increase 
of 1.9 points in the control group. When baseline values and 
communication impairment were controlled for, participants 
in the intervention group had improved mood compared with 
controls (P=0.002).89
These 4 trials of 330 participants were relatively small, 
and 3 were conducted at single institutions, but the reduction 
in depression results were consistent with the exception of the 
second Living Well With Stroke Study.
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 7 trials (n=775) suggest that brief psychosocial 
interventions may be useful and effective in treatment of PSD. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 e38  Stroke  February 2017
Whether antidepressant medication is a necessary or benefi-
cial adjuvant cannot be established from these trials because 
of a lack of placebo controls.
Management: Stroke Liaison Workers
Stroke liaison workers provide services including education, 
information provision, social support, and liaison with other ser-
vices. A systematic review of 15 interventions (2743 participants) 
in unselected groups of stroke survivors (ie, trials were not limited 
to people with or without depression) did not show any evidence 
of a beneficial effect from stroke liaison workers on depres-
sion, when compared with controls (standardized mean reduc-
tion in depression scores, −0.04; 95% CI, −0.12 to 0.04).91
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 15 trials (n=2743) have not revealed a beneficial 
effect from stroke liaison workers on PSD; however, the tri-
als included individuals without a diagnosis of PSD. Further 
studies are needed to determine the effect of liaison worker on 
those with established PSD.
Management: Information Provision
In a systematic review of studies assessing the effectiveness 
of information provision strategies in improving outcomes in 
stroke survivors (17 RCTs; n=2831), 12 trials evaluated the 
effect of passive or active information provision on depression. 
Dichotomous data were available for 956 of 1280 participants 
from 8 trials and revealed no significant difference on depres-
sion. Continuous data were available for 720 of 1016 partici-
pants in 7 trials and showed a small benefit of information 
provision on depression scores (weighted mean reduction in 
scores of −0.52; 95% CI, −0.93 to −0.10; P=0.01); however, 
the clinical significance of this improvement is unclear. Active 
information provision was significantly more effective than was 
passive information for depression (P<0.02 for all trials), and 
anxiety (P<0.05 for trials reporting dichotomous data, P<0.01 
for trials reporting continuous data).92 There was considerable 
variability in the interventions evaluated and quality of the trials.
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 7 trials (n=720) suggest that information provi-
sion provides a small benefit in depression scores; however, 
the clinical significance of this improvement is unclear.
Management: Self-Management
The US Institute of Medicine has defined self-management 
as “the tasks that individuals must undertake to live with 
one or more chronic conditions. These tasks include having 
the confidence to deal with medical management, role man-
agement and emotional management of their conditions.”93 
Self-efficacy, an individual’s confidence in their ability to 
carry out a specific task or behavior, is a mediator in the 
causal pathway between acquiring self-management skills 
and enactment of self-management behaviors. A systematic 
review without meta-analysis assessed the effectiveness of 
self-management strategies on depression, as a secondary 
end point, after stroke. No evidence of benefit was seen in 2 
RCTs including 303 participants.94 Further research is needed 
to assess the effect of self-management teaching on PSD inci-
dence and outcomes.
In summary, few studies have assessed the effectiveness 
of self-management strategies on PSD; further studies are 
needed to determine whether these strategies are beneficial.
Prevention of PSD Using Pharmacological 
Interventions
PSD is a disorder in which the ratio between recent incidence 
and prevalence is high (ie, high influx disorder).95 Given the 
high prevalence and association with functional impairment, 
poor QOL, and increased morbidity and mortality, PSD is an 
ideal target for selective prevention.
Salter et al performed a meta-analysis summarizing the 
findings of 8 RCTs (from 1990 through 2011) assessing the 
efficacy of preventive pharmacological interventions among 
776 initially nondepressed stroke patients.96 Pooled analyses 
revealed that the likelihood of developing PSD was reduced 
among patients receiving active pharmacological treatment 
(OR, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.22–0.53), especially after a 1 year treat-
ment (OR, 0.31; 95% CI, 0.18–0.56), and with the use of an 
SSRI (OR, 0.37; 95% CI, 0.22–0.61). The most commonly 
reported side effects were nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, and dizzi-
ness. There were no significant differences between the active 
treatment and placebo groups in the frequency of these symp-
toms. Only tremor was significantly associated with sertraline 
in 1 of the RCTs.96 This review included 2 publications from 
the same cohort and an open trial (drug vs usual care). These 
review results are contrary to an earlier 2008 Cochrane sys-
tematic review including 12 placebo-controlled trials of 611 
individuals, finding no evidence that antidepressant drugs 
prevented depression after stroke.97 The Salter meta-analysis 
included 3 small trials40,98,99 of antidepressant medications 
published after the Cochrane review, and 1 other trial has 
since been published.100 All 4 trials (401 participants) showed 
benefit of their respective antidepressant (fluoxetine n=59, 
placebo n=59; milnacipran n=56, placebo n=46; paroxetine 
n=32, placebo n=32; and escitalopram n=59, placebo n=58) 
over placebo. With the exception of the single open label trial, 
the studies had satisfactory methodological quality; however, 
only 3 studies reported their mechanism for concealed alloca-
tion, and all studies excluded those with aphasia and/or sig-
nificant cognitive impairment, limiting generalizability.
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 8 trials (n=776) suggest that pharmacologi-
cal treatment may be effective in preventing PSD; however, 
further studies are needed in more representative samples of 
stroke survivors, and additional study is required to determine 
the optimal timing and duration of treatment.
Prevention of PSD Using Psychosocial Interventions
A Cochrane review and meta-analysis first published in 2004, 
and updated in 2008 (4 trials including 902 participants), indi-
cated a small but significant effect of psychosocial strategies 
(problem-solving therapy, a broad home-based therapy, moti-
vational interviewing) to prevent PSD (OR, 0.64; 95% CI, 
0.42–0.98).97 Limitations included considerable heterogeneity 
in design, analysis, and reporting of clinical trials, variable 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e39
inclusion criteria, exclusion of individuals with aphasia, cog-
nitive impairment, and previous psychiatric illness (limiting 
generalizability), inadequate concealment of randomization, 
and high numbers of drop outs. In trial results published since 
the 2008 review, 1 long-term follow-up study of people with 
and without high depressive symptom burden at baseline 
(n=411), the group that received motivational interviewing 
sessions (n=204) was more likely to have normal mood (48% 
vs 38% control, OR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.08–2.55) and to have 
survived at 12 months (6.5% died in intervention vs 12.8% 
control; OR, 2.14; 95% CI, 1.06–4.38). Formal diagnoses of 
depression were not made in this study.101
A multisite prevention trial included pharmacological and 
psychosocial treatment for 176 nondepressed stroke survivors 
enrolled within 3 months of stroke. Participants were randomized 
to 1 year of treatment either with a double-blind trial of escita-
lopram (n=59) versus placebo (n=58) or a nonblinded problem-
solving therapy group (n=59). Those taking placebo were more 
likely to report clinical depression (HR, 4.5; 95% CI, 2.4–8.2) 
than those who participated in the problem-solving treatment 
(HR, 2.2; 95% CI, 1.4–3.5) and than those taking escitalopram.99 
However, 4 of those in the escitalopram group developed new 
symptoms of major depression when the drug was discontinued 
after 1 year, whereas no one in the placebo or problem-solving 
group developed new symptoms of depression.102
Implication for Clinical Practice
In summary, 5 trials (n=1078) suggest that psychosocial thera-
pies may prevent the development of PSD; however, the stud-
ies are not generalizable to all stroke survivors, given their 
narrow inclusion and exclusion criteria. Further research with 
more rigorous methods are needed to assess the effect of psy-
chotherapy on prevention of PSD.
Recommendations for Future Research
• Further elucidate pathophysiology of PSD, including 
relative contributions of biological and psychosocial fac-
tors in the development of PSD.
• Determine whether the pathophysiology of early PSD 
differs from late PSD.
• Assess the effect of PSD on outcomes and develop opti-
mal strategies to counteract these effects.
• Further elucidate the independent effect of PSD on QOL 
and determine how to improve QOL in individuals with 
or at risk for PSD.
• Evaluate the effect of treatment of PSD on subsequent 
healthcare use.
• Assess the risks and benefits of routine screening for 
PSD and determine optimal timing, frequency, setting, 
and method for screening.
• Conduct large, multicenter, international RCTs to 
determine whether screening for PSD—in conjunction 
with collaborative care to ensure timely intervention, 
treatment, and follow-up—improves outcomes.
• Conduct large, multicenter, international RCTs to iden-
tify safe and effective treatments for PSD, optimal timing 
and thresholds for treatment, and to determine whether 
effective treatment of PSD improves survival and other 
outcomes after stroke.
• Determine optimal strategies to prevent PSD.
Conclusions
Depression is common after stroke, affecting up to one 
third of stroke survivors at any one time. The natural his-
tory of PSD is dynamic; however, symptoms most fre-
quently develop in the first year. The pathophysiology of 
PSD is poorly understood; proposed mechanisms include 
psychosocial factors such as psychological response to new 
disability and social isolation, as well as biological factors 
such as genetic susceptibility, inflammation, alterations in 
neurotrophic factors, disruption of neural networks, and 
alterations in serotonergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic 
pathways. The most consistent predictors of PSD include 
physical disability, stroke severity, depression before stroke, 
and cognitive impairment. Individuals with PSD have higher 
healthcare use, poorer functional outcomes and QOL, and 
higher mortality. Numerous screening tools are reliable in 
identifying depression in stroke survivors; however, fur-
ther studies are needed to determine the optimal timing, 
setting, and follow-up for screening. Clinical trials of anti-
depressants in individuals with PSD have shown a benefi-
cial effect on depression remission and response, but trials 
were limited by small samples, variable criteria for PSD, 
and vague definitions for remission and response. Several 
recent trials have indicated a benefit of brief psychosocial 
therapies for treatment. The effect of information provision, 
collaborative care interventions, and clinical improvement 
teams on PSD require further study; however, preliminary 
data suggest a benefit of the latter 2. Pharmacological and 
psychosocial interventions have been shown to reduce the 
likelihood of developing PSD. The high prevalence and 
poor prognosis of depression in patients with stroke sup-
ports a strategy of increased awareness, timely screening, 
and prompt evidence-based management; however, further 
studies are needed to determine the optimal timing and 
method for screening, and ideal treatment strategy. This sci-
entific statement aimed to draw attention to this underrec-
ognized, underinvestigated, and undertreated problem with 
the goal of summarizing current knowledge, emphasizing 
implications for clinical practice, and recommending areas 
for future research.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 e40  Stroke  February 2017
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Amytis Towfighi
University of Southern California
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Bruce Ovbiagele
Medical University of South 
Carolina
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Nada El Husseini
Wake Forest University Baptist 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Maree L. Hackett
The George Institute for Global 
Health/Royal Prince Alfred 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Ricardo E. Jorge
Baylor College of Medicine
None
None
Janssen Cilag 
China*
None
None
None
None
Brett M. Kissela
University of Cincinnati 
Academic Health Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Pamela H. Mitchell
University of Washington
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Lesli E. Skolarus
University of Michigan
NIH†
University of Michigan 
(Institutional Grant)†
None
None
None
Bracket 
Global†
None
Mary A. Whooley
University of California, San 
Francisco Department of 
Veteran Affairs Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Linda S. Williams
Roudebush VA Medical Center
Veterans 
Administration*
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on 
the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the 
person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock 
or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under 
the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Disclosures
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert  
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Moira Kapral
University of Toronto, 
Canada
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Anjail Z Sharrief
University of Texas 
Medical School at 
Houston
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Brian Silver
Rhode Island Hospital
None
None
None
Medicolegal 
expert review*
None
None
Joint Commission 
(Surveyor)*; 
Women’s 
Health Initiative 
(Adjudicator of 
stroke outcomes)*; 
UCSF (Adjudicator 
for stroke outcomes 
in SOCRATES trial)*
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during 
any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or 
more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Significant.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e41
References
 1. 
Hackett ML, Pickles K. Part I: frequency of depression after stroke: an 
updated systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. 
Int J Stroke. 2014;9:1017–1025. doi: 10.1111/ijs.12357.
 2. Kutlubaev MA, Hackett ML. Part II: predictors of depression after stroke 
and impact of depression on stroke outcome: an updated systematic 
review of observational studies. Int J Stroke. 2014;9:1026–1036. doi: 
10.1111/ijs.12356.
 3. Bartoli F, Lillia N, Lax A, Crocamo C, Mantero V, Carrà G, Agostoni 
E, Clerici M. Depression after stroke and risk of mortality: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Stroke Res Treat. 2013;2013:862978. doi: 
10.1155/2013/862978.
 4. Hasin DS, Goodwin RD, Stinson FS, Grant BF. Epidemiology of 
major depressive disorder: results from the National Epidemiologic 
Survey on Alcoholism and Related Conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2005;62:1097–1106. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.10.1097.
 5. Kessler RC, Chiu WT, Demler O, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. 
Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders 
in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2005;62:617–627. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.617.
 6. Ayerbe L, Ayis S, Crichton S, Wolfe CD, Rudd AG. The natural his-
tory of depression up to 15 years after stroke: the South London Stroke 
Register. Stroke. 2013;44:1105–1110. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA. 
111.679340.
 7. Hackett ML, Yapa C, Parag V, Anderson CS. Frequency of depres-
sion after stroke: a systematic review of observational studies. Stroke. 
2005;36:1330–1340. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000165928.19135.35.
 8. Ayerbe L, Ayis S, Wolfe CD, Rudd AG. Natural history, predictors and 
outcomes of depression after stroke: systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. Br J Psychiatry. 2013;202:14–21. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.107664.
 9. Ng KC, Chan KL, Straughan PT. A study of post-stroke depression in a 
rehabilitative center. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1995;92:75–79.
 10. Nys GM, van Zandvoort MJ, van der Worp HB, de Haan EH, de Kort PL, 
Kappelle LJ. Early depressive symptoms after stroke: neuropsychologi-
cal correlates and lesion characteristics. J Neurol Sci. 2005;228:27–33. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.09.031.
 11. Murphy E. Social origins of depression in old age. Br J Psychiatry. 
1982;141:135–142.
 12. Whyte EM, Mulsant BH. Post stroke depression: epidemiology, patho-
physiology, and biological treatment. Biol Psychiatry. 2002;52:253–264.
 13. Folstein MF, Maiberger R, McHugh PR. Mood disorder as a specific 
complication of stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1977;40: 
1018–1020.
 14. Burvill P, Johnson G, Jamrozik K, Anderson C, Stewart-Wynne E. 
Risk factors for post-stroke depression. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
1997;12:219–226.
 15. Lieberman D, Friger M, Fried V, Grinshpun Y, Mytlis N, Tylis R, 
Galinsky D, Lieberman D. Characterization of elderly patients in reha-
bilitation: stroke versus hip fracture. Disabil Rehabil. 1999;21:542–547.
 16. Starkstein SE, Fedoroff JP, Price TR, Leiguarda R, Robinson RG. 
Anosognosia in patients with cerebrovascular lesions. A study of caus-
ative factors. Stroke. 1992;23:1446–1453.
 17. Fujikawa T, Yamawaki S, Touhouda Y. Incidence of silent cerebral 
infarction in patients with major depression. Stroke. 1993;24:1631–1634.
 18. Alexopoulos GS, Meyers BS, Young RC, Kakuma T, Silbersweig D, 
Charlson M. Clinically defined vascular depression. Am J Psychiatry. 
1997;154:562–565. doi: 10.1176/ajp.154.4.562.
 19. Loubinoux I, Kronenberg G, Endres M, Schumann-Bard P, Freret T, 
Filipkowski RK, Kaczmarek L, Popa-Wagner A. Post-stroke depression: 
mechanisms, translation and therapy. J Cell Mol Med. 2012;16:1961–
1969. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2012.01555.x.
 20. Craft TK, DeVries AC. Role of IL-1 in poststroke depressive-like 
behavior in mice. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;60:812–818. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsych.2006.03.011.
 21. Snaphaan L, van der Werf S, Kanselaar K, de Leeuw FE. Post-stroke 
depressive symptoms are associated with post-stroke characteristics. 
Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;28:551–557. doi: 10.1159/000247598.
 22. Altieri M, Maestrini I, Mercurio A, Troisi P, Sgarlata E, Rea V, Di 
Piero V, Lenzi GL. Depression after minor stroke: prevalence and pre-
dictors. Eur J Neurol. 2012;19:517–521. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331. 
2011.03583.x.
 23. Robinson RG, Shoemaker WJ, Schlumpf M, Valk T, Bloom FE. Effect 
of experimental cerebral infarction in rat brain on catecholamines and 
behaviour. Nature. 1975;255:332–334.
 24. Robinson RG, Kubos KL, Starr LB, Rao K, Price TR. Mood changes 
in stroke patients: relationship to lesion location. Compr Psychiatry. 
1983;24:555–566.
 25. Carson AJ, MacHale S, Allen K, Lawrie SM, Dennis M, House A, Sharpe 
M. Depression after stroke and lesion location: a systematic review. 
Lancet. 2000;356:122–126. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)02448-X.
 26. Wei N, Yong W, Li X, Zhou Y, Deng M, Zhu H, Jin H. Post-stroke depres-
sion and lesion location: a systematic review. J Neurol. 2015;262:81–90. 
doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7534-1.
 27. Yu L, Liu CK, Chen JW, Wang SY, Wu YH, Yu SH. Relationship 
between post-stroke depression and lesion location: a meta-
analysis. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2004;20:372–380. doi: 10.1016/
S1607-551X(09)70173-1.
 28. Kim JM, Stewart R, Kang HJ, Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim HR, Shin MG, 
Kim JT, Park MS, Cho KH, Yoon JS. A longitudinal study of SLC6A4 
DNA promoter methylation and poststroke depression. J Psychiatr Res. 
2013;47:1222–1227. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.04.010.
 29. Kim JM, Stewart R, Kang HJ, Kim SY, Kim SW, Shin IS, Park MS, 
Kim HR, Shin MG, Cho KH, Yoon JS. A longitudinal study of BDNF 
promoter methylation and genotype with poststroke depression. J Affect 
Disord. 2013;149:93–99. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.01.008.
 30. Kim JM, Stewart R, Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JT, Park MS, Park SW, Kim 
YH, Cho KH, Yoon JS. Associations of cytokine gene polymorphisms 
with post-stroke depression. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2012;13:579–587. 
doi: 10.3109/15622975.2011.588247.
 31. Spalletta G, Bossù P, Ciaramella A, Bria P, Caltagirone C, Robinson RG. 
The etiology of poststroke depression: a review of the literature and a 
new hypothesis involving inflammatory cytokines. Mol Psychiatry. 
2006;11:984–991. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001879.
 32. Rocco A, Afra J, Toscano M, Sirimarco G, Di Clemente L, Altieri M, 
Lenzi GL, Di Piero V. Acute subcortical stroke and early serotonergic 
modification: a IDAP study. Eur J Neurol. 2007;14:1378–1382. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.01985.x.
 33. Newberg AR, Davydow DS, Lee HB. Cerebrovascular disease basis 
of depression: post-stroke depression and vascular depression. Int Rev 
Psychiatry. 2006;18:433–441. doi: 10.1080/09540260600935447.
 34. Noonan K, Carey LM, Crewther SG. Meta-analyses indicate asso-
ciations between neuroendocrine activation, deactivation in neu-
rotrophic and neuroimaging markers in depression after stroke. 
J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013;22:e124–e135. doi: 10.1016/j.
jstrokecerebrovasdis.2012.09.008.
 35. Hackett ML, Anderson CS. Predictors of depression after stroke: a sys-
tematic review of observational studies. Stroke. 2005;36:2296–2301. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000183622.75135.a4.
 36. De Ryck A, Brouns R, Geurden M, Elseviers M, De Deyn PP, 
Engelborghs S. Risk factors for poststroke depression: identification 
of inconsistencies based on a systematic review. J Geriatr Psychiatry 
Neurol. 2014;27:147–158. doi: 10.1177/0891988714527514.
 37. Parikh RM, Robinson RG, Lipsey JR, Starkstein SE, Fedoroff JP, Price 
TR. The impact of poststroke depression on recovery in activities of daily 
living over a 2-year follow-up. Arch Neurol. 1990;47:785–789.
 38. Robinson RG, Bolla-Wilson K, Kaplan E, Lipsey JR, Price TR. 
Depression influences intellectual impairment in stroke patients. Br J 
Psychiatry. 1986;148:541–547.
 39. Wulsin L, Alwell K, Moomaw CJ, Lindsell CJ, Kleindorfer DO, 
Woo D, Flaherty ML, Khatri P, Adeoye O, Ferioli S, Broderick JP, 
Kissela BM. Comparison of two depression measures for predicting 
stroke outcomes. J Psychosom Res. 2012;72:175–179. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpsychores.2011.11.015.
 40. Chollet F, Tardy J, Albucher JF, Thalamas C, Berard E, Lamy C, Bejot Y, 
Deltour S, Jaillard A, Niclot P, Guillon B, Moulin T, Marque P, Pariente 
J, Arnaud C, Loubinoux I. Fluoxetine for motor recovery after acute isch-
aemic stroke (FLAME): a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 
Neurol. 2011;10:123–130. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70314-8.
 41. Dam M, Tonin P, De Boni A, Pizzolato G, Casson S, Ermani M, Freo U, 
Piron L, Battistin L. Effects of fluoxetine and maprotiline on functional 
recovery in poststroke hemiplegic patients undergoing rehabilitation 
therapy. Stroke. 1996;27:1211–1214.
 42. Pariente J, Loubinoux I, Carel C, Albucher JF, Leger A, Manelfe C, 
Rascol O, Chollet F. Fluoxetine modulates motor performance and 
cerebral activation of patients recovering from stroke. Ann Neurol. 
2001;50:718–729.
 43. Zittel S, Weiller C, Liepert J. Citalopram improves dexterity in chronic 
stroke patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2008;22:311–314. doi: 
10.1177/1545968307312173.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 e42  Stroke  February 2017
 44. Acler M, Robol E, Fiaschi A, Manganotti P. A double-blind placebo RCT 
to investigate the effects of serotonergic modulation on brain excitability 
and motor recovery in stroke patients. J Neurol. 2009;256:1152–1158. 
doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5093-7.
 45. Mead GE, Hsieh CF, Lee R, Kutlubaev MA, Claxton A, Hankey GJ, 
Hackett ML. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for stroke 
recovery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;11:CD009286. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009286.pub2.
 46. Naess H, Waje-Andreassen U, Thomassen L, Nyland H, Myhr KM. 
Health-related quality of life among young adults with ischemic stroke 
on long-term follow-up. Stroke. 2006;37:1232–1236. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000217652.42273.02.
 47. Paolucci S, Gandolfo C, Provinciali L, Torta R, Toso V; DESTRO 
Study Group. The Italian multicenter observational study on post-stroke 
depression (DESTRO). J Neurol. 2006;253:556–562. doi: 10.1007/
s00415-006-0058-6.
 48. Christensen MC, Mayer SA, Ferran JM, Kissela B. Depressed mood 
after intracerebral hemorrhage: the FAST trial. Cerebrovasc Dis. 
2009;27:353–360. doi: 10.1159/000202012.
 49. Sturm JW, Donnan GA, Dewey HM, Macdonell RA, Gilligan AK, 
Srikanth V, Thrift AG. Quality of life after stroke: the North East 
Melbourne Stroke Incidence Study (NEMESIS). Stroke. 2004;35:2340–
2345. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000141977.18520.3b.
 50. Pan JH, Song XY, Lee SY, Kwok T. Longitudinal analysis of quality of 
life for stroke survivors using latent curve models. Stroke. 2008;39:2795–
2802. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.515460.
 51. Williams LS, Bakas T, Brizendine E, Plue L, Tu W, Hendrie H, Kroenke 
K. How valid are family proxy assessments of stroke patients’ health-
related quality of life? Stroke. 2006;37:2081–2085. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000230583.10311.9f.
 52. Jia H, Damush TM, Qin H, Ried LD, Wang X, Young LJ, Williams 
LS. The impact of poststroke depression on healthcare use by veter-
ans with acute stroke. Stroke. 2006;37:2796–2801. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000244783.53274.a4.
 53. Ghose SS, Williams LS, Swindle RW. Depression and other mental 
health diagnoses after stroke increase inpatient and outpatient medical 
utilization three years poststroke. Med Care. 2005;43:1259–1264.
 54. Dossa A, Glickman ME, Berlowitz D. Association between mental 
health conditions and rehospitalization, mortality, and functional out-
comes in patients with stroke following inpatient rehabilitation. BMC 
Health Serv Res. 2011;11:311. doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-11-311.
 55. Blanchette CM, Simoni-Wastila L, Shaya F, Orwig D, Noel J, Stuart 
B. Health care use in depressed, elderly, cardiac patients and the effect 
of antidepressant use. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2009;66:366–372. doi: 
10.2146/ajhp080092.
 56. Ayerbe L, Ayis S, Rudd AG, Heuschmann PU, Wolfe CD. Natural his-
tory, predictors, and associations of depression 5 years after stroke: 
the South London Stroke Register. Stroke. 2011;42:1907–1911. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.605808.
 57. Ayerbe L, Ayis S, Crichton SL, Rudd AG, Wolfe CD. Explanatory factors 
for the increased mortality of stroke patients with depression. Neurology. 
2014;83:2007–2012. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001029.
 58. Meader N, Moe-Byrne T, Llewellyn A, Mitchell AJ. Screening for post-
stroke major depression: a meta-analysis of diagnostic validity stud-
ies. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014;85:198–206. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp-2012-304194.
 59. Whooley MA, Avins AL, Miranda J, Browner WS. Case-finding instru-
ments for depression. Two questions are as good as many. J Gen Intern 
Med. 1997;12:439–445.
 60. Turner A, Hambridge J, White J, Carter G, Clover K, Nelson L, Hackett 
M. Depression screening in stroke: a comparison of alternative measures 
with the structured diagnostic interview for the diagnostic and statisti-
cal manual of mental disorders, fourth edition (major depressive epi-
sode) as criterion standard. Stroke. 2012;43:1000–1005. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.643296.
 61. de Man-van Ginkel JM, Hafsteinsdóttir T, Lindeman E, Burger H, Grobbee D, 
Schuurmans M. An efficient way to detect poststroke depression by subse-
quent administration of a 9-item and a 2-item Patient Health Questionnaire. 
Stroke. 2012;43:854–856. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.640276.
 62. Williams LS, Brizendine EJ, Plue L, Bakas T, Tu W, Hendrie H, Kroenke K. 
Performance of the PHQ-9 as a screening tool for depression after stroke. 
Stroke. 2005;36:635–638. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000155688.18207.33.
 63. McManus D, Pipkin SS, Whooley MA. Screening for depression in 
patients with coronary heart disease (data from the Heart and Soul Study). 
Am J Cardiol. 2005;96:1076–1081. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.06.037.
 64. Dowrick C, Buchan I. Twelve month outcome of depression in gen-
eral practice: does detection or disclosure make a difference? BMJ. 
1995;311:1274–1276.
 65. Callahan CM, Hendrie HC, Dittus RS, Brater DC, Hui SL, Tierney WM. 
Improving treatment of late life depression in primary care: a random-
ized clinical trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1994;42:839–846.
 66. Williams JW Jr, Mulrow CD, Kroenke K, Dhanda R, Badgett RG, Omori 
D, Lee S. Case-finding for depression in primary care: a randomized 
trial. Am J Med. 1999;106:36–43.
 67. Whooley MA, Stone B, Soghikian K. Randomized trial of case-find-
ing for depression in elderly primary care patients. J Gen Intern Med. 
2000;15:293–300.
 68. Katon WJ, Lin EH, Von Korff M, Ciechanowski P, Ludman EJ, Young 
B, Peterson D, Rutter CM, McGregor M, McCulloch D. Collaborative 
care for patients with depression and chronic illnesses. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:2611–2620. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1003955.
 69. Simon G. Collaborative care for depression. BMJ. 2006;332:249–250. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.332.7536.249.
 70. Archer J, Bower P, Gilbody S, Lovell K, Richards D, Gask L, 
Dickens C, Coventry P. Collaborative care for depression and anxi-
ety problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD006525. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD006525.pub2.
 71. Katon W, Russo J, Lin EH, Schmittdiel J, Ciechanowski P, Ludman 
E, Peterson D, Young B, Von Korff M. Cost-effectiveness of a mul-
ticondition collaborative care intervention: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69:506–514. doi: 10.1001/
archgenpsychiatry.2011.1548.
 72. Siu AL, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Baumann LC, Davidson 
KW, Ebell M, García FA, Gillman M, Herzstein J, Kemper AR, Krist 
AH, Kurth AE, Owens DK, Phillips WR, Phipps MG, Pignone MP; US 
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). Screening for depression in 
adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
JAMA. 2016;315:380–387. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.18392.
 73. Williams LS, Kroenke K, Bakas T, Plue LD, Brizendine E, Tu W, 
Hendrie H. Care management of poststroke depression: a random-
ized, controlled trial. Stroke. 2007;38:998–1003. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000257319.14023.61.
 74. Williams LS, Ofner S, Yu Z, Beyth RJ, Plue L, Damush T. Pre-post 
evaluation of automated reminders may improve detection and manage-
ment of post-stroke depression. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26:852–857. 
doi: 10.1007/s11606-011-1709-6.
 75. Duncan PW, Zorowitz R, Bates B, Choi JY, Glasberg JJ, Graham 
GD, Katz RC, Lamberty K, Reker D. Management of Adult Stroke 
Rehabilitation Care: a clinical practice guideline. Stroke. 2005;36:e100–
e143. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000180861.54180.FF.
 76. Miller EL, Murray L, Richards L, Zorowitz RD, Bakas T, Clark P, 
Billinger SA; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing and the Stroke Council. Comprehensive over-
view of nursing and interdisciplinary rehabilitation care of the stroke 
patient: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Stroke. 2010;41:2402–2448. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3181e7512b.
 77. Intercollegiate Stroke Working Party. National Clinic Guideline for 
Stroke. 4th ed. London: Royal College of Physicians; 2012.
 78. Stroke Foundation of New Zealand and New Zealand Guidelines Group, 
Clinical Guidelines for Stroke Management 2010. Wellington, New 
Zealand: Stroke Foundation of New Zealand; 2010.
 79. National Stroke Foundation. Clinical Guidelines for Stroke Management. 
Melbourne, Australia: National Stroke Foundation; 2010.
 80. Berg A, Palomäki H, Lönnqvist J, Lehtihalmes M, Kaste M. Depression 
among caregivers of stroke survivors. Stroke. 2005;36:639–643. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000155690.04697.c0.
 81. Schulz R, Beach SR. Caregiving as a risk factor for mortality: the 
Caregiver Health Effects Study. JAMA. 1999;282:2215–2219.
 82. Ohtomo E, Hirai S, Terashi A, Hasegawa K, Tazaki Y, Araki G, Ito E, 
Nishimura T and Furukawa T. Clinical evaluation of aniracetam on psy-
chiatric symptoms related to cerebrovascular disease. J Clin Exp Med. 
1991;156:143–187.
 83. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House A, Xia J. Interventions for treating 
depression after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD003437.
 84. Robinson RG, Jorge RE, Clarence-Smith K. Double-blind randomized 
treatment of poststroke depression using nefiracetam. J Neuropsychiatry 
Clin Neurosci. 2008;20:178–184. doi: 10.1176/jnp.2008.20.2.178.
 85. Grade C, Redford B, Chrostowski J, Toussaint L, Blackwell B. 
Methylphenidate in early poststroke recovery: a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1998;79:1047–1050.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Towfighi et al  Poststroke Depression  e43
 86. Jorge RE, Moser DJ, Acion L, Robinson RG. Treatment of vascular 
depression using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65:268–276. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry. 
2007.45.
 87. Mitchell PH, Veith RC, Becker KJ, Buzaitis A, Cain KC, Fruin M, 
Tirschwell D, Teri L. Brief psychosocial-behavioral intervention 
with antidepressant reduces poststroke depression significantly more 
than usual care with antidepressant: living well with stroke: ran-
domized, controlled trial. Stroke. 2009;40:3073–3078. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.109.549808.
 88. Kirkness CJ, Becker KJ, Cain KC, Kohen R, Tirschwell DL, Teri L, 
Veith RR and Mitchell PH. Telephone versus in-person psychosocial 
behavioral treatment in post-stroke depression. Stroke. 2015;46(suppl 1): 
AWP125.
 89. Thomas SA, Walker MF, Macniven JA, Haworth H, Lincoln NB. 
Communication and Low Mood (CALM): a randomized controlled trial 
of behavioural therapy for stroke patients with aphasia. Clin Rehabil. 
2013;27:398–408. doi: 10.1177/0269215512462227.
 90. Alexopoulos GS, Wilkins VM, Marino P, Kanellopoulos D, Reding 
M, Sirey JA, Raue PJ, Ghosh S, O’Dell MW, Kiosses DN. Ecosystem 
focused therapy in poststroke depression: a preliminary study. Int J 
Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012;27:1053–1060. doi: 10.1002/gps.2822.
 91. Ellis G, Mant J, Langhorne P, Dennis M, Winner S. Stroke liaison work-
ers for stroke patients and carers: an individual patient data meta-analy-
sis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010:CD005066.
 92. Smith J, Forster A, Young J; Cochrane Group for information provi-
sion after stroke. Cochrane review: information provision for stroke 
patients and their caregivers. Clin Rehabil. 2009;23:195–206. doi: 
10.1177/0269215508092820.
 93. Parke HL, Epiphaniou E, Pearce G, Taylor SJ, Sheikh A, Griffiths 
CJ, Greenhalgh T, Pinnock H. Self-management support interven-
tions for stroke survivors: A systematic meta-review. PLoS One. 
2015;10:e0131448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131448.
 94. Jones F, Riazi A. Self-efficacy and self-management after stroke: a 
systematic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33:797–810. doi: 10.3109/ 
09638288.2010.511415.
 95. Beekman AT, Smit F, Stek ML, Reynolds CF 3rd, Cuijpers PC. Preventing 
depression in high-risk groups. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2010;23:8–11. 
doi: 10.1097/YCO.0b013e328333e17f.
 96. Salter KL, Foley NC, Zhu L, Jutai JW, Teasell RW. Prevention of 
poststroke depression: does prophylactic pharmacotherapy work? 
J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013;22:1243–1251. doi: 10.1016/j.
jstrokecerebrovasdis.2012.03.013.
 97. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House A, Halteh C. Interventions for 
preventing depression after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2008:CD003689.
 98. Tsai CS, Wu CL, Chou SY, Tsang HY, Hung TH, Su JA. Prevention 
of poststroke depression with milnacipran in patients with acute 
ischemic stroke: a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled 
trial. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2011;26:263–267. doi: 10.1097/
YIC.0b013e32834a5c64.
 99. Robinson RG, Jorge RE, Moser DJ, Acion L, Solodkin A, Small SL, 
Fonzetti P, Hegel M, Arndt S. Escitalopram and problem-solving therapy 
for prevention of poststroke depression: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 2008;299:2391–2400. doi: 10.1001/jama.299.20.2391.
 
100. Xu J, Wang J, Liu J. Preventive effects of antidepressants on post-stroke 
depression. Chin Ment Health J. 2006;20:186–188.
 
101. Watkins CL, Wathan JV, Leathley MJ, Auton MF, Deans CF, Dickinson 
HA, Jack CI, Sutton CJ, van den Broek MD, Lightbody CE. The 
12-month effects of early motivational interviewing after acute stroke: 
a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 2011;42:1956–1961. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.602227.
 
102. Mikami K, Jorge RE, Moser DJ, Arndt S, Jang M, Solodkin A, Small SL, 
Fonzetti P, Hegel MT, Robinson RG. Increased frequency of first-epi-
sode poststroke depression after discontinuation of escitalopram. Stroke. 
2011;42:3281–3283. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.626507.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
