 Human Clinical Article
Cell-Assisted Lipotransfer Using Autologous
Adipose-Derived Stromal Cells for Alleviation of
Breast Cancer-Related Lymphedema
NAVID MOHAMADPOUR TOYSERKANI,a CHARLOTTE HARKEN JENSEN,b SØREN PALUDAN SHEIKH,b
JENS AHM SØRENSENa
Key Words. Lymphedema x Stromal vascular fraction x Adipose-derived stromal cells x
Adipose-derived stem cells x Adipose-derived regenerative cells x Mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation x Regenerative medicine x Cell-based therapy x
Tissue-based therapy
ABSTRACT
Lymphedema is one of the most frequent side effects following cancer treatment, and treatment
opportunities for it are currently lacking. Stem cell therapy has been proposed as a possible novel
treatment modality. This study was the first case in which freshly isolated adipose-derived stromal
cells were used to treat lymphedema. Treatment was given as a cell-assisted lipotransfer in which
4.07 3107cells were injected with 10 ml oflipoaspirate inthe axillary region. Four months after treat-
ment, the patient reported a great improvement in daily symptoms, reduction in need for compres-
sion therapy, and volume reduction of her affected arm. There were no adverse events. The outcome
for this patient provides support for the potential use of cellular therapy for lymphedema treatment.
We have begun a larger study to further test the feasibility and safety of this procedure (ClinicalTrials.
gov Identifier NCT02592213). STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:857–859
SIGNIFICANCE
Lymphedema is a very debilitating side effect of cancer treatment and has very few treatment op-
tions. Stem cell therapy has the potential to change the treatment paradigm from a conservative
to a more curative approach. Freshly isolated, autologous, adipose-derived stromal cells were com-
bined with a fat-graft procedure to treat lymphedema. The treated patient had great improvement in
daily symptoms, a reduced need for compression therapy, and a reduction in arm volume after
4 months.There were no adverse events. The use of cellular therapy for lymphedema treatment is sup-
ported by this patient’s outcome. A phase II study has begun to further test its feasibility and safety.
INTRODUCTION
In the developed world, cancer treatment is the
leading cause of lymphedema. It is a debilitating
condition associated with recurrent infections
[1] and reduced quality of life [2, 3]. The present
standard of care is compression therapy, which
depends on continuous adherence to be effec-
tive [4].Accordingly, newtherapeutic approaches
are needed to treat this condition. One such ap-
proach is stem cell therapy; in a recent review,
we summarized all preclinical and clinical studies
that used stem cells for therapeutic lymphangio-
genesis [5]. All reported clinical studies used bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
Adipose tissue is the most abundant and easiest
accessible source of MSCs, but it has not been
used previously for lymphedema treatment. To
our knowledge, we are the first to report the use
of cell-assisted lipotransfer using freshly isolated
adipose-derived stromal cells (the stromal vascular
fraction [SVF]) to treat lymphedema.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The patient was a 48-year-old woman with breast
cancer-related lymphedema of her arm due to
lymphadenectomy and radiation therapy 4 years
ago.Besidesconservativemanagement,therewere
no treatment opportunities available; therefore,
she was offered experimental stem cell treatment,
which she accepted. Hospital exemption was
acquired from the Danish Health and Medicines
Authority to allow for the autologous cell treat-
ment. No further approvals were necessary.
The procedure was performed under gen-
eral anesthesia and involved liposuction (body-
jet; Human med AG, Schwerin, Germany, http://
www.humanmed.com) of 320 ml of lipoaspirate
Departments of aPlastic and
Reconstructive Surgery
and bClinical Biochemistry
and Pharmacology, Odense
University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark
Correspondence: Navid
Mohamadpour Toyserkani, M.D.,
Odense University Hospital,
Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery, Sdr. Boulevard 29,
Odense C, 5000, Denmark.
Telephone: 45 65411861; E-Mail:
navid.m.toyserkani@rsyd.dk
Received November 20, 2015;
acceptedfor publicationMarch1,
2016; published Online First on
May 5, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0357
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:857–859 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
HUMAN CLINICAL ARTICLE
 for SVF isolation using the automated Celution 800/CRS System
(Cytori Therapeutics, San Diego, CA, http://www.cytori.com)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The SVF was isolated
within 2 hours and resuspended in 5 ml of lactated Ringer’s solu-
tion with a syringe, and 1 ml was saved for characterization. An ad-
ditional 10 ml of pure centrifuged lipoaspirate was used for fat
grafting to the axillary region using a technique incorporating
fan-shapedinjectionstoreleaseaxillaryscarformation.Theremain-
ing 4 ml of SVF was injected into the same region in the subcutane-
ous plane immediately after isolation at 8 premarked points.
Figure 1 presents intraoperative photographs. The patient was dis-
charged the same afternoon.
As previously described by Haahr et al. [6], SVF was character-
ized by nucleated cell count and viability, the percentage of fibro-
blastoid colony-forming units (CFU-F), and surface marker analysis
usingthefollowingmarkersfromBDBiosciences(Albertslund,Den-
mark, http://www.bd.com): anti-CD34 (PE-CF594, clone 581), anti-
CD45 (fluorescein isothiocyanate, clone HI30), CD31 (Alexa Fluor
647, clone WM59), CD73 (allophycocyanin [APC], clone AD2), CD90
(APC, clone5E10),and appropriateisotypesaccordingto themanufac-
turer’srecommendations. Sample acquisition was performed on a
BD LSRII flow cytometer and analyzed using the FACSDiva soft-
ware version 8.0.1 (BD Biosciences) and FlowJo 7.6.5 (Tree Star,
Ashland, OR, http://www.flowjo.com). Cell doublets were ex-
cluded from all analyses by sequential gating through forward-
and side-scatter height/width plots. A nucleated cell count
including viability analysis was performed using three technical
replicates with a NucleocounterNC-200 (ChemoMetec, Allerod,
Denmark, http://chemometec.com). The percentage of CFU-F
was determined by seeding cells at low density (4 concentrations
in triplicate ranging from 28 to 280 live nucleated cells per cm2) in
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, http://www.sigmaaldrich.com) with 1 g/l glucose, 10% fetal
bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (PS)
(Sigma-Aldrich), culturing for 14 days, and counting hematoxylin-
stained colonies comprising more than 50 cells.
The outcome was evaluated by pre- and postoperative cir-
cumference measurements, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry
(DXA) scans, and evaluation of adverse events. DXA scans were
performed as whole-body scans and each arm was measured
separately; based on known densities of bone, fat, and nonfat
tissue, a volume was calculated as described in the literature
[7]. Adverse events were evaluated immediately following the
SVF injection, before discharge, and after 1 and 4 months with
a combination of clinical examination of the injected area, open-
ended questioning (experience of any discomfort) of the pa-
tient, and more specific questioning regarding infection, pain,
and swelling.
RESULTS
A total of 4.07 3 107 viable cells were administered to the pa-
tient. The CFU-F was 0.7%. Flow cytometry on stored, fixed cells
showed that cells were 14.3% CD451, 60.4% CD341, 9.6% CD311,
44.5% CD731, and 69.5% CD901.
The patient was seen after 1 and 4 months, and she reported
a great reduction in her symptoms of arm heaviness and tension.
The patient no longer needed to use intermittent pneumatic com-
pression therapy, which she had used on a daily basis before treat-
ment. She still wore her compression garment.
Circumference measurements after 4 months showed a re-
duction of 1 cm at the wrist and lower arm and 2 cm at the upper
arm. Pre- and postoperative DXA scans showed a reduction of
292 ml in the lymphedema-affected arm, whereas that of the
healthy armwas increased by 50 ml.There were no postoperative
complications or adverse events related to the procedure.
Figure 1.
Photographs and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan of the injection of the stromal vascular fraction of freshly isolated
adipose-derived stromal cells in the procedure described in this study. (A): Lipoaspirate (320 ml) was obtained using water-assisted liposuction.
This was transferred to 60-ml syringes and then injected into the Celution System (Cytori Therapeutics). (B): The adipose-derived stromal cells
were isolated within 2 hours and were suspended in 5 ml of lactated Ringer’s solution. (C): During the surgical procedure, 10 ml of lipoaspirate
was used for fat grafting to the axillary region. (D): The adipose-derived stromal cells were injected into the same region at eight prespecified
points immediately after isolation; the patient was awake at this time. (E): Whole-body DXA scans were used to calculate arm volume pre- and
postoperatively. The lines isolating the arms, including the shoulders, represent the areas from which volume was calculated.
858
Lymphedema and Adipose-Derived Stromal Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 DISCUSSION
Treatment of lymphedema remains one of the greatest chal-
lenges in reconstructive surgery for which efficient treatment
possibilities are lacking. The outcome of this patient supports
the results of previous studies using bone marrow-derived cells
andprovides afoundation for thepotential useofcellulartherapy
for lymphedema treatment [8, 9].
The DXA scan was performed as a whole-body scan. Software
limitations meant that the arm-volume measurements included
the shoulder, thereby increasing the risk for variability in the vol-
ume measurements. This could explain the increase of 50 ml in
the healthy arm volume at follow-up. To minimize variability,
we now scan each arm separately and isolate the arm with sub-
regional analysis, a technique that was not available to us when
this patient was scanned. Potential changes in lymph drainage
were not assessed in this patient, and this is a limitation when
interpreting the results, because we cannot conclude that the
cell therapy resulted in improved lymph drainage. We recommend
that all future studies seeking to treat lymphedema include stan-
dardized, subjective evaluations with validated questionnaires
and scales, objective measurements of arm volume through cir-
cumference measurements and imaging studies, and functional
measurements to evaluate any change in drainage.
Based on the promising preclinical and clinical results, we
have initiated a phase II study in our department to further test
the feasibility and safety of this procedure (ClinicalTrials.gov Iden-
tifier: NCT02592213).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.M.T.: conception and design, collection and/or assembly of
data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final
approval of manuscript; C.H.J.: provision of study material or
patients, collection and/or assembly of data, manuscript revi-
sion for intellectual content, final approval of manuscript;
S.P.S.: financial support, administrative support, provision of
study material or patients, manuscript revision for intellectual
content, final approval of manuscript; J.A.S.: conception and
design, financial support, administrative support, provision of
study material or patients, collection and/or assembly of data,
manuscript revision for intellectual content, final approval of
manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Dupuy A, Benchikhi H, Roujeau JC et al.
Risk factors for erysipelas of the leg (cellulitis):
Case-control study. BMJ 1999;318:1591–1594.
2
McWayne J, Heiney SP. Psychologic and
social sequelae of secondary lymphedema:
A review. Cancer 2005;104:457–466.
3
Tobin MB, Lacey HJ, Meyer L et al. The psy-
chological morbidity of breast cancer-related
arm swelling. Psychological morbidity of
lymphoedema. Cancer 1993;72:3248–3252.
4
Lasinski BB, McKillip Thrift K. et al. A sys-
tematic review of the evidence for complete
decongestive therapy in the treatment of
lymphedema from 2004 to 2011. PM R
2012;4:580–601.
5
Toyserkani NM, Christensen ML, Sheikh SP
et al. Stem cells show promising results for
lymphoedema treatment—a literature review.
J Plast Surg Hand Surg 2015;49:65–71.
6
HaahrMK,JensenCH,ToyserkaniNMetal.
Safety and potential effect of a single intra-
cavernous injection of autologous adipose-
derived regenerative cells in patients with
erectile dysfunction following radical prosta-
tectomy: An open-label phase I clinical trial.
EBioMedicine 2016;5:204–210.
7
Gjorup C, Zerahn B, Hendel HW. Assessment
of volume measurement of breast cancer-related
lymphedema by three methods: Circumference
measurement, water displacement, and dual
energy X-ray absorptiometry. Lymphat Res
Biol 2010;8:111–119.
8
Hou C, Wu X, Jin X. Autologous bone
marrow stromal cells transplantation for the
treatment of secondary arm lymphedema: A
prospective controlled study in patients with
breast cancer related lymphedema. Jpn J Clin
Oncol 2008;38:670–674.
9
Maldonado GEM, P´
erez CAA, Covarrubias
EEA et al. Autologous stem cells for the
treatment of post-mastectomy lymphedema:
A pilot study. Cytotherapy 2011;13:1249–
1255.
Toyserkani, Jensen, Sheikh et al.
859
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
