 nutrients
Review
Pre-Sleep Protein Ingestion to Improve the Skeletal
Muscle Adaptive Response to Exercise Training
Jorn Trommelen and Luc J. C. van Loon *
NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre+,
P.O. Box 616, Maastricht 6200 MD, The Netherlands; jorn.trommelen@maastrichtuniversity.nl
* Correspondence: l.vanloon@maastrichtuniversity.nl; Tel.: +31-43-388-1397
Received: 14 September 2016; Accepted: 23 November 2016; Published: 28 November 2016
Abstract: Protein ingestion following resistance-type exercise stimulates muscle protein synthesis
rates, and enhances the skeletal muscle adaptive response to prolonged resistance-type exercise
training. As the adaptive response to a single bout of resistance exercise extends well beyond
the first couple of hours of post-exercise recovery, recent studies have begun to investigate the
impact of the timing and distribution of protein ingestion during more prolonged recovery periods.
Recent work has shown that overnight muscle protein synthesis rates are restricted by the level of
amino acid availability. Protein ingested prior to sleep is effectively digested and absorbed, and
thereby stimulates muscle protein synthesis rates during overnight recovery. When applied during
a prolonged period of resistance-type exercise training, protein supplementation prior to sleep can
further augment gains in muscle mass and strength. Recent studies investigating the impact of
pre-sleep protein ingestion suggest that at least 40 g of protein is required to display a robust increase
in muscle protein synthesis rates throughout overnight sleep. Furthermore, prior exercise allows
more of the pre-sleep protein-derived amino acids to be utilized for de novo muscle protein synthesis
during sleep. In short, pre-sleep protein ingestion represents an effective dietary strategy to improve
overnight muscle protein synthesis, thereby improving the skeletal muscle adaptive response to
exercise training.
Keywords: sleep; recovery; exercise; hypertrophy; casein
1. Introduction
A single session of exercise stimulates muscle protein synthesis rates, and to a lesser extent,
muscle protein breakdown rates [1,2]. However, the muscle protein net balance will remain negative
in the absence of food intake [2]. Protein ingestion stimulates muscle protein synthesis and inhibits
muscle protein breakdown rates, resulting in net muscle protein accretion during the acute stages of
post-exercise recovery [3]. Therefore, post-exercise protein ingestion is widely applied as a strategy
to augment post-exercise muscle protein synthesis rates and, as such, to facilitate the skeletal muscle
adaptive response to exercise training. Various factors have been identified which can modulate the
post-exercise muscle protein synthetic response to exercise including the amount [4,5], type [6,7],
timing [8], and distribution [9] of protein ingestion.
Only few studies have investigated the dose-response relationship between protein ingestion and
post-exercise muscle protein synthesis rates in young [4,5] and older adults [10–12]. Ingestion of 20 g
egg or whey protein has been shown sufficient to maximize muscle protein synthesis rates during
recovery from lower-body resistance-type exercise in young males [4,5]. More recent evidence indicates
that this dose-response relationship may depend on the amount of muscle tissue that was recruited
during exercise, with the ingestion of 40 g protein further increasing muscle protein synthesis rates
during recovery from whole-body resistance-type exercise [13].
Nutrients 2016, 8, 763; doi:10.3390/nu8120763
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
2 of 9
A large variety of dietary protein sources have been shown to stimulate post-exercise muscle
protein synthesis rates, including egg protein [4], whey and casein protein [14], milk and beef
protein [15], and soy protein [6]. However, dietary protein sources can differ in their capacity to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis rates, which appears to be largely dependent on differences in
protein digestion and absorption kinetics [14,16] and amino acid composition [6,17], with the leucine
content being of particular relevance [18,19].
Besides the amount and type of ingested protein, the timing and distribution of protein ingestion
throughout the day can modulate post-exercise muscle protein synthesis rates. An even distribution
of total protein intake over the three main meals stimulates 24 h muscle protein synthesis rates more
effectively than an unbalanced distribution in which the majority (>60%) of total daily protein intake is
consumed at the evening meal [20]. During 12 h of post-exercise recovery, an intermediate pattern of
protein ingestion (20 g every 3 h) seems to increase muscle protein synthesis rates to a greater extent
than the same amount of protein provided in less frequent but larger amounts (40 g every 6 h), or in
more frequent, smaller amounts (10 g every 6 h) [9]. Therefore, an effective pattern of daily protein
intake distribution to support muscle protein synthesis is to provide at least 20 g of protein with each
main meal with no more than 4–5 h between meals.
As overnight sleep is typically the longest post-absorptive period during the day, we have
recently introduced the concept of protein ingestion prior to sleep as a means to augment post-exercise
overnight muscle protein synthesis. The aim of this review is to discuss the current state of evidence
regarding the efficacy of pre-sleep protein ingestion to stimulate overnight muscle reconditioning.
2. Overnight Protein Metabolism
In general, most studies assess the effects of food intake on the muscle protein synthetic response
to exercise performed in an overnight fasted state. Such post-absorptive conditions differ from normal
everyday practice in which recreational sports activities are often performed in the late afternoon
or evening after a full day of habitual physical activity and food intake. Therefore, we evaluated
the impact of exercise performed in a fed state in the evening and the efficacy of protein ingestion
immediately after exercise on muscle protein synthesis during prolonged overnight recovery [21].
The ingestion of 20–25 g of protein during exercise increased muscle protein synthesis rates during
exercise, but we observed no increase in muscle protein synthesis rates during the prolonged overnight
recovery period. Muscle protein synthesis rates during overnight sleep were unexpectedly low, with
values being even lower than those typically observed in the in the morning following an overnight
fast. Thus, a day of habitual food intake and the ingestion of 20–25 g of protein during and/or
immediately after an exercise bout performed in the evening does not suffice to augment overnight
muscle protein reconditioning.
3. Does the Gut Function at Night?
As overnight muscle protein synthesis rates are surprisingly low [21], we questioned whether
they are limited by overnight plasma amino acid availability. Therefore, we hypothesized that
protein provision during sleep increases overnight plasma amino acid availability and stimulates
overnight muscle protein synthesis rates. As human intestinal motility follows a circadian rhythm
with reduced activity during the night [22], we first assessed whether dietary protein provision during
sleep leads to proper dietary protein digestion and amino acid absorption. In a proof-of-principle
study, we first administrated specifically produced intrinsically L-[1-13C]-phenylalanine-labeled casein
protein via a nasogastric tube while subjects were asleep and assessed the subsequent protein digestion
and absorption kinetics [23]. We observed that administration of 40 g casein via a nasogastric tube
during overnight sleep is followed by proper dietary protein digestion and absorption kinetics, thereby
increasing overnight plasma amino acid availability and increasing muscle protein synthesis rates.
Clearly, these data demonstrated that the gut functions properly at night and that protein provided
during sleep strongly increases overnight muscle protein synthesis rates.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
3 of 9
4. Pre-Sleep Protein Feeding as a Strategy to Increase Overnight Muscle Protein Synthesis
Our observation that protein administered during sleep is effectively digested and absorbed
provided proof-of-principle that the gut functions properly during sleep [23]. However, nasogastric
tube feeding does not represent a feasible feeding strategy for athletes. Therefore, our next step was to
assess if protein ingestion prior to sleep would represent an effective dietary strategy to increase muscle
protein synthesis rates during overnight post-exercise recovery [24]. Therefore, we studied recreational
athletes during overnight recovery from a single bout of resistance-type exercise performed in the
evening after a full day of dietary standardization. Immediately after exercise, all athletes ingested
a recovery drink containing 20 g protein to maximize muscle protein synthesis rates during the acute
stages of post-exercise recovery [4,24]. As explained above, this prescribed recovery strategy does not
suffice to maintain elevated muscle protein synthesis rates during more prolonged overnight sleep [21].
Therefore, we provided subjects with either 40 g casein protein or a placebo drink immediately prior to
sleep. In line with intragastric protein administration during sleep [23], the bolus of protein ingested
prior to sleep was properly digested and absorbed throughout overnight sleep. The greater plasma
amino acid availability following pre-sleep protein ingestion improved the overnight whole-body
protein balance, allowing the net protein balance to become positive. In line, muscle protein synthesis
rates were approximately 22% higher during overnight recovery when protein was ingested prior to
sleep when compared to the placebo treatment. From these data we concluded that pre-sleep protein
ingestion represents an effective dietary strategy to further augment the skeletal muscle adaptive
response to resistance-type exercise training (Figure 1).
Nutrients 2016, 8, 763 
3 of 9 
 
4. Pre‐Sleep Protein Feeding as a Strategy to Increase Overnight Muscle Protein Synthesis 
Our observation that protein administered during sleep is effectively digested and absorbed 
provided proof‐of‐principle that the gut functions properly during sleep [23]. However, nasogastric 
tube feeding does not represent a feasible feeding strategy for athletes. Therefore, our next step was 
to assess if protein ingestion prior to sleep would represent an effective dietary strategy to increase 
muscle protein synthesis rates during overnight post‐exercise recovery [24]. Therefore, we studied 
recreational athletes during overnight recovery from a single bout of resistance‐type exercise 
performed in the evening after a full day of dietary standardization. Immediately after exercise, all 
athletes ingested a recovery drink containing 20 g protein to maximize muscle protein synthesis rates 
during the acute stages of post‐exercise recovery [4,24]. As explained above, this prescribed recovery 
strategy does not suffice to maintain elevated muscle protein synthesis rates during more prolonged 
overnight sleep [21]. Therefore, we provided subjects with either 40 g casein protein or a placebo 
drink immediately prior to sleep. In line with intragastric protein administration during sleep [23], 
the bolus of protein ingested prior to sleep was properly digested and absorbed throughout overnight 
sleep. The greater plasma amino acid availability following pre‐sleep protein ingestion improved the 
overnight whole‐body protein balance, allowing the net protein balance to become positive. In line, 
muscle protein synthesis rates were approximately 22% higher during overnight recovery when 
protein was ingested prior to sleep when compared to the placebo treatment. From these data we 
concluded that pre‐sleep protein ingestion represents an effective dietary strategy to further augment 
the skeletal muscle adaptive response to resistance‐type exercise training (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the process of muscle protein synthesis (MPS) and muscle 
protein breakdown (MPB) throughout the day. Protein ingestion stimulates MPS rates and allows for 
net muscle protein accretion (green areas). During post‐absorptive conditions, MPB rates exceed MPS 
rates, resulting in a net loss of muscle protein (red areas). Overnight sleep is the longest post‐
absorptive period of the day (A). Pre‐sleep protein ingestion stimulates overnight muscle protein 
synthesis rates (B), thereby improving muscle reconditioning during overnight sleep.  
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the process of muscle protein synthesis (MPS) and muscle protein
breakdown (MPB) throughout the day. Protein ingestion stimulates MPS rates and allows for net
muscle protein accretion (green areas). During post-absorptive conditions, MPB rates exceed MPS rates,
resulting in a net loss of muscle protein (red areas). Overnight sleep is the longest post-absorptive
period of the day (A). Pre-sleep protein ingestion stimulates overnight muscle protein synthesis rates
(B), thereby improving muscle reconditioning during overnight sleep.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
4 of 9
To test this hypothesis, we assessed the impact of pre-sleep protein feeding to facilitate the skeletal
muscle adaptive response to prolonged resistance-type exercise training [25]. Specifically, we selected
healthy young men to participate in a 12-week resistance-type exercise training program (three exercise
sessions per week) during which they ingested either 27.5 g of protein prior to sleep, or a non-caloric
placebo. Muscle mass and strength increased to a greater extent in the group that ingested protein
prior to sleep. These results indicate that protein supplementation prior to sleep represents an effective
dietary strategy to augment the gains in muscle mass and strength during resistance-type exercise
training. It remains to be established what dose and type of pre-sleep protein should be used to further
optimize overnight muscle protein synthesis rates and, as such, can support greater gains in muscle
mass and strength.
It should be noted that the ingestion of the pre-sleep protein supplement in both our acute
and long-term studies was compared with a non-protein placebo, and not compared with protein
supplementation provided at other time points. Therefore, we can only speculate on the surplus
benefits of pre-sleep protein provision when compared to other time points. It can be speculated that
the greater gains in muscle mass and strength are, at least partly, attributed to the pre-sleep timing
of the protein supplement, as the vast majority of studies in which protein has been supplemented
immediately before and/or after exercise do not show an increase in muscle mass gains when compared
to a placebo [26]. However, it has been suggested that protein supplementation increases muscle mass
gains mainly as a function of increased total protein intake, rather than the specific timing of a protein
supplement [27,28]. As a meta-analysis was required to demonstrate that additional protein intake
augments training-induced muscle hypertrophy [26], it seems unlikely that a possible positive effect of
protein timing (i.e., protein supplementation at a time point compared to protein supplementation at
different time point) on muscle mass gains can be detected in a longitudinal study. While it is currently
unclear whether pre-sleep protein ingestion is superior to protein ingestion at a different time point,
we propose that a more relevant question is whether pre-sleep protein ingestion is additive to protein
intake earlier in the day. We suggest that athletes should aim to ingest sufficient protein intake at
every meal to maximize muscle protein synthesis until the next meal. We have recently shown that the
ingestion of large amounts of protein in the early post-exercise recovery phase does not compromise
the muscle protein synthetic response to protein ingestion at a later stage [29]. This suggests that
every meal moment represents a unique opportunity to stimulate muscle protein synthesis and that
the muscle protein synthetic response to each meal may be additive. In addition, we have recently
shown that athletes typically consume well above 1.2 g protein/kg/day, with the majority of protein
consumed during the three main meals, and only a small amount of protein eaten as an evening snack
(~7 g) [30]. As such, additional pre-sleep protein ingestion represents a practical strategy to increase
the total daily protein intake, add another meal moment, and increase the overnight muscle protein
synthesis rates; this effect is likely additive to muscle protein synthesis rates observed throughout
the day.
5. Pre-Sleep Protein Feeding Characteristics
While we have identified the overnight sleeping period as a new window of opportunity to
augment post-exercise training adaptations, it remains to be established how we can maximize the
impact of pre-sleep protein feeding on overnight muscle protein synthesis rates. Previously we have
shown that the ingestion of 40 g protein prior to sleep stimulates overnight muscle protein rates [24],
which is considerably more than the 20 g of protein that is supposed to maximize muscle protein
synthesis rates during the first few hours of post-exercise recovery [4,5]. Therefore, we questioned if
a more moderate amount of protein would suffice to augment overnight muscle protein synthesis rates.
To address this issue, we performed a follow-up study similar in design to our previous pre-sleep
protein work, with the main difference that we provided 30 g of highly enriched intrinsically labeled
protein prior to sleep, with or without an additional 2 g of free leucine. In contrast to our previous
findings with 40 g protein, the ingestion of 30 g protein prior to sleep did not significantly increase
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
5 of 9
overnight muscle protein synthesis rates (preliminary observations). This suggests that a pre-sleep
protein dose-response relationship exists, which differs from the immediate post-exercise recovery
period during which the ingestion of merely 20 g protein seems to maximize post-exercise muscle
protein synthesis rates in young adults.
The ingestion of highly enriched, intrinsically L-[1-13C]-phenylalanine-labeled protein allowed
us to also directly assess the metabolic fate of the pre-sleep dietary protein-derived amino acids.
Pre-sleep protein-derived L-[1-13C]-phenylalanine was incorporated in de novo muscle protein as
evidenced by the increase in muscle protein–bound L-[1-13C]-phenylalanine following overnight
recovery, demonstrating that the pre-sleep protein provided amino acids as precursors for de novo
myofibrillar protein accretion during overnight sleep. This provides mechanistic evidence to support
our observation that the ingestion of 30 g protein prior to sleep augments muscle mass during three
months of resistance-type exercise training [25]. However, our data suggest that at least 40 g of
pre-sleep protein is required to induce a more substantial, detectable increase in muscle protein
synthesis rates when assessed acutely over a 7.5 h overnight period.
As we anticipated that 30 g of pre-sleep protein might not be sufficient to adequately increase
overnight muscle protein synthesis rates, we included a third treatment in which 2 g crystalline leucine
was added to the 30 g bolus of protein. The addition of supplemental free leucine to a suboptimal
amount of protein has been shown to enhance post-exercise muscle protein synthesis rates [18,19,31,32].
Despite these previous observations, co-ingesting free leucine with 30 g of casein prior to sleep did
not augment the overnight muscle protein synthetic response. Given the extended duration of
overnight sleep compared to a typical postprandial period (8 vs. 4–5 h), it is tempting to speculate
that larger amounts of protein (≥40 g) are required to maximize muscle protein synthesis rates during
overnight sleep.
6. Prior Exercise
It has been well established that the muscle protein synthetic response to protein ingestion is
enhanced following exercise when exercise is performed in the morning following an overnight
fast [12,33]. Recently, we evaluated the effect of resistance-type exercise performed in the evening
on the muscle protein synthetic response to pre-sleep protein ingestion [34]. Postprandial overnight
muscle protein synthesis rates were higher when exercise had been performed earlier that evening and
more of the ingested protein-derived amino acids were directed towards de novo myofibrillar protein
synthesis during overnight sleep. Therefore, protein ingestion prior to sleep represents an effective
strategy to enhance overnight muscle reconditioning and is likely of even more relevance on exercise
training days. In line, we have shown that physical activity performed in the evening increases the
overnight muscle protein synthetic response to pre-sleep protein ingestion in older adults [35]. Clearly,
combing pre-sleep protein ingestion with resistance-type exercise represents a more effective strategy
to further enhance overnight skeletal muscle protein synthesis rates and increases the efficiency by
which dietary protein is used for muscle protein accretion (Figure 2).
Nutrients 2016, 8, 763 
5 of 9 
 
recovery period during which the ingestion of merely 20 g protein seems to maximize post‐exercise 
muscle protein synthesis rates in young adults.  
The ingestion of highly enriched, intrinsically L‐[1‐13C]‐phenylalanine‐labeled protein allowed 
us to also directly assess the metabolic fate of the pre‐sleep dietary protein‐derived amino acids. Pre‐
sleep protein‐derived L‐[1‐13C]‐phenylalanine was incorporated in de novo muscle protein as 
evidenced by the increase in muscle protein–bound L‐[1‐13C]‐phenylalanine following overnight 
recovery, demonstrating that the pre‐sleep protein provided amino acids as precursors for de novo 
myofibrillar protein accretion during overnight sleep. This provides mechanistic evidence to support 
our observation that the ingestion of 30 g protein prior to sleep augments muscle mass during three 
months of resistance‐type exercise training [25]. However, our data suggest that at least 40 g of pre‐
sleep protein is required to induce a more substantial, detectable increase in muscle protein synthesis 
rates when assessed acutely over a 7.5 h overnight period.  
As we anticipated that 30 g of pre‐sleep protein might not be sufficient to adequately increase 
overnight muscle protein synthesis rates, we included a third treatment in which 2 g crystalline 
leucine was added to the 30 g bolus of protein. The addition of supplemental free leucine to a 
suboptimal amount of protein has been shown to enhance post‐exercise muscle protein synthesis 
rates [18,19,31,32]. Despite these previous observations, co‐ingesting free leucine with 30 g of casein 
prior to sleep did not augment the overnight muscle protein synthetic response. Given the extended 
duration of overnight sleep compared to a typical postprandial period (8 vs. 4–5 h), it is tempting to 
speculate that larger amounts of protein (≥40 g) are required to maximize muscle protein synthesis 
rates during overnight sleep. 
6. Prior Exercise 
It has been well established that the muscle protein synthetic response to protein ingestion is 
enhanced following exercise when exercise is performed in the morning following an overnight fast 
[12,33]. Recently, we evaluated the effect of resistance‐type exercise performed in the evening on the 
muscle protein synthetic response to pre‐sleep protein ingestion [34]. Postprandial overnight muscle 
protein synthesis rates were higher when exercise had been performed earlier that evening and more 
of the ingested protein‐derived amino acids were directed towards de novo myofibrillar protein 
synthesis during overnight sleep. Therefore, protein ingestion prior to sleep represents an effective 
strategy to enhance overnight muscle reconditioning and is likely of even more relevance on exercise 
training days. In line, we have shown that physical activity performed in the evening increases the 
overnight muscle protein synthetic response to pre‐sleep protein ingestion in older adults [35]. 
Clearly, combing pre‐sleep protein ingestion with resistance‐type exercise represents a more effective 
strategy to further enhance overnight skeletal muscle protein synthesis rates and increases the 
efficiency by which dietary protein is used for muscle protein accretion (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. Conceptual framework of the overnight muscle protein synthetic response to 40 g of pre‐
sleep protein feeding at rest or following prior exercise. 
7. Type of Pre‐Sleep Protein 
As protein sources differ in their capacity to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, the type of 
protein ingested prior to sleep may modulate the overnight muscle protein synthetic response. So far, 
Figure 2. Conceptual framework of the overnight muscle protein synthetic response to 40 g of pre-sleep
protein feeding at rest or following prior exercise.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
6 of 9
7. Type of Pre-Sleep Protein
As protein sources differ in their capacity to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, the type of protein
ingested prior to sleep may modulate the overnight muscle protein synthetic response. So far, all studies
assessing the efficacy of pre-sleep protein ingestion on exercise reconditioning have provided casein
protein. Casein is a more slowly digestible protein source, allowing a more moderate but prolonged
rise in plasma amino acid concentrations [17]. Given the extended nature of overnight sleep, it could be
speculated that such a more sustained postprandial aminoacidemia during overnight sleep is preferred
as it will provide precursors to support muscle protein synthesis rates throughout the entire night.
In contrast, whey protein is a more rapidly digestible protein, resulting in a pronounced but transient
rise in plasma amino acid concentrations [17]. Ingestion of a single bolus of whey protein has been
shown to stimulate muscle protein synthesis rates to a greater degree than casein protein when assessed
over periods up to 6 h [6,17,36]. This has been attributed to the more rapid protein digestion and amino
acid absorption kinetics as well as the higher leucine content in whey versus casein protein, resulting
in a more rapid rise in postprandial plasma leucine concentrations [37]. It remains to be established if
whey is superior to casein protein when ingested prior to sleep and muscle protein synthesis rates are
assessed over a more prolonged overnight period of 7.5 h. The plasma levels of leucine do not seem to
be the only factor in this regard, as we recently did not observe any differences in overnight muscle
protein synthesis rates following the ingestion of 30 g casein with or without 2 g crystalline leucine
(preliminary observations). Snijders et al. [25] provided a casein protein supplement that consisted of
50% micellar casein and 50% casein hydrolysate. When casein protein is hydrolyzed, its digestion and
absorption properties resemble a more rapid digestible protein [38]. Therefore, pre-sleep ingestion
of a mixture of a slow and more rapidly digestible protein source appears to be effective to augment
muscle mass and strength gains during a prolonged resistance-type exercise program. We speculate
that a variety of high-quality animal-based protein sources can augment overnight muscle protein
synthesis rates when provided in sufficient amounts (≥40 g; Table 1), with relatively minor differences
in efficacy between sources.
Table 1. Quantity of protein sources to provide 40 g pre-sleep protein.
Food Item
Quantity
Cooked eggs
7 eggs
Low fat milk
5 cups (1025 mL)
Low fat yogurt
5 cups (1176 mL)
Chicken breast
2 breasts (176 g)
Steak
2 steaks (168 g)
Protein concentrate in water
3 scoops (60 g)
Protein concentrate in low-fat milk
2 scoops in 300 mL
8. Applications
Overnight sleep has emerged as a novel window of opportunity to modulate muscle protein
metabolism. Pre-sleep protein ingestion represents an effective dietary strategy to stimulate both the
acute and long-term skeletal muscle adaptive response to resistance-type exercise training [24,25].
There are numerous other potential applications of protein ingestion prior to sleep. Protein ingestion
prior to sleep may also enhance exercise training adaptations to other exercise modalities. However,
research on the impact of protein supplementation on other modes of exercise such as concurrent
training [39] or endurance-type exercise training [40] is surprisingly scarce. While protein ingested
immediately after endurance-type exercise does not appear to further augment mitochondrial protein
synthesis rates [40], amino acid administration at rest stimulates mitochondrial protein synthesis
rates [41]. It remains to be established if pre-sleep protein can augment the adaptive response to
endurance-type exercise training with greater increases in skeletal muscle oxidative capacity, vascular
density and/or endurance performance capacity.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
7 of 9
Protein administration during sleep has been shown to stimulate overnight muscle protein
synthesis rates in older adults [23]. Consequently, pre-sleep protein feeding may also represent an
effective interventional strategy to support muscle mass maintenance in the older population or
possibly even in patients in more clinically compromised conditions characterized by accelerated
muscle loss such as acute sickness, systematic inflammation, and muscle disuse [42,43].
9. Conclusions
Muscle protein synthesis rates are particularly low during sleep, even when 20 g protein is
ingested immediately after exercise performed in the evening. Protein ingested immediately prior to
sleep is effectively digested and absorbed, thereby increasing amino acid availability during overnight
sleep. Greater amino acid availability during sleep stimulates muscle protein synthesis rates and
improves whole-body protein net balance during overnight recovery. At least 40 g of dietary protein
should be ingested prior to sleep to elicit a robust stimulation of muscle protein synthesis rates
throughout the night. Resistance-type exercise performed during the day augments the overnight
muscle protein synthetic response to pre-sleep protein ingestion and allows more of the protein-derived
amino acids to be used as precursors for de novo muscle protein synthesis. When applied during
prolonged resistance-type exercise, pre-sleep protein supplementation can be used effectively to further
increase gains in muscle mass and strength.
Author Contributions: Jorn Trommelen wrote the draft manuscript, Luc J. C. van Loon revised the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Biolo, G.; Maggi, S.P.; Williams, B.D.; Tipton, K.D.; Wolfe, R.R. Increased rates of muscle protein turnover
and amino acid transport after resistance exercise in humans. Am. J. Physiol. 1995, 268, E514–E520. [PubMed]
2.
Phillips, S.M.; Tipton, K.D.; Aarsland, A.; Wolf, S.E.; Wolfe, R.R. Mixed muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown after resistance exercise in humans. Am. J. Physiol. 1997, 273, E99–E107. [PubMed]
3.
Tipton, K.D.; Ferrando, A.A.; Phillips, S.M.; Doyle, D.J.; Wolfe, R.R. Postexercise net protein synthesis in
human muscle from orally administered amino acids. Am. J. Physiol. 1999, 276, E628–E634. [PubMed]
4.
Moore, D.R.; Robinson, M.J.; Fry, J.L.; Tang, J.E.; Glover, E.I.; Wilkinson, S.B.; Prior, T.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.;
Phillips, S.M. Ingested protein dose response of muscle and albumin protein synthesis after resistance
exercise in young men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 89, 161–168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Witard, O.C.; Jackman, S.R.; Breen, L.; Smith, K.; Selby, A.; Tipton, K.D. Myofibrillar muscle protein synthesis
rates subsequent to a meal in response to increasing doses of whey protein at rest and after resistance exercise.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 99, 86–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Tang, J.E.; Moore, D.R.; Kujbida, G.W.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Phillips, S.M. Ingestion of whey hydrolysate,
casein, or soy protein isolate: Effects on mixed muscle protein synthesis at rest and following resistance
exercise in young men. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009, 107, 987–992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Wilkinson, S.B.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Macdonald, M.J.; Macdonald, J.R.; Armstrong, D.; Phillips, S.M.
Consumption of fluid skim milk promotes greater muscle protein accretion after resistance exercise than
does consumption of an isonitrogenous and isoenergetic soy-protein beverage. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 85,
1031–1040. [PubMed]
8.
Levenhagen, D.K.; Gresham, J.D.; Carlson, M.G.; Maron, D.J.; Borel, M.J.; Flakoll, P.J. Postexercise nutrient
intake timing in humans is critical to recovery of leg glucose and protein homeostasis. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2001, 280, E982–E993. [PubMed]
9.
Areta, J.L.; Burke, L.M.; Ross, M.L.; Camera, D.M.; West, D.W.D.; Broad, E.M.; Jeacocke, N.A.; Moore, D.R.;
Stellingwerff, T.; Phillips, S.M.; et al. Timing and distribution of protein ingestion during prolonged recovery
from resistance exercise alters myofibrillar protein synthesis. J. Physiol. 2013, 591, 2319–2331. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
8 of 9
10.
Yang, Y.; Breen, L.; Burd, N.A.; Hector, A.J.; Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Josse, A.R.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.;
Phillips, S.M. Resistance exercise enhances myofibrillar protein synthesis with graded intakes of whey
protein in older men. Br. J. Nutr. 2012, 108, 1780–1788. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Yang, Y.; Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Burd, N.A.; Breen, L.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Phillips, S.M. Myofibrillar
protein synthesis following ingestion of soy protein isolate at rest and after resistance exercise in elderly
men. Nutr. Metab. 2012, 9, 57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Robinson, M.J.; Burd, N.A.; Breen, L.; Rerecich, T.; Yang, Y.; Hector, A.J.; Baker, S.K.; Phillips, S.M.
Dose-dependent responses of myofibrillar protein synthesis with beef ingestion are enhanced with resistance
exercise in middle-aged men. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2013, 38, 120–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Macnaughton, L.S.; Wardle, S.L.; Witard, O.C.; McGlory, C.; Hamilton, D.L.; Jeromson, S.; Lawrence, C.E.;
Wallis, G.A.; Tipton, K.D. The response of muscle protein synthesis following whole-body resistance exercise
is greater following 40 g than 20 g of ingested whey protein. Physiol. Rep. 2016, 4, e12893. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
14.
Tipton, K.D.; Elliott, T.A.; Cree, M.G.; Wolf, S.E.; Sanford, A.P.; Wolfe, R.R. Ingestion of casein and whey
proteins result in muscle anabolism after resistance exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2004, 36, 2073–2081.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Burd, N.A.; Gorissen, S.H.; van Vliet, S.; Snijders, T.; van Loon, L.J. Differences in postprandial protein
handling after beef compared with milk ingestion during postexercise recovery: A randomized controlled
trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 102, 828–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
West, D.W.D.; Burd, N.A.; Coffey, V.G.; Baker, S.K.; Burke, L.M.; Hawley, J.A.; Moore, D.R.; Stellingwerff, T.;
Phillips, S.M. Rapid aminoacidemia enhances myofibrillar protein synthesis and anabolic intramuscular
signaling responses after resistance exercise. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 94, 795–803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Pennings, B.; Boirie, Y.; Senden, J.M.G.; Gijsen, A.P.; Kuipers, H.; van Loon, L.J.C. Whey protein stimulates
postprandial muscle protein accretion more effectively than do casein and casein hydrolysate in older men.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 93, 997–1005. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Breen, L.; Di Donato, D.M.; Hector, A.J.; Mitchell, C.J.; Moore, D.R.; Stellingwerff, T.;
Breuille, D.; Offord, E.A.; Baker, S.K.; et al. Leucine supplementation of a low-protein mixed macronutrient
beverage enhances myofibrillar protein synthesis in young men: A double-blind, randomized trial. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 276–286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Wall, B.T.; Hamer, H.M.; de Lange, A.; Kiskini, A.; Groen, B.B.L.; Senden, J.M.G.; Gijsen, A.P.; Verdijk, L.B.;
van Loon, L.J.C. Leucine co-ingestion improves post-prandial muscle protein accretion in elderly men.
Clin. Nutr. 2013, 32, 412–419. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Mamerow, M.M.; Mettler, J.A.; English, K.L.; Casperson, S.L.; Arentson-Lantz, E.; Sheffield-Moore, M.;
Layman, D.K.; Paddon-Jones, D. Dietary protein distribution positively influences 24-h muscle protein
synthesis in healthy adults. J. Nutr. 2014, 144, 876–880. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Beelen, M.; Tieland, M.; Gijsen, A.P.; Vandereyt, H.; Kies, A.K.; Kuipers, H.; Saris, W.H.M.; Koopman, R.;
van Loon, L.J.C. Coingestion of carbohydrate and protein hydrolysate stimulates muscle protein synthesis
during exercise in young men, with no further increase during subsequent overnight recovery. J. Nutr. 2008,
138, 2198–2204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Furukawa, Y.; Cook, I.J.; Panagopoulos, V.; McEvoy, R.D.; Sharp, D.J.; Simula, M. Relationship between sleep
patterns and human colonic motor patterns. Gastroenterology 1994, 107, 1372–1381. [CrossRef]
23.
Groen, B.B.L.; Res, P.T.; Pennings, B.; Hertle, E.; Senden, J.M.G.; Saris, W.H.M.; van Loon, L.J.C. Intragastric
protein administration stimulates overnight muscle protein synthesis in elderly men. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2012, 302, E52–E60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Res, P.T.; Groen, B.; Pennings, B.; Beelen, M.; Wallis, G.A.; Gijsen, A.P.; Senden, J.M.G.; van Loon, L.J.C.
Protein ingestion before sleep improves postexercise overnight recovery. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2012, 44,
1560–1569. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Snijders, T.; Res, P.T.; Smeets, J.S.J.; van Vliet, S.; van Kranenburg, J.; Maase, K.; Kies, A.K.; Verdijk, L.B.;
van Loon, L.J.C. Protein ingestion before sleep increases muscle mass and strength gains during prolonged
resistance-type exercise training in healthy young men. J. Nutr. 2015, 145, 1178–1184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Cermak, N.M.; Res, P.T.; de Groot, L.C.; Saris, W.H.; van Loon, L.J.C. Protein supplementation augments the
adaptive response of skeletal muscle to resistance-type exercise training: A meta-analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2012, 96, 1454–1464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 763
9 of 9
27.
Reidy, P.T.; Rasmussen, B.B. Role of ingested amino acids and protein in the promotion of resistance
exercise-induced muscle protein anabolism. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 155–183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Schoenfeld, B.J.; Aragon, A.A.; Krieger, J.W. The effect of protein timing on muscle strength and hypertrophy:
A meta-analysis. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2013, 10, 53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Wall, B.T.; Burd, N.A.; Franssen, R.; Gorissen, S.H.; Snijders, T.; Senden, J.M.; Gijsen, A.P.; van Loon, L.J.C.
Pre-sleep protein ingestion does not compromise the muscle protein synthetic response to protein ingested
the following morning. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Gillen, J.B.; Trommelen, J.; Wardenaar, F.C.; Brinkmans, N.Y.J.; Versteegen, J.J.; Jonvik, K.L.; Kapp, C.;
de Vries, J.; van den Borne, J.J.G.C.; Gibala, M.J.; et al. Dietary protein intake and distribution patterns of
well-trained dutch athletes. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Katsanos, C.S.; Kobayashi, H.; Sheffield-Moore, M.; Aarsland, A.; Wolfe, R.R. A high proportion of leucine
is required for optimal stimulation of the rate of muscle protein synthesis by essential amino acids in the
elderly. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2006, 291, E381–E387. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Rieu, I.; Balage, M.; Sornet, C.; Giraudet, C.; Pujos, E.; Grizard, J.; Mosoni, L.; Dardevet, D.
Leucine supplementation improves muscle protein synthesis in elderly men independently of
hyperaminoacidaemia. J. Physiol. 2006, 575, 305–315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Pennings, B.; Koopman, R.; Beelen, M.; Senden, J.M.G.; Saris, W.H.M.; van Loon, L.J.C. Exercising before
protein intake allows for greater use of dietary protein-derived amino acids for de novo muscle protein
synthesis in both young and elderly men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011, 93, 322–331. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Trommelen, J.; Holwerda, A.M.; Kouw, I.W.K.; Langer, H.; Halson, S.L.; Rollo, I.; Verdijk, L.B.; van Loon, L.J.C.
Resistance exercise augments postprandial overnight muscle protein synthesis rates. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
2016, 48, 2517–2525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Holwerda, A.M.; Kouw, I.W. K.; Trommelen, J.; Halson, S.L.; Wodzig, W.K.; Verdijk, L.B.; van Loon, L.J.
Physical activity performed in the evening increases the overnight muscle protein synthetic response to
presleep protein ingestion in older men. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 1307–1314. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Burd, N.A.; Yang, Y.; Moore, D.R.; Tang, J.E.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Phillips, S.M. Greater stimulation of
myofibrillar protein synthesis with ingestion of whey protein isolate v. micellar casein at rest and after
resistance exercise in elderly men. Br. J. Nutr. 2012, 108, 958–962. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Devries, M.C.; Phillips, S.M. Supplemental protein in support of muscle mass and health: Advantage whey.
J. Food Sci. 2015, 80, A8–A15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Koopman, R.; Crombach, N.; Gijsen, A.P.; Walrand, S.; Fauquant, J.; Kies, A.K.; Lemosquet, S.; Saris, W.H.M.;
Boirie, Y.; van Loon, L.J.C. Ingestion of a protein hydrolysate is accompanied by an accelerated in vivo
digestion and absorption rate when compared with its intact protein. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 90, 106–115.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Perez-Schindler, J.; Hamilton, D.L.; Moore, D.R.; Baar, K.; Philp, A. Nutritional strategies to support
concurrent training. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2015, 15, 41–52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Moore, D.R.; Camera, D.M.; Areta, J.L.; Hawley, J.A. Beyond muscle hypertrophy: Why dietary protein is
important for endurance athletes 1. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2014, 39, 987–997. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Bohe, J.; Low, A.; Wolfe, R.R.; Rennie, M.J. Human muscle protein synthesis is modulated by extracellular,
not intramuscular amino acid availability: A dose-response study. J. Physiol. 2003, 552, 315–324. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
42.
Kortebein, P.; Ferrando, A.; Lombeida, J.; Wolfe, R.; Evans, W.J. Effect of 10 days of bed rest on skeletal
muscle in healthy older adults. JAMA 2007, 297, 1772–1774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Klaude, M.; Mori, M.; Tjader, I.; Gustafsson, T.; Wernerman, J.; Rooyackers, O. Protein metabolism and gene
expression in skeletal muscle of critically ill patients with sepsis. Clin. Sci. 2012, 122, 133–142. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
