 29
ISSN 2045-0907
CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1), 29–43
part of
CNS Oncology
10.2217/cns-2016-0032 © John Trusheim
SPECIAL REPORT
A state-of-the-art review and guidelines 
for tumor treating fields treatment 
planning and patient follow-up in 
glioblastoma
John Trusheim*,1, Erin Dunbar2, James Battiste3, Fabio Iwamoto4, Nimish Mohile5, 
Denise Damek6, Daniela A Bota7 & Jennifer Connelly8
1Abbott Northwestern Hospital Neuroscience Institute, Minneapolis, MN, USA 
2PiedmontBrain Tumor Center, Atlanta, GA, USA 
3Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA 
4The Neurological Institute of New York, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 
5University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA 
6University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, CO, USA 
7University of California, Irvine Medical Center, Orange, CA, USA 
8Froedtert Hospital & The Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA 
*Author for correspondence: Tel.: +1 952 920 7200; Fax: +1 612 863 3732; John.Trusheim@Mpls-clinic.com
Tumor treating fields (TTFields) are an integral treatment modality in the management of 
glioblastoma and extend overall survival when combined with maintenance temozolomide 
in newly diagnosed patients. Complexities exist regarding correct selection of imaging 
sequences with which to perform TTFields treatment planning. Guidelines are warranted first, 
to facilitate treatment planning standardization across medical disciplines and institutions, to 
ensure optimal TTFields delivery to the tumor and peritumoral brain zone while maximizing 
Practice Points
 
●
 
Tumor treating fields (TTFields) in combination with temozolomide are a standard treatment option in patients 
newly diagnosed with glioblastoma (GB) following maximal surgical debulking and completion of concurrent 
chemoradiation.
 
●
 
Treatment planning using the NovoTAL software optimizes TTFields intensity delivered in two orthogonal directions 
to the gross tumor volume and the proximal peritumoral brain zone.
 
●
 
Sequential neuroimaging should be reviewed in order to assess the extent of active, residual enhancing and 
nonmeasurable tumor when performing treatment planning.
 
●
 
Treatment should be planned mapping closely to the boundaries of active tumor or to the margins of a resection 
cavity visualized in axial and coronal planes using T1 postcontrast or T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery 
sequences as appropriate.
 
●
 
Changes in neuroimaging can occur following the initiation of treatment with TTFields. Response assessment should 
incorporate a comprehensive evaluation of the patient’s clinical status, concurrent therapies received, treatment 
compliance and general scalp health when assessing clinical response.
 
●
 
The median duration of TTFields therapy in a pivotal Phase III study conducted in newly diagnosed GB patients was 
9 months, with patients remaining on TTFields with a change to second-line chemotherapy through first progression.
 
●
 
Treatment can be re-planned if there are significant changes in imaging from baseline.
 
●
 
The development of TTFields treatment planning and response assessment algorithms aim to help standardize 
patient care across specialties and institutions caring for patients with GB.
For reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.com
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
30
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
Background
Tumor treating fields (TTFields) are an inte-
gral modality in the management of patients 
with newly diagnosed and recurrent glioblas-
toma (GB), in addition to surgery, radiation 
and chemotherapy. TTFields are a regionally 
delivered treatment utilizing alternating elec-
tric fields to disrupt highly orchestrated intra-
cellular processes necessary for successful cell 
division [1-5]. TTFields are clinically delivered 
in paired orthogonal directions, left–right and 
anterior–posterior, using Optune™ (NovoTTF-
100A System). Optune is a portable medical 
device consisting of a TTFields generator, cus-
tom backpack and insulated ceramic discs called 
transducer arrays, which are applied directly to 
a patient’s shaved scalp (Supplementary Figure 1) 
[6,7]. The device is preset to deliver TTFields at 
a frequency of 200 kHz and is operated by the 
patient independently. It is monitored periodi-
cally by device specialists, who are available 24/7 
to provide technical support to the patient, their 
family and physician.
TTFields are nonionizing and are delivered 
at an intermediate frequency (200 kHz for 
GB) and low intensities (1–3 V/cm) leading to 
a variety of downstream, antimitotic biologic 
effects, sparing quiescent cells. These include 
disruption of normal mitotic spindle and cyto-
kinetic contractile band assembly [1,4], mitotic 
arrest [8], dielectrophoresis of charged intracel-
lular macromolecules during cytokinesis [9,10], 
which ultimately result in polyploidy and ane-
uploidy in cellular progeny, leading to a loss of 
clonogenic potential [4,11,12], and immunogenic 
cell death [13]. When applied to GB cell lines 
in in vitro studies, TTFields can also induce 
other stress effects potentially culminating in 
the activation of immune-mediated and other 
death pathways [4,11,14]. In addition, TTFields 
have also been shown to induce autophagy, and 
can modulate cellular propensity to migrate and 
invade adjacent tissues [15,16]. Preclinical stud-
ies in GB and other cancer cell lines demon-
strate that incremental cytotoxic effects can be 
observed when TTFields’ intensity is increased 
from 1 to 2–3 V/cm, with complete arrest of cel-
lular proliferation observed with field intensities 
exceeding 2.25 V/cm [1,5]. TTFields exert maxi-
mal effects when aligned to a cell’s mitotic axis. 
As a cell’s mitotic axis can occur randomly in 
any direction, additive cytotoxic effects are also 
observed when TTFields are applied in m 
ultiple 
sequential directions [5].
Although the direct measurements of 
TTFields intensities delivered to the brain are 
not performed routinely, advanced electric field 
simulation studies can provide insights into the 
behavior and distribution of TTFields in the 
clinical setting. Spatial distributions of electric 
fields within the brain parenchyma have been 
determined in realistic head models computed 
with finite element method (FEM) simula-
tions [17,18]. Image segmentation initially sepa-
rates major tissue types such as scalp, skull and 
gray and white matter using MRI sequences 
and then model transducer arrays are positioned 
directly on the scalp [18]. The dimensions and 
separation of model electrodes accurately rep-
resent the geometry of ceramic discs used clini-
cally. Volume meshes are generated and solved 
using the FEM framework with preset electric 
field parameters of 200 kHz, and isotropic tis-
sue conductivity and relative permittivity values. 
A corresponding electromagnetic wavelength 
for a propagating field at a similar frequency 
would be on the order of 1 km. As TTFields are 
applied across the head at much shorter distances 
(∼20–30 cm), it is not possible to precisely focus 
the field to target discrete structures, as is pos-
sible with radiosurgery. Instead, TTFields will 
distribute nonuniformly mainly throughout the 
supratentorial brain. Electric field intensities can 
differ significantly based on the heterogeneous 
dielectric tissue properties of cranial structures 
such as the gray matter, white matter tracts and 
cerebrospinal fluid [17-19], tumor location, tumor 
properties and transducer array layout [20]. As 
the majority of GB will recur at the margin of a 
resection cavity or within the proximal 20 mm 
patient safety, and also to mitigate the risk of premature cessation of a potentially beneficial 
treatment. This summary guideline outlines methods for starting patients on TTFields, for 
monitoring patient response to therapy and provides a framework for evaluating when 
therapy should be re-planned, based on the extent of sequential imaging changes.
First draft submitted: 28 July 2016; Accepted for publication: 23 August 2016; Published 
online: 15 September 2016
KeYWoRDS    
• alternating electric fields 
• glioblastoma • guidelines 
• NovoTAL • response 
assessment • treatment 
planning • TTFields • tumor 
treating fields
 31
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
of peritumoral brain zone (PBZ) to the original 
tumor bed [21-23], it is important to understand 
the distribution of TTFields in these regions. 
Recent simulation studies have shown that elec-
tric field intensity delivered to the gross tumor 
volume (GTV) and proximal PBZ exceeds thera-
peutic thresholds of 1 V/cm in both orthogonal 
directions for models with solid brain tumors 
(Supplementary Figure 2) [24].
In clinical practice, TTFields are indicated 
in combination with maintenance temozolo-
mide (TMZ) for the treatment of patients with 
newly diagnosed GB, and as monotherapy for 
patients with recurrent disease [25,26]. TTFields 
gained US FDA approval for newly diagnosed 
GB patients based on the positive results of 
the Phase III randomized controlled, EF-14 
study [25]. At the first prespecified interim analy-
sis, this trial demonstrated that 315 patients with 
newly diagnosed GB (who had undergone maxi-
mal surgical debulking followed by six cycles 
of concurrent chemoradiation), randomized 2:1 
to receive TTFields with maintenance TMZ, 
experienced a significantly longer median 
progression- 
free survival (PFS) and median 
overall survival (OS) compared with patients 
receiving maintenance TMZ alone (20.5 vs 15.6 
months, hazard ratio [HR]: 0.64; p = 0.004). 
The addition of TTFields to standard of care did 
not increase serious adverse events and did not 
impair performance status or quality of life [27]. 
In the EF-14 study, patients randomized to the 
TTFields/TMZ treatment arm could remain 
on TTFields at first progression and switch 
to second-line chemotherapy [25]. In a post hoc 
analysis, OS was significantly higher from first 
progression, in patients receiving TTFields in 
combination with second-line chemotherapy 
compared with patients receiving second-line 
chemotherapy alone (11.8 vs 9.2 months, HR: 
0.695; p = 0.0489) [28]. TTFields were origi-
nally approved in the recurrent GB setting as 
monotherapy, based on the results of the ran-
domized controlled Phase III, EF-11 study [26]. 
This randomized trial demonstrated equivalent 
efficacy (median OS: 6.6 vs 6.0 months; HR: 
0.86; p = 0.27) combined with improved safety 
and quality of life in patients receiving TTFields 
monotherapy compared with patients receiving 
best physician’s choice of chemotherapy [26]. As 
TTFields are a locally directed therapy with 
no half-life, systemic side effects observed with 
chemotherapy are not typically seen in patients 
receiving TTFields monotherapy. The most 
common treatment-related adverse events are 
dermatologic in nature and have been reviewed 
in detail previously [29]. Skin irritation can occur 
beneath the transducer arrays as a consequence 
of chemical irritation from the hydrogel, local 
moisture at the skin surface or due to allergic 
irritation in response to the hydrogel and adhe-
sive tape. In addition, as treatment requires shav-
ing of the scalp and replacing the transducer 
arrays two- to three-times per week, mechani-
cal trauma from repeat shaving and physical 
stresses from removal and reapplication of the 
arrays can also predispose the skin to erosions. 
Pressure from the ceramic transducer discs can 
lead to decreased skin perfusion, a risk that is 
exacerbated in the presence of scars, hardware 
and in patients who have received prior radia-
tion therapy. In some cases, this can lead to the 
develop 
ment of an ulcer. Inappropriate scalp care 
can also lead to skin infections and folliculitis. 
The majority of dermatologic adverse events are 
mild to moderate in nature and can be man-
aged with high-potency topical steroids or topi-
cal anti 
biotics without requiring breaks in treat-
ment. Grade 3/4 adverse events were observed 
in 2% of patients receiving TTFields mono-
therapy in the EF-11 trial [26]. The TTFields 
device is contra 
indicated in patients with active 
implanted electronic medical devices such as 
deep brain stimulators, pacemakers and pro-
grammable shunts, and in patients with skull 
defects such as a missing bone flap, due to the 
risk of skin toxicity and tissue damage. It should 
also not be used in patients with known hyper-
sensitivity to conductive hydrogels or in patients 
with infratentorial disease.
In order to maximize the intensity of elec-
tric field delivered at the site of active tumor, 
treatment is individualized for each patient 
using the Novocure Transducer Array Layout 
– NovoTAL™ System (NovoTAL, USA) [30]. 
In simulation studies, personalizing treatment 
results in near doubling of TTFields intensity 
delivered to the GTV compared with TTFields 
delivery using a default symmetric array lay-
out [20]. Treatment planning with NovoTAL is 
required for any patient commencing treatment 
with TTFields. In the clinical trial setting, treat-
ment planning was historically performed by the 
study sponsor’s clinical team using the patient’s 
baseline MRI results. In the clinical practice set-
ting, physicians certified to prescribe TTFields 
who are managing patients with GB, may elect 
to perform their own treatment planning by 
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
32
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
completing a NovoTAL certification program, 
presently only available in the USA. This pro-
gram provides education on the fundamental 
principles of electric field distribution theory and 
practical training on obtaining head morpho-
metric measurements, as well as tumor coordi-
nates from MRI scans. A basic requirement for 
this certification is that physicians have familiar-
ity with reading and interpreting neuroimaging. 
As the treating physician may have comprehen-
sive information regarding the patient’s clinical 
history, current clinical status and knowledge 
of sequential imaging changes, there, may be 
potential benefits for the patient(s) in having 
their treating physician plan therapy directly.
●
● Overview of TTFields treatment planning 
using NovoTAL
Conventional treatment mapping using the 
FDA-approved NovoTAL software [30] is per-
formed by planning treatment to the extent of 
contrast-enhancing disease most indicative of 
active tumor (methods described previously) [30-
33]. A measure of axial head size is first obtained 
using the image at the uppermost limit of the 
orbit on a T1-weighted sequence (Figure 1A). A 
fiducial frame is placed around the head border-
ing the outer margin of the scalp on four sides. 
Measurements for anteroposterior (A-P), right-
to-left (R–L) and right to anatomic midline dis-
tances are obtained from the level of the scalp, 
extending tangentially from a right-anterior 
marker origin. Coronal head size is assessed in 
a similar manner, using a box drawn around 
the head to the lower margin of cerebrum on an 
MRI image at the level of the external auditory 
canal (Figure 1B). Conventional tumor location 
measurements are obtained from T1-weighted 
postcontrast sequences in axial and coronal 
views, selecting images that contain the maxi-
mal diameter of contrast enhancement. Boxes 
are drawn around the head commencing at the 
outer margin of the scalp axially and encom-
passing the extent of supratentorial cerebrum 
coronally. The same measurements described 
previously (anteroposterior, R–L and right to 
midline) are obtained (Figure 1C & D). In addi-
tion, four measures for tumor coordinates 
are obtained commencing from the reference 
frame and from a right-anterior or right-superior 
origin, respectively. On axial views, these are 
measurements from the right reference frame 
to the near tumor margin and to the far tumor 
margin, and the distance from the front of the 
reference frame to the near tumor margin and 
to the far tumor margin. On the coronal slice 
capturing the maximal diameter of contrast 
enhancement, the four tumor coordinates are 
measured from the right reference frame to near 
tumor margin and to the far tumor margin, and 
from the top of the reference frame to the near 
tumor margin and to the far tumor margin. 
All measurements are rounded to the nearest 
milli 
meter and are entered sequentially into the 
NovoTAL software. Based on the data derived 
from FEM simulations, the software algorithm 
will calculate the optimal transducer array lay-
out, which will maximize TTFields intensity 
at the site of the tumor based on the patient’s 
cranial morphometry.
Although the process described above is based 
on MRI measurements obtained from post-
contrast imaging, in the clinical setting gliomas 
can be very heterogeneous in nature, and thus the 
extent of active disease may not exclusively be cap-
tured in postcontrast sequences [34-36]. GBs may 
present with non-CE (NCE) T2-weighted/ fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal, or 
more commonly may be represented in a combi-
nation in contrast-enhancing and NCE frames. 
A patient will minimally require an MRI with 
T1-weighted, T2-weighted/FLAIR and gado-
linium-enhanced sequences in axial and coronal 
planes for treatment planning. A combination 
of these sequences can be used for planning 
purposes, as deemed appropriate by the treating 
physician. Although mapping based on discrete 
regions of contrast enhancement may result in 
a more focal planning approach, incorporation 
of margins of macroscopically normal brain or 
of wider regions of T2/FLAIR abnormality can 
alter the intensity of TTFields in areas where 
GB most commonly recurs such as the GTV, 
tumor margin and PBZ [21]. Maximizing field 
intensity within these zones could prove to be 
crucial for prolonging PFS and for improv-
ing patient outcomes overall. The PBZ, which 
macroscopically and radiologically resembles 
normal tissue, frequently harbors infiltrating 
tumor cells, tumorigenic stromal cells and pro-
inflammatory cells, which collectively support 
local tumor recurrence [22]. As such, a physi-
cian may theoretically wish to include a wider 
margin on NCE tissue into the treatment plan 
for TTFields in order to treat residual infiltrat-
ing tumor cells. Results of treatment planning 
simulation studies exploring the inclusion of a 
margin of macroscopically normal tissue around 
 33
Figure 1. Standard T1-weighted postcontrast MRI measurements required to perform NovoTAL 
treatment planning. (A) An axial slice at the apical level of the orbit. A reference frame is drawn at 
the level of the scalp, and measurements for anteroposterior, left–right and right-to-midline are 
drawn. (B) A coronal slice at the level of the external auditory canal used to estimate the extent 
of cerebrum. A reference frame is drawn from the level of the scalp to an inferior boundary at the 
lower extent of temporal lobe, and measurements for right–left, right-to-midline and superior-
to-inferior boundary are obtained. (C) Axial tumor coordinates drawn on a slice demonstrating 
the maximal tumor diameter. The same frame and initial measurements are repeated. In addition, 
measurements from the right frame to near and far tumor margins, as well as the anterior frame to 
near and far tumor margins, are added. (D) Coronal tumor coordinates drawn on a slice depicting 
the maximal diameter of tumor. The lower boundary of the box is drawn at the lowest level of 
visible supratentorial brain. The three initial head size measurements are repeated. In addition, 
measurements from the right frame to the near and far tumor margins, and from the top of the 
frame to the near and far tumor margin are obtained.
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
a boundary of contrast-enhancing tumor sug-
gest that field intensity is optimized in the GTV 
and PBZ, when treatment is planned mapping 
to the border of contrast-enhancing disease, as 
opposed to mapping to include wider margins of 
NCE PBZ. As such, this guideline recommends 
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
34
Figure 2. Tumor treating fields treatment planning algorithm for newly diagnosed glioblastoma. 
†MRI obtained 2–6 weeks following completion of concurrent chemoradiation is recommended 
for treatment planning in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma. Where available, compare 
preoperative and pre-RT sequences to determine areas of active disease versus post-treatment 
sequelae. 
‡In instances where a newly diagnosed patient has exclusively NCE signal, mapping should be 
performed using axial and coronal T2/FLAIR images, closely approximating to the margins of the tumor. 
§Coordinates for tumor location should closely approximate the edge of the region most representative 
of active tumor without including extra margin of normal tissue. This approach will maximize the field 
intensity in both the tumor volume and proximal peritumoral brain zone. 
C: Contrast; CE: Contrast enhancement; FLAIR: Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; GTR: Gross total 
resection; NCE: Noncontrast enhancement; RT: Radiotherapy; TMZ: Temozolomide.
MRI 4 weeks† post-RT
T1 + contrast, T2/FLAIR, axial and coronal views
CE signal
NCE‡ ± CE
signal
No CE or NCE
signal (GTR)
Map closely§ to
margins of tumor
using axial and
coronal T1 + C
Map closely§ to
margins of tumor
using axial and coronal 
T2/FLAIR ± T1 + C
sequences
Map closely§ to
margins of resection
cavity using axial 
and coronal 
T1 + C sequences
Initiate TTFields (200 kHz), ≥18 h/day with maintenance TMZ
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
planning therapy as closely as possible to the 
m 
argins of areas representing active tumor.
●
● Treatment planning for newly 
diagnosed GB
In the newly diagnosed setting, an MRI per-
formed approximately 4 (range: 2–6) weeks 
following completion of chemoradiation should 
be used for TTFields treatment planning pur-
poses. However, supplemental information 
from the preoperative, postoperative and pre-
radiation therapy scans (when available) can also 
help inform the region most likely to represent 
residual active tumor and target any microscopic 
disease. The minimum MRI sequences required 
are precontrast T1, T2/FLAIR and postcontrast 
T1 (axial and coronal), and the recommended 
slice thickness is ≤5 mm with no gap. In rare 
instances, where a patient cannot undergo MRI, 
a CT scan with contrast can be used for treat-
ment planning, as long as axial and coronal head 
size and tumor position can be clearly deline-
ated. Figure 2 describes the algorithm for treat-
ment planning in patients with newly diagnosed 
with GB.
In the postradiation setting, an important 
consideration is to distinguish post-treatment 
imaging changes such as pseudoprogression [37,38] 
from true disease progression. As mentioned 
previously, field intensity will be maximized in 
the GTV and PBZ, when the field is mapped as 
closely as possible to the margin of active tumor, 
so care should be taken not to overestimate the 
extent of active residual tumor. As reactive 
 35
Figure 3. Treatment planning in patient post gross total resection with no evidence of residual disease. (A–C) (from top left to right) 
Post-radiotherapy axial views on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, T1 and T1 with contrast sequences for a patient post-gross total 
resection. Head size measurements are obtained as standard on slices at the apical level of the orbit on axial views and at the level of 
the auditory canal on coronal views (not shown). (D & E) Treatment planning to the boundaries of the resection cavity on axial and 
coronal views, respectively. On axial views, the reference frame is drawn around the head, excluding the nose anteriorly. On coronal 
slices, the reference frame is drawn at the level of the scalp, excluding the ears, and the inferior margin is drawn to the lowest level of 
visible tentorium.
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
alterations in the blood–brain barrier with con-
trast enhancement may mimic tumor progres-
sion, there may be clinical value in obtaining 
additional imaging such as a magnetic resonance 
perfusion or PET scan in order to determine 
which areas represent active tumor [39-41]. For 
patients who have undergone a gross total resec-
tion and have neither residual contrast-enhanc-
ing nor NCE signals, treatment planning should 
be performed mapping as closely to the margins 
of the resection cavity as possible (Figure 3). The 
output from the NovoTAL software – the trans-
ducer array layout map – should subsequently be 
evaluated in the context of any surgical scars, 
impaired skin or palpable hardware that may 
impact the application of the transducer arrays 
on the patient’s scalp. TTFields are contraindi-
cated in patients with skull defects where the 
bone was not replaced and the arrays should not 
be placed directly above any palpable hardware, 
screws or underlying serious skin condition. A 
slight shifting of the arrays is appropriate in such 
instances.
In patients who have undergone biopsy or 
subtotal resection (those with residual tumor), 
sequential scans should be reviewed to determine 
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
36
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
the areas that represent most active areas of 
tumor. Mapping should be performed using 
the postcontrast and/or T2/FLAIR sequences as 
appropriate. The size of the planning field should 
conform to the boundary of active tumor, avoid-
ing and excluding blood products or cystic cavi-
ties not surrounded by active tumor, in order to 
optimize the field intensity in the tumor v 
olume 
and PBZ.
●
● Treatment planning for recurrent GB
There are additional practical considerations 
when planning treatment with TTFields for 
patients with recurrent GB, again with regard 
to evaluating and interpreting imaging changes 
and assessing the effects of prior therapies. 
Tumor progression can often be challenging to 
distinguish from pseudoprogression [42] or radi-
ation necrosis. Given the frequent use of bevaci-
zumab in recurrent GB, pseudoresponse should 
also be carefully evaluated in patients receiving 
antiangiogenic therapy [37,43,44]. These scenarios 
can lead to both an over- or under- 
estimation of 
active tumor volume in the context of TTFields 
planning and may lead to suboptimal deliv-
ery of TTFields. In this setting, additional 
information obtained from advanced imaging 
modalities such as diffusion-weighted imaging, 
apparent diffusion coefficient maps, magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy and perfusion-weighted 
imaging may help correlate regions that repre-
sent active tumor and distinguish tumor from 
pseudoprogression [45,46]. Patient’s scalp health 
should also be carefully evaluated when con-
sidering TTFields in the recurrent GB setting. 
Prior exposure to systemic chemotherapies and 
radiation may render patients more suscepti-
ble to skin toxicity (the most common device-
related adverse event reported with TTFields 
treatment); therefore, regular evaluation of the 
patient’s scalp while receiving therapy can help 
prevent the development of local skin irrita-
tion beneath the transducer arrays [29]. Figure 4 
describes the algorithm for treatment planning 
in patients with recurrent GB. The most recent 
MRI scan showing tumor progression should 
typically be used for TTFields treatment plan-
ning in patients with recurrent GB. A careful 
comparison between prior scans should be 
made in order to identify the areas of active 
tumor. This is especially important in patients 
who have received antiangiogenic therapy, in 
whom prior imaging (when available) should 
be evaluated with the most recent scan. Many 
patients receiving bevacizumab commonly pro-
gress with a nonenhancing signal abnormality 
and therefore are more likely to require the 
inclusion of T2/FLAIR sequences in treatment 
planning. The treating physician should cor-
relate the imaging findings with the patient’s 
clinical status and determine the region where 
the TTFields should be focused. The mapping 
coordinates should conform closely to the mar-
gin of the active tumor as this will maximize 
field in 
tensity in the tumor volume and the PBZ 
(Figure 5).
●
● Treatment planning for multifocal GB
Approximately one in five patients with GB 
may present with multifocal or multicentric 
disease manifesting with assorted distinct foci 
of enhancing tumors [47]. TTFields are a viable 
modality in the treatment of such patients, as 
TTFields distribute at therapeutic intensities 
within large areas of the supratentorial brain [17]. 
The NovoTAL software can accommodate treat-
ment planning for any number distinct lesions 
(>1 cm apart) within its algorithm. Any lesions 
which are <1 cm apart should be treated as one 
contiguous lesion. The approach to planning 
therapy in cases with multifocal disease is the 
same as described previously; once measure-
ments for axial as well as coronal head size have 
been obtained, each lesion should be delineated 
and measured separately, and the coordinates 
entered sequentially into the NovoTAL software 
(Figure 6).
●
● Response assessment & remapping 
TTFields
Once TTFields are initiated, the treating physi-
cian should monitor the patient’s monthly com-
pliance report to ensure that patient is receiving 
the maximal benefit from the treatment (the 
recommended goal is to be on therapy >18 h per 
day), and should periodically assess the scalp 
so that any local skin irritation is appropri-
ately managed. A follow-up MRI scan should 
routinely be performed 2–3 months following 
treatment start as is the standard practice for 
GB follow-up. There are unique challenges 
associated with the ongoing evaluation and 
interpretation of imaging changes in response 
to treatment with TTFields, which are com-
pounded by observations from clinical trials 
suggesting that there is no definitive correlation 
between objective radiographic response and 
overall patient benefit. Post hoc analyses have 
 37
Figure 4. Tumor treating fields treatment planning algorithm for recurrent glioblastoma. 
†Where available, compare pretreatment and post-treatment imaging to determine areas of active 
disease versus post-treatment sequelae, especially in patients receiving antiangiogenic therapy. 
‡Coordinates for tumor location should closely approximate the edge of the region most 
representative of active tumor without including extra margin of normal tissue. This approach will 
maximize the field intensity in both the tumor volume and the proximal peritumoral brain zone. 
§Patients initially receiving TTFields with maintenance TMZ who experience first progression, can 
remain on TTFields with a change to second-line chemotherapy. 
C: Contrast; CE: Contrast enhancement; FLAIR: Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; NCE: Noncontrast 
enhancement; TMZ: Temozolomide.
Most recent† MRI
T1 + contrast, T2/FLAIR, axial and coronal views
CE signal
CE ± NCE
signal
NCE signal
Map closely‡ to
margins of tumor
using axial and
coronal T1 + C
Map closely‡ to
margins of tumor
using axial and coronal 
T1 + C ± T2/FLAIR
Map closely‡ to
margins of active
tumor using
T2/FLAIR
Initial TTFields (200 kHz), ≥18 h/day ± chemotherapy§
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
demonstrated that tumor regression and clini-
cal benefit can still occur following initial early 
radiographic progression in patients receiving 
TTFields [48,49]. In a post hoc responder analysis 
from EF-11 (where TTFields were administered 
as monotherapy in recurrent GB patients), 
approximately a third of responders experienced 
progressive disease on their 2-month scan fol-
lowing initiation of TTFields. However, they 
subsequently developed delayed (median time 
to onset of objective response of 8 months), 
durable (a median duration of 7 months) and 
objective radiographic responses [48]. Similar 
observations are noted in patients receiving 
novel immunotherapeutics [50-52], which have 
recently prompted the Response Assessment in 
Neuro-Oncology Criteria (RANO) working 
group to develop an updated immunotherapy 
response assessment guideline (iRANO). 
This new guidance allows patients to remain 
on immune therapy if they demonstrate ini-
tial radiographic progression in the absence of 
significant clinical decline [53]. The iRANO 
updates recognize that immune therapies may 
take a longer period of time to confer a clinical 
benefit and facilitates a mechanism to prevent 
patients coming off therapy prematurely in 
the absence of true progressive disease, while 
ensuring patient safety. Similarly, TTFields 
require a longer period of treatment (at least 
4 weeks of continuous exposure) in order to 
reach a state of tumor stabilization during the 
course of therapy [49]. As TTFields exert an 
antimitotic effect, there will be an initial period 
where the rate of tumor cell replication will 
exceed cell killing and clearance rates from the 
brain. Over time, the rate of cell cytotoxicity 
and clearance will eventually exceed replica-
tion rates and, therefore, there will be a delay 
until tumor shrinkage is observed on sequential 
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
38
Figure 5. Treatment planning in a recurrent glioblastoma patient with nonmeasurable progression post-bevacizumab. 
(A & B) Preprogression axial T1 postcontrast and axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) abnormality, with no abnormality at 
the rostral, superior, lateral ventricle. (C–F) Postprogression axial T1 postcontrast and FLAIR abnormality, and coronal T1 postcontrast 
and FLAIR images. In this case, planning TTFields treatment using T1 postcontrast sequences will underestimate the extent of tumor 
progression. (G & H) Treatment planning performed using axial and coronal FLAIR sequences, obtaining tumor coordinates to the 
margins of FLAIR abnormality. 
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
imaging. In addition, early contrast-enhancing 
imaging changes may, in fact, represent a local 
inflammatory response to therapy, not neces-
sarily overt tumor progression [54]. As such, this 
clinical guideline provides recommendations 
for maintaining and/or terminating therapy, 
based on a holistic assessment of the patient’s 
clinical status, concurrent therapies and their 
imaging findings. Figure 7 describes the algo-
rithm for response assessment and remapping 
patients receiving TTFields.
As TTFields do not impact the blood–brain 
barrier, any reduction in tumor size is indica-
tive of a true anti-tumor effect (as opposed to 
pseudoresponse observed with antiangiogenic 
therapies). However, as TTFields may be used 
routinely in the clinical setting in conjunc-
tion with other chemotherapies, radiographic 
response assessment should be evaluated per 
the RANO criteria. In patients experiencing 
a complete or partial response, or those with 
stable disease, it is recommended to maintain 
TTFields therapy with the same array layout 
configuration. In instances where there has been 
a dramatic reduction in the extent of contrast 
enhancement (>50% reduction) in the absence 
of antiangiogenic therapy, it is also feasible for 
the treating physician to re-map the tumor 
based on the latest imaging, to ensure that the 
field is focused to the reduced area of contrast 
enhancement.
In patients exhibiting radiographic progres-
sion from the baseline planning scan, a num-
ber of factors should be considered. First, if 
the patient is a patient with newly diagnosed 
GB who has recently started TTFields in com-
bination with maintenance TMZ, and has 
clinically deteriorated, it is recommended to 
continue TTFields and switch to a second-line 
chemotherapy as long as the patient remains 
compliant and able to tolerate the treatment. 
In the EF-14 Phase III study in patients with 
newly diagnosed GB, the median duration of 
TTFields therapy was 9 months, while median 
PFS was 7.1 months [25], with the majority of 
patients in the TTFields arm receiving second-
line chemotherapies at first progression. If the 
patient has a recurrent GB and experienced 
 39
Figure 6. Treatment planning for multifocal tumors. (A & B) Axial views of a multifocal tumor with a 
multicentric right frontoparietal lesion, and a smaller posterior lesion adjacent to the posterior horn 
of the lateral ventricle. (C & D) Corresponding coronal views are shown. (B & C) Treatment planning 
commences with a determination of head size on a slice at the apical level of the orbit and at the 
level of the ear canal per standard planning. Mutlifocal lesions are then mapped separately when 
>1 cm apart. The multicentric anterior lesion is mapped as one contiguous lesion.
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
significant neurologic decline consistent with 
the imaging changes since initiating TTFields, 
then treatment should be re-evaluated at the 
clinician’s discretion.
In patients who exhibit radiographic changes 
consistent with disease progression at the 
2-month scan, but who remain neurologically 
stable and are compliant with therapy, it is feasi-
ble to maintain them on TTFields therapy with 
the same transducer array layout and repeat the 
scan in another 2–3 months. If however, there 
appears to be a significant increase of >25% in 
size, or new lesions have appeared distal to the 
original treated tumor bed at the first follow-up 
scan, then it is recommended to re-plan treat-
ment to include the new or increased size lesions 
in the field and then continue with therapy. In 
general, any major changes in imaging from the 
baseline planning scan should be reviewed in 
the context of the TTFields treatment field, and 
re-planning should be considered at the treat-
ing physicians’ discretion. Since TTFields exert 
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
40
Figure 7. Response assessment and remapping algorithm for tumor treating fields in glioblastoma. 
†Serves as new reference scan if TTFields treatment continued. 
‡Clinical and neurological decline indicative of tumor progression and not attributable to a co-existing medical condition. 
CR: Complete response; FLAIR: Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; PD: Progressive disease; PR: Partial response; RANO: Response 
Assessment in Neuro-Oncology Criteria; SD: Stable disease; TMZ: Temozolomide; TTFields: Tumor treating fields. 
Follow-up MRI 2–3 months post-TTFields initiation†
T1 + contrast, T2/FLAIR, axial and coronal views
Response per RANO
PR or CR 
SD
PD
PD
CR, PR or SD
Continue TTFields
with sam array layout
Signifcant
neurological decline‡
First progression
since receiving
TTFields/TMZ
Repeat imaging
2–3 months
post-progession
Re-evaluate TTFields
and/or
second-line therapy
Minimal
neurological decline‡
Repeat imaging 2–3 months
Consider re-mapping
if >50% decrease in
orthogonal diameters
of contrast-enhancing
disease and patient is
not on anti-angiogenic
therapy
Continue TTFields with
same map as long as
no new distant lesions
Consider re-mapping if
signifcant increase in
orthogonal tumor
diameters from basline
or if new lesion >1 cm
from original tumor bed
Continue TTFields with
same map and change
second-line
chemotherapy. Consider
re-mapping if signifcant
increase in orthogonal
tumor diameters from
baseline or if new lesion
>1 cm from orginal
tumor bed
YES
NO
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
an antimitotic effect exclusive to dividing cells, 
it may take several months of continuous use 
before true antitumor responses manifest on 
sequential imaging.
Future perspective
It has been more than a decade since the antican-
cer effects of TTFields were first characterized in 
GB cell lines and clinical studies were initiated. 
 41
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
Today, TTFields are FDA-approved for newly 
diagnosed and recurrent GB and further develop-
ment is underway in a variety of solid tumors [55-60]. 
Since TTFields are a comparatively new anticancer 
modality compared with surgery, chemotherapy 
and radiation therapy, this poses additional chal-
lenges in the clinic with regard to appropriately 
training physicians who are certified to plan 
treatment. This summary guideline proposes a 
framework for TTFields treatment planning that 
is consistent with current standards for MRI acqui-
sition and response assessment, which are sensitive 
to the heterogeneity of tumor activity in imaging 
and which aim to maximize field intensity at the 
site of active tumor. Importantly, it proactively 
addresses early imaging changes that can occur 
in patients receiving TTFields which may not be 
indicative of disease progression. The algorithms 
provide clinicians a roadmap for preventing pre-
mature treatment discontinuation of a potentially 
beneficial modality while balancing safety. As 
experience with TTFields grows, this guideline will 
require future revisions to incorporate the integra-
tion of advanced imaging modalities in treatment 
planning, and the potential inclusion of radiologic 
biomarkers to assess response to treatment. The 
prospective inclusion of these guidelines in future 
clinical studies is warranted in order to establish 
their clinical effectiveness.
Supplementary data
To view the supplementary data that accompany this paper 
please visit the journal website at: http://www.futuremedi-
cine.com/doi/full/10.2217/cns-2016-0032
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank A Chaudhry at Novocure, 
for medical writing support in the development of this 
manuscript
Financial & competing interests disclosure
J Battiste has disclosed serving as a consultant and speaker 
for Novocure, Inc. DA Bota has disclosed serving as a 
consultant and speaker for Novocure, Inc., and receiving 
funding from Triphase and travel, accommodation or 
other expenses reimbursement from ERC Belgium. 
J Connelly has disclosed serving as a consultant for 
Novocure, Inc., and owning stock in Elli Lilly and 
Company, Halyard Health, Medtronic, AbbVie, Abbot 
Labs and Johnson and Johnson. D Damek has disclosed 
serving as a consultant for Novocure, Inc., and receiving 
funding from BMS, Celldex and AbbVie. F Iwamoto has 
disclosed serving as a consultant for Novocure, Inc., 
Regeneron, AbbVie and Prime Oncology, and receiving 
funding from Celldex, Northwest, Novocure, Inc. and 
BMS. N Mohile has disclosed serving as a consultant for 
Novocure, Inc. J Trusheim has disclosed serving as a con-
sultant for Novocure, Inc., and owning stock in Fresca 
Medical. The authors have no other relevant affiliations 
or financial involvement with any organization or entity 
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the 
subject matter or materials d 
iscussed in the manuscript 
apart from those disclosed.
Open access
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Unported License. To 
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
References
1 
Kirson ED, Gurvich Z, Schneiderman R et al. 
Disruption of cancer cell replication by 
alternating electric fields. Cancer Res. 64, 
3288–3295 (2004).
2 
Lee SX, Wong ET, Swanson KD. Mitosis 
interference of cancer cells by NovoTTF-100A 
causes decreased cellular viability. Semin. 
Oncol. 14, iv9 (2012).
3 
Lee SX, Wong ET, Swanson KD. Disruption 
of cell division within anaphase by tumor 
treating electric fields (TTFields) leads to 
immunogenic cell death. Neuro Oncol. 
15(Suppl.), iii66–iii67 (2013).
4 
Giladi M, Schneiderman RS, Voloshin T 
et al. Mitotic spindle disruption by 
alternating electric fields leads to improper 
chromosome segregation and mitotic 
catastrophe in cancer cells. Sci. Rep. 5, 18046 
(2015).
5 
Kirson ED, Dbaly V, Tovarys F et al. 
Alternating electric fields arrest cell 
proliferation in animal tumor models and 
human brain tumors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 104, 10152–10157 (2007).
6 
Novocure. Optune Instructions for use. 
Document number QSD-QR-330 (2015). 
http://html.investis.com
7 
Lok E, Swanson KD, Wong ET. Tumor 
treating fields therapy device for glioblastoma: 
physics and clinical practice considerations. 
Expert Rev. Med. Devices 12(6), 717–726 
(2015).
8 
Gera N, Yang A, Holtzman TS, Lee SX, 
Wong ET, Swanson KD. Tumor treating 
fields perturb the localization of septins and 
cause aberrant mitotic exit. PLoS ONE 10, 
e0125269 (2015).
9 
Gutin PH, Wong ET. Noninvasive application 
of alternating electric fields in glioblastoma: a 
fourth cancer treatment modality. In: American 
Society of Clinical Oncology Educational Book. 
Govindan R (Ed.). ASCO University, 
Alexandria, VA, USA, 126–131 (2012).
10 
Yang A, Holtzman TS, Lee SX, Wong ET, 
Swanson KD. Alternating electric fields 
perturb the localization of cytokinetic furrow 
proteins and cause aberrant mitotic exit. 
Neuro Oncol. 16(Suppl. 5), v94 (2014).
11 
Giladi M, Schneiderman RS, Porat Y et al. 
Mitotic disruption and reduced clonogenicity 
of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo 
by tumor treating fields. Pancreatology 14, 
54–63 (2014).
 CNS Oncol. 2017 6(1)
42
Special RepoRt Trusheim, Dunbar, Battiste et al.
future science group
12 
Schneiderman R, Giladi M, Porat Y et al. 
TTFields reduce cancer cell clonogenic 
potential through abnormal chromosome 
segregation during mitosis. Cancer Res. 
74(Suppl. 19), Abstract 5521 (2014).
13 
Wong ET, Lok E, Gautam S, Swanson KD. 
Dexamethasone exerts profound immunologic 
interference on treatment efficacy for 
recurrent glioblastoma. Br. J. Cancer 113(2), 
232–241 (2015).
14 
Schneiderman RS, Voloshin-Sela T, Giladi M 
et al. p53 status dependence of tumor treating 
fields (TTFields) efficacy against glioma cells. 
Neuro Oncol. 17(Suppl. 5), v18–v40 (2015).
15 
Porat Y, Shteingauz A, Giladi M et al. 
Alternating electric fields (TTFields) induce 
autophagy in human cancer cell lines. 
Presented at: 2016 Proceedings of the AACR. 
New Orleans, LA, USA, 16–20 April 2016 
(Abstract 3543). 
16 
Schneiderman RS, Shteingauz A, Giladi M 
et al. Tumor treating fields (TTFields) reduce 
migration and invasion properties of human 
glioma cancer cells in vitro. Presented at: 2016 
Proceedings of the AACR. New Orleans, LA, 
USA, 16–20 April 2016 (Abstract 5078). 
17 
Wenger C, Salvador R, Basser PJ, Miranda 
PC. The electric field distribution in the brain 
during TTFields therapy and its dependence 
on tissue dielectric properties and anatomy:  
a computational study. Phys. Med. 
Biol. 60(18), 7339–7357 (2015).
18 
Miranda PC, Mekonnen A, Salvador R, 
Basser PJ. Predicting the electric field 
distribution in the brain for the treatment of 
glioblastoma. Phys. Med. Biol. 59, 4137–4147 
(2014).
19 
Lok E, Hua V, Wong ET. Computed 
modeling of alternating electric fields therapy 
for recurrent glioblastoma. Cancer Med. 4(11), 
1697–1699 (2015).
20 
Wenger C, Salvador R, Basser PJ, Miranda 
PC. Improving Tumor Treating Fields 
treatment efficacy in patients with 
glioblastoma using personalized array layouts. 
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 94(5), 
1137–1143 (2016).
21 
Lemee JM, Clavreul A, Aubry M et al. 
Characterizing the peritumoral brain zone in 
glioblastoma: a multidisciplinary analysis. 
J. Neurooncol. 122(1), 53–61 (2015).
22 
Lemee JM, Clavreul A, Menei P. Intratumoral 
heterogeneity in glioblastoma: don’t forget the 
peritumoral brain zone. Neuro Oncol. 17(10), 
1322–1332 (2015).
23 
Chen L, Chaichana KL, Kleinberg L, Ye X, 
Quinones-Hinojosa A, Redmond K. 
Glioblastoma recurrence patterns near neural 
stem cell regions. Radiother. Oncol. 116(2), 
294–300 (2015).
24 
Chaudhry A, Bomzon Z, Hershkovich H, 
Garcia-Carracedo D, Wenger C, Palti Y. 
Tumor-treating fields (TTFields) intensity in 
the gross tumor volume and peritumoral 
brain zone: implications for local recurrence 
in glioblastoma [abstract]. Presented at: 
107th Annual Meeting of the American 
Association for Cancer Research. New 
Orleans, LA, USA, 16–20 April 2016 
(Abstract 2051).
25 
Stupp R, Taillibert S, Kanner AA et al. 
Maintenance therapy with tumor-treating 
fields plus temozolomide vs temozolomide 
alone for glioblastoma: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 314(23), 2535–2543 (2015).
26 
Stupp R, Wong ET, Kanner AA et al. 
NovoTTF-100A versus physician’s choice 
chemotherapy in recurrent glioblastoma: a 
randomised Phase III trial of a novel 
treatment modality. Eur. J. Cancer 48, 
2192–2202 (2012).
27 
Zhu JJ, Pannullo S, Mehdorn M et al. Quality 
of life , cognitive function and functional 
status in the EF-14 Trial: a prospective, 
multi-center trial of tumor treating fields 
together with temozolomide compared to 
temozolomide alone in patients with newly 
diagnosed GBM. Neuro Oncol. 17(Suppl. 5), 
v9 (2015).
28 
Kesari S, Ram Z, Investigators OBOTET. 
Tumor treating fields with chemotherapy 
compared to chemotherapy alone in 
glioblastoma patients at first recurrence:  
a post-hoc analysis of the EF-14 trial. Neuro 
Oncol. 17(Suppl. 5), v14 (2015).
29 
Lacouture ME, Davis ME, Elzinga G et al. 
Characterization and management of 
dermatologic adverse events with the 
NovoTTF-100A System, a novel anti-mitotic 
electric field device for the treatment of 
recurrent glioblastoma. Semin. Oncol. 
41(Suppl. 4), S1–S14 (2014).
30 
Chaudhry A, Benson L, Varshaver M et al. 
NovoTTF-100A System (tumor treating 
fields) transducer array layout planning for 
glioblastoma: a NovoTAL system user study. 
World J. Surg. Oncol. 13, 316 (2015).
31 
Chaudhry A, Benson L, Varshaver M, Farber 
O, Kirson E, Palti Y. Tumor treating fields 
(TTFields) transducer array layout planning 
for glioblastoma: results of a NovoTAL™ 
System user study. Neuro Oncol. 17(Suppl. 5), 
v10–v11 (2015).
32 
Chaudhry A, Benson L, Varshaver M et al. 
NovoTTF™-110A System (tumor treating 
fields) transducer array layout planning for 
recurrent glioblastoma: results of a 
NovoTAL™ System User Study. Int. J. 
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 93(No 3S), 
E50–E60 (2015).
33 
Chaudhry A, Benson L, Varshaver M et al. 
NovoTTF-100A System (tumor treating 
fields) transducer array layout planning for 
glioblastoma: results of a NovoTAL system 
user study. J. Clin. Oncol. 33(Suppl. 15), 
e13029 (2015).
34 
Gallego Perez-Larraya J, Lahutte M, 
Petrirena G et al. Response assessment in 
recurrent glioblastoma treated with 
irinotecan-bevacizumab: comparative 
analysis of the Macdonald, RECIST, RANO, 
and RECIST + F criteria. Neuro Oncol. 
14(5), 667–673 (2012).
35 
Elson A, Paulson E, Bovi J, Siker M, Schultz 
C, Laviolette PS. Evaluation of pre-
radiotherapy apparent diffusion coefficient 
(ADC): patterns of recurrence and survival 
outcomes analysis in patients treated for 
glioblastoma multiforme. J. Neurooncol. 
123(1), 179–188 (2015).
36 
Nowosielski M, Wiestler B, Goebel G et al. 
Progression types after antiangiogenic therapy 
are related to outcome in recurrent 
glioblastoma. Neurology 82(19), 1684–1692 
(2014).
37 
Abdulla S, Saada J, Johnson G, Jefferies S, 
Ajithkumar T. Tumour progression or 
pseudoprogression? A review of post-
treatment radiological appearances of 
glioblastoma. Clin. Radiol. 70(11), 
1299–1312 (2015).
38 
Melguizo-Gavilanes I, Bruner JM, Guha-
Thakurta N, Hess KR, Puduvalli VK. 
Characterization of pseudoprogression in 
patients with glioblastoma: is histology the 
gold standard? J. Neurooncol. 123(1), 141–150 
(2015).
39 
Suh CH, Kim HS, Choi YJ, Kim N, Kim SJ. 
Prediction of pseudoprogression in patients 
with glioblastomas using the initial and final 
area under the curves ratio derived from 
dynamic contrast-enhanced T1-weighted 
perfusion MR imaging. Am. J. Neuroradiol. 
34(12), 2278–2286 (2013).
40 
Galldiks N, Rapp M, Stoffels G et al. 
Response assessment of bevacizumab in 
patients with recurrent malignant glioma 
using [18F]Fluoroethyl-L-tyrosine PET in 
comparison to MRI. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. 
Imaging 40(1), 22–33 (2013).
41 
Choi YJ, Kim HS, Jahng GH, Kim SJ, Suh 
DC. Pseudoprogression in patients with 
glioblastoma: added value of arterial spin 
labeling to dynamic susceptibility contrast 
perfusion MR imaging. Acta Radiol. 54(4), 
448–454 (2013).
 43
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
TTFields treatment planning guidelines Special RepoRt
42 
Brandsma D, Stalpers L, Taal W, Sminia P, 
Van Den Bent MJ. Clinical features, 
mechanisms, and management of 
pseudoprogression in malignant gliomas. 
Lancet Oncol. 9(5), 453–461 (2008).
43 
Huang RY, Neagu MR, Reardon DA, Wen 
PY. Pitfalls in the neuroimaging of 
glioblastoma in the era of antiangiogenic and 
immuno/targeted therapy – detecting illusive 
disease, defining response. Front. Neurol. 6, 
33 (2015).
44 
Hygino Da Cruz LC Jr, Rodriguez I, 
Domingues RC, Gasparetto EL, Sorensen 
AG. Pseudoprogression and pseudoresponse: 
imaging challenges in the assessment of 
posttreatment glioma. Am. J. Neuroradiol. 
32(11), 1978–1985 (2011).
45 
Prager AJ, Martinez N, Beal K, Omuro A, 
Zhang Z, Young RJ. Diffusion and perfusion 
MRI to differentiate treatment-related 
changes including pseudoprogression from 
recurrent tumors in high-grade gliomas with 
histopathologic evidence. Am. J. Neuroradiol. 
36(5), 877–885 (2015).
46 
Chu HH, Choi SH, Ryoo I et al. 
Differentiation of true progression from 
pseudoprogression in glioblastoma treated 
with radiation therapy and concomitant 
temozolomide: comparison study of 
standard and high-b-value diffusion-
weighted imaging. Radiology 269(3), 
831–840 (2013).
47 
Thomas RP, Xu LW, Lober RM, Li G, 
Nagpal S. The incidence and significance of 
multiple lesions in glioblastoma. 
J. Neurooncol. 112(1), 91–97 (2013).
48 
Wong ET, Lok E, Swanson KD et al. 
Response assessment of NovoTTF-100A 
versus best physician’s choice chemotherapy in 
recurrent glioblastoma. Cancer Med. 3, 
592–602 (2014).
49 
Vymazal J, Wong ET. Response patterns of 
recurrent glioblastomas treated with 
tumor-treating fields. Semin. Oncol. 
41(Suppl. 6), S14–S24 (2014).
50 
Hamid O, Robert C, Daud A et al. Safety and 
tumor responses with lambrolizumab 
(anti-PD-1) in melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 
369(2), 134–144 (2013).
51 
Okada H, Pollack IF. Do we need novel 
radiologic response criteria for brain tumor 
immunotherapy? Expert Rev. Neurother. 11(5), 
619–622 (2011).
52 
Topalian SL, Sznol M, Mcdermott DF et al. 
Survival, durable tumor remission, and 
long-term safety in patients with advanced 
melanoma receiving nivolumab. J. Clin. 
Oncol. 32(10), 1020–1030 (2014).
53 
Okada H, Weller M, Huang R et al. 
Immunotherapy response assessment in 
neuro-oncology: a report of the RANO 
working group. Lancet Oncol. 16(15), 
e534–e542 (2015).
54 
New P, Powell S. Pathology of cases of 
imaging progression in patients with 
glioblastoma who have been treated with the 
novocure – TTF device in the EF-14 trial. 
Neuro Oncol. 16(Suppl. 5), v164 (2014).
55 
Brozova H, Lucas A, Salmaggi A, Vymazal J. 
COMET: a Phase II randomized study of 
TTFields versus supportive care in non-small-
cell lung cancer patients with 1–5 brain 
matastases – initial safety results. Neuro 
Oncol. 17(Suppl. 5), V-46 (2015).
56 
Kirson ED, Giladi M, Gurvich Z et al. 
Alternating electric fields (TTFields) inhibit 
metastatic spread of solid tumors to the lungs. 
Clin. Exp. Metastasis 26, 633–640 (2009).
57 
Rivera F, Gallego J, Guillen Ponce C, 
Benavides M, Lopez-Martin JA, Küng M. 
PANOVA: a pilot study of TTFields 
concomitant with gemcitabine for front-line 
therapy of advanced pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 33(Suppl.), 
Abstract 269 (2015).
58 
Pless M, Droege C, Von Moos R, Salzberg M, 
Betticher D. A Phase I/II trial of tumor 
treating fields (TTFields) therapy in 
combination with pemetrexed for advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 81, 
445–450 (2013).
59 
Weinberg U, Farber O. A Phase II trial of 
TTFields with chemotherapy for first line 
treatment of malignant mesothelioma. 
Presented at: IASLC World Congress on Lung 
Cancer. Denver, CO, USA, 6–9 September 
2015.
60 
Mehta MP, Gondi V, Brown PD. A Phase III 
study of radiosurgery with TTFields for 1–10 
brain metastases from NSCLC. Sub to IASLC 
World Congress on Lung Cancer. Denver, CO, 
USA, 6–9 September 2015.
