 Ultrasensitive Antibody Detection by Agglutination-PCR (ADAP)
Cheng-ting Tsai,†,# Peter V. Robinson,†,# Carole A. Spencer,‡ and Carolyn R. Bertozzi*,§,∥
†Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, United States
‡USC Endocrine Laboratories, Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 91105, United
States
§Department of Chemistry and ∥Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
*
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Antibodies are widely used biomarkers for the
diagnosis of many diseases. Assays based on solid-phase
immobilization of antigens comprise the majority of clinical
platforms for antibody detection, but can be undermined by
antigen denaturation and epitope masking. These technological
hurdles are especially troublesome in detecting antibodies that
bind nonlinear or conformational epitopes, such as anti-insulin
antibodies in type 1 diabetes patients and anti-thyroglobulin
antibodies associated with thyroid cancers. Radioimmunoassay
remains the gold standard for these challenging antibody
biomarkers, but the limited multiplexability and reliance on
hazardous radioactive reagents have prevented their use outside
specialized testing facilities. Here we present an ultrasensitive
solution-phase method for detecting antibodies, termed antibody detection by agglutination-PCR (ADAP). Antibodies bind to
and agglutinate synthetic antigen−DNA conjugates, enabling ligation of the DNA strands and subsequent quantification by
qPCR. ADAP detects zepto- to attomoles of antibodies in 2 μL of sample with a dynamic range spanning 5−6 orders of
magnitude. Using ADAP, we detected anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies from human patient plasma with a 1000-fold increased
sensitivity over an FDA-approved radioimmunoassay. Finally, we demonstrate the multiplexability of ADAP by simultaneously
detecting multiple antibodies in one experiment. ADAP’s combination of simplicity, sensitivity, broad dynamic range,
multiplexability, and use of standard PCR protocols creates new opportunities for the discovery and detection of antibody
biomarkers.
■ INTRODUCTION
Circulating antibodies represent one of the most prevalent
classes of biomarkers for human disorders including infectious,1
autoimmune,2 neurological,3 and oncological4,5 diseases.
Detection of low-abundance antibodies using highly sensitive
assays improves patient outcomes significantly by enabling early
diagnosis and therapeutic intervention.4−6 However, the
physical deformation of antigen upon immobilization on solid
supports impedes the detection of many disease-specific
antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs),
protein microarrays, lateral flow assays, or immuno-PCR.7−16
Furthermore, the unpredictable orientation of surface-deposited
antigen can conceal important epitopes for antibody binding.17
Solution-phase approaches to antibody detection offer
significant advantages. The solution-phase radioimmunoassay
(RIA) is the current gold standard detection method for
antibodies that exclusively bind intact antigen,7 such as anti-
insulin autoantibodies used for the early detection of type 1
diabetes.9,10 RIAs are more sensitive than ELISAs but use
hazardous radioactive reagents and demand laborious washing
and centrifugation steps. Additionally, the limited multiplexing
capacity of RIA hinders its application to the discovery of new
antibody biomarkers. Consequently, current methods do not
meet the need for an assay that preserves the native
conformation of antigens and enables sensitive, multiplexed
detection of their cognate antibodies. Such a method would
greatly improve diagnostic strategies for diseases with
conformation-sensitive antibody biomarkers and accelerate
the discovery of underexplored biomarkers in various human
pathologies.
We report the development of a new assay, antibody
detection by agglutination-PCR (ADAP), for the robust and
rapid detection of antibodies in a solution-phase format (Figure
1). We took inspiration from two distinct assay formats: (1) the
classic latex agglutination assay,18 where serum antibodies
cluster antigen-latex particles into optically detectable com-
plexes, and (2) proximity ligation assays in which protein−
protein complexes are detected by PCR amplification.19−22
ADAP harnesses the agglutination power of antibodies to
aggregate antigen−DNA conjugates and thereby drive ligation
of oligonucleotides, in turn producing an amplifiable PCR
Received:
October 16, 2015
Published: February 16, 2016
Research Article
http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acscii
© 2016 American Chemical Society
139
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits
copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 at 03:33:05:499 on June 02, 2019
from https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340.
 amplicon (Figure 1). The ligation event converts the PCR-
incompetent half-amplicons on each antigen−DNA conjugate
into a new and distinct PCR reporter.19 Notably, this solution-
phase step preserves the antigen’s native conformation and
eliminates the need for washing and centrifugation protocols to
remove unbound secondary reporters.19 These features
significantly improved sensitivity over existing techniques
while only requiring slight modifications to a standard PCR
protocol.
■ RESULTS
Synthesis of Antigen−DNA Conjugates. Central to a
sensitive ADAP assay is the creation of antigen−DNA
conjugates. For protein antigens, we synthesized these
components by lysine-to-thiol cross-linking using sulfosuccini-
midyl 4-(N-maleimidomethyl)-cyclohexane-1-carboxylate
(sulfo-SMCC) and thiolated oligonucleotides.20 Briefly, mal-
eimides were installed on lysines of purified antigen by reaction
with sulfo-SMCC in PBS (Figure S1). Thiolated oligonucleo-
tides were activated by dithiothreitol (DTT)-mediated
reduction. Both antigen and oligonucleotides were desalted,
pooled, and allowed to react overnight. Unreacted reagents
were removed by extensive purification with size-exclusion spin
columns. Antigen-DNA conjugation ratios were determined by
UV−vis spectroscopy and by SDS-PAGE analysis. Typically, a
1:2 antigen-to-DNA conjugation ratio yielded the optimal
signal in ADAP assays. We found that greater degrees of
antigen−DNA conjugation can mask epitopes for antibody
binding and thus lead to reduced assay sensitivity (Figure S11).
For small molecule antigens, N-hydroxysuccinimidyl (NHS)
ester-activated derivatives were incubated with amine-modified
oligonucleotides in a one-step conjugation (Figure S5a). The
resulting small molecule−DNA conjugates were characterized
by high-resolution mass spectrometry. In contrast to protein-
based antigens, small molecules contain far fewer antibody
epitopes due to their size. It is thus critical to design
conjugation sites that still preserve the accessibility of epitopes
to antibodies. For the dinitrophenol (DNP)−DNA conjugate
(Figure 4a and Figure S5), we used the same conjugation site
that was used to generate the immunogen for the antibody we
tested (a DNP−BSA conjugate in which DNP was linked to
lysine side chains).23,24
ADAP Workflow. In a typical ADAP experiment (Figure 1),
pairs of antigen−DNA conjugates are diluted in buffer. One
Figure 1. Schematic representation of antibody detection by agglutination-PCR (ADAP). (a) The sample containing the target antibody analyte is
incubated with a pair of antigen−DNA conjugates. Each conjugate bears an oligonucleotide sequence comprising either the 5′-(red) or 3′-(green)
half of a full amplicon. (b) Next, antibodies within the sample agglutinate the antigen−DNA conjugates and position them for ligation upon the
addition of a bridging oligonucleotide (blue) and DNA ligase. (c) The newly generated amplicon (red/green) is exponentially amplified with primers
that bind their respective sites (red and green arrows) and quantified by real-time qPCR. The immune complex of antibodies and antigen−DNA
conjugates shown here represents the proposed mechanism for detecting polyclonal antibodies with relatively large antigens at high concentrations.
For monoclonal and anti-small molecule antibody detection, as well as when antibody concentration is significantly lower than that of antigen−DNA
conjugates, the complex likely consists of a single antibody bound to two antigen−DNA conjugates (Figure S5).
Figure 2. Sensitivity and specificity of ADAP. (a) Detection of serially diluted purified anti-insulin antibodies in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or
bovine serum. The x-axis displays the moles of antibody in a 2 μL sample. The y-axis is ΔCt calculated by the difference of Ct value between the
sample and a blank. (b) Head-to-head comparison with an ELISA for the detection of anti-insulin antibody. The right y-axis represents arbitrary
intensity units (AIU) from the ELISA. (c) The specificity of ADAP was investigated by analysis of serially diluted isotype IgG in serum. No
detectable signal was observed. Error bars represent standard deviation from triplicate samples, but for many data points are too small to be
visualized.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
140
 antigen−DNA conjugate bears the 5′ half of a PCR amplicon,
while the other conjugate bears the 3′ half that is 5′
phosphorylated to enable ligation. The pooled conjugates are
added to 2 μL of antibody-containing analyte and incubated for
30 min to allow binding. Next, DNA ligase and a bridging
oligonucleotide are added and incubated for 15 min. Following
selective hydrolysis of the bridging oligonucleotide, the ligation
mixture is preamplified, and the resulting products are analyzed
by qPCR. As high Ct values of qPCR are associated with low
assay reproducibility,25 we included a preamplification step in
the ADAP protocol to ensure high reproducibility and low
intra-assay (<1%) and interassay (<3%) variations.42
Assay Validation and Specificity/Sensitivity Analysis.
As a first target, we synthesized insulin−DNA conjugates to
detect anti-insulin antibodies. Insulin autoantibodies are an
important early biomarker of type 1 diabetes,9 but the
development of a standard immunoassay is thought to be
frustrated by the denaturation of insulin on solid supports.10,26
Currently, RIA is the principal technology for detecting insulin
autoantibodies.10,26 A solution-phase PCR assay would reduce
the amount of time needed for the test and remove the
requirement of radioactive reagents.
We serially diluted affinity-purified anti-insulin antibodies
into various biological matrices and analyzed them by ADAP.
We observed a dose-dependent response across 5 orders of
magnitude with very similar results obtained in different
biological diluents (Figure 2a). The detection limit in serum
was found to be 170 zeptomoles of antibody in a 2 μL sample
(Table S1). We performed a head-to-head comparison with a
direct ELISA and found an 865-fold improvement in limit of
detection (Figure 2b and Table S1). The specificity of ADAP
was determined by assaying samples containing isotype control
antibodies, which yielded no detectable signal (Figure 2c).
Similarly, no detectable signal was observed when the assay was
performed with irrelevant antigen−DNA conjugates (Figure
S12). These results demonstrate that ADAP detects target
antibodies with superior sensitivity and specificity over
traditional methods while using much smaller sample volumes.
To show that ADAP scales over a broad range of antigen
molecular weights, we assayed antigen−antibody pairs for
biotin (∼0.24 kDa), GFP (26 kDa), and mouse IgG (150 kDa).
For all three pairs, ADAP consistently detected low attomoles
of antibody (Figure 3, Table S1 and Figures S2−S4).
Detection of Serum-Derived Antibodies against Small
Molecules. Antibodies against small molecules can mediate
allergic responses to drugs, particularly those capable of
covalently modifying host proteins.24,27 However, the detection
of small molecule binding antibodies by solid-phase immuno-
assay is challenging. Small molecules do not adsorb readily to
plastics used in common immunoassays and therefore require
specialized surfaces to produce an appropriate substrate.28 We
were curious whether anti-small molecule antibodies could be
detected by ADAP given the limited ability of such a conjugate
to form large aggregates (Figure S5b). As a model system, we
synthesized DNP−DNA conjugates and incubated them with
rabbit antisera from animals inoculated with DNP−BSA.
Significantly, agglutination was detected with as little as 0.74
ng of total antiserum protein (Figure 4a and Figure S5 and
Table S1). This experiment demonstrates that ADAP can
sensitively detect natively produced antibodies from whole
serum and has the potential to monitor allergic responses to
small molecules.
ADAP Is 1000-fold More Sensitive than Clinically
Used Techniques. Next, we used ADAP to detect antibodies
directly from patient samples. Thyroglobulin autoantibodies
mediate and are diagnostic of autoimmune thyroiditis.29 They
can also be a critical biomarker for monitoring thyroid cancer
recurrence following therapeutic thyroidectomy.12 A widely
applicable, sensitive, and accurate detection assay for anti-
thyroglobulin autoantibodies could prevent misdiagnosis of
cancer recurrence and unnecessary treament for healthy
patients.12 Currently, radioimmunoassays remain the gold
standard for detecting this autoantibody.12 However, only
specialized laboratories retain the full capacity to perform this
test, as stringent regulations for use and disposal of radioactive
reagents limit widespread adoption. We analyzed anti-
thyroglobulin-positive patient plasma by ADAP with thyro-
globulin−DNA conjugates using healthy human plasma as a
Figure 3. ADAP detects zeptomoles to attomoles of antibodies that
bind antigens across a wide molecular weight distribution. The limits
of ADAP detection for antibiotin, anti-insulin, anti-GFP, and
antimouse IgG antibodies (antigen molecular weights of 0.24, 5.8,
27, and 150 kDa respectively) was determined by analyzing antibodies
added into PBS or bovine serum. Error bars represent the standard
deviation from triplicate samples.
Figure 4. Detection of antibodies in mouse serum or human patient
plasma and comparison with commercial diagnostics. (a) Detection of
anti-dinitrophenol (DNP) from rabbit antiserum. Antiserum was
serially diluted into PBS and analyzed by ADAP. A dilution series of
antigen-naı̈ve serum was analyzed as a negative control. (b) Detection
of conformation sensitive antithyroglobulin from patient plasma.
Antithyroglobulin-positive patient plasma was diluted into PBS as
indicated and analyzed by ADAP. Antithyroglobulin-negative plasma
from healthy subjects was analyzed as a negative control. (*p < 0.01)
(c) Identical samples of antithyroglobulin-positive human plasma were
analyzed by ADAP, an FDA-approved radioimmunoassay (Kronus
RIA) and two electrochemiluminescent assays (Beckman and Roche
ECL).
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
141
 negative control. A robust ADAP signal was observed from the
anti-thyroglobulin-positive samples (2 μL) down to 105-fold
dilution with nearly no background from healthy controls
(Figure 4b). Identical samples were assayed using three FDA-
approved clinical laboratory assays: the Kronus/RSR radio-
immunoassay and two electrochemiluminescence assays (Beck-
man Coulter and Roche). Impressively, ADAP detected anti-
thyroglobulin antibodies with a detection limit 3−4 orders of
magnitude lower than these standard assays (Figure 4c).
Circumventing Interference from Anti-DNA Autoanti-
bodies. One potential confounding issue for ADAP is the
interference from endogenous anti-DNA autoantibodies. These
antibodies might agglutinate antigen−DNA conjugates in an
antigen-agnostic manner and result in false positives. Patients
suffering from autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) often produce anti-DNA antibodies in
high titer.30 They are also generally present in small quantities
in about 10% of healthy adults.31 We obtained patient plasma
that was independently verified to harbor anti-DNA antibodies,
as well as normal plasma with much lower levels of anti-DNA
antibodies as a negative control. We used GFP−DNA
conjugates as a control antigen to observe the extent of
interference from anti-DNA autoantibodies, since there should
be no naturally occurring anti-GFP antibodies in human
plasma.
As expected, we observed strong signal from anti-DNA-
positive patient plasma and weak yet robust signal from normal
plasma (Figure 5a), demonstrating that these antibodies can
interfere with ADAP analysis. Interestingly, after adding in anti-
GFP antibodies, identical dose−response curves were observed
for both anti-DNA-positive patient plasma and normal plasma
(Figure S6). This observation is consistent with the notion that
high affinity anti-GFP antibodies dominate the agglutination
event and ADAP signal, regardless of the presence of anti-DNA
antibodies.
In an abundance of caution, we sought a general solution to
circumvent potential interference from anti-DNA autoanti-
bodies. To this end, we titrated in free DNA as a competitor to
“protect” the antigen−DNA conjugates from counterfeit
aggregation (Figure 5b). At 100 μM of the competitor DNA,
we no longer observed spurious signal from anti-DNA
antibodies (Figure 5b,c). To validate that competitor DNA
does not otherwise complicate ADAP performance, both anti-
GFP antibodies and competitor DNA were added to anti-DNA
positive plasma and normal plasma (Figure 5d). ADAP analysis
of these samples showed the expected dose response with no
interference from anti-DNA antibodies. The limit of detection
of anti-GFP antibodies in human plasma was similar to that in
buffer (48 and 27 attomoles, respectively). Together, these
results demonstrate that the addition of competitor DNA
allows us to circumvent interference in human plasma samples.
Multiplexed Detection of Antibodies by DNA Barcod-
ing. Multiplexed detection of several antibodies can be
accomplished by use of orthogonal DNA sequence pairs to
barcode distinct antigens. Diseases such as type 1 diabetes have
multiple autoantibody biomarkers (anti-insulin, anti-IA-2, anti-
GAD, anti-ZnT8).9 Several clinical protocols use antibody
panels to establish a diagnosis. A barcoded assay could help by
detecting antibodies in a single test.
We generated a set of orthogonal antigen−DNA conjugates
either with biotin (Sequence Set 1; Table S2) or mouse IgG
(Sequence Set 2; Table S2) as the antigen. The amplicons were
designed such that Set 1 primers did not amplify the Set 2
amplicon and vice versa. The two sets of antigen−DNA
conjugates were pooled and incubated with anti-biotin
antibodies, anti-IgG antibodies, or both and then analyzed by
ADAP. The sample incubated with the anti-biotin antibodies
showed signal only when analyzed with Set 1 primers, while the
sample incubated with the anti-mouse IgG antibodies showed
signal only with the Set 2 primers. The mixed sample
containing both antibodies generated signal when analyzed
with both sets of primers (Figure 6a and Figure S7).
Importantly, there was no detectable cross-talk in this
multiplexed experiment.
Additionally, typical antibody tests do not take into account
total immunoglobulin concentration. This can lead to false
negatives for patients with immunoglobulin deficiency, which is
a common problem in Celiac disease.32 We envisioned that
simultaneous detection of antigen-binding capacity and total
immunoglobulin content could differentiate false negatives
from abnormally low immunoglobulin levels.
To multiplex the detection of total IgG and antigen-binding
ability, we generated anti-IgG antibody−DNA conjugates from
a single batch of anti-IgG polyclonal antibodies. The batch was
split into two pools, and each was modified with either the
upstream or downstream fragment of the Set 2 PCR amplicon.
As in proximity ligation,19−22 the two halves of the amplicon
are brought close together when the polyclonal antibody−DNA
conjugates bind nearby epitopes, allowing for ligation and
subsequent detection by PCR. Goat anti-biotin antibodies were
diluted into total goat IgG such that the total amount of IgG
remained constant, but the anti-biotin fraction varied. ADAP
analysis with the Set 2 primers showed no change in signal,
corresponding to the constant concentration of IgG in every
Figure 5. Circumventing interference from anti-DNA autoantibodies
by competition with free DNA. (a) Investigation of interference from
anti-DNA autoantibodies. GFP−DNA conjugates were used to analyze
anti-DNA-positive patient plasma and healthy normal plasma. Patient
samples were grouped into those containing anti-single-stranded DNA
antibodies (ssDNA) and those with anti-dsDNA antibodies (dsDNA).
Interference was observed at dilution factors of 1 and 10 for all sample
types (b) Competitor DNA was titrated into undiluted patient and
normal plasma. The addition of competitor DNA eliminated
background signal from interfering antibodies. (c) The experiment
in (a) was repeated but with the addition of 100 μM competitor DNA
which eliminated interference. (d) Purified GFP antibodies were
added to anti-DNA positive and normal plasma. Detection of GFP
antibodies was performed in the presence of 100 μM competitor DNA
in all samples to confirm that it did not disrupt ADAP performance.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
142
 sample, whereas signal generated from the Set 1 primers
increased as the fraction of anti-biotin antibodies increased
(Figure 6b and Figures S8−9). This shows that detection of the
total antibody levels can be multiplexed with detection of
antigen-specific antibodies.
Effect of Antibody Valency and Clonality on ADAP
Performance. Finally, we wished to investigate the impact of
antibody valency and clonality on the performance of ADAP.
Serum antibodies are multivalent and polyclonal to allow
optimal agglutination of pathogens for effective neutralization
and clearance.33 However, the limited agglutination power of
Fab fragment and monoclonal antibodies33 might preclude
them from ADAP-based detection.
We incubated mouse IgG−DNA conjugates either with
bivalent anti-mouse IgG or the corresponding monovalent Fab
fragment and analyzed them by ADAP. As expected, robust
signal was detected for the anti-mouse IgG sample and no
signal from the Fab sample (Figure 7a). Next, we incubated
either polyclonal or monoclonal anti-GFP antibodies with
GFP−DNA conjugates. Interestingly, both antibodies displayed
similar limits of detection (Figure 7b), but with very different
dynamic ranges (about 6 or 4 orders of magnitude for
polyclonal or monoclonal antibody, respectively). We hypothe-
sized that this difference was due to the saturation of binding
sites when the concentration of the antigen−DNA conjugates
matches that of the antibody analytes (the “hook effect”).34
While the monoclonal antibody shows classic hook behavior
when the antibody concentration (1.3 nM) is close to the
antigen−DNA conjugate concentration (0.5 nM), the poly-
clonal antibody hook effect is delayed until a much higher
antibody concentration (64 nM). We attribute this delayed
hook effect to the availability of multiple antigen binding sites
with polyclonal antibody. Polyclonal antibodies enjoy a higher
effective epitope concentration and thus a wider dynamic range.
These results demonstrate ADAP is well-suited for the
detection of both poly- and monoclonal antibodies.
■ DISCUSSION
Of all the protein types one might want to detect in a clinical
setting, antibodies are by far the most numerous.1−6 They are
used as biomarkers of autoimmune diseases, cancers, infectious
diseases, neurological disorders, and vaccine efficacy.1−6
Despite the high value of antibodies as clinical diagnostic
targets, conventional assays for their detection such as solid-
phase ELISAs or RIAs have significant deficiencies. The ADAP
technology uniquely addresses these limitations, being opera-
tionally simple, ultrasensitive, and multiplexable, as well as
applicable to antibodies that recognize conformation-depend-
ent epitopes.
Previous applications of proximity ligation share the common
format of using DNA-conjugated antibodies to detect an
analyte of interest.19−22 ADAP inverts this scenario, using a
DNA-conjugated antigen for detection of antibodies. The assay
exploits the intrinsic multivalency of antibodies to drive the
proximity effect. The impressive dynamic range of ADAP
appears related to the ability of antibodies to aggregate their
antigens, as suggested by the superior performance of poly-
versus monoclonal antibodies (Figure 7b). This mechanism is
unique to antibody detection and to ADAP.
The advantages of the ADAP platform for antibody detection
are considerable. As a solution phase assay, ADAP circumvents
the protein denaturation and epitope masking problems of
surface-immobilized-antigen based formats. While solution-
phase assays such as the radioimmunoassay exist, they are
difficult to perform, are slow, and have limited capacity for
multiplexing. ADAP is 3 orders of magnitude more sensitive
than clinically used assays, creating new possibilities for the
early detection and treatment of disease. As a no-wash assay,
ADAP eliminates the tedious optimization of washing and
centrifugation steps that is necessary to minimize the loss of
low-affinity antibodies. It does not require isolation of unique
monoclonal antibodies as required for certain types of ELISAs.
Since the ADAP does not rely on animal antibodies as capture
reagents, it obviates interference from patient heterophilic
antibodies.35
The reduction in sample consumption and multiplexing
capability lessen the demand for patient serum to promote
patient compliance in applications requiring repeated monitor-
ing. Significantly, ADAP is readily deployable in many clinical
settings, as it uses only conventional PCR equipment and
reagents, which are standard devices in diagnostic laboratories.
The custom reagents (antigen−DNA conjugates, ligation
enzymes, and a bridging oligonucleotide) are used in ultralow
quantities. For example, 100 μg of a 60 kDa antigen-DNA
Figure 6. ADAP can be multiplexed. (a) Detection of two orthogonal
antibodies in one ADAP experiment. Biotin−DNA and mouse IgG−
DNA conjugates bearing either DNA sequence 1 or 2 (Table S2),
respectively, were incubated with either anti-biotin antibody only,
antimouse IgG antibody only, or both antibodies together, and then
analyzed by ADAP. (b) Multiplexed detection of anti-antigen antibody
and total antibody levels by ADAP and proximity ligation assay (PLA),
respectively. Biotin−DNA conjugates and anti-IgG−DNA conjugates
were incubated with samples containing constant total IgG but varied
fractions of anti-biotin antibodies. These samples were analyzed by
ADAP and PLA. Error bars represent the standard deviation from
triplicate samples, but for many data points are too small to be
visualized.
Figure 7. Effects of valency and clonality of the target antibody on
ADAP performance. (a) Mouse IgG−DNA conjugates were incubated
either with polyclonal antimouse IgG antibodies, monovalent Fab
fragment antimouse IgG antibodies, or a control Fab fragment that
recognizes unrelated antigens, and analyzed by ADAP. (b) GFP−DNA
conjugates are incubated either with polyclonal or monoclonal anti-
GFP antibodies and analyzed by ADAP. Error bars represent the
standard deviation from triplicate samples, but for many data points
are too small to be visualized.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
143
 conjugate is sufficient to perform approximately ∼1.7 million
assays.
Infectious diseases such as HIV increasingly rely on
combined antibody and antigen tests to improve confidence
in diagnosis.36 Combined with traditional proximity liga-
tion19−22 and PCR tests, ADAP opens the possibility of
performing all three types of tests (genome-derived nucleic
acids, antigens, and antibodies) in a unified platform. ADAP
could also be easily adapted to any number of novel point-of-
care PCR platforms to provide highly sensitive solution phase
antibody tests in low resource settings. Because of these
favorable attributes, its operational simplicity, and the
leveraging of existing technology, we predict that ADAP will
provide a useful analytical platform for a multitude of clinical
and research applications.
■ METHODS
Synthesis of Antigen−DNA Conjugates. Insulin−DNA
conjugate was synthesized by resuspending recombinant insulin
(Sigma-Aldrich) to make a 1 mg/mL solution in reaction buffer
(55 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM sodium chloride, 20 mM
EDTA, pH 7.2). One μL of a 4 mM solution of sulfo-SMCC
(Pierce Biotechnologies) in anhydrous DMSO was added to 10
μL of the protein solution and incubated at RT for 2 h.
Thiolated-DNA (IDT) was resuspended to 100 μM in reaction
buffer. Three microliters of the 100 μM thiolated-DNA stock
was then added to 50 μL of reaction buffer. To this solution, 4
μL of a 100 mM solution of DTT (Life Technologies) was
added to reduce the oxidized thiolated-DNA. The solution was
then incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. 7k MWCO gel microspin
columns (Life Technologies) were equilibrated with reaction
buffer. The reduced oligonucleotides were desalted by the
equilibrated microspin columns twice. Unreacted sulfo-SMCC
was removed from the insulin solution by a 3k MWCO
centrifugal filter column (EMD Millipore) to a final volume of
60 μL. The thiolated-DNA and insulin solutions were then
mixed, reacted overnight at 4 °C, and then purified by 10k
MWCO filter column. Conjugate concentrations were
determined by BCA assay (Life Technologies). Conjugation
efficiencies were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and silver staining as
described previously.37 A representative silver-stain is shown in
Figure S1. DNA-to-antigen ratios of the conjugates were
estimated by UV−vis absorption. Antigen−DNA conjugates
were stored at 4 °C for short-term usage or aliquoted for long-
term storage at −80 °C. GFP-, mouse-IgG-, and thyroglobu-
lin−DNA conjugates were synthesized similarly with slight
modifications. Briefly, unreacted SMCC was filtered by 7k
MWCO gel microspin columns. Conjugates were purified from
unconjugated DNA by centrifugal filter columns (GFP, 30k
MWCO column; mouse IgG, 100k MWCO column;
thyroglobulin, 100k MWCO column).
Finally, biotin−DNA conjugates was purchased from IDT.
DNP−DNA conjugates were synthesized as follows.Twenty-
five milligrams DNP-NHS ester (Life Technologies) was
dissolved in anhydrous DMSO to make a 50 mM solution. 5′
or 3′ amine functionalized DNA (IDT) was resuspended in
ddH2O to make a 1 mM solution. 40 μL of the 1 mM DNA
solution was added to 300 μL of PBS with 50 mM NaHCO3. 80
μL of the NHS ester solution was added over 2 days at RT
under constant rotational mixing. Modified DNA was then
precipitated by adding 2.5 vol of ethanol and 0.1 vol of 10 M
ammonium acetate and then incubated for 4 h. Precipitated
DNA was pelleted by centrifugation for 15 min at 4 °C,
followed by a gentle wash in ice cold 70% ethanol-H2O. The
pellet was then resuspended in 100 μL of ddH2O and then
purified again by precipitation as before to ensure complete
removal of unreacted small molecules. After the second
precipitation, the pellet was diluted in ddH2O to make a 100
μM stock solution, which was stored at −20 °C until used.
Synthesis was confirmed by high resolution LC-MS.
Antibody Detection by Agglutination-PCR (ADAP).
One fmole of paired antigen−DNA conjugates was resus-
pended in 2 μL of incubation buffer C (2% BSA, 0.2% Triton
X-100, 8 mM EDTA in PBS). Two microliters of analyte was
added to the conjugates and then incubated at 37 °C for 30
min. 116 μL of ligation mix (20 mM Tris, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM
MgCl2, 20 mM DTT, 25 μM NAD, 0.025 U/μL ligase, 100 nM
bridge oligo, 0.01% BSA, pH = 7.5) was added, and then
incubated at 30 °C for 15 min. Ten microliters uracil-excision
mix (0.025 U/μL Epicenter Bio) was added and incubated for
15 min at 30 °C. Twenty-five microliters of the solution was
added to 25 μL of 2x PCR Master Mix (Qiagen) with 10 nM
primers and then amplified by PCR (95 °C for 10 min, 95 °C
for 15 s, 60 °C for 30 s 12 cycles). The reaction was then
diluted 1:20 in ddH2O. 8.5 μL of the diluted PCR samples were
added to 10 μL of 2x qPCR Master Mix (Life Technologies)
with 1.5 μL of primers (final concentration 690 nM). qPCR
was performed on either a Bio-Rad CFX96 or a Bio-Rad iQ5
real-time PCR detection system.
The ADAP assays for affinity purified anti-insulin (Abcam),
anti-biotin (Abcam), anti-GFP (Vector Laboratories), and anti-
mouse IgG antibodies (Pierce Biotechnologies) were carried
out as described above with the following modifications. For
dilution in buffer, 2 μL of antigen−DNA conjugates was mixed
with 2 μL of serial diluted antibodies (concentration range:
102−10−4 μg/mL) in buffer C or buffer only (blank). For
dilution in fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), antibodies were
spiked in fetal bovine serum to obtain 2 wt %/wt antibodies
solution, which was then serial diluted in buffer C
(concentration range: 102−10−4 μg/mL) for ADAP assay.
Isotype antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotech) subjected to the same
preparation were analyzed side-by-side as negative controls.
ADAP Detection Assay for Anti-DNP Antibodies from
Antiserum. The ADAP PCR detection assay for anti-DNP
antiserum (Abcam) was carried out as described above with the
following modifications. Anti-DNP antiserum was obtained
from rabbit inoculated with DNP-conjugated carrier proteins
without further purification. Two microliters of DNP−DNA
conjugates was mixed with 2 μL of serial diluted anti-DNP
antiserum (concentration range: 0.4−0.0002 mg/mL) in buffer
C for ADAP detection.
ADAP Detection Assay for Anti-Thyroglobulin Patient
Plasma. The ADAP detection assay for anti-thyroglobulin
positive patient plasma (ImmunoVision) was carried out as
described above with the following modifications. Two
microliters of thyroglobulin−DNA conjugates were mixed
with 2 μL of serially diluted patient plasma (dilution factor:
100−106) in buffer C for ADAP detection.
Multiplexed ADAP for Anti-Biotin and Anti-Mouse
IgG Antibodies. Three sets of ADAP experiments were
carried out to investigate the orthogonality of anti-biotin and
anti-mouse IgG antibody detection. The multiplex ADAP assay
for anti-biotin and anti-mouse IgG antibody was carried out as
described above with the following modifications. 1 μL of
biotin−DNA conjugates (sequence 1 as in Table S2) and 1 μL
mouse-IgG−DNA conjugates (sequence 2 as in Table S2) are
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
144
 mixed with 2 μL of serial diluted either (1) anti-biotin
antibodies (concentration range: 102−10−4 μg/mL) in buffer C
or buffer only (blank) (2) anti-mouse antibodies (concen-
tration range: 102−10−4 μg/mL) in buffer C or buffer only
(blank) (3) both anti-biotin and anti-mouse antibodies
(concentration range: 102−10−4 μg/mL) in buffer C or buffer
only (blank). The antigen and antibody mixtures were
processed and analyzed as described above.
Multiplexed ADAP and PLA Detection for Anti-Biotin
Antibodies and Total IgG. ADAP and PLA19−22 (proximity
ligation assay) were used in conjunction to quantify the specific
antibodies and total antibodies amounts in a given sample. The
multiplex ADAP detection assay for anti-biotin and total IgG
was carried out as described above with the following
modifications. 1 μL biotin-DNA conjugates (sequence 1) and
1 μL anti-goat-IgG−DNA conjugates (sequence 2) are mixed
with 2 μL of serially diluted either (1) goat anti-biotin
antibodies (concentration range: 102−10−4 μg/mL) in buffer C
or buffer only (blank) (2) goat IgG (concentration range: 102−
10−4 μg/mL) in buffer C or buffer only (blank) (3) both anti-
biotin and goat IgG in buffer C, where total IgG is fixed at 0.7
μg/mL and anti-biotin antibodies fraction varied from 100%−
0% or buffer only (blank). The antigen and antibody mixtures
were processed and analyzed as described above.
Direct ELISA Detection of Anti-Insulin Antibodies.
Recombinant human insulin (Sigma) was resuspended to 1
mg/mL in PBS. 75 μL of the insulin solution was added to
wells of an ELISA plate (Santa Cruz Biotech). The plate was
covered with a plastic membrane, and the insulin was allowed
to adsorb to the plate overnight at 4 °C. Excess supernatant was
decanted, and the wells were blocked with 5% BSA in PBS
overnight at 4 °C. Anti-insulin antibodies were diluted into PBS
and allowed to bind at RT for 1 h. The supernatant was
decanted and the wells were washed 4× with PBS. Secondary
antibody-HRP probes (Santa Cruz Biotech) were diluted
1:5000 in 5% BSA in PBS and added to the wells and allowed
to incubate at RT for 1 h. The supernatant was decanted and
then washed 4× in PBS. 50 μL of TMB substrate solution as
added and allowed to develop for 15 min and then quenched
by addition of 50 μL of 2 M H2SO4. Absorbance was read at
450 nm in a plate reader.
Circumventing Interference from Anti-DNA Antibod-
ies. Anti-DNA antibodies positive patient plasmas were
purchased from ImmunoVision. ADAP detection of anti-
DNA plasma was carried out as described above with slight
modifications. For detection of anti-GFP antibodies, anti-GFP
antibodies are spiked into anti-DNA and normal plasma. A
sample of 2 μL serial diluted anti-GFP solution is incubated
with 2 μL solution containing GFP−DNA conjugates and with
or without 100 μM competition DNA. The competition DNA
is purchased from IDT with the sequence below:
Radioimmunoassay and Electrochemiluminescent
Assays for Anti-Thyroglobulin Autoantibodies. Tg-RIAs
(Kronus), the Beckman Access TgAb (Beckman Coulter) and
Roche Elecsys TgAb (Roche Diagnostics) were performed per
the manufactures’ instructions at University of Southern
California. These assays are standardized against WHO
reference serum 65/93. The assays were performed as
previously described.38
Data Analysis. Three replicate ADAP measurements were
carried out for each antibody sample in buffer C in addition to a
blank. The replicates were measured by taking aliquots from
the same dilution series and the same preparation of ligation,
excision and preamplification steps but placing them in three
different wells for qPCR analysis. A representative real-time
qPCR measurement plot taken from an ADAP assay for the
serial dilution of an anti-biotin antibody is shown in Figure S10.
A single threshold fluorescence value was automatically chosen
by Bio-Rad software. For each curve, the PCR cycle number
with the fluorescence value corresponding to the chosen
threshold value was defined as the cycle threshold (Ct) value.
ΔCt is defined as the Ct value of the blank minus the Ct value of
the samples.39 The value of ΔCt is proportional to the initial
amplicon concentration. This amplicon concentration is then
also proportional to the amount of target antibodies present in
the initial dilution series. A volume of 2 μL from each serial
dilution series was taken for ADAP measurement. Thus, the
number of antibody molecules in each measurement is (2 ×
10−6 L) × antibody concentration (M) × Avogadro’s number.
A nonlinear four parameter logistic fit40 for an antibody dilution
series is determined using custom software. The limit of
detection for the ADAP assay is defined as the average ΔCt
value of the buffer C only blank plus 3 standard deviations of
the blank.41 The value of each limit of detection is calculated
relative to the corresponding blank.
Intra-Assay and Interassay Variation for ADAP. The
intra-assay variation for ADAP was determined by repeating
ADAP measurements in triplicate for anti-GFP antibodies six
times on the same plate. The intra-assay variation is defined as
standard deviation of the triplicate divided by mean of the
triplicate42 and is consistently <1%. The interassay variation for
ADAP is evaluated by measuring anti-GFP antibody concen-
trations in triplicate on five different plates on different days.
The interassay variation defined by standard deviation of the
concentrations from five different plates divided by the mean of
concentrations from five different plates42 and is <3%. Both the
intra-assay and interassay variation of ADAP are far below the
accepted biomedical assay variation values, which are 10% and
15% respectively.42 ADAP’s superior intra-assay and interassay
performance is likely a result of having fewer overall handling
steps, no wash steps, and no centrifugation steps. The extensive
washing and centrifuging requirements for other assays might
compromise their precision and reproducibility.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340.
Additional experimental methods and figures, DNA
sequences, and synthetic schemes (PDF)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: bertozzi@stanford.edu.
Author Contributions
#C.T. and P.V.R. contributed equally to this work.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
145
 ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We graciously acknowledge M. C. Y. Chang and M. C.
Hammond for technical assistance. We thank the UC Berkeley
QB3/Chemistry mass spectrometry facility for help with
characterization of small molecule−DNA conjugates. We also
thank B. Belardi, C. M. Woo, M. Boyce, and P. J. Utz for fruitful
discussions and D. Fox, A. E. Herr, and S. W. Lee for critical
review of the manuscript. This work was funded by NIH Grant
R37 GM058867 and R21 DK108781 to C.R.B.
■ REFERENCES
(1) Bai, T.; Zhou, J.; Shu, Y. Serologic study for influenza A (H7N9)
among high-risk groups in China. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368, 2339−
2340.
(2) Meroni, P. L.; Biggioggero, M.; Pierangeli, S. S.; Sheldon, J.;
Zegers, I.; Borghi, M. O. Standardization of autoantibody testing: a
paradigm for serology in rheumatic diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol.
2013, 10, 35−43.
(3) Reddy, M. M.; Wilson, R.; Wilson, J.; Connell, S.; Gocke, A.;
Hynan, L.; German, D.; Kodadek, T. Identification of candidate IgG
biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease via combinatorial library screening.
Cell 2011, 144, 132−142.
(4) Anderson, K. S.; Sibani, S.; Wallstrom, G.; Qiu, J.; Mendoza, E.
A.; Raphael, J.; Hainsworth, E.; Montor, W. R.; Wong, J.; Park, J. G.;
Lokko, N.; Logvinenko, T.; Ramachandran, N.; Godwin, A. K.; Marks,
J.; Engstrom, P.; Labaer, J. Protein microarray signature of autoanti-
body biomarkers for the early detection of breast cancer. J. Proteome.
Res. 2011, 10, 85−95.
(5) Bradford, T. J.; Wang, X.; Chinnaiyan, A. M. Cancer
immunomics: using autoantibody signatures in the early detection of
prostate cancer. Urol. Oncol. 2006, 24, 237−242.
(6) Kudo-Tanaka, E.; Ohshima, S.; Ishii, M.; Mima, T.; Matsushita,
M.; Azuma, N.; Harada, Y.; Katada, Y.; Ikeue, H.; Umeshita-Sasai, M.;
Miyatake, K.; Saeki, Y. Autoantibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptide 2
(CCP2) are superior to other potential diagnostic biomarkers for
predicting rheumatoid arthritis in early undifferentiated arthritis. Clin.
Rheumatol. 2007, 26, 1627−1633.
(7) Liu, E.; Eisenbarth, G. S. Accepting clocks that tell time poorly:
fluid-phase versus standard ELISA autoantibody assays. Clin. Immunol.
2007, 125, 120−126.
(8) Butler, J. E.; Ni, L.; Brown, W. R.; Joshi, K. S.; Chang, J.;
Rosenberg, B.; Voss, E. W., Jr. The immunochemistry of sandwich
ELISAsVI. Greater than 90% of monoclonal and 75% of polyclonal
anti-fluorescyl capture antibodies (CAbs) are denatured by passive
adsorption. Mol. Immunol. 1993, 30, 1165−1175.
(9) Zhang, B.; Kumar, R. B.; Dai, H.; Feldman, B. J. A plasmonic chip
for biomarker discovery and diagnosis of type 1 diabetes. Nat. Med.
2014, 20, 948−953.
(10) Greenbaum, C. J.; Palmer, J. P.; Kuglin, B.; Kolb, H. Insulin
autoantibodies measured by radioimmunoassay methodology are more
related to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus than those measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay: results of the fourth interna-
tional workshop on the standardization of insulin autoantibody
measurement. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 1992, 74, 1040−1044.
(11) Gentile, F.; Conte, M.; Formisano, S. Thyroglobulin as an
autoantigen: what can we learn about immunopathogenicity from the
correlation of antigenic properties with protein structure. Immunology
2004, 112, 13−25.
(12) Spencer, C. A. Clinical utility of thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb)
measurements for patients with differentiated thyroid cancers (DTC).
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2011, 96, 3615−3627.
(13) Mahler, M.; Fritzler, M. J. Epitope specificity and significance in
systemic autoimmune diseases. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2010, 1183, 267−
287.
(14) Robinson, W. H.; DiGennaro, C.; Hueber, W.; Haab, B. B.;
Kamachi, M.; Dean, E. J.; Fournel, S.; Fong, D.; Genovese, M. C.; de
Vegvar, H. E.; Skriner, K.; Hirschberg, D. L.; Morris, R. I.; Muller, S.;
Pruijn, G. J.; van Venrooij, W. J.; Smolen, J. S.; Brown, P. O.;
Steinman, L.; Utz, P. J. Autoantigen microarrays for multiplex
characterization of autoantibody responses. Nat. Med. 2002, 8, 295−
301.
(15) Simon-Vecsei, Z.; Király, R.; Bagossi, P.; Tóth, B.; Dahlbom, I.;
Caja, S.; Csosz, É.; Lindfors, K.; Sblattero, D.; Nemes, É.; Mäki, M.;
Fésüs, L.; Korponay-Szabó, I. R. A single conformational trans-
glutaminase 2 epitope contributed by three domains is critical for
celiac antibody binding and effects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012,
109, 431−436.
(16) Richter, W.; Shi, Y.; Baekkeskov, S. Autoreactive epitopes
defined by diabetes- associated human monoclonal antibodies are
localized in the middle and C-terminal domains of the smaller form of
glutamate decarboxylase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1993, 90, 2832−
2836.
(17) Iverson, G. M.; Matsuura, E.; Victoria, E. J.; Cockerill, K. A.;
Linnik, M. D. The orientation of β2GPI on the plate is important for
the binding of anti- 2βGPI autoantibodies by ELISA. J. Autoimmun.
2002, 18, 289−297.
(18) Adler, S. P.; McVoy, M.; Biro, V. G.; Britt, W. J.; Hider, P.;
Marshall, D. Detection of cytomegalovirus antibody with latex
agglutination. J. Clin. Microbiol. 1988, 26, 2116−2119.
(19) Fredriksson, S.; Gullberg, M.; Jarvius, J.; Olsson, C.; Pietras, K.;
Gústafsdóttir, S. M.; Östman, A.; Landegren, U. Protein detection
using proximity-dependent DNA ligation assays. Nat. Biotechnol. 2002,
20, 473−477.
(20) Söderberg, O.; Gullberg, M.; Jarvius, M.; Ridderstråle, K.;
Leuchowius, K. J.; Jarvius, J.; Wester, K.; Hydbring, P.; Bahram, F.;
Larsson, L. G.; Landegren, U. Direct observation of individual
endogenous protein complexes in situ by proximity ligation. Nat.
Methods 2006, 3, 995−1000.
(21) Fredriksson, S.; Dixon, W.; Ji, H.; Koong, A. C.; Mindrinos, M.;
Davis, R. W. Multiplexed protein detection by proximity ligation for
cancer biomarker validation. Nat. Methods 2007, 4, 327−329.
(22) Darmanis, S.; Nong, R. Y.; Vänelid, J.; Siegbahn, A.; Ericsson,
O.; Fredriksson, S.; Bäcklin, C.; Gut, M.; Heath, S.; Gut, I. G.;
Wallentin, L.; Gustafsson, M. G.; Kamali-Moghaddam, M.; Landegren,
U. ProteinSeq: high-performance proteomic analyses by proximity
ligation and next generation sequencing. PLoS One 2011, 6, e25583.
(23) Yang, T.; Zhong, P.; Qu, L.; Wang, C.; Yuan, Y. Preparation and
identification of anti-2, 4-dinitrophenyl monoclonal antibodies. J.
Immunol. Methods 2006, 313, 20−28.
(24) Chipinda, I.; Hettick, J. M.; Siegel, P. D. Haptenation: chemical
reactivity and protein binding. J. Allergy 2011, 2011, 839682.
(25) Ling, D.; Salvaterra, P. M. Robust RT-qPCR data normalization:
validation and selection of internal reference genes during post-
experimental data analysis. PLoS One 2011, 6, e17762.
(26) Yu, L.; Miao, D.; Scrimgeour, L.; Johnson, K.; Rewers, M.;
Eisenbarth, G. S. Distinguishing persistent insulin autoantibodies with
differential risk. Diabetes 2012, 61, 179−186.
(27) Romano, A.; Gaeta, F.; Valluzzi, R. L.; Caruso, C.; Rumi, G.;
Bousquet, P. J. IgE-mediated hypersensitivity to cephalosporins: cross-
reactivity and tolerability of penicillins, monobactams, and carbape-
nems. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2010, 126, 994−999.
(28) Kaur, J.; Boro, R. C.; Wangoo, N.; Singh, K. R.; Suri, C. R.
Direct hapten coated immunoassay format for the detection of atrazine
and 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid herbicides. Anal. Chim. Acta 2008,
607, 92−99.
(29) Stassi, G.; De Maria, R. Autoimmune thyroid disease: new
models of cell death in autoimmunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2,
195−204.
(30) Riboldi, P.; Gerosa, M.; Moroni, G.; Radice, A.; Allegri, F.;
Sinico, A.; Tincani, A.; Meroni, P. L. Anti-DNA antibodies: a
diagnostic and prognostic tool for systemic lupus erythematosus?
Autoimmunity 2005, 38, 39−45.
(31) Ruffatti, A.; Calligaro, A.; Del Ross, T.; Bertoli, M. T.; Doria, A.;
Rossi, L.; Todesco, S. Anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies in the
healthy elderly: prevalence and characteristics. J. Clin. Immunol. 1990,
10, 300−303.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
146
 (32) Kumar, V.; Jarzabek-Chorzelska, M.; Sulej, J.; Karnewska, K.;
Farrell, T.; Jablonska, S. Celiac disease and immunoglobulin A
deficiency: how effective are the serological methods of diagnosis?
Clin. Diag. Lab Immunol. 2002, 9, 1295−1300.
(33) Roche, A. M.; Richard, A. L.; Rahkola, J. T.; Janoff, E. N.;
Weiser, J. N. Antibody blocks acquisition of bacterial colonization
through agglutination. Mucosal Immunol. 2015, 8, 176−185.
(34) Fernando, S. A.; Wilson, G. S. Studies of the ‘hook’ effect in the
one-step sandwich immunoassay. J. Immunol. Methods 1992, 151, 47−
66.
(35) Kricka, L. Human anti-animal antibody interferences in
immunological assays. J. Clin. Chem. 1999, 45, 942−956.
(36) Faraoni, S.; Rocchetti, A.; Gotta, F.; Ruggiero, T.; Orofino, G.;
Bonora, S.; Ghisetti, V. Evaluation of a rapid antigen and antibody
combination test in acute HIV infection. J. Clin. Virol. 2013, 57, 84−
87.
(37) Ji, Y. T.; Qu, C. Q.; Cao, B. Y. An optimal method of DNA
silver staining in polyacrylamide gels. Electrophoresis 2007, 28, 1173−
1175.
(38) Netzel, B. C.; Grebe, S. K.; Carranza Leon, B. G.; Castro, M. R.;
Clark, P. M.; Hoofnagle, A. N.; Spencer, C. A.; Turcu, A. F.; Algeciras-
Schimnich, A. Thyroglobulin (Tg) testing revisited: Tg Assays, TgAb
assays, and correlation of results with clinical outcomes. J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2015, 100, 1074−1083.
(39) Niemeyer, C.; Adler, M.; Wacker, R. Detecting antigens by
quantitative immuno-PCR. Nat. Protoc. 2007, 2, 1918−1930.
(40) Findlay, J. W. A.; Dillard, R. F. Appropriate calibration curve
fitting in ligand binding assays. AAPS J. 2007, 9, 260−267.
(41) Armbruster, D. A.; Pry, T. Limit of blank, limit of detection and
limit of quantitation. Clin. Biochem. Rev. 2008, 29, S49−S52.
(42) Bastarache, J. A.; Koyama, T.; Wickersham, N. E.; Mitchell, D.
B.; Mernaugh, R. L.; Ware, L. B. Accuracy and reproducibility of a
multiplex immunoassay platform: a validation study. J. Immunol.
Methods 2011, 367, 33−39.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.5b00340
ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 139−147
147
