 Antibody detection by agglutination–PCR (ADAP)
enables early diagnosis of HIV infection by oral
fluid analysis
Cheng-ting Tsaia,1, Peter V. Robinsonb,1, Felipe de Jesus Cortezb, Maria L. B. Elmac, David Seftelb, Narges Pourmandib,
Mark W. Pandoric,d,2, and Carolyn R. Bertozzia,e,2
aDepartment of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; bEnable Biosciences, San Francisco, CA 94107; cAlameda County Public Health
Laboratory, Oakland, CA 94605; dDepartment of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94113; and eHoward Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
Edited by Chad A. Mirkin, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, and approved December 19, 2017 (received for review June 18, 2017)
Oral fluid (OF) is a highly effective substrate for population-based
HIV screening efforts, as it is noninfectious and significantly easier
to collect than blood. However, anti-HIV antibodies are found at
far lower concentrations in OF compared with blood, leading to
poor sensitivity and a longer period of time from infection to
detection threshold. Thus, despite its inherent advantages in
sample collection, OF is not widely used for population screening.
Here we report the development of an HIV OF assay based on
Antibody Detection by Agglutination–PCR (ADAP) technology. This
assay is 1,000–10,000 times more analytically sensitive than clinical
enzyme-linked immunoassays (EIAs), displaying both 100% clinical
sensitivity and 100% specificity for detecting HIV antibodies
within OF samples. We show that the enhanced analytical sensi-
tivity enables this assay to correctly identify HIV-infected individ-
uals otherwise missed by current OF assays. We envision that the
attributes of this improved HIV OF assay can increase testing
rates of at-risk individuals while enabling diagnosis and treat-
ment at an earlier time point.
protein–DNA conjugation | PCR | immunoassay | oral fluid |
infection diseases
E
liminating HIV from the human population will require in-
novative diagnostic and therapeutic strategies (1). Currently,
large-scale population screening efforts remain the most effective
public health mechanism to identify and funnel HIV-infected
people to treatment (1). Early identification of newly infected
individuals permits the timely initiation of antiretroviral therapy
(ART) to reduce transmission rates and improve health outcomes
(1). During this “acute” period immediately following infection,
patients are up to 26 times more infectious and over 50% of new
transmissions are thought to occur in this window (2, 3).
While blood-based assays efficiently diagnose HIV infection
during the acute phase, these tests suffer from poor compliance
rates due to their invasive nature (4, 5). In contrast, noninvasive
assays such as oral fluid (OF) antibody tests have higher levels of
compliance but lack the analytical sensitivity to detect very low
levels of antibodies in the OF of acutely infected individuals (6–
10). Currently, no existing test meets the pressing medical need
to noninvasively detect HIV during acute infection, which is
essential to maximize the number of people screened and to
intervene at the earliest time.
HIV tests that analyze easily collected OF increase the numbers
of individuals tested in situations where needle-mediated blood
drawing is inefficient or unsafe (4, 5). The use of oral specimens
has facilitated testing in many populations including (i) pop-
ulations for whom it is inconvenient or unsafe to test using needles
(e.g., prisons), (ii) patients whose veins are difficult to draw from
(e.g., drug users, infants), and (iii) people who are averse to having
blood drawn using needles (e.g., children, adolescents) (10–12).
Furthermore, antibodies in OF are stable for several weeks at
ambient temperature, thus decreasing the likelihood of false
results when cold chain shipping is not available (13, 14). Finally,
OF is much safer to handle on a large scale, as HIV cannot be
transmitted by OF thanks to significantly lower viral loads and the
presence of naturally occurring enzymes and other inhibitors that
deactivate the virus (15). OF therefore represents an ideal sample
type for large-scale screening of HIV incidence in many groups,
including those hard-to-reach populations.
Antibodies are the most reliable markers of HIV infection in
OF (16). While HIV-derived RNA and proteins (i.e., p24) are
considered powerful blood-borne markers for detecting early
infections, these HIV components do not consistently appear in
OF (16). Thus, assays that measure HIV RNA by quantitative
PCR (qPCR) or HIV protein (p24) by enzyme-linked immuno-
assays (EIAs) are unsuitable for OF screening. By contrast, HIV-
associated immunoglobulins are reliable markers of infection in
OF (17, 18). Indeed, detection of OF IgG in EIA-type formats
forms the basis of the FDA-approved OraQuick test. Un-
fortunately, however, this test cannot detect disease until at least
40 d after infection (18). This unacceptably long window period
is attributed in part to the ∼1,000-fold lower antibody concen-
tration in OF relative to serum/plasma (19). As a point of
comparison, blood-based tests can detect infection as soon as 14–
25 d after exposure (20). The diminished antibody titers along
Significance
There is a substantial public health interest in identifying HIV-
infected individuals through population-based screening. Oral
fluid (OF) is easier to collect than blood and therefore ideal for
such screening efforts. Unfortunately, OF has a very low con-
centration of anti-HIV antibodies (markers of HIV infection),
which current assays cannot detect during the early stage of
this disease. Here we report an assay for anti-HIV antibodies in
OF that is up to 10,000 times more sensitive than current al-
ternatives. This assay, called Antibody Detection by Aggluti-
nation–PCR (ADAP), could be broadly deployed to screen at-risk
populations using OF in many settings, including those where
cold chain shipping is not available (low-resource settings) and
where needles are inconvenient (pediatrics) or unsafe (prisons).
Author contributions: C.-t.T., P.V.R., D.S., M.W.P., and C.R.B. designed research; C.-t.T., F.d.J.C.,
M.L.B.E., and N.P. performed research; C.-t.T., P.V.R., F.d.J.C., M.L.B.E., M.W.P., and C.R.B. ana-
lyzed data; and C.-t.T., P.V.R., D.S., M.W.P., and C.R.B. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: C.-t.T., P.V.R., D.S., and C.R.B. are founders of Enable
Biosciences. F.d.J.C. and N.P. are employees of Enable Biosciences.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
1C.-t.T. and P.V.R. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: Mark.Pandori@acgov.org or
bertozzi@stanford.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1711004115/-/DCSupplemental.
1250–1255
|
PNAS
|
February 6, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 6
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711004115
 with much lower antibody production in the early phase of the
disease pose significant analytical challenges for current HIV OF
antibody tests (19).
Here we report an ultrasensitive OF HIV antibody detection
method based on Antibody Detection by Agglutination–PCR
(ADAP) technology (Fig. 1) (21). The ADAP platform, similar in
nature to proximity ligation assay (PLA) (22), leverages multivalent
binding of antibodies to drive the agglutination of antigen–DNA
conjugates. The induced proximity enables ligation of DNA frag-
ments to form a full-length DNA amplicon, which can then be
quantified by qPCR. As reported previously, this amplification
permits detection of antigen-specific antibodies at high zeptomole
levels in 1-μL samples (21). Since ligation is only triggered following
a productive antibody–antigen interaction, ADAP does not require
washing steps to remove unbound antigen–DNA conjugates and is
thus well-equipped to detect low-affinity antibodies. Furthermore,
ADAP can detect antibodies of any isotype, including IgM, the
earliest antibody marker of acute infection (20). Importantly, DNA
barcoding allows multiplexing by linking the identity of each anti-
body to a unique DNA sequence. Thus, antibodies specific for
multiple antigens can be detected in a single sample.
Accordingly, we developed an HIV OF test based on ADAP
using DNA conjugates of the HIV proteins p24, gp41, and gp120
(Fig. 1A), the standard antigens for clinical HIV antibody testing
(23). The ADAP test was found to be 1,000–10,000-fold more
sensitive than the EIAs used in clinical settings. We analyzed OF
samples from the Alameda County (California) Public Health
Laboratory’s HIV screening program. We confirmed previously
assigned HIV diagnoses with 100% accuracy. To further evaluate
the assay, we tested a panel of eight OF samples that were
classified as “indeterminate” by current assays. ADAP analysis
reclassified six of these samples as HIV positive due to the
presence of two or more anti-HIV antibodies. Critically, one
such patient was confirmed to be HIV-infected by a follow-up
blood test. Thus, ADAP-based HIV testing may enable population-
based screening for early HIV infection using OF, especially for
those who will not normally get tested.
Results
Synthesis of Viral Antigen–DNA Conjugates. We used commercially
available full-length recombinant p24, gp120, and gp160 (pre-
cursor of gp41 and gp120), all from HIV-1 clade C, as substrates
for DNA conjugation (Fig. 1A). For gp41, we instead used a
recombinant gp41-derived peptide fragment. We then synthesized
the antigen–DNA conjugates by lysine modification with sulfo-
succinimidyl 4-(N-maleimidomethyl)-cyclohexane-1-carboxylate (sulfo-
SMCC), followed by reacting the newly installed maleimide groups
with thiolated oligonucleotides that had been prereduced by
treatment with DTT (Fig. 1B). Unreacted reagents were re-
moved by extensive purification with size-exclusion filter col-
umns. Viral antigen–DNA conjugation ratios were determined
by UV-Vis spectroscopy and gel analysis (Fig. S1). The conju-
gates were then diluted in buffer and stored at 4 °C until use.
Importantly, in a singleplex experiment, all viral antigen–DNA
conjugates contained the same DNA sequence (Table S1),
whereas in the multiplexed experiment, each viral antigen–
DNA conjugate had a unique DNA sequence (Table S1).
ADAP Workflow for HIV Antibody Detection. In an ADAP experi-
ment, pairs of viral antigen–DNA conjugates are first diluted in
buffer. One antigen–DNA conjugate bears the 5′ half of a PCR
amplicon, while the other conjugate bears the 3′ half that is 5′
phosphorylated to enable ligation. The pooled conjugates are
added to 1 μL of OF sample and incubated for 30 min to allow
antibody binding. Next, DNA ligase and a bridge oligonucleotide
are added and incubated for 15 min. The ligation mixture is then
preamplified by PCR, and the resulting products are quantified
by qPCR (Fig. 1C). As high Ct values of qPCR are associated
Fig. 1.
Principle scheme of antibody detection by
ADAP for HIV diagnosis. (A) HIV virus contains many
immunogenic proteins, including viral capsid protein
p24 (blue) and envelope glycoprotein gp160, which
can be cleaved into gp41 (brown) and gp120 (green).
(B) Recombinant viral proteins are activated by in-
stallation of maleimides onto lysine residues via the
small-molecule cross-linking agent sulfo-SMCC.
Thiol-functionalized DNA covalently ligates to these
maleimides by Michael addition to form protein–DNA
conjugates. (C) Upon incubation with antibody-con-
taining samples, antibodies and conjugates form im-
mune complexes, allowing nearby DNA to be ligated
into a full-length amplicon upon addition of a uni-
versal bridge oligonucleotide and DNA ligase. Each
amplicon bears unique primer binding sites for in-
dependent amplification and quantification by real-
time qPCR. Critically, DNA conjugates alone without
ligation bear only one primer binding site and are
therefore PCR-incompetent. Only successful ligation
into a full-length amplicon enables exponential am-
plification by PCR. This “turn-on” mechanism allows
ADAP to leverage PCR’s analytical sensitivity while
preserving assay specificity.
Tsai et al.
PNAS
|
February 6, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 6
|
1251
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
CHEMISTRY
 with low assay reproducibility, we include a preamplification step
in the ADAP protocol to ensure high assay reproducibility as
reported previously (21, 22).
ADAP Showed Enhanced Analytical Sensitivity Compared with a
Standard OF EIA Used in Public Health Laboratories. To demon-
strate that viral antigen–DNA conjugates were capable of
detecting their cognate antibodies, we obtained a panel of highly
purified human antibodies against p24, gp41, and gp160 derived
from HIV patients (Immunodx). We then serially diluted each
HIV antibody into buffer and quantitated them using ADAP or a
clinical EIA (Avioq microelisa, FDA approved). We observed
concentration-dependent signals for all three antibodies using
ADAP with a dynamic range up to 105 (Fig. 2). The detection
limits were 110, 880, and 550 zeptomoles (10−21 moles) of anti-
p24, anti-gp41, and anti-gp160, respectively. In contrast, with the
EIA assay, the detection limits were 8.5, 9.2, and 11 femtomoles
for anti-p24, anti-gp41, and anti-gp160, respectively. Collectively,
ADAP showed 1,000–10,000-fold enhanced analytical sensitivity
compared with a clinical EIA assay.
Singleplex Clinical Sensitivity and Specificity Using Archived OF
Samples from a Public Health Screening Program. Next, we evalu-
ated the clinical sensitivity and specificity of the ADAP method
using OF samples obtained as part of an HIV screening effort by
the Alameda County (California) Public Health Laboratory. The
OF samples were remnant test samples that were not individually
identifiable and complied with FDA guidance on their use (24).
We selected 22 EIA-reactive (“positive”) OF samples from HIV-
infected patients and 22 EIA-nonreactive (“negative”) OF
samples from non-HIV donors. The positive OF samples were
selected to represent a range of EIA assay signal intensities, with
signal-to-cutoff (S/C) ratios from 1.7 to 6.7 measured by EIAs
(Avioq microelisa). A confirmatory Western blot assay (Orasure)
was also performed on the OF samples to ensure the presence of
two or more reactive antibodies, as recommended by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines (25).
We incubated the OF samples with each viral antigen–DNA
conjugate (p24, gp41, gp120, and gp160) and followed the ADAP
protocol as outlined above. For all four viral antigens, a clear
difference (P < 0.05) between positive and negative OF was ob-
served (Fig. 3A). We then used two SDs of negative OF to es-
tablish a positivity threshold for each antibody marker. We
defined HIV positivity as two or more antibodies with signal in-
tensities above threshold values. Under these stringent criteria, all
22 negative OF samples were correctly classified as HIV-negative
and all 22 positive OF samples were classified as HIV-positive,
achieving 100% sensitivity and specificity (Fig. 3A).
Additionally, we sought to compare the signal intensities
measured using the ADAP and clinical EIA assays (Avioq
microelisa). The EIA assay measured total antibody-derived
signal. To approximate this composite measurement, we
summed the ADAP signal intensities derived from three viral
antigens (p24, gp41, and gp120, Fig. 3B). As shown in Fig.
3C, the correlation between the two assays was high (R =
0.80, P < 0.05). Signal correlations of individual HIV com-
ponents to EIA were shown in Fig. S4. These results further
validated ADAP as a means to detect anti-HIV antibodies.
A final concern we sought to address was whether the differ-
ence in signal between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individ-
uals was simply the result of intrinsic differences in their OF
compositions. For example, OF from immunosuppressed HIV-
positive patients might contain unknown factors that elevated
ADAP signal intensity in an antibody-independent manner. To
preclude this possibility, we synthesized negative-control GFP
(green fluorescent protein)–DNA conjugates. As there were no
naturally occurring anti-GFP antibodies within human OF, we
expected that no signal should be observed from ADAP analysis
using GFP–DNA conjugates. Indeed, HIV-positive and HIV-
negative OFs were indistinguishable following ADAP analysis
with GFP–DNA conjugates (P = 0.5) (Fig. S2). This experiment
supports the assignment of signals such as those shown in Fig. 3
A and B to the presence of anti-HIV antibodies in OF.
Multiplexed Clinical Sensitivity and Specificity Using Archived OF
Samples from a Public Health Screening Program. Our previous ex-
periments showed that ADAP faithfully detected individual
HIV-specific antibodies from OF. Next, we sought to create a
multiplexed ADAP assay to simultaneously analyze three of these
antibodies in a single test. We synthesized each viral antigen–DNA
conjugate with unique DNA barcodes (Fig. 1B and Table S1). Only
the correct antibody markers would agglutinate the related antigen–
DNA conjugates, leading to amplification of the associated
barcodes. Unique primer pairs within different wells of a qPCR
plate could then be used to quantify the amount of each DNA
barcode (Fig. 1C).
We reanalyzed the 22 positive OF and 22 negative OF samples
using this multiplexed ADAP strategy for antibodies against p24,
gp41, and gp120 in a single assay. Gp160 was not included due to
the fact that gp41 and gp120 are the cleavage products of gp160.
These two antigens together cover the entire amino acid se-
quence of gp160. Thus, the use of p24, gp41, and gp120 should
yield a near-complete landscape of the antibody response to HIV
infection. As before, we defined HIV-positivity by detection of
two or more antibodies above a cutoff threshold. By this metric,
a clinical profile identical to our previous singleplex analysis was
obtained, with clinical sensitivity and specificity of 100% (Fig. 4).
We observed the same patterns for individual antigens, with 91%
positivity for anti-p24 and 100% for anti-gp41 and anti-gp120
(Fig. 4). Correlations of signals between singleplex and multiplexed
Fig. 2.
ADAP’s analytical sensitivity outperformed commercial EIA by several orders of magnitude. Purified human anti-HIV antibodies were serially diluted
in buffer. The dilution series was assayed by ADAP and EIA (Avioq microelisa). The x axis displays the amount of antibody, while the left y axis shows the signal
from an ADAP qPCR experiment and the right y axis shows the signal from commercial EIA. For most data points, the error bars were too small to be
visualized.
1252
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711004115
Tsai et al.
 experiments were also very high (R = 0.99 for p24, 0.97 for gp41,
and 0.95 for gp120) (Fig. 5).
These data demonstrated that ADAP detection of HIV anti-
bodies in OF was at least as sensitive and specific as a current
clinical standard assay employed in public health laboratories.
Importantly, the ADAP OF assay allowed multiplexed profiling
of the HIV immune response in a single assay. It is also of
considerable note that the only FDA-approved confirmatory test
for positive OF EIA test results (OraSure HIV-1 Western Blot)
is poised to leave the market. An assay such as ADAP, which can
detect antibodies to multiple HIV antigens simultaneously,
might be an effective replacement. The absence of an OF con-
firmatory test will force laboratories to adapt existing blood-
based tests for this purpose, which could be a less than ideal
proposition for the diagnostic community.
ADAP May Detect HIV Earlier than Current OF Assays. Finally, we
performed a pilot study to determine whether ADAP analysis of
OF could detect HIV infection earlier than the clinical OF assay
(Avioq Microelisa). We obtained a panel of eight OF samples
that showed indeterminate results using the current OF test. The
indeterminate status was defined by S/C values measured by EIA
(Avioq microelisa) between 0.6–0.9 and showed a single weak
band in Western blot (Orasure). OF samples that met these
criteria displayed “HIV-positive–like” qualities but did not meet
the full criteria for HIV positivity. These samples might be de-
rived from patients in the early seroconversion phase of HIV
infection and thus might harbor very low levels of antibodies that
traditional assays could not detect.
ADAP analysis revealed that six of eight indeterminate samples
were positive for two or more HIV-associated antibodies and thus
reclassified these patients as HIV-positive (Fig. 4 and Table 1).
Critically, we obtained a blood sample from one ADAP-positive/
EIA-indeterminate individual (follow-up blood samples were not
available for other indeterminate individuals). As blood contains
1,000-fold higher levels of antibodies compared with OF, current
tests can analyze such samples with improved confidence. Analysis
of this blood sample revealed the patient to be HIV-positive, in
agreement with ADAP’s classification. These results suggested
that ADAP’s enhanced analytical sensitivity might enable early
detection of HIV infection from OF.
Discussion
Since the first FDA-approved tests for detection of HIV anti-
bodies became available in 1985 (26), assays for blood-based
HIV diagnostics have evolved enormously. The first-generation
HIV serum assays used whole HIV lysates as antigens, with anti–
human-IgG secondary antibodies as reporters. This assay design
suffered from low specificity due to contaminants present in the
lysates (25). To address this problem, a second-generation assay
instead employed recombinant peptides and proteins to improve
the purity of antigen probes. However, second-generation assays
still required a long period of up to 40 d after exposure before
antibody detection was possible (25). A third-generation assay
sought to improve the window period by detecting both IgM and
IgG anti-HIV antibodies in a sandwich EIA format (25). Since
IgM antibodies appear much earlier than IgG in the serocon-
version process, this technology shortened the window period to
∼20–25 d. Finally, fourth-generation assays not only detected
IgM and IgG anti-HIV antibodies but also detected viral protein
p24, which allowed HIV diagnosis ∼14–16 d after infection (25).
In addition to these protein detection assays, HIV RNA assays
have been developed to accurately quantify viral loads at the
earliest stage of infection (25). Moreover, highly sensitive im-
munoassays including digital ELISA have also been reported to
enable early diagnosis of HIV (27). These innovations together
have greatly improved the sensitivity and specificity of HIV di-
agnosis by blood samples.
In contrast, the performance of OF-based HIV assays has remained
relatively stagnant, with window periods persisting at 40–50 d
postinfection. Counterintuitively, the diagnostic technology used
in first- and second-generation blood-based assays outperforms
more recent-generation assays when analyzing OF (19). The much
lower antibody concentration and inconsistent presence of viral
proteins or RNA in OF samples surely contribute to this problem
(19). As OF-based assays can greatly improve HIV screening rates
and compliance, there remains an unmet need for improved OF
assays to advance HIV management.
Fig. 4.
Multiplexed ADAP analysis of clinical OF samples. A multiplexed
version of ADAP simultaneously detected antibodies against p24, gp41, and
gp120. We reanalyzed the OF samples from before and observed identical
performance to the singleplex analysis. HIV-positive samples again showed
91% positivity in p24 and 100% in gp41 and gp120. Applying the same
criteria for positivity (two or more antibodies), multiplexed ADAP analysis
demonstrated 100% clinical sensitivity and specificity as seen with single-
plex. In addition, we analyzed several indeterminate OF samples (n = 8) with
multiplexed ADAP. Detailed ADAP analysis results for eight indeterminate
samples are summarized in Table 1.
Fig. 3.
Singleplex ADAP analysis of OF samples. (A) OF samples from HIV-
negative (n = 22) and HIV-positive (n = 22) patients were analyzed by ADAP.
Using cutoff values established from HIV-negative samples, HIV-positive
samples showed 91% positivity for p24 and 100% for gp41, gp120, and
gp160. (B) Cumulative signal from all anti-HIV antibodies. All 22 HIV-positive
samples showed a higher signal than 22 HIV-negative samples. By defining
positivity as the presence of two or more HIV antibodies, singleplex ADAP
analysis yields 100% clinical sensitivity and specificity in comparison with the
clinical gold-standard EIA. (C) The cumulative signal intensities of ADAP
correlated well with the signal intensities of EIA (R = 0.80, P < 0.05).
Tsai et al.
PNAS
|
February 6, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 6
|
1253
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
CHEMISTRY
 Our ADAP OF assay leverages the analytical sensitivity of
PCR to achieve highly sensitive, specific, and multiplexed de-
tection of antibodies against several HIV antigens with low
sample consumption. Notably, the ADAP test likely reports on
the presence of both IgGs and IgMs, the earliest antibody in-
fection marker, as both species agglutinate DNA-conjugated
antigens (Table S2). We demonstrated that our ADAP assay was
1,000–10,000× more sensitive than a standard clinical OF EIA
test. The potential clinical utility of this sensitivity was demon-
strated by identifying an HIV infection that was otherwise missed
by current OF tests.
These results established the basis for further development and
validation of ADAP HIV OF assays. First, most viral antigens
employed in this report were derived from HIV-1 clade C. These
antigens were well-suited to develop assays for centers at the front
lines of the HIV pandemic, including South Africa (28). We en-
vision our ADAP HIV OF assays best applied as an incidence
screening test in public health settings. As such, future experi-
ments should focus on whether ADAP HIV OF assays retain
clinical sensitivity and specificity for HIV-1 of other clades. Sec-
ond, specific antigens for HIV-1 group N, O, and P and HIV-2
(e.g., gp36) were not incorporated into current multiplexed panels
(29). Including these antigens would strengthen an ADAP assay
for HIV diagnosis. Third, we demonstrated a promising but pre-
liminary example of ADAP’s ability to detect HIV during the
acute infection phase, where other tests might fail. Analysis of
paired OF and blood samples throughout the seroconversion
processes would be required to show that ADAP assays have a
shorter window period in comparison with other assays.
In summary, ADAP presents the unique potential to detect
early HIV infection using easily acquired OF samples on a
standard qPCR machine. ADAP meets the pressing public
health need to identify HIV and treat it as early as possible to
both improve interruption of disease transmission and enhance
patient outcomes.
Materials and Methods
Materials. Chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich unless otherwise
specified. DTT and sulfo-SMCC were purchased from Life Technologies. DNA ligase
was purchased from EpiCentre (A8101). Platinum Taq polymerase (10966026) and
SYBR qPCR 2X master mix (4385610) were purchased from Thermo Fischer. Other
reagents were detailed in the Materials and Methods section as appropriate.
Synthesis of Protein–DNA Conjugates. The p24 (Immunodx), gp120 (Immu-
nodx), and gp160 (Avioq) antigens in this study were full-length recombinant
proteins. The gp41 antigen was a recombinant peptide fragment (Fitzgerald
Industry International). The above proteins were suspended in reaction
buffer (55 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM sodium chloride, 20 mM EDTA,
pH 7.2) to make 1 mg/mL solutions. Sulfo-SMCC (Thermo Scientific) (1 μL of
8 mM solution in anhydrous DMSO) was added to 10 μL of the protein so-
lution. The reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature (RT) for
2 h. Thiolated-DNA (IDT) was suspended in reaction buffer to 100 μM. A 3-μL
aliquot of thiolated-DNA solution and 4 μL of a 100-mM solution of DTT were
mixed to reduce oxidized thiolated-DNA. The solution was then incubated at
37 °C for 1 h. The excess sulfo-SMCC in the protein solution and DTT in the
thiolated-DNA solution were removed by 7K MWCO Zeba spin column
(Thermo Fischer). The thiolated-DNA and viral protein solutions were then
pooled and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The DNA-to-protein incubation ratio
was 3-to-1 for all proteins and peptides used in this study. Finally, protein–
DNA conjugates were purified by 30K MWCO filter (Millipore). Conjugate
concentrations were determined by BCA assay (Life Technologies). Conjuga-
tion efficiencies were analyzed by SDS/PAGE and silver staining as described
previously (21). A representative silver stain was shown in Fig. S1. DNA-to-
protein ratios of the conjugates were estimated by UV-VIS absorption and
typically fell in the range of 2-to-1. Protein–DNA conjugates were stored at
4 °C for short-term usage or aliquoted for long-term storage at −80 °C.
DNA Sequences. All DNA sequences used in this study are provided in Table S1.
Clinical Samples. The study protocol (ID 36631) was approved by Stanford
University Institutional Review Board. OF samples used in this study were
deidentified remnant test samples (from the HIV screening program at Al-
ameda County) that would otherwise be discarded. These individually non-
identifiable leftover samples met the full criteria of FDA guidance on their
use, and informed consent requirements were waived (24). OF samples were
collected using Orasure oral specimen collection devices according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. An OF collection pad was inserted between the
cheek and gums for 5–7 min. Thereafter, the collection pad was stored in
the collection tube containing storage buffer. The OF specimen was then
transferred to Alameda County Public Health laboratory at RT. Once re-
ceived, OF specimens were eluted by centrifugation at 800 g for 15 min. Each
OF specimen contained 0.7–1.5 mL of liquid. HIV status was determined by a
two-tier algorithm. Avioq HIV-1 Microelisa was used as a first-tier assay, and
positive samples were confirmed by Orasure Western blots. All OF samples
had been stored at −20 °C.
Singleplex ADAP. Paired protein–DNA conjugates (1 femtomole) were sus-
pended in 2 μL of buffer C (2% BSA, 0.2% Triton X-100, 8 mM EDTA, 100 μM
of competition DNA, 1 mg/mL goat IgG in PBS). A 1-μL aliquot of analyte was
added to the conjugates and then incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. A 117-μL
aliquot of ligation mix (20 mM Tris, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 20 mM DTT,
25 μM NAD, 0.025 U/μL ligase, 100 nM bridge oligonucleotide, 0.01% BSA,
pH 7.5) was added and incubated at 30 °C for 15 min. A 25-μL aliquot of the
solution was added to 25 μL of 2× PCR Mix with 10 nM primers and then
amplified by PCR (95 °C for 10 min, 95 °C for 15 s, 56 °C for 30 s, 12 cycles).
The PCR was then diluted 1:20 in H2O. A 8.5-μL aliquot of the diluted PCR
samples was added to 10 μL of 2× qPCR Master Mix with 1.5 μL of a primer
solution (final primer concentration 690 nM). SYBR Green-based qPCR was
performed on a Bio-Rad CFX96 real-time PCR detection system (95 °C for
10 min, 95 °C for 30 s, 56 °C for 1 min, 40 cycles).
A 1-μL sample volume was used, as larger volumes lead to increased
background signals in some clinical samples. In addition, data generated
from sample volumes below 1 μL suffered from reduced reproducibility.
Importantly, to correct potential drift in qPCR signal across different ex-
periments, a blank sample containing buffer C was always run concurrent to
the actual samples of interest. The rest of the procedure then followed the
protocol outlined above.
Table 1.
Multiplexed ADAP assay identified HIV infection
missed by commercial EIA
Six out of eight indeterminate OF samples were reclassified as HIV-positive
(highlighted yellow) by multiplexed ADAP analysis. Strikingly, a follow-up blood
draw confirmed one such sample (16AC6294, highlighted red) to be HIV infected,
which was otherwise missed by commercial EIA (bold font for positive signals).
Fig. 5.
Singleplex and multiplexed ADAP signal intensities showed strong
correlation. The signal intensities from singleplex and multiplexed ADAP
analysis of the same samples were plotted and analyzed for correlation.
Correlation coefficients of 0.99, 0.97, and 0.96 were observed for p24, gp41,
and gp120, respectively.
1254
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711004115
Tsai et al.
 The ADAP assay readout ΔCt is defined as the Ct value of blank minus Ct
value of actual samples (Fig. S3). The value of ΔCt is proportional to the initial
amplicon concentrations in the PCR plate well. This amplicon concentration is
also proportional to the amount of target antibodies present in the samples.
(For each curve, the PCR cycle number with fluorescence value corresponding
to the chosen threshold value is defined as the cycle threshold, Ct.)
Multiplexed ADAP. The protocol was similar to singleplex ADAP analysis with
minor modifications. Briefly, 1 femtomole of all protein–DNA conjugates was
suspended in 2 μL of buffer C. Then, analyte and ligation mix were added
and incubated sequentially as described above. Then, 25 μL of ligated so-
lution was aliquoted into different wells of PCR tubes that each contained
PCR master mix and one primer pair. The preamplified products were then
quantified by different primer pairs in a 96-well qPCR plate. Finally, ΔCt for
each DNA amplicon/primer was calculated and therefore allowed multi-
plexed quantification of multiple antibody targets from a single sample.
Analysis of Purified HIV-Patient Antibodies. Purified patient-derived human
HIV antibodies against p24, gp41, and gp160 (ImmunoDx) were serially diluted
10-fold in buffer C and subjected to either ADAP analysis in our laboratory or
clinical EIA testing (Avioq microelisa) at the Alameda County Public Health
Laboratory. Each sample was run in triplicate. The dilution curve was modeled
by 4 parameter logistic fit (30). The limit of detection was then defined as the
average ΔCt value of the buffer C-only blank plus 3 SDs of the blank (31). In
this work, we measured buffer C-only blank in triplicate to derive the SDs. The
limit of detection was calculated relative to the blank (31).
Analysis of Clinical HIV OF Samples. HIV OF samples were obtained from Al-
ameda County Public Health Laboratory. The 22 HIV-positive OFs showed EIA
signals above the cutoff and two or more reactive bands on Western blot.
These positive samples were carefully selected to display a wide range of EIA
signal intensities to challenge ADAP’s assay performance (S/C ratio ranged
from 1.7 to 6.7). The 22 HIV-negative OF samples showed signal below the
EIA cutoff (S/C ratio ranged from 0.1 to 0.3). The eight indeterminate HIV
samples showed EIA signal close to the cutoff (S/C ratio ranged from 0.6 to
0.9). Furthermore, these samples showed one weakly reactive band in
Western blot analysis (Orasure), therefore rendering them HIV-indeterminate.
The Alameda County Public Health Laboratory obtained a follow-up
finger prick for one indeterminate sample donor and confirmed the
patient HIV-positive.
In singleplex ADAP analysis, p24–, gp41–, gp120–, and gp160–DNA conju-
gates were used separately to detect antibody reactivity in OF. In a multi-
plexed experiment, p24–, gp41–, and gp120–DNA conjugates that contained
unique DNA barcodes were used simultaneously to profile anti-HIV antibody
response in OF samples. Gp160 was not employed in a multiplexed experi-
ment because gp41 and gp120 displayed the entire amino acid sequence of
gp160. We thus did not foresee the additional benefit of including gp160.
Data Analysis. In the ADAP to EIA correlation analysis, the ADAP signal was
the geometric sum of the ΔCt value of the p24, gp41, and gp120 assays. The
summed signals were then correlated to the logarithm of EIA signals. The
use of logarithm was necessary as ΔCt is a logarithmic parameter (32). [For
instance, consider a sample of ΔCt value of 2 and another sample of ΔCt of
4; their amplicon quantities differ by fourfold (24/22) rather than twofold.]
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Mike Cronin from Avioq for kindly supply-
ing gp160. This work was supported by the Stanford Predictive and Diag-
nostics Accelerator (SPADA) and NIH Grant R21 DK108781 (to C.R.B.). Enable
Biosciences was supported in part by NSF Grant 1622257 (to P.V.R. and D.S.).
1. Bayer R, Oppenheimer GM (2013) Routine HIV testing, public health, and the
USPSTF—An end to the debate. N Engl J Med 368:881–884.
2. Hollingsworth TD, Anderson RM, Fraser C (2008) HIV-1 transmission, by stage of in-
fection. J Infect Dis 198:687–693.
3. Powers KA, et al. (2011) The role of acute and early HIV infection in the spread of HIV
and implications for transmission prevention strategies in Lilongwe, Malawi: A
modelling study. Lancet 378:256–268.
4. Carballo-Diéguez A, Frasca T, Dolezal C, Balan I (2012) Will gay and bisexually active
men at high risk of infection use over-the-counter rapid HIV tests to screen sexual
partners? J Sex Res 49:379–387.
5. Stekler JD, et al. (2013) Relative accuracy of serum, whole blood, and oral fluid HIV
tests among Seattle men who have sex with men. J Clin Virol 58:e119–e122.
6. Luo W, et al. (2013) Comparison of HIV oral fluid and plasma antibody results during
early infection in a longitudinal Nigerian cohort. J Clin Virol 58:e113–e118.
7. Pilcher CD, et al. (2013) Performance of rapid point-of-care and laboratory tests for
acute and established HIV infection in San Francisco. PLoS One 8:e80629.
8. Merson MH, O’Malley J, Serwadda D, Apisuk C (2008) The history and challenge of
HIV prevention. Lancet 372:475–488.
9. Beckwith CG, et al. (2011) An evaluation of a routine opt-out rapid HIV testing pro-
gram in a Rhode Island jail. AIDS Educ Prev 23(3 Suppl):96–109.
10. Hodinka RL, Nagashunmugam T, Malamud D (1998) Detection of human immuno-
deficiency virus antibodies in oral fluids. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 5:419–426.
11. Sherman GG, Jones SA (2005) Oral fluid human immunodeficiency virus tests: Im-
proved access to diagnosis for infants in poorly resourced prevention of mother to
child transmission programs. Pediatr Infect Dis J 24:253–256.
12. Kowalczyk Mullins TL, Braverman PK, Dorn LD, Kollar LM, Kahn JA (2010) Adolescent
preferences for human immunodeficiency virus testing methods and impact of rapid
tests on receipt of results. J Adolesc Health 46:162–168.
13. Schramm W, Angulo GB, Torres PC, Burgess-Cassler A (1999) A simple saliva-based test
for detecting antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol
6:577–580.
14. Tourinho RS, et al. (2012) Could oral fluid be used to evaluate anti-hepatitis A virus
status in individuals living in difficult-to-access areas? Vaccine 30:6421–6426.
15. Page-Shafer K, Sweet S, Kassaye S, Ssali C (2006) (C2) Saliva, breast milk, and mucosal
fluids in HIV transmission. Adv Dent Res 19:152–157.
16. Corstjens PL, Abrams WR, Malamud D (2012) Detecting viruses by using salivary di-
agnostics. J Am Dent Assoc 143(10 Suppl):12S–18S.
17. Balamane M, et al. (2010) Detection of HIV-1 in saliva: Implications for case-identifi-
cation, clinical monitoring and surveillance for drug resistance. Open Virol J 4:88–93.
18. US Food and Drug Administration (2012) OraQuick in-home HIV test: Summary of safety
and effectiveness. Available at https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
BloodBloodProducts/ApprovedProducts/PremarketApprovalsPMAs/UCM312534.pdf.
Accessed December 17, 2012.
19. Louie B, Lei J, Liska S, Dowling T, Pandori MW (2009) Assessment of sensitivity and
specificity of first, second, and third generation EIA for the detection of antibodies to
HIV-1 in oral fluid. J Virol Methods 159:119–121.
20. Taylor D, et al. (2015) Probability of a false-negative HIV antibody test result during
the window period: A tool for pre- and post-test counselling. Int J STD AIDS 26:
215–224.
21. Tsai CT, Robinson PV, Spencer CA, Bertozzi CR (2016) Ultrasensitive antibody de-
tection by agglutination-PCR (ADAP). ACS Cent Sci 2:139–147.
22. Fredriksson S, et al. (2007) Multiplexed protein detection by proximity ligation for
cancer biomarker validation. Nat Methods 4:327–329.
23. Buttò S, Suligoi B, Fanales-Belasio E, Raimondo M (2010) Laboratory diagnostics for
HIV infection. Ann Ist Super Sanita 46:24–33.
24. US Food & Drug Administration (2006) Informed consent for in vitro diagnostic device
studies using leftover human specimens that are not individually identifiable. Avail-
able at https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm078384.htm. Ac-
cessed April 25, 2006.
25. Cornett JK, Kirn TJ (2013) Laboratory diagnosis of HIV in adults: A review of current
methods. Clin Infect Dis 57:712–718.
26. US Food & Drug Administration (2014) HIV/AIDS Historical Time Line 1981-1990.
Available at https://www.fda.gov/forpatients/illness/hivaids/history/ucm151074.htm. Ac-
cessed August 8, 2014.
27. Chang L, et al. (2013) Simple diffusion-constrained immunoassay for p24 protein with
the sensitivity of nucleic acid amplification for detecting acute HIV infection. J Virol
Methods 188:153–160.
28. Wilkinson E, Engelbrecht S, de Oliveira T (2015) History and origin of the HIV-1 sub-
type C epidemic in South Africa and the greater southern African region. Sci Rep 5:
16897.
29. Lemey P, et al. (2003) Tracing the origin and history of the HIV-2 epidemic. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 100:6588–6592.
30. Findlay JWA, Dillard RF (2007) Appropriate calibration curve fitting in ligand binding
assays. AAPS J 9:E260–E267.
31. Armbruster DA, Pry T (2008) Limit of blank, limit of detection and limit of quanti-
tation. Clin Biochem Rev 29:S49–S52.
32. Niemeyer CM, Adler M, Wacker R (2007) Detecting antigens by quantitative immuno-
PCR. Nat Protoc 2:1918–1930.
Tsai et al.
PNAS
|
February 6, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 6
|
1255
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
CHEMISTRY
