 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Onionin A inhibits ovarian cancer 
progression by suppressing cancer 
cell proliferation and the protumour 
function of macrophages
Junko Tsuboki1,2,*, Yukio Fujiwara1,*, Hasita Horlad1, Daisuke Shiraishi1, Toshihiro Nohara3, 
Shingo Tayama2, Takeshi Motohara2, Yoichi Saito1, Tsuyoshi Ikeda3, Kiyomi Takaishi2, 
Hironori Tashiro4, Yukihiro Yonemoto5, Hidetaka Katabuchi2, Motohiro Takeya1 & 
Yoshihiro Komohara1
It is well known that tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) play an important role in tumour 
development by modulating the tumour microenvironment, and targeting of protumour activation or 
the M2 polarization of TAMs is expected to be an effective therapy for cancer patients. We previously 
demonstrated that onionin A (ONA), a natural low molecular weight compound isolated from onions, 
has an inhibitory effect on M2 macrophage polarization. In the present study, we investigated whether 
ONA had a therapeutic anti-ovarian cancer effect using in vitro and in vivo studies. We found that ONA 
reduced the extent of ovarian cancer cell proliferation induced by co-culture with human macrophages. 
In addition, we also found that ONA directly suppressed cancer cell proliferation. A combinatorial effect 
with ONA and anti-cancer drugs was also observed. The activation of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3), which is involved in cell proliferation and chemo-resistance, was significantly 
abrogated by ONA in ovarian cancer cells. Furthermore, the administration of ONA suppressed 
cancer progression and prolonged the survival time in a murine ovarian cancer model under single 
and combined treatment conditions. Thus, ONA is considered useful for the additional treatment of 
patients with ovarian cancer owing to its suppression of the protumour activation of TAMs and direct 
cytotoxicity against cancer cells.
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is one of the most lethal female cancers in the world. Although the number of 
new cases of EOC ranked tenth among female malignancies, the number of deaths due to EOC ranked fifth in 
the United States1. Clinically, peritoneal dissemination and ascitic fluid are common clinical features of advanced 
EOC, which are not only difficult to excise using surgery but also often resistant to chemotherapy. In other words, 
one of the keys in the treatment of patients with EOC is controlling peritoneal dissemination and ascitic fluid. 
It is well known that the cancer microenvironment in the peritoneal cavity is important for EOC progression2. 
Many infiltrating macrophages (referred to as tumour-associated macrophages, TAMs) are detected in the pri-
mary lesion and ascitic fluid of patients with advanced EOC, and TAMs are considered to play critical roles in the 
development of peritoneal dissemination3–6.
Recent studies revealed heterogeneity in macrophage function. Many researchers suspect that macrophages 
can differentiate into various activation states owing to the cytokine balance in the microenvironment. Briefly, 
macrophages are differentiated into the M1 (classically activated) phenotype by Th1-type cytokines or bacterial 
1Department of Cell Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Honjo 1-1-1, Chuo-ku, 
Kumamoto 860-8556, Kumamoto, Japan. 2Obsterics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, Honjo 1-1-1, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Kumamoto, Japan. 3Department of Natural 
Medicine, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sojo University, Ikeda 4-22-1, Nishi-ku, Kumamoto 860-0082, Japan. 
4Department of Mother-Child Nursing, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kuhonji 4-24-1, Chuo-ku, 
Kumamoto 862-0976, Kumamoto, Japan. 5Priority Organization for Innovation and Excellence, Kumamoto University, 
Kurokami 2-39-1, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8555, Kumamoto, Japan. ∗These authors contributed equally to this work. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y.K. (email: ycomo@kumamoto-u.ac.jp)
received: 02 October 2015
accepted: 22 June 2016
Published: 12 July 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
products and are differentiated into the M2 (alternatively activated) phenotype by Th2-type cytokines. We pre-
viously demonstrated that nearly all TAMs in the primary lesions and ascites of patients with EOC are polarized 
towards the M2 phenotype, which has a protumour function6,7. Furthermore, in vitro co-culture experiments 
have shown that the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), which plays an 
important role in tumour progression and chemo-resistance in EOC cells, was strongly induced by co-culture 
with M2 macrophages6,8,9. M2 macrophages activated by direct contact with EOC cells secrete several cytokines 
such as IL-6 and IL-10, which in turn induced tumour cell activation. Activated M2 macrophages are also consid-
ered to be related to angiogenesis, tumour invasion, tumour metastasis, and immunosuppression10–14. Therefore, 
macrophage polarization into the M2 phenotype and the cell-cell interaction of M2 macrophages and tumour 
cells are believed to be emerging targets to block EOC progression.
We have previously attempted to identify natural compounds that inhibit macrophage polarization into the 
M2 phenotype15–19, and we identified onionin A (ONA), a new natural compound containing sulfur that is iso-
lated from onions20. In the present study, we examined whether ONA has a beneficial effect and/or a combinato-
rial effect with chemotherapy for EOC using both in vitro and in vivo studies.
Results
ONA inhibits the cell-cell interaction between M2 macrophages and EOC cells. 
First, we determined 
whether ONA inhibited the EOC cell-induced M2 polarization of human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDMs), 
as described in our previous study. As shown in Fig. 1A, CD163 overexpression induced by IL-10 stimulation was sig-
nificantly abrogated by ONA. ONA inhibited STAT3 activation, whereas NF-κ 
B signalling was not influenced (Fig. 1B).
Tumour culture supernatant (TCS) increased the secretion of IL-10, one of the M2 phenotype markers, and 
decreased the secretion of IL-12 and TNF-α 
, M1 phenotype markers, in the HMDMs. Under the assay conditions 
used, ONA significantly suppressed TCS-induced IL-10 secretion and enhanced the IL-12 and TNF-α 
 secretion 
reduced by the TCS (Fig. 1C). PD-L1 is well known to be involved in immunosuppression, and we found that 
ONA abrogated the PD-L1 overexpression induced by LPS stimulation (Fig. 1D). IL-10 is also known to induce 
PD-L1 overexpression; however, IL-10-induced PD-L1 upregulation was not inhibited by ONA (Fig. 1E). These 
data indicated that ONA inhibited the EOC cell-induced M2 polarization of HMDMs.
Because it is well known that activated M2 HMDMs accelerate cancer cell proliferation, we hypothesized 
that ONA inhibited the cell-cell interactions between macrophages and cancer cells. To investigate the inhibi-
tory effects of ONA on cell-cell interactions, we examined the effect of ONA on the interaction between EOC 
cells and HMDMs, as shown in Fig. 2A. The proliferation of EOC cells was significantly increased by co-culture 
with macrophages (p-value < 
 0.01 in all cell lines), and this protumour function of the HMDMs was suppressed 
(p-value < 0.05 in SKOV3 or RMG1 and < 
0.01 in ES2) by ONA treatment (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, we measured 
the effect of ONA on the proliferation of EOC cells in co-culture conditions resembling actual EOC patients, as 
shown in Fig. 2C. ONA treatment also inhibited EOC cell proliferation under this model, even if we administered 
ONA after initiating co-culture with EOC cells and HMDMs (Fig. 2D,E). To test the effect of ONA on HMDM 
activation, we next investigated cytokine production using an ELISA and cytokine array kit as described in the 
materials and methods. Because IL-10 is preferentially produced by activated HMDMs, and most cancer cell lines 
secrete no or low concentrations of IL-10, IL-10 production is useful to evaluate HMDM activation. As shown 
in Fig. 2F, IL-10 production was strongly induced by the co-culture condition, and IL-10 production was signif-
icantly suppressed by ONA. As shown in Fig. 2G and Supporting Information 1, soluble molecules (cystatin C, 
macrophage migration inhibitory factor, growth differentiation factor-15, urokinase plasminogen activator recep-
tor, matrix metalloproteinase 9, epidermal growth factor, and IL-1 receptor antagonist) considered to be secreted 
from HMDMs were found to be suppressed by ONA. These data indicated that ONA inhibited the proliferation 
of EOC cells by abrogating HMDM activation induced by cell-cell interaction.
ONA inhibits EOC cell proliferation by suppressing STAT3 activation. 
We next measured the 
effect of ONA on the proliferation of EOC cells (SKOV3, ES2 and RMG1) and found that ONA can significantly 
inhibit cancer cell proliferation at a concentration of at least 30 μ 
M in SKOV3 (p-value < 
 0.05) and ES2 cells 
(p-value < 0.01) or 5 μ 
M in RMG1 cells (p-value < 0.05) (Fig. 3A). As shown in Supporting Information 2, JAK2 
and STAT3 activation was significantly suppressed by ONA treatment and slight inhibition of STAT1 and STAT6 
activation was induced by ONA. Because STAT3 is known to be an important molecule involved in both M2 
polarization and cancer cell proliferation, we hypothesized that ONA influenced STAT3 activation. As expected, 
STAT3 activation was significantly inhibited by ONA treatment in all cell lines (Fig. 3B). A similar phenomenon 
was observed when EOC cells were treated with a STAT3 inhibitor (WP1066) (Supporting Information 3), indi-
cating that STAT3 activation is closely involved in EOC proliferation.
ONA induces apoptosis and increases sensitivity against anti-cancer drugs in EOC cells. 
To 
determine whether ONA enhances the anti-cancer effect of PTX, CBDCA and CDDP in EOC cells, the poten-
tial combinatorial effects with ONA were examined. First, we measured the maximum ineffective concentration 
of each anti-cancer drug on EOC cell proliferation. The maximum ineffective concentration of each anti-cancer 
drug is shown in Supporting Information 4. In the case of SKOV3 cells, 0.5 μ 
M PTX, 1 μ 
M CBDCA, and 0.05 μ 
M 
CDDP did not have an inhibitory effect on cell proliferation (Supporting Information 4A). However, combined 
treatment with the ineffective concentrations of the anti-cancer drugs and ONA (10 μ 
M) suppressed the prolifera-
tion of SKOV3 cells compared to treatment with single anti-cancer drugs (Fig. 4A). Similar results were observed in 
ES2 cells (Supporting Information 4B and Fig. 4A) and RMG1 cells (Supporting Information 4C and Fig. 4A). The 
combination index of ONA and the anti-cancer drugs was evaluated as previously reported21, and we found that 
ONA synergistically enhanced the anti-proliferative effect of the anti-cancer drugs (Supporting information 5).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
In addition, we examined the effects of single and combined treatments on apoptosis to investigate the mech-
anism of the synergistic inhibitory effect induced by combined treatment with each anti-cancer drug and ONA. 
Caspase-3 activation in EOC cells was induced by single treatment with either ONA or the anti-cancer agents. 
Additionally, combined treatment with ONA and the anti-cancer agents upregulated caspase-3 activation com-
pared to treatment with single anti-cancer agents (Fig. 4B). This upregulation was inhibited by a caspase-3 inhib-
itor, which supported the reliability of these experiments. Furthermore, STAT3 activation in EOC cells was also 
Figure 1. Effect of ONA on surface molecules and cytokine secretion in HMDMs. Human monocyte-
derived macrophages (HMDMs) were stimulated with IL-10 in the presence of DMSO or ONA (30 μ 
M) for 
24 hours. The CD163 expression was evaluated by flow cytometry (A) and the activation of STAT3 and NF-κ 
B was evaluated by a Western blot analysis, as described in the Materials and Methods (B). HMDMs were 
stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) for 24 hours after incubation with ONA (30 μ 
M) for 24 hours in the presence of 
TCS, followed by determination of the levels of IL-10, IL-12 and TNF-α 
 secretion using ELISA, as described in 
the Materials and Methods (C). HMDMs were stimulated with LPS (D) or IL-10 (E) in the presence of DMSO 
or ONA (30 μ 
M) for 24 hours, and the PD-L1 expression was evaluated by flow cytometry, as described in the 
Materials and Methods. The data are presented as the mean ± SD. * 
p-value < 0.05, * 
* 
p-value < 0.01 vs. control.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
Figure 2. Effect of ONA on tumour cell proliferation in co-culture of EOC cells with HMDMs. Compared with 
EOC mono-culture (A-i), non-treated (A-ii) and onionin A (ONA) (10 μ 
M)-treated HMDMs (A-iii) were incubated 
with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells (SKOV3, ES2, and RMG1) for 24 hours, followed by the determination of 
BrdU-positive cells by ELISA (B). Compared with EOC mono-culture (C-i) and co-culture without ONA treatment 
(C-ii), co-cultured cells (HMDMs and EOC cells) were treated with the indicated concentrations of ONA (3–10 μ 
M) 
 
for 24 hours (C-iii), followed by the determination of BrdU-positive cells by ELISA (D). SKOV3 cells were labelled 
with CytoTell Red fluorescence and co-cultured with HMDMs, and then cell proliferation was assessed by flow 
cytometry (E). IL-10 production was evaluated by ELISA (F). HMDM-derived soluble factors were evaluated by 
a cytokine array kit, and the relative spot densities of cystatin C, macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), 
growth differentiation factor (GDF)-15, urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), matrix metalloproteinase 
9 (MMP9), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) were evaluated using the ImageJ 
software programme (G). The data are presented as the mean ± SD. * 
p-value < 0.05, * 
* 
p-value < 0.01 vs. control.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
suppressed by combined treatment with ONA and each anti-cancer drug (Fig. 4C–E). These data demonstrated 
that ONA can enhance the cancer cell apoptosis induced by each anti-cancer drug via the suppression of STAT3 
activation.
ONA suppresses ovarian cancer development in murine models. 
We next evaluated the anti-cancer 
effect of ONA using an in vivo EOC model. As observed in human EOC cells, ONA inhibited the prolifera-
tion of iMOC cells by suppressing STAT3 activation (Supporting Information 6A,B). Furthermore, ONA also 
enhanced the inhibitory effect of CDDP on iMOC cell proliferation (Supporting Information 6C and D). We 
then investigated the effects of ONA in a murine ovarian cancer model. ONA was administered orally, as shown 
in Fig. 5A, and the results showed that ONA significantly prolonged survival (Fig. 5B) and suppressed tumour 
development (Fig. 5C). In addition, immunohistochemical studies were performed to investigate the effects of 
ONA, and STAT3 activation in the ovarian cancer tissue was decreased by the administration of ONA (Fig. 5D). 
Furthermore, cleaved-caspase 3-positive cells were increased in ONA-treated tumour tissues (Fig. 5E), thus sug-
gesting that ONA can induce apoptosis in tumour cells. The infiltration of Iba-1+ pan-macrophages was not 
changed by ONA treatment; however, the percentages of F4/80+ and CD163+ macrophages were significantly 
reduced by ONA administration (Fig. 5F). On the other hand, the infiltration of CD4+ or CD8+ lymphocytes in 
cancer tissues was not altered by the administration of ONA (data not shown). These data indicated that ONA 
can suppress ovarian cancer development in murine models by inhibiting the M2 polarization of macrophages. 
Furthermore, cytotoxic effects in normal cells (HMDMs and normal lymphocytes) and side effects in animal 
models of ONA have not been observed (Supporting Information 7). ONA also inhibited human ovarian cancer 
(ES2) development and improved the survival rate in ES2-injected xenograft nude mice (Fig. 5G), thus suggesting 
that ONA can be an orally available small molecule for anti-ovarian cancer therapy.
Combined effects of ONA and CDDP on ovarian cancer progression using an in vivo EOC 
model. 
To clarify the potential of ONA as an auxiliary factor for anti-cancer therapy, we next investigated 
Figure 3. Effect of ONA on cell proliferation and STAT3 activation in EOC cells. EOC cells (SKOV3, ES2, and 
RMG1) were incubated with the indicated concentrations of ONA for 24 hours, followed by the determination of cell 
proliferation using the WST-8 assay (A). EOC cells were incubated with the indicated concentrations of ONA for 
3 hours, followed by the determination of pSTAT3, STAT3 and β 
-actin by Western blot analysis, as described in the 
Materials and Methods (B). The data are presented as the mean ± SD. * 
p-value < 0.05, * 
* 
p-value < 0.01 vs. control.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
Figure 4. Combined effect of ONA and anti-cancer drugs in EOC cells. EOC cells (SKOV3, ES2, and RMG1) 
were incubated with a combination of both the ineffective concentration of individual anti-cancer drugs (PTX, 
CBDCA, or CDDP) and ONA for 24 hours, followed by the determination of cell proliferation using the WST-8 
assay (A) and the ineffective concentration of each anti-cancer drug for each cell line was determined. In addition, 
the EOC cells were incubated with anti-cancer drugs and ONA for 4 hours, followed by caspase-3 measurement (B). 
The data are presented as the mean ± SD. * 
p-value < 0.05, * 
* 
p-value < 
 0.01 vs. control (without anti-cancer drug). In 
addition, each EOC cell line (SKOV3: C, ES2: D, and RMG1: E) was incubated with an ineffective concentration of 
each anti-cancer drug (PTX, CBDCA and CDDP) with or without ONA for 3 hours, followed by the measurement 
of pSTAT3, STAT3 and β 
-actin by Western blot analysis, as described in the Materials and Methods.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
Figure 5. Effect of ONA on tumour progression in mouse models. As a murine ovarian cancer model, C57B6 
mice were injected in the right ovary with iMOC cells and were administered ONA (20 mg/kg), as shown in the 
schematic diagram (A). Most of the untreated C57B6 mice died from cancer metastasis by day 40. The survival 
time (B) and tumour weight (C, scale bar: 1 cm) were evaluated. STAT3 activation (D, scale bar: 20 μ 
m), caspase-3 
activation (E, scale bar: 200 μ 
m), and the infiltration of macrophages (F) in the tumour tissues were evaluated 
using immunostaining. The percentage of F4/80- and CD163-positive cells in Iba-1-positive macrophages was 
presented (F). Then, nude mice were injected in the intraperitoneal cavity with ES2 cells and were administered 
ONA (20 mg/kg), as shown in the schematic diagram (G) followed by the determination of the survival rate (G). 
Most of the untreated nude mice died from cancer metastasis by day 20.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
the combined effects of ONA and CDDP on tumour progression in the iMOC-bearing murine model, as shown 
in Fig. 6A. A single administration of ONA (10 mg/kg) significantly suppressed tumour development (Fig. 6B). 
On the other hand, a single administration of ONA (5 mg/kg) and CDDP (0.5 mg/kg) using a feeding tube had 
no effect on tumour progression, whereas the combined administration of these compounds (5 mg/kg ONA + 
0.5 mg/kg CDDP) significantly suppressed tumour progression compared to the control (Fig. 6C). Furthermore, 
the combined administration also decreased the number of pSTAT3-positive cells in the tumour tissues (Fig. 6D).
Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated the anti-cancer effect of ONA and its combinatorial effect with CDDP in vivo. 
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to report an anti-ovarian cancer effect of ONA. We initially 
found that ONA inhibited the cell-cell interaction between M2 macrophages and cancer cells. We have previ-
ously demonstrated that cancer cell activation is induced by co-culture with M2 macrophages rather than M1 
macrophages6. Here, we found that BrdU incorporation in cancer cells was increased by co-culture with control 
M2 macrophages rather than ONA-stimulated macrophages. The secretion of some cytokines by macrophages 
was found to be suppressed by ONA stimulation, indicating that the protumour activation of M2 macrophages 
was abrogated by ONA. Co-culture experiments were subsequently performed with low-dose ONA to investigate 
whether ONA could directly inhibit the cell-cell interaction between macrophages and cancer cells. The find-
ing that ONA reduced BrdU incorporation in cancer cells co-cultured with M2 macrophages indicated that the 
cell-cell interaction was inhibited by ONA. Because STAT3 activation in co-cultured macrophages is significantly 
involved in cell-cell interaction6, the ONA-induced inhibition of the cell-cell interaction is considered to be due to 
STAT3 suppression by ONA. These observations suggested that the anti-cancer effect of ONA might be partially 
induced by the inhibition of direct contact-induced macrophage activation and STAT3 activation.
Many studies have revealed the detailed signalling mechanisms of macrophage differentiation, and we specu-
late that signalling molecules related to macrophage polarization towards the M2 phenotype are similar to those 
involved in cancer progression. STAT3 and NF-κ 
β 
 are well known molecules involved in both macrophage dif-
ferentiation into the M2 phenotype and cancer progression22. Because ONA inhibited macrophage activation and 
differentiation into the M2 phenotype, we hypothesized that ONA directly suppresses cancer cell proliferation. 
Consequently, cancer cell growth was significantly reduced and STAT3-activation was inhibited by ONA. These 
Figure 6. Combined effect of ONA and CDDP on tumour progression. As a subcutaneous tumour model, 
C57B6 mice were injected subcutaneously with iMOC cells and were administered the indicated concentrations of 
ONA and/or CDDP, as shown in the schematic diagram (A) followed by the determination of the tumour weight 
(B,C, scale bar: 1 cm). STAT3 activation in the subcutaneous tumour tissues was evaluated using immunostaining 
(D, scale bar: 50 μ 
m). The data are presented as the mean ± SD. * 
p-value < 0.05, * 
* 
p-value < 0.01 vs. control.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
results suggested that ONA has a direct anti-cancer effect that suppresses cell proliferation in EOC cells, possibly 
by inhibiting STAT3 activation. In our preliminary data, NF-κ 
β 
 activation was not changed by ONA (data not 
shown). Because STAT3 is involved in the proliferation and poor overall survival of EOC23, and blocking STAT3 
signalling has been shown to suppress ovarian cancer progression in an experimental animal model24, STAT3 is 
considered a target molecule for treating patients with advanced EOC. STAT3 signalling has also been shown to 
be related to chemoresistance via the activation of stem cell properties in specific types of cancer cells, including 
EOC cells25,26. In the present study, we found that ONA treatment significantly led to the sensitization of EOC 
cells to the anti-cancer agents PTX, CBDCA and CDDP, which suggested that ONA potentially reduced the 
stem cell properties of EOC cells by inhibiting STAT3 signalling. ONA and anti-cancer agents were found to 
synergistically influence EOC cells (Supporting Information 5). STAT3 activation was significantly suppressed 
with combined treatment, as shown in Fig. 4, and this might indicate that the anti-cancer agents PTX, CBDCA 
and CDDP increased the sensitivity of EOC cells to ONA. On the other hand, ONA also slightly inhibited STAT1 
and STAT5 activation (Supporting Information 2), thus suggesting that the other pathways besides STAT3 also 
might contribute to the anti-cancer therapeutic effects of ONA. These data indicated that the anti-cancer effect of 
anti-cancer drugs was enhanced by their combined administration with ONA and that the dose of these agents 
could be reduced by combined therapy with ONA, thus suggesting that ONA is a useful candidate as an auxiliary 
agent for anti-EOC therapy.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that ONA suppressed ovarian cancer progression by inhibiting the protu-
mour functions of TAMs and reducing cancer cell proliferation. One of the anti-cancer mechanisms of ONA was 
revealed to be mediated by the inhibition of STAT3 activation, and ONA also enhanced the anti-cancer effect of 
anti-cancer drugs (Supporting Information 8). ONA is an orally available small molecule that may be an effective 
adjuvant therapy for patients with advanced EOC.
Materials and Methods
Cells and cell culture conditions. 
Three human ovarian cancer cell lines, SKOV3, ES2 and RMG1, were 
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA), and a mouse ovarian cancer cell 
line (iMOC) was a kind gift from Professor Hideyuki Saya (Keio University, Tokyo, Japan)27. The cells were main-
tained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) and 
regularly tested and found to be negative for Mycoplasma contamination.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were acquired from healthy volunteer donors; written informed consent 
for sample collection and subsequent analysis was obtained from all healthy donors. All protocols using human 
macrophages were approved by the Kumamoto University Hospital Review Board (No. 486), and conducted in 
accordance with the approved guidelines. CD14+ monocytes were purified from the peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells via positive selection using magnetic-activated cell sorting (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, 
Germany) and cultured with GM-CSF (10 ng/ml, Wako, Tokyo, Japan) or M-CSF (50 ng/ml, WAKO) for seven 
days to differentiate the cells into macrophages. The differentiated macrophages were then used as human 
monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDMs) in the present study, as described previously28.
Flow cytometry. 
Macrophages were cultured on UpCell culture dishes (Cellseed, Tokyo, Japan) and stimu-
lated with LPS (100 ng/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) or IL-10 (20 μ 
g/mL, WAKO). Detached cells were 
then stained with mouse monoclonal anti-human CD163 (clone RM3/1) and anti-human PD-L1 (clone 10F.9G2) 
antibodies. Fc receptor Blocking Solution and all antibodies, including mouse monoclonal isotype-matched con-
trol antibodies, were obtained from BioLegend, Inc. (San Diego, CA, USA). The stained cell samples were ana-
lysed using a FACSverse™ 
 machine and the FACSuite software programme (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA).
Preparation of tumour culture supernatant (TCS). 
ES2 cells were maintained in culture medium for 
24 hours. The supernatant was used as a tumour culture supernatant (TCS) for this study.
Extraction and isolation of ONA. 
Fresh, peeled onion bulbs were roughly chopped and blended in a 
mixer along with acetone, and the mixture was subsequently soaked in acetone for three days at room tempera-
ture. The filtrate was concentrated at 40 °C in vacuo to obtain a syrup residue, which was then subjected to passage 
over a polystyrene gel (Diaion HP-20), followed by elution with H2O and methanol. The eluted fraction with 
MeOH was subjected to silica gel column chromatography to yield ONA, as previously described20. Purified ONA 
was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to create a 100 mM stock solution.
Anti-cancer drugs. 
Paclitaxel (PTX; Nihon Kayaku, Tokyo, Japan), carboplatin (CBDCA; Wako), and cispla-
tin (CDDP; Wako) were dissolved in DMSO at the appropriate concentrations.
Cytokine ELISA and cytokine array kit. 
HMDMs (3 × 
 105 cells per well of a 12-well plate) were stimu-
lated with LPS (100 ng/mL) for 24 hours after incubation with tumour cell supernatant (TCS) from SKOV3 cells 
or with TCS and ONA (30 mM) for 24 hours, followed by the determination of IL-10, IL-12 and TNF-α secretion 
by means of an ELISA kit (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA). The cytokine array kit was purchased from R&D 
Systems (Human XL Cytokine Array Kit #ARY022, Minneapolis, MN, USA).
Cell proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. 
EOC cells (1 × 
 104 cells) were cultured in a 96-well plate 
in quadruplicate before treatment. The cells were then cultured in the presence of ONA and/or the anti-cancer 
drugs. Cell viability was determined using a WST assay (WST-8 cell counting kit; Doujin Chemical, Kumamoto, 
Japan) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and tumour cell proliferation was detected under co-culture 
conditions using a BrdU ELISA Kit (Roche, Penzberg, Bavaria, Germany).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
EOC cells (1 × 
 105 cells) were labelled with CytoTell Red (AAT Bioquest, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and 
co-cultured with macrophages (1 × 
 105 cells) for 2 days with or without ONA, and then cell proliferation was 
evaluated by flow cytometry.
STAT3 activation assay. 
The degree of STAT3 activation was determined by measuring the increased 
expression of phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) with Western blot analysis, as previously described15. Briefly, the 
solubilized cells were run on a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) 
transfer membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). To detect pSTAT3, the membranes were exposed to an 
anti-pSTAT3 antibody (D3A7; Cell Signaling Technology Japan, Tokyo, Japan) and visualized using a horseradish 
peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibody with ECL Western blotting detection reagent (GE Healthcare Life 
Sciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). To detect STAT3, the membranes were exposed to anti-STAT3 antibody (sc-8019; 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and visualized using a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated 
anti-mouse IgG antibody with ECL Western blotting detection reagent. The membranes were re-blotted with an 
anti-β 
-actin antibody (C4) (sc-47778; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) as an internal calibration control.
Fluorimetric cleaved caspase-3 assay. 
Caspase-3 activities were measured using the AmpliteTM 
Fluorimetric Caspase 3/7 Assay Kit (AAT Bioquest, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Briefly, 1 × 
 104 EOC cells were cultured in 96-well plates and ONA and/or anti-cancer drugs were 
added to the cells. After 24 hours, the caspase-3 activity was determined.
Murine ovarian cancer model and subcutaneous model. 
Female C57BL/6 mice (6–8 weeks) were 
purchased from CLEA Japan (Tokyo, Japan). We used iMOC cells for the in vitro and in vivo studies. iMOC cells 
were suspended in 100 μ 
L of RPMI and injected in the ovary (1 × 
 104 cells) or subcutaneously injected (2 × 
 105 
cells). In the ovarian cancer model, ONA or vehicle (0.5% methylcellulose) was administered orally using a feed-
ing tube, and ONA, CDDP or vehicle (0.5% methylcellulose) was administered intraperitoneally in the subcuta-
neously implanted model on days 10–13 after iMOC injection. The mice were sacrificed on day 18, followed by 
the determination of the weight of ovarian tumours or subcutaneous cancer development.
Female athymic nude mice (6–8 weeks) were purchased from CLEA Japan. ES2 cells (5 × 
 106 cells/mouse) 
were suspended in 100 μ 
L of RPMI and injected into the intraperitoneal cavity. ONA or vehicle (DMSO) was 
administered orally on days 8–20 after ES2 injection, followed by the determination of the survival rates. All 
animal experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee for Animal Experiments of Kumamoto University 
(Permission Number: B24-125) and conducted in accordance with the Guidelines for Animal Experiments of 
Kumamoto University.
Immunohistochemistry. 
Murine ovarian cancer or subcutaneous cancer tissue specimens were fixed in 
paraformaldehyde and then embedded in paraffin. After sectioning (3 μ 
m thick), paraffin-embedded cancer tis-
sues were used for immunostaining with anti-pSTAT3 (D3A7; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-Iba-1 (WAKO), 
anti-F4/80 (clone CI:A3-1, Serotec, Ltd., Oxford, UK), anti-CD163 (rabbit polyclonal, Cosmo Bio, Tokyo, Japan), 
anti-Ki67 (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), anti-cleaved caspase-3 (5A1E; Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, 
USA) and anti-CD3 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) antibodies.
Murine tissues were also embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA), snap-frozen 
in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 
80 °C. After sectioning (7 μ 
m thick), the tissues were fixed with cold acetone 
and treated with the following primary antibodies: anti-CD4 (GK1.5; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and anti-CD8 
(53–6.72; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). The sections were subsequently treated with an HRP-conjugated second-
ary antibody (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan), and the reactions were visualized with diaminobenzidine. The number of 
immunopositive cells was counted using the BZ-9000 analysis software programme (Keyence, Osaka, Japan).
Statistics. 
All data are representative of two or three independent experiments. The data are expressed as the 
mean ± standard deviation (SD). Differences between the groups were examined for statistical significance using 
the Mann-Whitney U-test and a non-repeated measures ANOVA. A Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to 
assess the murine overall survival and compared using the log-rank test. A p-value of < 
0.05 was considered to 
indicate the presence of a statistically significant difference.
References
1. Siegel, R., Naishadham, D. & Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA Cncer J Clin. 63, 11–30 (2013).
2. Hagemann, T. et al. Ovarian cancer cells polarize macrophages toward a tumor-associated phenotype. J Immunol. 176, 5023–5032 
(2006).
3. Mantovani, A., Schioppa, T., Porta, C., Allavena, P. & Sica, A. Role of tumor-associated macrophages in tumor progression and 
invasion. Cancer Metast Rev. 25, 315–322 (2006).
4. Sica, A. & Mantovani, A. Macrophage fusion cuisine. Blood. 114, 4609–4610 (2009).
5. Lewis, C. E. & Pollard, J. W. Distinct role of macrophages in different tumor microenvironments. Cancer Res. 66, 605–612 (2006).
6. Takaishi, K. et al. Involvement of M2‐polarized macrophages in the ascites from advanced epithelial ovarian carcinoma in tumor 
progression via Stat3 activation. Cancer Sci. 101, 2128–2136 (2010).
7. Kawamura, K., Komohara, Y., Takaishi, K., Katabuchi, H. & Takeya, M. Detection of M2 macrophages and colony‐stimulating factor 
1 expression in serous and mucinous ovarian epithelial tumors. Pathol Int. 59, 300–305 (2009).
8. Yu, H., Kortylewski, M. & Pardoll, D. Crosstalk between cancer and immune cells: role of STAT3 in the tumour microenvironment. 
Nat Rev. Immunol. 7, 41–51 (2007).
9. Yu, H., Pardoll, D. & Jove, R. STATs in cancer inflammation and immunity: a leading role for STAT3. Nat Rev Cancer. 9, 798–809 
(2009).
10. Komohara, Y., Jinushi, M. & Takeya, M. Clinical significance of macrophage heterogeneity in human malignant tumors. Cancer Sci. 
105, 1–8 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:29588 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29588
11. Pollard, J. W. Tumour-educated macrophages promote tumour progression and metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 4, 71–78 (2004).
12. Pollard, J. W. Trophic macrophages in development and disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 9, 259–270 (2009).
13. Joyce, J. A. & Pollard, J. W. Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 9, 239–252 (2009).
14. Noy, R. & Pollard, J. W. Tumor-associated macrophages: from mechanisms to therapy. Immunity. 41, 49–61 (2014).
15. Fujiwara, Y., Komohara, Y., Ikeda, T. & Takeya, M. Corosolic acid inhibits glioblastoma cell proliferation by suppressing the 
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription‐3 and nuclear factor‐kappa B in tumor cells and tumor‐associated 
macrophages. Cancer Sci. 102, 206–211 (2011).
16. Horlad, H. et al. Corosolic acid impairs tumor development and lung metastasis by inhibiting the immunosuppressive activity of 
myeloid‐derived suppressor cells. Mol Nutr Food Res. 57, 1046–1054 (2013).
17. Fujiwara, Y. et al. Corosolic acid enhances the antitumor effects of chemotherapy on epithelial ovarian cancer by inhibiting signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 signaling. Oncol Lett. 6, 1619–1623 (2013).
18. Fujiwara, Y. et al. Oleanolic acid inhibits macrophage differentiation into the M2 phenotype and glioblastoma cell proliferation by 
suppressing the activation of STAT3. Oncol Rep. 26, 1533–1537 (2011).
19. Fujiwara, Y., Takeya, M. & Komohara, Y. A novel strategy for inducing the antitumor effects of triterpenoid compounds: blocking 
the protumoral functions of tumor-associated macrophages via STAT3 inhibition. BioMed Res Int. 2014, 348539 (2014).
20. El-Aasr, M. et al. Onionin A from Allium cepa inhibits macrophage activation. J Nat Prod. 73, 1306–1308 (2010).
21. Chou, Ting-Chao Frequently asked questions in drug combinations and the mass-action law-based answers. Synergy 1, 3–21 (2014).
22. Biswas, S. K., Sica, A. & Lewis, C. E. Plasticity of macrophage function during tumor progression: regulation by distinct molecular 
mechanisms. J Immunol. 180, 2011–2017 (2008).
23. Rosen, D. G. et al. The role of constitutively active signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 in ovarian tumorigenesis and 
prognosis. Cancer 107, 2730–2740 (2006).
24. Wen, W. et al. Targeting JAK1/STAT3 signaling suppresses tumor progression and metastasis in a peritoneal model of human 
ovarian cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 13, 3037–3048 (2014).
25. Abubaker, K. et al. Targeted disruption of the JAK2/STAT3 pathway in combination with systemic administration of paclitaxel 
inhibits the priming of ovarian cancer stem cells leading to a reduced tumor burden. Front Oncol. 4, 75 (2014).
26. Latifi, A. et al. Isolation and characterization of tumor cells from the ascites of ovarian cancer patients: molecular phenotype of 
chemoresistant ovarian tumors. PLoS One. 7, e46858 (2012).
27. Motohara, T. et al. Transient depletion of p53 followed by transduction of c-Myc and K-Ras converts ovarian stem-like cells into 
tumor-initiating cells. Carcinogenesis. 32, 1597–1606 (2011).
28. Komohara, Y., Ohnishi, K., Kuratsu, J. & Takeya, M. Possible involvement of the M2 anti-inflammatory macrophage phenotype in 
growth of human gliomas. J Pathol. 216, 15–24 (2008).
Acknowledgements
We thank Ms. Emi Kiyota, Mr. Takenobu Nakagawa, Ms. Yui Hayashida, and Mr. Osamu Nakamura for their 
technical assistance. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 25293089, 25460497, 25293344 
and 25860501. This work was also supported by the Kanzawa Medical Research Foundation.
Author Contributions
Concept and design (H.K., M.T. and Y.K.); analysis and interpretation (J.T. and Y.F.); writing the article (J.T., Y.F. 
and Y.K.); critical revision of the article (H.T., H.K., M.T. and Y.K.); Analysis and interpretation of the data (J.T., 
Y.F., H.H., D.S. and Y.Y.); provision of materials, patients or resources (T.N., S.T., T.M., Y.S., T.I. and K.T.).
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Tsuboki, J. et al. Onionin A inhibits ovarian cancer progression by suppressing cancer 
cell proliferation and the protumour function of macrophages. Sci. Rep. 6, 29588; doi: 10.1038/srep29588 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
