 A Research Agenda for Communication Between Health Care
Professionals and Patients Living With Serious Illness
James A. Tulsky, MD; Mary Catherine Beach, MD, MPH; Phyllis N. Butow, PhD; Susan E. Hickman, PhD;
Jennifer W. Mack, MD, MPH; R. Sean Morrison, MD; Richard L. Street Jr, PhD; Rebecca L. Sudore, MD;
Douglas B. White, MD, MAS; Kathryn I. Pollak, PhD
P
atients living with serious illness suffer both physically
and psychologically. Although many factors contribute,
including disease characteristics, quality of care, social
determinants, and systems issues, wide consensus exists that
poor communication by health care professionals plays a central
role.1(pp117-219) Physical and psychological suffering worsens when
patients do not fully understand their illness, prognosis, and
treatment options and when clinicians have not sufficiently elic-
ited patients’values. Consequently, patients may receive medical
care inconsistent with their goals.2
Inadequate communication also leads to higher use of inva-
sive care near death, shorter hospice stays, lower patient quality of
life at the end of life, and worse bereavement outcomes for family
and caregivers.3 Poor-quality communication not only affects
patients and families but also contributes to clinician burnout, a
troubling outcome given current workforce shortages.4 Although
considerableresearchexplorestheeffectofcommunicationonthese
outcomes,manyquestionsremain.Settingaclearresearchagenda
would move the field forward.
Since the late 1980s, the primary approach to addressing
poor communication and unwanted care for patients approaching
the end of life has been to promote advance directive comple-
tion. Despite legislation encouraging advance directives and
numerous dissemination efforts, the outcomes have been disap-
pointing. Initiatives that focus on advance directives alone have
changed little in the quality of the experience for seriously
patients and families.1 Many additional aspects of communication
that mediate outcomes in serious illness are insufficiently
addressed, including emotion, prognostic awareness, goals of
care, spirituality and existential issues, and costs of care.5-8
Furthermore, effective interventions have not been disseminated
widely into practice.
IMPORTANCE Poor communication by health care professionals contributes to physical and
psychological suffering in patients living with serious illness. Patients may not fully
understand their illness, prognosis, and treatment options or may not receive medical care
consistent with their goals. Despite considerable research exploring the role of
communication in this setting, many questions remain, and a clear agenda for communication
research is lacking.
OBSERVATIONS Through a consensus conference and subsequent activities, we reviewed the
state of the science, identified key evidence gaps in understanding the impact of
communication on patient outcomes, and created an agenda for future research. We
considered 7 broad topics: shared decision making, advance care planning, communication
training, measuring communication, communication about prognosis, emotion and serious
illness communication, and cultural issues. We identified 5 areas in which further research
could substantially move the field forward and help enhance patient care: measurement and
methodology, including how to determine communication quality; mechanisms of
communication, such as identifying the specific clinician behaviors that patients experience
as both honest and compassionate, or the role of bias in the clinical encounter; alternative
approaches to advance care planning that focus on the quality of serious illness
communication and not simply completion of forms; teaching and disseminating
communication skills; and approaches, such as economic incentives and other clinician
motivators, to change communication behavior.
CONCLUSIONS Our findings highlight the urgent need to improve quality of communication
between health care professionals and patients living with serious illness through a broad
range of research that covers communication skills, tools, patient education, and models
of care.
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(9):1361-1366. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.2005
Published online July 3, 2017.
Editorial page 1256 and
Viewpoint page 1237
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: James A.
Tulsky, MD, Department of
Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative
Care, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
450 Brookline Ave, Dana 2016A,
Boston, MA 02215-5450
(jamesa_tulsky@dfci.harvard.edu).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA Internal Medicine | Special Communication | SHARING MEDICINE
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
September 2017
Volume 177, Number 9
1361
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
 Inresponsetotheseneeds,inMay2015,weconvenedaconfer-
enceatDukeUniversitySchoolofMedicine,Durham,NorthCarolina,
that brought together the authors of this Special Communication.
The aims of the conference were to (1) review the state of the
scienceincommunicationresearchonseriousillness,(2)identifythe
key areas in which investment in research is likely to achieve the
greatest returns, and (3) map out an agenda for communication re-
searchthatincludestheidentificationofpotentialstakeholdersand
funding sources. We defined serious illness as life-limiting disease
for which most clinicians would not be surprised if the patient died
within the year. The majority of research has focused on communi-
cation between prescribing clinicians (physicians, nurse practition-
ers, physician assistants) and their patients, perhaps because they
are the clinicians most likely to deliver serious news and have con-
versationsabouttreatmentoptionstowardtheendoflife.9Wealso
reviewed the empirical work on registered nurse and social worker
communication in this setting.
Methods
We divided the field into 10 broad topic areas, and each expert
presented a summary and a focused literature review of their as-
signedarea.Afterthesereviewsanddiscussion,thegroupsumma-
rized what had been learned and created an initial list of research
priorities.Weusedthenominalgrouptechnique,astructureditera-
tiverankingprocessofproblemidentification,solutiongeneration,
and decision making, to develop a final set.10 In October 2015, we
convened a workshop with additional palliative care and commu-
nication experts at the National Palliative Care Research Center
Annual Foley Retreat, presented our findings, and received
feedback.
Findings
After the 10 presentations, we organized the broad topic areas un-
der 7 categories: shared decision making, advance care planning,
communication training, measuring communication, communica-
tion about prognosis, emotion and serious illness communication,
and cultural issues.
Shared Decision Making
Ethical, patient-centered care depends on shared decision making.
This has been defined as “a collaborative process that allows pa-
tients (or their surrogates) and clinicians to make healthcare deci-
sionstogether,takingintoaccountthebestscientificevidenceavail-
able, as well as the patient’
s values, goals, and preferences.”
11
By what criteria can we judge that shared decision making has
been achieved? One perspective argues that evidence of a discus-
sionofmedicalinformationthatincludespatients’
valuesandshared
deliberationmeetsthisstandard.12,13Alternatively,otherspositthat
shared decision making has occurred only if there is a documented
discussion about patient preferences for decision making, such as
whether the patient prefers patient-driven, physician-driven, or
shared approaches. This documentation allows for a determina-
tion of whether the patient’
s preferences have been followed.14,15
Although both approaches have value, communication research
may benefit most from a substantive definition that includes
specific elements of a conversation.
Given this understanding, does shared decision making occur
in practice? Patients and surrogates may have variable role
preferences.16 Furthermore, studies have shown that physicians
frequently fail to discuss options robustly or elicit patients’values
in decision-making encounters.17 A further problem arises when
patients with mild cognitive impairment who retain the ability to
make decisions about their medical care are excluded. In addition,
discordance between patients’desired and actual roles in decision
making may be associated with psychological distress.18 Finally,
consensus is lacking on whether shared decision making should
be evaluated on the basis of observed outcomes, such as audio
recorded visits or medical record documentation of patient prefer-
ences, or patient self-report.
More research is needed to define shared decision making,
observehowitunfoldswithinclinicalencounters,anddeterminehow
patient attributes affect the shared decision-making process.
Advance Care Planning
Advance care planning is a process that supports adults at any age
or stage of health in understanding and sharing their personal
values, life goals, and preferences regarding future medical care.19
Although a broad concept that includes many steps, most advance
careplanningresearchhasfocusedontoolsusedtodocumentend-
of-lifetreatmentpreferences,suchasadvancedirectivesandPOLST
(PhysicianOrdersforLifeSustainingTreatment)forms.Studieshave
explored various types of forms and facilitated processes in differ-
ent age groups, diseases, and the general public. Results of these
studies have been mixed. Advance directives are often not avail-
able when needed,20 and their impact on both costs and care re-
ceived is unclear.21,22 Disparities in literacy and culture compound
theproblem.Formsareusuallywrittenbeyondthe12thgradelevel,
only in English, and are oriented toward Western cultural norms
about autonomy and decision making.23(pp160-179)
Furthermore,littleisknownaboutthecommunicationthatoc-
curs between patients, clinicians, and caregivers that leads to the
creation of these documents and the clarification of patients’pref-
erences. Despite the completion of forms, patients may lack suffi-
cient rapport with their clinician to discuss their wishes, patients’
affect may not be addressed, overall values and life goals may be
unexplored,andpatientsmaybepoorlyinformedabouttheirprog-
nosis, medical condition, and choices.1
Despitetheselimitations,somerecenteffortshaveledtomore
effectiveadvancecareplanningeducation,discussion,andcomple-
tion. Patient videos that clearly describe potential outcomes have
affected patient preferences, as have low-literacy forms and
websites.24,25Coordinated,comprehensivesystem-leveleffortsthat
enhance measurement and provide patient-facing tools, clinician
training,andelectronichealthrecorddocumentationhavedemon-
strated increased advance directive completion and documenta-
tionofpatients’preferences,bettermatchesbetweenpreferences
on the directives and treatments received, increased patient and
familysatisfaction,andlowersurrogateanxietyanddepression.26,27
Greaterinvolvementbysocialworkersandnursepractitionersmay
lead to greater advance directive completion rates.28
Forseriousandadvancedillness,thePOLSTparadigmisanap-
proach for documenting treatment preferences as medical orders
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
A Research Agenda for Communication With Patients With Serious Illness
1362
JAMA Internal Medicine
September 2017
Volume 177, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
 that has become a standard component of advance care planning.
TheNationalPOLSTParadigmTaskForcewasconvenedin2004to
establishqualitystandardsandtoassiststatesindevelopingPOLST
paradigmprograms.29Thisoversightbodywithrepresentativesfrom
eachparticipatingstateprogramnowendorsesprogramsin24states
and recognizes 24 others as developing. Although research sug-
gests that POLST orders that reflect patients’choices to limit treat-
mentsareassociatedwithlowerratesofhospitalization,implemen-
tation at the patient level has been variable and the research is
not definitive.30
The literature on advance care planning leaves many
unanswered questions. When should advance care planning be
introduced?Whocanbestfacilitateadvancecareplanning,andcan
patients and their loved ones effectively do some planning on their
own? How should advance care planning be documented in the
medical record? Which approaches yield the greatest likelihood of
goal-concordant care: purely patient-facing interventions, purely
clinician-facing interventions, one-on-one facilitated discussions,
counselingaboutadvancecareplanningconductedinsmallgroups
of patients, or a combination of approaches tailored to patients’
preferences? Finally, which outcomes of advance care planning
communication are most important for clinical care?
Communication Training
There are multiple approaches to effectively train clinicians in
serious illness communication skills, including face-to-face
workshops, feedback on actual medical encounters both live and
audiorecorded,onlineinteractivecourses,andinnovativecomput-
erized simulation approaches.8,31-34 These approaches differ from
traditional didactic training by ensuring that learners observe
examplesofhigh-qualitycommunication,practicetheskills,andre-
ceive feedback. Although successful in changing clinician behavior,
little is known about the long-term effects of this training, the
intensityoftheinterventionsthatarenecessaryforsuccess,thevalue
of follow-up skills training, how to engage unmotivated learners,
and how to bring such programs to scale.
Several models have been shown, in small studies, to be effec-
tive.VitalTalk,ofwhichoneofus(J.A.T.)isafounderanddirector,35
hascreatedastructuredmodelofcommunicationskillsteachingthat
allows for greater standardization of training. Hundreds of facilita-
tors, trained in the method, now host their own local courses, and
VitalTalk provides them with technical support. Kaiser Perma-
nente has implemented the Four Habits model (not specifically
targetedatseriousillness),whichusesacombinationofsmallgroup
courses and online tools to teach clinicians to adopt 4 habits in ev-
ery encounter: invest in the beginning, elicit the patient’
s perspec-
tive, demonstrate empathy, and invest in the end.36 This interven-
tion has been credited with sustained improvement in patient
satisfaction scores. The Serious Illness Communication Project37
combinesbriefcommunicationskillstrainingwithadiscussionguide
and other systems supports.38 Respecting Choices offers advance
care planning skills training primarily for nurses and social workers.
Facilitatorcertificationisprovidedthroughstandardizedcoursesin
combination with systems change principles to promote a culture
ofperson-centeredcare.27,39Kaisercreateditstrainingfortheben-
efit of its own health system; VitalTalk, the Serious Illness Commu-
nicationProject,andRespectingChoicesreceivesupportfromphil-
anthropic foundations and also market their services to individuals
and health systems. Online approaches have also been shown
to be effective in small individual trials8; the potential for wider
dissemination requires evaluation.
Future directions include disseminating effective interven-
tions through existing mechanisms, such as electronic health rec-
ords that trigger and guide conversations or maintenance of certi-
ficationforhealthprofessionalsthatprovidesanincentivefortraining
in communications about serious illness. Another opportunity is to
createqualitymeasuresforcommunicationandtopayclinicianswho
achieve specified communication goals, such as documentation of
the conversation, minimal scores on patient surveys, or even qual-
ity as determined by audiorecorded encounters. The Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services decision in 2016 to pay for advance
careplanningvisitsisencouraging.40However,onthebasisofprior
evidence that advance directives alone do not change patient
outcomes,1thiseffortislikelytoincreasegoal-concordantcareonly
if accompanied by skills training and health system support.
Studies of the health system–level impact of communication skills
training should be conducted using appropriate research meth-
ods, such as cluster randomized trials that account for the possibil-
ity of diffusion of an intervention throughout a clinical practice.
Measuring Communication
Toimprovethequalityofcommunication,onemustbeabletomea-
sureit.Inthisdomain,measurementincludesbothwhatoccursdur-
ing a conversation (eg, actual words spoken) and how those words
are perceived (eg, what patients and clinicians hear). Outcomes of
communication include patient trust, satisfaction, decision quality,
and health care use. There are several measures for coding actual
utterances, including the Verona Coding Definitions of Emotional
Sequences(VR-CoDES),41theRoterInteractionalAnalysisSystem,42
theStreetpatientparticipationandphysicianpartnershiptool,43and
a number of content coding systems for specific behaviors, such as
shared decision making.8,44 These scientifically validated methods
enable investigators to quantitatively and powerfully describe ac-
tualclinicalinteractions,yettheirdependenceonhumanmanualcod-
ing makes them slow and cumbersome and not easily dissemi-
nated. For such methods to provide feedback to clinicians or
reviewersonamassscale,high-qualityautomatedcodingwillbere-
quired. Nonverbal communication also affects patient outcomes,
yet its measurement is less well developed.45
Several challenges remain, however. Of the numerous survey
measuresaboutcommunicationquality,itisnotknownwhichshould
be used for what patient populations and in what stage of illness.
What is the role of measuring direct communication behavior as an
outcome as compared with asking patients to report on communi-
cation quality? Moreover, many of these methods of measuring
communications have not been fully validated with patient and
family perceptions of communication.
Communication About Prognosis
Most clinicians are reluctant to talk about prognosis. They worry
about causing distress and loss of hope.46 As a result, some physi-
ciansdiscussprognosisinvagueoroverlyoptimisticterms,avoidthe
topicunlessthepatientinsists,orfocusthediscussionontreatment.9
Physicians’estimates of prognosis are often overly optimistic as
comparedwithactualoutcomes.47,48Patientstendtobeevenmore
optimistic than their physicians; nevertheless, they say they want
A Research Agenda for Communication With Patients With Serious Illness
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
September 2017
Volume 177, Number 9
1363
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
 prognostic information.49,50 Furthermore, with the exception of
1 recent study,51 the evidence suggests that prognosis communica-
tion does not take away hope, cause depression, increase anxiety,
orharmtherelationshipwiththeclinician.3,6,7,51,52Incontrast,there
is some evidence that communication about prognosis may sup-
port hope and peace of mind, even when prognosis is poor.5
Most data on communication about prognosis is in oncology;
lessisknownabouthowprognosisismanagedinotherillnesseswith
longerandlesscertaindiseasetrajectories.Itisalsonotknownhow
improving prognostic understanding affects decision making, par-
ticularly among patients who prefer not to even discuss the topic.
Emotion and Serious Illness Communication
Discussing serious illness can be frightening and overwhelming for
patients and families. Clinicians worry about taking away patients’
hope, must manage their own emotions, and often do not possess
the tools to address strong emotional reactions during clinical
encounters.8 Clinicians engaging in conversations about serious
illness have 3 primary tasks—establishing connection; eliciting
values, goals, and preferences; and delivering information.53 Pro-
vidinginformationworksbestwhenclinicianstailortheamountand
type to the individual patient and to the patient’
s emotional state.
Unfortunately, clinicians often share this information with patients
who are already upset and may be unable to process what they are
hearing.54 Allowing patients to express their emotions and to be
heard increases their sense of being cared for, conveys relation-
ship, and facilitates understanding and decision making.55
It is important to learn how much and what kinds of emotions
affectdecisionmaking,andhowtheeffectofemotionsondecision
makingvariesamongpatients.Howdopatientemotionschangeover
time,andhowdoesthequalityofthecommunicationinfluencethese
changes? And how can physicians facilitate patient emotional
expression and involvement?
Cultural Issues
Cultural issues play an important role in how patients receive infor-
mation and express emotion.56 Research has provided insight into
cultural differences in patient and clinician preferences, norms and
traditions, and levels of trust in the health care system.57 Further-
more, research has highlighted racial, ethnic, and language dispari-
ties in quality of care. For example, both African American patients
and clinicians have documented preferences for more aggressive
care at the end of life compared with their white counterparts.
African American patients also are less likely to be enrolled in hos-
pice,tohavedonotresuscitateorders,58andtousehealthcarepro-
fessionals as their primary source of advice.59 Studies have also
found that East Asian families more often have preferences for
indirect or no disclosure to the patient directly in the face of seri-
ous chronic illness, and greater preferences for family engagement
in decision making.60
These observations have prompted recommendations for
culturally appropriate communication that are not always evi-
dencebased,anditisnotclearhowculturalcompetencydiffersfrom
patient-centered communication.61 It is not known how clinicians
can best communicate with patients with various cultural and
individualpreferences.Norisitknownwhichcommunicationstrat-
egies work best to assess patients’needs and tailor care to the
individual patient within their cultural context.
Priorities for Communication Research in Serious Illness
Based on the review, we identified 5 areas in which further
research and improvements in communications could substan-
tially move the field forward and help to enhance patient care.
Measurement and Methodology
Greater consensus is needed on how to define and measure com-
munication quality and outcomes. Coding systems should be more
uniform,andinvestigatorswouldbenefitbyknowingwhichtoolsare
most efficient and serve which research questions best. Communi-
cation analysis tools should be more sensitive, more efficient (and
thereby scalable), and better able to evaluate the impact of spe-
cific clinician words and expressions. There should be more evalu-
ation of nonverbal communication and how it affects outcomes.
Communication analysis should be more culturally and socio-
economically appropriate, and studies should include underrepre-
sented populations in instrument development and validation.
Moreresearchshouldbeconductedinareasofmedicineotherthan
oncology. Other measurement needs include greater use of longi-
tudinal assessments, evaluation of how large a “
dose”of a commu-
nication approach is required to achieve an outcome, clarification
ofhowmanyconversationsareneededtoassessanoutcome,evalu-
ation of communication with multiple parties (ie, patient, family,
clinicians) present, and more multisite trials. Finally, to translate in-
terventions into practice in a timely manner, rapid assessment and
pragmatic trials that account for real-life challenges to implemen-
tation should be adopted for communication studies.
Mechanisms of Communication
Work in communication in serious illness is often atheoretical and
focuses on blunt interventions without a specific understanding of
the impact of discrete communication elements and behaviors. To
develop more targeted interventions requires a broader under-
standingofthe“basicscience”ofcommunication.Achievingthiswill
require collaboration between clinical and communication science
investigatorstoaddressquestionsatamorerudimentarylevelthan
areusuallystudied.Examplesofsuchquestionswouldbe,“Isitpos-
sible to move patients away from an optimistic bias without caus-
ingharm?”“Whatclinicianbehaviorsdopatientsexperienceasboth
honest and compassionate?”or “How does one promote clinician
curiosity,resilience,andpresence?”Broadtopicareasincludeteam-
based communication, clinician communication capacities and
motivation, management of bias in the medical encounter, tailor-
ing communication to individual patients, and the effects of social
media communication on the experience of serious illness.
Alternative Approaches to Advance Care Planning
Research on advance care planning and advance directives has not
translated into a significant effect on outcomes. Systems
approaches, such as POLST, hold promise but evidence is limited.
Although documentation is important, future research should
focusonthequalityofadvancecareplanningcommunicationrather
than just the completion of documents. Innovative ways to cap-
ture and share patient preferences should account for the trajec-
tory of illness and readiness to engage in advance care planning.
A focus should be preparing patients and surrogates for in-the-
moment decision making, as well as documenting general prefer-
ences for care that may not be applicable when specific situations
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
A Research Agenda for Communication With Patients With Serious Illness
1364
JAMA Internal Medicine
September 2017
Volume 177, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
 arise.Finally,shareddecisionmakinginthiscontextmayneedtobe
redefinedwithattentiontotheroleofthefamily,theimpactofemo-
tion, what effective deliberation looks like, and clinician behaviors
that enable expression of values and goals.
Teaching and Disseminating Communication Skills
There is little science about effective teaching methods to promote
long-termchange.Researchshouldfocusonwhetherfeedbackisan
essentialelement,howmethodscanbescaled,andhowbesttoincor-
porate decision aids into conversations. Furthermore, little is known
aboutcommunicationbyandmembersoftheinterdisciplinaryprofes-
sional team (including physicians, nurses, social workers, chaplains,
therapists), and how to train nonphysicians such as nurses, social
workers, or chaplains to conduct specific tasks currently performed
primarilybyphysicians,nursepractitioners,andphysicianassistants.
Identifying Approaches to Change Communication Behavior
Educating clinicians, nurses, and social workers is only one
approachtoimprovingcommunicationsforpatientswithseriousill-
ness. Research should explore the efficacy of multiple approaches
that capitalize on other levers in the system. These might include
payment approaches that incentivize the time spent on communi-
cation,orelectronichealthrecordpromptsthatremindcliniciansof
serious illness conversations and guide them through the discus-
sion.Alternatively,cliniciansmaybemotivatedbysharingtheiradop-
tion of communication behaviors with others in their practices.
Conclusions
Improvingcommunicationbetweencliniciansandpatientslivingwith
serious illness can alleviate physical and psychological suffering.
There is an urgent need to improve quality of communication in
serious illness through a broad range of research that covers com-
munication skills, tools, patient education, and models of care. By
focusingresearchintheseidentifiedpriorityareas,investigatorsand
entities that sponsor research can make substantial strides toward
an enhanced patient and clinician experience.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: April 10, 2017.
Published Online: July 3, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.2005
Author Affiliations: Department of Psychosocial
Oncology and Palliative Care, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts (Tulsky); Division
of Palliative Medicine, Brigham and Women’
s
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts (Tulsky);
Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland (Beach);
Psycho-Oncology Co-Operative Research Group,
Centre for Medical Psychology and Evidence-Based
Medicine, School of Psychology, University of
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (Butow);
School of Nursing, Indiana University, Indianapolis
(Hickman); Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts (Mack); Brookdale Department of
Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York
(Morrison); Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Houston, Texas (Street); Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas (Street);
Department of Communication, Texas A&M
University, College Station (Street); Division of
Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University of
California–San Francisco (Sudore); San Francisco
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco,
California (Sudore); Department of Critical Care
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (White); Cancer
Control and Population Sciences, Duke Cancer
Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
(Pollak); Department of Community and Family
Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
(Pollak).
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Tulsky reports
that he is a founder and director of VitalTalk, which
is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization, and that he
receives no compensation for his work with
VitalTalk. Dr Hickman reports that she is a member
of the National POLST Paradigm Task Force
Research Committee and Executive Director of the
Indiana Patient Preferences Coalition, as well as
organizational faculty for Respecting Choices Last
Steps. She receives no compensation for these
activities. No other disclosures are reported.
Funding/Support: We are grateful to the Emily
Davie and Joseph S. Kornfeld Foundation for
funding this work, and for administrative support
from the National Palliative Care Research Center, a
nonprofit center that is funded by multiple
foundations, committed to stimulating, developing,
and funding research directed at improving care for
seriously ill patients and their families.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: Neither funding
organization had any role in the design and conduct
of the work; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
REFERENCES
1. Institute of Medicine. Dying in America:
Improving Quality and Honoring Individual
Preferences Near the End of Life. Washington, DC:
National Academy of Sciences; 2014.
2. Bernacki RE, Block SD; American College of
Physicians High Value Care Task Force.
Communication about serious illness care goals:
a review and synthesis of best practices. JAMA
Intern Med. 2014;174(12):1994-2003.
3. Wright AA, Zhang B, Ray A, et al. Associations
between end-of-life discussions, patient mental
health, medical care near death, and caregiver
bereavement adjustment. JAMA. 2008;300(14):
1665-1673.
4. Thorne SE, Bultz BD, Baile WF, SCRN
Communication Team. Is there a cost to poor
communication in cancer care? a critical review of
the literature. Psychooncology. 2005;14(10):875-884.
5. Mack JW, Wolfe J, Cook EF, Grier HE, Cleary PD,
Weeks JC. Hope and prognostic disclosure. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25(35):5636-5642.
6. Mack JW, Wolfe J, Grier HE, Cleary PD, Weeks
JC. Communication about prognosis between
parents and physicians of children with cancer:
parent preferences and the impact of prognostic
information. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(33):5265-5270.
7. Wolfe J, Klar N, Grier HE, et al. Understanding of
prognosis among parents of children who died of
cancer: impact on treatment goals and integration
of palliative care. JAMA. 2000;284(19):2469-2475.
8. Tulsky JA, Arnold RM, Alexander SC, et al.
Enhancing communication between oncologists
and patients with a computer-based training
program: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2011;
155(9):593-601.
9. The AM, Hak T, Koëter G, van Der Wal G.
Collusion in doctor-patient communication about
imminent death: an ethnographic study. BMJ.
2000;321(7273):1376-1381.
10. Boddy C. The nominal group technique: an aid
to brainstorming ideas in research. Qual Market Res.
2012;15(1):6-18.
11. Kon AA, Davidson JE, Morrison W, Danis M,
White DB; American College of Critical Care
Medicine; American Thoracic Society. Shared
decision making in intensive care units: an
American College of Critical Care Medicine and
American Thoracic Society policy statement. Crit
Care Med. 2016;44(1):188-201.
12. Charles C, Whelan T, Gafni A. What do we mean
by partnership in making decisions about
treatment? BMJ. 1999;319(7212):780-782.
13. Elwyn G, Hutchings H, Edwards A, et al. The
OPTION scale: measuring the extent that clinicians
involve patients in decision-making tasks. Health
Expect. 2005;8(1):34-42.
14. Kon AA. The shared decision-making
continuum. JAMA. 2010;304(8):903-904.
15. Johnson SK, Bautista CA, Hong SY, Weissfeld L,
White DB. An empirical study of surrogates’
preferred level of control over value-laden life
support decisions in intensive care units. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;183(7):915-921.
16. Hubbard G, Kidd L, Donaghy E. Preferences for
involvement in treatment decision making of
patients with cancer: a review of the literature. Eur J
Oncol Nurs. 2008;12(4):299-318.
17. Tulsky JA, Fischer GS, Rose MR, Arnold RM.
Opening the black box: how do physicians
A Research Agenda for Communication With Patients With Serious Illness
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
September 2017
Volume 177, Number 9
1365
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
 communicate about advance directives? Ann Intern
Med. 1998;129(6):441-449.
18. Gries CJ, Engelberg RA, Kross EK, et al.
Predictors of symptoms of posttraumatic stress and
depression in family members after patient death in
the ICU. Chest. 2010;137(2):280-287.
19. Sudore RL, Lum HD, You JJ, et al. Defining
advance care planning for adults: a consensus
definition from a multidisciplinary delphi panel.
J Pain Symptom Manage. 2017;53(5):821-832.e1.
20. Perkins HS. Controlling death: the false
promise of advance directives. Ann Intern Med.
2007;147(1):51-57.
21. Hickman SE, Nelson CA, Perrin NA, Moss AH,
Hammes BJ, Tolle SW. A comparison of methods to
communicate treatment preferences in nursing
facilities: traditional practices versus the physician
orders for life-sustaining treatment program. J Am
Geriatr Soc. 2010;58(7):1241-1248.
22. Nicholas LH, Langa KM, Iwashyna TJ, Weir DR.
Regional variation in the association between
advance directives and end-of-life Medicare
expenditures. JAMA. 2011;306(13):1447-1453.
23. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on
Understanding and Eliminating Racial and Ethnic
Disparities in Health Care. Unequal Treatment:
Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health
Care. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 2003.
24. Volandes AE, Paasche-Orlow MK, Mitchell SL,
et al. Randomized controlled trial of a video
decision support tool for cardiopulmonary
resuscitation decision making in advanced cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(3):380-386.
25. Sudore RL, Knight SJ, McMahan RD, et al.
A novel website to prepare diverse older adults for
decision making and advance care planning: a pilot
study. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;47(4):674-686.
26. Molloy DW, Guyatt GH, Russo R, et al.
Systematic implementation of an advance directive
program in nursing homes: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2000;283(11):1437-1444.
27. Detering KM, Hancock AD, Reade MC, Silvester
W. The impact of advance care planning on end of
life care in elderly patients: randomised controlled
trial. BMJ. 2010;340:c1345.
28. Clark MA, Ott M, Rogers ML, et al. Advance
care planning as a shared endeavor: completion of
ACP documents in a multidisciplinary cancer
program. Psychooncology. 2017;26(1):67-73.
29. National POLST Paradigm Task Force.
http://polst.org/. Accessed May 18, 2017.
30. Hickman SE, Keevern E, Hammes BJ. Use of
the physician orders for life-sustaining treatment
program in the clinical setting: a systematic review
of the literature. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015;63(2):341-
350.
31. Fallowfield L, Jenkins V, Farewell V, Saul J, Duffy
A, Eves R. Efficacy of a Cancer Research UK
communication skills training model for
oncologists: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2002;359(9307):650-656.
32. Back AL, Arnold RM, Baile WF, et al. Efficacy of
communication skills training for giving bad news
and discussing transitions to palliative care. Arch
Intern Med. 2007;167(5):453-460.
33. Butow P, Cockburn J, Girgis A, et al; CUES
Team. Increasing oncologists’skills in eliciting and
responding to emotional cues: evaluation of a
communication skills training program.
Psychooncology. 2008;17(3):209-218.
34. Andrade AD, Bagri A, Zaw K, Roos BA, Ruiz JG.
Avatar-mediated training in the delivery of bad
news in a virtual world. J Palliat Med. 2010;13(12):
1415-1419.
35. VitalTalk. http://www.vitaltalk.org/. Accessed
May 18, 2017.
36. Stein T, Frankel RM, Krupat E. Enhancing
clinician communication skills in a large healthcare
organization: a longitudinal case study. Patient Educ
Couns. 2005;58(1):4-12.
37. Ariadne Labs. Serious Illness Care.
https://www.ariadnelabs.org/areas-of-work
/serious-illness-care/. Accessed May 18, 2017.
38. Bernacki R, Hutchings M, Vick J, et al.
Development of the Serious Illness Care Program:
a randomised controlled trial of a palliative care
communication intervention. BMJ Open. 2015;5
(10):e009032.
39. Respecting Choices. http://www
.gundersenhealth.org/respecting-choices/.
Accessed May 18, 2017.
40. Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Advance Care Planning. https://www.cms.gov
/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning
-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/Downloads
/AdvanceCarePlanning.pdf. Accessed May 18, 2017.
41. Del Piccolo L, de Haes H, Heaven C, et al.
Development of the Verona coding definitions of
emotional sequences to code health providers’
responses (VR-CoDES-P) to patient cues and
concerns. Patient Educ Couns. 2011;82(2):149-155.
42. Roter D, Larson S. The Roter interaction
analysis system (RIAS): utility and flexibility for
analysis of medical interactions. Patient Educ Couns.
2002;46(4):243-251.
43. Street RL Jr, Millay B. Analyzing patient
participation in medical encounters. Health Commun.
2001;13(1):61-73.
44. Braddock CH III, Fihn SD, Levinson W, Jonsen
AR, Pearlman RA. How doctors and patients discuss
routine clinical decisions: informed decision making
in the outpatient setting. J Gen Intern Med. 1997;12
(6):339-345.
45. Henry SG, Fuhrel-Forbis A, Rogers MA, Eggly S.
Association between nonverbal communication
during clinical interactions and outcomes:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Patient Educ
Couns. 2012;86(3):297-315.
46. Daugherty CK, Hlubocky FJ. What are
terminally ill cancer patients told about their
expected deaths? a study of cancer physicians’
self-reports of prognosis disclosure. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(36):5988-5993.
47. Christakis NA, Lamont EB. Extent and
determinants of error in doctors’prognoses in
terminally ill patients: prospective cohort study. BMJ.
2000;320(7233):469-472.
48. Lee SJ, Fairclough D, Antin JH, Weeks JC.
Discrepancies between patient and physician
estimates for the success of stem cell
transplantation. JAMA. 2001;285(8):1034-1038.
49. Hagerty RG, Butow PN, Ellis PM, et al.
Communicating with realism and hope: incurable
cancer patients’views on the disclosure of
prognosis. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(6):1278-1288.
50. Gramling R, Fiscella K, Xing G, et al.
Determinants of patient-oncologist prognostic
discordance in advanced cancer. JAMA Oncol. 2016;
2(11):1421-1426.
51. Carson SS, Cox CE, Wallenstein S, et al. Effect of
palliative care-led meetings for families of patients
with chronic critical illness: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA. 2016;316(1):51-62.
52. Enzinger AC, Zhang B, Schrag D, Prigerson HG.
Outcomes of prognostic disclosure: associations
with prognostic understanding, distress, and
relationship with physician among patients with
advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(32):3809-
3816.
53. Back AL, Arnold RM. “Yes it’
s sad, but what
should I do?”moving from empathy to action in
discussing goals of care. J Palliat Med. 2014;17(2):
141-144.
54. Siminoff LA, Step MM. A comprehensive
observational coding scheme for analyzing
instrumental, affective, and relational
communication in health care contexts. J Health
Commun. 2011;16(2):178-197.
55. Fogarty LA, Curbow BA, Wingard JR,
McDonnell K, Somerfield MR. Can 40 seconds of
compassion reduce patient anxiety? J Clin Oncol.
1999;17(1):371-379.
56. Butow PN, Sze M, Eisenbruch M, et al. Should
culture affect practice? a comparison of prognostic
discussions in consultations with immigrant versus
native-born cancer patients. Patient Educ Couns.
2013;92(2):246-252.
57. Mystakidou K, Parpa E, Tsilila E, Katsouda E,
Vlahos L. Cancer information disclosure in different
cultural contexts. Support Care Cancer. 2004;12
(3):147-154.
58. Johnson KS, Kuchibhatla M, Tulsky JA. What
explains racial differences in the use of advance
directives and attitudes toward hospice care? J Am
Geriatr Soc. 2008;56(10):1953-1958.
59. Trevino KM, Zhang B, Shen MJ, Prigerson HG.
Accuracy of advanced cancer patients’life
expectancy estimates: the role of race and source
of life expectancy information. Cancer. 2016;122
(12):1905-1912.
60. Wuensch A, Tang L, Goelz T, et al. Breaking bad
news in China—the dilemma of patients’autonomy
and traditional norms: a first communication skills
training for Chinese oncologists and caretakers.
Psychooncology. 2013;22(5):1192-1195.
61. Saha S, Beach MC, Cooper LA. Patient
centeredness, cultural competence and healthcare
quality. J Natl Med Assoc. 2008;100(11):1275-1285.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
A Research Agenda for Communication With Patients With Serious Illness
1366
JAMA Internal Medicine
September 2017
Volume 177, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
