 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
Introduction
Autoimmune responses to meiotic germ cell antigens (MGCA) 
expressed in the testis and on sperm are detected in 3%–12% of 
men with spontaneous infertility, which is a factor in 5% of cou-
ples desiring children (1). Testes biopsies have revealed that 50% 
of the patients had focal orchitis (2). Of the 0.5 million men in the 
USA who choose vasectomy as a contraceptive approach each 
year, 70% develop sperm Ab responses with undefined long-term 
sequelae. In addition, MGCA are expressed as cancer/testis anti-
gens (CTA) in many human epithelial tumors, melanomas, and 
leukemias. They are targets of tumor immunity and cancer vaccine 
candidates (3, 4). A better understanding of these tissue- 
specific 
and cancer-specific antigens in human diseases will require fuller 
knowledge of the sequestration and tolerance statuses of MGCA 
in normal and pathological states. Surprisingly, there have been 
little or no research efforts to address these critical issues.
Systemic tolerance is autoantigen dependent and involves 
multiple mechanisms (5). Tolerance begins in the thymus, 
controlled partly by the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene 
(6). This is followed by tolerance in the peripheral lymphoid 
organs, which requires continuous T cell recognition of acces-
sible tissue autoantigens (7–9). Tregs are critical for preventing 
organ-specific autoimmunity (10–12). The maintenance of Treg 
function requires continuous T cell receptor (TCR) signaling 
(9) and autoantigen recognition (13) that occurs in the regional 
lymph nodes. Each regional lymph node expresses unique TCR 
clonotypes (14) and is enriched in tissue antigen–specific Tregs 
that preferentially suppress autoimmune disease of the drain-
ing organ (8, 15, 16). Accordingly, peripheral tolerance should 
not apply to tissue autoantigens anatomically sequestered in 
organs such as the testes.
MGCA are expressed in postmeiotic germ cells located in 
the seminiferous tubules (Figure 1A), separated from interstitial 
leukocytes by the basal tight junctions of the Sertoli cell barrier 
(Figure 1, B and C) (17). Rodent MGCA appear 2 weeks after birth 
(Figure 1, B and C) (18); thereafter, a huge quantity of numerous 
novel testis-specific antigens are continuously synthesized and 
expressed in the meiotic germ cells (19). After being released into 
the seminiferous tubule lumen, the sperm enter the rete testis and 
ultimately reach the vas deferens (Figure 1A) (19). Spermatogen-
esis in adult mice occurs in 12 distinct stages along the length of 
the seminiferous tubule, each defined by unique composition and 
arrangement of the germ cells (Figure 1A) (20). Because the stages 
differ among tubules, their cross sections in an adult testis in many 
different stages coexist. However, the first wave of spermatogene-
sis initiated at puberty is synchronous in all tubules (21).
Autoimmune responses to meiotic germ cell antigens (MGCA) that are expressed on sperm and testis occur in human 
infertility and after vasectomy. Many MGCA are also expressed as cancer/testis antigens (CTA) in human cancers, but the 
tolerance status of MGCA has not been investigated. MGCA are considered to be uniformly immunogenic and nontolerogenic, 
and the prevailing view posits that MGCA are sequestered behind the Sertoli cell barrier in seminiferous tubules. Here, 
we have shown that only some murine MGCA are sequestered. Nonsequestered MCGA (NS-MGCA) egressed from normal 
tubules, as evidenced by their ability to interact with systemically injected antibodies and form localized immune complexes 
outside the Sertoli cell barrier. NS-MGCA derived from cell fragments that were discarded by spermatids during spermiation. 
They egressed as cargo in residual bodies and maintained Treg-dependent physiological tolerance. In contrast, sequestered 
MGCA (S-MGCA) were undetectable in residual bodies and were nontolerogenic. Unlike postvasectomy autoantibodies, which 
have been shown to mainly target S-MGCA, autoantibodies produced by normal mice with transient Treg depletion that 
developed autoimmune orchitis exclusively targeted NS-MGCA. We conclude that spermiation, a physiological checkpoint in 
spermatogenesis, determines the egress and tolerogenicity of MGCA. Our findings will affect target antigen selection in testis 
and sperm autoimmunity and the immune responses to CTA in male cancer patients.
Egress of sperm autoantigen from seminiferous 
tubules maintains systemic tolerance
Kenneth S.K. Tung,1,2,3 Jessica Harakal,2,3 Hui Qiao,1,3 Claudia Rival,1,3 Jonathan C.H. Li,1 Alberta G.A. Paul,1 Karen Wheeler,1,3 
Patcharin Pramoonjago,1 Constance M. Grafer,1 Wei Sun,1 Robert D. Sampson,1,3 Elissa W.P. Wong,4 Prabhakara P
. Reddi,1  
Umesh S. Deshmukh,5 Daniel M. Hardy,6 Huanghui Tang,7 C. Yan Cheng,4 and Erwin Goldberg7
1Department of Pathology, 2Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, and 3Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.  
4Center for Biomedical Research, Population Council, New York, New York, USA. 5Department of Internal Medicine and Center of Regenerative Medicine and Immunity, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA. 6Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas, USA. 7Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.
Authorship note: K.S.K. Tung and J. Harakal contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: August 4, 2016; Accepted: December 21, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(3):1046–1060. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI89927.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
been investigated nor supported by experimental evidence, and 
importantly, its validity has been questioned by recent clinical and 
experimental findings.
First, consistent with other spontaneous autoimmune diseas-
es, the cause of autoimmune infertility is likely rooted in immune 
dysregulation or defective tolerance and is influenced by genetic 
and environmental components. Therefore, loss of tolerance rath-
er than loss of sequestration is the likely cause of autoimmune 
Because the Sertoli cell barrier effectively blocks Abs and 
lymphoid cells from entering the seminiferous tubules (22–24), 
the barrier is presumed to also prevent MGCA from entering the 
interstitial space to reach the immune cells (19, 25–27). According-
ly, local antigen nonspecific mechanisms are deemed sufficient 
to control tissue barrier integrity and excessive testis inflamma-
tion in autoimmunity, trauma, or infection (19, 25, 27). However, 
the complete antigen sequestration paradigm itself has neither 
Figure 1. Testis anatomy and selective MGCA sequestration. (A) Sperm production occurs in cycles (different colors) longitudinally along seminifer-
ous tubules (SFT) (ia, ib). Mature sperm are transported to the vas deferens (v) via the rete testis (ii), ductus efferentes (iii), and epididymis (iv). (B) 
Seminiferous tubules, visualized by IF on Scx-GFP mouse testes with GFP+ Sertoli cells (green) and LDH3 (red), contain LDH3– spermatogonia (white 
arrows) and LDH3+ spermatocytes (yellow arrows). Insert: occludin+ Sertoli cell barriers (red) located between adjacent Sertoli cells (green). I/T, intersti-
tial space. Original magnification, ×500; ×800 (insert). (C) A seminiferous tubule segment with 2 Sertoli cells (light green) depicts the complete MGCA 
sequestration paradigm. Sertoli cells support spermatogenesis (steps i–iv) and spermiation (steps v–ix). Spermatogonia (i) traverse the Sertoli cell 
barriers to become MGCA+ spermatocytes (ii, pink), then round (iii) and elongating (iv) spermatids. At spermiation, redundant cytoplasm (yellow) and 
plasma membrane (black) are partially detached from elongated spermatids (v) to form residual bodies (vi) destined for degradation inside Sertoli cells 
(vii), and retained as cytoplasmic droplets (viii) on mature sperm (ix). The interstitial space contains spermatogonia, basal lamina, peritubular cells 
(not shown), Leydig cells, macrophages, and afferent lymphatic vessels (not shown). Sertoli cells and Sertoli cell barriers (purple) sequester all MGCA+ 
meiotic germ cells inside seminiferous tubules. (D) The new selective MGCA sequestration paradigm supported by our study is shown. Tolerogenic 
NS-MGCA are located in residual bodies and not removed by Sertoli cells. They enter the basal Sertoli cell cytoplasm and egress into the interstitial 
space. S-MGCA, including those in the sperm acrosome (green crescent), absent from residual bodies, are nontolerogenic. Note that some, but not all, 
residual bodies are destroyed by the Sertoli cells (vii).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
been found to develop a prolonged period of MGCA-specific tol-
erance due to the emergence of MGCA-specific Tregs (36). Thus, 
postvasectomy autoimmunity occurred only when it was accompa-
nied by partial Treg depletion with an anti-CD25 mAb (32, 36), a 
finding more likened to the concomitant effector T cell and Treg 
responses to foreign antigens described in food allergy (37) and in 
viral infections (38). Therefore, postvasectomy responses resemble 
the responses to immunogenic “foreign” antigens; moreover, the 
Ab repertoire is narrower than expected and suggests the existence 
of tolerance to other MGCA (36).
Third, a recent study on lactate dehydrogenase 3 (LDH3) (the 
mouse homolog of human LDHC) also argues against complete 
MGCA sequestration. LDH3 is a cytoplasmic MGCA expressed 
behind the Sertoli cell barrier and is a CTA (18, 39). After systemic 
infertility. For example, autoimmune orchitis occurs in autoim-
mune polyendocrine syndrome 1 (APS1) patients due to mutations 
of AIRE (28), possibly associated with impaired thymic deletion of 
autoreactive T cells and deficient Treg function (29).
Second, vasectomy, a popular contraceptive approach (30), 
does cause leakage of sperm in the epididymis (31). Instead of the 
expected MGCA Ab response directed to the numerous seques-
tered MGCA, a recent study indicated that over 85% of the vasec-
tomized mice produced a dominant autoantibody response against 
zonadhesin (ZAN) (32), an MGCA located in the outer acrosomal 
membrane of spermatids and the acrosomal matrix of spermatozoa 
(33, 34). Moreover, an unexplained latent period of several months 
exists before vasectomy results in detectable MGCA autoantibody 
responses (35). In this period, vasectomized mice have recently 
Figure 2. Tolerogenic MGCA egress from seminiferous 
tubules of normal mouse testes. (A) After rabbit anti-LDH3 
Ab injection, immune complexes appeared as rabbit IgG 
puncta (green) outside the occludin+ Sertoli cell barrier (red) 
in adult WT mouse testes (n = 7) surrounding approximately 
18% of seminiferous tubules (B arrows, n = 5), but not in 
(C) testes of adult Ldh3 null mice (n = 7). (D) No immune 
complexes were detected in the testes of WT mice injected 
with rabbit anti-ZAN D3p18 Abs. Original magnification, 
×800 (A); ×100 (B); ×800 (C); ×800 (D). Tolerance to LDH3 
and ZAN were determined by serum IgG Ab responses to 
rLDH3 (E and F) or ZAN D3p18 (G) at 3 weeks after immuni-
zation with testis homogenate in adjuvant. (E) Comparison 
of rLDH3 responses between WT male mice (n = 5) and WT 
female mice (n = 5) and (F) between Ldh3 null male mice  
(n = 6) and WT male mice (n = 6) are shown. (G) Comparison 
of ZAN D3p18 responses between WT male mice (n = 5) and 
WT female mice (n = 3) is shown. Ab responses to (H) rLDH3 
and (I) ZAN in WT male mice at 3 weeks after immuniza-
tion with testis homogenate in adjuvants, with (n = 7) and 
without (n = 13) concomitant CD25 mAb (PC61) injection are 
shown. Data in E–I are from 3 independent experiments.  
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U tests.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 4 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
that of WT male mice (Figure 2F). In contrast to LDH3, ZAN Ab 
responses were comparable between the immunized male and 
female mice (Figure 2G). These results, together with the findings 
on cognate Ab localization, suggest that LDH3 is a tolerogenic 
NS-MGCA, whereas ZAN is a nontolerogenic S-MGCA.
CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ Tregs control peripheral tolerance to the 
NS-MGCA. We began by treating the testis homogenate–immu-
nized male WT B6AF1 mice with anti-CD25 mAb that depletes 
approximately 60% of Tregs for 5 weeks (32). This significantly 
enhanced the LDH3 Ab responses compared with untreated male 
mice (Figure 2H), but did not affect ZAN Ab responses (Figure 2I). 
Therefore, Tregs are critical in controlling systemic tolerance of 
WT mice to LDH3.
To accrue more definitive evidence for Treg involvement in 
physiological tolerance to MGCA, we conducted experiments 
independent of testis antigen immunization in BAC-transgenic 
DEREG mice that express a diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor under 
the control of the forkhead box P3 (Foxp3) locus (42). Treg deple-
tion by DT injections in B6AF1-DEREG mice resulted in the pro-
duction of serum autoantibodies against testicular cell antigens. 
The response began at 3 weeks (Figure 3A) and was detected in 
72% of the mice at 8 weeks (Figure 3B). Notably, the autoantibod-
ies reacted only with the tolerogenic and nonsequestered LDH3 
(Figure 3C) and not with the sequestered ZAN (Figure 3D).
In addition to autoantibody responses, severe EAO was 
detected in 40% of the Treg-depleted DEREG mice at 8 weeks 
(Figure 3E) and could be suppressed by adoptive transfer of WT 
Tregs. EAO was characterized by disruption of spermatogenesis 
(Figure 3, E and F), reduction in epididymal sperm (Figure 3, E and 
F), focal interstitial lymphocytic infiltration (Figure 3F), reduction 
in testis weight (Figure 4A), and tubular atrophy with abundant 
interstitial macrophage infiltration (Figure 3F and Figure 4B). A 
larger fraction and number of the macrophages exhibited a proin-
flammatory EAO-associated M1-like phenotype as distinct from 
the M2-like phenotype of normal testis-resident macrophages 
(43, 44) (Figure 4C). The mice with epididymi devoid of sperm are 
expected to be infertile.
Although only 40% of the Treg-depleted DEREG mice 
exhibited testis histopathology, many more (72%; n = 44) devel-
oped massive immune complex deposition. Diffusely distribut-
ed immune complexes were detected at the seminiferous tubule 
boundaries adjacent to the defective Sertoli cell barrier (Figure 
4D). They were mostly of IgG1 subclass without IgG2a or C3 (data 
not shown). In addition, defective Sertoli cell barrier integrity 
was documented by the detection of subcapsularly injected bio-
tin inside the seminiferous tubule lumen (Figure 4E). The global 
increase in Sertoli cell barrier protein expression (Figure 4F) was 
indicative of the Sertoli cells’ adaptive responses in restoring tight 
junction integrity (45). Moreover, i.v.-injected rabbit LDH3 Ab 
into DEREG mice with EAO formed rabbit IgG–positive immune 
complexes that comingled with the endogenous mouse IgG1–pos-
itive immune complexes inside the seminiferous tubules (Figure 
4G). Notably, a reduction of nectin-3, which anchors elongat-
ed spermatids to the Sertoli cells, was consistent with elongated 
spermatid loss (Figure 4F). The results indicate that Tregs main-
tain physiological tolerance to the NS-MGCA that egress from the 
seminiferous tubules, but not to the S-MGCA.
injection, liposomes bearing LDH3 Abs were enriched in the testes 
of normal mice, indicating that LDH3 may be accessible to circu-
lating Abs in vivo (40).
In this study, we address whether all MGCA are sequestered 
and whether they are protected by systemic tolerance. Our study 
focuses on LDH3 and ZAN in WT mice. We also generated 2 
transgenic mouse lines that express OVA in elongated sperma-
tids, allowing us to investigate and identify the route of MGCA 
egress. We also developed a new model of spontaneous experi-
mental autoimmune orchitis (EAO) to explore defective systemic 
tolerance as a mechanism of autoimmune infertility. We showed 
that some MGCA are not sequestered. They exit the seminiferous 
tubules via a previously unappreciated physiological pathway that 
is important for testis function and maintain systemic tolerance. 
Finally, we documented that systemic tolerance to nonseques-
tered MCGA is critically dependent on Tregs. Conversely, other 
MGCA are sequestered and not tolerogenic.
Results
Tolerogenic MGCA continuously egress from the seminiferous tubules 
of normal mouse testes. To investigate the sequestration status of 
LDH3 and ZAN, we localized the tissue distribution of their cog-
nate Abs in WT testes after systemic injection. The Sertoli cell 
barrier is not an endothelial barrier, and circulating Abs readily 
enter the testicular interstitial space (19). However, being exclud-
ed from the seminiferous tubules by the Sertoli cell barrier, the 
Abs would react with NS-MGCA, but not with sequestered MGCA 
(S-MGCA), outside the barrier.
Patches of granular rabbit anti-LDH3 IgG were observed at the 
boundaries of the seminiferous tubules 19 hours after Ab injection 
(Figure 2A). The extratubular location of the immune complexes 
was confirmed by costaining with occludin, a Sertoli cell barri-
er component. This pattern was reproducible in 83% of 35 mice 
on different mouse strains, including C57BL/6 (n = 10), BALB/c 
 
(n = 10), SJL (n = 4), and C57BL/6 × A/J F1 (B6AF1; n = 11). Because 
immune complexes were only detected in approximately 18% of 
seminiferous tubule cross sections (Figure 2B, n = 6), we speculat-
ed that the observed LDH3 egress may occur only at some stages 
of spermatogenesis (20), a possibility that we address later in this 
study. Importantly, immune complexes were not detected in the 
testes of Ldh3 null C57BL/6 mice (41) (Figure 2C, n = 7), but were 
detected in Ldh3+/– mice (n = 5). They were also not detected in 
mice injected with rabbit IgG or rabbit anti-OVA Abs (n = 13). In 
contrast with mice injected with LDH3, mice injected with Abs to 
ZAN at several dilutions did not show testicular immune complex-
es. This applies to 2 ZAN Abs, one against the D3p18 B cell epitope 
of mouse ZAN (Figure 2D) and the other against the holoprotein 
of pig ZAN that crossreacts with mouse ZAN (data not shown). 
Therefore, although both MGCAs are located behind the Serto-
li cell barrier, LDH3 selectively egresses from the seminiferous 
tubules, whereas ZAN is sequestered.
To define the tolerance status for LDH3 and ZAN, we com-
pared the LDH3- and ZAN-specific responses of male and female 
mice after immunization with testis homogenate in adjuvant. A 
stronger Ab response to LDH3 was detected in female mice com-
pared with male mice (Figure 2E). Importantly, the response of 
Ldh3 null male mice with normal spermatogenesis also surpassed 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
OVA also egressed from the seminiferous tubules in mice 
expressing high levels of OVA. Deposition of granular rabbit anti-
OVA IgG immune complexes was readily detected in approxi-
mately 18% of 214 seminiferous tubules in 100% of OVA-Hi mice 
after i.p. injection of rabbit anti-OVA Abs (n = 13, Figure 5F), but 
not control rabbit IgG (n = 7, data not shown). These immune com-
plexes were located outside the Sertoli cell barrier. Some immune 
complexes were also detected inside the testis interstitial MHC 
class II+ macrophages (Figure 5G). In contrast, only trace immune 
complexes were detected in less than 5% of seminiferous tubules 
in 4 of 5 OVA-Lo mice injected with rabbit anti-OVA Abs.
Our results indicate that (a) the testicular structural and func-
tional properties of the OVA-Hi and OVA-Lo mice are indistin-
guishable from those of WT BALB/c mice, (b) OVA also egresses 
from the OVA-Hi mouse testes similarly to LDH3 in WT mice, and 
(c) OVA egress is dependent on the level of OVA expression behind 
the Sertoli cell barrier. We therefore utilized both the transgenic 
and WT mice to investigate the mechanism of MGCA egress.
Residual bodies export NS-MGCA, but not S-MGCA. We next 
investigated how NS-MGCA egress from normal seminiferous 
OVA expressed as a surrogate MGCA in elongated spermatids 
also egresses from the seminiferous tubules and depends on the level 
of expression. We next extended our study to 2 founder lines of 
OVA transgenic mice on the BALB/cByJ background, in which 
OVA was expressed as a surrogate MGCA under the mouse pro-
tamine 1 (Prm1) promoter to ensure testis-specific OVA expres-
sion (46) (Figure 5A). OVA-Hi mice expressed 2200 ± 45 ng of 
extractable OVA/g of testis, and OVA-Lo mice expressed 41-fold 
less OVA, at 54 ± 15 ng/g of testis. Both OVA-Hi and OVA-Lo mice 
expressed OVA confined to the elongated spermatid cytoplasm 
(Figure 5B). They exhibited normal fertility (data not shown) 
and normal testis histology (Figure 5B) and epididymides with 
full sperm content (data not shown). Consistent with elongated 
spermatid development (20), extractable OVA protein and OVA 
mRNA levels from OVA-Hi mouse testes were initially detected 
at postnatal day 25 and markedly increased in the next 4 days 
(Figure 5C and data not shown). Moreover, the Sertoli cell bar-
rier was intact, as determined by electron microscopy (Figure 
5D), and the seminiferous tubules excluded the FITC injected 
into the interstitial space (Figure 5E).
Figure 3. Treg-depleted B6AF1-DEREG mice sponta-
neously develop autoimmune orchitis and produce 
Abs to LDH3 but not to ZAN. (A) Kinetics of autoan-
tibody responses to testicular cell antigens (n = 3–43 
per time point). (B) Incidence and level of testicular 
cell autoantibody at 8 weeks between Treg-depleted 
DEREG mice (n = 106) and WT mice (n = 22) treated 
with DT. Serum Ab to (C) rLDH3 (n = 5 to n = 10 per 
group) and (D) ZAN D3p18 (n = 5 to n = 10 per group) 
in control and Treg-depleted DEREG mice at 8 weeks. 
(E) Incidences and severity of seminiferous tubules 
with abnormal spermatogenesis and sperm loss in 
epididymis at 8 weeks. (F) Representative histopa-
thology of testis and epididymis between DEREG mice 
treated with DT (bottom) and PBS (top). Arrow points 
to a cluster of leukocyte-like cells in the tubule lumen 
(H&E). Original magnification, ×400 (testis); ×200 
(epidymis). Data are pooled from 6–12 independent 
experiments. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, 
Mann-Whitney U tests (A–D); Kruskal-Wallis tests 
with Dunn’s post-tests (E).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
Figure 4. EAO of Treg-depleted DEREG mice is characterized by M1-like macrophage infiltration, immune complex deposition, and disrupted Sertoli 
cell barrier. (A) Testis weight at 8 weeks after DT treatment. (B) Increased interstitial F4/80+ macrophages (red) and reduced seminiferous tubule 
diameter and ZAN+ spermatids (green) in DEREG mice with EAO compared with control mice. Original magnification, ×100. (C) Most macrophages of 
control mice have the characteristic phenotype of M2 macrophages, including the expression of IL-4Rα, CD206, and F4/80 (left), whereas macrophages 
of Treg-depleted DEREG mice have an M1-like phenotype of high iNOS and MHC class II expression (right); data are expressed as a ratio of absolute 
numbers (right), where each symbol represents cells from 2 testes of 1 mouse. (D) Mouse IgG immune complexes (green) in the DEREG mouse testes 
with EAO are located both outside and inside seminiferous tubules relative to the occludin+ Sertoli cell barrier (red). Original magnification, ×300. (E) 
Biotin (red) exclusion assay in testes of control mice (top) and Treg-depleted DEREG mice (bottom). Original magnification, ×100. (F) Western blot 
analysis of extractable tight junction proteins of the Sertoli cell barrier from testes of control and Treg-depleted DEREG mice. This is a composite data 
set of 8 parallel blots wherein 4 control and Treg-depleted DEREG mouse testis samples were analyzed by using corresponding specific Abs in a single 
experimental session to avoid interexperimental variations. (G) IF staining of murine IgG (green) and rabbit IgG (red) in the testis of a DEREG mouse 
with EAO at 19 hours after i.p. injection of rabbit Abs to LDH3. Note rabbit (red) and mouse (green) immune complexes were admixed or colocalized 
inside the seminiferous tubule (arrow). Dotted line, seminiferous tubule boundary. Original magnification, ×800. Data are from 2–12 independent 
experiments. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001, Mann-Whitney U test (A and C).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
tubules and whether this is dependent on spermatogenic stages. 
Because the cycles in all seminiferous tubules are synchronous in 
the first wave of spermatogenesis, it is possible to define the age 
of onset of immune complex deposition and accurately define 
the stage of the cycle when MGCA egress occurs. LDH3 Ab injec-
tion at 5 weeks, but not at 3, 4, or 4.5 weeks, after birth, elicited 
immune complexes in many tubules (n = 4 for each group) (Figure 
2B and data not shown). This timing is consistent with the timing 
of spermiation when the mature testicular sperm are released into 
the seminiferous tubule lumen (21), but not with LDH3 expression 
that begins at postnatal day 12 (18).
Prior to sperm release, the redundant cytoplasm and plasma 
membrane of elongated spermatids are packaged into a large 
cytoplast (the residual body) retained in the seminiferous tubule 
epithelium and a small cytoplast (the cytoplasmic droplet) that 
remains attached to the sperm (Figure 1C). Although most resid-
ual bodies are likely engulfed and degraded by Sertoli cells (47–
49), a few putative residual bodies of unknown fate and unknown 
MGCA content are detected at stage IX (50). To determine wheth-
er these stage IX residual bodies participated in NS-MGCA egress, 
we investigated whether they contain antigenic MGCA and evade 
degradation by Sertoli cells.
Figure 5. Testis-specific transgenic OVA expressed in elongated spermatids as a surrogate MGCA also egresses from seminiferous tubules in a concen-
tration-dependent manner. Comparison between OVA-Hi and OVA-Lo mice: (A) adult OVA expression (reverse transcriptase PCR [RT-PCR]) and (B) OVA 
localization in elongated spermatids (top, IP with PAS; bottom, IP with hematoxylin). (C) Ontogeny of testicular OVA expression in OVA-Hi mice (ELISA). 
(D) Tight junction ultrastructure of a Sertoli cell barrier (arrows) in adult OVA-Hi mouse testis. (E) FITC (green) exclusion by the occludin+ Sertoli cell barrier 
(red) of seminiferous tubules in an OVA-Hi mouse testis (left) compared with testis of a mouse with EAO (right). In OVA-Hi mice injected i.p. with rabbit 
Abs to OVA, (F) immune complexes detectable as rabbit IgG puncta (green) are detected outside the occludin+ Sertoli cell barrier (red) and (G) inside inter-
stitial MHC class II+ macrophages (green, arrow). Original magnification, ×400 (B); ×10,000 (D); ×800 (E); ×400 (F–G).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
IX, numerous OVA-positive residual bodies of variable sizes 
were randomly distributed throughout the seminiferous epithe-
lium at stage IX of the seminiferous cycle (Figure 6A).
The identity of the OVA-positive structures as residual bod-
ies was further confirmed by their colocalization with the testic-
ular isoform of angiotensin-converting enzyme (tACE), a mem-
brane molecule expressed in the elongated spermatids (51). tACE 
formed a ring around OVA in the residual bodies (Figure 6C), 
indicating that the MGCA exist in the residual bodies at stage IX 
and that they are derived from both the cell membrane and the 
cytoplasm of elongated spermatids. In contrast, the residual bod-
ies of OVA-Lo mice stained positively for tACE without detectable 
OVA (data not shown). To investigate how these residual bodies 
avoid degradation by Sertoli cells, we studied OVA-Hi × Scx-GFP 
By immunoperoxidase (IP) and immunofluorescence (IF) 
microscopy, OVA was readily detected in the residual bodies 
in 20% of seminiferous tubule cross sections (39 of 194 semi-
niferous tubules in 3 experiments) of adult OVA-Hi mouse tes-
tes, consistent with the 18% of immune complexes detected in 
mice injected with Abs to OVA or LDH3 (Figure 2C). These were 
round and irregular structures of from less than 1 to 3 microns 
in diameter (Figure 6, A and C–F). By staging spermatogenesis 
based on the location and the rhomboid-shaped nuclei of the 
round spermatid, OVA-positive residual bodies were preferen-
tially detected at stage IX (n = 35, Figure 6B). In sagittal semi-
niferous tubule sections that span both stage VIII and stage IX 
(Figure 6A), OVA-positive residual bodies were attached to the 
apical sperm at stage VIII. After sperm release at stages VIII to 
Figure 6. Stage-specific OVA localization 
and detection in residual bodies of OVA-
Hi mice. (A) IP staining in a longitudinal 
seminiferous tubule section of an OVA-Hi 
mouse testis. Note: OVA+ residual bodies 
(arrows) are with sperm at stage VIII, but 
are randomly distributed throughout the 
seminiferous tubule at stage IX. (B) OVA+ 
residual bodies with high OVA content 
are maximally detected at stage IX of the 
spermatogenic cycle (significance between 
stage IX and all other stages ranges from 
significant to highly significant). *P < 0.05; 
**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, Kruskal-Wallis 
test. (C) Residual bodies (indicated by 
arrows) in OVA-Hi mouse testis at stage IX: 
OVA (green) is enclosed by membrane-as-
sociated tACE, a residual body marker 
(red). (D) Most OVA+ residual bodies (red) 
in OVA-Hi × Scx-GFP F1 testis at stage IX 
do not costain with Sertoli cell cytoplasm 
(green), including the very small residual 
bodies at the base of seminiferous tubules 
(yellow rectangle). Some OVA is inside 
the Sertoli cell cytoplasm (yellow) with 
plexiform distribution (white square). (E) 
Diffuse OVA IP staining confined to the 
basal cytoplasm of Sertoli cells in OVA-Hi 
mouse testis at stage IX (arrow). (F) OVA+ 
puncta (red) are inside the basal Sertoli cell 
cytoplasm (yellow, arrows) in OVA-Hi × Scx-
GFP F1 mouse testis at stage IX. (G) Small 
OVA+ speckles detected by IP staining in 
the interstitial space of OVA-Hi mouse 
testes (arrows) at stage VIII (left) and stage 
IX (right). All images are representative 
of 3–4 experiments. Dotted white lines 
denote the boundary of seminiferous 
tubules. Original magnification, ×100 (A); 
×400 (C–F); ×800 (G).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
In summary, our findings indicate that the residual bodies 
formed at stage IX of the spermatogenic cycle normally carry 
the tolerogenic NS-MGCA, but not the nontolerogenic S-MGCA. 
Instead of being totally degraded by the Sertoli cells, some intact 
residual bodies migrate basally in the seminiferous tubular epithe-
lium and discharge their contents into the interstitial space via the 
basal cytoplasm of the Sertoli cells. Based on these immunohis-
tochemical observations, along with the detection of NS-MGCA 
egress and tolerance status established in the above experiments, 
we conclude that NS-MGCA normally egress from the seminifer-
ous tubules as cargo in the residual bodies at spermiation.
Discussion
We presented conclusive evidence that for some murine MGCA 
located behind the Sertoli cell barrier, systemic tolerance that 
requires FOXPp3+ Tregs is normally induced. This finding will add 
insight and clarity to our comprehension of  the mechanism of tes-
ticular autoimmune disease pathogenesis and contribute to the 
understanding of human autoimmune infertility and vasectomy as 
well as immunity to CTA in male patients with cancer.
We discovered that MGCA can be either nonsequestered or 
sequestered in the seminiferous tubules, and systemic tolerance is 
only induced by the NS-MGCA that continuously egress from the 
seminiferous tubules with intact Sertoli cell barriers. The NS-MG-
CA are detected in the residual bodies that form at spermiation 
and egress into the testis interstitial space. We have also provided 
the first experimental evidence, to our knowledge, for the seques-
tration of other MGCA by showing that S-MGCA are neither 
detectable in the residual bodies nor tolerogenic. Although many 
of our experiments on MGCA egress relied on transgenic OVA as 
a surrogate MGCA, essentially all of the results were confirmed in 
WT mice; therefore, they are physiologically relevant.
The new paradigm of selective MGCA sequestration and 
tolerance (Figure 1D) is a clear departure from the current dog-
ma of complete MGCA sequestration (Figure 1C); it indicates 
that the immune protection for MGCA in the testis depends on 
2 processes: (a) systemic tolerance involving antigen-specific 
Tregs continuously maintained by the NS-MGCA in peripher-
al lymphoid organs, and (b) local mechanisms, including tissue 
barriers, for protecting the S-MGCA and limiting damage to germ 
cells during interstitial inflammation. The new paradigm, as well 
as the findings of Tregs as a critical peripheral tolerance mech-
anism, the immunological property of the residual bodies, and 
the identification of a new pathway of molecular transport from 
inside the seminiferous tubules into the testis interstitial space, 
will have a major impact on the current concepts of the testicular 
immune-privileged environment.
F1 mice that express GFP in the Sertoli cell cytoplasm under the 
Scx promoter (52). At stage IX, residual body internalization into 
the Sertoli cells was visualized as yellowish plexiform areas where 
the red OVA staining was colocalized with the Sertoli cell cytoplas-
mic GFP (Figure 6D). In contrast, numerous round and discrete 
OVA-positive residual bodies that did not colocalize with GFP 
were readily detected throughout the seminiferous tubules (Fig-
ure 6, D and F). Therefore, many residual bodies at stage IX were 
excluded from the Sertoli cell cytoplasm as they migrated to the 
basal seminiferous tubules (Figure 6, A and D).
Importantly, we also detected diffuse OVA staining confined 
to the basal cytoplasm of Sertoli cells in 12% of the seminiferous 
tubules at stage IX (n = 286 among 3 experiments), often sur-
rounding the cell nuclei (Figure 6E), but occasionally appearing 
as a speckled pattern inside the GFP+ Sertoli cell cytoplasm (Fig-
ure 6F). Moreover, in the interstitial spaces adjacent to the Sertoli 
cells that contain basal cytoplasmic OVA, we occasionally detect-
ed speckles of immunoreactive OVA (Figure 6G). Therefore, the 
OVA in the residual bodies appeared to enter the basal Sertoli cell 
cytoplasm before exiting the seminiferous tubules.
The detection of NS-MGCA in the residual bodies is not 
unique to the transgenic OVA antigen, as residual bodies con-
tained LDH3 but not ZAN in WT BALB/c mouse testes (Figure 
7A). This was confirmed by IF studies (Figure 7, B–E). In OVA-
Hi mouse testes, the OVA+ residual bodies at stage IX also 
contained LDH3 (Figure 7B), but not ZAN (Figure 7C). In WT 
 
BALB/c mice, with tACE as marker, LDH3 (Figure 7D) but not 
ZAN (Figure 7E) was detectable in the residual bodies.
Figure 7. Detection of LDH3 and ZAN in residual bodies of both OVA-Hi 
and BALB/c mouse testes. (A) LDH3 (left, arrows), but not ZAN (right, 
arrows), is detected in residual bodies of WT mouse testes at stage IX by 
IP staining (hematoxylin). In OVA-Hi mouse testes at stage IX, OVA (green) 
in residual bodies is colocalized with (B) LDH3 (red), but not with (C) ZAN 
(red). In WT testes, tACE (green) in the residual bodies is colocalized with 
(D) LDH3 (red), but not with (E) ZAN (red). All images are representative of 
3–4 independent experiments. Dotted white lines denote the boundary of 
seminiferous tubules. Original magnification, ×400.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
tain tolerance, but sufficient to activate effector/memory T cells. 
Although this may apply to clinical autoimmune diseases trig-
gered by molecular mimicry in the context of tissue inflamma-
tion (61), previous studies do not explain the mechanism of spon-
taneous EAO due to defective physiological tolerance normally 
maintained by the highly expressed and highly accessible tolero-
genic NS-MGCA, as exemplified by EAO in the DEREG mice with 
transient Treg depletion. It also does not apply to the S-MGCA 
targeted in EAO after vasectomy (32). The selection of pathogenic 
autoantigens in a given autoimmune disease may therefore vary 
depending on the context of pathogenesis.
Although normal mice do not exhibit systemic tolerance to 
S-MGCA, a positive immune response may not occur or be detect-
able following S-MGCA exposure from their sequestered location. 
Indeed, the exposure of S-MGCA in uni-Vx mice did not result in a 
detectable response for many months (32). Instead, the sperm anti-
gens that leaked from the inflamed epididymis after uni-Vx were 
found to elicit an efficient Treg response that rendered the mice 
specifically tolerant to MGCA (32, 36). Thus, simultaneous CD25 
Ab treatment in the uni-Vx mice led to development of immune 
responses to MGCA and EAO, but not experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. The tolerance to S-MGCA occurred rapidly; 
thus, the uni-Vx mice developed severe EAO and Ab response to 
S-MGCA when Tregs were depleted by anti-CD25 mAbs at the 
same time as vasectomy, but not after 7 days (36). Because the EAO 
resistance state was reversed by neutralization with an anti–PD-L1 
Ab, but not an anti–PD-1 Ab (36), and because PD-L1, but not PD-1, 
is required for peripheral Treg induction (62, 63), we surmised that 
the post-Vx EAO resistance state was partially attributed to periph-
eral Treg induction against the exposed MGCA. Therefore, in addi-
tion to maintaining physiological tolerance to NS-MGCA, Tregs 
can be induced by the “foreign” S-MGCA in a manner similar to 
the Treg response to foreign antigens (37, 38).
By defining the exit pathway of NS-MGCA egress, we have 
also uncovered an unanticipated function for the residual bodies. 
Contrary to previous suggestions (47, 50, 64), some residual bod-
ies are excluded from the Sertoli cell cytoplasm and persist as they 
move to the basal region of the seminiferous epithelium, and they 
contain antigenic MGCA. Our study has not defined the precise 
cellular mechanisms by which the NS-MGCA are exported by the 
Sertoli cells, including the endocytic and microparticle pathways. 
Nonetheless, we have shown that residual body formation at stage 
IX is a physiological checkpoint that determines the sequestration 
and tolerogenicity between the 2 subsets of MGCA.
Although previous studies have shown that the residual bodies 
participate in transepithelial transport and molecular recycling in 
seminiferous tubular epithelium, the actual egress of the mole-
cules out of the seminiferous tubules has not been documented. 
For example, residual bodies are involved in the transport of Fe++ 
and Fe++ transport molecules released from mature germ cells at 
the apical seminiferous tubules, for utilization by the less mature 
meiotic germ cells located near the basal seminiferous tubule (65). 
In remodeling of the basal tight junctions, molecules have been 
shown to be recycled from the apical junctions of the Sertoli cell 
barrier in a process dependent on the endocytic uptake of the api-
cal junction components into the ectoplasmic specialization of 
Sertoli cells (45, 66, 67). In addition, because the residual bodies 
We provided direct evidence for MGCA egress out of the sem-
iniferous tubules by documenting the formation of immune com-
plexes outside the Sertoli cell barrier following systemic LDH3 Ab 
transfer. Importantly, this occurred only in WT mice and did not 
occur in mice genetically deficient in LDH3. The fact that MGCA 
can react with circulating Abs also helps to clarify how EAO may be 
initiated despite the exclusion of the MGCA to the immune effectors 
in the presence of an intact Sertoli cell barrier. For example, in mice 
immunized s.c. with testis antigen in adjuvant, the NS-MGCA can 
form testicular immune complexes with circulating Abs produced 
in the immunogen-draining lymph nodes, and the MGCA can then 
be presented by testis antigen-presenting cells and reactivate the 
memory effector T cells. In cooperation with the effector cytokines 
and chemokines, the immune complexes could also direct the inter-
stitial inflammation to the boundary of seminiferous tubules, where 
they disrupt the Sertoli cell barrier and invade the seminiferous 
tubules to perturb spermatogenesis. This unique sequence of EAO 
immunopathology has been observed in most experimental and 
human testicular autoimmune diseases (32, 53–56). The finding will 
also explain how Abs can enhance adoptive transfer of postvasecto-
my EAO (32) and participate in EAO progression (A.G.A. Paul and 
K.S.K. Tung, unpublished observations).
We also provided direct evidence for Tregs as the critical 
mechanism of physiological tolerance to NS-MGCA by docu-
menting spontaneous EAO development in B6AF1-DEREG mice 
with transient Treg depletion. This conclusion was further sup-
ported by the preferential autoantibody response to LDH3 over 
ZAN in the Treg-depleted mice. Interestingly, when we investi-
gated the sera from unilaterally vasectomized (uni-Vx) and anti-
CD25 mAb–treated mice that previously tested positively for ZAN 
autoantibodies (32), none of the sera IgG reacted with LDH3 (J. 
Harakal et al., unpublished observations). Collectively, our results 
strongly support the conclusion that Treg-dependent physiolog-
ical tolerance is applicable to NS-MGCA and not to S-MGCA. It 
should also be noted that systemic tolerance was detectable for the 
NS-MGCA normally located in the elongated spermatids and the 
residual bodies. These cellular antigens have a late ontogeny of 5 
weeks after birth. Thus, our findings also argue against another 
prevailing opinion, that systemic tolerance can only be initiated 
and maintained by MGCA present in the neonatal period (19). It 
should be noted that transiently Treg-depleted FOXP3-DTR mice 
or DEREG mice were also used to document a role for Tregs in 
tolerance for murine gastric autoantigens (57–59).
In addition to their relevance to testicular autoimmune diseas-
es, the findings in this study may also affect tumor immunity (60). 
CTA expressed in many human tumors are currently considered 
highly immunogenic due to their sequestration and lack of sys-
temic tolerance (3, 4). Contrary to this concept, we now show the 
CTA derived from different MGCA are not equally immunogen-
ic. We posit that the differential tolerogenic properties of MGCA 
located behind the Sertoli cell barrier, predetermined by their 
sequestration and tolerance statuses in the normal testes, will 
likely influence the spontaneous or vaccine-induced immunity to 
CTA in tumors of male patients.
In autoimmune models induced by immunization with self- 
antigens in adjuvant, it is generally believed that the optimal 
immunogens are epitopes expressed at too low a level to main-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
were made in our laboratory. C57BL/6 Scx-GFP mice expressing Ser-
toli cell cytoplasmic GFP under the scleraxis locus were from Ronen 
Schweitzer (Oregon Health Center, Portland, Oregon, USA) and were 
bred into OVA-Hi mice. DEREG mice and Scx-GFP mice were gen-
otyped using tail DNA with published primers (41). OVA transgenic 
mice were genotyped using OVA primers (forward, 5′-AGGCCTT-
GAGCAGCTTGAGAGTAT, and reverse, 5′-TGAGGAGATGCCAG-
ACAGATT). All mice were bred in a specific pathogen–free facility 
and tested negative for fur mites, pinworm, and Helicobacter spp. Male 
fertility was determined by the number of pups borne by 2 females 
cohoused with each male mouse within 2 months.
Production of OVA transgenic mice and detection of OVA mRNA. To 
construct OVA transgenic mice, cDNA encoding full-length OVA protein 
was cloned into the BamHI site of the pPrCEXV-1 protamine expres-
sion vector (a gift of Robert E. Braun, University of Washington, Seat-
tle, Washington, USA) under the control of the mouse Prm1 5′ promoter 
sequence. The transgenic mice were generated in the University of Vir-
ginia Genetically Engineered Murine Model Core. Two OVA transgenic 
lines were backcrossed 18 times to BALB/cByJ mice. Transgenic OVA 
mRNA was detected in total RNA extracted by the Perfect RNA Mini 
Total RNA Isolation Kit (Eppendorf) or the TRIzol Reagent (Life Tech-
nologies). Samples were treated with DNase I (Life Technologies), and 
mRNA sequences were amplified from total RNA (3–5 mg) by oligo-dT 
primed reverse transcription using the SuperScript Preamplification Sys-
tem (Life Technologies). The OVA sequence was determined by PCR.
Recombinant MGCA and MGCA Ab production. Mouse LDH3 was 
extracted from adult mouse testis homogenate by heating to 55°C, 
followed by ammonium sulfate precipitation and DEAD-Sephadex 
chromatography. LDH3 crystals formed in 40% ammonium sulfate 
(86) were used to immunize rabbits. Serum LDH3 Ab IgG was isolated 
on the protein A column. Two ZAN antigens were prepared. Recom-
binant D3p18 (amino acids Cys4502 to Lys4621 of the ZAN sequence; 
accession no. AAC26680 [GenPept database of GenBank at Nation-
al Center for Biotechnology: https:/
/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein]) 
was expressed in E. coli (87), and rabbit Ab to D3p18 was generated by 
immunization with a recombinant glutathione S-transferase–D3p18 
(GST-D3p18) fusion protein and purified by affinity chromatography 
to sequentially remove GST and isolate ZAN epitope–specific Abs 
(34). The second was the ZAN holoprotein purified from pig sperma-
tozoa by affinity chromatography (88) using an Ab specific for the pig 
ZAN recombinant D3 domain (Ile1684–Pro1788; accession AAC48486 
[GenPept database of GenBank at National Center for Biotechnolo-
gy: https:/
/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein]). The ZAN holoprotein Ab 
isolated by protein G crossreacts with mouse and human ZAN (88). 
Antigen specificity of the ZAN Ab was confirmed by Western blot and 
by sperm acrosome binding on IF and immunoelectron microscopy 
(34, 88). IgG fraction of anti-OVA antiserum (MP Biochemicals) was 
isolated on a protein G column.
Ab injection. To detect MGCA egress from seminiferous tubules, 
mice were injected i.p. with rabbit Abs to mouse LDH3, ZAN D3p18 
peptide, pig ZAN, OVA, or control rabbit IgG at 3.75 μg IgG/g body 
weight (see Supplemental Table 1 for full list of reagents and catalog 
numbers). Nineteen hours later, mice were perfused with PBS. To local-
ize rabbit IgG immune complexes with endogenous mouse immune 
complexes in DEREG mice at 8 weeks after DT treatment, mice were 
injected i.p. with rabbit anti-LDH3 Abs. Nineteen hours later, mouse 
IgG1 was colocalized with rabbit IgG on frozen testis sections.
contain galectin-1 (68), a lectin that mediates activation-induced 
T cell apoptosis (69) and inhibits autoimmune arthritis and exper-
imental autoimmune encephalomyelitis development (70, 71), 
they could also regulate local responses in the testis microenviron-
ment, particularly near the location where premeiotic germ cells 
normally transit the Sertoli cell barrier.
The testis was established as an immune-privileged site by 
the seminal finding of prolonged allograft survival within the local 
testicular interstitial environment (72, 73). This was subsequently 
found to depend on Treg-dependent induction of systemic CD8+ T 
cell tolerance (73). We expect similar mechanisms to facilitate the 
induction and maintenance of physiological systemic tolerance to 
the NS-MGCA, involving interstitial somatic cells and cytokines 
that are also required for maintaining local immune privilege 
(25). In other words, similar local mechanisms will likely control 
both the afferent arm and the efferent arm of a testicular immune 
response. These include the immunoregulatory M2-like macro-
phages that dominate in the normal testis (25); the Sertoli cells, 
which can induce Treg conversion and expansion in a TGF-β–
dependent manner (74–78); the Leydig cells, which produce tes-
tosterone and also induce Treg expansion (79, 80); and production 
of vitamin A, which also regulates other local responses (81, 82). 
This raises the question of how local tissue environments could 
influence systemic tolerance induction in the lymph nodes. Two 
recent studies provide a clue. First, diabetogenic antigens from 
the pancreatic islets are presented by antigen-presenting cells in 
numerous lymph nodes and are not confined to the pancreatic 
lymph node (83). Second, implantation of Sertoli cells by them-
selves under the kidney capsule was sufficient to prevent and ame-
liorate diabetes in NOD mice (77). Together, they raise the possi-
bility that, in addition to providing a route for lymph node homing 
of soluble NS-MGCA molecules or tolerogenic antigen-presenting 
cells with their processed peptides to reach the regional lymph 
node, the testis afferent lymphatic vessels (84, 85) may allow 
immunoregulatory molecules produced in the “immune-privi-
leged” interstitial environment to reach the regional lymph nodes, 
where they promote tolerogenic presentation of NS-MGCA and 
maintain antigen-specific Treg function.
In conclusion, the findings described herein of selective 
MGCA sequestration associated with the existence of NS-MGCA 
and the critical role for Tregs in maintaining systemic tolerance 
to NS-MGCA have shifted the existing paradigm and established 
new mechanisms responsible for immunological tolerance and 
autoimmunity to sperm- and testis-specific antigens. We predict 
that they will also have a potential impact on CTA responses. 
Our results should stimulate new strategies for future research 
on immune privilege, testicular physiology, male infertility, and 
vasectomy as well as cancer immunity and cancer vaccine design.
Methods
Mice, genotyping, fertility study. B6AF1 mice were from the National 
Cancer Institute. A/J, C57BL/6, SJL, and BALB/cByJ mice were from 
The Jackson Laboratory. DO11.10 mice were from Marcia McDuffie 
(University of Virginia). C57BL/6-DEREG mice from Katharina Lahl 
and Tim Sparwasser (Twincore) were crossed with A/J mice to make 
B6AF1-DEREG mice. Ldh3 null mice were from Erwin Goldberg (41). 
Spermatid-specific OVA transgenic OVA-Hi and OVA-Lo mouse lines 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
(1:1000), SA-HRP (1:3000), and OPD substrates. The amount of OVA 
per testis weight was computed from an OVA standard curve.
LDH3 and ZAN Ab detection by ELISA. Recombinant LDH3 
expressed by a mouse LDH3 clone inserted in expression vector 
pKK223-3 was grown in E. coli strain W3110 lacIq, inducted by 1 mM 
IPTG, extracted by 600 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 100 mM Tris-
HCl, pH 7.9, 0.1 mg/ml of lysozyme (Roche Biochemicals), 2 mM 
PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Biochemicals), and iso-
lated by AMP-agarose column as described (90). Autoantibodies to 
LDH3 or ZAN were detected on 96-well flat-bottom plates coated with 
recombinant LDH3 (10 μg/ml) or recombinant ZAN D3p18 (10 μg/
ml) in PBS for 18 to 24 hours at 4°C. After the wells were washed and 
blocked with 1% BSA-PBS, experimental and control mouse sera were 
added to the wells at 1:100 and 1:300 dilutions for the LDH3 ELISA 
and 1:50 dilution for the ZAN ELISA in duplicate and incubated for 1 
hour. After 6 washes, the wells were incubated with HRP-conjugated 
goat anti-mouse IgG (Southern Biotech) at 1:2,000 for 1 hour. After 
8 washes, each well was reacted with OPD substrate solution (Sigma- 
Aldrich). The reaction was terminated with 2.5 N H2SO4, and absor-
bance at 490 nm was determined with a microplate reader.
Testicular cell Ab detection by ELISA. Single cell suspensions from 
decapsulated adult testes were incubated with collagenase II (100 U/
ml, Worthington Biochemical Corp.) and DNAase (10 μg/ml, Sigma- 
Aldrich) for 15 minutes at 34°C (91). 1 × 105 testicular cells were added 
to each of 96-well flat-bottom plates in 100 μl of PBS, centrifuged for 
5 minutes at 500 g, fixed with fresh 2% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour, 
and blocked with 1% BSA-PBS twice for 1 hour each time. The air-dried 
and coated plates were stored at –20°C for up to 4 months. After the 
plates were rehydrated with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (Sigma- 
Aldrich) and incubated with 1% BSA-PBS for 1 hour, they were incu-
bated with 1:100 and 1:300 dilutions of serum samples in duplicate for 
1 hour. The plate-bound mouse IgG was detected as described above, 
and autoantibody concentrations were extrapolated from a standard 
curve of pooled mouse sera with high testicular cell autoantibody titers.
IF and IP studies. All Abs and their sources are listed in Supplemen-
tal Table 1 (supplemental material available online with this article; 
doi:10.1172/JCI89927DS1). Supplemental Table 2 contains the details 
of the IF and IP procedures for each figure. Described below are the 
different procedures used on paraffin-embedded or frozen tissue sec-
tions. Frozen sections were used exclusively for IF studies, and paraffin- 
embedded sections were used for both IF and IP studies. For frozen sec-
tions, whole testes were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and 5- to 8-μm 
sections were prepared on a Leitz cryostat (Leica). For paraffin sections, 
the whole testes, fixed for 5 days in Bouin’s fixative and embedded in 
paraffin, were deparaffinized and hydrated. Antigen retrieval was per-
formed on 5-μm paraffin sections by boiling in citrate buffer (pH 6) for 
7 minutes in a microwave oven previously moistened with H2O and pre-
warmed. The slides were cooled and hydrated in H2O and then PBS.
For IF staining on frozen sections, the testis sections were fixed 
in ice-cold 1:1 acetone/ethanol, blocked with Tris-NaCl blocking buf-
fer (PerkinElmer), 3% H2O2 (EMD Chemicals), and 0.1% NaN3 (ICN 
Biomedicals, Inc.), followed by a biotin-avidin blocking kit (Vector 
Laboratories), and incubated with Ab for 30 to 45 minutes at room 
temperature. For IF staining on paraffin sections, Ab incubation was 
performed at 4°C overnight. The biotinylated Ab staining was ampli-
fied by the TSA Biotin Tyramide Reagent Pack (PerkinElmer) and 
detected with neutralite avidin–Texas Red.
Immunization with testis homogenate in adjuvant. Testis homoge-
nate was prepared and EAO was induced as previously described (24). 
Testis homogenate at 10 mg dry weight in CFA (4.5 mg/ml of Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis H37Ra, DIFCO) was injected in 1 hind footpad 
and 2 s.c. sites. Two 5 μg i.p. injections of Bordetella pertussis extracts 
(provided by John Munoz, Rocky Mountain National Laboratories, 
Hamilton, Montana, USA) were administered i.p. on days 0 and +1 of 
immunization, and the mice were studied 3 weeks later.
Unilateral vasectomy and anti-CD25 mAb treatment. Uni-Vx was 
performed by occlusion and bisection of the left vas deferens. On days 
–3, +3, and +7 of surgery (day 0), mice were injected with 250 μg of 
anti-CD25 mAb (clone PC61) (32). Serum Abs were determined 10 
weeks later. Controls included sham uni-Vx mice injected with anti-
CD25 mAbs and uni-Vx mice injected with PBS.
DT treatment of B6AF1-DEREG mice. Tregs were depleted by i.p. 
injection of DT (lot 322326, Calbiochem) at 40 μg/kg body weight 
on days 0, 2, and 5 (59), and mice were studied from 1 to 8 weeks lat-
er. Controls included WT mice injected with DT and DEREG mice 
injected with PBS.
In vivo Treg reconstitution. CD4+CD25+ Tregs were isolated from 
pooled lymph nodes and spleens of WT donors. Erythrocyte lysed 
spleen cells were enriched for the T cell fraction on a mouse T cell 
enrichment column (R&D Systems). CD4+CD25– T cells were isolat-
ed using CD4+CD25+ Microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) and AutoMACS 
(Miltenyi Biotec). Treg-depleted B6AF1-DEREG mice were injected 
i.v. with 2 × 106 viable Tregs at the time of the first dose of DT. The 
purity of the isolated CD4+CD25+ cells was 97.5% ± 2.2%.
EAO histopathology scoring and spermatogenic cycle staging. After 
the testes were weighed, EAO severity was scored on Bouin’s fixed and 
H&E–stained paraffin-embedded sections as unknown samples by a 
pathologist (K.S.K. Tung). The score was determined by the summation 
of testicular and epididymal inflammation, percentage of abnormal 
spermatogenesis, and epididymal sperm loss (24). Inflammation was 
graded from 0 to 4 (0 = none, 1 = very focal, and 4 = extremely severe 
with necrosis). Scores 2 and 3 were increments between 1 and 4. The 
epididymal sperm loss score was determined by the summation of the 
sperm loss scores in the vas deferens, caput, body, and cauda of the epi-
didymis as normal sperm levels (score 0), partial loss (score 1), and com-
plete loss (score 2) for each region of the epididymis. Staging of the sper-
matogenic cycle was performed on Bouin’s fixed paraffin- 
embedded 
sections of OVA-Hi mouse testes stained with rabbit anti-OVA Abs by 
immunoperoxidase and counterstained with H&E or periodic acid–
Schiff (PAS) with hematoxylin counter stain. 194 random tubule cross 
sections from 2 separate mice were photographed, and the images were 
staged based on criteria established in the literature (89).
Transgenic OVA antigen detection by ELISA. Testes were weighed, 
dissociated in RIPA buffer at 100 mg/ml (w/v) in the presence of 1 mM 
PMSF, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 2 μg/ml leupeptin, and 37.5 μg/ml soybean 
trypsin inhibitor, and incubated for 1 hour at 4°C. Tissue lysates were 
centrifuged at high speed for 20 minutes at 4°C, and total protein con-
centration of the supernatants was determined by the BCA Protein 
Assay Kit (Pierce). To detect OVA, 96-well flat-bottom plates were 
coated with 4 μg/ml rabbit anti-OVA in phosphate buffer at pH 6.0 
overnight at 4°C and then blocked with 3% BSA-PBS. Serial dilutions 
of testis extract were incubated with the OVA Abs for 1 hour at room 
temperature, and the bound OVA Abs were detected by mouse anti-
OVA IgG1 (4 μg/ml), followed by biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG1 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
Transmission electron microscopy. Briefly, deeply anesthetized mice 
were perfused intracardially with saline, followed by 1.5% glutalde-
hyde in saline, as previously described (93). The testes were trimmed, 
further fixed by immersion in 3% glutaldehyde in cacodylate buffer, 
and embedded in epon. Thin sections were stained with uranyl acetate 
and lead citrate and examined with a Zeiss electron microscope.
Analysis of testicular macrophages by flow cytometry. Testicular cells 
were isolated from testes of DEREG mice injected with DT 8 weeks 
earlier. Testis cell suspensions were obtained as described above, and 
macrophages, gated on live, CD45+ and CD11b+ cells were stained for 
M1-like macrophages by iNOS and MHC class II, and M2-like macro-
phages by F4/80, CD206, and IL-4Rα.
Statistics. Statistical differences between mouse groups were 
determined by the nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test or the Krus-
kal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post-tests using GraphPad Prism, version 
5.0. The 1-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to assess differences in 
disease incidences. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
Data represent mean ± SEM.
Study approval. All animal studies were approved by the Animal 
Care and Use Review Board at the University of Virginia that follows 
the NIH Guidelines.
Author contributions
KSKT and JH designed the experiments. KSKT, JH, HQ, CR, 
JCHL, AGAP, KW, PP, CMG, RDS, EWPW, and PPR conducted 
the experiments and analyzed the data. KSKT, JH, USD, DMH, 
HT, EG, CYC, and WS provided experimental tools or generated 
the mouse models. KSKT and JH wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
The study was supported by NIH RO1 AI 41236. The authors are 
grateful to Ka-Wai Mok and Weiliang Xia for their contributions. 
They are extremely appreciative of the very helpful advice from Rex 
Hess and Esther Meyron-Holtz.
Address correspondence to: Kenneth S.K. Tung, Department 
of Pathology, Carter Immunology Center, University of Virgin-
ia, Box 801386, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. Phone: 
434.924.9194; E-mail: kst7k@virginia.edu.
For IP staining, endogenous peroxidase was first blocked with Per-
oxidase and Alkaline Phosphatase Blocking Reagent (Dako). Paraffin- 
embedded tissue sections were incubated with Abs at 4°C overnight. 
After biotinylated Ab staining, the slides were incubated with Avidin- 
Biotin Complex (Vector Laboratories). Peroxidase was detected by the 
3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride until optimal color staining 
and intensity were achieved. Counterstains were H&E, PAS/hematox-
ylin, or methylene blue. After dehydration, the slides were mounted 
with Cytoseal (Richard-Allan Scientific). For OVA detection in OVA-Hi 
mouse testes, slides were exposed to 0.05% osmium vapor for 1 minute.
IF slides were examined and photographed on a Nikon Micro-
phot-FXA fluorescence microscope and Nikon HB-10101AF mercury 
lamp and Olympus Q color 5 camera. Alternatively, they were examined 
with a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope. The percentage of seminifer-
ous tubules with positive immune complex staining was counted among 
100 tubules per section. IP slides were examined with an Olympus BH2 
light microscope and photographed with the Olympus Infinity 1 camera.
Biotin and FITC exclusion assays. Mice were injected with 10 μl of 
7.5 mg/ml of biotin (Thermo Scientific) in PBS containing 1 mM CaCl2 
under the testis capsule, and 60 minutes later, the mice were perfused 
and the testes were snap-frozen. Testis sections were fixed in ice-cold 
1:1 acetone/ethanol, stained with neutralite avidin-Texas Red. FITC 
exclusion was determined after i.v. injection of 100 μl of 2 mg/ml of 
FITC (isomer I, C21H11NO5S, Mr 389.39, Anaspec Inc.) in PBS. Ninety 
minutes later, the testes were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and 8-μm 
testis sections were costained for FITC and occludin and studied by 
fluorescence microscopy. Normal testes served as negative controls, 
and testes with EAO induced by testis homogenate and adjuvant 
served as positive controls.
Sertoli cell barrier protein quantification. Frozen testes were homog-
enized in a lysing solution (Bio-Plex Lysis Kit, Bio-Rad), and the pro-
tein concentrations of the lysates were determined using the RC-DC 
Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) with BSA as a standard. Proteins expressed in 
the Sertoli cell tight junctions were quantified by immunoblotting per-
formed as previously described (92). Approximately 35 μg of protein 
extracted from frozen testes was used per lane for electrophoresis and 
immunoblotting. Immunoblot analysis was performed using a chemi-
luminescence kit prepared in-house (92), and images were acquired 
with a Fujifilm LAS4000 mini Luminescent Image Analyzer.
 1. Turek PJ, Lipshultz LI. Immunologic infertility. 
Urol Clin North Am. 1994;21(3):447–468.
 2. Duan YG, et al. Immunodeviation towards a 
Th17 immune response associated with testic-
ular damage in azoospermic men. Int J Androl. 
2011;34(6 Pt 2):e536–e545.
 3. Simpson AJ, Caballero OL, Jungbluth A, Chen YT, 
Old LJ. Cancer/testis antigens, gametogenesis 
and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005;5(8):615–625.
 4. Whitehurst AW. Cause and consequence of can-
cer/testis antigen activation in cancer. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014;54:251–272.
 5. Xing Y, Hogquist KA. T-cell tolerance: central 
and peripheral. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 
2012;4(6):doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a006957.
 6. Anderson MS, Venanzi ES, Chen Z, Berzins SP, 
Benoist C, Mathis D. The cellular mechanism 
of Aire control of T cell tolerance. Immunity. 
2005;23(2):227–239.
 
7. Garza KM, Agersborg SS, Baker E, Tung KS. Per-
sistence of physiological self antigen is required 
for the regulation of self tolerance. J Immunol. 
2000;164(8):3982–3989.
 8. Setiady YY, et al. Physiologic self antigens rapidly 
capacitate autoimmune disease-specific poly-
clonal CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells. Blood. 
2006;107(3):1056–1062.
 9. Vahl JC, et al. Continuous T cell receptor signals 
maintain a functional regulatory T cell pool. 
Immunity. 2014;41(5):722–736.
 10. Tung KS. Mechanism of self-tolerance and events 
leading to autoimmune disease and autoanti-
body response. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 
1994;73(3):275–282.
 11. Sakaguchi S, Yamaguchi T, Nomura T, Ono M. 
Regulatory T cells and immune tolerance. Cell. 
2008;133(5):775–787.
 12. Kim JM, Rasmussen JP, Rudensky AY. Regula-
tory T cells prevent catastrophic autoimmunity 
throughout the lifespan of mice. Nat Immunol. 
2007;8(2):191–197.
 13. Garza KM, Agersborg SS, Baker E, Tung KS. Per-
sistence of physiological self antigen is required 
for the regulation of self tolerance. J Immunol. 
2000;164(8):3982–3989.
 14. Lathrop SK, Santacruz NA, Pham D, Luo J, Hsieh 
CS. Antigen-specific peripheral shaping of the 
natural regulatory T cell population. J Exp Med. 
2008;205(13):3105–3117.
 15. Samy ET, Wheeler KM, Roper RJ, Teuscher C, 
Tung KS. Cutting edge: autoimmune disease in 
day 3 thymectomized mice is actively controlled 
by endogenous disease-specific regulatory T 
cells. J Immunol. 2008;180(7):4366–4370.
 16. Wheeler KM, Samy ET, Tung KS. Cutting edge: 
normal regional lymph node enrichment of 
antigen-specific regulatory T cells with autoim-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 5 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
mune disease-suppressive capacity. J Immunol. 
2009;183(12):7635–7638.
 17. Dym M, Fawcett DW. The blood-testis barrier in 
the rat and the physiological compartmentation 
of the seminiferous epithelium. Biol Reprod. 
1970;3(3):308–326.
 18. Hintz M, Goldberg E. Immunohistochemical 
localization of LDH-x during spermatogenesis in 
mouse testes. Dev Biol. 1977;57(2):375–384.
 19. Mital P, Hinton BT, Dufour JM. The blood-testis and 
blood-epididymis barriers are more than just their 
tight junctions. Biol Reprod. 2011;84(5):851–858.
 20. Russell LD, Ettlin RA, Sinha Hikim AP, Clegg ED. 
Histological and Histopathological Evaluation of 
the Testis. Int J Androl. 1990;16(1):83.
 21. Oakberg EF. Duration of spermatogenesis in 
the mouse and timing of stages of the cycle 
of the seminiferous epithelium. Am J Anat. 
1956;99(3):507–516.
 22. Johnson MH. Changes in the blood-testis barrier 
of the guinea-pig in relation to histological dam-
age following iso-immunization with testis.  
J Reprod Fertil. 1970;22(1):119–127.
 23. Tung KS, Unanue ER, Dixon FJ. Pathogenesis of 
experimental allergic orchitis. II. The role of anti-
body. J Immunol. 1971;106(6):1463–1472.
 24. Tung KS, Yule TD, Mahi-Brown CA, Listrom MB. 
Distribution of histopathology and Ia positive 
cells in actively induced and passively trans-
ferred experimental autoimmune orchitis.  
J Immunol. 1987;138(3):752–759.
 25. Hedger MP. Macrophages and the immune 
responsiveness of the testis. J Reprod Immunol. 
2002;57(1-2):19–34.
 26. Fijak M, Meinhardt A. The testis in immune privi-
lege. Immunol Rev. 2006;213:66–81.
 27. Li N, Wang T, Han D. Structural, cellular and 
molecular aspects of immune privilege in the 
testis. Front Immunol. 2012;3:152.
 28. Perheentupa J. APS-I/APECED: the clinical dis-
ease and therapy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North 
Am. 2002;31(2):295–320, vi.
 29. Kekäläinen E, et al. A defect of regulatory  
T cells in patients with autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy- 
candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy. J Immunol. 2007;178(2):1208–1215.
 30. Adams CE, Wald M. Risks and complica-
tions of vasectomy. Urol Clin North Am. 
2009;36(3):331–336.
 31. Köhler TS, Fazili AA, Brannigan RE. Putative 
health risks associated with vasectomy. Urol Clin 
North Am. 2009;36(3):337–345.
 32. Wheeler K, et al. Regulatory T cells control 
tolerogenic versus autoimmune response to 
sperm in vasectomy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2011;108(18):7511–7516.
 33. Hardy DM, Garbers DL. Species-specific 
binding of sperm proteins to the extracellular 
matrix (zona pellucida) of the egg. J Biol Chem. 
1994;269(29):19000–19004.
 34. Tardif S, et al. Zonadhesin is essential for species 
specificity of sperm adhesion to the egg zona pel-
lucida. J Biol Chem. 2010;285(32):24863–24870.
 35. Tung KS. Human sperm antigens and antisperm 
antibodies I. Studies on vasectomy patients. Clin 
Exp Immunol. 1975;20(1):93–104.
 36. Rival C, et al. Regulatory T cells and vasectomy.  
J Reprod Immunol. 2013;100(1):66–75.
 37. Kim KS, et al. Dietary antigens limit mucosal 
immunity by inducing regulatory T cells in the 
small intestine. Science. 2016;351(6275):858–863.
 38. Betts RJ, et al. Influenza A virus infection results 
in a robust, antigen-responsive, and widely dis-
seminated Foxp3+ regulatory T cell response.  
J Virol. 2012;86(5):2817–2825.
 39. Tang H, Goldberg E. Homo sapiens lactate dehy-
drogenase c (Ldhc) gene expression in cancer 
cells is regulated by transcription factor Sp1, 
CREB, and CpG island methylation. J Androl. 
2009;30(2):157–167.
 40. Dutta RC, Goldberg E. Testis specific lactate 
dehydrogenase as target for immunoliposomes. 
Am J Reprod Immunol. 2008;60(1):26–32.
 41. Odet F, et al. Expression of the gene for mouse 
lactate dehydrogenase C (Ldhc) is required for 
male fertility. Biol Reprod. 2008;79(1):26–34.
 42. Lahl K, et al. Selective depletion of Foxp3+ regu-
latory T cells induces a scurfy-like disease. J Exp 
Med. 2007;204(1):57–63.
 43. Hedger MP. Macrophages and the immune 
responsiveness of the testis. J Reprod Immunol. 
2002;57(1-2):19–34.
 44. Rival C, et al. Functional and phenotypic 
characteristics of testicular macrophages in 
experimental autoimmune orchitis. J Pathol. 
2008;215(2):108–117.
 45. Yan HH, Mruk DD, Lee WM, Cheng CY. 
Blood-testis barrier dynamics are regulated 
by testosterone and cytokines via their differ-
ential effects on the kinetics of protein endo-
cytosis and recycling in Sertoli cells. FASEB J. 
2008;22(6):1945–1959.
 46. Peschon JJ, Behringer RR, Brinster RL, Palmiter 
RD. Spermatid-specific expression of protamine 
1 in transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
1987;84(15):5316–5319.
 47. Smith BV, Lacy D. Residual bodies of seminifer-
ous tubules of the rat. Nature. 1959;184:249–251.
 48. Blanco-Rodríguez J, Martínez-García C. Apop-
tosis is physiologically restricted to a specialized 
cytoplasmic compartment in rat spermatids. Biol 
Reprod. 1999;61(6):1541–1547.
 49. Nakanishi Y, Shiratsuchi A. Phagocytic removal 
of apoptotic spermatogenic cells by Sertoli cells: 
mechanisms and consequences. Biol Pharm Bull. 
2004;27(1):13–16.
 50. Morales CR, Hay N, El-Alfy M, Zhao Q. Distri-
bution of mouse sulfated glycoprotein-1 (prosa-
posin) in the testis and other tissues. J Androl. 
1998;19(2):156–164.
 51. Atanassova N, Lakova E, Bratchkova Y, Krasteva 
G, Donchev M. Expression of testicular angioten-
sin-converting enzyme in adult spontaneously 
hypertensive rats. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 
2009;47(1):117–122.
 52. Muir T, et al. Integration of CREB and bHLH 
transcriptional signaling pathways through 
direct heterodimerization of the proteins: role in 
muscle and testis development. Mol Reprod Dev. 
2008;75(11):1637–1652.
 53. Bigazzi PE, Kosuda LL, Hsu KC, Andres GA. 
Immune complex orchitis in vasectomized rab-
bits. J Exp Med. 1976;143(2):382–404.
 54. Tung KS, Woodroffe AJ. Immunopathology of 
experimental allergic orchitis in the rabbit.  
J Immunol. 1978;120(1):320–328.
 55. Tung KS, et al. The black mink (Mustela vison).  
A natural model of immunologic male infertility. 
J Exp Med. 1981;154(4):1016–1032.
 56. Lehmann D, Temminck B, Da Rugna D, Leibund-
gut B, Sulmoni A, Müller H. Role of immuno-
logical factors in male infertility. Immunohisto-
chemical and serological evidence. Lab Invest. 
1987;57(1):21–28.
 57. Zheng Y, et al. Regulatory T-cell suppressor pro-
gram co-opts transcription factor IRF4 to control 
T(H)2 responses. Nature. 2009;458(7236):351–356.
 58. Nyström SN, Bourges D, Garry S, Ross EM, 
van Driel IR, Gleeson PA. Transient Treg-cell 
depletion in adult mice results in persistent self- 
reactive CD4(+) T-cell responses. Eur J Immunol. 
2014;44(12):3621–3631.
 59. Harakal J, Rival C, Qiao H, Tung KS. Regulatory 
T Cells Control Th2-Dominant Murine Autoim-
mune Gastritis. J Immunol. 2016;197(1):27–41.
 60. Gjerstorff MF, Burns J, Ditzel HJ. Cancer-germline 
antigen vaccines and epigenetic enhancers: future 
strategies for cancer treatment. Expert Opin Biol 
Ther. 2010;10(7):1061–1075.
 61. Luo AM, Garza KM, Hunt D, Tung KS. Antigen 
mimicry in autoimmune disease sharing of 
amino acid residues critical for pathogenic T cell 
activation. J Clin Invest. 1993;92(5):2117–2123.
 62. Francisco LM, et al. PD-L1 regulates the 
development, maintenance, and function 
of induced regulatory T cells. J Exp Med. 
2009;206(13):3015–3029.
 63. Riella LV, Paterson AM, Sharpe AH, Chandraker A. 
Role of the PD-1 pathway in the immune response. 
Am J Transplant. 2012;12(10):2575–2587.
 64. Breucker H, Schäfer E, Holstein AF. Morphogen-
esis and fate of the residual body in human sper-
miogenesis. Cell Tissue Res. 1985;240(2):303–309.
 65. Leichtmann-Bardoogo Y, et al. Compartmen-
talization and regulation of iron metabolism 
proteins protect male germ cells from iron 
overload. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 
2012;302(12):E1519–E1530.
 66. Smith BE, Braun RE. Germ cell migration 
across Sertoli cell tight junctions. Science. 
2012;338(6108):798–802.
 67. Vogl AW, Young JS, Du M. New insights into roles 
of tubulobulbar complexes in sperm release and 
turnover of blood-testis barrier. Int Rev Cell Mol 
Biol. 2013;303:319–355.
 68. Dettin L, Rubinstein N, Aoki A, Rabinovich 
GA, Maldonado CA. Regulated expression 
and ultrastructural localization of galectin-1, a 
proapoptotic beta-galactoside-binding lectin, 
during spermatogenesis in rat testis. Biol Reprod. 
2003;68(1):51–59.
 69. Rabinovich GA, Toscano MA. Turning ‘sweet’ 
on immunity: galectin-glycan interactions in 
immune tolerance and inflammation. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2009;9(5):338–352.
 70. Rabinovich GA, et al. Recombinant galectin-1 
and its genetic delivery suppress collagen-in-
duced arthritis via T cell apoptosis. J Exp Med. 
1999;190(3):385–398.
 71. Mari ER, et al. Galectin-1 is essential for the 
induction of MOG35-55 -based intravenous 
tolerance in experimental autoimmune encepha-
lomyelitis. Eur J Immunol. 2016;46(7):1783–1796.
 72. Head JR, Neaves WB, Billingham RE. Immune 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 0 6 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 3   March 2017
privilege in the testis. I. Basic parame-
ters of allograft survival. Transplantation. 
1983;36(4):423–431.
 73. Nasr IW, et al. Testicular immune privilege pro-
motes transplantation tolerance by altering the 
balance between memory and regulatory T cells. 
J Immunol. 2005;174(10):6161–6168.
 74. Selawry HP, Cameron DF. Sertoli cell-enriched 
fractions in successful islet cell transplantation. 
Cell Transplant. 1993;2(2):123–129.
 75. Suarez-Pinzon W, Korbutt GS, Power R, Hooton 
J, Rajotte RV, Rabinovitch A. Testicular sertoli 
cells protect islet beta-cells from autoimmune 
destruction in NOD mice by a transforming 
growth factor-beta1-dependent mechanism. Dia-
betes. 2000;49(11):1810–1818.
 76. Dufour JM, Dass B, Halley KR, Korbutt GS, Dixon 
DE, Rajotte RV. Sertoli cell line lacks the immu-
noprotective properties associated with primary 
Sertoli cells. Cell Transplant. 2008;17(5):525–534.
 77. Fallarino F, et al. Therapy of experimental type 1 
diabetes by isolated Sertoli cell xenografts alone. 
J Exp Med. 2009;206(11):2511–2526.
 78. Campese AF, et al. Mouse Sertoli cells sustain de 
novo generation of regulatory T cells by trigger-
ing the notch pathway through soluble JAGGED1. 
Biol Reprod. 2014;90(3):53.
 79. Fijak M, et al. Testosterone replacement effec-
tively inhibits the development of experimental 
autoimmune orchitis in rats: evidence for a direct 
role of testosterone on regulatory T cell expan-
sion. J Immunol. 2011;186(9):5162–5172.
 80. Fijak M, et al. Influence of testosterone on 
inflammatory response in testicular cells and 
expression of transcription factor Foxp3 in T 
cells. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2015;74(1):12–25.
 81. Hall JA, Grainger JR, Spencer SP, Belkaid Y. The 
role of retinoic acid in tolerance and immunity. 
Immunity. 2011;35(1):13–22.
 82. Zhou R, Horai R, Mattapallil MJ, Caspi RR. A new 
look at immune privilege of the eye: dual role for 
the vision-related molecule retinoic acid. J Immu-
nol. 2011;187(8):4170–4177.
 83. Wan X, Thomas JW, Unanue ER. Class-switched 
anti-insulin antibodies originate from unconven-
tional antigen presentation in multiple lymphoid 
sites. J Exp Med. 2016;213(6):967–978.
 84. Hirai S, et al. The origin of lymphatic capillaries 
in murine testes. J Androl. 2012;33(4):745–751.
 85. Svingen T, François M, Wilhelm D, Koopman 
P. Three-dimensional imaging of Prox1-EGFP 
transgenic mouse gonads reveals divergent 
modes of lymphangiogenesis in the testis and 
ovary. PLoS ONE. 2012;7(12):e52620.
 86. Goldberg E. Amino acid composition and proper-
ties of crystalline lactate dehydrogenase X from 
mouse testes. J Biol Chem. 1972;247(7):2044–2048.
 87. Tardif S, et al. Zonadhesin D3-polypeptides 
vary among species but are similar in Equus 
species capable of interbreeding. Biol Reprod. 
2010;82(2):413–421.
 88. Hickox JR, Bi M, Hardy DM. Heterogeneous 
processing and zona pellucida binding 
activity of pig zonadhesin. J Biol Chem. 
2001;276(44):41502–41509.
 89. Ahmed EA, de Rooij DG. Staging of mouse semi-
niferous tubule cross-sections. Methods Mol Biol. 
2009;558:263–277.
 90. LeVan KM, Goldberg E. Properties of human 
testis- 
specific lactate dehydrogenase expressed 
from Escherichia coli. Biochem J. 1991; 
273( Pt 3):587–592.
 91. Yule TD, Montoya GD, Russell LD, Williams 
TM, Tung KS. Autoantigenic germ cells exist 
outside the blood testis barrier. J Immunol. 
1988;141(4):1161–1167.
 92. Mruk DD, Cheng CY. Enhanced chemilumines-
cence (ECL) for routine immunoblotting: An 
inexpensive alternative to commercially avail-
able kits. Spermatogenesis. 2011;1(2):121–122.
 93. Tung KS, Alexander NJ. Monocytic orchitis and 
aspermatogenesis in normal and vasectomized 
rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta). Am J Pathol. 
1980;101(1):17–29.
