 Clinical Infectious Diseases
e34 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2017;64(6):e34–e65
2017 Infectious Diseases Society of America’s Clinical 
Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis 
and Meningitis*
Allan R. Tunkel,1 Rodrigo Hasbun,2 Adarsh Bhimraj,3 Karin Byers,4 Sheldon L. Kaplan,5 W. Michael Scheld,6 Diederik van de Beek,7  
Thomas P. Bleck,8 Hugh J. L. Garton,9 and Joseph R. Zunt10
1Department of Internal Medicine—Infectious Diseases, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island; 2Department of Infectious Diseases, the University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Texas; 3Department of Infectious Diseases, Cleveland Clinic, Ohio; 4Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pennsylvania; 
5Department of Pediatrics—Section of Infectious Diseases, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 6Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Virginia, Charlottesville; 7Department of 
Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam Neuroscience, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 8Departments of Neurological Sciences, Neurosurgery, Anesthesiology, and Medicine, 
Rush Medical College, Chicago, Illinois; 9Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; and 10Departments of Neurology, Global Health, Medicine—Infectious Diseases, 
and Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle.
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee collaborated with partner or-
ganizations to convene a panel of 10 experts on healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis. The panel represented pediatric 
and adult specialists in the field of infectious diseases and represented other organizations whose members care for patients with 
healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis (American Academy of Neurology, American Association of Neurological Sur-
geons, and Neurocritical Care Society). The panel reviewed articles based on literature reviews, review articles and book chapters, 
 
evaluated the evidence and drafted recommendations. Questions were reviewed and approved by panel members. Subcategories 
were included for some questions based on specific populations of patients who may develop healthcare-associated ventriculitis 
and meningitis after the following procedures or situations: cerebrospinal fluid shunts, cerebrospinal fluid drains, implantation of 
intrathecal infusion pumps, implantation of deep brain stimulation hardware, and general neurosurgery and head trauma. Recom-
mendations were followed by the strength of the recommendation and the quality of the evidence supporting the recommendation. 
Many recommendations, however, were based on expert opinion because rigorous clinical data are not available. These guidelines 
represent a practical and useful approach to assist practicing clinicians in the management of these challenging infections.
Keywords.  ventriculitis; meningitis; cerebrospinal fluid shunts; cerebrospinal fluid drains; central nervous system infections.
I D S A  G U I D E L I N E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw861
Received 12 December 2016; editorial decision 12 December 2016; accepted 16 December 2016.
*It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation 
among patients. They are not intended to supplant physician judgment with respect to particu-
lar patients or special clinical situations. The Infectious Diseases Society of America considers 
adherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their 
application to be made by the physician in the light of each patient’s individual circumstances.
Correspondence: A. R. Tunkel, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 222 Rich-
mond Street, Room G-M143 Providence, RI 02912 (Allan_Tunkel@brown.edu).
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Meningitis may not only be acquired in the community setting, 
but may be associated with a variety of invasive procedures or 
head trauma. The latter group has often been classified as nosoco-
mial meningitis because a different spectrum of microorganisms 
(ie, resistant gram-negative bacilli and staphylococci) is the more 
likely the etiologic agents, and different pathogenic mechanisms 
are associated with the development of this disease. Although 
many of these patients present with clinical symptoms during 
hospitalization, ventriculitis and meningitis may develop after 
hospital discharge or even many years later. We, therefore, prefer 
the term “healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis” to 
be more representative of the diverse mechanisms (that include 
placement of devices) that can lead to these serious illnesses.
Summarized below are recommendations for the evaluation, 
diagnosis, and management of healthcare-associated ventricu-
litis and meningitis, specifically addressing the approach to 
infections associated with cerebrospinal fluid shunts, cerebro-
spinal fluid drains, intrathecal drug (eg, baclofen) therapy, deep 
brain stimulation hardware, and neurosurgery and head trauma. 
These infections may be difficult to diagnose because changes in 
 
cerebrospinal fluid parameters are often subtle, making it hard 
to determine if the abnormalities are related to infection, related 
to placement of devices, or following neurosurgery. Many of our 
recommendations are based on expert opinion because rigor-
ous clinical data are not available and the likelihood that clini-
cal trials will be conducted to answer some of these questions is 
low. Our goal was to develop guidelines that offered a practical 
and useful approach to assist practicing clinicians in the man-
agement of these challenging infections. The panel followed a 
process used in the development of other IDSA guidelines that 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e35
included a systematic weighting of the strength of recommen-
dations and quality of evidence using the GRADE (Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) 
system (Figure 1) [1–5]. A detailed description of the methods, 
background, and evidence summaries that support each recom-
mendation can be found in the full text of the guidelines.
I. What are the Typical Symptoms and Signs in Patients with 
Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts and Drains
Recommendations
1. New headache, nausea, lethargy, and/or change in men-
tal status are suggestive of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunt 
infection (strong, moderate).
2. Erythema and tenderness over the subcutaneous shunt 
tubing are suggestive of CSF shunt infection (strong, 
moderate).
3. Fever, in the absence of another clear source of infection, 
could be suggestive of CSF shunt infection (weak, low).
4. Symptoms and signs of peritonitis or abdominal tenderness 
in patients with ventriculoperitoneal shunts, in the absence 
of another clear etiology, are indicative of CSF shunt infec-
tion (strong, moderate).
 5. Symptoms and signs of pleuritis in patients with ventricu-
lopleural shunts, in the absence of another clear etiology, 
are indicative of CSF shunt infection (strong, moderate).
 6. Demonstration of bacteremia in a patient with a ven-
triculoatrial shunt, in the absence of another clear source 
of bacteremia, is evidence of CSF shunt infection (strong, 
moderate).
 7. Demonstration of glomerulonephritis in a patient with a 
ventriculoatrial shunt is suggestive of CSF shunt infection 
(weak, low).
 8. New or worsening altered mental status in patients with 
external ventricular drains is suggestive of infection (weak, 
low).
 9. New fever and increased CSF white blood cell count in 
patients with external ventricular drains could be sugges-
tive of infection (weak, low).
Neurosurgery or Head Trauma
Recommendations
10. New headache, fever, evidence of meningeal irritation, 
seizures, and/or worsening mental status are suggestive of 
ventriculitis or meningitis in the setting of recent trauma or 
neurosurgery (strong, moderate).
Figure 1. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation) methodology (unrestricted use of the figure granted by the US GRADE Network).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e36 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
11. Fever, in the absence of another clear source of infection, is 
suggestive of central nervous system (CNS) infection in the 
setting of recent head trauma or neurosurgery (weak, low).
Intrathecal Infusion Pumps
Recommendation
12. New fever and drainage from the surgical site in patients 
with intrathecal infusion pumps are suggestive of wound 
infection (weak, low).
II. What are the Typical Cerebrospinal Fluid Findings in Patients 
with Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Cell Count, Glucose, and Protein
Recommendations
13. Abnormalities of CSF cell count, glucose, and/or protein 
may not be reliable indicators for the presence of infection 
in patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis (weak, moderate).
14. Normal CSF cell count, glucose, and protein may not relia-
bly exclude infection in patients with healthcare-associated 
ventriculitis and meningitis (weak, moderate).
15. A negative CSF Gram stain does not exclude the presence 
of infection, especially in patients who have received previ-
ous antimicrobial therapy (strong, moderate).
Culture
Recommendations
16. CSF cultures are the most important test to establish the 
diagnosis of healthcare-associated ventriculitis and menin-
gitis (strong, high).
17. If initial CSF cultures are negative in patients with CSF 
shunts or drains with suspected infection, it is recom-
mended that cultures be held for at least 10 days in an 
attempt to identify organisms such as Propionibacterium 
acnes (strong, high).
18. If a CSF shunt or drain is removed in patients suspected of 
having infection, cultures of shunt and drain components 
are recommended (strong, moderate).
19. If a CSF shunt or drain is removed for indications other 
than infection, cultures of shunt or drain components are 
not recommended (strong, moderate).
20. Blood cultures are recommended in patients with sus-
pected ventriculoatrial shunt infections (strong, high).
21. Blood cultures may be considered in patients with ven-
triculoperitoneal and ventriculopleural shunts (weak, low).
22. Single or multiple positive CSF cultures in patients with 
CSF pleocytosis and/or hypoglycorrhachia, or an increas-
ing cell count, and clinical symptoms suspicious for ven-
triculitis or meningitis, is indicative of CSF drain infection 
(strong, high).
23. CSF and blood cultures in selected patients should be 
obtained before the administration of antimicrobial 
therapy; a negative CSF culture in the setting of previous 
antimicrobial therapy does not exclude healthcare-associ-
ated ventriculitis and meningitis (strong, moderate).
Neurosurgery or Head Trauma
Recommendations
24. CSF pleocytosis with a positive culture and symptoms of 
infection are indicative of a diagnosis of healthcare-associ-
ated ventriculitis or meningitis (strong, high).
25. Hypoglycorrhachia and elevated CSF protein concentra-
tions are suggestive of the diagnosis of healthcare-associ-
ated ventriculitis or meningitis (weak, low).
26. Growth of an organism that is commonly considered a con-
taminant (eg, coagulase-negative staphylococcus) in enrich-
ment broth only or on just 1 of multiple cultures in a patient 
with normal CSF and no fever is not indicative of health-
care-associated ventriculitis or meningitis (strong, low).
27. CSF cultures with multiple organisms from a single sam-
ple may be contaminants in patients with no symptoms of 
infection or CSF pleocytosis (weak, low).
28. CSF cultures that grow Staphylococcus aureus or aerobic 
gram-negative bacilli are indicative of infection (strong, 
moderate).
29. CSF cultures that grow a fungal pathogen are indicative of 
infection (strong, moderate).
III. What Specific Tests of Cerebrospinal Fluid can be used to 
Confirm the Patient has Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis 
and Meningitis?
Recommendations
30. An elevated CSF lactate or an elevated CSF procalcitonin, 
or the combination of both, may be useful in the diagnosis 
of healthcare-associated bacterial ventriculitis and menin-
gitis (weak, moderate).
31. An elevated serum procalcitonin may be useful in dif-
ferentiating between CSF abnormalities due to surgery 
 
or intracranial hemorrhage from those due to bacterial 
infection (weak, low).
32. Nucleic acid amplification tests, such as polymerase chain 
reaction, on CSF may both increase the ability to identify a 
pathogen and decrease the time to making a specific diag-
nosis (weak, low).
33. Detection of β–D-glucan and galactomannan in CSF may 
be useful in the diagnosis of fungal ventriculitis and men-
ingitis (strong, moderate).
IV. What is the Role of Imaging in Patients with Suspected 
Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Recommendations
34. Neuroimaging is recommended in patients with suspected 
healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis (strong, 
moderate).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e37
35. Magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium enhance-
ment and diffusion-weighted imaging is recommended for 
detecting abnormalities in patients with healthcare-associ-
ated ventriculitis and meningitis (strong, moderate).
36. In patients with infected ventriculoperitoneal shunts and 
abdominal symptoms (eg, pain or tenderness), an ultra-
sound or computed tomography of the abdomen is recom-
mended to detect CSF loculations at the shunt terminus 
(strong, moderate).
V. What is the Empiric Antimicrobial Approach for Patients 
with Suspected Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and 
Meningitis?
Recommendations
37. Vancomycin plus an anti-pseudomonal beta-lactam (such as 
cefepime, ceftazidime, or meropenem) is recommended as 
empiric therapy for healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis; the choice of empiric beta-lactam agent should 
be based on local in vitro susceptibility patterns (strong, low).
38. In seriously ill adult patients with healthcare-associated 
ventriculitis and meningitis, the vancomycin trough con-
centration should be maintained at 15–20 μg/mL in those 
who receive intermittent bolus administration (strong, low).
39. For patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis who have experienced anaphylaxis to beta-
lactam antimicrobial agents and in whom meropenem is 
contraindicated, aztreonam or ciprofloxacin is recom-
mended for gram-negative coverage (strong, low).
40. For patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis who are colonized or infected elsewhere with 
a highly antimicrobial-resistant pathogen, adjusting the 
empiric regimen to treat for this pathogen is recommended 
(strong, low).
VI. Once a Pathogen is Identified, What Specific Antimicrobial 
Agent(s) Should be Administered?
Recommendations
41. For treatment of infection caused by methicillin-suscepti-
ble S. aureus, nafcillin or oxacillin is recommended (strong, 
moderate). If the patient cannot receive beta-lactam agents, 
the patient can be desensitized or may receive vancomycin 
as an alternative agent (weak, moderate).
42. For treatment of infection caused by methicillin-resist-
ant S. aureus, vancomycin is recommended as first-line 
therapy (strong, moderate), with consideration for an 
alternative antimicrobial agent if the vancomycin mini-
mal inhibitory concentration (MIC) is ≥1 μg/mL (strong, 
moderate).
43. For treatment of infection caused by coagulase-negative 
staphylococci, the recommended therapy should be similar 
to that for S. aureus and based on in vitro susceptibility 
testing (strong, moderate).
44. If the staphylococcal isolate is susceptible to rifampin, this 
agent may be considered in combination with other anti-
microbial agents for staphylococcal ventriculitis and men-
ingitis (weak, low); rifampin is recommended as part of 
combination therapy for any patient with intracranial or 
spinal hardware such as a CSF shunt or drain (strong, low).
45. For treatment of patients with healthcare-associated ven-
triculitis and meningitis caused by staphylococci in whom 
beta-lactam agents or vancomycin cannot be used, linezolid 
(strong, low), daptomycin (strong, low), or trimethoprim-sul-
famethoxazole (strong, low) is recommended, with selection 
of a specific agent based on in vitro susceptibility testing.
46. For treatment of infection caused by Propionibacterium 
acnes, penicillin G is recommended (strong, moderate).
47. For treatment of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli, 
therapy should be based on in vitro susceptibility testing 
with agents that achieve good CNS penetration (strong, 
moderate).
48. For treatment of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli 
susceptible to third-generation cephalosporins, ceftriaxone 
or cefotaxime is recommended (strong, moderate).
49. For treatment of infection caused by Pseudomonas species, 
the recommended therapy is cefepime, ceftazidime, or 
meropenem (strong, moderate); recommended alternative 
antimicrobial agents are aztreonam or a fluoroquinolone 
with in vitro activity (strong, moderate).
50. For treatment of infection caused by extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase–producing gram-negative bacilli, mero-
penem should be used if this isolate demonstrates in vitro 
susceptibility (strong, moderate).
51. For treatment of infection caused by Acinetobacter spe-
cies, meropenem is recommended (strong, moderate); 
for strains that demonstrate carbapenem resistance, colis-
timethate sodium or polymyxin B (either agent admin-
istered by the intravenous and intraventricular routes) is 
recommended (strong, moderate).
52. Prolonged infusion of meropenem (each dose adminis-
tered over 3 hours) may be successful in treating resistant 
gram-negative organisms (weak, low).
53. For treatment of infection caused by Candida species, 
based on in vitro susceptibility testing, liposomal ampho-
tericin B, often combined with 5-flucytosine, is recom-
mended (strong, moderate); once the patient shows clinical 
improvement, therapy can be changed to fluconazole if the 
isolated species is susceptible (weak, low).
54. For treatment of infection caused by Aspergillus or 
Exserohilum species, voriconazole is recommended 
(strong, low).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e38 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
VII. What is the Role of Intraventricular Antimicrobial Therapy 
in Patients with Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and 
Meningitis?
Recommendations
55. Intraventricular antimicrobial therapy should be consid-
ered for patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis 
and meningitis in which the infection responds poorly to 
systemic antimicrobial therapy alone (strong, low).
56. When antimicrobial therapy is administered via a ventricu-
lar drain, the drain should be clamped for 15–60 minutes to 
allow the agent to equilibrate throughout the CSF (strong, 
low).
57. Dosages and intervals of intraventricular antimicrobial 
therapy should be adjusted based on CSF antimicrobial 
concentrations to 10–20 times the MIC of the causative 
microorganism (strong, low), ventricular size (strong, low), 
and daily output from the ventricular drain (strong, low).
VIII. What is the Optimal Duration of Antimicrobial Therapy in 
Patients with Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Recommendations
58. Infections caused by a coagulase-negative staphylococcus 
or P. acnes with no or minimal CSF pleocytosis, normal 
CSF glucose, and few clinical symptoms or systemic fea-
tures should be treated for 10 days (strong, low).
59. Infections caused by a coagulase-negative staphylococcus 
or P. acnes with significant CSF pleocytosis, CSF hypoglyc-
orrhachia, or clinical symptoms or systemic features should 
be treated for 10–14 days (strong, low).
60. Infections caused by S. aureus or gram-negative bacilli with 
or without significant CSF pleocytosis, CSF hypoglycor-
rhachia, or clinical symptoms or systemic features should 
be treated for 10–14 days (strong, low); some experts sug-
gest treatment of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli 
for 21 days (weak, low).
61. In patients with repeatedly positive CSF cultures on appro-
priate antimicrobial therapy, treatment should be contin-
ued for 10–14 after the last positive culture (strong, low).
IX. What is the Role of Catheter Removal in Patients with 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts or Drains?
Recommendations
62. Complete removal of an infected CSF shunt and replace-
ment with an external ventricular drain combined with 
intravenous antimicrobial therapy is recommended in 
patients with infected CSF shunts (strong, moderate).
63. Removal of an infected CSF drain is recommended (strong, 
moderate).
64. Removal of an infected intrathecal infusion pump is rec-
ommended (strong, moderate).
65. Removal of infected hardware in patients with deep brain 
stimulation infections is recommended (strong, moderate).
X. How are Patients Monitored for Response to Treatment?
Recommendations
66. Patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and men-
ingitis should be monitored for response to treatment 
based on clinical parameters (strong, low).
67. In patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis and an external drainage device, monitoring of 
CSF cultures is recommended to ensure that they become 
negative (strong, low).
68. In patients with no definitive clinical improvement, addi-
tional CSF analysis is recommended to ensure that the CSF 
parameters have improved and the cultures become nega-
tive (strong, low).
69. For external CSF drains not being used in the treatment of 
CSF shunt infection, daily CSF cultures and analysis are not 
recommended unless clinically indicated (strong, low).
XI. In Patients with Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts Who Develop 
Ventriculitis and Meningitis, When can a New Shunt be 
Reimplanted?
Recommendations
70. In patients with infection caused by coagulase-negative 
staphylococci or P. acnes, with no associated CSF abnor-
malities and with negative CSF cultures for 48 hours after 
externalization, a new shunt should be reimplanted as soon 
as the third day after removal (strong, low).
71. In patients with infection caused by a coagulase-negative 
staphylococcus or P. acnes, with associated CSF abnormal-
ities but negative repeat CSF cultures, a new shunt should 
be reimplanted after 7 days of antimicrobial therapy (strong, 
low); if repeat cultures are positive, antimicrobial treatment 
is recommended until CSF cultures remain negative for 7–10 
consecutive days before a new shunt is placed (strong, low).
72. In patients with infection caused by S. aureus or gram-neg-
ative bacilli, a new shunt should be reimplanted 10 days 
after CSF cultures are negative (strong, low).
73. A period off antimicrobial therapy is not recommended to 
verify clearing of the infection before shunt reimplantation 
(strong, low).
XII. What is the Best Approach to Prevent Infection in Patients 
Who are Receiving Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts?
Recommendations
74. Periprocedural prophylactic antimicrobial administration 
is recommended for patients undergoing CSF shunt or 
drain insertion (strong, moderate).
75. Periprocedural prophylactic antimicrobial administration 
is recommended for patients undergoing placement of 
external ventricular drains (strong, moderate).
76. Prolonged antimicrobial prophylaxis for the duration of 
the external ventricular drain is of uncertain benefit and 
not recommended (strong, moderate).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e39
77. Use of antimicrobial-impregnated CSF shunts and CSF 
drains is recommended (strong, moderate).
78. In patients with external ventricular drains, fixed interval 
exchange is not recommended (strong, moderate).
79. Use of a standardized protocol for insertion of CSF shunts 
and drains is recommended (strong, moderate).
XIII. Is there a Role for Prophylactic Antimicrobial Therapy 
in Patients Undergoing Neurosurgery or in those with 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak?
Recommendation
80. For neurosurgical patients, perioperative antimicrobial 
agents are recommended to prevent infections of the inci-
sion (strong, high).
81. In patients with basilar skull fractures and a CSF leak, 
prophylactic antimicrobial agents are not recommended 
(strong, moderate).
82. In patients with basilar skull fractures and a prolonged CSF 
leakage (>7 days), an attempt to repair the leak is recom-
mended (strong, low).
83. In patients with basilar skull fractures and a CSF leak, pneu-
mococcal vaccination is recommended (strong, moderate).
INTRODUCTION
Meningitis may be acquired in the community setting or may be 
associated with a variety of invasive procedures or head trauma. 
The latter group has often been classified as nosocomial menin-
gitis because a different spectrum of microorganisms (eg, resist-
ant gram-negative bacilli and staphylococci) is the more likely 
etiologic agents and because different pathogenic mechanisms 
are associated with the development of this disease. Although 
many of these patients present with clinical symptoms during 
hospitalization, ventriculitis and meningitis may develop after 
hospital discharge or even many years later. Therefore, the term 
“healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis” is more 
representative of the diverse mechanisms that can lead to this 
serious illness. The following sections describe specific circum-
stances associated with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunts are considered permanent 
catheters in which the proximal end of the shunt is in the cere-
bral ventricle, subdural space, an intracranial cyst, or the lum-
bar subarachnoid space; the distal end usually terminates in 
the peritoneal, pleural, or vascular space. Typically, part of the 
system (as a separate integrated component) is a pressure-reg-
ulating valve that is usually placed just outside the skull or as 
an integral part of the distal tubing [6]. Reservoirs for inter-
mittent percutaneous access can also be added to the system 
or incorporated into the valve assembly. Additional hardware 
may include antisiphon valves and various connectors, allowing 
interconnection of more than 1 catheter or device. The case 
incidence of CSF shunt infection (ie, the occurrence of infec-
tion in any given patient) has ranged from 5% to 41% in various 
series, although the incidence is usually in the range of 4%–17% 
[7–14]. The operative incidence (ie, the occurrence of infection 
per procedure) has ranged from 2.8% to 14%, although most 
series have generally reported operative infection rates of less 
than 4% [15–17]. Factors associated with an increased risk of 
CSF shunt infection include premature birth (especially when 
associated with intraventricular hemorrhage), younger age, pre-
vious shunt infection, cause of hydrocephalus (more likely after 
purulent meningitis, hemorrhage, and myelomeningocele), less 
experienced neurosurgeon, higher number of people traversing 
the operating theater, exposure to perforated surgical gloves, 
intraoperative use of the neuroendoscope, longer duration of 
the shunt procedure, insertion of the catheter below the level of 
the T7 vertebral body in those with ventriculoatrial shunting, 
improper patient skin preparation, shaving of skin, exposure of 
large areas of the patient’s skin during the procedure, and shunt 
revision (risk is especially high in those undergoing 3 or more 
revisions) [18, 19].
There are 4 mechanisms by which CSF shunts may become 
infected. The first, and most frequent, mechanism is colo-
nization of the shunt at the time of surgery. This mechanism 
is suggested by the timing of most shunt infections and by 
the microorganisms that are isolated. In one study in adults 
with CSF shunt–associated infections, 62% occurred within 
the first month after shunt surgery and 72% were thought to 
be acquired intraoperatively [14]. The second mechanism is 
 
retrograde infection from the distal end of the shunt; for exam-
ple, bowel perforation can lead to distal catheter contamination 
in patients with ventriculoperitoneal shunts. In addition, cer-
tain populations of patients with CSF shunts, such as those with 
myelomeningocele, may have undergone multiple intraabdom-
inal procedures related to either bowel or bladder continence 
and may be at greater risk for shunt infection via this route. 
A third mechanism is through the skin, such as after insertion 
of a needle into the reservoir or the shunt to culture the CSF 
or assess patency, after injection of a drug into the ventricular 
reservoir, or after erosion of the catheter through the skin. The 
fourth mechanism is hematogenous seeding; patients with ven-
triculoatrial shunts have a foreign body (ie, the catheter) in the 
vascular system and are at continued risk of infection from bac-
teremia (with a retrograde infection). Patients with existing CSF 
shunts can also develop community-acquired bacterial menin-
gitis unrelated to the shunt, and this may need to be considered 
in the appropriate clinical circumstance.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Drains
CSF drains are temporary catheters that divert CSF externally 
[20]. The proximal end is in the cerebral ventricle (ventricular 
drain), the subdural space, an intracranial cyst, or the lumbar 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e40 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
subarachnoid space (lumbar drain). External ventricular drains 
are most useful for temporary management in patients with ele-
vated intracranial pressure secondary to acute hydrocephalus 
caused by intracranial hemorrhage, neoplasm obstruction of 
the CSF circulation, or trauma. The distal end of the catheter 
is connected to a collecting system, which has a drip chamber, 
ports for measuring intracranial pressure, sampling and injec-
tion ports (used to obtain CSF and inject medications), and 
a collection bag. Drains are usually placed via 1 incision and 
then tunneled a distance subcutaneously before exiting through 
the skin. In patients with external ventricular drains, the inci-
dence of ventriculitis has ranged from 0% to 22%. In a large 
metaanalysis of 35 studies that yielded 752 infections from 
66 706 catheter-days of observation [21], the overall pooled 
incidence of external ventricular drain–related CSF infection 
was 11.4 per 1000 catheter-days (95% confidence interval [CI], 
9.3–13.5); for high-quality studies, the incidence was 10.6 per 
1000 catheter-days (95% CI, 8.3–13). Factors associated with an 
increased risk of infection are intraventricular or subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, cranial fracture with CSF leak, catheter irrigation, 
craniotomy, and duration of catheterization. Although contro-
versy exists regarding the relationship between the duration 
of catheterization and risk of infection, most studies consider 
extended catheter duration (usually exceeding 5 days) to be an 
important risk factor for subsequent infection [20]. However, 
in the metaanalysis cited above [21], studies in which patients 
had a mean catheter duration of less than 7 days had a pooled 
external ventricular drain infection rate of 19.6 per 1000 cath-
eter-days, 12.8 per 1000 catheter-days for drains in place for 
7–10 days, and 8 per 1000 catheter-days for drains in place for 
more than 10 days. Although infection is most likely introduced 
at the time of placement, retrograde infection is another mech-
anism of infection of CSF drains. Microorganisms may enter 
the device by tracking from the exit site alongside the device, 
gaining access to the fluid column that drains CSF, or they may 
be introduced from flushing of the tubing to maintain tubular 
patency.
External lumbar drains, which may be placed to deal with 
complications of operative or post-traumatic transcutaneous 
CSF leak or to aid in the diagnosis of normal-pressure hydro-
cephalus (potentially a lower-risk group), have been associated 
with meningitis rates of up to 5%. The risk factors associated 
with these drains include disconnection of the external drain-
age system and the presence of other infections. In a study 
involving 233 consecutive patients who underwent placement 
of an external lumbar drain for normal-pressure hydrocephalus 
testing, the rate of meningitis was low (0.8%) [22]. The inves-
tigators in that study used a strict protocol that called for no 
surveillance testing of CSF, drainage of CSF for a maximum of 
5 days, sterile reconnection after disconnection or fracture of 
the drain, and permanent removal of the drain after a second 
disconnection or fracture.
Intrathecal Infusion Pumps
Administration of drug therapy (eg, baclofen) via intrathecal 
infusion pumps has been successful for patients with intractable 
spasticity, most commonly in patients with cerebral palsy but 
also in patients with spasticity from multiple sclerosis, trauma, 
hereditary spastic paraplegia, and a variety of other conditions. 
Intrathecal opiate therapy has been used in the management of 
intractable pain, usually in patients with malignancy. The cath-
eter is inserted in the lumbar region and passed intrathecally 
with the tip at the highest spinal cord level at which the drug 
is to be administered. Initially, the pumps were inserted sub-
cutaneously in the abdomen, but this has been superseded in 
some centers, particularly those focused on pediatric patients, 
by placement below the abdominal fascia to decrease the risk of 
erosion through the skin. Once implanted, the device must be 
periodically refilled with the desired drug via transcutaneous 
puncture of the device. 
Few studies have evaluated the incidence of meningitis com-
plicating use of intrathecal infusion pumps. Reported infection 
rates vary from 3.6% for those with subfascial placement of the 
pump to 20% for those with subcutaneous placement of the 
pump [23]. Infections are usually more common in pediatric 
series [24, 25]. Most reported infections are at the incision site; 
in one series, 3 of 49 patients developed meningitis in concert 
with an incisional infection, while 4 others had meningitis 
alone [26]. Another retrospective study identified infectious 
complications in 38 (18.4%) of 207 children with intrathecal 
infusion pumps delivering baclofen therapy [27]. Of these 38 
patients, 25 had suspected or superficial infections and 13 had 
deep-seated infections, with 2 patients diagnosed with men-
ingitis. In many reports, it is not possible to distinguish men-
ingitis from local infections related to the infusion pump. The 
majority of infections occur within the first 2 months of surgery, 
but infections may occur years after implantation as access for 
drug refills may be needed every 3–6 months for the service life 
of the device [26, 28]. The majority of reported infections are 
caused by Staphylococcus aureus, but a variety of other organ-
isms, including multiply drug-resistant gram-negative bacilli, 
have been recovered.
Deep Brain Stimulation Hardware
Deep brain stimulation, introduced in 1987 for the treatment 
of Parkinson’s disease, is now being used for other conditions 
such as dystonia, essential tremor, and obsessive-compulsive 
disorder [29]. The stimulator consists of an intracranial lead, 
a connector, and a pulse generator that is implanted in the 
infraclavicular area [30]. The incidence of infections following 
implantation of deep brain stimulation hardware varies from 
0.62% to 14.3% and can involve all 3 components of the device. 
The infection of the pulse generator is the most common, with 
infection usually caused by S. aureus, a coagulase-negative 
staphylococcus, or Propionibacterium acnes. These infections 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e41
may occur after initial implant or after the battery is exchanged 
at a subsequent surgery.
Brain stimulation for intractable focal epilepsy involves 
placement of a combination of cortical and depth electrodes 
intracranially. These electrodes are used to both sense abnormal 
electroencephalographic activity and to deliver patterned elec-
trical stimuli to interrupt developing seizures. The electrodes are 
connected to a controller that is implanted in the skull. In initial 
trials of this system, involving 256 patients, 2% of patients had 
a post-operative superficial wound infection; most were treated 
successfully with antimicrobial therapy, but 1 patient required 
explantation of the system [31]. The mean follow-up period was 
5.4 patient implant years (a total of 1389 patient implant years), 
during which 20 patients (7.8%) experienced a soft tissue infec-
tion at the implant site. Fourteen of these patients underwent 
removal of the stimulator. The organisms involved and their 
treatments were not reported.
Neurosurgery or Head Trauma
Ventriculitis and meningitis can be complications in patients 
who have undergone neurosurgery or head trauma. Because 
concern and evaluation of infection in the post-surgical and 
post-traumatic situations usually occur after a period of hos-
pitalization, this phenomenon is termed “healthcare-asso-
ciated,” recognizing that there will be individual instances, 
such as in trauma, in which the contamination that led to 
infection occurred prior to the patient’s entry into the health-
care system. The diagnosis may be difficult to establish since 
surgery and trauma can both induce CSF abnormalities that 
confound the usual diagnostic studies. These patients may 
also have fever for reasons unrelated to infection (eg, central 
fever, drug fever, thrombophlebitis, or chemical meningitis 
after posterior fossa surgery). Also, they are at increased risk 
of developing infection because of the risk associated with 
surgery (including surgery after head trauma), direct con-
tamination of the central nervous system (CNS), and the 
increased risk of meningitis in patients with a CSF leak. In a 
study of 334 procedures in patients undergoing craniotomy, 
risk factors associated with post-craniotomy meningitis were 
use of CSF drain, CSF leak, and perioperative steroid use 
[32]. Healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis is a 
problem at medical facilities that perform neurosurgery. In 
a review of all causes of meningitis at Massachusetts General 
Hospital between 1962 and 1988, 40% were classified as noso-
comial in origin [33]. In another study of confirmed bacterial 
meningitis in adults who were hospitalized at an acute care 
teaching hospital in southern Taiwan, 48% of cases were clas-
sified as nosocomial infections [34]. In a recent epidemiolog-
ical study of bacterial meningitis in the United States [35], the 
incidence of meningitis caused by nosocomial pathogens (eg, 
gram-negative bacilli and S. aureus) approached that caused 
by Neisseria meningitidis.
These guidelines address the management of children and 
adults with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis 
with the objective to provide evidence-based guidelines to man-
age these infections.
METHODOLOGY
Practice Guidelines
“Practice guidelines are systematically developed statements 
to assist practitioners and patients in making decisions about 
appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances” [36]. 
Attributes of good guidelines include validity, reliability, repro-
ducibility, clinical applicability, clinical flexibility, clarity, multi-
disciplinary process, review of evidence, and documentation 
[36].
Panel Composition
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) Standards 
and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC) collaborated 
with partner organizations to convene a panel of 10 experts 
on healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis. The 
panel represented pediatric and adult specialists in the field of 
infectious diseases and represented other organizations whose 
members care for patients with healthcare-associated ven-
triculitis and meningitis, including the following: American 
Academy of Neurology, American Association of Neurological 
Surgeons (AANS), Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS), 
Neurocritical Care Society (NCS), and Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America (SHEA). The AANS and CNS affirm 
the educational content and the AAN affirms the value of 
this document. These guidelines were reviewed and endorsed 
by NCS and SHEA. These guidelines were also reviewed and 
approved by the IDSA SPGC and the Board of Directors (BOD).
Process Overview, Literature Selection, and Consensus Development 
Based on Evidence
The panel followed a process used by IDSA in the development 
of other guidelines. The process included a systematic weight-
ing of the quality of the evidence and the grade of the recom-
mendation (Figure 1). [Approach and implications to rating the 
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the 
GRADE methodology. Available at: http://www.gradeworking-
group.org—Accessed July 2015].
The panel reviewed articles based on literature reviews (using 
PubMed and Medline); reviewed articles and book chapters 
(including references published in reviews and chapters); eval-
uated the evidence, which included analysis of source litera-
ture; and drafted recommendations. Panel members reviewed 
and approved questions. Subcategories were included for 
some questions based on specific populations of patients who 
may develop healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningi-
tis after the following procedures or situations: cerebrospinal 
fluid shunt placement, cerebrospinal fluid drain placement, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e42 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
implantation of intrathecal infusion pumps, implantation of 
deep brain stimulation hardware, and general neurosurgery and 
head trauma. Recommendations were followed by the strength 
of the recommendation and the quality of the evidence support-
ing the recommendation. Many recommendations, however, 
were based on expert opinion because rigorous clinical data are 
not available, and the likelihood that clinical trials will be con-
ducted to answer some of these questions is low. For many of 
these recommendations, the grade was designated as “strong” 
and evidence was designated as “low” if there was consensus 
among the experts around specific recommendations. Drafts 
were reviewed by panel members, who provided input on the 
content as well as weighting and grading of the evidence. These 
guidelines represent a practical and useful approach to assist 
practicing clinicians in the management of these challenging 
infections.
Guideline and Conflicts of Interest
All panel members complied with IDSA policy on conflicts of 
interest, which requires disclosure of any financial or other in-
terest that might be construed as constituting an actual, poten-
tial, or apparent conflict. They were provided IDSA’s conflicts of 
interest disclosure statement and asked to identify ties to com-
panies that develop products that might be affected by prom-
ulgation of the guideline. Information was requested regarding 
employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, re-
search funding, expert testimony, and membership on company 
advisory committees. The panel decided on a case-by-case basis 
whether a conflict should limit member participation. Potential 
conflicts are listed in the Acknowledgments section.
Future Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the panel chair, SPGC liaison advisor, and 
SPGC chair will determine the need for guideline revisions by 
reviewing current literature. If necessary, the entire panel will 
be reconvened. When appropriate, the panel will recommend 
revisions to the IDSA SPGC, BOD, and other collaborating 
organizations for review and approval.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND EVIDENCE SUMMARIES
I. What are the Typical Symptoms and Signs in Patients with 
Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts and Drains
Recommendations
1. New headache, nausea, lethargy, and/or change in men-
tal status are suggestive of CSF shunt infection (strong, 
moderate).
2. Erythema and tenderness over the subcutaneous shunt tub-
ing are suggestive of CSF shunt infection (strong, moderate).
3. Fever, in the absence of another clear source of infection, 
could be suggestive of CSF shunt infection (weak, low).
4. Symptoms and signs of peritonitis or abdominal tenderness 
in patients with ventriculoperitoneal shunts, in the absence 
of another clear etiology, are indicative of CSF shunt infec-
tion (strong, moderate).
5. Symptoms and signs of pleuritis in patients with ventricu-
lopleural shunts, in the absence of another clear etiology, are 
indicative of CSF shunt infection (strong, moderate).
6. Demonstration of bacteremia in a patient with a ventricu-
loatrial shunt, in the absence of another clear source of 
bacteremia, is evidence of CSF shunt infection (strong, 
moderate).
7. Demonstration of glomerulonephritis in a patient with a 
ventriculoatrial shunt is suggestive of CSF shunt infection 
(weak, low).
Evidence Summary
The clinical features of CSF shunt infection can be quite var-
iable and depend on the pathogenesis of infection, organism 
virulence, and type of shunt [14, 37–39]. Unlike the organ-
isms that cause community-acquired bacterial meningitis, 
those that cause CSF catheter-associated ventriculitis, such as 
coagulase-negative staphylococci and P. acnes, are indolent, 
evoke minimal inflammation, and are primarily pathogenic 
in the presence of prosthetic material. Frequently, there may 
only be minimal ventriculitis without meningeal involvement 
or only mechanical blockage as a result of biofilm formation 
in or on the catheter [40, 41]. Therefore, the clinical symp-
toms of meningitis may be absent and the clinical presenta-
tion more subtle with a longer duration of symptoms. The 
most frequent symptoms in patients with CSF shunt infection 
are headache, nausea, lethargy, and change in mental status 
(seen in as many as 65% of infected patients). These symp-
toms occur as a result of shunt malfunction secondary to the 
infection. Fever is reported in as few as 14% to as many as 92% 
of cases, so the absence of fever cannot exclude the possibility 
of infection, although fever is typically present in the majority 
of patients. Pain, often related to infection at the peritoneal or 
pleural endings of the shunt, may be absent in as many as 60% 
of infections [42]. Clinically, individual symptoms are not typ-
ically both sensitive and specific [43, 44]. This is not surpris-
ing since the most common presenting complaints associated 
with a request for assessment of a CSF shunt for infection (ie, 
headache, nausea, vomiting, irritability, and fever) are present 
in a wide variety of other illnesses. Because the vast majority 
of shunt infections occur in the first few months after shunt 
surgery, the positive and negative predictive values of individ-
ual symptoms will change depending on when the shunt pro-
cedure was performed [45].
Symptoms and signs of a CSF shunt infection may be ref-
erable either to the proximal or distal portion of the shunt. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e43
Infection beginning in the proximal portion of the shunt (ie, 
the catheter within the CSF space) may result in ventriculitis 
or meningitis and may cause shunt obstruction or decreased 
function [38, 46]. Rarely, intracranial empyemas and abscesses 
may occur secondary to an incompletely treated infection or in 
the presence of hardware not removed as part of the treatment 
process.
Symptoms of infection referable to the distal portion of the 
shunt are more specific to terminus location [46]. Infected 
shunts that terminate in the peritoneal or pleural space may 
lead to an inflammatory response in the absorbing tissue (ie, 
peritonitis or pleuritis). In patients with infected ventricu-
loperitoneal shunts, symptoms of peritonitis appear as the 
peritoneal inflammation becomes more severe and as fever, 
anorexia, and other signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen 
develop. With low-virulence organisms, localizing signs of 
peritonitis may be confined to abdominal tenderness and/or 
guarding. In the peritoneal cavity, host defense mechanisms 
attempt to limit the infection, often resulting in the encyst-
ment of the shunt catheter, fluid buildup within the cyst, and 
loculation of pockets of fluid within the abdomen. These fluid 
collections, often termed pseudocysts, can grow quite large 
because the loculated CSF is not absorbed within the cyst. 
Partial or complete shunt obstruction may result. However, 
pseudocyst formation may be the result of noninfectious eti-
ologies (eg, local inflammatory response to the foreign body) 
that will resolve with reimplantation of the distal part of the 
catheter.
Infected ventriculoatrial shunts may lead to bacteremia sec-
ondary to infected CSF directly entering the bloodstream, an 
infected thrombus or atrial mural vegetation at the end of the 
vascular catheter, or true bacterial endocarditis. However, the 
clinical presentation of an infected vascular shunt is usually 
nonspecific, with fever and lethargy often seen. One unique 
complication of a chronic vascular shunt is shunt nephritis 
[10, 38, 46], which is observed in 4%–14% of patients with 
infected ventriculoatrial shunts. The majority of isolated bacte-
ria in patients with shunt nephritis are usually coagulase-neg-
ative staphylococci and S. aureus, although diphtheroids and 
other pathogens have been isolated. The pathogenesis of shunt 
nephritis is similar to that of subacute bacterial endocarditis, 
with deposition of immunoglobulin M and G antigen–antibody 
complexes in the renal glomeruli. The complement system is 
activated with subsequent depletion of circulating complement 
factors C3 and C4. Failure to detect this condition can lead to 
permanent kidney injury.
However, some shunt infections are insidious and cause 
few or no symptoms, perhaps only an intermittent low-grade 
fever or general malaise. The patient may present with an unex-
plained occlusion of an open-ended peritoneal catheter or fail-
ure of peritoneal CSF absorption.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Drains
Recommendations
8. New or worsening altered mental status in patients with 
external ventricular drains is suggestive of infection (weak, 
low).
9. New fever and increased CSF white blood cell count in 
patients with external ventricular drains could be suggestive 
of infection (weak, low).
Evidence Summary
Ventricular drains become infected from organisms that are 
introduced through the drainage system or through the skin 
site [47, 48]. Infections are more frequent with external ven-
tricular drains than with CSF shunts and may be caused by hos-
pital flora. The change in mental status that occurs in patients 
in whom meningitis or ventriculitis develops may be difficult 
to distinguish from the impaired level of consciousness that is 
a manifestation of the patient’s underlying disease. In patients 
with CSF drain–related ventriculitis, symptoms and signs are 
not very useful in determining the underlying reason for drain 
placement; subarachnoid hemorrhage or tumor can also cause 
a similar neurologic presentation and these patients are often 
unresponsive in the intensive care unit and unable to report 
symptoms. Fever that occurs in these patients may also be from 
other sources of infection. In one study that compared the clini-
cal and laboratory findings at the time of insertion of the exter-
nal ventricular drain and at the time of documented infection, 
increasing CSF pleocytosis (median white blood cell [WBC] 
count of 175/mm3) and fever were the most reliable indicators 
of infection [49].
Neurosurgery or Head Trauma
Recommendations
10. New headache, fever, evidence of meningeal irritation, 
seizures, and/or worsening mental status are suggestive of 
ventriculitis or meningitis in the setting of recent trauma or 
neurosurgery (strong, moderate).
11. Fever, in the absence of another clear source of infection, 
is suggestive of CNS infection in the setting of recent head 
trauma or neurosurgery (weak, low).
Evidence Summary
The recognition of infectious meningitis or ventriculitis in 
patients who have had recent neurosurgery or head trauma can 
be difficult because patients may not be able to provide any his-
tory. Because there are little data on patients in this setting, this 
recommendation is based largely on studies of patients with bac-
terial meningitis in the community. The usual symptoms and 
signs of meningitis can also be due to a recent intracranial bleed 
or other procedures such as neurosurgery. Fever and altered 
mental status may be the only signs of infection [50]. Fever and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e44 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
peripheral leukocytosis are also classic findings in meningitis, but 
there may be many other causes of these findings in a hospital-
ized patient [51]. Signs of meningeal irritation, including nuchal 
rigidity, are seen in only 20%–30% of patients [52, 53]. A history 
of a device placed into the CSF, a craniotomy or trauma resulting 
in contamination of the CSF, and the absence of another cause for 
fevers or seizures makes this diagnosis more likely.
Intrathecal Infusion Pumps
Recommendation
12. New fever and drainage from the surgical site in patients 
with intrathecal infusion pumps are suggestive of wound 
infection (weak, low).
Evidence Summary
The clinical presentation of patients with intrathecal infusion 
pump infections is not well documented in the literature. One 
retrospective case series described 45 (8%) infections in 571 
baclofen pump surgeries [28]. Clinical features were present 
for 12 patients with infection caused by gram-negative organ-
isms. The most common presentations were fever and drain-
age from the surgical site. Other series have reported similar 
rates of infection [54]. As in patients who have CSF shunts, 
symptoms can be divided into those indicative of local wound 
infection (eg, erythema, swelling, and purulent drainage at 
surgical sites) and those indicative of meningitis. Patients may 
present with either or both of these classes of symptoms. In 
one series of 19 infectious complications in 119 patients [23], 
one-third of patients had meningitic symptoms, and one-half 
of those occurred in the absence of symptoms at the surgi-
cal site, most occurred soon after surgery, implying infection 
occurring at surgery rather than as a result of a pump refill.
II. What are the Typical Cerebrospinal Fluid Findings in Patients 
with Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Cell Count, Glucose, and Protein
Recommendations
13. Abnormalities of CSF cell count, glucose, and/or protein 
may not be reliable indicators for the presence of infection 
in patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis (weak, moderate).
14. Normal CSF cell count, glucose, and protein may not relia-
bly exclude infection in patients with healthcare-associated 
ventriculitis and meningitis (weak, moderate).
15. A negative CSF Gram stain does not exclude the presence 
of infection, especially in patients who have received previ-
ous antimicrobial therapy (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
The diagnosis of CSF shunt and CSF drain infections is difficult. 
Nonspecific laboratory parameters (eg, leukocytosis, elevation of 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein) have not 
been evaluated in the approach to diagnosis of these infections. In 
patients with suspected CSF shunt infection (ie, in those in whom 
evidence of infection is suspected and other sources of infection 
have been excluded), consultation with a neurosurgeon is neces-
sary to access CSF for analysis. Note that CSF may not need to be 
obtained if another clear source of infection has been identified. 
Changes in CSF parameters may be subtle [14], thus making it 
hard to determine if the abnormalities are related to infection or 
secondary to the underlying reason for catheter placement or a 
result of neurosurgery [55, 56]. Although high CSF white blood 
cell counts correlate with the presence of infection, infection may 
be present even in patients with normal CSF white blood cell 
counts. CSF white blood cell counts and lactate concentrations 
were normal in approximately 20% of episodes in one study of 
adults with shunt-associated infection [14]. CSF eosinophilia 
(>8% of the differential count) has been associated with an indo-
lent infection [57]. Using a looser definition of eosinophilia (ie, 
>1% of the differential count), another analysis noted a corre-
lation of eosinophilia with CSF infection but also with subcu-
taneous (not transcutaneous) CSF extravasation, blood in the 
CSF, younger age at shunt insertion, and intraventricular hem-
orrhage as a cause of the hydrocephalus [58]. However, others 
have questioned the association between CSF eosinophil count 
and infection [59]. The cell count may be obscured by recent sur-
gery during which blood spilled into the CSF or may have caused 
an inflammatory reaction, so-called chemical meningitis [55]. 
Attention should also be paid to the site of CSF sampling, as the 
CSF white blood cell count in samples obtained by shunt aspira-
tion or from ventricular fluid tends to be lower than when CSF 
is obtained after lumbar puncture. Conversely, it should also be 
considered that in many patients with CSF shunts in the ventricu-
lar space, the lumbar cistern may not be in communication with 
the ventricular space, as is the case in obstructive hydrocephalus.
In one cohort study of 230 consecutive patients with external 
CSF drains [56], CSF samples were collected daily and prospec-
tively evaluated for the presence of bacteria using Gram stain 
and culture. In this study, lumbar catheters were placed in 125 
patients (54.3%), ventricular catheters in 97 patients (42.2%), 
and more than 1 type of catheter in 8 patients (3.5%). The CSF 
was also analyzed for leukocyte count, protein concentration, 
glucose concentration, and ratio of CSF to blood glucose. 
External drainage–related bacterial meningitis developed in 
22 patients (9.6%). Results from analyses of 1516 CSF samples 
showed no significant differences between the patients in whom 
external ventricular drain–related meningitis developed and a 
control group without external ventricular drain–related men-
ingitis during the first 3 days of infection. Also, there were no 
significant differences during the 3 days preceding the infection 
with regard to leukocyte count, protein concentration, glucose 
concentration, and CSF-to-blood glucose ratio. The predictive 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e45
and diagnostic values of the CSF parameters were evaluated 
using receiver operating characteristic curves. They could not 
establish a cutoff value with a sensitivity and specificity of at 
least 60% for any of the CSF parameters.
In a prospective study that included 130 patients at a neuro-
surgical intensive care unit who received an external ventricu-
lar drain [60], daily CSF samples were obtained and examined 
for cell count and glucose and protein content. Bacteriological 
cultures were taken 3 times a week. Standard laboratory param-
eters, such as peripheral leukocyte count, CSF glucose, and CSF 
protein, were not reliable predictors for incipient ventricular 
catheter infection. The only parameter that significantly corre-
lated with the occurrence of a positive CSF culture was the CSF 
cell count (P < .05).
One prospective study evaluated the utility of cell index, 
which is the ratio of leukocytes to erythrocytes in CSF and of 
leukocytes to erythrocytes in peripheral blood, in predicting 
ventriculitis [61]. The study was limited to 13 patients with 
intraventricular hemorrhage who had external ventricular 
drains; 7 patients developed a culture-confirmed ventriculi-
tis. Diagnosis by cell index was possible up to 3 days prior to 
conventional diagnosis. The results, however, have not been 
validated.
The diagnostic accuracy of a Gram stain is a function of the 
number of microorganisms present, the type of meningeal 
pathogen, and the receipt of prior antimicrobial therapy [62]. 
A negative result of a CSF Gram stain does not exclude the 
likelihood of infection. The CSF Gram stain was positive in 
65 (71%) of 91 cases in one study of patients with nosocomial 
meningitis [63].
Culture
Recommendations
16. CSF cultures are the most important test to establish the 
diagnosis of healthcare-associated ventriculitis and menin-
gitis (strong, high).
17. If initial CSF cultures are negative in patients with CSF 
shunts or drains with suspected infection, it is recom-
mended that cultures be held for at least 10 days in an 
attempt to identify organisms such as P. acnes (strong, 
high).
18. If a CSF shunt or drain is removed in patients suspected of 
having infection, cultures of shunt and drain components 
are recommended (strong, moderate).
19. If a CSF shunt or drain is removed for indications other 
than infection, cultures of shunt or drain components are 
not recommended (strong, moderate).
20. Blood cultures are recommended in patients with sus-
pected ventriculoatrial shunt infections (strong, high).
21. Blood cultures may be considered in patients with ven-
triculoperitoneal and ventriculopleural shunts (weak, low).
22. Single or multiple positive CSF cultures in patients with 
CSF pleocytosis and/or hypoglycorrhachia, or an increas-
ing cell count, and clinical symptoms suspicious for ven-
triculitis or meningitis, is indicative of CSF drain infection 
(strong, high).
23. CSF and blood cultures in selected patients should be 
obtained before the administration of antimicrobial ther-
apy; a negative CSF culture in the setting of previous anti-
microbial therapy does not exclude healthcare-associated 
ventriculitis and meningitis (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
CSF cultures from the shunt, reservoir, or drain are the most 
important tests for establishing the diagnosis of infection. The 
culture will usually be positive in patients with an infected 
device even when there is no pleocytosis or alterations in CSF 
chemistries. Positive cultures in only thioglycolate broth should 
be interpreted with caution but may be significant in the appro-
priate clinical circumstance (eg, in patients who have received 
prior antimicrobial therapy). CSF cultures may require several 
days to weeks of incubation before they can be called negative, 
especially for slow-growing organisms such as P. acnes, or the 
results may be negative in patients who have received previous 
antimicrobial therapy. A negative result of a CSF culture does 
not exclude the possibility of infection, and cultures should be 
repeated if initial cultures are negative and infection is con-
sidered likely. In a study of 245 children with bacterial men-
ingitis, the sensitivity of the CSF culture decreased from 88% 
to 70% with any use of antimicrobial therapy (P < .001). The 
sensitivity further decreased to 59% if antimicrobial therapy 
was administered for >24 hours prior to the lumbar puncture, 
although patients with CSF shunts were specifically excluded 
from this study [64]. A similar study in patients with health-
care-associated ventriculitis and meningitis is currently lacking. 
However, one study of 86 cases of suspected nosocomial men-
ingitis showed that use of broad-range 16S rRNA polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) detected bacteria in approximately 50% of 
culture-negative cases [65]. Most of the patients who were PCR 
positive and culture negative had received previous antimicro-
bial therapy.
Occasionally, CSF shunts may be tapped for evaluation of 
function in patients with no clinical evidence of infection and 
may be found to be culture positive. In this situation, contam-
ination may be responsible for the positive culture, but true 
infection must be strongly considered. The shunt should be 
retapped; a positive culture with the same microorganism is 
usually indicative of true infection.
Shunt failure in the absence of shunt infection is a com-
mon occurrence; shunt components are frequently removed 
during surgical procedures to revise the failed shunt. In 
the absence of clinical evidence of a CSF shunt infection, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e46 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
routine cultures of shunt components, when shunts are 
removed for other indications, is not recommended. In one 
study of 174 shunt revisions, 19 patients had positive shunt 
component cultures without signs of infection (ie, asymp-
tomatic bacteriologic shunt contamination); only 1 patient 
was treated with antimicrobial therapy [66]. There was no 
increase in the risk of shunt malfunction in this group when 
compared to other patients with CSF shunts in the database 
at their institution.
In patients with ventriculoatrial shunts, blood cultures 
should be performed because bacteremia is invariably present 
in patients with infected ventriculoatrial shunts (positive blood 
cultures in >90% of cases). This contrasts with infections in 
other types of CSF shunts in which the incidence of negative 
blood cultures approaches 80% [38]. Blood cultures may be 
considered in these patients, although positive results should 
be interpreted cautiously in patients with nonvascular CSF 
shunts and may represent a contaminant or another source of 
infection.
In patients with lumbar or ventricular drains, definite infec-
tion is defined as a positive CSF culture (obtained from the 
ventricular or lumbar catheter) associated with CSF pleocytosis 
[20, 47]. Progressively decreasing CSF glucose and increasing 
CSF protein accompanied by advancing CSF pleocytosis, in 
the absence of positive CSF cultures or positive Gram stain, 
characterizes a suspected infection in the absence of another 
etiology. A contaminating microorganism is defined as an iso-
lated positive CSF culture and/or positive Gram stain with a 
normal CSF cell count, CSF glucose, and CSF protein. Lozier 
et al [20] proposed a classification system for determination of 
ventriculostomy infection in the presence of ventriculitis. Cases 
with positive CSF cultures were classified as contaminant, col-
onization, suspected ventriculostomy-related infection, ven-
triculostomy-related infection, and ventriculitis. The definition 
of ventriculitis included “clinical signs of meningitis” such as 
neck stiffness and photophobia, which are often absent because 
organisms such as a coagulase-negative staphylococcus and 
P. acnes are indolent and may not cause significant inflamma-
tion. In addition, patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage can 
have symptoms that mimic meningitis. The classification we 
propose for patients with ventricular drains is a modification, 
as follows:
• Contamination: An isolated positive CSF culture or Gram 
stain, with normal CSF cell count and glucose and protein 
concentrations and with lack of clinical symptoms suspicious 
for ventriculitis or meningitis.
• Colonization: Multiple positive CSF cultures or Gram stain, 
with normal CSF cell count and glucose and protein concen-
trations and with lack of clinical symptoms suspicious for 
ventriculitis or meningitis.
• Infection: Single or multiple positive CSF cultures with CSF ple-
ocytosis and/or hypoglycorrhachia, or an increasing cell count, 
and clinical symptoms suspicious for ventriculitis or meningitis.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National 
Healthcare Safety Network (CDC/NHSN) definition of health-
care-associated ventriculitis or meningitis includes at least 1 of 
the following criteria (CDC/NHSN Surveillance Definitions; 
January 2015) [67]:
• Organism cultured from CSF
• At least 2 of the following symptoms with no other recog-
nized cause in patients aged >1 year: fever >38°C or headache, 
meningeal signs, or cranial nerve signs, or at least 2 of the fol-
lowing symptoms with no other recognized cause in patients 
aged ≤1 year: fever >38°C or hypothermia <36°C, apnea, 
bradycardia, or irritability and at least 1 of the following:
 o Increased white cells, elevated protein, and decreased glu-
cose in CSF
 o Organisms seen on Gram stain of CSF
 o Organisms cultured from blood
 o Positive nonculture diagnostic laboratory test from CSF, 
blood, or urine
 o Diagnostic single-antibody titer (immunoglobulin M) or 
4-fold increase in paired sera (immunoglobulin G) for 
organism.
However, a nonculture diagnostic laboratory test or antibody 
titers for specific organisms are not often used in patients with 
healthcare-associated ventriculitis or meningitis.
Neurosurgery or Head Trauma
Recommendations
24. CSF pleocytosis with a positive culture and symptoms of 
infection are indicative of a diagnosis of healthcare-associ-
ated ventriculitis or meningitis (strong, high).
25. Hypoglycorrhachia and elevated CSF protein concentra-
tions are suggestive of the diagnosis of healthcare-associ-
ated ventriculitis or meningitis (weak, low).
26. Growth of an organism that is commonly considered a con-
taminant (eg, coagulase-negative staphylococcus) in enrich-
ment broth only or on just 1 of multiple cultures in a patient 
with normal CSF and no fever is not indicative of health-
care-associated ventriculitis or meningitis (strong, low).
27. CSF cultures with multiple organisms from a single sam-
ple may be contaminants in patients with no symptoms of 
infection or CSF pleocytosis (weak, low).
28. CSF cultures that grow S. aureus or aerobic gram-negative 
bacilli are indicative of infection (strong, moderate).
29. CSF cultures that grow a fungal pathogen are indicative of 
infection (strong, moderate).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e47
Evidence Summary
Many criteria have been used to establish the diagnosis of 
meningitis or ventriculitis in the setting of neurosurgery or 
head trauma. Because there is no gold standard for defining 
an infection, the definition has usually included an evalua-
tion of the microorganism that grew in culture, the number 
of positive cultures, and clinical parameters. However, the 
CDC/NHSN definition is useful in defining the likelihood 
of a true infection (see above). Older studies often required 
only a single positive CSF culture. Others accepted either a 
CSF pleocytosis or low CSF glucose concentration to diagnose 
infection. More recently, experts have suggested use of a com-
bination of findings to establish the diagnosis [20]. One study 
used a combination of a positive CSF culture with CSF pleo-
cytosis (at least 11 WBCs/mm3 and ≥50% neutrophils) along 
with clinical symptoms [68]. This definition was later refined 
to require 2 positive CSF cultures with the same organism on 
different days [51]. There are also reports of healthcare-as-
sociated meningitis in patients with a normal CSF white cell 
count [50].
CSF changes following neurosurgery, head trauma, or intrac-
ranial bleeding may be suggestive of infection. After neurosur-
gery, the CSF white cell count can be quite high and the glucose 
concentration may be low. These patients often have headaches, 
nuchal rigidity, vomiting, and altered mentation. However, if 
the CSF white blood cells are >7500/mm3 or if the CSF glucose 
is <10 mg/dL, infection is more likely. High fever (≥40°C) or 
prolonged fever (>1 week) was more suggestive of infectious 
meningitis in one study [55], although a limitation of this study 
was that there was no single variable that could be used to accu-
rately distinguish between bacterial and aseptic meningitis at 
the time of presentation.
The most common CSF contaminants are coagulase-negative 
staphylococci. In a study of pediatric patients who had daily 
cultures, more than half of the positive cultures were thought to 
be contaminants, and a coagulase-negative staphylococcus was 
isolated in more than half of those with positive cultures [47]. 
It was thought to be a contaminant in 15 positive cultures and 
a true pathogen in only 3 cultures. However, a coagulase-neg-
ative staphylococcus is also one of the more common causes 
of infection in patients who have had recent surgery or who 
have external ventricular drains. Clues to this organism being a 
contaminant included light growth, growth only in enrichment 
broth, and growth of the organism in a minority of cultures. All 
patients with predefined “true infections” in this study had fever 
and a peripheral leukocytosis. However, these results have not 
been validated in other cohorts.
When cultures are collected from a drainage device (eg, an 
external ventricular drain or a lumbar drain), the absence of any 
change in CSF parameters (eg, cell count, glucose, protein) sug-
gests contamination. Ideally, cultures should be collected from 
the injection site and sampling port of an external ventricular 
drain rather than the drainage bag in order to decrease the risk 
of contamination. Similarly, with a lumbar drain, the sampling 
port is the preferred site for obtaining CSF.
The majority of reports of healthcare-associated meningitis 
identified a single pathogen with each episode of meningitis. 
While sequential infections may be seen in a patient who has a 
drainage device for a long period of time, it would be unusual 
to develop an infection with multiple organisms simultane-
ously unless there was an obvious route of infection from a 
contaminated source (eg, after head trauma with open frac-
ture). In the absence of a likely source, changes in the CSF, or 
symptoms of infection, this may represent contamination from 
the time of CSF collection. If there is a question of whether or 
not the culture represents contamination, it is reasonable to 
collect additional CSF to evaluate CSF parameters and repeat 
cultures in order to determine the significance of the result.
Healthcare-associated fungal ventriculitis and meningitis 
is much less common than that caused by bacteria; however, 
it may be seen after surgery or other invasive procedures or 
trauma. In the post-operative setting, Candida species are the 
most likely pathogen. This organism has been implicated in 
premature infants and in 5% of cases following neurosurgery 
[69]. Other fungal pathogens have also been isolated after trau-
matic head injuries, including Aspergillus [70] and Cryptococcus 
neoformans [71]. The underlying host defect may also affect the 
epidemiology. In a review of oncology patients at Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center with meningitis between 1993 
and 2004 [72], 7% of patients were infected with C. neoformans 
and 1% with Candida albicans; 78% of these patients had prior 
neurosurgery. In a multistate outbreak of fungal meningitis in 
September 2012 as a result of contaminated methylpredniso-
lone made at a single compounding pharmacy in Massachusetts 
[73–75], the index patient was infected with Aspergillus fumig-
atus, but most of the subsequent infections were caused by 
Exserohilum rostratum. Of the 749 patients with infections, 
meningitis was seen in 233 (31%) cases. Another 151 patients 
(20%) had meningitis and a concurrent spinal or paraspinal 
infection. In addition, a large number of patients had epidural 
infections without meningitis [74].
III. What Specific Tests of Cerebrospinal Fluid can be used to 
Confirm the Patient has Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis 
and Meningitis?
Recommendations
30. An elevated CSF lactate or an elevated CSF procalcitonin, 
or the combination of both, may be useful in the diagnosis 
of healthcare-associated bacterial ventriculitis and menin-
gitis (weak, moderate).
31. An elevated serum procalcitonin may be useful in differen-
tiating between CSF abnormalities due to surgery or intrac-
ranial hemorrhage from those due to bacterial infection 
(weak, low).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e48 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
32. Nucleic acid amplification tests, such as PCR, on CSF may 
both increase the ability to identify a pathogen and decrease 
the time to making a specific diagnosis (weak, low).
33. Detection of β–D-glucan and galactomannan in CSF may 
be useful in the diagnosis of fungal ventriculitis and men-
ingitis (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Lactate 
An elevated CSF lactate concentration of more than 3.5 to 4.2 
mmol/L occurs more frequently in bacterial than in aseptic 
meningitis. Two large metaanalyses have concluded that ele-
vated CSF lactate concentration is better than the CSF WBC 
count, glucose, or protein in differentiating bacterial menin-
gitis from aseptic meningitis (sensitivity of 93% and 97% and 
specificity of 96% and 94%, respectively) [76, 77]. However, the 
studies in these metaanalyses mostly equated aseptic meningi-
tis with viral meningitis, and few post-surgical or post-trauma 
patients were included. In patients with healthcare-associated 
ventriculitis and meningitis, CSF lactate concentrations, using 
a cutoff of 4 mmol/L, are both sensitive (88%) and highly spe-
cific (98%) in making the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis 
following neurosurgery [78]. The positive predictive value 
was 96% and the negative predictive value was 94%; this study 
included patients who had a lumbar puncture performed 
within 40 days of neurosurgery. However, the evidence is con-
flicting. In a prospective study of 16 patients with an intraven-
tricular hemorrhage who had an external ventricular drain, 
the CSF lactate was elevated in all 3 patients with infection. In 
11 of 13 patients without infection it was <4 mmol/L, and in 2 
patients it was between 4 and 6 mmol/L. One of these patients 
had a grade 5 subarachnoid hemorrhage and the other had 
renal insufficiency. In this population, the positive predictive 
value for infection was 60% and the negative predictive value 
was 100% [79]. Because subarachnoid hemorrhage and brain 
injury are known to cause hyperglycolysis, it is not surprising 
that CSF lactate may be elevated in these patients. Metabolic 
suppressive therapies (benzodiazepines and opiates) have also 
been shown to decrease CSF lactate concentrations in this 
population, and specific elevations in CSF lactate concen-
trations (mean 3.2 ± 0.9 mmol/L) have been associated with 
withdrawal of sedation [80, 81]. In a prospective clinical study 
to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of CSF lactate as a marker 
of post-neurosurgical bacterial meningitis [80], increased 
CSF lactate (≥4 mmol/L) demonstrated a better predictive 
value than CSF hypoglycorrhachia or pleocytosis and had a 
sensitivity of 97% and specificity of 78%, with a 97% negative 
predictive value. However, a retrospective review of cases of 
bacterial meningitis associated with a CSF shunt showed that 
if a cutoff value of 4 mmol/L for CSF lactate had been used, 
almost half of the infections would have been missed [14]. In 
patients who already have a CSF shunt for the management 
of hydrocephalus, CSF lactate concentrations were normal in 
20% of patients who were diagnosed with a shunt infection.
Procalcitonin
In patients who presented from the community with meningi-
tis, serum procalcitonin concentrations had the highest speci-
ficity for identifying bacterial meningitis when compared to 
C-reactive protein, blood and CSF leukocyte counts, CSF pro-
tein, CSF lactate concentrations, and the CSF-to-serum glucose 
ratio. The cutoff used in this study was 0.5 ng/mL. The speci-
ficity was 100%, but the sensitivity was only 68% [82]. Serum 
procalcitonin has been studied in patients who had a neurologic 
disorder that resulted in hydrocephalus and subsequent place-
ment of an external ventricular drain [83]. This included patients 
with intracranial hemorrhage, infarction, or tumor. In this study, 
body temperature, CSF white cell count, CSF protein, CSF lac-
tate and CSF-to-serum glucose ratio did not predict infection. 
All patients with a serum procalcitonin concentration >1 ng/mL 
had a proven CSF infection. The mean procalcitonin concentra-
tion with a positive CSF culture was 4.7 ± 1.0 vs 0.2 ± 0.01 ng/
mL (P < .0001). The sensitivity and specificity of this cutoff were 
both 100%. In this study, the CSF lactate in 34 patients with a 
positive culture compared to those with a negative culture 
was 42 mmol/L vs 34 mmol/L (P = .76) [83]. The CSF lactate 
in the group with negative cultures was higher than would be 
expected in patients without bacterial meningitis. This may be 
due to the large number of patients who had an intracranial 
hemorrhage. In a more recent observational prospective study 
of 36 adult patients with severe head trauma and an external 
ventricular drain [84], patients with negative CSF cultures had 
a mean serum procalcitonin concentration <2.0 ng/mL, while 
patients with positive cultures had a mean serum procalcitonin 
of 4.18 ng/mL. These results suggest that early high serum pro-
calcitonin concentration is a reliable indicator of bacterial CNS 
infection in patients with external ventricular drains. Another 
study found the combination of both CSF procalcitonin and CSF 
lactate concentrations, using cutoff values of 0.075 ng/mL and 
3.45 mmol/L, respectively, to have a high diagnostic accuracy 
(sensitivity of 96% and negative predictive value of 97.6%) in 
distinguishing between post-neurosurgical bacterial and aseptic 
meningitis [85]. While these studies are quite supportive, both 
are small and require further validation.
Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests
PCR has been evaluated to detect the presence of bacterial DNA 
in CSF from patients with external ventricular drains and ven-
triculoperitoneal shunts. In one study that used broad-range 
16S rRNA PCR to detect bacteria in 86 specimens of patients 
with suspected nosocomial meningitis, 42 (49%) were culture 
negative, but PCR positive [65]. There were no positive cul-
ture results in patients with a negative CSF PCR, suggesting 
that a negative result is predictive of the absence of infection. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e49
However, more studies are needed before routine use of PCR 
can be recommended in this setting.
In a study of patients with ventricular drainage catheters, add-
ing broad-range real-time PCR (RT-PCR) to culture increased 
the ability to identify pathogens by 25%; however, the sensitivity 
of the RT-PCR was only 47.1% (95% CI, 39.8%–64.8%) and the 
specificity was 93.4% (95% CI, 90.0%–95.8%). The test was most 
useful for identifying fastidious gram-negative bacilli [86].
β–D-Glucan and Galactomannan
If there is a concern for fungal ventriculitis or meningitis, addi-
tional studies may be needed because the inability to isolate 
the organism is not adequate to exclude the diagnosis. These 
could include CSF galactomannan and CSF (1, 3)-β-D-glu-
can. Candida meningitis may be difficult to diagnose because 
the sensitivity of CSF cultures is low. CSF Candida mannan 
antigen and anti-mannan antibodies may be useful additional 
tests in patients with suspected Candida meningitis in whom 
cultures are negative [87]. CSF galactomannan has been evalu-
ated in several studies of patients with CNS infections caused by 
Aspergillus spp. and may be useful in establishing the diagnosis 
before the culture is positive [74, 88, 89].
In the 2012 outbreak of fungal meningitis that resulted from 
contaminated methylprednisolone injections [74], laboratory 
evidence was supportive of a fungal infection in 173 patients 
(33%) in whom specimens were obtained, including direct 
detection of fungal DNA in 87 samples (50%), fungal isolation in 
33 (19%), and evidence from multiple techniques in 53 (31%). In 
5 patients with CSF (1, 3)-β-D-glucan who were evaluated, 3 had 
elevated CSF (1, 3)-β-D-glucan concentrations (range, 39–2396 
pg/mL) and responded to antifungal therapy. Measurement 
of CSF (1, 3)-β-D-glucan using the manufacturer’s cutoff of 
≥80 pg/mL was highly sensitive (96%) and specific (95%) for the 
diagnosis of proven fungal meningitis associated with contam-
inated methylprednisolone injections [90]. Another study has 
also demonstrated the usefulness of CSF (1, 3)-β-D-glucan for 
diagnosing or excluding fungal CNS infection [91].
IV. What is the Role of Imaging in Patients with Suspected 
Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Recommendations
34. Neuroimaging is recommended in patients with suspected 
healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis (strong, 
moderate).
35. Magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium enhance-
ment and diffusion-weighted imaging is recommended 
for detecting abnormalities in patients with health-
care-associated ventriculitis and meningitis (strong, 
moderate).
36. In patients with infected ventriculoperitoneal shunts and 
abdominal symptoms (eg, pain or tenderness), an ultra-
sound or computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen is 
recommended to detect CSF loculations at the shunt ter-
minus (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Neuroimaging studies, while rarely the definitive study in 
patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningi-
tis, are very frequently obtained in the course of patient eval-
uation. For patients with CSF shunts, and those undergoing 
craniotomy or suffering from trauma, these studies will be 
part of the initial evaluation, perhaps even before infection 
is strongly suspected. In the context of a known infection, 
findings of potential importance include CSF shunt hard-
ware retained from previous surgical procedures or, rarely, 
a subdural empyema or brain abscess. Plain radiographs of 
the shunt system to document retained hardware may also 
be helpful. Neuroimaging may also be useful in determining 
the source of infection (eg, local extension from an adjacent 
infection) and in identifying complications from the infection, 
including hydrocephalus, vasculitis, or thrombosis of vessels 
[92, 93]. Noncontrast CT scanning may be useful in evaluating 
noninfectious complications but is often normal in the setting 
of uncomplicated meningitis. In the setting of ventriculitis, CT 
scans will show ependymal enhancement after the adminis-
tration of intravenous contrast. Magnetic resonance imaging 
is more sensitive than CT for detecting ventriculitis. Fluid-
attenuation inversion recovery and post-contrast T1 weighted 
images may be most useful. Diffusion weighted imaging may 
be used to detect pus in the ventricular system (visualized as 
bright signal) and to differentiate a brain abscess from malig-
nancy [92]. Care must be taken to ensure that the specific 
devices used for intracranial pressure monitoring and external 
CSF drainage are cleared for magnetic resonance imaging.
The diagnosis of CSF shunt infection may be more difficult 
to establish when the distal portion of the ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt is infected. The shunt tap may be normal with negative 
cultures if a retrograde infection has not yet developed in the 
patient. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts with distal occlusion and 
without an obvious mechanical cause and with no symptoms 
or signs of infection have been associated with infection. An 
ultrasound or CT of the abdomen may identify CSF loculations 
at the shunt terminus in patients with abdominal symptoms 
or signs. Although some free fluid in the pleural or peritoneal 
cavities is normal, it should not be confused with the larger 
volumes and cysts seen with infection at the shunt terminus.
V. What is the Empiric Antimicrobial Approach for Patients with 
Suspected Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis?
Recommendations
37. Vancomycin plus an anti-pseudomonal beta-lactam (such 
as cefepime, ceftazidime, or meropenem) is recommended 
as empiric therapy for healthcare-associated ventriculitis 
and meningitis; the choice of empiric beta-lactam agent 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e50 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
should be based on local in vitro susceptibility patterns 
(strong, low).
38. In seriously ill adult patients with healthcare-associated 
ventriculitis and meningitis, the vancomycin trough con-
centration should be maintained at 15–20 μg/mL in those 
who receive intermittent bolus administration (strong, 
low).
39. For patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis who have experienced anaphylaxis to beta-
lactam antimicrobial agents and in whom meropenem is 
contraindicated, aztreonam or ciprofloxacin is recom-
mended for gram-negative coverage (strong, low).
40. For patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis who are colonized or infected elsewhere with 
a highly antimicrobial-resistant pathogen, adjusting the 
empiric regimen to treat for this pathogen is recommended 
(strong, low).
Evidence Summary
The principles of antimicrobial therapy for patients with 
healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningitis are gener-
ally the same as those for acute bacterial meningitis [94]: the 
agent must penetrate the CNS, attain adequate CSF concen-
trations, and have bactericidal activity against the infecting 
pathogen. However, some of the microorganisms that cause 
these infections often form biofilms in those patients with 
prosthetic devices into which antimicrobial agents do not 
penetrate well. Therefore, drug therapy may be problematic 
when the catheter is not removed. When a CSF pleocytosis 
is present, antimicrobial therapy should be initiated after 
appropriate cultures are obtained, but before culture results 
are available, if there is suspicion of infection. The most 
likely microorganisms associated with CSF shunt and drain 
infections are coagulase-negative staphylococci (especially 
Staphylococcus epidermidis), S. aureus, P. acnes, and gram-neg-
ative bacilli (including Escherichia coli, Enterobacter spe-
cies, Citrobacter species, Serratia species, and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa). Empirical therapy with intravenous vancomy-
cin plus cefepime, ceftazidime, or meropenem is appropriate 
[18]. The serum vancomycin trough concentration should 
be maintained between 15 and 20 µg/mL in adult patients 
who receive intermittent bolus administration [94, 95]. The 
empirical choice to treat a presumptive gram-negative patho-
gen should be based on the local antimicrobial susceptibility 
patterns of these pathogens.
In a patient with anaphylaxis to beta-lactam antimicrobial 
agents and in whom meropenem is contraindicated, empiric 
therapy against gram-negative pathogens should be either 
 
aztreonam or ciprofloxacin. The choice of the specific antimi-
crobial agents should take into account local in vitro suscepti-
bility patterns as well as the bacteria previously isolated from 
the patient.
VI. Once a Pathogen is Identified, what Specific Antimicrobial 
Agent(s) Should be Administered?
Recommendations
41. For treatment of infection caused by methicillin-suscepti-
ble S. aureus, nafcillin or oxacillin is recommended (strong, 
moderate). If the patient cannot receive beta-lactam agents, 
the patient can be desensitized or may receive vancomycin 
as an alternative agent (weak, moderate).
42. For treatment of infection caused by methicillin-resistant 
S. aureus, vancomycin is recommended as first-line therapy 
(strong, moderate), with consideration for an alternative 
antimicrobial agent if the vancomycin minimal inhibitory 
concentration (MIC) is ≥1 μg/mL (strong, moderate).
43. For treatment of infection caused by coagulase-negative 
staphylococci, the recommended therapy should be simi-
lar to that for S. aureus and based on in vitro susceptibility 
testing (strong, moderate).
44. If the staphylococcal isolate is susceptible to rifampin, 
this agent may be considered in combination with other 
antimicrobial agents for staphylococcal ventriculitis and 
meningitis (weak, low); rifampin is recommended as part 
of combination therapy for any patient with intracranial 
or spinal hardware such as a CSF shunt or drain (strong, 
low).
45. For treatment of patients with healthcare-associated ven-
triculitis and meningitis caused by staphylococci in whom 
beta-lactam agents or vancomycin cannot be used, linezolid 
(strong, low), daptomycin (strong, low), or trimethoprim-sul-
famethoxazole (strong, low) is recommended, with selection 
of a specific agent based on in vitro susceptibility testing.
46. For treatment of infection caused by P. acnes, penicillin G is 
recommended (strong, moderate).
47. For treatment of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli, 
therapy should be based on in vitro susceptibility testing 
with agents that achieve good CNS penetration (strong, 
moderate).
48. For treatment of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli 
susceptible to third-generation cephalosporins, ceftriaxone 
or cefotaxime is recommended (strong, moderate).
49. For treatment of infection caused by Pseudomonas species, 
the recommended therapy is cefepime, ceftazidime, or 
meropenem (strong, moderate); recommended alternative 
antimicrobial agents are aztreonam or a fluoroquinolone 
with in vitro activity (strong, moderate).
50. For treatment of infection caused by extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase–producing gram-negative bacilli, mero-
penem should be used if this isolate demonstrates in vitro 
susceptibility (strong, moderate).
51. For treatment of infection caused by Acinetobacter species, 
meropenem is recommended (strong, moderate); for strains 
that demonstrate carbapenem resistance, colistimethate 
sodium or polymyxin B (either agent administered by the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e51
intravenous and intraventricular routes) is recommended 
(strong, moderate).
52. Prolonged infusion of meropenem (each dose adminis-
tered over 3 hours) may be successful in treating resistant 
gram-negative organisms (weak, low).
53. For treatment of infection caused by Candida species, 
based on in vitro susceptibility testing, liposomal ampho-
tericin B, often combined with 5-flucytosine, is recom-
mended (strong, moderate); once the patient shows clinical 
improvement, therapy can be changed to fluconazole if the 
isolated species is susceptible (weak, low).
54. For treatment of infection caused by Aspergillus or Exserohilum 
species, voriconazole is recommended (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Antimicrobial therapy should be modified once a microorganism 
is isolated and in vitro susceptibility results are available (Table 1), 
although there are no randomized controlled trials that compared 
clinically meaningful outcomes (eg, attributable mortality, mor-
bidity, or clinical cure rates) between different antimicrobials, 
doses, or durations of treatment for healthcare-associated ven-
triculitis and meningitis. Most studies that evaluated intravenous 
antimicrobials for meningitis or ventriculitis, including external 
ventricular drain–related ventriculitis, were pharmacokinetic 
studies, uncontrolled case series, or case reports reporting clinical 
and microbiologic cure rates. Recommended dosages of antimi-
crobial agents in infants and children and in adults with normal 
renal and hepatic function are shown in Table 2.
Vancomycin should be used if infection is caused by 
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). If the patient is 
infected with MRSA strains that have a vancomycin MIC 
of ≥1 µg/mL, linezolid, daptomycin, or trimethoprim- 
sulfamethoxazole should be considered [96]. If staph-
ylococci are isolated and the organism is methicillin 
susceptible, therapy should be changed to either nafcillin 
or oxacillin. The addition of rifampin to an antistaphylo-
coccal agent may augment treatment [97–99], especially 
if the infected catheter is retained. One patient with an 
S. epidermidis ventriculoperitoneal shunt infection [100] 
and another with an Enterococcus faecalis ventriculoperito-
neal shunt infection [101] were cured with shunt removal 
and intravenous linezolid. Linezolid has been successfully 
used in a number of other patients with CSF shunt infec-
tion [102–104]; however, linezolid is not considered first-
line therapy for this infection. Daptomycin, combined with 
rifampin, has also been successfully used in patients with 
infections of CSF shunts caused by gram-positive patho-
gens [105]. In one study of 6 neurosurgical patients with 
indwelling external CSF shunts and suspected meningitis or 
ventriculitis [106], a single dose of daptomycin (10 mg/kg) 
led to an overall CSF penetration of 0.8%. When corrected 
for protein binding, the overall CSF penetration was 11.5%. 
For treatment of healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis caused by gram-negative bacilli, therapy should 
be based on in vitro susceptibility testing. One retrospec-
tive study of meningitis caused by Enterobacter spp. in 19 
patients showed that clinical cure or improvement occurred 
in 54% of those treated with a third-generation cephalo-
sporin compared to 83% of patients who were treated with 
 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole [107]. Another case series 
of 13 episodes of Enterobacter meningitis treated with vari-
ous antimicrobial regimens, including an additional 33 epi-
sodes from the literature, reported that the development of 
resistance to beta-lactam agents may be much higher [108]. 
All patients who received trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
were cured compared to about 70% of those who received 
beta-lactam agents. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or 
meropenem may be preferred for treatment of organisms 
that hyperproduce β–lactamase.
For patients with Acinetobacter ventriculomeningitis, empiric 
therapy should be initiated with meropenem. If carbapenem 
resistance is suspected, a combination of intravenous and 
intraventricular colistimethate sodium or polymyxin B is rec-
ommended [109]. In a recent case series of 40 patients with 
Acinetobacter baumannii meningitis, the mortality was 39%; 55% 
of them had isolates resistant to carbapenems. Use of either intra-
ventricular or intrathecal colistimethate in those with carbape-
nem resistance was associated with a cure of their infection [110]. 
The duration of administration of beta-lactam agents may affect 
clinical outcomes. When the carbapenems and piperacillin/tazo-
bactam were given as an extended infusion lasting ≥3 hours or as 
a continuous infusion rather than with standard short-term infu-
sion, clinical outcomes were improved [111]. Prolonged infusion 
of meropenem, each dose administered over 3 hours, may also 
be successful in treating resistant gram-negative infections [112].
The definitive treatment for fungal meningitis depends 
on the pathogen. An intravenous amphotericin B prepara-
tion, often combined with 5-flucytosine, is recommended for 
Candida ventriculitis and meningitis [113]. A lipid formulation 
of amphotericin B (usually liposomal amphotericin B) is rec-
ommended because these formulations achieved higher CNS 
concentrations than other formulations of amphotericin B in a 
rabbit model [114]. Consideration can be given to a step-down 
of therapy to fluconazole after there is clinical improvement and 
if isolated Candida is a susceptible species [113]. Echinocandins 
should not be used because they do not achieve adequate CSF 
concentrations. Some agents have shown effectiveness in exper-
imental animal models, but at doses higher than would be used 
in humans. Treatment should continue until all signs and symp-
toms of infection have resolved, CSF has normalized, and there 
is no radiographic evidence of ongoing infection.
The recommended treatment for Aspergillus ventriculitis and 
meningitis is voriconazole [115], with the goal of maintaining 
a serum trough concentration of 2–5 µg/mL. Posaconazole, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e52 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
liposomal amphotericin B, and amphotericin B lipid complex 
are reasonable alternatives. The duration of therapy for these 
infections depends largely on the host. If the patient is chroni-
cally immunosuppressed, the initial treatment may be followed 
by oral therapy to prevent relapse. Any immunosuppressive 
agents that can be safely discontinued should be stopped. In the 
2012 outbreak of E. rostratum meningitis, voriconazole was also 
recommended. A 3-month course of treatment appeared to be 
adequate for patients who had isolated meningitis and who had 
no symptoms or CSF abnormalities after 3 months [74, 75].
VII. What is the Role of Intraventricular Antimicrobial Therapy 
in Patients with Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and 
Meningitis?
Recommendations
55. Intraventricular antimicrobial therapy should be consid-
ered for patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis 
and meningitis in which the infection responds poorly to 
systemic antimicrobial therapy alone (strong, low).
56. When antimicrobial therapy is administered via a ven-
tricular drain, the drain should be clamped for 15–60 
minutes to allow the agent to equilibrate throughout the 
CSF (strong, low).
57. Dosages and intervals of intraventricular antimicrobial 
therapy should be adjusted based on CSF antimicrobial 
concentrations to 10–20 times the MIC of the causative 
microorganism (strong, low), ventricular size (strong, low), 
and daily output from the ventricular drain (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Direct instillation of antimicrobial agents into the lateral ven-
tricle or the lumbar thecal sac (in the case of lumbar shunts) 
may be necessary in patients with CSF shunt or drain infec-
tions that are difficult to eradicate with intravenous antimi-
crobial therapy alone or when the patient is unable to undergo 
the surgical components of therapy. This route of admin-
istration bypasses the blood–CSF barrier, with controlled 
delivery of the antimicrobial agent to the site of infection. 
Intraventricular antimicrobials have the theoretical advantage 
of achieving high CSF concentrations without high systemic 
blood concentrations, hence lower potential systemic toxic-
ities [116]. However, the efficacy and safety of this route of 
Table 1. Recommended Antimicrobial Therapy in Patients With Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis Based on Isolated Pathogen and In 
Vitro Susceptibility Testing
Microorganism
Standard Therapy
Alternative Therapies
Staphylococcia
 Methicillin sensitive
 Methicillin resistant
Nafcillin or oxacillin
Vancomycin
Vancomycin
Daptomycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or linezolid
Propionibacterium acnes
Penicillin G
Third-generation cephalosporin,b vancomycin, daptomycin, or 
linezolid
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 Penicillin MIC ≤0.06 μg/mL
 Penicillin MIC ≥0.12 μg/mL
  Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone MIC <1.0 μg/mL
  Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone MIC ≥1.0 μg/mL
Penicillin G
Third-generation cephalosporinb
Vancomycin plus a third-generation 
cephalosporinb,c
Third-generation cephalosporinb
Cefepime or meropenem
Moxifloxacind
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Cefepime, ceftazidime, or meropenem
Aztreonam or ciprofloxacin
Haemophilus influenzae
 β-lactamase negative
 β-lactamase positive
Ampicillin
Third-generation cephalosporinb
Third-generation cephalosporin,b cefepime, or a fluoroquinolone
Cefepime, aztreonam, or a fluoroquinolone
Extended spectrum β-lactamase-producing 
gram-negative bacilli
Meropenem
Cefepime or a fluoroquinolone
Acinetobacter baumannii
Meropenem
Colistin (usually formulated as colistimethate sodium)e or 
polymyxin Be
Other Enterobacteriaceaef
Third-generation cephalosporinb
Meropenem, aztreonam, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or 
ciprofloxacin
Candida speciesg
Lipid formulation of amphotericin 
B ± flucytosine
Fluconazole or voriconazole
Aspergillus species
Voriconazole
Lipid formulation of amphotericin B or posaconazole
Abbreviation: MIC, minimal inhibitory concentration.
aAdd rifampin if organism is susceptible and prosthetic material is also in place.
bCefotaxime or ceftriaxone.
cConsider adding rifampin if the MIC to ceftriaxone is >2 μg/mL.
dMany authorities would combine moxifloxacin with either vancomycin or a third-generation cephalosporin (cefotaxime or ceftriaxone).
eMay also need to administer via the intraventricular or intrathecal route.
fChoice of agent based in in vitro susceptibility testing. For organisms (eg, Enterobacter, Citrobacter, Serratia) that may hyperproduce β-lactamases, meropenem or trimethoprim-sulfame-
thoxazole may be preferred.
gCandida kruzei should not be treated with fluconazole. Candida glabrata may be treated with fluconazole if it is susceptible; however, many isolates will only be susceptible to high doses 
or will be resistant.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e53
administration have not been demonstrated in controlled tri-
als. Intraventricular antimicrobials are not approved by the 
US Food and Drug Administration and there is insufficient 
evidence to recommend their general use. However, intraven-
tricular antimicrobial therapy may be considered an option for 
patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and meningi-
tis in which the infection responds poorly to systemic antimi-
crobial therapy alone. A recent systematic review sponsored by 
the American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress 
of Neurological Surgeons also noted insufficient evidence 
to recommend their use in pediatric shunt infections [117]. 
However, they have been recommended by the Neurosurgery 
Working Party of the British Society for Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy for the management of neurosurgical patients 
with postoperative meningitis or external ventricular drain–
associated ventriculitis [118]. Reports suggest that intraven-
tricular or intrathecal administration of antimicrobials (eg, 
polymyxin B, colistimethate sodium, gentamicin, and van-
comycin) is not associated with severe or irreversible toxic-
ity [119]. There are also prospective comparative studies that 
demonstrated that antimicrobials intraventricularly adminis-
tered show better pharmacodynamics and similar efficacy and 
safety compared to intravenous antimicrobial agents [120, 
121]. Penicillins and cephalosporins should not be given by 
the intrathecal route because they have been associated with 
significant neurotoxicity, especially seizures [116].
Table 2. Recommended Dosages of Antimicrobial Agents in Infants and Children and in Adults With Normal Renal and Hepatic Function
Total Daily Dose (Dosing Interval in Hours)
Antimicrobial Agent
Infants and Children
Adults
Amikacina
22.5 mg/kg (8)
15 mg/kg (8)
Amphotericin B lipid complex
5 mg/kg (24)
5 mg/kg (24)
Ampicillin
300–400 mg/kg (6)
12 g (4)
Aztreonam
120 mg/kg (6–8)
6–8 g (6–8)
Cefepime
150 mg/kg (8)
6 g (8)
Cefotaxime
300 mg/kg (6–8)
8–12 g (4–6)
Ceftazidime
200 mg/kg (8)
6 g (8)
Ceftriaxone
100 mg/kg (12–24)
4 g (12)
Ciprofloxacin
30 mg/kg (8–12)
800–1200 mg (8–12)
Daptomycin
Dose not establishedb
6–10 mg/kg (24)
Fluconazole
12 mg/kg (24)
400–800 mg (24)
Gentamicina
7
.5 mg/kg (8)
5 mg/kg (8)
Linezolid
Age <12 years: 30 mg/kg (8)c
Age ≥12 years: 20 mg/kg (12)c
1200 mg (12)
Liposomal amphotericin B
3–5 mg/kg (24)
3–5 mg/kg (24)d
Meropenem
120 mg/kg (8)
6 g (8)
Moxifloxacine
Dose not established
400 mg (24)
Nafcillin
200 mg/kg (6)
12 g (4)
Oxacillin
200 mg/kg (6)
12 g (4)
Penicillin G
300 
000 units/kg (4–6)
24 million units (4)
Posaconazole
—
800 mg (6–12)f
Rifampin
20 mg/kg (24)g
600 mg (24)
Tobramycina
7
.5 mg/kg (8)
5 mg/kg (8)
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleh
10–20 mg/kg (6–12)
10–20 mg/kg (6–12)
Vancomycini
60 mg/kg (6)
30–60 mg/kg (8–12)
Voriconazole
16 mg/kg (12) j,k,l
8 mg/kg (12)j,k
aNeed to monitor peak and trough serum concentrations.
bNot approved in pediatrics. Dose is based on trials registered with clinical trials.gov (NTC01522105) and (NTC01728376) as follows: 2–6 years, 12 mg/kg (24); 7–11 years, 9 mg/kg (24); and 
12–17 years, 7 mg/kg (24).
cNot to exceed the adult dose.
dDose of 5–7
.5 mg/kg every 24 hours in patients with Aspergillus infection.
eNo data on optimal dose in patients with bacterial meningitis.
fDose of 200 mg orally every 6 hours initially, then 400 mg orally every 12 hours. The newer formulations (ie, intravenous and extended-release tablets) of posaconazole appear to have 
improved pharmacokinetic properties, but there are no available data on their use in treatment of fungal infections of the central nervous system.
gMaximum dosage of 600 mg.
hDosage based on trimethoprim component.
iMaintain serum trough concentrations of 15–20 μg/mL in adult patients who receive intermittent bolus administration. Some clinicians administer vancomycin with a loading dose of 
15 mg/kg, followed by a continuous infusion of 60 mg/kg/day.
jLoad with 6 mg/kg intravenous every 12 hours for 2 doses in adults and 9 mg/kg every 12 hours for 2 doses in children aged 2–12 years.
kMaintain serum trough concentrations of 2–5 μg/mL.
lMaximum maintenance dose in children of 350 mg every 12 hours.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e54 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
In several studies on the pharmacokinetics, safety, and 
efficacy of intraventricular administration of antimicrobial 
agents [119, 122–126], CSF sterility and normalization of 
CSF parameters were achieved sooner with intraventricu-
lar and intravenous use when compared to intravenous use 
alone, especially in adults. Combined intravenous and intra-
ventricular use of vancomycin may improve CSF vancomycin 
concentrations without side effects [127]. However, use of 
intraventricular antimicrobial agents was not recommended 
in infants based on data in a recent Cochrane review [128]. 
One randomized, controlled clinical trial found a 3-times 
higher relative risk of mortality when infants with gram-neg-
ative meningitis were treated with intraventricular gen-
tamicin and intravenous antimicrobials when compared to 
intravenous therapy alone. However, one half of the infants 
in the intraventricular gentamicin group had received only 1 
dose, raising doubts about the exact cause of death, although 
it may be related to increased CSF concentrations of inter-
leukin-1β. Antimicrobial agents administered by the intra-
ventricular or intrathecal route should be preservative free. 
When administered through a ventricular drain, the drain 
should be clamped for 15–60 minutes to allow the antimi-
crobial solution to equilibrate in the CSF before opening 
the drain [129]. In the setting of a CSF shunt that has not 
been externalized or replaced with an external drainage sys-
tem, at least one group has recommended administration of 
intrathecal antimicrobial therapy by a separately implanted 
shunt reservoir to reduce loss of drug down a shunt system 
that might occur with direct injection into the CSF shunt 
[130].
The doses of antimicrobial agents for intraventricular 
use have been determined empirically, with adjustments of 
dose and dosing interval based on the ability of the agent to 
achieve adequate CSF concentrations (Table 3). It is challeng-
ing to determine the correct dosing regimen because the CSF 
concentrations obtained for the same intraventricular dose in 
pharmacokinetic studies have been highly variable, probably 
due to the differences among patients in the volume of distri-
bution, ventricular size, or variable CSF clearance as a result 
of CSF drainage [119, 122–129]. In a consensus guideline, the 
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy Working 
Party on Infections in Neurosurgery recommended that the 
initial dose of an intraventricular antimicrobial be based on 
ventricular volume as estimated by neuroimaging [118]. The 
recommended dose of vancomycin is 5 mg in patients with slit 
ventricles, 10 mg in patients with normal-sized ventricles, and 
15–20 mg in patients with enlarged ventricles. Using the same 
rationale, the initial dosing of an aminoglycoside can also be 
tailored to ventricular size. The same working party recom-
mended that the frequency of dosing be based on the daily 
volume of CSF drainage: once-daily dosing if CSF drainage is 
>100 mL/day, every other day if the drainage is 50–100 mL/day, 
 
and every third day if drainage is <50 mL/day. However, these 
recommendations are based on expert opinion and have not 
been validated in clinical studies. Additionally, given that the 
total CSF volume in adults (~125–150 mL) is higher than in 
infants (~50 mL), intraventricular doses in infants should 
probably be reduced by 60% or more. Another approach is 
to base dosing on monitoring of CSF drug concentrations. 
However, very few studies have evaluated CSF therapeutic 
drug monitoring and, given the variable CSF clearance of an 
antimicrobial agent, it is difficult to determine when to obtain 
CSF to measure peak and trough drug concentrations. A CSF 
drug concentration obtained 24 hours after administration of 
the first dose can be presumed to be the trough CSF concen-
tration. The trough CSF concentration divided by the MIC 
of the agent for the isolated bacterial pathogen is termed the 
inhibitory quotient, which should exceed 10–20 for consist-
ent CSF sterilization [18]. Although not standardized, this 
approach is reasonable for ensuring that adequate CSF con-
centrations of these agents are obtained.
Table 3. Recommended Dosages of Antimicrobial Agents Administered 
by the Intraventricular Route
Antimicrobial Agent
Daily Intraventricular Dose
Amikacin
5–50 mga
Amphotericin B deoxycholateb
0.01–0.5 mg in 2 mL of 5% dextrose in 
water
Colistin (formulated as colisti-
methate sodium)
10 mg
Daptomycin
2–5 mgc
Gentamicin
1–8 mgd,e,f
Polymyxin B
5 mgg
Quinupristin/dalfopristin
2–5 mg
Tobramycin
5–20 mg
Vancomycin
5–20 mge,f,h
There are no specific data that define the exact dose of intraventricular antimicrobial 
agents that should be used in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunt and drain infections. Given 
the smaller CSF volume in infants (approximately 50 mL) compared to adults (approxi-
mately 125–150 mL), doses in infants should probably be decreased at least 60% or more 
compared to adults.
aThe usual intraventricular dose is 30 mg daily.
bNot usually necessary but may be needed if removal of the device is too risky or the 
patient has not responded to systemic antifungal therapy.
cOne study used 10 mg every day for 2 days and then 10 mg every 48 hours. Another 
study used 5 mg or 10 mg every 72 hours. Data are based on isolated case reports.
dDose is 4–8 mg in adults; 1–2 mg in children.
eDosage recommendations in adults based on ventricle size/volume as follows:
•Slit ventricles: 5 mg vancomycin and 2 mg gentamicin
•Normal size: 10 mg vancomycin and 3 mg gentamicin
•Enlarged ventricles: 15–20 mg vancomycin and 4–5 mg gentamicin.
fRecommendations for frequency of administration based on external ventricular drain 
output over 24 hours as follows:
•<50 mL/24 hours: every third day
•50–100 mL/24 hours: every second day
•100–150 mL/24 hours: once daily
•150–200 mL/24 hours: increase the dosage by 5 mg of vancomycin and 1 mg of 
gentamicin and give once daily
•200–250 mL/24 hours: increase the dosage by 10 mg of vancomycin and 2 mg of 
gentamicin and give once daily.
gDose is 2 mg/day in children.
hMost studies used a 10-mg or 20-mg dose.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e55
Although there are methodological limitations in published 
studies, intraventricular vancomycin was shown to be safe and 
efficacious in a systematic review in adults [124]. Intraventricular 
aminoglycosides were also shown to be effective [122, 126]. In 
one study, there were no relapses when intraventricular gen-
tamicin was combined with intravenous meropenem in patients 
with neurosurgical gram-negative bacillary ventriculitis and 
meningitis [126]. In another study of treatment of 34 consecutive 
CSF shunt infections in 30 children, high-dose intraventricular 
antimicrobial therapy sterilized CSF cultures in 100% of 26 chil-
dren who were treated for 3 days or longer [131]. Intravenous 
and intraventricular quinupristin/dalfopristin has been used suc-
cessfully to treat a patient with ventriculostomy-related menin-
gitis caused by vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium [132]. 
Teicoplanin, a glycopeptide antimicrobial agent not currently 
licensed in the United States, was also found to be successful after 
intraventricular administration in 7 patients with staphylococcal 
neurosurgical shunt infections [133]. Intraventricular daptomy-
cin was successfully used in individual case reports in patients 
with CSF shunt and CSF drain infections caused by methicil-
lin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci and resistant ente-
rococci [134–137]. Intraventricular colistin (usually formulated 
as colistimethate sodium) and polymyxin B have been used in 
the treatment of gram-negative ventriculitis and meningitis [109, 
116, 119, 138–140]; however, these agents should be reserved for 
patients with infections caused by multidrug-resistant gram-neg-
ative bacteria or in those who failed therapy with standard intra-
venous agents. Intraventricular amphotericin B deoxycholate 
may be required for Candida shunt infections that fail to respond 
to parenteral therapy and shunt removal.
VIII. What is the Optimal Duration of Antimicrobial Therapy 
in Patients with Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and 
Meningitis?
Recommendations
58. Infections caused by a coagulase-negative staphylococcus 
or P. acnes with no or minimal CSF pleocytosis, normal 
CSF glucose, and few clinical symptoms or systemic fea-
tures should be treated for 10 days (strong, low).
59. Infections caused by a coagulase-negative staphylococcus 
or P. acnes with significant CSF pleocytosis, CSF hypoglyc-
orrhachia, or clinical symptoms or systemic features should 
be treated for 10–14 days (strong, low).
60. Infections caused by S. aureus or gram-negative bacilli with 
or without significant CSF pleocytosis, CSF hypoglycor-
rhachia, or clinical symptoms or systemic features should 
be treated for 10–14 days (strong, low); some experts sug-
gest treatment of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli 
for 21 days (weak, low).
61. In patients with repeatedly positive CSF cultures on appro-
priate antimicrobial therapy, treatment should be continued 
for 10–14 days after the last positive culture (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
The duration of antimicrobial therapy for CSF shunt infections 
is not completely defined and is dependent on the isolated 
microorganism, the extent of infection as defined by cultures 
obtained after externalization, and occasionally CSF findings. 
There are no controlled trials or studies that compared differ-
ent durations of antimicrobial therapy for treatment of health-
care-associated ventriculitis and meningitis. In a prospective 
observational study evaluating 70 patients treated at 10 centers 
[141], treatment duration ranged from 4 to 47 days; reinfection 
occurred in 26% of patients. Individuals who became reinfected 
were treated for a mean of 14 days compared to 12.7 days for 
those who did not experience reinfection. Reinfection rates for 
therapy durations ≤10 days, 11–20 days, and ≥21 days were 
28.5%, 23.3%, and 27.7%, respectively (data abstracted from fig-
ure 1 in reference). When divided by duration of therapy after 
the CSF was noted to be free of infection by negative culture, 
those treated for 7 days or less had a 20% reinfection rate com-
pared to a 28% reinfection rate for those treated for longer than 
7 days. It should be noted, however, that treatment for patients 
in this study was not standardized, with different surgical strat-
egies used for shunt removal and replacement, as well as anti-
microbial choices. A second large cohort study of 675 patients 
followed after first infection noted a mean duration of therapy 
of 7.5 days in 15% of those who experienced reinfection com-
pared to 9 days of treatment in those who did not experience 
reinfection (differences not significant) [142].
IX. What is the Role of Catheter Removal in Patients with 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts or Drains?
Recommendations
62. Complete removal of an infected CSF shunt and replace-
ment with an external ventricular drain combined with 
intravenous antimicrobial therapy is recommended in 
patients with infected CSF shunts (strong, moderate).
63. Removal of an infected CSF drain is recommended (strong, 
moderate).
64. Removal of an infected intrathecal infusion pump is rec-
ommended (strong, moderate).
65. Removal of infected hardware in patients with deep brain 
stimulation infections is recommended (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
Surgical options for the management of CSF shunt infection 
include no surgical management (ie, antimicrobial therapy 
alone), removal of the device and performance of an alternative 
nonhardware-based procedure for hydrocephalus treatment 
(when the patient’s anatomy allows), removal of the device with 
immediate replacement, and partial or complete device removal 
with a period of external drainage followed by subsequent CSF 
shunt insertion [38, 39, 46, 143]. In children with noncommu-
nicating hydrocephalus and persistent infection, shunt removal 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e56 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
and an endoscopic third ventriculostomy have been advocated 
[144]. Even if the endoscopic third ventriculostomy fails, the 
ventriculoperitoneal shunt inserted after failure appears to have 
better longevity than if it is inserted without first performing 
the ventriculostomy [145].
Management of shunt infection without removal of shunt 
hardware has been attempted periodically since shunts were 
first introduced. In early attempts, intravenous and/or intra-
ventricular antimicrobial agents were used without sur-
gery to avoid the morbidity of additional operations and 
to maintain CSF diversion during treatment. Success with 
this approach, however, was low (34%–36%) and carried a 
high mortality rate [146, 147]. Additionally, instillation of 
antimicrobial agents into CSF often required a lengthy hos-
pitalization, and the frequency of adverse outcomes was 
unacceptably high. The ability of many of the organisms 
to adhere to prostheses and survive antimicrobial therapy 
likely precluded optimal treatment in situ. However, in one 
observational study that readdressed the potential for non-
operative management using a combination of systemic and 
intraventricular antimicrobial agents (instilled via a separate 
ventricular access device), 84% of 43 patients were cured. 
There was a 92% success rate for infections caused by bac-
teria other than S. aureus [130], suggesting that conserva-
tive management may be appropriate for selected patients 
with CSF shunt infections caused by less virulent organisms 
such as coagulase-negative staphylococci. Similar results 
have been achieved in patients with CSF shunt infections 
caused by P. acnes [14]. However, it must be noted that in the 
only randomized study to include a nonoperative approach 
to management of infected CSF shunts in 30 children, all 
of whom received antimicrobial therapy [148], no shunt 
removal was associated with a 70% recurrence rate.
Combining the removal of shunt hardware with immediate 
shunt replacement and intravenous and/or intrathecal antimi-
crobial therapy was also assessed in the above-mentioned ran-
domized trial and a subsequent nonrandomized cohort study 
[148, 149]. This strategy cured approximately 90% of patients. 
However, other studies found that this approach cured only 
approximately 65%–75% of patients with shunt infections [146, 
147], with failure and reinfection rates still quite significant with 
this approach.
The most commonly practiced approach to the surgical 
treatment of a CSF shunt infection is systemic antimicrobial 
use with removal of some or all components of the infected 
shunt followed by insertion of a ventricular drain [141, 150]. 
The presence of a drainage catheter allows for monitoring of 
CSF parameters (as needed), including cultures, and admin-
istration of intraventricular antimicrobial therapy, if neces-
sary. Ventricular drainage also allows continued treatment 
of the underlying hydrocephalus and avoids the complica-
tions associated with only shunt removal. Once the drainage 
cultures become negative, the ventricular drain is removed 
and a new shunt can be inserted (see Question X for spe-
cific recommendations on timing of shunt reimplantation). 
However, even with this approach, treatment failures still 
occur in 10%–20% of cases [141, 146, 147, 150, 151]. It is not 
clear from existing studies whether all or just the externalized 
portion of the shunt should be removed, although logically, 
one would expect that complete removal, if possible, would 
be the better approach. Another option is shunt removal with 
delayed replacement (to treat the infection with antimicro-
bial therapy in the absence of any shunt hardware), although 
this approach leaves the reason for the initial shunt placement 
untreated.
In patients with intrathecal infusion pumps that deliver 
baclofen, removal was required in all patients with deep-seated 
infections [27]. Treatment of deep brain stimulation–associ-
ated infections requires surgical removal of the infected com-
ponents, with follow-up targeted antimicrobial therapy for 2–6 
weeks [29, 30].
X. How are Patients Monitored for Response to Treatment?
Recommendations
66. Patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and men-
ingitis should be monitored for response to treatment 
based on clinical parameters (strong, low).
67. In patients with healthcare-associated ventriculitis and 
meningitis and an external drainage device, monitoring of 
CSF cultures is recommended to ensure that they become 
negative (strong, low).
68. In patients with no definitive clinical improvement, addi-
tional CSF analysis is recommended to ensure that the CSF 
parameters have improved and the cultures become nega-
tive (strong, low).
69. For external CSF drains not being used in the treatment 
of CSF shunt infection, daily CSF cultures and analysis 
are not recommended unless clinically indicated (strong, 
low).
Evidence Summary
There is no evidence that monitoring of inflammatory mark-
ers (ie, peripheral white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate, or C-reactive protein) is useful in monitoring 
response to therapy. In patients with healthcare-associated ven-
triculitis and meningitis, monitoring of CSF cultures should be 
performed; typically, cultures should be negative for several 
days before a new shunt is placed. A retrospective study among 
pediatric patients examined whether routine CSF bacteriolog-
ical cultures in patients with external ventricular drains could 
identify ventriculitis [45]. In all patients in whom infections 
developed, routine daily cultures of CSF were performed, and 
these cultures failed to identify the infections before clinical 
symptoms developed. All 7 patients with infection had fever 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e57
(>38.5°C) and peripheral leukocytosis (>11 000/mm3) on the 
day the infection was identified, and 1 had a change in CSF 
appearance. A prospective study also demonstrated no value of 
routine analysis of CSF for prediction and diagnosis of exter-
nal drain–related bacterial meningitis [56]. Another study 
assessed whether the incidence of ventriculitis changed when 
CSF sampling frequency was reduced to once every 3 days 
[152]. In that study, a prospective sample of external ventricu-
lar drain–treated patients was compared to a historical com-
parison group at 2 tertiary hospital intensive care units. The 
incidence of ventriculitis decreased from 17% to 11% overall 
and, in those with proven ventriculitis, from 10% to 3% once 
sampling frequency was reduced.
XI. In Patients with Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts who Develop 
Ventriculitis and Meningitis, When can a New Shunt be 
Reimplanted?
Recommendations
70. In patients with infection caused by coagulase-negative 
staphylococci or P. acnes, with no associated CSF abnor-
malities and with negative CSF cultures for 48 hours after 
externalization, a new shunt should be reimplanted as soon 
as the third day after removal (strong, low).
71. In patients with infection caused by a coagulase-negative 
staphylococcus or P. acnes, with associated CSF abnormali-
ties but negative repeat CSF cultures, a new shunt should be 
reimplanted after 7 days of antimicrobial therapy (strong, 
low); if repeat cultures are positive, antimicrobial treatment 
is recommended until CSF cultures remain negative for 
7–10 consecutive days before a new shunt is placed (strong, 
low).
72. In patients with infection caused by S. aureus or gram-neg-
ative bacilli, a new shunt should be reimplanted 10 days 
after CSF cultures are negative (strong, low).
73. A period off antimicrobial therapy is not recommended to 
verify clearing of the infection before shunt reimplantation 
(strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Once the infected CSF shunt has been removed, the optimal 
timing of shunt reimplantation is unclear. Early placement 
may increase the risk of relapse, but a delay in reimplantation 
may increase the risk of secondary infection of the external 
ventricular drain. The timing of reimplantation should be 
individualized based on the isolated organism, severity of 
ventriculitis, and improvement of CSF parameters and CSF 
sterilization in response to antimicrobial therapy. The total 
duration of antimicrobial therapy (see Question VIII) is diffi-
cult to separate from the timing of shunt reimplantation. Some 
authorities extend antimicrobial therapy for several days after 
shunt reimplantation, whereas others decide on total duration 
of therapy based on obtaining negative CSF cultures and do 
not extend antimicrobial therapy beyond the time of shunt 
reimplantation.
In patients with shunt infection caused by coagulase-nega-
tive staphylococci and with normal CSF findings, the presence 
of negative CSF cultures for 48 hours after externalization gen-
erally confirms that removal of the hardware affected a cure 
and that the patient can have a new shunt placed on the third 
day after removal. If the coagulase-negative staphylococcus was 
isolated in association with CSF abnormalities (eg, CSF pleocy-
tosis, abnormal chemistries), a true infection was likely present. 
If repeat cultures are negative, 7 days of antimicrobial therapy 
are usually recommended before shunt placement. However, if 
repeat cultures are positive, antimicrobial treatment is contin-
ued until CSF cultures remain negative for 7–10 consecutive 
days before a new shunt is placed. This approach is also recom-
mended for infection caused by P. acnes [131]. For shunt infec-
tions caused by S. aureus or gram-negative bacilli, 10 days of 
antimicrobial therapy with negative cultures are recommended 
before shunt placement [18, 153], although some authorities 
would consider a 21-day course of therapy when gram-neg-
ative bacilli are isolated. Some experts also suggest a 3-day 
period off antimicrobial therapy in order to verify clearing of 
the infection before shunt reimplantation; this observation 
period is optional and not routinely recommended. However, 
these recommendations have not been rigorously studied, and 
some patients may require a longer duration of antimicrobial 
therapy before a new CSF shunt is placed. Furthermore, sig-
nificant variations have been observed in the duration of anti-
microbial therapy in patients with CSF shunt infections [141, 
150]. Careful follow-up after reimplantation is also critical to 
ensure that the patient has been cured. Regardless of the man-
ner of treatment, CSF shunt infection can recur. In one study 
[141], the recurrence rate was 26%, with two-thirds of cases 
caused by the same microorganism. The recurrence rate in 
patients with S. epidermidis shunt infection was 29%.
In a recent study in children, risk factors identified for rein-
fection were those with complex shunts (multiple shunts placed 
or any single shunt with multiple catheters together), an atrial 
shunt, any complication after the first infection (ie, shunt mal-
function, hemorrhage, CSF leak), or intermittent negative 
cultures defined as positive CSF cultures clearing and then 
returning over the course of treatment [142].
XII. What is the Best Approach to Prevent Infection in Patients 
Who are Receiving Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts?
Recommendations
74. Periprocedural prophylactic antimicrobial administration 
is recommended for patients undergoing CSF shunt or 
drain insertion (strong, moderate).
75. Periprocedural prophylactic antimicrobial administration 
is recommended for patients undergoing placement of 
external ventricular drains (strong, moderate).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e58 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
76. Prolonged antimicrobial prophylaxis for the duration of 
the external ventricular drain is of uncertain benefit and 
not recommended (strong, moderate).
77. Use of antimicrobial-impregnated CSF shunts and CSF 
drains is recommended (strong, moderate).
78. In patients with external ventricular drains, fixed interval 
exchange is not recommended (strong, moderate).
79. Use of a standardized protocol for insertion of CSF shunts 
and drains is recommended (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
There have been numerous studies on specific surgical tech-
niques to minimize the possibility of infection in patients 
undergoing CSF shunt placement; however, there are signifi-
cant methodological limitations to these studies. Much of what 
is recommended is based on described risk factors for shunt 
infection. In one prospective, randomized controlled study of 
61 patients undergoing 84 shunt procedures, the shunt infec-
tion rate was reduced in those who received antimicrobial-im-
pregnated sutures (4.3% vs 21%; P = .038) [154], although there 
was a high rate of infection in the control group. There is some 
evidence that double gloving may decrease CSF shunt infection 
rates [155], and good surgical techniques [156] and adherence 
to infection control measures are important. There appears to 
be relatively strong evidence for the use of prophylactic anti-
microbial therapy prior to shunt insertion surgery, although 
the clinical trials supporting this recommendation generally 
predate the use of antimicrobial-impregnated catheters. The 
latter have been less well studied to date but appear promising. 
Studied interventions are detailed in the following sections.
Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
Evidence supports the use of periprocedural prophylactic 
antimicrobial administration for patients undergoing CSF 
shunt insertion and placement of external ventricular drains. 
Although no randomized studies of periprocedural prophy-
lactic antimicrobial agents for CSF shunt placement have 
been adequately powered to clearly establish efficacy, several 
metaanalyses have concluded that this approach decreases 
infection rates by approximately 50% [157, 158]. A Cochrane 
database review indicated that the odds ratio for decreased 
infection was 0.52 (95% CI, 0.36–0.74) [159]. The antimicrobial 
agent should be given before incision to achieve adequate tissue 
concentrations and should be continued for as long as 24 hours 
postoperatively, as studies included in these analyses generally 
administered therapy for this duration.
With respect to CSF drain infection prevention, one review 
[20] that cited 10 studies addressed the use of prophylactic anti-
microbials [47, 68, 160–167]. One study with 102 ventriculos-
tomies in 70 patients [165] included 44 patients who received 
antimicrobials and 26 who did not. This study showed a 
decrease in ventriculitis rates from 27% to 9%. Eight subsequent 
studies did not show a difference [20, 47, 160–162, 168], with 
the caveat that they were underpowered for an event rate of 
1%–10%. A recent large review of 35 studies published from 
1972 to 2013 noted that about half of these studies describe the 
use of periprocedural antimicrobial therapy [21], but did not 
assess the efficacy of this practice. Some studies also showed 
that use of prophylactic antimicrobials resulted in develop-
ment of ventriculitis due to resistant organisms [162, 167]. In 
one study, patients in the prophylactic antimicrobial arm devel-
oped ventriculitis caused by MRSA and Candida spp. [163]. 
In another study, rates of gram-negative ventriculitis were 
higher in patients who received prophylactic antibiotics [160]. 
However, conflicting reports have been published. In a Brazilian 
prospective study [169], prophylactic antimicrobials were used 
in 75% of the patients, and there was no significant difference 
in ventriculitis when compared to those who did not receive 
antimicrobials. Another study from the Netherlands also did 
not show a difference in percentage of patients who developed 
ventriculitis [170]. The limitations of these studies were that 
most of them were retrospective, underpowered, used differ-
ent definitions for ventriculitis, and did not all report adverse 
effects (eg, adverse reactions to antimicrobials and infections 
with resistant organisms).
Prolonged Prophylactic Systemic Antimicrobials for External CSF Drains
Although the use of periprocedural prophylactic antimicrobial 
agents for placement of external ventricular drains is gener-
ally accepted, the use of prophylactic prolonged systemic anti-
microbials for the duration of external CSF drainage is more 
controversial. One study noted that the infection rate was 3.8% 
in those who received prophylactic antimicrobials for the dura-
tion of external ventricular drain placement and 4.0% for those 
who received only periprocedural antimicrobial therapy [160]. 
This suggests that prophylactic antimicrobial agents through-
out drainage did not significantly decrease the rate of ventricu-
litis and might select for emergence of resistant organisms. In 
contrast, another study demonstrated the benefit of prophy-
lactic antimicrobial agents (2.6% CSF infection rate vs 10.6% 
in those who only received periprocedural antimicrobials; P = 
.001) [163]. It is important to note that the infections in those 
who received prophylactic antimicrobials were caused by more 
drug-resistant virulent pathogens and that the mortality rate 
was higher (66% vs 41%). In a pooled estimate of 9 studies, the 
CSF infection rate was 8.1% in those who received periproce-
dural antimicrobials and 5.3% in those who received antimicro-
bial therapy for the duration of external drainage [20, 168]. This 
led to a recommendation to maintain prophylactic antimicro-
bial therapy in all patients while the external ventricular drain is 
in place, although this is not the practice in all clinical facilities. 
One randomized study that compared placebo to trimethop-
rim-sulfamethoxazole did not show a significant difference in 
the rate of ventriculitis between the 2 groups [171]. A second 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e59
randomized study that compared periprocedural antimicrobi-
als only (intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam) to prolonged anti-
microbials (ampicillin/sulbactam and aztreonam) revealed that 
the patients who received prolonged ampicillin/sulbactam and 
aztreonam had a significantly lower rate of ventriculitis (3 of 
115, 3%) than those who received only periprocedural ampicil-
lin/sulbactam (12 of 113, 11%; P < .05) [163]. The limitations 
of this study were that it did not provide a clear definition of 
ventriculitis and the duration that the external ventricular drain 
remained in place was not specified for both groups. Another 
important finding in this study was that infections caused by 
resistant organisms such as MRSA and Candida species were 
higher in the prolonged antimicrobial arm. The mortality rate 
in the prolonged antimicrobial arm was 66% (2 of 3) when 
compared to the periprocedural antimicrobial arm, which had 
a 41% mortality rate (5 of 12).
In a systematic review that pooled data from 2 randomized 
studies and 4 observational studies [172], there was a reduced 
relative risk of 0.45 with use of prophylactic prolonged systemic 
antimicrobials, although there were significant methodological 
limitations and heterogeneity in the pooled studies. The defi-
nitions of ventriculitis were variable, the type and dose of anti-
microbials were different, adverse effects were not well studied, 
and most of the studies were retrospective and prone to bias. In 
light of these findings and based on the availability of an effi-
cacious alternative (ie, antimicrobial-impregnated catheters; 
see below), the use of prophylactic prolonged systemic anti-
microbials for prevention of infection in patients with external 
ventricular drains is not recommended, although prolonged 
use does remain the practice in some centers. In a recent study 
in patients with antimicrobial-impregnated external ventricu-
lar drains who also received prolonged systemic antimicrobial 
therapy, the addition of prolonged systemic therapy did not 
reduce the incidence of catheter-related ventriculitis but was 
associated with a higher rate of nosocomial infections (blood-
stream infections and ventilator-associated pneumonia) and 
increased cost [173].
Antimicrobial-Impregnated Catheters
Antimicrobial-impregnated catheters for CSF shunts and drains 
have been under development for several decades and, more 
recently, have been introduced into clinical practice. They are 
typically impregnated with either minocycline or clindamy-
cin, combined with rifampin. In one randomized study that 
included 110 patients who underwent placement of CSF shunts 
impregnated with clindamycin and rifampin, there was a trend 
toward a decrease in infection rate from 16.6% to 6% (P = .084) 
[174]. However, the study was hampered by a small number of 
patients and a high infection rate in the control group. Other 
noncontrolled studies in patients with CSF shunts have led to 
mixed results, some supporting [175, 176] and others disputing 
[177, 178] these findings. In a metaanalysis of pooled data from 
12 studies that compared antimicrobial-impregnated to non-
antimicrobial-impregnated ventriculoperitoneal shunts, there 
was a statistically significant decrease in infections in patients 
who had received antimicrobial-impregnated shunts (risk ratio, 
0.37; P < .0001) [179]. In another systematic literature review of 
5613 shunt procedures, use of antimicrobial-impregnated shunt 
catheters was associated with a decreased risk of shunt infection 
(3.3% vs 7.2%; P < .00001) [180], with significant differences 
in both children and adults. Use did not appear to be associ-
ated with emergence of antimicrobial-resistant infections. Use 
of antimicrobial-impregnated shunts has not only reduced the 
incidence of CSF shunt infections but also has resulted in sig-
nificant hospital cost savings [181]. In a study that compared 
the effectiveness of antimicrobial-impregnated shunt catheters 
in treatment of 12 589 consecutive cases from 287 hospital sys-
tems in adult and pediatric patients with hydrocephalus [182], 
antimicrobial-impregnated catheter use was associated with a 
significant reduction in infection in both adult (2.2% vs 3.6%; 
P = .02) and pediatric (2.6% vs 7.1%; P < .01) patients. Reduced 
infection was demonstrated regardless of hospital size, annual 
shunt volume, hospital location, or patient risk factors.
Similar results have been noted in patients who received 
antimicrobial-impregnated external ventricular drains. A ran-
domized study of 306 patients who had placement of external 
ventricular drains impregnated with minocycline and rifampin 
showed a decrease in the CSF infection rate from 9.4% to 1.3% 
compared to those who received uncoated external ventricular 
drains [183]. The mean duration of external ventricular drain 
placement in both arms was similar. However, 95% of partic-
ipants in both arms also received prolonged prophylactic anti-
microbials; the antimicrobials were not specified. Pooled data 
from 5 studies in one metaanalysis showed a statistically signifi-
cant benefit for antimicrobial-impregnated external ventricular 
drains (risk ratio, 0.31; P = .009) [179].
Sonabend et al [172] conducted a systematic review of 
studies that used antimicrobial-impregnated external ven-
tricular drains. One randomized, controlled trial [183] and 3 
cohort studies [184–186] that assessed the efficacy of antimi-
crobial-coated external ventricular drains for ventriculitis pre-
vention were included in the metaanalysis. A pooled analysis 
of these studies showed a relative risk of 0.19 (95% CI, 0.07–
0.52) with antimicrobial-coated external ventricular drains. 
Ventriculitis developed in 2 patients (1.3%) in the interven-
tion group and in 13 patients (9.6%) treated with the standard 
uncoated external ventricular drains (P = .0012). The organism 
most commonly isolated from CSF samples of control patients 
was coagulase-negative staphylococcus, whereas CSF cultures 
from patients in the treated group grew E. faecalis, S. aureus, 
and Enterobacter aerogenes. The study did not provide a clear 
definition of colonization or contamination rates vs a definite 
infection. In another study that compared 47 children treated 
with a clindamycin and rifampin–coated external ventricular 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e60 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
drain to 44 children who were treated with a standard exter-
nal ventricular drain [186], CSF cultures were positive in 14 of 
44 control patients (31.8%) and in only 1 of 47 patients (2.1%) 
treated with a coated catheter, demonstrating a statistically sig-
nificant decrease in ventriculitis with the use of an antimicro-
bial-coated catheter (P < .05). In another study that compared 
prolonged antimicrobial prophylaxis (ampicillin/sulbactam and 
ceftriaxone) to antimicrobial-coated external ventricular drains 
with clindamycin and rifampin [187], the interim data analysis 
demonstrated that no ventriculitis occurred in either group.
Allergic or systemic complications directly related to the 
antimicrobial agents in antimicrobial-impregnated catheters 
have been rare. When used for CSF shunt insertions, antimi-
crobial-impregnated catheters have not been associated with an 
increased risk of late CSF shunt infections when compared to 
historic controls [188].
Elective Fixed Interval Revision
The greatest risk related to the external ventricular drain is that 
of secondary infection [20]. A longer duration of drain place-
ment appears to increase the risk. Three studies have shown 
that the risk of infection does increase with catheter duration 
[47, 56, 166]. This was also confirmed in another review that 
demonstrated that longer duration of external ventricular CSF 
drain placement increased the risk of infection [189], although 
the risk may plateau over time. Prophylactic catheter exchange 
has been advocated to reduce this risk. However, prophylactic 
catheter exchange performed every 5 days does not significantly 
decrease the likelihood of CSF infection [190, 191]. In one study 
in 103 patients who required external ventricular drains for 
more than 5 days [191], the CSF infection rate was 7.8% for the 
group that underwent catheter exchange every 5 days and 3.8% 
for the no-change group (P = .5). This suggests that a single 
external ventricular drain can be used for as long as clinically 
indicated unless a change is necessary because of CSF infection 
or catheter malfunction. In addition, no significant difference 
was found in intensive care unit stay, ward stay, or clinical out-
come between the 2 groups.
Thus, in addition to use of antimicrobial-impregnated cath-
eters, the infection risk can be lowered by prompt removal of 
the external ventricular drain when no longer needed, but not 
with prophylactic catheter exchange at a set interval. While not 
clearly demonstrated in the medical literature but by extrap-
olating from studies with other indwelling catheters, it seems 
likely that attention to maintaining a sterile, closed system with 
avoidance of injections into the system and surveillance of the 
draining CSF will also minimize the likelihood of infection.
Combined Interventions
Many of the studies on prevention of CSF shunt infections 
detailed above examined single interventions to determine 
effects on infection rates. However, use of “practice bundles” 
may also be valuable in development of standardized protocols 
for CSF shunt insertion. The Hydrocephalus Clinical Research 
Network recently undertook an initiative in which centers 
agreed to develop an 11-step protocol in an effort to reduce 
CSF shunt infection rates. This was a collaboration of pediatric 
neurosurgical centers and included all children who received 
shunts or revisions [192]. The initiative involved 21 surgeons 
and included 1571 procedures in 1004 children. Overall pro-
tocol compliance was about 75%, and another 20% followed 
10 of the 11 steps. The network infection rate decreased from 
8.8% prior to the protocol to 5.7% while using the protocol 
(P = .0028; relative risk reduction, 36%), indicating that use of a 
standardized protocol and reduction in variation by adherence 
to a common protocol are effective at reducing CSF shunt infec-
tion rates. Only proper hand-washing technique by all team 
members emerged as an independent predictor of decreased 
infection rates. Factors associated with increased infection were 
use of BioGlide catheters and use of antiseptic cream by any 
member of the surgical team. However, the nature of the study 
precluded identification of individual items of the bundle with 
certainty. Identification of other factors that are associated with 
infection may lead to addition of new interventions to the pro-
tocol in order to further reduce infection rates in the future.
In patients with external ventricular drains, adherence to a 
checklist for insertion that included hand hygiene, appropriate 
skin preparation with povidone iodine, allowance of the skin 
preparation to completely dry before insertion, use of all 5 
maximal sterile barriers (sterile gloves, sterile gown, cap, mask, 
and large sterile drape), and adherence to the policy for exter-
nal ventricular drain maintenance led to a decline in infection 
rates from 16 per 1000 external drain catheter days to 4.5 per 
1000 catheter days [193]. This infection rate further decreased 
to 1.3 per 1000 catheter days. Initiation of this protocol eventu-
ally resulted in no infections over a 25-month period. However, 
this study, as with many similar nonrandomized comparisons 
of care protocols, begins with an awareness of a recent increase 
in infection rates, making some of the achieved improvement 
possibly due to regression of the mean.
XIII. Is there a Role for Prophylactic Antimicrobial Therapy 
in Patients Undergoing Neurosurgery or in those with 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak?
Recommendations
80. For neurosurgical patients, perioperative antimicrobial 
agents are recommended to prevent infections of the inci-
sion (strong, high).
81. In patients with basilar skull fractures and a CSF leak, 
prophylactic antimicrobial agents are not recommended 
(strong, moderate).
82. In patients with basilar skull fractures and a prolonged CSF 
leakage (>7 days), an attempt to repair the leak is recom-
mended (strong, low).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e61
83. In patients with basilar skull fractures and a CSF leak, pneu-
mococcal vaccination is recommended (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary
While perioperative antimicrobial agents have been shown to 
decrease the risk of cranial wound infections [194–197], they 
have not been shown to decrease the risk of post-craniotomy 
meningitis [194, 195] or of meningitis after placement of a CSF 
shunt [198]. For prophylaxis against cranial wound infections, 
the first dose of antimicrobials should be given within 1 hour of 
surgery and should be discontinued within 24 hours after surgery 
[199].
Patients with traumatic injuries that result in a basilar skull 
fracture or CSF leak deserve special consideration. The over-
all infection rate of meningitis has been reported to be 1.4% 
[200]. However, in those who have depressed cranial fractures 
(up to 6% of patient with head injuries) [201], the infection 
rate is as high as 10.6% [202]. In a review of 51 patients with 
post-traumatic CSF leaks that did not resolve in 24 hours, the 
risk of meningitis was decreased from 21% to 10% with the 
use of prophylactic agents [203]. However, in another study of 
patients with traumatic pneumocephalus, the administration 
of ceftriaxone did not appear to decrease the risk of bacterial 
meningitis [204]. A Cochrane systematic review evaluated 208 
participants from 4 randomized studies who were considered 
suitable for inclusion in the metaanalysis [205]. There were 
no significant differences between antimicrobial prophylaxis 
groups and control groups in terms of reduction of the fre-
quency of meningitis, all-cause mortality, meningitis-related 
mortality, and the need for surgical correction in patients with 
CSF leakage. Leakage of CSF is the major risk factor for the 
development of meningitis, although most leaks that occur 
after trauma are unrecognized [200, 206]. Most leaks resolve 
spontaneously within 7 days, but surgical intervention is indi-
cated if leakage persists.
Since Streptococcus pneumoniae is an important pathogen in 
the setting of head trauma and a CSF leak [207, 208], it is rea-
sonable to try to prevent infections with this organism using 
pneumococcal vaccination, although clinical studies assessing 
the efficacy of this approach are lacking. Nevertheless, specific 
recommendations exist for both adult and pediatric patients 
with CSF leaks. For unimmunized children aged 6–18 years 
and adults aged ≥19 years with CSF leak, the 13-valent pneu-
mococcal conjugate vaccine should be administered first fol-
lowed at least 8 weeks later with the 23-valent pneumococcal 
polysaccharide vaccine [209, 210]. The Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices recently recommended both the 
13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and the 23-valent 
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, administered in series, 
with the polysaccharide vaccine given 6–12 months after the 
conjugate vaccine in all pneumococcal vaccine-nave adults aged 
≥65 years [211].
Notes
Acknowledgments. The expert panel expresses its gratitude for 
thoughtful reviews of an earlier version by Drs Naomi O’Grady, Richard 
Whitley, William E. Whitehead, and Ram Yogev. The panel thanks Vita 
Washington for her guidance and preparation of the manuscript.
Financial support. Support for these guidelines was provided by the 
IDSA.
Potential conflicts of interest. The following is a reflection of what has 
been reported to the IDSA regarding potential conflicts of interest (COI). 
In order to provide thorough transparency, the IDSA requires full disclo-
sure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the guideline topic. Such 
relationships as potential conflicts of interest are determined by a review 
process that includes assessment by the SPGC chair, the SPGC liaison to 
the development panel, and the BOD liaison to the SPGC, and, if neces-
sary, the COI Task Force of the Board. This assessment of disclosed rela-
tionships for possible COI is based on the relative weight of the financial 
relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the relevance of the relationship 
(ie, the degree to which an association might reasonably be interpreted 
by an independent observer as related to the topic or recommendation of 
consideration). The reader should be mindful of this when the list of dis-
closures is reviewed. A. T. received royalties from UpToDate and Elsevier 
and honoraria from ACP and Merck. A. B. received research support from 
Cubist. R. H. has received personal fees for speaker bureau participation 
with Pfizer, Medicine’s Company and Biofire; he has served as a consultant 
for Biomeriaux. S. K. served as a consultant for Pfizer; received royalties 
from UpToDate and Elsevier; and received research grants from Pfizer, 
Forest Laboratories, Cubist, and Merck. W. M. S. received research grants 
from the National Institutes of Health, Pfizer, and Wyeth. D. v. d. B received 
research grants from the Netherlands Organization for Health Research 
and Development, Netherlands Scientific Organization, European Research 
Council, FP-7, Horizon 2020, and Omeros and served as a consultant for 
GSK. All other authors: No reported conflicts. All authors have submitted 
the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts 
that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been 
disclosed.
References
1. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Going from evi-
dence to recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Incorporating 
considerations of resources use into grading recommendations. BMJ 2008; 
336:1170–3.
3. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Schünemann HJ; 
GRADE Working Group. What is “quality of evidence” and why is it important to 
clinicians? BMJ 2008; 336:995–8.
4. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al; GRADE Working Group. GRADE: an 
emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommenda-
tions. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
5. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al; GRADE Working Group. Use of 
GRADE grid to reach decisions on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is 
elusive. BMJ 2008; 337:a744.
6. Edwards RJ, Drake JM. Cerebrospinal fluid devices. In: Winn, HR, ed. Youmans 
& Winn Neurological Surgery. 7th ed. 2017: 1638–43.
7. Renier D, Lacombe J, Pierre-Kahn A, Sainte-Rose C, Hirsch JF. Factors causing 
acute shunt infection. Computer analysis of 1174 operations. J Neurosurg 1984; 
61:1072–8.
8. Younger JJ, Simmons JC, Barrett FF. Operative related infection rates for ven-
triculoperitoneal shunt procedures in a children’s hospital. Infect Control 1987; 
8:67–70.
9. Quigley MR, Reigel DH, Kortyna R. Cerebrospinal fluid shunt infections. 
Report of 41 cases and a critical review of the literature. Pediatr Neurosci 1989; 
15:111–20.
10. Kontny U, Höfling B, Gutjahr P, Voth D, Schwarz M, Schmitt HJ. CSF shunt infec-
tions in children. Infection 1993; 21:89–92.
11. Piatt JH Jr, Carlson CV. A search for determinants of cerebrospinal fluid shunt 
survival: retrospective analysis of a 14-year institutional experience. Pediatr 
Neurosurg 1993; 19:233–41; discussion 42.
12. McGirt MJ, Leveque JC, Wellons JC 3rd, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid shunt survival 
and etiology of failures: a seven-year institutional experience. Pediatr Neurosurg 
2002; 36:248–55.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e62 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
13. Vinchon M, Dhellemmes P. Cerebrospinal fluid shunt infection: risk factors and 
long-term follow-up. Childs Nerv Syst 2006; 22:692–7.
14. Conen A, Walti LN, Merlo A, Fluckiger U, Battegay M, Trampuz A. Characteristics 
and treatment outcome of cerebrospinal fluid shunt-associated infections in adults: 
a retrospective analysis over an 11-year period. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47:73–82.
15. Choux M, Genitori L, Lang D, Lena G. Shunt implantation: reducing the inci-
dence of shunt infection. J Neurosurg 1992; 77:875–80.
16. Winston KR. Hair and neurosurgery. Neurosurgery 1992; 31:320–9.
17. Morissette I, Gourdeau M, Francoeur J. CSF shunt infections: a fifteen-year experi-
ence with emphasis on management and outcome. Can J Neurol Sci 1993; 20:118–22.
18. van de Beek D, Drake JM, Tunkel AR. Nosocomial bacterial meningitis. N Engl J 
Med 2010; 362:146–54.
19. Simon TD, Butler J, Whitlock KB, et al. Risk factors for first cerebrospinal fluid 
shunt infection: findings from a multi-center prospective cohort study. J Pediatr 
2014; 164:1462–8 e2.
20. Lozier AP
, Sciacca RR, Romagnoli MF, Connolly ES Jr. Ventriculostomy-related 
infections: a critical review of the literature. Neurosurgery 2002; 51:170–81; discus-
sion 81–2.
21. Ramanan M, Lipman J, Shorr A, Shankar A. A meta-analysis of ventriculosto-
my-associated cerebrospinal fluid infections. BMC Infect Dis 2015; 15:3.
22. Governale LS, Fein N, Logsdon J, Black PM. Techniques and complications of 
external lumbar drainage for normal pressure hydrocephalus. Neurosurgery 
2008; 63:379–84; discussion 84.
23. Motta F, Antonello CE. Analysis of complications in 430 consecutive pediat-
ric patients treated with intrathecal baclofen therapy: 14-year experience. J 
Neurosurg Pediatr 2014; 13:301–6.
24. Fjelstad AB, Hommelstad J, Sorteberg A. Infections related to intrathecal baclofen 
therapy in children and adults: frequency and risk factors. J Neurosurg Pediatr 
2009; 4:487–93.
25. Vender JR, Hester S, Waller JL, Rekito A, Lee MR. Identification and management 
of intrathecal baclofen pump complications: a comparison of pediatric and adult 
patients. J Neurosurg 2006; 104:9–15.
26. Ghosh D, Mainali G, Khera J, Luciano M. Complications of intrathecal baclofen 
pumps in children: experience from a tertiary care center. Pediatr Neurosurg 
2013; 49:138–44.
27. Hester SM, Fisher JF, Lee MR, Macomson S, Vender JR. Evaluation of salvage 
techniques for infected baclofen pumps in pediatric patients with cerebral palsy. J 
Neurosurg Pediatr 2012; 10:548–54.
28. Wunderlich CA, Krach LE. Gram-negative meningitis and infections in individu-
als treated with intrathecal baclofen for spasticity: a retrospective study. Dev Med 
Child Neurol 2006; 48:450–5.
29. Fily F, Haegelen C, Tattevin P, et al. Deep brain stimulation hardware-related 
infections: a report of 12 cases and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 
52:1020–3.
30. Stenehjem E, Armstrong WS. Central nervous system device infections. Infect Dis 
Clin North Am 2012; 26:89–110.
31. Bergey GK, Morrell MJ, Mizrahi EM, et al. Long-term treatment with respon-
sive brain stimulation in adults with refractory partial seizures. Neurology 2015; 
84:810–7.
32. Kourbeti IS, Vakis AF, Ziakas P, et al. Infections in patients undergoing craniot-
omy: risk factors associated with post-craniotomy meningitis. J Neurosurg 2015; 
122:1113–9.
33. Durand ML, Calderwood SB, Weber DJ, et al. Acute bacterial meningitis in adults. 
A review of 493 episodes. N Engl J Med 1993; 328:21–8.
34. Tsai MH, Lu CH, Huang CR, et al. Bacterial meningitis in young adults in 
Southern Taiwan: clinical characteristics and therapeutic outcomes. Infection 
2006; 34:2–8.
35. Castelblanco RL, Lee M, Hasbun R. Epidemiology of bacterial meningitis in the 
USA from 1997 to 2010: a population-based observational study. Lancet Infect 
Dis 2014; 14:813–9.
36. Field MJK, Lohr, KN. Institute of Medicine Committee to advise the Public Health 
Service on clinical practice guidelines. Clinical practice guidelines: directions for 
a new program. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1990: 52–77.
37. George R, Leibrock L, Epstein M. Long-term analysis of cerebrospinal fluid shunt 
infections. A 25-year experience. J Neurosurg 1979; 51:804–11.
38. Schoenbaum SC, Gardner P, Shillito J. Infections of cerebrospinal fluid 
shunts: epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and therapy. J Infect Dis 1975; 
131:543–52.
39. Walters BC, Hoffman HJ, Hendrick EB, Humphreys RP. Cerebrospinal fluid 
shunt infection. Influences on initial management and subsequent outcome. J 
Neurosurg 1984; 60:1014–21.
40. Braxton EE Jr, Ehrlich GD, Hall-Stoodley L, et al. Role of biofilms in neurosurgi-
cal device-related infections. Neurosurg Rev 2005; 28:249–55.
41. Snowden JN, Beaver M, Smeltzer MS, Kielian T. Biofilm-infected intracere-
broventricular shunts elicit inflammation within the central nervous system. 
Infect Immun 2012; 80:3206–14.
42. Bryant MS, Bremer AM, Tepas JJ 3rd, Mollitt DL, Nquyen TQ, Talbert JL. 
Abdominal complications of ventriculoperitoneal shunts. Case reports and 
review of the literature. Am Surg 1988; 54:50–5.
43. Piatt JH Jr, Garton HJ. Clinical diagnosis of ventriculoperitoneal shunt failure 
among children with hydrocephalus. Pediatr Emerg Care 2008; 24:201–10.
44. Garton HJ, Kestle JR, Drake JM. Predicting shunt failure on the basis of clinical 
symptoms and signs in children. J Neurosurg 2001; 94:202–10.
45. Rogers EA, Kimia A, Madsen JR, Nigrovic LE, Neuman MI. Predictors of ven-
tricular shunt infection among children presenting to a pediatric emergency 
department. Pediatr Emerg Care 2012; 28:405–9.
46. Odio C, McCracken GH Jr, Nelson JD. CSF shunt infections in pediatrics. A sev-
en-year experience. Am J Dis Child 1984; 138:1103–8.
47. Mayhall CG, Archer NH, Lamb VA, et al. Ventriculostomy-related infections. 
A prospective epidemiologic study. N Engl J Med 1984; 310:553–9.
48. Gerner-Smidt P, Stenager E, Kock-Jensen C. Treatment of ventriculostomy-re-
lated infections. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1988; 91:47–9.
49. Walti LN, Conen A, Coward J, Jost GF, Trampuz A. Characteristics of infections asso-
ciated with external ventricular drains of cerebrospinal fluid. J Infect 2013; 66:424–31.
50. Chen HP, Lai CH, Chan YJ, et al. Clinical significance of Acinetobacter species 
isolated from cerebrospinal fluid. Scand J Infect Dis 2005; 37:669–75.
51. Hader WJ, Steinbok P. The value of routine cultures of the cerebrospinal fluid in 
patients with external ventricular drains. Neurosurgery 2000; 46:1149–53; discus-
sion 53–5.
52. Wiberg K, Birnbaum A, Gradon J. Causes and presentation of meningitis in a 
Baltimore community hospital 1997–2006. South Med J 2008; 101:1012–6.
53. Oostenbrink R, Moons KG, Theunissen CC, Derksen-Lubsen G, Grobbee DE, 
Moll HA. Signs of meningeal irritation at the emergency department: how often 
bacterial meningitis? Pediatr Emerg Care 2001; 17:161–4.
54. Malheiro L, Gomes A, Barbosa P, Santos L, Sarmento A. Infectious complications 
of intrathecal drug administration systems for spasticity and chronic pain: 145 
patients from a tertiary care center. Neuromodulation 2015; 18:421–7.
55. Forgacs P, Geyer CA, Freidberg SR. Characterization of chemical meningitis after 
neurological surgery. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:179–85.
56. Schade RP, Schinkel J, Roelandse FW, et al. Lack of value of routine analysis of 
cerebrospinal fluid for prediction and diagnosis of external drainage-related bac-
terial meningitis. J Neurosurg 2006; 104:101–8.
57. Tung H, Raffel C, McComb JG. Ventricular cerebrospinal fluid eosinophilia in 
children with ventriculoperitoneal shunts. J Neurosurg 1991; 75:541–4.
58. Fulkerson DH, Boaz JC. Cerebrospinal fluid eosinophilia in children with ven-
tricular shunts. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2008; 1:288–95.
59. Heidemann SM, Fiore M, Sood S, Ham S. Eosinophil activation in the cerebrospi-
nal fluid of children with shunt obstruction. Pediatr Neurosurg 2010; 46:255–8.
60. Pfisterer W, Mühlbauer M, Czech T, Reinprecht A. Early diagnosis of external 
ventricular drainage infection: results of a prospective study. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 2003; 74:929–32.
61. Pfausler B, Beer R, Engelhardt K, Kemmler G, Mohsenipour I, Schmutzhard E. 
Cell index–a new parameter for the early diagnosis of ventriculostomy (external 
ventricular drainage)-related ventriculitis in patients with intraventricular hem-
orrhage? Acta Neurochir (Wien) 2004; 146:477–81.
62. Brouwer MC, Thwaites GE, Tunkel AR, van de Beek D. Dilemmas in the diagno-
sis of acute community-acquired bacterial meningitis. Lancet 2012; 380:1684–92.
63. Kim HI, Kim SW, Park GY, et al. The causes and treatment outcomes of 91 
patients with adult nosocomial meningitis. Korean J Intern Med 2012; 27:171–9.
64. Nigrovic LE, Malley R, Macias CG, et al; American Academy of Pediatrics, 
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Collaborative Research Committee. Effect of 
antibiotic pretreatment on cerebrospinal fluid profiles of children with bacterial 
meningitis. Pediatrics 2008; 122:726–30.
65. Banks JT, Bharara S, Tubbs RS, et al. Polymerase chain reaction for the rapid detec-
tion of cerebrospinal fluid shunt or ventriculostomy infections. Neurosurgery 
2005; 57:1237–43; discussion -43.
66. Steinbok P, Cochrane DD, Kestle JR. The significance of bacteriologically posi-
tive ventriculoperitoneal shunt components in the absence of other signs of shunt 
infection. J Neurosurg 1996; 84:617–23.
67. CDC/NHSN Surveillance Definitions for Specific Types of Infections. January 
2015. Available at:  www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/pscmanual/17pscnosinfdef_current.
pdf. Accessed 11 April 2016.
68. Sundbärg G, Nordström CH, Söderström S. Complications due to prolonged ven-
tricular fluid pressure recording. Br J Neurosurg 1988; 2:485–95.
69. Palabiyikoglu I, Tekeli E, Cokca F, et al. Nosocomial meningitis in a university 
hospital between 1993 and 2002. J Hosp Infect 2006; 62:94–7.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e63
70. Marinovic T, Skrlin J, Vilendecic M, Rotim K, Grahovac G. Multiple Aspergillus 
brain abscesses in immuno-competent patient with severe cranio-facial trauma. 
Acta Neurochir (Wien) 2007; 149:629–32; discussion 32.
71. Mazumder SA, Cleveland KO. Cryptococcal meningitis after neurosurgery. Am J 
Med Sci 2010; 339:582–3.
72. Safdieh JE, Mead PA, Sepkowitz KA, Kiehn TE, Abrey LE. Bacterial and fungal 
meningitis in patients with cancer. Neurology 2008; 70:943–7.
73. Kainer MA, Reagan DR, Nguyen DB, et al; Tennessee Fungal Meningitis 
Investigation Team. Fungal infections associated with contaminated methylpred-
nisolone in Tennessee. N Engl J Med 2012; 367:2194–203.
74. Smith RM, Schaefer MK, Kainer MA, et al; Multistate Fungal Infection Outbreak 
Response Team. Fungal infections associated with contaminated methylpredniso-
lone injections. N Engl J Med 2013; 369:1598–609.
75. Kauffman CA, Pappas PG, Patterson TF. Fungal infections associated with con-
taminated methylprednisolone injections. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:2495–500.
76. Huy NT, Thao NT, Diep DT, Kikuchi M, Zamora J, Hirayama K. Cerebrospinal 
fluid lactate concentration to distinguish bacterial from aseptic meningitis: a sys-
temic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2010; 14:R240.
77. Sakushima K, Hayashino Y, Kawaguchi T, Jackson JL, Fukuhara S. Diagnostic 
accuracy of cerebrospinal fluid lactate for differentiating bacterial meningitis 
from aseptic meningitis: a meta-analysis. J Infect 2011; 62:255–62.
78. Leib SL, Boscacci R, Gratzl O, Zimmerli W. Predictive value of cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) lactate level versus CSF/blood glucose ratio for the diagnosis of bacterial 
meningitis following neurosurgery. Clin Infect Dis 1999; 29:69–74.
79. Wong GK, Poon WS, Ip M. Use of ventricular cerebrospinal fluid lactate measure-
ment to diagnose cerebrospinal fluid infection in patients with intraventricular 
haemorrhage. J Clin Neurosci 2008; 15:654–5.
80. Maskin LP, Capparelli F, Mora A, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid lactate in post-neu-
rosurgical bacterial meningitis diagnosis. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2013; 
115:1820–5.
81. Stein M, Schomacher J, Scharbrodt W, Preuss M, Oertel MF. Cerebrospinal fluid 
lactate concentration after withdrawal of metabolic suppressive therapy in suba-
rachnoid hemorrhage. Acta Neurochir Suppl 2012; 114:333–7.
82. Schwarz S, Bertram M, Schwab S, Andrassy K, Hacke W. Serum procalcitonin 
levels in bacterial and abacterial meningitis. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:1828–32.
83. Berger C, Schwarz S, Schaebitz WR, Aschoff A, Schwab S. Serum procalcitonin in 
cerebral ventriculitis. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:1778–81.
84. Omar AS, El Shawarby A, Singh R. Early monitoring of ventriculostomy-related 
infections with procalcitonin in patients with ventricular drains. J Clin Monit 
Comput 2015; 29:759–65.
85. Li Y, Zhang G, Ma R, et al. The diagnostic value of cerebrospinal fluids procal-
citonin and lactate for the differential diagnosis of post-neurosurgical bacterial 
meningitis and aseptic meningitis. Clin Biochem 2015; 48:50–4.
86. Deutch S, Dahlberg D, Hedegaard J, Schmidt MB, Moller JK, Ostergaard L. 
Diagnosis of ventricular drainage-related bacterial meningitis by broad-range real-
time polymerase chain reaction. Neurosurgery 2007; 61:306–11; discussion 11–2.
87. Biesbroek JM, Verduyn Lunel FM, Kragt JJ, Amelink GJ, Frijns CJ. Culture-
negative Candida meningitis diagnosed by detection of Candida mannan antigen 
in CSF. Neurology 2013; 81:1555–6.
88. Verweij PE, Brinkman K, Kremer HP, Kullberg BJ, Meis JF. Aspergillus meningi-
tis: diagnosis by non-culture-based microbiological methods and management. J 
Clin Microbiol 1999; 37:1186–9.
89. Machetti M, Zotti M, Veroni L, et al. Antigen detection in the diagnosis and man-
agement of a patient with probable cerebral aspergillosis treated with voricona-
zole. Transpl Infect Dis 2000; 2:140–4.
90. Malani AN, Singal B, Wheat LJ, et al. (1,3)-β-D-glucan in cerebrospinal fluid for 
diagnosis of fungal meningitis associated with contaminated methylprednisolone 
injections. J Clin Microbiol 2015; 53:799–803.
91. Lyons JL, Thakur KT, Lee R, et al. Utility of measuring (1,3)-β-D-glucan 
in  
cerebrospinal fluid for diagnosis of fungal central nervous system infection. 
J Clin Microbiol 2015; 53:319–22.
92. Ferreira NP
, Otta GM, do Amaral LL, da Rocha AJ. Imaging aspects of pyogenic 
infections of the central nervous system. Top Magn Reson Imaging 2005; 16:145–54.
93. Kline MW, Kaplan SL. Computed tomography in bacterial meningitis of child-
hood. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1988; 7:855–7.
94. Tunkel AR, Hartman BJ, Kaplan SL, et al. Practice guidelines for the management 
of bacterial meningitis. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:1267–84.
95. Rybak M, Lomaestro B, Rotschafer JC, et al. Therapeutic monitoring of vanco-
mycin in adult patients: a consensus review of the American Society of Health-
System Pharmacists, the Infectious Diseases Society of America, and the Society 
of Infectious Diseases Pharmacists. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2009; 66:82–98.
96. Liu C, Bayer A, Cosgrove SE, et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America for the treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus infections in adults and children: executive summary. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 
52:285–92.
97. Gombert ME, Landesman SH, Corrado ML, Stein SC, Melvin ET, Cummings 
M. Vancomycin and rifampin therapy for Staphylococcus epidermidis meningitis 
associated with CSF shunts: report of three cases. J Neurosurg 1981; 55:633–6.
98. Nau R, Prange HW, Menck S, Kolenda H, Visser K, Seydel JK. Penetration of 
rifampicin into the cerebrospinal fluid of adults with uninflamed meninges. J 
Antimicrob Chemother 1992; 29:719–24.
99. Dunne WM Jr, Mason EO Jr, Kaplan SL. Diffusion of rifampin and vancomycin 
through a Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilm. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1993; 37:2522–6.
100. Gill CJ, Murphy MA, Hamer DH. Treatment of Staphylococcus epidermidis ven-
triculo-peritoneal shunt infection with linezolid. J Infect 2002; 45:129–32.
101. Milstone AM, Dick J, Carson B, Siberry GK. Cerebrospinal fluid penetration 
and bacteriostatic activity of linezolid against Enterococcus faecalis in a child 
with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt infection. Pediatr Neurosurg 2007; 43:406–9.
102. Yilmaz A, Dalgic N, Müslüman M, Sancar M, Colak I, Aydin Y. Linezolid treat-
ment of shunt-related cerebrospinal fluid infections in children. J Neurosurg 
Pediatr 2010; 5:443–8.
103. Maranich AM, Rajnik M. Successful treatment of vancomycin-resistant ente-
rococcal ventriculitis in a pediatric patient with linezolid. Mil Med 2008; 
173:927–9.
104. Graham PL, Ampofo K, Saiman L. Linezolid treatment of vancomycin-resistant 
Enterococcus faecium ventriculitis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002; 21:798–800.
105. Antony SJ, Hoffman-Roberts HL, Foote BS. Use of daptomycin as salvage ther-
apy in the treatment of central nervous system infections including meningitis 
and shunt infections. Infect Dis Clin Pract 2012; 20:161–3.
106. Kullar R, Chin JN, Edwards DJ, Parker D, Coplin WM, Rybak MJ. 
Pharmacokinetics of single-dose daptomycin in patients with suspected or 
confirmed neurological infections. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011; 
55:3505–9.
107. Foster DR, Rhoney DH. Enterobacter meningitis: organism susceptibilities, 
antimicrobial therapy and related outcomes. Surg Neurol 2005; 63:533–7; dis-
cussion 7.
108. Wolff MA, Young CL, Ramphal R. Antibiotic therapy for Enterobacter meningi-
tis: a retrospective review of 13 episodes and review of the literature. Clin Infect 
Dis 1993; 16:772–7.
109. Kim BN, Peleg AY, Lodise TP, et al. Management of meningitis due to antibiot-
ic-resistant Acinetobacter species. Lancet Infect Dis 2009; 9:245–55.
110. Moon C, Kwak YG, Kim BN, Kim ES, Lee CS. Implications of postneurosurgical 
meningitis caused by carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. J Infect 
Chemother 2013; 19:916–9.
111. Falagas ME, Tansarli GS, Ikawa K, Vardakas KZ. Clinical outcomes with 
extended or continuous versus short-term intravenous infusion of carbapenems 
and piperacillin/tazobactam: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect 
Dis 2013; 56:272–82.
112. Capitano B, Nicolau DP, Potoski BA, et al. Meropenem administered as a pro-
longed infusion to treat serious gram-negative central nervous system infec-
tions. Pharmacotherapy 2004; 24:803–7.
113. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the 
management of candidiasis: 2016 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; doi:10.1093/cid/civ933.
114. Groll AH, Giri N, Petraitis V, et al. Comparative efficacy and distribution of lipid 
formulations of amphotericin B in experimental Candida albicans infection of 
the central nervous system. J Infect Dis 2000; 182:274–82.
115. Patterson TF, Thompson GR III, Denning DW, et al. Practice guidelines for 
the diagnosis and management of aspergillosis: 2016 update by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; doi:10.1093/cid/ciw326.
116. Wen DY, Bottini AG, Hall WA, Haines SJ. Infections in neurologic surgery. The 
intraventricular use of antibiotics. Neurosurg Clin N Am 1992; 3:343–54.
117. Tamber MS, Klimo P Jr, Mazzola CA, Flannery AM; Pediatric Hydrocephalus 
Systematic Review and Evidence-Based Guidelines Task Force. Pediatric hydro-
cephalus: systematic literature review and evidence-based guidelines. Part 8: 
Management of cerebrospinal fluid shunt infection. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2014; 14 
Suppl 1:60–71.
118.  Infection in Neurosurgery Working Party of the British Society for Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy. The management of neurosurgical patients with postoperative 
bacterial or aseptic meningitis or external ventricular drain-associated ventricu-
litis. Br J Neurosurg 2000; 14:7–12.
119. Ziai WC, Lewin JJ 3rd. Improving the role of intraventricular antimicrobial 
agents in the management of meningitis. Curr Opin Neurol 2009; 22:277–82.
120. Pfausler B, Spiss H, Beer R, et al. Treatment of staphylococcal ventriculitis asso-
ciated with external cerebrospinal fluid drains: a prospective randomized trial of 
intravenous compared with intraventricular vancomycin therapy. J Neurosurg 
2003; 98:1040–4.
121. Pfausler B, Haring HP, Kampfl A, Wissel J, Schober M, Schmutzhard E. 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pharmacokinetics of intraventricular vancomycin in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e64 • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • Tunkel et al
patients with staphylococcal ventriculitis associated with external CSF drainage. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997; 25:733–5.
122. Wang JH, Lin PC, Chou CH, et al. Intraventricular antimicrobial therapy in 
postneurosurgical gram-negative bacillary meningitis or ventriculitis: a hospi-
tal-based retrospective study. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2014; 47:204–10.
123. Wilkie MD, Hanson MF, Statham PF, Brennan PM. Infections of cerebrospinal 
fluid diversion devices in adults: the role of intraventricular antimicrobial ther-
apy. J Infect 2013; 66:239–46.
124. Ng K, Mabasa VH, Chow I, Ensom MH. Systematic review of efficacy, phar-
macokinetics, and administration of intraventricular vancomycin in adults. 
Neurocrit Care 2014; 20:158–71.
125. Imberti R, Cusato M, Accetta G, et al. Pharmacokinetics of colistin in cerebro-
spinal fluid after intraventricular administration of colistin methanesulfonate. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:4416–21.
126. Tängdén T, Enblad P, Ullberg M, Sjölin J. Neurosurgical gram-negative bacil-
lary ventriculitis and meningitis: a retrospective study evaluating the efficacy 
of intraventricular gentamicin therapy in 31 consecutive cases. Clin Infect Dis 
2011; 52:1310–6.
127. Chen K, Wu Y, Wang Q, et al. The methodology and pharmacokinetics study 
of intraventricular administration of vancomycin in patients with intracranial 
infections after craniotomy. J Crit Care 2015; 30:218 e1–5.
128. Shah SS, Ohlsson A, Shah VS. Intraventricular antibiotics for bacterial meningi-
tis in neonates. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 7:CD004496.
129. Cook AM, Mieure KD, Owen RD, Pesaturo AB, Hatton J. Intracerebroventricular 
administration of drugs. Pharmacotherapy 2009; 29:832–45.
130. Brown EM, Edwards RJ, Pople IK. Conservative management of patients with cer-
ebrospinal fluid shunt infections. Neurosurgery 2006; 58:657–65; discussion 65.
131. Arnell K, Cesarini K, Lagerqvist-Widh A, Wester T, Sjölin J. Cerebrospinal 
fluid shunt infections in children over a 13-year period: anaerobic cultures and 
comparison of clinical signs of infection with Propionibacterium acnes and with 
other bacteria. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2008; 1:366–72.
132. Williamson JC, Glazier SS, Peacock JE Jr. Successful treatment of ventriculosto-
my-related meningitis caused by vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus with intra-
venous and intraventricular quinupristin/dalfopristin. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 
2002; 104:54–6.
133. Cruciani M, Navarra A, Di Perri G, et al. Evaluation of intraventricular teico-
planin for the treatment of neurosurgical shunt infections. Clin Infect Dis 1992; 
15:285–9.
134. Erritouni M, Ktaich N, Rahal JJ, et al. Use of daptomycin for the treatment of 
methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococcal ventriculitis. Case Rep 
Med 2012; 2012:593578.
135. Elvy J, Porter D, Brown E. Treatment of external ventricular drain-associated 
ventriculitis caused by Enterococcus faecalis with intraventricular daptomycin. J 
Antimicrob Chemother 2008; 61:461–2.
136. Jaspan HB, Brothers AW, Campbell AJ, et al. Multidrug-resistant Enterococcus 
faecium meningitis in a toddler: characterization of the organism and successful 
treatment with intraventricular daptomycin and intravenous tigecycline. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J 2010; 29:379–81.
137. Mueller SW, Kiser TH, Anderson TA, Neumann RT. Intraventricular daptomy-
cin and intravenous linezolid for the treatment of external ventricular-drain-as-
sociated ventriculitis due to vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium. Ann 
Pharmacother 2012; 46:e35.
138. Katragkou A, Roilides E. Successful treatment of multidrug-resistant 
Acinetobacter baumannii central nervous system infections with colistin. J Clin 
Microbiol 2005; 43:4916–7.
139. Falagas ME, Bliziotis IA, Tam VH. Intraventricular or intrathecal use of poly-
myxins in patients with gram-negative meningitis: a systematic review of the 
available evidence. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2007; 29:9–25.
140. Rodríguez Guardado A, Blanco A, Asensi V
, et al. Multidrug-resistant 
Acinetobacter meningitis in neurosurgical patients with intraventricular catheters: 
assessment of different treatments. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008; 61:908–13.
141. Kestle JR, Garton HJ, Whitehead WE, et al. Management of shunt infections: a 
multicenter pilot study. J Neurosurg 2006; 105:177–81.
142. Simon TD, Mayer-Hamblett N, Whitlock KB, et al. Few patient, treatment, and 
diagnostic or microbiological factors, except complications and intermittent 
negative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures during first CSF shunt infection, are 
associated with reinfection. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 2014; 3:15–22.
143. Nelson JD. Cerebrospinal fluid shunt infections. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1984; 3:30–2.
144. Jones RF, Stening WA, Kwok BC, Sands TM. Third ventriculostomy for shunt 
infections in children. Neurosurgery 1993; 32:855–9; discussion 60.
145. Shimizu T, Luciano MG, Fukuhara T. Role of endoscopic third ventriculos-
tomy at infected cerebrospinal fluid shunt removal. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2012; 
9:320–6.
146. Yogev R. Cerebrospinal fluid shunt infections: a personal view. Pediatr Infect 
Dis 1985; 4:113–8.
147. Schreffler RT, Schreffler AJ, Wittler RR. Treatment of cerebrospinal fluid shunt 
infections: a decision analysis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002; 21:632–6.
148. James HE, Walsh JW, Wilson HD, Connor JD. The management of cerebrospi-
nal fluid shunt infections: a clinical experience. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1981; 
59:157–66.
149. James HE, Walsh JW, Wilson HD, Connor JD, Bean JR, Tibbs PA. Prospective 
randomized study of therapy in cerebrospinal fluid shunt infection. 
Neurosurgery 1980; 7:459–63.
150. Whitehead WE, Kestle JR. The treatment of cerebrospinal fluid shunt infec-
tions. Results from a practice survey of the American Society of Pediatric 
Neurosurgeons. Pediatr Neurosurg 2001; 35:205–10.
151. Turgut M, Alabaz D, Erbey F, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid shunt infections in chil-
dren. Pediatr Neurosurg 2005; 41:131–6.
152. Williams TA, Leslie GD, Dobb GJ, Roberts B, van Heerden PV. Decrease in 
proven ventriculitis by reducing the frequency of cerebrospinal fluid sampling 
from extraventricular drains. J Neurosurg 2011; 115:1040–6.
153. Chapman PH, Borges LF. Shunt infections: prevention and treatment. Clin 
Neurosurg 1985; 32:652–64.
154. Stone J, Gruber TJ, Rozzelle CJ. Healthcare savings associated with reduced 
infection rates using antimicrobial suture wound closure for cerebrospinal fluid 
shunt procedures. Pediatr Neurosurg 2010; 46:19–24.
155. Tulipan N, Cleves MA. Effect of an intraoperative double-gloving strategy 
on the incidence of cerebrospinal fluid shunt infection. J Neurosurg 2006; 
104:5–8.
156. Pirotte BJ, Lubansu A, Bruneau M, Loqa C, Van Cutsem N, Brotchi J. Sterile sur-
gical technique for shunt placement reduces the shunt infection rate in children: 
preliminary analysis of a prospective protocol in 115 consecutive procedures. 
Childs Nerv Syst 2007; 23:1251–61.
157. Haines SJ, Walters BC. Antibiotic prophylaxis for cerebrospinal fluid shunts: a 
metaanalysis. Neurosurgery 1994; 34:87–92.
158. Langley JM, LeBlanc JC, Drake J, Milner R. Efficacy of antimicrobial prophy-
laxis in placement of cerebrospinal fluid shunts: meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 
1993; 17:98–103.
159. Ratilal B, Costa J, Sampaio C. Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical introduction of 
intracranial ventricular shunts. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; CD005365.
160. Alleyne CH Jr, Hassan M, Zabramski JM. The efficacy and cost of prophylac-
tic and perioprocedural antibiotics in patients with external ventricular drains. 
Neurosurgery 2000; 47:1124–7; discussion 7–9.
161. Aucoin PJ, Kotilainen HR, Gantz NM, Davidson R, Kellogg P, Stone B. 
Intracranial pressure monitors. Epidemiologic study of risk factors and infec-
tions. Am J Med 1986; 80:369–76.
162. Clark WC, Muhlbauer MS, Lowrey R, Hartman M, Ray MW, Watridge 
CB. Complications of intracranial pressure monitoring in trauma patients. 
Neurosurgery 1989; 25:20–4.
163. Poon WS, Ng S, Wai S. CSF antibiotic prophylaxis for neurosurgical patients 
with ventriculostomy: a randomised study. Acta Neurochir Suppl 1998; 
71:146–8.
164. Schultz M, Moore K, Foote AW. Bacterial ventriculitis and duration of ventricu-
lostomy catheter insertion. J Neurosci Nurs 1993; 25:158–64.
165. Stenager E, Gerner-Smidt P, Kock-Jensen C. Ventriculostomy-related infec-
tions–an epidemiological study. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1986; 83:20–3.
166. Smith RW, Alksne JF. Infections complicating the use of external ventriculos-
tomy. J Neurosurg 1976; 44:567–70.
167. Wyler AR, Kelly WA. Use of antibiotics with external ventriculostomies. J 
Neurosurg 1972; 37:185–7.
168. Lozier AP, Sciacca RR, Romagnoli MF, Connolly ES Jr. Ventriculostomy-related 
infections: a critical review of the literature. Neurosurgery 2008; 62 Suppl 
2:688–700.
169. Camacho EF, Boszczowski I, Basso M, et al. Infection rate and risk factors 
associated with infections related to external ventricular drain. Infection 2011; 
39:47–51.
170. Hoefnagel D, Dammers R, Ter Laak-Poort MP, Avezaat CJ. Risk factors for 
infections related to external ventricular drainage. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 2008; 
150:209–14; discussion 14.
171. Blomstedt GC. Results of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis in ven-
triculostomy and shunting procedures. A double-blind randomized trial. J 
Neurosurg 1985; 62:694–7.
172. Sonabend AM, Korenfeld Y, Crisman C, Badjatia N, Mayer SA, Connolly ES 
Jr. Prevention of ventriculostomy-related infections with prophylactic anti-
biotics and antibiotic-coated external ventricular drains: a systematic review. 
Neurosurgery 2011; 68:996–1005.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis and Meningitis • CID 2017:64 (15 March) • e65
173. Murphy RK, Liu B, Srinath A, et al. No additional protection against ventricu-
litis with prolonged systemic antibiotic prophylaxis for patients treated with 
antibiotic-coated external ventricular drains. J Neurosurg 2015; 122:1120–6.
174. Govender ST, Nathoo N, van Dellen JR. Evaluation of an antibiotic-impregnated 
shunt system for the treatment of hydrocephalus. J Neurosurg 2003; 99:831–9.
175. Pattavilakom A, Xenos C, Bradfield O, Danks RA. Reduction in shunt infection 
using antibiotic impregnated CSF shunt catheters: an Australian prospective 
study. J Clin Neurosci 2007; 14:526–31.
176. Sciubba DM, Stuart RM, McGirt MJ, et al. Effect of antibiotic-impregnated 
shunt catheters in decreasing the incidence of shunt infection in the treatment 
of hydrocephalus. J Neurosurg 2005; 103:131–6.
177. Kan P, Kestle J. Lack of efficacy of antibiotic-impregnated shunt systems in pre-
venting shunt infections in children. Childs Nerv Syst 2007; 23:773–7.
178. Ritz R, Roser F, Morgalla M, Dietz K, Tatagiba M, Will BE. Do antibiotic-im-
pregnated shunts in hydrocephalus therapy reduce the risk of infection? An 
observational study in 258 patients. BMC Infect Dis 2007; 7:38.
179. Thomas R, Lee S, Patole S, Rao S. Antibiotic-impregnated catheters for the pre-
vention of CSF shunt infections: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J 
Neurosurg 2012; 26:175–84.
180. Parker SL, Anderson WN, Lilienfeld S, Megerian JT, McGirt MJ. Cerebrospinal 
shunt infection in patients receiving antibiotic-impregnated versus standard 
shunts. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2011; 8:259–65.
181. Attenello FJ, Garces-Ambrossi GL, Zaidi HA, Sciubba DM, Jallo GI. Hospital 
costs associated with shunt infections in patients receiving antibiotic-impregnated 
shunt catheters versus standard shunt catheters. Neurosurgery 2010; 66:284–9; 
discussion 9.
182. Parker SL, McGirt MJ, Murphy JA, Megerian JT, Stout M, Engelhart L. 
Comparative effectiveness of antibiotic-impregnated shunt catheters in the 
treatment of adult and pediatric hydrocephalus: analysis of 12 589 consecutive 
cases from 287 US hospital systems. J Neurosurg 2015; 122:443–8.
183. Zabramski JM, Whiting D, Darouiche RO, et al. Efficacy of antimicrobial-im-
pregnated external ventricular drain catheters: a prospective, randomized, con-
trolled trial. J Neurosurg 2003; 98:725–30.
184. Harrop JS, Sharan AD, Ratliff J, et al. Impact of a standardized protocol and 
antibiotic-impregnated catheters on ventriculostomy infection rates in cerebro-
vascular patients. Neurosurgery 2010; 67:187–91; discussion 91.
185. Gutiérrez-González R, Boto GR, González N, Viudez I, Pérez-Zamarrón A, 
Rivero-Garvía M. Effect of antibiotic-impregnated catheters on the incidence of 
infection after cerebrospinal fluid shunting. Med Clin (Barc) 2008; 131:121–4.
186. Tamburrini G, Massimi L, Caldarelli M, Di Rocco C. Antibiotic impregnated 
external ventricular drainage and third ventriculostomy in the management of 
hydrocephalus associated with posterior cranial fossa tumours. Acta Neurochir 
(Wien) 2008; 150:1049–55; discussion 55–6.
187. Wong GK, Poon WS, Ng SC, Ip M. The impact of ventricular catheter impreg-
nated with antimicrobial agents on infections in patients with ventricular cath-
eter: interim report. Acta Neurochir Suppl 2008; 102:53–5.
188. Sciubba DM, McGirt MJ, Woodworth GF, Carson B, Jallo GI. Prolonged expo-
sure to antibiotic-impregnated shunt catheters does not increase incidence of 
late shunt infections. Childs Nerv Syst 2007; 23:867–71.
189. Park P, Garton HJ, Kocan MJ, Thompson BG. Risk of infection with prolonged 
ventricular catheterization. Neurosurgery 2004; 55:594–9; discussion 9–601.
190. Holloway KL, Barnes T, Choi S, et al. Ventriculostomy infections: the effect of moni-
toring duration and catheter exchange in 584 patients. J Neurosurg 1996; 85:419–24.
191. Wong GK, Poon WS, Wai S, Yu LM, Lyon D, Lam JM. Failure of regular external 
ventricular drain exchange to reduce cerebrospinal fluid infection: result of a 
randomised controlled trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002; 73:759–61.
192. Kestle JR, Riva-Cambrin J, Wellons JC 3rd, et al; Hydrocephalus Clinical 
Research Network. A standardized protocol to reduce cerebrospinal fluid shunt 
infection: the hydrocephalus clinical research network quality improvement ini-
tiative. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2011; 8:22–9.
193. Hill M, Baker G, Carter D, et al. A multidisciplinary approach to end external 
ventricular drain infections in the neurocritical care unit. J Neurosci Nurs 2012; 
44:188–93.
194. Korinek AM, Baugnon T, Golmard JL, van Effenterre R, Coriat P, Puybasset L. 
Risk factors for adult nosocomial meningitis after craniotomy: role of antibiotic 
prophylaxis. Neurosurgery 2006; 59:126–33; discussion -33.
195. Korinek AM, Golmard JL, Elcheick A, et al. Risk factors for neurosurgical site 
infections after craniotomy: a critical reappraisal of antibiotic prophylaxis on 
4578 patients. Br J Neurosurg 2005; 19:155–62.
196. Barker FG 2nd. Efficacy of prophylactic antibiotics for craniotomy: a meta-anal-
ysis. Neurosurgery 1994; 35:484–90; discussion 91–2.
197. Geraghty J, Feely M. Antibiotic prophylaxis in neurosurgery. A randomized 
controlled trial. J Neurosurg 1984; 60:724–6.
198. Schmidt K, Gjerris F, Osgaard O, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis in cerebrospinal 
fluid shunting: a prospective randomized trial in 152 hydrocephalic patients. 
Neurosurgery 1985; 17:1–5.
199. Bratzler DW, Houck PM; Surgical Infection Prevention Guidelines Writers 
Workgroup; American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; American 
Association of Critical Care Nurses; American Association of Nurse Anesthetists; 
American College of Surgeons; American College of Osteopathic Surgeons; 
American Geriatrics Society; American Society of Anesthesiologists; American 
Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons; American Society of Health-System 
Pharmacists; American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses; Ascension Health; 
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses; Association for Professionals 
in Infection Control and Epidemiology; Infectious Diseases Society of America; 
Medical Letter; Premier; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America; 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons; Surgical Infection Society. Antimicrobial proph-
ylaxis for surgery: an advisory statement from the National Surgical Infection 
Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38:1706–15.
200. Baltas I, Tsoulfa S, Sakellariou P, Vogas V, Fylaktakis M, Kondodimou 
A. Posttraumatic meningitis: bacteriology, hydrocephalus, and outcome. 
Neurosurgery 1994; 35:422–6; discussion 6–7.
201. Heary RF, Hunt CD, Krieger AJ, Schulder M, Vaid C. Nonsurgical treatment of 
compound depressed skull fractures. J Trauma 1993; 35:441–7.
202. Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al; Surgical Management of Traumatic 
Brain Injury Author Group. Surgical management of depressed cranial frac-
tures. Neurosurgery 2006; 58:S56–60; discussion Si–iv.
203. Friedman JA, Ebersold MJ, Quast LM. Post-traumatic cerebrospinal fluid leak-
age. World J Surg 2001; 25:1062–6.
204. Eftekhar B, Ghodsi M, Nejat F, Ketabchi E, Esmaeeli B. Prophylactic adminis-
tration of ceftriaxone for the prevention of meningitis after traumatic pneumo-
cephalus: results of a clinical trial. J Neurosurg 2004; 101:757–61.
205. Ratilal B, Costa J, Sampaio C. Antibiotic prophylaxis for preventing meningi-
tis in patients with basilar skull fractures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 
CD004884.
206. Choi D, Spann R. Traumatic cerebrospinal fluid leakage: risk factors and the use 
of prophylactic antibiotics. Br J Neurosurg 1996; 10:571–5.
207. Levin S, Nelson KE, Spies HW, Lepper MH. Pneumococcal meningitis: the 
problem of the unseen cerebrospinal fluid leak. Am J Med Sci 1972; 264:319–27.
208. Jones SR, Luby JP, Sanford JP. Bacterial meningitis complicating cranial-spinal 
trauma. J Trauma 1973; 13:895–900.
209. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Use of 13-valent pneumococ-
cal conjugate vaccine and 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine 
for adults with immunocompromising conditions: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2012; 61:816–9.
210. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Use of 13-valent pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine and 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine among 
children aged 6–18 years with immunocompromising conditions: recommen-
dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 2013; 
62:521–4.
211. Tomczyk S, Bennett NM, Stoecker C, et al; Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). Use of 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and 
23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine among adults aged ≥65 years: 
recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices 
(ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014; 63:822–5.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/6/e34/2996079 by guest on 03 June 2019
