 Upright Intubation 
Feasibility of  upright patient positioning and intubation success rates At two 
academic EDs 
Joseph S. Turner, Timothy J. Ellender, Enola R. Okonkwo, Tyler M. Stepsis, Andrew C. Stevens, 
Erik G. Sembroski, Christopher S. Eddy, Anthony J. Perkins, Dylan D. Cooper 
Objectives: 
Endotracheal intubation is most commonly taught and performed in the supine position. 
Recent literature suggests that elevating the patient’s head to a more upright position may 
decrease peri-intubation complications. However, there is little data on the feasibility of upright 
intubation in the emergency department. The goal of this study was to measure the success 
rate of emergency medicine residents performing intubation in supine and non-supine, 
including upright positions. 
Methods: 
This was a prospective observational study. Residents performing intubation recorded the angle 
of the head of the bed. The number of attempts required for successful intubation was 
recorded by faculty and respiratory therapists. The primary outcome of first past success was 
calculated with respect to three groups: 0-10 degrees (supine), 11-44 degrees (inclined), and 
≥45 degrees (upright); first past success was also analyzed in 5 degree angle increments.  
Results: 
A total of 231 intubations performed by 58 residents were analyzed. First pass success was 
65.8% for the supine group, 77.9% for the inclined group, and 85.6% for the upright group (p= 
0.024). For every 5 degree increase in angle, there was increased likelihood of first pass success 
(AOR = 1.11; 95% CI = 1.01-1.22, p = 0.043).  
Conclusions: 
In our study emergency medicine residents had a high rate of success intubating in the upright 
position. While this does not demonstrate causation, it correlates with recent literature 
challenging the traditional supine approach to intubation and indicates that further 
investigation into optimal positioning during emergency department intubations is warranted. 
Keywords: upright, intubation, laryngoscopy 
___________________________________________________________________
This is the author's manuscript of the article published in final edited form as:
Turner, J. S., Ellender, T. J., Okonkwo, E. R., Stepsis, T. M., Stevens, A. C., Sembroski, E. G., ... & Cooper, D. D. (2017). 
Feasibility of upright patient positioning and intubation success rates at two academic emergency departments. The American 
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 35(7), 986-992.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2017.02.011
 Upright Intubation 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Endotracheal intubation via direct laryngoscopy has been an important procedure in 
medicine since the late 19th century [1-3]. While commonly performed in intensive care units 
(ICUs), emergency departments (EDs), and even procedural suites, much of what we know 
about endotracheal intubation comes from anesthesiology experience in the operating room 
(OR) and much of the practiced technique is historically driven by operative management. Most 
commonly, this involves supine patient positioning. Furthermore, while there have been 
significant advances in technology, including the advent of video laryngoscopy, many aspects of 
the procedure have remained unchanged for more than a century.  
Endotracheal intubation in the ED, often done emergently, in contrast to the controlled 
context of the OR, has a higher incidence of complications (e.g., hypoxemia, aspiration, and 
hypotension) and difficult intubation [4-11]. Increasingly reports of “bundled interventions”, 
“process control” of induction sequence, and even patient positioning have been levied as 
means to reduce complications associated with emergent endotracheal intubation [6, 12-14]. 
Head-elevated positioning has been shown to improve pre-oxygenation in both obese and non-
obese patients [14-17], improve glottic view [18], and reduce complications of intubation [14]. 
However, data regarding the effect of patient positioning on success rates of emergent 
endotracheal intubation in an ED environment are lacking. 
The goal of this study was to measure the success rate of emergency medicine (EM) 
residents performing intubation in supine and non-supine, including upright positions. We also 
sought to measure provider satisfaction and complication rates with endotracheal intubation in 
an upright position. 
 
 Upright Intubation 
3 
 
 
2. Methods 
 
2.1 Study Design and Setting 
 
This was a prospective observational study conducted at two academic teaching 
hospitals affiliated with the ________ University Emergency Medicine Residency program. The 
_________________ Hospital is a county hospital with approximately 100,000 patient visits 
annually. ______________________________ Hospital is a tertiary referral center, also with 
approximately 100,000 patient visits annually. Data collection occurred from July 17, 2014 – 
July 16, 2015. The study was approved by the ________ University Institutional Review Board.  
 
2.2 Population 
 
Prior to initiation of the study, the concept of intubation with the head of the bed 
elevated to 45 degrees was introduced to residents and faculty at department-wide meetings. 
A video demonstration was sent to the entire department. Residents participated in a brief 
practice session in which they intubated a high-fidelity adult mannequin (Laerdal SimMan 3G – 
Stavanger, Norway) in the 45 degree position (Figure 1). Residents who would be performing 
intubations and supervising faculty were invited to participate in the study on a voluntary basis. 
All participating residents and supervising faculty signed informed consent statements and 
attested to watching the demonstration video.  
 
Intubation events that were eligible for data collection included adult medical 
intubations performed at participating hospitals in which the intubating resident and 
supervising faculty both consented to study participation. Pediatric, obstetric, and trauma 
patients were excluded. 
 
2.3 Study Protocol 
 
Study packets were attached to airway trays in the participating EDs. Each packet 
contained a tool for measuring the angle of the head of the bed, faculty and resident pre-
intubation surveys, a stopwatch, a sheet for the nurse to record the procedure time, and post-
 Upright Intubation 
4 
 
intubation surveys for the resident, faculty, and respiratory therapist (RT). Pre-intubation 
surveys for the resident and faculty contained a single question which asked about anticipated 
difficulty of intubation based on overall clinical gestalt on a three point scale: easy, 
intermediate, or difficult (Table 1).  
 
Residents were asked to set the head of the patient’s bed to a position of their 
choosing. They were instructed to choose without regard to anticipated difficulty of intubation, 
and to vary position throughout the course of the study. Prior to intubation, if time allowed, 
residents were asked to use the tool to measure and record the angle of the head of the bed 
with respect to the floor and fill out the pre-intubation surveys. If the urgency of the procedure 
did not allow recording of the angle prior to the intubation attempt, they were asked to record 
it immediately after the procedure. Following the procedure, residents, faculty, and RTs were 
asked to fill out the post-intubation surveys. Resident surveys included questions regarding 
angle of intubation, whether position was changed during the procedure, type of blade used, 
best Cormack-Lehane (CL) view obtained during the procedure, best Percent of Glottic Opening 
score obtained during procedure, and satisfaction on a three point scale with patient 
positioning (not satisfied, somewhat satisfied, very satisfied). Faculty and RT post-intubation 
surveys were modified versions of airway evaluation forms already used by the residency 
program. Data that were extracted from these cards included number of attempts needed for 
successful intubation, starting and lowest oxygen saturation, and presence of adverse events 
(esophageal intubation or cardiac arrest) (Table 1).  
 
Additional data including patient demographics and 5-day outcomes were obtained 
through chart review. 
 
2.4 Outcome Measures 
 
The primary outcome of interest was successful endotracheal intubation on first 
attempt. An attempt was defined as the act of placing the laryngoscope blade in the patient’s 
oropharynx. At the beginning of the study residents, faculty, and RTs were educated on this 
definition. Periodic pre-planned reminders of this definition were sent throughout the study 
duration. In cases in which the faculty and RT recorded a different number of attempts, parties 
 Upright Intubation 
5 
 
were contacted and after discussion to determine what had happened, a consensus on number 
of attempts was reached. If consensus could not be reached after discussion, data for that 
intubation were excluded from final analysis.  
 
Secondary outcomes included overall success rate of endotracheal intubation, time 
required for intubation, esophageal intubation, cardiac arrest within 30 minutes of the 
intubation attempt, decrease in oxygen saturation during the procedure, best Cormack-Lehane 
view obtained during the procedure, best Percent of Glottic Opening (POGO) score obtained 
during the procedure, resident satisfaction with patient positioning, death in the ED, death 
within 5 days of intubation, and new pneumonia developing within 5 days of intubation.  
 
Total procedure time was measured by a nurse with a stopwatch. The timer was started 
when the resident first began to insert the laryngoscope blade into the mouth and was stopped 
when either color change on colormetric end-tidal CO2 detector or bilateral breath sounds was 
announced, whichever came first. Decrease in oxygen saturation was calculated as the 
difference between starting saturation and lowest saturation as recorded by faculty and RT. In 
cases where two different numbers were recorded, the greater difference was used.  
 
Death within 5 days was analyzed according to 3 possible outcomes: no death, death 
due to withdrawal of care, or death despite continued medical care. New pneumonia within 5 
days was also analyzed according to 3 possible outcomes: no pneumonia, pneumonia occurring 
prior to intubation attempt, or pneumonia developed subsequent to the intubation attempt. 
Diagnosis of pneumonia was made by reviewing chest radiographs in the days following the 
intubation attempt and (when available) prior to the intubation attempt, as well as reviewing 
ICU charts for a diagnosis of pneumonia. In cases of new infiltrate, ED and ICU charts were 
reviewed for documentation of suspected aspiration prior to the intubation attempt. When 
clear documentation of such was determined by consensus of study investigators, the outcome 
was considered a pneumonia occurring prior to intubation attempt. All other pneumonias not 
present on a pre-procedure radiograph were considered new pneumonias. 
 
2.5 Data Analysis 
 Upright Intubation 
6 
 
 
Since gaps in data collection were anticipated due to the difficulty collecting information 
during an emergent procedure, investigators defined at the beginning of the study the data 
required for the intubation encounter to be included in final analysis. This included patient 
medical record number, the angle of head position, and number of attempts as recorded by 
either faculty or RT.  
 
Patient position was divided into three groups for data analysis: 0-10 degrees (“supine” 
group), 11-44% (“inclined” group), and ≥45 degrees (“upright” group).   We used chi-square 
tests and analysis of variance (ANOVA) models to determine if patient characteristics differed 
by the three position groups.  When testing the association between patient position and other 
characteristics with the primary and secondary outcomes, we used mixed effects models (linear 
and logistic).  The mixed effect models contained fixed effects for patient characteristics and a 
random effect for resident to account for the clustering of patients intubated by the same 
resident.   We modeled the effect of position (supine, inclined, upright) two different ways, 
using position as either a classification variable or ordinal variable.  The ORs from both sets of 
models were similar so we only report the model using the ordinal classification.  Additionally, 
we ran mixed-effect logistic regression models using degrees increase in head position in place 
of the 3 defined groups.  Several variables were recoded for mixed effects logistic regression 
analysis due to either small cell sizes or extremely skewed data.  Satisfaction was recoded as 
very satisfied versus not satisfied/somewhat satisfied and CL view was recoded as I versus II, III, 
and IV.  Saturation decrease was recoded to any saturation decrease versus no saturation 
decrease since over 50% of cases had no saturation decrease. The POGO score was recoded as 
a score of 100 versus a score less than 100 since 60% of cases had a POGO score of 100. 
 
 
3. Results 
 
3.1 Characteristics of Study Subjects 
A total of 67 residents consented to participate in the study and 58 of these residents 
submitted data. Participating residents performed a range of 1-12 intubations. There were 38 
 Upright Intubation 
7 
 
residents that submitted three or more intubations, and 31 of these residents submitted 
intubations in multiple positions. Residents were supervised by 60 different consenting faculty. 
There were 253 data packets submitted over the course of the study. Of these, 15 were 
excluded because they were missing the predefined required data, and 4 were excluded 
because they met exclusion criteria (all 4 were trauma patients). One entry was determined to 
be a duplicate and one entry was excluded because the faculty performed the intubation rather 
than the resident. Of the remaining 232 intubations, 164 reported data on first past success 
from both the faculty and the RT, while 68 included only one data point on first-pass success. 
For 8 intubations there were discrepancies between faculty and RT on whether there was first-
pass success; 7 of these discrepancies were resolved by discussion with the involved parties, 
while in 1 case the discrepancy could not be resolved and the data was therefore excluded. This 
left 231 intubations for final data analysis (Figure 2). For the 7 discrepancies in which a 
resolution was reached, 2 were determined to have succeeded on first pass while 5 were 
determined to have required multiple attempts. Study investigators were the supervising 
faculty in 36 of the intubations (8 supine, 11 inclined, and 17 upright).  
 
3.2 Main Results 
 
Residents intubated 38 patients in the supine position (16%), 68 in the inclined position 
(29%), and 125 in the upright position (54%). Distribution of the angle of the head of the bed 
can be found in Figure 3. Patient demographics and relevant information about the intubations 
can be found in Table 2. There were significant differences between groups with respect to 
indication for intubation, sedative used, and paralytic used. On further analysis, these measures 
were not associated with likelihood of first-pass success. Additionally, 5 patients in the supine 
group were undergoing active cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) at the time of intubation, 
compared with 1 patient in the inclined group and 0 patients in the upright group. There were 
no significant differences between groups in terms of gender of the patient, resident level, 
blade used, bougie use, predicted difficulty from the resident, predicted difficulty from the 
faculty, preceding hypoxia, comorbidities, home oxygen use, patient age, patient weight, or 
patient body mass index (BMI).  
 Upright Intubation 
8 
 
 
Results for primary and secondary outcomes are presented in Table 3. For the primary 
outcome, first pass success rates were higher in the upright group than in the supine and 
inclined groups, and the difference was statistically significant. When adjusting for other 
variables including resident experience level, patient age, patient BMI, patient gender, and use 
of direct versus video laryngoscopy, this difference remained statistically significant. 
Specifically, for each position increase (supine to inclined, inclined to upright), there was an 
increased odds of first pass success (AOR=1.75, 95% CI = 1.04 – 2.95) (Table 4). For each 5 
degree increase in head position, there was a statistically significant increase in the odds of first 
pass success (AOR=1.11, 95% CI = 1.01 – 1.24). Resident level was significantly associated with 
likelihood of first pass success, with more experienced residents having higher rates of first pass 
success.  Patient gender was also associated with first pass success, with male patients being 
more difficult to intubate than female patients (OR 0.37, 95% CI 0.16-0.87). There was a trend 
toward increased likelihood of success with video laryngoscopy compared with direct 
laryngoscopy, though this did not reach statistical significance.   
 
There were 6 intubations performed during ongoing CPR (5 supine and 1 inclined). 
Excluding these 6 cases, position was still associated with first pass success (p=0.034). However, 
after excluding these cases and subsequently adjusting for demographics, the first pass success 
was only marginally different by position (p=0.062). 
In terms of secondary outcomes, post-intubation cardiac arrest within 30 minutes of the 
procedure occurred more often in the supine group compared with the inclined and upright 
groups (p = 0.006). There was no significant difference in rates of esophageal intubation, view 
obtained, 5-day mortality, development of new pneumonia, oxygen saturation decrease, or 
time to intubation with respect to position. A higher percentage of residents reported being 
very satisfied with the upright position compared to the supine and inclined positions, though 
this did not meet statistical significance.  
 
For secondary outcomes, increased BMI (p = 0.031), pre-procedure hypoxia (p = 0.034), 
and decreased resident experience (p = 0.051) were associated with significantly increased 
levels of desaturation. Video laryngoscopy (p = 0.057) and female patient gender (p = 0.039) 
were associated with improved Cormack-Lehane view, and video laryngoscopy (p = 0.061) was 
 Upright Intubation 
9 
 
marginally associated with improved POGO score. Third year residents were more likely to be 
satisfied with the procedure compared to second or first year residents (p = 0.032). There were 
no statistically significant differences in 5-day mortality or rates of new pneumonia.  
 
 
4. Discussion 
 
In our study emergency medicine residents intubating patients with the head of the bed 
elevated to 45 degrees or higher had a high rate of first past success and high rates of 
satisfaction with patient positioning. Importantly, residents received only very brief training and 
practice with the technique prior to participating in the study. It is possible that with additional 
training and experience, the rate of success would have been higher.  
There are a number of potential advantages to intubating with the head of the bed in an 
upright position. Khandelwal et al. found that intubating with the head of the bed elevated 
above 30 degrees was associated with decreased peri-intubation complications, in particular 
decreased rates of hypoxemia and aspiration [14]. Upright positioning in the pre-oxygenation 
period has been associated with longer times to desaturation [15-17]. Standard care in patients 
with intracranial hemorrhage and elevated intracranial pressure is to keep the head of the bed 
elevated, and one could hypothesize a benefit to maintaining this position throughout the 
intubation procedure. Most importantly, emerging evidence suggests that head-elevated 
positioning may be associated with improved glottic views in both simulated [19] and OR 
environments [18], suggesting that this technique has the potential to help facilitate successful 
endotracheal intubation. This is important as first pass success is associated with lower rates of 
adverse events than when multiple attempts are needed [20]. 
Consequently, there will likely be increasing use of upright positioning in a variety of 
care settings. To our knowledge, our study is the first to report on the feasibility of this 
technique in the ED. We found upright positioning had higher rates of first past success 
compared with the traditional supine position. The observational nature of our study 
 Upright Intubation 
10 
 
introduces selection bias and a number of potential confounders, limiting what conclusions may 
be drawn.  
We attempted to account for selection bias by collecting data on patient characteristics 
and procedure elements that could influence intubation difficulty. We also compared faculty 
and resident pre-intubation predictions of difficulty of the procedure. The groups were similar 
with respect to anticipated difficulty of intubation, as well as most patient-specific and 
procedure-specific variables. When differences between the groups did exist, such as sedative 
and paralytic use, the variables did not have an association with first past success. Furthermore, 
we used logistic regression to adjust for other variables that potentially could influence success 
and the results for the primary outcome remained statistically significant.  
Nevertheless, there are potentially other important confounders that we did not 
account for, and it is possible that when residents chose the position they were motivated by 
other variables that could influence likelihood of success but were not captured in our data. In 
particular, while it did not reach statistical significance, a larger percentage of patients in the 
supine group were intubated for cardiovascular dysfunction and potentially were more 
unstable. Additionally, there were 5 cases of ongoing CPR in the supine group and none in the 
upright group. When these cases were removed from analysis there was still a statistically 
significant association between position and first pass success, though this association lost 
statistical significance when also adjusting for additional demographic factors. 
Another limitation of our study is that all eligible intubations were not captured. The 
institutions involved in the study do not have a central mechanism for tracking data on all 
emergency department intubations so we do not know how many intubations were missed. 
Based on resident procedure tracking, we estimate that we captured approximately half of all 
eligible intubations. It is possible that intubations that were missed differed in some way from 
those that were captured, and therefore the results might not be generalizable to those 
intubations.  
The first pass success rate of 65.8% in the supine group in our study is lower than 
reported first past success rates in other studies, which generally range from 70-90% [20-22]. 
This may suggest that there are factors that we did not capture that made the intubations in 
 Upright Intubation 
11 
 
our supine group more difficult. However, this difference could also be related to methods of 
data collection. Most previous studies reporting EM resident success rates rely on self-reporting 
of number of attempts by the intubator. We used a strict definition of attempt with frequent 
reminders to observers and two observers per case in an effort to make sure all attempts were 
counted. The fact that there were 7 discrepancies in our data set and in 5 of these cases it was 
determined that there were multiple attempts suggests that in general attempts may be 
underreported in intubation studies. Use of video recording and review by independent 
observers may provide more accurate data in future studies.  
These limitations prevent us from conclusively attributing the differences in first pass 
success to patient position. Nevertheless, our study demonstrates that upright intubation is 
feasible in the ED with high rates of success and intubator satisfaction. Combined with 
emerging literature suggesting this technique is associated with improved glottic views and 
decreased complications, it indicates that this is a topic that warrants further study. In 
particular, a randomized control trial would help limit selection bias.  
Other factors that were associated with an increased likelihood of first pass success in 
our study include increased resident experience level and patient gender. The association 
between male gender and increased difficulty of intubation has been previously reported [23-
25], but is underexplored in the literature. Further investigation into gender-related differences 
would also be helpful.  
 
 
5. Conclusions  
 
Our study adds to a growing body of evidence that there are advantages to performing 
endotracheal intubation in an upright rather than the traditional supine position. To our 
knowledge, this is the first prospective study examining success rates of upright endotracheal 
intubation in the ED. High success rates with upright positioning suggest this is an area that 
deserves further study. A randomized control trial would be the next step to more conclusively 
measure the benefits of upright intubation. 
 Upright Intubation 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
[1] Szmuk P, Ezri T, Evron S, Roth Y, Katz J. A brief history of tracheostomy and tracheal intubation, from 
the Bronze Age to the Space Age. Intensive care medicine. Feb 2008;34(2):222-228. 
 
[2] Mouton WG, Bessell JR, Maddern GJ. Looking back to the advent of modern endoscopy: 150th 
birthday of Maximilian Nitze. World journal of surgery. Dec 1998;22(12):1256-1258. 
 
[3] Burkle CM, Zepeda FA, Bacon DR, Rose SH. A historical perspective on use of the laryngoscope as a 
tool in anesthesiology. Anesthesiology. Apr 2004;100(4):1003-1006. 
 
[4] Mort TC. Emergency tracheal intubation: complications associated with repeated laryngoscopic 
attempts. Anesthesia and analgesia. Aug 2004;99(2):607-613, table of contents. 
 
[5] Schwartz DE, Matthay MA, Cohen NH. Death and other complications of emergency airway 
management in critically ill adults. A prospective investigation of 297 tracheal intubations. 
Anesthesiology. Feb 1995;82(2):367-376. 
 
[6] Jaber S, Amraoui J, Lefrant JY, et al. Clinical practice and risk factors for immediate complications of 
endotracheal intubation in the intensive care unit: a prospective, multiple-center study. Critical care 
medicine. Sep 2006;34(9):2355-2361. 
 
[7] Li J, Murphy-Lavoie H, Bugas C, Martinez J, Preston C. Complications of emergency intubation with 
and without paralysis. The American journal of emergency medicine. Mar 1999;17(2):141-143. 
 
[8] Mort TC. Complications of emergency tracheal intubation: hemodynamic alterations--part I. Journal 
of intensive care medicine. May-Jun 2007;22(3):157-165. 
 
[9] Mort TC. Complications of emergency tracheal intubation: immediate airway-related consequences: 
part II. Journal of intensive care medicine. Jul-Aug 2007;22(4):208-215. 
 
[10] 
Griesdale DE, Bosma TL, Kurth T, Isac G, Chittock DR. Complications of endotracheal intubation in 
the critically ill. Intensive care medicine. Oct 2008;34(10):1835-1842. 
 
[11] 
Dargin JM, Emlet LL, Guyette FX. The effect of body mass index on intubation success rates and 
complications during emergency airway management. Internal and emergency medicine. Feb 
2013;8(1):75-82. 
 
 Upright Intubation 
13 
 
[12] 
Jaber S, Jung B, Corne P, et al. An intervention to decrease complications related to endotracheal 
intubation in the intensive care unit: a prospective, multiple-center study. Intensive care medicine. 
Feb 2010;36(2):248-255. 
 
[13] 
Kim GW, Koh Y, Lim CM, Han M, An J, Hong SB. Does medical emergency team intervention reduce 
the prevalence of emergency endotracheal intubation complications? Yonsei medical journal. Jan 
2014;55(1):92-98. 
 
[14] 
Khandelwal N, Khorsand S, Mitchell SH, Joffe AM. Head-elevated patient positioning decreases 
complications of emergent tracheal intubation in the ward and intensive care unit. Anesthesia and 
analgesia. Apr 2016;122(4):1101-1107. 
 
[15] 
Lane S, Saunders D, Schofield A, Padmanabhan R, Hildreth A, Laws D. A prospective, randomised 
controlled trial comparing the efficacy of pre-oxygenation in the 20 degrees head-up vs supine 
position. Anaesthesia. Nov 2005;60(11):1064-1067. 
 
[16] 
Dixon BJ, Dixon JB, Carden JR, et al. Preoxygenation is more effective in the 25 degrees head-up 
position than in the supine position in severely obese patients: a randomized controlled study. 
Anesthesiology. Jun 2005;102(6):1110-1115; discussion 1115A. 
 
[17] 
Ramkumar V, Umesh G, Philip FA. Preoxygenation with 20 masculine head-up tilt provides longer 
duration of non-hypoxic apnea than conventional preoxygenation in non-obese healthy adults. 
Journal of anesthesia. Apr 2011;25(2):189-194. 
 
[18] 
Lee BJ, Kang JM, Kim DO. Laryngeal exposure during laryngoscopy is better in the 25 degrees back-
up position than in the supine position. British journal of anaesthesia. Oct 2007;99(4):581-586. 
 
[19] 
Turner JS, Ellender TJ, Okonkwo ER et al. Cross-over study of novice intubators performing 
endotracheal intubation in an upright versus supine position. Intern Emerg Med (2016). 
doi:10.1007/s11739-016-1481-z 
 
[20] 
Sakles JC, Chiu S, Mosier J, et al. The importance of first pass success when performing orotracheal 
intubation in the emergency department. Acad Emerg Med. 2013 Jan;20(1):71-8. 
 
[21] 
Sagarin MJ, Barton ED, Chng YM, Walls RM, and NEAR Investigators. Airway management by US and 
Canadian emergency medicine residents: a multicenter analysis of more than 6,000 endotracheal 
intubation attempts. Ann Emerg Med. 2005 Oct;46(4):328-36 
 
[22] 
Brown CA 3rd, Bair AE, Pallin DJ, Walls RM, and NEAR Investigators. Techniques, success, and adverse 
events of emergency department adult intubations. Ann Emerg Med. 2015 Apr;65(4):363-370 
 
[23] 
Diggs LA, Viswakula SD, Sheth-Chandra M, et al. A pilot model for predicting the success of 
prehospital endotracheal intubation. Am J Emerg Med. 2015 Feb;33(2):202-8. 
 
[24] 
Neligan PJ, Porter S, Max B, Malhotra G, Greenblatt EP, Ochroch EA. Obstructive sleep apnea is not a 
risk factor for difficult intubation in morbidly obese patients. Anesth Analg. 2009 Oct;109(4):1182-6. 
 
 Upright Intubation 
14 
 
[25] 
Tremblay MH, Williams S, Robitaille A, Drolet P. Poor visualization during direct laryngoscopy and 
high upper lip bite test score are predictors of difficult intubation with the GlideScope 
videolaryngoscope. Anesth Analg. 2008 May;106(5):1495-500 
 
