 Stabilized single-injection inactivated polio vaccine
elicits a strong neutralizing immune response
Stephany Y. Tzenga,b, Kevin J. McHugha, Adam M. Behrensa, Sviatlana Rosea, James L. Sugarmana, Shiran Ferbera,
Robert Langera,1, and Ana Jakleneca,1
aDavid H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; and bDepartment of Biomedical
Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231
Contributed by Robert Langer, March 29, 2018 (sent for review December 4, 2017; reviewed by Calum J. Drummond and David L. Kaplan)
Vaccination in the developing world is hampered by limited patient
access, which prevents individuals from receiving the multiple
injections necessary for protective immunity. Here, we developed
an injectable microparticle formulation of the inactivated polio
vaccine (IPV) that releases multiple pulses of stable antigen over
time. To accomplish this, we established an IPV stabilization strategy
using cationic polymers for pH modulation to enhance traditional
small-molecule–based stabilization methods. We investigated the
mechanism of this strategy and showed that it was broadly applicable
to all three antigens in IPV. Our lead formulations released two bursts
of IPV 1 month apart, mimicking a typical vaccination schedule in the
developing world. One injection of the controlled-release formula-
tions elicited a similar or better neutralizing response in rats, consid-
ered the correlate of protection in humans, than multiple injections of
liquid vaccine. This single-administration vaccine strategy has the po-
tential to improve vaccine coverage in the developing world.
inactivated polio vaccine | vaccine stability | controlled release |
global health | single-administration vaccines
B
ecause of the challenges of patient access in resource-poor
settings, the World Health Organization (WHO) states that
an ideal vaccine should be easy to administer with a single in-
jection (1). Controlled release technologies that can release
vaccine over time after a single injection could provide a potential
solution for this problem. To achieve this, we sought to design a
device that could: (i) encapsulate a vaccine that can be injected as a
depot using a standard gauge needle and will remain in the patient
for weeks or months; (ii) use a biocompatible material that degrades
by hydrolysis to ensure consistent patient-to-patient release kinetics;
(iii) stabilize the encapsulated vaccine against thermal and other
physiological stresses over time; and (iv) release the vaccine in timed
pulses that match the traditional vaccination schedule. We chose as
the material poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), a biodegradable
polymer used for Food and Drug Administration-approved appli-
cations in humans and generally recognized as safe (2, 3). PLGA
can encapsulate a vaccine and be injected into the patient as a de-
gradable depot, releasing vaccine over time in pulses and providing
the entire vaccination schedule with one injection. However, the use
of PLGA-based systems for single-injection vaccines is hampered by
numerous challenges, vaccine stability being the most prominent (4,
5). Many antigens and other proteins aggregate under conditions
relevant to single-administration systems, including antigen drying,
low pH, and incubation at body temperature (37 °C) (6–9).
One vaccine that could benefit from a single-administration
delivery vehicle is the inactivated polio vaccine (IPV). Poliomyelitis
is a potentially fatal but vaccine-preventable infectious disease. In
many countries, IPV is administered in two to three injections of
the liquid vaccine formulation, with 1 mo between each of the
injections (10). While this is effective, it is infeasible in countries
where patients may not have easy or regular access to healthcare.
Studies in some of the relevant regions have found that many
fewer children receive a second dose of vaccines than a first (11,
12), and children who receive only one injection of IPV remain
unprotected from the disease, with seroconversion rates of as low
as <20% after only one dose (10, 13). A single-administration
vaccine could eliminate the need to return for a second injection
and thereby protect patients, despite only one-time access to
healthcare. This type of technology is of particular interest now
due to the current efforts to eradicate polio, as successful erad-
ication will require a very high coverage rate to ensure that the
disease cannot be carried or transmitted by unvaccinated indi-
viduals. In many low-resource settings, an alternative to the tra-
ditional vaccination programs and schedules may be necessary
for sufficient protection.
Additionally, because IPV is thermally unstable (14), excipi-
ents must be included in the formulation to maintain the D-antigen
conformation of IPV, which correlates with protective immu-
nogenicity (15, 16). We have previously used small-molecule
excipients to protect IPV from thermal stress while encapsu-
lated within microspheres (17). However, for this technology to
be viable, the antigen must also remain stable despite the
changing pH of the microsphere environment for the lifetime of
the injected depot to induce neutralizing antibody production,
which is required for protective immunity. In particular, aside
from any intrinsic instability of the antigen’s conformation, the
high-concentration, low-pH environment inside PLGA particles
is well known to cause aggregation and denaturation of encap-
sulated proteins (18–20). While protein aggregation has been
shown to induce an immune response in vivo (21), the high tem-
peratures and pH variation that are observed in microparticles
Significance
Inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) must be administered two to
three times, with a 1–2 month gap between administrations,
for patients to be protected. However, in the developing world
healthcare workers often have difficulty reaching their patients
multiple times to administer booster shots. We formulated IPV
into microspheres that need to be injected only once and will
be released in pulses with the desired timing without needing
additional visits by a healthcare worker. To achieve this, we
stabilized IPV using biocompatible excipients that allow it to
remain in its active conformation inside the particles for
months, and showed that they elicited a strong neutralizing
immune response in rats, similar to that elicited by two sepa-
rate injections of the traditional vaccine.
Author contributions: S.Y.T., R.L., and A.J. designed research; S.Y.T., K.J.M., A.M.B., S.R.,
J.L.S., and S.F. performed research; S.Y.T. analyzed data; and S.Y.T., R.L., and A.J. wrote
the paper.
Reviewers: C.J.D., Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology University; and D.L.K.,
Tufts University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0
(CC BY).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: rlanger@mit.edu or jaklenec@mit.
edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1720970115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online May 21, 2018.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1720970115
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 23
|
E5269–E5278
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 tend to cause the protein to aggregate in a nonnative confor-
mation (22). As this type of aggregation is usually irreversible
(23), it can lead to an antibody response that is not specific to the
protective conformational epitope, or the D-antigen in the case
of IPV, making the vaccine ineffective. We hypothesized that basic
excipients would neutralize the acid formed by the degrading
particles and that increasing the electrostatic repulsion among
IPV virions would reduce or prevent their aggregation. Therefore,
to improve antigen stability in the formulation, we selected three
specific cationic polymers that are basic, cannot quickly diffuse
out of the microspheres due to their size, and have a history of
use as nanoparticle complexation agents. Throughout this report,
we use the term “stability” to refer to the degree to which IPV
retains its immunogenic (D-antigen) conformation as determined
by ELISA.
We show here that the cationic polymer excipients Eudragit E,
poly(L-lysine) (PLL), and branched polyethylenimine (bPEI) can
be used to stabilize all of the three IPV antigens in PLGA mi-
crospheres. Having been used preclinically for drug delivery
applications (24), cationic Eudragits have been shown to be safe
and biocompatible (25); PLL, a polypeptide, is enzymatically
degradable and is rapidly cleared from the body after adminis-
tration (26); and bPEI, widely used for drug delivery, is nontoxic
at the low molecular mass (1.8 kDa) used here (27). We designed
PLGA-based microspheres with desirable release kinetics and
high IPV stability. We then administered the IPV microspheres
to rats in a single injection and compared their immunogenicity
to that of a clinically relevant control of two boluses spaced 1 mo
apart. To our knowledge, this report of a single-injection IPV
formulation that could elicit a potent neutralizing immune re-
sponse similar to that of multiple injections of a liquid bolus is
unique. This indicates that our single-injection IPV formulation
cannot only release stable D-antigen IPV over time in vitro but
also provide protection in vivo, as the presence of neutralizing
antibodies is considered the correlate of protection in humans
for this vaccine (28, 29). Because the excipients studied here
were used for their pH-modulating properties and electrostatic
effects, we believe that they may potentially be applied broadly
to stabilize many different vaccine antigens that normally ag-
gregate under acidic conditions. This improved understanding of
how excipients affect the pH environment and the physico-
chemical properties of antigens encapsulated in PLGA could
open new directions for single-administration vaccine systems.
Results
Effect of Cationic Excipients on pH and PLGA Properties. IPV can be
encapsulated in PLGA to form F1 microspheres that release two
bursts of IPV at 1 d and 25 d (17). This approximates the delivery
of two human doses spaced 1 mo apart, mimicking a clinical
vaccination schedule. However, the overall efficiency was low;
only 5%, 6%, and 5% of the total loaded IPV types 1, 2, and 3,
respectively, was released in D-antigen form (Table 1).
To develop a formulation with improved efficiency, we utilized
various polycations that have been shown to be efficient at elec-
trostatic complexation for biologics (16, 30), hypothesizing that their
basic nature would counteract the build-up of acid within the
degrading PLGA and thereby protect IPV from the decreasing pH.
We measured the buffering capacity of the materials and focused on
the pH range of interest, defined here as pH 6–7.4, outside of which
the IPV D-antigen stability is dramatically reduced (17) (Fig. 1A).
Because the loss of D-antigen is not reversed by neutralization of
the pH, excipients that prevent the initial denaturation and aggre-
gation events may be critical.
PLL had some buffering capacity at high pH, as expected due
to its high pKa, but had little or no buffering capacity within the
range conducive to IPV stability (Table 2), indicating that it was
unlikely to play a major role in maintaining near-neutral mi-
crosphere pH. By contrast, Eudragit E had higher buffering
strength in this range (2.31 mmol H+/g Eudragit E) than a
standard neutral buffer like PBS (1.78 mmol H+/g PBS salts),
indicating that this material may prevent excessive acidification
in the PLGA environment. bPEI could buffer a similar amount
Table 1.
Efficiency of D-antigen IPV release from microspheres
Particle
formulation
Doses/mg particles
(loaded) (%)
% D-antigen released
(type 1)
% D-antigen released
(type 2)
% D-antigen released
(type 3)
F1
0.64
5
6
5
F2
0.64
17
56
20
Both microsphere formulations were loaded with the same initial amount of IPV, but the stabilizing proper-
ties of F2 allow much higher total release of IPV in its antigenic conformation.
Fig. 1.
Eudragit E and bPEI have buffering capacity and affect PLGA deg-
radation. The buffering capacity of Eudragit E, PLL, and bPEI was measured
(A). After they were blended with PLGA and formulated into microspheres,
Eudragit E and bPEI accelerated PLGA degradation over the course of a re-
lease study (B), observed as a difference in the rate at which the peak mo-
lecular weight (Mp) of the PLGA decreased. The release of acid from the
microspheres into the external release medium correlated with PLGA deg-
radation and total release of type 1 IPV, all of which are affected by in-
corporation of Eudragit E or bPEI (C–F). Release of Eudragit E or bPEI from
the microspheres (plotted as a percentage of the total loading) was also
pulsatile and matched the timing of IPV release. Data are reported as
mean ± SD.
E5270
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1720970115
Tzeng et al.
 of protons in the pH range of 6–7.4 but differs in that it is water-
soluble; it can thus interact directly with the hydrophilic IPV.
Although Eudragit E and bPEI were hypothesized to alleviate
the acidification of PLGA particles that normally contributes to
PLGA degradation by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis, the addition of the
excipients was found to promote, rather than mitigate, accelerated
PLGA degradation (Fig. 1B). Particles containing only PLGA,
PLGA with 3% Eudragit E, PLGA with 6% Eudragit E, and PLGA
with 3% bPEI had PLGA degradation half-lives of 29.6, 17.5, 11.5,
and 21.6 d, respectively. This correlated with the kinetics of total
IPV release from particles as well as the release of acid into the
external release medium (Fig. 1 C–F), and the effect became
stronger as the proportion of the excipients in the particle increased.
Therefore, it is likely that Eudragit E and bPEI affect the local pH
of the polymer phase in which they are blended, thereby causing
accelerated PLGA degradation via base-catalyzed ester hydrolysis.
This is also supported by the data collected on the pH of the release
medium, which show that acid is released from the particle more
quickly in the presence of these basic excipients, indicative of in-
creased PLGA degradation. It is also noteworthy that the peak
acidity of the release medium is observed very close to the time
point at which the largest burst of IPV release is recorded. Eudragit
E or bPEI is also released in a burst around the same time as IPV in
these formulations (Fig. 1 C–F), further supporting the hypothesis
that they act as buffers within the microspheres and help to facilitate
IPV release upon their own dissolution and release.
Effect of Cationic Excipients on IPV Stability and Physical Properties.
In addition to their effect on PLGA, cationic polymers could also
affect the properties of IPV. One of the mechanisms by which
vaccines can lose immunogenicity is via aggregation (31), which
can be exacerbated by changes in pH or extremely high concentra-
tions when encapsulated in a delivery vehicle (32, 33). At a neutral
pH of 7.4, dynamic light scattering (DLS) shows an IPV peak
around 30 nm, the expected diameter of the virus particle (34). At
low pH (pH 4.5), a condition relevant to PLGA-encapsulated ma-
terials, IPV can be seen to aggregate (Fig. 2A), as the peak shifts to
the right and broadens, indicating the presence of IPV aggregates.
Polycations may, however, be able to affect the electrostatic
properties of IPV, which has a net-negative surface charge, and
prevent aggregation in solution. When trivalent IPV (tIPV) was
mixed with cationic excipients before being diluted to pH 4.5, the
net-positive charge conferred on the virus particles by the poly-
cations seemed to prevent acid-induced aggregation by in-
creasing the electrostatic repulsion among virus particles, as
demonstrated by the much higher percentage of particles
remaining in the 30-nm peak after complexation with PLL or
Eudragit E (Fig. 2B). While the addition of bPEI seemed to
preserve some of the 30-nm population of particles, it was far
less effective than PLL and Eudragit E in preventing IPV ag-
gregation at the same concentration (25 μg/mL). After 24 h of
incubation at 37 °C, the differences among the cationic excipi-
ents became even more clear, as the addition of 25 μg/mL PLL
preserved a substantial population of small particles (Fig. 2C).
With 25 μg/mL Eudragit E, there was a large population of
particles with a peak centered at 87.6 nm, suggesting that
Eudragit E prevented the formation of large aggregates but not
the formation of small ones.
The effect of IPV complexation with polycations was
concentration-dependent. While 25 μg/mL PLL was able to pre-
vent the formation of most IPV aggregates after 1 d of incubation
at 37 °C at pH 4.5 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A), a higher concentration
(100 μg/mL) of Eudragit E and bPEI was able to prevent IPV
aggregation nearly as well as PLL (Fig. 2 D–F). Moreover, the
electrostatic interaction between polycations and IPV differed
among the IPV serotypes. In particular, type 1 IPV was found to
be more prone to aggregation than type 3, and the polycations had
a much stronger positive effect on type 3 IPV particles than on
Table 2.
Buffering strength of polycationic excipients
Excipient or buffer
Protons buffered within pH 6–7.4 (mmol H+/g
excipient or buffer)
None (NaCl only)
0
PBS
1.79
Eudragit E
2.31
bPEI
2.51
PLL
0.19
The number of protons buffered within the relevant pH range of 6–
7.4 was calculated for each of the buffers or excipients relative to an un-
buffered sodium chloride solution.
Fig. 2.
Acid-induced aggregation of IPV is prevented by complexation with polycations. IPV forms a broad distribution of large aggregates at low pH (A)
when diluted in PBS without excipients. Cationic polymers, such as PLL, Eudragit E, and bPEI, prevent acid-induced aggregation at low pH (B). After 24 h of
incubation at low pH, PLL is the only cation to preserve a large population of virus particles with diameters close to 30 nm at low concentration (25 μg/mL),
while Eudragit E prevented some but not most of the aggregation (C). Serotypes 1 and 3 act differently in the presence of polycations, with type 3 showing
the least aggregation at low pH in the presence of polycations (D–F).
Tzeng et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 23
|
E5271
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 type 1 (Fig. 2 D–F). This may indicate that the polycations could
have a more significant effect on type 3 IPV than on the other
serotypes, particularly for excipients like PLL that were found to
be highly effective at preventing aggregation; nonetheless, aggre-
gation could be prevented to some degree in all three serotypes
using this method.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging confirmed the
effect measured by DLS. Individual IPV particles can be visualized
at neutral pH with little to no observable aggregation (Fig. 3A).
Very large aggregates form at pH 4.5 (Fig. 3B). The addition of
PLL to IPV at neutral pH results in very few minor aggregates (Fig.
3C), and this precomplexation of IPV with PLL confers resistance
to aggregation upon acidification to pH 4.5 (Fig. 3D).
Effect of PLL and bPEI on IPV Release from Microspheres. Because
Eudragit E was a useful excipient that contributed to PLGA
degradation, microsphere pH, and IPV stability in formulation
F1, we examined the effects of alternatives to Eudragit E. During
emulsification, bPEI was added to the organic phase to emulate
the effect of Eudragit E on buffering the PLGA microenvironment
and PLGA degradation, while PLL was added at low concentration
to the aqueous phase to prevent excessive IPV aggregation at low
pH. While bPEI has been incorporated into PLGA to complex with
negatively charged cargo (35), to our knowledge, it has not pre-
viously been used specifically as an organic-miscible base to mod-
ulate the internal PLGA environment. Similarly, while PLL was
chosen for its history of use as an electrostatic complexation ma-
terial and as a method for controlling surface charge, its effect on
IPV as a method of enhancing the stability of the vaccine has never
before been reported.
To first test the effect of PLL on IPV stability, particles based
on F1 were fabricated, containing tIPV with aqueous excipients
maltodextrin, monosodium glutamate (MSG), MgCl2, and PLL
and organic excipient Eudragit E mixed with PLGA. The total
D-antigen IPV release during the first and second burst was
measured (Fig. 4 A–C), and 0.008–0.04% PLL loading (1:1–
5:1 molar ratio of PLL:IPV) was found to significantly increase
both the initial (0–4 d) and the later (20–40 d) IPV release in its
D-antigen form. In particular, the initial burst of type 1 IPV was
2.2- and 4.5-fold higher after the addition of 1:1 and 5:1 PLL:
IPV, respectively, while the initial burst of type 3 IPV was 3.8-
and 5.8-fold higher, respectively. Although the initial type 2 re-
lease was also improved by the addition of 1:1 PLL:IPV, unlike
for types 1 and 3, 5:1 PLL:IPV had no significant net effect on
type 2 release (Fig. 4B). The addition of PLL also affected the
second burst of IPV release. At these later time points, only 1:1
PLL:IPV had no negative effect on type 1 release; higher con-
centrations of PLL decreased the D-antigen IPV release from
20 to 40 d. However, both types 2 and 3 seem to have been
stabilized significantly by the addition of 1:1 or 5:1 PLL:IPV,
with 2.7- and 2.5-fold increases, respectively, of the second burst
of type 2 IPV; and 3.6- and 3.4-fold increases, respectively, of the
second burst of type 3 IPV (Fig. 4C). Because 1:1 PLL:IPV had a
significantly positive effect and no significant negative effect on the
D-antigen release of all three IPV serotypes both initially and
during the second burst, this amount of PLL was incorporated into
the aqueous phase of the microsphere emulsion for further testing.
Fig. 3.
The polycation PLL mitigates acid-induced aggregation of IPV. IPV
can be observed mostly as individual 30-nm particles at pH 7.4 (A) but forms
massive aggregates at low pH 4.5 (B). Addition of PLL causes only a few
minor aggregates at neutral pH (C) and prevents the formation of large
aggregates upon acidification to pH 4.5 (D).
Fig. 4.
PLL and polyethylenimine promote stable IPV release from microspheres. All microspheres shown above contained in the same number of doses of
tIPV and the same aqueous sugar- and salt-based excipients. Microspheres with Eudragit E cationic polymer in the organic phase released more stable IPV
initially and in the second burst after addition of small amounts of PLL in the internal aqueous phase during emulsification, listed as molar ratio of PLL to IPV
(A–C). Microspheres included PLL in the hydrophilic compartment and varying amounts of bPEI or Eudragit E in the organic polymer compartment. Micro-
spheres containing 3–6% bPEI tended to release more stable IPV initially and in the second burst than those containing 3% Eudragit E (D–F). Groups that
performed statistically significantly better than the control (“No PLL” in A–C; “3% Eudragit E” in D–F) are marked in the figure (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).
E5272
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1720970115
Tzeng et al.
 Then, microspheres were formulated with 1:1 PLL:IPV in the in-
ner aqueous phase of the emulsion along with tIPV and other ex-
cipients and either 3% Eudragit E or varying amounts of bPEI in the
organic polymer phase (Fig. 4 D–F). The initial and second bursts of
IPV release from the resulting microspheres were measured again.
Generally, use of bPEI led to D-antigen IPV release similar to or
greater than the IPV release from particles with 3% Eudragit E. For
the initial burst, replacing 3% Eudragit E with 3%, 6%, or 10% bPEI
resulted in 1.4-, 1.6-, or 1.6-fold higher type 1 IPV release, re-
spectively; statistically similar and 1.3- or 1.8-fold higher type 2 IPV
release, respectively; and 1.3-, 1.6-, or 1.4-fold higher type 3 IPV re-
lease, respectively. As with PLL, a greater effect was seen in the
second burst of release, with 5.1-, 3.6-, and 2.8-fold higher release of
stable types 1, 2, and 3 IPV when 3% bPEI was used.
Accordingly, for our new formulation, F2, we replaced Eudragit E
with PLL, mixed 1:1 with IPV in the internal aqueous phase
during emulsification to promote direct interaction with the IPV,
and 3% bPEI in the organic polymer phase for close interaction
with the PLGA (Fig. 5 A and B). Scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) and sizing by Coulter Counter showed that the F2 mi-
crospheres were spherical and smooth with an average diameter of
10.5 ± 2.8 μm, similar in morphology to the F1 microspheres,
which have an average diameter of 11.2 ± 3.4 μm (Fig. 5C). The
release and cumulative release graphs of F2 (Fig. 5 D–I) show
release of IPV between 20 and 30 d, but while the second burst
of release from 50 mg F1 microspheres was 31%, 70%, and 52%
of a human dose of serotypes 1, 2, and 3, respectively, the same
amount of F2 microspheres released 218%, 769%, and 283% of a
human dose in the second burst. Additionally, a high total amount
of D-antigen IPV was released over the course of the study. While
only 5%, 6%, and 5% of the total loaded amounts of types 1, 2,
and 3 D-antigen IPV, respectively, was released from formulation
F1, F2 released 17%, 56%, and 20% of types 1, 2, and 3, re-
spectively, suggesting better stability of the encapsulated IPV
(Table 1).
Immunogenicity of Eudragit E-Doped F1 Microspheres. The neutral-
izing response of rats immunized with boluses of liquid IPV or a
single injection of F1 or F2 microspheres is reported as absolute
antibody titers (Fig. 6 and SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Throughout this
report, “noninferiority” of neutralizing antibody titers is defined as
titers superior to the multiple-bolus control or not statistically dif-
ferent from the control with a confidence interval of 95%. For type
1 IPV, no neutralizing response was seen after a single bolus in-
jection of liquid vaccine (Fig. 6A). Only after a second bolus in-
jection 1 mo later were neutralizing antibodies detected, with a
geometric mean titer of 7.0 ± 1.4 [log2(titer): 2.8 ± 0.5] after 2 wk.
Titers peaked 4 wk after the boost, with a geometric mean titer of
47.4 ± 7.0 [log2(titer): 5.6 ± 2.8]. In contrast, F1 microspheres
containing the same dose of D-antigen IPV required only a single
injection to elicit high neutralizing titers [26.0 ± 6.5 geometric mean,
log2(titer): 4.7 ± 2.7] within 2 wk, which peaked at 4 wk [53.2 ±
6.3 geometric mean, log2(titer): 5.7 ± 2.6]. Importantly, even at late
time points, F1 microspheres elicited a neutralizing response that
was noninferior to that induced by the clinical control of two sep-
arate bolus injections, which may indicate that long-lived immunity
is possible using this approach.
Type 2 IPV had a similar effect, with high neutralizing titers
within 2 wk after injection. It was clear that the magnitude of the
neutralizing response to a single injection of liquid IPV was dose-
dependent, with a single injection of the full dose of a liquid IPV
bolus (4.8 DU) eliciting a stronger response at early time points
than a single injection of half the dose (2.4 DU) (Fig. 6B); however,
after the latter group received a booster injection at 4 wk with the
Fig. 5.
F1 and F2 microspheres release stable IPV over >3 wk. F1 and F2 microspheres contain Eudragit E, PLL, and/or bPEI as excipients, as depicted in the
schematic (A). As depicted in B, the initial burst of release results from diffusion of IPV on or near the surface of the particles, followed by a lag phase as PLGA
begins to degrade by chain scission and finally a second burst as degradation proceeds enough for the particle to lose mass and release internally encap-
sulated cargo. F1 and F2 microspheres have smooth morphology by SEM (C). (Scale bar, 20 μm.) Release (D–F) and cumulative release (G–I) graphs show that
all three IPV serotypes are released in D-antigen conformation in two distinct bursts and that F2 microspheres deliver more stable IPV than F1.
Tzeng et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 23
|
E5273
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 second half of the dose (2.4 DU), the titers increased substantially
and were maintained for a longer time. Interestingly, F1 micro-
spheres elicited a stronger initial response than the highest dose of a
single bolus at 2 and 4 wk and also maintained high titers for as long
as the two-bolus control at late time points.
In contrast to type 1 and 2, the type 3 IPV released from
F1 microspheres elicited a significantly weaker response in vivo
than the two-bolus control of liquid IPV (Fig. 6C). Therefore,
F2 microspheres, formulated with the PLL and bPEI that were
shown to be beneficial to in vitro IPV stability, particularly for
type 3, were also tested in the in vivo rat model.
Immunogenicity of F2 IPV Microspheres. F2 microspheres were in-
jected into rats, and the total IgG response and the neutralizing
antibody response were both measured. After 4 wk, a single
bolus injection of liquid IPV elicited an IgG response to all three
serotypes (Fig. 7 A–C), but the response to IPV types 1 and 2 was
significantly stronger when encapsulated in F1 microspheres
(P < 0.01), and the response to all three IPV serotypes was
significantly stronger when encapsulated in F2 microspheres. For
types 1 and 2, coinjection of empty PLGA microspheres along-
side liquid IPV also causes a lower but still statistically significant
increase in total IgG titers. As seen in Figs. 6A and 7D, however,
the antibodies raised against a single bolus injection of liquid
type 1 IPV were not neutralizing. In contrast, one injection of
formulation F2, like F1, was sufficient for high seroconversion,
defined as the percentage of animals in a group with detectable
neutralizing antibodies. F2 elicited detectable neutralizing anti-
bodies against type 1 poliovirus in 80% of all tested animals
within 4 wk (Fig. 7 D and J). Interestingly, although type 2 IPV
was the easiest to stabilize in vitro and formulation F1 elicited a
strong type 2 neutralizing response in vivo, an injection of
F2 resulted in 100% seroconversion but lower absolute neu-
tralizing antibody titers than the previous formulation F1 (Fig. 7
E and K). As expected, due to the higher in vitro stability, for-
mulation F2 had the greatest effect on the type 3 neutralizing
response in vivo, with 90% seroconversion within the first 4 wk
and higher absolute antibody titers than any of the other tested
groups, including the F1 microsphere group (Fig. 7 F and L). In
the liquid bolus control group, a second injection caused in-
creased neutralizing antibody production, as expected, but even
then the neutralizing antibody response to type 3 poliovirus elicited
by the bolus control group was not statistically significantly different
from that elicited by a single injection of formulation F2 (Fig. 7I).
For type 1 IPV, the seroconversion rate peaked at 70% after two
injections of a liquid bolus and at 80% after injection of either
formulation F1 or F2 (Fig. 7J). The portion of animals still sero-
positive for type 1 neutralizing antibodies after 24 wk was 20%,
30%, and 10% for the bolus control, F1, and F2, respectively. For
type 2 IPV, 100% of the animals had seroconverted at the peak of
the response, and seroconversion at 24 wk was 90%, 100%, and
90% for the control, F1, and F2, respectively (Fig. 7K). For type 3
IPV, the peak response to the control, F1, and F2 was 80%, 60%,
and 90% seroconversion, respectively, with 70%, 40%, and 70%
seroconversion at 24 wk, respectively (Fig. 7L). Therefore, formu-
lation F1 was noninferior to the two-bolus control for IPV types
1 and 2, while formulation F2 was noninferior to the two-bolus
control for IPV type 3.
Discussion
The development of single-administration IPV formulations, which
could potentially have a significant impact on vaccine coverage and
seroprotection against polio in resource-poor settings, has been
hampered by the instability of the vaccine under physiologically
relevant conditions. While some groups have reported stabilization
of IPV in solid form for thermostability during storage (36) or dose
reduction (37–40), these studies do not aim to reduce the number of
repeated injections required for protective immunity. Here, we show
that IPV in PLGA-based microspheres can be stabilized with small-
molecule excipients and also protected against changes in pH by
interactions with polycations. The resulting pulsatile-release for-
mulations can elicit a neutralizing immune response noninferior to
that of two bolus injections at clinically relevant concentrations. We
also demonstrate general principles by which electrostatic com-
plexation can be used to achieve antigen stability in single-injection
PLGA systems.
The immune response to type 3 IPV in F1 microspheres was not
as strong as the response to the other two components, types 1 and
2, demonstrating the importance of optimizing parameters for each
immunogen in a vaccine formulation. We and other groups have
previously reported significant differences in the D-antigen stability
of the various serotypes (17, 36), which may contribute to the dif-
ferences in the in vivo immune response to each. One distinction
between type 3 IPV and the other two serotypes is its relatively low
isoelectric point (pI), which has been reported to be ∼7.0–7.1 for
Brünhilde strain type 1 (41, 42), 6.7–6.8 for MEF-1 strain type 2 (42,
43), and 5.8 for Saukett strain type 3 (43). Upon reaching this pH,
the normally negative IPV virus particles lose their net charge,
allowing aggregation to occur. We hypothesized that the lower pI
Fig. 6.
F1 microspheres elicit a strong neutralizing response against type 1 and type 2 poliovirus. The neutralizing antibodies in the serum of immunized rats
is shown as the geometric mean absolute titer (A–C) for types 1, 2, and 3, respectively. A single bolus injection of liquid IPV is represented by the gray X; a
single bolus injection of liquid IPV along with empty microspheres is represented by closed gray circles; two bolus injections of liquid IPV at t = 0 and 4 wk is
represented by open black diamonds; and a single injection of F1 microspheres is represented by closed black squares. Data represent geometric mean ±
geometric SE.
E5274
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1720970115
Tzeng et al.
 would make interactions with cationic excipients more significant
for type 3 than for types 1 and 2. Thus, Eudragit E was examined in
detail, along with other cationic polymers.
As seen in Figs. 1 and 2, Eudragit E, an important component
of formulation F1, performs multiple functions in the micro-
spheres. As an organic-soluble base, it can be blended into the
PLGA phase. Rather than only buffering acidic protons resulting
from PLGA ester hydrolysis, which would result in slower deg-
radation as the pH is kept near neutral, Eudragit E accelerates
PLGA ester hydrolysis by locally increasing the pH and facili-
tating base-catalyzed PLGA degradation. This accelerated bulk
PLGA erosion results in a sudden release of IPV days or weeks
after the initial burst (Fig. 1), allowing the formulation to better
mimic a clinical vaccination schedule of two bolus injections.
Triphasic release kinetics have commonly been reported for
PLGA and other bulk-eroding polymers (44), and the addition of
excipients that further accelerate internal degradation empha-
sizes this effect, leading to pulsatile release with kinetics that can
be tailored by changing the amount of basic excipients, as we
have previously reported (17). Moreover, the timing of the IPV
release is correlated with the timing of sudden pH changes and
Eudragit E release, suggesting that Eudragit E becomes succes-
sively more protonated until it becomes soluble in the low-pH
environment and diffuses away, further increasing the particle
Fig. 7.
Formulations F1 and F2 combined elicit a strong neutralizing antibody response to all three IPV serotypes. The total IgG binding titers against IPV type
1 (A), 2 (B), and 3 (C) are shown 4 wk after injection. The absolute neutralizing antibody titers against poliovirus types 1 (D and G), 2 (E and H), and 3 (F and I)
elicited by the bolus controls and formulations F1 and F2 are shown before (D–F) and after (G–I) the bolus control group received its second injection. Se-
roconversion (the percent of animals with detectable neutralizing antibody titers) was comparable in rats immunized with a single injection of F1 or
F2 microspheres as in rats administered two standard injections of the liquid bolus (J–L). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (*P < 0.05, **P <
0.01) compared with the control (bolus injected at t = 0 and t = 4 wk) at the time point shown.
Tzeng et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 23
|
E5275
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 porosity. The timing of both the pH and the IPV release peaks
can be adjusted depending on the amount of Eudragit E in-
corporated into the particles, providing an additional method of
modulating vaccine-delivery kinetics.
Eudragit E may also have the additional benefit of preventing
IPV aggregation at low pH. Although Eudragit E is water-
insoluble at neutral pH, it becomes increasingly soluble as the
pH inside the microspheres decreases, allowing it to partition
more into the hydrophilic microsphere compartment to associate
with IPV. Thus, the decrease in pH as PLGA degrades, which
would otherwise cause IPV aggregation and denaturation, is
linked to local mobilization of Eudragit E polymer chains. Then,
the Eudragit E is believed to coat the virions and prevent ag-
gregation by acting as an electrosteric stabilizer, increasing short-
range steric repulsion due to its polymeric chain structure as well
as long-range electrostatic repulsion among the virions via its
positively charged side chains (45, 46).
Thus, when designing new formulations for IPV stabilization,
polycations were examined that were similar to Eudragit E in
their (i) effect on PLGA degradation and pH and (ii) effect on
IPV stability at low pH. Polyethylenimine was identified as a
candidate because of its high positive charge density and known
buffering capacity in physiological ranges (47). In particular,
bPEI was used because of its miscibility with organic solvents,
which would allow it to associate closely with PLGA in the or-
ganic phase, and low molecular mass bPEI (1.8 kDa) was chosen
to prevent toxicity (27). As expected, within the relevant pH
range, bPEI had similar effects on PLGA degradation and
buffering as Eudragit E. The slightly less pulsatile proton release
profile from bPEI-containing particles (Fig. 1) and the higher
concentration required to prevent IPV aggregation (SI Appendix,
Fig. S1) may be because of the low molecular weight of the bPEI
used, which could allow it to leach from PLGA particles over
time, lowering its complexation efficiency and also decreasing
the range of any steric stabilization effect it may have.
In contrast, PLL is water-soluble and has a history of use for
electrostatic complexation and layering (26, 30, 48). It was therefore
chosen for complexation with IPV virions to increase electrostatic
repulsion under decreased pH conditions. Interestingly, all three of
the polycations tested, Eudragit E, PLL, and bPEI, were better able
to prevent type 3 IPV aggregation than type 1 aggregation (Fig. 2),
likely because of the lower pI of type 3 IPV. Polycations may as-
sociate better with type 3 IPV than the other serotypes, explaining
in part the greater improvement in type 3 IPV stability with PLL
compared with the other serotypes (Fig. 4).
Because the F2 microsphere formulation, which used PLL
as an IPV complexation agent and bPEI as a pH modulator,
showed high release of all three IPV serotypes in D-antigen
conformation (Fig. 5), the immunogenicity of F2 was tested in
rats. As expected, the F2 microspheres elicited a stronger type
3 neutralizing response than F1 microspheres, with the sero-
conversion similar to that caused by the clinical control (2× bolus
at t = 0 and t = 4 wk) and no statistically significant difference in
absolute titers between the control and the F2 treatment group
(Fig. 7). F2 microspheres were less effective than F1 in eliciting a
neutralizing response to IPV types 1 and 2, although this dif-
ference was only statistically significant for type 2, in agreement
with the only moderate effect of PLL and bPEI on type 1 and
2 stability measured in vitro (Fig. 5). Interestingly, while a single
bolus injection of IPV elicits an IgG response, those antibodies
cannot neutralize type 1 IPV without a second (boost) injection
(Fig. 7 A and D). That a single injection of the F1 or F2 mi-
crospheres causes not only a stronger total IgG response, but
also a strong neutralizing response suggests that the microsphere
formulations elicit higher quality antibodies and not simply more
antibodies, further demonstrating the utility of this strategy for
vaccine delivery. Importantly, we did not observe any obvious
local or systemic toxicity in response to the injection, which was
as expected given that PLGA and similar polyesters have a long
history of safety in the clinic (49–52).
Thus, PLGA can be used to encapsulate IPV, which, instead of
only being thermostabilized with small molecule excipients, is
also stabilized against pH changes using polycationic excipients
like Eudragit E, PLL, and bPEI. The organic-soluble Eudragit E
and bPEI interacted with PLGA, modulating the microsphere
degradation kinetics while also buffering the internal micro-
sphere environment and preventing a build-up of acidic degra-
dation byproducts. In the hydrophilic compartment of the
microspheres, all of the polycations tested, particularly PLL, miti-
gated pH-driven IPV aggregation that could lead to denaturation
and may have additionally acted as a physical steric barrier to ag-
gregation of nearby virions. Importantly, the acidic internal particle
microenvironment may affect the ionization behavior of both the
polycationic excipients and the IPV proteins: decreasing pH causes
greater protonation and accumulation of positive charge on the
polycations, thus reinforcing association of excipient with IPV and
further improving electrosteric stabilization effects. In agreement
with other reports (36, 37), we found that the three antigens in IPV,
serotypes 1, 2, and 3 behaved very differently. In contrast to the
work-intensive, empirical screening often required optimization
small-molecule excipient formulations for biologics on a case-by-
case basis (53, 54), our microparticle pH-neutralizing strategy us-
ing charged excipients of comparatively higher molecular weight
appear to be broadly applicable to various antigens. Greater effects
were seen for the IPV serotype with the most negative charge at
neutral pH (type 3), suggesting that the virus particles and the
polycations are associating via electrostatic interactions, but all three
serotypes were positively affected by the polycations to some extent.
Microspheres containing IPV and a combination of polycations that
could both modulate PLGA degradation and also complex with IPV
elicited a strong immune response in rats. To our knowledge, this
report of a single-administration, pulsatile-release formulation of
IPV that was able to achieve neutralizing antibody titers in vivo that
were statistically equivalent to those achieved with a clinically rele-
vant two-bolus control is unique. No adverse events were observed,
nor would they be expected with this type of system, as PLGA mi-
croparticles have long been used successfully in the clinic, and IPV
has not been causally associated with any serious adverse events.
Because vaccine stability in single-administration vaccines is
critical for protection of the patient, a better understanding of
the stabilizing excipients, including the polycations described
here, will be crucial to designing successful formulations. This
strategy of electrostatic complexation will potentially be appli-
cable to other vaccine antigens whose stability is affected by acid-
induced aggregation phenomena. As protein aggregation under
various conditions, including in acidic media, is a common
problem for long-term controlled release systems (6–9), this
strategy has the potential for significant impact in the field of
next-generation vaccines. This type of controlled release tech-
nology could serve as a platform for delivery of different types of
vaccines with various vaccination schedules by simply altering the
PLGA molecular weight or hydrophobicity to increase the time
between bursts. Alternative strategies for the development of
single-injection vaccines, including the recently reported SEAL
technology (55), must also overcome similar challenges in vac-
cine stability and could benefit from the stabilization strategies
described here. This technology can therefore serve as a tool to
improve global health and aid in campaigns to control or erad-
icate infectious diseases, including polio.
Materials and Methods
Materials. tIPV, composed of serotypes 1, 2, and 3 (Brünhilde strain type 1,
MEF-1 strain type 2, and Saukett strain type 3 with 327 DU/mL, 70 DU/mL,
and 279 DU/mL starting concentrations, respectively), were purchased from
Statens Serum Institut (SSI) in their clinical formulations. For all experiments,
one human dose of IPV was considered to be 40 DU, 8 DU, and 32 DU of
E5276
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1720970115
Tzeng et al.
 types 1, 2, and 3, respectively, and the tIPV was used in this ratio. D-antigen
content was determined using an ELISA kit from SSI. PLGA with an average
molecular mass of 12 kDa and a lactide:glycolide ratio of 50:50, as well as
Eudragit E PO, were purchased from Evonik. Gelatin from cold-water fish
skin, maltodextrin (16.5–19.5 dextrose equivalent), PLL with a molecular
mass range of 150–300 kDa, MSG, magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl2),
heavy mineral oil, and Span 80 were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. bPEI
with a molecular mass of 1.8 kDa was purchased from Polysciences. All other
materials were of at least reagent grade.
Microsphere Formulations. IPV and stabilizing excipients were coencapsulated
in PLGA microspheres by the double emulsion method described previously
(17). Briefly, tIPV was concentrated using an Amicon Ultracel centrifugal filter
(Merck Millipore) with a molecular mass cut-off of 100 kDa and washed once
with distilled water, yielding concentrated tIPV (IPVconc), with 148-, 150-, and
145-fold increases in the concentrations of type 1, 2, and 3, respectively, and
with most of the excipients in the manufacturer’s initial formulation removed.
The aqueous excipients were prepared as a solution of 20% maltodextrin, 17%
MSG, and 17% MgCl2 in water. Aqueous excipients were mixed with IPVconc,
with a final volumetric ratio of 2:1 (IPVconc:excipients) and a final ratio of 2.9:1
IPV doses to milligrams of excipient, forming the inner aqueous phase (w1). For
microspheres containing PLL, a solution of PLL in 1× PBS was added to the IPV
and mixed well before the final concentration and washing steps. For empty
particle controls, water was used in place of IPVconc.
PLGA was dissolved in dichloromethane (DCM) along with organic ex-
cipients like Eudragit E and bPEI, forming the first oil phase (o1) with a total
polymer concentration of 25 mg/mL. The first emulsion was formed by
sonication of w1 in o1 in an ice bath for 20 s at 35% amplitude. The initial
(theoretical) loading was 0.64 doses of IPV and 216 μg of aqueous excipients
per milligram of polymer. The second emulsion was formed by adding heavy
mineral oil with 3% Span 80 (o2) to the first emulsion at a 1:1 volumetric
ratio of o1:o2 and vortexing at 3,500 rpm for 5 s. The w1/o1/o2 double
emulsion was then poured into a stirring bath of heavy mineral oil with Span
80 for a final surfactant concentration of 0.4%.
The emulsion was stirred at 250 rpm at room temperature for 3 h to allow DCM
evaporation. The hardened microspheres were then pelleted by centrifugation
for 5 min at 3,200 × g at 4 °C. The excess oil and surfactant were decanted, and
the pellet was washed three times by resuspension in hexanes and centrifuga-
tion at 200 × g for 3 min at 4 °C. After decanting the supernatant after the final
wash, all residual hexanes and water were removed under vacuum for 1 h at
room temperature. The dry particles were stored at 4 °C with dessicant until use.
IPV Stability Measurements in Vitro. The D-antigen content of IPV, as an in vitro
correlate of protective immunogenicity, was measured by ELISA (SSI) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, plates were coated with a mono-
clonal capture antibody specific to the D-antigen of either IPV serotype 1, 2, or
3 for 2–5 h at room temperature. The wells were washed using 1× PBS with 1%
Triton-X, and samples and standards, diluted in the same buffer, were added
for overnight incubation at 4 °C. The pH of all samples was determined before
measurement by ELISA and, if necessary, was adjusted to a range of 6.5–8 to
minimize interference with the assay. After washing excess samples and
standards from the wells, an HRP-conjugated monoclonal detection antibody
specific to the D-antigen of IPV serotype 1, 2, or 3 was diluted in 1× PBS with
50% FBS for blocking and added to the wells for incubation at room tem-
perature for 1.5–3 h. The wells were washed again, and the IPV content in
each well was detected using o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD) re-
agent. Total IPV content, not specific to the D-antigen, was measured with an
ELISA using polyclonal antibodies from rabbits immunized with denatured IPV
by Spring Valley Laboratories, as described previously (17). IPV particle size was
measured by DLS using a Wyatt Dyna Pro plate reader and by TEM using a
JEOL 2100F TEM in the Nanotechnology Materials Core Facility at the David H.
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research.
To measure the effect of acidity on IPV physicochemical properties, tIPV was
diluted fourfold with 1× PBS adjusted with 1 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) to pH 7.4,
6, or 4.5. Excipients were added to this solution at a final concentration of 2–
100 μg/mL to test their stabilizing effects under these conditions. In the case of
Eudragit E, the polymer was first dissolved in a solution of 0.7% HCl and 0.2%
sodium chloride (NaCl) at 20 mg/mL, then diluted into the IPV solution. The pH
of the final solution was verified in all cases to be unaffected by the addition of
small amounts of excipients. These solutions were incubated at 37 °C with ro-
tation. The condition of the IPV was then assessed by DLS and by ELISA.
In Vitro Microsphere Characterization.
Microsphere size and morphology. The size distribution of the microspheres was
measured using a Multisizer 3 Coulter Counter (Beckman Coulter). For qualitative
assessment of size and morphology, microspheres were mounted on conductive
carbon tape, sputtered with gold, and imaged using a Jeol 5600LV SEM at the
W. M. Keck Microscopy Facility at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research.
Release kinetics. For release studies, IPV-encapsulating microspheres were
suspended in release buffer (1× PBS with 50 mM Hepes, 0.2% BSA, and
0.001% phenol red) at 10–15 mg/mL and incubated at 37 °C with rotation. At
predetermined time points, the particles were pelleted by centrifugation at
1,500 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the full volume of the supernatant was
removed and stored at 4 °C for no more than 1 wk before analysis. The same
volume of fresh release medium was replaced in the tubes, and the particles
were resuspended and returned to 37 °C with rotation until the next time
point. Total IPV content and D-antigen content were measured by ELISA.
The first burst or pulse of release was defined as the amount of IPV released
over the first 4 d. The beginning of the second burst was defined as the first
time point following the first burst at which more IPV was released than at
the previous time point.
PLGA degradation and acidification. At certain time points over the course of the
release study, aliquots of microspheres were washed with water, frozen with
liquid nitrogen, and lyophilized. The lyophilized particles were dissolved in
tetrahydrofuran (THF), and the polymer/THF solution was filtered through a
0.2-μm poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) syringe filter to remove particulates
and insoluble proteins, sugars, and salts. The polymer was then measured by
gel permeation chromatography to track the change in molecular weight
over the course of the release study. Additionally, the pH of the super-
natants collected during the release study was measured using a pH probe.
The efficacy of cationic excipients as pH modulators was assessed by
measuring their buffering capacity. Five milligrams of each tested excipient
was dissolved in 10 mL of 100 mM NaCl. The pH was adjusted to 11 using 1 M
sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and then titrated to pH 3 using 0.1 M HCl. The
number of protons buffered by the excipient was calculated relative to that
of the 100 mM NaCl solution with no excipients.
In Vivo Immunogenicity of IPV Formulations. All procedures in animals were ap-
proved before beginning in vivo experiments by the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Committee on Animal Care. The immunogenicity of IPV microspheres
formulations was tested in female Wistar rats, aged 8–12 wk at the start of the
experiment. Rats were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation and injected in-
tramuscularly in the hind quadriceps, with 200 μL injected per site (400 μL total).
To obtain serum samples for analysis, blood was collected from the lateral tail
vein of rats, clotted, and centrifuged at 15,000 × g to separate the serum from
the clot. Serum was frozen, and neutralizing antibody titers were measured for
each sample by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Animals with
neutralizing titers >23 were considered to have seroconverted. It should be noted
that a titer of 210.5, or 1,448.2, was the highest output value of the neutralizing
assay used, and graphed values of 210.5 should be considered to be 210.5 or higher.
Total binding IgG titers were measured by ELISA as previously reported (17).
All groups received the same total dose of D-antigen IPV over the course
of the experiment (24 DU, 4.8 DU, and 19.2 DU of types 1, 2, and 3, re-
spectively). Three control groups were tested using liquid tIPV diluted in 1×
PBS: a single bolus administered at t = 0; a single bolus administered with
empty particles at t = 0; and two boluses administered at t = 0 and t = 4 wk.
Two experimental groups were tested: a single injection of F1 particles at t = 0;
and a single injection of F2 particles at t = 0 (see Table 3 for formulations).
Statistics. Unless otherwise indicated, results are reported as mean ± SD. For
antibody titers, the normality of the log2(titer) values was verified by the
Table 3.
IPV microsphere formulations used for rodent studies
Formulation
Aqueous excipients
Organic excipients
F1
8% maltodextrin
3% Eudragit E
6.8% MSG
6.8% MgCl2
F2
8% Maltodextrin
3% bPEI
6.8% MSG
6.8% MgCl2
0.008% PLL
(1:1 mol/mol PLL:IPV)
Empty particles
8% Maltodextrin
3% Eudragit E
6.8% MSG
6.8% MgCl2
Percentages refer to the mass ratio of excipients to the PLGA microspheres.
Tzeng et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 23
|
E5277
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 D’Agostino and Pearson omnibus normality test using Prism 6 (GraphPad
Software). Antibody titers are reported as geometric mean ± geometric SD,
and a one-way ANOVA with a Dunnett posttest was used to determine
statistically significant differences between experimental groups and the
control. Differences were considered statistically significant when P < 0.05
(*) or very significant when P < 0.01 (**).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Dynamic light scattering measurements were carried
out at the Nanotechnology Materials Core Facility at the David H. Koch In-
stitute for Integrative Cancer Research, and transmission electron micros-
copy imaging was done by Dr. Dong Soo Yun in the Nanotechnology
Materials Core Facility. This work was supported by the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation (OPP1095790).
1. Bloom BR (1989) Vaccines for the Third World. Nature 342:115–120.
2. Jain A, et al. (2016) Injectable formulations of poly(lactic acid) and its copolymers in
clinical use. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 107:213–227.
3. Cook DM, et al. (2002) The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics of
a long-acting growth hormone (GH) preparation (nutropin depot) in GH-deficient
adults. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:4508–4514.
4. McHugh KJ, Guarecuco R, Langer R, Jaklenec A (2015) Single-injection vaccines:
Progress, challenges, and opportunities. J Control Release 219:596–609.
5. Izutsu K (2005) Stabilization of therapeutic proteins by chemical and physical meth-
ods. Methods Mol Biol 308:287–292.
6. Schwendeman SP, et al. (1995) Stabilization of tetanus and diphtheria toxoids against
moisture-induced aggregation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:11234–11238.
7. Zhu G, Mallery SR, Schwendeman SP (2000) Stabilization of proteins encapsulated in
injectable poly (lactide- co-glycolide). Nat Biotechnol 18:52–57.
8. Determan AS, Wilson JH, Kipper MJ, Wannemuehler MJ, Narasimhan B (2006) Protein
stability in the presence of polymer degradation products: Consequences for con-
trolled release formulations. Biomaterials 27:3312–3320.
9. Pavot V, et al. (2014) Poly(lactic acid) and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) particles as
versatile carrier platforms for vaccine delivery. Nanomedicine (Lond) 9:2703–2718.
10. Estívariz CF, et al. (2013) Poliovirus vaccination options for achieving eradication and
securing the endgame. Curr Opin Virol 3:309–315.
11. Anand A, Pallansch MA, Estivariz CF, Gary H, Wassilak SGF (2014) Estimating the likely
coverage of inactivated poliovirus vaccine in routine immunization: Evidence from
demographic and health surveys. J Infect Dis 210(Suppl 1):S465–S474.
12. WHO (2015) Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals: Updated Data on Immunization
Coverage Published by WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization, Geneva).
13. Grassly NC (2014) Immunogenicity and effectiveness of routine immunization with
1 or 2 doses of inactivated poliovirus vaccine: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Infect Dis 210(Suppl 1):S439–S446.
14. Chen D, Kristensen D (2009) Opportunities and challenges of developing thermo-
stable vaccines. Expert Rev Vaccines 8:547–557.
15. Beale AJ, Ungar J (1962) Potency and stability of combined pertussis, diphtheria,
tetanus, and poliomyelitis (quadruple) vaccine. Lancet 280:805–808.
16. Wood DJ, Heath AB, Sawyer LA (1995) A WHO collaborative study on assays of the
antigenic content of inactivated poliovirus vaccines. Biologicals 23:83–94.
17. Tzeng SY, et al. (2016) Thermostabilization of inactivated polio vaccine in PLGA-based
microspheres for pulsatile release. J Control Release 233:101–113.
18. Wang W (2005) Protein aggregation and its inhibition in biopharmaceutics. Int J
Pharm 289:1–30.
19. Estey T, Kang J, Schwendeman SP, Carpenter JF (2006) BSA degradation under acidic
conditions: A model for protein instability during release from PLGA delivery systems.
J Pharm Sci 95:1626–1639.
20. Giteau A, Venier-Julienne MC, Aubert-Pouëssel A, Benoit JP (2008) How to achieve
sustained and complete protein release from PLGA-based microparticles? Int J Pharm
350:14–26.
21. Rosenberg AS (2006) Effects of protein aggregates: An immunologic perspective.
AAPS J 8:E501–E507.
22. Chi EY, Krishnan S, Randolph TW, Carpenter JF (2003) Physical stability of proteins in
aqueous solution: Mechanism and driving forces in nonnative protein aggregation.
Pharm Res 20:1325–1336.
23. Weiss WF, 4th, Young TM, Roberts CJ (2009) Principles, approaches, and challenges
for predicting protein aggregation rates and shelf life. J Pharm Sci 98:1246–1277.
24. Basarkar A, Singh J (2009) Poly (lactide-co-glycolide)-polymethacrylate nanoparticles
for intramuscular delivery of plasmid encoding interleukin-10 to prevent autoim-
mune diabetes in mice. Pharm Res 26:72–81.
25. Domnina YA, Yeo Y, Tse JY, Bellas E, Kohane DS (2008) Spray-dried lipid-hyaluronan-
polymethacrylate microparticles for drug delivery in the peritoneum. J Biomed Mater
Res A 87:825–831.
26. Isaksson K, Akerberg D, Posaric-Bauden M, Andersson R, Tingstedt B (2014) In vivo
toxicity and biodistribution of intraperitoneal and intravenous poly-L-lysine and poly-
L-lysine/poly-L-glutamate in rats. J Mater Sci Mater Med 25:1293–1299.
27. Kunath K, et al. (2003) Low-molecular-weight polyethylenimine as a non-viral vector
for DNA delivery: Comparison of physicochemical properties, transfection efficiency
and in vivo distribution with high-molecular-weight polyethylenimine. J Control
Release 89:113–125.
28. Plotkin SA (2010) Correlates of protection induced by vaccination. Clin Vaccine
Immunol 17:1055–1065.
29. WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization (2015) Recommendations to
assure the quality, safety and efficacy of poliomyelitis vaccines (inactivated), WHO
Technical Report Series 993. (World Health Organization, Geneva).
30. Schatzlein AG (2001) Non-viral vectors in cancer gene therapy: Principles and prog-
ress. Anticancer Drugs 12:275–304.
31. Jiang W, Schwendeman SP (2000) Formaldehyde-mediated aggregation of protein
antigens: Comparison of untreated and formalinized model antigens. Biotechnol
Bioeng 70:507–517.
32. Kersten GFA, Donders D, Akkermans A, Beuvery EC (1996) Single shot with tetanus
toxoid in biodegradable microspheres protects mice despite acid-induced de-
naturation of the antigen. Vaccine 14:1627–1632.
33. Jiang W, Schwendeman SP (2001) Stabilization of a model formalinized protein an-
tigen encapsulated in poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-based microspheres. J Pharm Sci 90:
1558–1569.
34. Hogle JM, Chow M, Filman DJ (1985) Three-dimensional structure of poliovirus at 2.9
A resolution. Science 229:1358–1365.
35. Son S, Kim WJ (2010) Biodegradable nanoparticles modified by branched poly-
ethylenimine for plasmid DNA delivery. Biomaterials 31:133–143.
36. Kraan H, van Herpen P, Kersten G, Amorij JP (2014) Development of thermostable
lyophilized inactivated polio vaccine. Pharm Res 31:2618–2629.
37. Kraan H, et al. (2015) Alternative delivery of a thermostable inactivated polio vaccine.
Vaccine 33:2030–2037.
38. Nelson KS, Janssen JM, Troy SB, Maldonado Y (2012) Intradermal fractional dose in-
activated polio vaccine: A review of the literature. Vaccine 30:121–125.
39. Edens C, Dybdahl-Sissoko NC, Weldon WC, Oberste MS, Prausnitz MR (2015) In-
activated polio vaccination using a microneedle patch is immunogenic in the rhesus
macaque. Vaccine 33:4683–4690.
40. Baldwin SL, et al. (2011) Increased potency of an inactivated trivalent polio vaccine
with oil-in-water emulsions. Vaccine 29:644–649.
41. Zerda KS, Gerba CP (1984) Agarose isoelectrofocusing of intact virions. J Virol
Methods 9:1–6.
42. Mandel B (1976) Neutralization of poliovirus: A hypothesis to explain the mechanism
and the one-hit character of the neutralization reaction. Virology 69:500–510.
43. Thomassen YE, van Eikenhorst G, van der Pol LA, Bakker WA (2013) Isoelectric point
determination of live polioviruses by capillary isoelectric focusing with whole column
imaging detection. Anal Chem 85:6089–6094.
44. Fu Y, Kao WJ (2010) Drug release kinetics and transport mechanisms of non-
degradable and degradable polymeric delivery systems. Expert Opin Drug Deliv 7:
429–444.
45. Fritz G, Schadler V, Willenbacher N, Wagner NJ (2002) Electrosteric stabilization of
colloidal dispersions. Langmuir 18:6381–6390.
46. Einarson MB, Berg JC (1993) Electrosteric stabilization of colloidal latex dispersions.
J Colloid Interface Sci 155:165–172.
47. Sunshine JC, Peng DY, Green JJ (2012) Uptake and transfection with polymeric
nanoparticles are dependent on polymer end-group structure, but largely in-
dependent of nanoparticle physical and chemical properties. Mol Pharm 9:3375–3383.
48. Wood KC, Boedicker JQ, Lynn DM, Hammond PT (2005) Tunable drug release from
hydrolytically degradable layer-by-layer thin films. Langmuir 21:1603–1609.
49. Anderson JM, Shive MS (2012) Biodegradation and biocompatibility of PLA and PLGA
microspheres. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 64:72–82.
50. Cleland JL, et al. (1997) Recombinant human growth hormone poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA) microspheres provide a long lasting effect. J Control Release 49:193–205.
51. Kang F, Singh J (2005) Preparation, in vitro release, in vivo absorption and bio-
compatibility studies of insulin-loaded microspheres in rabbits. AAPS PharmSciTech 6:
E487–E494.
52. Lü JM, et al. (2009) Current advances in research and clinical applications of PLGA-
based nanotechnology. Expert Rev Mol Diagn 9:325–341.
53. Bye JW, Platts L, Falconer RJ (2014) Biopharmaceutical liquid formulation: A review of
the science of protein stability and solubility in aqueous environments. Biotechnol
Lett 36:869–875.
54. Jain NK, et al. (2015) Formulation and stabilization of recombinant protein based
virus-like particle vaccines. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 93:42–55.
55. McHugh KJ, et al. (2017) Fabrication of fillable microparticles and other complex
3D microstructures. Science 357:1138–1142.
E5278
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1720970115
Tzeng et al.
