 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 19 November 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02206
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
Edited by:
Teri Kirby,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Crystal L. Hoyt,
University of Richmond, United States
Mary S. Himmelstein,
University of Connecticut,
United States
*Correspondence:
Susanne Täuber
s.tauber@rug.nl
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Organizational Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 17 July 2018
Accepted: 24 October 2018
Published: 19 November 2018
Citation:
Täuber S, Mulder LB and Flint SW
(2018) The Impact of Workplace
Health Promotion Programs
Emphasizing Individual Responsibility
on Weight Stigma and Discrimination.
Front. Psychol. 9:2206.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02206
The Impact of Workplace Health
Promotion Programs Emphasizing
Individual Responsibility on Weight
Stigma and Discrimination
Susanne Täuber 1*†, Laetitia B. Mulder 1† and Stuart W. Flint 2
1 Department of Human Resource Management and Organizational Behavior, University of Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands, 2 School of Sport, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, United Kingdom
Over time, there has been a steady increase of workplace health promotion programs
that aim to promote employees’ health and fitness. Previous research has focused
on such program’s effectiveness, cost-savings, and barriers to engaging in workplace
health promotion. The present research focuses on a downside of workplace health
promotion programs that to date has not been examined before, namely the possibility
that they, due to a focus on individual responsibility for one’s health, inadvertently facilitate
stigmatization and discrimination of people with overweight in the workplace. Study 1
shows that the presence of workplace health promotion programs is associated with
increased attributions of weight controllability. Study 2 experimentally demonstrates that
workplace health promotion programs emphasizing individual rather than organizational
responsibility elicit weight stigma. Study 3, which was pre-registered, showed that
workplace health promotion programs emphasizing individual responsibility induced
weight-based discrimination in the context of promotion decisions in the workplace.
Moreover, focusing on people with obesity who frequently experience weight stigma and
discrimination, Study 3 showed that workplace health promotion programs highlighting
individual responsibility induced employees with obesity to feel individually responsible
for their health, but at the same time made them perceive weight as less controllable.
Together, our research identifies workplace health promotion programs as potent
catalysts of weight stigma and weight-based discrimination, especially when they
emphasize individual responsibility for health outcomes. As such, we offer valuable
insights for organizations who aim to design and implement workplace health promotion
programs in an inclusive, non-discriminatory way that benefits all employees.
Keywords: workplace health promotion programs, attribution of controllability, responsibility, weight stigma,
weight-based discrimination, obesity
INTRODUCTION
Decades ago, employees worked in environments where smoking was normal and yoga or going
for a run during office hours was out of the question. Back then, employers would not have thought
about encouraging employees to eat less meat, exercise regularly, and reduce cigarette and alcohol
consumption. However, over the course of the last 30 years the interference of employers with
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
their employees’ health and lifestyle gained support and is now
largely considered appropriate (Goetzel et al., 2014). This is partly
due to the aging workforce, which emphasizes the necessity of
sustainable employment and partly due to improved insights into
the contribution of lifestyle to health outcomes. Consequently,
and although the types of intervention and design vary,
workplace health promotion programs (WHPP) have become
common and accepted (Walters, (n.d.); Mattke et al., 2013).
Indeed, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2018) state
that “All workplaces, particularly large organizations such as the
NHS and local authorities should address the prevention and
management of obesity, because of the considerable impact on
the health of the workforce and associated costs to industry”
(p. 3). The present research challenges the assumption that such
programs are unanimously beneficial for all parties. Specifically,
many WHPP focus on supporting employees to “manage
their weight” in response to the current agenda relating to
obesity (Public health England, 2018). We propose and test
that such framing of responsibility within WHPP forms a
potent foundation for weight stigma and discrimination in
the workplace. Since experiences of stigma are associated with
decreased mental and physical health (e.g., Puhl and Suh, 2015)
and with an associated increase in healthcare costs (e.g., Osumili
et al., 2016), WHPP might form a cause of what they aim to cure.
The current investigation tests the influence of both the presence
and focus (individual vs. organizational responsibility) of WHPP
on weight stigma and discrimination.
Workplace Health Promotion and Weight
Stigma
Healthy employees are the backbone of sustainable employment
and productivity (e.g., World Health Report; World Health
Organisation, 2002). Given that most people spend two-thirds of
their waking hours at work, the workplace represents a logical
setting to deliver health and wellbeing interventions (Frase and
Gornick, 2012). In alignment, the World Health Organisation
(2010) suggested that in the twenty-first century, the workplace
should form the primary setting for health promotion. Not
surprisingly, therefore, the last thirty years have seen a steady
increase in WHPP (Goetzel et al., 2014). According to the 2012
Employer Health Benefits Survey, 94% of large and 63% of
small employers offered a WHPP (cf. Chen et al., 2015). While
WHPP vary widely in what they target (e.g., disease prevention,
employee wellbeing, or lifestyle and health education; Chen et al.,
2015), the expectation is that they will benefit employers as well
as employees. An area of particular focus for WHPP currently
is employees’ weight status, and in particular the reduction of
weight and the increase of physical activity (e.g., Quintiliani
et al., 2007; Schröer et al., 2013). This focus is in response to the
high and increasing prevalence of overweight and obesity and
associated non-communicable disease across the world (World
Health Organisation, 2017), and an appreciation of the influence
of workplace issues such as sedentary behavior, prolonged sitting
time, and unhealthy food and drink consumption (Schröer
et al., 2013). This is reflected in the WHO’s Global Plan of
Action on Worker’s Health 2008-2017 as cited by Quintiliani
et al. (2007), pp. 7–8: “Health promotion and prevention of
non-communicable diseases should be further stimulated in the
workplace, in particular by advocating healthy diet and physical
activity among workers, and promoting mental health at work...”
Whilst there are benefits to WHPP, we propose that
the current focus on weight that emphasizes employees’
responsibility can inadvertently elicit weight stigma. Weight
stigma refers to negative attitudes toward a person because
of their weight status. People with overweight or obesity are
negatively stereotyped as being weak willed, lazy, unintelligent
and gluttonous (Puhl and Brownell, 2001; Phelan et al., 2014).
Indeed, although a link between prejudice and discrimination
is not always evident, negative attitudes toward people with
overweight and obesity have been associated with biased
treatment (O’Brien et al., 2013). Weight-based discrimination
has been reported across a range of settings and among people
of all ages and backgrounds. For instance, Phelan et al. (2015)
reviewed empirical evidence for obesity stigma in health care
settings, noting that many health care providers hold strongly
negative stereotypes about people with obesity. Aligning with
this observation, weight stigma and discrimination have also
been reported in settings that are critical for the prevention and
treatment of obesity such as exercise (Schvey et al., 2017), and
healthcare facilities (Raves et al., 2016). Relatedly, Tomiyama
et al. (2015) found that, while implicit weight bias decreased,
explicit weight bias increased between 2001 and 2013 among
scientific researchers specializing in obesity and other obesity-
related professionals.
Negative stereotypes about people with obesity also lead
to discrimination in the workplace. For instance, suitability
judgements of applicants in the hiring process or employees for
promotion are lower for applicants with obesity (e.g., Flint et al.,
2016), people with overweight or obesity, on average, earn less
and are more often unemployed (Kim and von dem Knesebeck,
2018). Further, it has been shown that people with obesity are
perceived as possessing less leadership qualities compared to
normal weight counterparts (O’Brien et al., 2008; Flint and
Snook, 2014). In addition, research has reported that employees
with obesity have lower starting salaries, are assessed as being less
qualified, and work longer hours than normal weight employees
(Baum and Ford, 2004; Han et al., 2011). Not surprisingly,
experiences of weight stigma and discrimination also may have
serious adverse effects on mental health, including compromised
psychosocial wellbeing, social isolation, healthcare avoidance,
binge eating, body related shame and guilt, and weight gain and
development of obesity (e.g., Puhl and Suh, 2015; Mensinger
et al., 2018), which can contribute to sickness absence.
The above suggests that, while health promotion in the
workplace is considered a prime tool in supporting employee
health (e.g., World Health Organisation, 2010), the workplace
also is a prime setting where weight stigma and discrimination is
experienced (e.g., Roehling et al., 2007; Bartels and Nordstrom,
2013). With regards to WHPP, systematic reviews examining
their impact on overweight and obesity (Anderson et al., 2009)
and on increasing physical activity (Malik et al., 2014), report
modest improvements or inconclusive results. Building on these
insights and testing the idea that workplace health promotion can
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
be a mixed blessing, we propose that WHPP affect employees’
attributions of how controllable weight is, thereby laying the
foundation for weight stigma and discrimination. We expect
this effect to be particularly pronounced for WHPP focusing
on individual rather than organizational responsibility for
health outcomes. Given that weight discrimination is a stressful
experience with a host of negative outcomes on psychological
and physical health (e.g., Quintiliani et al., 2007; Phelan et al.,
2014, 2015), and even increasing mortality risk (Sutin et al.,
2015), understanding the impact of WHPP on weight stigma and
discrimination is important. In the sections below, we provide
greater elaboration for our reasoning on the associations between
WHPP, controllability and responsibility attributions, and weight
stigma.
WHPP, Controllability and Responsibility
Attributions, and Weight Stigma
The design and implementation of WHPP has implications for
who is held responsible for employee health. Scholars note a shift
in focus from occupational health protection to occupational
health promotion, which involves an associated change in
responsibility from employers to employees (Macdonald and
Sanati, 2010). According to Attribution Theory (Weiner, 1985),
how people respond to the negative outcomes of others
depends predominantly on the (assumed) controllability of the
outcome. A large body of research demonstrates that perceived
controllability leads to greater blaming of people for negative
outcomes (Weiner et al., 1988; Crandall and Martinez, 1996;
Weiner, 2000). This is due to a strong link between perceived
controllability and ascribed responsibility for negative outcomes
(Mantler et al., 2003). This basic link has been shown for various
outcomes such as blindness, heart disease, unemployment, AIDS,
alcoholism, divorce and obesity (Weiner et al., 1988; Weiner,
1995).
While many studies show that people blame and stigmatize
others held responsible for a negative outcome (Crandall and
Martinez, 1996; Rudolph and Tscharaktschiew, 2014), recent
research on beliefs about the changeability of attributes suggests
a more complex relationship. Specifically, labeling obesity
as a biologically driven disease on the one hand decreased
anti-fat prejudice through decreasing blame (Burnette et al.,
2017; Hoyt et al., 2017), but on the other hand, increased
anti-fat prejudice through suggesting that people with obesity
have an unchangeable essence. The associations between
controllability,
ascribed
responsibility,
weight-stigma
and
weight-based discrimination are thus complex and inconsistent.
Understanding these associations is crucial as they directly affect
public health policy and the design of health messages (Burnette
et al., 2017; Hoyt et al., 2017). Our research contributes to the
literature by examining these associations in the context of
WHPP.
Indeed, scholars have warned that an ethical consideration
highly relevant for WHPP is the risk of blaming the target
(van Berkel et al., 2014). This risk is particularly salient
regarding lifestyle-related topics and is thought to arise from
the focus of most WHPP on the individual employee rather
than on the nature of work and the organization itself (van
Berkel et al., 2014, p. 2). Van Berkel et al. further concluded
that WHPP would contribute to greater individualization of
organizational problems, thereby eroding solidarity. Based on
interviews with different stakeholder groups about occupational
health, van Berkel et al. (2014) found that stakeholders differed
in their view of risk factors in occupational health. Whilst
employees and occupational physicians considered the job and
working conditions as primary risk factors, employers considered
employees’ lifestyle decisions to be primary risk factors. Hence,
employees construe health as the organization’s responsibility,
while employers construe health as the individual employee’s
responsibility. These differences align with the notion that,
different from prevention, in health promotion the responsibility
for health is more ambiguous (Macdonald and Sanati, 2010).
However, because WHPP are generally set-up by employers
rather than by employees, they will often be based on the
perception that occupational health is largely the responsibility
of employees (Meershoek et al., 2010).
This focus on employee responsibility can be manifest in
the type of program organizations implement but also in the
way a WHPP is communicated. Regarding the type of program,
WHPP may contain policies that encourage employees to engage
in healthy behaviors. For example, providing education about
healthy choices regarding food and drinks or providing access
to sport facilities. As such, the responsibility of organizations to
provide a working environment that inherently evokes health
and healthy behaviors (e.g., making the canteen 100% healthy,
giving the staircase a more prominent place than the elevator),
may be overlooked. With regard to the way the organization
communicates a program, a WHPP may be framed in terms
of employee or organizational responsibility. For example,
organizations may communicate that healthy food in the canteen
is meant to encourage employees to make healthy choices
(which taps into employee responsibility of making healthy
choices). By contrast, they could also communicate that healthy
food offered in the canteen prevents employees from being
seduced into unhealthy eating (which taps into the organization’s
responsibility of creating a health-promoting environment).
Overview articles reviewing WHPP that aimed at weight
reduction specifically indeed list the above factors as parts of
the reviewed programs (e.g., Schröer et al., 2013). Importantly,
these authors also note that “The evaluated interventions were
implemented at individual, organizational or combined level with
a majority of interventions that were individually focused” (p. 9).
We argue that a focus on employee responsibility will contribute
to the belief that obesity is controllable. As controllability
beliefs are associated with higher weight stigma (e.g., Teachman
et al., 2003; Flint et al., 2017), such a focus can be expected
to result in stigmatization and discrimination toward people
with overweight or obesity (e.g., Crandall and Martinez, 1996;
Crandall et al., 2001; Mantler et al., 2003).
The Present Research
Aiming to test the effects of WHPP on controllability, weight
stigma and discrimination, we conducted three studies. As an
initial test, Study 1 examined the impact of WHPP Presence
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
on controllability attributions for weight. Study 2 extended the
first study’s findings by experimentally varying WHPP Presence
and WHPP Focus (emphasizing individual vs. organizational
responsibility) and examining their impact on weight stigma.
Study 3 (pre-registered) further extended this to weight-based
discrimination in the context of promotion decisions, and the
impact of WHPP Focus on weight bias internalization among
employees with overweight and obesity in particular, thereby
shedding light on the potential targets’ perspective.
All three studies presented in this article were carried
out in accordance with the recommendations of the Ethical
Commission of the Behavioral Research Lab of the Faculty of
Economics and Business (University of Groningen) with written
informed consent from all subjects. All subjects gave written
informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
STUDY 1
As a first test of our ideas, we conducted a survey, measuring
the presence of a WHPP in the organization that people are
employed and controllability perceptions of overweight. We
hypothesized that weight is perceived as more controllable when
a WHPP is present as opposed to when it is absent (Hypothesis
1).
Methods
Participants and Procedure
After we instructed M-Turk to recruit 250 respondents, 255 M-
Turk workers completed an online survey. Of these, 38% were
from non-western countries. Considering that WHPP are more
specific for Western countries and that, in non-western countries,
due to a lower prevalence of overweight, there is likely a lower
focus on weight in public discourse and WHPP, we decided to
include respondents from North-America and Western Europe
only. Respondents first answered control questions regarding
their employment and size of their organization. We excluded
11% who did not work in an organization (but were self-
employed or unemployed). This left a sample of 131 respondents
(57 female; Mage= 35.2, SDage= 9.24), which gave us a power of
0.95 for detecting medium effects of r = 0.30 in a one-sample
correlation (for the size of our main finding, a correlation of
0.20, the power was 0.64). First, the presence of a WHPP was
measured and control questions were asked about respondents’
involvement with the WHPP and its implementation. Then,
perceived controllability of a range of life events, among which
health-related events, was measured.
Measurements
To assess the presence of a health program, the following question
was asked, “At the organization where you work, is there a
health program installed?” Possible answers were “yes,” “no,”
and “I don’t know.” The answers “no” and “I don’t know”
were collapsed, so that the value “1” stood for “WHPP present”
(N = 63) and “0” for “not aware of a WHPP being present”
(N = 68).
To assess controllability of health, respondents were presented
with several life events and for each event were asked to indicate
to what extent they thought it was under people’s control or
determined outside of a person’s control. Answers were given
in percentages, with 100% representing an event perceived to
be completely within a person’s control, and 0% representing
an event perceived to be completely outside a person’s control.
In total, four health-related events were presented: “becoming
overweight,” “being overweight,” “getting cancer,” and “getting
a burnout.” Controllability of becoming overweight and being
overweight were highly correlated (r = 0.81) and were therefore
combined into one index representing the controllability of
overweight. The health-related events were embedded in 12 filler
events unrelated to health, such as “being unemployed,” “having
children,” and “winning an Olympic medal.” We included these
filler items to examine whether the presence of a WHPP affects
controllability attributions in general or affects controllability
attributions of health-related outcomes specifically. The non-
health related filler items were combined into one scale as
a measure of controllability of non-health related life events
(α = 0.79). The events were presented in a randomized order.
Results
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics and correlations. WHPP
presence was only significantly associated with perceptions of
the controllability of overweight indicating that respondents
who reported that a WHPP was present in their organization
perceived overweight as more controllable (r = 0.20, p = 0.02,
Cohen’s d = 0.41). By contrast, WHPP presence was only
marginally associated with perceived controllability of cancer
(r = 0.15, p = 0.09, Cohen’s d = 0.30) and of non-health events
(r = 0.16, p = 0.06, Cohen’s d = 0.32). It was unrelated to
perceived controllability of burnout.
Upfront we had determined that, to test whether WHPP
presence influenced controllability perceptions, we needed to
control for alternative variables that could explain this relation,
namely those variables that correlated both with WHPP presence
and controllability perceptions. As shown by Table 1, WHPP
presence was correlated with organization size, own use of
WHPP and involvement in implementing the WHPP. While
these variables could not explain the relation between WHPP
presence and perceived controllability of overweight (as they
did not correlate with perceptions of the controllability of
overweight), they could explain the marginal relations between
WHPP presence on the one hand and controllability perceptions
of cancer and controllability perceptions of non-health events on
the other hand. To test whether this was the case, we performed
a univariate ANCOVA with the presence of a WHPP program as
independent variable, perceptions of the controllability of cancer
as the dependent variable, and own use and involvement in
implementation as covariates. This showed no effect of presence
of WHPP program, F(1, 129) = 0.99, p = 0.32, Cohen’s d = 0.18;
only the effect of involvement in the WHPP implementation (the
more involved, the more cancer was perceived as controllable)
was significant, F(1, 129) = 5.85, p = 0.02, Cohen’s d = 0.43.
An equivalent ANCOVA was performed on controllability
perceptions of non-health events, revealing no effect of health
program F(1, 127) = 0.23, p = 0.63, Cohen’s d = 0.002. Again,
only the effect of involvement in the HP implementation (the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
TABLE 1 | Descriptive statistics and correlations for Study 1.
M (SD)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Control variables
1. Gender (1 = female)
0.44 (0.50)
1.00
2. Age
35.2 (9.24) −0.03
1.00
3. BMI
−0.15
0.27**
1.00
4. Size organization (9-point scale)
5.95 (2.16) −0.12
0.16+
0.08
1.00
5. Own use of Health Program
2.31 (1.29)
0.12
0.01
−0.12
0.06
1.00
6. Involvement in implementing HP
1.97 (1.30)
0.01 −0.22**
−0.20 −0.14
0.67**
1.00
IV
7. Health program present (1 = yes)
0.48 (0.50)
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.25**
0.53**
0.30**
1.00
DV’s
8. Controllability overweight*
73.1 (22.6)
0.08
0.09
−0.11
0.02
0.06 −0.03
0.20*
1.00
9. Controllability burn-out*
57.8 (26.1)
0.10
0.14
0.01 −0.02
0.08
0.06
0.02
0.16
1.00
10. Controllability cancer*
24.3 (23.1)
0.04 −0.09
−0.01
0.12
0.17*
0.27**
0.15+
0.10
0.17+
1.00
11. Controllability non-health events*
56.7 (15.0)
0.08 −0.15+
−0.11
0.01
0.28**
0.31**
0.16+
0.48**
0.43**
0.32**
*In percent (%). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
more involved, the more non-health event were perceived as
controllable) was significant, F(1, 127) = 4.33, p = 0.04, Cohen’s
d = 0.37. Thus, the additional analyses demonstrated that the
marginal effects of WHPP presence on controllability perceptions
of cancer and non-health related life events disappeared when
controlling for involvement in implementation and own use of
the WHPP.
Overall, these results suggest that WHPP presence is only
related to perceived controllability of overweight and that this
cannot be explained by other variables as measured in this study,
Discussion
Findings show that the mere presence of a WHPP in
organizations was associated with employees’ perceptions that
overweight is more controllable. This association was not evident
for burnout, and the marginally significant relation between
presence of a WHPP and controllability of cancer and non-
health related events was fully explained by employees’ own
involvement in implementing a health program. Thus, the
association between WHPP presence and health-related events
was unique for weight. This supports Hypothesis 1 that weight
is perceived as more controllable when a WHPP is present
compared to when a WHPP is absent. Findings further suggest
that the effect of WHPP presence is less pronounced for other
health outcomes. One might speculate whether this effect is
due to the visibility of a health outcome which has appeared
to affect attributions of controllability and responsibility (e.g.,
Weiner et al., 1988). It may also be the case that, in line with
our reasoning, most WHPP entail policies that are overweight-
relevant and incorporate activities that tap into the controllability
of weight. In sum, Study 1 provides initial evidence for the
proposition that the mere presence of a WHPP affects employees’
perceptions of the controllability of weight.
STUDY 2
Whilst the correlational patterns in Study 1 support the
hypothesis that weight is perceived as more controllable when a
WHPP is present compared to when it is absent, the relationship
between WHPP and weight stigma was not examined. In
addition, causal relationships were not established. In Study 2, we
again included a measure of controllability perceptions. However,
we specifically aimed to investigate the proposed causal effects
of WHPP presence on weight stigma. We hypothesized that
weight stigma would be higher when a WHPP is present than
when a WHPP is absent (Hypothesis 2). Based on our reasoning
that weight stigma results mostly from a WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility, we also tested the difference between a
WHPP emphasizing individual vs. organizational responsibility.
We hypothesized that weight stigma would be higher when
a WHPP emphasizes individual as opposed to organizational
responsibility for employees’ health (Hypothesis 3).
Methods
Participants and Design
We ran this experiment in the lab of a European university
among undergraduate business students who participated in
exchange for course credits. We aimed to reach 120 respondents,
but used the end of the scheduled period as a the stopping
rule. Ninety-six students (34 female; Mage= 20.4, SDage= 2.28)
participated. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
four conditions, namely No WHPP (N = 25), WHPP without
responsibility information (N = 24), WHPP emphasizing
organizational responsibility (N = 23), and WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility (N = 24). The first two conditions
are thus comparable with Study 1, as they represent the
presence of WHPP (no vs. yes), while the last two conditions
allow comparison of WHPP emphasizing either individual or
organizational responsibility.
Procedure
First, participants answered questions about their gender, age,
weight and height (which were later used to calculate their BMI
by dividing people’s weight in kilos by their height in meters,
squared). Then, participants were presented with a declaration
about health, ostensibly from their university. Participants were
informed that their university was in the process of further
developing this declaration, and wanted to present it to various
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
stakeholders, including students. They were further told that
the university would like to hear their opinion about it. The
hypothetical declaration served to manipulate the presence and
the focus of a WHPP. Students read the declaration and were
asked to provide their opinion about it in an open question.
Afterwards, they were asked to engage in a task supposedly
unrelated to the health declaration they just read. Specifically,
they read about a new study examining how people perceive each
other, before completing a “picture task,” which served as the
measure of weight stigma. Participants’ then completed questions
relating to the controllability of overweight.
Manipulation of Health Program
The Appendix provides a detailed overview of the manipulations
used in this research. In all conditions, the declaration stated,
“The University deems it important that employees and students
are healthy, have good condition and are not overweight.” In
the no WHPP condition, only this declaration was provided. In
the three conditions where a WHPP was present, participants
also read that the university would implement several policies
to promote the health of employees and students. Policies that
could credibly be implemented were chosen with both a focus on
individual and organizational responsibility. These were adapting
the building to make the stairs more prominent and the elevator
a less prominent, provide healthy food in the canteen, and
provide more sports facilities. In the WHPP condition without
responsibility information, this was all that respondents read.
In the WHPP conditions with information about responsibility,
the policies were explained in more detail. This differed
between the WHPP emphasizing individual responsibility and
the WHPP emphasizing organization responsibility with regard
to emphasizing how the policies were a matter of effort of
the individual employee or student, or of the organization.
For example, when explaining adaptions to the building, in
the WHPP emphasizing individual responsibility condition,
participants read, “In this way, people will be motivated to take
the stairs instead of the elevator.” In the WHPP emphasizing
organization responsibility condition, participants read, “In this
way, taking the stairs becomes the more “logical option” and
people automatically will be more inclined to take the stairs
instead of the elevator.” Likewise, there was a difference in
the declaration conclusion, where participants read, “As such,
the university appeals to their employees and students to take
responsibility for fostering their own health” when the WHPP
emphasized individual responsibility and “As such, the university
takes her responsibility to foster the health of their employees
and students” when the WHPP emphasized organization
responsibility.
Measures
Weight stigma
Weight stigma was measured by a picture task in which the items
of the shortened version of the Fat Phobia scale (Bacon et al.,
2001) were used. Participants were shown pictures of two persons
of which they were asked to imagine that these people were their
lecturers. The picture on the left was of a woman with overweight
and the picture on the right was of a woman without overweight.
The pictures were drawn from a “before-after” image on the
internet of the same person (see the Appendix for the pictures
that are anonymized for the purpose of this paper). A pilot test
had shown that the woman on the left was indeed perceived as
overweight and the woman on the right was not. In addition,
the woman with overweight was perceived to be friendlier, less
attractive, and younger, although these effects were smaller, and
some at the advantage of the woman with overweight. The two
women did not differ in perceived competence and dressing style
(see Appendix for pilot details).
Participants were asked to imagine that these women were
their lecturers and were presented with “several attributes that a
university lecturer could possess.” For each attribute, participants
were asked to indicate whether this attribute fitted the woman
on the left or the woman on the right the most. This was done
on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = only applicable to the woman on
the left, 4 = equally applicable to both, 7 = only applicable to
the woman on the right). A number of attributes were presented,
among which were 14 Fat Phobia items: industrious, will power,
attractive, slow, endurance, active, weak, self-indulgent, likes
food, insecure, high self-esteem, well-shapely, overeats, good
self-control. As a lower score reflected a stronger association
of the attribute with the woman with overweight, the negative
items (slow, weak, self-indulgent, likes food, insecure, overeats)
were reverse coded. After these 14 items were averaged into
one scale (α = 0.84), a high score on this measure reflected
weight stigma. Another item, namely “capable as a teacher,” was
included to test whether weight stigma would manifest itself in
biased perceptions specific for the context of students evaluating
teachers.
Controllability attributions
Two
questions
assessed
respondents’
beliefs
about
the
controllability of weight (“People have little influence on
their weight” and “Overweight is something that people cannot
change themselves”). These items were reverse coded and
combined into a single index of controllability (r = 0.37, p <
0.001), with higher values indicating greater perceived weight
controllability.
BMI
For exploratory reasons, participants were asked to fill in their
height and weight and, from this, BMI was calculated. Mean BMI
was 22.26 kg/m2 (SD = 2.42), with a minimum of 18.01 kg/m2
and a maximum of 30.19 kg/m2. Of the respondents, 87.5% had
no overweight (BMI < 25 kg/m2), 11.5% had overweight (BMI
between 25 and 29.9 kg/m2), and 1% had obesity (BMI ≥ 30
kg/m2).
Results
Analytic Strategy
We performed one-way ANOVA’s with post-hoc LSD tests to
compare all four conditions. Power analyses for this analysis
showed a power of 0.50 to detect a medium effect size. Results
of these analyses are presented in Table 2 and explained in more
detail in the following paragraph. To disentangle the effect of
WHPP presence (investigated in Study 1) and the focus of the
WHPP, and to make it easier to explore with more power whether
the effects of these factors were moderated by BMI, we computed
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
two additional factors from the experimental conditions, namely
WHPP Presence and WHPP Focus. For WHPP Presence, a
dichotomous variable was constructed contrasting the no WHPP
condition with the other three conditions collapsed, thereby
corresponding to the absence (0) vs. presence (1) of a WHPP. For
WHPP Focus, the WHPP emphasizing individual responsibility
condition was coded as “1,” the no WHPP condition and
the WHPP conditions without responsibility information were
coded as “0,” and the WHPP organizational responsibility was
coded as “−1.” Thus, a higher score reflected an emphasis
on individual responsibility. Correlations of these two factors
with other variables are shown in Table 3. Power analysis for
correlations showed a power of 0.86 to find a medium effect size
of r = 0.30.
Weight Stigma
A one-way ANOVA was performed to test the influence of
the different conditions on weight stigma. This showed an
overall marginally significant effect of condition, F(3, 92) = 2.45,
p = 0.069, η2 = 0.07. LSD post-hoc analyses showed that
weight stigma was significantly higher in the WHPP individual
responsibility condition (M = 5.58, SD =
0.68), compared
to the WHPP organization responsibility condition (M = 5.10,
SD = 0.72) (p = 0.015, Cohen’s d = 0.69) and compared to the
no WHPP program condition (M = 5.16, SD = 0.54), (p = 0.032,
Cohen’s d = 0.68). The condition in which the WHPP contained
no responsibility information (M = 5.27, SD = 0.58) did not
differ from the other conditions, all p’s > 0.11 and all Cohen’s d <
0.50. Table 3 further shows that weight stigma was affected by the
focus of the WHPP (r = 0.27, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.56) and
not by the mere presence of a WHPP (r = 0.08, Cohen’s d = 0.16,
n.s.). Together, these results suggest that the presence of a WHPP
does not necessarily contribute to weight stigma; however, when
WHPP emphasize individual responsibility this does contribute
to weight stigma.
Impact of BMI
We also explored whether the effect of WHPP Presence or
WHPP Focus on weight stigma depends on someone’s own BMI.
We performed a regression analysis with weight stigma as the
dependent variable and WHPP presence, BMI (standardized)
and the interaction term as independent variables. This model
was significant, F(3, 95) = 2.77, p = 0.046 and rendered a marginal
main effect of BMI, β = −0.19, p = 0.07, Cohen’s d = 0.39,
and a significant BMI × WHPP presence interaction, β = 0.25,
p = 0.02, Cohen’s d = 0.50. This interaction is plotted in Figure 1.
Simple slopes analyses showed that weight stigma increased due
to WHPP Presence, but only in participants with a relatively
high BMI (β = 0.33, p = 0.02, Cohen’s d = 0.51) and not
participants with a relatively low BMI (β = −0.11, p = 0.43,
Cohen’s d = 0.16). More specifically, the shape of the figure
shows that, in absence of a WHPP, weight stigma is lower among
people with a high BMI than among those with a low BMI, and
that the presence of a WHPP increase the weight stigma up to
the same level as the low BMI participants’ weight stigma. We
performed a similar regression for WHPP Focus. This rendered
a significant overall model, F(3, 95) = 3.96, p = 0.01, a marginal
main effect of BMI, β = −0.16, p = 0.099, Cohen’s d = 0.35, and a
marginally significant BMI × WHPP focus interaction, β = 0.19,
p = 0.06, Cohen’s d = 0.40. This interaction is plotted in Figure 2.
Simple slopes analyses showed that weight stigma was affected by
WHPP Focus, but only in participants with a relatively high BMI
(β = 0.47, p = 0.002, Cohen’s d = 0.68) and not participants
with a relatively low BMI (β = 0.06, p = 0.67, Cohen’s d = 0.09).
Hence, when the focus does not lie on individual responsibility,
people with a high BMI experience lower levels of weight stigma
than people with a low BMI. But an individual focused WHPP
increased the level of weight stigma up to the same level of the
low BMI participants’ weight stigma.
The results suggest that participants reported more weight
stigma
when
exposed
to
WHPP
emphasizing
individual
responsibility. Also, people with a higher BMI reported more
weight stigma both when a WHPP was present and when exposed
to WHPP emphasizing individual responsibility compared to
people with a lower BMI.
Other Weight-Biased Perceptions
We tested the influence of the experimental conditions on
students’ work-related biased perceptions in the context of
teaching. Hence, we performed a one-way ANOVA to examine
the item “capable as teacher” as dependent variable. There
was an overall significant effect, F(3, 92) = 3.94, p = 0.01,
Cohen’s d = 0.70. Means and post-hoc differences are presented
in Table 2 (Cohen’s d of the largest significant difference
was 0.93 and Cohen’s d of the smallest significant difference
was 0.58). These results indicate that the WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility increased work-context related biased
perceptions toward a person with overweight, compared to all
other conditions. Table 3 shows that the bias regarding capability
as a teacher was affected by both the presence (r = 0.21, Cohen’s
d = 0.43) and the focus of the WHPP (r = 0.25, Cohen’s d = 0.52).
This result suggests that implementing a WHPP, especially when
it emphasizes individual responsibility, induces people to regard
people with overweight as less suitable for a specific job.
We also investigated whether the influence of WHPP presence
and focus on biased perceptions of capability as a lecturer
depended on respondents’ own BMI. This was not the case, as
the regression analyses did not show any (marginally) significant
interactions between BMI and WHPP (presence or focus).
Controllability
A one-way ANOVA was performed to test the influence of the
experimental conditions on attributions of the controllability
of weight. This showed an overall marginally significant effect
of condition, F(3, 92) = 2.48, p =
0.066, Cohen’s d = 0.59.
LSD post-hoc analyses showed that respondents perceived
overweight, compared to the condition without a WHPP, to be
more controllable in the WHPP-no responsibility information
condition (Cohen’s d = 0.52) and in the WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility condition (Cohen’s d = 0.72). WHPP
Focus did not affect perceived controllability of weight. This
aligns with Table 3, which shows that attributions of the
controllability of weight were significantly influenced by the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
TABLE 2 | Means and standard deviations per experimental condition for Study 2.
Condition
Weight stigma
Overweight bias—capable as teacher
Controllability perceptions
No WHPP
5.16a (0.54)
4.28b (0.98)
5.46b (1.30)
WHPP—no responsibility information
5.27ab (0.58)
4.63b (0.97)
6.04a (0.88)
WHPP—organization responsibility
5.10a (0.72)
4.48b (0.99)
6.00ab (1.12)
WHPP—individual responsibility
5.58b (0.68)
5.21a (1.02)
6.21a (0.67)
Within columns, subscripts that share a letter do not differ significantly.
TABLE 3 | Descriptive statistics and correlations for Study 2.
M (SD)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Control variables
1. Gendera
1.35 (0.48)
2. Age
20.40 (2.48)
0.06
3. BMI
22.26 (2.42)
−0.15
0.37**
IVs
4. WHPP Presenceb
0.74 (0.44)
0.09
−0.18
0.03
5. WHPP Focusc
0.01 (0.70)
−0.20
0.06
0.03
0.01
DVs
6. Weight stigma
5.30 (0.61)
0.10
−0.08
−0.12
0.08
0.27**
7. Bias—Capability as a teacher
4.65 (1.04)
−0.08
−0.15
−0.11
0.21*
0.25*
0.40**
8. Controllability
5.92 (1.05)
0.00
0.09
−0.03
0.26*
0.07
0.25*
0.40**
a1 = male, 2 = female.
b1 = yes (N = 71), 0 = no (N = 25).
c1 = individual (N = 24), 0 = no WHPP/ WHPP no information (N = 25 and N = 24, respectively), −1 = organizational (N = 23). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
FIGURE 1 | Simple slopes for the effect of WHPP Presence on weight stigma,
moderated by respondents’ BMI, Study 3.
WHPP Presence (r = 0.26, Cohen’s d = 0.54) rather than by
WHPP Focus.
Discussion
Study 2 varied the presence of a WHPP and its focus on
individual or organizational responsibility for health in a higher
education institution. In line with the findings of Study 1, the
mere presence of a WHPP led to higher perceived controllability
of weight. While controllability perceptions were not influenced
by the WHPP’s focus on individual or organization responsibility,
in line with predictions, WHPP focus (and not so much
the mere presence of WHPP) did affect weight stigma.
Respondents displayed significantly more weight stigma when
the WHPP emphasized individual responsibility compared to
organizational responsibility for health. WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility also elicited a more particular work-
related bias against people with overweight, namely with regard
to capability as a lecturer.
Thus, consistent with our reasoning, to the extent that
workplace health promotion emphasizes individual rather than
organizational responsibility for employee health, weight stigma
is evoked. Arguably, stigmatizing thoughts and biases about
people with overweight is not the same as discriminatory
behaviors toward people with overweight. However, in line with
previous research (e.g., O’Brien et al., 2008; Flint et al., 2016),
it is expected that biases about people with overweight lead to
discriminatory behavior. After all, there is ample evidence that
both conscious and unconscious biases about certain groups lead
to discriminatory behavior toward members of these groups (e.g.,
Phelan et al., 2014). To test this, Study 3 aimed to examine the
effects of WHPP Focus on weight-based discrimination in the
context of a promotion decision. This study tests the expectation
that people show greater weight discrimination when exposed
to WHPP that endorse individual compared to organizational
responsibility for health (Hypothesis 4).
Another interesting finding of Study 2 was that, while, in
absence of a WHPP, people with a high BMI showed less
weight bias than people with a low BMI, the WHPP changed
this. The presence of a WHPP, especially the WHPP that
emphasizes individual responsibility, increased the weight stigma
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
FIGURE 2 | Simple slopes for the effect of WHPP Focus on weight stigma, moderated by respondents’ BMI, Study 3.
only among people with a high BMI up to the same level
as people with a low BMI. This finding suggests that the
perspective of potential targets of weight stigma in the workplace
warrants greater attention. WHPP that emphasize individual
responsibility, might lead to people with a high BMI perceiving
that they are to be blamed for their weight, thereby inducing
self-stigmatization or weight bias internalization (Durso and
Latner, 2008). Therefore, in Study 3 we aimed to explore
the target’s perspective. Thus far, we have focused on those
making the judgments; however, in Study 3 we also test the
effect of WHPP on weight bias internalization amongst people
with overweight or obesity. Specifically, Study 3 tests the
prediction that people report more weight bias internalization
after exposure to a WHPP emphasizing individual compared
to organizational responsibility (Hypothesis 5a) and that this
effect is more pronounced in people with a high rather than
low BMI (Hypothesis 5b). Note that the statistical power of
Study 2 is rather low, and results should therefore be interpreted
with caution. We sought to recruit more respondents to reach
adequate statistical power in Study 3. To achieve sufficient
variance in respondents’ weight-status, that would allow testing
the effects of WHPP Focus on employees with overweight and
obesity, we aimed for a large sample of US citizens.
STUDY 3
Methods
Study 3 was pre-registered. A link to the complete pre-
registration of the hypothesis and procedures with regard
to sampling, stopping rule and data-analysis can be viewed
at https://osf.io/69qmc/?view_only=None by clicking “view
registration form.” All procedures as described in the method and
result section are in accordance with this pre-registration.
Participants and Design
The experiment was posted on MTurk as a study about “Decision
Making in HR” and people who worked in HR were especially
encouraged to participate. Payment was $3 plus a chance to
win a $10 bonus. Two hundred and fifty-one MTurk users who
were employed and located in the US participated in the study.
They were randomly assigned to the conditions of a 2 (WHPP
Focus: individual vs. organizational) between-subjects factor
by 2 (Candidate Weight-Status: normal weight vs. overweight)
within-subjects factor design. Thirteen respondents (5.2%) did
not seriously engage with the writing task that was part of
manipulating WHPP Focus and were removed from further
analyses. This left a sample of 238 respondents (52% male;
Mage= 35.76, SDage= 10.15), of whom 21% worked in HR, either
currently or in the past. Seventy-one (71) percent had at least
some experience with hiring people (varying from “a little” to “a
great deal”). Amongst the respondents, 10% reported high school
as their highest level of education, 23% “some college,” 12% a 2-
year college degree (Associates), 42% a 4-year college degree (BA,
BS), 10% a master’s degree, and 3% a doctoral or a professional
degree.
Procedure
All materials for this study, including the manipulations and
measures, can be found in the Appendix. Respondents were
asked to take the role of the HR manager in “Sturdation”,
a big construction company. In this role, their first task was
to write a statement about a WHPP that Sturdation was
planning to implement. This task and the preparation for
the task served to manipulate WHPP Focus. In preparing
respondents for the writing task, they were informed that
Sturdation decided to implement a WHPP. After introducing the
content of the program and Sturdation’s viewpoint on who is
responsible for employee health (individual vs. organization), a
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
manipulation check question was asked. The envisioned WHPP
and Sturdation’s viewpoint on health were then repeated and
respondents were asked to write a persuasive text for the advisory
board of Sturdation. They were instructed to make the viewpoint
of Sturdation clear, convince the supervisory board of this
viewpoint, and explain how the measures being implemented in
the WHPP align with Sturdation’s viewpoint. Respondents could
not continue with the survey if they wrote a text shorter than 180
characters. This was not part of the instructions, and respondents
only became aware of this if they tried to continue with a text
of less than 180 words. After writing this text, respondents were
asked three questions about their agreement with the WHPP and
their satisfaction with Sturdation. These questions were intended
to let the manipulation sink in and were not part of hypotheses
testing.
In the second task, which served as the dependent measure
of weight-based discrimination, respondents took an advisory
role in an internal application procedure for the vacancy of
senior policy advisor with advising on international branding
as main responsibility. They saw a short CV and photo of two
candidates named Lucy and Megan (see Attachment)1. For half
of the respondents, a photo of a women with overweight was
coupled with Lucy’s CV and a photo of a woman with normal
weight was coupled with Megan’s CV. For the other half of the
respondents, this was the other way around. We used the same
photos as in the weight stigmatization task in Study 2. The order
that the candidates were presented, as well as whether Lucy
or Megan was with overweight, was randomized. Respondents
indicated the hireability of each candidate. A suspicion probe
was presented that asked respondents to write down what
they thought the research question was for this study. Then,
respondents completed measures of weight bias internalization,
two measures of perceived controllability of weight, and a second
manipulation check. Finally, demographic questions were asked,
amongst which was weight and height.
Manipulation WHPP
Depending on the experimental condition, respondents read
different
information
about
the
WHPP
and
Sturdation’s
viewpoint on employee health. In the text below, the individual
responsibility instruction is in brackets and the organizational
responsibility instruction is in Italics:
“The Workplace Health Promotion Program is based on the
viewpoint that the health of an employee is the responsibility of
the organization (each individual employee). This is because the
health of a person is very much influenced by the environment
he/she lives and works in, in terms of availability of healthy food
and opportunities to exercise (his/her own behavior in terms of
eating an exercise). Therefore, the task of Sturdation is to offer
a healthy work environment (encourage employees to take their
responsibility).”
1In a pilot study (N = 56) designed to create the materials for this study, a paired
sample t-test revealed no differences in hireability ratings between these two CV’s,
t(55) = 1.05, p = 0.30.
The WHPP’s content in both conditions concerned four actions,
namely healthy food in the canteen, taking the stairs rather than
the elevator, offering a health check, and influencing employees’
movement in the office while at work. The implementation
of these actions differed between conditions. In the individual
responsibility condition, the actions were aimed at encouraging
employees to behave in healthy ways, while the actions in the
organizational responsibility condition were aimed at adapting
the working environment so that it evoked healthy behavior
amongst employees. In addition, the action of offering a health
check differed between conditions where, in the individual
responsibility condition, follow-up actions on the health check
were at the cost of the employee, whilst in the organization
responsibility condition, follow-up actions were covered by the
organization. The actions as described in the two different
conditions are presented in the Appendix.
Measurements
BMI
BMI was calculated in the same way as in Study 2. For two
respondents this rendered a missing value, as there was doubt
about the unit they used to fill in their height or weight. Mean
BMI was 27.19 kg/m2 (SD = 6.18), with a minimum of 16.65
kg/m2 and a maximum of 53.16 kg/m2. Of the respondents,
40.3% were without overweight (BMI < 25 kg/m2), 33.4% with
overweight (BMI between 25 and 29.9 kg/m2), and 26.4% with
obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2).
Manipulation checks
We checked the WHPP manipulation with two questions.
Specifically, respondents were asked, “According to the viewpoint
of Sturdation, who is responsible for the health of individual
employees?” directly after the WHPP manipulation, and “In your
own opinion, who is responsible for the health of individual
employees?” after the measure of Weight Bias Internalization.
Both questions were answered on a 7-point Likert scale (1=
the employee is solely responsible, 7 = the organization
is solely responsible). These questions were reverse coded,
such that higher values reflect greater perceived individual
responsibility for health. In addition to these questions, the text
that respondents wrote about Sturdation’s vision on the WHPP
was coded with regard to whether they wrote about individual
responsibility, organizational responsibility, or mixed/unclear.
This coding was performed by a researcher who was blind to
experimental conditions.
Weight bias internalization
The 11-item Modified Weight Bias Internalization Scale (Pearl
and Puhl, 2014) was used. An example item is “Because of
my weight, I feel that I am just as competent as anyone”
(reverse coded). Answers were given on a 7-point Likert scale
(1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). The scale was highly
reliable (α = 0.95).
Controllability of overweight
Two measures were employed. First, the slider measure in Study 1
was used, but now focusing on the overweight items (which made
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
all other items distraction items). Since “becoming overweight”
and “being overweight” rendered similar results in Study 1, we
now only included “being overweight.” The second measure was
the 8-item Beliefs About Obese Persons Scale (BAOP; Allison
et al., 1991). An example item of this scale is “Obesity is usually
caused by overeating.” Answers were given on a 6-point Likert
scale (1 = I strongly disagree, 6 = I strongly agree). Reliability was
insufficient (α = 0.61), but reliability increased to a satisfactory
level (α = 0.79) after removal of the first and last item. Items were
coded such that for both measures, higher scores reflected greater
perceived controllability.
Weight-based discrimination
Weight-based discrimination was operationalized by comparing
hireability judgments of the two candidates. Lower hireability
judgement for the candidate with overweight compared to
the
candidate
without
overweight
indicated
weight-based
discrimination. For both candidates, hireability judgements were
measured with four items relating to the candidates’ skills and
competences (α = 0.91 and α = 0.92 for the normal weight and
the candidate with overweight, respectively). The Appendix
provides the detailed measurements.
Suspicion
Answers that respondents gave to the question asking them what
they thought the research question was for this study were coded
on suspicion. More specific, an independent coder, blind for
the condition to which participants were assigned, coded for
each answer whether it showed that the participant thought that
the study was about weight bias in evaluating job candidates
(0 = no, 1 = yes). Answers that were coded as suspicious were,
for example, “Not sure. Possibly trying to gain insight into weight
biases” and “I think this research aims at observing whether
participants will hire the woman without overweight or the
woman with overweight, once they have been exposed to health
concerns in the workplace.”
Results
The coding of the suspicion probe made clear that a significant
portion of our respondents issued suspicion about the hypothesis
(69 respondents, 27.5%). Consistent with our pre-registered
analytical strategy, for the analysis of Hypothesis 4 (about
weight-based discrimination), we removed the respondents who
indicated suspicion about the hypotheses. However, the number
of suspicious respondents was larger than we had imagined
upfront. Naturally, removing so many respondents reduces
our statistical power. Therefore, we additionally report the
(non-pre-registered) analysis including these respondents. For
Hypothesis 5 (about weight-bias internalization), we continued
testing our hypotheses on weight bias internalization including
the 69 suspicious respondents. Our reason for doing this was
not only that including these respondents increases power, but
also that the suspicion about the hiring task was less relevant
for measuring weight bias internalization than for measuring
weight-based discrimination. This is something we had not
realized during the pre-registration. To abstain from p-hacking,
we did not do any further analyses without the 69 suspicious
respondents.
For all our hypothesis-testing and exploratory analyses, we
tested for studentized residual outliers and determined the cut-off
point using a Bonferroni correction. In the following, we report
outliers when they were detected and explain how we dealt with
them (which was in line with the pre-registration).
Analyses supplementing the analyses reported below are
provided in the Appendix.
Manipulation Checks
Of all respondents, 95% wrote a text that matched the
experimental condition they were assigned to; 1.7% wrote a
text contrary to their condition; 3.4% wrote a mixed or unclear
text. As we could not conclude for sure that respondents
providing texts contrary to their condition or mixed or unclear
texts did not keep to the instructions (as it was not forbidden
to use opposite or irrelevant arguments), we chose not to
exclude these respondents from the analysis, in line with our
pre-registration. Further, we regressed WHPP Focus (individual
responsibility
=
1,
organizational
responsibility
=
−1),
BMI (standardized) and their interaction term on the two
manipulation
check
questions
concerning
responsibility
attributions. Both models were significant, F(3, 228) = 247.67, p
< 0.001, R2 = 0.77 and F(3, 228) = 19.30, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.20,
for Sturdation’s and respondents’ own viewpoint, respectively.
Importantly, for both questions only a main effect of condition
was evident (Sturdation: β = 0.0.87, t = 27.05, p < 0.001;
Own opinion: β = 0.45, t = 7.57, p < 0.001). Thus, a WHPP
emphasizing
individual
responsibility
elicited
significantly
greater attributions of individual responsibility, as opposed to
organizational responsibility for health. The manipulation can
thus be considered successful.
Hypothesis Testing: Weight-Based Discrimination
Hypothesis 4 stated that weight-based discrimination would
be greater when the WHPP emphasized individual as opposed
to organizational responsibility. A mixed-model ANOVA with
WHPP Focus as between-subjects factor and candidate weight-
status as within-subjects factor was performed by including
hireability judgements of the candidate with overweight and
without overweight as the dependent variable. Power analyses
for this analysis using G∗Power (Faul et al., 2007) showed
a power of 0.76 and of 0.91 to detect a medium effect size
for the analysis with and without the exclusion of suspicious
respondents, respectively.
With exclusion of suspicious respondents (as preregistered)
We identified four outliers that did not significantly affect the
regression coefficient of interest, which is why we did not remove
them. A main effect was found of candidates’ weight-status,
F(1, 163) =
4.62, p = 0.03, Cohen’s d = 0.33. The candidate
was judged as less hireable when she was with overweight
(M = 5.76, SD = 1.17) compared to without overweight (M
= 5.90, SD = 0.96), indicating weight-based discrimination.
The interaction between WHPP Focus and Candidate Weight-
Status did not reach significance, F(1, 167) =
1.99, p = 0.16,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
Cohen’s d = 0.012. Nevertheless, given the a priori prediction
we performed tests for simple main effects. These showed
that weight-based discrimination was evident only when the
WHPP emphasized individual responsibility, F(1, 167) = 5.69,
p = 0.02, Cohen’s d = 0.37, but not when the WHPP emphasized
organizational responsibility, F(1, 167) = 0.31, p = 0.58, Cohen’s
d = 0.09.
With inclusion of suspicious respondents (not pre-registered)
We performed the same analysis including the 69 suspicious
respondents. Six outliers were detected that did not affect the
regression coefficients, and were therefore not removed. Again
a main effect of the candidates’ weight-status was observed,
F(1, 236) = 11.14, p =
0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.43 (candidate
with overweight candidate: M = 5.80, SD = 1.11; candidate
without overweight: M = 6.00, SD = 0.91). This effect was
qualified by a significant WHPP Focus × Candidate Weight-
Status interaction, F(1, 236) = 4.27, p = 0.04, η2 = 0.02, Cohen’s
d = 0.27. Tests for simple main effects showed that weight-based
discrimination was evident only when the WHPP emphasized
individual responsibility, F(1, 236) = 14.85, p < 0.001, Cohen’s
d = 0.50, but not when the WHPP emphasized organizational
responsibility, F(1, 236) = 0.74, p= 0.374, Cohen’s d = 0.11.
Conclusions Hypothesis 4
Results of the two analyses reported above thus support
Hypothesis 4. Nevertheless, we wish to frame this conclusion
with some care as the analyses that were done according to
our pre-registered analyses (thus excluding the 69 suspicious
participants) partly supported Hypotheses 4: whereas the simple
main effects were in line with the hypothesis, the interaction
was not significant (p = 0.16). Table 4 provides an overview
over means and standard deviations both when the 69 suspicious
respondents are excluded and included.
Hypotheses Testing: Weight Bias Internalization
Hypotheses 5a and 5b stated that the WHPP emphasizing
individual
responsibility
would
increase
weight
bias
internalization, and that this effect would be more pronounced
for people with a high BMI. To test this, we effect coded WHPP
Focus (−1 =
individual responsibility, 1 = organization
responsibility), standardized BMI and from this calculated
WHPP × BMI interaction term. These variables were regressed
TABLE 4 | Hireability judgments per condition for Study 3.
WHPP Focus
Organizational
Individual
SUSPICIOUS RESPONDENTS EXCLUDED (n = 169)
Candidate Weight Status
Non-overweight
5.99 (1.00)a
6.00 (0.83)a
Overweight
5.91 (1.10)a
5.69 (1.12)b
SUSPICIOUS RESPONDENTS INCLUDED (n = 238)
Candidate Weight Status
Non-overweight
5.89 (1.05)a
5.91 (0.86)a
Overweight
5.84 (1.17)a
5.67 (1.08)b
Within columns, subscripts that share a letter do not differ significantly.
on weight bias internalization. This rendered a significant model
(no outliers were detected), F(2, 229) = 32.46, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.22
and a main effect of BMI, β = 0.70, t = 7.93, p < 0.001, Cohen’s
d = 1.22, showing that respondents with a higher BMI reported
more weight bias internalization than respondents with a lower
BMI. There was no effect of WHPP Focus (β = −0.04, p = 0.49,
Cohen’s d = 0.10) nor a significant WHPP × BMI interaction,
β = 0.01, p = 0.82, Cohen’s d = 0.03). As people’s self-perception
of whether they are with overweight or obesity may depend more
on whether their BMI falls into the “overweight” or “obesity”
categories than on their exact BMI value, we also conducted an
analysis with BMI as a categorical variable, making categories
based on overweight (BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2) or obesity (BMI ≥ 30
kg/m2). However, there were no interactions between WHPP
Focus and respondents’ BMI. Power analysis for multiple
regression showed a power of 0.99 to find a medium effect size of
f2 = 0.15 using G∗Power (Faul et al., 2007).
Conclusions Hypothesis 5
Hypotheses 5a and 5b that WHPP Focus affects weight bias
internalization, and that this effect is stronger for employees with
a higher BMI were not supported. Rather, higher BMI generally
was associated with greater weight bias internalization amongst
employees.
Exploratory Analyses: Targets’ Perspective
Next to our preregistered hypotheses, we also performed a
number of exploratory analyses in order to gain more insights
into potentially different effects of WHPP on employees with
or without overweight. More specifically, we tested the effects
of WHPP Focus and respondents’ BMI on our two measures
of controllability of overweight (the slider measure and BAOP).
We first tested this regarding BMI as a continuum and then
regarding with BMI as weight status categories (contrasting “with
overweight” vs. “without overweight” and contrasting “with
obesity” vs. “without obesity”).
BMI as continuous variable
Regressing the slider measure of perceived controllability of
overweight on WHPP Focus, BMI and their interaction term
rendered only a marginal main effect of BMI, β = −0.11,
t = −1.73, p = 0.086, Cohen’s d = 0.23. Regressing BAOP on
WHPP Focus, BMI and their interaction rendered a significant
main effect of BMI, β = −0.19, t = −2.87, p < 0.005, Cohen’s
d = 0.38. This shows that respondents with a relative high BMI
perceived weight as being less controllable than respondents with
a relative low BMI. In both regressions, no effect of WHPP Focus
or a BMI by WHPP Focus interaction was evident. Power analysis
for multiple regression showed a power of 0.99 to find a medium
effect size of f2 = 0.15 using G∗Power (Faul et al., 2007).
BMI as categorical variable
We tested whether controllability attributions were determined
by respondents’ BMI category rather than their exact BMI. We
indeed found support for this when comparing respondents
with and without obesity. Specifically, we tested the influence
of WHPP Focus (Responsibility: individual vs. organizational)
and respondents’ BMI (BMI Category: without obesity vs. with
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
TABLE 5 | Correlations between control variables, independent and dependent variables, Study 3.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Control variables
1. Gender (1 = male, 2 = female)
1.00
2. Age
0.04
1.00
3. Education
−0.01
0.00
1.00
4. Work in HR
0.11
0.02
0.11
1.00
5. Hiring Experience
−0.03
0.22*
0.23**
0.52**
1.00
6. BMI
0.03
0.08
−0.20*
−0.03
0.06
1.00
IVs
7. WHPP focusa
−0.07
−0.06
0.04
0.01
0.08
0.09
1.00
DVs
8. Weight discrimination
−0.12
−0.09
0.16*
−0.02
0.05
−0.04
0.13*
1.00
9. Weight bias internalization
0.20**
−0.07
−0.05
0.11
0.01
0.47**
0.07
0.01
1.00
10. Controllability (slider)b
−0.17**
−0.02
−0.04
−0.10
−0.07
−0.11
−0.02
0.11
−0.15*
1.00
11. Controllability (BAOP)b
−0.12+
−0.01
−0.08
−0.18**
−0.20**
−0.18*
0.03
0.18*
−0.19**
0.58**
a1 = individual responsibility (N = 121), −1 = organizational responsibility (N = 117).
bHigher values indicate greater perceived controllability, +p = 0.065, *p < 0.01, **p < 0.001.
obesity) on controllability perceptions by means of a multivariate
ANOVA with the slider measure and BAOP as dependent
variables. For both indicators of perceived controllability of
weight, no main effects of WHPP Focus and BMI Category
were found, but significant interactions between the independent
variables were revealed for the slider measure, F(2, 232) = 6.05,
p = 0.01, Cohen’s d = 0.32, and for BAOP, F(2, 232) = 3.94,
p = 0.048, Cohen’s d = 0.26. Table 6 shows means and
standard deviations. Tests for simple main effects for both
measures of perceived controllability of weight revealed that
respondents with and without obesity did not differ in
perceived controllability of weight when the WHPP emphasized
organizational responsibility, both F’s(1, 227) < 2.3, both p’s >
0.13. By contrast, respondents with obesity perceived weight to be
significantly less controllable than respondents without obesity
when the WHPP emphasized individual responsibility [Slider
measure: F(1, 227) = 4.09, p = 0.04, Cohen’s d = 0.26; BAOP:
F(1, 227) = 5.84, p = 0.016, Cohen’s d = 0.32]. Power analyses
for this analysis showed a power of 0.99 to detect a medium effect
size of f = 0.25 using G∗Power (Faul et al., 2007).
Conclusions exploratory analyses
The exploratory results suggest that people with obesity
feel that overweight is less controllable than people without
obesity, but that this is only the case when confronted with
a WHPP that emphasizes individual responsibility (Table 5).
So, one the one hand, our investigation shows that WHPP
emphasizing individual responsibility causes all employees to
ascribe responsibility for health to the individual employee (as
the manipulation checks presented earlier suggest). On the other
hand, employees with obesity perceive weight to be significantly
less controllable in such situations. We will elaborate on the
significance of this finding in more detail in the discussion
section.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The findings in this paper show that WHPP emphasizing
individual
responsibility
induce
weight
stigma
and
discrimination in the workplace. We reasoned that workplace
health promotion, especially when the program emphasizes
individual responsibility, would contribute to the perception
that weight is controllable, and that this would evoke weight
stigma and weight-based discrimination. Our data shows
that this is not the complete story. We found that the mere
presence of a WHPP leads to stronger beliefs that weight
is controllable (Studies 1 and 2). However, WHPP focus
(i.e., individual or organization responsibility) did not affect
beliefs about the controllability of weight but did affect
weight stigma and weight-based discrimination. Thus, whilst
weight stigma and discrimination were not the result of
a belief that weight is controllable, a focus on individual
responsibility within a WHPP did lead to increased weight stigma
and discrimination.
Thus, the increase in weight stigma and discrimination
observed in our studies was not caused by changes in
controllability beliefs. This aligns with decision stage models
of attribution (e.g., Mantler et al., 2003). These models entail
that attributions of controllability, ascriptions of responsibility,
and target blame are hierarchical constructs that prompt social
observers to infer from the presence of the higher order construct
that the lower order constructs are present too (Mantler et al.,
2003). In other words, when social observers blame the target,
they will assume responsibility for and controllability over the
outcome. Likewise, when social observers ascribe responsibility
for an outcome such as overweight, they will infer that the
other person had control over the outcome. Hence, blaming
and responsibility ascriptions may not always be the result of
controllability perceptions but may actually cause them. This
may be the reason why, in the current investigation, WHPP
focus (which are responsibility ascriptions) did not affect stigma
and discrimination through controllability perceptions. This also
aligns with the notion that moral evaluations based on obesity
are often implicit (Hoverd and Sibley, 2007) and thus need not to
arise from controllability attributions. Indeed, a general feeling of
dislike was also reported by Pescud et al. (2015), who found that
employers’ views of “unhealthy workers” involved perceptions
such as “unpleasant company.”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
TABLE 6 | Perceived controllability of weight (slider measure and BAOP) as a
function of WHPP Focus and BMI category (without overweight vs. with
overweight), Study 3.
WHPP Focus
Organizational
Individual
SLIDER MEASURE
Candidate Weight Status
Without overweight
70.56 (20.72)a
76.81 (19.85)a
With overweight
77.68 (17.93)a
66.56 (25.16)b
BAOP
Candidate Weight Status
Without overweight
4.41 (0.80)a
4.62 (0.82)a
With overweight
4.51 (0.91)a
4.17 (0.90)b
Within columns, subscripts that share a letter do not differ significantly.
Our findings contribute to both existing literature and practice
in three important ways. First, the insights offered in this
research contribute to what we know about WHPP. Research
on WHPPs has, so far, only focused on health-related outcomes
such as sick leave, physical activity, and workplace wellness
(Anderson et al., 2009; Odeen et al., 2012; Osilla et al., 2012;
Malik et al., 2014). These systematic reviews concerning the
impact of WHPP on employee health in several domains have
revealed sobering conclusions. We have suggested that this is
at least partly due to a general failure to consider the complex
interplay between individuals and their social environments—
such as the organizations they work for—when employee health
is concerned. The current investigation is the first to focus on
the negative side-effects of WHPP in terms of stigmatization
and discrimination of employees with overweight and obesity. In
addition, we studied the effect of framing WHPP differently and
found that weight-stigma and weight-based discrimination can
be prevented by WHPP emphasizing organizational rather than
individual responsibility.
Second, our findings contribute to existing insights about
weight stigma. Prior research already showed that people with
overweight and obesity are stigmatized and face discrimination
in the workplace based on weight (e.g., O’Brien et al., 2008;
Flint et al., 2016). However, our findings extend existing evidence
by experimentally examining the effects of WHPP and their
emphasis of either individual or organizational responsibility.
This research is both novel and timely given the rapid rise in
WHPP that aim to support employee health, many of which aim
to “support employees in weight management.” The workplace
represents a setting where weight stigma and discrimination is
reported, and there is a need to reduce these experiences. Thus,
when designing WHPP, organizations should ensure that they
support employee health and avoid potential counterproductive
effects such as weight stigma and discrimination as observed in
our studies.
Third, our finding contribute to the literature on the effect of
changeability beliefs concerning weight (the “stigma asymmetry
model,” see Burnette et al., 2017; Hoyt et al., 2017), also
mentioned in the introduction. This literature shows that the
belief that obesity is an unchangeable disease has opposite effects
on weight stigma through different paths. On the one hand, it
reduces blame, but, on the other hand, it fosters the view of people
with obesity having an unchangeable essence, thus fostering an
essentialist view. Our data is in line with this model and suggest
stigma asymmetry extends beyond the “obesity as a disease” issue
and into the domain of WHPP. After all, we studied not only
the focus of WHPP but also its mere presence. When a WHPP
is present, this suggests that obesity is changeable (either by
individual themselves or by their organizational environment).
In Study 2, the mere presence of the WHPP did not affect weight
stigma. This could be due to the fact that the WHPP on the one
hand (or: for some people) increases blame, increasing weight
stigma, and on the other hand (or: for other people), reduced
an essentialist view of obesity, decreasing weight stigma. Our
data further suggest that, only when changeability is connected
to controllability by an individual rather than the environment, it
increases weight stigma.
The Target’s Perspective
With regard to the targets’ perspective, although our findings
in Study 2 suggest that the presence of a WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility increases the weight bias of people
with a relative high BMI, Study 3 did not support the idea
that it increased weight bias internalization in employees with
overweight and obesity. However, the WHPP’s emphasis on
individual responsibility did appear to decrease the belief that
weight is controllable particularly in people with obesity. On
first sight, this may seem like a manifestation of resistance
against the message that individuals are responsible for their
own weight, a message that is arguably threatening for people
with obesity (e.g., Dillard and Shen, 2005). However, our data
does not support this interpretation. As became clear from
the manipulation checks in Study 3, people with obesity were
convinced by the WHPP emphasizing individual responsibility
that employees were to be held responsible. Thus, when involved
with a WHPP emphasizing individual responsibility, employees
with obesity respond with a disturbing combination of feeling
personally responsible for their weight, whilst perceiving little
controllability of weight.
From a motivational perspective, people with obesity are
thus likely to be caught in a Catch-22 like situation, which
can result in maladaptive responses. After all, insights from
learned helplessness theory show that, when people feel
responsible for uncontrollable events, this harms their self-
esteem (Abramson et al., 1978; Alloy et al., 1988; Pierce and
Wardle, 1997) and potentially results in diet-breaking behavior
and weight gain (Ogden and Wardle, 1990; Townend, 2009).
Indeed, those targeted by moralized views of others often
respond maladaptively. For instance, Mulder et al. (2015)
showed that when confronted with moralizing health messages,
participants with overweight ate more unhealthy snacks than
when they were confronted with counter-moralizing health
messages. Future research should thus explore the impact
of public views of the morality of obesity on motivation
for dieting and exercise in people with overweight and
obesity.
In sum, the current research suggests that emphasizing
individuals’ responsibility for employee health in WHPP leads
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
to a moral burden compounded by employees with obesity
feeling that they are unable to influence the outcome. This is
likely to have a demotivating effect. Thus, it could very well
be that a WHPP, to the extent that it emphasizes individual
responsibility, fails to evoke healthy behavior amongst employees
with overweight and obesity. Further, WHPP emphasizing
individual responsibility also lead to employees with overweight
and obesity being targeted by stigma and discrimination. Both are
associated with several unwarranted outcomes, such as decreased
mental and physical health (Pascoe and Smart Richman, 2009;
Puhl and Suh, 2015), increased healthcare costs (Osumili et al.,
2016), and underperformance (Glover et al., 2017). Thus, if not
implemented carefully, WHPP might have negative rather than
the expected positive effects.
Strengths, Limitations, and Future
Research
Due to the experimental designs employed in Studies 2 and
3, the research presented here allows for causal inferences
regarding the effects of WHPP presence and focus on employees’
controllability perceptions, weight stigma, and weight-based
discrimination. Further, both Studies 1 and 3 included varied
samples of US citizens, and a diverse range of BMI. Study 3
in particular involved a great number of people who reported
making hiring decisions in their work context. An additional
strength of particularly Study 3 was that the hypotheses and
analytical strategy were preregistered. This approach safeguards
the confirmatory (rather than exploratory) nature of our data
analysis and offers a transparent approach to post-hoc analyses
and interpretations (Lindsay et al., 2016; Nosek and Lindsay,
2018). Together, this makes us confident that our results are
credible and generalizable.
A limitation of our research is that we exclusively focused
on
WHPP
effects
on
weight
stigma
and
weight-based
discrimination, thereby excluding a range of other health-related
behaviors and outcomes. The question thus remains whether our
results would also generalize to people with, for instance, burn-
out, cancer, or chronic diseases. Based on extensive research
into the role of controllability and responsibility attributions
on blame (e.g., Weiner et al., 1988; Weiner, 1995; Mantler
et al., 2003), emphasizing individual responsibility for health
may affect stigma toward other health-related behaviors and
outcomes in the same way. Recent research shows that health
moralization—which is strongly associated with responsibility—
prompts people who live healthily to stigmatize and discriminate
against others who live less healthy (Täuber, 2018). This effect
was also evident for non-weight related health outcomes
such as smoking, an unhealthy lifestyle more generally, and
even for being ill. Nevertheless, overweight is more strongly
associated with lifestyle than many (other) diseases such as
cancer or burnout. Therefore, WHPP emphasizing individual
responsibility may affect weight stigma more than stigma based
on non-lifestyle related diseases. The results of Study 1 indeed
support this notion as the WHPP presence only predicted
controllability perceptions with regard to overweight and not
with regard to cancer or burnout. More research is needed to
test the effects of WHPP presence and focus on stigma based on
diseases other than overweight.
Further, we manipulated WHPP focus rather than studying
the focus of existing WHPP as they are implemented in
organizations. The advantage of this is that we could establish
causal relations and draw robust conclusion about the effects
of
a
WHPP’s
individual
vs.
organizational
responsibility
focus. We assumed that most WHPP are implemented with
a focus on individual responsibility. This was based on the
notion that these programs are often employer-driven, and
employers typically see health as employees’ responsibility
(Meershoek et al., 2010; van Berkel et al., 2014), as well as
on the identified shift in focus from occupational health
protection (responsibility of employers) to occupational health
promotion
(responsibility
of
employees;
Macdonald
and
Sanati, 2010). However, the extent to which actual WHPP
reflect this individual focus, and how this extent contributes
to weight bias and discrimination, is a topic for further
research.
Finally, to highlight the target’s perspective, we focused on the
influence of BMI. However, a valuable extension of this would
be to take into account self-perceived weight rather than BMI.
Prior research (Major et al., 2014) points out that people who
do not perceive themselves as overweight feel less threatened
by weight-stigmatizing messages, even when they are objectively
overweight. Thus, WHPP focusing on individual responsibility
might have less negative effects on employees with overweight
or obesity but do not perceive themselves as such, and a more
negative effects on employees without overweight or obesity but
do perceive themselves as such. This is a notion that future
research might examine.
CONCLUSION
Our findings suggest that the implementation of WHPP
affects
employees’
perceptions
of
the
controllability
of
weight, and the WHPP focus on individual (rather than
organizational) responsibility leads to weight stigma and
weight-based discrimination. These consequences have to be
considered severe, particularly in light of the prevalence of
employees with overweight and obesity (e.g., World Health
Organisation,
2010),
and
the
ever-increasing
number
of
WHPP aiming to promote health at the workplace (e.g., Chen
et al., 2015). Our research thus suggests that WHPP might
be less beneficial for employees than commonly expected,
especially
when
they
emphasize
individual
responsibility
for health. Specifically, our results demonstrate that a clear
communication
of
organizational
rather
than
individual
responsibility
for
health
might
interrupt
the
automatic
association of controllability with responsibility and ultimately
blame (Weiner et al., 1988; Weiner, 1995, 2000; Crandall
et al., 2001). In addition, such organizational responsibility
attribution may induce the right motivation of those targeted
to change their behavior. This notion is based on insights
showing that using non-moral language is more motivating
than using moralized language, which holds for diverse
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
15
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
topics such as climate change (Täuber et al., 2015), poverty
reduction (Täuber and van Zomeren, 2012), immigration policy
(Täuber and van Zomeren, 2013), and obesity (Mulder et al.,
2015).
This is a valuable insight for practitioners, particularly
for human resource management concerned with the design
and implementation of WHPP. Our research suggests that
to attenuate weight-based stigmatization and weight-based
discrimination, WHPP should be designed and communicated
in ways that emphasize the responsibility of the organization
rather than of the individual employee. This can be done,
for instance, by creating healthy organizational environments
where mostly healthy food is offered in the canteen (rather than
simply informing employees about what healthy eating is), by
providing offices with standing desks, or by giving the stairs
a more prominent placing than the elevator. In addition, in
communication about the WHPP it is important that the focus
should lie on the responsibility of the organization rather than
the individual employee (e.g., communicate that the healthy food
offering in the canteen is meant to make it easier for employees to
eat healthier rather than to encourage employees to make healthy
choices). Based on our findings, we recommend HR managers
and other professionals involved in designing and implementing
WHPP to critically review their policies regarding who is held
responsible for employee health—even if this is implied rather
than explicitly formulated in the policy.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ST and LM contributed equally to this paper and designed,
carried out and performed the statistical analyses of study 2.
LM designed, carried out and analyzed study 1 and performed
the statistical analyses of study 3. ST, LM, and SF designed and
carried out study 3. ST wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All
authors contributed to writing the manuscript and have read and
approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This research was supported by an individual grant awarded to
ST (#451-15-035) by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Martijn Blikmans and Marije Driesen for
their support in preparing the materials and collecting the data.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article contains the appendix
and can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/
10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02206/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., and Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned
helplessness in humans - critique and reformulation. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 87,
49–74. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.87.1.49
Allison, D. B., Basile, V. C., and Yuker, H. E. (1991). The measurement of attitudes
toward and beliefs about obese persons. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 10, 599–607.
Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., and Hartlage, S. (1988). The
hopelessness theory of depression - attributional aspects. Br. J. Clin. Psychol.
27, 5–21. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8260.1988.tb00749.x
Anderson, L. M., Quinn, T. A., Glanz, K., Ramirez, G., Kahwati, L. C., Johnson, D.
B., et al. (2009). The effectiveness of worksite nutrition and physical activity
interventions for controlling employee overweight and obesity: a systematic
review. Am. J. Prev. Med. 37, 340–357. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2009.07.003
Bacon, J. G., Scheltema, K. E., and Robinson, B. E. (2001). Fat phobia scale revisited:
the short form. Int. J. Obes. 25, 252–257. doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0801537
Bartels, L. K., and Nordstrom, C. R. (2013). Too big to hire: factors
impacting
weight
discrimination.
Manage.
Res.
Rev.
36,
868–881.
doi: 10.1108/MRR-06-2012-0134
Baum, C. L., and Ford, W. F. (2004). The wage effects of obesity: a longitudinal
study. Health Econ. 13, 885–899. doi: 10.1002/hec.881
Burnette, J. L., Hoyt, C. L., Dweck, C. S., and Auster-Gussman, L. (2017). Weight
beliefs and messages: mindsets predict body-shame and anti-fat attitudes via
attributions. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 47, 616–624. doi: 10.1111/jasp.12464
Chen, L., Hannon, P. A., Laing, S. S., Kohn, M. J., Clark, K., Pritchard,
S.,
et
al.
(2015).
Perceived
workplace
health
support
is
associated
with
employee
productivity.
Am.
J.
Health
Prom.
29,
139–146.
doi: 10.4278/ajhp.131216-QUAN-645
Crandall, C. S., D’Anello, S., Sakalli, N., Lazarus, E., Nejtardt, G. W., and Feather,
N. T. (2001). An attribution-value model of prejudice: anti-fat attitudes in six
nations. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 27, 30–37. doi: 10.1177/0146167201271003
Crandall, C. S., and Martinez, R. (1996). Culture, ideology, and antifat attitudes.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 22, 1165–1176. doi: 10.1177/01461672962211007
Dillard, J. P., and Shen, L. (2005). On the nature of reactance and its
role in persuasive health communication. Commun. Monogr. 72, 144–168.
doi: 10.1080/03637750500111815
Durso, L. E., and Latner, J. D. (2008). Understanding self-directed stigma:
development of the weight bias internalization scale. Obesity 16, S80–S86.
doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.448
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., and Buchner, A. (2007). G∗ Power 3: a flexible
statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical
sciences. Behav. Res. Methods 39, 175–191. doi: 10.3758/BF03193146
Flint, S. W., Cadek, M., Codreanu, S. C., Ivi,´
c, V., Zomer, C., and Gomoiu, A.
(2016). Obesity discrimination in the recruitment process: “You’re not Hired!”
Front. Psychol. 7:647. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00647
Flint, S. W., Crank, H., Tew, G., and Till, S. (2017). “It’s not an obvious
issue, is it?” Office-based employees’ perceptions of prolonged sitting
at work: a qualitative study. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 59, 1161–1165.
doi: 10.1097/JOM.0000000000001130
Flint, S. W., and Snook, J. (2014). Obesity and discrimination: the next ‘big issue’?
Int. J. Discrim. Law 14, 183–193. doi: 10.1177/1358229114534550
Frase, P., and Gornick, J. C. (2012). The time divide in cross-national perspective:
the work week, education and institutions that matter. Soc. Forces 91, 697–724.
doi: 10.1093/sf/sos189
Glover, D., Pallais, A., and Pariente, W. (2017). Discrimination as a self-fulfilling
prophecy: evidence from French grocery stores. Q. J. Econ. 132, 1219–1260.
doi: 10.1093/qje/qjx006
Goetzel, R. Z., Henke, R. M., Tabrizi, M., Pelletier, K. R., Loeppke, R., Ballard, D.
W., et al. (2014). Do workplace health promotion (wellness) programs work? J.
Occup. Environ. Med. 56, 927–934. doi: 10.1097/JOM.0000000000000276
Han, E., Norton, E. C., and Powell, L. M. (2011). Direct and indirect
effects of body weight on adult wages. Econ. Hum. Biol. 9, 381–392.
doi: 10.1016/j.ehb.2011.07.002
Hoverd, W. J., and Sibley, C. G. (2007). Immoral bodies: the implicit association
between moral discourse and the body. J. Sci. Study Religion 46, 391–403.
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-5906.2007.00365.x
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
16
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
Hoyt, C. L., Burnette, J. L., Auster-Gussman, L., Blodorn, A., and Major, B.
(2017). The obesity stigma asymmetry model: the indirect and divergent effects
of blame and changeability beliefs on antifat prejudice. Stigma Health 2:53.
doi: 10.1037/sah0000026
Kim, T. J., and von dem Knesebeck, O. (2018). Income and obesity: what is the
direction of the relationship? A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Ppen
8:e019862. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019862
Lindsay, D. S., Simons, D. J., and Lilienfeld, S. O. (2016). Research Preregistration
101. Observer. Available online at: https://www.psychologicalscience.org/
observer/research-preregistration-101 (Accessed 27.06.2018).
Macdonald, E. B., and Sanati, K. A. (2010). Occupational health services now
and in the future: the need for a paradigm shift. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 52,
1273–1277. doi: 10.1097/JOM.0b013e3181f7cbf0
Major, B., Hunger, J. M., Bunyan, D. P., and Miller, C. T. (2014). The ironic effects
of weight stigma. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 51, 74–80. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2013.11.009
Malik, S. H., Blake, H., and Suggs, L. S. (2014). A systematic review of workplace
health promotion interventions for increasing physical activity. Br. J. Health
Psychol. 19, 149–180. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12052
Mantler, J., Schellenberg, E. G., and Page, J. S. (2003). Attributions for serious
illness: are controllability, responsibility and blame different constructs? Can.
J. Behav. Sci. 35, 142. doi: 10.1037/h0087196
Mattke, S., Liu, H., Caloyeras, J. P., Huang, C. Y., Van Busum, K. R., Khodyakov,
D., et al. (2013). Workplace Wellness Programs Study. Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation, RR-254-DOL. As of May 1, 2015. Available online at: http://www.
rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR254.html
Meershoek, A., Bartholomée, Y., and Horstman, K. (2010). Vitaal en bevlogen: De
economisering van de gezondheid van werknemers. Beleid en Maatschappij 37,
232–245.
Mensinger, J. L., Tylka, T. L., and Calamari, M. E. (2018). Mechanisms underlying
weight status and healthcare avoidance in women: a study of weight stigma,
body-related shame and guilt, and healthcare stress. Body Image 25, 139–147.
doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2018.03.001
Mulder, L. B., Rupp, D. E., and Dijkstra, A. (2015). Making snacking less sinful:
(counter-) moralising obesity in the public discourse differentially affects food
choices of individuals with high and low perceived body mass. Psychol. Health
30, 233–251. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2014.969730
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2018). Obesity Prevention: Workplace
Interventions.
Available
online
at:
http://pathways.nice.org.uk/pathways/
obesity (Accessed 26th August 2018).
Nosek, B., and Lindsay, D. S. (2018). Preregistration becoming the norm in
psychological science. APA Observ. 31.
O’Brien, K. S., Latner, J. D., Ebneter, D., and Hunter, J. A. (2013). Obesity
discrimination: the role of physical appearance, personal ideology, and anti-fat
prejudice. Int. J. Obes. 37, 455. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2012.52
O’Brien, K. S., Latner, J. D., Halberstadt, J., Hunter, J. A., Anderson, J., and Caputi,
P. (2008). Do antifat attitudes predict antifat behaviors? Obesity 16, 87–92.
doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.456
Odeen, M., Magnussen, L. H., Mæland, S., Larun, L., Eriksen, H. R., and Tveito,
T. H. (2012). Systematic review of active workplace interventions to reduce
sickness absence. Occup. Med. 63, 7–16. doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqs198
Ogden, J., and Wardle, J. (1990). Control of eating and attributional style. Br. J.
Clin. Psychol. 29, 445–446. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8260.1990.tb00912.x
Osilla, K. C., Van, K. B., Schnyer, C., Larkin, J. W., Eibner, C., and Mattke, S. (2012).
Systematic review of the impact of worksite wellness programs. Am. J. Manag.
Care 18, e68-81.
Osumili, B., Henderson, C., Corker, E., Hamilton, S., Pinfold, V., Thornicroft, G.,
et al. (2016). The economic costs of mental health-related discrimination. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 134, 34–44. doi: 10.1111/acps.12608
Pascoe, E. A., and Smart Richman, L. (2009). Perceived discrimination and health:
a meta-analytic review. Psychol. Bull. 135, 531. doi: 10.1037/a0016059
Pearl, R. L., and Puhl, R. M. (2014). Measuring internalized weight attitudes
across body weight categories: validation of the modified weight bias
internalization scale. Body Image 11, 89–92. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2013.
09.005
Pescud, M., Teal, R., Shilton, T., Slevin, T., Ledger, M., Waterworth, P., et al.
(2015). Employers’ views on the promotion of workplace health and wellbeing:
a qualitative study. BMC Public Health 15:642. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-2029-2
Phelan, S. M., Burgess, D. J., Yeazel, M. W., Hellerstedt, W. L., Griffin, J.
M., and van Ryn, M. (2015). Impact of weight bias and stigma on quality
of care and outcomes for patients with obesity. Obes. Revi. 16, 319–326.
doi: 10.1111/obr.12266
Phelan, S. M., Dovidio, J. F., Puhl, R. M., Burgess, D. J., Nelson, D. B., Yeazel, M.
W., et al. (2014). Implicit and explicit weight bias in a national sample of 4,732
medical students: the medical student CHANGES study. Obesity 22, 1201–1120.
doi: 10.1002/oby.20687
Pierce, J. W., and Wardle, J. (1997). Cause and effect beliefs and self-esteem of
overweight children. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 38, 645–650.
Public health England (2018). Adult obesity: Applying All Our Health. Available
online
at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/adult-obesity-
applying-all-our-health/adult-obesity-applying-all-our-health (Accessed 04
July 2018).
Puhl, R., and Brownell, K. D. (2001). Bias, discrimination, and obesity. Obes. Res.
9, 788–805. doi: 10.1038/oby.2001.108
Puhl, R., and Suh, Y. (2015). Health consequences of weight stigma: implications
for obesity prevention and treatment. Curr. Obes. Rep. 4, 182–190.
doi: 10.1007/s13679-015-0153-z
Quintiliani, L., Sattelmair, J., and Sorensen, G. (2007). “The workplace as a setting
for interventions to improve diet and promote physical activity,” in Background
Paper Prepared for the WHO/WEF Joint Event on Preventing Noncommunicable
Diseases in the Workplace (Dalian/China, September 2007). Available online
at: http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/Quintiliani-workplace-as-setting.
pdf (Accedded 15.08.2018).
Raves, D. M., Brewis, A., Trainer, S., Han, S. Y., and Wutich, A. (2016).
Bariatric surgery patients’ perceptions of weight-related stigma in healthcare
settings impair post-surgery dietary adherence. Front. Psychol. 7:1497.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01497
Roehling, M. V., Roehling, P. V., and Pichler, S. (2007). The relationship between
body weight and perceived weight-related employment discrimination: the
role of sex and race. J. Vocat. Behav. 71, 300–318. doi: 10.1016/j.jvb.2007.
04.008
Rudolph, U., and Tscharaktschiew, N. (2014). An attributional analysis of moral
emotions: naïve scientists and everyday judges. Emot. Rev. 6, 344–352.
doi: 10.1177/1754073914534507
Schröer,
S.,
Haupt,
J.,
and
Pieper,
C.
(2013).
Evidence-based
lifestyle
interventions in the workplace—an overview. Occup. Med. 64, 8–12.
doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqt136
Schvey, N. A., Sbrocco, T., Bakalar, J. L., Ress, R., Barmine, M., Gorlick, J., et al.
(2017). The experience of weight stigma among gym members with overweight
and obesity. Stigma Health 2:292. doi: 10.1037/sah0000062
Sutin, A. R., Stephan, Y., and Terracciano, A. (2015). Weight discrimination
and risk of mortality. Psychol. Sci. 26, 1803–1811. doi: 10.1177/0956797615
601103
Täuber, S. (2018). Moralized health-related persuasion undermines social
cohesion. Front. Psychol. 9:909. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00909
Täuber, S., and van Zomeren, M. (2012). Refusing intergroup help from
the morally superior: how one group’s moral superiority leads to another
group’s reluctance to seek their help. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48, 420–423.
doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2011.08.014
Täuber, S., and van Zomeren, M. (2013). Outrage towards whom? Threats to moral
group status impede striving to improve via out-group-directed outrage. Eur. J.
Soc. Psychol. 43, 149–159. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.1930
Täuber, S., van Zomeren, M., and Kutlaca, M. (2015). Should the moral
core of climate issues be emphasized or downplayed in public discourse?
Three ways to successfully manage the double-edged sword of moral
communication. Clim. Change 130, 453–464. doi: 10.1007/s10584-014-
1200-6
Teachman, B. A., Gapinski, K. D., Brownell, K. D., Rawlins, M., and
Jeyaram, S. (2003). Demonstrations of implicit anti-fat bias: the impact of
providing causal information and evoking empathy. Health Psychol. 22, 68–78.
doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.22.1.68
Tomiyama, A. J., Finch, L. E., Belsky, A. C. I., Buss, J., Finley, C., Schwartz,
M. B., et al. (2015). Weight bias in 2001 versus 2013: contradictory attitudes
among obesity researchers and health professionals. Obesity 23, 46–53.
doi: 10.1002/oby.20910
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
17
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
 Täuber et al.
Weight Stigma in Workplace Health
Townend, L. (2009). The moralizing of obesity: a new name for an old sin? Criti.
Soc. Pol. 29, 171–190. doi: 10.1177/0261018308101625
van Berkel, J., Meershoek, A., Janssens, R. M., Boot, C. R., Proper, K. I.,
and van der Beek, A. J. (2014). Ethical considerations of worksite health
promotion: an exploration of stakeholders’ views. BMC Public Health 14:458.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-458
Walters, R. (n.d.). The Value of Promoting Employee Health and Wellbeing.
Available
online
at:
https://www.robertwalters.com/content/dam/robert-
walters/corporate/news-and-pr/files/whitepapers/health-and-wellbeing-
whitepaper-aus.pdf (Accessed 26th August 2018).
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and
emotion. Psychol. Rev. 92, 548–573. doi: 10.s/0033-295X.92.4.548
Weiner, B. (1995). “Attribution theory in organizational behavior: a relationship of
mutual benefit,” in Attribution Theory: An Organizational Perspective, ed M. J.
Martinko (Danvers, MA: St Lucie Press), 3–6.
Weiner, B. (2000). Intrapersonal and interpersonal theories of motivation
from
an
attributional
perspective.
Educ.
Psychol.
Rev.
12,
1–14.
doi: 10.1023/A:1009017532121
Weiner,
B.,
Perry,
R.
P.,
and
Magnusson,
J.
(1988).
An
attributional
analysis
of
reactions
to
stigmas.
J.
Pers.
Soc.
Psychol.
55,
738.
doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.55.5.738
World Health Organisation (2002). The World Health Report 2002 - Reducing
Risks, Promoting Healthy Life. Available online at: http://www.who.int/whr/
2002/en/ (Accessed 13 July 2018).
World Health Organisation (2010). Workplace Health Promotion. The Workplace:
A Priority Setting for Health Promotion. Available online at: http://
www.who.int/occupational_health/topics/workplace/en/ (Accessed 13 July
2018).
World Health Organisation (2017). Overweight and Obesity. Available online at:
http://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight
(Accessed 04 July 2018).
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Täuber, Mulder and Flint. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
18
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2206
