 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
OCD-like behavior is caused by dysfunction of
thalamo-amygdala circuits and upregulated
TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling as a result of SPRED2 deficiency
M Ullrich1, M Weber2, AM Post3,4, S Popp4, J Grein1, M Zechner1, H Guerrero González1, A Kreis5, AG Schmitt5, N Üçeyler6,
K-P Lesch4,7 and K Schuh1
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a common neuropsychiatric disease affecting about 2% of the general population. It is
characterized by persistent intrusive thoughts and repetitive ritualized behaviors. While gene variations, malfunction of cortico-
striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits, and dysregulated synaptic transmission have been implicated in the pathogenesis of OCD,
the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here we show that OCD-like behavior in mice is caused by deficiency of
SPRED2, a protein expressed in various brain regions and a potent inhibitor of Ras/ERK-MAPK signaling. Excessive self-grooming,
reflecting OCD-like behavior in rodents, resulted in facial skin lesions in SPRED2 knockout (KO) mice. This was alleviated by
treatment with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine. In addition to the previously suggested involvement of cortico-
striatal circuits, electrophysiological measurements revealed altered transmission at thalamo-amygdala synapses and
morphological differences in lateral amygdala neurons of SPRED2 KO mice. Changes in synaptic function were accompanied by
dysregulated expression of various pre- and postsynaptic proteins in the amygdala. This was a result of altered gene transcription
and triggered upstream by upregulated tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB)/ERK-MAPK signaling in the amygdala of SPRED2 KO
mice. Pathway overactivation was mediated by increased activity of TrkB, Ras, and ERK as a specific result of SPRED2 deficiency and
not elicited by elevated brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels. Using the MEK inhibitor selumetinib, we suppressed TrkB/ERK-
MAPK pathway activity in vivo and reduced OCD-like grooming in SPRED2 KO mice. Altogether, this study identifies SPRED2 as a
promising new regulator, TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling as a novel mediating mechanism, and thalamo-amygdala synapses as critical
circuitry involved in the pathogenesis of OCD.
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 444–458; doi:10.1038/mp.2016.232; published online 10 January 2017
INTRODUCTION
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a neuropsychiatric condi-
tion characterized by persistent intrusive thoughts (obsessions)
and repetitive ritualized actions (compulsions). Factor analytic
studies have identified four primary subtypes of OCD: contamina-
tion obsessions with cleaning compulsions, symmetry obsessions
with ordering compulsions, hoarding obsessions with collecting
compulsions, and aggressive/sexual/religious/somatic obsessions
with checking compulsions.1 However, OCDs vary greatly in
the
types
of
obsessions
and
compulsions,
reflecting
both
heterogeneity
in
clinical
phenotypes
and
the
underlying
pathophysiology.2,3 Furthermore, there are various OCD-related
disorders, for example trichotillomania and excoriation disorder,
tic disorders like Tourette’s syndrome, and autism spectrum
disorders that share considerable overlapping features with OCD.4
As with many neuropsychiatric disorders, the neurobiological
basis of OCD still remains obscure. A large body of functional
neuroimaging studies has related OCD symptoms to alterations in
the activity of cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits.5,6
Especially hyperactivity in orbitofrontal cortex and ventromedial
striatum seems to be crucial in the pathogenesis of OCD.7 The
amygdala is the integrative center for emotions and emotional
behavior and its role in mediating fear and anxiety is the most
commonly referenced to date.8,9 However, a possible impact of
the amygdala on the development of OCDs is indicated and
extensively discussed but needs additional investigation.10
Although family and twin studies support a significant genetic
contribution to OCD and related conditions, no particular gene
has reached the stringent level of statistical evidence to be
considered a definitive risk gene.4 Since selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine, are the first-line
pharmacological treatment for OCDs, one of the strongest
candidates for the cause of OCD is the gene encoding the
serotonin transporter.11 The same meta-analysis also implicated
glutamatergic and dopaminergic neurotransmitter systems as well
as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and tropomyosin
receptor kinase B/neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 2
(TrkB/NTRK2) as possible genetic factors.11 The latter two are part
of a cerebral signaling pathway, which is essential for the
regulation of neuronal gene transcription, neurogenesis, and
1Institute of Physiology I, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Institute of Physiology II, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 3Department of
Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 4Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Clinical Research Unit on
Disorders of Neurodevelopment and Cognition, Laboratory of Translational Neuroscience, Center of Mental Health, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany; 5Department
of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Center of Mental Health, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany; 6Department of Neurology, University of Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany and 7Department of Translational Neuroscience, School for Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNS), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Correspondence: Professor K Schuh, University of Wuerzburg, Institute of Physiology I, University of Wuerzburg, Roentgenring 9, 97070 Wuerzburg, Germany.
E-mail: kai.schuh@uni-wuerzburg.de
Received 9 June 2016; revised 20 October 2016; accepted 1 November 2016; published online 10 January 2017
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 444–458
www.nature.com/mp
 neuronal differentiation. In the adult nervous system, BDNF/TrkB
signaling
regulates
synaptic
strength,
transmission,
and
plasticity.12,13
Because
BDNF
plays
a
critical
role
in
brain
development and plasticity, it is widely implicated in psychiatric
diseases, including major depressive, bipolar, anxiety-related, and
neurodevelopmental disorders but also in neurodegenerative
diseases.14,15 Although several studies demonstrated the involve-
ment of BNDF in OCD as well, the outcomes were inconclusive in a
way that it is still unclear whether BDNF sequence variants like the
common Val66Met substitution are protective or predictive for
OCD.16,17 Alterations in BDNF plasma levels are indicative of
various psychiatric disorders14 and may also be associated with
OCD.18 Genetic variations of the NTRK2 gene encoding TrkB were
suggested to contribute to OCD in humans, however, the
pathomechanism is unknown.19 The impact of BDNF and its
receptor TrkB on anxiety-related disorders has been investigated
in mouse models but this also revealed contradictory results.20
The neurotrophin BDNF is the most prevalent growth factor in
the central nervous system and the preferred ligand of TrkB, a
transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase that is phosphorylated at
several tyrosine residues.21 After BDNF-mediated activation of
TrkB, signals are mediated by different intracellular cascades,
of which the Ras/ERK-MAPK pathway is one of the most
prominent.12,13 Ras is activated after receptor phosphorylation
via different adapter molecules. From Ras, signals can be
propagated by phosphorylation and activation of sequential
kinases including Raf, MEK1/2, and ERK1/2. ERK activation results
in phosphorylation and activation of transcription factors and
other regulatory target proteins.22 Important intrinsic regulators of
Ras/ERK-MAPK pathway activity are the SPRED proteins (Sprouty-
related, EVH1 domain-containing protein 2), a family of the three
homologs
SPRED1,
2
and
3.23
SPREDs
very
potently
and
exclusively inhibit the Ras/ERK-MAPK cascade downstream of
multiple receptor tyrosine kinases and in response to a wide range
of mitogenic stimuli, for example, growth factors, cytokines, and
chemokines.23–25 The expression pattern of SPRED proteins,
especially that of SPRED2 is widespread in humans and mice
but most pronounced in the central nervous system.26,27 SPREDs
are also functionally required in neuronal development by
regulating neurogenesis through control of ERK-dependent neural
progenitor cell proliferation and maintenance of germinal zone
integrity.28 Because of the co-localization of SPREDs with various
endosome markers, a role in synaptic vesicle transport is also
assumed.27–29
SPRED1
deficiency
in
humans
causes
Legius
syndrome, a disease of the rasopathy spectrum, which is
associated with learning disabilities, developmental delays, and
macrocephaly.30 Similarly, SPRED1 KO mice also show disabilities
in hippocampus-dependent learning31 and facial abnormalities.32
The loss of functional SPRED2 in mice leads to hyperactivity of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, demonstrated by
increased release of stress hormones including corticotropin-
releasing
hormone,
adrenocorticotropic
hormone,
and
corticosterone.33
Here we show that SPRED2 deficiency caused an OCD-like
behavioral phenotype. The observation of OCD-like grooming
resulting in severe self-inflicted facial lesions in SPRED2 KO mice
prompted us to investigate anxiety-related behavior and skin
sensitivity, and to treat SPRED2 KO mice with fluoxetine. Since our
results supported the assumption of an OCD-like phenotype in
SPRED2 KO mice, we performed electrophysiological recordings at
cortico-striatal and thalamo-amygdala synapses in SPRED2 KOs.
We recorded distinct changes of synaptic excitability at thalamo-
amygdala synapses, which was accompanied by altered neuron
morphology in the lateral amygdala. Hence, we aimed to unravel
the cause of thalamo-amygdala malfunction and to verify its
contribution to OCD. Investigation of SPRED2 expression and of
various pre- and postsynaptic proteins in wildtype (WT) and
SPRED2
KO
amygdala
identified
the
molecular
basis
for
dysregulated activity in thalamo-amygdala circuits. Given the
described inhibitory effect of SPRED2 on Ras/ERK-MAPK signaling,
which is an essential mediator of BDNF/TrkB signals in brain, we
considered TrkB/ERK pathway dysregulation as a cause of synaptic
protein level alterations in the amygdala. We investigated
expression and activity of crucial signaling components like BDNF,
TrkB, Ras and ERK and demonstrated that pathway upregulation is
a specific result of SPRED2 deficiency. Our hypothesis that TrkB/
ERK-MAPK pathway overactivation contributes to OCD was
confirmed by artificial pathway downregulation using selumetinib,
which restored normal behavior in SPRED2 KO mice. With this
study, we discovered a link between SPRED2 deficiency, TrkB/ERK
signaling, thalamo-amygdala malfunction, and psychiatric condi-
tions like OCD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SPRED2 KO mice
SPRED2 KO mice were generated by a gene trap approach as described
previously.34,35 To generate mice with a disrupted, non-functional Spred2
gene, the embryonic stem cell line XB228 (International Gene Trap
Consortium, Davis, CA, USA) was used. It contained the pGT0 gene trap
vector, which functionally disrupted the Spred2 gene (Figure 1b). Mice
were housed in a daily 12/12 h light-dark cycle under controlled room
temperature (21 ± 1 °C) and humidity (55 ± 5%) conditions with tap water
and standard mouse chow ad libitum unless stated otherwise. To minimize
possible inbred effects, mice were raised on a mixed 129/Ola × C57Bl/6
genetic background. SPRED2 KO mice were obtained by mating SPRED2
heterozygous animals. All mouse experiments were conducted using
SPRED2 KO mice and WT littermates as controls. Unless stated otherwise,
we used SPRED2 KO mice aged 6–12 months with apparent OCD-like
phenotype of mixed gender. Mice too severely affected by their behavior
and thereby not suitable for testing were excluded from the analyses.
Required sample sizes were calculated based on effect size and error
probabilities using G*Power 3.1.9.2.36 Numbers of samples (n) used in each
experiment are indicated in figure legends. All experiments were approved
by the local councils for animal care (Regierung von Unterfranken: #98/14;
#03/12; #2-375) and were conducted according to the European law for
animal care and use.
Behavioral analysis
Open field.
The open field (OF) consisted of a quadratic black opaque
PERSPEX XT box (50 × 50 × 40 cm), which was semipermeable to infrared
light (TSE Systems, Bad Homburg, Germany) and illuminated by infrared
LEDs from below.37 The area of the OF was divided into a 36 × 36 cm
central zone (100 lx) and the surrounding periphery (50 lx). Mice were
placed in the periphery and their behavior was recorded for 5 min using
the VideoMot2 system (TSE Systems). Variables measured included time
spent, distance traveled, and visits in each zone, total time spent moving,
total distance traveled, vertical rears, number of grooming bouts, and
defecation/urination.
Elevated plus maze.
An elevated plus maze (EPM) made from black
PERSPEX (TSE Systems) and semipermeable for infrared light was used and
illuminated by infrared LEDs from below.37 The apparatus was elevated to
a height of 60 cm above floor level and comprised a central platform
(5 × 5 cm, 15 lx) extending to two opposing open arms (30 × 5 × 0.25 cm,
30 lx) and two opposing closed arms (30 × 5 × 15 cm, 5 lx). Mice were
placed in the center facing an open arm, and their behavior was recorded
for 5 min using the VideoMot2 system (TSE Systems). Behavioral analysis
included time spent, distance traveled, and visits in each zone, total
distance traveled, total time spent moving, vertical rears, number of
grooming bouts, and defecation/urination.
Light/dark box.
The light/dark box (LDB) contained a central gate (5×5 cm)
separating a transparent, brightly illuminated 'lit' compartment (40×40×27 cm,
300 lx) from a small enclosed 'dark' compartment (40×20×27 cm, 0–5 lx).38
Mice were placed into the light compartment and their behavior was
recorded for 5 min. Measured behavioral parameters included time spent in
each compartment, latency to cross from lit to dark area, number of
grooming bouts, and defecation/urination.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
445
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 Mechanical sensitivity
The von Frey test based on the up-and-down-method39 was used to
examine paw withdrawal thresholds to mechanical stimulation. Mice were
placed in plexiglass cages on a wire mesh and the plantar surface of the
hindpaws was touched with a von Frey filament starting at 0.69 g. If
the mouse withdrew its hindpaw upon administration of mild pressure, the
next thinner von Frey filament was used. If the mouse showed no reaction
to this stimulation, the next thicker von Frey filament was applied. Each
hindpaw was tested three times. The 50% withdrawal threshold (that is
force of the von Frey hair to which an animal reacts in 50% of the
administrations) was recorded. Tests were performed by an investigator
blinded for mouse genotype and study objectives.
Thermal sensitivity
Paw withdrawal latencies to heat were determined applying a standard
algesiometer (Ugo Basile, Gemonio, Italy) based on the method of
Hargreaves.40 Mice were placed on a glass surface and a radiant heat
source was positioned under one hindpaw. The time until paw withdrawal
was recorded automatically. To avoid tissue damage, a time limit for heat
application of 15 s was used. Each hindpaw was tested three times. Tests
were performed by an investigator blinded for mouse genotype and study
objectives.
Grooming behavior
Grooming included face-wiping, full-body grooming, and scratching and
rubbing of head and ears. Grooming bouts lasted at least 3 s; bouts after
pauses longer than 3 s were regarded as new bouts. Number of grooming
bouts were counted during EPM, OF and LDB tests. Mouse behavior was
also determined by video observations before and after experimental
rescue with fluoxetine. Mice were placed in a standard cage, which was
covered by a closed chamber containing a webcam (Philips, Amsterdam,
Netherlands) and infrared LEDs for illumination on top. Every mouse was
recorded for 30 min and movies were analyzed for the times mice spent
with grooming, digging, rearing, locomotion and the distance traveled
using VideoMot2 (TSE Systems).
Experimental therapy
Fluoxetine treatment.
SPRED2 KO mice and WT littermate controls were
treated with the SSRI fluoxetine (Stada, Bad Vilbel, Germany) for 2 weeks.
Mice of each genotype were randomly selected for either the placebo or
fluoxetine
group.
Fluoxetine
was
administered
at
a
dose
of
20 mg kg − 1 day − 1 within standard mouse diet; the placebo group was
fed with standard mouse diet. Documentation by photos (Canon EOS
1000D digital camera, Tokyo, Japan) and videos (Philips PixelPlus webcam)
was performed before and after 2 weeks of treatment.
Selumetinib treatment
SPRED2 KO mice were treated with the MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib
(AZD6244, Selleck chemicals, Houston, TX, USA) for one week. Selumetinib
was administered at a dose of 8 mg kg − 1 day − 1 within standard mouse
diet. Photo documentations were performed with a Canon EOS 1000D
digital camera before and after one week of treatment.
Electrophysiology
Mice were terminally anesthetized with isoflurane, decapitated, brains
were rapidly removed and transferred into ice-cold preparation solution
containing (in mM): 210 sucrose, 26 NaHCO3, 1.3 MgSO4, 1.2 KH2PO4,
Figure 1.
Self-inflicted facial lesions result from OCD-like grooming in SPRED2 KO mice. (a) Severe facial skin lesions developed mostly uni-
and sometimes bilaterally in SPRED2 KO mice from the age of 4 months. These lesions were a result of excessive and injurious self-grooming,
appeared on head, neck and snout regions and were characterized by ulcerations and hemorrhage. (b) SPRED2 KO mice were generated by
insertion of a gene trap vector between exons 4 and 5 of Spred2. Gene trapping resulted in a non-functional Spred2 gene and the Spred2
promoter-driven expression of the β-geo reporter gene. (c) In vivo monitoring of Spred2 expression by X-Gal staining of coronal brain sections
of SPRED2 heterozygous mice demonstrated widespread SPRED2 expression in the brain including cortex, hippocampus, amygdala and
striatum, the latter two brain regions associated with the development of OCDs. (d) Exemplary Western blot analyses revealed SPRED2
expression in WT amygdala lysates and the complete absence of SPRED2 protein in amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice. Expression of related
SPRED1 was not compensatory upregulated as confirmed by quantification of relative SPRED1 expression (n = 11 for WT and KO). Data are
mean ± s.e.m. KO, knockout; n.s., not significant; OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder; WT, wildtype.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
446
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 2 MgCl2, 2 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 10 glucose, 3 myoinositol, 2 sodium-pyruvate, and
0.4 ascorbic acid, equilibrated with 95% O2/5% CO2. Coronal slices
(250 μm) were cut with a vibratome (Leica VT1000S, Wetzlar, Germany) in a
submerged chamber filled with ice-cold preparation solution. Slices were
transferred to a holding chamber filled with artificial cerebrospinal fluid
containing (in mM): 124 NaCl, 26 NaHCO3, 2 KCl, 1.2 KH2PO4, 1.3 MgSO4,
2 CaCl2, and 10 glucose, equilibrated with 95% O2/5% CO2. The holding
chamber was heated for 1 h to 34 °C to improve patch success before
slices were kept at room temperature. For recording, slices were
transferred into a superfusion recording chamber mounted on an upright
fixed stage microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) with infrared
differential interference optics. Superfusion rate was 2-3 ml artificial
cerebrospinal fluid per minute. Patch-clamp recordings were made at
room temperature under visual guidance by an infrared sensitive camera
(Kappa CF6, Gleichen, Germany). Patch electrodes were pulled from
borosilicate capillaries (Science Products, Hofheim, Germany) and filled
with a solution containing (in mM): 95 K-gluconate, 20 K3-citrate, 10 NaCl, 1
MgCl2, 0.5 CaCl2, 1 BAPTA (1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-
tetraacetic acid), and 10 HEPES, pH 7.2 (KOH), 270–290 mosm/l. Measure-
ments of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) were made
with a high chloride solution containing (in mM): 140 KCl, 5 NaCl, 1 CaCl2,
10 EGTA, 2 MgCl2, 2 K2-ATP, 0.5 Na-GTP, and 10 HEPES, pH 7.2 (KOH),
270–290 mosm/l. Electrodes had a resistance of 2–4 MΩ.
Synaptic
input
to
lateral
amygdala
and
putamen
neurons
was
investigated by placing a SNEX-200 concentric tungsten electrode (Science
Products, Hofheim, Germany) in the afferent fiber tract. The electrode was
connected to a stimulator (ISO-Flex, A.M.P.I., Jerusalem, Israel). As marked
in Figure 3, appropriate brain regions were identified according to the
mouse brain atlas by Paxinos and Franklin.41 During whole cell recordings
a presynaptic stimulus was applied in voltage-clamp configuration at
− 70 mV for 150 μs. Amplitudes of 10 responses were always averaged
(1 s repeat interval). The stimulation threshold was the minimal stimulation
amplitude (in mA) eliciting a postsynaptic response. Recordings were
made using an EPC10 amplifier (HEKA Elektronik, Lambrecht/Pfalz,
Germany). Data were filtered with a 10 kHz Bessel and 2.9 low-pass
Bessel filter with a sampling rate of 4–30 kHz. The Pulse and Pulsefit
software (HEKA Elektronik) was used for data acquisition and analysis.
mEPSC were measured in voltage clamp configuration (−70 mV) for
1 min with 200 μM CdCl2 in artificial cerebrospinal fluid. For data
analysis we used Mini Analysis 6.0 software (Synaptosoft, Decatur, GA,
USA). Resistance and seal quality were monitored at the beginning and
several times during recordings to assure consistent measurement
conditions.
Neuron morphology
Mouse neurons were stained using a modified Golgi-Cox impregnation
method as described previously.42 In brief, dissected brains were
impregnated in Golgi solution for 30 days, 150 μm serial coronal slices
were prepared using a sliding microtome and mounted on glass
microscopic slides using Vitro Clud (R. Langenbrinck, Emmendingen,
Germany). Golgi-stained pyramidal neurons in the lateral amygdala were
reconstructed by an experimenter blind to the genotype using the
Neurolucida system (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT, USA). Only neurons
located in the center of sections, displaying intense staining of dendritic
arborizations and allowing unequivocal identification of dendritic spines
were chosen for reconstructions. Per genotype 20–30 neurons were used
to determine dendritic parameters such as length of dendrites, spine
numbers, and spine densities/10 μm in total or of a particular branch order.
Quantitative real-time PCR
Amygdala was punched out from mouse brains, tissues were homogenized
with a Polytron PT 3100 homogenizer (Kinematica, Luzern, Switzerland)
and RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). 500 ng of total RNA
were reverse transcribed to complementary DNA (cDNA) using TaqMan
Reverse Transcription Reagents (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) in
a 100 μl PCR reaction additionally containing: 10 × Reaction Buffer (10 μl),
10 mM dNTPs (20 μl), 25 mM MgCl2 (22 μl), Random Hexameres (5 μl),
RNAse Inhibitor (2 μl) and 50 U/μl Multiscribe Reverse Transcriptase
(6.25 μl). The 96-well GeneAmp PCR System 9700 cycler was used and
the following cycler conditions obtained: 10 min, 38 °C; 60 min, 48 °C;
25 min, 95 °C. Five μl of cDNA entered quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) using TaqMan Universal Master Mix and the following target
specific
predesigned
mouse
TaqMan
Gene
Expression
Assays
(Applied Biosystems; Assay-IDs in brackets): PSD 95 (Mm00492193_m1),
mGluR2
(Mm01235831_m1),
mGluR5
(Mm00690332_m1),
and
ERC1
(Mm00453569_m1). 18 s rRNA (Hs99999901_s1) was used as an endogen-
ous control. The 2−ΔΔCq method was applied for relative quantification of
gene expression as previously described.43 Mean value of WT samples was
set to 1 and mean value of KO samples was expressed as x-fold of WT.
Preparation of amygdala lysates
Amygdala was dissected from mouse brains on a metal plate cooled with
ice and homogenized in an assay-dependent buffer using a plastic
douncer fitting into a 1.5 ml microreaction tube. Protein content of
samples was measured using the Bradford method.
Western blot
Amygdala lysates were prepared by adding 1 ml of 2% SDS in PBS
supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel,
Switzerland) and PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) to
50 mg of tissue. Proteins were separated by 5–15% SDS–PAGE under
reducing conditions and electrotransferred to Protran nitrocellulose
membranes using semi-dry blotters. Blots were probed using primary
antibodies against GAPDH (#2118, 1:10,000, Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA), SPRED1 (1:500,34), SPRED2 (1:500,34), PSD95 (#P246,
1:2,000, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), mGluR5 (#53090, 1:500, Abcam,
Cambridge, UK), mGluR2 (#15672, 1:1,000, Abcam), ERC1 (#50312, 1:500,
Abcam),
Bassoon
(#
141003,
1:500,
Synaptic
Systems,
Goettingen,
Germany), Rab3A (#107111, 1:1,000, Synaptic Systems), Rab6 (#sc310,
1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas TX, USA), α-Tubulin (#T6074,
1:5,000, Sigma-Aldrich), β-Tubulin (#T8320, 1:2,000, Sigma-Aldrich), p44/42
MAP kinase (#9102, ERK1/2, 1:2,000, Cell Signaling Technology), phospho-
p44/42 MAP kinase (P-ERK1/2, #9101, 1:1,000, Cell Signaling Technology),
TrkB (#07225, 1:1,000, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), phospho-TrkB
Y515 (P-TrkB Y515, #ab109684, 1:150, Abcam) and phospho-TrkB Y817 (P-
TrkB Y817, #bs-3732R, 1:200, Bioss, Woburn, MA, USA) followed by goat
anti-rabbit (#111-035-144, 1:10,000, Jackson Immuno Research, West
Grove, PA, USA) or goat anti-mouse (#115-035-146, 1:5,000, Jackson
Immuno Research) horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibo-
dies, all diluted in 5% non-fat dry milk in PBS supplemented with 0.05%
Tween20. Signals were developed using CheLuminate-horseradish perox-
idase
FemtoDetect
reagent
(Applichem,
Darmstadt,
Germany)
and
recorded by a FluorChem SP Imager (Alpha Innotech, Biozym, Hessisch
Oldendorf, Germany).
Ras activity assay
A pan-Ras Activation Assay Kit (#STA-400, Cell Biolabs, San Diego, CA, USA)
was used to detect active Ras in mouse amygdala lysates according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Tissue was lysed at a ratio of 50 mg per 1 ml assay
buffer and 1 mg total protein was used for each Ras pull-down.
Quantification of protein expression
Band intensities of Western blots were quantified using ImageJ software
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Expression levels of
proteins were normalized to GAPDH expression, P-ERK levels were
normalized to total ERK, P-TrkB levels to total TrkB, and levels of active
Ras to total Ras signals. Mean value of WT samples was set to 1 and mean
value of KO samples was expressed as x-fold of WT.
Phospho-RTK array
Active phosphorylated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) in amygdala lysates
were identified using the membrane-based Proteome Profiler Mouse
Phospho-RTK Array (#ARY014, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). For
incubation of each membrane 500 μg of protein was used, following the
instructions of the manufacturer's protocol. Signals were detected by a
FluorChem SP Imager (Alpha Innotech, Biozym).
BDNF ELISA
For determination of mature free BDNF levels in mouse amygdala lysates,
we used the BDNF Emax ImmunoAssay System (#G7610, Promega,
Madison, WI, USA) without an acid treatment procedure according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were analyzed in duplicate,
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
447
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 BDNF concentrations were calculated from a standard curve using
nonlinear regression curve fitting (Prism5, GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA)
and related to the corresponding protein content.
SPRED2 phosphorylation assay
Embryonic mouse hypothalamic cells (cell line mHypoE-44, Cedarlane,
Burlington, ON, Canada) were cultivated in high glucose DMEM (Invitro-
gen), supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Pen/Strep at 37 °C and 5% CO2
and grown to 90–100% confluency. To starve for growth factors, cells were
rinsed twice with sterile PBS and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM
without FBS. After 6 h, cells were stimulated with 50 ng ml − 1 BDNF in
DMEM (Merck Millipore) for 5, 15, 30 or 60 min. Cells were lysed in 1 ml of
ice-cold buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal CA-630, 0.5% Sodium
deoxycholate, Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and PhosSTOP
Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Lysates were centrifuged for
10 min at 12 000g and 4 °C and supernatants were collected. As an input
control 50 μl of each sample was mixed with 50 μl Laemmli buffer and
incubated for 5 min at 95 °C. For antibody incubation, 5 μg phospho-
tyrosine (PY) antibody mix containing 3 μg anti-PY 100 and 2 μg anti-PY
102 (#9411 and #9416, Cell Signaling Technology) was added to each
sample before rotating for 1 h at 4 °C. Precipitation of the antibody-protein
complexes was performed by adding 100 μl of 50% v/v Protein G
Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK) to
protein samples and incubating for 1 h at 4 °C under gentle rotation. After
washing of beads 2 times with 1 ml lysis buffer and once with 1 ml 50 mM
Tris buffer (pH 8.0) they were mixed with 50 μl Laemmli buffer
and incubated for 5 min at 450 r.p.m. and 95 °C. Samples were stored at
− 20 °C and analyzed by Western blot.
X-Gal staining
Dissected mouse brains were embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT-compound
(Sakura Finetek Europe, Leiden, Netherlands) and snap-frozen in liquid
nitrogen. 10 μm cryosections were cut using a CM1950 microtome (Leica)
and X-Gal staining was performed as previously described.26,35 Stained
sections were photographed by a Canon EOS 1000D digital camera
connected to a Stereomicroscope 2000-C (Zeiss).
Statistics
Data obtained from the fluoxetine rescue experiment were first analyzed
via three-way mixed ANOVA with genotype (WT/KO) and treatment
(fluoxetine/placebo) as between-subjects factors and time (baseline/
2 weeks) as repeated measures factor. Post hoc t-tests were performed
to further analyze significant time × treatment × genotype interactions. In
the remaining experiments, significant differences between genotypes
were analyzed by Mann–Whitney U test for not normal distributed data or
by two-sided two-sample t-tests and Welch´s tests, respectively, depend-
ing on the homogeneity of variances. Normal distribution of data was
tested using the Shapiro–Wilk test in combination with graphical analysis
tools like box and histogram plots. Statistical analyses were performed
using SPSS Statistics 19 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) or Prism5 (GraphPad).
Results are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. A P-value of *Po0.05 was
considered statistically significant, whereas **Po0.01 represented high
and ***Po0.001 highest significance. P-values ⩾ 0.05 were considered as
statistically not significant (n.s.).
RESULTS
Self-inflicted facial lesions of SPRED2 KO mice are indicative of
obsessive-compulsive grooming
Starting at ~ 4 months of age, SPRED2 KO mice developed
apparent skin lesions on head, neck, and snout regions. These
lesions occurred uni- and bilaterally and progressed to ulcerations
with hemorrhage over time (Figure 1a). The penetrance of this
phenotype increased with age, and 80% of the KOs were affected
at the age of 12 months. We did not detect any lesions in WT
littermates, even when they were housed in the same cage with
SPRED2 KO mice from birth. This indicated that the lesions in KO
mice were not a result of aggressive encounters between cage
mates. However, SPRED2 KO mice were often seen engaged in
self-grooming regardless of whether they were housed alone or
with littermates (Supplementary Video). Thus, we hypothesized
that the phenotype of SPRED2 KOs could be the result of excessive
and injurious self-grooming, indicating an OCD-like behavior
caused by SPRED2 deficiency in brain regions relevant for the
onset of OCD.
In SPRED2 KO mice, the Spred2 gene was disrupted by insertion
of a gene trap vector between exons 4 and 5 of Spred2 (Figure 1b).
The gene trap vector comprised a β-geo reporter gene, which is
expressed under control of the endogenous Spred2 promoter.
Therefore, in vivo monitoring of Spred2 expression by X-Gal
staining is possible. Indicated by the blue color after X-Gal staining
of coronal brain sections from heterozygous mice, SPRED2 is
expressed in various regions of the brain, including cortex and
hippocampus. High promoter activity was especially detected in
amygdala and striatum, both brain regions associated with the
development of OCD-like behaviors (Figure 1c). Western blot
analysis using amygdala lysates from SPRED2 KO mice and WT
controls demonstrated SPRED2 expression in WT amygdala but
the complete loss of full-length SPRED2 protein in KO amygdala.
The deficiency of functional SPRED2 was not compensated by
increased expression of homologous SPRED1, demonstrated
by unaltered SPRED1 expression after normalization to GAPDH
(Figure 1d).
Obsessive-compulsive grooming is associated with changes in
anxiety-like behavior in SPRED2 KO mice
Excessive grooming or other OCD-related conditions are often
associated with additional behavioral phenotypes in mice. To
assess anxiety-like behavior in SPRED2 KO mice, we performed OF,
EPM and LDB tests. We used male mice aged 7–10 months,
displaying excessive grooming and facial lesions. In the OF an
elevated number of grooming events was recorded in SPRED2 KO
Figure 2.
Obsessive-compulsive grooming is accompanied by altered anxiety-like behavior and can be alleviated by fluoxetine in SPRED2 KOs.
(a) In the open field, the number of grooming bouts was elevated in SPRED2 KO mice (n = 9), whereas the total distance traveled by SPRED
KOs was reduced compared with WT controls (n = 7). (b) In the elevated plus maze, SPRED2 KOs (n = 9) spent more time in the open arms and
the distance traveled was again reduced in comparison to WT littermates (n = 7). (c) In the light/dark box, SPRED2 KO mice (n = 9) spent more
time in the brightly lit chamber than the WT controls (n = 7) and took longer to cross from the lit to the dark compartment. (d) Compared with
WTs (n = 5), SPRED2 KO mice (n = 7) showed neither differences in withdrawal thresholds of the hindpaw upon mechanical stimulation with
von Frey filaments nor in hindpaw withdrawal latencies upon thermal stimulation with radiant heat. (e) Photo documentations of mice within
the placebo group revealed an unaltered or even worsened state of facial lesions in SPRED2 KO mice (n = 7) but no occurence of wounds in
WT controls (n = 6) after 2 weeks. (f) Photo documentations of mice treated with fluoxetine for 2 weeks demonstrated a clear recovery of
occurrence and severity of self-inflicted lesions due to reduced hemorrhages and ulcerations in SPRED2 KOs (n = 11) but no visible effects of
treatment in WT mice (n = 7). (g-h) Videotaping of single mice before and after 2 weeks of fluoxetine treatment revealed an increased duration
of grooming events in SPRED2 KO mice (n = 11) as compared with WT (n = 7) at baseline. (g) Duration of grooming events was not affected by
placebo treatment in WT mice but seemed slightly increased in SPRED2 KOs (P = 0.073) after 2 weeks. (h) Fluoxetine treatment had no effect
on grooming time in WT mice but decreased it in SPRED2 KOs after 2 weeks of treatment. Data are mean ± s.e.m; *Po0.05, **Po0.01,
***Po0.001. KO, knockout; n.s., not significant; WT, wildtype.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
448
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 mice (Figure 2a), supporting our hypothesis of an obsessive-
compulsive behavior as cause of the self-inflicted skin lesions. The
total distance traveled was reduced in SPRED2 KO mice, indicating
diminished locomotor and exploratory activity as a consequence
of obsessive grooming (Figure 2a). In comparison to WTs, SPRED2
KO mice tended to spend more time in the center of the OF
(Supplementary Table 1), which was indicative of less anxiety. In
the EPM, SPRED2 KOs in fact spent a longer time span in the open
arms (Figure 2b), traveled a longer distance in, and payed more
visits to the open area as compared with control mice; the
parameters in the guarded area were accordingly decreased
(Supplementary Table 1). Normally, mice avoid exploration of the
potentially dangerous open arms, which pointed to reduced
anxiety in SPRED2 KO mice. Similar to the OF test, the total
distance traveled during the EPM test was decreased (Figure 2b),
again suggesting a basically impaired locomotion. Species-
conform behaviors, for example, rearing and digging were also
generally reduced in favor of compulsive grooming (Supple-
mentary Table 1 and Supplementary Figure 1). In the LDB test,
SPRED2 KO mice again preferred the stressful environment and
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
449
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 spent more time in the brightly lit chamber. The latency to cross to
the save and dark compartment was prolonged, again indicating a
less anxious phenotype in SPRED2 KOs (Figure 2c). Like in the OF
test, the number of grooming bouts was higher in SPRED2 KO
mice compared with WTs (Supplementary Table 1). We also
examined the anxiety behavior in a group of younger male mice
aged 2–4 months, which did not show the grooming phenotype
or skin lesions. However, we could not detect any behavioral
changes of these younger SPRED2 KO mice in the above described
tests compared with WT controls (Supplementary Table 2).
Therefore, we conclude that reduced anxiety of SPRED2 KO mice
correlates with the occurrence of obsessive-compulsive grooming.
SPRED2 KO mice did not stop grooming even when they
already had apparent lesions. Therefore, we investigated the
sensitivity to thermal and mechanical stimuli in SPRED2 KOs and
WT controls. We used 7–10 months old mice without apparent
lesions and only showing first signs of OCD-like behavior. SPRED2
KOs displayed similar heat and mechanical paw withdrawal
latencies and thresholds compared with WT littermates, suggest-
ing intact skin sensitivity (Figure 2d). Since nociceptive testing is
normally conducted in younger mice and not well suited for mice
permanently
engaged
in
self-grooming,
assays
were
also
performed with mice aged 2-3 months. Again, we observed no
differences in nociception between young WT and SPRED2 KOs
(Supplementary Table 2).
Fluoxetine treatment reduces obsessive-compulsive grooming in
SPRED2 KO mice
We next evaluated whether drugs used to treat OCD in humans
would be effective in reducing the abnormal grooming in SPRED2
KO mice. Because SSRIs are a first-line treatment for OCD, we
treated SPRED2 KO mice with apparent OCD-like phenotype and
WT controls aged 7–10 months either with fluoxetine or placebo
for 2 weeks. We monitored treatment effects on behavior and the
occurrence of skin lesions by photo and video documentations.
Photo monitoring revealed no occurrence of lesions in placebo-
treated WT mice. In contrast, in placebo-treated SPRED2 KO mice
facial lesions resulting from overgrooming remained or ulcerations
and hemorrhages even worsened (Figure 2e). In the fluoxetine
group, no treatment effects were visible in WT mice, while in
SPRED2 KOs the occurrence and severity of self-inflicted lesions
were diminished (Figure 2f).
These findings were confirmed by video recordings of single
mice at baseline and after 2 weeks of placebo vs fluoxetine
treatment. Here, ANOVA revealed a significant time × treatment ×
genotype interaction (P = 0.008) and a highly significant main
effect of genotype (Po0.001) for the time mice were engaged
in grooming. Overall, SPRED2 KO mice did not only display a
higher number of grooming events (Figure 2a) but also a
longer grooming time compared with WT mice. Neither placebo
nor fluoxetine treatment affected the duration of grooming
events in WT mice (Figure 2g and h). In placebo-treated
KO mice, however, grooming time seemed slightly increased after
2 weeks compared with baseline (Figure 2g), which is in line
with
aggravation
of
facial
lesions
over
time.
Interestingly,
fluoxetine-treated SPRED2 KO mice spent less time grooming
after 2 weeks of treatment compared with baseline (Figure 2h).
This
confirms
that
grooming
can
be
interpreted
as
an
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 KOs, which can be treated with
fluoxetine.
Digging is a species-typical behavior in mice but responsive to
SSRI treatment.44 Therefore, it can also be regarded as OCD-like
and is commonly used as control parameter for fluoxetine effects.
Digging was reduced by fluoxetine treatment in addition to
excessive grooming, confirming the efficiency of fluoxetine
treatment and the OCD-like nature of the self-grooming behavior
in SPRED2 KOs (Supplementary Figure 1).
Changed synaptic transmission at cortico-striatal and thalamo-
amygdala synapses in SPRED2 KO mice
The pathogenesis of OCD is associated with dysregulation in CSTC
circuits. SPRED2 is highly expressed in cortex, striatum, and
thalamus but also in other parts of the central nervous system. To
detect possible defects in striatal neurotransmission caused by
SPRED2 deficiency, we performed whole cell patch clamp
measurements on acute brain slices of SPRED2 KO mice with
apparent OCD phenotype and WT controls aged 6–8 months. The
stimulation electrode was placed in fibers of the corpus callosum
and the recording electrode in single neurons of the putamen,
which is part of the striatum (Figure 3a). We stimulated putamen-
innervating corpus callosum fibers with two consecutive pulses of
1 mA and with an interstimulus interval of 50 ms. This presynaptic
fiber stimulation elicited two elevated excitatory postsynaptic
currents (EPSCs) in the putamen of SPRED2 KO mice, indicating
an increased synaptic transmission at cortico-striatal synapses
compared with WT controls (Figure 3b and d). According to that,
the stimulation threshold tended to be reduced in putamen
neurons of SPRED2 KOs (Figure 3c). Since both EPSC1 and EPSC2
were elevated to a similar extent in SPRED2 KO mice (Figure 3d),
the paired pulse ratio in KOs was comparable to WTs (Figure 3e),
indicating no relevant changes in the presynaptic vesicle release
probability.
The effects seen in cortico-striatal neurotransmission, however,
were even more pronounced in thalamo-amygdala circuits.
Accordingly, we performed another set of whole cell patch clamp
measurements by placing the stimulation electrode in thalamic
fibers and the recording electrode in single neurons of the lateral
amygdala (Figure 3f). Stimulation of thalamic afferents with two
consecutive pulses of 1 mA and with an interstimulus interval of
50 ms elicited an elevated EPSC1 in lateral amygdala neurons of
Figure 3.
Altered synaptic excitability in amygdala and striatum of SPRED2 KO mice. (a) Schematic brain slice showing representative positions
of afferent fiber stimulation (asterisk) in the corpus callosum and of whole cell current measurements in the putamen. The location of each
measured cell is marked by a circle. (b) Exemplary excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSC1, EPSC2) for SPRED2 KO and WT recorded after two
consecutive afferent fiber stimulations (asterisks). (c) Stimulation threshold in putamen of SPRED2 KOs tended to be reduced after stimulation
of afferent corpus callosum fibers. (d) Both EPSC1 and EPSC2 were elevated comparably in putamen of SPRED2 KO mice after two consecutive
afferent fiber stimulations (paired pulses). (e) Paired pulse ratio of WTs and KOs was similar in putamen. n = 5 for WT and SPRED2 KO in each
experimental setup of cortico-striatal neurotransmission measurement. (f) Schematic brain slice showing representative positions of thalamic
afferent fiber stimulation (asterisk) and of whole cell current measurements in the lateral amygdala. (g) Exemplary excitatory postsynaptic
currents (EPSC1, EPSC2) for SPRED2 KO and WT recorded after two consecutive afferent fiber stimulations (asterisks). (h) Stimulation threshold
in lateral amygdala of SPRED2 KOs was decreased after stimulation of afferent thalamic fibers. (i) In comparison to WTs, consecutive afferent
fiber stimulations (paired pulses) revealed an increased EPSC1 but a similar EPSC2 in lateral amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice. (j) Accordingly, the
paired pulse ratio was reduced in lateral amygdala of SPRED2 KOs. (k) Exemplary miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs)
measured in lateral amygdala of WT and SPRED2 KO cells. (l) mEPSC frequency was decreased in SPRED2 KO mice. (m) mEPSC magnitude was
reduced in SPRED2 KOs. n = 8 for WT and n = 9 for SPRED2 KO in each experimental setup of thalamo-amygdala neurotransmission
measurement. Data are mean ± s.e.m; *Po0.05. KO, knockout; n.s., not significant; WT, wildtype.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
450
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 SPRED2 KO mice (Figure 3g and i). This indicates an increased
transmission also at thalamo-amygdala synapses and is in line
with the reduced stimulation threshold in lateral amygdala
neurons of SPRED2 KOs (Figure 3h). The provoked EPSC2 was
comparable in WTs and SPRED2 KOs (Figure 3g and i). This
leads to a reduced paired pulse ratio in SPRED2 KO mice and
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
451
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 reflects changes in the presynaptic vesicle release probability
at
these
amygdaloid
synapses
(Figure
3j).
Therefore,
we
additionally measured response parameters of spontaneously
released vesicles by recording mEPSCs (Figure 3k) in lateral
amygdala neurons. The frequency of mEPSCs recorded within
1 min was reduced in SPRED2 KO mice, which again indicates
presynaptic alterations in vesicle release probability (Figure 3l).
mEPSC magnitudes were also decreased in SPRED2 KOs, which
might either be caused by changes in postsynaptic sensitivity or in
vesicle transmitter load (Figure 3m).
Altered morphology in lateral amygdala neurons is accompanied
by dysregulated transcription and expression of synaptic genes
Changes in synaptic input are correlated with morphological
alterations in the respective neurons. Hence, we reconstructed
pyramidal neurons from the lateral amygdala of SPRED2 KO
mice showing apparent OCD-like behavior and of WT controls
aged 9–12 months. We detected a higher total spine number on
dendritic
branches
of
branch
orders
1–4
in
SPRED2
KOs
(Figure 4a). Spine density per 10 μm of dendritic length was also
elevated
across
these
branch
orders
compared
with
WTs
(Figure 4b).
Since SPREDs are suppressors of Ras/ERK-MAPK signaling and
thus critical regulators of cell proliferation and gene expression,
we further examined whether changed synaptic excitability and
neuron morphology was associated with altered expression of
synaptic proteins in the amygdala. Western blot analyses of pre-
and postsynaptic proteins demonstrated different expression
levels in 10–12 months old SPRED2 KO mice compared with WT
controls (Figure 4c). The expression of PSD95, an important anchor
of various synaptic proteins at the postsynapse, was upregulated
in SPRED2 KOs compared with WT littermates. Protein levels of
metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5), which is primarily
located at the periphery of postsynaptic densities, were also
elevated in SPRED2 KO mice as well as levels of mGluR2, which is
primarily distributed at presynaptic axon terminals but may also
be expressed at postsynaptic sites. ERC1 (ELKS/RAB6-interacting/
CAST family member 1), a structural and functional determinant of
the
presynaptic
active
zone,
was
also
upregulated,
while
presynaptic bassoon, a direct interaction partner of ERC1 in the
active zone, was downregulated. The expression of the small
GTPases
Rab3A
and
Rab6,
which
are
involved
in
the
regulation of synaptic vesicle transport along microtubules and
exocytosis at the presynapse, was not altered. Furthermore,
levels
of
α-
and
β-tubulin
were
unchanged
(Figure
4c).
Quantification
of
protein
amounts
by
normalization
to
GAPDH
confirmed
the
dysregulated
expression
of
various
pre- and postsynaptic proteins in the amygdala of SPRED2 KOs
(Figure 4d).
Differences in protein expression are mainly caused either by
altered gene transcription or by protein turnover rate. To address
a possible dysregulation at transcriptional level, we performed
quantitative RT-PCRs using RNA from the amygdala and gene-
specific primers for PSD95, mGluR2, mGluR5 and ERC1. We
detected that the dysregulated protein expression observed in
Western blots was accompanied by altered expression levels of
the selected genes (Figure 4e). Because mRNA and protein levels
were changed in the same direction, transcriptional dysregulation
is most likely causative for alterations in synaptic protein
expression.
SPRED2 deficiency leads to increased TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling
and induces OCD-like grooming in SPRED2 KO mice
Given the dysregulated synaptic gene expression in the amygdala,
we focused on the upstream regulatory mechanism that might
contribute
to the
molecular
and
physiological
changes
at
amygdaloid synapses. An essential regulator of neuronal gene
transcription, proliferation and differentiation but also of synaptic
transmission and potentiation is the BDNF/TrkB signaling path-
way. Upon binding of the neurotrophin BDNF to its preferred
receptor tyrosine kinase TrkB, downstream signals are mediated
by the Ras/ERK-MAPK cascade. Because SPRED2 is a critical
inhibitor of Ras/ERK-MAPK signaling, we investigated if SPRED2
deficiency impacts BDNF/TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling in SPRED2 KO
mice. We analyzed the expression and phosphorylation of ERK1/2
in amygdala of 10–12 months old SPRED2 KO mice and WT
littermates by Western blot. The expression of unphosphorylated
ERK was not altered, however, P-ERK was increased in SPRED2 KO
mice. The 2.5-fold elevated P-ERK/ERK ratio clearly reflected
pathway overactivation due to the loss of SPRED2-mediated
inhibition (Figure 5a). To unravel whether the increase in Ras/ERK-
MAPK signaling is also involved in the development of the
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 KOs, we specifically blocked the
Ras/ERK-MAPK in vivo using the MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib. In
this prospective study, we treated SPRED2 KO mice aged 8 months
with selumetinib for one week. Photo documentation revealed
reduced hemorrhage and ulceration of self-inflicted wounds in
SPRED2 KOs after one week of treatment (Figure 5b). This
indicated
that
SPRED2,
as
an
endogenous
suppressor
of
Ras/ERK-MAPK signaling, is required to ensure normal behavior.
Investigation of factors further upstream in this pathway revealed
that also Ras was activated 1.9-fold in the amygdala of SPRED2 KO
mice compared with WTs (Figure 5c). To test whether pathway
activation
is
elicited
by
elevated
BDNF
expression,
we
estimated BDNF levels in the amygdala of 6–12 months old
SPRED2 KO mice and WT controls and found no differences
between genotypes (Figure 5d). SPRED2 can be phosphorylated at
various confirmed tyrosine residues and might therefore be a
direct target of TrkB. To address this, we immunoprecipitated
tyrosine-phosphorylated
proteins
from
BDNF-stimulated
murine hypothalamic cells and analyzed SPRED2 and TrkB by
Western
blot.
The
input
controls
demonstrated
constant
expression of both TrkB and SPRED2 in mHypoE44 cells after
different times of BDNF stimulation. In the IP samples, BDNF
stimulation resulted in increasing TrkB phosphorylation over time.
After 60 min of BDNF stimulation, BDNF-mediated TrkB activation
provoked phosphorylation of SPRED2 (Figure 5e). Consequently,
SPRED2 is a target of TrkB itself or of a kinase downstream of TrkB.
Given the unaltered BDNF levels in the amygdala and the
interaction between SPRED2 and TrkB, we further investigated
whether the augmented activity of Ras and ERK in SPRED2 KO
mice
might
be
a
result
of
specifically
increased
TrkB
activation. We used a phospho-RTK array to identify active
phosphorylated RTKs in amygdala of 10 months old SPRED2 KO
and WT mice. Independently of the genotype, only PDGF-Rα was
markedly phosphorylated among the 39 different murine RTKs
included in the array. In the amygdala lysates of SPRED2
KOs, we detected highest phosphorylation levels in EGFR, ErbB2
and TrkB (Figure 5f). This demonstrated activation of the TrkB
receptor in response to loss of SPRED2; however, a parallel
phosphorylation
of
EGFR
and
ErbB2
might
contribute
to
induction of downstream pathways. To support our hypothesis
that TrkB is responsible for activation of the Ras/ERK-MAPK
pathway,
we
examined
possible
alterations
in
TrkB
phosphorylation and expression quantitatively. TrkB expression
levels were 1.4-fold higher in SPRED2 KO amygdala after
normalization
to
GAPDH
in
comparison
to
WT
controls
(Figure
5g).
In
addition
to
TrkB
receptor
overexpression,
phosphorylation of Y515, the tyrosine residue indicative for
Ras/ERK-MAPK pathway activation in mouse TrkB, was 1.3-fold
elevated in amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice. In contrast, Y817
phosphorylation level, which is relevant for phospholipase C
activation, was not altered, indicating that the downstream
actions of activated TrkB are specifically mediated by the
Ras/ERK MAPK pathway (Figure 5g). Although a contribution of
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
452
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 activated EGFR and ErbB2 cannot be excluded, TrkB seems to be a
crucial modulator of upregulated ERK-MAPK pathway in SPRED2
KO mice as demonstrated by TrkB overexpression, activation, and
association with phosphorylation of SPRED2. Missing inhibition of
BDNF/TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling resulted in OCD-like behavior in
SPRED2 KO mice whereas SPRED2-mediated pathway down-
regulation seems to be necessary for coordinated neuronal
protein expression, synaptic function and behavior in vivo.
Figure 4.
Differences in lateral amygdala neuron morphology are associated with dysregulated gene transcription and protein expression. (a)
Morphological analysis of reconstructed neurons from lateral amygdala of WT (n = 26) and SPRED2 KO mice (n = 22) revealed a higher total
spine number on dendritic branches of branch orders 1–4. (b) Spine density per 10 μm of dendritic length was also higher within these branch
orders. (c) Exemplary Western blot analyses showed changed expression levels of different pre- and postsynaptic proteins in the amygdala of
SPRED2 KO mice in comparison to WT controls. Protein levels of PSD95, mGluR5, mGluR2, and ERC1 were increased, those of bassoon were
decreased. Protein expression of Rab3A, Rab6, α-tubulin, β-tubulin and GAPDH was unaltered; GAPDH was used as loading control. (d)
Quantified signals of investigated synaptic proteins after normalization to GAPDH confirmed changed expression levels in the amygdala of
SPRED2 KOs (n = 11) compared with WTs (n = 11). (e) Quantitative RT-PCRs with mRNA isolated from amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice (n = 11) and
WT controls (n = 11) using gene-specific primers confirmed the increased expression of PSD95, mGluR5, mGluR2, and ERC1 on mRNA level.
Data are mean ± s.e.m; *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001. KO, knockout; n.s., not significant; WT, wildtype.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
453
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 DISCUSSION
Identification of SPRED2 as a new factor for the pathogenesis of
OCD
Our study demonstrates that deficiency of SPRED2 causes
excessive and pathological self-grooming in mice. One first clear
indication for the presence of an OCD in SPRED2 KOs is that they
do not stop grooming even if they already have severe facial
lesions with ulcerations and hemorrhage. Reactions to mechanical
and heat stimuli were not altered in SPRED2 KO mice, suggesting
normal skin sensitivity but compulsive actions up to the point of
being self-injurious. Increased anxiety is a common feature
associated with certain forms of OCD and also occurs in SAPAP3
or SLITRK5 KO mice, two comparable models of OCD-like
grooming.45,46 Unexpectedly, SPRED2 KO mice did not show
increased anxiety-like behavior but seemed less anxious. However,
in contrast to the other mouse models, behavioral tests revealed a
generally decreased locomotor activity in SPRED2 KOs in addition
to the reduced anxiety, which may also be interpreted as lack of
drive, lethargy, or signs of depression-like behavior. In line with
this, other species-conform behaviors, for example, rearing, were
also reduced, indicating that SPRED2 KO mice are massively
captured by compulsive actions, which influence experimental
readouts. Furthermore, SPRED2 KO mice might also display
learning defects similar to mice deficient for the related SPRED1
(ref. 31)
and SPRED1-deficient
humans.30
Altogether,
these
disabilities possibly impact appropriate reactions to anxiogenic
stimuli or their interpretation. OCD in humans is to a great extent
associated with anxiety, specifically avoidance. However, common
comorbid conditions also include other psychiatric disorders.
Estimated comorbidity with generalized anxiety disorder ranges
from below 20% to nearly 76% (overview in47,48). To a similar
extend, OCD is associated with major depressive disorder (40–65%
according to47,48). This may also be the case in SPRED2 deficient
mice and explain the reduced locomotor activity and the observed
lack of drive. Moreover, OCD and anxiety disorders vary greatly in
features
like
neurocircuitry,
neurochemistry,
symptoms
and
cognitive-emotional processing,49 and therefore in DSM-V (5th
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders), OCD is no longer categorized as an anxiety disorder,
thus emphasizing the differences between both entities.50
A second important feature of OCD is its susceptibility to stress,
that is, symptoms increase at times of stress and stressful events
may precede the onset of OCD.51,52 Accordingly, increased stress
hormone levels such as corticotropin-releasing hormone, adreno-
corticotropic hormone, and corticosterone are often detected in
OCD patients.53,54 This is in line with our previous findings of a
hyperactive HPA axis in SPRED2 KO mice, leading to elevated
release of these stress hormones.33
Third, SPRED2 KOs were responsive to fluoxetine, a treatment
shown to be effective in the reduction of OCD-like grooming and
digging.7,44–46 Altogether, these data identify SPRED2 as a
candidate factor involved in the pathogenesis of OCD-like
disorders and SPRED2 KO mice as a suitable new model to
investigate OCD-like behaviors.
Excitability changes at cortico-striatal and thalamo-amygdala
synapses contribute to OCD pathogenesis in SPRED2 KO mice
Both neuroimaging studies in humans5,6 and studies with mutant
mice
implicated
dysregulation
within
CSTC
circuits
in
the
pathogenesis of OCD. Mice deficient for SAPAP3 or SLITRK5, like
SPRED2 highly expressed in the striatum, displayed alterations in
the activity of cortico-striatal neurons in combination with OCD-
like grooming.45,46 In SPRED2 KO mice, we detected increased
transmission at cortico-striatal synapses. In line with our results,
repeated experimental cortico-striatal stimulation in mice also
provoked excessive grooming,7 indicating that especially hyper-
activity of cortico-striatal synapses might be causative for OCD-like
behaviors and that SPRED2 is crucially involved in regulation of
cortico-striatal circuit activity.
Interestingly, we also detected elevated synaptic excitability at
thalamo-amygdala synapses of SPRED2 KO mice. Although
aberrant function of CSTC circuits is at present the most widely
accepted neurobiological explanation for OCD, the underlying
pathology
is
not
necessarily
limited
to
orbitofronto-striatal
regions. Recent evidence suggests that limbic structures such as
hippocampus, anterior cingulate, and amygdala contribute to the
pathology of OCD.10,55,56 In fact, functional magnetic resonance
imaging studies in humans correlate OCD disorders with elevated
amygdala activity,55–57 which is in line with the observed
hyperactivity in the lateral amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice.
Especially the basolateral amygdala sends prominent projections
to the ventral striatum,8,9,56 underlining the functional connectiv-
ity of both brain regions. Since the amygdala is central to
processing emotion and to multiple aspects of cognition that are
impaired in OCD, aberrant communication between amygdala
and striatum could mediate compulsive behavior. Additionally,
dysregulation of amygdala activity may contribute to compulsivity
by imparting excessive affective influence on behavioral selection.
Here, we provide a mouse model showing similar changes of
synaptic excitability in both functionally related brain regions
associated with OCD, which is unique amongst previously
published mouse models.45,46,58 These data suggest that the
altered activity of CSTC circuits observed in OCD may indeed be
triggered upstream by changes in amygdala activity and that
SPRED2 is a crucial modulator of synaptic transmission from
thalamus to lateral amygdala.
Changed synaptic input into lateral amygdala results from a
combination of altered neuron morphology and dysregulated
expression of pre- and postsynaptic proteins
Detailed analysis of electrophysiological data revealed both
pre- and postsynaptic changes in SPRED2 KO mice, which
contributed to the observed increased synaptic transmission in
Figure 5.
Increased TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling caused by SPRED2 deficiency leads to OCD-like grooming in SPRED2 KO mice. (a) Western blot
analyses of ERK expression and phosphorylation in amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice (n=8) and WT littermates (n=8) revealed no differences in levels
of unphosphorylated ERK but increased levels of phosphorylated ERK in SPRED2 KOs. Upregulation of ERK-MAPK signaling was verified by the 2.5-
fold elevated P-ERK/ERK ratio. (b) In vivo inhibition of Ras/ERK-MAPK signaling in SPRED2 KO mice (n=3) by administration of the MEK1/2 inhibitor
selumetinib for one week alleviated hemorrhage and ulceration of facial lesions. (c) Ras activation was 1.9-fold higher in SPRED2 KO amygdala (n=8)
compared with WT (n=8). (d) BDNF levels in relation to total protein content were unchanged in amygdala lysates of WT (n=18) and SPRED2 KO
mice (n=24). (e) Western blot analyses (IB) of SPRED2 and TrkB after BDNF stimulation of murine hypothalamic cells revealed constant TrkB and
SPRED2 expression over time (Input). After immunoprecipitation of tyrosine-phosphorylated (PY) proteins from BDNF-stimulated mHypoE44 cells,
Western blot analyses detected increasing phosphorylation of TrkB over time and, mediated by active TrkB, phosphorylation of SPRED2 60 min after
BDNF stimulation (IP). (f) Parallel determination of phosphorylation of 39 different mouse receptor tyrosine kinases revealed a higher
phosphorylation of TrkB specifically in amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice (n=2 for WT and KO). (g) Western blot analyses of TrkB in amygdala indicated
an increased expression in SPRED2 KOs reflected by the 1.4-fold TrkB/GAPDH ratio as compared with WTs. Phosphorylation of TrkB at Y515 was
1.3-fold elevated but unchanged at Y817. n=8 for WT and KO. Data are mean±s.e.m; **Po0.01, ***Po0.001. BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic
factor; KO, knockout; n.s., not significant; OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder; TrkB, tropomyosin receptro kinase B; WT, wildtype.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
454
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 amygdala and striatum. In the lateral amygdala, diminished
paired pulse ratio and decreased frequency of spontaneously
released vesicles indicate a reduced presynaptic vesicle release
probability. In line with these findings we detected altered
expression of ERC1 and bassoon, both scaffolding proteins
interacting at the active zone of presynapses. They are not only
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
455
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 critical for the integrity of active zone structures,59 but also for the
regulation of presynaptic neurotransmitter release.60,61 Especially
ERC1, a homolog of Drosophila´s bruchpilot, is required to
maintain Ca2+-channel density and synaptic transmission after
evoked stimuli,60 which is in line with the ERC1 overexpression
and increased excitability of amygdala synapses in SPRED KOs.
Consistent with the changes in synaptic transmission, we also
found dysregulated expression of glutamate receptors in the
amygdala. Because SPRED2 is rather associated with intracellular
signaling than with regulation of ion channels, we focused on
metabotropic
glutamate
receptors
and
revealed
a
higher
expression of mGluR5 and mGluR2. While mGluR2 can be located
at both pre- and postsynaptic sites and generally decreases
neuronal excitability, mGluR5 acts exclusively at postsynaptic sites
by increasing neuronal excitability.62 Dysregulation of mGluRs is
generally associated with different psychiatric and anxiety-related
disorders, and particularly mGluR5 antagonists and mGluR2
agonists are promising antipsychotic compounds.63 Hence, the
observed higher expression of mGluR5 in SPRED2 KOs might
contribute to the OCD-like behavior and increased synaptic
transmission,
whereas
the
upregulated
mGluR2
expression
could already be a counterregulatory mechanism and associated
with the reduced anxiety. PSD95 is the major scaffolding protein
at the postsynapse of mature glutamate synapses and clusters
with ionotropic but also with metabotropic glutamate receptors.64
This coupling explains the higher expression of both mGluRs and
PSD95 at amygdala postsynapses. Alterations in the expression of
PSD95 or of interacting proteins are again associated with a
variety of mood disorders in humans,65 in mice especially with
OCD-like behaviors, as also observed in the SAPAP3 KO mouse
model.45
Taken together, the mostly presynaptic effects detected by
electrophysiological recordings in the amygdala are correlated
with the dysregulated expression of proteins that have been
shown
to
regulate
presynaptic
active
zone
structure
and
neurotransmitter release like bassoon, ERC1 and mGluR2. The
dysregulation of proteins expressed at the postsynapse, for
example, PSD95 and mGluR5, is consistent with the detected
higher branch order-dependent spine number and spine density
in lateral amygdala neurons of SPRED2 KO mice. In fact, PSD95,
mGluR5 and also TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling are associated with
regulation
of
spine
morphology,
primarily
investigated
in
hippocampus66–69 but also in amygdala.70
Dendritic spines are the main target for excitatory inputs.
Excitatory drive from thalamus to lateral amygdala was increased
in SPRED2 KOs as confirmed by higher provoked EPSCs and
reduced stimulation threshold. Therefore, higher spine number
and density in SPRED2 KOs is supposed to be the structural
manifestation of enhanced excitability at thalamo-amygdala
synapses. This in turn might contribute to general amygdala
hyperactivity, which is a feature of OCD but also of other anxiety
disorders.55–57 Although SPRED2 KO mice did not show increased
anxiety in the conducted standard tests, other features of anxiety-
related behavior are highly apparent, including increased stress
hormone levels due to HPA axis hyperactivity,33 and reduced
exploratory locomotion. Accordingly, the amygdala has a high
density of CRH and glucocorticoid receptors and stress exposure
can induce both amygdala activation and increases in spine
density.9,42,71 Taken together, the altered synaptic excitability in
the amygdala contributes to the OCD-like phenotype in SPRED2
KO mice and is a result of both pre- and postsynaptic effects.
Changes in thalamo-amygdala synaptic transmission are caused
by dysregulated protein expression as a consequence of altered
gene transcription, altogether a result of SPRED2 deficiency and
the associated upregulation of TrkB/ERK signaling.
Increased TrkB/BDNF-ERK pathway activity is associated with
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 KO mice
In
combination
with
the
OCD-like
behavior,
we
detected
hyperactivation of TrKB/ERK-MAPK signaling at critical levels of
the cascade. In amygdala of SPRED2 KO mice, TrkB was not only
overexpressed, but also phosphorylation of TrkB was increased, as
demonstrated by a phospho-RTK-array and by Western blots.
More
precisely,
phosphorylation
at
Y515
was
elevated
in
amygdala lysates of SPRED2 KO mice, phosphorylation at Y817,
however, was unchanged. Whereas P-TrkB Y817 is responsible for
induction of downstream phospholipase C-mediated cascades,
P-TrkB Y515 triggers Ras/ERK-MAPK pathways,13 indicating that
they are specifically activated by active TrKB in SPRED2 KOs.
Consequently, both Ras activity and ERK phosphorylation were
augmented in SPRED2 KO amygdala. BDNF levels in amygdala
were not changed, demonstrating that overactivation of Ras/ERK-
MAPK signaling in fact results from loss of SPRED2-mediated
pathway inhibition.
Furthermore, we detected that SPRED2 is phosphorylated after
BDNF-stimulated TrkB activation. TrkB is activated by autophos-
phorylation and in turn activates various downstream targets by
phosphorylation. SPRED2 can be phosphorylated at different
tyrosine residues in response to stimulation by various growth
factors.23 SPRED phosphorylation is functionally required for
regulation of the inhibitory effect72,73 or as prevention of
proteasomal degradation.72 We assume that TrkB-dependent
tyrosine phosphorylation of SPRED2 might be preventive for
protein degradation and might enable the suppression of Ras/ERK
signaling stimulated by BDNF-induced TrkB activation. This
mechanism could regulate SPRED2 steady-state levels, maintain
physiological TrkB/BDNF-ERK pathway activity in vivo, and ensure
normal behavior.
BDNF/TrkB pathways are crucially involved in nearly all stages of
neural circuit development and associated with multiple neuro-
psychiatrc diseases.12–15 Untill now, however, only first descriptive
studies associate the BDNF/TrkB system with OCD16,17 or related
disorders in humans and mice, indicating that genetic mutations
and altered protein levels might play a role.18–20 ERK, a critical
regulator of proliferation, is present in presumably all cells and
tissues. In brain, ERK contributes to the induction of transcription
of plasticity-related genes, mediates synaptic transmitter release
and is therefore implicated in learning and memory.74–76 However,
not much is known about the role of ERK in neuropsychiatric
disorders, especially in OCD-like disorders. In SPRED2 KO mice, we
determined the mechanism how SPRED2 deficiency leads to an
increase of active TrkB receptor and signaling, which is mediated
downstream by increased Ras activity and ERK-phosporylation and
induces OCD-like behavior.
The contribution of dysregulated TrkB/ERK-MAPK signaling to
OCD-development was confirmed by administration of selumeti-
nib, a MEK1/2 inhibitor and specific blocker of Ras/ERK-MAPK
activity. Selumetinib is experimentally used for the treatment of
cancer in mouse models and clinical trials have also been
conducted in humans.77,78 Although we used selumetinib not as
a putative medication but as an experimental rescue, it robustly
alleviated self-inflicted lesions resulting from excessive grooming
in SPRED2 KO mice. Our prospective in vivo study showed that the
TrkB-activated ERK-MAPK pathway is specifically involved in the
development of OCD and confirmed that physiological SPRED2-
regulated pathway activity is required to maintain normal
behavior in vivo.
Here we provide evidence that upregulation of the Ras/ERK-
MAPK pathway is not only involved in cancer pathogenesis and
developmental
disorders
like
rasopathies,
but
also
in
the
development of OCD-related disorders. We ascertained thalamo-
amygdala circuits as affected brain region in addition to the
known cortico-striatal circuitry. In the amygdala, the upstream
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
456
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 trigger of OCD-like behavior is hyperactivity of BDNF/TrkB
signaling, a result of the loss of SPRED2-mediated pathway
inhibition. BDNF/TrkB/ERK-MAPK pathway dysregulation leads to
changes in pre- and postsynaptic mRNA and protein expression
and to alterations of thalamo-amygdala synaptic transmission.
Both the SSRI fluoxetine and the Ras/ERK pathway inhibitor
selumetinib reduced OCD-like grooming in SPRED2 KO mice
(Supplementary Figure 2). Thus, our study identifies SPRED2 as a
considerable factor in the pathogenesis of OCD, as a critical
regulator of synaptic transmission in different brain regions and as
a new regulator of BDNF/TrkB pathways. SPRED2 is highly
conserved,
the
most
ubiquitously
expressed
SPRED
family
member, and its expression is especially widespread in brain.
Therefore, SPRED2 is a very promising target for further and more
specific studies of brain function and associated neuropsychiatric,
-developmental and -degenerative diseases both in mice and
humans.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Lydia Biko for expert technical help with mechanical and thermal sensitivity
assays. We are also very grateful to Marion Winning for her excellent technical
expertize in Golgi-Cox staining. We acknowledge Marco Abesser for technical
assistance in photography and videotaping and Nadine Ehmann and Martin Pauli for
generously providing reagents. The position of Melanie Ullrich was funded by the
DFG (SCHU1600/3-1).
REFERENCES
1 Leckman JF, Grice DE, Boardman J, Zhang H, Vitale A, Bondi C et al. Symptoms of
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry 1997; 154: 911–917.
2 Miguel
EC,
Leckman
JF,
Rauch
S,
do
Rosario-Campos
MC,
Hounie
AG,
Mercadante MT et al. Obsessive-compulsive disorder phenotypes: implications for
genetic studies. Mol Psychiatry 2005; 10: 258–275.
3 Fineberg NA, Potenza MN, Chamberlain SR, Berlin HA, Menzies L, Bechara A et al.
Probing compulsive and impulsive behaviors, from animal models to endophe-
notypes: a narrative review. Neuropsychopharmacology 2010; 35: 591–604.
4 Browne HA, Gair SL, Scharf JM, Grice DE. Genetics of obsessive-compulsive
disorder and related disorders. Psychiatr Clin North Am 2014; 37: 319–335.
5 Graybiel AM, Rauch SL. Toward a neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Neuron 2000; 28: 343–347.
6 Aouizerate B, Guehl D, Cuny E, Rougier A, Bioulac B, Tignol J et al. Pathophy-
siology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a necessary link between phenomen-
ology, neuropsychology, imagery and physiology. Prog Neurobiol 2004; 72:
195–221.
7 Ahmari SE, Spellman T, Douglass NL, Kheirbek MA, Simpson HB, Deisseroth K et al.
Repeated cortico-striatal stimulation generates persistent OCD-like behavior.
Science (New York, NY) 2013; 340: 1234–1239.
8 Janak PH, Tye KM. From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature 2015; 517:
284–292.
9 Davis M, Whalen PJ. The amygdala: vigilance and emotion. Mol Psychiatry 2001; 6:
13–34.
10 Milad MR, Rauch SL. Obsessive-compulsive disorder: beyond segregated cortico-
striatal pathways. Trends Cogn Sci 2012; 16: 43–51.
11 Taylor S. Molecular genetics of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a comprehensive
meta-analysis of genetic association studies. Mol Psychiatry 2013; 18: 799–805.
12 Huang EJ, Reichardt LF. Neurotrophins: roles in neuronal development and
function. Annu Rev Neurosci 2001; 24: 677–736.
13 Huang EJ, Reichardt LF. Trk receptors: roles in neuronal signal transduction. Annu
Rev Biochem 2003; 72: 609–642.
14 Autry AE, Monteggia LM. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neuropsychiatric
disorders. Pharmacol Rev 2012; 64: 238–258.
15 Zuccato C, Cattaneo E. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor in neurodegenerative
diseases. Nat Rev Neurol 2009; 5: 311–322.
16 Hall D, Dhilla A, Charalambous A, Gogos JA, Karayiorgou M. Sequence variants of
the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene are strongly associated with
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Am J Hum Genet 2003; 73: 370–376.
17 Hemmings SM, Kinnear CJ, Van der Merwe L, Lochner C, Corfield VA,
Moolman-Smook JC et al. Investigating the role of the brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) val66met variant in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). World J
Biol Psychiatry 2008; 9: 126–134.
18 Oliveira-Maia AJ, Castro-Rodrigues P. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor: a bio-
marker for obsessive-compulsive disorder? Front Neurosci 2015; 9: 134.
19 Alonso P, Gratacos M, Menchon JM, Saiz-Ruiz J, Segalas C, Baca-Garcia E et al.
Extensive genotyping of the BDNF and NTRK2 genes define protective haplotypes
against obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2008; 63: 619–628.
20 Olsen D, Kaas M, Schwartz O, Nykjaer A, Glerup S. Loss of BDNF or its receptors in
three mouse models has unpredictable consequences for anxiety and fear
acquisition. Learn Mem 2013; 20: 499–504.
21 Guiton M, Gunn-Moore FJ, Stitt TN, Yancopoulos GD, Tavare JM. Identification of
in vivo brain-derived neurotrophic factor-stimulated autophosphorylation sites on
the TrkB receptor tyrosine kinase by site-directed mutagenesis. J Biol Chem 1994;
269: 30370–30377.
22 Zhang W, Liu HT. MAPK signal pathways in the regulation of cell proliferation in
mammalian cells. Cell Res 2002; 12: 9–18.
23 Wakioka T, Sasaki A, Kato R, Shouda T, Matsumoto A, Miyoshi K et al. Spred is a
Sprouty-related suppressor of Ras signalling. Nature 2001; 412: 647–651.
24 King JA, Straffon AF, D'Abaco GM, Poon CL, I ST, Smith CM et al. Distinct
requirements for the Sprouty domain for functional activity of Spred proteins.
Biochem J 2005; 388(Pt 2): 445–454.
25 Bundschu K, Walter U, Schuh K. Getting a first clue about SPRED functions.
Bioessays 2007; 29: 897–907.
26 Bundschu K, Gattenlohner S, Knobeloch KP, Walter U, Schuh K. Tissue-specific
Spred-2 promoter activity characterized by a gene trap approach. Gene Expr
Patterns 2006; 6: 247–255.
27 Engelhardt CM, Bundschu K, Messerschmitt M, Renne T, Walter U, Reinhard M
et al. Expression and subcellular localization of Spred proteins in mouse and
human tissues. Histochem Cell Biol 2004; 122: 527–538.
28 Phoenix TN, Temple S. Spred1, a negative regulator of Ras-MAPK-ERK, is enriched
in CNS germinal zones, dampens NSC proliferation, and maintains ventricular
zone structure. Genes Dev 2010; 24: 45–56.
29 Mardakheh FK, Yekezare M, Machesky LM, Heath JK. Spred2 interaction with the
late endosomal protein NBR1 down-regulates fibroblast growth factor receptor
signaling. J Cell Biol 2009; 187: 265–277.
30 Brems H, Chmara M, Sahbatou M, Denayer E, Taniguchi K, Kato R et al. Germline
loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1 cause a neurofibromatosis 1-like pheno-
type. Nat Genet 2007; 39: 1120–1126.
31 Denayer E, Ahmed T, Brems H, Van Woerden G, Borgesius NZ, Callaerts-Vegh Z
et al. Spred1 is required for synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent
learning. J Neurosci 2008; 28: 14443–14449.
32 Inoue H, Kato R, Fukuyama S, Nonami A, Taniguchi K, Matsumoto K et al. Spred-1
negatively regulates allergen-induced airway eosinophilia and hyperresponsive-
ness. J Exp Med 2005; 201: 73–82.
33 Ullrich M, Bundschu K, Benz PM, Abesser M, Freudinger R, Fischer T et al. Iden-
tification of SPRED2 (Sprouty-related Protein with EVH1 Domain 2) as a Negative
Regulator of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis. J Biol Chem 2011; 286:
9477–9488.
34 Bundschu K, Knobeloch KP, Ullrich M, Schinke T, Amling M, Engelhardt CM et al.
Gene disruption of Spred-2 causes dwarfism. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 28572–28580.
35 Ullrich M, Schuh K. Gene trap: knockout on the fast lane. Methods Mol Biol (Clifton,
NJ) 2009; 561: 145–159.
36 Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power
analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behav Res
Methods 2007; 39: 175–191.
37 Post
AM,
Weyers
P,
Holzer
P,
Painsipp
E,
Pauli
P,
Wultsch
T
et
al.
Gene-environment interaction influences anxiety-like behavior in ethologically
based mouse models. Behav Brain Res 2011; 218: 99–105.
38 Bourin M, Hascoet M. The mouse light/dark box test. Eur J Pharmacol 2003; 463:
55–65.
39 Chaplan SR, Bach FW, Pogrel JW, Chung JM, Yaksh TL. Quantitative assessment of
tactile allodynia in the rat paw. J Neurosci Methods 1994; 53: 55–63.
40 Hargreaves K, Dubner R, Brown F, Flores C, Joris J. A new and sensitive method for
measuring thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. Pain 1988; 32: 77–88.
41 Paxinos G, Franklin KBJ. The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Academic
Press, 1997.
42 Nietzer SL, Bonn M, Jansen F, Heiming RS, Lewejohann L, Sachser N et al.
Serotonin transporter knockout and repeated social defeat stress: impact on
neuronal morphology and plasticity in limbic brain areas. Behav Brain Res 2011;
220: 42–54.
43 Chen Y, Boettger MK, Reif A, Schmitt A, Uceyler N, Sommer C. Nitric oxide
synthase
modulates
CFA-induced
thermal
hyperalgesia
through
cytokine
regulation in mice. Mol Pain 2010; 6: 13.
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
457
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
 44 Huang GJ, Bannerman D, Flint J. Chronic fluoxetine treatment alters behavior, but
not adult hippocampal neurogenesis, in BALB/cJ mice. Mol Psychiatry 2008; 13:
119–121.
45 Welch JM, Lu J, Rodriguiz RM, Trotta NC, Peca J, Ding JD et al. Cortico-striatal
synaptic defects and OCD-like behaviours in Sapap3-mutant mice. Nature 2007;
448: 894–900.
46 Shmelkov SV, Hormigo A, Jing D, Proenca CC, Bath KG, Milde T et al. Slitrk5
deficiency impairs corticostriatal circuitry and leads to obsessive-compulsive-like
behaviors in mice. Nat Med 2010; 16: 598–602, 591p following 602.
47 Bartz JA, Hollander E. Is obsessive-compulsive disorder an anxiety disorder? Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2006; 30: 338–352.
48 Ruscio AM, Stein DJ, Chiu WT, Kessler RC. The epidemiology of obsessive-
compulsive disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Mol
Psychiatry 2010; 15: 53–63.
49 Stein DJ, Fineberg NA, Bienvenu OJ, Denys D, Lochner C, Nestadt G et al. Should
OCD be classified as an anxiety disorder in DSM-V? Depress Anxiety 2010; 27:
495–506.
50 Association AP (ed). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th
Edition. American Psychiatric Publishing: Arlington, VA, 2013.
51 Findley DB, Leckman JF, Katsovich L, Lin H, Zhang H, Grantz H et al. Development
of the Yale Children's Global Stress Index (YCGSI) and its application in children
and adolescents ith Tourette's syndrome and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003; 42: 450–457.
52 Toro J, Cervera M, Osejo E, Salamero M. Obsessive-compulsive disorder in child-
hood and adolescence: a clinical study. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 1992; 33:
1025–1037.
53 Altemus M, Pigott T, Kalogeras KT, Demitrack M, Dubbert B, Murphy DL et al.
Abnormalities in the regulation of vasopressin and corticotropin releasing factor
secretion in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1992; 49: 9–20.
54 Kluge M, Schussler P, Kunzel HE, Dresler M, Yassouridis A, Steiger A. Increased
nocturnal secretion of ACTH and cortisol in obsessive compulsive disorder.
J Psychiatr Res 2007; 41: 928–933.
55 Menzies L, Chamberlain SR, Laird AR, Thelen SM, Sahakian BJ, Bullmore ET. Inte-
grating
evidence
from
neuroimaging
and
neuropsychological
studies
of
obsessive-compulsive disorder: the orbitofronto-striatal model revisited. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2008; 32: 525–549.
56 Wood J, Ahmari SE. A framework for understanding the emerging role of
corticolimbic-ventral striatal networks in OCD-associated repetitive behaviors.
Front Syst Neurosci 2015; 9: 171.
57 Breiter HC, Rauch SL, Kwong KK, Baker JR, Weisskoff RM, Kennedy DN et al.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of symptom provocation in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1996; 53: 595–606.
58 Albelda N, Joel D. Current animal models of obsessive compulsive disorder:
an update. Neuroscience 2012; 211: 83–106.
59 Sudhof TC. The presynaptic active zone. Neuron 2012; 75: 11–25.
60 Kittel RJ, Wichmann C, Rasse TM, Fouquet W, Schmidt M, Schmid A et al.
Bruchpilot promotes active zone assembly, Ca2+ channel clustering, and vesicle
release. Science (New York, NY) 2006; 312: 1051–1054.
61 Davydova D, Marini C, King C, Klueva J, Bischof F, Romorini S et al. Bassoon
specifically controls presynaptic P/Q-type Ca(2+) channels via RIM-binding
protein. Neuron 2014; 82: 181–194.
62 Benarroch EE. Metabotropic glutamate receptors: synaptic modulators and ther-
apeutic targets for neurologic disease. Neurology 2008; 70: 964–968.
63 Niswender
CM,
Conn
PJ.
Metabotropic
glutamate
receptors:
physiology,
pharmacology, and disease. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2010; 50: 295–322.
64 Tu JC, Xiao B, Naisbitt S, Yuan JP, Petralia RS, Brakeman P et al. Coupling of mGluR/
Homer and PSD-95 complexes by the Shank family of postsynaptic density pro-
teins. Neuron 1999; 23: 583–592.
65 Keith D, El-Husseini A. Excitation control: balancing PSD-95 function at the
synapse. Front Mol Neurosci 2008; 1: 4.
66 Steiner P, Higley MJ, Xu W, Czervionke BL, Malenka RC, Sabatini BL. Destabilization
of the postsynaptic density by PSD-95 serine 73 phosphorylation inhibits spine
growth and synaptic plasticity. Neuron 2008; 60: 788–802.
67 Vanderklish PW, Edelman GM. Dendritic spines elongate after stimulation of
group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors in cultured hippocampal neurons.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99: 1639–1644.
68 Chakravarthy S, Saiepour MH, Bence M, Perry S, Hartman R, Couey JJ et al.
Postsynaptic TrkB signaling has distinct roles in spine maintenance in adult visual
cortex and hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 1071–1076.
69 Alonso M, Medina JH, Pozzo-Miller L. ERK1/2 activation is necessary for BDNF to
increase dendritic spine density in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Learn
Mem 2004; 11: 172–178.
70 Bennett MR, Lagopoulos J. Stress and trauma: BDNF control of dendritic-spine
formation and regression. Prog Neurobiol 2014; 112: 80–99.
71 Roozendaal B, McEwen BS, Chattarji S. Stress, memory and the amygdala. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2009; 10: 423–433.
72 Meng S, Zhang M, Pan W, Li Z, Anderson DH, Zhang S et al. Tyrosines 303/343/353
within the Sprouty-related domain of Spred2 are essential for its interaction with
p85 and inhibitory effect on Ras/ERK activation. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2012; 44:
748–758.
73 Quintanar-Audelo
M,
Yusoff
P,
Sinniah
S,
Chandramouli
S,
Guy
GR.
Sprouty-related Ena/VASP homology 1-domain-containing protein (SPRED) 1, a
SHP2 substrate in the Ras/ERK pathway. J Biol Chem 2011; 286: 23102–23112.
74 Kelleher RJ 3rd, Govindarajan A, Jung HY, Kang H, Tonegawa S. Translational
control by MAPK signaling in long-term synaptic plasticity and memory. Cell 2004;
116: 467–479.
75 Cui Y, Costa RM, Murphy GG, Elgersma Y, Zhu Y, Gutmann DH et al. Neurofibromin
regulation of ERK signaling modulates GABA release and learning. Cell 2008; 135:
549–560.
76 Giese KP, Mizuno K. The roles of protein kinases in learning and memory. Learn
Mem 2013; 20: 540–552.
77 Bartholomeusz C, Xie X, Pitner MK, Kondo K, Dadbin A, Lee J et al. MEK inhibitor
selumetinib
(AZD6244;
ARRY-142886)
prevents
lung
metastasis
in
a
triple-negative breast cancer xenograft model. Mol Cancer Ther 2015; 14:
2773–2781.
78 Carvajal RD, Sosman JA, Quevedo JF, Milhem MM, Joshua AM, Kudchadkar RR
et al. Effect of selumetinib vs chemotherapy on progression-free survival in
uveal melanoma: a randomized clinical trial. J Am Med Assoc 2014; 311:
2397–2405.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under
the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license
holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2018
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Molecular Psychiatry website (http://www.nature.com/mp)
OCD-like behavior in SPRED2 deficient mice
M Ullrich et al
458
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 444 – 458
