 Screening for Prostate Cancer
USPreventiveServicesTaskForceRecommendationStatement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE In the United States, the lifetime risk of being diagnosed with prostate cancer is
approximately 11%, and the lifetime risk of dying of prostate cancer is 2.5%. The median age
of death from prostate cancer is 80 years. Many men with prostate cancer never experience
symptoms and, without screening, would never know they have the disease. African
American men and men with a family history of prostate cancer have an increased risk of
prostate cancer compared with other men.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2012 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on prostate-specific antigen (PSA)–based screening for prostate cancer.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits and harms of
PSA-based screening for prostate cancer and subsequent treatment of screen-detected
prostate cancer. The USPSTF also commissioned a review of existing decision analysis models
and the overdiagnosis rate of PSA-based screening. The reviews also examined the benefits
and harms of PSA-based screening in patient subpopulations at higher risk of prostate cancer,
including older men, African American men, and men with a family history of prostate cancer.
FINDINGS Adequate evidence from randomized clinical trials shows that PSA-based screening
programs in men aged 55 to 69 years may prevent approximately 1.3 deaths from prostate
cancer over approximately 13 years per 1000 men screened. Screening programs may also
prevent approximately 3 cases of metastatic prostate cancer per 1000 men screened.
Potential harms of screening include frequent false-positive results and psychological harms.
Harms of prostate cancer treatment include erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence, and
bowel symptoms. About 1 in 5 men who undergo radical prostatectomy develop long-term
urinary incontinence, and 2 in 3 men will experience long-term erectile dysfunction.
Adequate evidence shows that the harms of screening in men older than 70 years are at least
moderate and greater than in younger men because of increased risk of false-positive results,
diagnostic harms from biopsies, and harms from treatment. The USPSTF concludes with
moderate certainty that the net benefit of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer in men
aged 55 to 69 years is small for some men. How each man weighs specific benefits and harms
will determine whether the overall net benefit is small. The USPSTF concludes with moderate
certainty that the potential benefits of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer in men 70
years and older do not outweigh the expected harms.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION For men aged 55 to 69 years, the decision to undergo
periodic PSA-based screening for prostate cancer should be an individual one and should include
discussion of the potential benefits and harms of screening with their clinician. Screening offers
a small potential benefit of reducing the chance of death from prostate cancer in some men.
However, many men will experience potential harms of screening, including false-positive results
that require additional testing and possible prostate biopsy; overdiagnosis and overtreatment;
and treatment complications, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction. In determining
whether this service is appropriate in individual cases, patients and clinicians should consider the
balance of benefits and harms on the basis of family history, race/ethnicity, comorbid medical
conditions, patient values about the benefits and harms of screening and treatment-specific
outcomes, and other health needs. Clinicians should not screen men who do not express
a preference for screening. (C recommendation) The USPSTF recommends against PSA-based
screening for prostate cancer in men 70 years and older. (D recommendation)
JAMA. 2018;319(18):1901-1913. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.3710
Corrected on June 19, 2018.
Editorial page 1866
Author Audio Interview
Animated Summary Video
Related article page 1914 and
JAMA Patient Page page 1946
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
Related articles at
jamaoncology.com
jamasurgery.com
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at
the end of this article.
Corresponding Author: David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH
(david.c.grossman@kp.org).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
(Reprinted)
1901
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 T
he US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) makes
recommendations about the effectiveness of specific
preventive care services for patients without obvious
related signs or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions involve more
considerations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand
the evidence but individualize decision making to the specific
patient or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and
coverage decisions involve considerations in addition to the evi-
dence of clinical benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
For men aged 55 to 69 years, the decision to undergo periodic
prostate-specific antigen (PSA)–based screening for prostate
cancer should be an individual one. Before deciding whether to
be screened, men should have an opportunity to discuss the
potential benefits and harms
of screening with their clini-
cian and to incorporate their
values and preferences in the
decision. Screening offers a
small potential benefit of re-
ducing the chance of death
from prostate cancer in some
men. However, many men will
experience potential harms of
screening, including false-
positive results that require
additional testing and pos-
sible prostate biopsy; overdi-
agnosis and overtreatment; and treatment complications, such as
incontinence and erectile dysfunction. In determining whether
this service is appropriate in individual cases, patients and clini-
cians should consider the balance of benefits and harms on the
basis of family history, race/ethnicity, comorbid medical condi-
tions, patient values about the benefits and harms of screening
and treatment-specific outcomes, and other health needs. Clini-
cians should not screen men who do not express a preference for
screening (C recommendation) (Figure 1).
TheUSPSTFrecommendsagainstPSA-basedscreeningforpros-
tate cancer in men 70 years and older. (D recommendation)
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionformoreinformationon
screening higher-risk populations, including African American men
and men with a family history of prostate cancer.
Rationale
Importance
Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer that
affects men. In the United States, the lifetime risk of being diag-
nosed with prostate cancer is approximately 11%, and the lifetime
risk of dying of prostate cancer is 2.5%.1 Many men with prostate
cancer never experience symptoms and, without screening,
would never know they have the disease. In autopsy studies of
men who died of other causes, more than 20% of men aged 50 to
59 years and more than 33% of men aged 70 to 79 years were
found to have prostate cancer.2 In some men, the cancer is more
aggressive and leads to death. The median age of death from
prostate cancer is 80 years, and more than two-thirds of all men
who die of prostate cancer are older than 75 years.1 African
American men have an increased lifetime risk of prostate cancer
death compared with those of other races/ethnicities (4.2% for
African American men, 2.9% for Hispanic men, 2.3% for white
men, and 2.1% for Asian and Pacific Islander men).1
Detection
Screening for prostate cancer begins with a test that measures
the amount of PSA protein in the blood. An elevated PSA level
may be caused by prostate cancer but can also be caused by
other conditions, including an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic
hyperplasia) and inflammation of the prostate (prostatitis). Some
men without prostate cancer may therefore have positive screen-
ing results (ie, “false-positive”results). Men with a positive PSA
test result may undergo a transrectal ultrasound-guided core-
needle biopsy of the prostate to diagnose prostate cancer.
Benefits of Early Detection and Treatment
The goal of screening for prostate cancer is to identify high-risk,
localized prostate cancer that can be successfully treated,
thereby preventing the morbidity and mortality associated with
advanced or metastatic prostate cancer.
Adequate evidence from randomized clinical trials (RCTs)
shows that PSA-based screening programs in men aged 55
to 69 years may prevent approximately 1.3 deaths from prostate
cancer over approximately 13 years per 1000 men screened.3,4
Screening programs may also prevent approximately 3 cases
of metastatic prostate cancer per 1000 men screened.3 Current
results from screening trials show no reductions in all-cause
mortality from screening. There is inadequate evidence to
assess whether the benefits for African American men and men
with a family history of prostate cancer aged 55 to 69 years are
different than the benefits for the average-risk population.
There is also inadequate evidence to assess whether there are
benefits to starting screening in these high-risk groups before
age 55 years.
Adequate evidence from RCTs is consistent with no benefit of
PSA-based screening for prostate cancer on prostate cancer mor-
tality in men 70 years and older.
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
The harms of screening for prostate cancer include harms
from the PSA screening test and subsequent harms from di-
agnosis and treatment. Potential harms of screening include fre-
quent false-positive results and psychological harms. One major
trial in men screened every 2 to 4 years concluded that, over 10
years, more than 15% of men experienced at least 1 false-positive
test result.5 Harms of diagnostic procedures include com-
plications of prostate biopsy, such as pain, hematospermia
(blood in semen or ejaculate), and infection. Approximately 1% of
JAMA.COM
+
Animated Summary Video
Screening for Prostate
Cancer: USPSTF
Recommendation Statement
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
1902
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 prostate biopsies result in complications requiring hospitalization.
The false-positive and complication rates from biopsy are higher
in older men.3 Adequate evidence suggests that the harms of
screening and diagnostic procedures are at least small.
PSA-based screening for prostate cancer leads to the diagno-
sis of prostate cancer in some men whose cancer would never
have become symptomatic during their lifetime. Treatment of
these men results in harms and provides them with no benefit.
This is known as overdiagnosis, and follow-up of large random-
ized trials suggests that 20% to 50% of men diagnosed with
prostate cancer through screening may be overdiagnosed.3 Over-
diagnosis rates would be expected to increase with age and
to be highest in men 70 years and older because older men have
high risk of death from competing causes.
Harms of prostate cancer treatment include erectile dysfunc-
tion, urinary incontinence, and bothersome bowel symptoms.
About 1 in 5 men who undergo radical prostatectomy develop
long-term urinary incontinence requiring use of pads, and 2 in 3
men will experience long-term erectile dysfunction. More than
half of men who receive radiation therapy experience long-term
sexual erectile dysfunction and up to 1 in 6 men experience long-
term bothersome bowel symptoms, including bowel urgency and
fecal incontinence.3 Adequate evidence suggests that the harms
of overdiagnosis and treatment are at least moderate.
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
1903
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Adequate evidence shows that the harms of screening in
men older than 70 years are at least moderate and greater than in
younger men because of increased risk of false-positive results,
harms from diagnostic biopsy, and harms from treatment.
USPSTF Assessment
PSA-based screening for prostate cancer has both potential ben-
efits and harms. The USPSTF does not recommend screening for
prostate cancer unless men express a preference for screening
after being informed of and understanding the benefits and risks.
The decision about whether to be screened for prostate cancer
requires that each man incorporate his own values about the
potential benefits and harms. The potential harms of screening,
diagnostic procedures, and treatment occur soon after screen-
ing takes place. Although the potential benefits may occur any
time after screening, they generally occur years after treatment,
because progression from asymptomatic, screen-detected cancer
to symptomatic, metastasized cancer or death (if it occurs at all)
may take years or decades to occur.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net
benefit of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer in men aged
55 to 69 years is small for some men. How each man weighs spe-
cific benefits and harms will determine whether the overall net
benefit is small.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the po-
tential benefits of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer in men
70 years and older do not outweigh the expected harms.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to adult men in the general US
population without symptoms or a previous diagnosis of prostate
cancer. It also applies to men at increased risk of death from pros-
tate cancer because of race/ethnicity or family history of prostate
cancer (Figure 2). The sections below provide more information
on how this recommendation applies to African American men
and men with a family history of prostate cancer.
Risk Assessment
Older age, African American race, and family history of prostate
cancer are the most important risk factors for the development of
prostate cancer. Other factors with weaker associations and less
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Screening for Prostate Cancer
Population
Recommendation 
Men aged 55 to 69 y
Men 70 y and older
The decision to be screened for prostate cancer should
be an individual one.
Grade: C
Do not screen for prostate cancer.
Grade: D
Informed Decision
Making
Risk Assessment
Treatments
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Before deciding whether to be screened, men aged 55 to 69 years should have an opportunity to discuss the potential benefits and
harms of screening with their clinician and to incorporate their values and preferences in the decision. Screening offers a small
potential benefit of reducing the chance of death from prostate cancer in some men. However, many men will experience potential
harms of screening, including false-positive results that require additional testing and possible prostate biopsy; overdiagnosis and
overtreatment; and treatment complications, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction. Harms are greater for men 70 years
and older. In determining whether this service is appropriate in individual cases, patients and clinicians should consider the balance
of benefits and harms on the basis of family history, race/ethnicity, comorbid medical conditions, patient values about the benefits
and harms of screening and treatment-specific outcomes, and other health needs. Clinicians should not screen men who do not
express a preference for screening and should not routinely screen men 70 years and older.
Older age, African American race, and family history of prostate cancer are the most important risk factors for prostate cancer.
Screening Tests
Screening for prostate cancer begins with a test that measures the amount of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) protein in the blood.
An elevated PSA level may be caused by prostate cancer but can also be caused by other conditions, including an enlarged prostate
(benign prostatic hyperplasia) and inflammation of the prostate (prostatitis). Some men without prostate cancer may therefore
have false-positive results. Men with a positive PSA test result may undergo a transrectal ultrasound-guided core-needle biopsy
of the prostate to diagnose prostate cancer.
The 3 most common treatment options for men with screen-detected, localized prostate cancer are surgical removal of the prostate
gland (radical prostatectomy), radiation therapy (external-beam radiation therapy, proton beam therapy, or brachytherapy), 
and active surveillance.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
1904
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 evidence include diets high in fat and low in vegetable consump-
tion. Cigarette smoking is associated with higher risk of prostate
cancer mortality.
Screening
PSA-based screening is the usual method of screening and has
been studied in several large trials. Although new screening meth-
ods are being developed (such as single- and adjusted-threshold
testing and PSA velocity and doubling time), evidence is insuffi-
cient to support one method of PSA-based screening over
another. Evidence is also insufficient that using a prebiopsy risk
calculator, with or without measurement of free PSA levels, or
using genetic or adjunctive imaging tests meaningfully changes
the potential benefits and harms of screening. This is an impor-
tant area of current research that has the potential to decrease
the harms of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer. The use of
digital rectal examination as a screening modality is not recom-
mended because there is a lack of evidence on the benefits; digi-
tal rectal examination was either eliminated from or not included
in the major screening trials.
PSA-based screening for prostate cancer has been studied in 3
verylargeRCTs,eachwithatleastadecadeofmedianfollow-up:the
US-based Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer
Screening Trial, the European Randomized Study of Screening for
Prostate Cancer (ERSPC), and the Cluster Randomized Trial of PSA
TestingforProstateCancer(CAP).Thesetrialsusedvaryingscreen-
ing intervals (from 1-time screening to every 1 to 4 years) and PSA
thresholds (2.5 to 10.0 ng/mL) for diagnostic biopsy.3
The PLCO trial may be viewed as a trial of organized vs oppor-
tunistic screening for prostate cancer because of the substantial
screening rate in the control group and the high screening rate
among men in both the control and intervention groups prior to
study enrollment.6 Men in the intervention group were screened
more often than men in the control group, and more men in the
intervention group were diagnosed with prostate cancer than in
the control group. The trial found no difference between groups
in death from prostate cancer after almost 15 years of follow-up
(absolute risk, 4.8 per 1000 person-years in the intervention
group vs 4.6 per 1000 person-years in the control group; relative
risk [RR], 1.04 [95% CI, 0.87-1.24]).7
In the ERSPC trial, the results suggest that, overall, the num-
ber needed to screen is 781 men aged 55 to 69 years at enroll-
ment (95% CI, 490-1929) to prevent 1 man from dying of pros-
tate cancer after 13 years. The results varied across the individual
ERSPC sites, and prostate cancer mortality was significantly
reduced only at the sites in the Netherlands and Sweden. How-
ever, point estimates were in favor of screening at all sites except
Switzerland. At the largest site (Finland), there was no significant
benefit observed for prostate cancer mortality (rate ratio, 0.91
[95% CI, 0.75-1.10]), and in Sweden there was an absolute risk
reduction of 0.72% (95% CI, 0.50%-0.94%), a 42% relative
reduction.8-10
Four ERSPC trial sites reported data on the effect of PSA-
based screening for prostate cancer on the development of meta-
static cancer after 12 years of follow-up. The risk of developing
metastatic prostate cancer was 30% lower among men random-
ized to screening than among men in the control group (absolute
risk, 7.05 per 1000 men in the screening group vs 10.14 per 1000
men in the control group [calculated from numbers in the study]).
This translates to an absolute reduction in the long-term risk of
metastatic prostate cancer of 3.1 cases per 1000 men screened.11
The CAP trial was a cluster-randomized trial of a single invita-
tion to PSA-based screening in the United Kingdom among
415 357 men. Overall, 34% of invited men received a valid PSA
screening test. After a median follow-up of 10 years, there was no
significant difference in prostate cancer mortality between the
invited group and the control group (absolute risk, 0.30 per 1000
person-years vs 0.31 per 1000 person-years, respectively).12
Based on clinical stage, tumor grade, and PSA level, prostate
cancer is classified as low, medium, or high risk for clinical pro-
gression and prostate cancer death. Although treatment is
thought to be most immediately beneficial for men with high- and
medium-risk prostate cancer, the vast majority of cases of screen-
detected cancer are low risk.
As with all screening tests, some men without prostate can-
cer will receive positive PSA test results (ie, “false-positive”
results). The false-positive rate for the PSA test depends on the
PSA threshold used. Among 5 ERSPC sites that reported the false-
positive rate, approximately 1 in 6 men screened at least once had
1 or more false-positive results, and of the positive results in the
first round of screening, two-thirds were false positives. In Swe-
den, where a low PSA threshold (3.0 ng/mL) was used to deter-
mine a positive test result and men were screened every 2 years,
more than 45% of men who participated in all screening rounds
had a false-positive result over 10 years of screening.5 In the PLCO
trial, more than two-thirds of men who underwent a prostate
biopsy because of a positive PSA test result were found not to
have prostate cancer.13 In addition to false-positive results, there
are other harms associated with screening and subsequent diag-
nostic evaluation; biopsies may result in pain, fever, hematosper-
mia, and hospitalization.
The 3 large RCTs on screening predominantly included men
aged 55 to 69 years. There is inadequate evidence on starting
screening at a younger age in the average-risk population or to
obtain a baseline PSA level. Evidence in men 70 years and older
does not support routine screening because of the lack of trial
evidence of benefit, the low likelihood of benefit given the time
to realize benefit, and the increased risk of harms from false-
positive results, biopsies, overdiagnosis, and treatment. Although
the evidence does not support routine screening in all men older
than 70 years, the USPSTF recognizes the common use of PSA-
based screening in practice today and understands that some
older men will continue to request screening and some clinicians
will continue to offer it. Men older than 70 years who request
screening should be aware of the reduced likelihood of benefit
from screening and the increased risk of false-positive test results
and complications of diagnosis and treatment.
The USPSTF considered whether there are screening and
follow-up approaches that increase the potential for benefit while
reducing the potential for harms. Variation across sites in ran-
domized trials of screening suggests there may be greater mortal-
ity benefit from screening every other year compared with longer
intervals and from using lower PSA thresholds for diagnostic
biopsy. Although these approaches may have increased the
potential benefit reported in studies, they also resulted in sub-
stantially more harms—more false-positive results, more prostate
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
1905
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 biopsies, and more cases of overdiagnosis. This trade-off was also
observed in a review of decision analysis models; screening pro-
tocols using lower PSA thresholds (<4.0 ng/mL) for biopsy and
more frequent screening intervals offered greater potential
reductions in prostate cancer mortality but higher rates of overdi-
agnosis and other harms.14 The frequency of screening in the
ERSCP sites ranged from every 2 to 7 years. No ERSPC trial site
offered screening more often than every 2 years, and many sites
screened every 4 years. The PSA threshold for biopsy in the
ERSCP sites ranged from 2.5 to 4 ng/mL (except for 10 ng/mL in
the earlier years at the Belgium site). In the Göteborg, Sweden,
site, which reported the largest benefit, the frequency of screen-
ing was every 2 years, and the threshold for biopsy was 2.5 ng/mL
(3.0 ng/mL in the first few years of the study).
Treatment
The potential benefit of screening for prostate cancer is because
of treatment. Thus, it is important for men to consider both the
potential benefits and harms of treatment (including active sur-
veillance) as they consider whether to be screened. Men not able
or willing to tolerate treatment should not be screened for pros-
tate cancer. Because most cases of prostate cancer advance very
slowly, if at all, the 10-year survival rate for screen-detected, local-
ized prostate cancer is very high. In a recent major trial that
enrolled more than 1500 men randomized to receive either active
treatment or active surveillance, the 10-year survival rate in all
groups was 99%.15 The good prognosis for early-stage prostate
cancer makes it difficult to study the effectiveness of treatment.
Multiple treatment options exist for prostate cancer, and new
ones are being developed. In current practice, the 3 most com-
mon treatment options for men with screen-detected, localized
prostate cancer are surgical removal of the prostate gland (radical
prostatectomy), radiation therapy (external-beam radiation
therapy, proton beam therapy, or brachytherapy), and active sur-
veillance. The USPSTF considered available evidence on treat-
ment when evaluating the effectiveness of screening and found
that current evidence suggests that treatment of early-stage,
screen-detected prostate cancer with radical prostatectomy or
radiation therapy likely reduces risk of clinical progression and
metastatic disease and may reduce prostate cancer mortality.
More details about the effectiveness and adverse effects of active
treatment are provided in the Discussion section.
Active surveillance is a treatment approach that seeks to
limit the harms of treatment by allowing men with apparent
low-risk prostate cancer to forego surgery or radiation in favor
of ongoing monitoring of their cancer. Although protocols vary,
active surveillance usually includes regular, repeated PSA test-
ing and often repeated digital rectal examination and prostate
biopsy, with potential for exposure to repeated harms from biop-
sies. Men whose cancer is found to be changing are offered defini-
tive treatment with surgery or radiation therapy. Other treatment-
monitoring strategies for men with low-risk cancer exist (for
example, watchful waiting) and also vary in protocol. Active surveil-
lance has become a more common treatment choice in the United
States over the past several years. In a study assessing community-
based urology practice in the United States between 2010 and
2013, about half of men with low-risk prostate cancer were treated
with radical prostatectomy. The active surveillance rate, however,
increased from about 10% in 2005-2009 to 40.4% in 2010-2013
among men with low-risk prostate cancer.16
Active treatment of prostate cancer can result in major adverse
effects. About 3 in 1000 men die during or soon after radical pros-
tatectomy, and about 50 in 1000 men have serious surgical com-
plications requiring intervention. About 1 in 5 men who undergo
radical prostatectomy develop long-term urinary incontinence
requiring regular use of pads, and about 2 in 3 men experience
long-term erectile dysfunction. More than half of men who receive
radiation therapy experience long-term erectile dysfunction, and
up to 1 in 6 men experience long-term bothersome bowel symp-
toms, including bowel urgency and fecal incontinence.3
Screening for Prostate Cancer in African American Men
Burden
In the United States, African American men are more likely to de-
velop prostate cancer than white men (203.5 vs 121.9 cases per
100 000 men). African American men are also more than twice as
likely as white men to die of prostate cancer (44.1 vs 19.1 deaths per
100 000 men).1 The higher death rate is attributable in part to an
earlier age at cancer onset, more advanced cancer stage at diagno-
sis, and higher rates of more aggressive cancer (ie, higher tumor
grade). These differences in death from prostate cancer may also
reflectthatAfricanAmericanmenhavelowerratesofreceivinghigh-
quality care.
Available Evidence
The USPSTF searched for evidence about the potential benefits
and harms of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer in African
American men.
Potential Benefits
The PLCO trial enrolled 4% African American men, which is not
enough to determine whether the overall trial results differed for
African American men.17 The ERSPC trial did not record or report
any race-specific subgroup information. The low proportion of per-
sons of African descent in European countries during the study
period makes it likely that these groups were not well represented.
Potential Harms
An analysis from the PLCO trial found that African American men
were significantly more likely to have major infections after pros-
tatebiopsythanwhitemen(oddsratio[OR],7.1[95%CI,2.7-18.0]).13
Evidence is insufficient to compare the risk of false-positive re-
sults,potentialforoverdiagnosis,andmagnitudeofharmsfrompros-
tate cancer treatment in African American vs other men.
Advising African American Men
Based on the available evidence, the USPSTF is not able to make
a separate, specific recommendation on PSA-based screening
for prostate cancer in African American men. Although it is pos-
sible that screening may offer greater benefits for African American
men compared with the general population, currently no direct
evidence demonstrates whether this is true. Screening, and
subsequent diagnosis and treatment, has the potential to increase
exposure to potential harms. Decision analysis models suggest
that given the higher rates of aggressive prostate cancer in
African American men, PSA-based screening may provide greater
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
1906
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 benefit to African American men than the general population.
These models also suggest a potential mortality benefit for African
American men when beginning screening before age 55 years. The
USPSTF believes that a reasonable approach for clinicians is to
inform African American men about their increased risk of develop-
ing and dying of prostate cancer as well as the potential benefits
and harms of screening so they can make an informed, personal
decision about whether to be screened. Although the USPSTF
found inadequate evidence about how benefits may differ for
African American men, it recognizes the epidemiologic data show-
ing that African American men may develop prostate cancer at
younger ages than average-risk men and understands that some
African American men and their clinicians will continue to screen
at younger ages. The USPSTF does not recommend screening
for prostate cancer in men, including African American men, older
than 70 years.
The USPSTF strongly encourages research on screening for
and treatment of prostate cancer in African American men. It is
important to consider both the potential additional benefits and
harms to fully understand the value of screening. Studies are
needed to confirm that African American men who undergo
screening receive similar or greater reductions in prostate cancer
mortality compared with men in the general population, as well as
to explore the optimal screening frequency and whether begin-
ning screening before age 55 years provides additional benefits in
African American men. Studies are also needed to better under-
stand strategies to mitigate harms and maximize benefits of
screening, diagnostic follow-up, and treatment (including active
surveillance) in African American men. It is also important that
research and quality improvement activities continue to work to
eliminate disparities in access to high-quality care for men with
prostate cancer.
Screening for Prostate Cancer in Men With a Family History
Burden
TheintroductionofPSA-basedscreeningforprostatecancerhassub-
stantiallyalteredtheepidemiologicdataforprostatecancer,greatly
increasing the number of men with a diagnosis of prostate cancer
and thus also the number of men with a father, brother, or son with
a history of prostate cancer.
Available Evidence
It is generally accepted that men with a family history of prostate
cancer are more likely to develop prostate cancer. A study of twins
in Scandinavia estimated that genetic factors may account for up to
42% of prostate cancer risk.18 An analysis from the Finnish site of
the ERSPC trial concluded that men with at least 1 first-degree rela-
tive with prostate cancer were 30% more likely to be diagnosed
with prostate cancer than men without a family history.19 Men with
3 first-degree relatives with prostate cancer or 2 close relatives on
the same side of the family with prostate cancer diagnosed before
age 55 years may have an inheritable form of prostate cancer asso-
ciated with genetic changes passed down from one generation to
the next. This type of prostate cancer is thought to account for less
than 10% of all prostate cancer cases.20
The USPSTF searched for evidence about the potential ben-
efits and harms of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer in men
with a family history of prostate cancer.
Potential Benefits
Of the 7% of men in the PLCO trial who reported a family history of
prostate cancer on a baseline questionnaire, prostate cancer mor-
tality was lower among white men in the intervention group than
in the control group (hazard ratio [HR], 0.49 [95% CI, 0.22-1.10];
P = .08),21 but the difference was not significant and the confi-
dence interval was wide.
Potential Harms
No studies have assessed the risk of harms related to screening for,
diagnosis of, or treatment of prostate cancer based on family his-
tory of prostate cancer.
Advising Men With a Family History of Prostate Cancer
Based on the available evidence, the USPSTF is not able to make a
separate,specificrecommendationonPSA-basedscreeningforpros-
tate cancer in men with a family history of prostate cancer. Al-
though it is possible that screening may offer additional potential
benefits for these men compared with the general population,
screening also has the potential to increase exposure to potential
harms,especiallyamongmenwithrelativeswhosecancerwasover-
diagnosed. Men who have a first-degree relative who had ad-
vanced prostate cancer at diagnosis, developed metastatic pros-
tate cancer, or died of prostate cancer are probably the most likely
to benefit from screening. The USPSTF believes that a reasonable
approachforcliniciansistoinformmenwithafamilyhistoryofpros-
tatecancer,particularlythosewithmultiplefirst-degreerelativeswith
prostate cancer, about their increased risk of developing cancer as
well as the potential earlier age at disease onset. This discussion
shouldincludethepotentialbenefitsandharmsofscreeningforpros-
tate cancer so these men have the opportunity to make an in-
formed, personal decision about whether to be screened. Al-
thoughtheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidenceabouthowbenefits
may differ for men with a family history of prostate cancer, it recog-
nizestheepidemiologicdatashowingthatthesemenareatagreater
than average risk and understands that some men and their clini-
cians will continue to screen at younger ages in men with a family
history.TheUSPSTFdoesnotrecommendscreeningforprostatecan-
cer in men, including men with a family history of prostate cancer,
older than 70 years.
Epidemiologic studies examining outcomes in men with rela-
tives who died of prostate cancer vs men with relatives diagnosed
withprostatecancerwhodiedofothercausesmayhelpprovidebet-
ter guidance. Studies are needed that explore the optimal screen-
ingfrequencyandwhetherbeginningscreeningbeforeage55years
provides additional benefits for men with a family history of pros-
tatecancer.Additionalresearchisalsoneededtohelpidentifymen
with an inheritable form of prostate cancer and to understand how
the potential benefits and harms of screening, including screening
intervals and starting ages, may differ in these men compared with
the general population.
Research Needs and Gaps
There are many areas in need of research to improve screening for
and treatment of prostate cancer, including
•Comparing different screening strategies, including different
screening intervals, to fully understand the effects on benefits
and harms
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
1907
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 •Developing, validating, and providing longer-term follow-up of
screening and diagnostic techniques, including risk stratification
tools, use of baseline PSA level as a risk factor, and use of non–
PSA-basedadjunctiveteststhatcandistinguishnonprogressiveand
slowly progressive cancer from cancer that is likely to become
symptomatic and affect quality or length of life, to reduce overdi-
agnosis and overtreatment
•Screening for and treatment of prostate cancer in African
American men, including understanding the potential benefits
and harms of different starting ages and screening intervals and
the use of active surveillance; given the large disparities in pros-
tate cancer mortality in African American men, this should be a
national priority
•How to better inform men with a family history of prostate can-
cer about the benefits and harms of PSA-based screening for
prostate cancer, including the potential differences in outcomes
between men with relatives who died of prostate cancer and
men with relatives diagnosed with prostate cancer who died of
other causes
•Howtorefineactiveprostatecancertreatmentstominimizeharms
•How to better understand patient values about the known ben-
efits and harms of screening for and treatment of prostate can-
cer; how these values influence men’
s assessment of the overall
benefit vs harm; how to best implement informed decision mak-
ing programs that incorporate the values and preferences of
men and their families about screening; how to adapt the
informed decision-making process to a range of diverse patient
populations as screening, diagnosis, and treatment strategies
evolve; and the effects of informed decision making on health
outcomes and patient experience
Discussion
Burden of Disease
For men in the United States, the lifetime risk of being diagnosed
with prostate cancer is approximately 11%, and the lifetime risk
of dying of prostate cancer is 2.5%.1 In 2013, the most recent year
for which data are available, approximately 172 000 men in the
United States were diagnosed with prostate cancer and almost
28 000 died of prostate cancer.22 From 2003 to 2012, the pros-
tate cancer mortality rate among US men decreased significantly
by 3.4% per year (3.3% and 3.9% per year in white and black men,
respectively).23 Most cases of prostate cancer found in autopsy
studies are microscopic, well-differentiated lesions that did not
affect men’
s health during their lifetime. Data from screening trials
suggest that many cases of low-risk cancer detected by screening
would never have caused symptoms or affected men’
s health had
they never been identified through screening.
Scope of Review
To update its 2012 recommendation, the USPSTF commissioned
a systematic review of the evidence regarding the benefits and
harms of PSA-based screening for prostate cancer and subsequent
treatment of screen-detected prostate cancer.3,4 The USPSTF also
commissioned a review of multiple contextual questions, including
a review of existing decision analysis models and what they sug-
gest about the potential for mitigating the harms of screening and
treatment and the overdiagnosis rate of PSA-based screening.14,24
The commissioned reviews also examined the effectiveness and
harms of PSA-based screening in patient subpopulations at higher
risk of prostate cancer, including older men, African American
men, and men with a family history of prostate cancer.
Effectiveness of Early Detection
Potential Benefits of Screening
To understand the potential benefits of PSA-based screening for
prostate cancer, the USPSTF examined the results of the ERSPC,
PLCO,andCAPtrialsandsite-specificreportsfrom4ERSPCtrialsites.
To understand the effectiveness of treatment of screen-detected,
early-stage prostate cancer, the USPSTF also examined the results
of 3 randomized trials and 9 cohort studies.3
The ERSPC trial randomly assigned a core group of more than
160 000 men aged 55 to 69 years from 7 European countries to
PSA-based screening vs usual care.8 Four ERSPC sites reported on
the cumulative incidence of metastatic prostate cancer. After a
median follow-up of 12 years, the risk of developing metastatic
prostate cancer was 30% lower among men randomized to
screening compared with usual care (RR, 0.70 [95% CI, 0.60-
0.82]; P = .001). The absolute reduction in long-term risk of
metastatic prostate cancer associated with screening was 3.1
cases per 1000 men.11 After a median follow-up of 13 years, the
prostate cancer mortality rate among men aged 55 to 69 years
was 4.3 deaths per 10 000 person-years in the screening group
and 5.4 deaths per 10 000 person-years in the usual care group
(RR, 0.79 [95% CI, 0.69-0.91]; P = .001).8 The ERSPC trial did not
find a reduction in all-cause mortality.8
The results of the overall ERSPC trial provide some of the
most important evidence about the potential benefits of PSA-
based screening for prostate cancer. The trial was rated as fair
quality by the USPSTF review because of several important meth-
odologic issues, including observed differences in how men in the
screening and control groups were treated for prostate cancer.
Among men diagnosed with nonmetastatic prostate cancer, a
greater proportion of men in the screening group underwent radi-
cal prostatectomy (41.3%) than in the usual care group (32.8%).25
Although one might expect treatment differences by screening
group if screening produces a shift toward more localized clinical
stages, treatment differences across ERSPC study groups per-
sisted even with stratification by clinical stage and tumor grade.
The cause for these differences is not known.
In the prostate component of the PLCO trial, more than
76 000 men aged 55 to 74 years were randomized to either annual
PSA-based screening for 6 years or usual care. Abnormal screening
results (PSA level >4.0 ng/mL or abnormal digital rectal examina-
tion findings) were forwarded to patients and their primary care cli-
nician, who coordinated further diagnostic evaluation.17 The major-
ity of men were non-Hispanic white (86.2% and 83.8% of the
screening and control groups, respectively). Approximately one-
third of men in both groups had either a PSA test or digital rectal
examination within the 3 years prior to enrollment. An estimated
78% of men in the control group had a PSA test during the screen-
ing phase of the trial.25 On average, men in the intervention group
received 5 PSA tests during the screening phase of the trial and
men in the usual care group received 3 PSA tests.26 This high PSA
testing rate in the control group limits the study’
s ability to identify
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
1908
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 a potential screening benefit. Despite the common use of PSA test-
ing in the control group, after 13 years more cases of prostate can-
cer were diagnosed in the screening group than in the control
group (108.4 vs 97.1 cases per 10 000 person-years, respectively)
(RR, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.07-1.17]). At a median follow-up of 14.8 years
in the PLCO trial, the prostate cancer mortality rate was not sig-
nificantly different between the intervention and control group
(4.8 vs 4.6 deaths per 10 000 person-years, respectively) (RR,
1.04 [95% CI, 0.87-1.24]).7 This result does not rule out the possibil-
ity of a reduction in prostate cancer mortality from screening for
prostate cancer.
The CAP trial was a cluster randomized trial in the United
Kingdom among 415 357 men aged 50 to 69 years invited for a
single PSA-based screening for prostate cancer.12 Men with a PSA
level of 3.0 ng/mL or greater were referred for biopsy. Men with
localized prostate cancer were offered enrollment into the Pros-
tate Testing for Cancer and Treatment (ProtecT) trial, in which the
primary outcome was prostate cancer mortality. At intervention
sites, 34% of men received a valid PSA screening test; the per-
centage of men at control sites who received a PSA test for
screening purposes was estimated to be about 10% to 15% over
10 years. After a median follow-up of 10 years, there was no sig-
nificant difference in prostate cancer mortality between the
group of men invited to screening and control group (RR, 0.99
[95% CI, 0.94-1.03]; P = .49).
Neither the ERSPC, PLCO, or CAP trials, nor any of the ERSPC
site-specific analyses, found an overall all-cause mortality benefit
from screening for prostate cancer.
There are limited data on the benefit of screening in younger
men.ThePLCOtrialdidnotrecruitmenyoungerthan55years.The
ERSPCtrialreportedaslightlyhigherandnonsignificantriskreduc-
tion(RR,0.84[95%CI,0.28-2.49])forprostatecancermortalityin
menaged50to55yearscomparedwithmeninthecoregroupaged
55 to 69 years (RR, 0.79 [95% CI, 0.69-0.91]).
There are few data that screening is effective in men older
than 70 years. The PLCO and ERSPC trials enrolled men 74 years
and younger; men older than 70 years were not in the core age
group (55-69 years) in the ERSPC trial. The CAP trial did not enroll
men older than 69 years. In the ERSPC trial, the prostate cancer
mortality rate ratio in the screening vs control group among men
70 years and older at randomization was 1.17 (95% CI, 0.82-1.66);
however, a statistical test found no significant heterogeneity
across age groups. In the PLCO trial, the analogous rate ratio at a
median follow-up of 13 years among men aged 65 to 74 years at
randomization was 1.02 (95% CI, 0.77-1.37); the test for heteroge-
neity was not significant (P = .81).
Potential Benefits of Treatment
The USPSTF examined 3 good-quality randomized trials of treat-
ment of localized prostate cancer and 9 observational cohort stud-
ies to understand the potential benefit of active treatment (radical
prostatectomy or radiation therapy) compared with conservative
treatment (active surveillance or watchful waiting) on overall mor-
tality,prostatecancermortality,andprogressiontometastaticpros-
tate cancer.3
TheUKProtecTtrialrandomizedmorethan1600menaged50
to69yearswithscreen-detected,localizedprostatecancertoradi-
cal prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or active surveillance and fol-
lowed them up for 10 years. Approximately 77% of men had low-
gradeprostatecancer(Gleasonscoreof6)withafavorableprognosis.
Thus,somemenrandomizedtoactivesurveillancehadaninterme-
diate-grade tumor (or other tumor characteristics) such that they
may not have been considered a candidate for active surveillance
in some settings. The trial did not find a significant improvement in
all-causeorprostatecancermortalityinanyofthetreatmentgroups.
The unexpectedly high survival rate across the trial groups (99%)
made any potential differences harder to detect. Longer-term fol-
low-up studies may provide important additional information. The
trialreportedasignificantreductioninprogressiontometastaticcan-
cer when comparing both radical prostatectomy (61% reduction
[95%CI,27%-79%])andradiationtherapy(52%reduction[95%CI,
13%-73%])withactivesurveillance.Intheactivesurveillancegroup,
6.0%ofmendevelopedmetastaticcancer,comparedwith2.7%and
2.3%intheradiationtherapyandradicalprostatectomygroups,re-
spectively. During the 10-year follow-up period, 54.8% of men ran-
domized to active surveillance crossed over to active treatment.15
The other 2 randomized trials of radical prostatectomy took
place prior to widespread PSA-based screening and thus recruited
many men with tumors detected from clinical symptoms. Approxi-
mately 50% of men in the US-based Prostate Cancer Intervention
vs Observation Trial (PIVOT) and almost 90% of men in the Scan-
dinavian Prostate Cancer Group-4 (SPCG-4) trial had palpable tu-
mors.TheSPCG-4trialcomparedradicalprostatectomywithwatch-
ful waiting (a passive protocol dissimilar to active surveillance) and
found a significant reduction over 13 years in all-cause and prostate
cancer mortality.27 The PIVOT trial did not find significant reduc-
tions overall in all-cause or prostate cancer mortality.28 Recent re-
sults from extended follow-up of the PIVOT trial to a median of 12.7
yearsreportedsimilarresults;radicalprostatectomydidnotsignifi-
cantly reduce prostate cancer mortality (HR, 0.63 [95% CI, 0.39-
1.02]) or all-cause mortality (HR, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.81-1.09]) com-
pared with conservative management.29
Severalcohortstudiesexaminingradicalprostatectomyorradia-
tion therapy found significant reductions in prostate cancer mortal-
ity when comparing active treatment with watchful waiting or other
conservativeapproaches.3Thecohortstudyresults,however,should
beinterpretedwithcautionbecauseofthepotentialforbiasintreat-
mentassignment.Intheseclinicalsettings,menwhoarehealthiermay
have been more likely to receive active treatment.
Two studies reported on the difference in benefit by age. The
PIVOT trial reported no significant differences by age (younger or
older than 65 years) in the association between radical prostatec-
tomy and all-cause mortality. In the SPCG-4 trial, the risk of all-
causemortalityafterradicalprostatectomyvswatchfulwaitingwas
not significantly reduced among men 65 years and older (but was
significantly reduced in men younger than 65 years).
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
Potential Harms of Screening and Diagnosis
InadditiontotheERSPCandPLCOtrials,theUSPSTFexaminedthe
results of a good-quality cohort study embedded within the Pro-
tecTtrial(ProstateBiopsyEffects[ProbE]),afair-qualitycohortstudy
conductedintheUSDepartmentofVeteransAffairs(VA)healthsys-
tem,aswellasareportoncomplicationsofprostatebiopsyfromthe
ERSPCRotterdamsitetounderstandthepotentialharmsofscreen-
ing and diagnosis.3
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
1909
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 In the large RCTs, one-fourth to one-third of men offered
PSA-basedscreeninghadatleast1positivescreeningtestresult.Inthe
PLCO trial, 13% of men had undergone at least 1 biopsy. In the ERSPC
trial, nearly 28 biopsies were performed for every 100 men random-
izedtoscreening.3IntheProbEtrial,7.3%ofmenreportedmoderate
or greater pain, 5.5% reported moderate to severe fever, and 26.6%
reported troublesome hematospermia within the 35 days after
biopsy.28 Complications from transrectal prostate biopsy resulted in
1.3%ofmenintheUKcohort,1.6%ofmenintheVAcohort,and0.5%
ofmenintheRotterdamcohortrequiringhospitalization.30-32Inthese
studies,two-thirdstothree-fourthsofbiopsiesdemonstratedthatthe
PSA screening test was a false positive.3
Overdiagnosis, the identification of asymptomatic cancer that
would never cause symptoms or contribute to death, is one of the
most important harms of PSA-based screening programs. Al-
though there is no way to conclusively determine the overdiagno-
sis rate, the USPSTF used data from trials and reviewed decision
analysis models to estimate the overdiagnosis rate. Trial data sug-
gest that 21% of cases of screen-detected cancer in the PLCO trial
and 50% in the ERSPC trial were overdiagnosed.3 Using a different
typeofmethodology(ie,notestimatesbaseddirectlyonsingletrials),
3decisionanalysismodelsproducedbytheCancerInterventionand
Surveillance Modeling Network estimated that between 1988 and
2000 in the United States, the overdiagnosis rate among cases of
screen-detected prostate cancer was 22% to 42%.24 Overdiagno-
sisincreaseswithage;1studyestimatesthattheoverdiagnosisrate
is more than 15-fold higher in men older than 85 years than in men
aged 50 to 54 years.24
Men older than 70 years in the ERSPC trial had a higher rate of
false-positive results than younger men (younger than 55 years)
(20.6%vs3.5%inthefirstscreeninground,respectively).IntheVA
cohort study, fewer older men were sent for biopsy for a PSA level
greater than 4.0 ng/mL (50.5% of men aged 65-69 years vs 25.4%
ofmenaged75-79years).DatafromthePLCOtrialsuggestthatolder
menmaybemorelikelythanyoungermentoexperiencebiopsycom-
plications (28.2 vs 17.7 complications per 1000 biopsies, respec-
tively; OR, 1.4 [95% CI, 0.9-2.4]; P = .06).
The USPSTF reviewed studies evaluating psychological harms
ofscreeninganddiagnosis.In2observationalstudies,menwhohad
abnormal PSA screening results but benign biopsy results had sig-
nificantlyincreasedworryaboutprostatecancerat6-to8-weekand
at 1-year follow-up compared with men with normal PSA screening
results.33 After 1 year, one-third of men with a benign biopsy find-
ing after an abnormal screening result thought about prostate can-
cer “
a lot”or “
some,”compared with 18% of men who had a normal
PSAlevel(P = .005).Inaprospectivecohortstudyembeddedinthe
UK ProtecT trial (n = 7344), there was no increase in anxiety or de-
pressionandsimilarscoresontheMentalHealthComponentofthe
12-Item Short Form Health Survey compared with baseline among
men who had abnormal PSA screening results.34 In a cross-
sectional US study (n = 210), men with benign biopsy findings af-
terabnormalPSAscreeningresultsdidnothavesignificantlygreater
anxiety than men who had normal results.35
Potential Harms of Treatment
Men who undergo active surveillance may undergo repeated biop-
sies and be exposed to potential repeated harms from biopsies (as
discussed above). In addition, a significant proportion of men will
goontohaveactivetreatmentwithsurgeryorradiationtherapy,with
resultant harms (as discussed below).
TheUSPSTFidentified3good-qualityand1fair-qualityrandom-
ized trials and 7 large fair-quality observational studies that exam-
ined the potential harms of active treatment of prostate cancer.3 A
meta-analysisoftheharmsofradicalprostatectomyconcludedthat
1manwillexperiencesubstantialurinaryincontinence(requiringdaily
use of pads or worse) for every 7.9 men who undergo radical pros-
tatectomy rather than conservative management (95% CI, 5.4-
12.2), and 1 man will experience long-term erectile dysfunction for
every2.7menwhoundergoradicalprostatectomyratherthancon-
servative management (95% CI, 2.2-3.6).3 In addition, more than
20%ofmeninthePIVOTtrialhadaperioperativecomplicationand
5.3% of men in a large US cohort study required reintervention for
a surgical complication.3 A meta-analysis of the harms of radiation
therapy found that 1 man will experience long-term erectile dys-
functionforevery7mentreatedwithradiationtherapyratherthan
conservative management (95% CI, 5.1-10.7).3 Although results are
conflicting across cohort studies regarding the association of uri-
nary incontinence and radiation therapy, rates of fecal inconti-
nence and bowel urgency were as high as 31.8% after radiation
therapy in 1 cohort study,36 and these bowel complications were
morecommoncomparedwithconservativemanagementin2trials
and 3 cohort studies.3
After a median follow-up of 6 years in the ProtecT trial, there
wasnosignificantdifferenceamongmenrandomizedtoradicalpros-
tatectomy,radiationtherapy,oractivesurveillanceinreportedanxi-
ety, depression, health status, and cancer-related quality of life.36
The older SPCG-4 trial had similar results after a median follow-up
of 12 years when comparing men who received radical prostatec-
tomy vs watchful waiting.37 There was no evidence of an adverse
effect of radical prostatectomy on generic quality-of-life measures
compared with conservative management in cohort studies.
In several studies, men older than 70 years had a significantly
increased risk of medical complications and perioperative mortal-
ity after radical prostatectomy compared with younger men.3
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
Conclusionsfromdecisionanalysismodels,whichareconsistentwith
the findings of randomized trials and cohort studies, suggest that
more aggressive screening strategies, particularly those that use a
lower PSA threshold for biopsy than generally used in the United
States,providethegreatestpotentialreductionindeathfrompros-
tatecancer.However,thesestrategiesarealsoassociatedwithmore
false positives, more biopsies, and higher rates of overdiagnosis.24
Optionsforreducingtheoverdiagnosisrateincludeloweringthe
age at which to stop screening, extending the interval between
screenings, and using higher PSA thresholds for biopsy. However,
nostrategycompletelyeliminatesoverdiagnosis.PSA-basedscreen-
ing for prostate cancer every 2 or 4 years instead of annually ap-
pears to provide a good trade-off between a reduction in overdiag-
nosis and a small reduction in mortality benefit.24
DecisionanalysismodelsconfirmtheUSPSTF’
sconclusionthat
theoverallbenefitofPSA-basedscreeningforprostatecancerissen-
sitive to the values of individual men. The magnitude of net benefit
of PSA-based screening depends on how each man weighs the po-
tential benefits and harms of screening, diagnosis, and treatment.
The value a man places on potential benefits and harms may also
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
1910
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 change over time. It may therefore be useful for clinicians to regu-
larly revisit the decision to screen (or not screen) with their pa-
tients (Table).
Althoughactivesurveillancemayreduceexposuretothepoten-
tialharmsofactivetreatment,itmaynotbeviewedfavorablybysome
men who value definitive action, are concerned about repeat biop-
sies, or want to avoid a potential increase in metastatic cancer.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
publiccommentontheUSPSTFwebsitefromApril11toMay8,2017.
A number of comments suggested that because men are now liv-
ing longer, they should be screened beyond 70 years of age. How-
ever, the USPSTF considered other evidence in addition to data on
lifeexpectancywhenrecommendingagainstscreeninginmenolder
than 70 years, including results from large screening trials that did
not report a mortality benefit for men older than 70 years and evi-
denceontheincreasedlikelihoodofharmfromscreening,diagnos-
tic evaluation, treatment, overdiagnosis, and overtreatment. Sev-
eral comments requested a recommendation for younger men and
for baseline PSA-based screening in men 40 years and older or 50
yearsandolder.TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidencethatscreen-
ing younger men or performing baseline PSA-based screening pro-
vides benefit.
Several comments asked for clarification about what new evi-
dence led to the change from a D to a C grade. The new evidence
included longer-term follow-up of the ERSPC trial and new data on
reductionsinriskofmetastaticdiseasewithscreening.Althoughthe
added benefit reported from the additional follow-up to 13 years
(from10years)intheERSPCtrialincreasedthenumberoflivessaved
from 1.07 to 1.28 (a small amount, according to some comments),
these results gave the USPSTF more confidence that the benefit of
screening could be greater over a 20- to 30-year period. Evidence
newly considered since the draft recommendation statement was
postedforcommentincludestheCAPtrial,evidenceonpsychologi-
cal harms, and longer-term follow-up of the PIVOT trial. This evi-
dence led the USPSTF to continue to conclude that there is a small
amount of benefit for some men. The USPSTF recognizes the im-
portanceofthepotentialharmsofscreeningandtreatment,includ-
ingpsychologicalharmsandharmsfromactivesurveillance,andhas
addedinformationaboutthisevidencetotheRationale,ClinicalCon-
siderations, and Discussion sections. New evidence from the re-
cently published CAP trial was added. Given the limitations of the
CAP trial, including that it only examined 1-time PSA-based screen-
ing and the small difference between the percentage of men in the
control and intervention groups (approximately 10%-15% vs 34%,
respectively)whoreceivedPSA-basedscreening,theresultsofthis
trial did not change the USPSTF’
s overall assessment of the evi-
dence and its recommendation.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
Thisrecommendationreplacesthe2012USPSTFrecommendation38
on PSA-based screening for prostate cancer. In 2012, the USPSTF
concluded that, although there are potential benefits of screening
for prostate cancer, these benefits do not outweigh the expected
harms enough to recommend routine screening (D recommenda-
tion). The change in recommendation grade is based in part on ad-
ditional evidence that increased the USPSTF’
s certainty about the
reductions in risk of dying of prostate cancer and risk of metastatic
disease. Longer-term follow-up of the ERSPC trial and from some
ERSPC trial sites found that PSA-based screening for prostate can-
cerprevents1.28menfromdyingofprostatecancerforevery1000
men screened. In addition, a subset of ERSPC trial sites have since
reported that screening 1000 men aged 55 to 69 years may pre-
ventapproximately3menfromdevelopingmetastaticprostatecan-
cer. Longer-term, 12.7-year results of the PIVOT trial became avail-
able since the posting of the draft recommendation statement and
are similar to the 10-year results. Studies continue to demonstrate
the harms of PSA-based screening, including false-positive results,
complications from transrectal prostate biopsies, overdiagnosis
(whichmayoccurin20%-50%ofcasesofscreen-detectedcancer,
basedonestimatesfromtrialdata),psychologicalharms,andharms
of treatment, including urinary incontinence and erectile dysfunc-
tion.Thechangeinrecommendationgradefurtherreflectsnewevi-
denceaboutandincreaseduseofactivesurveillanceoflow-riskpros-
tate cancer, which may reduce the risk of subsequent harms from
screening.ThisrecommendationalsoclearlyidentifiesAfricanAmeri-
can men and men with a family history of prostate cancer as having
higher risk for prostate cancer and provides additional information
to help support these men in making informed decisions about
screening. For the C recommendation for men aged 55 to 69 years,
theUSPSTF’
sintentionistoconveythateachman’
svaluesmayshift
Table. Estimated Effects After 13 Years of Inviting Men Aged 55 to 69 Years
in the United States to PSA-Based Screening for Prostate Cancera
Effect
No. of Men
Men invited to screening
1000
Men who received at least 1 positive
PSA test result
240
Men who have undergone 1 or more transrectal
prostate biopsies
220b
Men hospitalized for a biopsy complication
2
Men diagnosed with prostate cancer
100
Men who initially received active treatment
with radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy
65
Men who initially received active surveillance
30
Men who initially received active surveillance
who went on to receive active treatment
with radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy
15
Men with sexual dysfunction who received initial
or deferred treatment
50
Men with urinary incontinence who received initial
or deferred treatment
15
Men who avoided metastatic prostate cancer
3
Men who died of causes other than prostate cancer
200
Men who died of prostate cancer despite screening,
diagnosis, and treatment
5
Men who avoided dying of prostate cancer
1.3
Abbreviation: PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
a Estimates based on benefits observed in the ERSPC trial for men aged 55 to 69
years and on treatment harms derived from pooled absolute rates in the
threatment groups in the 3 treatment trials (ProtecT, PIVOT, SPCG-4).
bResult based on biopsy rate in the ERSPC trial. Current practice in the
United States will likely result in fewer biopsies. The potential effect of
fewer biopsies on other outcomes, including reductions in prostate cancer
diagnosis and mortality, are not clear.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
1911
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 thebalancetoanetbenefitofscreeningandtopromotetheimpor-
tance of informed decision making prior to screening. The USPSTF
continuestofindthatthebenefitsofscreeningdonotoutweighthe
harms in men 70 years and older and recommends against screen-
ing in these men.
Recommendations of Others
TheAmericanAcademyofFamilyPhysicians39andtheCanadianTask
Force on Preventive Health Care40 recommend against PSA-based
screening for prostate cancer. The American College of Physicians41
recommendsthatcliniciansdiscussthebenefitsandharmsofscreen-
ing with men aged 50 to 69 years and only recommends screening
for men who prioritize screening and have a life expectancy of more
than 10 to 15 years. The American Urological Association42 recom-
mends that men aged 55 to 69 years with a life expectancy of more
than 10 to 15 years be informed of the benefits and harms of screen-
ingandengageinshareddecisionmakingwiththeirclinicians,taking
into account each man’
s values and preferences. It notes that to re-
ducetheharmsofscreening,thescreeningintervalshouldbe2ormore
years.TheAmericanUrologicalAssociationalsonotesthatdecisions
about screening, including potentially starting screening before age
55 years, should be individual ones for African American men and
men with a family history of prostate cancer. The American Cancer
Society43adopteddetailedscreeningrecommendationsin2016that
highlight the importance of shared decision making and the need
for informed discussion of the uncertainties, risks, and potential
benefits of screening. It recommends conversations about screen-
ing beginning at age 50 years and earlier for African American men
and men with a father or brother with a history of prostate cancer
before age 65 years.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 20, 2018.
Correction: This article was corrected on June 19,
2018, for incorrect data in the abstract and text.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS; Aaron B.
Caughey, MD, PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc;
Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH; Mark Ebell, MD, MS;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD,
MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Martha Kubik,
PhD, RN; C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M.
Mangione, MD, MSPH; Michael Silverstein, MD,
MPH; Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH; Albert L. Siu,
MD, MSPH; Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System,
Palo Alto, California (Owens); Stanford University,
Stanford, California (Owens); University of
California, San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo);
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland
(Caughey); Columbia University, New York, New
York (Davidson); University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (Doubeni); University of Georgia,
Athens (Ebell); Virginia Tech Carilion School of
Medicine, Roanoke (Epling); Nationwide Children’
s
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio (Kemper); Fairfax Family
Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (Krist);
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(Kubik); University of Alabama at Birmingham
(Landefeld); University of California, Los Angeles
(Mangione); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon); Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York
(Siu); James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Bronx, New York (Siu); University of Hawaii,
Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific Health Research and
Education Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Grossman had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Tracy Wolff,
MD, MPH (AHRQ), and David Meyers, MD (AHRQ),
who contributed to the writing of the manuscript,
and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who assisted with
coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. National Cancer Institute. Cancer stat facts:
prostate cancer. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts
/html/prost.html. Accessed March 8, 2018.
2. Jahn JL, Giovannucci EL, Stampfer MJ.
The high prevalence of undiagnosed prostate
cancer at autopsy: implications for epidemiology
and treatment of prostate cancer in the
prostate-specific antigen-era. Int J Cancer. 2015;137
(12):2795-2802.
3. Fenton JJ, Weyrich MS, Durbin S, Liu Y, Bang H,
Melnikow J. Prostate-Specific Antigen–Based
Screening for Prostate Cancer: A Systematic
Evidence Review for the US Preventive Services Task
Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 154. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2018.
AHRQ publication 17-05229-EF-1.
4. Fenton JJ, Weyrich MS, Durbin S, Liu Y, Bang H,
Melnikow J. Prostate-specific antigen-based
screening for prostate cancer: evidence report and
systematic review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force [published online May 8, 2018]. JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2018.3712
5. Kilpeläinen TP, Tammela TL, Roobol M, et al.
False-positive screening results in the European
randomized study of screening for prostate cancer.
Eur J Cancer. 2011;47(18):2698-2705.
6. Cuzick J, Thorat MA, Andriole G, et al.
Prevention and early detection of prostate cancer.
Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(11):e484-e492.
7. Pinsky PF, Prorok PC, Yu K, et al. Extended
mortality results for prostate cancer screening in
the PLCO trial with median follow-up of 15 years.
Cancer. 2017;123(4):592-599.
8. Schröder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al;
ERSPC Investigators. Screening and prostate cancer
mortality: results of the European Randomised
Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) at
13 years of follow-up. Lancet. 2014;384(9959):
2027-2035.
9. Kilpeläinen TP, Tammela TL, Malila N, et al.
Prostate cancer mortality in the Finnish randomized
screening trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105(10):719-
725.
10. Arnsrud Godtman R, Holmberg E, Lilja H,
Stranne J, Hugosson J. Opportunistic testing versus
organized prostate-specific antigen screening:
outcome after 18 years in the Göteborg randomized
population-based prostate cancer screening trial.
Eur Urol. 2015;68(3):354-360.
11. Schröder FH, Hugosson J, Carlsson S, et al.
Screening for prostate cancer decreases the risk
of developing metastatic disease: findings
from the European Randomized Study of Screening
for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC). Eur Urol. 2012;62(5):
745-752.
12. Martin RM, Donovan JL, Turner EL, et al; CAP
Trial Group. Effect of a low-intensity PSA-based
screening intervention on prostate cancer
mortality: the CAP randomized clinical trial. JAMA.
2018;319(9):883-895.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
1912
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 13. Pinsky PF, Parnes HL, Andriole G. Mortality and
complications after prostate biopsy in the Prostate,
Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening
(PLCO) trial. BJU Int. 2014;113(2):254-259.
14. Lin JS, Petitti DB, Burda BU. Overview of
Prostate Cancer Screening Decision Models:
A Contextual Review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2018. AHRQ publication
17-05229-EF-2.
15. Hamdy FC, Donovan JL, Lane JA, et al; ProtecT
Study Group. 10-year outcomes after monitoring,
surgery, or radiotherapy for localized prostate
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(15):1415-1424.
16. Cooperberg MR, Carroll PR. Trends in
management for patients with localized prostate
cancer, 1990-2013. JAMA. 2015;314(1):80-82.
17. Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Grubb RL III, et al;
PLCO Project Team. Mortality results from a
randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl
J Med. 2009;360(13):1310-1319.
18. Lichtenstein P, Holm NV, Verkasalo PK, et al.
Environmental and heritable factors in the
causation of cancer—analyses of cohorts of twins
from Sweden, Denmark, and Finland. N Engl J Med.
2000;343(2):78-85.
19. Saarimäki L, Tammela TL, Määttänen L, et al.
Family history in the Finnish prostate cancer
screening trial. Int J Cancer. 2015;136(9):2172-2177.
20. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of prostate
cancer (PDQ®)–health professional version.
https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/hp
/prostate-genetics-pdq. Accessed March 8, 2018.
21. Liss MA, Chen H, Hemal S, et al. Impact of
family history on prostate cancer mortality in white
men undergoing prostate specific antigen based
screening. J Urol. 2015;193(1):75-79.
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
United States cancer statistics: 1999–2014 cancer
incidence and mortality data. https://nccd.cdc.gov
/uscs/. Accessed March 8, 2018.
23. Ryerson AB, Eheman CR, Altekruse SF, et al.
Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of
Cancer, 1975-2012, featuring the increasing
incidence of liver cancer. Cancer. 2016;122(9):1312-
1337.
24. Petitti DB, Lin JS, Burda BU. Overdiagnosis in
Prostate Cancer Screening Decision Models:
A Contextual Review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2018. AHRQ publication 17-
05229-EF-3.
25. Wolters T, Roobol MJ, Steyerberg EW, et al.
The effect of study arm on prostate cancer
treatment in the large screening trial ERSPC. Int J
Cancer. 2010;126(10):2387-2393.
26. Pinsky PF, Blacka A, Kramer BS, Miller A,
Prorok PC, Berg C. Assessing contamination and
compliance in the prostate component of the
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial. Clin Trials. 2010;7(4):303-311.
27. Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Garmo H, et al.
Radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting in early
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(10):932-942.
28. Wilt TJ, Brawer MK, Jones KM, et al; Prostate
Cancer Intervention versus Observation Trial
(PIVOT) Study Group. Radical prostatectomy versus
observation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2012;367(3):203-213.
29. Wilt TJ, Jones KM, Barry MJ, et al. Follow-up
of prostatectomy versus observation for early
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(2):132-142.
30. Rosario DJ, Lane JA, Metcalfe C, et al. Short
term outcomes of prostate biopsy in men tested for
cancer by prostate specific antigen: prospective
evaluation within ProtecT study. BMJ. 2012;344:
d7894.
31. Walter LC, Fung KZ, Kirby KA, et al. Five-year
downstream outcomes following prostate-specific
antigen screening in older men. JAMA Intern Med.
2013;173(10):866-873.
32. Raaijmakers R, Kirkels WJ, Roobol MJ,
Wildhagen MF, Schrder FH. Complication rates and
risk factors of 5802 transrectal ultrasound-guided
sextant biopsies of the prostate within a
population-based screening program. Urology.
2002;60(5):826-830.
33. Fowler FJ Jr, Barry MJ, Walker-Corkery B, et al.
The impact of a suspicious prostate biopsy on
patients’psychological, socio-behavioral, and
medical care outcomes. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21
(7):715-721.
34. Brindle LA, Oliver SE, Dedman D, et al.
Measuring the psychosocial impact of
population-based prostate-specific antigen testing
for prostate cancer in the UK. BJU Int. 2006;98(4):
777-782.
35. Katz DA, Jarrard DF, McHorney CA, Hillis SL,
Wiebe DA, Fryback DG. Health perceptions in
patients who undergo screening and workup for
prostate cancer. Urology. 2007;69(2):215-220.
36. Donovan JL, Hamdy FC, Lane JA, et al; ProtecT
Study Group. Patient-reported outcomes after
monitoring, surgery, or radiotherapy for prostate
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(15):1425-1437.
37. Johansson E, Steineck G, Holmberg L, et al;
SPCG-4 Investigators. Long-term quality-of-life
outcomes after radical prostatectomy or watchful
waiting: the Scandinavian Prostate Cancer Group-4
randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(9):891-899.
38. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(2):120-134.
39. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive service recommendation:
prostate cancer. https://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/prostate-cancer
.html. 2012. Accessed March 8, 2018.
40. Bell N, Connor Gorber S, Shane A, et al;
Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.
Recommendations on screening for prostate cancer
with the prostate-specific antigen test. CMAJ.
2014;186(16):1225-1234.
41. Qaseem A, Barry MJ, Denberg TD, Owens DK,
Shekelle P; Clinical Guidelines Committee of the
American College of Physicians. Screening for
prostate cancer: a guidance statement from the
Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American
College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158
(10):761-769.
42. Carter HB, Albertsen PC, Barry MJ, et al. Early
detection of prostate cancer: AUA Guideline. J Urol.
2013;190(2):419-426.
43. American Cancer Society. American Cancer
Society recommendations for prostate cancer
early detection. https://www.cancer.org
/cancer/prostate-cancer/early-detection/acs
-recommendations.html. 2016. Accessed
March 8, 2018.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Prostate Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 8, 2018
Volume 319, Number 18
1913
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
