 Hormone Therapy for the Primary Prevention
of Chronic Conditions in Postmenopausal Women
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE Menopause occurs at a median age of 51.3 years, and the average US woman
who reaches menopause is expected to live another 30 years. The prevalence and incidence
of most chronic conditions, such as coronary heart disease, dementia, stroke, fractures, and
breast cancer, increase with age; however, the excess risk for these conditions that can be
attributed to menopause alone is uncertain. Since the publication of findings from the
Women’
s Health Initiative that hormone therapy use is associated with serious adverse health
effects in postmenopausal women, use of menopausal hormone therapy has declined.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2012 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on the use of menopausal hormone therapy for the primary prevention of chronic conditions.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits and harms of systemic
(ie, oral or transdermal) hormone therapy for the prevention of chronic conditions in
postmenopausal women and whether outcomes vary among women in different subgroups
or by timing of intervention after menopause. The review did not address hormone therapy
for preventing or treating menopausal symptoms.
FINDINGS Although the use of hormone therapy to prevent chronic conditions in
postmenopausal women is associated with some benefits, there are also well-documented
harms. The USPSTF determined that the magnitude of both the benefits and the harms of
hormone therapy in postmenopausal women is small to moderate. Therefore, the USPSTF
concluded with moderate certainty that combined estrogen and progestin has no net benefit
for the primary prevention of chronic conditions for most postmenopausal women with an
intact uterus and that estrogen alone has no net benefit for the primary prevention of chronic
conditions for most postmenopausal women who have had a hysterectomy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends against the use of
combined estrogen and progestin for the primary prevention of chronic conditions in
postmenopausal women. (D recommendation) The USPSTF recommends against the use of
estrogen alone for the primary prevention of chronic conditions in postmenopausal women
who have had a hysterectomy. (D recommendation)
JAMA. 2017;318(22):2224-2233. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.18261
Editorial page 2187
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 2234 and
JAMA Patient Page page 2265
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
Related articles at
jamacardiology.com
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at
the end of this article.
Corresponding Author: David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH
(david.c.grossman@kp.org).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
2224
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththebenefits
andharmsoftheserviceandanassessmentofthebalance.TheUSPSTF
doesnotconsiderthecostsofprovidingaserviceinthisassessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
TheUSPSTFrecommendsagainsttheuseofcombinedestrogenand
progestin for the primary prevention of chronic conditions in post-
menopausal women. (D recommendation)
TheUSPSTFrecommendsagainsttheuseofestrogenaloneforthe
primarypreventionofchronicconditionsinpostmenopausalwomen
who have had a hysterectomy (D recommendation) (Figure 1).
Rationale
Importance
Menopauseisdefinedasthepermanentcessationofawoman’
smen-
strualcycle.Itistypicallydefinedinretrospect,12monthsafterawom-
an’
s final menstrual period. Menopause occurs at a median age of
51.3years,andtheaverageUSwomanwhoreachesmenopauseisex-
pectedtoliveanother30years.Theprevalenceandincidenceofmost
chronicconditions,suchascoronaryheartdisease,dementia,stroke,
fractures, and breast cancer, increase with age; however, the excess
riskfortheseconditionsthatcanbeattributedtomenopausealoneis
uncertain.SincethepublicationoffindingsfromtheWomen’
sHealth
Initiative(WHI)thathormonetherapyusewasassociatedwithserious
adversehealtheffectsinpostmenopausalwomen,useofmenopausal
hormonetherapyhasdeclined,from44%ofUSwomenusingorhav-
ingusedhormonetherapyin1988-1994to4.7%ofwomenin2010.1
Benefits of Preventive Medication
Combined Estrogen and Progestin
Many health outcomes potentially associated with the use of hor-
mone therapy in postmenopausal women have been examined.
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that use of combined
estrogen and progestin has a moderate benefit in reducing the
risk of fractures in postmenopausal women and adequate evi-
dence that it has a small benefit in reducing the risk of diabetes.
Estrogen Alone
The use of estrogen without progestin has generally been re-
stricted to women who have had a hysterectomy, because unop-
posed estrogen use increases the risk of endometrial cancer in
women with an intact uterus. The USPSTF found convincing evi-
dence that use of estrogen alone has a moderate benefit in reduc-
ing the incidence of fractures in postmenopausal women. The
USPSTFfoundadequateevidencethattheuseofestrogenalonehas
amoderatebenefitinreducingtheriskofdevelopingordyingofin-
vasive breast cancer and a small benefit in reducing the risk of dia-
betes. The USPSTF found convincing evidence that estrogen use
does not have a beneficial effect on risk of coronary heart disease.
Harms of Preventive Medication
Combined Estrogen and Progestin
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that use of combined es-
trogen and progestin is associated with moderate harms, including
increasedriskofinvasivebreastcancerandvenousthromboembo-
lism,andasmalltomoderateharmofincreasedriskofcoronaryheart
disease. The USPSTF also found adequate evidence of other mod-
erateharms,suchasincreasedriskofstroke,dementia,gallbladder
disease, and urinary incontinence.
Estrogen Alone
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatuseofestrogenaloneis
associatedwithmoderateharms,includingincreasedriskofstroke,
dementia, gallbladder disease, urinary incontinence, and venous
thromboembolism.
USPSTF Assessment
TheUSPSTFconcludeswithmoderatecertaintythattheuseofcom-
binedestrogenandprogestinhasnonetbenefitfortheprimarypre-
ventionofchronicconditionsinmostpostmenopausalwomenwith
an intact uterus.
TheUSPSTFconcludeswithmoderatecertaintythattheuseof
estrogen alone has no net benefit for the primary prevention of
chronic conditions in most postmenopausal women who have had
a hysterectomy.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationstatementappliestoasymptomatic,postmeno-
pausal women who are considering hormone therapy for the pri-
marypreventionofchronicmedicalconditions(Figure2).Itdoesnot
apply to women who are considering hormone therapy for the man-
agementofmenopausalsymptoms,suchashotflashesorvaginaldry-
ness.Italsodoesnotapplytowomenwhohavehadprematuremeno-
pause (primary ovarian insufficiency) or surgical menopause.
Assessment of Risk
This recommendation statement applies to an average-risk popu-
lation.Riskfactorsforaspecificchronicconditionorindividualchar-
acteristicsthataffectthelikelihoodofexperiencingaspecifictherapy-
associated adverse event may cause a woman’
s net balance of
benefits and harms to differ from that of the average population.
Treatment and Intervention
Menopausal hormone therapy refers to the use of combined estro-
genandprogestininwomenwithanintactuterus,orestrogenalone
in women who have had a hysterectomy, taken at or after the time
of menopause. For this recommendation, the USPSTF considered
evidence on the benefits and harms of systemic (ie, oral or trans-
dermal) menopausal hormone therapy but not local formulations
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
2225
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 (eg,creamsorrings)ofhormonetherapy,becausethesearenotgen-
erally used for the primary prevention of chronic conditions.
IndicationsforhormonetherapyapprovedbytheUSFoodand
DrugAdministration(FDA)inmenopausalwomenarelimitedtothe
treatment of menopausal symptoms and the prevention of post-
menopausal osteoporosis. An FDA-issued black box warning indi-
cates that estrogen therapy, with or without progestin, should be
prescribed at the lowest effective dose and for the shortest dura-
tion consistent with the patient’
s treatment goals and risks.2
Severaldifferentformulationsofmenopausalhormonetherapy
are approved by the FDA for use in the United States; the specific
formulation used in the WHI trial, the largest trial reviewed by the
USPSTF,was0.625mg/doforalconjugatedequineestrogens,with
orwithout2.5mg/dofmedroxyprogesteroneacetate.Currently,evi-
dencetodeterminewhetherdifferenttypes,doses,ormodesofde-
livery of hormone therapy affect its benefit-to-harm profile for the
prevention of chronic conditions is limited.1
Theuseofmenopausalhormonetherapyisassociatedwithboth
benefitsandharms.Combinedestrogenandprogestinuseisassociated
withadecreasedriskoffractures,diabetes,andcolorectalcancer;how-
ever,itisalsoassociatedwithanincreasedriskofinvasivebreastcancer,
coronary heart disease, thromboembolic events, stroke, dementia,
gallbladderdisease,andself-reportedurinaryincontinence.Estrogen
usealoneisassociatedwithadecreasedriskoffractures,invasivebreast
cancer, and diabetes; however, it is also associated with an increased
riskofthromboembolicevents,stroke,dementia,gallbladderdisease,
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
2226
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 and self-reported urinary incontinence. The reason for the discor-
danteffectofestrogenalonecomparedwithcombinedestrogenand
progestin on the risk of invasive breast cancer is unclear. Table 1 and
Table 2 show the estimated absolute event rate differences associ-
ated with the use of combined estrogen and progestin and estrogen
alone, compared with placebo, for these health outcomes.1
Other Approaches to Prevention
Severalinterventionsandpreventivemedicationstoreducetherisk
ofchronicconditionsinwomenhavebeenstudied.Forexample,the
use of medications such as tamoxifen and raloxifene in women at
increased risk of breast cancer who do not have contraindications
andareatlowriskofadversemedicationeffectsisapotentialstrat-
egy to reduce risk of breast cancer.3 The USPSTF recommends be-
havioral counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet and
physicalactivityforthepreventionofcardiovasculardiseaseinadults
whoareoverweightorobeseandhaveadditionalcardiovasculardis-
ease risk factors.4 The USPSTF also recommends daily use of low-
doseaspirintodecreasetheriskofcolorectalcancerandcardiovas-
cular disease in appropriate candidates.5
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
Evidence is limited whether the benefits and harms of menopausal
hormone therapy vary by age, race/ethnicity, or timing of initiation
after menopause. In the WHI trial, the test for trend by age group
showed a statistically significant trend toward lower all-cause mor-
tality among younger women (aged 50 to 59 years at time of ran-
domization)assignedtoestrogenalonebutnotwomenassignedto
combinedestrogenandprogestin.Thereisnoevidencethatwomen
ofdifferentraces/ethnicitiesexperienceadifferentbalanceofben-
efits and harms with menopausal hormone therapy; however, the
majority (approximately 80%) of women in the largest trial (WHI)
werewhite,sotheseanalysesmaybeunderpoweredtodetectsuch
differences. Data regarding whether the timing of initiation of hor-
mone therapy after menopause affects the balance of benefits and
harmsareconflicting.Ameta-analysisofindividual-patientdatamay
behelpfultodeterminewhetherthebalanceofbenefitsandharms
of hormone therapy is different in any of these subgroups.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Naturalmenopauseoccursatamedianageof51.3years.6Thepreva-
lence and incidence of most chronic conditions increase with age,
andtheaverageUSwomanwhoreachesmenopauseisexpectedto
live another 30 years.7 However, the excess risk for these condi-
tions that can be attributed to menopause alone is uncertain. The
evidencesupportingmenopauseasariskfactorforchronicdisease
is strongest for cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis. Accord-
ing to the National Center for Health Statistics, heart disease is the
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Hormone Therapy for the Primary Prevention of Chronic Conditions in Postmenopausal Women
Population
Recommendation 
Postmenopausal women
Do not use combined estrogen and progestin for the
primary prevention of chronic conditions. 
Grade: D
Postmenopausal women who have had a hysterectomy
Do not use estrogen alone for the primary prevention of
chronic conditions.
Grade: D
This recommendation statement applies to postmenopausal women who are considering hormone therapy for the primary prevention
of chronic medical conditions. It does not apply to women who are considering hormone therapy for the management of menopausal
symptoms, or to women who have had premature menopause (primary ovarian insufficiency) or surgical menopause.
Risk Assessment
Preventive
Medication
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
These recommendations apply to an average-risk population. Risk factors for a specific chronic condition or individual characteristics
that affect the likelihood of experiencing a specific therapy-associated adverse event may cause a woman’
s net balance of benefits
and harms to differ from that of the average population.
Hormone therapy refers to the use of combined estrogen and progestin in women with an intact uterus, or estrogen alone in women
who have had a hysterectomy, taken at or after the time of menopause. For this recommendation, the USPSTF considered evidence
on systemic (ie, oral or transdermal) menopausal hormone therapy but not local formulations (ie, creams or rings), since they are not
generally used for primary prevention. Several different formulations of menopausal hormone therapy are approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration for use in the United States; the specific formulation used in the Women’
s Health Initiative, the largest trial,
was 0.625 mg/d of oral conjugated equine estrogens, with or without 2.5 mg/d of medroxyprogesterone acetate.
The USPSTF recommends behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet and physical activity for the prevention of
cardiovascular disease in women who are overweight or obese and have additional cardiovascular disease risk factors. The USPSTF
recommends daily low-dose aspirin use to decrease the risk of colorectal cancer and cardiovascular disease in appropriate candidates.
The USPSTF recommends offering medications such as tamoxifen and raloxifene to women at increased risk of breast cancer who
do not have contraindications and are at low risk of adverse medication effects to decrease the risk of breast cancer.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
2227
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 leadingcauseofdeathamongwomenintheUnitedStates;in2013,
289 758 women died from the disease.8 In 2014, there were more
than 267 000 hospitalizations for hip fractures among persons 65
yearsandolder,andoverall,69%ofhipfracturesoccurinwomen.9
By 2025, the estimated annual incidence and costs of fractures in
the United States will increase by 50%.10
Scope of Review
To update its 2012 recommendation, the USPSTF reviewed evi-
denceaboutthebenefitsandharmsofsystemic(ie,oralortransder-
mal)hormonetherapyforthepreventionofchronicconditionsinpost-
menopausal women and whether outcomes vary among women in
differentsubgroupsorbytimingofinterventionaftermenopause.The
use of hormone therapy, whether administered orally, transder-
mally, or locally for the treatment of menopausal symptoms (eg, va-
somotor hot flashes or vulvovaginal symptoms) or for other indica-
tions is outside the scope of this recommendation.
Benefits and Harms of Preventive Medication
The USPSTF found 18 fair- or good-quality trials comparing the ef-
fects of combined estrogen and progestin or estrogen alone vs pla-
cebo on the prevention of chronic conditions in postmenopausal
women.1Ofthesetrials,theWHItrialwasthelargestandwastheonly
trialdesignedandsufficientlypoweredtoevaluatetheeffectiveness
of hormone therapy for primary prevention of the multiple condi-
tions that are the focus of this recommendation statement.
The WHI trial compared 0.625 mg/d of oral conjugated equine
estrogens, both with and without 2.5 mg/d of medroxyprogester-
one acetate, vs placebo. Other trials used a variety of estrogenic
agents (conjugated equine estrogens, estradiol, or transdermal es-
tradiol)andprogestogens(medroxyprogesteroneacetate,noreth-
indrone, or micronized progesterone) as active study agents. The
WHI trial enrolled women aged 50 to 79 years; the mean age was
63 years.
The WHI trial provided most of the estimates used to assess the
benefits and harms of menopausal hormone therapy. Including the
posttrial phases, the WHI trial had up to 13 years of follow-up to as-
sess how risks for chronic conditions changed after women stopped
hormonetherapy.Dataontheeffectsofmenopausalhormonetherapy
on the risk of chronic conditions for all relevant studies are pre-
sented below. Where possible, trial data were combined in a meta-
analysis. If this was not possible, trial data are discussed separately.
Coronary Heart Disease
Observational evidence has suggested that there might be a pro-
tective effect of menopausal hormone therapy on coronary heart
disease; however, the WHI and other trials have not demonstrated
suchaneffect.Pooledresultsof3trialsreportingontheriskofcoro-
naryheartdiseaseinwomenrandomizedtocombinedestrogenand
progestin vs placebo (N = 18 081) showed a higher risk of coronary
eventsinwomenwhotookhormonetherapy(relativerisk[RR],1.23
[95% CI, 1.00-1.52]) during a mean follow-up of 5 years1; however,
this difference did not reach statistical significance.
Postintervention follow-up of women in the WHI trial showed
that2.4yearsafterstoppingcombinedestrogenandprogestin,risk
of coronary heart disease was not significantly different between
women who took hormone therapy during the trial and those who
received placebo (hazard ratio [HR], 1.04 [95% CI, 0.89-1.21]).11
Pooled results of 3 trials reporting on the risk of coronary heart
disease in women randomized to estrogen alone vs placebo
(N = 11 310) showed no statistically significant difference in risk of
coronary events between women who took estrogen therapy and
those who received placebo (RR, 0.95 [95% CI, 0.79-1.14]).1
Postintervention follow-up of women in the WHI trial showed
that 3.9 years after stopping estrogen alone, risk of coronary heart
disease was not significantly different between women who took
hormone therapy during the trial and those who received placebo
(HR, 0.97 [95% CI, 0.75-1.25]).12
Breast Cancer
Becauseestrogengenerallystimulatesbreastcellproliferation,trials
ofmenopausalhormonetherapyhavereportedontheriskofbreast
cancerasoneoftheprimaryadverseoutcomesoftreatment.Sixtrials
comparing combined estrogen and progestin vs placebo reported
on breast cancer incidence. However, only 2 of these trials fol-
lowed up women for more than 4 years, and only the WHI trial re-
ported on the risk of invasive breast cancer (vs any breast cancer).
Table 1. Estimated Event Rate Difference Associated With Combined
Estrogen and Progestin Use vs Placebo in Postmenopausal Women
Outcome
Absolute Event Rate Difference
per 10 000 Woman-Years (95% CI)
Harms
Breast cancer (invasive)
9 (1 to 19)
Coronary heart disease
8 (0 to 18)
Dementia (probable)a
22 (4 to 53)
Gallbladder disease
21 (10 to 34)
Stroke
9 (2 to 19)
Venous thromboembolismb
21 (12 to 33)
Urinary incontinence
876 (606 to 1168)
Benefits
Diabetes
−14 (−24 to −3)
All fractures
−44 (−71 to −13)
Colorectal cancer
−6 (−9 to −1)
a Women aged 65 years and older.
bIncludes deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
Table 2. Estimated Event Rate Difference Associated With Estrogen Use
Alone vs Placebo in Postmenopausal Women
Outcome
Absolute Event Rate Difference
per 10 000 Woman-Years (95% CI)
Harms
Dementia (probable)a
12 (−4 to 41)
Gallbladder disease
30 (16 to 48)
Stroke
11 (2 to 23)
Venous thromboembolismb
11 (3 to 22)
Urinary incontinence
1261 (880 to 1689)
Benefits
Breast cancer (invasive)
−7 (−14 to 0.4)
All fractures
−53 (−69 to −39)
Diabetes
−19 (−34 to −3)
a Women aged 65 years and older.
bIncludes deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
2228
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 During the intervention phase of the WHI trial (median dura-
tion, 5.6 years), women assigned to combined estrogen and pro-
gestin had a significantly increased risk of invasive breast cancer vs
women assigned to placebo (HR, 1.24 [95% CI, 1.01-1.53]). The risk
remained significantly increased during a median postintervention
follow-up of 8.2 years (HR, 1.32 [95% CI, 1.08-1.61]).13 In the Heart
and Estrogen/Progestin Replacement Study (HERS), more women
randomizedtocombinedestrogenandprogestindevelopedbreast
cancerduringthe4.1-yearinterventionphasethandidwomenwho
receivedplacebo,buttheresultswerenotstatisticallysignificant(HR,
1.38 [95% CI, 0.82-2.31]).14
In 3 smaller trials (the Estrogen Replacement and Atheroscle-
rosis [ERA],15 Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions
[PEPI],16andEstonianPostmenopausalHormoneTherapy[EPHT]17
trials), the risk of breast cancer incidence was not significantly dif-
ferent between women randomized to receive combined estrogen
and progestin and those who received placebo over 3 to 4 years;
however, few cases occurred overall. The fourth trial, the Women’
s
International Study of Long Duration Estrogen After Menopause
(WISDOM), was stopped after 1 year because of the WHI results in-
dicatingexcessbreastcancerriskinwomenreceivingcombinedes-
trogen and progestin; breast cancer incidence was not significantly
different between groups at 1 year.18
Five trials comparing estrogen alone vs placebo reported on
breastcancerincidence;however,onlytheWHItrialreportedonrisk
of invasive breast cancer. In the WHI trial, women assigned to es-
trogenalonehadanonsignificantdecreaseinriskofinvasivebreast
cancer vs women assigned to placebo during the median 7.2-year
intervention phase (HR, 0.79 [95% CI, 0.61-1.02]).12,13 The risk re-
mained lower during the median 6.6-year postintervention phase
after the trial had been stopped. The difference between groups
wasstatisticallysignificantduringcumulativefollow-up(includestrial
and postintervention phase; median duration, 13 years) (HR, 0.79
[95% CI, 0.65-0.97]).13
In the Estrogen for the Prevention of Re-Infarction Trial
(ESPRIT),theriskofbreastcancerwasnotsignificantlydifferentbe-
tween women randomized to estrogen alone and those receiving
placebo during the 2-year intervention period (RR, 0.98 [95% CI,
0.25-3.91]).19IntheERAtrial,15PEPItrial,16andEstrogeninthePre-
vention of Atherosclerosis Trial (EPAT),20 there were few cases of
breast cancer, and the results were inconclusive.
Thromboembolic Events
In the WHI trial, women randomized to combined estrogen and pro-
gestin had an increased risk of pulmonary embolism (HR, 1.98 [95%
CI, 1.36-2.87]) and deep vein thrombosis (HR, 1.87 [95% CI, 1.37-
2.54]) vs women randomized to placebo over a median follow-up of
5.6years.13Therewasnosignificantdifferencebetweengroupsinrisk
ofdeepveinthrombosisorpulmonaryembolismduringthe2.4-year
postinterventionperiod.11Womenrandomizedtoestrogenalonehad
anincreasedriskofdeepveinthrombosisduringthemean7.1-yearin-
tervention phase (HR, 1.48 [95% CI, 1.06-2.07]); the risk of pulmo-
naryembolismwasnotsignificantlyhigherthanintheplacebogroup
(HR,1.35[95%CI,0.89-2.05]).13Therewasnosignificantdifference
betweengroupsinriskofdeepveinthrombosisorpulmonaryembo-
lism during the 3.9-year postintervention period.12
In 3 smaller trials (ERA,15 EPHT,17 and the Estrogen Memory
Study [EMS]21) of combined estrogen and progestin, which varied
in study duration and outcome measures, there was no significant
differenceinriskofvenousthromboembolismbetweenwomenran-
domized to hormone therapy vs placebo over 2 to 3 years; how-
ever, the number of events was small. One trial of estrogen alone
(EPAT20)reportednovenousthromboemboliceventsineithergroup
during 2 years of follow-up.
Stroke
In the WHI trial, women who took combined estrogen and proges-
tinhadasignificantlyhigherriskofstrokevsthosewhoreceivedpla-
ceboduringtheinterventionphase(medianduration,5.6years;HR,
1.37 [95% CI, 1.07-1.76]); during postintervention follow-up, stroke
risk was not significantly different between the 2 groups (HR, 1.04
[95% CI, 0.86-1.26]).13
Two other trials comparing combined estrogen and progestin
vs placebo reported on the incidence of various cerebrovascular
events. In the EPHT trial, women randomized to combined estro-
gen and progestin had an increased risk of any cerebrovascular
event vs those randomized to placebo (HR, 2.46 [95% CI,
1.14-5.34]).17 In EMS, few events occurred over 2 years, and the
results were inconclusive.21
In the WHI trial, women who took estrogen alone had a statis-
tically significantly higher risk of stroke vs those who received pla-
ceboduringtheinterventionphase(medianduration,7.2years;HR,
1.35[95%CI,1.07-1.70]).Duringpostinterventionfollow-up,therisk
of stroke was not significantly different between the 2 groups (HR,
0.92,[95%CI,0.71-1.19]).13InthesmallerEPAT20andtheERA15trial,
few events occurred, and the results were inconclusive.
Cognitive Impairment
Observational evidence has suggested that menopausal hor-
mone therapy might be associated with a protective effect against
dementia or cognitive impairment; however, the WHI Memory
Study (WHIMS) did not confirm such an effect. WHIMS and the
WHIMS estrogen-only trial evaluated the risk of probable dementia
or mild cognitive impairment in women taking combined estro-
gen and progestin or estrogen alone vs placebo. Both studies
were subsets of the WHI trial and were limited to women aged 65
to 79 years at baseline who were free of probable dementia.
Women who took combined estrogen and progestin had a higher
risk of probable dementia than those who received placebo
(HR, 2.05 [95% CI, 1.21-3.48]) but not mild cognitive impair-
ment.22 Women who took estrogen alone had a higher risk of
the composite outcome measure (probable dementia or mild cog-
nitive impairment) (HR, 1.38 [95% CI, 1.01-1.89]) but not probable
dementia alone.23
Gallbladder Disease
In the WHI trial, women randomized to combined estrogen and
progestinorestrogenalonehadanincreasedriskofgallbladderdis-
ease (HR, 1.59 [95% CI, 1.28-1.97] and HR, 1.67 [95% CI, 1.35-2.06],
respectively).24 Risk of gallbladder disease in the combined estro-
gen and progestin group decreased postintervention but contin-
ued to be greater in the hormone therapy group than in the pla-
cebo group (median duration, 8.2 years; HR, 1.24 [95% CI, 1.01-
1.52]); the risk of gallbladder disease was no longer significantly
different at 6.6 years postintervention in the estrogen-alone group
(HR, 0.98 [95% CI, 0.68-1.41]).13
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
2229
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Urinary Incontinence
BoththeWHItrialandHERSshowedaconsistentlyhigherriskofself-
reported incident urinary incontinence at all time points in women
who took combined estrogen and progestin vs placebo. In the WHI
trial, women who took combined estrogen and progestin had a
higherriskofincontinenceat1year(RR,1.39[95%CI,1.27-1.52])and
at3years(RR,1.81[95%CI,1.16-2.84]).25InHERS,womenwhotook
combined estrogen and progestin had a higher risk of incontinence
at the 4.2-year follow-up (odds ratio, 1.6 [95% CI, 1.3-1.9]).26
Two trials, WHI25 and Ultra Low Dose Transdermal Estrogen
Assessment(ULTRA),27provideddataonself-reportedincidenturi-
nary incontinence in women who took estrogen alone vs placebo.
In the WHI trial, women who took estrogen alone had an increased
riskofurinaryincontinencevsthosewhoreceivedplaceboat1year
(RR, 1.53 [95% CI, 1.37-1.71]); results based on smaller samples at 2
(ULTRA) and 3 (WHI) years of treatment did not show any signifi-
cant differences in incident urinary incontinence.
Fractures
Pooled results of 5 trials (N = 20 499) showed a significantly re-
duced risk of fractures in women randomized to combined estro-
gen and progestin vs placebo (RR, 0.80 [95% CI, 0.68-0.94]).1
TheWHItrialshowedasignificantlyreducedriskoftotalosteo-
porotic fractures in women randomized to estrogen alone vs pla-
cebo (HR, 0.72 [95% CI, 0.64-0.80]).13 The difference was no
longer statistically significant in the postintervention phase (dura-
tion,10.7years);however,thisstudyreportedonlyonhipfractures.12
TheERAtrialfoundfewerfracturesofanytypeinwomenwhotook
estrogen alone vs placebo, but the finding was not statistically sig-
nificant (RR, 0.42 [95% CI, 0.17-1.04]).15
Diabetes
Twotrialsprovidedinformationabouttheriskofdevelopingdiabe-
tes with combined estrogen and progestin (N = 17 903) in women
without diabetes or not receiving treatment for diabetes at base-
line. Combined estrogen and progestin reduced the risk of incident
diabetes in HERS (mean follow-up, 4.1 years; HR, 0.65 [95% CI,
0.48-0.89])28 and self-reported incident diabetes in the WHI trial
(meanfollow-up,5.6years;HR,0.81[95%CI,0.70-0.94]).Thisrisk
reductionwasnolongerobserved8.2yearspostinterventioninthe
WHI trial (HR, 1.19 [95% CI, 1.05-1.34]).13
TheWHItrialwastheonlytrialtoprovideinformationaboutthe
risk of self-reported incident diabetes with use of estrogen alone.
During a median follow-up of 7.2 years, fewer women who took es-
trogenalonevsplaceboreportedanewdiabetesdiagnosis(HR,0.86
[95% CI, 0.76-0.98]). The overall reduction in diabetes risk was no
longer observed 6.6 years postintervention (HR, 1.07 [95% CI,
0.92-1.25]).13
Colorectal Cancer
Four trials reported on the incidence of colorectal cancer in women
receiving combined estrogen and progestin vs placebo. In the WHI
intervention phase, women who received combined estrogen and
progestin vs placebo were less likely to develop colorectal cancer
(HR, 0.62 [95% CI, 0.43-0.89]). Over the median 13.2-year cumula-
tive follow-up period, the risk of colorectal cancer remained
numerically lower in the hormone therapy group, but this differ-
ence did not reach statistical significance (HR, 0.80 [95% CI,
0.63-1.01]).13 In HERS, there were fewer cases of colorectal cancer
in women randomized to combined estrogen and progestin (vs pla-
cebo) over a mean duration of 4.1 years, but the results were not
statistically significant (HR, 0.69 [95% CI, 0.32-1.49]).14 EMS21 and
the WISDOM18 trial reported no statistically significant differences
in risk of colorectal cancer. However, event rates in these studies
were low, and the length of follow-up was short (<2 years), which
precluded these studies from being combined with the WHI trial
and HERS in a meta-analysis.
The WHI trial reported no significant difference in the inci-
dence of colorectal cancer between women randomized to estro-
gen alone vs placebo during the intervention phase (HR, 1.15 [95%
CI,0.81-1.64])orthecumulativefollow-upperiod(HR,1.13[95%CI,
0.85-1.51]).13
Other Types of Cancer
Both the WHI trial13 and HERS14 showed no significant difference
in the incidence of lung cancer in women who received combined
estrogen and progestin vs placebo during the intervention phase
and postintervention follow-up. EMS21 reported only 1 case of
lung cancer, in the hormone therapy group, and its short trial pe-
riod precluded it from being combined with the WHI trial and HERS
in a meta-analysis.
The WHI trial reported no significant difference in lung cancer
incidencebetweenwomenwhoreceivedestrogenaloneandwomen
whoreceivedplacebo,bothduringtheinterventionphaseandpost-
intervention follow-up.13
IntheWHItrial13andHERS,14theincidenceofendometrialcan-
cer during the intervention phase did not differ significantly be-
tween women who received combined estrogen and progestin vs
placebo. During the WHI postintervention period, statistically sig-
nificantlyfewerwomenrandomizedtohormonetherapyduringthe
trialphasedevelopedendometrialcancer(HR,0.58[95%CI,0.40-
0.86])thandidwomenwhoreceivedplacebo.13Twoadditionaltrials,
ERA15 and PEPI,16 reported no cases of endometrial cancer; how-
ever,thetrialsweretooshorttobecombinedwiththeWHItrialand
HERS in a meta-analysis.
In the WHI trial, there was no significant difference in the inci-
denceofinvasiveovariancancerbetweenwomenwhoreceivedcom-
binedestrogenandprogestinvsplacebo,bothduringtheinterven-
tion phase and postintervention follow-up.13
ESPRIT29 reported no significant difference in the incidence
of ovarian cancer between women who received estrogen alone vs
placebo during long-term follow-up (which included a 2-year inter-
vention phase and a posttrial observational phase, for an average
of 12.6 years).
There was no significant difference in the incidence of cervical
canceramongwomenwithanintactuteruswhoreceivedeithercom-
bined estrogen and progestin or placebo in the WHI trial.30
All-Cause Mortality
Pooled results of 3 trials (N = 19 580) showed no significant differ-
enceinall-causemortalitybetweenwomenreceivingcombinedes-
trogenandprogestinandthosereceivingplacebo(RR,1.01[95%CI,
0.88-1.17]) during a mean follow-up of 5.2 years. Similarly, pooled
results of 3 trials reporting all-cause mortality in women random-
ized to estrogen alone vs placebo (N = 11 961) showed no signifi-
cant difference between the 2 groups (RR, 1.01 [95% CI, 0.88-1.17])
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
2230
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 duringameanfollow-upof6.8years.1ArecentWHIanalysisshowed
nosignificantdifferenceinall-causemortalitybetweenwomenran-
domized to combined estrogen and progestin (HR, 1.02 [95% CI,
0.96-1.08])orestrogenalone(HR,0.94[95%CI,0.88-1.01])vspla-
cebo during 18 years of cumulative follow-up.31
Subgroups of Interest
Subgroups of interest for this recommendation statement include
women grouped according to race/ethnicity; age; duration of hor-
mone therapy use; type, dose, and mode of delivery of hormone
therapy; and presence of comorbid conditions.
Trials did not report results for most of these subgroups.
Subgroup analyses were limited to those based on race/ethnicity,
age, and a small number of comorbid conditions or risk factors.
For most outcomes, there were no statistically significant sub-
group effects; however, studies may have been underpowered to
detect such effects.
In the WHI estrogen-alone trial, statistically significant interac-
tionsbetweenageandtheriskofall-causemortality,colorectalcan-
cer, and myocardial infarction, though not total coronary heart dis-
ease events, were detected. There were significant trends toward
lowerrisksoftheseoutcomesinyoungerwomen(50-59years)and
higher risks in older women (70-79 years) randomized to estrogen
alone relative to placebo.13 However, the multiplicity of outcomes
and subgroup comparisons conducted (in these analyses, P values
for trend by age group were not adjusted for the large number of
tests conducted), as well as the small number of events that oc-
curred for some of these outcomes in the estrogen-alone trial sub-
groups,limitthestrengthofthesefindings.Theselimitations,along
with the absence of significant subgroup effects for most out-
comes, led the USPSTF to conclude that the evidence was inad-
equate to determine that any subgroup had a different balance of
benefits and harms.
Todate,evidencetodeterminewhetherdifferenttypes,doses,
or modes of delivery of hormone therapy have a different balance
of benefits and harms is limited.
Timing of Preventive Medication
It has been proposed that hormone therapy initiated closer to the
time of menopause may have a more beneficial, or less deleteri-
ous, effect on risk of coronary heart disease (and possibly other
health outcomes) than hormone therapy initiated later; this pro-
posal has been termed the timing hypothesis. Findings from post
hoc subgroup analyses of the WHI trial regarding the effect of tim-
ing of hormone therapy initiation on the risk of coronary events are
conflicting. In 1 subgroup analysis, women randomized to com-
binedestrogenandprogestinwithin10yearsofmenopausedidnot
havetheincreasedriskofcoronaryheartdiseaseobservedinwomen
randomized to hormone therapy more than 20 years postmeno-
pause; however, there was also no beneficial effect in the former
group.Incontrast,asecondsubgroupanalysisthatconsideredprior
hormone therapy use (ie, before trial enrollment), which provides
a more accurate assessment of the time between menopause and
initiation of hormone therapy, found no difference in coronary risk
between early (<5 years) vs late (�5 years) initiation of hormone
therapy.Itisimportanttonotethatallsuchposthocanalysesshould
be considered exploratory (hypothesis forming) and not confirma-
tory in nature, and are also subject to potential bias.
To date, no good-quality randomized trials have prospectively
evaluated the effect of timing of hormone therapy initiation rela-
tive to the onset of menopause on associated benefits and harms.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
Although the use of hormone therapy to prevent chronic condi-
tions in postmenopausal women is associated with some benefits,
therearealsowell-documentedharms.TheUSPSTFdeterminedthat
the magnitude of both the benefits and the harms of hormone
therapy in postmenopausal women is small to moderate. There-
fore, the USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that com-
binedestrogenandprogestinhasnonetbenefitfortheprimarypre-
ventionofchronicconditionsinmostpostmenopausalwomenwith
an intact uterus and that estrogen alone has no net benefit for the
primary prevention of chronic conditions in most postmenopausal
women who have had a hysterectomy.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Traditionally, estrogen has been viewed as having cardioprotective
effects. The incidence of coronary heart disease in premenopausal
women is lower than in men of the same age; this difference de-
creases as women age past menopause. Estrogen decreases
levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, increases levels of
high-densitylipoproteincholesterol,andhasavasodilatoreffect.De-
spite these observations, data from randomized clinical trials show
a lack of benefit, or even a harmful effect, of hormone therapy on
risk of coronary heart disease in postmenopausal women. Several
potential factors, including timing of initiation of hormone therapy
with respect to menopause, older age, and presence of atheroma,
havebeenproposedtoaccountforthesediscrepantfindings.None-
theless, the underlying causes of this lack of benefit are uncertain.
Another discrepant finding is that combined estrogen and
progestin is associated with a small increase in the risk of breast
cancer, while estrogen alone appears to slightly reduce this risk.
Althoughestrogengenerallystimulatesbreastcellproliferation,some
preclinical studies have shown that estrogen can induce breast cell
apoptosis if administered under conditions of estrogen depriva-
tion, and that progestin can stimulate breast cell proliferation and
formation of new blood vessels. These findings have been pro-
posedasapossibleexplanationfortheapparentdiscrepanteffects
of combined estrogen and progestin and estrogen alone on breast
cancer risk.32
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from May 16 to June 12,
2017.Inresponsetopubliccomment,theUSPSTFmodifiedthetitle
of the recommendation statement to clarify that the patient popu-
lationunderconsiderationconsistsofpostmenopausalwomen.The
USPSTF clarified that it reviewed the evidence on the benefits and
harms of systemic menopausal hormone therapy (ie, administered
orally or transdermally), not local hormone therapy (eg, creams or
rings). The USPSTF also provided additional details about the WHI
trial, specifying the formulation of hormone therapy used and the
average age of women enrolled in the trial. The USPSTF added 2
tables showing the absolute risk increase or decrease of various
health outcomes in women receiving combined estrogen and pro-
gestin or estrogen alone (Table 1 and Table 2).
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
2231
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 In response to comments that some subgroups of women
(eg, women aged 50 to 59 years taking estrogen alone) experience
a more beneficial balance of benefits and harms than the overall
group of women in the WHI trial, the USPSTF expanded its discus-
sionontheinteractionbetweenageandhealthoutcomesintheWHI
trial in the “Discussion” section. The USPSTF also clarified that the
WHIanalysesthatassessedwhethertimebetweenmenopauseand
initiationofhormonetherapyaffectsthebenefitsandharmsofhor-
mone therapy were conducted post hoc.
The USPSTF added the word “primary” to the recommendation
summary to further highlight that this recommendation statement
focusesontheuseofhormonetherapyfortheprimarypreventionof
chronic conditions in postmenopausal women, not on its use for the
treatment of vasomotor, vulvovaginal, or other symptoms. The
USPSTF is tasked with evaluating the benefits and harms of clinical
preventive services in generally asymptomatic populations; there-
fore, the treatment of symptoms is outside of its purview.
The USPSTF agrees with comments regarding the importance
of individualized and shared decision making, and states so in the
preamble to each recommendation statement. Last, the USPSTF
clarifiedthedefinitionofmenopauseinthe“Rationale”sectionand
added a reference to the Endocrine Society’
s guidelines on hor-
mone therapy in the “Recommendations of Others” section.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
Asinits2012recommendationontheuseofmenopausalhormone
therapyfortheprimarypreventionofchronicconditions,theUSPSTF
continuestorecommendagainsttheuseofcombinedestrogenand
progestin for the primary prevention of chronic conditions in post-
menopausal women and against the use of estrogen alone in post-
menopausal women who have had a hysterectomy.
Recommendations of Others
The American Heart Association33 and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists34 recommend against the use
of hormone therapy for the primary or secondary prevention of
coronary heart disease, and most clinical guidelines, including
those of the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care35 and
the American Academy of Family Physicians,36 recommend against
the use of hormone therapy for prevention of any chronic condi-
tions. The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists37,38
recommends that cardiovascular risk, age, and time from meno-
pause be considered when using hormone therapy in symptomatic
postmenopausal women and notes that hormone therapy is
approved by the FDA for use in women at increased risk of osteo-
porosis and fractures. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists mentions that the effect of hormone therapy on risk
of cardiovascular disease may differ based on early vs late initiation
of hormone therapy with respect to onset of menopause. The
North American Menopause Society39 focuses primarily on consid-
erations for women with symptoms; it notes that hormone therapy
has been shown to prevent fractures and that treatment should
be individualized to balance the potential health benefits and
risks for each woman. The Endocrine Society40 also focuses pri-
marily on the use of hormone therapy for the treatment of symp-
toms of menopause.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: November 2, 2017.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
Members: David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Michael J.
Barry, MD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke
A. Doubeni, MD, MPH; John W. Epling Jr, MD,
MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H.
Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH;
C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD,
MSPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael
Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH;
Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) Members: Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System,
Palo Alto, California (Owens); Stanford University,
Stanford, California (Owens); Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts (Barry); Columbia
University, New York, New York (Davidson);
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni);
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke
(Epling); Nationwide Children’
s Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio (Kemper); Fairfax Family Practice Residency,
Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond (Krist); Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut (Kurth); University of
Alabama at Birmingham (Landefeld); University of
California, Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps);
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
(Silverstein); Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois (Simon); University of Hawaii, Honolulu
(Tseng); Pacific Health Research and Education
Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Grossman had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts
of interest described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Howard
Tracer, MD (AHRQ), who contributed to the writing
of the manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ),
who assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Gartlehner G, Patel S, Viswanathan M, et al.
Hormone Therapy for the Primary Prevention of
Chronic Conditions in Postmenopausal Women:
An Evidence Review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 155. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017.
AHRQ publication 15-05227-EF-1.
2. Pfizer Inc. Premarin [package insert].
http://labeling.pfizer.com/showlabeling.aspx?id
=131. 2014. Accessed October 17, 2017.
3. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Medications
to decrease the risk for breast cancer in women:
recommendations from the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2013;159(10):698-708.
4. LeFevre ML; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
2232
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk
factors: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;
161(8):587-593.
5. Bibbins-Domingo K; U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Aspirin use for the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2016;
164(12):836-845.
6. McKinlay SM. The normal menopause transition:
an overview. Maturitas. 1996;23(2):137-145.
7. Social Security Administration. Actuarial life
table: period life table, 2014. https://www.ssa.gov
/oact/STATS/table4c6.html. Accessed October 17,
2017.
8. Xu J, Murphy SL, Kochanek KD, Bastian BA.
Deaths: final data for 2013. Natl Vital Stat Rep.
2016;64(2):1-119.
9. Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project. Total
number of discharges by age group, by sex, for CCS
principal diagnosis category 226, fracture of neck of
femur. https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/. 2014. Accessed
February 14, 2017.
10. Ensrud KE. Epidemiology of fracture risk with
advancing age. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2013;
68(10):1236-1242.
11. Heiss G, Wallace R, Anderson GL, et al;
WHI Investigators. Health risks and benefits 3 years
after stopping randomized treatment with estrogen
and progestin. JAMA. 2008;299(9):1036-1045.
12. LaCroix AZ, Chlebowski RT, Manson JE, et al;
WHI Investigators. Health outcomes after stopping
conjugated equine estrogens among
postmenopausal women with prior hysterectomy:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2011;305
(13):1305-1314.
13. Manson JE, Chlebowski RT, Stefanick ML, et al.
Menopausal hormone therapy and health
outcomes during the intervention and extended
poststopping phases of the Women’
s Health
Initiative randomized trials. JAMA. 2013;310(13):
1353-1368.
14. Hulley S, Furberg C, Barrett-Connor E, et al;
HERS Research Group. Noncardiovascular disease
outcomes during 6.8 years of hormone therapy:
Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study
follow-up (HERS II). JAMA. 2002;288(1):58-66.
15. Herrington DM, Reboussin DM, Brosnihan KB,
et al. Effects of estrogen replacement on the
progression of coronary-artery atherosclerosis.
N Engl J Med. 2000;343(8):522-529.
16. Miller VT, LaRosa J, Barnabei V, et al; Writing
Group for the PEPI Trial. Effects of estrogen or
estrogen/progestin regimens on heart disease risk
factors in postmenopausal women: the
Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions
(PEPI) Trial. JAMA. 1995;273(3):199-208.
17. Veerus P, Hovi SL, Fischer K, Rahu M, Hakama
M, Hemminki E. Results from the Estonian
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy Trial
[ISRCTN35338757]. Maturitas. 2006;55(2):162-173.
18. Vickers MR, MacLennan AH, Lawton B, et al;
WISDOM Group. Main morbidities recorded in the
Women’
s International Study of Long Duration
Oestrogen After Menopause (WISDOM):
a randomised controlled trial of hormone
replacement therapy in postmenopausal women.
BMJ. 2007;335(7613):239.
19. Cherry N, Gilmour K, Hannaford P, et al; ESPRIT
Team. Oestrogen therapy for prevention of
reinfarction in postmenopausal women:
a randomised placebo controlled trial. Lancet.
2002;360(9350):2001-2008.
20. Hodis HN, Mack WJ, Lobo RA, et al; Estrogen in
the Prevention of Atherosclerosis Trial Research
Group. Estrogen in the prevention of
atherosclerosis: a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135
(11):939-953.
21. Tierney MC, Oh P, Moineddin R, et al.
A randomized double-blind trial of the effects of
hormone therapy on delayed verbal recall in older
women. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009;34(7):
1065-1074.
22. Shumaker SA, Legault C, Rapp SR, et al; WHIMS
Investigators. Estrogen plus progestin and the
incidence of dementia and mild cognitive
impairment in postmenopausal women: the
Women’
s Health Initiative Memory Study. JAMA.
2003;289(20):2651-2662.
23. Shumaker SA, Legault C, Kuller L, et al;
Women’
s Health Initiative Memory Study.
Conjugated equine estrogens and incidence of
probable dementia and mild cognitive impairment
in postmenopausal women. JAMA. 2004;291(24):
2947-2958.
24. Cirillo DJ, Wallace RB, Rodabough RJ, et al.
Effect of estrogen therapy on gallbladder disease.
JAMA. 2005;293(3):330-339.
25. Hendrix SL, Cochrane BB, Nygaard IE, et al.
Effects of estrogen with and without progestin on
urinary incontinence. JAMA. 2005;293(8):935-948.
26. Steinauer JE, Waetjen LE, Vittinghoff E, et al.
Postmenopausal hormone therapy: does it cause
incontinence? Obstet Gynecol. 2005;106(5, pt 1):
940-945.
27. Waetjen LE, Brown JS, Vittinghoff E, et al.
The effect of ultralow-dose transdermal estradiol
on urinary incontinence in postmenopausal
women. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;106(5, pt 1):946-952.
28. Kanaya AM, Herrington D, Vittinghoff E, et al;
Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement
Study. Glycemic effects of postmenopausal
hormone therapy: a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138
(1):1-9.
29. Cherry N, McNamee R, Heagerty A, et al.
Long-term safety of unopposed estrogen used by
women surviving myocardial infarction: 14-year
follow-up of the ESPRIT randomised controlled
trial. BJOG. 2014;121(6):700-705.
30. Anderson GL, Judd HL, Kaunitz AM, et al.
Effects of estrogen plus progestin on gynecologic
cancers and associated diagnostic procedures: the
Women’
s Health Initiative randomized trial. JAMA.
2003;290(13):1739-1748.
31. Manson JE, Aragaki AK, Rossouw JE, et al; WHI
Investigators. Menopausal hormone therapy and
long-term all-cause and cause-specific mortality:
the Women’
s Health Initiative randomized trials.
JAMA. 2017;318(10):927-938.
32. Chlebowski RT, Anderson GL. Changing
concepts: menopausal hormone therapy and breast
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104(7):517-527.
33. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al.
Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention
of cardiovascular disease in women—2011 update:
a guideline from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2011;123(11):1243-1262.
34. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 565:
hormone therapy and heart disease. Obstet Gynecol.
2013;121(6):1407-1410.
35. Wathen CN, Feig DS, Feightner JW, et al;
Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.
Hormone replacement therapy for the primary
prevention of chronic diseases: recommendation
statement from the Canadian Task Force on
Preventive Health Care. CMAJ. 2004;170(10):1535-
1537.
36. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive service recommendation:
hormone replacement therapy. http://www.aafp
.org/patient-care/clinical-recommendations/all/hrt
.html. 2012. Accessed October 17, 2017.
37. Goodman NF, Cobin RH, Ginzburg SB, et al;
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists
medical guidelines for clinical practice for the
diagnosis and treatment of menopause. Endocr Pract.
2011;17(suppl 6):1-25.
38. Cobin RH, Goodman NF; AACE Reproductive
Endocrinology Scientific Committee. American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and
American College of Endocrinology position
statement on menopause—2017 update. Endocr
Pract. 2017;23(7):869-880.
39. NAMS 2017 Hormone Therapy Position
Statement Advisory Panel. The 2017 hormone
therapy position statement of the North American
Menopause Society. Menopause. 2017;24(7):728-753.
40. Stuenkel CA, Davis SR, Gompel A, et al.
Treatment of symptoms of the menopause:
an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(11):3975-4011.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Hormone Therapy After Menopause
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 12, 2017
Volume 318, Number 22
2233
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
