 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Statin Use for the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular
Disease in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
TheUSPSTFrecommendsthatadultswithoutahistoryofcardiovas-
culardisease(CVD)(ie,symptomaticcoronaryarterydiseaseorische-
mic stroke) use a low- to moderate-dose statin for the prevention of
CVD events and mortality when all of the following criteria are met:
(1)theyareaged40to75years;(2)theyhave1ormoreCVDriskfac-
tors(ie,dyslipidemia,diabetes,hypertension,orsmoking);and(3)they
haveacalculated10-yearriskofacardiovasculareventof10%orgreater
(B recommendation). See the Animated Summary Video.
Identification of dyslipidemia and calculation of 10-year CVD
eventriskrequiresuniversallipidsscreeninginadultsaged40to75
years. See the “
Clinical Considerations”section for more informa-
tion on lipids screening and the assessment of cardiovascular risk.
Although statin use may be beneficial for the primary preven-
tion of CVD events in some adults with a 10-year CVD event risk of
lessthan10%,thelikelihoodofbenefitissmaller,becauseofalower
probability of disease and uncertainty in individual risk prediction.
Cliniciansmaychoosetoofferalow-tomoderate-dosestatintocer-
tain adults without a history of CVD when all of the following crite-
ria are met: (1) they are aged 40 to 75 years; (2) they have 1 or more
CVDriskfactors(ie,dyslipidemia,diabetes,hypertension,orsmok-
ing); and (3) they have a calculated 10-year risk of a cardiovascular
event of 7.5% to 10% (C recommendation).
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insuffi-
cient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of initiating statin
IMPORTANCE Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in
the United States, accounting for 1 of every 3 deaths among adults.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2008 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on screening for lipid disorders in adults.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits and harms of
screening for and treatment of dyslipidemia in adults 21 years and older; the benefits and
harms of statin use in reducing CVD events and mortality in adults without a history of CVD
events; whether the benefits of statin use vary by subgroup, clinical characteristics, or
dosage; and the benefits of various treatment strategies in adults 40 years and older without
a history of CVD events.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS The USPSTF recommends initiating use of low- to
moderate-dose statins in adults aged 40 to 75 years without a history of CVD who have 1 or
more CVD risk factors (dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, or smoking) and a calculated
10-year CVD event risk of 10% or greater (B recommendation). The USPSTF recommends
that clinicians selectively offer low- to moderate-dose statins to adults aged 40 to 75 years
without a history of CVD who have 1 or more CVD risk factors and a calculated 10-year CVD
event risk of 7.5% to 10% (C recommendation). The USPSTF concludes that the current
evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of initiating statin use in
adults 76 years and older (I statement).
JAMA. 2016;316(19):1997-2007. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.15450
Editorial pages 1977, 1979 and
1981
Author Audio Interview,
Author Video Interview,
Animated Summary Video,
and JAMA Report Video
Related article page 2008 and
JAMA Patient Page page 2056
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com
Related articles at
jamacardiology.com,
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
1997
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
use for the primary prevention of CVD events and mortality in
adults 76 years and older without a history of heart attack or stroke
(I statement) (Figure 1).
Considerations for Implementation
To determine whether a patient is a candidate for statin therapy,
clinicians must first determine the patient’
s risk of having a future
CVD event. However, clinicians’ability to accurately identify a pa-
tient’
strueriskisimperfect,becausethebestcurrentlyavailablerisk
estimation tool, which uses the
Pooled Cohort Equations from
the 2013 American College of
Cardiology/AmericanHeartAsso-
ciation(ACC/AHA)guidelineson
theassessmentofcardiovascular
risk,1 has been shown to over-
estimate actual risk in multiple
external validation cohorts.2-4
Thereasonsforthispossibleover-
estimation are still unclear. The
Pooled Cohort Equations were
derivedfromprospectivecohorts
of volunteers from studies con-
ductedinthe1990sandmaynot
be generalizable to a more con-
temporary and diverse patient
populationseenincurrentclinicalpractice.Furthermore,nostatinclini-
caltrialsenrolledpatientsbasedonaspecificriskthresholdcalculated
usingaCVDriskpredictiontool;rather,patientshad1ormoreCVDrisk
factors other than age and sex as a requirement for trial enrollment.
Because the Pooled Cohort Equations lack precision, the risk
estimationtoolshouldbeusedasastartingpointtodiscusswithpa-
tients their desire for lifelong statin therapy. The likelihood that
apatientwillbenefitfromstatinusedependsonhisorherabsolute
baseline risk of having a future CVD event, a risk estimation that is
imprecisebasedonthecurrentlyavailableriskestimationtool.Thus,
clinicians should discuss with patients the potential risk of having
a CVD event and the expected benefits and harms of statin use. Pa-
tientswhoplaceahighervalueonthepotentialbenefitsthanonthe
potentialharmsandtheinconvenienceoftakingadailymedication
may choose to initiate statin use for reduction of CVD risk. The
USPSTF has made several other recommendations relevant to the
prevention of CVD in adults (see the “
Other Approaches to Preven-
tion”section).
Patient Population Under Consideration
These recommendations apply to adults 40 years and older with-
out a history of CVD who do not have current signs and symptoms
of CVD (ie, symptomatic coronary artery disease or ischemic
stroke) (Figure 2). Some individuals in this group may have unde-
tected, asymptomatic atherosclerotic changes; for the purposes of
this recommendation statement, the USPSTF considers these per-
sons to be candidates for primary prevention interventions. These
recommendations do not apply to adults with a low-density lipo-
protein cholesterol (LDL-C) level greater than 190 mg/dL (to con-
vert LDL-C values to mmol/L, multiply by 0.0259) or known famil-
ial hypercholesterolemia; these persons are considered to have
very high cholesterol levels and may require statin use.
Rationale
Importance
Cardiovascular disease is a broad term that encompasses a num-
ber of atherosclerotic conditions that affect the heart and blood
vessels, including coronary heart disease, as ultimately mani-
fested by myocardial infarction (MI), and cerebrovascular disease,
as ultimately manifested by stroke. Cardiovascular disease is the
leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States,
accounting for 1 of every 3 deaths among adults.5
Statins are a class of lipid-lowering medications that function
by inhibiting the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A
reductase, which is involved in the rate-limiting step in the produc-
tionofcholesterol.StatinsreducelevelsoftotalcholesterolandLDL-C
and, to a lesser extent, triglycerides, and probably have anti-
inflammatory and plaque stabilization effects as well.6
Potential Benefits of Statin Use
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatuseoflow-tomoderate-
dose statins reduces the probability of CVD events (MI or ischemic
stroke) and mortality by at least a moderate amount in adults aged
40 to 75 years who have 1 or more CVD risk factors (dyslipidemia,
diabetes, hypertension, or smoking) and a calculated 10-year CVD
event risk of 10% or greater.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that use of low- to
moderate-dosestatinsreducestheprobabilityofCVDeventsandmor-
talitybyatleastasmallamountinadultsaged40to75yearswhohave
1 or more CVD risk factors (dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, or
smoking) and a calculated 10-year CVD event risk of 7.5% to 10%.
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence to conclude whether
initiatingstatinuseinadults76yearsandolderwhoarenotalready
taking a statin is beneficial in reducing the incidence of CVD events
and mortality.
Potential Harms of Statin Use
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethattheharmsoflow-tomod-
erate-dose statin use in adults aged 40 to 75 years are small. Ran-
domized clinical trials (RCTs) of statin use for the primary preven-
tionofCVDeventshavelargelyusedlowandmoderatedoses;under
these conditions, statin use was not associated with serious ad-
verse events such as cancer, severely elevated liver enzyme levels,
orseveremuscle-relatedharms.However,evidenceconcerningthe
associationbetweenstatinuseanddiabetesmellitusismixed,with
1preventiontrialsuggestingthattheremaybeasmallincreasedrisk
of developing diabetes with use of high-dose statins. Myalgia is
a commonly reported adverse effect of statins, but placebo-
controlled trial data do not support the conclusion that statin use
has a major causative role in its occurrence. Evidence for cognitive
harmsisrelativelysparse;furtherresearchwouldbeneededtomore
definitively establish the relationship between statin use and cog-
nitive function. The USPSTF found no clear evidence of decreased
cognitivefunctionassociatedwithstatinuse.Thesefindingsarecon-
sistent with those from a recent systematic review of RCTs and ob-
servational studies assessing the effect of statins on cognition that
foundnoeffectonincidenceofAlzheimerdiseaseordementia.7The
recently published HOPE-3 (Heart Outcomes Prevention Evalua-
tion 3) trial found that statin use increased risk of cataract surgery,
JAMA.COM
+
Animated Summary Video
Statins for Prevention
of Cardiovascular Disease
in Adults: USPSTF
Recommendation Statement
available at jamastatins.com
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
1998
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
which was unanticipated and not a predetermined outcome of
the trial.8 None of the other primary prevention trials reported
this outcome.9
TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidenceontheharmsofstatin
use for the prevention of CVD events in adults 76 years and older
without a history of heart attack or stroke.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that initiating use
of low- to moderate-dose statins for the prevention of CVD events
andmortalityinadultsaged40to75yearswithoutahistoryofCVD
whohave1ormoreCVDriskfactors(dyslipidemia,diabetes,hyper-
tension,orsmoking)andacalculated10-yearCVDeventriskof10%
or greater has at least a moderate net benefit.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that initiating
use of low- to moderate-dose statins for the prevention of CVD
events and mortality in adults aged 40 to 75 years without a his-
tory of CVD who have 1 or more CVD risk factors (dyslipidemia, dia-
betes,hypertension,orsmoking)andacalculated10-yearCVDevent
risk of 7.5% to 10% has a small net benefit. The decision to initiate
therapyinthispopulationshouldreflectanassessmentofpatients’
specific circumstances and their preference for a potential small
benefit relative to the potential harms and inconvenience of taking
a lifelong daily medication.
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
1999
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
The USPSTF concludes that the evidence is insufficient to de-
terminethebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofinitiatingstatinusefor
theprimarypreventionofCVDeventsandmortalityinadults76years
and older without a history of CVD.
Clinical Considerations
Risk Factors for CVD
For the purposes of this recommendation, dyslipidemia is defined
as an LDL-C level greater than 130 mg/dL or a high-density lipopro-
teincholesterol(HDL-C)levellessthan40mg/dL(toconvertHDL-C
values to mmol/L, multiply by 0.0259). Most participants enrolled
in trials of statin use for the prevention of CVD had an LDL-C level
of 130 to 190 mg/dL or a diabetes diagnosis; hypertension and
smoking were also common among trial participants.6 Persons
with an LDL-C level greater than 190 mg/dL were usually excluded
from trial participation, as it was not considered appropriate to
randomly assign them to placebo. Thus, these recommendations
do not pertain to persons with very high cholesterol levels
(ie,LDL-C>190mg/dL)orfamilialhypercholesterolemia,astheywere
excluded from most prevention trials.
One trial, JUPITER (Justification for the Use of Statins in Pre-
vention: An Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin), which
excluded persons with dyslipidemia or diabetes, evaluated the
effect of high-dose rosuvastatin vs placebo in participants with
elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels.10 The USPSTF previously
reviewed the evidence on the utility of CRP as a risk predictor of
coronary heart disease and found that although there is an asso-
ciation between elevated CRP levels and coronary heart disease
events, there is insufficient evidence that a reduction in CRP levels
results in fewer CVD events.11 Additionally, CRP is not currently
included in any of the major risk prediction calculators, and the
effects of using CRP in addition to traditional CVD risk factors to
guide the prescription of statins for reducing CVD risk are uncer-
tain. As such, the USPSTF does not recommend for or against the
use of CRP alone as a risk factor in screening to prevent CVD
events in asymptomatic adults without a history of CVD.12 In
JUPITER, most of the trial participants either also had hyperten-
sion (57%) or were smokers (15%)10—risk factors the USPSTF
Figure 2. Statin Use for the Primary Prevention of CVD in Adults: Clinical Summary
Population
Adults aged 40–75 y with no history of
CVD, ≥1 CVD risk factors, and calculated
10-y CVD event risk of 7.5%–10%
Adults 76 y and older with no history of CVD
Recommendation 
Adults aged 40–75 y with no history of
CVD, ≥1 CVD risk factors, and calculated
10-y CVD event risk ≥10%
Initiate use of low- to moderate-dose
statins.
Grade: B 
Discuss with patient and selectively offer
use of low- to moderate-dose statins.
Grade: C 
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment 
Preventive
Medication
Considerations for
Implementation
Balance of Benefits
and Harms
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Risk factors for CVD include dyslipidemia (LDL-C >130 mg/dL or HDL-C <40 mg/dL), diabetes, hypertension, and smoking.
The USPSTF recommends using the ACC/AHA Pooled Cohort Equations to calculate 10-year risk of CVD events. The calculator
derived from these equations takes into account age, sex, race, cholesterol levels, systolic blood pressure level, antihypertension
treatment, presence of diabetes, and smoking status as risk factors.
Statins are a class of lipid-lowering medications that function by inhibiting the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A
reductase. Statins reduce levels of total cholesterol and LDL-C and, to a lesser extent, triglycerides. The most directly applicable
body of evidence for patients without a history of CVD demonstrates benefits with use of low- to moderate-dose statins.
The likelihood that a patient will benefit from statin use depends on his or her absolute baseline risk of having a future CVD event,
a risk estimation that is imprecise based on the currently available risk estimation tools. Thus, clinicians should discuss with patients
the potential risk of having a CVD event and the expected benefits and harms of statin use.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate
certainty that initiating use of low- to
moderate-dose statins in this population
has at least a moderate net benefit.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate
certainty that initiating use of low- to
moderate-dose statins in this population
has a small net benefit.
The USPSTF concludes that the evidence
is insufficient to determine the balance
of benefits and harms of initiating statin
use in this population.
The USPSTF has made other recommendations relevant to the prevention of CVD in adults, including aspirin use for the prevention
of CVD, screening for coronary heart disease using electrocardiography, use of nontraditional risk factors in CVD risk assessment, 
screening for high blood pressure, screening for abnormal blood glucose levels and type 2 diabetes mellitus, interventions for 
tobacco smoking cessation, behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity for CVD prevention in adults,
and screening for and management of obesity in adults.These recommendations are available on the USPSTF website
(https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).   
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; CVD, cardiovascular disease; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol;
LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
2000
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
prioritized for determining potential suitability for statin therapy.
In the recent HOPE-3 trial, there was no difference in the effects of
statins among participants with or without elevated CRP levels.8
10-Year Risk of CVD Events
TheUSPSTFrecommendsusingtheACC/AHAPooledCohortEqua-
tionstocalculate10-yearriskofCVDevents.13In2013,theACC/AHA
released the Pooled Cohort Equations with the publication of new
statin therapy guidelines.1 The calculator derived from these equa-
tions takes into account age, sex, race, cholesterol levels, systolic
blood pressure level, antihypertension treatment, presence of dia-
betes,andsmokingstatusasriskfactorsinthepredictionmodeland
focusesonhardclinicaloutcomes(heartattackanddeathfromcoro-
naryheartdisease;ischemicstrokeandstroke-relateddeath)asthe
outcomes of interest.
Thisriskcalculatorhasbeenthesourceofsomecontroversy,as
severalinvestigatorsnotinvolvedwithitsdevelopmenthavefound
that it overestimates risk when applied to more contemporary US
cohorts, especially those at the lower end of the risk spectrum.14
Althoughotherriskpredictiontoolsareavailable,theyaddressvary-
ingpopulations,riskfactors,andoutcomesandhavetheirownlimi-
tations. The ACC/AHA risk calculator is, to date, the only US-based
CVDriskpredictiontoolthathaspublishedexternalvalidationstud-
ies in other US-based populations. Other advantages are that it can
generate sex- and race-specific risk predictions and that it includes
ischemic stroke as an outcome.
NonmodifiableriskfactorsforCVDincludeolderage,malesex,
and race/ethnicity; however, statin trials have not included per-
sons with only these risk factors. Other risk factors, such as family
history of premature coronary artery disease, have not been dem-
onstratedtoimproveriskpredictioninaclinicallymeaningfulway.15
It is important to note that the calculated 10-year CVD event
risk derived from the ACC/AHA risk calculator is heavily influenced
by age. For example, 41% of men and 27% of women aged 60 to
69 years without a history of CVD will be found to have a calcu-
lated 10-year CVD event risk of 10% or greater.16 Many older
adults, particularly those aged 65 to 75 years, may meet the rec-
ommended risk threshold for treatment with statins in spite of the
absence of dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, or smoking. No
trial data evaluated statin use among persons in this age group
without CVD risk factors; thus, the evidence is insufficient to know
whether statin use provides them the same or less benefit than in
similarly aged adults with CVD risk factors. Decisions about initiat-
ing statin use in this age group should be based on shared decision
making between patients and clinicians about the potential ben-
efits and harms. Specific recommendations from other organiza-
tions for such individuals are discussed in the “Recommendations
of Others”section.
Periodicassessmentofcardiovascularriskfactorsfromages40
to75years,includingmeasurementoftotalcholesterol,LDL-C,and
HDL-C levels, is required to implement this recommendation. The
optimal intervals for cardiovascular risk assessment are uncertain.
Based on other guidelines and expert opinion, reasonable options
includeannualassessmentofbloodpressure17andsmokingstatus18
andmeasurementoflipidlevelsevery5years.1Shorterintervalsmay
be useful for persons whose risk levels are close to those warrant-
ingtherapy,andlongerintervalsareappropriateforpersonswhoare
not at increased risk and have repeatedly normal levels.
Screening and Statin Use in Adults Aged 21 to 39 Years
The USPSTF systematically searched for evidence on the effect of
screening for dyslipidemia in adults aged 21 to 39 years. It found in-
sufficient evidence that screening for dyslipidemia before age 40
years has an effect on either short- or longer-term cardiovascular
outcomes.19,20TheUSPSTFfoundnostudiesthatevaluatedtheef-
fects of screening vs no screening, treatment vs no treatment, or
delayed vs earlier treatment in adults in this age group. Thus, the
USPSTF recommends neither for nor against screening for dyslip-
idemiainthisagegroup.Aseparaterecommendationstatementalso
found insufficient evidence to assess the balance of benefits and
harms of screening for dyslipidemia in children and adolescents.21
The USPSTF recognizes the rationale for screening for dyslip-
idemia in adults aged 20 to 39 years to identify those at risk for the
development of early atherosclerosis, including those with familial
hypercholesterolemia.Unfortunately,theevidenceislackinginthis
age group. The USPSTF found 4 trials of statin use for primary pre-
ventionthatenrolledpatientsyoungerthan40years.However,re-
sults were not reported separately for this age group, and it com-
prised a small part of the overall population.19,20 One cohort study
comparedtheeffectsofstatinsvsnostatinsforthetreatmentoffa-
milial hypercholesterolemia.22 However, the mean age of patients
in this study was 44 years. Given the lack of data on the efficacy of
screening for or treatment of dyslipidemia in adults aged 20 to 39
years, the USPSTF encourages clinicians to use their clinical judg-
ment for patients in this age group.
Statin Use in Adults Aged 40 to 75 Years
NineteenRCTsevaluatedtheeffectsofstatinsvsplaceboornostat-
ins in adults aged 40 to 75 years without known CVD. Most of the
trials, including the recently published HOPE-3 trial,8 enrolled par-
ticipants based on an elevated LDL-C level, a diabetes diagnosis, or
at least 1 CVD risk factor. Use of low- or moderate-dose statins was
associatedwithareducedriskofall-causemortality(pooledriskra-
tio [RR], 0.86 [95% CI, 0.80-0.93]), cardiovascular mortality (RR,
0.69[95%CI,0.54-0.88]),ischemicstroke(RR,0.71[95%CI,0.62-
0.82]), heart attack (RR, 0.64 [95% CI, 0.57-0.71]), and a compos-
ite cardiovascular outcome (RR, 0.70 [95% CI, 0.63-0.78]).6
Amongthestudypopulations,theproportionofCVDeventspre-
vented (ie, the relative risk reduction) was similar across age, sex,
race/ethnicity, lipid level, and other risk factor categories.6 Among
trials that stratified participants according to a baseline global car-
diovascularriskscore,similarrelativeriskestimateswereobserved
among those classified at a higher vs lower CVD event risk.10,23
Given similar relative risk reductions, the absolute magnitude
ofbenefitthataninterventionwithdemonstratedefficacycanhave
in a specific population directly depends on the incidence of dis-
ease over time in that population. In other words, the more likely it
is that persons in a certain population will have a heart attack or is-
chemicstroke,thegreaterthepotentialreductioninthenumberof
CVD events with statin use will be in that population. This is one of
the fundamental reasons for the distinction between a grade B and
C recommendation for the population that presents with dyslipid-
emia, diabetes, hypertension, or smoking and a 10% or greater vs
7.5% to 10% 10-year CVD event risk.
In the absence of other risk factors, adults with an LDL-C level
greater than 190 mg/dL may still fall below the risk threshold for
statin use for CVD prevention. As noted previously, these persons
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
2001
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
were generally excluded from the prevention trials evaluating the
effects of statin use on health outcomes, because expert opinion
strongly favors intervention for these individuals. It is possible that
the relative risk reduction in this group is higher than in adults with
a lower LDL-C level and that the absolute benefit is greater than
would be predicted from a risk calculator.24
Dosage
As previously noted, available RCTs evaluating statins for the pre-
vention of CVD events largely used low and moderate doses. There
werenocleardifferencesinestimatesofeffectwhenthetrialswere
stratified according to statin dose (see the Table for the drug regi-
mens used in the available trials). The Cholesterol Treatment Trial-
ists meta-analysis showed that greater degree of LDL-C reductions
achievedwereassociatedwithproportionalreductionsinmajorcar-
diovascular events.25 However, these analyses were based not on
randomized comparisons but on the degree of LDL-C reduction
achieved. The degree of cholesterol reduction may be attributable,
in part, to interindividual variability in response to statins, not just
statin dosage.
Limited information is available about use of high-dose statins
inaprimarypreventionpopulation.Assuch,theharmsofstatinuse
for the prevention of CVD events in adults aged 40 to 75 years can
only be bounded as small for low- or moderate-dose statins. There
may be individual clinical circumstances that warrant consider-
ation of use of high-dose statins; decisions about dose should be
based on shared decision making between patients and clinicians.
However, the most directly applicable body of evidence for pa-
tients without a history of CVD demonstrates benefits with use of
low- to moderate-dose statins.
Available information about use of high-dose statins in a pre-
vention population comes from the JUPITER trial. The trial found
an increased risk of physician-reported incident diabetes with
statin use compared with placebo after 2 years of follow-up (3.2%
vs 2.4%; RR, 1.25 [95% CI, 1.05-1.49]), which was not reported in
trials evaluating use of moderate- or low-dose statins.10 Post hoc
analysis subsequently suggested that many of the diabetes cases
in JUPITER may have occurred in participants who had other risk
factors for diabetes at baseline (eg, impaired fasting blood glucose
or obesity).26
Summary
The incidence of CVD events in a population increases linearly with
CVD risk level; there is no threshold at which event rates abruptly
escalate. As such, any cut point for assessing where the net benefit
of statin use shifts from small to moderate for a population re-
quiresjudgment.Evidenceindicatesthatcurrentlyavailableriskcal-
culatorstendtooverestimateCVDrisk,suggestingthatactualben-
efits may be lower than estimated. Issues to consider include the
uncertaintyofcurrentriskpredictionmethods,theoverallprobabil-
ity of CVD events occurring in the population, the known and un-
known associated harms of statin use, and patient preferences.
The USPSTF concludes that adults who smoke or have dyslip-
idemia,diabetes,orhypertensionanda10%orgreater10-yearCVD
event risk should be offered a low- to moderate-dose statin. Adults
with diabetes or dyslipidemia and a 20% or greater 10-year CVD
event risk are most likely to benefit from statin use.
Clinicians may selectively offer adults who smoke or have dys-
lipidemia, diabetes, or hypertension and a 7.5% to 10% 10-year
CVD event risk a low- to moderate-dose statin. Fewer persons in
this population will benefit from the intervention, so the decision
to initiate use of low- to moderate-dose statins should reflect
shared decision making that weighs the potential benefits and
harms, the uncertainty about risk prediction, and individual
patient preferences, including the acceptability of long-term use
of daily medication.
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
for Initiating Statin Therapy for Primary Prevention
in Adults 76 Years and Older
Potential Preventable Burden
Adults 76 years and older were not included in any of the random-
ized trials of statin use for the primary prevention of CVD.6 Thus,
understandingofthepotentialbenefitsofinitiatingstatinuseforpri-
mary prevention in this age group is limited.
Potential Harms
Evidence on the potential harms of statin use for the primary pre-
vention of CVD events in adults 76 years and older is very limited.
Observational evidence suggests there may be an association be-
tween very low cholesterol levels and an increased risk of mortality
with advanced age, after adjusting for other risk factors.27,28
Current Practice
The most current data from the National Health and Nutrition Ex-
aminationSurveyindicatethatnearlyhalf(47.6%)ofadults75years
and older in the United States use prescription cholesterol-
loweringmedications.Themajority(>80%)useastatinalone.29The
Table. Statin Regimens Used in Available Trials
Statin
Dose, mga
Low
Moderate
High
Atorvastatin
10-20
40-80
Fluvastatin
20–40
40 twice daily
Fluvastatin extended release
80
Lovastatin
20
40
Pitavastatin
1
2-4
Pravastatin
10-20
40-80
Rosuvastatin
5-10
20-40
Simvastatin
10
20-40
a Dose categories are from the
American College of
Cardiology/American Heart
Association 2013 guidelines on the
treatment of blood cholesterol to
reduce atherosclerotic
cardiovascular risk in adults.24
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
2002
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
survey did not distinguish between the use of cholesterol-lowering
medications for the purposes of primary vs secondary prevention,
so it is not possible to determine how many of these persons have
hadapreviousheartattackorischemicstroke.Anotherstudyusing
datafromtheMedicalExpenditurePanelSurvey,whichdidallowfor
the differentiation of individuals with and without vascular disease
(definedascoronaryheartdisease,stroke,orperipheralvasculardis-
ease), found that the rate of statin use among adults 80 years and
older for the purposes of primary prevention increased from about
9% in 1999-2000 to 34% in 2011-2012.30
TheSocietyforPost-AcuteandLong-TermCareMedicine,aspart
oftheChoosingWiselycampaign,highlightedtheuseofcholesterol-
lowering medications in adults with limited life expectancy (ie, 70
yearsand,mostparticularly,85yearsandolder)amongits“10Things
PhysiciansandPatientsShouldQuestion”becauseoftheincreased
likelihood of an overall unfavorable risk-to-benefit ratio.31
Other Approaches to Prevention
The USPSTF has made other recommendations relevant to the
prevention of CVD in adults, including aspirin use for the preven-
tion of CVD,32 screening for coronary heart disease using
electrocardiography,33 use of nontraditional risk factors in CVD risk
assessment,12screeningforhighbloodpressure,17screeningforab-
normal blood glucose levels and type 2 diabetes mellitus,34 inter-
ventionsfortobaccosmokingcessation,18behavioralcounselingto
promote a healthful diet and physical activity for CVD prevention
inadults,35andscreeningforandmanagementofobesityinadults.36
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
Given the lack of studies on screening for and treatment of dyslip-
idemiainadultsaged20to39years,moreresearchisneededtoex-
aminetheefficacyofscreeningandtreatmentinthisagegroup.More
research is needed to address the efficacy and safety of long-term
statin use in this population and to determine effects of earlier vs
delayedinitiationofstatinuse,particularlyinpersonswithhighlyel-
evated lipid levels (eg, persons with familial hypercholesterol-
emia). Additional research is needed to further clarify the true pre-
dictive accuracy of the Pooled Cohort Equations to predict
cardiovascular risk in more contemporary and diverse populations
to optimally guide clinical risk assessment. Research is needed to
evaluate the optimal frequency of cardiovascular risk assessment,
including serum lipid screening. There are limited data on different
statin dosing strategies; trials that directly compare titrated statin
therapy to attain target lipid levels vs fixed-dose therapy would be
of great value, as would studies that directly compare higher- vs
lower-dosestatinregimens.Suchtrialsshouldusehardclinicalout-
comes as end points rather than intermediate markers.
Additional research is also warranted on the potential long-
termharmsofstatintherapy,particularlyregardingthepossibleas-
sociation with increased incidence of diabetes and cataract sur-
gery. Last, research is needed to assess the balance of benefits and
harms of initiating statin use for the primary prevention of cardio-
vascular events in adults 76 years and older. Currently, there is no
trial evidence to evaluate the net benefit of initiating statin therapy
in this population.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
In 2011, an estimated 375 000 adults died of coronary heart dis-
easeand130 000diedofcerebrovasculardisease.37Coronaryheart
disease is responsible for approximately one-fifth of deaths among
adults aged 45 to 64 years and one-fourth of deaths among those
65 years and older.38 The prevalence of coronary heart disease in-
creaseswithage,rangingfromabout7%inadultsaged45to64years
to 20% in those 65 years and older, and is somewhat higher in men
(8%) than in women (5%).39
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned 2 systematic evidence reviews to up-
date its 2008 recommendation on screening for lipid disorders in
adults. The reviews addressed the benefits and harms of screening
for and treatment of dyslipidemia in asymptomatic adults 21 years
andolderonCVD-relatedmorbidityandmortality;thebenefitsand
harms of statin use in reducing the incidence of CVD-related mor-
bidity and mortality or all-cause mortality in asymptomatic adults
without a history of CVD events; whether the benefits of statin use
vary by subgroup, clinical characteristics, or dosage; and the ben-
efitsoftreatment-to-targetvsothertreatmentstrategiesinasymp-
tomatic adults 40 years and older without a history of CVD events.
Benefits of Statin Use
Nineteenrandomizedtrials(n = 71 344participants)evaluatedtheef-
fects of statins in adults at increased cardiovascular risk but without
ahistoryofCVDevents.Themediandurationoffollow-upwas3years,
and 3 trials were stopped early because of observed benefits in the
interventiongroup.Themajorityofparticipantsweremenandwhite.6
Most of the available trials relied on a composite outcome of
CVD events as the primary outcome of interest; the exact compo-
sition of this combined end point varied across trials. In general,
statin therapy was statistically significantly associated with a
reduced incidence of composite CVD outcomes compared with
placebo; pooled analysis of 13 trials found an RR of 0.70 (95% CI,
0.63-0.78) after 1 to 6 years. Fifteen trials reported on all-cause
mortality after 1 to 6 years, and pooled analysis estimated an RR of
0.86 (95% CI, 0.80-0.93). Although this estimate was heavily
influenced by the JUPITER, HOPE-3, and ASCOT-LLA (Anglo-
Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial—Lipid Lowering Arm)
trials10,40 because of their large sample sizes, the estimate was
robust in multiple sensitivity analyses.6
Ten trials reported on cardiovascular mortality. Pooled analy-
sis found an RR of 0.69 (95% CI, 0.54-0.88) after 2 to 6 years, al-
though statistical heterogeneity was present and there was some
inconsistency in the individual trials.6 Twelve trials provided infor-
mation about fatal and nonfatal MI. Results were mixed, but most
large trials found that statin use led to a statistically significant re-
duction in the incidence of any MI; the pooled RR after 2 to 6 years
of follow-up was 0.64 (95% CI, 0.57-0.71).6 Thirteen trials re-
portedontheincidenceoffatalandnonfatalstroke.After6months
to 6 years of follow-up, statin use was associated with a decreased
risk of any stroke (RR, 0.71 [95% CI, 0.62-0.82]).6
Across these outcomes, benefits appeared consistent across
different demographic and clinical subgroups, including patients
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
2003
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
without severe dyslipidemia at baseline.6 Given similar relative risk
estimates across a population, the absolute degree of benefit
will be greatest in persons with higher baseline risk of experiencing
a CVD event.
Fifteen trials used fixed-dose statin therapy, of which the ma-
jorityevaluatedmoderatedoses;therewerenocleardifferencesin
estimates when trials were stratified according to dose. Two trials
directlycompareddifferentstatindosesbutwereunderpoweredto
draw reliable conclusions about clinical outcomes. No studies were
identified that directly compared treatment with statins titrated to
attaintargetcholesterollevelsvsfixed-doseorotherstrategies.Al-
though 3 trials used high-dose statin therapy, only 1 (JUPITER) in-
vestigated hard clinical outcomes (eg, fatal or nonfatal MI or CVD
mortality).6,10 Thus, direct evidence on whether different doses of
statin therapy or treatment-to-target strategies affect clinical out-
comes is extremely limited.
Harms of Statin Use
In randomized trials of statin use for the primary prevention of
CVD, statin therapy was not associated with an increased risk of
withdrawal because of adverse events compared with placebo,
and there were no statistically significant differences in the risk of
experiencing any serious adverse event. The trials also found no
evidence of an increase in cancer or elevated aminotransferase
levels with statin use.6
Evidenceontheassociationbetweenstatinuseandadversecog-
nitive effects is very limited, but no clear increase in risk was
observed.6 A systematic review of RCTs and observational studies
on the effects of statin use for any indication on cognition found no
statisticallysignificantdifferencesinperformancescoresontestsof
attention,visualperception,motorandprocessingspeed,memory,
cognitive performance, or executive function, and no effect on the
incidence of Alzheimer disease or dementia.7
Althoughmusclepain,soreness,orweaknessarecommonlyre-
ported with statin use, there were no statistically significant differ-
ences between the intervention and control groups for myalgia (7
trials;pooledRR,0.96[95%CI,0.79-1.16]),myopathy(3trials;pooled
RR, 1.09 [95% CI, 0.48-2.47]), or rhabdomyolysis (4 trials; pooled
RR, 1.57 [95% CI, 0.41-5.99]), although the confidence intervals for
the latter 2 conditions were very wide because of a low number of
reported events.6
Data from 5 RCTs and 2 observational studies provided evi-
dence on the potential association between statin use and diabe-
tes incidence. Pooled analysis of the RCTs demonstrated no asso-
ciationbetweenstatinuseandincreasedriskofdiabetescompared
withplacebo(RR,1.05[95%CI,0.91-1.20])6;however,theonlytrial
that evaluated a high-dose statin (JUPITER) reported a statistically
significant increased risk of diabetes with statin use.10 In post hoc
stratified analysis, participants with 1 or more risk factors for diabe-
tes (eg, obesity or the metabolic syndrome) were at higher risk of
developing diabetes than those without such factors (hazard ratio,
1.28 [95% CI, 1.07-1.54] vs 0.99 [95% CI, 0.45-2.21]).26 Observa-
tionalstudiesalsoreportedmixedfindings;aUKcase-controlstudy
foundnoassociationwithstatinuse,41butananalysisfromtheWo-
men’
s Health Initiative noted an increased diabetes risk (adjusted
hazard ratio, 1.48 [95% CI, 1.38-1.59]).42
The HOPE-3 trial found that statin use was associated with
increased risk of cataract surgery, which was unanticipated and
not a predetermined outcome of the trial (3.8% vs 3.1%; RR, 1.24
[95% CI, 1.03-1.49]). No other trials noted this outcome.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
No direct evidence from RCTs is available to guide the choice of a
specific CVD risk threshold for statin use. However, in the available
trials of statin use among adults at increased risk of CVD but with-
out a history of CVD events, benefits have been generally consis-
tent across different clinical and demographic subgroups (even
among adults without marked dyslipidemia). As such, the likeli-
hood that patients will benefit from statin use is directly associ-
ated with their absolute baseline risk of experiencing a CVD event.
The USPSTF concludes that adults who smoke or have dyslip-
idemia, diabetes, or hypertension and have a 10% or greater 10-
yearCVDeventriskshouldbeofferedalow-tomoderate-dosestatin.
Inthispopulation,thehighertheunderlying10-yearCVDeventrisk,
thegreaterthelikelihoodofbenefitfromstatinuse.Becausetheab-
soluteunderlyingriskislower,feweradultswhosmokeorhavedys-
lipidemia,diabetes,orhypertensionanda7.5%to10%10-yearCVD
event risk will benefit from statin use. As such, any decision to ini-
tiateuseofalow-tomoderate-dosestatininthispopulationshould
involve shared decision making that weighs the potential benefits
andharmsandtheuncertaintysurroundingindividualCVDriskpre-
diction. It should also take into consideration the personal prefer-
ences of each patient, including the acceptability of long-term use
of daily medication.
TheUSPSTFconcludesthatthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsof
initiatingstatinusefortheprimarypreventionofCVDeventsinadults
76 years and older without a history of CVD cannot be determined.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from December 22,
2015, to January 25, 2016. Some comments asked why the
USPSTF recommended evaluation of CVD risk factors in addition
to the use of a risk calculator or why it used different cut points
compared with the ACC/AHA guidelines. In response, the USPSTF
clarified its rationale, noting that trial participants generally had 1
or more CVD risk factors and were not recruited based on any
particular calculated risk score or cut point. Reliance on a risk cal-
culator such as the Pooled Cohort Equations alone as a basis for
prevention may be problematic, given its possible overestimation
of risk in some populations. As such, the USPSTF clarified that the
benefits of statin use may be linear according to a patient’
s abso-
lute risk level, and any cut points used are only population esti-
mates of benefits. Clinicians should encourage individualized
decision making regarding statin use in their patients, given the
known potential benefits and harms.
A few comments requested clarification on the I statement re-
gardingstatinuseamongadults76yearsandolder.TheUSPSTFclari-
fied that the I statement pertains to initiating statin use for primary
prevention in adults 76 years and older who are not already taking
a statin. Some comments requested clarification regarding the op-
timal dose of statins. The USPSTF clarified that its recommenda-
tionforuseoflow-tomoderate-dosestatinsisbasedonthefactthat
mostofthetrialswereprimarilyoflowtomoderatedoses,andthere
were no clear differences in estimates of benefit when trials were
stratified according to dose.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
2004
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
In addition, the USPSTF clarified that these recommendations
do not pertain to adults with very high CVD risk, such as those with
familial hypercholesterolemia or an LDL-C level greater than
190mg/dL,sincetheywereexcludedfromprimarypreventiontrials.
Thesepersonsshouldbescreenedandtreatedinaccordancetoclini-
cal judgment for the treatment of dyslipidemia. Last, some com-
ments inquired about the use of other factors for CVD risk assess-
ment. The USPSTF clarified that CRP level, coronary artery calcium
score, ankle-brachial index, and other factors for CVD risk assess-
ment are addressed in other USPSTF recommendations (available
at https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/).
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation replaces the USPSTF 2008 recommenda-
tion on screening for lipid disorders in adults. When making a rec-
ommendationonapreventivemedication,theUSPSTFusesthesys-
tematicevidencereviewtodeterminehowtoidentifypersonsinthe
general population for whom the USPSTF can be moderately cer-
tain about the balance of benefits and harms of a preventive medi-
cation on health outcomes.
Accumulating evidence on the role of statins in preventing
CVD events across different populations led the USPSTF to
reframe its main clinical question from “which population should
be screened for dyslipidemia?”to “which population should be
prescribed statin therapy?”Screening for elevated lipid levels is a
necessary (but not sufficient) step in the overall assessment of
CVD risk to help identify persons who may benefit from statin
therapy. In the age range in which statins have been studied for
primary prevention, universal screening for elevated lipid levels is
required to make this determination. Therefore, the screening
framework used in the previous USPSTF recommendation state-
ment is no longer relevant and has been replaced by a preventive
medication framework. This recommendation statement focuses
on the assessment of overall CVD risk to identify adults aged 40
to 75 years without a history of CVD who will benefit most from
statin use to reduce their risk of experiencing a CVD event. The
USPSTF found no studies that evaluated the effects of statin use
on health outcomes in disease-free adults younger than 40 years.
The research plan that guided the evidence review, which served
as the foundation of this recommendation statement, did not
consider reduction in LDL-C level to be a sufficient surrogate for
health outcomes.
Recommendations of Others
The ACC and AHA recommend statin use in asymptomatic adults
aged 40 to 75 years without a history of CVD who have an LDL-C
level of 70 to 189 mg/dL if they also have diabetes (use of moder-
ate- to high-dose statins is recommended, depending on the pa-
tient’
s 10-year CVD event risk) or an estimated 10-year CVD event
risk of 7.5% or greater, as calculated with the Pooled Cohort Equa-
tions risk calculator (shared decision making is recommended be-
fore initiating use of moderate- to high-dose statins). Instead of
treating to a specific LDL-C target, the ACC and AHA recommend
fixed-dosestatintherapyusingeitherahigh-intensityregimen(daily
dose reduces LDL-C level by approximately �50%) or a moderate-
intensity regimen (daily dose reduces LDL-C level by approxi-
mately30%to<50%).24Inresponse,theMayoClinicestablisheda
task force, which generally provides consistent recommendations,
although it emphasizes lifestyle modifications rather than statin
therapy in adults 40 years and older who have an LDL-C level less
than 100 mg/dL or are sufficiently motivated to reduce their CVD
event risk to less than 7.5%.43
The Canadian Cardiovascular Society recommends statin
therapycombinedwithhealthbehaviormodificationinmen40years
and older and women 50 years and older without CVD risk factors
and in adults of any age with CVD risk factors who also have a
20% or greater 10-year CVD event risk or an LDL-C level of 135 to
190mg/dLanda10%to20%CVDeventrisk(basedontheFraming-
hamriskscore).StatintherapyinadultswithaFraminghamriskscore
of less than 10% is reserved for those with genetic hypercholester-
olemiaoranLDL-Clevelof193mg/dLorgreater.Thetreatmentstrat-
egy is treatment-to-target rather than by therapy dose (eg, �50%
reduction in LDL-C level).44
The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence rec-
ommendsthatstatintherapy(specifically,atorvastatin[20mg])for
theprimarypreventionofCVDeventsbeofferedtoadults40years
and older with a 10% or greater 10-year CVD event risk, as esti-
matedbytheQRISK2assessmenttool.Beforeofferingstatintherapy,
clinicians should discuss the benefits of lifestyle modification and
optimizethemanagementofallothermodifiableCVDriskfactors.45
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) Members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo,
PhD, MD, MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH;
Susan J. Curry, PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD,
MASc; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A. R.
García, MD, MPH; Matthew W. Gillman, MD, SM;
Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD,
MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Michael L. LeFevre, MD, MSPH;
Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH; William R. Phillips,
MD, MPH; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Maureen G.
Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH.
Affiliations of Authors/US Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) Members: University of
California, San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group
Health Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); State University of New York Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health
Care Institute, Boston, Massachusetts (Gillman);
Now with the National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland (was not affiliated with the
National Institutes of Health while a member of the
USPSTF) (Gillman); Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina (Kemper); Fairfax Family Practice
Residency, Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (Krist); Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut (Kurth);
University of Alabama at Birmingham (Landefeld);
University of Missouri, Columbia (LeFevre);
University of California, Los Angeles (Mangione);
University of Washington, Seattle (Phillips);
Stanford University, Stanford, California (Owens);
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island
(Phipps); University of Texas at Austin (Pignone).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Dr Bibbins-Domingo reported having consulted
for the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review
on the cost-effectiveness of a new class of
lipid-lowering drugs. Dr Epling reported
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
2005
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
serving on a technical expert panel for the
protocol review of a study related to comparative
effectiveness of lipid-modifying agents.
Dr Gillman reported receiving a grant from the
National Institutes of Health and receiving
royalties from Cambridge University Press and
UpToDate. Dr Pignone reported receiving royalties
from UpToDate. No other authors reported
disclosures. Authors followed the policy regarding
conflicts of interest described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ, the US Department of Health and Human
Services, or the National Institutes of Health.
Additional Contributions: We thank Quyen
Ngo-Metzger, MD, MPH, and Jennifer Croswell, MD,
MPH, who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA, of AHRQ, who
assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013
ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;
129(25)(suppl 2):S49-S73.
2. Rana JS, Tabada GH, Solomon MD, et al.
Accuracy of the atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk
equation in a large contemporary, multiethnic
population. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67(18):2118-2130.
3. Cook NR, Ridker PM. Further insight into the
cardiovascular risk calculator: the roles of statins,
revascularizations, and underascertainment in the
Women’
s Health Study. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174
(12):1964-1971.
4. DeFilippis AP, Young R, Carrubba CJ, et al.
An analysis of calibration and discrimination among
multiple cardiovascular risk scores in a modern
multiethnic cohort. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(4):
266-275.
5. Mensah GA, Brown DW. An overview of
cardiovascular disease burden in the United States.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2007;26(1):38-48.
6. Chou R, Dana T, Blazina I, et al. Statin Use for the
Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults:
A Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 139. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016.
AHRQ publication 14-05206-EF-2.
7. Richardson K, Schoen M, French B, et al. Statins
and cognitive function: a systematic review. Ann
Intern Med. 2013;159(10):688-697.
8. Yusuf S, Bosch J, Dagenais G, et al;
HOPE-3 Investigators. Cholesterol lowering in
intermediate-risk persons without cardiovascular
disease. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(21):2021-2031.
9. Chou R, Dana T, Blazina I, Daeges M, Jeanne T.
Statins for prevention of cardiovascular disease in
adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis for
the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2015.15629
10. Ridker PM, Danielson E, Fonseca FA, et al;
JUPITER Study Group. Rosuvastatin to prevent
vascular events in men and women with elevated
C-reactive protein. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(21):
2195-2207.
11. Buckley DI, Fu R, Freeman M, Rogers K, Helfand
M. C-reactive protein as a risk factor for coronary
heart disease: a systematic review and
meta-analyses for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151(7):483-495.
12. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Using
nontraditional risk factors in coronary heart disease
risk assessment: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2009;151(7):474-482.
13. American Heart Association, American College
of Cardiology. Pooled Cohort Equations
Cardiovascular Risk Calculator. 2014. http://tools
.acc.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator/. Accessed
September 16, 2016.
14. Ridker PM, Cook NR. Statins: new American
guidelines for prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Lancet. 2013;382(9907):1762-1765.
15. Helfand M, Buckley DI, Freeman M, et al.
Emerging risk factors for coronary heart disease:
a summary of systematic reviews conducted for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med.
2009;151(7):496-507.
16. Dehmer SP, Maciosek MV, Flottemesch TJ.
Aspirin Use to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease and
Cancer: A Decision Analysis. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015. AHRQ
publication 15-05229-EF-1.
17. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for high blood pressure in adults: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(10):
778-786.
18. Siu AL; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for
tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including
pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163(8):622-634.
19. Chou R, Dana T, Blazina I, Daeges M, Bougatsos
C, Jeanne T. Screening for Dyslipidemia in Younger
Adults: A Systematic Review to Update the 2008 US
Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation:
Evidence Synthesis No. 138. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016. AHRQ
publication 14-05206-EF-1.
20. Chou R, Dana T, Blazina I, Daeges M, Bougatsos
C, Jeanne TL. Screening for dyslipidemia in younger
adults: a systematic review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(8):
560-564.
21. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al; US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for lipid disorders in children and adolescents: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. JAMA. 2016;316(6):625-633.
22. Versmissen J, Oosterveer DM, Yazdanpanah M,
et al. Efficacy of statins in familial
hypercholesterolaemia: a long term cohort study.
BMJ. 2008;337:a2423.
23. Downs JR, Clearfield M, Weis S, et al. Primary
prevention of acute coronary events with lovastatin
in men and women with average cholesterol levels:
results of AFCAPS/TexCAPS. JAMA. 1998;279(20):
1615-1622.
24. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013
ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular
risk in adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129(25)
(suppl 2):S1-S45.
25. Mihaylova B, Emberson J, Blackwell L, et al;
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’(CTT) Collaborators.
The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with statin
therapy in people at low risk of vascular disease:
meta-analysis of individual data from 27
randomised trials. Lancet. 2012;380(9841):
581-590.
26. Ridker PM, Pradhan A, MacFadyen JG, Libby P,
Glynn RJ. Cardiovascular benefits and diabetes risks
of statin therapy in primary prevention: an analysis
from the JUPITER trial. Lancet. 2012;380(9841):
565-571.
27. Schatz IJ, Masaki K, Yano K, Chen R, Rodriguez
BL, Curb JD. Cholesterol and all-cause mortality in
elderly people from the Honolulu Heart Program:
a cohort study. Lancet. 2001;358(9279):351-355.
28. Weverling-Rijnsburger AW, Blauw GJ, Lagaay
AM, Knook DL, Meinders AE, Westendorp RG. Total
cholesterol and risk of mortality in the oldest old.
Lancet. 1997;350(9085):1119-1123.
29. Gu Q, Paulose-Ram R, Burt VL, Kit BK.
Prescription cholesterol-lowering medication use in
adults aged 40 and over: United States,
2003-2012. NCHS Data Brief. 2014;(177):1-8.
30. Johansen ME, Green LA. Statin use in very
elderly individuals, 1999-2012. JAMA Intern Med.
2015;175(10):1715-1716.
31. AMDA—The Society for Post-Acute and
Long-Term Care Medicine. Ten things physicians
and patients should question. http://www
.choosingwisely.org/societies/amda-the-society
-for-post-acute-and-long-term-care-medicine/.
2015. Accessed September 16, 2016.
32. Bibbins-Domingo K; U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Aspirin Use for the Primary Prevention
of Cardiovascular Disease and Colorectal Cancer:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med.
2016;164(12):836-845.
33. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for coronary heart disease with
electrocardiography: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
2006
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2012;157(7):512-518.
34. Siu AL; U S Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for abnormal blood glucose and type 2
diabetes mellitus: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163(11):861-868.
35. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling interventions to promote a
healthful diet and physical activity for
cardiovascular disease prevention in adults: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(5):367-371.
36. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for and management of obesity in adults:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;
157(5):373-378.
37. Hoyert DL, Xu J. Deaths: preliminary data for
2011. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2012;61(6):1-51.
38. Miniño AM. Death in the United States, 2011.
NCHS Data Brief. 2013;(115):1-8.
39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Prevalence of coronary heart
disease—United States, 2006-2010. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(40):1377-1381.
40. Sever PS, Dahlöf B, Poulter NR, et al; ASCOT
Investigators. Prevention of coronary and stroke
events with atorvastatin in hypertensive patients
who have average or lower-than-average
cholesterol concentrations, in the
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial—Lipid
Lowering Arm (ASCOT-LLA): a multicentre
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;361
(9364):1149-1158.
41. Jick SS, Bradbury BD. Statins and newly
diagnosed diabetes. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2004;58
(3):303-309.
42. Culver AL, Ockene IS, Balasubramanian R, et al.
Statin use and risk of diabetes mellitus in
postmenopausal women in the Women’
s Health
Initiative. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(2):144-152.
43. Lopez-Jimenez F, Simha V, Thomas RJ, et al.
A summary and critical assessment of the 2013
ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease risk in adults: filling the gaps. Mayo Clin Proc.
2014;89(9):1257-1278.
44. Anderson TJ, Grégoire J, Hegele RA, et al. 2012
update of the Canadian Cardiovascular Society
guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
dyslipidemia for the prevention of cardiovascular
disease in the adult. Can J Cardiol. 2013;29(2):
151-167.
45. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment
and reduction, including lipid modification. https:
//www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/CG181. 2016.
Accessed September 16, 2016.
Statin Use for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
November 15, 2016
Volume 316, Number 19
2007
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
