 Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk
With Electrocardiography
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE Cardiovascular disease (CVD), which encompasses atherosclerotic conditions
such as coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral arterial disease, is the
most common cause of death among adults in the United States. Treatment to prevent CVD
events by modifying risk factors is currently informed by CVD risk assessment with tools such
as the Framingham Risk Score or the Pooled Cohort Equations, which stratify individual risk to
inform treatment decisions.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2012 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on screening for coronary heart disease with electrocardiography (ECG).
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on whether screening with resting or
exercise ECG improves health outcomes compared with the use of traditional CVD risk
assessment alone in asymptomatic adults.
FINDINGS For asymptomatic adults at low risk of CVD events (individuals with a 10-year CVD
event risk less than 10%), it is very unlikely that the information from resting or exercise ECG
(beyond that obtained with conventional CVD risk factors) will result in a change in the
patient’
s risk category as assessed by the Framingham Risk Score or Pooled Cohort Equations
that would lead to a change in treatment and ultimately improve health outcomes.
Possible harms are associated with screening with resting or exercise ECG, specifically the
potential adverse effects of subsequent invasive testing. For asymptomatic adults at
intermediate or high risk of CVD events, there is insufficient evidence to determine the extent
to which information from resting or exercise ECG adds to current CVD risk assessment
models and whether information from the ECG results in a change in risk management and
ultimately reduces CVD events. As with low-risk adults, possible harms are associated
with screening with resting or exercise ECG in asymptomatic adults at intermediate or high
risk of CVD events.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends against screening
with resting or exercise ECG to prevent CVD events in asymptomatic adults at low risk
of CVD events. (D recommendation) The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence
is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening with resting
or exercise ECG to prevent CVD events in asymptomatic adults at intermediate or high
risk of CVD events. (I statement)
JAMA. 2018;319(22):2308-2314. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.6848
Editorial page 2277
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 2315 and
JAMA Patient Page page 2346
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page 2331
Related articles at
jamainternalmedicine.com
jamacardiology.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Susan J.
Curry, PhD, University of Iowa,
111 Jessup Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
2308
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendations about the effectiveness of specific clinical
preventive services for patients without obvious related
signs or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends against screening with resting or exer-
cise electrocardiography (ECG) to prevent cardiovascular disease
(CVD) events in asymptomatic adults at low risk of CVD events
(D recommendation) (Figure 1).
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insuffi-
cient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening with
resting or exercise ECG to prevent CVD events in asymptomatic
adults at intermediate or high risk of CVD events. (I statement)
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionforsuggestionsforprac-
tice regarding the I statement.
Rationale
Importance
Cardiovascular disease, which encompasses atherosclerotic condi-
tions such as coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, and
peripheral arterial disease, is the most common cause of death
amongadultsintheUnitedStates.TreatmenttopreventCVDevents
by modifying risk factors is currently informed by CVD risk assess-
ment with tools such as the Framingham Risk Score or the Pooled
Cohort Equations, which stratify individual risk to inform treat-
ment decisions. If existing CVD risk assessment tools could be im-
proved,treatmentmightbebettertargeted,therebymaximizingthe
benefits of and minimizing the harms of screening.
Detection
TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidencetodeterminewhetheradding
restingorexerciseECGtoconventionalriskfactorassessmentleadsto
improvedriskstratificationofpersonstoinformtreatmentdecisions.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention and Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence to determine whether the
incrementalinformationofferedbyrestingorexerciseECG(beyond
thatobtainedwithtraditionalCVDriskfactors)canbeusedtoguide
treatment decisions and ultimately reduce CVD events.
Based on the epidemiology and natural history of CVD and es-
tablished treatment strategies based on risk stratification, it is un-
likely that the benefits of screening with resting or exercise ECG in
asymptomaticadultsatlowriskofCVDeventsaregreaterthansmall.
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionfordefinitionofriskcat-
egories and assessment of risk.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention and Treatment
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that screening with resting
or exercise ECG in asymptomatic adults leads to harms that are at
leastsmallandmaybemoderate,includingunnecessaryinvasivepro-
cedures, overtreatment, and labeling.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the potential
harms of screening with resting or exercise ECG to prevent CVD
eventsequalorexceedthepotentialbenefitsinasymptomaticadults
at low risk of CVD events.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insuffi-
cient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening with
resting or exercise ECG to prevent CVD events in asymptomatic
adults at intermediate or high risk of CVD events.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to adults without symptoms of or a
diagnosis of CVD (Figure 2).
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
IndecidingwhethertoscreenwithrestingorexerciseECGinasymp-
tomatic adults at intermediate or high risk of CVD events, clinicians
should consider the following information.
Potential Preventable Burden
Althoughevidenceisinsufficienttodeterminewhetherscreeningwith
ECGinadultsisbeneficial,thosewhomaybeatincreasedriskofCVD
events might have the greatest potential for net benefit. Reclassifi-
cationintoahigher-riskcategorymightleadtomoreintensivemedi-
cal management that could lower the risk of CVD events but might
alsoresultinharms,includingadversemedicationeffectssuchasgas-
trointestinalbleedingandhepaticinjury.RegardlessofECGfindings,
personswhoarealreadyathighriskofCVDeventsshouldreceivein-
tensiveriskfactormodification.Personswhoareclassifiedaslowrisk
are unlikely to benefit from screening with ECG.
For persons in certain occupations, such as pilots and opera-
torsofheavyequipment,forwhomsuddenincapacitationordeath
may endanger the safety of others, considerations other than the
health benefit to the patient may influence the decision to screen
with ECG to prevent CVD events.
Potential Harms
In all risk groups, an abnormal ECG finding (a true-positive or false-
positive result) can lead to invasive confirmatory testing and treat-
ment that have the potential for serious harm, including unneces-
sary radiation exposure. Two studies of asymptomatic adults with
diabetes reported that 6% and 12% of patients who were screened
with exercise ECG subsequently underwent angiography, and 3% to
5% underwent revascularization, without evidence of benefit to the
study patients.1,2 Angiography and revascularization are associated
withharms,includingbleeding,contrast-inducednephropathy,cardiac
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 12, 2018
Volume 319, Number 22
2309
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 arrhythmia, stroke, myocardial infarction, coronary artery dissec-
tion, allergic reaction to the contrast agent, and death.
Current Practice
Althoughmanyguidelinegroupsrecommendcardiovascularriskas-
sessment, there are few data on how this is applied in clinical prac-
tice. Only 41% of respondents in a survey of more than 900 US
cliniciansreportedusingcardiovascularriskpredictionequationsin
practice.3 There are few data on the use of ECG to assess CVD risk
in asymptomatic patients in the United States. A Canadian retro-
spective cohort study from 2010 to 2015 found that 21.5% of low-
risk primary care patients had an ECG within 30 days of an annual
healthexamination,andtheproportionofpatientswhohadanECG
ranged across clinics from 1.8% to 76.1%.4
Assessment of Risk
Accurate identification of persons at high risk of CVD events pro-
videstheopportunityformoreintensiveriskfactormanagementto
reduce the likelihood of such an event. In addition, identifying per-
sons at low risk may allow for a reduction in interventions among
patients not likely to benefit from them.
SeveralfactorsareassociatedwithanincreasedriskofCVDevents,
includingolderage,malesex,highbloodpressure,currentsmoking,ab-
normal lipid levels, diabetes, obesity, and physical inactivity. Risk fac-
tors are combined in many ways to estimate a person’
s risk of a CVD
event.Severalcalculatorsandmodelsareavailabletoquantifyaperson’
s
10-yearriskofCVDevents.TheFraminghamRiskScore,5basedondata
fromtheFraminghamHeartStudy,wasoneofthefirstwidelyusedCVD
riskassessmenttools.Personswitha10-yearCVDeventriskgreaterthan
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
2310
JAMA
June 12, 2018
Volume 319, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 20%aregenerallyconsideredhighrisk,thosewitha10-yearCVDevent
risklessthan10%areconsideredlowrisk,andthosewitha10-yearCVD
eventriskof10%to20%areconsideredintermediaterisk.ThePooled
Cohort Equations, introduced by the American College of Cardiology
andAmericanHeartAssociationin2013,includethesamevariablesas
theFraminghamRiskScoreaswellasrace/ethnicityanddiabetes.Per-
sonswitha10-yearCVDeventrisklessthan7.5%areconsideredatlow
risk,andthosewitha10-yearCVDeventriskof7.5%orgreaterarecon-
sideredatelevatedrisk.6TheUSPSTFrecommendsthatcliniciansuse
thePooledCohortEquationstoassessCVDrisk.
Screening Tests
Both resting and exercise ECG are used for the diagnostic evaluation
ofsuspectedCVD,whichhasledtothesuggestionthatECGcouldalso
beusedtoscreenasymptomaticpersonstoidentifythosewhowould
benefit from earlier, more intensive management of modifiable risk
factors, preventive interventions, or both. Resting ECG records car-
diac electrical activity while the patient is at rest, over a short period
of time. Standard ECG testing is performed with 12 leads, although
sometestsusefewerleads.Morerecently,ECGleadshavebeenbuilt
into blood pressure cuffs, smartphones, and other devices. Exercise
ECGrecordscardiacelectricalactivityduringphysicalexertion,often
at a prespecified intensity level. The most common method of exer-
ciseECGisthetreadmilltest,butothermethods,suchasthoseusing
bicycles and ergometers, have also been used. Both resting and ex-
ercise ECG look for markers of previous myocardial infarction, myo-
cardial ischemia, and other cardiac abnormalities (such as left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, bundle branch block, or arrhythmia) that may
be associated with CVD or predict future CVD events.
Treatment and Interventions
Asymptomatic adults at increased risk of CVD events are usually
treatedwithacombinationofdietandexercisemodifications,lipid-
lowering medications, aspirin, hypertension management, and in-
terventionstoencouragetobaccocessation.Recommendationsfor
dietandexercisemodifications,lipid-loweringmedications,andas-
pirinarebasedonlevelofcardiovascularrisk.Recentguidelinesalso
recommend risk stratification of hypertension treatment7; the rec-
ommendation for tobacco cessation applies to all persons regard-
less of CVD risk.
Useful Resources
The USPSTF has made recommendations on many factors related
toCVDprevention,includingscreeningforhighbloodpressure,8use
of statins,9 counseling on smoking cessation,10 and counseling to
promotehealthfuldietandphysicalactivity.11Inaddition,theUSPSTF
recommends low-dose aspirin use in certain persons at increased
risk of CVD events.12
OtherresourcesarealsoavailablefromtheNationalHeart,Lung,
andBloodInstitute13;CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention14;
and Healthy People 2020.15
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
A considerable number of studies have reported hazard ratios and
othermeasuresofassociationbetweenECGchangesandcardiovas-
cular outcomes, so additional studies of this nature are unlikely to
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
Population
Recommendation 
Adults at low risk of CVD events
Adults at intermediate or high risk of CVD events
Do not screen with resting or exercise ECG.
Grade: D
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment
Screening Tests
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Risk factors for CVD events include older age, male sex, high blood pressure, current smoking, abnormal lipid levels, diabetes, obesity,
and physical inactivity. Several calculators and models are available to quantify a person's 10-year risk of CVD events; the USPSTF
recommends that clinicians use the Pooled Cohort Equations to assess CVD risk.
Resting ECG records cardiac electrical activity while the patient is at rest, over a short period. Exercise ECG records cardiac electrical
activity during physical exertion, often at a prespecified intensity level. The most common method of exercise ECG is the treadmill
test. Both resting and exercise ECG look for markers of previous myocardial infarction, myocardial ischemia, and other cardiac
abnormalities (such as left ventricular hypertrophy, bundle branch block, or arrhythmia) that may be associated with CVD or predict
future CVD events.
Treatments
Asymptomatic adults at increased risk of CVD events are usually treated with a combination of diet and exercise modifications,
lipid-lowering medications, aspirin, hypertension management, and interventions to encourage tobacco cessation.
The USPSTF has made recommendations on many factors related to CVD prevention, including screening for high blood pressure,
use of statins, counseling on smoking cessation, and counseling to promote healthful diet and physical activity. In addition, the
USPSTF recommends low-dose aspirin use in certain persons at increased risk of CVD events.
CVD indicates cardiovascular disease; ECG, electrocardiography; USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 12, 2018
Volume 319, Number 22
2311
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 advancethefield.Studiesareneededthatassesstheincrementalvalue
of adding ECG to current CVD risk assessment tools or instruments
todirectlyinformdecisionmaking;studiesthatexaminepatientout-
comeswouldbemostuseful.Failingthat,studiesareneededthatas-
sess the added value of ECG for risk reclassification across clinically
relevantriskthresholds.AnystudyofCVDriskassessmentshouldalso
evaluate the harms associated with assessment as well as those re-
lated to additional testing and treatment. Studies that measure risk
reclassification should report total, event, and nonevent Net Reclas-
sificationIndices,withcorrespondingconfidenceintervals,aswellas
measures of calibration and discrimination.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of death among
adults in the United States, accounting for 1 in 3 deaths. Although
CVDremainsasignificantcauseofillnessanddeath,mortalityfrom
CVD has been decreasing over time in the United States. Currently,
the annual incidence of new cases of myocardial infarction and
cerebral vascular accident in the United States is 580 000 and
610 000, respectively.16
Scope of Review
In 2012, the USPSTF recommended against screening for coronary
heart disease with ECG in low-risk adults (D recommendation) and
issuedanIstatementforintermediate-andhigh-riskadults.17Toup-
date the prior recommendations, the USPSTF requested the cur-
rent evidence review.18,19 In recognition of how the field has ad-
vanced, the current evidence review did not include association
studies but addressed whether the addition of screening with rest-
ing or exercise ECG improves health outcomes compared with tra-
ditional CVD risk assessment in asymptomatic adults.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
TheUSPSTFreviewedtheevidenceonwhetherscreeningwithrest-
ing or exercise ECG improves calibration, discrimination, or risk re-
classificationwhenaddedtoCVDriskassessmentmodelsusingtra-
ditionalriskfactors.TheUSPSTFfocusedonevidencethatECGadds
to current CVD risk assessment with the Framingham Risk Score or
the Pooled Cohort Equations, because this could lead to change in
treatments for patients.
TheUSPSTFidentified5cohortstudies(2ofwhichoverlapwith
the previous review) that evaluated whether adding exercise ECG
to current CVD risk assessment models improves calibration, dis-
crimination, or reclassification. Four studies assessed whether ex-
ercise ECG improved calibration; 2 studies evaluated adding exer-
ciseECGtotheFraminghamRiskScore,20,21andtheother2studies
evaluatedaddingexerciseECGtootherriskassessmentmodels.22,23
The studies used different measures and showed mixed effects
oncalibration.ThreestudiesassessedwhetheraddingexerciseECG
totheFraminghamRiskScore21orotherriskassessmentmodels22,24
improveddiscrimination,andallfoundonlysmallabsoluteimprove-
ments in area under the curve or C statistic (0.02-0.03). Only 1 risk
assessment model development study evaluated whether adding
exerciseECGimprovedriskreclassification.However,thestudydid
notapplyriskthresholdsthatcurrentlydeterminetreatmentandonly
reported overall reclassification, not event and nonevent net
reclassification.22
The USPSTF identified 9 cohort studies (1 of which overlapped
withthepreviousreview)thatevaluatedwhetheraddingrestingECG
to current CVD risk assessment models improves calibration, dis-
crimination, or reclassification; 5 of these studies evaluated mul-
tiple ECG changes and 4 evaluated a single ECG change. Five stud-
iesevaluatedaddingrestingECGtotheFraminghamRiskScore,25-29
and 1 of these studies29 also evaluated adding resting ECG to the
Pooled Cohort Equations. Adding resting ECG to existing CVD risk
assessment models improved calibration for several CVD out-
comes, although the strength of evidence was low and resulted in
small or very small improvements in discrimination (absolute im-
provementinareaunderthecurveorCstatistic,0.001-0.050).Two
studies reported net reclassification when resting ECG was added
to the Framingham Risk Score,18,26,27 and 1 study29 evaluated add-
ing resting ECG to both the Framingham Risk Score and the Pooled
Cohort Equations. There was a small to moderate improvement in
reclassification but the studies did not present the full reclassifica-
tion data, so it is difficult to determine whether the reclassification
wouldchangetreatment.No2studiesevaluatedthesameCVDrisk
assessment model, risk category threshold, or outcome.
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
TheUSPSTFidentifiednostudiesthatdirectlyassessedwhetheradd-
ingrestingECGtocurrentCVDriskassessmentmodelsimprovescar-
diovascular outcomes for any risk group.18,19 The USPSTF identified
2fair-qualityrandomizedclinicaltrialsofscreeningwithexerciseECG
inpersonswithdiabetes(andthereforeatincreasedriskofCVD)that
found no difference in mortality or cardiovascular events.1,2 How-
ever, both trials fell far short of their intended enrollment and there-
forewereunderpoweredandhadarelativelyshorttimeperiod(mean,
3.5 years) to detect a difference in cardiovascular outcomes.
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
RestingECGhasthepotentialforanxietyandlabeling;however,the
USPSTF was unable to find relevant studies on these harms. Exer-
cise ECG has more potential for direct harms (eg, triggering a car-
diovascular event or musculoskeletal injury), but survey data of
symptomatic patients suggests that these harms are very rare.30,31
The primary concern for both types of ECG screening is the harm
of subsequent procedures or interventions initiated as a result of
screening (eg, angiography or revascularization procedures). Only
1 study reported harms of subsequent testing (1/12 patients re-
ferred for revascularization had a nonfatal myocardial infarction)2;
therefore,theUSPSTFincludedabroaderrangeofstudydesignsin
its evaluation to estimate potential harms.
Angiography rates after screening with exercise ECG in asymp-
tomaticpopulationsaregenerallylessthan3%(range,0.6%-13%).The
majorityofpatientsundergoingangiographyinthesestudiesdidnot
have angiographically demonstrable coronary artery stenosis, but
some did undergo revascularization (0.1%-0.5%).18 Based on large
population-basedregistriesthatincludesymptomaticpersons,angi-
ography is associated with a serious harm rate of 1.7%, including ar-
rhythmia (0.40%), death (0.10%), stroke (0.07%), and myocardial
infarction(0.05%).Revascularizationincreasestheriskofperiproce-
duralmyocardialinfarction(1.7%),coronaryarterydissection(1.3%),
bleedingeventswithin72hours(1.3%),vascularcomplications(0.4%),
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
2312
JAMA
June 12, 2018
Volume 319, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 renal failure (0.4%), stroke (0.1%), and death on day of procedure
(<0.01%).18 The USPSTF did not find any recent studies that directly
addressed the potential harms of anxiety or labeling.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
ForasymptomaticadultsatlowriskofCVDevents(definedas10-year
CVD event risk <10%), it is very unlikely that the information from
restingorexerciseECG(beyondthatobtainedwithconventionalCVD
risk factors) will result in a change in the patient’
s risk category that
would lead to a change in treatment and ultimately improve health
outcomes.Seriouspossibleharmsareassociatedwithscreeningwith
restingorexerciseECG,specificallythepotentialadverseeffectsof
subsequentinvasivetesting.Therefore,theUSPSTFconcludeswith
moderatecertaintythatscreeningwithECGinasymptomaticadults
at low risk of CVD events has no net benefit.
For asymptomatic adults at intermediate or high risk of CVD
events (defined as a 10-year CVD event risk of 10%-20% or >20%,
respectively), there is insufficient evidence to determine the ex-
tent to which information from resting or exercise ECG adds to cur-
rentCVDriskassessmentmodels(ie,PooledCohortEquations)and
whetheritresultsinachangeinriskmanagementandultimatelyre-
duces CVD events. As with low-risk adults, serious possible harms
areassociatedwithscreeningwithrestingorexerciseECGinasymp-
tomatic adults at intermediate or high risk of CVD events. The
USPSTFconcludesthatthereisinsufficientevidencetoestimatethe
net benefit of screening with ECG in asymptomatic adults at inter-
mediate or high risk of CVD events.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Thereissubstantialandconsistentevidencethatidentifyingandtreat-
ingtraditional,modifiableCVDriskfactorssuchashighbloodpressure,
abnormallipidlevels,diabetes,currentsmoking,physicalinactivity,and
dietimprovecardiovascularoutcomes.Theseriskfactorsarelinkedto
thebiologicalunderstandingofthepathophysiologyofCVD.Electro-
cardiographymeasurestheelectricalactivityintheheartandresults
canbeabnormalformanyreasons,onlysomeofwhichareattributable
toatheroscleroticCVD.Inlow-riskpatients,theseabnormalitiesareun-
likelytoresultfromatheroscleroticCVD;inintermediate-andhigh-risk
patients,theyaremorelikelytoresultfromatheroscleroticCVD,but
thereisnoevidencethattargetingtheseabnormalitiesinadditionto
modifiable risk factors has benefit.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from December 19, 2017,
to January 22, 2018. In response to public comments, the USPSTF
clarified the definition of CVD and the preferred CVD risk assess-
ment tool.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
Thisrecommendationisanupdateofthe2012USPSTFrecommen-
dation. As in 2012, the USPSTF continues to recommend against
screening with ECG in adults at low risk, and the evidence remains
insufficient on screening in adults at increased risk.17
Recommendations of Others
The American College of Physicians recommends against screening
forCVDwithrestingorstressECGinasymptomatic,low-riskadults.32
The American College of Cardiology concludes that exercise ECG is
rarely appropriate in asymptomatic adults at low global risk of CVD
events,maybeanappropriateoptionforadultsatintermediaterisk,
andisappropriateforadultsathighrisk.33In2012,theAmericanAcad-
emy of Family Physicians recommended against screening with ECG
in asymptomatic, low-risk persons.34 The American College of Pre-
ventiveMedicinerecommendsagainstroutinelyscreeningwithrest-
ing or exercise ECG in the general adult population.35
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: May 2, 2018.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Susan J. Curry, PhD; Alex H. Krist, MD,
MPH; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Michael J. Barry,
MD; Aaron B. Caughey, MD, PhD; Karina W.
Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD,
MPH, MS; Martha Kubik, PhD, RN; C. Seth
Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH;
Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A. Simon,
MD, MPH; Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE;
John B. Wong, MD.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of Iowa,
Iowa City (Curry); Fairfax Family Practice Residency,
Fairfax, Virginia (Krist); Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond (Krist); Veterans Affairs
Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California
(Owens); Stanford University, Stanford, California
(Owens); Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts (Barry); Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland (Caughey); Columbia
University, New York, New York (Davidson);
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni);
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke
(Epling); Nationwide Children’
s Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio (Kemper); Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (Kubik); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon); University of
Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific Health Research
and Education Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii (Tseng);
Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts (Wong).
Author Contributions: Dr Curry had full access to
all of the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis. The USPSTF members contributed
equally to the recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Howard
Tracer, MD, and Elizabeth Kato, MD, MRP (AHRQ),
who contributed to the writing of the manuscript,
and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who assisted with
coordination and editing.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 12, 2018
Volume 319, Number 22
2313
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 REFERENCES
1. Lièvre MM, Moulin P, Thivolet C, et al; DYNAMIT
Investigators. Detection of silent myocardial
ischemia in asymptomatic patients with diabetes:
results of a randomized trial and meta-analysis
assessing the effectiveness of systematic screening.
Trials. 2011;12:23. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-23
2. Turrini F, Scarlini S, Mannucci C, et al. Does
coronary atherosclerosis deserve to be diagnosed
early in diabetic patients? the DADDY-D trial:
screening diabetic patients for unknown coronary
disease. Eur J Intern Med. 2015;26(6):407-413.
doi:10.1016/j.ejim.2015.05.006
3. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
Assessing Cardiovascular Risk: Systematic Evidence
Review From the Risk Assessment Work Group.
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/assessing
-cardiovascular-risk. Published 2013. Accessed
April 24, 2018.
4. Bhatia RS, Bouck Z, Ivers NM, et al.
Electrocardiograms in low-risk patients undergoing
an annual health examination. JAMA Intern Med.
2017;177(9):1326-1333. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed
.2017.2649
5. Framingham Heart Study. Cardiovascular
disease (10-year risk) calculator. https://www
.framinghamheartstudy.org/fhs-risk-functions
/cardiovascular-disease-10-year-risk/. 2018.
Accessed April 24, 2018.
6. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of
cardiovascular risk. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;
63(25, pt B):2935-2959. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.005
7. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/
NMA/PCN guideline for the prevention, detection,
evaluation, and management of high blood
pressure in adults: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published
online November 7, 2017]. J Am Coll Cardiol.
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2017.11.006
8. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for high blood pressure in adults: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(10):778-786.
doi:10.7326/M15-2223
9. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al. Statin use for the primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease in adults: US Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement.
JAMA. 2016;316(19):1997-2007. doi:10.1001/jama
.2016.15450
10. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for
tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including
pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163(8):622-634. doi:10.7326/M15-2023
11. LeFevre ML; U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful
diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk
factors: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med.
2014;161(8):587-593. doi:10.7326/M14-1796
12. Bibbins-Domingo K; U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Aspirin use for the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164(12):836-845.
doi:10.7326/M16-0577
13. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
NHLBI Online Catalog. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov
/health-topics/publications-and-resources.
Accessed April 24, 2018.
14. Prevention Works: CDC Strategies for
a Heart-Healthy and Stroke-Free America.
https://www.cdc.gov/dhdsp/prevention_works
.htm. Updated 2013. Accessed April 24, 2018.
15. Healthy People 2020. Evidence-Based
Resources. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020
/tools-resources/Evidence-Based-Resources.
Accessed April 24, 2018.
16. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, et al.
Heart disease and stroke statistics—2017 update:
a report from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2017;135(10):e146-e603.
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000485
17. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for coronary heart disease with
electrocardiography: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2012;157(7):512-518.
18. Jonas DE, Reddy S, Middleton JC, et al.
Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With
Electrocardiography: An Evidence Review for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Evidence
Synthesis No. 163. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2018. AHRQ
publication 17-05235-EF-1.
19. Jonas DE, Reddy S, Middleton JC, et al.
Screening for cardiovascular disease risk with
resting or exercise electrocardiography: evidence
report and systematic review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force [published June 12, 2018]. JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2018.6897
20. Cournot M, Taraszkiewicz D, Galinier M, et al.
Is exercise testing useful to improve the prediction
of coronary events in asymptomatic subjects? Eur J
Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2006;13(1):37-44.
doi:10.1097/00149831-200602000-00006
21. Cournot M, Taraszkiewicz D, Cambou JP, et al.
Additional prognostic value of physical
examination, exercise testing, and arterial
ultrasonography for coronary risk assessment in
primary prevention. Am Heart J. 2009;158(5):845-
851. doi:10.1016/j.ahj.2009.08.017
22. Chang SM, Nabi F, Xu J, et al. Value of CACS
compared with ETT and myocardial perfusion
imaging for predicting long-term cardiac outcome
in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients at low
risk for coronary disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging.
2015;8(2):134-144. doi:10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.11.008
23. Erikssen G, Bodegard J, Bjørnholt JV, et al.
Exercise testing of healthy men in a new
perspective: from diagnosis to prognosis. Eur Heart
J. 2004;25(11):978-986. doi:10.1016/j.ehj.2004
.04.009
24. Aktas MK, Ozduran V, Pothier CE, et al. Global
risk scores and exercise testing for predicting
all-cause mortality in a preventive medicine
program. JAMA. 2004;292(12):1462-1468.
doi:10.1001/jama.292.12.1462
25. Denes P, Larson JC, Lloyd-Jones DM, et al.
Major and minor ECG abnormalities in
asymptomatic women and risk of cardiovascular
events and mortality. JAMA. 2007;297(9):978-985.
doi:10.1001/jama.297.9.978
26. Badheka AO, Patel N, Tuliani TA, et al.
Electrocardiographic abnormalities and
reclassification of cardiovascular risk: insights from
NHANES-III. Am J Med. 2013;126(4):319-326.
doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.10.020
27. Auer R, Bauer DC, Marques-Vidal P, et al;
Health ABC Study. Association of major and
minor ECG abnormalities with coronary heart
disease events. JAMA. 2012;307(14):1497-1505.
doi:10.1001/jama.2012.434
28. Badheka AO, Patel NJ, Grover PM, et al.
ST-T wave abnormality in lead aVR and
reclassification of cardiovascular risk (from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey-III). Am J Cardiol. 2013;112(6):805-810.
doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2013.04.058
29. Shah AJ, Vaccarino V, Janssens AC, et al.
An electrocardiogram-based risk equation for
incident cardiovascular disease from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(7):779-786. doi:10.1001
/jamacardio.2016.2173
30. Myers J, Arena R, Franklin B, et al.
Recommendations for clinical exercise laboratories:
a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2009;119(24):3144-3161.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192520
31. American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM’s
Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription. 10th
ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
32. Chou R; High Value Care Task Force of the
American College of Physicians. Cardiac screening
with electrocardiography, stress echocardiography,
or myocardial perfusion imaging: advice for
high-value care from the American College of
Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(6):438-447.
doi:10.7326/M14-1225
33. Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al.
ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/
SCMR/STS 2013 multimodality appropriate use
criteria for the detection and risk assessment of
stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation
Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American
Heart Association, American Society of
Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear
Cardiology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions, Society of
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of
Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(4):
380-406. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.009
34. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive service recommendation:
coronary heart disease, adults. https://www.aafp
.org/patient-care/clinical-recommendations/all/cvd
.html. 2012. Accessed April 27, 2018.
35. Lim LS, Haq N, Mahmood S, Hoeksema L.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease screening in
adults: American College of Preventive Medicine
position statement on preventive practice. Am J
Prev Med. 2011;40(3):381.e1-381.e10. doi:10.1016/j
.amepre.2010.11.021
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Cardiovascular Disease Risk With Electrocardiography
2314
JAMA
June 12, 2018
Volume 319, Number 22
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
