 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Celiac Disease
USPreventiveServicesTaskForceRecommendationStatement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththebenefits
andharmsoftheserviceandanassessmentofthebalance.TheUSPSTF
doesnotconsiderthecostsofprovidingaserviceinthisassessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthat
clinical decisions involve more
considerations than evidence
alone. Clinicians should un-
derstand the evidence but indi-
vidualize decision making to
the specific patient or situation.
Similarly,theUSPSTFnotesthat
policy and coverage decisions
involveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclinicalbenefits
and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assessthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofscreeningforceliacdis-
ease in asymptomatic persons (I statement) (Figure 1). See the
Summary Video.
Rationale
Importance
Celiac disease is a multisystem autoimmune disorder in geneti-
cally predisposed adults and children that is triggered by dietary
gluten. Ingestion of gluten by persons with celiac disease causes
immune-mediated inflammatory damage to the small intestine,
which can cause gastrointestinal and nongastrointestinal illness.
The clinical presentation, severity of symptoms, and natural his-
tory of the disease varies and includes asymptomatic (or “
silent”)
celiac disease.
In studies of US populations, the estimated prevalence of ce-
liac disease among adults ranges from 0.40% to 0.95%.1 Preva-
lence is higher than average among non-Hispanic whites, persons
with a family history of celiac disease, and persons with other auto-
immune conditions.2
Detection
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence regarding the accuracy of
screening tests for celiac disease in asymptomatic populations.
JAMA.COM
+
SummaryVideoScreeningfor
CeliacDisease:USPreventive
ServicesTaskForce
RecommendationStatement
IMPORTANCE Celiacdiseaseiscausedbyanimmuneresponseinpersonswhoaregenetically
susceptibletodietarygluten,aproteincomplexfoundinwheat,rye,andbarley.Ingestionofgluten
bypersonswithceliacdiseasecausesimmune-mediatedinflammatorydamagetothesmallintestine.
OBJECTIVE To issue a new US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation on
screening for celiac disease.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the accuracy of screening
in asymptomatic adults, adolescents, and children; the potential benefits and harms of
screening vs not screening and targeted vs universal screening; and the benefits and harms
of treatment of screen-detected celiac disease. The USPSTF also reviewed contextual
information on the prevalence of celiac disease among patients without obvious symptoms
and the natural history of subclinical celiac disease.
FINDINGS TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidenceontheaccuracyofscreeningforceliac
disease,thepotentialbenefitsandharmsofscreeningvsnotscreeningortargetedvsuniversal
screening,andthepotentialbenefitsandharmsoftreatmentofscreen-detectedceliacdisease.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence
is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for celiac disease
in asymptomatic persons. (I statement)
JAMA. 2017;317(12):1252-1257. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.1462
Editorial page 1221
Author Audio Interview
Video
Related article page 1258 and
JAMA Patient Page page 1286
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 1271
Related article at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
1252
JAMA
March 28, 2017
Volume 317, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention
or Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the effectiveness
of screening for celiac disease in asymptomatic adults, adoles-
cents, and children with regard to morbidity, mortality, or quality
of life. The USPSTF also found inadequate evidence on the effec-
tiveness of targeted screening in persons who are at increased
risk for celiac disease (eg, persons with family history or other risk
factors).
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the effectiveness
of treatment of screen-detected, asymptomatic celiac disease to
improve morbidity, mortality, or quality of life compared with no
treatment or treatment initiated after clinical diagnosis.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention or Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the harms of screening
for or treatment of celiac disease.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to
assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for celiac
disease in asymptomatic persons. Evidence is lacking, and the bal-
ance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Celiac Disease
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 28, 2017
Volume 317, Number 12
1253
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to adults, adolescents, and children
who do not have signs or symptoms of celiac disease (Figure 2).
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
Potential Preventable Burden
Classic celiac disease is associated with symptoms of malabsorp-
tion,includingdiarrhea,abdominalpain,andweightloss.Itmayalso
manifest as nonspecific, nongastrointestinal symptoms, including
anemia, osteoporosis, chronic fatigue, peripheral neuropathy
or ataxia, and short stature.3 Data from the United States suggest
that some patients may have symptoms for years before being
diagnosed.4 Evidence also suggests that celiac disease is associ-
ated with excess mortality, intestinal adenocarcinoma, and lym-
phoma; however, evidence is insufficient as to whether silent, or
asymptomatic,diseasehasthesameriskassymptomaticdisease.2,5-7
In 3 US-based studies, the prevalence of laboratory-confirmed
celiac disease ranged from 0.40% to 0.95% among adults.1 Some
variationsinprevalencecanbeattributedinparttothemethodused
to confirm diagnosis.2 For example, some population-based stud-
ies on prevalence rely on serologic testing without histologic con-
firmation, which may result in false-positive diagnoses and overes-
timate prevalence. However, in a systematic review of 38 studies
from North America and Western Europe, prevalence of celiac dis-
ease was similar among studies that included biopsy confirmation
(0.15%-1.90%) and among studies that did not include biopsy con-
firmation (0.15%-2.70%).1
Celiac disease affects children, adolescents, and adults. Sero-
conversion to antibodies associated with celiac disease may occur
at any time, and disease progression can take months or years, if it
occurs at all. Data suggest that the average age at diagnosis is now
in the fourth to sixth decade of life.8,9 Data are limited on the pro-
portionofpersonswithsilentceliacdisease(positivehistologyfind-
ings but no symptoms) or potential celiac disease (positive serol-
ogy findings but mild or no intestinal damage on biopsy) who later
developsymptomaticceliacdisease.Threelong-termstudiesofUS
adults with follow-up ranging from 10 to 45 years reported rates of
progression from positive serology findings to clinical diagnosis of
celiac disease of 0% to 15%.10-12
Persons at increased risk for celiac disease include those who
have a positive family history (eg, a first- or second-degree rela-
tive),withanestimatedprevalenceof5%to20%,13andpersonswith
other autoimmune diseases (eg, type 1 diabetes mellitus, inflam-
matoryluminalgastrointestinaldisorders,Downsyndrome,Turner
syndrome, IgA deficiency, and IgA nephropathy).14 Several spe-
cialty societies recommend screening in these populations.15-17
Reported prevalence among racial/ethnic minorities is lower than
among non-Hispanic whites.2,5
Potential Harms
Potentialharmsofscreeningforceliacdiseaseinasymptomaticpopu-
lations include false-positive, inconclusive, or unnecessary sero-
logic test results and biopsies, with possible anxiety or complica-
tionsfromtesting.Basedonestimatedlikelihoodratiosinthegeneral
population,2 the positive predictive value of serologic testing for
celiac disease is 12% to 40%, assuming a prevalence of approxi-
mately1%.Inahigher-riskpopulation,thepositivepredictivevalue
is 40% to 80%, depending on the serologic test used and whether
the assumed prevalence is 5% or 10%. Some patients with positive
serology findings who do not undergo histologic confirmation may
make efforts to avoid dietary gluten, which can increase costs and
burdens and may result in limitations on quality of life. Limited evi-
dencefrom5long-termfollow-upstudies(3studiesofpatientswith
positive serology findings; 2 studies of children with biopsy confir-
mation) has shown that some persons who are diagnosed with
Figure 2. Screening for Celiac Disease: Clinical Summary
Population
Recommendation 
Asymptomatic adults, adolescents, and children
No recommendation.
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment
Screening Tests
Balance of Benefits
and Harms 
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Persons at increased risk for celiac disease include those who have a positive family history (eg, a first- or second-degree relative)
and persons with other autoimmune diseases (eg, type 1 diabetes mellitus, inflammatory luminal gastrointestinal disorders, Down
syndrome, Turner syndrome, IgA deficiency, and IgA nephropathy).
Screening for celiac disease is typically not performed in average-risk persons. The standard method of diagnosing celiac disease
is the tissue transglutaminase IgA test, followed by intestinal biopsy for histologic confirmation.
Treatment
Treatment of celiac disease is lifelong adherence to a gluten-free diet, which reverses disease manifestations in a majority of patients.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for celiac
disease in asymptomatic persons.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Celiac Disease
1254
JAMA
March 28, 2017
Volume 317, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
celiacdiseasemayneverdevelopsymptomsorcomplications;thus,
overdiagnosis is also a potential concern.10-12,18,19
Current Practice
Reliable data on the frequency of screening for celiac disease in
asymptomaticpersonsinclinicalpracticearenotavailable.20Itisnot
known how many patients with positive serology findings without
biopsy confirmation are treated with a gluten-free diet.
Screening Tests
Screening for celiac disease is typically not performed in average-
risk persons.2 The standard method of diagnosing celiac disease in
symptomaticpersonsolderthan2yearsisthetissuetransglutamin-
ase (tTG) IgA test, followed by intestinal biopsy for histologic
confirmation.2
Treatment and Interventions
Treatmentofceliacdiseaseislifelongadherencetoagluten-freediet,
which reverses disease manifestations in a majority of patients.2
Additional Approaches to Prevention
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
eases provides current, comprehensive, science-based information
about the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of celiac disease.21
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
Studiesthatrandomlyassignparticipantstoscreeningvsnoscreen-
ing and evaluate clinical outcomes are lacking. However, screening
studies that target populations at increased risk for celiac disease
are likely to be more informative than trials that target the general
population,becauseofthehigherprevalenceofdisease,andshould
be given higher priority. More information is needed about the ac-
curacy of serologic testing in asymptomatic persons, particularly
those with disease risk factors.
Treatment studies in screen-detected, asymptomatic persons
arealsoneededtounderstandtheeffectsofadherencetoagluten-
free diet (compared with no dietary intervention), as well as the ef-
fects of immediate vs delayed dietary changes (ie, at the time of
screen-detected diagnosis vs when symptoms develop). Ideally,
studieswouldreportbothshort-termeffectsonsymptomsandqual-
ity of life and long-term outcomes (eg, osteoporotic fractures, can-
cer, and mortality). As for screening, treatment studies focused on
asymptomaticpersonsathighriskforceliacdiseasewhoscreenposi-
tivewouldbehelpfulfordevelopingguidanceforthispopulationand
may be faster and more efficient to complete than other study de-
signs.Moreresearchisneededtobetterunderstandthenaturalhis-
tory of positive serology in patients without histologic changes or
withhistologicconfirmationbutnosymptoms.Also,treatmentstud-
ies should report results stratified according to baseline histologic
findings, given current uncertainty about the natural history of ce-
liac disease in persons with mild histologic abnormalities.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Celiacdiseaseiscausedbyanimmuneresponseinpersonswhoare
genetically susceptible to dietary gluten, a protein complex found
in wheat, rye, and barley. Ingestion of gluten by persons with celiac
diseasecausesimmune-mediatedinflammatorydamagetothesmall
intestine mucosa, resulting in malabsorption of nutrients.
Celiacdiseasecanhaveseveraldifferentpresentations.Classic
celiacdiseaseisassociatedwithdiarrhea,abdominalpain,andweight
loss. However, celiac disease is also associated with nongastroin-
testinal, nonspecific manifestations of disease such as anemia, os-
teoporosis, chronic fatigue, peripheral neuropathy or ataxia, aph-
thousstomatitis,dermatitisherpetiformis,infertility,recurrentfetal
loss, or short stature.3 Children may also experience pubertal delay
and dental enamel defects.22 For patients with subclinical disease,
symptoms may be mild and not recognized until after initiation of a
gluten-free diet. Patients with silent, or asymptomatic, celiac dis-
ease have been diagnosed by serologic testing and intestinal bi-
opsy but do not have the typical signs or symptoms of celiac dis-
ease. Patients with potential celiac disease have positive serology
findingsandmildornointestinaldamageonbiopsy;theymayormay
nothavesymptoms.Thenaturalhistoryofsilentandpotentialceliac
disease is not well understood, and it is not clear if they represent
progressive stages of celiac disease or distinct subtypes.2
Data on the prevalence of silent celiac disease in the United
States, as well as the proportion of these individuals who later de-
velop symptomatic celiac disease, are limited.2 Reported preva-
lenceofceliacdiseaseintheliteraturevariesduetothedifferentra-
cial/ethnic populations studied and the method used to confirm
diagnosis.2Inasystematicreviewof38studiesfromNorthAmerica
andWesternEurope,prevalencewassimilaramongstudiesthatin-
cludedbiopsyconfirmation(0.15%-1.90%)andamongstudiesthat
didnot(0.15%-2.70%).1Inthe3US-basedstudies,prevalenceamong
adults ranged from 0.40% to 0.95%.1
Scope of Review
The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the accuracy of screening in
asymptomaticadults,adolescents,andchildren;thepotentialben-
efits and harms of screening vs not screening, as well as targeted
vs universal screening; and the benefits and harms of treatment of
screen-detected celiac disease. For questions regarding the ben-
efits and harms of screening and treatment, outcomes of interest
included morbidity, mortality, and quality of life. The USPSTF also
reviewed contextual information on the prevalence of celiac dis-
easeamongpatientswithoutevidentsymptomsandthenaturalhis-
tory of subclinical or silent celiac disease.2 The USPSTF did not re-
view the evidence on nonceliac gluten sensitivity because this
conditionisdefinedbasedonthepresenceofsymptomsratherthan
diagnostic tests, and it is not thought to lead to the health compli-
cations associated with celiac disease.23
Accuracy of Screening Tests
Arecentgood-qualitysystematicreviewontheaccuracyofdiagnos-
tictestsforceliacdisease,whichincludedstudiesenrollingbothper-
sons with symptoms and those whose symptom status was not de-
scribed,foundhighstrengthofevidencethatthetTGIgAtesthashigh
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Celiac Disease
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 28, 2017
Volume 317, Number 12
1255
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
(>90%)sensitivityandspecificityandendomysialantibody(EMA)IgA
testshavehighspecificity,basedonconsistentresultsfrompriorsys-
tematic reviews and new studies.24 This systematic review included
only 2 studies reporting diagnostic accuracy in asymptomatic per-
sons at higher risk for celiac disease, due to other autoimmune dis-
orders or family history, and no studies in asymptomatic persons at
average risk. These 2 cross-sectional studies, which were both con-
ducted outside the United States, found lower sensitivity and speci-
ficityforthetTGandEMAIgAtests(sensitivity,57%-71%;specificity,
83%-98%), compared with studies that did not restrict enrollment
to asymptomatic patients. One study was conducted in Iraq among
patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus, no symptoms of celiac dis-
ease,andnofamilyhistoryofceliacdiseaseorthyroiddisorders.Sen-
sitivitywas71%forboththetTGandEMAIgAtestsandspecificitywas
93%forthetTGtestand96%fortheEMAIgAtest.25Thesecondstudy
was conducted in the Czech Republic among children and adoles-
cents at higher risk for celiac disease due to family history or a diag-
nosisoftype1diabetesmellitus.Amongasymptomaticpatients,speci-
ficityandsensitivityofdetectingantitransglutaminaselevelsofmore
than 10 times the upper limit of normal and a positive EMA IgA test
result in patients with a Marsh histologic classification of stage 2 or 3
were67%and83%,respectively.Amongfirst-degreerelativesofpa-
tients with celiac disease (n = 32), specificity was 70% and sensitiv-
ity was 81%. Among patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (n = 40),
specificity was 64% and sensitivity was 93%.26
Effectiveness of Early Detection or Treatment
The USPSTF found no trials or controlled observational studies on
the benefits of screening vs not screening or targeted vs universal
screening in asymptomatic populations.
The USPSTF found no studies on the benefits of treatment of
screen-detected celiac disease compared with treatment initiated
afterclinicaldiagnosis.TheUSPSTFfound1smallfair-qualitytrialon
thebenefitsoftreatmentofscreen-detected,asymptomaticadults
compared with no treatment.27 This study (n = 40) reported that
after 1 year, a gluten-free diet was associated with improvements
in histopathologic findings and small improvements in 3 of 5 gas-
trointestinal symptoms that were statistically but not clinically sig-
nificant (<1 point on a 7-point scale). While there was also improve-
ment in anxiety, no other measures of health-related quality of life
showed improvements, and social functioning was worse in the
groupbeingtreatedwithagluten-freediet.After2years,morethan
90% of participants in the intervention group reported adherence
to the gluten-free diet, but there were no differences between the
2 groups in serology or subjective perception of health as mea-
sured by the visual analog scale.
Potential Harms of Screening or Treatment
The USPSTF found no trials or controlled observational studies on
the harms of screening for celiac disease in asymptomatic popula-
tions.Potentialharmsofscreeningincludefalse-positive,inconclu-
sive, or unnecessary serologic test results and biopsies, with pos-
sible anxiety or complications from testing. However, the USPSTF
found no studies on these harms. A subset of patients with biopsy-
confirmed celiac disease may never develop symptoms; therefore,
overdiagnosis is also a potential concern.2
Onesmallfair-qualitytrialoftreatmentwithagluten-freediet27
reportednowithdrawalsduetomajorsymptomsorcomplications.
TheUSPSTFfoundnootherstudiesontheharmsoftreatmentwith
a gluten-free vs nongluten-free diet in persons with screen-
detected celiac disease.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevidenceontheaccuracyofscreen-
ing for celiac disease in asymptomatic populations. The USPSTF
found inadequate evidence on the potential benefits and harms of
screening vs not screening, as well as targeted vs universal screen-
inginasymptomaticpopulations.TheUSPSTFfoundinadequateevi-
dence on the potential benefits and harms of treatment of screen-
detected celiac disease compared with no treatment or treatment
after clinical diagnosis. Therefore, the USPSTF concludes that the
currentevidenceisinsufficienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsand
harms of screening for celiac disease in asymptomatic persons.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
publiccommentontheUSPSTFwebsitefromMay3toMay30,2016.
Many comments described patients’personal experience of a de-
layeddiagnosisbecauseofatypicalornonspecificsymptoms.Inre-
sponse, the USPSTF expanded the “Suggestions for Practice”sec-
tion to call attention to the prevalence of nonclassical symptoms,
including anemia and osteoporosis, and delayed diagnosis. An-
other frequently raised concern was the higher risk among rela-
tives of patients with celiac disease and patients with other auto-
immune diseases. The USPSTF revised the “Research Needs and
Gaps”section to emphasize the importance of developing evi-
dence to guide clinical practice for this population.
Recommendations of Others
TheAmericanAcademyofFamilyPhysicianshasconcludedthatthe
currentevidenceisinsufficienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsand
harmsofscreeningforceliacdiseaseinasymptomaticpersons.28The
American College of Gastroenterology recommends that asymp-
tomaticpersonswithafirst-degreerelativewhohasaconfirmeddi-
agnosisofceliacdiseasebeconsideredfortesting.Patientswithtype
1diabetesmellitusshouldbetestedforceliacdiseaseifthereareany
digestivesymptoms,signs,orlaboratoryevidencesuggestiveofce-
liac disease.15
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recom-
mendsofferingserologictestingtopersonswithafirst-degreerela-
tive with celiac disease or persons with type 1 diabetes mellitus or
autoimmune thyroid disease on diagnosis. Serologic testing for
celiac disease should be considered for persons with any of the
following: metabolic bone disorder (reduced bone mineral density
or osteomalacia), unexplained neurologic symptoms (particularly
peripheral neuropathy or ataxia), unexplained subfertility or
recurrent miscarriage, persistently elevated liver enzyme levels
with unknown cause, dental enamel defects, Down syndrome, or
Turner syndrome.16
The North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition recommends testing for celiac dis-
ease in asymptomatic children who have conditions associated
with celiac disease (type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune thyroid-
itis, Down syndrome, Turner syndrome, Williams syndrome,
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Celiac Disease
1256
JAMA
March 28, 2017
Volume 317, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
or selective IgA deficiency) or a first-degree relative with celiac dis-
ease. It recommends testing these children beginning around age
3years,providedtheyhavehadanadequategluten-containingdiet
for at least 1 year prior. It also recommends that asymptomatic,
at-risk children with negative serology findings be considered for
repeat testing.17
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS;
David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J. Curry, PhD;
Michael J. Barry, MD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD,
MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH; Mark Ebell, MD,
MS; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Jessica Herzstein,
MD, MPH; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H.
Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH;
C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD,
MSPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael
Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH;
Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(Barry); Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (Doubeni); University of Georgia,
Athens (Ebell); Virginia Tech Carilion School of
Medicine, Roanoke (Epling); Independent
consultant, Washington, DC (Herzstein); Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps); Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts (Silverstein);
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon);
University of Hawaii, Manoa (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Elisabeth
Kato, MD, MRP (AHRQ), who contributed to the
writing of the manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA
(AHRQ), who assisted with coordination and
editing.
REFERENCES
1. Dubé C, Rostom A, Sy R, et al. The prevalence of
celiac disease in average-risk and at-risk Western
European populations: a systematic review.
Gastroenterology. 2005;128(4)(suppl 1):S57-S67.
2. Chou R, Blazina I, Bougatsos C, Mackey K,
Grusing S, Selph S. Screening for Celiac Disease:
Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force: Evidence Synthesis No. 144. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017.
AHRQ publication 14-05215-EF-1.
3. Green PH, Cellier C. Celiac disease. N Engl J Med.
2007;357(17):1731-1743.
4. Stavropoulos SN, Panagi SG, Goldstein SL,
Mcmahon DJ, Absan H, Neugut AI; Green PHR.
Characteristics of adult celiac disease in the USA:
results of a national survey. Am J Gastroenterol.
2001;96(1):126-131.
5. Chou R, Bougatsos C, Blazina I, Mackey K,
Grusing S, Selph S. Screening for celiac disease:
evidence report and systematic review for the US
Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001
/jama.2016.10395
6. Tursi A, Elisei W, Giorgetti GM, Brandimarte G,
Aiello F. Complications in celiac disease under
gluten-free diet. Dig Dis Sci. 2009;54(10):2175-2182.
7. Tio M, Cox MR, Eslick GD. Meta-analysis: coeliac
disease and the risk of all-cause mortality, any
malignancy and lymphoid malignancy. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther. 2012;35(5):540-551.
8. Rampertab SD, Pooran N, Brar P, Singh P,
Green PH. Trends in the presentation of celiac
disease. Am J Med. 2006;119(4):355.e9-355.e14.
9. Green PH. The many faces of celiac disease:
clinical presentation of celiac disease in the
adult population. Gastroenterology. 2005;128(4)
(suppl 1):S74-S78.
10. Rubio-Tapia A, Kyle RA, Kaplan EL, et al.
Increased prevalence and mortality in undiagnosed
celiac disease. Gastroenterology. 2009;137(1):88-93.
11. Catassi C, Kryszak D, Bhatti B, et al. Natural
history of celiac disease autoimmunity in a USA
cohort followed since 1974. Ann Med. 2010;42(7):
530-538.
12. Godfrey JD, Brantner TL, Brinjikji W, et al.
Morbidity and mortality among older individuals
with undiagnosed celiac disease. Gastroenterology.
2010;139(3):763-769.
13. Fasano A, Berti I, Gerarduzzi T, et al. Prevalence
of celiac disease in at-risk and not-at-risk groups in
the United States: a large multicenter study. Arch
Intern Med. 2003;163(3):286-292.
14. Murray JA. Celiac disease in patients with an
affected member, type 1 diabetes, iron-deficiency,
or osteoporosis? Gastroenterology. 2005;128(4)
(suppl 1):S52-S56.
15. Rubio-Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, Calderwood AH,
Murray JA; American College of Gastroenterology.
ACG clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management
of celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2013;108(5):
656-676.
16. Richey R, Howdle P, Shaw E, Stokes T; Guideline
Development Group. Recognition and assessment
of coeliac disease in children and adults: summary
of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2009;338:b1684.
17. Hill ID, Dirks MH, Liptak GS, et al; North
American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Nutrition. Guideline for the
diagnosis and treatment of celiac disease in
children: recommendations of the North American
Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology
and Nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2005;
40(1):1-19.
18. Mäki M, Mustalahti K, Kokkonen J, et al.
Prevalence of Celiac disease among children in
Finland. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(25):2517-2524.
19. van Koppen EJ, Schweizer JJ, Csizmadia CG,
et al. Long-term health and quality-of-life
consequences of mass screening for childhood
celiac disease: a 10-year follow-up study. Pediatrics.
2009;123(4):e582-e588.
20. Fasano A, Catassi C. Clinical practice: celiac
disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(25):2419-2426.
21. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases. Celiac disease. https://www.niddk
.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases
/celiac-disease. Accessed January 24, 2017.
22. Fasano A. Clinical presentation of celiac disease
in the pediatric population. Gastroenterology.
2005;128(4)(suppl 1):S68-S73.
23. Ludvigsson JF, Leffler DA, Bai JC, et al. The Oslo
definitions for coeliac disease and related terms. Gut.
2013;62(1):43-52.
24. Maglione MA, Okunogbe A, Ewing B, et al.
Diagnosis of Celiac Disease. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016. AHRQ
publication 15(16)-EHC032-EF.
25. Mansour AA, Najeeb AA. Coeliac disease in Iraqi
type 1 diabetic patients. Arab J Gastroenterol. 2011;
12(2):103-105.
26. Nevoral J, Kotalova R, Hradsky O, et al.
Symptom positivity is essential for omitting biopsy
in children with suspected celiac disease according
to the new ESPGHAN guidelines. Eur J Pediatr.
2013;173:497-502.
27. Kurppa K, Paavola A, Collin P, et al. Benefits of
a gluten-free diet for asymptomatic patients with
serologic markers of celiac disease. Gastroenterology.
2014;147(3):610-617.e1.
28. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive services recommendations.
http://www.aafp.org/patient-care/browse
/type.tag-clinical-preventive-services
-recommendations.html. Accessed
January 24, 2017.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Celiac Disease
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 28, 2017
Volume 317, Number 12
1257
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
