 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Screening for Thyroid Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation
Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
Itbasesitsrecommendationsontheevidenceofboththeben-
efits and harms of the service and an assessment of the balance.
The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a service in
this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends against screening for thyroid cancer in
asymptomatic adults (D recommendation) (Figure 1).
Rationale
Importance
In2013,theincidencerateofthyroidcancerintheUnitedStateswas
15.3 cases per 100 000 persons, which represents a significant in-
crease from 1975, when the incidence rate was 4.9 cases per
100 000persons.1Theincreaseinthyroidcancerincidencewas6.7%
IMPORTANCE The incidence of thyroid cancer detection has increased by 4.5% per year over
the last 10 years, faster than for any other cancer, but without a corresponding change in the
mortality rate. In 2013, the incidence rate of thyroid cancer in the United States was 15.3 cases
per 100 000 persons. Most cases of thyroid cancer have a good prognosis; the 5-year
survival rate for thyroid cancer overall is 98.1%.
OBJECTIVE To update the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation on
screening for thyroid cancer.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the benefits and harms of
screening for thyroid cancer in asymptomatic adults, the diagnostic accuracy of screening
(including neck palpation and ultrasound), and the benefits and harms of treatment of
screen-detected thyroid cancer.
FINDINGS The USPSTF found inadequate direct evidence on the benefits of screening
but determined that the magnitude of the overall benefits of screening and treatment
can be bounded as no greater than small, given the relative rarity of thyroid cancer,
the apparent lack of difference in outcomes between patients who are treated
vs monitored (for the most common tumor types), and observational evidence
showing no change in mortality over time after introduction of a mass screening program.
The USPSTF found inadequate direct evidence on the harms of screening but determined
that the overall magnitude of the harms of screening and treatment can be bounded as at
least moderate, given adequate evidence of harms of treatment and indirect evidence that
overdiagnosis and overtreatment are likely to be substantial with population-based
screening. The USPSTF therefore determined that the net benefit of screening
for thyroid cancer is negative.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends against screening for
thyroid cancer in asymptomatic adults. (D recommendation)
JAMA. 2017;317(18):1882-1887. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.4011
Editorial page 1840
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 1888
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page
1906
Related articles at
jamainternalmedicine.com
jamaotolaryngology.com
jamasurgery.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
1882
JAMA
May 9, 2017
Volume 317, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
per year from 1997 to 2009, but the rate of increase has slowed to
2.1%peryearinrecentyears(2009-2013).1Meanwhile,thechangein
mortalityratehasincreasedbyonlyabout0.7deathsper100000per-
sonseachyear.1Mostcasesofthyroidcancerhaveagoodprognosis.2
The5-yearsurvivalrateforthyroidcanceroverallis98.1%andvaries
from 99.9% for localized disease to 55.3% for distant disease.3
Detection
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence to estimate the accuracy
of neck palpation or ultrasound as a screening test for thyroid can-
cer in asymptomatic persons.
Benefits of Early Detection and Treatment
TheUSPSTFfoundinadequatedirectevidencetodeterminewhether
screening for thyroid cancer in asymptomatic persons using neck
palpation or ultrasound improves health outcomes. However, the
USPSTFdeterminedthatthemagnitudeofbenefitcanbebounded
as no greater than small, based on the relative rarity of thyroid
cancer, the apparent lack of difference in outcomes between pa-
tients who are treated vs only monitored (ie, for the most common
tumor types), and the observational evidence demonstrating no
change in mortality over time after introduction of a population-
based screening program.
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Thyroid Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 9, 2017
Volume 317, Number 18
1883
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
The USPSTF found inadequate direct evidence to assess the
harms of screening for thyroid cancer in asymptomatic persons.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence to bound the magnitude of
the overall harms of screening and treatment as at least moderate,
based on adequate evidence of serious harms of treatment of thy-
roidcancerandevidencethatoverdiagnosisandovertreatmentare
likely consequences of screening.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that screening for
thyroid cancer in asymptomatic persons results in harms that out-
weigh the benefits.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to screening in asymptomatic adults
(Figure 2). It does not apply to persons who experience hoarse-
ness, pain, difficulty swallowing, or other throat symptoms or per-
sonswhohavelumps,swelling,asymmetryoftheneck,orotherrea-
sons for a neck examination. It also does not apply to persons at
increased risk of thyroid cancer because of a history of exposure to
ionizing radiation (eg, medical treatment or radiation fallout), par-
ticularly persons with a diet low in iodine, an inherited genetic syn-
dromeassociatedwiththyroidcancer(eg,familialadenomatouspol-
yposis), or a first-degree relative with a history of thyroid cancer.4,5
Assessment of Risk
Although the USPSTF recommends against screening in the gen-
eralasymptomaticadultpopulation,severalfactorssubstantiallyin-
creasetheriskforthyroidcancer,includingahistoryofradiationex-
posure to the head and neck as a child, exposure to radioactive
fallout,familyhistoryofthyroidcancerinafirst-degreerelative,and
certain genetic conditions, such as familial medullary thyroid can-
cer or multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome (type 2A or 2B).4
Screening Tests
Although screening for thyroid cancer using neck palpation and ul-
trasound of the thyroid has been studied, the USPSTF recommends
against screening in the general asymptomatic adult population.
Treatment and Interventions
Surgery(ie,totalorpartialthyroidectomy,withorwithoutlymphad-
enectomy) is the main treatment of thyroid cancer. Additional treat-
ment,includingradioactiveiodinetherapy,maybeindicated,depend-
ingonpostoperativediseasestatus,tumorstage,andtypeofthyroid
cancer. External-beam radiation therapy and chemotherapy are not
generally used to treat early-stage, differentiated thyroid cancer.
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
The USPSTF found no direct studies that compared screened
vs unscreened populations or immediate surgery vs surveillance or
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Screening for Thyroid Cancer
Population
Asymptomatic adults
Recommendation 
Do not screen for thyroid cancer.
Grade: D
Risk Assessment 
Screening Tests 
Treatment
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.
Factors that substantially increase the risk for thyroid cancer include a history of radiation exposure to the head and neck as a child,
exposure to radioactive fallout, family history of thyroid cancer in a first-degree relative, and certain genetic conditions, such as
familial medullary thyroid cancer or multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome (type 2A or 2B).
Evidence is inadequate to estimate the accuracy of neck palpation or ultrasound of the thyroid as screening tests for thyroid
cancer in asymptomatic persons.
Surgery (ie, total or partial thyroidectomy, with or without lymphadenectomy) is the main treatment for thyroid cancer.
Additional treatment, including radioactive iodine therapy, may be indicated, depending on postoperative disease status,
tumor stage, and type of thyroid cancer. External-beam radiation therapy and chemotherapy are not generally used to treat
early-stage, differentiated thyroid cancer.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that screening for thyroid cancer in asymptomatic persons results in harms
that outweigh the benefits.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Thyroid Cancer
1884
JAMA
May 9, 2017
Volume 317, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
observation and reported health outcomes (ie, morbidity, mortality,
quality of life, or harms). Trials or well-designed observational stud-
iesthataddressthebenefitofscreeninginhigh-riskpersons(ie,per-
sonswithahistoryofradiationorfamilyhistoryofdifferentiatedthy-
roidcancer)areimportantforunderstandinghowtobestadvisethese
patients. Trials or well-designed observational studies of early treat-
ment vs surveillance or observation of patients with small, well-
differentiated thyroid cancer are also needed to identify patients at
greatest risk for clinical deterioration. Risk prediction tools and mo-
lecular markers are needed to help understand the prognosis of dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
An estimated 637 115 persons in the United States were living with
thyroid cancer in 2013, according to data from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results Program.3 In 2017, an estimated
56 870 new cases of thyroid cancer will be diagnosed, represent-
ing3.4%ofallnewcancercasesintheUnitedStates,and2010thy-
roidcancer–relateddeathswilloccur(0.3%ofallcancerdeaths);the
highestpercentageofdeathswilloccuramongadultsaged75to84
years (27.5%). The incidence of thyroid cancer detection has in-
creased by 4.5% per year over the last 10 years, faster than for any
other cancer, but without a corresponding change in the mortality
rate, which remained at 0.5 deaths per 100 000 persons in 2013.6
The estimated 5-year survival rate is 98% but ranges from 99% for
localized disease (68% of cancer cases at diagnosis) to 55% for dis-
tant disease (4% of cancer cases at diagnosis).3,6
Scope of Review
To update its 1996 recommendation, the USPSTF commissioned a
systematic evidence review5,7 to examine the benefits and harms
of screening for thyroid cancer in asymptomatic adults. The review
also assessed the diagnostic accuracy of screening (including neck
palpation and ultrasound) and the benefits and harms of treat-
mentofscreen-detectedthyroidcancer,whichwerenotpartofthe
previous evidence review.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
Evidenceontheaccuracyofscreeningforthyroidcancerusingneck
palpation or ultrasound is limited, with only 2 applicable studies for
eachscreeningmethod,allofwhichcomparedthescreeningmethod
with a reference standard in a screening population. Two fair-
quality prospective studies from Finland by the same investigator
reported low sensitivity for neck palpation to detect thyroid
nodules.8,9 In a study of randomly selected adults (n = 253), 5.1%
had abnormal findings on neck examination (thyroid nodule or dif-
fuse enlargement), and sensitivity and specificity to detect thyroid
noduleswere11.6%(95%CI,5.1%-21.6%)and97.3%(95%CI,93.8%-
99.1%), respectively.7,8 One study of women presenting for mam-
mography (n = 101) reported sensitivity of 27.8% for neck palpa-
tiontodetectthyroidnodulesinwomenwithanabnormalultrasound
finding(womenwithnegativeneckpalpationfindingswerenotfol-
lowed up, so the false-positive rate could not be estimated).7,9
Two fair-quality population-based studies, both conducted in
SouthKoreabythesameinvestigator,reportedondiagnosticaccu-
racy of screening using ultrasound only.10,11 The prospective study
(n = 2079 screened; 113 referred for biopsy with fine-needle aspi-
ration) found that the sensitivity and specificity of having 1 or more
malignant features (ie, microcalcification or irregular shape) de-
tected on screening ultrasound were 94.3% (95% CI, 84.3%-
98.8%) and 55.0% (95% CI, 41.6%-67.9%), respectively. A retro-
spective analysis of 130 asymptomatic adults selected from 1009
patients who had biopsy with fine-needle aspiration, based on ul-
trasound findings (ie, having �2 high-risk sonographic characteris-
tics), reported sensitivity and specificity of 94.8% and 86.6%, re-
spectively(calculatedperthyroidnoduleratherthanperpatient;CIs
not provided). However, this study did not follow up patients with
negative ultrasound findings and therefore may have overesti-
mated the sensitivity of this screening method.
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
No studies directly compared patient health outcomes for
screened vs unscreened populations. No randomized trials evalu-
ated whether earlier treatment or treatment of screen-detected,
well-differentiatedthyroidcancerresultsinbetterpatientoutcomes
compared with observation (ie, delayed or no treatment).5 Two
observationalstudies(reportedin5articles12-16)mettheinclusioncri-
teriaforbenefitofearlytreatment.Onefair-quality,retrospective,ob-
servational study using Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
data from 1973 to 2005 compared survival rates of persons treated
(n = 35 663) vs not treated (n = 440) for papillary thyroid cancer.12
Overall,untreatedpersonshadaslightlyworse20-yearsurvivalrate
compared with treated persons (97% vs 99%; P < .001). However,
there were statistically significant baseline differences between the
2 groups, and the study did not adjust for potential confounding.
Another fair-quality prospective study conducted in Japan re-
portedtherecurrenceandsurvivalratesfor2separatecohorts(1993-
2004and2005-2013)withpapillarymicrocarcinoma.13-16Inthefirst
cohort, 1055 persons chose treatment with immediate surgery and
340 opted for surveillance. After approximately 6 years of follow-
up, 32.1% of patients who opted for surveillance had surgery, and 2
patients in the immediate surgery group and none in the observa-
tiongrouphaddied.Inthesecondcohort,974personsoptedfortreat-
ment with immediate surgery, and 1179 opted for active surveil-
lance. After approximately 4 years of follow-up, 8% of patients who
opted for active surveillance had surgery, and no patients in either
group developed distant metastases or died of thyroid cancer.
Becauseofmajorlimitationsinthedesignofbothstudies(eg,lackof
adjustmentforconfounding),itisuncertainwhetherearlierorimme-
diate treatment vs delayed or no surgical treatment improves pa-
tient outcomes for papillary carcinoma or microcarcinoma.
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
No studies directly examined the harms of screening for thyroid
cancer using neck palpation or ultrasound. Overall, evidence
on the harms of screening for thyroid cancer is very limited, in-
cluding harms of diagnostic biopsy with fine-needle aspiration
(eg, hospitalization, postprocedural hematoma, and needle tract
implementation).5,17,18TheUSPSTFfound36fair-qualitystudiesre-
porting on surgical harms, 32 studies on permanent hypoparathy-
roidism (hypocalcemia), 28 studies on permanent recurrent laryn-
gealnervepalsy(vocalcordparalysis),2studiesonsurgicalmortality,
and15studiesonothermajorsurgicalharms.7Themajorityofstudies
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Thyroid Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 9, 2017
Volume 317, Number 18
1885
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
were retrospective observational studies, although 3 randomized
trials were included. Cohort size ranged from 76 to 13 854 persons.
Only 7 studies were conducted in the United States.
Considerable evidence has documented the harms of treat-
ment with surgery and radioactive iodine therapy. The rate of per-
manent hypoparathyroidism varied widely (15 study groups); best
estimateswere2to6eventsper100totalthyroidectomies,andes-
timates varied more with lymph node dissection. The rate of per-
manentrecurrentlaryngealnervepalsyvariedless(14studygroups),
at an estimated 1 to 2 events per 100 operations (with or without
lymphnodedissection).Sixteenfair-qualitystudies(n = 94 823)pro-
videdevidenceforpotentialharmsofradioactiveiodineremnantab-
lationortherapy.7Estimatesofasecondarymalignancyrangedfrom
approximately12to13excesscancersper10 000person-years,7,19,20
andsalivaryglandharms(eg,drymouth)rangedfrom2.3to21events
per 100 persons.7,21-26
Although no direct studies of whether screening causes overdi-
agnosisexist,ecologicalandcross-sectionaldatasuggestthatscreen-
ingforthyroidcancerleadstoanincreaseinincidenceofdiseasewith-
out any resulting change in mortality.5 Multiple studies in the United
States show a rising incidence in thyroid cancer detection over time,
with no corresponding change in the mortality rate.7 The best eco-
logical evidence on the overdiagnosis of thyroid cancer comes from
South Korea, which has had an organized cancer screening program
since1999.27Althoughtheprogramdidnotofficiallyincludescreen-
ingforthyroidcancer,cliniciansfrequentlyofferedthyroidscreening
using ultrasound for a small additional cost. In 2011, the rate of thy-
roid cancer diagnosis was 15 times the rate in 1993, while the thyroid
cancer–specific mortality rate remained stable.27
Autopsystudiesprovideadditionalevidenceonoverdiagnosisof
thyroid cancer. A 2014 review by Lee et al28 summarizes 15 studies
published between 1969 and 2005 on latent thyroid cancer discov-
ered at autopsy. Of the 8619 thyroid glands incidentally obtained at
autopsy,989(11.5%)testedpositiveforpapillarythyroidcarcinoma.
The majority of the tumors were tiny (diameter <1 to 3 mm).
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF found inadequate direct evidence on the benefits of
screening but determined that the magnitude of the overall ben-
efitsofscreeningandtreatmentcanbeboundedasnogreaterthan
small, given the relative rarity of thyroid cancer, the apparent lack
of difference in outcomes between treatment and surveillance
(for the most common tumor types), and observational evidence
showingnochangeinmortalityovertimeafterintroductionofamass
screening program. Similarly, the USPSTF found inadequate direct
evidence on the harms of screening but determined that the mag-
nitude of the overall harms of screening and treatment can be
bounded as at least moderate, given adequate evidence of harms
of treatment and indirect evidence that overdiagnosis and over-
treatmentarelikelytobesubstantialwithpopulation-basedscreen-
ing.Therefore,theUSPSTFdeterminedwithmoderatecertaintythat
the net benefit of screening for thyroid cancer is negative.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted
for public comment on the USPSTF website from November 22 to
December26,2016.Manyrespondentssharedpersonalstoriesofhow
their clinician noticed a lump during physical examination, often
prompted by symptoms such as hoarseness or throat pain, and ex-
pressedconcernthattherecommendationwouldpreventdiagnosis
ofsuchcancercases.Clinicianswhointerpretedtherecommendation
as discouraging them from performing neck examination also ex-
pressed concern. In response, the USPSTF expanded the Clinical
Considerationssectiontoclarifythatthisrecommendationdoesnot
applytopersonswhoexperiencehoarseness,pain,difficultyswallow-
ing,orotherthroatsymptomsorpersonswhohavelumps,swelling,
asymmetry of the neck, or to other reasons for a neck examination.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This is an update of the 1996 USPSTF recommendation.29 In 1996,
the USPSTF recommended against screening for thyroid cancer in
asymptomatic adults using either neck palpation or ultrasound
(D recommendation). In addition, using older methodology, the
USPSTF issued a C recommendation for screening in asymptom-
atic adults with a history of radiation of the external upper body
(primarily the head and neck) in infancy or childhood; in 1996,
a C recommendation was defined as “insufficient evidence to rec-
ommend for or against.”The USPSTF focused its current recom-
mendation on the general asymptomatic adult population.
Recommendations of Others
The American Cancer Society does not specifically recommend
screening for thyroid cancer using neck palpation or any other
method.30In1996,theAmericanAcademyofFamilyPhysiciansrec-
ommended against screening for thyroid cancer using neck palpa-
tion or ultrasound in asymptomatic persons.31 The Canadian Task
Force on the Periodic Health Examination does not include exami-
nation of the thyroid in its 2015 Preventive Care Checklist Form.32
The American Thyroid Association33 and the American Association
ofClinicalEndocrinologists,AmericanCollegeofEndocrinology,and
AssociazioneMediciEndocrinologi34issuedguidelinesforthediag-
nosis and management of thyroid nodules in 2016; these guide-
lines included no recommendation on screening for thyroid cancer
in asymptomatic persons.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 27, 2017.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Michael J. Barry, MD; Karina W.
Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD,
MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth,
PhD, RN, MSN, MPH; C. Seth Landefeld, MD;
Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH; Maureen G. Phipps,
MD, MPH; Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A.
Simon, MD, MPH; Albert L. Siu, MD, MSPH;
Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Kaiser
Permanente Washington Health Research Institute,
Seattle (Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City
(Curry); Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts (Barry); Columbia University,
New York, New York (Davidson); University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni); Virginia Tech
Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke (Epling); Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham (Landefeld); University of
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Thyroid Cancer
1886
JAMA
May 9, 2017
Volume 317, Number 18
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
California, Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps); Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts (Silverstein);
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon);
Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York (Siu);
James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Bronx, New York (Siu); Pacific Health Research and
Education Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii (Tseng);
University of Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts
of interest described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
No other disclosures are reported.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Elisabeth
Kato, MD, MRP, and David Niebuhr, MD, MPH, MSc
(AHRQ), who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who
assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al, eds.
SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2013. Bethesda,
MD: National Cancer Institute; 2016, https://seer
.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013/. Accessed March 9, 2017.
2. Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, et al;
American Thyroid Association (ATA) Guidelines
Taskforce on Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated
Thyroid Cancer. Revised American Thyroid
Association management guidelines for patients
with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid
cancer [published correction appears in Thyroid.
2010;20(8):942]. Thyroid. 2009;19(11):1167-1214.
3. National Cancer Institute. Cancer stat facts:
thyroid cancer. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts
/html/thyro.html. Accessed March 9, 2017.
4. American Cancer Society. Thyroid cancer
risk factors. https://www.cancer.org/cancer
/thyroid-cancer/causes-risks-prevention/risk
-factors.html. Accessed March 9, 2017.
5. Lin JS, Aiello Bowles EJ, Williams SB, Morrison CC.
Screeningforthyroidcancer:updatedevidencereport
andsystematicreviewfortheUSPreventiveServices
Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.0562
6. American Cancer Society. Thyroid at a glance.
https://cancerstatisticscenter.cancer.org. Accessed
March 9, 2017.
7. Lin JS, Aiello Bowles EJ, Williams SB, Morrison
CC. Screening for Thyroid Cancer: A Systematic
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 151. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017. AHRQ
publication 15-05221-EF-1.
8. Brander A, Viikinkoski P, Nickels J, Kivisaari L.
Thyroid gland: US screening in a random adult
population. Radiology. 1991;181(3):683-687.
9. Brander A, Viikinkoski P, Nickels J, Kivisaari L.
Thyroid gland: US screening in middle-aged women
with no previous thyroid disease. Radiology. 1989;
173(2):507-510.
10. Kim SJ, Moon WK, Cho N. Sonographic criteria
for fine-needle aspiration cytology in a Korean
female population undergoing thyroid ultrasound
screening. Acta Radiol. 2010;51(5):475-481.
11. Kim JY, Lee CH, Kim SY, et al. Radiologic and
pathologic findings of nonpalpable thyroid
carcinomas detected by ultrasonography in a
medical screening center. J Ultrasound Med. 2008;
27(2):215-223.
12. Davies L, Welch HG. Thyroid cancer survival in
the United States: observational data from 1973 to
2005. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;136
(5):440-444.
13. Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Inoue H, et al. An
observational trial for papillary thyroid
microcarcinoma in Japanese patients. World J Surg.
2010;34(1):28-35.
14. Ito Y, Uruno T, Nakano K, et al. An observation
trial without surgical treatment in patients with
papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid. Thyroid.
2003;13(4):381-387.
15. Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Kihara M, Higashiyama T,
Kobayashi K, Miya A. Patient age is significantly
related to the progression of papillary
microcarcinoma of the thyroid under observation.
Thyroid. 2014;24(1):27-34.
16. Oda H, Miyauchi A, Ito Y, et al. Incidences of
unfavorable events in the management of low-risk
papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid by active
surveillance versus immediate surgery. Thyroid.
2016;26(1):150-155.
17. Ito Y, Tomoda C, Uruno T, et al. Needle tract
implantation of papillary thyroid carcinoma after
fine-needle aspiration biopsy. World J Surg. 2005;
29(12):1544-1549.
18. Abu-Yousef MM, Larson JH, Kuehn DM, Wu AS,
Laroia AT. Safety of ultrasound-guided fine needle
aspiration biopsy of neck lesions in patients taking
antithrombotic/anticoagulant medications.
Ultrasound Q. 2011;27(3):157-159.
19. Brown AP, Chen J, Hitchcock YJ, Szabo A,
Shrieve DC, Tward JD. The risk of second primary
malignancies up to three decades after the
treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93(2):504-515.
20. Iyer NG, Morris LG, Tuttle RM, Shaha AR,
Ganly I. Rising incidence of second cancers in
patients with low-risk (T1N0) thyroid cancer who
receive radioactive iodine therapy. Cancer. 2011;117
(19):4439-4446.
21. Hyer S, Kong A, Pratt B, Harmer C. Salivary
gland toxicity after radioiodine therapy for thyroid
cancer. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2007;19(1):83-86.
22. Ish-Shalom S, Durleshter L, Segal E, Nagler RM.
Sialochemical and oxidative analyses in radioactive
I131-treated patients with thyroid carcinoma. Eur J
Endocrinol. 2008;158(5):677-681.
23. Jeong SY, Kim HW, Lee SW, Ahn BC, Lee J.
Salivary gland function 5 years after radioactive
iodine ablation in patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer: direct comparison of pre- and
postablation scintigraphies and their relation to
xerostomia symptoms. Thyroid. 2013;23(5):609-616.
24. Solans R, Bosch JA, Galofré P, et al. Salivary and
lacrimal gland dysfunction (sicca syndrome) after
radioiodine therapy. J Nucl Med. 2001;42(5):738-743.
25. Grewal RK, Larson SM, Pentlow CE, et al.
Salivary gland side effects commonly develop
several weeks after initial radioactive iodine
ablation. J Nucl Med. 2009;50(10):1605-1610.
26. Ryu CH, Ryu J, Ryu YM, et al. Administration of
radioactive iodine therapy within 1 year after total
thyroidectomy does not affect vocal function.
J Nucl Med. 2015;56(10):1480-1486.
27. Ahn HS, Kim HJ, Welch HG. Korea’
s
thyroid-cancer “
epidemic”—screening and
overdiagnosis. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(19):1765-1767.
28. Lee YS, Lim H, Chang HS, Park CS. Papillary
thyroid microcarcinomas are different from latent
papillary thyroid carcinomas at autopsy. J Korean
Med Sci. 2014;29(5):676-679.
29. US Preventive Services Task Force. Guide to
Clinical Preventive Services. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.
30. American Cancer Society. Can thyroid cancer
be found early? https://www.cancer.org/cancer
/thyroid-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging
/detection.html. Accessed March 9, 2017.
31. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive service recommendation:
thyroid cancer. http://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/thyroid.html. 1996.
Accessed March 9, 2017.
32. Ridley J, Ischayek A, Dubey V, Iglar K. Adult
health checkup: update on the Preventive Care
Checklist Form. Can Fam Physician. 2016;62(4):
307-313.
33. Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al;
American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task
Force on Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated
Thyroid Cancer. 2015 American Thyroid Association
Management Guidelines for Adult Patients With
Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer.
Thyroid. 2016;26(1):1-133.
34. Gharib H, Papini E, Garber JR, et al;
AACE/ACE/AME Task Force on Thyroid Nodules.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists,
American College of Endocrinology, and
Associazione Medici Endocrinologi medical
guidelines for clinical practice for the diagnosis and
management of thyroid nodules—2016 update.
Endocr Pract. 2016;22(5):622-639.
USPSTF Recommendation: Screening for Thyroid Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
May 9, 2017
Volume 317, Number 18
1887
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
