 Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer in the United States. Although
invasive melanoma accounts for only 2% of all skin cancer cases, it is responsible for 80% of
skin cancer deaths. Basal and squamous cell carcinoma, the 2 predominant types of
nonmelanoma skin cancer, represent the vast majority of skin cancer cases.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2012 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on behavioral counseling for the primary prevention of skin cancer and the 2009
recommendation on screening for skin cancer with skin self-examination.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on whether counseling patients about
sun protection reduces intermediate outcomes (eg, sunburn or precursor skin lesions) or skin
cancer; the link between counseling and behavior change, the link between behavior change
and skin cancer incidence, and the harms of counseling or changes in sun protection
behavior; and the link between counseling patients to perform skin self-examination and skin
cancer outcomes, as well as the harms of skin self-examination.
FINDINGS The USPSTF determined that behavioral counseling interventions are of moderate
benefit in increasing sun protection behaviors in children, adolescents, and young adults with
fair skin types. The USPSTF found adequate evidence that behavioral counseling
interventions result in a small increase in sun protection behaviors in adults older than 24
years with fair skin types. The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the benefits and harms
of counseling adults about skin self-examination to prevent skin cancer.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends counseling young adults,
adolescents, children, and parents of young children about minimizing exposure to UV
radiation for persons aged 6 months to 24 years with fair skin types to reduce their risk of skin
cancer. (B recommendation) The USPSTF recommends that clinicians selectively offer
counseling to adults older than 24 years with fair skin types about minimizing their exposure
to UV radiation to reduce risk of skin cancer. Existing evidence indicates that the net benefit
of counseling all adults older than 24 years is small. In determining whether this service is
appropriate in individual cases, patients and clinicians should consider the presence of risk
factors for skin cancer. (C recommendation) The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence
is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of counseling adults about skin
self-examination to prevent skin cancer. (I statement)
JAMA. 2018;319(11):1134-1142. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.1623
Editorial page 1101
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 1143 and
JAMA Patient Page page 1176
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page 1160
Related articles at
jamapediatrics.com
jamadermatology.com
jamaoncology.com
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
1134
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendations about the effectiveness of specific clinical
preventive services for patients without obvious related
signs or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the ben-
efits and harms of the service and an assessment of the balance.
The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a service in
this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
TheUSPSTFrecommendscounselingyoungadults,adolescents,chil-
dren, and parents of young children about minimizing exposure to
UV radiation for persons aged 6 months to 24 years with fair skin
types to reduce their risk of skin cancer (B recommendation)
(Figure 1).
The USPSTF recommends that clinicians selectively offer coun-
seling to adults older than 24 years with fair skin types about mini-
mizingtheirexposuretoUVradiationtoreduceriskofskincancer.Ex-
isting evidence indicates that the net benefit of counseling all adults
olderthan24yearsissmall.Indeterminingwhethercounselingisap-
propriate in individual cases, patients and clinicians should consider
the presence of risk factors for skin cancer. (C recommendation)
See the Clinical Considerations section for information on
risk assessment.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insuffi-
cienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofcounselingadults
about skin self-examination to prevent skin cancer. (I statement)
SeetheClinicalConsiderationssectionforsuggestionsforprac-
tice regarding the I statement.
Rationale
Importance
SkincanceristhemostcommontypeofcancerintheUnitedStates
andisgenerallycategorizedasmelanomaornonmelanomaskincan-
cer.Melanomaisthefifth-leadingtypeofincidentcancer,and2.2%
of adults will be diagnosed with it in their lifetime.1 Although inva-
sivemelanomaaccountsforonly2%ofallskincancercases,itisre-
sponsible for 80% of skin cancer deaths.1 Basal and squamous cell
carcinoma, the 2 predominant types of nonmelanoma skin cancer,
represent the vast majority of skin cancer cases. There were an es-
timated 3.3 million new cases of nonmelanoma skin cancer in 2012
andanestimated91 270newcasesofmelanomaskincancerin2018.1
Recognition of Risk Status
Exposure to UV radiation during childhood and adolescence in-
creases the risk of skin cancer later in life, especially when more se-
veredamageoccurs,suchaswithseveresunburns.Personswithfair
skintypes(ivoryorpaleskin,lighthairandeyecolor,freckles,orthose
whosunburneasily)areatincreasedriskofskincancer.Personswho
use tanning beds and those with a history of sunburns or previous
skin cancer are also at substantially increased risk of skin cancer.
Other factors that further increase risk include an increased num-
ber of nevi (moles) and atypical nevi, family history of skin cancer,
HIVinfection,andhistoryofreceivinganorgantransplant.Moststud-
iesofinterventionstoincreasesunprotectionbehaviorshavebeen
limited to persons with fair skin types.2-4
Benefits of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
Behavioral counseling interventions target sun protection behav-
iors to reduce UV radiation exposure. UV radiation is a known
carcinogen5 that damages DNA and causes most skin cancer
cases.6 A substantial body of observational evidence demonstrates
that the strongest connection between UV radiation exposure and
skin cancer results from exposure in childhood and adolescence.
Sun protection behaviors include the use of broad-spectrum sun-
screen with a sun-protection factor of 15 or greater; wearing hats,
sunglasses, or sun-protective clothing; avoiding sun exposure;
seeking shade during midday hours (10 AM to 4 PM); and avoiding
indoor tanning bed use.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that behavioral coun-
selinginterventionsavailableinorreferablefromaprimarycareset-
ting result in a moderate increase in the use of sun protection be-
haviors for persons aged 6 months to 24 years with fair skin types.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that behavioral coun-
selinginterventionsavailableinorreferablefromaprimarycareset-
ting result in a small increase in the use of sun protection behaviors
for persons older than 24 years with fair skin types.
The USPSTF found insufficient evidence regarding the ben-
efits of counseling adults about skin self-examination to prevent
skin cancer.
Harms of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethattheharmsrelatedtobe-
havioral counseling interventions and sun protection behaviors in
young persons or adults are small. The USPSTF found inadequate
evidence regarding the harms of counseling adults about skin self-
examination.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that behavioral
counseling interventions have a moderate net benefit for young
adults, adolescents, and children aged 6 months to 24 years with
fair skin types.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that behav-
ioralcounselinginterventionshaveasmallbenefitinadultsolderthan
24 years with fair skin types.
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insuffi-
cienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofcounselingadults
about skin self-examination.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to asymptomatic persons without a
history of skin cancer (Figure 2). Because most trials of skin cancer
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
1135
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 counseling predominantly include persons with fair skin types, the
USPSTF limited its recommendation to this population.
Assessment of Risk
Persons with fair skin types (ivory or pale skin, light eye color,
red or blond hair, freckles, those who sunburn easily) are at
increased risk of skin cancer and should be counseled. Other fac-
tors that further increase risk include a history of sunburns, previ-
ous use of indoor tanning beds, and a family or personal history
of skin cancer. Persons with an increased number of nevi and
atypical nevi are at increased risk of melanoma. Persons with a
compromised immune system (eg, persons living with HIV, per-
sons who have received an organ transplant) are at increased risk
of skin cancer.
Behavioral Counseling Interventions
All studies conducted in children and adolescents focused on
sun protection behaviors; most were directed at parents, and
some provided child-specific materials or messages. Half of the
interventions included face-to-face counseling, and all included
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
1136
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 print materials. Three studies provided the intervention in con-
junction with well-child visits. The majority of studies conducted
in young adults and adults focused on improving sun protection
behaviors, and 2 studies used “appearance-focused”messages.
The mode of delivery varied and included mail-based, face-to-
face or telephone counseling, and technology-based (text mes-
sages, online programs and modules, personal UV facial photo-
graphs) interventions.2
Suggestions for Practice Regarding the I Statement
Potential Preventable Burden
Counseling adults about performing skin self-examination
appears to result in an increase of such examinations. The poten-
tial benefit of behavioral counseling about skin self-examination is
uncertain because of the lack of evidence on the link between
behavior change and skin cancer or other health outcomes. In
addition, there is no evidence about the incremental benefit that
might occur with skin self-examination above the benefit from
counseling for sun protection behaviors and from current levels
of skin examinations being performed by clinicians.
Potential Harms
Skin self-examination is performed by the patient and is noninva-
sive. Psychosocial harms, such as anxiety or cancer worry, are pos-
sible.Ifskinself-examinationleadstobiopsy,proceduralharmssuch
as pain, bleeding, scarring, or infection could occur.7
Current Practice
Thefrequencyofbehavioralcounselingforskinself-examinationin
the asymptomatic population is not well known.
Additional Approaches to Prevention
The Community Preventive Services Task Force recommends
child care center–based, primary and middle school–based, and
multicomponent community-wide interventions for the preven-
tion of skin cancer.8 These interventions combine school- and
community-based communications and policy to increase pre-
ventive behaviors (eg, covering up, using shade, or avoiding
the sun during peak UV hours) among certain populations in spe-
cific settings.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) provides
information to help guide patients and clinicians regarding sun
protection and the use and effectiveness of broad-spectrum
sunscreen.9 The FDA has determined that broad-spectrum sun-
screens with a sun-protection factor of 15 or greater, reapplied at
least every 2 hours, protect against both UVA and UVB radiation
and reduce the risk of skin cancer and early skin aging. The FDA
also provides consumer education materials on the dangers of
indoor tanning.10
The Environmental Protection Agency provides a variety of
educational tools regarding sun safety, including state-specific
information, and interactive widgets and smartphone ap-
plications that forecast UV exposure by zip code or city. It also
provides sun safety fact sheets and handouts, including age-
appropriate materials.11
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
Population
Recommendation 
Young adults, adolescents, children, and
parents of young children with fair skin type
Adults older than 24 years with fair
skin type
Skin self-examination in adults
No recommendation.
Counsel about minimizing exposure to
UV radiation.
Selectively offer counseling about
minimizing exposure to UV radiation. 
Grade: B
Grade: C
Grade: I (insufficient evidence)
Risk Assessment
Behavioral
Counseling
Interventions
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
Ultraviolet radiation exposure during childhood and adolescence increases risk of skin cancer later in life, especially when more severe
damage occurs. Persons with fair skin type (light hair and eye color, freckles, those who sunburn easily) are at increased risk of skin
cancer. Persons who use tanning beds and those with a history of sunburns or previous skin cancer are also at greatly increased risk
of skin cancer. Other factors that increase risk include an increased number of nevi (moles) and atypical nevi, family history of skin
cancer, HIV infection, and history of receiving an organ transplant.
Behavioral counseling interventions target sun protection behaviors to reduce UV radiation exposure, including use of broad-spectrum
sunscreen with a sun-protection factor of 15 or greater; wearing hats, sunglasses, or sun-protective clothing; avoiding sun exposure;
seeking shade during midday hours (10 AM to 4 PM); and avoiding indoor tanning use.
The USPSTF has issued a recommendation on screening for skin cancer in adults.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
1137
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Useful Resources
TheUSPSTFhasissuedarecommendationonscreeningforskincan-
cer in adults.12
Other Considerations
Implementation
Interventions included tailored mailings, print materials, and
in-person counseling by health professionals. Interventions for
children were directed mostly toward parents; some materials
were child-specific. Counseling interventions for children, their
parents, or both provided messages focused on increasing sun
protection behaviors (eg, using sunscreen, avoiding midday sun,
wearing sun-protective clothing). Some print-based interventions
included materials tailored to the child’
s risk level, barriers to
change, self-efficacy, or other factors. Health professionals pro-
viding in-person counseling included primary care clinicians and
health educators.
One trial of an intervention involving children 3 years and
younger used clinician counseling and print materials for parents
promoting child sun protection with sun protection aids (sun-
screen samples and hat).13 Several trials in children aged 3 to 10
years used standard or tailored mailings over 1 to 36 months.14-17
One study also included a DVD in addition to a standard mailing
promoting sun protection. One trial used a 1-day, in-person par-
ent education session with a children’
s video, print materials, and
sun protection aids (shirt, hat, and sunscreen). For the single
study in adolescents, clinicians directly counseled participants,
with 4 follow-up telephone counseling sessions by a health edu-
cator over 18 months; mailed materials and sunscreen samples
were also used.
In the 16 trials among adults, interventions included a variety
of messages and components, conducted in a range of settings.2,4
Technology-based interventions included an interactive web pro-
gram and tailored text messages on sun protection, as well as ap-
pearance-focused print materials. The web program study re-
ported reduced sunburns after the intervention, which provided
information on topics such as indoor tanning, UV radiation expo-
sureandhealth,skincancer,sunscreen,andskinexamination.Each
module took about 10 minutes to complete and included a goal-
setting section. Other interventions that increased sun protection
behaviors in adults included mailed print materials containing per-
sonalizedriskfeedbackandrecommendations,self-monitoringaids
for UV exposure, and skin cancer prevention and detection infor-
mation;individualizedcomputerreports;andaninteractiveeduca-
tional computer program on skin cancer prevention that provided
individual feedback on personal risk of skin cancer.
Research Needs and Gaps
Abetterunderstandingoftheeffectivenessofcounselingontheuse
of sun protection behaviors in adults 25 years and older is needed
to address the key evidence gap on counseling for this age group.
ResearchthatevaluatestheassociationbetweenUVexposuredur-
ing adulthood and skin cancer risk would also be valuable.
In addition, studies regarding the effectiveness of counseling
persons without a fair skin type are lacking. Ideally, research stud-
ies would provide measurements of sun exposure, sunburn, pre-
cursor skin lesions, and cancer among large trial populations, with
anemphasisonbehaviorsandhealthoutcomesamongpersonswho
receive an intervention focused on sun protection behaviors. Such
studies would also assess whether these behaviors continue after
trialcompletion.Thesecohortsshouldincludepopulationswithdi-
verseskincolorsandshouldincludeadolescents,youngadults,and
preschool-aged children and their parents. These studies may be
used to further develop technologies and vehicles for administer-
ing relevant interventions for behavior change in the primary care
setting,especiallyamongnonwhitepersons,youngadults,andper-
sons who practice indoor or outdoor tanning. Further evidence is
needed to assess the balance of benefits and harms of counseling
adults about skin self-examination to prevent skin cancer and pre-
mature death.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer. Melanoma is less
common than basal or squamous cell carcinoma but has a much
higher death rate. In 2018, an estimated 91 270 new cases of mela-
noma are expected, representing 5.2% of all new cancer cases.1 An
estimated 9730 persons will die of the disease, representing 1.6%
of all cancer deaths.18 Although age-adjusted incidence rates have
increased from 1989 to 2014 (from 13.7 to 25.2 cases per 100 000
persons), the death rate has remained fairly stable over the same
period(from2.7to2.6deathsper100 000persons).18Adultsolder
than 50 years; men; and persons with fair skin types are at in-
creasedrisk.Melanomaismostfrequentlydiagnosedamongadults
aged 65 to 74 years; death rates are highest among the middle-
aged and elderly. Melanoma is 5 times more common among His-
panicadultsand25timesmorecommonamongwhitethanAfrican
American adults.18
Nonmelanoma skin cancer, of which most cases are basal and
squamous cell skin cancer, is associated with a substantial burden
to the patient but rarely results in death. Basal cell skin cancer con-
stitutes about 80% of nonmelanoma skin cancer cases, and squa-
mouscellskincancerconstitutesabout20%.6Ingeneral,nonmela-
nomaskincanceraccountsforasmallpercentageofallcancerdeaths,
mostly in older adults or persons with a compromised immune sys-
tem.Anestimated2000personsdiefromnonmelanomaskincan-
cer each year.6 The true prevalence of nonmelanoma skin cancer is
difficult to estimate because it is not a required cancer for registry
entry; an estimated 5.4 million cases were diagnosed in 3.3 million
persons in 2012.6
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review to up-
dateits2012recommendationonbehavioralcounselingforthepri-
marypreventionofskincancer19andits2009recommendationon
screeningforskincancerwithskinself-examination.20Thereview2,4
focusedondirectevidencethatcounselingpatientsaboutsunpro-
tection reduces intermediate outcomes (eg, sunburn or precursor
skin lesions) or skin cancer. The review also sought evidence on the
linkbetweencounselingandbehaviorchange,thelinkbetweenbe-
haviorchangeandskincancerincidence,andtheharmsofcounsel-
ing or changes in sun protection behavior. In addition, the review
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
1138
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 examined evidence regarding counseling patients to perform skin
self-examination and skin cancer outcomes and the harms of skin
self-examination.
Effectiveness of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
to Change Behavior
Manycounselinginterventionswerefoundtobemoderatelyeffec-
tiveinmodifyingsunprotectionbehaviorsamongchildren,adoles-
cents,andyoungadultsbutlesseffectiveinadults.Bothtraditional
cancer prevention and appearance-focused messages (ie, stress-
ing the aging effects of UV radiation on the skin) increased sun pro-
tection behaviors compared with control groups.
Of the 6 trials that evaluated the effect of interventions on sun
protection behaviors among children and adolescents, 5 reported
a statistically significant improvement in parent-reported compos-
ite scores of child sun protection behaviors compared with control
groups.13,15,17,21,22 Four of the 6 trials specifically targeted children
aged 3 to 10 years, 1 trial focused on children from birth to 3 years,
and 1 trial focused on adolescents aged 11 to 15 years. Among the 4
trials in children aged 3 to 10 years, 3 showed statistically signifi-
cant differences in changes in sun protection behavior and sun-
screen use at 3 months to 3 years of follow-up.14-16
A cluster randomized clinical trial13 that provided counseling to
parents of newborns in a series of 4 well-child visits showed statis-
tically significant improvement in composite sun protection scores
in the intervention group. However, most individual measures were
not statistically significant, and it was difficult to determine the
clinical relevance of the small improvements. An in-person counsel-
ing intervention targeting adolescents and involving clinicians
and health educators showed that sun protection scores were
higher in the intervention group than in the control group at 2 years
of follow-up.21
Adequate evidence of the effectiveness of counseling inter-
ventions was found in 2 of the 3 fair-quality trials conducted among
young adults. In a web-based study of 18- to 25-year olds, partici-
pants viewed an interactive 12-module web program featuring
10-minute topics such as indoor tanning, UV exposure and health,
skin cancer, and skin examination.22 At 3 months of follow-up,
there was a significant improvement in past-month UV exposure
and sun protection behaviors, sunscreen use, outdoor tanning, and
skin self-examination. Another study (a randomized clinical trial)
used a video intervention, with or without UV facial photography;
the intervention showed no effect on composite sun protection
scores.23 In the third young adult study, women who used indoor
tanning were given a 24-page booklet that detailed the effects of
UV radiation and indoor tanning and appearance-enhancing alter-
natives to indoor tanning. At 6 months of follow-up, there was a
significantly smaller increase in indoor tanning sessions in the past
3 months in the intervention group than in the control group.24
Evidence of the effectiveness of counseling interventions in
adults older than 24 years is mixed. Six of 12 trials that addressed
sun protection behavior composite scores in adults found an in-
creaseinsuchbehaviorscomparedwithcontrolgroups.2,4Threeof
these interventions promoted sun protection with tailored mail-
ings,2usedinteractiveonlineprograms,and1usedtailoredtextmes-
sages. Four of 7 trials assessing sunscreen use found an increase in
this outcome. Of 3 trials of self-reported indoor tanning behavior,
only1trialusinganappearance-focusedinterventionamongyoung
female adults noted a significant improvement compared with the
control group.24 Effective interventions were more often of longer
durationorhadmorefrequentcontactswithparticipantsduringthe
study period.
Trials of counseling interventions that focused on counseling
patients to perform skin self-examination as a means of reducing
skin cancer risk were inconclusive. A trial with more than 1300 par-
ticipants showed that those who received a skin self-examination
counseling intervention did not have significant differences in
the incidence of skin cancer cases or atypical nevi compared with
those in the control group at 12 months of follow-up.25 Several
studies showed that skin self-examination interventions increase
the likelihood of participants reporting that they perform skin
self-examination.2,4Additionalstudiesareneededtodeterminethe
direct effect of skin self-examination on skin cancer risk.
Link Between Behavior Change and Cancer Risk
Sun Exposure
Total and recreational sun exposure during childhood is associated
with increased melanoma risk. Studies that measured long-term or
totalsunexposureshowedmixedassociationbetweenincreasedsun
exposure and skin cancer risk. Several fair- to good-quality studies
demonstrated a link between adult recreational exposure to UV ra-
diation and increased melanoma risk.3 One large population-based
studyshowedincreasedriskofbothmelanomaincidenceandmela-
noma death with higher quartiles of UV exposure.26 Two recent
meta-analyses and 2 cohort studies also showed an increased risk
ofnonmelanomaskincancerinpersonswithincreasedexposureto
ambient UV radiation.2
Indoor Tanning
Indoor tanning is associated with increased melanoma risk, and
younger age at first indoor tanning exposure increases this risk.27
A meta-analysis provided evidence of a dose-response relationship
between melanoma risk and indoor tanning in women younger
than 50 years.28 Four studies found that increasing indoor tanning
frequency was associated with increased melanoma risk. Two sys-
tematic reviews, 1 cohort study, and 1 case-control study found evi-
dence that having ever used indoor tanning was associated with
increased risk of squamous cell and basal cell carcinoma compared
with never having used indoor tanning.29-32
Sunscreen Use
Two studies in adults provided new evidence of a protective
effect of sunscreen use. One study, which was considered by the
USPSTF for its previous recommendation statement, analyzed
long-term follow-up data from a randomized clinical trial. In this
study, intervention group participants applied sunscreen daily,
while control group participants continued their usual behavior.
At 4.5 years, the intervention group had a decreased risk of squa-
mous cell carcinoma.33 Ten years after conclusion of the trial, the
intervention group had half as many incident melanomas as the
control group. Overall, melanoma risk was reduced in the inter-
vention group compared with the control group and was most
pronounced for invasive melanoma compared with in situ
melanoma.34 A large US case-control study also demonstrated a
lower likelihood of melanoma in persons routinely using sun-
screen compared with those who do not.29
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
1139
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Skin Self-Examination and Health Outcomes
Evidence on the effectiveness of skin self-examination in reducing
death or illness is lacking. One 20-year follow-up study showed no
associationbetweenskinself-examinationandskincancerdeath.35
Potential Harms of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
Potential harms of interventions promoting sun protection
behaviors include skin reactions to sunscreen lotion, vitamin D
deficiency, reduced physical activity due to avoiding the out-
doors, and a paradoxical increase in sun exposure from a false
reassurance of protection from sunscreen use. Sunscreen use can
be associated with numerous transient skin reactions, including
allergic, irritant, and photoallergic contact dermatitis. Although
vitamin D deficiency is a hypothetical harm of sun avoidance,
recent studies have not shown an association between sunscreen
use and decreased vitamin D levels. Among the sparse evidence
available, 1 study suggested that sun protection behaviors do not
lead to decreased physical activity or increased body mass
index.36 Older studies reported that sunscreen use did not result
in an intentional increase in sun exposure, but 2 recent studies
showed that sunscreen use was associated with higher likelihood
of multiple sunburns.37,38
Persons who performed skin self-examination were more
likely to subsequently undergo a skin procedure compared with
those who did not, as evidenced by 1 trial, indicating a potential
harm of skin self-examination. Although melanoma death rates
have remained stable, the increasing number of skin biopsies and
rising melanoma incidence over recent decades provide evidence
for overdiagnosis.39
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF determined that behavioral counseling interventions
areofmoderatebenefitinincreasingsunprotectionbehaviorsinchil-
dren, adolescents, and young adults with fair skin types. The link of
behaviorchangetooutcomesissupportedbyseveraltrialsandasub-
stantialbodyofobservationalevidenceshowingthatthestrongest
connection between UV radiation exposure and skin cancer stems
from exposure in childhood and adolescence. Evidence of a con-
nection between sun exposure in adulthood and melanoma is less
robustthaninchildhood.TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethat
theharmsrelatedtocounselingorsunprotectionbehaviorsaresmall.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net ben-
efit of counseling to decrease UV exposure and reduce skin cancer
risk is moderate in children, adolescents, and young adults aged 6
months to 24 years.
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that behavioral coun-
seling interventions result in a small increase in sun protection be-
haviors in adults older than 24 years. The harms of counseling are
small. The USPSTF determined that the evidence supporting a link
between decreased UV exposure in adulthood and skin cancer risk
is adequate. The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that
the net benefit of counseling to decrease UV exposure and reduce
skin cancer risk is small in adults older than 24 years.
The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on the benefits and
harmsofcounselingadultsaboutskinself-examinationtopreventskin
cancer. Therefore, the USPSTF concludes that the current evidence
isinsufficienttoassessthebalanceofbenefitsandharmsofcounsel-
ing adults about skin self-examination to prevent skin cancer.
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
UV radiation from both solar and artificial sources has been classi-
fied as a human carcinogen by national and international organi-
zations. Epidemiologic evidence suggests that the effect of UV
radiation exposure from typical doses of sunlight varies over the
life span, with some evidence of a window of biological vulner-
ability in childhood and adolescence that translates into increased
skin cancer risk later in life. Much of the available evidence con-
cerns the most common skin lesions, nonmalignant neoplasia and
basal cell and squamous cell cancer. It remains unclear whether
the same mechanisms apply to melanoma risk. For all 3 types of
cancer, increasing intermittent or recreational sun exposure and
total sun exposure are linked to increased risk. Artificial UV radia-
tion, specifically indoor tanning, is also associated with an
increased risk of skin cancer. Indoor tanning before age 35 years,
for more than 10 tanning sessions over a lifetime, and for longer
than 1 year have been linked to increased cancer risk.
Response to Public Comments
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from October 10 to
November 6, 2017. In response to public comments, the USPSTF
clarified the definition of fair skin type for the purposes of this rec-
ommendation. Comments requested more details about the
behavioral counseling interventions, and the USPSTF provided
additional information on implementation strategies. Several com-
ments requested clarification about why skin self-examination is
included in this recommendation; the USPSTF clarified that this
recommendation addresses several preventive counseling inter-
ventions, including evidence about primary care clinicians counsel-
ing patients to perform skin self-examination. The USPSTF also
added suggestions for practice regarding the I statement, informa-
tion on newer technologies, and further information on the evi-
dence for the different age ranges in the recommendations.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation replaces the 2012 USPSTF recommenda-
tion on counseling about skin cancer prevention19 and the
skin self-examination portion of the 2009 USPSTF recommenda-
tion on screening for skin cancer.20 In this updated recommenda-
tion, the USPSTF expanded the age range for behavioral counsel-
ing interventions to include persons aged 6 months to 24 years
with fair skin types (the previous recommendation applied to per-
sons aged 10 to 24 years, based on the evidence available at that
time). Recent studies in children younger than 10 years resulted
in the USPSTF extending the lower end of the age range to 6
months, the minimum age recommended for sunscreen use.
Based on additional evidence since the prior recommendation,
the USPSTF now also recommends that clinicians consider selec-
tively offering counseling to adults older than 24 years with fair
skin types. As in 2012, the evidence on persons without a fair skin
type remains insufficient for this population to be included in the
recommendation statement. The evidence continues to be insuf-
ficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of counseling
adults about skin self-examination to prevent skin cancer, as it
was in 2009.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
1140
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Recommendations of Others
TheUSSurgeonGeneral,40AmericanCancerSociety,41AmericanCol-
lege of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,42 American Academy of
Pediatrics,43RoyalAustralianCollegeofGeneralPractitioners,44and
the World Health Organization’
s International Agency for Research
onCancer45endorsetheinvolvementofcliniciansincounselingpa-
tients about skin cancer prevention.
The Community Preventive Services Task Force recommends
education and policy approaches to encourage sun protection be-
haviors in child care centers, schools, recreational sites, and occu-
pational settings. In addition, it recommends community-wide
interventionsthatmayormaynotinvolvehealthcaresettingstoin-
crease protection behavior from UV radiation. Interventions in-
cludemassmediacampaignsandenvironmentalandpolicychanges
across multiple settings within a defined geographic area or an en-
tire community.8
The American Academy of Dermatology encourages everyone
toperformskinself-examinationtocheckforsignsofskincancer.46
The American Cancer Society47 and the Skin Cancer Foundation48
recommend monthly skin self-examination.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Corresponding Author: David C. Grossman, MD,
MPH (chair@uspstf.net)
Accepted for Publication: February 8, 2018.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS; Michael J.
Barry, MD; Aaron B. Caughey, MD, PhD; Karina W.
Davidson, PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD,
MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Martha
Kubik, PhD, RN; Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M.
Mangione, MD, MSPH; Michael Silverstein, MD,
MPH; Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH; Chien-Wen
Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System,
Palo Alto, California (Owens); Stanford University,
Stanford, California (Owens); Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts (Barry); Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland (Caughey);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (Doubeni); Virginia Tech Carilion
School of Medicine, Roanoke (Epling); Nationwide
Children’
s Hospital, Columbus, Ohio (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (Kubik); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon); University of
Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific Health Research
and Education Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Grossman had full
access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org
/Page/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
All members of the USPSTF receive travel
reimbursement and an honorarium for
participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Ernest
Sullivent, MD, MPH (AHRQ), who contributed
to the writing of the manuscript, and Lisa
Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who assisted with
coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures
2017. https://www.cancer.org/research/cancer
-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer
-facts-figures-2017.html. Accessed
February 2, 2018.
2. Henrikson NB, Morrison CC, Blasi PR, Nguyen M,
Shibuya KC, Patnode CD. Behavioral Counseling for
Skin Cancer Prevention: A Systematic Evidence
Review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 161. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2018. AHRQ
publication 17-05234-EF-1.
3. Centers for Disease Control. Skin cancer: what
are the risks for skin cancer? https://www.cdc.gov
/cancer/skin/basic_info/risk_factors.htm. Accessed
January 31, 2018.
4. Henrikson NB, Morrison CC, Blasi PR, Nguyen M,
Shibuya KC, Patnode CD. Behavioral counseling for
skin cancer prevention: evidence report and
systematic review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force [published online March 20, 2018]. JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2017.21630
5. International Agency for Research on Cancer.
IARC Monograph on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic
Risks to Humans. Vol 100. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization Press; 2012.
6. American Cancer Society. About basal and
squamous cell skin cancer. https://www.cancer.org
/cancer/basal-and-squamous-cell-skin-cancer
/about.html. Accessed February 2, 2018.
7. Abhishek K, Khunger N. Complications of skin
biopsy. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2015;8(4):239-241.
8. Community Preventive Services Task Force.
Community-wide interventions to prevent skin
cancer: recommendation of the Community
Preventive Services Task Force. Am J Prev Med.
2016;51(4):540-541.
9. US Food and Drug Administration. Sunscreen:
how to help protect your skin from the sun.
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou
/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely
/UnderstandingOver-the-CounterMedicines
/ucm239463.htm. Accessed February 2, 2018.
10. US Food and Drug Administration. Indoor
tanning: the risks of ultraviolet rays.
https://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers
/ConsumerUpdates/ucm186687.htm. Accessed
February 2, 2018.
11. US Environmental Protection Agency. Sun
safety. https://www.epa.gov/sunsafety. Accessed
February 2, 2018.
12. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al; US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for skin cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA. 2016;316(4):
429-435.
13. Crane LA, Deas A, Mokrohisky ST, et al.
A randomized intervention study of sun protection
promotion in well-child care. Prev Med. 2006;42
(3):162-170.
14. Crane LA, Asdigian NL, Barón AE, et al. Mailed
intervention to promote sun protection of children:
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Prev Med. 2012;
43(4):399-410.
15. Gritz ER, Tripp MK, Peterson SK, et al.
Randomized controlled trial of a sun protection
intervention for children of melanoma survivors.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013;22(10):
1813-1824.
16. Glasser A, Shaheen M, Glenn BA, Bastani R.
The Sun Sense study: an intervention to improve
sun protection in children. Am J Health Behav.
2010;34(4):500-510.
17. Glanz K, Steffen AD, Schoenfeld E, et al.
Randomized trial of tailored skin cancer prevention
for children: the Project SCAPE family study.
J Health Commun. 2013;18(11):1368-1383.
18. National Cancer Institute. Cancer Stat Facts:
melanoma of the skin. https://seer.cancer.gov
/statfacts/html/melan.html. Accessed
February 2, 2018.
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
1141
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 19. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling to prevent skin cancer: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(1):59-65.
20. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for skin cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2009;150(3):188-193.
21. Norman GJ, Adams MA, Calfas KJ, et al.
A randomized trial of a multicomponent
intervention for adolescent sun protection
behaviors. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2007;161(2):
146-152.
22. Heckman CJ, Darlow SD, Ritterband LM,
Handorf EA, Manne SL. Efficacy of an intervention
to alter skin cancer risk behaviors in young adults.
Am J Prev Med. 2016;51(1):1-11.
23. Mahler HI, Kulik JA, Gerrard M, Gibbons FX.
Long-term effects of appearance-based
interventions on sun protection behaviors.
Health Psychol. 2007;26(3):350-360.
24. Hillhouse J, Turrisi R, Stapleton J,
Robinson J. A randomized controlled trial of an
appearance-focused intervention to prevent
skin cancer. Cancer. 2008;113(11):3257-3266.
25. Weinstock MA, Risica PM, Martin RA, et al.
Melanoma early detection with thorough skin
self-examination: the “
Check It Out”randomized
trial. Am J Prev Med. 2007;32(6):517-524.
26. Lin SW, Wheeler DC, Park Y, et al. Prospective
study of ultraviolet radiation exposure and risk of
cancer in the United States. Int J Cancer. 2012;131
(6):E1015-E1023.
27. Boniol M, Autier P, Boyle P, Gandini S.
Cutaneous melanoma attributable to sunbed use:
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012;
345:e4757.
28. Veierød MB, Adami HO, Lund E, Armstrong BK,
Weiderpass E. Sun and solarium exposure and
melanoma risk: effects of age, pigmentary
characteristics, and nevi. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19(1):111-120.
29. Lazovich D, Vogel RI, Berwick M, Weinstock
MA, Warshaw EM, Anderson KE. Melanoma risk in
relation to use of sunscreen or other sun protection
methods. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011;
20(12):2583-2593.
30. Veierod MB, Couto E, Lund E, et al. Host
characteristics, sun exposure, indoor tanning and
risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Int J
Cancer. 2014;135(2):413-422.
31. Wehner MR, Shive ML, Chren MM, et al. Indoor
tanning and non-melanoma skin cancer: systematic
review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012;345:e5909.
32. Ferrucci LM, Vogel RI, Cartmel B, et al. Indoor
tanning in businesses and homes and risk of
melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer in 2 US
case-control studies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71
(5):882-887.
33. Green A, Williams G, Neale R, et al. Daily
sunscreen application and betacarotene
supplementation in prevention of basal-cell
and squamous-cell carcinomas of the skin:
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 1999;354
(9180):723-729.
34. Green AC, Williams GM, Logan V, Strutton GM.
Reduced melanoma after regular sunscreen use:
randomized trial follow-up. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(3):
257-263.
35. Paddock LE, Lu SE, Bandera EV, et al. Skin
self-examination and long-term melanoma survival.
Melanoma Res. 2016;26(4):401-408.
36. Milne E, Simpson JA, Johnston R, Giles-Corti B,
English DR. Time spent outdoors at midday and
children’
s body mass index. Am J Public Health.
2007;97(2):306-310.
37. Linos E, Keiser E, Fu T, et al. Hat, shade, long
sleeves, or sunscreen? rethinking US sun protection
messages based on their relative effectiveness.
Cancer Causes Control. 2011;22(7):1067-1071.
38. Koster B, Thorgaard C, Philip A, et al.
Prevalence of sunburn and sun-related behaviour
in the Danish population: a cross-sectional study.
Scand J Public Health. 2010;38(5):548-552.
39. Weinstock MA, Lott JP, Wang Q, et al. Skin
biopsy utilization and melanoma incidence among
Medicare beneficiaries. Br J Dermatol. 2017;176(4):
949-954.
40. US Department of Health and Human Services.
The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent
Skin Cancer. Washington, DC: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon
General; 2014.
41. American Cancer Society. Skin cancer
prevention and early detection. https://www.cancer
.org/cancer/skin-cancer/prevention-and-early
-detection.html. Accessed February 2, 2018.
42. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Committee opinion no. 626: the
transition from pediatric to adult health care:
preventive care for young women aged 18-26 years.
Obstet Gynecol. 2015;125(3):752-754.
43. Balk SJ; Section on Dermatology, Council on
Environmental Health. Ultraviolet radiation:
a hazard to children and adolescents. Pediatrics.
2011;127(3):588-597.
44. Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners. Guidelines for Preventive Activities in
General Practice. 8th ed. East Melbourne, Australia:
Royal Australian College of General Practitioners;
2012.
45. International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Sunscreens. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization Press; 2001. IARC Handbook of Cancer
Prevention; vol 5.
46. American Academy of Dermatology.
Skin cancer. https://www.aad.org/media/stats
/conditions/skin-cancer. Accessed
February 2, 2018.
47. American Cancer Society. Melanoma skin
cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/melanoma
-skin-cancer.html. Accessed February 2, 2018.
48. Skin Cancer Foundation. Early detection
and self exams. https://www.skincancer.org/skin
-cancer-information/early-detection. Accessed
February 2, 2018.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer
1142
JAMA
March 20, 2018
Volume 319, Number 11
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
