 Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendations and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends screening for colorectal cancer starting
at age 50 years and continuing until age 75 years (A recommenda-
tion) (Figure 1).
Therisksandbenefitsofdifferentscreeningmethodsvary.See
the Clinical Considerations section later in this article and the Table
for details about screening strategies.
The decision to screen for colorectal cancer in adults aged 76 to
85yearsshouldbeanindividualone,takingintoaccountthepatient’
s
overallhealthandpriorscreeninghistory(Crecommendation).
•Adults in this age group who have never been screened for colo-
rectal cancer are more likely to benefit.
IMPORTANCE Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in the United
States. In 2016, an estimated 134 000 persons will be diagnosed with the disease, and about
49 000 will die from it. Colorectal cancer is most frequently diagnosed among adults aged 65
to 74 years; the median age at death from colorectal cancer is 73 years.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2008 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on screening for colorectal cancer.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the effectiveness of screening with
colonoscopy, flexible sigmoidoscopy, computed tomography colonography, the guaiac-based
fecal occult blood test, the fecal immunochemical test, the multitargeted stool DNA test, and
the methylated SEPT9 DNA test in reducing the incidence of and mortality from colorectal
cancer or all-cause mortality; the harms of these screening tests; and the test performance
characteristics of these tests for detecting adenomatous polyps, advanced adenomas based
on size, or both, as well as colorectal cancer. The USPSTF also commissioned a comparative
modeling study to provide information on optimal starting and stopping ages and screening
intervals across the different available screening methods.
FINDINGS The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that screening for colorectal cancer in
average-risk, asymptomatic adults aged 50 to 75 years is of substantial net benefit. Multiple
screening strategies are available to choose from, with different levels of evidence to support
their effectiveness, as well as unique advantages and limitations, although there are no
empirical data to demonstrate that any of the reviewed strategies provide a greater net
benefit. Screening for colorectal cancer is a substantially underused preventive health
strategy in the United States.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS The USPSTF recommends screening for colorectal
cancer starting at age 50 years and continuing until age 75 years (A recommendation). The
decision to screen for colorectal cancer in adults aged 76 to 85 years should be an individual one,
taking into account the patient’
s overall health and prior screening history (C recommendation).
JAMA. 2016;315(23):2564-2575. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.5989
Published online June 15, 2016. Last corrected on June 6, 2017.
Viewpoint page 2519 and
Editorial page 2529
Author Audio Interview at
jama.com
Related articles pages 2576
and 2595 and JAMA Patient
Page pages 2635 and 2636
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com
Related articles at
jamaoncology.com
jamainternalmedicine.com
Author/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net)
Clinical Review & Education
US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
2564
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 •Screening would be most appropriate among adults who (1) are
healthy enough to undergo treatment if colorectal cancer is de-
tected and (2) do not have comorbid conditions that would sig-
nificantly limit their life expectancy.
Rationale
Importance
Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in
the United States. In 2016, an estimated 134 000 persons will be
diagnosed with the disease, and about 49 000 will die from it.
Colorectal cancer is most frequently diagnosed among adults
aged 65 to 74 years; the median age at death from colorectal can-
cer is 73 years.3
Detection
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that screening for colorec-
talcancerwithseveraldifferentmethodscanaccuratelydetectearly-
stage colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps.
Although single test performance is an important issue in the
detection of colorectal cancer, the sensitivity of the test over time
ismoreimportantinanongoingscreeningprogram.However,data
thatpermitassessmentanddirectcomparisonofscreeningmethods
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
2565
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 to detect colorectal neoplasia in screening programs over time are
limited to those from analytic modeling.
Benefits of Screening and Early Intervention
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that screening for colorec-
tal cancer in adults aged 50 to 75 years reduces colorectal cancer
mortality.TheUSPSTFfoundnohead-to-headstudiesdemonstrat-
ing that any of the screening strategies it considered are more ef-
fective than others, although the tests have varying levels of evi-
dence supporting their effectiveness, as well as different strengths
andlimitations(Table).Aboutone-thirdofeligibleadultsintheUnited
States have never been screened for colorectal cancer,4 and offer-
ing choice in colorectal cancer screening strategies may increase
screening uptake.5 As such, the screening tests are not presented
in any preferred or ranked order; rather, the goal is to maximize the
total number of persons who are screened because that will have
the largest effect on reducing colorectal cancer deaths.
The benefit of early detection of and intervention for colorec-
talcancerdeclinesafterage75years.Amongolderadultswhohave
beenpreviouslyscreenedforcolorectalcancer,thereisatbestamod-
erate benefit to continuing screening during the ages of 76 to 85
years. However, adults in this age group who have never been
screened for colorectal cancer are more likely to benefit than those
who have been previously screened.
The time between detection and treatment of colorectal
cancer and realization of a subsequent mortality benefit can be
substantial. As such, the benefit of early detection of and inter-
vention for colorectal cancer in adults 86 years and older is at
most small.
Todate,nomethodofscreeningforcolorectalcancerhasbeen
shown to reduce all-cause mortality in any age group.1,6
Harms of Screening and Early Intervention
Theharmsofscreeningforcolorectalcancerinadultsaged50to75
years are small. The majority of harms result from the use of colo-
noscopy,eitherasthescreeningtestorasfollow-upforpositivefind-
ings detected by other screening tests. The rate of serious adverse
events from colorectal cancer screening increases with age.1 Thus,
the harms of screening for colorectal cancer in adults 76 years and
older are small to moderate.
Table. Characteristics of Colorectal Cancer Screening Strategiesa
Screening Method
Frequencyb
Evidence of Efficacy
Other Considerations
Stool-Based Tests
gFOBT
Every year
RCTs with mortality end points:
High-sensitivity versions (eg, Hemoccult SENSA)
have superior test performance characteristics
than older tests (eg, Hemoccult II)
Does not require bowel preparation, anesthesia,
or transportation to and from the screening
examination (test is performed at home)
FITc
Every year
Test characteristic studies:
Improved accuracy compared with gFOBT
Can be done with a single specimen
Does not require bowel preparation, anesthesia,
or transportation to and from the screening
examination (test is performed at home)
FIT-DNA
Every 1 or 3 yd
Test characteristic studies:
Specificity is lower than for FIT, resulting in more
false-positive results, more diagnostic
colonoscopies, and more associated adverse
events per screening test
Improved sensitivity compared with FIT
per single screening test
There is insufficient evidence about appropriate
longitudinal follow-up of abnormal findings after
a negative diagnostic colonoscopy; may
potentially lead to overly intensive surveillance
due to provider and patient concerns over the
genetic component of the test
Direct Visualization Tests
Colonoscopyc
Every 10 y
Prospective cohort study with mortality end point
Requires less frequent screening
Screening and diagnostic follow-up of positive
findings can be performed during the same
examination
CT colonographye
Every 5 y
Test characteristic studies
There is insufficient evidence about the potential
harms of associated extracolonic findings,
which are common
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
Every 5 y
RCTs with mortality end points:
Modeling suggests it provides less benefit
than when combined with FIT or compared
with other strategies
Test availability has declined in the United States
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
with FITc
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
every 10 y plus FIT
every year
RCT with mortality end point (subgroup analysis)
Test availability has declined in the United States
Potentially attractive option for patients who
want endoscopic screening but want to limit
exposure to colonoscopy
Abbreviations: FIT, fecal immunochemical test; FIT-DNA, multitargeted stool
DNA test; gFOBT, guaiac-based fecal occult blood test; RCT, randomized
clinical trial.
a Although a serology test to detect methylated SEPT9 DNA was included in the
systematic evidence review, this screening method currently has limited
evidence evaluating its use (a single published test characteristic study met
inclusion criteria, which found it had a sensitivity to detect colorectal cancer of
<50%).1 It is therefore not included in this table.
bApplies to persons with negative findings (including hyperplastic polyps) and
is not intended for persons in surveillance programs. Evidence of efficacy is
not informative of screening frequency, with the exception of gFOBT and
flexible sigmoidoscopy alone.
c Strategy yields comparable life-years gained (ie, the life-years gained with the
noncolonoscopy strategies were within 90% of those gained with the
colonoscopy strategy) and an efficient balance of benefits and harms in
CISNET modeling.2
dSuggested by manufacturer.
e Strategy yields comparable life-years gained (ie, the life-years gained with the
noncolonoscopy strategies were within 90% of those gained with the
colonoscopy strategy) and an efficient balance of benefits and harms in
CISNET modeling when lifetime number of colonoscopies is used as the proxy
measure for the burden of screening, but not if lifetime number of cathartic
bowel preparations is used as the proxy measure.2
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
2566
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the net benefit
(ie, the benefit minus the harms) of screening for colorectal cancer
in adults aged 50 to 75 years is substantial.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net
benefitofscreeningforcolorectalcancerinadultsaged76to85years
whohavebeenpreviouslyscreenedissmall.Adultswhohavenever
been screened for colorectal cancer are more likely to benefit.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationappliestoasymptomaticadults50yearsand
older who are at average risk of colorectal cancer and who do not
have a family history of known genetic disorders that predispose
them to a high lifetime risk of
colorectalcancer(suchasLynch
syndrome or familial adenoma-
tous polyposis), a personal his-
tory of inflammatory bowel dis-
ease, a previous adenomatous
polyp, or previous colorectal
cancer (Figure 2).
When screening results in
the diagnosis of colorectal ad-
enomas or cancer, patients are
followed up with a surveillance
regimen, and recommenda-
tions for screening no longer
apply. The USPSTF did not re-
view or consider the evidence on the effectiveness of any particu-
lar surveillance regimen after diagnosis and removal of adenoma-
tous polyps or colorectal cancer.
Assessment of Risk
For the vast majority of adults, the most important risk factor for
colorectal cancer is older age. Most cases of colorectal cancer oc-
cur among adults older than 50 years; the median age at diagnosis
is 68 years.3
Apositivefamilyhistory(excludingknowninheritedfamilialsyn-
dromes)isthoughttobelinkedtoabout20%ofcasesofcolorectal
cancer.1 About 3% to 10% of the population has a first-degree rela-
tivewithcolorectalcancer.7TheUSPSTFdidnotspecificallyreview
the evidence on screening in populations at increased risk; how-
ever,otherprofessionalorganizationsrecommendthatpatientswith
afamilyhistoryofcolorectalcancer(afirst-degreerelativewithearly-
onsetcolorectalcancerormultiplefirst-degreerelativeswiththedis-
ease)bescreenedmorefrequentlystartingatayoungerageandwith
colonoscopy.8
Male sex and black race are also associated with higher colo-
rectal cancer incidence and mortality. Black adults have the high-
est incidence and mortality rates compared with other racial/
ethnic subgroups.3 The reasons for these disparities are not
entirely clear. Studies have documented inequalities in screening,
diagnostic follow-up, and treatment; they also suggest that equal
treatment generally seems to produce equal outcomes.9-11
Accordingly, this recommendation applies to all racial/ethnic
groups, with the clear acknowledgment that efforts are needed to
ensure that at-risk populations receive recommended screening,
follow-up, and treatment.
Screening Tests
The Table lists the various screening tests for colorectal cancer and
notes potential frequency of use as well as additional consider-
ationsforeachmethod.Figure3presentstheestimatednumberof
life-years gained, colorectal cancer deaths averted, lifetime colo-
noscopiesrequired,andresultingcomplicationsper1000screened
adultsaged50to75yearsforeachofthescreeningstrategies.These
estimates are derived from modeling conducted by the Cancer In-
tervention and Surveillance Modeling Network (CISNET) to inform
this recommendation.2,12
Stool-Based Tests
Multiple randomized clinical trials (RCTs) have shown that screen-
ing with the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) reduces
colorectal cancer deaths.1 Fecal immunochemical tests (FITs),
which identify intact human hemoglobin in stool, have improved
sensitivity compared with gFOBT for detecting colorectal cancer.1
Among the FITs that are cleared by the US Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) and available for use in the United States, the OC
FIT-CHEK family of FITs (Polymedco)—which include the OC-Light
and the OC-Auto—have the best test performance characteristics
(ie, highest sensitivity and specificity).1 Multitargeted stool DNA
testing (FIT-DNA) is an emerging screening strategy that combines
a FIT with testing for altered DNA biomarkers in cells shed into the
stool. Multitargeted stool DNA testing has increased single-test
sensitivity for detecting colorectal cancer compared with FIT
alone.13 The harms of stool-based testing primarily result from
adverse events associated with follow-up colonoscopy of positive
findings.1 The specificity of FIT-DNA is lower than that of FIT
alone,13 which means it has a higher number of false-positive
results and higher likelihood of follow-up colonoscopy and experi-
encing an associated adverse event per screening test. There are
no empirical data on the appropriate longitudinal follow-up for an
abnormal FIT-DNA test result followed by a negative colonoscopy;
there is potential for overly intensive surveillance due to clinician
and patient concerns about the implications of the genetic compo-
nent of the test.
Direct Visualization Tests
Several RCTs have shown that flexible sigmoidoscopy alone
reduces deaths from colorectal cancer.1 Flexible sigmoidoscopy
combined with FIT has been studied in a single trial and was found
to reduce the colorectal cancer–specific mortality rate more than
flexible sigmoidoscopy alone.14 Modeling studies conducted by
CISNET also consistently estimate that combined testing yields
more life-years gained and colorectal cancer deaths averted com-
pared with flexible sigmoidoscopy alone.2 Flexible sigmoidoscopy
can result in direct harms, such as colonic perforations and bleed-
ing, although the associated event rates are much lower than those
observed with colonoscopy.1 Harms can also occur as a result of
follow-up colonoscopy.
Completedtrialsofflexiblesigmoidoscopyprovideindirectevi-
dence that colonoscopy—a similar endoscopic screening method—
reducescolorectalcancermortality.Aprospectivecohortstudyalso
JAMA.COM
+
Animated Summary Video
Screening for Colorectal
Cancer: US Preventive
Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
2567
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 found an association between patients who self-reported being
screened with colonoscopy and a lower colorectal cancer mortality
rate.15Colonoscopyhasbothindirectanddirectharms.Harmsmay
be caused by bowel preparation prior to the procedure (eg, dehy-
dration and electrolyte imbalances), the sedation used during the
procedure (eg, cardiovascular events), or the procedure itself
(eg, infection, colonic perforations, or bleeding).
Evidence for assessing the effectiveness of computed tomog-
raphy(CT)colonographyislimitedtostudiesofitstestcharacteristics.1
Computed tomography colonography can result in unnecessary di-
agnostictestingortreatmentofincidentalextracolonicfindingsthat
are of no importance or would never have threatened the patient’
s
healthorbecomeapparentwithoutscreening(ie,overdiagnosisand
overtreatment).1 Extracolonic findings are common, occurring in
about40%to70%ofscreeningexaminations.Between5%and37%
of these findings result in diagnostic follow-up, and about 3% re-
quire definitive treatment.1 As with other screening strategies, indi-
rect harms from CT colonography can also occur from follow-up
colonoscopy for positive findings.
Serology Tests
The FDA approved a blood test to detect circulating methylated
SEPT9DNA(EpiproColon;Epigenomics)inApril2016.16Asingletest
characteristicstudymettheinclusioncriteriaforthesystematicevi-
dencereviewsupportingthisrecommendationstatement;itfound
the SEPT9 DNA test to have low sensitivity (48%) for detecting
colorectal cancer.17
Starting and Stopping Ages
Available RCTs of gFOBT and flexible sigmoidoscopy included pa-
tients with age ranges of 45 to 80 years and 50 to 74 years, respec-
tively. For gFOBT, the majority of participants entered the trials at
age50or60years;forflexiblesigmoidoscopy,themeanageofpar-
ticipants was 56 to 60 years.1
Microsimulation analyses performed by CISNET suggest that
starting colorectal cancer screening at age 45 years rather than 50
years is estimated to yield a modest increase in life-years gained
and a more efficient balance between life-years gained and lifetime
number of colonoscopies (a proxy measure for the burden of
Figure 2. Screening for Colorectal Cancer: Clinical Summary
Population
Adults aged 50 to 75 y
Adults aged 76 to 85 y
Recommendation 
Screen for colorectal cancer starting at age 50 y.
The decision to screen for colorectal cancer is an individual one.
Grade: A
Grade: C
Risk Assessment 
Screening Tests 
Treatment and
Interventions
Starting and
Stopping Ages
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
For the vast majority of adults, the most important risk factor for colorectal cancer is older age. Other associated risk factors include
family history of colorectal cancer, male sex, and black race.
There are numerous screening tests to detect early-stage colorectal cancer, including stool-based tests (gFOBT, FIT, and FIT-DNA),
direct visualization tests (flexible sigmoidoscopy, alone or combined with FIT; colonoscopy; and CT colonography), and serology tests
(SEPT9 DNA test). The USPSTF found no head-to-head studies demonstrating that any of these screening strategies are more effective
than others, although they have varying levels of evidence supporting their effectiveness, as well as different strengths and limitations.
Treatment of early-stage colorectal cancer generally consists of local excision or simple polypectomy for tumors limited to the
colonic mucosa or surgical resection (via laparoscopy or open approach) with anastomosis for larger, localized lesions.
The USPSTF concluded that the evidence best supports a starting age of 50 y for the general population. The age at which the
balance of benefits and harms of colorectal cancer screening becomes less favorable varies based on a patient’
s life expectancy,
health status, comorbid conditions, and prior screening status. The USPSTF does not recommend routine screening for colorectal
cancer in adults 86 y and older.
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the net
benefit of screening for colorectal cancer is substantial.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the net benefit of
screening for colorectal cancer in adults aged 76 to 85 y who have
been previously screened is small. Adults who have never been screened
are more likely to benefit. Screening is most appropriate for those healthy
enough to undergo treatment and those without comorbid conditions that
significantly limit their life expectancy.
The USPSTF has made a recommendation on aspirin use for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer
in average-risk adults. This recommendation is available on the USPSTF website (http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
CT indicates computed tomography; FIT, fecal immunochemical test; FIT-DNA, multitargeted DNA stool test; gFOBT, guaiac-based fecal occult blood test;
USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
2568
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 screening).2 However, across the different screening methods,
lowering the age at which to begin screening to 45 years while
maintaining the same screening interval resulted in an estimated
increase in the lifetime number of colonoscopies. In the case of
Figure 3. Benefits, Harms, and Burden of Colorectal Screening Strategies Over a Lifetime
0
300
250
200
150
100
Life-Years Gained per 1000 Screened
50
Benefit: Life-years gained per 1000 individuals screened
A
Screening Method and Frequency
Middle
Low
High
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y
221
181
227
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 10 y
plus FIT every yeara
256
246
270
FIT-DNA every 3 y
226
215
250
FIT-DNA every year
261
246
271
FIT every yeara
244
231
260
HSgFOBT every year
247
232
261
CT colonography every 5 yb
248
226
265
Colonoscopy every 10 ya
270
248
275
Model Estimates, Life-Years
Gained per 1000 Screened
0
25
20
15
10
CRC Deaths Averted per 1000 Screened
5
Benefit: Colorectal cancer deaths averted per 1000 individuals screened
B
Screening Method and Frequency
Middle
Low
High
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y
20
17
21
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 10 y
plus FIT every yeara
23
22
24
FIT-DNA every 3 y
20
19
22
FIT-DNA every year
23
22
24
FIT every yeara
22
20
23
HSgFOBT every year
22
20
23
CT colonography every 5 yb
22
20
24
Colonoscopy every 10 ya
24
22
24
Model Estimates, CRC Deaths
Averted per 1000 Screened
0
16
10
12
14
8
6
4
Complications per 1000 Screened
2
Harms: Complications (gastrointestinal and cardiovascular events) of colorectal
cancer screening and follow-up testing per 1000 individuals screenedc
C
Screening Method and Frequency
Middle
Low
High
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y
10
9
12
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 10 y
plus FIT every yeara
12
11
12
FIT-DNA every 3 y
9
9
10
FIT-DNA every year
12
12
13
FIT every yeara
10
10
11
HSgFOBT every year
11
11
11
CT colonography every 5 yb
10
10
11
Colonoscopy every 10 ya
15
14
15
Model Estimates, Complications
per 1000 Screened
0
1500
1000
Colonoscopies per 1000 Screened
500
4000
3500
2000
3000
2500
Burden: Lifetime No. of colonoscopies per 1000 individuals screened
D
Screening Method and Frequency
Middle
Low
High
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y
1820
1493
2287
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 10 y
plus FIT every yeara
2289
2248
2490
FIT-DNA every 3 y
1714
1701
1827
FIT-DNA every year
2662
2601
2729
FIT every yeara
1757
1739
1899
HSgFOBT every year
2253
2230
2287
CT colonography every 5 yb
1743
1654
1927
Colonoscopy every 10 ya
4049
4007
4101
Model Estimates, Lifetime
Colonoscopies per 1000
Screened
Outcomes are from Cancer
Intervention and Surveillance
Modeling Network (CISNET) models,
which include the Simulation Model
of Colorectal Cancer (SimCRC), the
Microsimulation Screening Analysis
(MISCAN) for Colorectal Cancer, and
the Colorectal Cancer Simulated
Population model for Incidence and
Natural History (CRC-SPIN).2
Screening occurs between the ages
of 50 and 75 years, with follow-up
continuing throughout an individual’
s
remaining life span. FIT indicates
fecal immunochemical test; FIT-DNA,
multitargeted stool DNA test;
HSgFOBT, high-sensitivity
guaiac-based fecal occult blood test.
a These strategies yield comparable
life-years gained (ie, the life-years
gained with the noncolonoscopy
strategies were within 90% of
those gained with the colonoscopy
strategy) and an efficient balance of
benefits and harms (ie, no other
strategy or combination of
strategies within the class of
screening tests provides more
life-years with the same [or fewer]
number of colonoscopies, which
represents the primary source of
harms from screening).2
bComputed tomographic (CT)
colonography can also be
considered efficient, but if cathartic
bowel preparation is considered to
be a proxy measure for the burden
of screening (instead of number of
lifetime colonoscopies), its
efficiency ratio (ie, the incremental
number of colonoscopies required
to achieve an additional year of life
gained [ΔCOL/ΔLYG]) exceeds that
of colonoscopy.
c Gastrointestinal events include
perforations, bleeding, transfusions,
paralytic ileus, nausea and vomiting,
dehydration, and abdominal pain.
Cardiovascular events include
myocardial infarction, angina,
arrhythmia, congestive heart failure,
cardiac or respiratory arrest,
syncope, hypotension, and shock.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
2569
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 screening colonoscopy, 2 of the 3 models found that by starting
screening at age 45 years, the screening interval could be extended
from 10 to 15 years. Doing so maintained the same (or slightly
more) life-years gained as performing colonoscopy every 10 years
starting at age 50 years without increasing the lifetime number of
colonoscopies. However, 1 model estimated a slight loss in life-
years gained with a longer screening interval and an earlier age at
which to begin screening.2
The USPSTF considered these findings and concluded that the
evidence best supports a starting age of 50 years for the general
population,notingthemodestincreaseinlife-yearsgainedbystart-
ing screening earlier, the discordant findings across models for ex-
tendingthescreeningintervalwhentheageatwhichtobeginscreen-
ing is lowered, and the lack of empirical evidence in younger
populations.
The age at which the balance of benefits and harms of colorec-
tal cancer screening becomes less favorable varies based on a pa-
tient’
slifeexpectancy,healthstatus,comorbidconditions,andprior
screening status.18 Empirical data from randomized trials on out-
comesofscreeningafterage74yearsarescarce.All3CISNETmod-
els consistently estimate that few additional life-years are gained
when screening is extended past age 75 years among average-risk
adults who have previously received adequate screening.2
The USPSTF does not recommend routine screening for colo-
rectal cancer in adults 86 years and older. In this age group, com-
peting causes of mortality preclude a mortality benefit that would
outweigh the harms.
Screening Intervals
Evidence from RCTs demonstrates that annual or biennial screen-
ing with gFOBT as well as 1-time and every 3- to 5-year flexible sig-
moidoscopy reduces colorectal cancer deaths.1 The CISNET mod-
els found that several screening strategies were estimated to yield
comparablelife-yearsgained(ie,life-yearsgainedwiththenoncolo-
noscopystrategieswerewithin90%ofthosegainedwiththecolo-
noscopy strategy) among adults aged 50 to 75 years and an effi-
cient balance of benefits and harms (see the full CISNET report for
moredetails2,12).Thesescreeningstrategiesinclude(1)annualscreen-
ing with FIT, (2) screening every 10 years with flexible sigmoidos-
copyandannualscreeningwithFIT,(3)screeningevery10yearswith
colonoscopy, and (4) screening every 5 years with CT colonogra-
phy. The findings for CT colonography depend on the proxy mea-
sure used for the burden of screening (number of lifetime colonos-
copiesorlifetimecatharticbowelpreparations).Twoofthe3CISNET
models found that FIT-DNA screening every 3 years (as recom-
mended by the manufacturer) was estimated to yield life-years
gained less than 90% of the colonoscopy screening strategy (84%
and 87%, respectively). Another way to conceptualize these find-
ings is to note that CISNET modeling found that FIT-DNA screening
every 3 years was estimated to provide about the same amount of
benefitasscreeningwithflexiblesigmoidoscopyaloneevery5years
(Figure 3).2
Treatment
Treatment of early-stage colorectal cancer generally consists of
local excision or simple polypectomy for tumors limited to the
colonic mucosa or surgical resection (via laparoscopy or open
approach) with anastomosis for larger, localized lesions.
Other Approaches to Prevention
TheUSPSTFhasmadearecommendationonaspirinusefortheprimary
preventionofcardiovasculardiseaseandcolorectalcancerinaverage-
risk adults (http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
Other Considerations
Implementation
Colorectal cancer causes substantial morbidity and mortality, and
the evidence is convincing that screening for colorectal cancer
reduces that burden. Despite the availability of several effective
screening options, nearly one-third of eligible adults have never
been screened.19 Different screening methods may be more or less
attractive for patients based on their features. For example, colo-
noscopy requires a relatively greater time commitment over a short
period (bowel preparation, procedure, and recovery) but allows for
much longer time between screenings compared with stool-based
screening. Stool-based screening requires persons to handle their
feces, which may be difficult for some, but the test is quick and
noninvasive and can be done at home (the sample is mailed to the
laboratory for testing). Flexible sigmoidoscopy combined with
annual FIT may be an attractive option for persons who want reas-
surance from endoscopic screening but want to limit their expo-
sure to colonoscopy. Given the lack of evidence from head-to-head
comparative trials that any of the screening strategies have a
greater net benefit than the others, clinicians should consider
engaging patients in informed decision making about the screening
strategy that would most likely result in completion, with high
adherence over time, taking into consideration both the patient’
s
preferences and local availability.
Forcolorectalcancerscreeningprogramstobesuccessfulinre-
ducing mortality, they need to involve more than just the screening
method in isolation. Screening is a cascade of activities that must
occur in concert, cohesively, and in an organized way for benefits
to be realized, from the point of the initial screening examination
(includingrelatedinterventionsorservicesthatarerequiredforsuc-
cessful administration of the screening test, such as bowel prepa-
rationorsedationwithendoscopy)tothetimelyreceiptofanynec-
essary diagnostic follow-up and treatment.
Multiple effective implementation strategies have been dem-
onstratedtoincreaseappropriateprovisionanduseofcolorectalcan-
cerscreening.Specifically,theCommunityPreventiveServicesTask
Force recommends using clinician and patient reminder systems,
using small media (such as videos, letters, and brochures), reduc-
ing structural barriers to screening (such as the time or distance to
the screening delivery setting or offering extended or nonstandard
clinichours),andprovidingclinicianassessmentandfeedbackabout
screening rates (more information is available at http://www
.thecommunityguide.org/cancer).
Last, clinicians also need to consider how they will engage pa-
tients older than 75 years about when to stop screening.
Research Needs and Gaps
Higher-quality data are needed about the natural history of small
(<10 mm) adenomas to improve understanding of optimal screen-
ing and surveillance strategies and to guide when clinical interven-
tion is necessary. Further, because determining the ultimate worth
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
2570
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 of a screening method requires an accurate assessment of the net
benefit of that intervention, randomized trials are needed to
directly compare different types of colorectal cancer screening pro-
grams to more clearly define their relative benefits and harms;
however, the USPSTF appreciates the challenges inherent in per-
forming such trials, given the large sample sizes and long time hori-
zons required.
A recent analysis of data from the National Cancer Institute’
s
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program sug-
gests that the incidence of colorectal cancer may be increasing
among adults younger than 50 years.20 Modeling suggests there
may be some potential advantages to starting colonoscopy screen-
ing at an earlier age (45 years) and to extending the interval
between screenings with negative findings.
Black and Alaska Native individuals have a higher incidence of
and mortality rate from colorectal cancer compared with the gen-
eral population. Empirical data about the effectiveness of different
screening strategies for these at-risk populations are not available.
Although there is a growing body of evidence on the test per-
formancecharacteristicsofCTcolonography,evidencetoboundthe
potential harms of this technology is still lacking, particularly in re-
gard to incidental findings. More consistent and complete report-
ing, in studies with longer-term follow-up, of the downstream con-
sequences of initial detection, subsequent workup, and definitive
treatment of extracolonic findings (ie, CT Colonography Reporting
and Data System findings categorized as E3—“likely unimportant
finding,incompletelycharacterized:subjecttolocalpracticeandpa-
tientpreference,workupmaybeindicated”andE4—“
potentiallyim-
portant finding: communicate to referring physician as per ac-
cepted practice guidelines”) would allow for better understanding
of the net benefit associated with this screening approach.
Empiricalevidenceislackingontheappropriatefollow-upofab-
normalresultsfromFIT-DNAscreeningwhentheinitialdiagnosticcolo-
noscopyisnegative.ThereisatheoreticalconcernthatFIT-DNAmay
generate inappropriate use of surveillance colonoscopy if clinicians
and patients place increased importance on the genetic component
ofthetest.Atpresent,evidenceislackingtoestablishtheoptimalfre-
quency of screening with the FIT-DNA test. As a condition of its ap-
proval of the test, the FDA required the manufacturer to conduct a
longitudinalstudyexaminingthetestcharacteristicsofa3-yearscreen-
ing interval; these data should help inform decisions.21
Studies on patient adherence to the various screening op-
tions, within single-method screening programs over time, as well
as factors that may influence adherence across different screening
methods, are needed to help better inform and improve uptake of
screening across eligible populations.
Discussion
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review1,6 to up-
date its 2008 recommendation on screening for colorectal cancer.
Thereviewaddressedthefollowing:(1)theeffectivenessofscreen-
ing with colonoscopy, flexible sigmoidoscopy, CT colonography,
gFOBT, FIT, FIT-DNA, and methylated SEPT9 DNA testing in reduc-
ing incidence of and mortality from colorectal cancer or all-cause
mortality;(2)theharmsofthesescreeningtests;and(3)thetestper-
formance characteristics of these tests for detecting adenomatous
polyps, advanced adenomas based on size, or both, as well as co-
lorectalcancer.Incontrasttotheevidencereviewperformedforthe
USPSTFin2008,thisreviewexpandeditsapproachtoadditionally
search for and consider (1) observational evidence about the ben-
efits of screening tests when trial evidence does not exist and
(2) comparative effectiveness of screening tests on cancer inci-
dence and mortality.
Inaddition,theUSPSTFcommissionedareportfromtheCISNET
Colorectal Cancer Working Group2,12 to provide information from
comparative modeling on optimal starting and stopping ages and
screening intervals across the different available screening meth-
ods. Compared with the previous decision analysis performed for
theUSPSTF,thisanalysisusedmorenarrowlydefinedagesatwhich
to begin and end screening and screening intervals. It also included
newscreeningmethods(FIT-DNA,CTcolonography,andflexiblesig-
moidoscopy combined with FIT), updated test characteristics, and
age-specific risks of colonoscopy complications.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
All of the available studies of the test characteristics of different
screeningmethodsevaluated1-timeapplicationofthetest.Assuch,
it is not possible to draw meaningful inferences about the ultimate
performance of these tests as intended in the real-world setting
(ie, in a program of repeated screening over time).
High-sensitivity gFOBT (Hemoccult SENSA; Beckman Coulter)
has a sensitivity of 62% to 79% and a specificity of 87% to 96% for
detecting colorectal cancer.1 Fecal immunochemical tests can be
grouped according to whether they are qualitative (fixed cutoff) or
quantitative (adjustable cutoff) assays; overall, test performance
among this class of stool-based tests varies widely. Sensitivity and
specificity of the OC-Light test using a cutoff of 10 μg hemoglobin
(Hb)/g feces to detect colorectal cancer range from 79% to 88%
and 91% to 93%, respectively1; sensitivity and specificity of the
OC FIT-CHEK family of tests using a cutoff of 20 μg Hb/g feces
(as directed by the manufacturer) to detect colorectal cancer range
from 73% to 75% and 91% to 95%, respectively.1 In the largest
study assessing the test characteristics of the only FIT-DNA test
available in the United States (Cologuard; Exact Sciences), its sensi-
tivity and specificity to detect colorectal cancer was 92% (95% CI,
84%-97%) and 84% (95% CI, 84%-85%), respectively. Its sensitiv-
ity to detect advanced precancerous lesions (advanced adenomas
and sessile serrated polyps measuring �1 cm) was 42% (95% CI,
39%-46%), and its specificity to detect “
all nonadvanced findings”
(including nonneoplastic findings and negative colonoscopy find-
ings) was 87% (95% CI, 86%-87%).13 A second, smaller study
involving Alaska Native individuals confirmed that FIT-DNA testing
has higher sensitivity but lower specificity than FITs to detect colo-
rectal neoplasia with 1-time use.22
Colonoscopy is generally considered the criterion standard for
test characteristic studies, although it does miss some cases of
colorectal cancer. No studies have evaluated the test performance
characteristics of flexible sigmoidoscopy against a colonoscopy
standard in an average-risk screening population.1 Studies of CT
colonography have not been powered to estimate its ability to
detect cancer. Studies of CT colonography test performance with
bowel preparation found that the per-person sensitivity to detect
adenomas measuring 10 mm or larger ranged from 67% to 94%;
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
2571
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 specificity ranged from 86% to 98%. Only 2 studies evaluated the
performance of CT colonography without bowel preparation; they
found sensitivity and specificity to detect adenomas measuring 10
mm or larger ranging from 67% to 90% and 85% to 97%,
respectively.1
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
The USPSTF found convincing evidence of benefit associated with
colorectal cancer screening. The Hemoccult II test was the first co-
lorectal cancer screening test to demonstrate reduction in disease-
specificmortalityinanRCT.Sixtrialsshowedthatafter11to30years
offollow-up,screeningwithlow-sensitivitygFOBTreducedtherisk
ofcolorectalcancerdeathbyabout9%to22%whenperformedbi-
ennially(about9-16fewercolorectalcancerdeathsper100 000per-
son-years) and by about 32% when done annually.1 When consid-
ering the life-years gained compared with the burden and harms of
screening(asassessedbytheproxymeasureoftotalnumberoflife-
time colonoscopies), annual screening with high-sensitivity gFOBT
was consistently dominated by annual FIT screening in the CISNET
modeling.2
Flexible sigmoidoscopy has also been assessed in multiple
RCTs. Pooled meta-analysis of 4 trials demonstrated that 1-time
screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy reduced the risk of dying of
colorectal cancer by 27% after about 11 to 12 years (incidence rate
ratio, 0.73 [95% CI, 0.66-0.82]), or about 9 to 14 fewer colorectal
cancer deaths per 100 000 person-years.1 The Norwegian Colorec-
tal Cancer Prevention Trial found that its flexible sigmoidoscopy–
plus-FIT group had a lower colorectal cancer–specific mortality rate
than the flexible sigmoidoscopy–only group (hazard ratio [HR],
0.62 [95% CI, 0.42-0.90] vs 0.84 [95% CI, 0.61-1.17]).14 The
CISNET models estimated that screening with flexible sigmoidos-
copy from the ages of 50 to 75 years, repeated every 5 years,
would result in about 181 to 227 life-years gained per 1000 persons
screened over a lifetime. However, a combined approach of flexible
sigmoidoscopy repeated every 10 years with annual FIT screening
was estimated to result in about 246 to 270 life-years gained per
1000 persons screened (although it would also increase the total
number of diagnostic and surveillance colonoscopies required).2
No RCTs have evaluated the effect of colonoscopy on colorec-
tal cancer mortality, although several are in progress (Spanish
COLONPREV, Swedish SCREESCO, and US CONFIRM trials),23-26
including 1 trial (Northern European Initiative on Colorectal Cancer)
with a control group of no screening.24 One large (n = 88 902), fair-
quality prospective cohort study combining data from the Nurses’
Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study found
an association between self-reported receipt of screening colonos-
copy and reduced distal and proximal colorectal cancer mortality
(multivariate HR, 0.18 [95% CI, 0.10-0.31] and 0.47 [95% CI, 0.29-
0.67], respectively).15 Although the investigators adjusted for
known potential risk factors for colorectal cancer, given the study
design, they could not address unknown or unmeasured confound-
ers. In addition, it is unclear based on the study design whether the
benefit accrued from 1 or multiple colonoscopies or screening plus
surveillance colonoscopy. Overall, the study likely overestimates
the magnitude of benefit associated with colonoscopy; the
observed effect size in this study also cannot be directly compared
with that measured in randomized trials of other colorectal cancer
screening methods.
TheCISNETmodelscommissionedforthisreviewestimatedthe
number of life-years gained, colorectal cancer deaths averted, life-
time colonoscopies required (as a proxy measure for the burden of
screening),andresultingcomplications(ie,gastrointestinalandcar-
diovascularevents)forvariousscreeningstrategies,varyingtheage
at which to start and stop screening and the frequency of screen-
ing. With an age to begin screening of 50 years and an age to end
screeningof75years,assuming100%adherencetoscreeningover
a lifetime, 4 screening strategies were estimated to provide an ef-
ficient balance of benefits and harms while also providing roughly
comparable life-years gained: colonoscopy every 10 years, annual
FIT,flexiblesigmoidoscopyevery10yearscombinedwithannualFIT,
and CT colonography every 5 years. For CT colonography, the find-
ings depend on the perspective taken: if lifetime number of colo-
noscopies is used as the proxy measure for the burden of screen-
ing, it is efficient; if cathartic bowel preparations are considered as
the proxy measure, it is not efficient. The CISNET models esti-
mated that these strategies would produce about 226 to 275 life-
years gained over a lifetime, or about 20 to 24 colorectal cancer
deaths averted per 1000 adults aged 50 to 75 years screened.2
Harms of Early Detection and Treatment
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidenceofharmsassociatedwithdif-
ferentcolorectalcancerscreeningprograms.Withallscreeningmeth-
ods, positive findings lead to follow-up colonoscopy to resolve the
diagnosis; colonoscopy represents the primary source of harms as-
sociated with colorectal cancer screening. As an invasive proce-
dure,colonoscopycanproduceimportantmorbidityaswellasanxi-
ety and discomfort. Bowel preparation may lead to dehydration or
electrolyteimbalances,particularlyinolderadultsorthosewithco-
morbid conditions; accurate estimates of the rates of these events
are not available. If sedation is used during colonoscopy, cardiopul-
monary adverse events may rarely occur; the precise frequency of
occurrence is also not known.
Screening with FIT-DNA and CT colonography each has sev-
eral unique harms to consider. Screening with FIT-DNA is less spe-
cific than screening with FIT,13,22 resulting in more false-positive
results per screening test and an increased probability of harm
from diagnostic colonoscopy. Further, a theoretical concern about
FIT-DNA is whether its use might lead to more frequent and inva-
sive follow-up testing in persons who are not at increased risk of
colorectal cancer because of patient or clinician concerns about
abnormal DNA results. Although modeling can be used to under-
stand the estimated effects of the test’
s reduced specificity and
increased false-positive rate, empirical evidence on appropriate
follow-up of abnormal results is lacking, making it difficult to
accurately understand the overall balance of benefits and harms
of this screening test.
Extracolonic findings detected on CT colonography are com-
mon, occurring in about 40% to 70% of screening tests.1 About
5% to 37% of these extracolonic findings require diagnostic
follow-up, and about 3% need definitive treatment.1 These find-
ings have the potential for both benefit and harm. Potential
harms include additional diagnostic testing of an abnormality that
is of no clinical importance, as well as treatment of findings that
may never threaten a patient’
s health or even become apparent
without screening (ie, overdiagnosis and overtreatment).
Radiation-induced cancer is a potential long-term concern with
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
2572
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 repeated use of CT colonography. No studies directly measured
this risk, but radiation exposure during the procedure seems to be
low, with a maximum exposure of about 7 mSv per examination.1
In comparison, annual background radiation exposure in the
United States is 3 mSv per year per person. Although 7 new stud-
ies have examined the potential harms associated with CT colo-
nography since the prior USPSTF review,1 high-quality evidence
to draw clear conclusions about the ultimate clinical effect associ-
ated with the detection and subsequent workup of extracolonic
findings remains lacking. Given the frequency with which these
incidental findings occur, it is difficult to accurately understand
the overall balance of benefits and harms of this screening test
without this information.
The direct harms of endoscopy have been somewhat better
studied.1 Pooled estimates suggest there are about 4 (95% CI, 2-5)
colonic perforations and about 8 (95% CI, 5-14) major intestinal
bleedingepisodesper10 000screeningcolonoscopiesperformed.1
Manyoftheseeventsappeartoberelatedtopolypectomy,andthe
risk of experiencing an adverse event increases with age.1 The risk
of bleeding or perforation seems to be greater if the colonoscopy is
doneaspartofdiagnosticfollow-upofapositivefindingonascreen-
ing test of a different method; for example, pooled data from flex-
iblesigmoidoscopytrialsfoundabout14(95%CI,9-26)colonicper-
forationsand24(95%CI,5-63)majorbleedingepisodesper10 000
persons undergoing diagnostic colonoscopy.1 This compares with
about 1 perforation and 2 major bleeding episodes per 10 000 flex-
ible sigmoidoscopies performed for the purposes of cancer
screening.1
Theharmsfromasingleadministrationofascreeningtestmust
be considered in the context of how often the test will be repeated
over a patient’
s lifetime. In the case of colorectal cancer screening,
thismeansconsideringhowmanycolonoscopies(theprimarysource
of serious harms) will be required to follow up abnormal findings.
TheCISNETmodelssuggestthattheavailablestrategiesrangefrom
an estimated 1714 to 4049 total colonoscopies required per 1000
persons screened over a lifetime; screening colonoscopy every 10
years generates the highest degree of associated burden or harm
(Figure 3).2
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that screening for colo-
rectal cancer in average-risk, asymptomatic adults aged 50 to 75
years is of substantial net benefit. Multiple screening strategies are
available to choose from, with different levels of evidence to sup-
port their effectiveness, as well as unique advantages and limita-
tions (Table).
For older adults aged 76 to 85 years, the benefits of screening
forcolorectalcancerdecline,andtheriskofexperiencingseriousas-
sociatedharmsincreases.Themostimportantconsiderationforcli-
niciansandpatientsinthisagegroupiswhetherthepatienthaspre-
viously been screened. Patients in this age group who have never
been screened for colorectal cancer are more likely to benefit than
thosewhohavebeenpreviouslyscreened.Otherfactorsthatshould
beconsideredincludewhetherthepatienthasotherchronichealth
conditions and would be healthy enough to undergo treatment if
cancer was found.
Screeningforcolorectalcancerisasubstantiallyunderusedpre-
ventivehealthstrategyintheUnitedStates.19Inaddition,thereare
no empirical data to suggest that any of the strategies provide a
greater net benefit. Accordingly, the best screening test is the one
thatgetsdone,andtheUSPSTFconcludesthatmaximizingthetotal
proportionoftheeligiblepopulationthatreceivesscreeningwillre-
sult in the greatest reduction in colorectal cancer deaths.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from October 6 to
November 2, 2015. Many comments expressed concern that the
terms “recommended”and “alternative”to describe the testing
strategies lacked clarity and were confusing to interpret. In
response, the USPSTF removed these terms from the final recom-
mendation to better communicate the primary message of impor-
tance: there is convincing evidence that screening for colorectal
cancer provides substantial benefit for adults aged 50 to 75 years,
and a sizable proportion of the eligible US population is not taking
advantage of this effective preventive health strategy. With this
recommendation, the USPSTF acknowledges that there is no
“one size fits all” approach to colorectal cancer screening and
seeks to provide clinicians and patients with the best possible evi-
dence about the various screening methods to enable informed,
individual decision making. Accordingly, both the Table and
Figure 3 were updated to provide more detailed information
about the available evidence on the effectiveness of each
method, as well as the strengths, limitations, and unique consid-
erations for the various screening tests.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
Thisisanupdateofthe2008USPSTFrecommendation.27In2008,
the USPSTF recommended screening with colonoscopy every 10
years, annual FIT, annual high-sensitivity FOBT, or flexible sigmoi-
doscopy every 5 years combined with high-sensitivity FOBT every
3years.Inthecurrentrecommendation,insteadofemphasizingspe-
cificscreeningapproaches,theUSPSTFhasinsteadchosentohigh-
lightthatthereisconvincingevidencethatcolorectalcancerscreen-
ingsubstantiallyreducesdeathsfromthediseaseamongadultsaged
50 to 75 years and that not enough adults in the United States are
usingthiseffectivepreventiveintervention.Thereasonsforthisgap
betweenevidenceandpracticearemultifacetedandwillrequiresus-
tained effort among clinicians, policy makers, advocates, and pa-
tients to overcome.
Recommendations of Others
Manyorganizationshaveissuedguidelinesconcerningscreeningfor
colorectal cancer. All of the following recommendations apply to
average-risk adults 50 years and older.
In 2008, the American Cancer Society, American College of
Radiology, and the US Multi-Society Task Force (including the
American Gastroenterological Association, American College of
Gastroenterology, and American Society for Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy) jointly issued recommendations. They prioritized flex-
ible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years, colonoscopy every 10 years,
double-contrast barium enema every 5 years, and CT colonogra-
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
2573
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 phy every 5 years as preferred tests “
designed to both prevent and
detect cancer”if resources are available but also recommended
annual high-sensitivity gFOBT or FIT-DNA testing (interval
uncertain).8 Shortly thereafter, the American College of Gastroen-
terology released an independent guideline recommending colo-
noscopy every 10 years as the single preferred screening strategy.
It stated that if colonoscopy is not available or is unacceptable to a
patient, recommended alternative strategies include flexible sig-
moidoscopy every 5 to 10 years or CT colonography every 5 years
(preferred) or annual FIT, annual Hemoccult II SENSA, or FIT-DNA
testing every 3 years (acceptable).28
In 2012, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network recom-
mendedcolonoscopyevery10yearsasthepreferredscreeningstrat-
egy if available; otherwise, it recommended annual gFOBT or FIT,
withorwithoutflexiblesigmoidoscopy,every5yearsorflexiblesig-
moidoscopy alone every 5 years as secondary approaches to
screening.29
In2015,theAmericanCollegeofPhysiciansrecommendedthat
average-risk adults aged 50 to 75 years should be screened for co-
lorectalcancerby1of4strategies:(1)annualhigh-sensitivitygFOBT
or FIT, (2) flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years, (3) high-sensitivity
gFOBTorFITevery3yearsplusflexiblesigmoidoscopyevery5years,
or(4)colonoscopyevery10years.Itadvisedthataverage-riskadults
youngerthan50years,olderthan75years,orwithanestimatedlife
expectancy of less than 10 years should not be screened.30 The
American Academy of Family Physicians is in the process of updat-
ing its guidelines.31
In2016,theCanadianTaskForceonPreventiveHealthCarerec-
ommended that adults aged 50 to 59 years (weak recommenda-
tion) and 60 to 74 years (strong recommendation) be screened for
colorectalcancerwithgFOBTorFITevery2yearsorflexiblesigmoi-
doscopyevery10years.Itrecommendedagainstscreeninginadults
75 years and older (weak recommendation) and using colonos-
copy as a primary screening test (weak recommendation).32
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members include the following
individuals: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; John
W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A. R. García, MD,
MPH; Matthew W. Gillman, MD, SM; Diane M.
Harper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH,
MS; Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN,
MSN, MPH; C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M.
Mangione, MD, MSPH; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS;
William R. Phillips, MD, MPH; Maureen G. Phipps,
MD, MPH; Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH; Albert L.
Siu, MD, MPH.
Affiliations of Authors/US Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) members: University of
California, San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group
Health Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); State University of New York Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health
Care Institute, Boston, Massachusetts (Gillman);
University of Louisville, Kentucky (Harper); Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Veterans Affairs Palo Alto
Health Care System, Palo Alto, California (Owens);
Stanford University, Stanford, California (Owens);
University of Washington, Seattle (Phillips); Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps);
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (Pignone);
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
New York (Siu); James J. Peters Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Bronx, New York (Siu).
Correction: This article was corrected online on
August 2, 2016, to correct the name of a screening
test and on June 6, 2017, to correct data errors in
the abstract, text, and a figure.
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at http:
//www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page
/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Jennifer
Croswell, MD, MPH, of AHRQ, who contributed to
the writing of the manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella,
MA, of AHRQ, who assisted with coordination
and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Lin JS, Piper M, Perdue LA, et al. Screening for
Colorectal Cancer: A Systematic Review for the US
Preventive Services Task Force: Evidence Synthesis
No. 135. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2016. AHRQ publication 14-
05203-EF-1.
2. Zauber A, Knudsen A, Rutter CM,
Lansdorp-Vogelaar I, Kuntz KM. Evaluating the
Benefits and Harms of Colorectal Cancer Screening
Strategies: A Collaborative Modeling Approach.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality; 2015. AHRQ publication 14-05203-EF-2.
3. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al, eds.
SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2013. National
Cancer Institute. http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975
_2013/. Accessed April 21, 2016.
4. Shapiro JA, Klabunde CN, Thompson TD, Nadel
MR, Seeff LC, White A. Patterns of colorectal cancer
test use, including CT colonography, in the 2010
National Health Interview Survey. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21(6):895-904.
5. Inadomi JM, Vijan S, Janz NK, et al. Adherence to
colorectal cancer screening: a randomized clinical
trial of competing strategies. Arch Intern Med. 2012;
172(7):575-582.
6. Lin JS, Piper MA, Perdue LA, et al. Screening for
colorectal cancer: updated evidence report and
systematic review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.3332.
7. Henrikson NB, Webber EM, Goddard KA, et al.
Family history and the natural history of colorectal
cancer: systematic review. Genet Med. 2015;17(9):
702-712.
8. Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al;
American Cancer Society Colorectal Cancer
Advisory Group; US Multi-Society Task Force;
American College of Radiology Colon Cancer
Committee. Screening and surveillance for the early
detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous
polyps, 2008: a joint guideline from the American
Cancer Society, the US Multi-Society Task Force on
Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of
Radiology. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58(3):130-160.
9. Brawley OW. Colorectal cancer control:
providing adequate care to those who need it.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(4):dju075.
10. Dignam JJ, Colangelo L, Tian W, et al. Outcomes
among African-Americans and Caucasians in colon
cancer adjuvant therapy trials: findings from the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel
Project. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91(22):1933-1940.
11. Cooper GS, Koroukian SM. Racial disparities in
the use of and indications for colorectal procedures
in Medicare beneficiaries. Cancer. 2004;100(2):
418-424.
12. Knudsen AB, Zauber AG, Rutter CM, et al.
Estimation of benefits, burden, and harms of
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
2574
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 colorectal cancer screening strategies: modeling
study for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.6828.
13. Imperiale TF, Ransohoff DF, Itzkowitz SH, et al.
Multitarget stool DNA testing for colorectal-cancer
screening. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(14):1287-1297.
14. Holme Ø, Løberg M, Kalager M, et al. Effect of
flexible sigmoidoscopy screening on colorectal
cancer incidence and mortality: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312(6):606-615.
15. Nishihara R, Wu K, Lochhead P, et al. Long-term
colorectal-cancer incidence and mortality after
lower endoscopy. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(12):1095-
1105.
16. Premarket approval (PMA) for Epi proColon.
US Food and Drug Administration. http://www
.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfPMA
/pma.cfm?id=P130001. Accessed April 21, 2016.
17. Church TR, Wandell M, Lofton-Day C, et al;
PRESEPT Clinical Study Steering Committee,
Investigators and Study Team. Prospective
evaluation of methylated SEPT9 in plasma for
detection of asymptomatic colorectal cancer. Gut.
2014;63(2):317-325.
18. Lansdorp-Vogelaar I, Gulati R, Mariotto AB,
et al. Personalizing age of cancer screening
cessation based on comorbid conditions: model
estimates of harms and benefits. Ann Intern Med.
2014;161(2):104-112.
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Vital signs: colorectal cancer screening test
use: United States, 2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2013;62(44):881-888.
20. Abdelsattar ZM, Wong SL, Regenbogen SE,
Jomaa DM, Hardiman KM, Hendren S. Colorectal
cancer outcomes and treatment patterns in
patients too young for average-risk screening. Cancer.
2016;122(6):929-934.
21. Premarket approval application (PMA) approval
letter for Cologuard. US Food and Drug
Administration. http://www.accessdata.fda.gov
/cdrh_docs/pdf13/P130017a.pdf. Accessed April 20,
2016.
22. Redwood DG, Asay ED, Blake ID, et al. Stool
DNA testing for screening detection of colorectal
neoplasia in Alaska Native people. Mayo Clin Proc.
2016;91(1):61-70.
23. Quintero E, Castells A, Bujanda L, et al;
COLONPREV Study Investigators. Colonoscopy
versus fecal immunochemical testing in
colorectal-cancer screening. N Engl J Med. 2012;
366(8):697-706.
24. Kaminski MF, Bretthauer M, Zauber AG, et al.
The NordICC Study: rationale and design of a
randomized trial on colonoscopy screening for
colorectal cancer. Endoscopy. 2012;44(7):695-702.
25. Colonoscopy vs Fecal Immunochemical Test in
Reducing Mortality From Colorectal Cancer
(CONFIRM) [NCT01239082]. ClinicalTrials.gov.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01239082.
Accessed May 27, 2016.
26. Colonoscopy and FIT as Colorectal Cancer
Screening Test in the Average Risk Population
[NCT02078804]. ClinicalTrials.gov. https:
//clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02078804.
Accessed May 27, 2016.
27. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for colorectal cancer: US Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2008;149(9):627-637.
28. Rex DK, Johnson DA, Anderson JC, Schoenfeld
PS, Burke CA, Inadomi JM; American College of
Gastroenterology. American College of
Gastroenterology guidelines for colorectal cancer
screening 2009 [published correction appears in
Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104(6):1613]. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2009;104(3):739-750.
29. Burt RW, Cannon JA, David DS, et al; National
Comprehensive Cancer Network. Colorectal cancer
screening. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2013;11(12):
1538-1575.
30. Wilt TJ, Harris RP, Qaseem A; High Value Care
Task Force of the American College of Physicians.
Screening for cancer: advice for high-value care
from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern
Med. 2015;162(10):718-725.
31. Clinical preventive service recommendation:
colorectal cancer. American Academy of Family
Physicians. http://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/colorectal-cancer
.html. Accessed April 20, 2016.
32. Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.
Recommendations on screening for colorectal
cancer in primary care. CMAJ. 2016;188(5):340-348.
USPSTF Recommendation Statement: Screening for Colorectal Cancer
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
June 21, 2016
Volume 315, Number 23
2575
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
