 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Folic Acid Supplementation for the Prevention
of Neural Tube Defects
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
The USPSTF recognizes that clinical decisions involve more
considerations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand
the evidence but individualize decision making to the specific
patient or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and
coverage decisions involve considerations in addition to the evi-
dence of clinical benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends that all women who are planning or ca-
pableofpregnancytakeadailysupplementcontaining0.4to0.8mg
(400-800 μg) of folic acid (A recommendation) (Figure 1).
Rationale
Importance
Neural tube defects are major birth defects of the brain and spine
that occur early in pregnancy due to improper closure of the
embryonic neural tube, which may lead to a range of disabilities
or death. The most common neural tube defects are anencephaly
(an underdeveloped brain and an incomplete skull) and spina
bifida (incomplete closing of the spinal cord).1,2 Based on 2009-
2011 data, the estimated averageannual prevalence of anenceph-
aly and spina bifida combinedwas 6.5 cases per 10 000 live
births.1-3 Daily folic acid supplementation in the periconceptional
period can prevent neural tube defects.1,2
Folic acid is the synthetic form of folate, a water-soluble
B vitamin (B9). Folic acid is usually given as a multivitamin, prena-
tal vitamin, or single supplement. It is also used to fortify cereal
grain products. Folate occurs naturally in foods such as dark green
leafy vegetables, legumes, and oranges.1 However, most women
do not receive the recommended daily intake of folate from
diet alone.1 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
IMPORTANCE Neural tube defects are among the most common major congenital anomalies
in the United States and may lead to a range of disabilities or death. Daily folic acid
supplementation in the periconceptional period can prevent neural tube defects. However,
most women do not receive the recommended daily intake of folate from diet alone.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2009 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on folic acid supplementation in women of childbearing age.
EVIDENCE REVIEW In2009,theUSPSTFreviewedtheeffectivenessoffolicacidsupplementation
inwomenofchildbearingageforthepreventionofneuraltubedefectsininfants.Thecurrent
reviewassessednewevidenceonthebenefitsandharmsoffolicacidsupplementation.
FINDINGS The USPSTF assessed the balance of the benefits and harms of folic acid
supplementation in women of childbearing age and determined that the net benefit is
substantial. Evidence is adequate that the harms to the mother or infant from folic acid
supplementation taken at the usual doses are no greater than small. Therefore, the USPSTF
reaffirms its 2009 recommendation.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends that all women who are
planning or capable of pregnancy take a daily supplement containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg
(400-800 μg) of folic acid. (A recommendation)
JAMA. 2017;317(2):183-189. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.19438
Editorial page 144
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 190
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com
Related article at
jamapediatrics.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
183
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
(NHANES) data from 2003 to 2006 suggest that 75% of non-
pregnant women aged 15 to 44 years do not consume the recom-
mended daily intake of folic acid for preventing neural tube
defects.1,2,4
Recognition of Risk Status
Women who have a personal or family history of a pregnancy af-
fected by a neural tube defect are at increased risk of having an af-
fectedpregnancy.However,mostcasesoccurintheabsenceofany
personal or family history.
Benefits of Preventive Medication
The USPSTF found convincing evidence that folic acid supple-
mentation in the periconceptional period provides substantial
benefits in reducing the risk of neural tube defects in the de-
veloping fetus. The USPSTF found inadequate evidence on
how the benefits of folic acid supplementation may vary by
dosage, timing relative to pregnancy, duration of therapy, or
race/ethnicity.
Harms of Preventive Medication
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethattheharmstothemother
or infant from folic acid supplementation taken at the usual doses
are no greater than small.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the net benefit of
daily folic acid supplementation to prevent neural tube defects in
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What 
the 
USPSTF 
Grades 
Mean 
and 
Suggestions 
for 
Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions 
for 
Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I 
statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF 
Levels 
of 
Certainty 
Regarding 
Net 
Benefit
Level 
of 
Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Folic Acid to Prevent Neural Tube Defects
184
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the developing fetus is substantial for women who are planning or
capable of pregnancy.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to women who are planning or ca-
pableofpregnancy(Figure2).Itdoesnotapplytowomenwhohave
had a previous pregnancy affected by neural tube defects or who
are at very high risk due to other factors (eg, use of certain antisei-
zure medications or family history). These women may be advised
to take higher doses of folic acid.
Assessment of Risk
Although all women of childbearing age are at risk of having a
pregnancy affected by neural tube defects and should take
folic acid supplementation, some factors increase their risk,
including a personal or family history (first- or second-degree rela-
tive) of neural tube defects.1 Women with a personal history of an
affected pregnancy require special care and are not within the
scope of this recommendation statement. Other risk factors
include the use of particular antiseizure medications (eg, valproic
acid or carbamazepine), maternal diabetes, obesity, and muta-
tions in folate-related enzymes.1
Questions persist regarding increased risk of neural tube
defects in some racial/ethnic groups. Birth prevalence rates
are highest among Hispanic women, followed by non-Hispanic
white and non-Hispanic black women.1 Genetic mutations in
folate-related enzymes may vary by race/ethnicity. Dietary folate
or folic acid intake differs by race/ethnicity. For example, Mexican
American women may be at increased risk because of decreased
consumption of fortified foods and greater intake of corn
masa–based diets.1 Fewer Hispanic women (28%) report consum-
ing 0.4 mg (400 μg) or more of folic acid daily through fortified
food or supplements, compared with 39% of non-Hispanic
white women.1,5
Timing
Half of all pregnancies in the United States are unplanned.6
Therefore, clinicians should advise all women who are capable of
pregnancy to take daily folic acid supplements. The critical period
for supplementation starts at least 1 month before conception
and continues through the first 2 to 3 months of pregnancy.1,7,8
Dosage
Trials and observational studies conducted in settings without
food fortification suggest that supplementation with a multi-
vitamin containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg (400-800 μg) of folic acid
decreases the risk of neural tube defects.1,7,8 Evidence shows that
most women in the United States are not consuming fortified
foods in a quantity needed to demonstrate optimal benefit.8 An
analysis of NHANES data found that 48% of respondents of child-
bearing age consumed the recommended amount of folic acid
from mandatorily fortified foods only.1,9
According to the National Academy of Sciences Food and Nu-
tritionBoard,thetolerableupperintakeleveloffolicacidinwomen
19 years and older is 1 mg/d (1000 μg/d) from supplements
Figure 2. Folic Acid Supplementation for the Prevention of Neural Tube Defects: Clinical Summary
Population
Recommendation 
Women 
who 
are 
planning 
or 
capable 
of 
pregnancy
Take 
a 
daily 
supplement 
containing 
0.4 
to 
0.8 
mg 
(400-800 
µg) 
of 
folic 
acid. 
Grade: 
A
Risk 
Assessment
Preventive
Medication
Timing
Balance 
of 
Benefits
and 
Harms
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
All women of childbearing age are at risk of having a pregnancy affected by neural tube defects. Some factors increase this risk,
including a personal or family history of neural tube defects, use of particular antiseizure medications, maternal diabetes, obesity,
and mutations in folate-related enzymes.
Folic acid is the synthetic form of folate, a water-soluble B vitamin. Folic acid is usually given as a multivitamin, prenatal vitamin, or
single supplement and is also used to fortify cereal grain products. Folate occurs naturally in foods such as dark green leafy
vegetables, legumes, and oranges. However, most women do not receive the recommended daily intake of folate from diet alone.
The critical period for supplementation starts at least 1 month before conception and continues through the first 2 to 3 months
of pregnancy.
Dosage
Supplementation with a multivitamin containing 0.4 to 0.8 mg (400-800 μg) of folic acid decreases the risk of neural tube defects.
The USPSTF concludes with high certainty that the net benefit of daily folic acid supplementation to prevent neural tube defects in
the developing fetus is substantial for women who are planning or capable of pregnancy.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation: Folic Acid to Prevent Neural Tube Defects
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
185
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
orfortifiedfood(excludingnaturallyoccurringfolate)and0.8mg/d
(800 μg/d) for those aged 14 to 18 years.10 Fewer than 3% of
girls and women aged 14 to 50 years receive more than 1 mg/d
(1000 μg/d) of folic acid from supplements or food.3,11,12
Additional Approaches to Prevention
The Community Preventive Services Task Force recommends
community-wide education campaigns to encourage women of
childbearing age to take folic acid supplements.13
In 2016, the US Food and Drug Administration approved folic
acidfortificationofcornmasaflour.Thisallowsmanufacturerstovol-
untarily add folic acid to corn masa flour at levels consistent with
those found in other enriched cereal grains.14
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
Study results on the effectiveness of folic acid supplementation in
reducingneuraltubedefectsamongHispanicwomencomparedwith
white or black women have been inconsistent. Future research
should continue to evaluate differences in diverse populations.1
Discussion
Burden of Disease
During early fetal development, a neural tube forms that later
becomes the spinal cord, brain, and neighboring protective struc-
tures (eg, spinal column), with complete closure occurring by the
fourth week of pregnancy. Incomplete neural tube closure results
in defects such as anencephaly and spina bifida. These defects
vary in level of disability and may lead to death. Neural tube
defects are among the most common major congenital anomalies
in the United States.1 Based on 2009-2011 data from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, the estimated average annual
prevalence of anencephaly and spina bifida combined was 6.5
cases per 10 000 live births.1,2
Since widespread recommendations on folic acid supplemen-
tation and the implementation of food fortification laws by the
US Food and Drug Administration in 1998, prevalence rates of
infants born with neural tube defects have decreased.1,2 Preva-
lence of neural tube defects declined from 10.7 cases per 10 000
live births before the implementation of food fortification (1995
to 1996) to 7.0 cases per 10 000 live births after fortification
(1999 to 2011).2 Folic acid supplementation prevents about 1300
annual births from being affected by neural tube defects, accord-
ing to recent estimates.2 Although supplementation recommen-
dations and food fortification laws have reduced the prevalence
of neural tube defects, it is still difficult for most women to con-
sume the daily requirement of 0.4 mg (400 μg) of folic acid from
food alone. The 2007-2012 NHANES found that 48% of respon-
dents of childbearing age reported consuming folic acid from
mandatorily fortified foods only. Only 29% of all respondents
reported taking a daily folic acid supplement.9 Among women
who were taking a daily folic acid supplement, about half (14.6%
of all women) were taking a supplement containing less than the
daily recommended dose of 0.4 mg (400 μg).1,9
Scope of Review
In2009,theUSPSTFreviewedtheeffectivenessoffolicacidsupple-
mentation in women of childbearing age for the prevention of neu-
ral tube defects in infants.7 The current review assessed new evi-
denceonthebenefitsandharmsoffolicacidsupplementation.The
USPSTF did not review the evidence on folic acid supplementation
in women with a history of pregnancy affected by neural tube de-
fects or other high-risk factors. Evidence on folic acid fortification,
counselingtoincreasedietaryintakeoffolicacidornaturallyoccur-
ring food folate, or screening for neural tube defects is also outside
the scope of this review.
Effectiveness of Preventive Medication
In 2009, the USPSTF reviewed the evidence on folic acid supple-
mentation in women of childbearing age and found that the ben-
efits are well-established and outweigh the harms.8
Inthecurrentreview,theUSPSTFevaluated1randomizedclini-
cal trial (RCT), 2 cohort studies, 8 case-control studies, and 2 pub-
lications from the previous USPSTF review for evidence of effec-
tiveness of folic acid supplementation (n = at least 41 802
participants). Results were not pooled because of study heteroge-
neity and differences in food fortification over time.
A fair-quality RCT conducted in Hungary (1984-1992)
assessed women (n = 5453) without a personal history of preg-
nancy affected by neural tube defects.1,15 Participants were ran-
domized to receive either a daily vitamin supplement containing
0.8 mg (800 μg) of folic acid (experimental group) or a daily
trace-element supplement (control group) in the periconcep-
tional period. The trial reported no cases of neural tube defects in
the experimental group and 6 cases in the control group (0% vs
0.25%; P = .01 by Fisher exact test).15 These results indicate a sta-
tistically significant lower odds of neural tube defects with folic
acid supplementation (Peto odds ratio [OR], 0.13 [95% CI, 0.03-
0.65]; P = .01).1,15
Evidence from older, fair-quality observational studies pro-
vide additional support that folic acid supplementation is
beneficial.1,5 A fair-quality prospective cohort study (n = 6112)
conducted in Hungary compared women who were provided a
vitamin supplement containing 0.8 mg (800 μg) of folic acid
before conception with unsupplemented women at the first pre-
natal visit (between 8 and 12 weeks of pregnancy) and showed a
statistically significant effect on the odds of neural tube defects
(OR, 0.11 [95% CI, 0.01-0.91]).1,16 A fair-quality retrospective
cohort study conducted in the United States in women undergo-
ing α-fetoprotein testing or amniocentesis between 15 and 20
weeks of pregnancy showed a statistically significant effect on
the odds of neural tube defects among 10 713 women who took
multivitamins containing folic acid in weeks 1 through 6 of preg-
nancy compared with 3157 women who did not take any supple-
ments (OR, 0.27 [95% CI, 0.11-0.63]).1,17
The 8 remaining studies were fair-quality case-control studies
of births occurring over 3 decades, from 1976 through 2008.1 Stud-
ies compared infants who had malformations caused by neural
tube defects with either nonmalformed infants or infants
who had malformations not caused by neural tube defects. Data
were drawn from 2 multistate studies (National Birth Defects
Prevention Study and the Slone Epidemiology Center Birth Defects
Study), a 2-state study (National Institute of Child Health and
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Folic Acid to Prevent Neural Tube Defects
186
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Human Development Neural Tube Defects Study), and 2 single-
state studies (Texas Neural Tube Defect Project and the California
Birth Defects Monitoring Program).1 Older case-control studies
conducted before implementation of food fortification laws were
generally consistent with the more recent evidence showing that
folic acid supplementation is beneficial for the prevention of neural
tube defects (OR range, 0.6-0.7 [in 3 of 4 studies]). Newer case-
control studies conducted after food fortification did not show a
protective effect of folic acid supplementation on neural tube
defects (OR range, 0.93-1.40 [95% CI included the null]).1
Ethical considerations limited the use of RCT methods to
study the effects of folic acid supplementation after food fortifi-
cation. The newer studies are more subject to design issues than
the older ones, which had fewer design flaws.1 Case-control stud-
ies have the potential for selection and recall bias, both of which
can reduce the observed effect of folic acid supplementation on
neural tube defects. Another issue with all study designs is the
relative rarity of the outcome and the challenge of adequately
powering studies to determine benefits. Another potential expla-
nation for the findings is that the majority of cases of neural tube
defects due to folate deficiency have now been prevented, and
subsequent cases result from a different etiology. Despite this
possible rationale, evidence indicates that most women are not
consuming fortified foods at the level needed for optimal benefit.
Inadequate folate intake continues to leave nearly one-fourth
of the US population with suboptimal red blood cell folate
concentration.1,9
Three fair-quality case-control studies (n = 11 154) examined
the effects of folic acid supplementation by race/ethnicity.1,18-20
One study found that folic acid supplementation may be less pro-
tective among Hispanic women compared with white or black
women.18 A second study found a statistically nonsignificant
increased risk of neural tube defects with supplementation among
Hispanic women (OR adjusted for consistent users vs nonusers,
2.20 [95% CI, 0.98-4.92]).19 A third study found that periconcep-
tional supplementation did not decrease the risk of neural tube
defects and reported no differences in effect by race/ethnicity.20
These inconsistent results among Hispanic women could be a
result of chance due to small sample sizes.
Eight fair-quality case-control studies addressed dose, timing,
or duration of therapy.1 Of these 8 studies, 4 (n = 26 791) provided
information on dose, 5 (n = 26 808) provided information on tim-
ing, and none provided information on duration. Across the stud-
ies,evidencewasinconsistentthatthebenefitsoffolicacidsupple-
mentation differ by dosage or timing.1
Potential Harms of Preventive Medication
TheUSPSTFfoundadequateevidencethatfolicacidsupplementa-
tion does not have serious harms. One fair-quality trial and 1 fair-
quality cohort study did not find evidence of a statistically signifi-
cant increased risk of pregnancy with twins in women.1
IntheHungariantrial(n = 5453),therateoftwinpregnancywas
notstatisticallysignificantlydifferentbetweenthemultivitaminand
trace-element groups (OR, 1.4 [95% CI, 0.89-2.21]).1,21 In a retro-
spective, population-based cohort study in Norway (n = 176 042),
no association was found between folic acid supplementation and
twinpregnancy(OR,1.04[95%CI,0.91-1.18])afteradjustingforuse
of in vitro fertilization, maternal age, and parity.22
The Hungarian trial examined adverse events in women and
found a potential increased risk of maternal weight gain, diarrhea,
and constipation at 12 weeks of pregnancy. However, there was a
low event rate, and these symptoms could have occurred by
chance. These symptoms are also associated with pregnancy.1,15
Three systematic reviews of observational studies (n = at
least 14 438 participants) evaluated childhood asthma, wheezing,
or allergies and found inconsistent evidence of harms.1,23,24
Evidence was also inconsistent on the harms of folic acid supple-
mentation differing by dosage and timing. No evidence was found
on harms differing by duration of therapy.1
Other potential hypothesized harms of folic acid sup-
plementation include the masking of symptoms of vitamin B12
deficiency and subsequent neurologic complications, carcino-
genic effects, asthma/allergic reactions, and interactions with
medications.1,7,10 The USPSTF found no significant evidence of
these potential harms.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF found no new substantial evidence on the benefits
and harms of folic acid supplementation that would lead to a
change in its recommendation from 2009.7 The USPSTF assessed
the balance of the benefits and harms of folic acid supplementa-
tion in women of childbearing age and determined that the net
benefit is substantial. Evidence is adequate that the harms to the
mother or infant from folic acid supplementation taken at the
usual doses are no greater than small. Therefore, the USPSTF
reaffirms its 2009 recommendation that all women who are plan-
ning or capable of pregnancy take a daily supplement containing
0.4 to 0.8 mg (400-800 μg) of folic acid.8
How Does Evidence Fit With Biological Understanding?
Genetic predisposition and environmental influences are thought
to contribute to neural tube defects. These environmental influ-
ences are being investigated. An important environmental influ-
ence is the consumption of folate. The mechanism of action of
folate in the prevention of neural tube defects is unknown. Folate
acts as a coenzyme in the synthesis of nucleic acids and the
metabolism of amino acids. An important function of folate is its
role in single-carbon transfers, which are important in methylation
reactions and in purine and pyrimidine synthesis. Folate is neces-
sary for the regulation of DNA synthesis and function; reduced con-
centrations of folate may limit the number of methyl groups avail-
able for DNA replication and methylation.1,7,10
EvidencesuggeststhatmutationintheMTHFRgene,whichen-
codestheenzymemethylenetetrahydrofolatereductase,isariskfac-
tor for neural tube defects. This enzyme regulates folate and ho-
mocysteine levels. Persons who have this gene mutation have
decreasedfolatelevels,whichreducestheconversionofhomocys-
teine to methionine and may increase the risk of neural tube
defects.1,25Folicacidconsumptionmayhelpdiminishtheeffectsof
the gene mutation.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from May 10 to June 6,
2016. Some comments requested a more detailed definition of
“
excessive”folic acid. In response, the USPSTF added information
USPSTF Recommendation: Folic Acid to Prevent Neural Tube Defects
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
187
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
about tolerable upper intake levels for folic acid. Other comments
suggested emphasizing that many women do not meet daily rec-
ommended amounts of folic acid and adding language on the
potential harms of folic acid supplementation. The USPSTF added
language about the harms of supplementation and the difficulty
of consuming enough folic acid from food alone.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation reaffirms the 2009 recommendation state-
ment on folic acid supplementation in women of childbearing age.8
The current statement recommends that all women who are plan-
ning or capable of pregnancy take a daily supplement containing
0.4 to 0.8 mg (400-800 μg) of folic acid.
Recommendations of Others
The Health and Medicine Division of the National Academies
(formerly the Institute of Medicine), American College of Obstetri-
cians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Family Physicians,
US Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion, American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Neu-
rology,andAmericanCollegeofMedicalGeneticsandGenomicsrec-
ommendthatwomenwhoarecapableofbecomingpregnantshould
take at least 0.4 mg (400 μg) of folic acid daily.10,26-30 The Ameri-
can College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention, and several other organizations rec-
ommend that women with a history of neural tube defects or other
high-risk factors take 4 mg (4000 μg) of folic acid daily.31-33
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J.
Curry, PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc;
John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A.R.
García, MD, MPH; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS;
Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN,
MSN, MPH; C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M.
Mangione, MD, MSPH; William R. Phillips, MD, MPH;
Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael P.
Pignone, MD, MPH; Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH;
Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); State University of New York Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); University of Washington,
Seattle (Phillips); Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island (Phipps); University of Texas at Austin
(Pignone); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); University of Hawaii,
Manoa (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Iris
Mabry-Hernandez, MD, MPH (AHRQ), who
contributed to the writing of the manuscript, and
Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who assisted with
coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Viswanathan M, Treiman KA, Kish-Doto J,
Middleton JC, Coker-Schwimmer EJL, Nicholson
WK. Folic Acid Supplementation: An Evidence
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 145. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017. AHRQ
publication 14-05214-EF-1.
2. Williams J, Mai CT, Mulinare J, et al; Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Updated estimates
of neural tube defects prevented by mandatory
folic acid fortification—United States, 1995-2011.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64(1):1-5.
3. Viswanathan M, Treiman KA, Kish-Doto J,
Middleton JC, Coker-Schwimmer EJ, Nicholson WK.
Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of
neural tube defects: an updated evidence report
and systematic review for the US Preventive
Services Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016
.19193
4. Tinker SC, Cogswell ME, Devine O, Berry RJ.
Folic acid intake among U.S. women aged 15-44
years, National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 2003-2006. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(5):
534-542.
5. Bentley TG, Willett WC, Weinstein MC,
Kuntz KM. Population-level changes in folate intake
by age, gender, and race/ethnicity after folic acid
fortification. Am J Public Health. 2006;96(11):
2040-2047.
6. Finer LB, Zolna MR. Unintended pregnancy in
the United States: incidence and disparities, 2006.
Contraception. 2011;84(5):478-485.
7. Wolff T, Witkop CT, Miller T, Syed SB. Folic Acid
Supplementation for the Prevention of Neural Tube
Defects: An Update of the Evidence for the
US Preventive Services Task Force: Evidence
Synthesis No. 70. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2009. AHRQ
publication 09-051132-EF-1.
8. US Preventive Services Task Force. Folic acid
for the prevention of neural tube defects:
US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2009;150(9):626-631.
9. Tinker SC, Hamner HC, Qi YP, Crider KS.
U.S. women of childbearing age who are at possible
increased risk of a neural tube defect-affected
pregnancy due to suboptimal red blood cell folate
concentrations, National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 2007 to 2012. Birth Defects
Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2015;103(6):517-526.
10. Institute of Medicine Food and Nutrition Board.
Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin,
Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic
Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 1998.
11. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee;
Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines
Advisory Committee. Advisory Report to the
Secretary of Health and Human Services. Rockville,
MD: US Department of Health and Human Services
and US Department of Agriculture; 2015.
12. National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary
Supplements. Folate: dietary supplement fact
sheet. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Folate
-HealthProfessional/. 2016. Accessed November
22, 2016.
13. Community Preventive Services Task Force.
Birth defects: community-wide campaigns to
promote the use of folic acid supplements.
https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings
/birth-defects-community-wide-campaigns
-promote-use-folic-acid-supplements. 2004.
Accessed November 22, 2016.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Folic Acid to Prevent Neural Tube Defects
188
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
14. US Food and Drug Administration. FDA
approves folic acid fortification of corn masa flour.
http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom
/PressAnnouncements/ucm496104.htm. April 14,
2016. Accessed November 22, 2016.
15. Czeizel AE, Dudás I. Prevention of the first
occurrence of neural-tube defects by
periconceptional vitamin supplementation. N Engl J
Med. 1992;327(26):1832-1835.
16. Czeizel AE, Dobó M, Vargha P. Hungarian
cohort-controlled trial of periconceptional
multivitamin supplementation shows a reduction in
certain congenital abnormalities. Birth Defects Res
A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004;70(11):853-861.
17. Milunsky A, Jick H, Jick SS, et al.
Multivitamin/folic acid supplementation in early
pregnancy reduces the prevalence of neural tube
defects. JAMA. 1989;262(20):2847-2852.
18. Shaw GM, Schaffer D, Velie EM, Morland K,
Harris JA. Periconceptional vitamin use, dietary
folate, and the occurrence of neural tube defects.
Epidemiology. 1995;6(3):219-226.
19. Ahrens K, Yazdy MM, Mitchell AA, Werler MM.
Folic acid intake and spina bifida in the era of
dietary folic acid fortification. Epidemiology. 2011;
22(5):731-737.
20. Mosley BS, Cleves MA, Siega-Riz AM, et al;
National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Neural
tube defects and maternal folate intake among
pregnancies conceived after folic acid fortification
in the United States. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169(1):
9-17.
21. Czeizel AE, Métneki J, Dudás I. The higher rate
of multiple births after periconceptional
multivitamin supplementation: an analysis of
causes. Acta Genet Med Gemellol (Roma). 1994;43
(3-4):175-184.
22. Vollset SE, Gjessing HK, Tandberg A, et al.
Folate supplementation and twin pregnancies.
Epidemiology. 2005;16(2):201-205.
23. Crider KS, Cordero AM, Qi YP, Mulinare J,
Dowling NF, Berry RJ. Prenatal folic acid and risk of
asthma in children: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;98(5):1272-1281.
24. Yang L, Jiang L, Bi M, et al. High dose of
maternal folic acid supplementation is associated to
infant asthma. Food Chem Toxicol. 2015;75:88-93.
25. Tsang BL, Devine OJ, Cordero AM, et al.
Assessing the association between the
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
677C>T polymorphism and blood folate
concentrations: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of trials and observational studies.
Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;101(6):1286-1294.
26. Cheschier N; ACOG Committee on Practice
Bulletins-Obstetrics. ACOG practice bulletin: neural
tube defects. number 44, July 2003 (replaces
committee opinion number 252, March 2001). Int J
Gynaecol Obstet. 2003;83(1):123-133.
27. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical Preventive Service Recommendation:
neural tube defects. http://www.aafp.org/patient
-care/clinical-recommendations/all/neural-tube
-defects.html. Accessed November 22, 2016.
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Recommendations for the use of folic acid to
reduce the number of cases of spina bifida and
other neural tube defects. MMWR Recomm Rep.
1992;41(RR-14):1-7.
29. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on
Genetics. Folic acid for the prevention of neural
tube defects. Pediatrics. 1999;104(2, pt 1):325-327.
30. Harden CL, Pennell PB, Koppel BS, et al;
American Academy of Neurology; American
Epilepsy Society. Practice parameter update:
management issues for women with
epilepsy—focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based
review): vitamin K, folic acid, blood levels, and
breastfeeding: report of the Quality Standards
Subcommittee and Therapeutics and Technology
Assessment Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology and American Epilepsy
Society. Neurology. 2009;73(2):142-149.
31. Toriello HV; Policy and Practice Guideline
Committee of the American College of Medical
Genetics. Policy statement on folic acid and neural
tube defects. Genet Med. 2011;13(6):593-596.
32. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. ACOG committee opinion number
313, September 2005: the importance of
preconception care in the continuum of women’
s
health care. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;106(3):665-666.
33. Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Use of folic
acid for prevention of spina bifida and other neural
tube defects—1983-1991. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 1991;40(30):513-516.
USPSTF Recommendation: Folic Acid to Prevent Neural Tube Defects
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
January 10, 2017
Volume 317, Number 2
189
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
